I 


7 
meen 


Mm 


1th 


Ny tyt 


i Hy 


7 
" 


hy 
Ny 


Sapient 


er? 


COUNTY LIBRARY 
Tse rT 


JALPENA COUNTY LIBRARY 
é 211 N, First St. 
Alpena, Mieh: 48707 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/nolyvedasO000bibe 


THE HOLY VEDAS 


Rig Veda 
Yajur Veda 
Sama Veda 

Atharva Veda 


> ALPENA COUNTY LIBRAR 

seh 4 
ie 211N. Firet St, : 
Alpena; Mish: 49707 


Bibek Debroy 
& 
Dipavali Debroy 


B.R. Publishing Corporation 


[A Division of BRPC (India) Ltd.] 
Delhi-110035 


© 1994 Publisher 

Second Edition 1995 
Third Edition 1996 
Fourth Edition 1998 


ISBN 81-7018-850-—4 


Published by: 

B.R. Publishing Corporation 
[A Division of BRPC (India) Ltd.] 
3779, Ist Floor, Kanhaiya Nagar, 
Tri Nagar, Delhi-110 035 

Phone: 3259196, 3259648 
E-Mail: brpcltd@del2.vsnl.net.in 


Typeset by: 
ABC for DTP 
Delhi-110 034 . Ph: 7183087 


Printed at: 
BDH Printer 
Delhi-110085 
At 


Inter India Publications 
Delhi-110015 


PRINTED IN INDIA 


CONTENTS 


Introduction v 
Rig Veda 1 
Yajur Veda 115 
Sama Veda hy 215 
Atharva Veda 328 


Glossary 


INTRODUCTION 


The Vedas are ancient texts that are sacred in India 
and renowned the world over. The world veda literally 
means knowledge. The root is vid, ‘to know’. The Vedas 
are thus texts that provide knowledge. 


There are four Vedas, known as the Rig Veda, the 
Yajur Veda, the Sama Veda and the Atharva Veda. Many 
years ago, the Vedas were referred to as trayi or three. 
There must have been some point of time when there 
were only three Vedas. These are acknowledged to 
have been the Rig Vedas, the Yajur Veda and the Sama 
Veda. The Atharva Veda is believed to have been a later 
addition to the sacred canon. 


The world trayi is also interpreted in a different 
sense. Although the interpretation does seem to be 
slightly artificial, it is following. The three paths to 
salvation are believed to be those of jnana 
(knowledge), bhakti (devotion) and karma (Action). 
Since the Vedas teach these three paths to salvation, 
they are referred to as trayi. The Rig Veda is identified 
with the path of knowledge, the Yajur Veda with the 
path of action, and the Sama Veda with the path of 
devotion. 


VI 


Each of the Vedas has two parts, a samhita and the 
brahmanas. The samhita part consists of mantras or 
incantations. These were hymns that were used in 
sacrifies. But these mantras are difficult to interpret 
without commentaries. This is what the brahmanas set 
out to do. They explain the hymns and indicate how 
these are to be used in sacrifices. The brahmanas also 
have detailed descriptins of sacrifices and how they 
are to be conducted. The samhita and how they are to 
be conducted. The samhita and the brahmanas are 
often known as karma kanda, that is, the part of the 
vedas that deals with rituals. 


In addition, Vedic literature also includes jnana 
kanda. This is the part that deals with supreme 
knowledge. Included in jnana kanda are the aranyakasf 
and the upanishads. These are identified with various 
Vedas. 


We can therefore have a narrow definition of a Veda 
as well as a broad one. The narrow definition would 
take the word Veda to mean the samhita alone. The 
broad definition would include, in addition, associated 
brahmanas, aranyakas and upanishads. By the word 
Veda, we will mean the samhita alone. 


When were the Vedas composed and who composed 
them? Strictly speaking, there is no answer to these 
questions. The Vedas were revealed; they were shrutis. 
They were not written down or composed. They were 
communicated by the supreme godhead or the divine 
essence (brahman) to the ancient seers (rishis). These 
rishis di not compose the Vedas; they merely obtained 
this divine knowledge through their extraordinary 


VII 


powers. In this sense, the Vedas are apourusheya, that 
is, not the handiwork of men. Their authorship cannot 
be ascribed to any human author. 


In the Hindu conception of time, time is divided 
into four eras. These are known as satya yuga, treta 
yuga, dvapara yuga and kali yuga. As one moves from 
satya yuga towards kali yuga, the power of 
righteousness diminishes and evil starts to rear its ugly 
head. To bring men back to the righteous path, the 
sacred knowledge that is in the Vedas must ve 
disseminated amongst them. But the Vedas are 
abstract an esoteric, too difficult for ordinary mortals 
to comprehend. To make the dissemination and 
assimilation easier, the Vedas must be conveniently 
partitioned and divided into various groups. A person 
whos thus divides (vyasa) the Vedas has the title of 
Vedavyasa o1 Vyasadeva conferred on him. 


In every dvapara yuga, such a Vedavyasa is born to 
perform this sacred task. The Vedavyasa born in the 
dvapara yuga tha immediately preceded the present 
kali yuga, was Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa. It is he 
who is credited with having divided the original 
unified Vedas into the four segments of the Rig Veda, 
the Yajur Veda,the Sama Veda and the Atharva Veda. 
Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa did not compose the 
Vedas, he merely recapitulated what was already 
known. Incidentally, Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa 
is also credited with the composition of the great epic, 
the Mahabharata. 


Just as it is impossible to determine who composed 
the Vedas, it is also impossible to determine when they 


Vill 


were composed. Widely different dates have been 
suggested by scholars. Tilak suggested a date of 
around 6000 B.C., while Jacobi’s date was around 
4500 B.C. Most scholars would agree that the Vedas 
were compiled some time between 4000 B.C. and 1000 
B.C. and that it is impossible to narrow down the 
range further. The earliest of the Vedas is clearly the 
Rig Veda. This reached a stage of final compilation 
between 1000 B.C. and 900 B.C. 


The Rig 
Veda 


The Rig Veda Samhita 


It is first important to understand that there were 
four classes of priests who were required at any 
sacrifice, or yajna. The first class consisted of the 
officiating priests or acolytes (hotri). They invoked the 
gods by reciting the mantras, prepared the sacrificial 
ground and the altar, and poured out the libations. 
The hymns of the Rig Veda are for this class of priests. 
The second class of priests consisted of the choristers 
(udgatri). These were the ones who chanted the sacred 
hymns and the hymns of the Sama Veda are for this 
class of priests. The third class of priests consisted of 
the reciters (adhvaryu). They carried out sacificial rites 
while chanting the sacred texts and the hymns of the 
Yajur Veda are for this class of priests. The fourth class 
of priests consisted of brahmana overseers. They 
supervised the sacrifice and the hymns of the Atharva 
Veda are for this class of priests. 


The Rig Veda derives its name from the word rik, 
which means a mantra. There are 10,589 verses in the 


Zz 


Rig Veda Samhita. These are divided into ten mandalas 
or books. Each of the mandalas is subdivided into 
anuvakas (lessons) and suktas (hymns). The ten 
mandalas have 85 anuvakas, 1080 suktas and 10,589 
verses. There is also a_ valakhilya_ section or 
supplement. This seems to have been a later addition. 


Let us now see what the Rig Veda has to say. Since 
the Rig Veda is fairly long, we will have to be selective. 
We cannot be exhaustive. 


MANDALA ONE 


(This mandala has 181 suktas and 2006 mantras. 
The bulk of the mantras are addressed to Indra. Agni 
comes next in order of importance.) 


Agni 

(Agni is the fire-god. It is to Agni that oblations ina 
sacrifice are offered. Agni is regarded as a messenger 
who summons the other gods to the sacrifice and 
carries the offerings to them. This particular hymn is 
ascribed to a sage named Madhuchhanda 
Vaishvamitra. He was descended from the famous 
sage Vishvamitra. Various hymns follow various 
metres and this one is in the gayatri metre.) 


I pray to Agni. He advances to the front so that he 
can bring about the welfare of men. It is Agni who 
makes the sacrifice a success. This is a sacvifice that is 
being performed according to the rites of the season. 
Agni is the prosperous one. He will summon the gods 
to this sacrifice. 


3 


Agni has been praised by many sages of earlier 
times. He is being praised by the sages who are here 
now. May Agni bring the gods to this sacrifice. 


Every day, men will obtain nourishment from Agni. 
They will certainly obtain fame, valour and riches. 


O Agni! This is a non-violent sacrifice that is being 
performed. Make it successful from every direction. 
May we be able to attain the proximity of the gods. 


You are the one who will summon the gods. You 
are the one who will ensure that the sacrifice is 
successfully completed. You are the one who inspires 
learned men to action. O Agni! Many ere your forms 
and you are always truthful. You are the radiant one 
who has performed wonderous deeds. Agni has come 
to the sacrifice with the other gods. 


O my beloved Agni! You ensure the welfare of those 
who give alms. You are the one who is present in every 
portion of our anatomy. The acts you perform are the 
ones that are truly righteous. 


O Agni! We pray to you always, night and day. 
May we use our intelligence to come close to you. 


You are the radiant one. You are the protector of 
non-violent sacrifices. You are the one who manifests 
the immutable truth. We bow in obeisance before 
Agni and come close to him. He will make our houses 


prosper. 
O Agni! You are the famous one. We are like your 


sons; be like a father unto us. Grant us happiness and 
ensure our welfare. Aid us in our endeavours. 


Vayu 

(Vayu is the god of the wind. This hymn is also 
ascribed to the sage Madhuchhanda Vaishvamitra. And 
this too, is in the gayatn metre.) 


O Vayu! You are the one who is fit to be seen. Come 
here. This soma juice has been prepared for you. Drink 
the soma juice and listen to our prayers. 


O Vayu! The learned priests are well-versed in the 
knowledge of which days are auspicious and which ~ 
are not. They have prepared the soma juice on an 
auspicious day. The choristers are singing your praise 
through their hymns. 


O Vayu! These great words are being addressed to 
you. You are the great one. You are the one who 
grants boons. We desire that you may drink this soma 
juice. 

O Indra! O Vayu! This is soma juice that has been 


prepared. Take great care in coming here. This soma 
juice wishes to be united with you. 


O Vayu! You and Indra know well the wonderful 
properties of the soma juice. You are the ones who 
have an abundance of riches and foodgrains. Come 
here quickly. 


O Vayu! You and Indra are the leaders. You are 
always in the forefront. Use your wisdom to come here 


quickly. Accept the soma juice that has been 
extracted. 


1 call upon the powerful god Mitra. I call upon the 
god Varuna who is the destroyer of enemies. Through 


5 


their benevolent wisdom, may they enable our tasks 
to be completed. 


Mitra and Varuna are always connected with truth. 
They are the ones who enhance the truth. They will 
use the power of truth to make the sacrifice a success. 


Mitra and Varuna are omnipresent. They are 
learned and powerful. They will provide us the 
strength that will inspire us to action. 


(Although the hymn is basically addressed to Vayu, 
Indra, Mitra and Varuna also figure in it. Indra is the 
chief god of the Vedas. He rules over the atmosphere 
(antariksha), the intervening region between the earth 
(prithivi) and heaven (dyuloka). Indra kills the demons 
with his weapon vajra. In particular, he killed the 
demon Vritra. Mitra is an aspect of the sun that 
presided over the day. Correspondingly, Varuna presided 
over the night. Soma juice was extracted from the soma 
herb, the herbs having been collected by moonlight. The 
herbs were crushed to extract the juice, which was next 
purified by straining. The purified juice was mixed with 
water, milk and flour and offered to the gods). 


Indra 
(This hymn is also ascribed to Madhuchhanda 
Vaishamitra and the metre continues to be gayatn.) 


O friends! You who are desirous of performing a 
sacrifice. Come here and be seated. Sing the praise of 
the great Indra. 


When you are seated and have begun to extract the 
soma juice, praise the wonderful qualities of the great 


6 


Indra. He is the one who has destroyed many 
enemies. He is the one who is the lord of a lot of riches. 


Indra will certainly grant us an abundance of 
riches. Indra will grant us riches and a lot of wisdom. 
He will come to us with an abundant supply of 
foodgrains. 


When there is a battle, enemies are not even able to 
touch Indra’s horses. His chariot cannot be touched. Sing 
his praise. 


This soma juice has been extracted and pure curds 
have been mixed with it. This is the juice that deserves 
to be drunk. It will be united with Indra. 


O Indra! You are the performer of wonderful deeds. 
You are the great one who drinks the soma juice. You 
become great so as to perform these wonderful deeds. 


O Indra! You are the one who deserves to be 
praised. May the soma juice, which is a source of 
inspiration, be united with you. May it gladden your 
heart. 


O brave one! You are the performer of several 
wonderful deeds. May these hymns enhance your 
greatness and increase your fame. May our words 
increase your fame. 


O Indra! You have the unlimited power to protect. 
Partake of these offerings of foodgrains. In these 
offerings can be found all forms of strength. 


O Indra! You are the one who deserves to be praised. 
May the soldiers of the enemy not be able to harm our 


7 


bodies. You are the lord of all that there is. Please keep 
the weapons of the enemies at a distance. 


The Ribhus 


(The Angirasa formed an important priestly family. 
In this line was born a sage named Sudhanva. 
Sudhanva had three sons named Ribhu, Vibhvan and 
Vaja. These three were collectively referred to as the 
Ribhus. Their deeds were such that they were elevated 
to the status of gods. This hymn is ascribed to the sage 
Medhatithi, son of the sage Kanva. The metre is gayatri.) 


The learned recited the words of this hymn with their 
own mouths. So sacred is this hymn that it gives birth 
to a cluster of jewels. This hymn is addressed to the 
Ribhus, the ones who had divine births. 


The Ribhus were very skilled. They trained two 
horses so that the horses could follow instructions 
given by signs. The Ribhus gave Indra these horses. 
The Ribhus will come to every sacrifice. 


The Ribhus constructed a beautiful and swift 
chariot for the Ashvinis. They made the cows yield a 
lot of milk. 


The Ribhus were righteous and straightforward in 
conduct. They travelled in all the directions and they 
made their aged parents young again. 


O Ribhus! This soma juice is being offered for your 
pleasure. Come and savour it with Indra, the Maruts 
and the other gods. 


Tvashta made only one ladle. But the Ribhus, with 
their skills, made four sacrificial ladles out of that. 


8 


(Tvashta was the architect of the gods. It has been 
suggested that the Ribhus were Tvashta’s disciples.) 


May the Ribhus be pleased with our prayers. May 
they come to our sacrifice and accept the soma juice 
that the priests have offered. May they grant us 
twenty-one types of riches. 


(Twenty-one simply signifies a large number.) 


The energy of the Ribhus rivals that of Agni. . 
Through their deeds, the Ribhus came to be accepted 
as gods. They are entitled to a share of the oblations 
made at sacrifices. 


Varuna 


(This hymn is ascribed to a sage named 
Shunahshepa. He was the son of the sage Ajigarta. The 
metre in which this hymn is composed is gayatn.) 


O Varuna! Other men commit sin. We are no 
different, we too commit sin. We violate your 
commandments every day. 


Your anger is terrible. You raise your weapon to kill 
those who sin and those who violate you. But despite 


the sins we have committed, spare us from your 
anger. 


O Varuna! A charioteer pacifies his horses when 
they are tired. Like that brave warrior, we use these 
hymns to pacify your anger. May you look upon us 
with favour and may you grant us happiness. 


A bird flies here and there and finally returns to its 
nest. Like that, my mind and my heart roam here and 


9 


there in search of riches. (What is left implicit is that 
the mind and the heart seek refuge with Varuna after 
the pursuit of riches is over.) 


Varuna is the source of all valour. Varuna is the 
source of all good fortune. Varuna is the one who sees 
everything. We desire to ensure our happiness. Who 
can we pray to but Varuna? 


Mitra and Varuna are the gods who wish to elevate 
those who observe religious rites. They elevate those 
who give alms. Mitra and Varuna will partake ot the 
oblations we have offered. They will never desert their 
devotees. 


These two gods know the ways of thé birds that fly 
in the atmosphere. They know the ways of the boats 
that travel in the oceans. 


Varuna is the god who follows the proper rites. He is 
acquainted with the twelve months that bring 
prosperity to the subjects. He knows well the 
thirteenth month that comes in between. 


(The twelve lunar months add up to 360 days. 
Therefore, a supplementary and __intercalary 
thirteenth month has to be introduced every sixth 
year to bring conformity between the solar and the 


lunar years.) 


Varuna knows the ways of the great and fast winds. 
He knows well the ways of the gods who rule. 


Varuna observes the proper rites. He is the performer 
of excellent deeds. He comes amidst his subjects so 
that kingdoms may flourish. 


10 


He is the one who knows how extraordinary deeds 
are to be performed. He knows what has been done 
and what remains to be done. He is the one who sees 
everything. 


Varuna is the son of Aditi. He is the performer of 
wonderous deeds. May Varuna guide us along the 
righteous path. May he increase our life expectancy. 


Varuna is the one who wears a golden gown. On 
top of this, he dons clothings that radiate energy. The 
rays of the sun spread out in the four directions and 
are his messengers. 


The evil ones who are assassins can bring no harm to 
Varuna. Those who bear hatred in their hearts can bring 
no harm to Varuna. Enemies can bring no harm to the 
great god. 


He is the one who brings fame to mankind. He is 
the one who brings fruition to all action. He is the one 
who created our wonderful digestive systems. 


Varuna is a witness to everything. When our 
intelligence is elevated, we wish to attain his 
proximity, the way a cow desires closeness to a 
pasture. 


I have brought you offerings of honey. May these 
offerings be as beloved to you as the officiating priest 
himself. Accept this honey. And after you have eaten 
it, you and I will sit together and converse. 


I have seen the god whose glory can be seen 
everywhere in the universe. I have seen his chariot 
travel on the ground. He has accepted my prayers. 


11 


O Varuna! Listen to my prayers. Make us happy 
today. We seek your protection. Grant it to us. 


O god! You are the one who manifests himself 
through wisdom. You rule over earth, heaven and the 
rest of the universe. Listen to our prayers and grant us 
our wishes. 


Remove all the bondage that we suffer from. Free 
us. And grant us long lives. 


The Ashvinis 

(The two Ashvinis were gods whose identities are 
not very clear. They brought light to the morning sky. 
They were probably two stars, one identified with the 
morning and the other with the evening. They were 
subsequently characterised as the physicians of the 
gods. This hymn is ascribed to a sage named 
Hiranyastupa, son of the sage Angirasa. The metre is 
partly jagati and partly trishtupa.) 


O learned Ashvinis! We are performing three 
sacrifices today. Come and be with us on the occasion. 
The two of you travel on a chariot that is huge and 
greatness characterises your generous hearts. You are 
as intimately connected with us as clothing is 
connected to the coldness of winter. Those who are 
learned can easily attain proximity to you. 


The chariot of the Ashvinis bears honey and three 
wheels are attached to the chariot. (This is a reference 
to the three daily sacrifices that are held). Everyone 
knows that the two of you desire to partake of the 
oma juice. Three are the pillars that hold up your 


ae 


chariot. And you travel thrice during the day and 
thrice during the night. 


O Ashvinis! You are the ones who forgive all sins. 
Today we will perform three sacrifices. Come here and 
make our sacrifices overflow with honey. Morning 
and evening, grant us three offerings of foodgrains. 


O Ashvinis! Come to our household thrice. Come 
thrice to your devotees. Come thrice to those who 
deserve to be protected. Come thrice and increase our 
learning. The two of you will bring us wonderful 
objects three times. You will thrice nourish us by 
bringing foodgrains and other objects. 


O Ashvinis! You will come to the sacrifice thrice. 
You will bring us riches thrice. Three are the occasions 
on which you will protect and preserve our sacrifices. 
You will thrice bring us riches and foodgrains. Your 
chariot has three wheels. And the daughter of the sun 
sits in your chariot. (The Ashvinis were married to the 
sun’s daughter.) 


O Ashvinis! You are the ones who ensure the 
performance of righteous deeds. Grant us thrice, 
medicines from heaven. Grant us thrice, herbs from 
' the earth. Grant us thrice, herbs from the water. Grant 
protection and happiness to our sons. Grant them a 
proper balance of the three constituents. 


(The three constituents (dhatu) of the human body 
are vata (wind), pitta (bile) and kafa (phlegm). When 
these are in perfect balance, a person is well.) 


O Ashvinis! You are the ones who deserve to be 
worshipped. The earth is the altar on which we perform 


13 


three sacrifices every day. Come on your chariot and 
be seated here thrice. You are the protectors of the 
truth. You may be far away. But like the breath of life 
that unites with the atman (the human soul), come 
and be united with us. 


O Ashvinis! There are seven sacred rivers. The 
vessels have been filled thrice with water from these 
sacred rivers. The oblations have been divided into 
three. The two of you travel in the ‘hree worlds (loka). 
You are the ones who protect divine happiness during 
night and day. 


(The seven sacred rivers were Indus (Sindhu), 
Vitasta, Asikli, Parushni, Vipasha, Shatadru and 
Sarasvati. The three lokas were the earth (prithivi), the 
atmosphere (antariksha) and heaven (dyuloka),) 


O gods who ensure that truth prevails! Where are 
the three pillars that hold up your chariot? Where are 
its three wheels? When will powerful donkeys be 
hamessed to your chariot? When will you climb into 
your chariot and come here? 


O Nasatyas! The oblations have been poured into 
the fire. Come here. Drink the sweet soma juice with 
your mouths. Wonderful are the decorations on your 
chariot. Before the onset of dawn, the sun sends your 
chariot to the sacrifice. 


(Nasatyas is another name for the Ashvinis. 
Literally, the word means one who preserves the truth. 
Sacrifices were begun at the stroke of dawn.) 


O Nasatyas! Come with the thirty-three gods to 
drink the soma juice we have offered. Grant us long 


14 


lives and purify us of our sins. Stay with us and purge 
us of all thoughts of enmity. 


O Ashvinis! Three are the pillars that hold up your 
chariot. Bring us riches in that chariot. Bring us 
valour. We call upon you for protection and 
happiness. Increase our intelligence at the time of 
battle. 


(The thirty-three gods included eight Vasus, eleven 
Rudras and twelve Adityas. This adds up to thirty-one. 
The remaining two are sometimes identified as 
Prajapati and Vashatkar.) 


The Vishvadevas 


(The ‘Vishvadevas’ was a general expression which 
signified all the gods collectively. Sometimes the 
suggestion however is that Vishvadevas were a special 
group of gods. In the hymn that follows, most verses 
are addressed to the Vishvadevas, although other 
gods are also mentioned. This hymn is important as it 
includes a phrase that is often quoted. Ekam sad vipra 
vahudha vadanti - truth is one, but the learned speck of 
it in various ways. The hymn is ascribed to the sage 
Dirghatama, the son of the sage Ouchathya. The 
metres that figure are trishtupa, jagati, prastarapamkti 
and anushtupa.) 


Surya is the beautiful one. He is the one who rules 
over everything and sucks out the juices from the 
earth. The brother who is in the middle pervades 
everything. The younger brother has a radiant back 
and his back is sprinkled with clarified butter. I have 


1S 


seen the one who rules over the world through his 
seven sons. 


(Surya is the god of the sun. The three brothers are 
Surya, Vayu and Agni. Surya rules in dyuloka and is 
the eldest. Vayu rules in antariksha and is the brother 
who is in the middle. Agni rules on pzithivi and is the 
youngest brother. The seven sons are Surya’s seven 
rays with which Surya governs the world.) 


Surya’s chariot has only one wheel, but seven 
horses are harnessed to it. Although there seem to be 
seven horses, there is actually only one horse with seven 
names. The immortal and constant wheel has three 
naves. It is through this wheei that the entire universe is 
established. 


(The seven horses are again the seven rays of the 
sun, which actually are but one. The three naves have 
been identified as the seasons autumn, summer and 
monsoon.) 


Seven are the rays that sit astride the sun’s chariot. 
Seven are the wheels and seven the horses that Surya 
uses to drive through time. Seven are the forms of 
speech that worship the sun. The seven sisters praise 
Surya in the four directions. 


(The seven wheels refer to different periods into 
which time is divided. These are ayana (six months), 
ritu (season), masa (month), paksha (fortnight), dina 
(day), rata (night) and muiurta (roughly equivalent to 
an hour). The seven forms of speech are the seven 
major metres. The seven sisters could be these metres. 
Alternatively, they could be the seven sacred rivers.) 


16 


He who has no bones created all living beings that 
have bones. Did anyone see him being created? 
Where then were to be found the life, the blood and 
the soul of the earth? Who is the leamed one who 
knows the answers to these questions? 


(This refers to the creation and the one with no 
bones is Prajapati, the creator. The life of the earth is 
the wind, the blood is the water, and the soul is the 
sun. The sense is that these were not present prior to 
creation.) 


I am the one whose learning is incomplete. Yet, 
with all due humility, I wish to know how the gods 
were created. The learned ones used seven different 
types of thread to create the universe that can be seen 
and lived in. 


(The learned ones are the gods. They created the 
universe with seven threads - mind, life, earth, water, 
energy, wind and the sky.) 


He who created the six regions of the universe is 
Prajapati. He himself was not bom. Who can 
comprehend the nature of Prajapati? I am the 
ignorant one, but I wish to learn of this knowledge. I 
will resort to the learned for wisdom. 


(Three lokas or regions have already been 
mentioned. There is a reference here to three 
additional regions that are above these.) 


Surya is handsome and always mobile. Who knows 
of the origin of the sun? Let that learned one come 
here and reveal to me the knowledge. The supreme 


17 


rays of the sun suck up the water from the earth. The 
water is borne by the sun and is then rained down on 
earth. 


The earth is the mother and heaven is the father. 
They had united to bring about the cosmic act of 
creation. The earth bore the foodgrains in her womb. 
May those who desire foodgrains worship the earth. 


It is the sun’s powers of preservation that bear up 
the earth. The calf saw the many forms of the cow in 
the three worlds and began to call. It was then that 
the seed was implanted in the womb of the earth. 


(The cow symbolises the rays of the sun that create 
clouds and rain, and the clouds are the calf. The 
calling of the calf indicated thunder and then it began 
to rain. It is this rain that leads to the seed of 
foodgrains being implanted in the womb of the earth.) 


Prajapati alone bears aloft the three mothers and the 
three fathers. He bears them, but is above them all. He is 
untouched by misery. He knows the universe and rules 
over it, but himself remains unattached. The gods who 
populate heaven debate about the nature of Prajapati. 


(The three mothers are heaven, the atmosphere and 
the earth. The three fathers are Surya, Vayu and Agni.) 


Twelve are the spokes (the twelve months) on the 
sun’s wheel. Surya’s wheel traverses heaven in the four 
directions. It never wears thin. O Agni! The seven 
hundred and twenty twin sons are always present. 


(The seven hundred and twenty twin sons are the 
three hundred and sixty days and three hundred and 


sixty nights in any year.) 


18 


The father has five feet and twelve forms. Some say 
that he traverses the further half of heaven. Others 
say that the chariot has seven wheels and six spokes. 


(This is difficult to interpret. The father is Surya. He 
traverses the further half of heaven, that is, the sky as 
opposed to the earth. The twelve forms are the twelve 
months and the five feet are the five seasons spring, 
monsoon, summer, autumn and winter. There are six 
spokes when autumn is further subdivided into early , 
autumn and late autumn. The seven wheels are the 
seven rays of the sun.) 


All the worlds are gathered together in the 
movement of the wheel with the five spokes (the five 
seasons). No matter what the weight may be, the axle 
of the wheel never gets heated. It travels perpetually 
through time, but never breaks. 


The wheel with the axle is like the universe and 
moves all the time. It never breaks. When nature was 
created, the chariot began to be drawn by ten horses. 
The sun’s radiance is shrouded in water and it is the 
sun who rules over all the worlds. 


(The ten horses are intelligence, mind, heart, ego, 
the earth, water, fire, wind, sky and the soul.) 


The seven elements were created at the same time. 
They have the same origin, that is, Prajapati. Six of these 
are connected to one another, like twins. They are like 
the sages who were created by the gods. In six of them, 
independent sacrifices are held, depending on the 
occasion. Although the seven elements function 
independently, they were created at the same time 
and have the same origin. 


13 


(This is difficult to interpret. The six who are 
connected to one another seem to be the six seasons, 
of two months each. The seventh element is the 
thirteenth intercalary month ) 


The rays of the sun have both masculine and 
feminine traits. He who has the eyes of learning can 
see this. He who is blind and ignorunt never realises 
this. Learned sons know this wisdom and become so 
learned that they are as revered as fathers. 


The cow (the sun) has borne her calf (the clouds) in 
the region that is below heaven and above the earth. 
Who knows where the cow travels? And who knows 
where the calf is born? This much is certain that the 
calf is not born on earth. * 


The earth is below heaven and Agni is the ruler of the 
earth. Heaven is above the earth and Surya is the ruler of 
heaven. Who knows where divine minds originate? He 
who knows the answer to this question is learned. Let him 
come here and tell us the answer. 


The universe is in constant movement. That which 
is near today, is far tomorrow. That which is far today, 
is near tomorrow. O Soma! You and Indra have 
created the paths that you traverse. Along these 
paths, your steeds draw your chariots. Thus it is that 
all the worlds are pulled. 


(Soma is a personification of the soma herb, but is 
also identified with the moon-god. In this context, the 
sun is being referred to as Indra. That is, the sun and 
the moon traverse paths across the sky). 


20 


The two birds have beautiful wings. They sit on the 
same tree and are friends. One of the birds eats the 
sweet fruit that grows on the tree. The other does not 
eat the fruit, it merely manifests itself. 


(The two birds are the divine soul (paramatman) 
and the human soul (atman). The tree is the world. 
The paramatman and the atman are intimateiy 
connected with each other. The atman savours the 
fruit of the world, that is, the rewards of actions. But 
the paramatman does not savour these fruit. It remains ~ 
a detached and passive spectator.) 


The two birds with beautiful wings sit on the tree and 
pray for immortality with their words. May the learned one 
who is the lord of the universe impart wisdom to my 
ignorant heart. 


The two birds with beautiful wings sit on the tree 
that is the world. They create all living beings and 
drink the honey that the tree provides. Sweet are the 
fruits that grow in the upper parts of the tree. But he 
who does not know the nature of the paramatman, 
does not get to eat these fruits. 


Gayatri is established on gayatri, trishtupa is 
established on trishtupa and jagati is established on 
jagati. He who knows this, attains the immortality that 
knowledge confers. 


(Gayatnh, trishtupa and jagati are metres. But this 
verse is interpreted as follows. Agni (the first gayatri) 
has been established on earth (the second gayatri). 
Vayu (the first trishtupa) has been established in the 
atmosphere (the second trishtupa). Surya (the first 


21 


jagati) has been established in heaven (the second 
jagati).) 


Riks have been composed in the gayatri metre. Many 
riks taken together, constitute sama hymns. Hymns have 
also been composed in the trishtupa metre. With different 
combinations of syllables, the seven raajor metres can be 
formed. 


Surya is the speedy one. Through the sun, Prajapati 
ensured that there is always water in heaven. The sun 
is united with the earth through the medium of rain. 
It is said that the sun is like a verse that has three 
components. It is Surya who enhances the strength 
and greatness of Prajapati. . 


(The three components of the sun are heaven, the 
atmosphere and the earth.) 


For the sacrifice, I call upon the cow which yields 
excellent milk. I call upon the person who will milk 
the cow with his hands. May Savita (the sun) grant 
me a plentiful supply of milk. May the containers for 
boiling the milk be heated. 


The cow calls to her beloved calf. She yields the 
milk that will ensure prosperity and nourish the eight 
Vasus. This cow does not deserve to be killed. Milk will 
be provided for the Ashvinis. May the cow thrive so that 
prosperity is ensured. 


The eyes of the calf are closed. The cow calls and 
goes near the calf. She licks its head and drags its 
mouth to her udders. The cow calls. Her udders are 
warm. She will satiate the calf with her milk. 


22 


The clouds have covered the sun’s rays form the 
four directions. The clouds thunder. The lightning 
that is in the clouds roars. Through their act of 
showering rain, the clouds ensure that mankind 
thrives. Once it rains, the clouds shine in their glory. 


The atman is always mobile. When life is over, the 
atman forsakes the physical body that is dead and 
enters a new one. The atman resides with the physical 
body, but is itself immortal. Through its powers, the 
atman moves all the time. 


I have seen the sun which never falls down. I have 
seen the sun which travels far and near. I have seen 
the sun who is the protector. The sun is the one whose 
energy blazes forth in the four directions. The sun 
manifests himself in the world. 


So vast is the universe that he who has created it 
does not know its full expanse. When the atman tries 
to visualise the universe, the universe seems to 
disappear. The atman is born in the mother’s womb. It 
has many offspring. And although the atman is itself 
immortal, the physical body must eventually die. 


Heaven has created me and heaven is my 
preserver. Heaven is like my brother and is the 
fulcrum of my being. This vast earth is my mother. 
Heaven and earth are like two vessels that face each 
other. The sun is between the two. It is the sun who 
implants the seed of foodgrains in the womb of the 
‘earth. 


1 ask you about the end of this earth. I ask you 
about the centre of this universe. I ask you about the 
origin of horses. I ask you about the origin of speech. 


Z3 


This sacrificial altar is the end of the earth. This 
sacrifice is the centre of the universe. Soma is the 
origin of all horses. The brahman (the divine essence) 
is the origin of all speech. 


(The sacrificial altar is the end of the earth as it is the 
place that is closest to heaven. It is there that the gods 
come to meet men. The brahman is used synonymously 
with the paramatman.) 


The essence of the universe is in seven sons. They 
follow their own paths according to the instructions 
received from the supreme godhead. The seven sons 
encompass the entire universe. There is nothing that 
is beyond their reach. 7 


(The seven sons are mind, life and the five elements 
cf earth, water, energy, the wind and the sky. 
Everything in the universe is formed out of these seven 
constituents.) 


1 do not know what the atman may be compared to. 
The atman is constrained inside the physical body, but 
the mind is free to wander. When the atman is united 
with the paramatman and realises the truth, it is then 
that ! grasp the significance of these words. 


The atman is immortal. But it remains with the 
mortal body through its own powers. The atman 
attains higher births and lower ones. The physical 
body and the atman are together, but their 
destinations are different. People can easily see the 
physica! body. But it is difficult to visualise the atman. 


24 


The paramatman is as vast as the sky and as 
constant as the syllables of the riks. All the gods are to 
be found in the paramatman. What use are the 
mantras of the Vedas to someone who does not 
understand the nature of the great brahman? He who 
knows the paramatman is the one who is the most 
learned. He gets to sit in the most elevated of places. 


O cows! You do not deserve to be killed. Drink the 
purest of water and eat the best of grass. May you 
have good fortune. Roam at will. May we also have 
good fortune. 


The cow (here symbolising clouds) which gives 
water has thundered. Sometimes the cow has one foot, 
sometimes two, sometimes four, sometimes eight and 
sometimes nine. It is the voice of heaven itself that 
thunders in a thousand syllables. 


(The clouds have only one foot when they thunder 
only from the cloud. There are two feet when the 
thunder is heard both from the cloud and from the 
sky. Similarly, the four feet refer to the four cardinal 
points and the eight feet to the four cardinal points 
plus the four intermediate points. Nine feet include, in 
addition, the zenith.) 


From the cow, the oceans flow. It is because of the 
cow that the four directions prosper. The rains shower so 
that the entire universe can live. 


From a great distance, I have seen the many forms 
of powerful smoke. (I therefore know that there must 
be a fire.) There the brave ones are preparing the soma 


Zs 


juice that is the source of strength. This is what must 
always be done before any major task is embarked on. 


The objects with three rays can be seen, depending 
on the season. One of them is lit once every year. The 
second lights up the entire universe with its rays. The 
movement of the third can be seen, but its form itself 
remains invisible. 


(The objects with three rays are Agni, Surya and 
Vayu. The flames of the fire were lit at the beginning 
of the year and the fire was not put out throughout 
the year. Surya’s rays light up the universe. Vayu is 
the one who remains invisible, although the 
movement of the wind can be seen.) 


Speech has been measured out in four divisions. 
Learned brahmanas are aware of this division. Three of 
these divisions remain secret and do not appear. It is 
the fourth division that mankind are familiar with. 


(This is obscure, but the meaning seems to be as 
follows. The first division of speech is its origin. The 
second division of speech is when it reaches the heart. 
The third division of speech is when it reaches the 
brain. These three divisions cannot be seen. The 
fourth and final division of speech is when it reaches 
the mouth. This is the one that can be seen, or felt.) 


Truth is one (the paramatman). Learned people refer 
to it by various names. Some call it Indra, others 
Mitra, others Varuna and still others Agni. It is 
referred to as Yama or as Matarishvan. It is also 
known as the golden-winged Garutman (a celestial 


bird). 


26 


The rays of the sun carry water up into the sky. The 
water next descends from the atmosphere in the form 
of rain. It is this water that makes the earth wet. 


There is a wheel which has twelve bounds around 
it. The wheel has three naves and three hundred and 
sixty spokes. Only the learned ones know of this. 


(The bounds are the twelve months. The naves are 
the three seasons of summer, autumn and monsoon. 
The spokes are the three hundred and sixty days.) 


O Sarasvati! You are the source of happiness. 
Nurture us with all sorts of riches. You are the 
possessor of jewels, you are the one who grants jewels. 
You grant the gifts that ensure our welfare. May you 
look upon us with favour. 


(Sarasvati was a river. It was only later that she 
came to be identified as the goddess of leaming.) 


The gods themselves worship the paramatman. The 
worship of the paramatman is the righteous path. He 
who follows this dictum achieves the best of wortds, 
where there is perpetual happiness. ‘t is there that the 
gods dwell. 


During the space of a day, it is the same water that 
goes up (into the sky) and comes down. The clouds 
satisfy the eaith and the fires of heaven. 


I call upon Surya for the sake of my protection. He 
is the one who was born in heaven and he is the one 
who is always on the move. He is the fulcrum of the 
water as he ensures that it rains He nourishes the 
herbs and satisfies the earth. i worship Surya. 


Pele 
MANDALA TWO 


(This mandala has 43 suktas and 429 mantras. 
Almost all the suktas are ascribed to a sage named 
Gritsamada). 


Rudra 


(The bulk of the suktas in mandala two are 
addressed to Indra. Then follow those addressed to 
Agni. But since we have already recapitulated suktas 
addressed to Indra and Agni, we now choose one that 
is addressed to Rudra. The Rudra of the Vedas seems to 
have been a god of storms. It was only later that he 
came to be identified with Shiva. Rudra is the father 
of the Maruts, who were gods of the wind. The hymn 
that follows is composed in the trishtupa metre.) 


O father of the Maruts! Confer happiness on us. 
May we not be parted from the rays of the sun. May 
our warriors be able to vanquish enemies in battle. O 
Rudra! May we have many subjects. 


O Rudra!’ You will grant us the herbs that bring 
happiness. With their aid, we will be able to live for a 
hundred years. May we be free of all thoughts of 
hatred. May we never sin. May the diseases that 
overcome the body maintain their distance. 


O Rudra! Your riches make you the best of all objects 
that have been created. You are the one who holds 
weapons in your hands. You are the strongest of the 
Strong. Preserve us from sin and ensure our welfare. 
May we never tread the path of evil. 


28 


O Rudra! May we never anger you through worship, 
that is fraudulent. May we not anger you through the 
utterance of hymns that are improper. May we not 
anger you through mixed worship. Make our progeny 
strong through your herbs. I have learnt that you are 
the best of all physicians. 


(Mixed worship signifies worship in which otner 
gods are also invoked together with Rudra.) 


Rudra is the one who is summoned through 
oblations and hymns. May I pacify Rudra through my 
hymns. He is the one who has a soft heart. He is the 
one who deserves to be prayed to. He is the nourisher 
and preserver. He is the one who grants us the best of 
protection. May we not fall prey to envy and anger 
Rudra. 


Rudra is the strong one. He is the one who is 
associated with the Maruts. We seek Rudra’s favour 
May he satisfy us through foodgrains that provide 
energy. Those who suffer from the sun seek the refuge 
of the shade. Like that, we are plagued by sin and seek 
refuge with Rudra. May we be happy. May we be able 
to serve Rudra. 


O Rudra! Your hands banish disease. Your hands 
grant happiness. Where are those hands? Lay them 
on us. Forgive us our sins and remove any impediments 
that the gods may cast in our paths. 


You are the one who nourishes everything. You 
permeate all objects that are full of strength and 
energy. I praise you as best as I can. May the radiant 


29 


Rudra be pleased with our prayers. We chant Rudra’s 
glorious names. 


Rudra is the one whose body is firm. Many are his 
forms. He is the radiant one who nourishes. He is the 
one who is lit up through his energy. He nurtures all 
that there is in this universe. He is the supreme ruler. 
Rudra always has the power to destroy the demons. 


O Rudra! You are the deserving one who holds bows 
and arrows. You are the one who deserves worship. 
You bear the metal gold, gold of many hues. You are 
the protector of this vast universe. O Rudra! There is no 
one to rival your energy. 


O man! Rudra is the famous one. He is the one who 
rides in a chariot. He is as terrible as a young lion. He is 
the brave one who destroys enemies. Pray to him. O 
Rudra! Be pleased and confer happiness on your 
devotees. Let your soldiers not kill us, let them kill others 
instead. 


© Rudra! A son worships his revered father. Like 
that, we are praying to you. We pray that you may be 
near us. You are the one who protects those who are 
righteous. You are the one who grants boons. May 
Rudra be pleased through our prayers and grant us 
herbs. 


O Miuruts! You are the strong ones. You possess pure 
and s.cred herbs. Grant 11s the herbs that will ensure 
our welfare and confer happiness on us. These are the 
herbs; that our father Manu accepted. These are the 
herbs that please Rudra and banish disease. We crave 
these herbs. 


30 


(Manu was the father of the human race, although 
‘there were several Manus. One of these Manus built a 
boat when there was an universal flood, and 
preserved himself in it. The Mahabharata states that 
Manu took some seeds with him into the boat.) 


May we not suffer from Rudro’s terrible weapons. 
May his anger plague others. O Rudra! Grant us 
happiness. May you not use your bow when you deal 
with us. Make our sons and grandsons happy. 


You are the nourishers and the preserver of the 
universe. You are the strong and radiant one. You are 
the one who is omniscient. Listen to our prayers and 
do not be angered. Reveal to us the way in which we 
may please you. May we be blessed with excellent 
sons and grandsons. May we thus be able to perform 
sacrifices in your honour. 


The Maruts 
(This hymn follows the jagati metre.) 


The Maruts are supreme in the field of battle. They 
are as terrible as lions and force enemies to flee. They 
are as radiant as Agni and their strength deserves 
worship. The Maruts are swift of feet. They are the 
ones who drink the soma juice. May the powers of the 
brave Maruts free us from the prisons of our enemies. 


As stars adom the sky, bangles adorn the hands of 
the brave Maruts. The Maruts are the brave ones who 
shower strength. They are like lightning in the clouds. 
O radiant Maruts! You wear golden necklaces on your 


Sl 


chests. O brave ones! The great Rudra gave you birth 
and the earth was your mother. 


The Maruts make their steeds as strong as 
racehorses. They are the ones who thunder as they 
swiftly charge into battle. O brave Maruts! You are the 
source of inspiration. You are adorned with golden 
helmets. You are the ones who vanquish your 
enemies. You obtain foodgrains from those enemies. 
Come to us with your spotted deer. 


(The relevance of a deer is not at all clear. The 
horses of the Maruts are probably being compared 
with deer.) 


You are the ones who swiftly accomplish victory. 
You are the ones who possess spotted steeds. Your 
riches can never be stolen. You are the ones who 
follow the straight path to upliftment. You are always 
at the forefront of every deed. O Maruts! You are 
seated first at every sacrifice and grant foodgrains to 
our friends who are performing the sacrifice. You are 
the ones who shelter the entire universe. 


O brave Maruts! Great is your inspiration. You 
wield flaming weapons. You are the radiant and energetic 
ones. You are the possessors of riches. You are the ones 
who deserve to be worshipped. You are the owners of 
cows. Come along the immortal paths to the sacrifice at 
which soma juice is being offered. Come here the way a 
swan returns to its nest. 


O Maruts! You are the source of inspiration. You 
are the bravest of the brave. Our sacrifice is blessed 
with leaming and soma juice is being offered on the 


Se 


occasion. Come and bless our cows with an abundant 
supply of milk. Perform the acts that will ensure to 
your devotees unlimited foodgrains and beauty. 


O brave Maruts! Grant us courageous sons who 
may ride on our chariots. May we be blessed with 
learned sons. May your devotees be blessed with the 
foodgrains that they desire. Please grant riches and 
intelligence to the warriors who are brave in battle. 
May their powers of endurance be increased. 


The Maruts are generous in their gifts. They wear 
golden necklaces on their breasts. They will harness 
their horses to their chariots and come here. They will 
grant us prosperity. They will make our houses full of 
foodgrains. They will nourish us the way a cow 
nourishes her calf with milk. 


O brave Maruts! You will establish us. There are 
men who are cruel as wolves; they are our enemies. 
Protect us from their violence. Surround them with 
your chariots, hurl your weapons at them. You are the 
ones who will make our enemies weep. Our enemies 
are greedy. They deserve to be killed. Slay them. 


O brave Maruts! Everyone is familiar with your 
prowess in battle. You will bless us with your 
friendship. You are the ones who drink milk from the 
udders of cows. You are the invincible ones. May those 
who critidse your devotees come to grief. It is well 
known that you will bring destruction to the enemies 
who are attempting to kill the sage Trita. 


O brave Maruts! You are the swift ones. You are the 
great ones. We call upon you so that you may ensure 


33 


our welfare. We call upon you so that our wisdom 
may be increased. We call upon you so that we may 
be able to perform righteous deeds. You are as radiant 
as gold. You are the superior ones. We pray to the 
brave Maruts for riches. 


They are the brave ones who performed a sacrifice 
for ten months. May they inspire us at the time of dawn. 
The blushing rays of dawn encompass the dark night. 
May the shining rays of the brave Maruts encompass the 
entire world. 


(The word that is used for the Maruts is Dashavgas. 
This literally means one who has performed a 
sacrifice for ten months. The Maruts are believed to have 
been the first ones to have performed a sacrifice.) 


The Maruts are the brave ones who make the enemies 
weep. They scatter the enemies in all directions. They 
are adorned in yellow ornaments and yellow clothing. 
May the Maruts thrive in houses where there is no 
shortage of water. May they be beauteous and 
handsome. May they look upon us with favour and impart 
their strength to us. 


The sage Trita called upon the five brave ones for 
his protection. Those were the ones who performed a 
sacrifice. (This is clearly a reference to the Maruts. But 
the number five remains obscure, the Maruts were not 
five in number.) We call upon those to whom the sage 
Trita prayed. We praise them for our protection. 


O brave Maruts! Your powers preserve your 
devotees from sin. Your powers preserve those who 
pray to you from all manner of criticism. We pray to 


34 


your powers of protection. May your powers of 
protection preserve us. May wisdom come to us like a 
lowing cow comes home. 


MANDALA THREE 


(This mandala has 62 suktas and 617 mantras. Most 
of these are ascribed to the sage Vishvamitra or to his 
family. The bulk of the suktas are addressed to Indra, ’ 
followed by Agni. But for the sake of variety, we will 
start with a sukta that is primarily addressed to the 
sacrificial post or yupa. The hymn is composed in a 
mixture of the metres trishtupa and anushtupa.) 


Yupa 

O tree! We wish to become like the gods themselves. 
On the occasion of the sacrifice, we sprinkle you with 
divine nectar (clarified butter). Whether you stand 
straight upright or whether you lie down on the lap of 


the earth, may you grant us riches on the occasion of 
the sacrifice. 


O sacrifidal post! You are the superior one and you 
stand up before the fire of the sacrifice. You are the 
one who listens to the hymns that are a source of 
valour. Banish all evil thoughts from our heads. Stand 
up straight so that you may bring us good fortune. 


O sacrificial post made out of a tree! Stand up straight 
at an auspicious spot on the earth. The ground of the 
sacrifice has been measured out. Stand up there and 
energise the one who is performing the sacrifice. 


35 


The youthful sacrifidal post has been wrapped up 
in excellent dothing and brought to the place of the 
sacrifice. Wonderful is the sight of the sacrifidal post 
ever since it was erected. We are the intelligent and 
leamed ones who, through this sacrifice, wish to 
become like the gods themselves. We have erected the 
sacrifidal post. 


The sacrificial post will increase in glory as the 
sacrifice proceeds through the day. The learned ones 
who are performing the sacrifice will sanctify the post 
through their wisdom. The learned ones who pray to 
the gods will chant hymns. 


O sacrificial post made out of a tree! There are men 
who, by dint of this sacrifice, wish to become godlike. It is 
they who have measured you out. An axe has been used 
to fashion the divine saciifidal post. The yupa which 
stands upright is as radiant as the sun. May the sacifidal 
post grant the devotee subjects and riches. 


An axe was used to cut and trim the sacificial post. 
The officiating priests set it up on the ground. The post 
will purify the sacrifice. May the post grant us the best 
of riches on the occasion of this sacrifice. 


Aditya, Rudra, the Vasus and the other gods 
traverse the best of paths. They populate the vast 
heaven, the atmosphere and the earth and increase 
love in these worlds. May the gods preserve this 
sacrifice. May they hold aloft the post which is the 
symbol of the sacrifice. 


The sacrificial post is full of energy. It shines like the 
sun itself. When the post is set up on the ground, chips 


36 


are lopped off so that a stake may be formed. When 
these chips fall to the ground, it seems as if a flock of 
geese is flying in the sky. The learned ones have set up 
this post on the occasion of the sacrifice. It rises up 
into the atmosphere, the place where the gods roam. 


The sacrificial post shines like the sun. Its sides 
have been lined with rings of iron before the pillar 
was set up in the ground. The yupa gleams like the 
horns of animals. May the sacrificial post listen to the. 
hymns that are being chanted at the time of the 
‘sacrifice. May it protect us at the time of battle. 


A sharp axe was used to fashion out the sacrificial 
post, so that our good fortune may be ensured. O tree 
from which this yupa was made! May you flourish with 
many branches. May we have a thousand branches, 
and prosper. 


Usha 


(Usha is the personification of the dawn. We now 
have a sukta addressed to Usha. The sage to whom 
this hymn is ascribed continues to be Vishvamitra. 
The metre is trishtupa.) 


O Usha! You are the one who grants foodgrains and 
riches. Listen attentively to the hymns we are 
chanting. You are the goddess who deserves to be 
praised by all of us. You have been around for a long 
time, but you are always youthful. You are the wise 
one who permits the observance of religious rites. 


O goddess Usha! You ride on a chariot that is as 
beautiful as the moon. You are the one who inspires 


37 


sweet speech. You are the manifestation of 
immortality. May you manifest yourself. There are 
strong steeds which have the hue of gold. May those 
steeds bring you here. 


O Usha! You are at the forefront of all the worlds. 
You are in the loftiest of places, like the flag of 
immortality. You are the one who is always youthful. 
You keep rotating like a wheel. May you grant us 
prosperity. 

Your radiant rays banish the darkness. You are the 
wife of the day which brings riches. You are the 
beautiful one who makes the day manifest. You are 
the one who grants good fortune. Your light spreads to 
the furthest extremity of heaven and earth. 


O those who are chanting the hymns! The goddess 
Usha is manifesting herself before you. Bow in 
obeisance before her and chant hymns to her. She is 
the one whose energy can be felt in the loftiest parts of 
heaven. She is the one who is the source of all 
sweetness. Beauteous is her form. Radiant Usha is 
becoming manifest. 


Usha is the preserver of truth. Her rays percolate 
through to heaven. Usha is the source of all 
prosperity. It is she who sustains the myriad hues of 
heaven and earth. O Agni! You are lit on earth and your 
flames spread upwards as if to greet Usha. 


It is the powerful Surya who sends Usha at the onset 
of the day. Usha spreads herself in heaven and on 
earth. The energies of Mitra and Varuna bear Usha’s 
rays in the four directions. Usha is golden. 


38 
MANDALA FOUR 


(This mandala has 58 suktas and 589 mantras. Most 
of these are ascribed to the sage Vamadeva, the son of 
the sage Goutama. The bulk of the suktas are 
addressed to Agni. We however start with one that is 
addressed to the falcon (shyena). This falcon brings 
down soma juice from heaven. Agni, in his form of 
lightning, rends the clouds and brings down a shower 
of rain. The lightning is being compared to a falcon 
and the rain to soma juice. The metre in which the 
hymn is composed is mostly trishtupa.) 


Shyena 


When I (the falcon) was in the womb, I learnt the 
account of the birth of the gods. A hundred cities 
fortified with iron protected me. But I swiftly emerged 
in the form of a falcon. 


(The context is that of the falcon bringing soma 
juice from heaven. The hundred cities of the gods in 
heaven were protected through iron fortifications. But 
despite these, the falcon managed to emerge with the 
soma juice.) 


Those cities could not surround me well. I overcame 
the cities with my great powers. The paramatman, who is 
the creator of all that there is, destroyed the enemies. 
The paramatman killed the enemies who were as swift 
as the wind. 


The falcon thundered in heaven when it grasped the 
soma. The learmed ones who were the protectors of the 


39 


soma, tried to take it away from the falcon. The swift 
archer Krishanu strung his bow and let fly an arrow at 
the falcon. 


(Krishanu was one of the guards who protected the 
soma.) 


The falcon flew in a straight path. It brought the 
soma from heaven, despite the fact that Indra himself 
protects heaven. The falcon rescued the soma the way 
the Ashvinis rescued Bhujyu. In the fight that ensued, 
one of the wings of the falcon was cut off with a 
weapon. 


(Bhujyu was a sage who was resaied by the 
Ashvinis from drowning. The fight and the weapon 
refer to Krishanu’s shooting an arrow at the falcon. 
Krishanu has been interpreted as the demon of 
drought. He prevents mankind from enjoying the 
fruits of rainfall. The wing of the falcon fell off and 
became the pama or palasha tree.) 


It was after all this that the powerful soma juice was 
kept in pots. The energetic adhvaryu priests mixed the 
soma juice with the milk of cows. The excellent juice 
was sweet and brought satiation. It was like food and 
brought bliss to the prosperous Indra. The brave Indra 
drank soma juice for his happiness. May Indra accept 
the soma juice. 


Dadhikra 

(This sukta is addressed to Dadhikra. Dadhikra was 
a mythical being, a bit like a celestial horse. The 
name is derived from dadhi (curds) and kri (to scatter). 


40 


Dadhikra has been identified as a personification of 
the morning sun. The rising sun seems to spread dew 
and frost and these are likened to curds. This 
sukta also is ascribed to Vamadeva and the metre is 
trishtupa.) 


O heaven and earth! The generous Trasadasyu gave 
mankind many riches. All of these riches belong to the 
two of you. You have granted us horses that conquer the 
land. You have granted us sons who will make the land 
fertile. You nave granted us sharp weapons so that we 
may triumph over the evil ones. 


(Heaven and earth were regarded as the parents of 
Dadhikra. Trasadasyu was a victorious king. He was 
favoured by the gods, particularly the Ashvinis.) 


Heaven and earth bore the strong Dadhikra. He is 
the destroyer of many enemies. He is the one who 
brings welfare to all of mankind. The energetic Dadhikra 
traverses a straight path like the falcon bird. The best of 
men have praised him. He is as swift and brave as a 
great king. 


The god Dadhikra is as fast as water flowing 
downhill. He is the brave one who desires to triumph 
in all battles. He is the one who advances on his feet 
and is as fleet-footed as Vayu. Dadhikra is the one who 
inspires our chariots. It is him that all men seek to please. 


He is the god who prevents riches from falling into the 
hands of the enemy at the time of battle. He is the one 
who travels everywhere and in all the directions with his 
riches, Dadhikra is the one who uses his weapons and 


41 


becomes famous in battle. He is the god who will 
vanquish the enemies of the best of men. 


Men shout when they see a thief running off with 
articles of clothing. Like that, the soldiers of the 
enemy shout when they see Dadhikra’s prowess in 
battle. Great are his riches and great his animals. 
Other birds flee when they see a hungry vulture 
descending. Like that, enemies flee when they catch 
sight of Dadhikra. 


Dadhikra advances in the front. The wheels of his 
chariot plough through the ranks of the enemy. The 
handsome Dadhikra adorns his body with garlands, 
like women do. He bites at the bridle and his hooves 
raise a cloud of dust. (Remember that the image is 
that of a horse.) 


The strong horse destroys enemies in the course of 
battle. He licks his body and serves himself. Swiftly 
does Dadhikra advance on the enemies. Straight is his 
path as the cloud of dust is raised. The dust is such 
that it blinds his own eyes. 


So great is Dadhikra’s prowess that enemies cower 
before him, the way they shrink before a stroke of 
lightning. The enemies are scared of his attack, as 
they know that it brings certain destruction. In the 
four directions, Dadhikra fights with thousands of 
enemies. And no one can stand up to the terrible one. 


He is the swift one who fulfils the desires of all men. 
Men pray to his speed and valour. Warriors who 
advance into battle say that Dadhikra tore through 
the ranks of a thousand enemies. 


42 


Surya spreads his radiance throughout the 
atmosphere. Like that, Dadhikra’s energy spreads 
through the five types of men. Hundreds and 
thousands are the riches that this powerful horse 
grants. May Dadhikra listen to our prayers and grant 
us sweet boons. 


(The five types of men are priests, warriors, traders, 
artisans and slaves.) 


Ghrita 


(Ghrita is clarified butter. Although Agni and Surya 
are mentioned in the hymn that follows, the hymn is 
essentially addressed to clarified butter. The sukta is 
ascribed to the sage Vamadeva and the metre is a 
combination of trishtupa and jagati.) 


From the ocean, waves of sweetness surged forth. 
These mixed with soma juice and _ attained 
immortality. Ghrita has a secret name. It is the tongue of 
the gods and the navel of amrita. 


(Amrita is a heavenly drink that confers 
immortality. But that apart, the rest of the passage is 
exceedingly obscure. The ocean probably represents 
the sacrificial fire and the waves are the clarified 
butter that is poured into the fire as libation. The sense of 
the second part may be that ghnta pleases the tongues of 
the gods and is like a heavenly drink.) 


We praise ghrita. May we worship it on the occasion 
of this sacrifice. May the brahman listen to the prayers 
that we are chanting. The buffalo (goura) with four 
horns created this universe. 


43 


(The buffalo is the paramatman or the brahman. The 
four homs are interpreted as the four Vedas.) 


The god of the sacrifice (Agni) has four horns (the 
four Vedas) and three legs (morning, afternoon and 
evening). He has two heads. (The two heads are two 
ceremonies named brahmoudana and pravargya. At 
the brahmoudana ceremony, boiled rice was 
distributed to brahmanas. Pravargya formed part of the 
ceremony of offering soma juice. At this, fresh milk 
was poured into a heated vessel.) The god has seven 
hands (the seven basic metres). He is the strong god 
who roars at the three places where he is tethered. 
(The three bonds are the three components of the 
sacrifice, mantras, brahmanas and kalpas. Kalpas refer 
to ceremonies.) The god of the sacvifice is always to be 
found among men. 


The gods discovered how the panis had hidden the 
three types of clarified butter among cows. The first 
type was created by Indra, the second by Surya, and 
the third type by all the gods from the energy of fire. 


(The three types of clarified butter signify milk, 
curds and butter. The creation of milk is ascribed to 
Indra, that of curds to Surya, and that of butter 
primarily to Agni. The panis were robbers or 
malignant demons. They stole cows and hid them in 
caves.) 

From the ocean, the sacred flow issues in a hundred 


streams. The enemies have not been able to see this 
flow. I have seen the sacred flow of clarified butter. | 


44 


see the radiant and golden Agni in the midst of this 
flow. 


This flow of energy issues out of the heart. It is 
purified by the mind and flows like a river that is the 
source of happiness. The flow of clarified butter is as 
swift as a deer fleeing from a hunter. 


The juice flows as swiftly as the water of a river _ 
coursing downhill. It is as strong as Vayu. The waves 
surge and the juice dashes like a strong horse. Great 
streams of clarified butter flow. 


Wives who are good at heart happily unite with 
their husbands. Like that, the flows of clarified butter 
unite with Agni. The flames of the fire are pleased at 
the offerings of clarified butter. They rise upwards. 


A saqifice is held at the place where soma juice is 
extracted. It is there that flows of clarified butter are to be 
found. A bride who is about to be married, is adorned with 
ornaments and looks radiant. Radiant are the flows of 
Clarified butter, as 1 gaze upon them. 


O men! Chant excellent hymns for the gods. O 
gods! Grant us cows and victory. Grant us riches that 
will ensure our welfare. May our sacrifice attain the 
gods. Sweet indeed is the clarified butter that flows. 


O paramatman! The entire universe seeks refuge in 
your energy. Your sweet juices flow in the ocean. Your 
sweet juices flow in our hearts. They are to be found in 
foodgrains and in water. They are to be found in the 
midst cf battles. May your sweet juices fulfil us. 


45 
MANDALA FIVE 


(This mandala has 87 suktas and 727 mantras. These 
are ascribed to various sages. The suktas are addressed 
mostly to Agni, followed by the Vishvadevas, the 
Maruts and Indra, in that order. We begin with a 
sukta addressed to the apris. Apris is a collective name 
for gods and deified objects. Many such deified objects 
were forms of Agni. Apri suktas were recited prior to 
animal sacrifices. The sukta we reproduce is ascribed 
to the sage Vasushruta, the son of the sage Atri. The 
metre is gayatri.) 


Apris 

O men! Agni is the learned one. His flames are full 
of energy and flare up well. Offer into the fire oblations of 
powerful clarified butter. 


Agni is the one who is praised by men. May Agni 
inspire this sacrifice. Agni is the non-violent one. He is 
the learned one. His rays are full of sweetness. 


O Agni! Be praised and offer us protection. Come to 
us on the chariot that brings happiness. Bring our 
beloved Indra here. Indra is the one who is strong. 


O men! Spread out as seats mats that are soft as 
wool. The chanting of hymns has begun. O powerful 
seats! May you grant us riches. 


O divine doors! May you open. May you be blessed 
with excellent qualities and may you grant us protection in 
the course of the sacrifice. (This refers to the doors of the 


saqifidal hall.) 


46 


O night and dawn! You are beauteous of form. You 
increase our life expectancies. You enable this great 
sacrifice to be performed. We pray to you. 


O officiating priests! You are divine. May the two of 
you be praised. May your speed be that of the wind 
and may you swiftly come to this sacrifice that is 
being performed by men. (The two divine officiating 
priests could be Agni and Aditya, or Agni and Varuna.). 


May the three goddesses Ila, Sarasvati and Bharati 
grant us happiness. May they be non-violent. May 
they come and be seated on the occasion of the 
sacrifice. 


(Ila has been identified as the goddess of sacred 
speech and action. Sarasvati was a river, and so, a 
river-deity. Later, she came to be identified with the 
goddess of speech. Bharati has also been identified as 
a goddess of speech.) 


O Tvashta! You are great and you are the one who 
grants welfare. Come here and nourish us on the 
occasion of every sacrifice. Grant us protection. 


(Ivashta was a divine artisan and the architect of 
the gods.) 


O vanaspati! You are acquainted with the secret 
places of the gods. Take our oblations to the gods. 


(Vanaspati means a tree. But here, it seems to 
signify the sacrifidal stake.) 


These offerings are being made to Agni. These 
offerings are being made to Varuna. These offerings 


47 


are being made to Indra and the Maruts. These 
offerings are being made to all the gods. 


Mitravaruna 

(Mitra and Varuna are often addressed in unison 
and referred to as Mitravaruna. Mitra presides over 
the day and Varuna over the night. This sukta is 
addressed to Mitravaruna and is composed in the 
trishtupa metre. It is ascribed to the sage 
Shrutavidatreya.) 


O Mitravaruna! The two of you have places that 
are always constant. That is the place where the sun’s 
horses (the rays) are unharnessed and the true nature 
of the sun is shrouded in water’ (This seems to 
visualise an ocean in heaven. And the sun traverses 
this ocean.) One thousand horses dwell together. I have 
seen the beauty of those handsome gods. 


O Mitravaruna! Wonderful is your greatness. One 
of you is always mobile and instils juices in trees and 
herbs. The second one nourishes the celestial cow with 
energy. One of you possesses a wheel that always 
moves. 


(Both Mitra and Varuna were probably 
manifestations of Surya. But in this passage, Mitra 
seems to be identified with the sun and Varuna with 
water. The sun is the one who is always mobile and 
whose wheel moves constantly. The celestial cow is an 
image for clouds and tnese are nourished by Varuna’s 


water.) 


48 


O powerful Mitravaruna! You are the ones who 
bear up heaven and earth through your energy. You 
are the ones who nourish and sustain trees, herbs and 
cows. You are the ones who grant boons with 
quickness. You are the ones who make rain flow in 
torrents. 


O Mitravaruna! May steeds that are harnessed well 
bring you here. May the bridles of the horses bring 
you here. Your forms mirror clarified butter. You make 
rivers of clarified butter flow down from heaven. 


(The rivers of clarified butter that flow down from 
heaven must be an image for rain.) 


O Mitravaruna! You are the source of strength. You 
have been famous from time immemorial. You 
protect the earth in the way that mantras protect a 
sacrifice. You are the source of foodgrains. You dimb 
into your chariot and come to the place of the 
sacrifice. 


Your hands remove all impediments. You are 
capable of protecting us even when you are at a 
distance. You are the ones who do not cause violence 
to anyone. O Mitravaruna! The two. of you combine to 
preserve righteous deeds through a sacrifice. May you 


grant us riches. May you grant us houses with a 
thousand pillars. 


Beautiful is the chariot of these gods. The pillars in the 
chariot are made of gold. The chariot shines in heaven 
like lightning. The sacrifidal altar has been measured out 
in an auspicious place. It has been sprinkled with 


49 


sacred water. May Mitravaruna come here on their 
chariot. 


O Mitravaruna! When dawn manifests herself and 
the sun rises, you climb into your chariot. You dimb 
into the chariot with golden pillars. From your chariot 
you gaze upon the earth and the beings who dwell 
here. 


O Mitravaruna! You are the protector of the universe 
and the granters of excellent boons. You are the ones 
who cannot be vanquished by the most powerful of 
enemies. O Mitravaruna! Pure is your home. Protect us 
from that home of yours. We desire to obtain riches. We 
desire to plunder the riches of our enemies. Grant us 
these boons. 


Savita 

(Savita is a manifestation of Surya in his form of 
the generator. The sukta that follows is addressed to 
Savita and is composed in the metre jagati. It is 
ascribed to the sage Shyavashva, son of the sage Atri.) 


The god Savita is great, intelligent and learned. 
Learned ones devote their minds and_ their 
intelligence to the worship of Savita. Savita is the one 
who knows the best of paths and the best of deeds. It is 
for that reason that he alone is the source of all fame. 
May Savita’s praise increase. 


Savita is the one who can see far into the future. 
Savita is the god who has many forms. He is the one who 
grants welfare to all bipeds and quadrupeds. Savita is the 


50 


superior god who makes heaven manifest. When 
dawn comes, Savita makes his presence felt. 


All the other gods follow the path that is indicated 
by Savita. It is Savita who energises the other gods. 
Savita is the one who measures out the dimensions of 
the earth. Great is Savita’s energy. 


O Savita! You travel in the three radiant worlds. 
You are the one who is associated with the rays of the 
sun. You approach the night from both directions ~ 
(rising and setting). O god! Such are your qualities 
that you befriend everyone. 


O Savita! You alone are the lord and ruler of all the 
worlds that were created. You nourish the universe 
through your care. You are the king of all the worlds. 
Brave warriors who possess energetic horses chant 
hymns dedicated to you. 


Parjanya 

(We now have a sukta that is addressed to Parjanya. 
Parjanya is the god of thunderstorms and rain. The 
sukta is ascribed to the sage Bhoumotri. It is composed 


in a mixture of the metres trishtupa, anushtupa and 
jagati.) 


The clouds are strong and swift. They thunder and 
grant boons. They instil juices into the wombs of trees 
and herbs. O men! Pray to the powerful douds. Pray 
to them well. Pray to them through these words. And 
chant their praise in all humility. 


ball 


Clouds lead to lightning and burn down trees. 
Clouds destroy demons. Such is the terrible fury of: 
clouds that the universe trembles. Those who are evil 
are destroyed through the thunder of clouds. Clouds 
shower down rain and preserve those who are 
righteous. 


Parjanya encompasses the sky with rain. Like a 
charioteer spurring on his horses with a whip, 
Parjanya spurs on the clouds to shower down rain. 
Parjanya’s roar is like that of a lion. It can be heard 
from a great distance. 


The clouds shower down the life force on earth. It is 
then that winds begin to blow. Lightning blazes and 
trees and herbs drink up the water. The sky itself is 
nourished. The earth and the entire universe is 
nourished and begins to prosper. 


It is the acts of the clouds that make the land fertile. 
It is the acts of the couds that make living beings 
thrive. It is the acts of the clouds that make trees and 
herbs grow. O Parjanya! May you grant us a lot of 
happiness. 


O Maruts! Grant us rain from heaven. Nourish us 
through the showers. O clouds! Come towards us with 
your thunder. Shower down rain and make life 
flourish. May the clouds nurture us. 


O Parjanya! May you thunder and roar. May you 
instil juices into the wombs of the trees. Travel in the 
four directions in your watery chariot. Overtum your 
vessels of water so that we may have showers. May 


52 


there be such a lot of rain that there remains no 
difference between mountains and plains. 


O Parjanya! Open up your treasure-house of water. 
May the. water flow downwards. May the rivers 
overflow with water and head towards the east. Fill 
heaven and earth with water so that the cows may 
drink their fill. 


O Parjanya! When you roar and thunder, the evil 
ones are killed. Everything that there is on earth is 
pleased by your action. (The evil ones are the demons 
of drought.) 


O Parjanya! It has rained for many years. Now 
withdraw your showers. You have made the deserts 
fertile. You have provided food for our delight in the 
form of trees and herbs. All the subjects have sung 
your praise. 


Prithivi 
(Prithivi is the earth and the next sukta is addressed 


to prithivi. This too is ascribed to the sage Bhoumotri. It 
is in the anushtupa metre.) 


O prithivi! You are the possessor of excellent 
qualities. You are greatness itself. You satisfy living 
beings through your greatness. You are indeed the 
one who bears aloft the mountains. 


O land! You are full of energy and you move in all 
the directions. You roar like a horse when you accept 
rain from the clouds. Your devotees sing your praise 
through the hymns that they chant. 


53 


O land! There are clouds in heaven and lightning 
streaks through them. It rains and it is your strength 
that sustains trees and herbs on the ground. 


MANDALA SIX 


(This mandala has 75 suktas and 765 mantras. 
Almost all the suktas are ascribed to the sage 
Bharadvaja and his family. The suktas are addressed 
mostly to Indra, followed by Agni. But we have 
already reproduced suktas addressed to Indra and 
Agni. Let us therefore start with a sukta that is 
addressed to cows. This is ascribed to the sage 
Bharadvaja, descended from Brihaspati. It is 
composed in a mixture of the metres trishtupa, jagatiand 
anushtupa.) 


Cows 


May cows come to our homes and may they ensure 
our welfare. May cows reside in the cowsheds and 
please us. Many are the forms that cows take, many 
the hues. Some of them have calves. May the cows 
yield milk in the morning so that offerings can be 
made to Indra. 


Indra is the one who enables sacrifices to be 
performed. He is the one who grants foodgrains. He is 
the one who grants riches. Indra never reduces the 
riches of one who gives alms; instead, he increases 
them. Those who wish to become like the gods are 
thereby protected at their homes. 


54 


Cows never perish. Even thieves bear them no 
hatred. The weapons of the enemies do not pierce 
cows. He who possesses cows uses their milk to make 
offerings to the gods. May he always have cows that 
yield milk. 


May those who invade us on horses not be able to 
rob us of our cows. May they not be able to kill these 
cows. May the cows remain in the possession of he 
who performs sacrifices. May the cows be free from 
fear and roam the vast expanses at will. 


Cows are wealth. May Indra grant me cows. The 
milk obtained from cows should first be mixed with 
soma juice. O men! These cows are nothing but forms 
of Indra. With great devotion, I pray for the proximity 
of the Indra who is in these cows. 


O cows! Make us strong. Make those who are ill and 
lean, strong and handsome. O cows! You are the 
source of blessed speech. Make our households happy. 
Grant us food. May your fame be chanted in the 
assemblies. 


O cows! May you have calves. Eat soft grass and 
drink limpid water from the ponds. May you not be 
stolen by thieves. May you not be possessed by 
sinners. May Rudra’s weapons never pierce you. 


May various objects which give strength be mixed 
with the milk of cows. O Indra! We have mixed milk 
with soma juice so that your strength is increased. 


55 


Pusha 


(Pusha is a manifestation of Surya; that is, he is a 
solar deity. In particular, Pusha acts as a guide on 
travels and protects cows and other possessions. The 
next sukta is addressed to Pusha. It is ascribed to the 
sage Bharadvaja and is composed in the metres 
gayatri and anushtupa.) 


O Pusha! You are the protector of all routes. You 
harness steeds to your chariot so that you may come 
and grant us foodgrains. May you come and increase 
the wisdom of mankind. 


O Pusha! Grant us the riches that wilkbring welfare 
to mankind. Grant us brave sons who will be generous. 
Take us to households where the residents are generous 
of heart. 


O radiant Pusha! There are those who are miserly. 
Change their hearts so that they may become 
generous. Traders tend to be hard of heart. Make their 
hearts soft. 


Seek out the paths that lead to prosperity. Defeat 
assassins and enemies. O brave Pusha! May all our 
acts come to fruition. 


O learned and far-sighted one! If traders continue 
to be hard of heart, destroy them with your weapons. 
For our welfare, demolish all these evil ones. 


O Pusha! The panis are robbers. Bring misery to 
their hearts. May you desire to bring welfare to 
everyone. But destroy our enemies for us. 


56 


O radiant Pusha! You are learned in the usage of 
weapons. But others also display the same knowledge in 
the usage of weapons. O god! Bring wisdom tc our hearts 
so that we may look upon everyone as an equal. May our 
minds be purified and may all thoughts of evil be 
banished. 


O brave warrior! Your power is all pervasive and 
increases the number of animals we posssess. May 
your wisdom be imparted to us. This is our desire. 


O god! Motivate us so that we may serve our cows 
and horses. May we attain foodgrains as well as sons 
and grandsons. May we live in peace with the rest of 
mankind. May our hearts be directed towards that 
purpose. 


Sarasvati 


(The next sukta is addressed to Sarasvati. It is 
ascribed to the sage Bharadvaja and is composed in a 
mixture of the metres gayatni, jagati and trishtupa.) 


Vodhryashvaya (a sage) was generous and patient. 
When he prayed to Sarasvati, the goddess granted 
him a son named Divodasa. Divodasa cancelled all 
his father’s debts. O Sarasvati! Your wisdom is such 
that it destroys those who are misers and bring harm 
to others. 


(Every man owes a debt to his ancestors. That debt is 
repaid only when he gives birth to a son. Once 


Divodasa was born, his father’s ancestral debt was 
cancelled.) 


57 


This Sarasvati (the river) tears down the highest 
peaks of mountains with her torrents. Such is her 
strength that the mountains seem to be as delicate as 
lotus stalks. With sincere devotion, we pray to the 
goddess Sarasvati for our protection. 


© Sarasvati! Destroy those who aiticise god. 
Destroy all the subjects who are rraudulent and evil. 
For the welfare of mankind, grant us the land masses 
that are well protected. You are the one who grants 
foodgrains. You make the waters flow. You nourish 
the worlds. 


The goddess Sarasvati is the source of all 
foodgrains. She is the one who grants foodgrains. May 
the one who protects our intelligence grant us 
protection. 


O goddess Sarasvati! Indra prayed to you before he 
set out to do battle with the demon Vritra. Others too 
invoke you before a fight. 


O goddess Sarasvati! You are the source of strength. 
May you grant us protection in the course of a battle. 
Like Pusha, grant us riches. 


Sarasvati is the valiant one. She rides in a golden 
chariot. She is the one who destroys Vritra. She is the 
one who desires to listen to our prayers. 


Sarasvati’s waters know no bounds. They are swift 
and constantly on the move. The waters roar as they 
course. 


Sarasvati will banish all our enemies. She is a lover 
of the truth. She will take us to her sisters, the other 


58 


rivers. Sarasvati’s radiance is like the sun during the 
day. 


Sarasvati is our beloved one. She is the one who 
deserves to be worshipped. The seven sisters are the 
seven rivers. Sarasvati is the one who deserves to be 
praised. 


(The seven rivers have been named earlier.) 


Sarasvati is the one who grants material wealth. 
She is the one who radiates energy in the atmosphere. 
May Sarasvati preserve us from those who criticise us. 


Sarasvati resides in the three worlds (heaven, the 
atmosphere and the earth). She has seven sisters. She 
increases the prosperity of the five types of men. (The 
five types of men have been enumerated earlier.) She 
is the goddess who should be worshipped before every 
battle. She is the goddess who should be praised before 
every action. 


Sarasvati is supreme among rivers in her greatness, 
her energy and her influence. Her stream is swifter 
than that of other rivers. Her flow is as vast as a 
chariot. The supreme creator himself gave birth to 
Sarasvati. Such is her learning that she should be 
praised. 


O Sarasvati! Take us to the riches that we desire. 
May the flow of your waters not bring us any harm. 
May we not be denied your proximity. Accept our 
devotion and our friendship. Please ensure that we do 
not forsake you and go to others. 


59 


Dyavoprithivi 

(Dyavaprithivi is a word that connotes heaven and 
earth taken together. The next sukta is addressed to 
Dyavaprithivi. It is ascribed to the sage Bharadvaja 
and is composed in the jagati metre.) 


Dyavaprithivi is full of water and is the refuge of all 
the worlds. Vast is the expanse of Dyavaprithivi and 
sweet are the juices of foodgrains that grow there. 
Beautiful is heaven, and the earth never decays. Both 
these regions possess wonderful powers. Varuna is the 
one who decrees the rules that heaven and earth 
follow. 


O Dyavaprithivi! The two of you are actually 
Separate. You are full of water. You are full of milk. 
You ensure the performance of religious deeds. You 
are the source of sacred rites and clarified butter. You 
make this universe manifest. O Dyavaprithivi! Make 
the waters flow so that the welfare of mankind can be 
ensured. 


O Dyavaprithivi! You are the ones who sustain 
everything. A man who devotes himself to the pursuit 
of a simple life is the one who becomes famous. One 
who lives according to the norms of righteousness is 
the one who is blessed with sons and grandsons. 
Many are the codes of conduct that emanate from you 
and they are all sacred. 


O Dyavaprithivi! You are full of water. You have 
an intimate association with that beautiful water. 
You are great and you know no bounds. You are at 
the forefront to receive any oblations that an 


60 


otnciating priest may make. Learned ones pray to 
you for the sake of happiness. 


O Dyavaprithivi! May you unite us with the 
sweetest of juices. The two of you are the sources of all 
kinds of sweet juices. The two of you shower down 
sweet juices. The granting of sweet juices forms part of 
your nature. You sustain fame, sacrifices and 
divinity. Grant us strength, energy and great fame. 


May heaven and earth increase our strength. They 
are like our parents. They are the omniscient ones 
who ensure the performance of the best of deeds. O 
powerful heaven and earth! You grant welfare to 
everyone. Grant us fame, strength and riches. 


Brihaspati 

(Brihaspati is not quite a god. He is divinity 
personified in the officiating priest. He is also the 
priest of the gods, and subsequently, their preceptor. 
The next sukta is addressed to Brihaspati. It is ascribed 


to the sage Bharadvaja and is composed in the 
trishtupa metre.) 


Brihaspati is the one who destroys the fortresses of 
the enemies. He is the one who was created first and 
he is the one who ensures the performance of 
righteous deeds. He was born in the lineage of 
Angirasa and he is personified in the oblations made 
by warriors. Brihaspati is the one who protects the 
land through his excellent qualities. He is radiant 
with energy. Brihaspati is the strong one and he is 


like our father. His roar can be heard in heaven and 
on earth. 


61 


Brihaspati is the one who ensures the preservation 
of those who are righteous. It is righteousness that 
Brihaspati preserves in the sacrifices of the gods. He 
has killed the enemies, demolished their cities and 
triumphed over them. 


Brihaspati wins riches from the enemies. He wins 
cows and cowsheds from the enemies. It is he who 
brings down water from heaven. Brihaspati is the 
invincible one. Through his powers, he destroys the 
enemies. 


Weapons of War 

(The next sukta is addressed to various weapons of 
war. It is ascribed to the sage Bharadvaja and is 
composed in the metres trishtupa, jagati, anushtupa 
and pamKkti.) 


Armour - The warrior dons this armour and goes 
forth to do battle. He looks like a cloud in the armour. 
The warrior will not be killed, he will attain victory. 
May the glory of the armour protect the soldier. 


Bow - This bow will be used to win cows in battle. 
This bow will be used for the sake of victory. Fierce 
will be the battle, but the bow will triumph. The bow 
wil! rullify all the desires of the enemies. The enemies 
will ve defeated and the bow will be victorious in all 
the directions. 

The string of the bow - The string of the bow is drawn 


back upto the ear. It seems to be whispering 
something into the ear. The string of the bow is 


62 


extended on the bow. It makes a sound that is like the 
voice of a woman. The string of the bow will remove 
all impediments in battle 


The ends of the bow - Like two co-wives who have 
similar minds, the two ends of the bow remain united 
in action. Like a mother carrying her son on her lap, 
the two ends of the bow cradle the arrow. The two 
ends of the bow help to pierce enemies in battle and 
destroy them. 


The quiver - The quiver is the father of many arrows. 
It has many sons. The clanging of the quiver can be 
heard in battle. This father of arrows is slung onto the 
back. The arrows that come out of the quiver destroy 
the soldiers of the enemy. 


The charioteer - An excellent charioteer sits astride a 
chariot and drives the horses where he wills. Marvel 
at the power of the reins. They take the chariot where 
one wants. 


The horses - The horses are stronger than bulls. 
They are so powerful that they swiftly run with the 
chariot. Loud is the noise that the horses make. They 
attack the enemies with their hooves. Not retreating 
fora moment, the horses destroy the enemies. 


The chariot - In the chariot has been kept fodder 
that will please the horses. In the chariot have been 
kept weapons for destroying the enemies. Armour too 
has been kept in the chariot. May I always be able to 


sit on the superior chariot that brings pleasure to the 
mind. 


63 


Defenders of the chariot - These are the ones who 
bring pleasure and aid. These are the ones who grant 
refuge in times of danger. These are the firm and 
strong ones, armed with the power of arrows. These 
brave warriors fight on the side of righteousness. 
Enemies can bring them no harm. Many are the 
enemies who are defeated by these defenders. 


Various gods - May brahmanas, the ancestors, Soma, 
Pusha and Dyavaprithivi preserve us from sin and 
ensure our welfare. May those who traverse the 
righteous paths grant us protection. May the evil ones 
not be able to enslave us. 


(This passage does not quite seem to belong to the 
sukta.) 


The point of the arrow - The arrow has an excellent 
trail made of feathers. Sharp indeed is the point of the 
arrow. The string of the bow is made out of cowhide. 
And it is with this that the arrow is shot into the ranks 
of the enemy. There are battles in which warriors 
fight together and there are battles in which warriors 
fight singly. Whatever the nature of the battle, may 
the point of the arrow bring me pleasure. 


The arrow - O arrow! May you follow a straight 
path. Protect me from the four directions and make 
my body as firm as stone. May Soma increase my 
inspiration and may Aditi grant me happiness. 


The whip - O whip! Ycu are the one who drives the 
horses. It is you who inspire the horses in the course of 
battle. You descend on the horses from above. And 
you lash at them from below. 


64 


The arm-guard - It twirls around the arm like a 
snake. It guards the arm from the lash of the string of 
the bow. The arm-guard is like a learned person who 
knows the secret of all action. May the arm-guard 
protect the warrior from the four directions. 


(The arm-guard was worn on the archer’s left arm 
and was fastened on with leather straps.) 


The shaft of the arrow - The shaft of the arrow has 
been dipped in snake-venom. It is like the horn of a 
deer and a bit of iron has been fixed to the mouth. 
Parjanya himself has increased the strength of the 
arrow with his showers. I bow in obeisance before the 
god of arrows. 


(The head of the arrow used to be tipped with deer- 
hor. Later, iron came to be used. The shaft was 
often made out of reeds and it was the rain that made 
the reeds grow.) 


The arrow - The arrow has been sharpened by our 
knowledge. When one lets go, the arrow flies into the 
ranks of the enemy. May not a single one of the 
enemy lives. 


The battlefield - Like a boy who does not have a 
tonsure, let the arrow fly where it wili. Let 
Brahmanaspati and Aditi bring us happiness on the 
battlefield. May we always be happy. 


(This is not dear. Brahmanaspati is the god of 
prayers and is sometimes used synonymously with 
Brihaspati. A boy who does not have a tonsure has 
not had his sacred thread ceremony. There are thus 


65 


no restrictions on his movements. And like such a 
boy, the arrow is free to go anywhere.) 


The armour - I cover the delicate parts of your 
anatomy with armour. King Soma will bless you with 
the boon of immortality. Varuna will make you great 
and grant you the best of riches. May all the gods be 
pleased when you attain victory and may they work 
towards this end. 


Gods - Those who want to kill us may be close to us, 
or they may be far away. They may be our inferiors. 
But whatever be their nature, may all the gods destroy 
them. I will be protected as 1 am armed with the 
armour of knowledge. . 


MANDALA SEVEN 


(This mandala has 104 suktas and 841 mantras. 
Most of the suktas are addressed to Indra, followed by 
those addressed to Agni. All the hymns are ascribed 
to the sage Vasishtha, although his sons also feature 
in a few suktas. The first sukta that we choose glorifies 
Vasishtha and his family. It is composed in the 
trishtupa metre.) 


Vasishtha 

Those who belong to Vasishtha’s family are fair in 
complexion. They are the intelligent ones who 
perform righteous action. They wear their tonsures to 
the right. Great is the joy that Vasishtha and his 
family have brought me. I arose from my seat and 


66 


told everyone that I did not wish to be separated from 
Vasishtha and his family. 


(There is an interpretation that the above words are 
being uttered by Indra.) 


The brave Indra drinks the soma juice that is offered 
in vessels. He comes from far away to drink the soma 
juice that is offered. Soma juice was also offered by 
Pashadyumna, the son of Vayat. But Indra preferred 
the soma juice offered by Vasishtha. 


(There was a king named Sudas and Vasishtha was 
his priest. So Vasishtha offered the soma juice on 
behalf of Sudas. Pashadyumna was a rival king.) 


Indra crossed the river easily and removed all 
impediments. Thus did Indra help Sudas in the battle 
of the ten kings. O Vasishtha! It is because of your 
prayers that Indra protected Sudas. 


(This needs some explanation. The battle of the ten 
kings (dasha rajria) was a fairly important battle to 
which stray references can be found in the Rig Veda. 
Sudas was the king of the Tritsu tribe. He crossed the 
river Parushni (Iravati or Ravi) with Indra’s aid and 
put his enemies to flight. Ten kings or tribes were 
allied against Sudas, but they were defeated.) 


O leaders! Your hymns please the ancestors. I have 
driven the axle of my chariot. I have driven the 
chariot so that I can go home. (This “I” may be 
Indra.) O those who belong to the family of 
Vasishtha! May you be strong and may you not grow 
infirm. Recite hymns and be blessed with the strength 


67 


that Indra confers. Increase your strength and chant 
Indra’s praise. 


Vasishtha was like a man who was thirsting for 
water. He sang Indra’s praise prior to the battle of the 
ten kings. Indra heard the hymns that Vasishtha 
chanted. He made vast expanses free for the Tritsu 
tribe. 


The Bharatas were initially as small and 
insignificant as a rod that is used to beat cows. But 
Vasishtha became the priest of the Tritsus and the 
Bharatas. It is then that the Bharatas began to 
prosper. 


(In this verse, the suggestion is that the Bharatas 
and the Tritsus were identical. Other parts of the Rig 
Veda indicate that this was not quite the case. Sudas 
was originally the king of the Bharatas, not of the 
Tritsus. At this point, the priest of the Bharatas was 
Vishvamitra and Vasishtha was the priest of the 
Tritsus. Sudas made Vasishtha his priest and thus 
forged an alliance between the Bharatas and the 
Tritsus. Vishvamitra felt slighted and formed a 
confederation of ten kings against Sudas. But the ten 
kings, who were led by Bheda, were defeated.) 


There are three gods (Agni, Vayu and Surya) who 
infuse the worlds with energy. There are three types of 
subject+ who are known as aryas. (These are 
brahmanas or priests, kshatriyas or warriors and 
vaishyas or traders.) There are three types of sacrifice 
that are begun at the stroke of dawn. Vasishtha is 
well-versed in all this knowledge. 


68 


O sons of Vasishtha! May your glory spread before 
the rays of the sun. May your fame be deep as the 
ocean itself. May your hymns reach the gods as 
swiftly as Vayu. May no one else be able to duplicate 
the hymns that you chant. It is only you who possess 
that special knowledge. 


O those who belong to the family of Vasishtha! 
There are hundreds and thousands who labour hard 
to attain this knowledge. They strive to light up their ° 
hearts with this wisdom. To a person who has 
attained this knowledge, the entire universe is like a 
piece of cloth spread out. 


O Vasishtha! Your energy flashed out like a streak 
of lightning. When you appeared from the lightning, 
that was like a birth and Mitra and Varuna witnessed 
this birth of yours. The sage Agastya introduced you 
to mankind. 


(Vasishtha is believed to have been Agastya’s 
younger brother. Presumaby, Agastya introduced 
Vasishtha to the Tritsus.) 


O Vasishtha! You are the son of Mitra and Varuna. 
O brahmana! You were mothered by the celestial 
nymph Urvashi. When you were born, divine hymns 
were chanted and the gods showered down their 
benediction. 


Vasishtha is acquainted with all the knowledge of 
heaven and earth. He is the one who gives a 
thousand forms of alms. He is the one who donates 
everything. Vasishtha is the one who spreads out 


69 


knowledge like an open piece of cloth. Vasishtha was 
born of an apsara (a celestial nymph). 


Mitra and Varuna were initiated as priests at the 
time of a sacrifice. They put their energy into a pot. 
From this energy, first Agastya was born. Vasishtha 
was born after that. 


O Bharatas! Vasishtha is coming to you. Welcome 
him with due respect. Vasishtha will be your leader in 
the chanting of sacred hymns. He will be the chief of 
the adhvaryus. 


Water 
(The next sukta is addressed to-water and is 
composed in the trishtupa metre.) 


O water! You will enable us to obtain divinity. 
Soma herbs have been obtained from the ground, 
thanks to the generosity of water. Water has been 
mixed with the extracted soma juice and is being 
offered to Indra. The water that comes from rain is 
pure and free of sin. May this sweet water be mixed 
with soma juice. May we obtain this juice today. May 
we drink it today. 


O water! Your sweet flow has been mixed with the 
soma juice. May Agni protect the water and the soma 
juice. Indra and the Vasus are pleased when they 
drink this soma juice. We wish to become like the gods 
themselves. May we too obtain the soma juice today. 
May we get to drink it. 


Divine water performs purification in a hundred 
ways. It grants pleasure through the provision of 


70 


foodgrains. Divine water is used in the sacrifices of 
the gods. This is the water that preserves all of Indra’s 
actions. Offer oblations of clarified butter to the water 
of the rivers. 


With its rays, the sun spreads the water in all 
directions. Indra himself dug the routes along which 
water could travel. O water of the rivers! May your 
flow grant us the best of foodgrains and riches. May 
water always protect us and ensure our welfare. 


Vastoshpati 


(The next sukta is addressed to Vastoshpati. The 
word vastu means house and Vastoshpati is the god of 
the household. In the course of the hymn, he is also 
referred to as Indu. Indu is another name for Soma. 
The sukta is composed in the trishtupa metre.) 


O Vastoshpati! May you look upon us as your own. 
Make sure that disease does not frequent our houses. 
Grant us the riches that we ask of you. Ensure the 
welfare of all bipeds and quadrupeds. 


O Vastoshpati! You are the one who delivers us. 
You are the one who increases our prosperity. O Indu! 
May we be blessed with cows and horses. May we not 
suffer from old age. May you took upon us as friends. 
A father takes care of his son. Like that, you will take 
care of us. 


O Vastoshpati! May we attain happiness and 
beauty through your blessings. May we get to attend 
your assembly. May we be counted as members of 
your assembly. You will grant us the riches that we 


71 


deserve. You will also grant us the riches that we do 
not deserve. You will protect all our riches and ensure 
our welfare. 


Vishnu 


(Vishnu was a minor god in the Vedas. He became 
prominent in post-Vedic times. In the Vedas, Vishnu 
seems to have been a manifestation of Surya. The 
next sukta is addressed to Vishnu and is composed in 
the trishtupa metre.) 


O Vishnu! Your superior form is one that expands. 
No one is capable of fathoming your greatness. | 
know of the two worlds, heaven and earth, that you 
inhabit. But O god! There is also a world above all 
these that you inhabit. 


O Vishnu! The furthest extremities of your 
greatness remain unknown. He who has been born 
does not know this. Nor will he who will be born, ever 
know this. It is you who have established heaven 
above. That is a beautiful sight, fit to behold. It is you 
who hold up the eastern frontiers of the earth. 


O Dyavaprithivi! You wish to ensure the welfare of 
all of mankind. It is for that reason that you produce 
foodgrains and cows. O Vishnu! You have held aloft 
heaven and earth. With mountain ranges, you have 
made the earth firm. 


O Vishnu! You have created vast expanses so that 
sacrifices may be held. O Vishnu and Indra! The two 
of you are the leaders. You have given birth to Surya, 
Usha and Agni. The enemies were strong and well- 


72 


protected. But you invaded and vanquished them in 
your clever way. 


O Indra and Vishnu! The demon Shambara 
possessed ninety-nine invincible fortresses. But you 
demolished them. You killed the hundreds and 
thousands of soldiers that the demon Varchasvi sent. 


This hymn of praise is indeed lofty. It is a hymn 
that has been composed in praise of the strong and 
valiant Indra and Vishnu. O Indra and Vishnu! I 
have submitted these hymns so that they may be 
chanted on the occasion of the sacrifice. May you 
provide us food at the time the battle. 


O Vishnu! I have offered these oblations of 
foodgrains to you. O Vishnu! You are the energetic 
one. Accept the offerings that I have made. May 
these excellent hymns that I have composed add to 
your fame. Grant us protection and ensure our 
welfare. 


The Frog Song 


(Our final sukta from mandala seven is the frog 
song. This is composed in the trishtupa and anushtupa 
metres. What is remarkable about this sukta is the 
element of satire in the comparison of the priests to 
the frogs.) 


The brahmanas who have been observing religious 
rites have been quiet for a year while the rites were 
going on. Now that the rites are over, they have 
begun to recite hymns. They are like the frogs which 
have remained quiet for a year, as long as it was hot. 


US 


Now that the monsoon has started, the frogs have 
started to croak. 


The frogs lay there, in ponds that were dry. They 
seemed to be wrinkled bags made of skin. As soon as 
water descended from the monsoon clouds, the frogs 
began to croak. Their sound was like the lowing of 
cows that have calved. 


One whose throat is parched thirsts for water. The 
frogs were like thirsty people. When the clouds gave 
rise to monsoon showers, the frogs started to croak. 
The sound of the croaking was like the sound of a 
father talking to his son. One frog went to another, 
and they gathered together. 


One frog welcomed another, as the monsoon 
showers made them all happy. Once it rained, the 
frogs began to leap. A spotty frog leaped to a green 
frog and the two seemed to talk. 


One frog seemed to talk to another. It was almost 
as if a disciple was conversing with his teacher. The 
frogs leaped on the water and croaked, and their 
bodies glistened and shone. 


One frog croaked like a cow, another croaked like a 
goat. One frog was spotty, another was green. All of 
them were frogs, as commonly referred to. And yet 
they were all different. Distinct from one another. 
Many were their forms and different were the voices in 
which they croaked. 


At the sacrifice named atiratra, brahmanas gather 
together. The frogs were like brahmanas assembled for 


74 


such a sacrifice. As soon as the monsoon made the 
pond full, the frogs gathered together. The first day of 
monsoon showers is earmarked for such an assembly. 


Brahmanas observe sacrifices for a year. Soma juice 
is offered at these sacrifices and hymns are recited at 
the end of the year. The adhvaryu priests sweat as they 
chant the mantras. No one leaves the place of the 
sacrifice. No one stays hidden. The frogs were like 
these priests. 


The leaders are the ones who follow the divine 
codes of conduct. They observe the religious rites in 
each of the twelve months. As soon as it rains, the 
frogs which have suffered from the heat, emerge. 


The frog which croaks like a cow will grant us 
riches. The frog which croaks like a goat will grant us 
riches. The frog that is spotty wil] grant us riches, the 
one that is green will grant us riches. The monsoon 
indicates the advent of a thousand herbs. The frogs 
will grant us a hundred cows. They will increase our 
life expectancies. 


(The frogs grant all these objects as they proclaim 
the onset of the monsoon. The rains revive the earth, 
and in this sense, grant all these riches.) 


MANDALA EIGHT 


(This mandala has 103 suktas and 1716 mantras. 
The suktas are ascribed to various sages. Most of the 
mantras are addressed to Indra, followed by those to 
Agni and the Ashvinis. The valakhilya section that 


75 


was mentioned in the introduction forms part of this 
mandala. In order to learn about gods other than 
those who have figured earlier, we start with a sukta 
addressed to the Adityas. Aditi is the mother of the 
gods and Aditya signifies ‘son of Aditi’. Thus, Aditya 
is a general expression for all gods. But the word 
Aditya is also used in a more specific sense. There are 
twelve manifestations of Surya, one for each of the 
twelve solar months. These are the twelve Adityas. 
The sukta that we reproduce is ascribed to the sage 
Kanva and is composed in the ushnika metre.) 


It is certain that a man who worships the Adityas 
and follows the rules indicated by them, will obtain 
riches and happiness such as have never been 
obtained before. 


The path followed by the Adityas is a straight one 
and is free of all violence. The path indicated by the 
Adityas is the path that should be followed by 
mankind. It is the path that leads to happiness. 


May Savita, Bhaga, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama 
(five Adityas) grant us the great happiness that we 
have been desiring. 


O goddess! You nourish us along the path that is 
blessed with the best of qualities. That path is free of 
all violence and is full of love. You are the immortal 
goddess. Come to us with learning and come to us 
with happiness. Come to us with all the gods. 


(The goddess in question is Aditi.) 


O mother Aditi! Your great sons are free from evil 
and perform the best of deeds. They know well how 


76 


to banish the enemies who hate them. They know 
well the means of destroying sinners. 


Aditi is the goddess who is never destroyed. May 
the pure Aditi protect our animals during the day. 
May she protect them during the night. May mother 
Aditi ensure the prosperity of our sons and our 
animals. May she preserve us from sin. 


Aditi is the source of all intelligence. She will come . 
to us with her powers of protection. Aditi will grant us 
peace and happiness. She will banish all our 
enemies. 


The two Ashvinis are the physicians of the gods. 
May they grant us happiness and may they protect us 
from sin. May they banish our enemies. 


Agni’s flames and energies will ensure our welfare. 
Surya will radiate just the right amount of heat, so 
that we are warmed, but not burnt up. May the pure 
Vayu blow and grant us happiness. May all the gods 
banish our enemies. 


O Adityas! May disease not come close to us. 
Banish our enemies. May we not fall prey to evil 
thoughts. Preserve us from all manner of sin. 


O Adityas! Banish all our enemies and banish all 
our evil thoughts. You are the ones who possess all 
the wisdom that there is. Please make sure that those 
who hate us do not get to come near us. 


O Adityas! You are the generous ones. Grant us the 


happiness that mokes even sinners forsake the path of 
sin. 


dd 


There are men who have become like demons and 
wish to kill us. May such men be destroyed through 
their own deeds. May such men not be able to come 
near us. 


There are those who hate us and are treacherous 
towards us. These violent and evil ones are our 
enemies. May their sins devour them up. 


O Adityas! You are the gods who establish 
everything. You know who are fraudulent and who 
are not. May you only reside with men who are pure 
of heart. 


We desire to obtain the happiness. that there is in 
mountains and in water. May heaven and earth 
protect us from sin. 


O gods! You are the ones who establish everything. 
Grant us happiness and ensure our welfare. The 
chanting of your names will protect us from all sin. 


O great Adityas! The saczifice to which you wish to 
come is being performed. We are the ones who desire 
to be like your friends. May you look upon us with 
favour. 


We call upon the Indra who protects the Maruts. 
We call upon the Ashvinis, Mitra and Varuna. We 
call upon Vastoshpati, the lord of households. May 
all these gods ensure our welfare. 


O Mitra, Aryama and Varuna! O Mantts! Make us 
non-violent and grant us fame. Grant us three- 
storeyed houses. 


78 


O Adityas! All of us men will eventually die. But 
grant us long lives. May we live for many years. 


Praskanva’s Gift 


(We next have a sukta from the valakhilya section. 
The valakhilyas were sages who were physically small 
in stature. In mandala eight, there are eleven suktas 
which constitute the valakhilya section. These eleven 
hymns are not included in mandala eight, but are © 
placed after it, as a sort of supplement. 
Commentators on the Rig Veda have tended to ignore 
them. 


The sukta we reproduce from the valakhilya section 
is called Praskanva’s gift and is composed in the 
gayatri and anushtupa metres. It is ascribed to the sage 
Kanva. But there seems to have been a sage named 
Praskanva, who belonged to the Kanva family. He 
invoked Indra to aid a king in a fight against the 
enemies.) 


It is Indra’s great valour which becomes manifest 
the four directions. O Indra! You are the one who 
Slices up all the demons. May we receive your bounty. 


O Indra! There are a hundred white bulls in 
heaven. They shine like the stars in the sky. Indra 
has granted us these bulls, he has granted us a 
hundred bamboos. He has granted us a hundred dogs 
and as many soft hides. Indra gave us a hundred 
bundles of sacrificial grass and four hundred red 
horses. 


a 


O son of Kanva! (This is a reference to Praskanva.) 
May you become like a god and roam like the birds. 
May you roam like a horse. 


O men! Pray to the Indra who is the lord of the 
seven regions that there are. Indra is the complete 
one and his fame is widespread. There are paths that 
are dark with the shadow of sin. One who has 
managed to cross these paths gets to see Indra. 


MANDALA NINE 


(There are 114 suktas and 1108 mantras in mandala 
nine. Barring a single exception, all the suktas are 
addressed to Pavamana Soma. Soma is the 
personification of the soma juice, and is also identified 
with the moon-god. Pavamana signifies ‘that which 
is being purified. This refers to the purification of the 
extracted soma juice, to its being strained through 
strainers. To avoid repetition, we reproduce only one 
sukta from mandala nine. This is composed in the 
gayatri metre and is ascribed to the sage Vishvamitra.) 


Pavamana Soma 


The soma juice has been extracted so that Indra 
may drink it. O Soma! May you be pleasing to the 
palate. Flow in streams that will be a source of 
happiness. 


Soma is the one who destroys all the demons. 
Soma is the one who sees everything. The place where 


80 


pots of soma juice have been placed has been made 
firm with iron stakes. 


O Soma! You are the one who grants riches. You 
are the one who destroys powerful enemies. Rob the 
enemies of their riches and grant those riches to us. 


Sacrifices are being performed for the great gods. 
May soma juice be offered at these sacrifices, together 
with foodgrains. May soma juice grant us foodgrains . 
and riches. 


O Soma! We serve you well. That is our desire every 
day. O Soma! It is to you that we express all our 
wishes. 


Soma juice is extracted from soma herbs. It is then 
purified. It is poured through a piece of cloth that is 
spread out. It is Surya’s daughter who performs the 
act of straining, an act of purification. 


(Surya’s daughter is shraddha, or respect. The 
implication is that soma juice is strained most 
respectfully, with faith and devotion in one’s heart.) 


On the day of the sacrifice, ten fingers grasp the 
soma herbs. The ten fingers of the hand are like ten 
women who are sisters. 


The fingers bring the soma herbs. They extract the 
powerful soma juice from the herbs. Sweet is the juice 
and there are three types of power in it. Soma juice 
prevents all sorts of misery. 


(The three types of power in soma juice are the 
powers to purify the body, the mind and intelligence.) 


81 


Cows should never be killed. They look upon Soma 
as their son. The milk from cows is mixed with soma 
juice and an offering is then made to Indra. 


It is the pleasure that is derived from drinking the 
soma juice which provides Indra energy to demolish 
the enemies who surround him. It is the valiant Indra 
who grants riches. 


MANDALA TEN 


(Mandala ten is the richest mandala of the Rig Veda 
Samhita. Most of the references that one finds to the 
Rig Veda are from this mandala. As a whole, the 
mandala has 181 suktas and 1754 mantras. 


We start with a dialogue between Yama and Yami. 
Yama and Yami were, respectively, the son and 
daughter of Vivasvana or Surya. They were thus, 
brother and sister. The sukta is ascribed to no 
particular sage. Yama and Yami are themselves 
referred to as the sages. The hymn is composed in the 
trishtupa metre.) 


Yama and Yami 

Yami tells Yama - In the secret places that are near 
the vast ocean, I would like to become your friend. I 
welcome you with an open heart. Prajapati, the 
creator, has made us and is like our father. He has 
desired that we may unite and have an excellent son. 
Otherwise, the human race will not multiply. 


82 


Yama replies - 1 am indeed your friend and your 
companion. But I do not desire to become your 
husband. You are my sister and a brother cannot 
marry a sister. Besides, this is not a secret place at all. 
There are the sons of the demons, who are mighty and 
strong. They are everywhere and see all that happens 
on heaven and earth. 


Yami says - You may be right. Such an union 
between a brother and a sister may be forbidden 
among men. But such an union is not frowned upon 
or discouraged by the gods. I wish to become your 
wife, do not refuse me. Become my husband and 
grant me ason that I may bearin my womb. 


Yama replies - I have never done anything like this 
before. I always follow the path of truth. I have never 
lied. Our parents are the gandharvas (a semi-divine 
species) in heaven, the Adityas who rule over the 
water, and the great Pusha. They are our best friends. 
What you propose is not proper, as our parents would 
disapprove of such an union. 


Yami says - The great god Tvashta is the creator of 
all that there is. He is everywhere and bears up 
everything. It is Tvashta himself who decreed that we 
should be man and wife; for, there is no one else. How 
can one go against the wishes of that great creator? 
Heaven and earth will approve of our marriage. 


Yama replies - Who knows the secrets of the first 
day of creation? Who knows how the universe was 
created? Who knows what relationships are 
sanctioned? But what you propose is a sin. It will lead 


83 


to a downfall of the world that Mitra and Varuna 
preside over. 


Yami says - All that I know is that I want you to 
become my husband. We will be like the two wheels 
of a chariot, united in action. Let us be man and wife. 


Yama replies The spies of the gods roam 
throughout the world, night and day. They never rest 
in one place, their eyes are never closed. If we commit 
a sin, it will not escape them. You will bring 
unhappiness to both of us. Go to some other man. 
You and he can be like the two wheels of a chariot. 
Establish a relationship with him. 


Yami says - Let night and day grant us what we 
desire. Let the energy of the sun grant Yama what he 
wants. Heaven and earth know.that there is no one 
but the pair of us. May Yami become Yama’s wife. 
There is no sin in this. 


Yama replies - Perhaps there will be some era in the 
future, when a brother may become his sister’s 
husband. But that day has not come. O beauteous 
one! Wish for someone else as your husband. Seek 
refuge with another. 


Yami says - What sort of a brother do I have? He 
cannot even satisfy his sister’s wishes. What sort of a 
sister am I? I am forced to be unhappy, even though I 
have a brother to succour me. Many are the words | 
have uttered. I love you. Marry me. 


Yama replies - Unfortunately, it is also true that I do 
not wish to marry you. A brother who marries a sister 


84 


commits a sin, Leave me alone. Go to some other 
man and find your pleasure with him. O beautiful 
one! Your brother does not wish to become your 
husband. 


Yami says - O Yama! You are indeed weak. | have 
not been able to fathom what goes on in your mind. 
Do you have some other wife? Has some other 
woman tied you up, the way a horse is tied up witha 
noose? Like a creeper entwines itself around a tree, 
has some other woman embraced you? 


Yama replies - O Yami! Go and embrace somé other 
man like a creeper embracing a tree. May some other 
man embrace you. May you be able to charm his 
mind. May he be able to charm you. May you be 
happy with him. 


Havirdhanas 


(The next sukta is addressed to the Havirdhanas. 
Two shakatas or carts were used at sacrifices to carry 
offerings, for example, soma herbs. These carts were 
known as the Havirdhanas. The sukta is composed in 
the trishtupa and jagati metres. !t is not clear to which 
sage the sukta is ascribed, but he seems to have 
belonged to the Angirasa family.) 


O carts! These mavitras originated many years ago. 
I utter the mantras and place foodgrains and other 
sacrificial offerings on you. I take you to the place of 
the sacrifice. My hymns are like the oblations. May 
they attain the gods. The gods are the sons of the 
great creator. They live in divine places. May the 
gods listen to my prayers. 


85 


The two carts are taken to the place of sacrifice 
together. Men who are devoted to the gods place 
oblations on the carts. You (the carts) know the place 
where you are supposed to stand. You are the 
excellent stands on which soma juice is placed. 


There are five steps that lead to the sacrifice. May I 
climb each of the steps. Four of these are trishtupa and 
other metres in which hymns are composed. The fifth 
step is the sacred syllable om, to whose chanting I 
perform the saczifice. On the altar of the sacrifice is 
placed the purified soma fuice. 


For the sake of the gods, may death be banished. 
May the immortal life that all living beings are 
entitled to, not be destroyed. The officiating priests 
are performing the sacrifice to the chanting of sacred 
hymns. May the nooses of death not be able to 
encompass our physical bodies. 


Soma juice is like our father. It deserves to be 
praised. It is from soma juice that the seven basic 
metres emanate. The choristers are chanting the 
hymns. The two carts shine in heaven and on earth. 
The two carts try to nourish men and gods. 


Manasa 

(Manasa means spirit. This hymn is addressed to 
the spirit of a man who {s about to die. It attempts to 
call the spirit back. The sukta is composed in the 
anushtupa metre. It is ascribed to sages named 
Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu and Gopayana.) 


86 


Your spirit has gone far away. Yama is the son of 
Vivasvana. Your spirit has gone to Yama. May your 
spirit come back. You have been born so that you 
may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has gone near 
heaven and the earth. May your spirit return. You 
have been born so that you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
earth which is heated from the four directions. (This 
suggests the desert.) May your spirit return. You have 
been born so that you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away in the four directions. 
May your spirit return. You have been born so that 
you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
water of the ocean. May your spirit return. You have 
been born so that you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
rays that radiate out in the four directions. May your 
spirit return. You have been born so that you may live 
in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
water, the trees and the herbs. May your spirit return. 
You have been born so that you may live in this 
world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
sun and the dawn. May your spirit return. You have 
been bom so that you may live in this world. 


87 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
lofty mountains. May your spirit return. You have 
been born so that you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone tar away, beyond the portals of 
this world. May your spirit retum. You have been 
born so that you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away, as far away as is 
possible to imagine. May your spirit return. You have 
been bom so that you may live in this world. 


Your spirit has gone far away. It has reached the 
past and the future. May your spirit return. You have 
been born so that you may live in this world. 


Rivers 

(The next sukta is addressed to rivers. It fs 
composed in the jagati metre and is ascribed to the 
sage Preyamedha.) 


O waters! I sing hymns in praise of your greatness. 
I chant them at the house of the one who is 
performing the sacrifice. Twenty-one are the rivers 
that flow, seven for each of the three worlds. The most 
famous of all these rivers is the Sindhu (Indus). It is 
the greatest. 

O Sindhu! When you headed for the fertile plains, 


Vanna himself charted out a path for you. Excellent 
is the course that you follow. You are the source of life 


for all living beings. 


The thunder of your roar is heard in the sky, above 
the earth. Your waters shine -as they speed past. The 


88 


river Sindhu thunders like a bull. The sound it makes 
is like the clouds thundering before the onset of 
showers. It has been said that the Sindhu roars in the 
sky before descending on earth. 


O Sindhu! A mother goes to her son with love in her 
heart. A cow goes to a calf that has just been born, to 
offer it milk. Like that, other rivers head towards a 
confluence with the Sindhu. You are the leader of the 
rivers, like a king is the leader of his army. You are 
foremost among all the rivers. 


O Ganga! O Yamuna! O Sarasvati! O Shutudri! 
(The Shutudri is the Sutlej.) O Parushni! O Asikli! (The 
Asikli is the Chandrabhaga or the Chenab.) O 
Marudvridha! (This river has not been identified.) O 
Vitasta! (The Vitasta is the Jnelum.) O Sushoma! (The 
Sushoma is said to be another name for the Sindhu.) 
O Arjikiya! (The Arjikiya has been identified as the 
Vipasha or the Beas.) O Sindhu! May you and the 
other seven nvers listen to our prayers. 


(Criginaliy, there were seven rivers including the 
Sindhu. Moreover, in addition to the Sindhu, nine 
rivers are mentioned in the above passage.) 


O Sindhu! You wish to unite with the fast-flowing 
Gomati river. But first you unite with the river named 
Tushtama. Then you unite with the rivers Susartu, 
Shveti, Kubha and Mehatnu. You unite with them, as 
if you are riding on the same chariot with them. 


White are the waters of the Sindhu and they flow 
Straight ahead. Fast is the Sindhu and its speed 


89 


cannot be stemmed. The river is like a fleet-footed 
Stallion. It is as handsome as a beautiful woman. 


Sindhu possesses excellent horses, beautiful 
chariots, handsome clothing and golden ornaments. 
Its water is pure and it abounds in aquatic plants. 
Flowering trees line its banks. 


Sindhu possesses a chariot that brings happiness. 
To this chariot, steeds are harnessed. Sindhu will bring 
us foodgrains in that chariot. The praise of the river is 
chanted at the time of a battle or a sacrifice. Great 
and famous is Sindhu’s chariot. It performs no violent 
deeds. 


Vishvakarma 


(The next sukta is addressed to Vishvakarma. 
Vishvakarma is regarded as the creator of the 
universe. Later, he came to be regarded as the 
architect of the gods. The sukta is composed in the 
trishtupa metre and is ascribed to the sage Bhouvana.) 


Vishvakarma was the first priest. He performed a 
sacrifice so that all the worlds and all the riches could 
be created. He offered oblations to Agni and to 
himself. He is our father. Vishvakarma recited hymns 
so that the riches that are typified in heaven might be 
created. First, he created the universe. Next, he 
merged into Agni. 


Where was Vishvakarma at the time of creation? 
What did he look like then? Where did he start his act 
of creation? How did he go about the task? Who 


90 


knows why Vishvakarma created the land masses of 
the earth? Why did he create the vast expanse of the 
sky? Who knows the answers to these questions? 


Vishvakarma is the paramatman. He is omniscient. 
His mouths, his arms, and his feet are everywhere. It is 
this paramatman who created the three worlds. With 
his own hands and feet, he created heaven and earth 
at the same time. He is the single and supreme , 
godhead who oversees the functioning of the universe. 


What was the forest and what the trees with which 
heaven and earth were fashioned? O leamed one! 
Search in your mind to see if you know the answer to 
this question. Think of the place where the supreme 
godhead resides. It is there that he bears up the entire 
universe. 


O Vishvakarma! You are the supreme creator. You 
have a superior body, you have a medium body, and 
you have an inferior body. May all these bodies make 
the elements our friends. May water be mixed with 
your body to generate foodgrains. May we obtain 
these foodgrains. 


O Vishvakarma! The oblations increase your 
strength. Through your power and wisdom, you bear 
up heaven and earth. May oblations be offered to 
heaven and earth at the time of sacrifices. Those who 
do not perform saqifices according to the proper rites, 
may they be deluded. Vishvakarma is the lord of all 
riches at all sacrifices. May he grant us heaven and 
earth. 


91 


Vishvakarma is the lord of all speech. He is as swift 
as the speed of thought. We call upon Vishvakarma 
so that he may offer us protection at the time of this 
sacrifice. May he accept our oblations and grant us 
protection. He is the one who is the source of all 
happiness and the source of all righteous action. 


Purusha 

(The next sukta is the famous Purusha sukta. Furusha 
is the embodiment of the universal soul and is thus 
regarded as the origin of the universe. The sukta is 
composed in the anushtupa and trishtupa metres and is 
ascribed to the sage Narayana.) 


Purusha is the supreme godhead who has a 
thousand heads, a thousand eyes and a thousand 
feet. He surrounds the earth from the four directions. 
One of his forms is merely ten fingers tall. But it 
pervades creation. 


(One interpretation is that, purusha or the 
paramatman also has a manifestation in terms of the 
individual soul or atman. It is the atman which is ten 
fingers in length.) 


It is the purusha who is the past and the future. It is 
the purusha who is the present. The purusha‘flourishes 
through foodgrains. He is the lard of immortality and 
of divine bliss. 


Immense is the greatness of the purusha. But there is 
a purusha who is superior to him as well. All the 
elements that constitute the universe are merely like 
one foot of the purusha. Three of his footsteps provide 
immortality in heaven. 


a2 


Three of the purusha’s footsteps can be traced in 
heaven. His form is divided into four quarters. One 
fourth of his form is born again and again in the 
universe in the shape of living beings. He created in 
the four directions being that live on foodgrains and 
beings that do not. 


(Beings that live on foodgrains are the sentient 
ones. The others are insentient.) 


It is from the purusha that virat was created. Above 
virat, there is the greater purusha. Virat was divided 
into various parts. First, the land and the worlds were 
created. Physical bodies emerged later. 


(Virat is regarded as the female counterpart of the 
primeval purusha.) 


The gods offered oblations to purusha and virat. 
They performed a sacrifice. The spring season was the 
Clarified butter that was offered on the occasior. of the 
sacrifice. The summer season was the kindling and 
the autumn season was the oblation. 


Virat was the first to be created and deserved to be 
worshipped. The gods and the sages saw virat and 
purusha and performed a sacrifice in their honour. 


From that sacrifice were obtained curds and 
Clarified butter. The birds that fly in the sky were 
created. The animals that live in the forests where 
Vayu rules, also emerged. Domesticated animals were 
created. 


From the sacrifice emerged the mantras of the Rig 
veda, Sama hymns, Various metres and the mantras of 


93 


the Atharva Veda and the mantras of the Yajur Veda as 
well. 


From that sacrifice were created horses and animals 
that have two tusks. Cows, goats and sheep emerged. 


The purusha who has been mentioned was 
described in all sorts of ways. What was his mouth 
like? Where were his two arms? Where were his thighs 
and where were his feet? Such are the questions that 
are asked. 


From the mouth of the purusha were born the 
learned brahmanas. From his arms were born the 
brave kshatriyas. From his thighs were born vaishyas 
and from his feet were born the shudras (a servant or 
slave class). 


The moon was created from the mind of the 
paramatman. His eyes became the sun. Indra and Agni 
were born from the mouth and Vayu was created from 
the breath of life. 


The atmosphere was made from the paramatman's 
navel. His head became heaven and his feet the earth. 
The directions were created from his ears. In this 
fashion, other worlds can be thought to have been 
created from other parts of the paramatman’s 
anatomy. 


Seven.were the fencings (the metres) that encircled 
the place where the sacrifice was held. Twenty-one 
bundles of kindling were used. The gods performed 
the sacrifice and the paramatman himself was the 


sacrifidal beast. 


94 


The gods began to perform the sacrifice with the aid 
of the purusha. This was one of the most righteous acts 
ever performed. The individuals who performed this 
rightecus act reside in the most sacred of places. It is 
certainly the case that learned men go to that most 
happy of places. 


Urvashi and Pururava 


(In this sukta, Urvashi and Pururava are described 
as the divinities to whom the hymn is addressed. They 
are also described as the sages to whom the hymn is 
ascribed. The entire hymn is in the form of a dialogue 
between Urvashi and Pururava. The sukta is composed 
in the trishtupa metre. 


In a_ naturalistic sense, Pururava has been 
interpreted as the morning sun and Urvashi as the 
dawn. The sukta in question is however based on a 
more earthy legend. Urvashi was an apsara from 
heaven who was banished to the earth. There she 
encountered King Pururava and Pururava wished to 
marty Urvashi. Urvashi agreed, subject to two 
conditions being met. The first was that Pururava 
should always take care of two rams that Urvashi 
possessed. The second condition was that Urvashi 
should never see Pururava naked. The couple married 
and lived together for four years. But the gandharvas 
plotted to take Urvashi back to heaven. One night, 
they stole one of the rams. In an attempt to catch the 
thief, Pururava rose from his bed, without having the 
time to put his clothes on. At that moment, there was 
a flash of lighting and Urvashi caught a glimpse of 
her husband naked. Since the conditions were 


95 


violated, Urvashi vanished and returned to heaven. 
Pururava met her subsequently and begged her to 
return to him. Urvashi consented to do this, but only 
until a son was born to them.) 


Pururava - O cruel wife! Stay here for a short while 
with your loving words. May the two of us remain 
together for some time and converse. The memory of 
the conversation that we have together will be a 
source of happiness in the days to come. 


Urvashi—what purpose will these dry words serve? 
What happiness can be gleaned from them? I will 
disappear from your presence like the dawn. O 
Pururava! Return to your home. I am as elusive as the 
wind. 


Pururava—Your separation has caused me much 
pain. I can no longer lift an arrow from my quiver in 
pursuit of victory. 1 am strong. Yet, 1 find myself 
unable to rob my enemies of their cattle and riches. I 
no longer find the power to carry on with my kingly 
duties. I used to be like a lion whose roars struck terror 
into enemies on the field of battle. Alas, all that is a 
thing of the past. 


Urvashi—O dawn! This Urvashi wishes to cock food 
for her father-in-law. I think of my husband often, 
and I wish to go to his house. Night and day, I think of 
my happy life with him. O Pururava! I think of the joy 
we haverhad together. i never had any feelings of 
jealousy for my co-wives. O brave warrior! You were 


my lord. 


96 


Pururava - O Urvashi! You came to me with four of 
your friends. Their names were Sujumi, Shreni, 
Sumnapi and Hridechakshu. But after you left, they 
no longer come to visit me, dressed in their gorgeous 
clothing. I no longer hear the sounds of their voices, 
like the voices of cows that have just calved. 


Urvashi - O Pururava! When you were born, the 
wives of the gods came to witness the birth. The rivers 
that flow bowed down in salutation before the baby. 
The gods gave you the strength to vanquish and kill 
enemies in battle. When Pururava came before the 
apsaras, they fled before his energy. It was as if deer 
were fleeing from a hunter. Yet Pururava married this 
apsara and loved her. Urvashi had a fleeting presence 
like the lightning that flashes through the clouds. My 
wishes will be fulfilled if I bear your son. Urvashi prays 
that the boy may have a long life. O Pururava! The 
son that I bear you wiil rule over the whole world. I 
warned you that my conditions would have to be met, 
but you paid no heed. You broke the conditions. What 
is the point of sorrowing now? 


Pururava - When will you give birth to a son who 
will address me as father? He will come to me and cry. 
Who will wipe his tears then? How can a son be bon 
who will lead to his parents being separated? When 
will your son frolic in the house of your father-in-law? 


Uryashi - I will answer your questions. When your 
son cries, I will pray for his welfare. I will make sure 
that he has no reason to cry. I will send your son to 
you when he is born. It is time for you to return home 


97 


now. Do not be ignorant. It is impossible for me to ve 
with you now. 


Pururava - I was your beloved husband, but I have 
fallen from that pedestal. How does it matter if I die 
unprotected in distant lands? How does it matter if I 
sleep on the ground or die in grief? How does it matter 
if wolves devour me in the forests? 


Urvashi - O Pururava! May you not die. Do not fall 
from your pedestal. May you come to no harm and 
may wolves not bring you grief. May you be 
preserved. The love of women is but fickle. Their 
hearts are as cruel as those of wolves. I adopted the 
form of a woman and lived among men. | lived with 
you for the space of four years. | loved you. Those 
memories will serve me well once | take leave of you. 


Pururava - You are the joy of the atmosphere. I am 
the generous Pururava, I am the performer of great 
deeds. I love you. May I be united with you. My heart 
is suffering at the thought of the impending 
separation. Do not go away. Please retum to me. 


Urvashi - O Pururava! You are the son of Ila. The 
gods are telling you that you are mortal. But you will 
worship the best of gods. And after your death, you 
will go to heaven and be happy. 


Herbs 

(The next sukta is a praise to herbs. It is ascribed to 
a sage named Bhishag, born in the line of the sage 
Atharvan. The hymn is composed in the anushtupa 
metre.) 


98 


Many are the forms that herbs take. They are full of 
juices. The gods themselves gave birth to herbs in 
three different periods of time. (The three periods of 
time are the seasons spring, monsoon and autumn.) | 
know that the brown herbs are to be found in a 
hundred and seven different places. (Hundred and 
seven is probably simply a large number.) 


O herbs! You are like our mothers. You are to be 
found in a hundred different places. You have a’ 
thousand saplings. Many are the acts that you are 
capable of performing. May you cure us of all 
ailments. 


O herbs! May you thrive and may you have flowers. 
May you look upon patients with favour. The diseases 
are like enemies, may you invade them like horses 
attacking foes. You free us from illnesses. You deliver 
us from disease. 


O herbs! You are the possessors of divine qualities. 
You are like mothers in the way that you take care of 
us. That is what I feel about you. O physician! I grant 
you my horses, cows and clothing for the sake of these 
herbs. 


O herbs! It is certain that you grow on trees. You are 
to be found on the palasha tree. You are praised by 
mankind and you are the ones who nourish cows. 


Like kings coming together to do battle, various 
herbs come together and mingle. The physician is a 
learned person. He is well-versed in the treatment of 
diseases and ailments. 


99 


I know the names of the herbs Ashvavati, 
Somavati, Udojasa and Urjayanti. These and other 
herbs heal the body. 


Like cows emerging from cowsheds, all sorts of 
powerful juices emerge from herbs. O man! These 
herbs will serve your body and grant you the wealth of 
good health. 


O herbs! Your mother is named Ishkriti (relief). You 
cure ailments and banish all disease. May you quickly 
fall down (presumably, from the trees). May he who is 
a patient, be quickly cured. 

Like a thief invading a cowshed, the herbs invade 


all sorts of disease. Herbs banish all the ailments that 
cause trouble to the body. 


I grasp with my hands herbs that are a source of 
strength. Like animals fleeing before a hunter, the 
symptoms of the disease run away. 


O herbs! The disease has entered the limbs and the 
bones of the patient. May the herbs enter his body and 
purge all disease. 


O disease! Fly away like birds. Run quickly away. 
May you have the speed of the wind. 


O herbs! The juice of one herb is mixed with that of 
a second. The juice of the second herb is mixed with 
that of a third. May all the herbs of the world be 
united in listening to my prayers. May I be protected. 


There are herbs that have fruit, and there are those 
that do not. There are herbs that have flowers, and 


100 


there are those that do not. All these herbs were 
created by Brihaspati. May all herbs free us from 
illness. 


May herbs protect me from all curses. May herbs 
protect me from the weapons of Varuna, Yama and 
the other gods. May herbs make me free. 


The herbs descended from heaven. If the herbs look 
upon a person with favour, he never suffers from ill 
health. 


Soma is the king of herbs. Soma is blessed with 
many qualities. O Soma! You are the best of the 
herbs. May you fulfil my desires and may you bring 
happiness into my life. 


The herbs are to be found on earth and Soma is 
their chief. Brihaspati created the herbs so that they 
may cure patients. 


O herbs! The one who digs you out of the ground, 
may he not be destroyed. I dig you out from the 
ground for the sake of the patient. May the patient 
not be destroyed. May all bipeds and quadrupeds be 
free from disease. May our sons and our animals be 
free from disease. 


The herbs which are far away will listen to these 
prayers. The herbs which are near will also listen to 
these prayers. All the herbs will combine to make the 
diseased body healthy again. 


The physician uses the herbs for treatment. Soma is 
the king of the herbs. The other herbs propose to Soma 


101 


that the patient may be cured. May the danger of 
disease be removed. 


O herbs! You are the best of all the herbs. You are 
superior to all other trees. There are those who wish to 
destroy us. (This means ailments.) May such foes 
become our slaves. 


Sarama and the Panis 

(The next sukta is in the form of a dialogue between 
Sarama and the panis. Sarama is a messenger of the 
gods. Later, she became the divine dog. As mentioned 
earlier, the panis were robbers. This sukta is composed 
in the trishtupa metre. It is not ascribed io any 
particular sage. Sarama and the panis are named as 
the sages.) 


The panis - O Sarama! Why have you come here to 
visit us? The path that comes here is long and difficult. 
How did you come here? How did you pass the night? 
How did you manage to cross the waters of the river? 


(The panis have stolen some cows and have hidden 
them in a mountain cavern. This place is surrounded 
by a river.) 


Sarama - O panis! I am Indra’s messenger. It is he 
who has sent me to you. You have stolen a lot of cows 
and it is my desire to retrieve them. The waters of the 
river could do me no harm as | was protected by the 
gods. It is true that, at first, I was scared of the 
crossing. But I managed to cross and come over to the 
other bank. 


102 


The panis - O Sarama! What is your master Indra 
like? How strong is he? What does he look like? How 
many soldiers does he have? You have come a long 
way at the behest of your master. We would like Indra 
to be our friend. We would like him to be our master. 
We would like Indra to look after our cattle as well. 


Sarama - I know that my master can never be 
destroyed. He is the one who destroys everything. Such 
is the master at whose behest I have travelled such a ' 
long distance. The deep waters of the river could not 
run counter to the wishes of my master. O panis! Listen 
to what I have to say. It is certain that Indra will 
slaughter you all. 


The panis - O Sarama! You are the fortunate one. 
You may be able to reach the furthest points of the 
sky. You expressed a desire to obtain the cows. But 
who is going to let go of the cows without a fight? We 
have many sharp weapons that we can fight with. 


Sarama - O panis! Your words are not those that 
should be used by warriors. You are sinners. And 
therefore you will not have the strength to use your 
arrows. You will not be able to tread properly. 
Brihaspati will never grant you happiness. 


The panis - O Sarama! We have hidden the treasure 
in a place that is surrounded by mountains. There are 
cows, horses and many other riches. We panis are 
well-versed in the art of defence. We will be able to 
protect our treasure. Our cows and riches are safe. You 
have wasted a trip. 


103 


Sarama - The sages Angirasa and Ayasya will be 
fortified after drinking the soma juice. They will come 
here straight. They will free all the cows. O panis! Then 
you will have to retract your proud words. 


The panis - O Sarama! We know that you have been 
frightened by the gods and forced to come here. We 
look upon as our own sister. Do not return to Indra. 
O beautiful one! Stay here. We will give you a share of 
the cows. 


Sarama - O panis! I cannot be your sister and you 
are not my brothers. I do not know these 
relationships. I only know Indra and the powerful 
Angirasa, When | return and tell Iridra what has 
happened, he will come and invade you. He will 
deliver the cows. You will run far away if you know 
what is good for you. O panis! Flee far away. Free the 
cows and let them go up to heaven. Brihaspati will 
receive the cows that you have secreted so well. You 
have tried to keep it a secret. But Soma, Indra and the 
sages have found out where the cows are hidden. 


Prajapati 

(The next sukta is addressed to Hiranyagarba or 
Prajapati the creator. It is composed in the trishtupa 
metre and is ascribed to no particular sage.) 


Prior to the act of creation, only Hiranyagarbha 
was there. Hiranyagarbha is the paramatman. He is 
the one and only one who created the universe. He is 
the one who bears aloft the earth and the atmosphere. 
The paramatman is the source of all happiness. It is 
him that we worship through our oblations. 


104 


He is the one who provides the knowledge of the 
atman. He is the source of all strength. All the worlds 
and all the gods follow his instructions. It is his decree 
that is followed everywhere. In the shadow of his 
refuge there is the seed of immortality. To forsake the 
paramatman is to get to know death. The paramatman 
is the source of all happiness. It is him that we 
worship through our oblations. 


His greatness makes him the lord of all things, 
sentient and insentient. He alone is the king of all 
things, mobile and immobile. He is the master of all 
bipeds and quadrupeds. The paramatman is the source 
of all happiness. It is him that we worship through our 
oblations. 


The snow-clad mountains have been created by his 
power. The rivers that flow and the earth that moves 
have been created by him. It is he who created the 
oceans and the sky. The four directions owe their 
origin to his strength. The paramatman is the source of 
all happiness. It is him that we worship through our 
oblations. 


It is he who instilled energy in the sky and the 
atmosphere. It is through his grace that the earth has 
been made firm. He created heaven and he 
established the sun in the atmosphere. It is he who 
placed water in the sky. The paramatman is the source 
of all happiness. It is him that we worship through our 
oblations. 


Heaven and earth are full of sound. But they are 
firm so that living beings may be protected. It is his 


105 


will that has achieved all thts. It is through his powers 
that the sun rises and shines in the sky. The 
paramatman is the source of all happiness. It is him 
that we worship through our oblations. 


The great fire and the entire universe was created 
by him. It is he who bore the golden (hiranya) egg 
(anda) from which the universe was created. He is 
Hiranyagarbha. He is the one who made water course 
in the universe. He is the supreme Prajapati. He is the 
one who provided water so that gods and other living 
beings could thrive. The paramatman is the source of 
all happiness. It is him that we worship through our 
oblations. 


He is the creator of sacrifices and of the water that 
pervades the universe at the time of destruction. It is 
through his grace that the waters rise up into the sky. 
He is the lord of all the gods. He alone is supreme. The 
paramatman is the source of all happiness. It is him 
that we worship through our oblations. 


May the creator of the earth preserve us from all 
harm. He is the origin of righteousness and he is the 
creator of heaven. He is the source of the waters that 
bring bliss. The paramatman is the source of all 
happiness. It is him that we worship through our 
oblations. 


O Prajapati! There is no one else but you. You alone 
are the one who permeates the past, the present and 
the future. You are the vastness itself. We offer 
oblations to you so that our desires may be fulfilled. 
Grant us our wishes. May we be the possessors of 
riches. 


106 


Creation 


(Let us next have a sukta on creation. It is addressed 
to Prajapati and is composed in the trishtupa metre. 
The sukta is not ascribed to any particular sage.) 


After the destruction, there was no truth. Nor was 
there any untruth. This was prior to the creation and 
there were no worlds then. The objects that can be 
seen in the sky were not present. Who was it that 
covered up everything then? Where were al! objects 
then? Where were the deep and silent waters? 


At that time, there was no death. But nor was there 
immortality. The sun and the moon were not there. 
Therefore, there was no sense of night or day. Winds 
did not blow. The brahman alone was there. And it 
was the brahman alone who breathed through his 
powers. Apart from the brahman, there was no other 
object. 

This was the scene of destruction and chaos that 
prevailed before creation began. Everything was 
shrouded in darkness. There was water all around. All 
that could be seen around was the power of the 
brahman. 


The time of creation came. The idea of creation 
entered the paramatman’s mind. From the powers of 
his mind, he first created the origin of seeds. Through 
the intelligence of-his heart, he next created the 
elements that constitute the universe. 


It was the purusha who bore the seeds. The power of 
greatness was created. The rays that emanated from 
the paramatman spread out in all the directions, above 
and below. 


TO7 


No man knows and no man can tell how creation 
began. Men are ignorant of who performed the act of 
creation. Even. the learned ones were born only after 
creation started. How can one oneself say how one 
was created? 


No one is learned enough to know about the 
creation. How does one know who bore all that was 
created? The learned ones only know that the 
paramatman, the creator, resides above. And even that 
knowledge is probably suspect. 


The Forests 


(We now have a sukta addressed to the goddess of 
the forests. This is composed in the anushtupa metre 
and is ascribed to the sage Devamuni.) 


O goddess of the forests! You can be seen in the 
forests and in the wilderness. But you vanish before 
Our eyes. Why are you not seen in towns and villages? 
Why do you go to the deserted forests? Do you not feel 
sacred there? 


There are animals that roar in a loud voice. There 
are animals that call in a soft voice. When these two 
types of voices mingle, the sound is that of a musical 
instrument (veena) being played. It is as if the animals 
are chanting the praise of the goddess of the forest. 


Animals Jike cows also graze in the forest. The trees 
and creepers that grow in the forest seem to set up a 
canopy above one’s head. When it is evening, carts 
emerge from the forest. They are laden with saplings 


108 


and firewood. It is almost as if the goddess of the 
forests is sending the carts home. 


O goddess of the forest! There a man is calling to his 
cows. There is another chopping down firewood. Men 
who spend the night in the forests hear all sorts of 
sounds and are frightened. So it is said. 


The forests do not perform violent acts towards 
anyone. In fact, no one brings any harm to the forests. , 
The forest is the place where sweet fruits can be found. 
One can eat those and live happily. 


All sorts of fragrances can be found in the forest. 
There is food in the form of fruits and roots. The forest 
is a fertile region. It is the mother of the deer. Is it not 
natural that I should sing the praise of the goddess of 
the forests? 


Shraddha 


(Shraddha connotes respect, faith and devotion, and 
in the sukta which follows, shraddha is itself described 
as the sage to whom the sukta is ascribed. The hymn is 

_composed in the anushtupa metre.) 


It is through devotion that a fire is kindled in every 
household. It is through devotion that oblations are 
offered at a sacrifice. We praise shraddha. It is the best 
of all riches. 


O shraddha! May the desires of one who gives alms 
be fulfilled. O shraddha! Ensure the welfare of one who 
is generous. Listen to these words of mine. And grant 
the desired fruit to those who are performing the 
sacrifice. 


109 


Indra and the other gods decided to destroy the 
powerful demons. You ensured that their desires were 
fulfilled. Like that, may the wishes of those who are 
performing the sacrifice be granted. 


Gods and men pray to devotion so that they may be 
protected from strong winds. They make up their 
minds that they will worship shraddha. May shraddha 
grant them riches. 


We pray to devotion in the moming. We pray to 
devotion in the middle of the day. We pray to 
devotion in the evening. O shraddha! Grant devotio. 
to those of us who live in this world. 

Shachi 

(Shachi is Indra’s wife. In the sukta that follows, she 
exults at her triumph over her co-wives. She is the 
sage to whom the hymn is ascribed and the hymn is 
composed in the anushtupa metre.) 


The sun which is established in heaven hus risen. It 
is Indra himself who adopts the form of Surya. May 
my good fortune also dawn like the sun. I know my 
husband and I know that he will be devoted to me. I 
have the power to triumph over my co-wives. I will be 
victorious over them. 


1am the chief of the wives, like the head is the chief 
of the body. I am learned and rise above, like a flag. 
Even when I am angry, I can persuade my husband to 
utter sweet words to me. I am the one who triumphs 
over my co-wives. They will listen to me and obey my 
wishes. 


110 


It is my son who will defeat the enemies. It is my 
daughter who will be adorned. I will triumph over 
everyone. I am the one who, with my husband, will be 
famous. 


My husband Indra gains his strength from the 
oblations that are offered. He is supreme in the 
universe. O gods! It is 1 who offered those oblations. It 
is thanks to this that my co-wives have been subdued. 


I do not have enemies. I triumph over my enemies. 
I am the victorious one who triumphs over all. Just as 
the power and the energy of enemies gets deStroyed, 
the power and energy of my co-wives have been 
neutralised by me. 


I am the one who defeats others. I have defeated 
my co-wives. I will lord over Indra and his relations. 
Such is my wish. 


A Charm against Nightmares 


(We now have a charm against nightmares. This is 
ascribed to the sage Angirasa, descended from the 
sage Prachetas. The hymn is composed in a mixture 
of the metres anushtupa, trishtupa and pamkti.) 


O lord of the mind! Do not cause me distraction 
while I sleep. May you be banished. Go far away. Go 
and dwell in distant regions. Tell Nirriti, the goddess 
of sin, to keep her distance. I am still alive and my 
mind is preoccupied with thoughts of the material 
world. Let her not bring me grief. 


(Nirriti is the goddess of destruction.) 


111 


Everyone desires to have the best of rewards. And 
they do attain what they want. I ask the favour of 
Yama, the son of Vivasvana. May he not cause me 
unhappiness. May my mind be able to think of 
various subjects. 


When I am awake, I think of the various 
misfortunes that may descend on me. When | go to 
sleep, I try to be free from fear and think of the good 
things that may happen to me. But the various 
misfortunes plague me in my sleep. O Agni! Please 
ensure that such nightmares keep their distance. 


O Indra! O Brihaspati! If I have committed sins 
against you, please forgive me. May those sins not 
give rise to nightmares. May Angirasa and the 
learned Varuna preserve me from all manner of sin. 


Today is the day when I will be victorious. Today is 
the day when I will attain my desires. I have been 
cleansed of all sin. I have been forgiven all the sins 
that I, asleep or awake, may have committed. | have 
even been forgiven the sins that I may have thought 
of committing. May sin plague only those who hate 
me. 


The Destruction of Rivals 

(The next sukta is a prayer for the destruction of 
rivals. It is ascribed to the sage Rishabha and is 
composed in the anushtupa and mahapamkti metres.) 


O Indra! Make me the best among all my peers. 
May I have special powers so that I can defeat my 


112 


enemies. May I defeat my enemies and become 
radiant. May I become the possessor of cows. 


I am the one who destroys enemies. I will be like 
Indra. No one will be able to hate or hurt me. All my 
enemies will have to cower down before my feet. 


The two ends of a bow are tied down with the string 
of the bow. O lord of speech! I tie you down like the 
two ends of a bow. Influence the words that my 
enemies utter; make them speak humbly to me. 


I will be the one who will vanquish everyone. | will 
be the powerful and strong one. O my enemies! 
I conquer your minds. I conquer your deeds. I conquer 
you in battle. 


O my enemies! I will rob you of all your good 
qualities and become superior to you in every respect. 
I will be acknowledged as your leader and adorn you 
like a crown. You will be gathered together at my feet 
and croak like frogs do from a pond. 


The King 


(Our next sukta is a hymn that was recited when a 
new king was crowned. It is ascribed to the sage 


Dhruva Angirasa and is composed in the anushtupa 
metre.) 


O king! You have been crowned the lord of this 
kingdom. You are our king. May you always be 
constant and firm. May all the subjects love you. We 


pray that you may not bring any ham to the 
kingdom. 


113 


O king! May you be firm and constant in this 
kingdom. May you never be dislodged from your 
throne. May you be as firm as a mountain. May you 
rule on earth the way Indra rules in heaven. May you 
sustain the kingdom. 


Many are the oblations that have been offered to 
Indra. May Indra be pleased and bless this king. May 
Soma look upon this king with favour. May 
Brahmanaspati look upon this king with favour. 


Let the sky be firm. Let the earth be firm. Let the 
mountains also be firm. May the entire universe be 
firm. This king is the lord of his subjects. May he be 
firm. ; 


O king! The powerful Varuna will preserve your 
kingdom. Brihaspati is the generous one. He will 
preserve your kingdom. Indra and Agni will preserve 
your kingdom. You have made offerings of cakes. 
These oblations will please Soma. They will please 
Indra. Indra will ensure that your subjects pay their 
taxes. 


There are many other hymns in the Rig Veda 
Samhita. We cannot hope to-reproduce them all. But 
the sample that we have given you should have 
stimulated your interest. The Rig Veda is like a vast 
storehouse. If your interest has been stimulated, why 
don’t you read the original text? And if you cannot 
read all of it, you should certainly read the tenth 
mandala. 


The Yajur 
Veda 


The Yajur Veda Samhita 


It is important to understand that there were four 
classes of priests who were required at any sacrifice 
(yajna). The first class consisted of the officiating 
priests or acolytes (hotri). They invoked the gods by 
reciting the mantras, prepared the sacrificial ground 
and the altar, and poured out the libations. The 
hymns of the Rig Veda are for this class of priests. The 
second class of priests consisted of the choristers 
(udgatri). These were the ones who chanted the sacred 
hymns and the hymns of the Sama Veda are for this 
class of priests. The third class of priests consisted of 
the reciters (adhvaryu). They carried out sacrificial rites 
while chanting the sacred texts and the hymns of the 
Yajur Veda are for this class of priests. The fourth class 
of priests consisted of brahmana overseers. They 


116 


supervised the sacrifice and the hymns of the Atharva 
Veda are for this class of priests. 


The Yajur Veda Samhita thus consists of formulae 
and verses to be uttered by the adhvaryu. These priests 
were mainly entrusted with manual work that had to 
be performed at yajnas. The liturgical Yajur Veda is 
partly metrical and most of this part is extracted from 
the hymns of the Rig Veda. The remaining part is in 
prose. The word yaj means to sacrifice and it is from 
this that the name Yajur Veda is derived. 


Every Veda was taught in different shakhas (schools) 
and the teaching of one school often varied from that 
of another. According to the legend, Vedavyasa 
taught the four Vedas to four of his disciples. Paila was 
taught the Rig Veda, Vaishampayana the Yajur Veda, 
Jaimini the Sama Veda and Sumantu the Atharva Veda. 
Vaishampayana taught the Yajur Veda to twenty- 
seven different pupils, and over time the Yajur Veda 
branched off into two different schools. The first one 
was the Taittiriya, often referred to as the black Yajur 
Veda. And the second one was the Vajasaneyi, often 
referred to as the white Yajur Veda. 


The Tattiriya Samhita is called black as it is impure. 
It is impure because the samhita and brahmana 
portions are mixed. The Vajasaneyi Samhjta clearly 
demarcates the samhita and brahmana parts, the 
brahmana part being known as the Shatapatha 
Brahmana. 


We will retell for you the Vajasaneyi Samhita. As 
mentioned earlier, this is partly in metrical form and 


117 


partly in prose. The prose passages are known as 
yajus. The entire samhita consists of forty books or 
chapters (adhyaya). 


The gods of the Vedas 


The Vedas cannot really be appreciated without 
some sort of an understanding of the gods of the 
Vedas. The gods of the Vedas were different in nature 
and character from the gods that one encounters in 
the epics or in the sacred texts known as the Puranas. 


The three major gods of the Vedas were Agni, Indra 
or Vayu and Surya. Agni ruled over the earth (prithivi), 
Indra or Vayu ruled over the atmosphere (antariksha), 
and Surya ruled over heaven (dyuloka). All other gods 
were regarded as manifestations of these three gods. 
For example, all gods on earth were identified with 
Agni, all gods in the atmosphere were identified with 
Indra or Vayu, and all gods in heaven were identified 
with Surya. This at least was the version given by 
Yaska, a commentator on the Vedas who lived around 
800 B.C. There were two other points of view as well. 
One held that all the various gods_ were 
manifestations of the sarne unified supreme godhead. 
This monotheistic point of view can be particularly 
found in the Upanishads. An alternative point of view 
subscribed to polytheism and held that all the various 
gods could not be identified; they were distinct. 


Even within the Vedas, the number of gods varies 
from place to place. In some places, there are only 
three gods, one ruling over the earth, the second over 
the atmosphere and the third over heaven. The earth, 


118 


the atmosphere and heaven were known as lokas 
(regions), there being three lokas. In some places, the 
Vedas state that there were 11 gods for each loka, so 
that there were 33 gods in all. In some cases, there are 
references to 3339 gods. When it came to the age of 
the Puranas, the number of gods increased to thirty- 
three crores. 


Many scholars have suggested that the gods of the 
Vedas are nature gods. That is, forces of nature came 
to be ascribed with divine qualities and became gods. 
To some extent, this is indeed true. But the forces of 
nature have been so humanised that their original 
elemental form is sometimes impossible to detect. This 
is known as anthropomorphism. Besides, there are 
also abstract deities with whom no forces of nature 
can readily be identified. 


It is also important to realise that the gods of the 
Vedas cannot easily be compartmentalised into 
pantheons of monotheism or polytheism. What is 
more commonly found is kathenotheism. That is, 
there is more than one god, but whenever a hymn is 
addressed to a particular god, that god comes to be 
ascribed with all the divine qualities. In course of the 
hymn, the god in question is regarded as the supreme 
godhead, and all the other gods come to be regarded 
as his manifestations. 


The gods of the Vedas can now be catalogued under 
three different headings - gods of heaven (dyuloka), 
gods of the atmosphere (antariksha), and gods of the 
earth (prithivi). 


119 


The chief gods of heaven are Dyouspita, Mitra/ 
Varuna, Surya/Savita/Pusha, Vishnu, the two 
Ashvinis, Usha and Chandrma. Dyouspita is regarded 
as the father of the universe, prithivi being regarded as 
the mother. Dyouspita and the earth are together 
addressed as Dyavaprithivi. Dyouspita seems to have 
been a personification of the sky. The gods Mitra and 
Varuna are almost invariably addressed in unison. 
Mitra seems to have been identified with the day and 
Varuna with the night. Mitra is also identified with 
Surya. In the period of the epics and the Puranas, 
Varuna came to be regarded as the lord of the ocean. 
But this was not the case at the time cf the Vedas. 
Surya is the sun-god and Savita is a manifestation of 
Surya at specific points of time. Pusha is also a 
manifestation of Surya. Vishnu is a minor god in the 
Vedas and there are indications that Vishnu was also 
regarded as a manifestation of Surya. The two 
Ashvinis are physicians of the gods, sharing a 
common wife named Usha (the dawn). In the Vedas, 
the Ashvinis are closely associated with Surya. They 
may very well have been stars (nakshatra) identified 
with the moming and the evening. Another name for 
the two Ashvinis is Nasatya. Usha is the goddess of the 
dawn. She is also addressed as Dakshina (sacifical 
fee). It was at the time of dawn that priests began 
sacrifices and received their fees. Chandrama is the 
moon-god, but is a minor god. He is closely identified 
with the god Soma. 


The chief gods of the atmosphere are Indra, Aja 


Ekapada, Matarishvan/Vayu/Vata, Parjanya, Rudra 
and the Maruts. Indra is the most powerful of all the 


120 


gods. He killed the demon Vritra and {s accordingly 
addressed as Vritraha. Purandara is another of his 
names. Aja Ekapada is a minor god and is probably a 
manifestation of either Agni or Surya. Matarishvan, 
Vayu and Vata are all gods of the wind. Parjanya has 
a close relationship with them and is a personification 
of clouds. Parjanya thus rules over herbs and rains. 
The Rudra of the Vedas is not the Rudra of the Puranas. 
In the Vedas, Rudra is a god associated with the wind. 
Alternatively, he is identified with Agni. The Maruts 
are also wind-gods and are regarded as the offspring 
of Rudra. The number of the Maruts is not 
unambiguously given. In some places, the number 
seems to be 180. In other places, there seem to be 21 
Maruts. The Maruts are close companions of Indra. 


The chief gods of the earth are Agni,Brihaspati/ 
Brahmanaspati, Soma and Sarasvati. Agni is the 
main god of the earth, he is the fire-god. There are 
three different types of fire - ahavaniya, dakshinagni 
and garhapatya. Ahavaniya agni is used to offer 
oblations to the gods, dakshinagni is used to make 
offerings to the ancestors and garhapatya agni is the 
fire that continually burns in any household. In the 
age of the Vedas, fire was ignited by rubbing two 
pieces of stick (arani) together. These are known as 
uttararani and adhararani. It is.not entirely clear 
whether Brihaspati or Brahmanaspati is indeed a god. 
He seems to have been more like a chief priest, often 
regarded as the lord of all hymns. It was only in a 
later period that Brihaspati came to be identified with 
G nakshatra. Soma is really a herb, although he is also 
identified with Chandrama. In the Vedas, Sarasvati is 


121 


not the goddess of learning. She is a river, also known 
as Bharati. 


Let us now see what the Yajur Veda Samhita has to 
say. 


Adhyaya one 

The god Savita is the creator of all beings. May 
Savita grant you foodgrains. May he grant you 
Strength. O men! You are the breath of life. May the 
great creator guide you on the path to superior action. 
O men! Forge ahead. May you not kill other living 
beings. May you set aside a share for Indra at 
sacrifices. May you have children and may you be free 
of ill health and tuberculosis. Thieves will not steal 
your goods and sinners will not harm you. O Savita! 
Reside with the king who is performing this sacrifice. 
Bless him with many subjects and preserve the 
sacrificial beasts. 


(Although the hymn is addressed to Savita, in this 
context, Savita probably does not mean a 
manifestation of Surya. The word is probably used to 
signify the supreme godhead (paramatman).) 


You are the one who makes the vasus pure, you are 
heaven and earth, you are the one who makes the 
warmth of life flow in all living beings. You are the 
one who nurtures everything. May your greatness 
increase in the best of places. You will not be evil, nor 
will one who performs a sacrifice to you be evil. 


(This hymn is again addressed to the paramatman. 
The vasus are gods and there are eight of them. The 


122 


eight vasus are sometimes identified as Agni, Prithivi, 
Vayu, Antariksha, Aditya, Dyou, Chandrama and 
Nakshatra. The word aditya signifies a son of Aditi, the 
mother of all the gods.) 


In your countless flows you make the vasus pure. 
Your thousand flows unite with the vasus to make 
them pure. O men! The one who purifies everything 
and the one who creates everything will also purify 
you. O men! Where is the kamadhenu whose milk you 
have drunk? 


(A kamadhenu is a cow which gives whatever fruits 
one desires. The answer to the question of where is the 
kamadhenu, is given in the subsequent hymn.) 


O men! You possess three kamadhenus. The first is a 
full life span, the second is the power to perform all 
actions, and the third is the energy that is the nurturer 
of everything. O men! You are all parts of Indra and to 
you too, I offer the soma juice. O Vishnu! Please 
protect the oblations of the sacrifice. 


(The first part of this hymn may seem obscure, but 
the implication is the following. Some men sirive for a 
long live, others attain fame through their actions 
and still others seek union with the energy that is the 
paramatman. The word Vishnu is probably used not 
with the specific god Vishnu in mind, but as a general 
expression for all gods.) 


O Agni! You are the one who enables religious rites 
(vrata) to be performed. I will try to observe vratas and 
may I be successful in this endeavour. May my vrata 


123 


be performed and may I spurn that which is untrue 
and seek that which is true. 


O men! Who is the one who spurs you to action? 
Why does he desire that this action be performed? He 
inspires the two of you to action so that both of you 
may obtain houses. 


(This again is slightly obscure. Who are the two 
who are being addressed ? The word two refers to two 
types of men, the wise as oppossed to the ignorant 
and the weak as opposed to the strong. The house 
seems to be a reference to heaven. Those who perform 
good acts attain this house quickly.) 


Rakshasas (demons) have been vanquished; they 
have been burnt to ashes. Those who are narrow- 
minded have also been burnt up. Now the wide open 
spaces are free and! can roam at will. 


O men! You have the power to destroy. Destroy 
assassins and killers, destroy those who bring us 
harm. Destroy those whom all of us wish to vanquish. 
You are the ones who can summon the gods with 
excellent oblations. You are the ones who can offer 
them means of transport. You are the ones who can 
purify the gods and make them complete. 


(This hymn is to be interpreted in the sense that the 
gods reside in human bodies. For example, Surya is in 
the eyes, Chandrama in the mind, Vayu in the nose, 
Prithivi in the legs, and Aniariksha in the navel.) 


Oblations are offered in vessels. O men: May you be 
as straight as these vessels and may you be strong. 


124 


May you be truthful and may the one who is 
performing the sacrifice for you also be truthful. May 
Vishnu descend on you and may you roam in the 
places frequented by Vayu. Rakshasas will keep their 
distance from you. The five will act as captors. 


(The five is a reference to the five senses of action, 
knowledge, the mind, inteiligence and the soul. The 
five senses will be controlled and will capture the 
divine energy.) 


The god who is the root cf all creation will preserve 
you (men). The arms of the Ashvinis will preserve you 
and the hands of the god Pusha will preserve you. | 
will offer the oblations that are loved by Agni, | will 
also offer the oblations that are loved by Soma. 


Men have been created so that they may tread 
along superior paths. They have not been created so 
as to be narrow-minded. I can see the shining atman 
(soul). May the dwellings on earth be well-preserved, 
may I travel through the atmosphere at will. Men 
have been established at the centre of the earth. O 
Agni! Preserve these oblations. 


The two of you are blessed with the power of the 
great Vishnu and with the power to purify. This 
universe has been made by the great creatror. I will 
use the rays of the sun to purify everything. O divine 
drops of water! You are the first one to make every 
object sacred. Come to this sacrifice. Bless the 
performer of the sacrifice with the best of metals. 
Make the performer of the sacrifice devoted to the 
gods so that he can forge forward. 


125 


(The first part of this hymn is again not very clear. 
Obviously, men in general are being addtessed. 
Vishnu probably means the paramatman and the 
word two is used to signify Vishnu’s power and the 
power to purify.) 


O water! Indra acknowledged your Superiority at 
the time of killing the demon Vritra. You also 
acknowledged Indra’s superiority at that time. You 
have been purified. I purify you, the beloved of Agni. ! 
purify you, the beloved of Soma. May you become 
sacred so that divine tasks can be performed. May you 
become sacred so that sacrifices to the gods can be 
performed. Men who are not pure get defeated. It is for 
these reasons that I am purifying you. 


May demons keep their distance and may narrow- 
minded people be banished. O men! Happiness is to 
be found in you. May you be free. You are like 
mountains covered with trees. You are like boulders. 
May you prosper. 


O men! You are the body of Agni. You have the 
power to create words. | accept that in you can be 
found the energy of the gods. You are like mountains 
covered with trees. Prepare oblations so that all the 
gods may be satisfied. Purify the oblations and offer 
them in peace. You are the ones who offer oblations of 
food. Come here. 


O men! You can conjure up sweet words. Create 
compositions in praise of strength and foodgrains. 
Your power will lead to the destruction of enemies. 
May your wisdom and knowledge increase every year. 


126 


Demons will maintain their distance or be destroyed. 
Those who are narrow-minded will be banished. Vayu 
will purify you. The god Savita whose hands are 
covered with gold will bless you. 


O men! May you have patience. O Agni! Let not 
those who eat meat come near us. But reside with 
those who worship the gods. May Agni be constant 
and may he make the earth prosper. Agni is the one 
who makes brahmanas (the priestly class), kshatriyas 
(the warrior class) and our kin thrive. I crave that 
Agni may be near me so that the evil can be killed. 


O Agni! Make wisdom pervasive. You are the 
nurturer, nurture the atmosphere. You are the one 
who makes brahmanas, kshatriyas and our kin thrive. 
Make heaven prosper. I keep you close to me in all the 
four directions. You are the harbinger of our welfare 
and you are the one who sharpens our senses. Make 
us tread along superior paths. May the energy of the 
sages Bhrigu and Angirasa increase your energy even 
more. 


O Agni! You are the source of all happiness. May 
demons and those who are narrow-minded maintain 
their distance. May prosperity be close to you. You are 
the wisdom that resides in mountains. May you be 
familiar with this knowledge. May you make heaven 
thrive. 


(The concept of there being wisdom in mountains 
may not be very clear. In yoga (a technique of 
meditation), there is an identification of the human 
spine with a mountain range and it is thought that 


127 


there is latent knowledge in the spine which needs to 
be progressively elevated through the meditation.) 


_ Foodgrains find their expression in men. It is men 
who please and satisfy the gods. It is men who bear 
the breath of life. As a man, the divine energy courses 
through my body so that I may have a long life. The 
god Savita whose arms are adorned with gold will 
bless us men. The eyes and the senses of men are the 
source of great energy. 


O men! You flourish in the creation created by the 
supreme godhead. You flourish in the creation that is 
blessed by the arms of the Ashvinis. You flourish in 
the creation that is blessed by the arms of Pusha. May 
the water be mingled with the herbs and may the 
herbs thrive. Let the rich and the swift live in 
harmony. May this universe be sweetened. 


I praise men because they are the source of 
offsprings. The gods Agni and Soma have their 
presence in human bodies. Men have warmth in their 
bodies. They are great and may they have long lives. 
May their greatness increase even more. May those 
who perform sacrifices attain fame. Agni will not 
harm the skin of humans. The god Savita will take 
men to the highest of heavens. 

O men! Do not be afraid. Do not retreat. Perform 
sacrifices. Let those who perform sacrifices prosper. 
May the three, the two, and the one make you 
complete. 

(The three, the two, and the one requires 
explanation. The three basic qualities (guna) and 


128 


those of truth (sattva), passion (rajas) and darkness 
(tamas). Sattva is identified with three, rajas with two, 
and tamas with one. The idea is that an admixture of 
these three qualities should make men complete.) 


I praise men who flourish in the universe created by 
the supreme godhead. The greatness of men is 
increased through the blessings of the Ashvinis and 
Pusha. May men perform non-violent deeds. Men are 
like Indra’s right arm. Men are full of boundless 
energy, they can kill thousands of enemies. Men 
destroy those who have hatred in their hearts. Men 
are the breath of life. 


O Prithivi! The gods are worshipping you. May the 
herbs which grow on you never bring me 
unhappiness. Make the cowsheds of cowherds 
prosper. May heaven bring you rains. O supreme 
creator! On this earth there are those who have hatred 
in their hearts, and those whom we hate. Bind them 
up in the nets and let them not escape. 


I banish the evil from those places on earth where 
the gods are worshipped. O supreme creator! Bind the 
hated ones up in nets. O evil ones! You will not be able 
to bring grief to heaven. 


O Prithivi! I chant hymns to you composed in the 
gayatri metre. I chant hymns to you composed in the 
trishtupa metre. I chant hymns to you composed in the 
jagati metre. O mother earth! You grant us strength 
and bring us welfare. You bring us happiness and 
grant us the best of places to sit in. The earth is blessed 
with food and water. 


re? 


O learned ones! Brave is he who gives up his life in 
a battle between two powerful foes. But braver is he 
who gives up his life for the sake of his motherland. 
Though his powers, such a person delivers up his 
motherland to Chandrama. May those who thus 
purify be near us. May they kill the ones who hate. 


(Chandrama is not literally meant to signify the 
moon. Etymologically, the word chandrama means 
one who brings happiness. The sense therefore is that 
someone who sacrifices himself for his motherland 
brings happiness to his country.) 


The demons have been vanquished and burnt to 
ashes. The narrow-minded ones have _ been 
vanquished and bumt to ashes. The vast and open 
spaces are now free. Men are strong like sharp 
weapons. Men are the swords which destroy enemies. 
I purify the power that is in men. 


O men! You are like the clothing of independence. 
You are the dwelling-house of the supreme creator. | 
praise you for the sake of foodgrains and strength. | 
look upon you with my eyes. You are like the tongue 
of Agni. You will welcome the gods to the sacrifices 
held in every household. 


This universe has been created by the supreme 
godhead. | purify all men with the rays of the sun. 
Men ace energy and valour. Men are immortal like 
the place where a sacrifice is held. Men are beloved of 
the gods. 


This concludes Adhyaya one. We will now skip a few 
chapters and move on to Adhyaya five. 


130 


Adhyaya five 

O Soma! You are the body of Agni. I worship you 
because you are the beloved of the paramatman. I pray 
to Soma because Soma is the beloved of Vishnu. O 
Soma! You are the one who pleases and satisfies 
guests. You yourself are like Vishnu, the lord of all 
riches. 


Soma is the source of Agni. Soma is the source of all 
strength. O Soma! You are life. You are Urvashi and 
Pururava. I churn you to the chanting of hymns 
composed in the gayatri, trishtupa and jagati metres. 


(Pururava was the grandson of Chandrama and 
Urvashi was an apsara (dancer) from heaven. The 
Vedas and Puranas have references to the love affair 
between the King Pururava and the celestial nymph 
Urvashi. Scholars have interpreted this union in a 
naturalistic sense. That is, Pururava has been 
identified with the Sun and Urvashi with the dawn. 
Urvashi also means someone who controls every 
object and this is probably the sense in which the 
word should be interpreted in the context of the 
hymn. Similarly, Pururava means someone who can 
converse well. That is, the drinking of the soma juice 
confers the power to converse well.) 


O Agni! May you be concentrated and constant, 
may you not flicker. Do not destroy the sacrifice and 
make sure that the performer of the sacrifice prospers. 
On this day, we desire that you will bring us welfare. 


O Agni! Preserve those who are performing the 
sacrifice. May Agni merge into the ahavaniya fire. You 


131 


are the son of the sages. O Agni! Bring us the 
happiness and carry our oblations to the gods. I offer 
these oblations to you. 


(You will remember of course that ahavaniya agni is 
the fire into which oblations are offered. Why should 
Agni be referred to as the son of the sages? The word 
that is used for son is putra. Etymologically, the word 
putra signifies a person who delivers one from the hell 
(naraka) named put. The sense therefore is that Agni 
delivers the sages from hell.) 


I worship the Agni who is the lord of everything. | 
worship the Agni who is as beloved to me as a 
grandson. I worship the Agni who is strong and 
powerful and always mobile. Agni has so far never 
been maligned by anybody, nor will Agni ever be 
maligned. Agni increases the strength of the gods; he 
deserves all praise. May Agni protect us from 
performing tasks that bring disrepute. Let Agni rise up 
straight and attain the best of places. We are 
performing the sacrifice in accordance with the 
prescribed rites. May Agni make our sacrifice a 
SUCCESS. 


O Agni! You are the one who permits religious rites 
(vrata) to be performed. May your body merge with 
mine. May we always be close together. May my 
initiation into the world of learning (diksha) be a 
success. May I attain powers. 

O Soma of the divine powers! May you be offered to 


Indra and may you increase Indra’s wisdom. Bring 
riches and wisdom to all my friends. O shining Soma! 


132 


May you prosper. Grant me the boon that I may be 
able to successfully complete my saqifice. Grant me 
riches and show me the path that leads to the truth. | 
worship all those who are fit to be worshipped in 
heaven and on earth. 


O Agni! Your energy can be found in iron. You are 
the one who grants the gods the objects of their desire. 
You are the one who makes the demons live in terrible 
places and you are the one who robs them of their - 
harsh words. I dedicate this sacrifice to your body. O 
Agni! Your energy can be found in silver. O Agni! Your 
energy can be found in gold. I dedicate this body to 
your sacrifice. 


O Agni! You bring us warmth and riches. Preserve 
me in the course of this sacrifice. 1 acknowledge you to 
be the fire that is there in the sky. I acknowledge you 
to be the fire that is in my body. I acknowledge you to 
be the fire that grants us long lives. You are present on 
earth at all sacrifices. You are never maligned. O 
Agni! Since you are in the sky, I hail you by the name 
of Nabha. (Nabha means the sky.) Since you are in my 
body, I hail you by the name of Angirasa. (Anga 
means part of the anatomy). From the atmosphere 
you descend to the place of the sacrifice. I establish 
you on the occasion of the sacrifice. O earth! ! also 
acknowledge your supremacy so that I may please the 
gods. 


O earth! May you be like a lioness and may you 
defeat the enemies. May you ensure the welfare of the 
gods. May you be pure. 


133 


Indra and the e’ ht Vasus will protect the earth 
towards the east. Varuna and the eleven Rudras will 
protect the ec.+h towards the west. The ancestors 
(pitris) will protect the earth towards the south. 
Vishvakarma and the twelve Adityas will protect the 
earth towards the north. | offer this sanctified water 
with this wish. 

(The Vasus are gods and there are believed to be 
eight such gods. Rudra is sometimes referred to as a 
single god, and at other times, there are said to be 
eleven different Rudras. Vishvakarma is regarded as 
the architect of the gods, but in the Vedas, he is often 
referred to as the creator of the universe. That is, he is 
identified with the supreme godhead. The word 
Aditya signifies a son of Aditi, the mother of the gods. 
Gods are thus generally referred to as Adityas. 
Specifically, there were twelve Adityas, each such 
Aditya being a manifestation of Surya. For each of the 
twelve months, there was one Aditya.) 


O earth! You destroy the demons through your 
valour. You are like a lioness. I offer these oblations to 
you; please accept them. You are the fount of all 
wisdom: I offer these oblations to you. You are the one 
who grants good subjects, riches and prosperity. 
Accept these offerings and bring the gods to this 
sacrifice. Bless all beings who are born. 


May the earth be still. May the atmosphere be still. 
May the heaven be still. Let not anything in the 
universe move. That is my wish. 


Those who are learned attain wisdom by observing 
others who are learned. They concentrate their minds 


134 


and seek the path of yoga. They control their 
intelligence and perform righteous deeds. The learned 
sing the praise of the paramatman and may this praise 
be glorified. May oblations be offered for the pleasure 
of the paramatman. 


Vishnu bore this universe. He placed one step on 
earth, a second step in the atmosphere and a third 
step in heaven. Vishnu is omnipresent; he 
encompasses the universe. Oblations are offered to’ 
the great godhead. 


(The word Vishnu is here used synonymously with 
the paramatman. There is an associated legend in the 
Puranas whereby Vishnu traversed the universe in 
three of his footsteps. This took place on the occasion 
of the sacrifice organised by the demon-king Vali and 
relates to the story of Vishnu’s dwarf (vamana) 
incarnation.) 


O Dyavaprithivi! You bring about the welfare of 
men by providing them with foodgrains and cows. O 
omnipresent paramatman! You have divided 
Dyavaprithivi into the sky and the earth. You protect 
the earth through your rays. | offer these oblations to 
you. 


O men! Announce this message in all assemblies of 
learned people. Make it be known that it is non- 
violent .deeds that should be performed. Advance 
towards the east, the direction where the sun rises. 
Observe sacrifices and perform righteous deeds. Do 
not retreat and do not perform acts of ill repute. Do 
not perform destructive deeds. Establish your 


135 


cowsheds in the best of places. Do not do that which 
impairs one’s long life. Make sure that the subjects 
prosper. And dwell in those places on earth that bring 
one happiness. 


I do not have words to describe the glory of the 
paramatman. It is he who created the earth, the 
atmosphere and heaven. His power manifests itself in 
these three worlds. May his fame spread and may he 
dwell in the best of places. 


O Vishnu! (Vishnu again means the paramatman.) 
Take pity on us. Bring us objects from heaven so that 
we may be fulfilled. May objects from the atmosphere 
bring us happiness. May we be’ fulfilled through 
objects received from the earth. O supreme godhead! 
Bring us happiness from the right and from the left. It 
is to you that we pray through this sacrifice. 


The paramatman is like a terrible lion that dwells in 
the mountain. Such is his valour. His acts deserve 
praise. It is through the paramatman’s grace that 
living beings get to dwell in the three worlds. 


The glory of the paramatman is pervasive. It is 
Vishnu who makes this universe constant and 
controls its expanse. Sentient or not, all objects in the 
universe were created by the paramatman. It is for that 
great creator that we perform this sacrifice. 


It is to please the great Savita that I make offerings. 
I make offerings to the Ashvinis and to Pusha with my 
two arms. May Savita come to my aid. May I be able 
to chop off the heads of the demons with my acts. O 


136 


men! You are capable of speech. Chant hymns in 
praise of Indra. 


(In this hymn, Savita is being used as a synonym 
for the paramatman. Pusha is a manifestation of 
Surya). 


O learned men! I vanquish demons through my 
valour and spread the glory of the paramatman. May 
you also do the same. May your servants also do the 
same, May you also attain the wisdom that I have 
attained. 


O men! You have been created so that you may 
perform righteous deeds and defeat your enemies. You 
have been created so that you may perform sacrifices 
and kill the insolent. Destroy evil demons and 
preserve those who are righteous and learned. 


O men! You destroy the evil ones and you worship 
the omnipresent paramatman. It is for this reason that 
you are sacred. May | vanquish the soldiers of my 
enemies and may I protect the devotees of the 
paramatman. May my wisdom increase and may | 
learn the knowledge that teaches of the giory of 
Vishnu. May all of us become devotees of the great 
paramatman. 


O Savita! For your pleasure I acknowledge the 
supremacy of the Ashvinis and of Pusha. May you 
make me great. May I perform righteous deeds and 
behead the demons. You are ever youthful. Please 
ensure that enemy ‘cohorts maintain their distance. I 
sanctify you for the welfare of heaven. I sanctify you 
for the welfare of the atmosphere. | sanctify you for 


137 


the welfare of the earth. I sanctify you for the welfare 
of the place where the ancestors dwell. 


© men! Make heaven lofty. (Heaven is already 
lofty. The sense is that, be as high as heaven by 
performing good deeds). Make the atmosphere vast. 
(Be as vast as the atmosphere through your deeds.) 
Make the earth firm. (Be as firm as the earth in your 
actions). May the god Vayu bring you righteousness. 
May Mitra and Varuna protect you. Be blessed with 
wisdom, strength and riches. May you have long lives 
and may your children prosper. 


O wives of those who are performing sacrifices! 
Bring your children and your cows to the place of the 
sacrifice. Make the sacrifice a success with your 
husbands. Offer clarified butter at the sacrifice and 
fulfil the sky and the earth. O women who perform 
sacrifices! You are like Indra’s shadow; you shelter the 
world and bring it happiness. 


O Indra! You are the one who deserves praise. I sing 
your glory through my hymns. The aged are praised 
for their learning. Such is your wisdom that you are 
the oldest of them all. All praise to you. 


Men will be like ropes that bind Indra; they will 
attain his proximity. Men will obtain Indra’s 
friendship. In men will be found Indra’s strength; in 
them will be found the strength of all the gods. 


Agni is everywhere. It is Agni’s flames that enable 
us to perform wonderous deeds. Agni is our friend. He 
is the bearer (vahana) of our oblaticns (havya) and he 
ss thus known as Havyavahana. Agni is the source of 


138 


all wisdom. In him is found the knowledge (veda) of 
the universe (vishva) and he is thus known as 
Vishvaveda. 


O Agni! You are handsome and learned. You 
deliver us from sin. You protect us from our enemies. 
You are sacred and you purify everyone. Blaze forth. 
You purify the priest who has become thin in body as 
a result of performing this arduous sacrifice. You 
bring us welfare and you kill the abductors. O Agni! 
You are sacred because you carry our oblations to 
their destinations. You are radiant. You are powerful. 
You are truth it self. 


O paramatman! You are as vast as the ocean. You 
are omnipresent and you have no origin. The 
universe is gathered near your feet. You do not wither 
away. You are the first and the foremost. You are the 
speech; you are the source of divine wealth. You are 
like the door which opens a sacrifice. May you protect 
us from all misery. You rule over the righteous path; 
guide us along it. May we perform good deeds and 
may our welfare be ensured. 


O powerful Agni! We pray to you so that you may 
look upon us as a friend. You are the one who deserves 
praise. Protect us through your flaming tongue. May 
Agni preserve us. We bow down in obeisance before 
him. Do not lead to our destruction. 


O Soma! In you can be found the forms of all the 
gods. You are like a lamp which lights up their 
presence. You punish those who bear hatred towards 
us in their hearts. You destroy the evil demons. We 


139 


offer these oblations to you. Be powerful and uccept 
these offerings. May the pleasant Soma accept the 
clarified butter that we have offered. 


O paramatman! You light up the entire universe. In 
you can be found all the divine qualities. You are the 
source of all wisdom. You are the one who knows the 
secret of the righteous path. Guide us along that path 
and make our sacrifice a success. May we attain the 
fruits that we desire. May we obtain riches. Remove all 
impediments and sin from the path of the sacrifice. 
We chant these words in your praise. 


Agni will grant us riches. Agni will Jead us when we 
scatter our enemies in battle. Agni will bring us 
triumph over our foes. Agni will grant us foodgrains. 
Agni will accept our offerings. 


O paramatman! You are the supreme godhead. 
Remove our enemies and remove all our vices. Make 
us prosper and make us great. We offer these offerings 
of clarified butter in your name; accept our offerings 
and thrive. May they prosper who make offerings to 
you. 


O Savita! This soma juice is being offered to you, 
preserve it. May no one bring harm to this soma juice. 
O Soma! You are blessed with divine qualities; bring 
the gods here to our sacrifice. | summon the gods here 
for the prosperity and well-being of all mankind. We 
make these offerings to the gods. May Varuna look 
upon us with favour. 


© Agni! You are the one who ensures that religious 
rites are properly performed. You will ensure the 


140 


success of our rites. Your presence can be found in our 
bodies, which are part of your being. The paramatman 
will look upon our religious acts with favour. 


O Vishnu! You are the paramatman, you are like the 
ahavaniya fire. Display your valour when you fight 
with our enemies and with our vices. Make us great so 

that we may get to reside in heaven. Accept the 
' offerings of clarified butter that we have made. Make 
the one who is performing a sacrifice prosper. These 
offerings are for you. 


O god who created the trees! (This seems to be 
addressed to the paramatman). You shun evil people 
and are close to those who are learned. May I also 
keep company with learned people. May I attain your 
proximity. The leamed wish to be close io you. That is 
my wish as well. The learned desire your presence at 
sacrifices made for the gods. That is my desire as well. 
Preserve the herbs and protect us. May disease not 
bring us harm. Please ensure that our sacrifice is a 
success. May we be wise. 


O god who created the trees! Preserve all objects in 
heaven and preserve all objects in the atmosphere. Be 
like a friend to the earth. This axe is indeed sharp. We 
will use it to chop wood for the sacrifice. Stay at the 
place of the sacrifice for a hundred years. Bring a 
thousand riches to us. 


This concludes Adhyaya five. We will again skip a 
few chapters and move on to Adhyaya ten. 


141 


Adhyaya ten 


The gods have accepted the water that is sweet and 
strong. This water stirs the senses and grants the 
power to rule. It is this water that is used for the 
coronation of the gods Mitra and Varuna. It is this 
water that is used for the coronation of Indra, the 
destroyer of enemies. May the gods accept this 
offering of water. 


O water! You increase our strength and wisdom. 
You grant us kingdoms. Please grant us kingdoms 
that are ruled through truth. You bring us happiness. 
Grant us kingdoms and grant kingdoms also to others 
who desire such a boon. O water! Countless soldiers 
accompany you. Grant us kingdoms to the sound of 
sweet words. 


O water! You are the one who tries to bring us 
riches. You are also the one who gives us kingdoms. 
Grant me kingdoms according to the proper rites. 
Grant kingdoms to brave warriors who deserve such 
gifts. 1 am powerful and valiant, therefore grant me 
kingdoms. Grant kingdoms to those who possess 
many soldiers. Those who can rule over the water are 
those who deserve to be kings. 


O kings! Our radiance is like that of the sun. It is we 
who deserve to be kings and obtain kingdoms. I will 
bring happiness te the kingdoms | get, | will:rule over 
them through the ways of truth. All the subjects will 
thrive in bliss. Kingdoms will go to those who worship 
the paramatman. Kingdoms will go to those who 
preserve cows and other animals. I deserve kingdoms 


142 


as I will follow the path of truth. I deserve kingdoms 
as 1 am strong and powerful. 


May I be like the one who brings prosperity to the 
universe, may I be as radiant as that great one. I offer 
these oblations to Agni, to Soma, to Savita, to 
Sarasvati, to Pusha, to Brihaspati, to Indra, to the 
gods who rule over the power of sound, to the gods 
who create ripples in the water, to the gods who 
created good deeds (punya), and sin (papa), and to the 
omnipresent Aryama. | offer these oblations for the 
sake of riches. 


O subjects! May you be righteous and pure. May 
you be devoted to the supreme godhead and may you 
please him through your good deeds. May you be free 
from all sin and populate this great universe. May 
you make righteousness spread throughout this 
world. May you be as pure as the water that rises up 
when it is heated by the rays of the sun. O subjects! Do 
not deviate from the righteous path. Please one 
another and be like friends through your sweet words. 
Study the sacred knowledge and perform meditation. 
It is through your deeds that kingdoms prosper. 


Water is the source of all happiness. It is powerful 
and makes us perform good deeds. It is not impaired 
by the acts of our enemies. The subjects build houses 
and the king mules over his subjects with as much 
purity as can be found in the energy of Agni when it is 
manifested in the water. 


O kings! You are the receptacles of valour. You are 
the source of valour. You are the fulcrum of brave 
deeds. You are like the strength of Indra himself. Mitra 


143 


and Varuna possess wonderful weapons. These 
weapons will stay with you and enable you to 
vanquish your foes. They will help you to break down 
the fortresses of your enemies. You are like arrows that 
bring misery to your foes. You are the ones who rule in 
truth. O brave warriors! Be in the forefront of battle 
and protect the king. Protect him from the front, 
protect him from the back, and protect him from the 
sides. Protect him in all the four directions. 


Let all men protect the one who observes sacrifices. 
Let the Agni who presides over the household protect 
him, let Indra, the performer of wonderous deeds, 
know him well. Let Mitra and Varuna, the protectors 
of proper rites, be close to him. Let him be known by 
the omniscient Pusha and let him be protected by 
heaven and earth. The mother of the gods is the 
source of great happiness. Let her protect him as well. 


The snakes have evil natures; may they be 
destroyed. O men! Move towards the east. The gayatri 
mantra, the sama hymns and the spring season will 
protect you and bring you joy in the form of riches. 


O men! Move towards the south. The trishtupa 
metre, the sama hymns and the summer season will 
protect you and bring you joy in the form of riches. 


O men! Move towards the west. The jagati metre, 
the sama hymns and the monsoon season will protect 
you and bring you joy in the form of riches. 


O men! Move towards the north. The anushtupa 
metre, the sama hymns and the autumn season will 
protect you and bring you joy in the form of riches. 


144 


O men! Advance upwards. The pamkti metre, the 
sama hymns and the winter season will protect you 
and bring you joy in the form of riches. May those 
who do not forsake sinful ways, be beheaded. 


May I be prosperous, strong and valiant. May I be 
freed from the cycle of birth and death. May I be 
radiant. May I be protected from death. 


O Mitra! O Varuna! The two of you are as radiant 
as gold and as prosperous as kings. You are the ones 
who rise to make Usha manifest and to spread the 
glory of Surya and Chandrama. O Mitra! O Varuna! 
Ascend your chariots and come. Make large kingdoms 
and small ones flourish through your advice. O Mitra! 
You are the benefactor. O Varuna! You are capable of 
repulsing all enemies. 


O king! I crown you so that you may shine like 
Chandrama. I crown you so that you may be as 
radiant as Agni. I crown you so that you may be as 
strong as Indra. May you rule over all kshatriyas (the 
warrior class). O king! May you triumph over all 
impediments that come in the way of your subjects 
and may you rule over them well. 


O gods! Bring power and valour to this deserving 
king. Bring him great kingdoms so that he may rule 
like Indra. Let him be crowned so that he may 
vanquish all his enemies. Let the son of such and such 
parents be crowned so that he may rule over his 
subjects. O such and such subjects! This is your king, 
and also the king of us brahmanas (the priestly class). 


145 


(Obviously the clause such and such would be 
replaced by the appropriate name as the occasion 
warranted.) 


The water that is in mountain streams flows down 
the backs of the mountains. Like that, the water used 
for the coronation flows down the king’s back. From 
above and from below, this king is sprinkled with 
wuter so that he may never be killed. O earth! You will 
be the place where the fame of this king will spread. O 
atmosphere! His valour will spread to you. O heaven! 
You will also learn of the glory of this king. 


O Rudra! You rule over subjects. You are alone the 
lord of all objects; they have no other lord. Grant us 
the fruits for the sake of which we are making these 
oblations to you. The one who is performing the 
sacrifice is the son of such and such and the father of 
such and such. But we acknowledge you to be our 
father. With your aid we will perform righteous deeds 
and attain wealth. O Rudra! You are the one who can 
destroy everyone. You are the one who deserves to be 
worshipped in every household. I make these offerings 
to you; may you accept them. 


O men! May you be like Indra’s vajra. May you be 
blessed by the gods Mitra and Varuna. May you not 
suffer violence at the hands of your enemies. May you 
triumph over your foes through your valour. 


© Indra! You wield the vajra in you hand. You 
swiftly defeat all your enemies. You are prosperous 
and you are the receptacle of all divine qualities. You 
drive in a chariot to which excellent and well-trained 


146 


horses are harnessed. May we never be separated from 
you and may we never become ctheists. 


I offer these oblations to Agni who is present in 
every household. I offer these oblations to Soma, 
whose presence can be detected in all the trees. | offer 
these oblations to the valorous Maruts. I offer these 
oblations to the brave Indra. O motheriand! May you 
preserve me from all destruction and may I never 
bring you grief. 


You are the performer of all righteous deeds. You 
are the protector of all the subjects. You dwell in the 
atmosphere, but are the lord of all beings. You are 
worshipped by those who make oblations into the fire. 
You make your seat on the earth and are welcomed 
like a guest in every household. You are present in 
every kingdom; you are present in the bodies of our 
leaders. You are based in truth and you are the 
protector. You are the origin of water and you are the 
source of true wisdom. In you can be found the 
strength that does not wane. You grant strength to 
men and you are the greatest of the great. 


(It is not entirely clear to whom this and some of 
the succeeding hymns are addressed. They are 
probably addressed to Agni). 


You are indeed great; you are like life itself. Grant 
me a long life. You are energy itself; grant me energy. 
You are the performer of all righteous deeds. You are 
like strength itself; grant me strength. O Mitra and 
Varuna! You are like the two arms of the great Indra. 
May you be close to Indra. 


147 


You bring happiness. You provide the strength that 
preserves kingdoms. Be seated on this throne and rule 
over this kingdom. 


The best of kings makes his subjects prosper. He 
performs good deeds and makes the kingdom thrive. 
He rules in all fairness. 


O god! You are capable of defeating all your 
enemies. May the five directions bring you bliss. You 
are strong and learned. You are the god who created 
righteousness. You are the valorous Varuna. You are 
the strong Indra who rules over his subjects. You are 
the Rudra who brings: happiness. You permit 
wonderful deeds to be performed and you bring 
welfare. You are the lord of all prosperity. You are like 
Indra’s vajra. Bring us happiness. 


Let this powerful king be the leader. Let him 
perform the duties of a king and preserve his subjects 
the way Agni preserves righteous deeds. Let the king’s 
valour increase through truthfulness. O king! You 
have been blessed with various forms of prosperity. 
May you be as powerful as the rays of the sun. May 
the brave warriors of the kingdom preserve the king in 
their midst. 


I advance along the best of paths through the 
blessings of ten gods. First is Savita of the divine 
qualities. He is the source of all riches. Second is 
Prajapati, the ruler of all forms. Third is Pusha, the 
lord of all animals. Fourth is Vakpati, the lord of the 
Vedas and of all knowledge. Fifth is Indra, who rules 
over kings. Sixth is the brave Varuna. Seventh is Agni, 


148 


the source of all energy. Eighth is Soma, in whom can 
be found all the traits of a king. Ninth is Vishnu, in 
whom can be found all qualities. And the tenth is the 
god who rules over words. 


© men! May you be as learned and wise as Surya 
and Chandrama. May your words be full of 
knowledge. May you make your country prosper for 
the sake of your king. May you be strong and may you 
be the performers of righteous deeds. May you 
worship the gods and may you be blessed with all the 
desirable qualities. May you pray to the paramatman 
through yoga. 


O learned ones! Through your deeds you have 
attained the proximity of the prosperous Ashvinis. 
Your words are full of wisdom and you will attain 
riches. Those who dwell in you country will prosper. 
Prepare food for those who are aged. Farmers 
carefully separate the chaff from the grain. Like that, 
separate out evil deeds from righteous ones. Perform 
good deeds. Protect the righteous and destroy the evil. 


O Ashvinis! You bring welfare to all of mankind. 
Indra is the destroyer of the demon Namucihi. It is you 
who aided Indra in this task. It is you who drank the 
sweet soma juice. 


O Indra! The two Ashvinis aided you in your task. 
They protected you the way parents protect their sons. 
O Indra! You drank the soma juice after defeating the 
demon Namuchi. It is then that Sarasvati pleased you 
with her words. 


149 


This concludes Adhyaya ten. Let us now move on to 
Adhyaya fifteen. 


Adhyaya fifteen 


O omniscient Agni! You are acquainted with all 
objects. Destroy all our enemies. Protect us from 
enemies who have not yet emerged. Do not forsake us, 
but grant us boons with a benevolent heart. May we 
be blessed with the happiness that your bounties will 
confer. May we be saved from the radiance of your 
energy. 


O Agni! You are omniscient. Destroy our enemies 
from all the directions. Destroy even those enemies 
who have not yet been created. You have the best of 
minds, advise us on the righteous path. May we be 
strong in every respect, may all our enemies be 
destroyed. 


The words of these hymns are blessed with all the 
arts. These hymns will bring us riches. The words of 
these hymns have in them all forms of strength. These 
hymns will bring us strength. These hymns will make 
Agni blaze brighter. They will bring all the gods to us. 
These hymns are the refuge of those who are strong 
and valiant. May these hymns bring the devotees 
immense prosperity. 


In speed there is joy. In superiority there is joy. In 
happiness there is joy. There is joy in enveloping all 
the directions. There is joy in covering all objects. In 
the power of the mind there is joy. In vast expanses 
there is joy. In water there is joy. In the ocean there is 
joy. In poetry there is joy. In metres there is joy. 


150 


(This may seem obscure. In fact, the sense of the 
hymn is that in metres (chhanda) there is joy. Eighteen 
different metres are mentioned by name, some of 
which can be interpreted in the literal senses given 
above. The names of these eighteen metres are eva, 
variva, shambhu, paribhu, acchata, mana, vyacha, 
sindhu, samudra, sariram, kakupa, trikakupa, kavya, 
ankupa, aksharapamkti, padapamKkti, vishtarapamkti and 
shurabhraja.) 


O that which grants us the fruits we desire! I bear in 
mind the foodgrains that sustain the body and revere 
you. I bear in mind the water that sustains the body 
and revere you. I bear in mind the night and revere 
you. I bear in mind the day and revere you. I bear in 
mind the vast heaven and revere you. I bear in mind 
the earth where chariots travel and revere you. I bear 
in mind the noisy wind and revere you. | bear in mind 
the atmosphere where ghosts and demons dwell and 
revere you. | bear in mind the food which can be 
eaten and revere you. I bear in mind the flaming fire 
and revere you. I bear in mind the power of speech 
and revere you. I bear in mind the circle of energy and 
revere you. I bear in mind my childhood and revere 
you. I bear in mind hunger and revere you. I bear in 
mind the heaven which grants riches and revere you. 
I bear in mind the illusions created by solar rays and 
revere you. I bear in mind the sacifices which yield 
knowledge and revere you. I bear in mind my 
ignorance and revere you. I bear in mind atheism and 


revere you. | bear in mind pits and stones and revere 
you. 


151 


(This hymn also seems to be exceedingly obscure. 
But the sense again is that various metres yield joy. 
Twenty-two different metres are intended and their 
names are acchata, pracchata, samyata, viyata, vrihata, 
rathantara, nikaya, vivadha, gira, bhraja, samstupa, 
anushtupa, eva, variva, vaya, vayaskrita, vishpardha, 
vishala_ chhadi, durohana, tandra and amkadanka. 
Some of these metres can be interpreted in the literal 
senses given above.) 


O men! Be energetic in the pursuit of truth so that 
truth may be preserved. Use your learning to follow 
the path of righteousness so that righteousness may 
be preserved. Forge ahead energetically so that 
heaven may be pleased. Maintain non-violence and 
preserve the atmosphere. Make sure that foodgrains 
grow in abundance and please the earth. Know the 
monsoon that gives rise to rains. Know the day and 
know the night. Please the Vasus who have human 
welfare in their hearts. Learn of the Adityas through 
your wisdom and please them. 


© men! Use the foodgrains to preserve your bodies. 
Use the riches to sustain your bodies. Protect the Vedas 
and learn the knowledge that is in them. Use the 
herbs well to make medicines. Nurture your bodies 
well through food and increase your knowledge 
through studying. May your energies increase and 
may you be victorious. 


O men! You are intelligent. I praise you because 
intelligence can be found in you. You are the 
manifestation of food. I praise you because food can 
be traced in your bodies. You are the possessors of 


152 


wealth. I praise you because wealth can be found in 
your possession. In you can be found an abundance 
of energy. I praise you because you are the source of 
energy. 


O men! You are as sacred as sacrifices. I 
acknowledge your supremacy for the success of the 
sacrifice. You yourselves are the inspiration behind all 
action. I acknowledge your supremacy for the success’ 
of action. In you can be found excellence of character, 
and I acknowledge your supremacy for that reason. I 
acknowledge your supremacy when you do battle 
with your enemies. You are the ones who invade your 
foes. I acknowledge you for the sake of your 
supremacy. 


O men who observe sacrifices! You are like the 
queen who rules over the eastern direction. The eight 
Vasus bless you. Agni preserves you from all 
unhappiness. These hymns will establish your 
supremacy on earth. These offerings of clarified butter 
will make you great. These sama hymns will establish 
you firmly in the atmosphere. The sages will sing of 
your glory in heaven. The lord of all the objects in the 
universe will preserve you. The Vasus and the other 
gods will bring happiness to all those who observe 
sacrifices. 


O men who observe sacrifices! You dre like the vast 
expanse of the southern direction. The Rudras will 
bless you. The god Indra will protect you from disease. 
These hymns will establish your supremacy on earth. 
These offerings will make you great. These sama 
hymns will establish you firmly in the atmosphere. 


153 


The sages will sing of your glory in heaven. The lord 
who brings welfare will make you great. The Vasus 
and the other gods will bring happiness to all those 
who observe sacifices; they will establish them in 
heaven. 


O men who observe sacrifices! You are like the 
radiance of the western direction. The Adityas will 
preserve you through their divine qualities. Varuna 
will save you from unhappiness and these hymns will 
establish your supremacy on earth. Weapons will 
make you firm and strong. These sama hymns will 
establish you firmly in the atmosphere. The sages will 
sing of your glory in heaven. The best of the gods will 
make you great. The Vasus and the other gods will 
bring happiness to all those who observe sacrifices 
and establish them in heaven. 


O men who observe sacrifices! You are like the light 
of the northern direction. The Maruts will protect you. 
Soma will not permit disease to come near you. These 
hymns will establish your supremacy on earth. 
Weapons will make you firm and strong. These sama 
hymns will establish you firmly in the atmosphere. 
The sages will sing of your glory in heaven. The gods 
who ensure the success of all action will make you 
great. The Vasus and the other gods will bring 
happiness to all those who observe sacrifices; they will 
establish them in heaven. 


O men who observe sacrifices! You are like the lofty 
upper direction. All the gods are your protectors. 
Brihaspati will preserve you from all unhappiness. 
These hymns will establish your supremacy on earth. 


154 


Agni and the Maruts will make you firm and strong. 
These sama hymns will establish you firmly in the 
atmosphere. The sages will sing of your glory in 
heaven. The gods who grant desired fruits will make 
you great. The Vasus and the other gods will bring 
happiness to all those who observe sacrifices and 
establish them in heaven. 


Agni is present in the eastern direction. His hue is 
golden and his radiance is like the rays of the sun. 
Wonderful is Agni’s chariot and the spring season is 
like Agni’s charioteer. Great is the learning that can 
be found with Agni. His weapons are as powerful as 
fierce animals like tigers. I bow down before Agni with 
all my offerings. May Agni and his companions bring 
me happiness and protection. May those who hate me 
be destroyed. 


Vayu is present in the southern direction. He 
controls all action. Wonderful is Vayu’s chariot and 
the summer season is like Vayu’s charioteer. Two 
apsaras (dancers of heaven) named Yatudhana and 
Heti ride on Vayu’s chariot. His weapons are as fierce 
as terrible demons. I bow down before Vayu with all 
my offerings. May Vayu and his companions bring 
me happiness and protection. May those who hate me 
be destroyed. 


Aditya is present in the western direction. (The 
word Aditya is used here in the singular). He is the one 
who makes the entire universe manifest. Wonderful is 
Aditya’s chariot and the monsoon season is like 
Aditya’s charioteer. Two apsaras named Sarpa and 
Praheti ride on Aditya’s chariot. His weapons are as 


155 


powerful as tigers. I bow down before Aditya with all 
my offerings. May Aditya and his companions bring 
me happiness and protection. May those who hate me 
be destroyed. 


Yajna is present in the northern direction. (This god 
is a personification of yajna or Sacrifice.) He is the one 
who grants riches. His weapons are as fierce as birds of 
prey that roam in the sky. Wonderfu! is Yajna’s 
chariot and the autumn season is like Yajna’s 
charioteer. The two apsaras Heti and Praheti ride on 
Yajna’s chariot. I bow down before Yajna with all my 
offerings. May Yajna and his companions bring me 
happiness and protection. May those who hate me be 
destroyed. 


Parjanya is present in the upper direction. He is the 
one who grants all desires. Wonderful is his chariot 
and the late autumn season is like Parjanya’s 
charioteer. The two apsaras Heti and Praheti ride on 
Parjanya’s chariot. His weapons are as sharp as the 
lightning. | bow down before Parjanya with all my 
offerings. May Parjanya and his companions bring 
me happiness and protection. May those who hate me 
be destroyed. 


Agni is supreme in heaven. He is as lofty as the 
shoulder of a bull. Agni is the lord of this earth. He is 
the one who nurtures the water. 


Agni is omniscient. He is the one who grants a 
thousand forms of happiness. He is the one who 
grants a thousand forms of riches and foodgrains. He 
is as lofty as one’s head and he is the source of the 
supreme wisdom. 


156 


O Agni! The priests who are the most learned, the 
priests who are the best among all the priests on 
earth, have brought you into being by rubbing two 
sticks together. You have descended in our midst from 
the sky. You are high and lofty. 


O Agni! The flames of your tongue spread to accept 
the oblations that we have offered. You are the one 
who ensures that the sacrifice will be a success. You 
are the one who grants excellent horses and other 
objects. You are the one who makes the Adityas 
happy in heaven. 


Agni’s fires are lit through the firewood collected by 
men. Men are inspired at the sight of dawn, the way a 
calf is inspired at the sight of the mother cow. (This is 
relevant because sacrifices commenced when it was 
dawn.) Agni’s shining flames rise upwards towards 
heaven. It is almost as if a bird is rising up into the 
highest parts of the sky. 


We pray to the Agni who is omniscient. We pray to 
the Agni who rules over sacrifices. Men use words, 
food and hymns to welcome the ahavaniya fire. 
Oblations are offered and Agni is praised, the way the 
sun is praised at the time of the evening. 


Agni is the one who summons the gods to our 
midst. Agni is the one who presides over the sacrifice. 
It is Agni whom the priests praise through their 
hymns It is Agni whom the sages establish on the 
occasion of a sacrifice. The sage Bhrigu had many 
sons. He lit the flames of Agni in the middle of a 
forest. 


LS7 


Agni protects those who perform sacrifices. Agni 
never sleeps, but is ever awake. Agni is skilled. Agni is 
pure. It is to Agni that clarified butter is offered on the 
occasion of a sacrifice. It is Agni who is lit by the sages 
on the occasion of a sacrifice. Agni’s radiant flames 
rise upwards towards heaven. 


O Agni! You are the beloved of the sages Angirasa. 
(There were several sages named Angirasa. In fact, it 
is not quite clear that the Angirasa were sages. The 
Vedas often suggest that they were a semi-divine 
species and were Agni’s companions.) You resided in 
caves and in trees. But the Angirasa obtained you in 
their midst and were blessed. O Agni¥ You blaze forth 
when you are obtained by rubbing two sticks together. 
It is because you are so strong that the sages have 
addressed you as the son of strength. 


O Mitra! Those who are learned have prayed to you 
for foodgrains so that these may be offered as 
oblations to the great Agni. 


O Agni! You are strong and you are the lord of all 
that there is. Grant the desired fruits to the ones who 
are performing this sacrifice. We have prepared a pyre 
for you to the north of the place where the sacrifice is 
being held. Be seated there. Great is your fame. You 
will be pleased and will grant us wonderful riches. 


O Agni! You are the lord of action and riches. All 
your subjects call upon you to come and accept their 
oblations. 


I call upon the immortal Agni with these offerings 
of foodgrains. I call upon the Agni who has his origin 


158 


in water and who is the source of all learning. I call 
upon the Agni who is always energetic and who 
brings fruition to sacrifices. I call upon the Agni who is 
like a messenger for the gods. 


Agni is immortal, he is the messenger. Agni can 
never be destroyed. I call upon the Agni who is not 
stirred by anger. I call upon the Agni to whom the best 
of the oblations are offered. Agni has two steeds, 
harnessed to his chariot. When we call upon him, he 
swiftly arrives in our midst. 


This sacrifice is the best of sacrifices, and has the 
best of priests. Agni has been summoned to the 
sacrifice in the prescribed fashion. He will come here 
and shower the performer of the sacrifice with riches. 
Once Agni comes, Vasu, Rudra and the other gods will 
also come to the sacrifice. 


O Agni! You are omniscient, you are the son of 
strength. You are the lord of foodgrains and cows. 
Grant us riches. 


O Agni! You are the source of all happiness. You 
are radiant and you are the one who establishes all 
objects. You are omniscient and the Vedas are full of 
praise for you. You are the one who presides over 
sacrifices. Make your presence felt and grant us riches. 


O Agni! You are the shining one. Your tongues are 
as sharp as the vajra. You are famous as the destroyer 
of the demons. Destroy the demons who are here 
during the day and destroy the ones who are here at 
the time of dawn. 


US? 


O Agni! You are prosperous and learned. The 
priests have lit you for the sake of our welfare. You will 
grant us boons and you will make the sacrifice a 
success. We chant these hymns to you so that you 
may bring us happiness. 


O Agni! So great are your mental powers that you 
vanquish all your enemies in battle. Use those mental 
powers to protect us in the course of battle. We pray to 
you so that our welfare may be increased. 


O Agni! Great are your powers. You destroy your 
enemies in battle. They are deluded and become 
immobile. The strings of their bows snap. Use those 
powers to bring us prosperity. 


I know the Agni who is the one who establishes 
every object. I am acquainted with the Agni whose 
blessings make steeds strong and swift. I know the 
Agni whose energy brings the cows safely back to their 
cowsheds. O Agni! I am praying to you. Make my 
house full of foodgrains. 


I pray to Agni. Riches and prosperity are nothing 
but manifestations of Agni’s being. Agni is the lord of 
cows and fleet-footed steeds. Those who are blessed at 
birth and those who are learned worship the divine 
qualities of Agni. O Agni! Grant a plentiful supply of 
foodgrains to your devotees. 


O Agni! You bring us as much of happiness as 
Chandiama does. You accept our offerings of clarified 
butter with your tongues. You are the lord of all 
strength. This sacrifice is being performed for you, it is 
to you that hymns are being sung. Grant us riches 
and foodgrains. 


160 


Food nurtures a steed that is swift. A true devotee 
-nurtures a sacrifice. O Agni! Nurture the sama hymns 
that we are chanting on the occasion of the sacrifice. 


O Agni! You are skilled and you will bring us 
welfare. You will aid us in the performing of 
wonderful deeds and you will grant us the fruits of our 
desire. You are great, you are the sustainer of a true 
sacrifice. Come and be our leader. 


O Agni! Be pleased at the prayers that are being 
chanted for your benefit. Be present before us with all 
your rays. May you flood us with your radiance the 
way ihe sun floods the earth at the time of sunrise. 


Agni is the possessor of divine qualities. Agni is the 
one who nurtures sacrifices. Agni is the one whose 
flames attain the lofty gods. Agni is the one who 
desires to drink the clarified butter that is offered at 
the time of sacrifices. Agni will establish everyone. 
Agni will summon the gods. Agni is the son of 
strength; he has been created through the rubbing 
together of sticks. Agni is the learned one, he is well- 
versed in all the sacred texts (shastras). | revere Agni as 
much as! revere a brahmana. 


O Agni! You are the one who is closest to us. You 
are the one who brings us happiness. You are our 
protector. Bring welfare to our houses. You are like a 
leader, you are the performer.of wonderful deeds. You 
are the lord of riches. GV pure Agni! Come to the place 
where we are holding the sacrifice. Grant us riches. O 
handsome one! We ask of you the riches that will 
make us radiant. 


161 


The sages perform sacrifices through their powers 
of meditation. They light the flames of Agni so as to 
obtain true bliss. I pray to Agni so that I may obtain 
the same happiness. The learned refer to Agni as the 
one who makes the expanse of the sky vast. 


O Agni! You are blessed with divine qualities. You 
rule in heaven. I crave for the bliss that there is in 
heaven through my good deeds. | perform this 
sacrifice with my lawful wives for your sake. | perform 
this sacrifice with my sons for your sake. I perform this 
sacrifice with my brothers for your sake. 


Agni is the lord of the universe. Agni is the one who 
preserves righteous people. Agni i$ learned. The 
radiant Agni is established on earth; he is praised 
through our words. Enemy soldiers who wish to fight 
with us are destroyed by Agni. 


The brave Agni is the one who accepts our 
oblations. Agni is the performer of a thousand 
wonderful deeds. Agni is shining; he does not hesitate 
in the course of performing any action. Let Agni shine 
on earth and make us feel the radiance that there isin 
heaven. 


O men! All of you come close to Agni. Come close to 
Agni and receive him in your midst. O Agni! Display 
to us the path that leads to the gods. Display to us the 
path that leads to the ancestors. The sages have 
summoned you on the occasion of the sacrifice. 


O Agni! Arise and awake. Awaken every day the 
person who desires to perform a sacrifice. Ensure that 
good deeds are performed Such righteous deeds 


162 


indude donation and meditation. May the bodies of 
those who perform such deeds be pure and may their 
houses be full. It is through your blessing that the 
performer of the saczifice will receive whatever boon 
he wants. O lord of the universe! Your proximity will 
grant us our desires and your proximity will free us 
from all sin. May we always be desirous of performing 
sacrifices. 


O Agni! Reside in our households as garhapatya 
agni. Be present in all the seasons and grant us riches. 


O Agni! Our sacrifices are accompanied by the 
giving of fees (dakshina). Make sure the sacrifices are a 
success. Bring the gods to our sacrifice and thereby 
ensure our proximity to heaven. 


The months of Magha and Falguna constitute 
winter (shishira). O Agni! You are the flaming fire. Be 
constant and firm. May heaven and earth bring us 
happiness through your grace. May water and soma 
and other herbs bring us happiness through your 
grace. May all the different forms of fire bless those 
who are performing sacrifices. There are many forms 
of fire in heaven and on earth. May all these various 
forms of fire thrive in the winter season. Just as Indra 
is the refuge of the gods, may Agni be the refuge of all 
the seasons. Reside with the Angirasa and make them 
great. 


O goddess! You are full of energy. Vishvakarma 
established you atop heaven. Surya is your husband. 
Grant those who perform sacrifices the breath of life. 
Make them superior through your energy. Use the 


163 


influence of the gods to make sure that Angirasa are 
firm in their resolve to perform the sacrifice. 


(It is not clear which goddess is being addressed.) 


You will fill up the world so that no holes remain. 
You will be firm and constant. Indra, Agni, Brihaspati 
and the other gods have established you. 


(This is another hymn addressed to the same 
goddess.) 


The sun’s rays mix with water in heaven. They 
have been there since the time when the gods were 
created. The performer of the sacrifice is located in one 
of the three worlds. He prepares the soma juice. 


The words of the Vedas are as vast as the ocean. 
Like a great warrior surrounded by minor warriors, 
the words of the Vedas surround Indra. Indra is the 
lord of all foodgrains. 


Agni is lit by rubbing two sticks together. The sound 
that the fire makes then is like the sound made by a 
horse which is hungry for grass. The sound of the fire 
raging attracts the wind and Vayu follows Agni’s 
path. The trail that the fire leaves is black of hue. 


The god named Ayu is as grim as the ocean; he is 
the ruler. Luminiscent Agni is established right in the 
middle of Ayu’s heart. Agni lights up heaven and the 
atmosphere. 

Vishvakarma isthe creator and he established you 


on heaven’s pinnacle. You are the breath of life that 
courses through all living beings. You are the one who 


164 


aids the performance of righteous deeds. May Surya 
preserve you in all the directions. May heaven find 
pleasure in you. Protect all beings through your 
energy and be as constant as the Angirasa. 


(This is a hymn addressed to a goddess whose 
identification is not dear. But obviously the earlier 
hymn was also addressed to the same goddess.) 


O Agni! Be full of a thousand powers. Be the . 
manifestation of a thousand riches. Be strong. Have a 
thousand forms of strength. Live in thousands of lofty 
places. You deserve to be the ruler of thousands. I 
appoint you as the ruler of a thousand subjects. 


This concludes Adhyaya fifteen. We now move on to 
Adhyaya twenty. 


Adhyaya twenty 


O king! You are the refuge of the power of kshatriyas 
and the power of the kingdom. You are the centre of 
all martial prowess, May you never kill your subjects 
and may your subjects never kill you. 


Let the one who is a leader of men follow the path 
of truth and observe religious rites. Let him be 
intelligent and a man of action. Let him be the best of 
men. O king! Protect your subjects from death. Protect 
them from lightning and other catastrophes. 


O king! Savita will bless you at the time of your 
coronation. The two Ashvinis and Pusha will bring 
you bounties with their arms. The Ashvinis will bless 
your coronation with their healing powers. May the 
wisdom that is in the Vedas vest with you. You are 


165 


being crowned so that foodgrains may grow, and so 
that Sarasvati may impart her power to the herbs. You 
are being crowned so that Indra’s strength and 
intelligence may increase. May we obtain prosperity 
and fame as your subjects. 


© king! May you be the performer of righteous 
deeds. May you bring welfare. May you rule in the 
light of truth. May you be the fount of happiness. | 
crown you so that you may be the receptacle of the 
wisdom of the Vedas and of the knowledge of the 
brahman (the divine essence). 


O subjects! I have been crowned as the king of this 
land. Different parts of my body will correspond to 
various traits of my kingdom. The prosperity of the 
kingdom will be my head, the fame of the kingdom 
will be my face, the truth that prevails in the kingdom 
will be my hair, beard and moustache, the life of the 
kingdom will be my breath of life, the throne will be 
like my eyes and the various assemblies of learned 
subjects will be my ears. 1 will carefully rule in the 
name of all that is righteous. 


(This and the succeeding hymns are being sung by 
the king.) 


May my tongue be the source of sweet words, may 
my speech bring glory to the kingdom and my mind 
be the source of rage for those who are evil. My anger 
will aid me in ruling the kingdom well, my fingers will 
bring joy to the kingdom and my body will contribute 
to its happiness. My friends will help me in defeating 
my enemies. 


166 


My two arms will be full of strength. All my senses 
will also be powerful. My arms will spur me to action 
and enable me to perform valorous deeds. My heart 
will be full of martial traits. 


My shoulders will be vast so that I can support the 
kingdom. I will look after my subjects the way I look 
after my stomach, shoulders, neck, thighs, waist and 
other parts of my anatomy. That is, I will take good 
care of my subjects. 


I will be the source of knowledge and prosperity for 
my kingdom. I am the king who has been crowned, I 
will rule over my subjects in accordance with the 
norms of righteousness. 


I am the lord of this kingdom and I will protect it 
from all decay. I will ensure its prosperity and I will 
ensure that my kingdom is full of cows, horses and all 
manner of riches. I will be like the soul of the 
kingdom. I will be like its breath of life. I. will rule so 
that I become dear to heaven. 


May the eleven gods of heaven, the eleven gods of 
the atmosphere, and the eleven. gods of the earth 
protect me. May the leamed Brihaspati, the leader of 
the gods, spur them to bless me with their divine 
qualities. May all the gods protect me. 


(You will recollect that in an introductory section, 
we stated that there were thirty-three gods, eleven for 
each of the three lokas. Brihaspati is the leader of the 
gods in the sense of being their preceptor.) 


167 


Prithivi and the other Vasus will make sure that |! 
attain my desires. The eleven Rudras will make sure 
that I attain my desires. The twelve Adityas will make 
sure that I attain my desires. The truest of the true, the 
Yajur Veda , the Sama Veda and the Rig Veda, will make 
sure that I attain my desires. The mantras uttered on 
the occasion of the sacrifices and the sacificial 
oblations will make sure that I attain my desires. 


(Thirty-three gods are obtained by adding the eight 
Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Adityas, 
Prajapati and the brahman. The eight Vasus are 
Prithivi, Apa, Teja, Vayu, Akasha, Kala, Disha and 
Atma. Alternatively, they are sometimes stated to be 
Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Ghara, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha 
and Prabhata. The eleven Rudras are Prana, Apana, 
Vyana, Udana, Samana, Naga, Kurma, Krikala, 
Devadatta, Dhananjaya and Atma. The twelve 
Adityas are Chaitra, Vaishakha, Jyeshtha, Ashada, 
Shravana, Bhadrapada, Ashivna, Kartika, 
Margashirsha, Pousha, Magha and Falguna. That is, 
the twelve Adityas are the twelve solar months. 
Alternatively, the twelve Adityas are referred to as 
Dhata, Mitra, Aryama, Rudra, Varuna, Surya, Bhaga, 
Vivasvana, Pusha, Savita, Tvashta and Vishnu.) 


The hair on my body will be sensitive to the needs 
of the kingdom. My skin and bones will be sensitive to 
the needs of the kingdom. My bones and marrow will 
serve the world and be sensitive to the needs of the 


kingdom. 


\LPENA COUNTY LIBRARY 
, 211 N. First St. 
Alpena: Mich: 49767 


168 


O radiant gods! May the god Agni free me of all the 
sins that I have committed so as to offend the gods. 
May the god Agni preserve me from all manner of 
sinful deeds. 


The god Vayu will free me from all the sins that I 
may have committed during the day or during the 
night. 


The god Surya will free me from all the sins that I 
may have committed while I was sleeping or while | 
was awake. 


The gods will free me from all the sins that I may 
have committed in villages, in forests or in assemblies. 
May all the sins that I have committed through my 
various senses be pardoned. 


O Varuna! I may have committed the crime of 
stating that cows can be killed. Pardon me that sin. O 
Varuna! You are swift of foot. But tarry a while with 
me. Free me from the sins that I may have committed 
against the gods, free me from the sins that I may 
have committed against men. O Varuna! Protect me 
from the violent enemies who hate me. 


O Soma! Your heart mingles with the water of the 
ocean. May your heart mix with the water and the 
herbs. May they bring you pleasure. May the water 
and the herbs protect me from those who hate me and 
from those whom I hate. 


May the water purify me from all sin. A man who 
has sweated becomes clean after he has bathed. May I 
be cleansed thus. May I be purified the way clarified 
butter becomes pure once it is strained. 


169 


Surya provides light to the world that is the best of 
all the worlds. May Surya’s blazing radiance protect 
me from the darkness. 


O Agni! I have come to you after sanctifying this 
water. Bless me with riches so that my subjects may 
prosper. 

O Agni! You are the one who grants intelligence; 
may I have intelligence. You are the one who grants 
energy; may I have energy. Please ensure that this 
earth brings me happiness. May Usha bring me 
happiness. May Surya bring me happiness. May this 
entire universe bring me happiness. © Agni! Make all 
living beings energetic. May I attain all the objects 
that I want. I offer these oblations to you; please 
accept them. 


O Agni! You are the one who ensures that religious 
rites are observed. I have decided to perform a 
sacrifice and I offer these oblations to you. | light your 
flames so that the sacrifice may be successful. 


Blessed is a land where brahmanas and kshatriyas 
unite in the performance of religious deeds. That land 
is sacred and free of all evil. The learned inhabitants 
of that land are as radiant as Agni. 


I know for a fact that the world where Indra and 
Vayu live together is blessed. There is no misery in 
that world, nor is there a lack of foodgrains. 


O soma juice ! You are part of Soma’s being and 
may you bring us happiness. 


170 


Those who crush soma herbs and extract the soma 
juice are blessed with strength. Strong are those who 
drink the soma juice. But those who merely taik 
without acting, obtain nothing at all. 


O Indra! In the morning we have offered you riches, 
curds, balls of flour and cakes (purodasha). Please 
accept these and listen to our hymns. 


O Maruts! Chant sama hymns in praise of the — 
valorous Indra, the destroyer of the demon Vritra. The 
hymns that the officiating priests chant on the 
occasion of the sacrifice speak of Indra’s glory. 


O priests! Bring the soma juice here. Purify it so that 
it may be offered to Indra. 


I pray to the paramatman. He is the lord of all living 
beings and all the worlds find refuge in his being. He 
is the greatest of the great, he is the one who controls 
all objects. 


O Ashvinis! { pray to the two of you so that you 
may be kindly disposed towards me. | pray to you for 
the sake of Indra and Sarasvati. I pray to you for the 
sake of protection. 


O Ashvinis! You will protect our lives and you will 
protect all the Xshatriyas. You will make our speech 
pure and you will guide us along the righteous path. 


I partake of this food in the name of the two 
Ashvinis. I partake of this food in the name of 
Sarasvati. I partake of this food in the name of Indra, 
the protector. 


171 


Indra blazes with radiance. At the time of dawn, he 
manifests himself as the sun in the eastern sky. He 
arrives with the thirty-three gods. He is the wielder of 
the vajra. He is the killer of the demon Vritra. He is the 
one who broke open the doors of the fortresses. 


Indra is prayed to by countless people. He is the life 
of sacrifices and he is the one who created wonderous 
objects. Indra is valiant, his form never fades and he is 
the one who provides milk in cattle. Our offerings of 
Clarified butter increase Indra’s energy. Indra’s form is 
more golden than gold itself. Learned is the great god 
whom everyone worships. He is the only one who can 
be our refuge. 


The gods themselves worship the manifold rays of 
Agni. He is the one for whom sacrifices are observed. 
He is the one to whom offerings are made by the 
sacrificial priests. Agni is strong. He destroys the cities 
of his enemies and demolishes the fortresses of the 
demons. Agni’s arms are as strong as the vajra. May 
he come to our sacrifice. 


Indra’s rays radiate out. He is the pleasant one who 
performs fantastic deeds. Indra is accompanied by the 
twelve Adityas and the eight Vasus. Indra will bring 
us joy. He will ascend the seat we have reserved for 
him on the occasion of the sacrifice. 


Like a wife is united with her husband, we will be 
united with Indra. He will bring strength to the brave 
king. He will spread the king’s fame and bring victory 
over the enemies. 


172 


Usha and Ratri (the night) bring fame to the great 
Indra. They are as sacred as beautiful cows which give 
an abundant supply of milk. 


Those who are desirous of observing a sacrifice first 
pray to Indra. Indra is the one who is the foremost. 
Vayu and Agni are also summoned on the occasions 
of sacrifices. 


The three goddesses Sarasvati, Bharati and Ila will" 
come with Indra when he comes to attend the 
sacrifice. They will ensure that our offerings of milk 
are blessed. 


Indra is the performer of excellent deeds, the brave 
warrior who destroys the power of enemies. The 
famous Indra performs acts that are unsurpassed by 
others. May Indra be worshipped and may he bring us 
the fruits of our desire. May Indra be present at our 
sacrifice. May he claim the best of seats and may he 
bring the other gods to the sacrifice. 


Indra manifests himself in his radiance. Gigantic 
trees like the banyan were created so that they might 
bring peace and happiness to the world. They are like 
Indra’s belly when it has been satiated with food. We 
have made offerings of clarified butter and honey on 
the occasion of the sacrifice. Indra will accept these 
offerings. 


Indra is strong; he destroys the enemies. He showers 
down happiness the way a cloud showers down rain. 
These offerings of clarified butter will please Indra. He 
and the other immortal gods will accept our offerings 
of soma juice, and be pleased. 


173 


Let Indra be near us and grant us protection. Let 
him be pleased through this praise so that he may 
bring us joy. Let Indra increase our strength and 
power. Let him increase our intelligence. May we be 
able to vanquish our enemies. And may Indra make 
our martial prowess as powerful as Surya’s energy. 


Let Indra be close to us. He is the one who fulfils all 
desires. He is the powerful one who protects all men. 
He is he wielder of the vajra. Indra defeats his enemies, 
in battles big and small. Let Indra come to us and 
offer us protection. 


Indra is the possessor of myriad riches. He is the 
wielder of the great vajra. Let him come for our 
protection and let him increase our prosperity. Let 
him climb onto his horses and come to our sacrifice. 


I pray to Indra who is our protector. I call him to 
every sacrifice so that he may offer us deliverance. He 
is the one who is worshipped by many. | call upon 
Indra. May he bring us welfare. 


Indra is the one who preserves righteous deeds. 
Indra is the one who will come to our aid. He is the 
one who will grant riches and foodgrains. He will be 
the king who will bring us happiness. May Indra 
bring misery to those who are opposed to him. May he 
free us from all the manner of fear. Indra will bless his 
subjects so that they become powerful and fearless. 


May Indra look upon us with favour, may he look 
upon us with benevolence. Even if Indra is not close to 
us, he will grant us protection and prosperity. He will 


174 


make those who bear hatred towards us maintain 
their distance. 


O Indra! Your body-hair have the colour of peacock 
feathers. Your voice is like the sound of thunder. Come 
to us on your horses. Hunters capture birds in their 
nooses and nets. But there is no enemy who can 
capture you. The enemies may be terrible, but they 
are scattered by the valour of your bow. 


Indra showers us with the objects that we desire; his 
arm is as powerful as the vajra. It is to Indra that the 
sage Vashishtha prayed through his mantras. The 
performer of brave deeds will bless us with valour and 
with cows and other animals. He will be our protector. 
O priests! Your prayers will please Indra and bring us 
protection. 


O Ashvinis! Agni is full of energy and that energy 
has mixed with this soma juice. Accept these offerings 
of soma juice. Sarasvati herself has aided in the 
extraction of this soma juice. This sacrifice has been 
blessed through her presence. 


The two Ashvinis cure all manner of illnesses. 
Sarasvati fills all the words with sweetness. Sarasvati 
and the Ashvinis will take us closer to Indra. 


Sarasvati has helped in the preparation of this 
soma juice so that it may be offered to Indra on the 
occasion of the sacrifice. The Ashvinis have provided 
the herbs from whicn the soma juice has been 
obtained. 


175 


(Sarasvati connotes a river. What is probably 
meant by Sarasvati helping is that the waters of the 
river have been mixed with the soma juice.) 


Sarasvati and the two Ashvinis will summon Indra 
to the sacrifice. They have sharpened Indra’s senses 
and given him strength so that he may grant us 
riches. 


The two Ashvinis mixed soma juice with the juices 
of other herbs. The soma juice was stolen by the 
demon Namuchi. But Sarasvati stole the juice from 
the demon and offered it to Indra. 


The Ashvinis, Sarasvati and Indra will grant us our 
desires. They are like the door of the sacrifice; they will 
make heaven and earth complete. 


Sarasvati and the Ashvinis increase Indra’s 
strength, be it morning, evening, night or day. 


O Ashvinis! Protect us during the day. O Sarasvati! 
Protect us during the night. O goddess and O 
physicians of the gods! Be united in your desire to 
prepare the soma juice and offer it to Indra. 


The two Ashvinis and the three goddesses unite to 
prepare the soma juice for Indra. The three goddesses 
are Sarasvati, Bharati and Ila. The soma juice brings 
happiness. 


When the soma juice has been prepared, the 
Ashvinis bring herbs. The juice from these herbs is 
mixed with the soma juice. Sarasvati brings other 
herbs from which the juice can be extracted. The god 
Tvashta imparts'a beauteous form to the soma juice. 


176 


Indra is the lord of the forests. In every season, 
Indra mixes foodgrains with the soma juice. The 
Ashvinis and Sarasvati impart sweetness to the soma 
juice. 

O Ashvinis! Unite with Sarasvati in mixing the 
juices of herbs with the soma juice. Offer the sweet 
$oma juice as an offering to Indra. 


The demon Namuchi possessed many offerings and 
riches. The Ashvinis and Sarasvati robbed Namuchi of 
these possessions and brought them for Inara. 


The two Ashvinis and Sarasvati united to increase 
Indra’s valour through these offerings. Indra 
destroyed the strength of the demon Namuchi. 


The Ashvinis and Sarasvati are to be praised. They 
are to be praised as they made offerings to Indra. 


The gods Savita, Varuna and Bhaga increased 
Indra’s strength and sharpened his senses. They 
offered oblations to the protector. 


Indra robbed the demon Namuchi of his riches, 
senses and power. Savita and Varuna granted boons 
of strength and riches to the devotees. 


Indra and Savita are the gods who increase fame. 
They are the ones who increase prosperity and 
martial prowess. 


Sarasvati and the two Ashvinis offer cows, horses, 
riches, strength and valour to their devotees. 


The Ashvinis traverse a golden path and are 
handsome of appearance. O Ashvinis, Sarasvati and 


177 


Indra! Please protect us while we are performing this 
sacrifice. 


The Ashvinis are physicians who _ perform 
beauteous deeds. Sarasvati fulfils our desires. Indra is 
the destroyer of the demon Vritra. 


O Ashvinis! O Sarasvati! Be united. The demon 
Namuchi has the soma juice. Take it away from him 
and offer it to Indra. Drink it yourself. 


O Indra! The Ashvinis will protect you with their 
mantras. They will protect you the way a son is 
protected by his parents. O Indra! Drink the soma juice 
and increase your strength. Sarasvati will look upon 
you with favour. 


Agni is the one who will accept our offerings of 
foodgrains, he will drink the soma juice we have 
offered. He will make himself manifest and grant us 
horses, bulls, cows and sheep. He will grant us 
protection. 


O Agni! Accept these oblations with your tongues. 
Accept these offerings of clarified butter, accept these 
offerings of soma juice. Grant us foodgrains, brave 
sons and riches. You will grant us the greatness that 
brings fame. 


The two Ashivinis bring energy to the eyes. 
Sarasvati brings strength to life and Indra brings 
sound to speech. 

O Ashvinis! You are the performers of that which is 
true. You are the brave ones who make the evil weep. 


178 


Grant us boons of cows and horses. Make us traverse 
the righteous path. 


O Ashvinis! You are the ones who give rise w rain. 
May the enemies who slander us be unable to bring us 
harm. May those who do not associate with us be 
unable to bring us harm. 


O Ashvinis! You are the ones who establish all 
objects. The two of you will bring us yellow ane and 
other riches. 


Sarasvati will energise our sacrifice. She is the one 
who purifies. She is the one who grants foodgrains, 
riches and intelligence. 


Sarasvati inspires us to excellent speech, she 
increases our wisdom. May Sarasvati make this 
sacrifice a success. 


Through her wisdom Sarasvati imparts intelligence 
to the sky. She is the manifestation of all wisdom. 


O Indra! You are handsome and many are your 
manifestations. Come here and bless those who wish 
to be close to you. We have prepared this soma juice 
with our own fingers. We have purified it. Accept it. 


O Indra! Those who are wise pray to you. Those 
who are learned pray to you. And those who desire 
riches also pray to you. Come here and grant us 
riches, fame and foodgrains. 


O Indra! You are the possessor of the best of horses. 
Come quickly to the sacrifice and be close to those 
who are chanting the mantras. Drink the soma juice 
we have offered. Accept the oblations we have offered. 


Fae] 


May Sarasvati and the two Ashvinis unite and 
drink the soma juice. May Indra, the destroyer of the 
demon Vritra, drink the soma juice. 


This the end of Adhyaya twenty. We will skip some 
chapters and move on to Adhyaya twenty-five. 


Adhyaya twenty-five 

I please the sweet grass with my teeth. With the 
roots of my teeth I please the expanse where the sweet 
grass grows. The back of my teeth brings pleasure to 
the earth and the front of my téeth brings pleasure to 
the god Tega. The tip of my tonque will please 
Sarasvati and my tongue will please the god Utsada. 
My palate brings pleasure to the god Avakandra and 
my two lips bring pleasure to foodgrains. | will please 
the god Apa through my mouth and my beard and 
moustaches will please the Adityas. My eyebrows 
bring pleasure to the god Pantha and my eyelashes 
bring pleasure to Dyavaprithivi. The centre of my 
forehead pleases the god of lightning. | offer these 
oblations to the god of fairness (Shukladeva), I offer 
these oblations to the god of darkness (Krishnadeva). 
The top of my eyes worships the god Para and the 
bottom of my eyes worships the god Roma. 


Through my breath of life I worship the gods Vata 
and Nasika. My lower lips worship the god Upayama 
and my upper lips worship the god Sata. The upper 
part of my body is for the pleasure of the god Antara 
and the lower part of my body is for the pleasure of 
the god Brahma. My head is for the pleasure of the 


180 


god Niveshya and the bones of my head are for the 
pleasure of the god Stananiyatnu. With the centre of 
my head | worship the god Ashani and with my eyes I 
worship the god of lightning. With my ears and my 
throat I worship various other gods. With my head I 
worship the goddess Aditi. 


With my hair I worship the god Mashakan. With 
my action I worship Indra and with my gait I worship 
Brihaspati. With my calves I worship the god ' 
Kapinjala and with my arms I! worship the god 
Marga. With my thighs I worship the gods Aranya 
and Agni, with my hands I worship Pusha, and with 
my shoulders I worship the Ashvinis. With the joints 
of my body I worship Rudra. 


The first joint on my right is for Agni, the second 
joint is for Vayu, the third for Indra, the fourth for 
Soma, the fifth for Aditi, the sixth for Indrani (Indra’s 
wife), the seventh for the Maruts, the eighth for 
Brihaspati, the ninth for Aryama, the tenth for Dhata, 
the eleventh for Indra,-the twelfth for Varuna, and the 
. thirteenth for Yama. 


The first joint on my left is for Indra and Agni, the 
second joint is for Sarasvati, the third for Mitra, the 
fourth for the god of waters, the fifth for Agni, the 
sixth for Soma, the seventh for the god of the snakes, 
the eighth for Vishnu, the ninth for Pusha, the tenth 
for Tvashta, the eleventh for Indra, the twelfth for 
Varuna, and the thirteenth for Yama. 


(In both of these hymns, by ‘joints’ are meant joints 
of the body.) 


181 


The kingdom is like a body. The tents of the soldiers 
are like the kingdom’s shoulders. The righteous path 
indicated by the gods is the soul. The general and the 
king are like the legs of the kingdom and the learned 
citizens are like the waist. 


In any body, the lap is Indra’s and the feet belong 
to Aditi. Aditi, Dyou and Prithivi can be found in the 
human body. The clouds are like the blood that there 
is in the body and the arteries of the heart are like the 
atmosphere. The sky is like the intestine and the 
clouds are like the spleen. Termite-hills can be likened 
to the liver and creepers can be likened to the veins of 
the heart. The various veins and arteries in the body 
are like creepers and the pools of blood in the body 
resemble ponds. The stomach is like an ocean. The fire 
named Vaishvanara is like the juices in the stomach 
which digest the food. 


Compare the energy that holds up the universe to 
the navel. Compare clarified butter to the strength of 
the body. Compared the learned in the kingdom to 
the digestive juices. The sun is to be compared to the 
fat of the body and the morning dew to the body-heat. 
Trees can be compared to the fat and the water which 
makes trees thrive to the water that there is in the 
body. The lightning in the sky can be compared to the 
eyes. Wonderful places in the kingdom can be 
compared to various parts of the anatomy. The stars 
can also be compared to various parts of the body. 
The earth can be compared to the skin of the body. 
These offerings are being made to the god Varuna. 


182 


Surya and other objects that are full of energy are 
manifestations of the paramatman. The paramatman 
was present before the universe was created. It is the 
paramatman which is the lord of the universe. The 
paramatman bears aloft heaven and earth and the 
paramatman is the source of all happiness. We make 
these offerings to the paramatman. 


The powers of the paramatman created life and ° 
sight in all living beings that populate the universe. 
The paramatman is the lord of the universe. The 
paramatman is the lord of bipeds like humans and 
birds and quadrupeds like cows and elephants. The 
paramatman is the lord of all subjects (prajapati). We 
make these offerings to Prajapati. 


The powers of the paramatman created these snow- 
clad mountains and the great oceans. The powers of 
the paramatman created all the directions. The 
paramatman is the source of all happiness and is full 
of divine qualities. We make these offerings to the 
paramatman. 


The paramatman is the granter of physical and 
spiritual strength. All the gods follow the path laid 
down by the paramatman. The paramatman is the 
source of all bliss and immortality. To forsake the 
paramatman is to be close to death. The paramatman 
is the source of all happiness. We make these offerings 
to the paramatman. 


May we obtain the objects of our desire and may 
these fruits bring us happiness. May these objects be 
everlasting and may they surpass all the fruits that 


183 


others may have obtained before. May these objects 
bring us wisdom. The gods will be energetic in 
providing us learning and protection. 


The god follow a constant and straight path; they 
will grant us wisdom and other boons. May they look 
upon us with favour and be like our friends. May they 
grant us long lives and intelligence. 


We pray to Bhaga, Mitra, Aditi, Daksha, Aryama, 
Varuna, Soma and the two Ashvinis so that we may 
be preserved from destruction. We pray to the 
knowledge manifest in the Vedas so that we may be 
protected. May the goddess Sarasvati bring us welfare 
and good fortune. 


Vayu will be close to us and will bring us herbs that 
are a source of happiness and banish all manner of 
disease. The mother earth will be the source of a 
plentiful supply of foodgrains. Heaven will provide us 
with the energy that is the source of happiness. 
Heaven will make the water flourish. Soma will bring 
us herbs. O Ashvinis! You are the ones who will bear 
us. Please bring us all manner of happiness. 


O men! Let us pray to the paramatman for our 
protection. Let us call upon the paramatman who is 
the protector of all objects in the universe. May our 
intelligence be purified through these prayers. The 
paramatman will strengthen our learning, protect us 
from death and bring us happiness. 


The paramatman is the performer of wonderous 
deeds and may we obtain happiness from that great 
source. The paramatman is the source of the learning 


184 


that there is in the Vedas. It will bring us welfare. The 
paramatman is everywhere and it cannot be 
splintered. May the great Brihaspati bring us 
happiness. 


The Maruts are as swift as strong steeds; they are 
the ones who encompass the sky. The Maruts give 
birth to clouds in the atmosphere. The Maruts have 
the energy of Agni, and Surya is like their eyes. They 
are the possessors of divine qualities. The Maruts will 
come here for our welfare and will protect us. 


O gods who are the possessors of divine qualities! 
May we listen to sweet speech. O officiating priests! 
May we only look upon objects that bring us 
happiness. We pray to the supreme godhead and 
praise him. The learned have decreed a life span for 
humans. May we attain that lifespan and be blessed 
in various ways. 


O gods! You are the possessors of divine qualities. 
May we live to see a hundred autumns, may we not 
die before that. (That is, may we live to be a hundred 
years.) May we not die before our sons have 
themselves become fathers. 


May heaven be the source of infinite strength. May 
the atmosphere be the source of infinite strength. May 
the earth be the source of infinite strength. May the 
paramatman protect all living beings from being ever 
destroyed. The gods are never destroyed. Five types of 
men are never destroyed. The world that is constituted 
of the five elements is never destroyed. The one who is 
bom first is never destroyed. 


185 


(This needs some explanation. The five types of 
men refers to the five classes or castes—brahmanas, 
kshatriyas, vaishyas, shudras and nishadas. Brahmanas 
were priests, kshatriyas warriors, vaishyas traders, 
shudras a serving class; nishadas were hunters. The 
sense of one who is born first never being destroyed is 
not clear either. The idea is that there is a constant 
cycle of birth. Those who were born earlier are 
destroyed, but others are born to take their place. In 
this fashion, the world is never destroyed.) 


Mitra, Varuna, Aryama, Vayu, Indra, Ribhu and 
the Maruts will look upon us with favour. The gods 
are the possessors of divine qualities, to.them we pray 
for strength and prosperity. 


One who follows the path indicated by the supreme 
godhead is energised like the sun when it rises in the 
east. Such a person becomes immortal and treads the 
path that is loved by Indra and Pusha. 


Such a person is blessed with divine qualities. He is 
the one who deserves to be a leader of warriors among 
men. He is the one who becomes the destroyer of the 
enemies and the protector of the kingdom. He 
becomes famous and is the beloved of the inhabitants 
of the kingdom. 


The king should be a deserving person so that he is 
as revered as a handsome sacrificial horse. He should 
be the beloved of the gods. Thrice a year, the leaders of 
the kingdom take the king on a tour of the kingdom. 
(This was a ritual which enabled the king to get 
acquainted with the kingdom.) The gods are the ones 


186 


who protect and sustain. They remain in the forerront 
and protect the kingdom. 


O officiating priests! Make the offerings and offer 
dakshina (the sacrificial fee) to the brahmanas. May the 
rivers overflow and may the learned be satisfied. 


A person has laboured to make the sacrificial 
scaffolding. A person has laboured to bring it here 
and another person has laboured to make the bridle 
for the sacrificial horse. Some other person has ° 
laboured to collect the wood. May all this labour 
ensure our welfare. 


The king brings welfare to his subjects, he is the one 
who can grant protection. He is the refuge of the 
learned. The sages are pleased when they are close to 
the king. May the king bring prosperity to his subjects 
and victory to his warriors. 


The sacrifidal horse has a bridle; its neck, legs and 
head are tied with ropes. In its mouth can be found 
grass and other fodder. May all these objects please 
the gods. 


The mouth of the horse will bring us victory. Part of 
the horse remains attached to the weapon and part of 
it is in the hands of the person who wishes for peace. 
Part of the body is beyond the purview of the senses. 
Then part of it is offered to the kingdom. All of this is 
blessed by those who are learned. 


(This is ouscure. It probably refers to the actual act 
of the horse being sacrificed and the body being 
divided up.) 


187 


May peace be brought to the waste matter of the 
body. May only that food be cooked which is pure and 
sanctified. 


© men! Part of the field has not been ploughed; it 
has been burnt by the fire of the sun. Let not that part 
of the field remain fallow. Let it not be swallowed up 
by weeds and grass. May those learned ones who want 
this land be given it, so that they can grow foodgrains 
on it. 


The kingdom is like a field. There are those who 
wish to see the kingdom as full as a field on which 
foodgrains grow. The fields are irrigated with water 
from ponds and wells. The kingdom is full of resting- 
houses where travellers can rest from the heat of the 
sun. Thus it is that the kingdom flourishes. 


May the smoke of Agni protect you from grief. May 
Usha and her energy protect you from disease. The 
king is handsome and the beloved of everyone. He is 
energetic and hard-working. May he be accepted as a 
leader by everyone. 


The horse comes out, sits, moves here and there, 
moves backwards, drinks water, eats grass. May all 
these acts please those who are learned. 


There are handsome clothes in which the horse is to 
be covered. There is gold with which it will be 
adorned. There are ropes to tie its head and feet. May 
these objects be preserved by those who are learned. 


(These are references to the sacrificial horse.) 


188 


Your enemies are swift of foot. They will attack you 
from behind and catch you unawares. They will bring 
you harm. I will use my knowledge of the Vedas to 
protect you from such misery. I will cover all your 
faults. 


(This and the subsequent hymn are addressed to 
the king.) 


You are so strong that all by yourself you are 
capable of protecting the kingdom. You are the friend 
of the learned and you are the one who knows well 
the thirty-four parts of a horse’s body. O best of men! 
Protect the kingdom through your efforts and make 
the kingdom prosper. 


The seasons divide the year into various parts. 
There are two ayanas in a year, each consisting of six 
months. The sun is the ruler of time. I offer oblations 
in the various seasons. 


When the atman (soul) leaves the body at the time 
of death, may you not grieve. May weapons which 
pierce you not overpower your body. May one who is 
undeserving not rule over you. May swords not chop 
up your body. 


May you not be plagued by death and may you not 
know misery. May the path you tread be such that it 
takes you straight to the gods. O king! May the 
kingdom be like an excellent chariot which bears you 
on two handsome steeds. May one who is appointed 
as the prime minister of the kingdom be learned. 


A strong king will bring us excellent horses and 
cows. There will be brave warriors in the kingdom and 


189 


we will have sons. The land will prosper. O king! 
Protect us from evil and sin. May he who rules over us 
be as strong as a horse. May the kingdom be blessed 
with prosperity and martial prowess. 


This world will certainly be biessed with happiness. 
Indra and other gods, the twelve Adityas, and the 
forty-nine Maruts, will bring us the herbs that grant 
us welfare. The prosperous Indra and the Adityas will 
protect our sacrifices, our body and our sons. They will 
grant us the best of qualities. 


O Agni! You are the une who is pure. You are the 
one in whom the Vasus find a refuge. You are the one 
who brings us riches in the form of the ahavaniya fire. 
Stay close to us and protect us. Bring us welfare. Grant 
us sons. Grant objects which bring us happiness. May 
the flames of our sacrificial fire rise upwards. May you 
blaze in glory. O handsome one! Light up our lives 
and bless us with the best of qualities. We are like your 
friends. We are praying to you so that you may grant 
us riches and prosperity. 


This is the end of Adhyaya twenty-five. We now 
move on to Adhyaya thirty. 


Adhyaya thirty 

This chapter has twenty-two mantras, all of which 
need some explanation. 

May the supreme godhead grant everyone the 


wisdom to perform righteous deeds and protect 
righteousness. May the supreme godhead purify us 


190 


and purify our learning. May our speech become 
sweet and may we tread superior paths. 


(Men who desire to elevate themselves require four 
qualities. These are (i) the inspiration to perform 
righteous deeds; (ii) the desire to protect 
righteousness; (iii) purity of learning; (iv) sweetness of 
speech.) 


We meditate on the energy of the supreme 
godhead. It is this energy that inspires our 
intelligence. 


(The supreme godhead is the receptacle of all good 
qualities. These are the qualities of strength, power, 
energy, bliss and purification. When one meditates on 
the supreme godhead, it is on these qualities that one 
meditates. One meditates on infinite strength, infinite 
power, infinite energy, infinite bliss and infinite 
purification and is accordingly blessed with these 
qualities. Such a form of meditation (upasana) is 
known as saguna upasana.) 


O supreme godhead! You are the creator. Keep all 
evil away from us and keep us close to all that is good. 


(The specific evils that are intended are evil 
thoughts, evil habits, evil acts and _ evil 
companionship. If these are avoided, and good 
thoughts, good habits, good acts and good 
companionship cultivated, man is purified and 
elevated.) 


There exists one who has divided righteous action 
into various forms. This has been done for the sake of 


191 


prosperity. There exists one who has advised all men 
and inspired them to righteous action. He is the one 
who deserves all praise. 


(The word prosperity should not be interpreted ina 
narrow sense. Prosperity or riches mean different 
things to different people. For brahmanas, prosperity is 
in learning and knowledge. For kshatriyas, prosperity 
connotes valour and_ kingdoms. For vaishyas, 
prosperity lies in trade and money. And for snudras, 
prosperity means artisanship and physical labour. 
Accordingly, each class has certain specified tasks that 
connote righteous action. Righteous action means 
studying and teaching for brahmanas; for kshatriyas it 
means fighting and protecting others. For vaishyas its 
connotations are accumulation and donation of 
wealth, and for shudras they are manufacture of 
artefacts and spreading the skills of artisanship. It is 
in this sense that righteous action has been divided 
into various forms.) 


One who associates with the learned for the sake of 
learning is a brahmana. One who is known for his 
valour is a king. One who is appointed for the sake of 
men is a vaishya. The shudra is for acts that require 
physical effort. May each stick to his appointed task so 
that ignorance is banished. To preserve the soldiers 
may there be warriors who can vanquish enemies. Be 
impotent in the case of evil. Take special care in 
buying and selling. Attain proximity to the one who 
has control over wishes. Appoint the one who can 
substantiate his speech with evidence. 


192 


(This seems to be very confusing, because advice to 
different classes are mixed up in the same mantra. 
That brahmanas should associate with the learned is 
clear enough. Moreover, one resorts to brahmanas for 
the sake of one’s learning. The word kshatra means 
kingdom as well as valour. Thus, a kshatriya can be a 
king as well as one who is valourous. One resorts to 
the king or to kshatriyas for protection. The vaishyas 
trade in articles and set up shops and men require ‘ 
these articles and shops for their everyday living. It is 
for this reason that the vaishya is appointed for the 
sake of men. Physical tasks are set aside for the shudra. 
Each must stick to his appointed task, otherwise there 
will be chaos. Evil thoughts and evil deeds tempt men. 
If one is impotent, one does not act and so does not 
fall prey to such temptation. One is accordingly 
preserved from evil. The admonishment to take 
special care in buying and selling is meant for 
vaishyas. Alternatively, the sense is that, to take care of 
buying and selling, vaishyas must be employed. One 
who has a lot of will-power can influence other people 
and thus have control over wishes. Such people 
should be associated with; for, they can spur other 
men to good action. There were a class of people 
known as magadhas. They eventually became bards 
and minstrels, but the word magadha also means one 
who can substantiate the points made in his speech 
with appropriate evidence. It is thus suggested that a 
magadha be employed for important speeches.) 


Let dancers be employed for the purpose of 
dancing. Let those who play on cymbals be employed 
for the purpose of singing. May righteous advisers be 


193 


appointed for assemblies. Let one who is powerful be 
employed for the soul of the nation. One who is strong 
must be employed for martial games. An artisan must 
be employed for brightening up the kingdom. 
Befriend women for the sake of happiness. If you have 
a strong enemy, appoint the brave son of a brave 
woman. For the sake of strength, appoint charioteers 
and those who look after chariots. Appoint architects 
for the sake of patience. , 


(Some of the sentences are clear enough, but others 
require explanation. There were assemblies known as 
sabhas. These were dharma sabhas, as they indicated 
the canons of righteousness (dharma) that should be 
followed in ruling over the kingdom. Proper advisers 
or members of these assemblies should be appointed. 
The soul of the nation lies in the kingdom’s strength, 
energy and truthfulness, and a _ powerful ruler 
preserves these traits. The suggestion is not that one 
should befriend all women indiscriminately. The 
woman in question is one’s wife. What have architects 
got to do with patience? Architects build houses and if 
a house has been built well, it instils patience in the 
mind of one who lives in it. That is the reason why a 
good architect must be employed.) 


A man who meditates must be employed because 
he brings glory to his lineage. For the sake of the 
kingdom, skilled artisans must be employed. For the 
beauty of one’s own body, jewellers must be 
employed. And the beauty of one’s body is also 
enhanced by employing barbers. If you wish to create 
a cloud of arrows in battle, employ those who make 


194 


arrows. If you wish to possess weapons, employ those 
who make bows and other weapons. For the sake of 
battle, employ those who make the strings of bows. If 
you wish your orders to be followed, do not employ 
one who deviates from his path. Employ one who can 
kill the deer. Employ as executioner someone whose 
voice thunders. 


(Most of this passage is clear, but a few words need 
to be said about meditation (tapas). Meditation 
should not be construed as praying. For a brahmana, 
meditation means praying and studying. But for a 
kshatriya, meditation means protecting the kingdom. 
For a vaishya, meditation consists of agriculture, trade 
and animal husbandry. And for a shudra, meditation 
connotes artisanship and working as servants.) 


Let ordinary men populate the banks of the rivers. 
But let hunters live in the forests so that they can take 
care of wild animals. Employ those who are like tigers 
in spirit. Appoint teachers who will travel around and 
instruct farmers and workers. For each task, only a 
person who is not evil must be appointed. The learned 
must be employed as instructors for those who live in 
the forests and also for ordinary subjects. To ensure 
one’s own elevation, one must employ those who are 
wise and learned. Such individuals must not be 
frauds. Appoint those who can create a division in the 
ranks of the ghosts. Employ soldiers with weapons to 
take care Of robbers and dacoits. 


(We have used the word ghost as a translation for 
pishacha in the text. Pishacha literally means “one 
who lives on flesh and blood” and could therefore also 


195 


refer to cannibalistic races. The division in their ranks 
leads to their fighting amongst themselves. The word 
used for robbers and dacoits is yatudhana. These were 
robbers, dacoits and bandits, particularly those who 
waylaid travellers.) 


For advice resort to the aged, as they have the 
wisdom of experience. For protecting the house, 
sentries must be employed. In times of unhappiness, 
resort to the advice of those who are learned. The 
learned will preserve you from decline. Employ those 
who are skilled for performing tasks that are difficult 
to accomplish. To improve one’s appearance, employ 
those who are well-versed in the art of beautification. 
Those who perform their tasks with love and kind 
words should be employed; for they bring wisdom. But 
if a specific task needs to be done immediately, 
employ whoever is best from those who are at hand. 
Time should not be lost in looking for someone who is 
better. Each person who is employed should be given 
a task that is characteristic of his class. One who helps 
should be employed, as he provides succor in hours of 
stress. 


(It is worth pointing out that the words that are 
used in the context of employing the learned are 
parivitti, parivividana and edidhishu. In the above 
passage, we have used these three words as signifying 
“those who are learned”. Technically, all three words 
mean “someone who ensures one’s own welfare 
before that of others”. In the context of marriages, 
these three words have an additional significance. 
The words parivitti and parivividana are used for 


196 


younger brothers who get married before their elder 
brothers are married. And the word edidhishu is used 
for a younger sister who gets married before her elder 
sister is married.) 


For destroying your enemies, employ a soldier who 
wields a scimitar. For the sake of happiness, employ 
one whose mind is pure. One who likes to labour 
should be employed as a guard at the main gate. © 
Mental peace comes if one controls one’s senses. Close 
your ears to the temptations of sin. Resort to 
physicians for the sake of a pure body. If you desire 
special knowledge, resort to an astrologer. For 
someone who wishes to learn, always employ a 
person who will ask questions. If you need to practise 
what you have learned, you still need an instructor 
who will ask questions. For the sake of fairness, 
employ a proper judge. 


(On two occasions, references are made to a person 
who asks questions. The first word that is used is 
prashnim and this word also means complainant. The 
second word that is used is abhiprashnim and this word 
also means defendant. This is followed by a reference 
to a judge (prashnavivakam), but it becomes difficult to 
interpret the sentences in the sense of a litigation.) 


To ensure speed, employ those who can ride on 
elephants. Also emplay those who can ride on horses 
and look after them. Cowherds should be employed as 
the yield of cows will bring you sustenance. Also 
employ those who tend sheep, as the milk of sheep 
brings development to the body. Goatherds must be 
employed, as the milk of goats makes the body 


197 


energetic. Employ farmers so that foodgrains may be 
obtained. To obtain wine, employ those who make 
wine. Guards must be employed for the welfare of the 
household. For the sake of your welfare, employ those 
who bear riches and increase them. A person who. 
keeps an eye on other employees must be employed. 


(The reference to wine must be elaborated on. The 
word that is used is kilala. Kilala does mean wine, but it 
also means a heavenly drink. For instance, the word 
kilala is used for one part of salt mixed with a hundred 
parts of pure water. It is also used for coconut-milk. 
Thus the sentence need not necessarily be interpreted 
as a reference to wine. The word that,is used for a 
maker of wine is surakara. But this coyld also signify 
someone who makes water purified. And surakara 
does also mean a coconut tree. A person who 
increases riches is a money-lender.) 


To obtain light, employ a bringer of firewood. 
Employ those who can light fires for brightness. 
Employ one who will bathe you to protect you from 
the heat. For the sake of happiness, employ one who 
will remove your impediments. To attain the abode of 
the gods, employ someone who will beautify you. 
Employ those who will bring welfare to mankind. 
Employ those who will bring welfare to the universe. 
Employ those who will kill your enemies and bring 
such distress to them that they do not dare to attack 
you again. Employ a washerman so that your clothes 
may be pure and clean. For your beautification, 
employ those who are skilled in the use of colour. 


198 


(Those who are skilled in the use of colour will 
colour one’s clothes, or other objects.) 


To deal with your enemies, employ a person who 
has the heart of a thief. Employ one who will bring a 
division to the ranks of the enemies. He will destroy 
the enemies. Employ spies to find out what is 
happening. Men who obey orders, that is, are 
obedient by nature, must be employed as soldiers. A 
travelling employee must be there to earmark, 
different plots of land and mark out villages and 
Cities. If you wish that there should be love, employ 
those who are sweet of speech. For the sake of 
protection, have a cavalry. As advisers and ministers 
to the king, employ those who make the kingdom as 
lofty as heaven. For the sake of happiness, employ 
those who remove all impediments. 


(Why should a person with the heart of a thief be 
employed to deal with one’s enemies? A thief hides his 
thoughts, he does not come out into the open. It is this 
trait of treachery that must be used in dealing with 
one’s enemies.) 


If you wish to be strong, employ those who will 
smelt iron for you. To keep your anger in check, 
employ those who will give alms on your behalf. To 
learn the techniques of yoga, employ teachers of yoga. 
May your body be energised with the energy of gold. 
May those whom you employ bring you peace and 
protection. Employ those who know the techniques of 
rising and falling water. Employ those who will make 
your body strong. For a good body, employ those who 
will take care of your eyes. For times of emergency, 


199 


employ a treasurer for the kingdom. Be impartial to 
ensure that fairness prevails. 


(Yoga literally means union. It is a technique of 
meditation that seeks to bring about an union 
between the human soul (atman) and divine soul 
(paramatman). There are eight components of yoga. 
The first four are named yama, niyama, asona and 
pranayama. These try to bring about physical 
upliftment. The other four are named pratyahara, 
dhyana, dharana and samadhi. These seek to bring 
about spiritual upliftment. There are places where the 
water rises or ascends and there are other places 
where the water falls or descends. There are still other 
places where water neither rises nor falls, but 
maintains a stable level. The neighbourhood of the 
water must be populated by those who know how to 
handle these three types of water.) 


To follow proper rules, employ those who know 
these rules. In the case of a practitioner of yoga who 
has attained the supreme state of meditation 
(samadhi), employ people to take care of him. For the 
first year, @ woman who is youthful must be in 
control. For the second year, a learned and middle- 
aged woman must be in control. For the third year, a 
woman who achieves superiority fast must be in 
control. For the fourth year, a white-haired old 
woman must be in control. For the fifth year, an 
extremely learned woman must be in control. For 
each span of five years, an old woman must have the 
control. Those who deal with chariots must have the 
help of those who work with leather. Those who make 


200 


wooden chairs must also have the help of those who 
work with leather. 


(The part about the women is not very clear. But 
the general idea is that a woman must be appointed 
to supervise other women. The nature of the woman 
in control must not remain constant over time, but 
should be rotated and varied from year to year. If that 
is done, no particular group of women can have a 
grievance.) ‘ 


Employ fishermen to take care of lakes and ponds. 
Those who are employed to look after copses need not 
be the best of men. People must be employed to take 
care of small ponds. The water in these ponds must 
regularly be cleaned. People must be employed to 
make arrows. Those who know how to traverse rivers 
must be employed to help people cross. Those who 
can swim well must be employed near rivers and 
ponds to prevent others from drowning. In places 
where one can swim across the water, people must be 
employed to build dams. In places which go uphill 
and downhill, those who know the paths must be 
employed to protect others. Employ musicians to 
obtain a good voice. Employ hunters to live in caves. 
Employ mountain-dweliers to live on the peaks of 
mountains. But in other places in the mountains, 
ordinary people can reside. 


For cruel acts, forest-dwellers must be employed. To 
obtain splendour, employ jewellers who work with 
gold. Employ tradesmen and shopkeepers to measure 
weights. A person who is always at the back must be 
specially hard-working. One who pursues the truth 


201 


must be employed to take care of the learned. Be 
skilled so that you may attain superiority. If one is 
lazy, downfall is certain. At times of danger or at 
times of destruction, employ someone who can think 
of the welfare of the human race. Be humble to attain 
superiority. As executioner, employ someone who can 
behead efficiently. 


(A person who is always at the back of every action 
suffers from the sin of never being in the front. He 
must therefore be specially hard-working so as to 
overcome this sin.) 


The chief employee of the kingdom must be a 
person who is extremely learned. To ensure the 
success of your action, employ someone who will 
always find fault with your action. Employ one who is 
imaginative so that he can think of good deeds for 
you. Employ one who will enable you to overcome 
your laziness. Before embarking on a war, obtain the 
consent of one who is influential in the assembly. 
Punish with death those who oppress cows or kill 
them. 


(Before embarking on a war, the king has to obtain 
the permission of the assembly (sabha). This becomes 
easy if someone who is influential in the assembly has 
sanctioned the war.) 


Punish with hunger those who maim cows and 
those who are beggars. Those who are evil must be 
taught so that they retum to the righteous path. And 
there must be soldiers with weapons to take care of 
those who sin. 


202 


One who is impartial must be employed to 
adjudicate promises and vows. If a speech requires a 
loud volume, employ one whose voice is strong. If a 
debate is to be concluded, employ a good orator. If a 
debate is unlikely to be concluded, employ those who 
talk less. If you require noise, employ those who play 
on drums. For the sake of glory, employ those who 
play on the veena (a musical instrument). If you want - 
a loud noise, employ those who play on drums. But if 
you want a medium noise, employ those who play on 
conch-shells. Employ foresters to take care of the 
forests. For larger forests, employ fire-fighters to 
protect the forests. 


For martial games, employ those who are strong. 
Employ artisans to make the kingdom shine. If the 
kingdom is to be strong, employ leaders in the 
villages. Employ those who can count the riches of the 
kingdom. Employ those who can make 
announcements for the people. For the sake of 
dancing, employ those who can play on the veena. 
Employ those who can play on cymbals and musical 
instruments made of leather (percussion instruments). 
For the sake of happiness, employ those who have 
some sense of music. 


Employ strong men to work with fire. To work 
under the ground, employ those who can crawl. To 
work in places where the wind is strong, employ 
outcasts. If you need work to be done up in the air, 
employ those who can walk on stilts. If work is to be 
done in the sky, someone who knows the way of the 
sky must be employed. To deal with Surya, employ 


203 


ones whose eyes are green. To deal with the stars, 
employ one whose eyes are orange. To deal with the 
moon, employ one whose eyes are white. To work 
during the day, employ someone whose complexion is 
fair. His eyes must however be brown. And to work 
during the night, employ someone whose complexion 
is dark. His eyes must however be brown. 


(It is difficult to make sense of the bit about the sun, 
the moon and the stars. This must have had 
something to do with astronomy. For example, if one 
uses green-tinted glasses to look at the sun, one’s eyes 
are not damaged.) : 


There are eight types of men who are unbecoming 
of appearance. These are men who are too tall, too 
short, too fat, too thin, too fair, too dark, those who 
have no hair and those who have too much of hair. 
These eight types of men and four additional types 
can be retained by the king. The four additional types 
are those who sing the king’s praise (magadha), 
eunuchs (pumshchali), those who play with dice 
(kitava), and those who are impotent (kliba). These 
twelve types of men are not brahmanas, nor are they 
shudras. 


This is the end of Adhyaya thirty. We now meve on 
to Adhyaya thirty-six. The reason for choosing chapter 
thirty-six, rather than chapter thirty-five, is that 
chapter thirty-six contains many mantras which are 
commonly recited. 


204 


Adhyaya Thirty-six 
There are twenty-four mantras in this chapter. 


Through my speech I seek refuge in the Rig Veda. 
Through my mind I seek refuge in the Yajur Veda. 
Through my breath of life I seek refuge in the Sama 
Veda. Through my senses I seek refuge in the Atharva 
Veda. May the strength of speech, the strength of unity . 
and the strength of life be constant in my body. 


My eyes, my heart and my mind may have holes in 
them. Any such faults that I have will be rectified by 
the lord of all learning. The lord of all creation will 
bring welfare to all of us. 


The supreme godhead is the creator of the universe. 
He has the same form in all three worlds. He is the 
source of infinite happiness. We meditate on the 
energy of this supreme godhead. It is he who will 
specially inspire our intelligence. 


(Since this mantra is recited quite often, it is worth 
reproducing the Sanskrit. That goes as follows. 


bhu bhuvah svah tat savituh varenyam bhargah 
devasya dhimahi dhiyo yo nah prachodayat.) 


The great and wonderful godhead befriends all of 
us through his protection, through his great power 
and through the constant evolution of action. All of 
this ensures our welfare. 


O supreme godhead! You bring more happiness 
than the happiness that comes from savouring food 
and other material objects. You are constant in the 


205 


three periods of time (the past, the present and the 
future). Who can please you? You can blow to bits the 
strong earth and all its objects. O men! The supreme 
godhead, who is the source of all happiness, is 
constant in the three periods of time and brings you 
happiness through food and other pleasures. He 
grants you many riches to free you from misery. 


O god! You are our benefactor. You are our 
protector. You take care of your devotees through all 
manner of protection. 


O god! You shower down happiness on us. You are 
the source of happiness and you make us happy in all 
the directions through your protection. You sustain 
through your happiness all those who praise you. 


The supreme godhead has an abundance of riches 
and is the lord of everyone. He brings welfare to 
bipeds and to quadrupeds. 


May he who is everyone’s friend (Mitra) bring us 
welfare. May he who is the greatest (Varuna) bring us 
welfare. May he who is fair (Aryama) bring us 
welfare. May he who is prosperous (Indra) bring us 
welfare. May he who is the lord of speech (Brihaspati) 
bring us welfare. May he who is everywhere and is the 
performer of great deeds (Vishnu) bring us welfare. 


May the wind (Vayu) blow so that it brings 
everyone welfare. May the sun (Surya) radiate heat so 
that it brings everyone welfare. May the rain 
(Parjanya) thunder and shower so that it brings 
everyone welfare. 


206 


May the day bring all of us welfare. May the night 
bring all of us welfare. May he who is prosperous and 
energetic grant all of us protection and welfare. May 
he who is prosperous and supreme grant all of us 
foodgrains and welfare. May the prosperous one who 
sustains us bring us welfare when he grants us 
foodgrains. May the prosperous one who is learned 
grant us welfare. May he protect us from disease and 
fear. May our welfare be ensured. 


The divine water will fulfil our wishes and slake our ~ 


thirst. It will bring us welfare. It will flow so that 
disease is banished and so that we are freed from all 
harm. 


O earth! May you be such that you bring us 
happiness. May we never have to suffer. Grant us 
excellent places to dwell in. Increase your expanse so 
that all of us can attain happiness. 


Water is certainly the source of happiness. The 
water nourishes our strength, foodgrains and 
intelligence. May water enable us to know the nature 
of divine sound and divine sight. 


On this earth, water is the source of all juices that 
bring happiness. May we obtain these juices. O earth! 


Give us these juices the way a mother gives her son 
milk. 


Water is the source of all juices. May we obtain 
these juices by obtaining the completeness that is in 
“water. O water! Show us the path by which we can 
attain superiority. 


207 


May heaven give rise to peace. May the 
atmosphere give rise to peace. May the earth give rise 
to peace. May the water give rise to peace. May the 
herbs give rise to peace. May the trees give rise to 
peace. May the learned ones (Vishvadevas) give rise to 
peace. May the knowledge of the brahman give rise to 
peace. May peace prevail in the entire universe. May 
peace itself give rise to true peace. May | attain the 
peace that is indeed true. 


(This an oft-recited mantra and so it is worthwhile 
reproducing the original Sanskrit. This runs as 
follows. 


dyouh shantih antariksham shantih pnithivi shantih 
apah shantih oshadhayah shantih vanaspatayah shantih 
vishve devah shantih brahma shantih sarvam shantih 
shanti eva shantih sa ma shantiredhi.) 


O brahman! Make me strong. May all living beings 
look upon me as a friend. May I look upon all living 
beings as friends. May we look upon each other as 
friends. 


O powerful one! Make me strong. If I get to see you, 
I will live for along time. If I get to meet you, I will live 
for a long time. 


I pray to the one who removes all evil. I pray to the 
one who increases purity. I pray to the one whose 
energy radiates out. I bow in obeisance before you. 
May your weapons leave me unharmed; may they 
instead be diverted towards others. The supreme 
godhead who purifies everything will bring all of us 
welfare. 


208 


I pray to the one in whose form there is special 
energy. I pray to the one in whose form there is a 
thunderous roar. O prosperous one! | pray to thee. 
You are the one who is the source of all happiness. 


in every place where you perform your action, may 
you free us from fear. Bring our subjects welfare and 
free them from fear. Make our animals free from fear. 


(We will reproduce the original Sanskrit for this as 
well, and it is as follows. 


yatah yatah sam ihase tatah nah abhayam kuru sham 
nah kuru prajabhyah abhayam nah pashubhyah.) 


The water and the herbs will bring welfare to all of 
us. But they will bring misery to the one who bears 
hatred towards us in his heart. They will also bring 
misery to the one whom we hate in our hearts. 


The pure learning that brings welfare to the learned 
has been known for some time. It will help the learned 
to live for a hundred years. They will hear for a 
hundred years and talk for a hundred years. For a 
hundred years, they will not live in penury, but will be 
blessed with happiness. 


This is the end of Adhyaya thirty-six. We will now 
move on to the last chapter of the Yajur Veda. This is 
Adhyaya forty. Adhyaya forty is in fact rather special. It 
is actually an Upanishad, the Ishopanishad. This is the 
only instance where an Upanishad forms a part of the 
samhita section of a Veda. 


209 


Adhyaya Forty, the Ishopanishad 


There are seventeen mantras in this chapter. The 
supreme godhead is the origin of this universe where 
one can dwell. The universe evolves and changes, but 
it continues to be the same constant universe. Enjoy 
the universe by donating its riches. Do not be greedy. 
Do the riches of the universe belong to any single 
individual? 


This world is the place to perform great acts 
(karma). It is action that enables one to live for a 
hundred years. May you realise this knowledge. There 
is no other course of action. Performing deeds never 
sullies the human race. 


Those who are famous for their physica! strength 
and strive only for that, are shrouded in the darkness 
of ignorance. Those who kill themselves join the ranks 
of these ignorant ones after they die. 


(Killing oneself does not mean killing oneself in a 
literal sense. There are ten ways to kill oneself. These 
are : (i) negating that the supreme godhead is 
everywhere ; (ii) harming the populace in general to 
further one’s own desires; (iii) being selfish in the 
pursuit of pleasure; (iv) being greedy; (v) desiring all 
the wealth for one’s own self; (vi) performing evil acts; 
(vii) performing acts that reduce one’s life expectancy; 
(viii) not maintaining the concentration of the mind; 
(ix) believing in a path that is not the righteous one; 
and (x) believing that righteous deeds act as bonds. 
Anyone who does any of these, kills himself by failing 
to elevate himself spiritually. Thus, the death referred 


210 


to above does not refer to the literal act of dying. 
People who are evil in the above senses are spiritually 
dead even though they may be physically alive.) 


The supreme godhead is one. It is constant and 
does not move. It is ancient and was there before the 
universe was created. The supreme godhead is the 
source of all inspiration; it is swifter than the speed of 
thought. The senses are incapable of getting to know 
the paramatman. Although the godhead is constant 
and immobile, it is faster than any object that one can 
think of. An individual who is in his mother’s womb 
has given up his earlier physical body and is awaiting 
a new one. It is the supreme godhead which guides 
him along the path to future action and it is the 
paramatman which keeps a tally of all the action that 
he performs. 


The paramatman makes others move, but it does 
not move itself. The paramatman is far away, and yet 
it is certainly very near. The paramatman is in 
everything, but it is also outside everything. 


He who is truly learned visualises the paramatman 
in every object. He realises that the paramatman is 
inside and outside every element. The truly learned 
never doubt this truth. 


One who attains this special knowledge realises 
that it is his atman that is there in every object and in 
every element. How can one who understands this 
unification suffer from any form of illusion? How can 
he ever be unhappy? 


211 


The paramatman is everywhere. It has no body, nor 
does it have any senses. It has no hue. The 
paramatman is pure and energetic, untouched by sin. 
It sees everything and it knows everything. The 
paramatman is victorious; it has created itself. From 
time immemorial, the paramatman has preordained 
the destiny of all objects according to prescribed 
paths. 


One can strive for the unity of a nation or one can 
Strive for the independence of its individual entities. 
One who Strives for individual independence is 
shrouded in the darkness of ignorance. One who 
Strives for the independence of individual! entities is 
also ignorant. One who Strives only for the unity of a 
nation is also ignorant. But the ignorance of the one 
who strives for individual independence is greater. 


(There must therefore be a proper balance between 
individual independence and the unity of the nation. 
Too much of emphasis on_ unification - stifles 
individual initiative. And too much of emphasis on 
individual independence leads to selfishness.) 


There is some good in striving for the unity of the 
nation and there is also some good in striving for 
individual independence. These are two distinct 
paths. Those who chocse that which is good from 
each of these two paths and attain a balance are the 
truly learned. 


Learned indeed is the one who knows the good of 
each of these two paths. He attains immortality. 


212 


He who does not know the nature of the atman is 
shrouded in the darkness of ignorance. But he who 
knows only the atman and ignores the world at large, 
is also shrouded in the darkness of ignorance. In fact, 
the ignorance of the latter is greater. 


The fruits of pursuing spiritual knowledge are 
different from the fruits of pursuing material 
knowledge. That is the instruction we have received 
from those who are learned. 


(Spiritual knowledge is attained by those who strive 
to understand the nature of the atman. Material 
knowledge is attained by those who are obsessed with 
the world and material possessions. The learned have 
instructed us thet pursuing either path in an extreme 
fashion has its dangers. Someone who concentrates 
exclusively on the material world does not attain 
spiritual upliftment. And someone who concentrates 
only on the atman and ignores the material -world, 
liable to spurn all action. The path indicated by the 
learned is a proper mixture of the two.) 


The person who has a knowledge of the atman and 
a knowledge of the world is indeed leamed. Through 
his knowledge of the world, he banishes death. 
Through his knowledge of the atman, he attains 
immortality. 


The force of life is divine and immortal. The 
physical body will eventually be bumt to ashes. O 
men! You are the ones who perform action. Meditate 
on the atman for your protection. Think of the deeds 
that you have performed. O men! You are the ones 


213 


who perform action Think. Think of the deeds that 
you have performed. 


O Agni! You are the one who lights everything up. 
Show us the path along which we can elevate 
ourselves. O gods! You are familiar with the acts we 
have performed. Please rernove the sin resulting from 
any evil acts that we may have committed. We bow 
down in obeisance before you and chant your praise. 


The happiness that is in truth is covered inside a 
golden vessel. It is true that I am the one who is 
present in all life. It is true that heaven is nothing but 
the brahman. : 


(The pursuit of gold leads to distraction. Gold is a 
symbol for the illusions of the material world. Unless 
one sets aside this distraction, one will not attain the 
light of true knowledge. | am the one who is present in 
all life since I am trying to obtain the knowledge of 
the brahman through all living beings. The brahman 
pervades the universe and heaven is identical with the 
brahman.) 


This truth is universal. That (the brahman) is 
complete. This (the world) is also complete (as it was 
created by the brahman). It is known that anything 
created by the complete is also complete. If the 
complete (the world) is taken away from the complete 
(the brahman), what remains is also complete. 


(The creation of the world did not, in any way, 
impair the completeness of the braliman. This mantra 
is also cited quite often. Therefore, let us reproduce 


the Sanskrit. 


214 


om — purnamadah pumamidam purnatpurn- 
amudachyate pumasya purnamadaya  pumnameva- 
vashishyate.) 


O protector! May there be peace. May there be 
peace. May there be peace. 


(Om! Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! The first invocation 
of peace refers to individual peace, the second to . 
social peace and the third to worldly peace.) 


This concludes the Yajur Veda Samhita. As you have 
realised, we have not reproduced the text in its 
entirety. That would have been impossible in so short 
a space. We have skipped many chapters. Wouldn’t 
you like to savour what the other chapters have to 
offer? You will also have realised that there is scope for 
varied interpretation in translating the text. The text 
of the Yajur Veda is not as straightforward as is the 
case with, say, the text of the Sama Veda. Wouldn’t 
you like to check whether our interpretations are 
correct? 


What better way is there to do this than to read the 
original Yajur Veda for yourself? 


The Sama 
Veda. 


The Sama Veda Samhita 

The Sama Veda Samhita is composed entirely in 
metrical form. It is about half as long as the Rig Veda 
Samhita and also borrows considerably from the Rig 
Veda Samhita. This shows that the Sama Veda was 
composed after the Rig Veda. The word sama means 
sweet songs or hymns. Since the Sama Veda consists of 
such hymns, it is known as the Sama Veda. Perhaps a 
point needs to be mentioned about these sama hymns. 
These hymns were sung so that the initial pitch or 
volume was high and was gradually reduced. Since 
the pitch never fluctuated between a high and a low, 
the listener’s mind was gradually lulled and drawn 
towards an inner peace. Sama hymns were not pure 
incantations (mantras), nor were they pure songs. 
They were a mixture of the two. 


216 


It is sometimes held that the Sama Veda originally 
had one thousand different branches (shakha). 
Scholars do not believe this to have been seriously 
possible and there are records of only thirteen 
branches of the Sama Veda. These are as follows: 

(i) Ranayana 

(ii) Shatyamukhya 
(iii) Vyasa 

(iv) Bhaguri 

(v) Oulundi 

(vi) Goulgulvi 

(vii) Bhanuman-Oupamanyava 
(viii) Karati 

(ix) _Mashaka Gargya 

(x) Varshagavya 
(xi) Kuthuma 

(xii) Shalihotra 

(xiii) Jaimini ; 

Of these, only three branches are now available. 
The others have been lost. The three branches that 
continue to be available are Ranayana, Kuthuma and 
Jaimini. What circulates by the name of the Sama Veda 
today is based on these three branches. The Sama Veda 


that is now there accordingly consists of 1875 mantras. 
On these, around 4000 sama hymns are based. 


The mantras are divided into two broad groups or. 
parts. The first is known as purvarchika and consists of 
650 mantras. The remaining 1225 mantras are in the 


217 


subsequent or second part, known as uttararchika. The 
purvarchika is divided into four sections (kandas) - 
agneya kanda, aindra kanda, pavamana kanda and 
aranya kanda. Each of the kandas is subdivided into 
chapters (adhyaya). The uttararchika does not have 
kandas, but is simply divided into twenty-one 
chapters. 


The brahmanas which are identified with the Sama 
Veda Samhita are the following: 


(i) Tandya Brahmana, also known as Proudra 
Brahmana or Panchavimsha Brahmana 
(ii) Shadavimsha Brahmana 
(iii) Samavidhana Brahmana 
(iv) Arsheya Brahmana 
(v) Devatadhyaya Brahmana 


(vi) Upanishad Brahmana, also known as Mantra 
Brahmana 


(vii) Vamsha Brahmana. 


4 


The gods of the Vedas 

The Vedas cannot really be appreciated without 
some sort of an understanding cf the gods mentioned 
in the Vedas. The gods of the Vedas were different in 
nature and character from the gods that one 
encounters in the epics or in the sacred texts known as 
the Puranas. 

The three major gods of the Vedas were Agni, Indra 


or Vayu and Surya. Agni ruled over the earth (prithivi), 
Indra or Vayu ruled over the atmosphere (antariksha) 


218 


and Surya ruled over heaven (dyuloka). All other gods 
were regarded as manifestations of these three gods. 
For example, all gods on earth were identified with 
Agni, all gods in the atmosphere were identified with 
Indra or Vayu, and all gods in heaven were identified 
with Surya. This at least’ was the version given by 
Yaska, a commentator on the Vedas who lived around 
800 B.C. There were two other points of view as well. 
One held that all the various gods were 
manifestations of the same unified supreme godhead. 
This monotheistic point of view can be particularly 
found in the Upanishads. An alternative point of view 
subscribed to polytheism and held that the various 
gods could not be identified, they were distinct. 


Even within the Vedas, the number of gods varies 
from place to place. In some places, there are only 
three gods, one ruling over the earth, the second over 
the atmosphere and the third over heaven. The earth, 
the atmosphere and heaven were known as lokas 
(regions), there being three Jokas. In some places, the 
Vedas state that there were 11 gods for each loka, so 
that there were 33 gods in all. In some cases, there are 
references to 3339 gods. When it came to the age of 
the Puranas, the number of gods increased to thirty- 
three crores. 


Many scholars have suggested that the gods of the 
Vedas are nature gods. That is, forces of nature came 
to be ascribed with divine qualities and became gods. 
To some extent, this is indeed true. But the forces of 
nature have been so humanised that their original 
elemental form is sometimes impossible to detect. This 


219 


is known as anthropomorphism. Besides, there are 
also abstract deities with whom no forces of nature 
can be readily identified. 


It is also important to realise that the gods of the 
Vedas cannot easily be compartmentalised into 
pantheons of monotheism or polytheism. What is 
more commonly found is what goes by the name of 
kathenotheism. That is, there is more than one god. 
But whenever a hymn is addressed to a particular god, 
that god comes to be ascribed with all the divine 
qualities. In the course of the hymn, the god in 
question is regarded as the supreme godhead and all 
the other gods come to be regarded as _ his 
manifestations. 


The gods of the Vedas can now be catalogued under 
three different headings - gods of heaven (dyuloka), 
gods of the atmosphere (antariksha) and gods of the 
earth (prithivi). 


The chief gods of heaven are Dyouspita, Mitra/ 
Varuna, Surya/Savita/Pusha, Vishnu, the two 
Ashvinis,, Usha and Chandrama. Dyouspita is 
regarded as the father of the universe, prithivi being 
regarded as the mother. Dyouspita and the earth are 
together addressed as Dyavaprithivi. Dyouspita seems 
to have been a personification of the sky. The gods 
Mitra and Varuna are almost invariably addressed in 
unison. Mitra seems to have been identified with the 
day and Varuna with the night. Mitra is also 
identified with Surya. In the period of the epics and 
the Puranas, Varuna came to be regarded as the lord 
of the oceans. But this was not the case at the time of 


220 


the Vedas. Surya is the sun-god and Savita is a 
manifestation of Surya at specific points of time. 
Pusha is also a manifestation of Surya. Vishnu is a 
minor god in the Vedas and there are indications that 
Vishnu was also regarded as a manifestation of Surya. 
The two Ashvinis are physicians of the gods, they 
share a common wife named Usha (the dawn). In the 
Vedas, the Ashvinis are closely associated with Surya. 
They may very well have been stars (nakshatra) _ 
identified with the morning and the evening. Another 
name for the two Ashvinis is Nasatya. Usha is the 
goddess of the dawn. She is also addressed as Dakshina 
(sacrificial fee). It was at the time of dawn that priests 
began sacrifices and received their fees. Chandrama is 
a minor god, the moon-god. He is closely identified 
with the god Soma. 


The chief gods of the atmosphere are Indra, Aja 
Ekapada, Matarishvan/Vayu/Vata, Parjanya, Rudra 
and the Maruts. Indra is the most powerful of all the 
gods. He killed the demon Vritra and is accordingly 
addressed as Vritraha. Purandara is another of his 
names. Aja Ekapada is a minor god and is probably a 
manifestation of either Agni or Surya. Matarishvan, 
Vayu and Vata are all gods of the wind. Parjanya has 
a close relationship with them and is a personification 
of the clouds. Parjanya thus rules over herbs and 
rains. The Rudra of the Vedas is not the Rudra of the 
Puranas. In the Vedas, Rudra is a god of the wind. 
Alternatively, he is identified with Agni. The Maruts 
are also wind-gods and are regarded as the offspring 
of Rudra. The number of the Maruts is not 
unambiguously given. In some places, the number 


221 


seems to be 180. In other places, there seem to be 21 
Maruts. The Maruts are close companions of Indra. 


The chief gods of the earth are Agni, Brihaspati/ 
Brahmanaspati, Soma and Sarasvati. Agni is the 
main god of the earth, he is the fire-god. There are 
three different types of fire - ahavaniya, dakshinagni 
and garhapatya. Ahavaniya agni is used to offer 
oblations to the gods, dakshinagni is used to make 
offerings to the ancestors and garhapatya agni is the 
fire that continually burns in any household. In the 
age of the Vedas, fire was ignited by rubbing two 
pieces of stick (arani) together. These are known as 
ultararani and adhararani. It is not entirely clear 
whether Brihaspati or Brahmanaspati is indeed a god. 
He seems to have been more like a chief priest, often 
regarded as the lord of all hymns. It was only in a 
later period that Brihaspati came to be identified with 
a nakshatra. Soma is really a herb, although he is also 
identified with Chandrama. In the Vedas, Sarasvati is 
not the goddess of learning. She is a river, also known 
as Bharati. 


Let us now see what the hymns of the Sama Veda 
Samhita have.to say. 


We will start with the Purvarchika section. 


The first part of Purvarchika is Agneya Kanda. As the 
name implies, this part (kanda) is predominantly 
concerned with hymns (mantra) to Agni. There are 
however a few other mantras addressed to gods like 
Indra, Brahmanaspati, Yupa, Pusha, Vishvadeva, 
Angira, Soma and Aditi. 


222 


There are a hundred and fourteen mantras in the 
Agneya Kanda. These are divided into twelve sections 
(khanda). The mantras follow five different metres. 
These are gayatri, vrihati, trishtupa, anushtupa and 
ushnika. 


PURVARCHIKA 


Agneya Kanda 


O Agni! Come and receive the offerings we make at 
sacrifices. It is to you that one must pray before 
making offerings to the gods at sacrifices. Come and 
be the priest at the sacrifice (yajna), come and be 
seated on the altar of the sacrifice. O Agni!. You are 
the one who summons the gods to all sacrifices. It is 
the gods themselves who have established you among 
human beings. We acknowledge the fire-god as the 
messenger of all the gods. He is omniscient, he 
summons the gods, it is he who ensures that the 
sacrifice will be performed according to the prescribed 
rites 


Agni is pleased by specific hymns. Agni grants 
wealth to devotees. He manifests himself in pure 
radiance when we call upon him. It is he who destroys 
the enemies who surround us from all sides. I pray to 
Agni with the love I display towards a beloved friend. I 
pray to Agni with the devotion I show to honoured 
guests. I pray to Agni with the respect I exhibit 
towards a chariot bearing riches. 


O Agni! Protect me from my enemies. Protect me 
from men who are driven by hatred. Guide me along 
the path to salvation. O Agni! Come here. | call upon 


223 


you with the chanting of sacred hymns. | offer to you 
the juice of the soma herb. Thrive on it and attain 
greatness. O Agni! Your son calls upon you. Descend 
from your elevated seat and grace me. O Agni! I use 
these hymns to attain your blessings. 


O Agni! The learned have described you as the 
fulaum of the universe, the supreme among all 
elements. They have brought you into being through 
the rubbing together of sticks. O Agni! Grant me an 
appropriate home so that I may be well-protected. 
You are the god who shows us the right path. 


O Agni! O God! Men pray to you for power. Use 
your power to destroy our enemies. Fire-god, you are 
the lord of all wealth. You are the one who receives all 
sacrificial offerings, you are the one who is the 
messenger of the gods. I will please Agni through my 
prayers and make him kindly disposed to all those 
who perform sacrifices. One who observes sacrifices 
loves your hymns as much as he loves his own sister. 
Your hymns express your divine qualities and mingle 
into the air. ‘ 


O Agni! I pray to you every day, night and day. My 
prayers bring me closer to thee. Agni becomes known 
through prayers and hymns. He is there for the 
welfare of all men. He is there for the despair of the 
wicked. These beautiful hymns are sung to Agni. Fire- 
god, listen to our prayers. 


O Agni! These are wonderful non-violent sacrifices. 
We are summoning you so that you may protect 
them. Come to us with the Maruts, the gods of the 


224 


wind. Agni, you are like a steed with a flowing tail. 
You are the one who will oless our non-violent 
sacrifices. We chant hymns to Agni. I pray to the 
sacred and pure fire that resides in the ocean. He who 
lights a fire with faith kindles his own devotion. It is 
the fire-god who is resplendent in the rays of the 
blazing sun. Agni manifests himself in heaven 
(dyuloka). But men can witness his power in the light 
of the day. 


O supreme and all-powerful, O harbinger of 
prosperity! Protect our non-violent sacrifice. The fire- 
god demolishes our foes with his radiance. He grants 
us wealth. O Agni! You are indeed great. Come to us, 
those who pray to the gods. Seat yourself on the 
throne we have reserved for you and make us happy. 
O Agni! Let us not be harmed by enemies who are 
sinful and hateful. O fire-god! You who are ever- 
youthful, burn up all our enemies with your energy. 


O Agni! You are the possessor of fleet-footed steeds. 
Harness them to your chariot and hasten here. It is 
with you that we seek sanctuary, it is you who protect 
and aid all men. Radiant and omnipotent lord, we 
pray to thee. The fire-god has the most supreme of 
places, he resides in the Icftiest locations of heaven 
(dyuloka). Rule over earth and grant to all the fruits of 
their deeds. 


O Agni! We are making offerings of grain that has 
just been reaped. We are chanting hymns composed 
in the gayatri metre. Please make sure that these are 
known to the gods. Sages in hermitages have sung 
your praises, and it is you who purified the great sage 


225 


Angira. Please listen to our prayers. You are the lord of 
all foodgrains, you are all-knowing, you are the one 
who receives offerings made at sacrifices. You are the 
one who grants jewels to those who give alms. 


The fire-god manifests the sun to the entire 
universe. And the rays of the sun are like the 
knowledge of the sacred Vedas. Pray to Agni so that 
our non-violent and righteous sacrifices may be 
blessed, pray to Agni so that our ailments may 
disappear. May all the objects that we wish for be 
granted to us. May the water we drink be sanctified 
and bring us happiness. May the waters that bring 
peace flow on earth. O fire-god! Preserve the truth. 
Protect the cattle, protect the senses and grant us 
knowledge. It is for these that we pray to thee. 


Praise be to Agni in every sacrifice and in every 
hymn. We pray to the fire-god with all the love that 
we display towards a beloved friend. O Agni! This first 
hymn is so that you may protect us. This second hymn 
is also so that you may protect us. Lord of foodgrains, 
this third hymn is also so that you may protect us. 
Preserver of life, this fourth hymn is also so that you 
may protect us. 


O Agni! You manifest yourself in all the great fires. 
You manifest yourself in pure radiance. You make us 
young and wealthy and pure. I, the sage Bharadvaja, 
am praying to you. Manifest yourself for my sake. O 
Agni! You are loved by all those who perform 
righteous sacrifices, you are loved by the learned and 
the wealthy, you are loved by those who rule over 
their subjects. It is you who preserve the cattle. 


226 


O Agni! You are a learned god, you protect the 
subjects and cause havoc among the demons 
(rakshasa). You are the lord of households. You do not 
desert a household, but reside in it. You are the one 
who protects heaven (dyuloka). 


You are the immortal god. The dawn brings forth 
wonderous riches. Grant these to those who give alms. 
Omniscient god, bring to us the gods who arise with , 
the dawn. O Agni! You are the one who secures 
habitations for everyone. Amazing indeed are your 
powers, bring to us wonderful riches laden in your 
chariot, bring prosperity to our progeny. 


O Agni! O protector! You are indeed famous. You 
are truth and knowledge. O powerful god. When your 
flames blaze, learned brahmanas (priests) worship 
you. Purify us. Grant us wealth. O learned god! Show 
us the right path. Grant us fame. It is you who bring 
happiness to men by summoning gods in their midst. 
It is to Agni that vessels full of the juice of the soma 
herb are offered. It is to Agni that hymns are chanted. 


O Agni! Do not let the strength drain away from 
these foodgrains. | call upon the immortal god, I pray 
to him. Grant me knowledge. Men pray to you, 
whether they are in forests, on the ground, or in the 
wombs of their mothers. Those who are not lazy and 
those who make offerings at sacrifices, it is to them 
that you manifest all the gods. Let my prayers reach 
Agni so that he may grant me a long life. Let Agni 
show me that which is righteous. 


It is Agni who must first be worshipped at all 
sacrifices. Our non-violent sacrifice has stones for the 


227 


crushing of the soma herb. It also has a seat for the 
immortal god. Come and ascend on your seat. Come 
with the gods of the wind, I am praying to you with 
the sacred hymns of the Vedas. Pray to the fire-god so 
that he may preserve you. Pray to the fire-god so that 
he may grant you wealth. Pray to the fire-god so that 
he may grant you a habitation. 


O Agni! Listen to our prayers. Come and ascend 
your throne with the gods Mitra and Aryama. You are 
as powerful as the great Indra, you were prayed to by 
King Divodasa. You first condescended to manifest 
yourself on earth and then began to reside in heaven. 
O Agni! Thy energy increase on earth as it does in 
heaven. Ensure that my sacrifice is a success and 
protect my relations. 


O Agni! Make the forests thrive. Do not forsake me 
and disappear into the water. I cannot bear to be 
parted from you. Even if you must go far away, leave 
a part of you with me. The learned among men keep 
you in their midst. From time immemorial your 
radiance has blessed the human race. Your flames 
have graced the hermitage of every learned sage. 
Burn brighter so that the sacrifice may be a success. 
We bow in obeisance before you. 


The god will grant us wealth and prosperity. Let us 
pour ladles of clarified butter into the fire. The god will 
be pleased and will lead us along the path to 
salvation. Let Agni come to us. Let Sarasvati, the 
goddess of learning, come to us. Let all the gods come 
to our sacrifice and bless mankind. Let them lead the 
bravest amongst us along the highest paths. Great 


228 


fire-god, protect us from above. Become as lofty as 
Surya, the sun-god. Grant us foodgrains. That is the 
reason we are calling upon you. 


Establish us. He who prays to you for prosperity, he 
who gives you offerings and he who chants hymns 
unto you, obtains the right to rule over a thousand 
men. He is blessed with brave sons. Those who light 
the flames of the fire-god attain divinity. The hymns , 
we chant express the devotion of such devotees. Agni 
is the lord of bravery and wealth. He is the lord of 
progeny and cattle. He is the one who destroys your 
enemies. 


O Agni! You are the lord of my household. Be the 
priest at my non-violent sacrifice. You are worshipped 
by everyone. You bring truth, you bring knowledge, 
you bring prosperity. O Agni! We call upon you. You 
will grant us wealth. You will make us perform good 
deeds. You will protect us from treading along the 
path of sin. We pray that you may descend among us. 


I call upon all men to listen to me. Bring forth the 
sacrifidal offerings. Be pure of heart. Establish the 
fire-god on the occasion of every sacrifice. When you 
offer oblations, welcome Agni with faith and 
devotion. 


Agni is like a son bom of two mothers. (That is, fire 
is generated by rubbing two sticks together.) But 
strange indeed is the fire-god’s life. After being born, 
he does not suckle milk from either mother’s breasts. 
He immediately begins to act as the messenger of the 
gods. Men have three different forms. The first form is 


api, 


that of the fire. (That is, after cremation, the physical 
body merges into the fire.) The second form is that of 
the wind. (After death, one merges into the wind.) The 
third form is assimilated into the energy of the sun. 
(Once merged into this energy, the human soul 
attains the highest of places.) 


The learned welcome Agni with these hymns. The 
hymns are like a sacrifice that bring forth the fire- 
god’s chariot. Agni’s presence preserves us from all 
harm. Agni is the crown of heaven, the lord of the 
earth, and the leader of the universe. He is born from 
the sacrifice, but was earlier created by the gods. He is 
omniscient and radiant. Agni should be worshipped 
like an honoured guest. 


O Agni! Your presence can be felt in hymns and 
incantations. The priest of a sacrifice uses these to 
summon you. Flow like a stream coursing through the 
mountains. Like a valiant steed dashing into battle, 
become fleet-footed and powerful through our 
incantations. You are the king of our non-violent 
sacrifice. You are the vriest of our sacrifice and golden 
is your hue. It is lightning that created Agni, but it is 
the clarified butter offered at sacrifices that make the 
fire-god stronger. Agni blazes in radiance even before 
the stroke of dawn. 


The fire roars on earth. It was first born in the sky. It 
thrived in the water and in the clouds. A person 
observing a sacrifice rubs two pieces of stick (arani) 
between his hands. It is from this rubbing that Agni is 
born. 


230 


Agni is like a sacred cow, a gigantic tree. Agni 
preserves the intelligent and destroys the demons. Let 
the learned pray to the fire-god. Let Agni lead them 
towards prosperity, let him be their armour. Pray to 
the fire-god. His flames have a myriad hues. 


O Pusha! (Pusha is the sun-god, another name for 
Surya. A hymn to Pusha is inserted amongst the 
hymns to Agni.) Your bright day is distinct from your 
dark night. It is your glory that gives rise to day and’ 
night. You grant us foodgrains and you make the day 
as bright as heaven. Protect your subjects and arant 1s 
boons. 


O Agni! We incessantly perform sacrifices. Grant us 
progeny and grant us cattle. Make us successful. It is 
the fire in the household that is manifested as 
lightning in the sky. It is the same fire that blazes at a 
sacrifice. It is Agni who devours all sacificial 
offerings. If you are a devotee, pray to Agni. He will 
grant you foodgrains and wealth, he will grant you 
health. Brave warriors pray to Agni. He is as powerful 
as Indra. Let us please the fire-god through our 
prayers. 


Agni can be found in all forms of knowledge. It is 
he who protects the wombs of expectant mothers. And 
for him, the two arani sticks are like a womb. Agni 
should be worshipped by all men, every day. O Agni! 
Kill the enemies who cause us harm and 
unhappiness. The demons cannot vanquish you on 
the field of battle. Burn up all cannibal demons 
(rakshasa). Let no foe flee from your divine weapons. 


231 
O Agni! Grant us wealth, show us the path that 
leads to prosperity. Show us also the paths that lead to 
foodgrains and power. A person who gives birth to a 
brave son worships Agni and offers the fire-god 


oblations at a sacrifice. It is this which gives him 
divine bliss. 


When Agni burns, the pure smoke whirls away into 
the sky. Agni is the purifier, he is as powerful as the 
sun. Agni establishes everyone, his eyes see all that 
there is to see. Humans make offerings to the fire-god. 
He is worshipped at the stroke of dawn. Hymns to 
Agni are the best of all hymns. O Agni! Grant us 
wealth and grant us foodgrains. If you wish for wealth 
and foodgrains, it is to the fire-god ‘that you must 
pray. Pray to him with your hymns. He will reside in 
your house and grant you happiness. 


Collect a lot of offerings for Agni. It is Agni who 
killed the demon Vritra. Agni is born from the 
sacrifice, he is the munifestation of righteousness. His 
father is the sage Kashyapa. His mother is Shraddha 
(faith). And it is the poet Manu who sings Agni’s 
praise. 


I call upon the gods Soma, Varuna, Agni, Aditya, 
Surya, Brahmanaspati, Vishnu and Brihaspati. | call 
upon them repeatedly. (This is again an interpolatior 
amongst hymns to Agni.) 


The great sages Angirasa trod along superior paths 
and ascended to heaven. They seated themselves in. 
heaven. (This is yet another interpolation. In the 
Vedas, the Angirasa were a semi-divine spedes who 
were companions of Agni.) 


232 


O Agni! I light you so that I may obtain more and 
more of wealth. Pray to the heaven and to the earth so 
that Agni may be a priest at this sacrifice. Agni is like 
the axle of a wheel. Around him revolve all poetry 
and all action. O Agni! Rob the oppressive demons of 
their happiness. Destroy them from all the four 
directions, vanquish their valour. Great fire-god! 
Perform a sacrifice for Vasu, Rudra, Aditya and the 
other gods. We humans who are descended from the 
great Manu are praying unto you. 


O Agni! I offer you oblations like a devoted servant. 
I seek refuge in you. Agni is the source of all wisdom. 
It is he who summons the gods and the supreme 
godhead to the saciifice. Chant hymns to him. O fire- 
god! You are the lord of the foodgrains that are bon 
from cattle. Grant us a lot of wealth. 


O Agni! You are worshipped on the occasion of a 
sactifice. Be the chief priest at the sacifice and 
summon the gods here. Defeat our enemies and adorn 
our sacrifice. Let the fire-god bring us prosperity. Let 
him protect us on this day. Let him grant us peace and 
happiness. Let him banish our enemies. Pray to the 
destroyer of all foes, pray to him whose power knows 
no bounds. Pray to the great god whose smoke 
envelopes the four directions. 


The performer of the sacrifice offers oblations to 
Agni. Fraudulent enemies and thieves are banished 
- by the fire-god. He preserves truth and he shows us the 
righteous path. O Agni! You are valiant and preserve 


your subjects. Listen to my hymns and bum up the 
evil demons. 


233 


Those of you who wish to perform a sacrifice, make 
sure that you sing hymns to Agni. He will preserve 
your sacrifice, he will manifest himself in his 
greatness, and he will be the harbinger of truth. One 
who is befriended by Agni is freed from all misery. He 
is protected by the bravest of the brave. 


If you wish to perform a sacrifice, pray to Agni. 
Your oblations will then be carried to heaven. The 
gods themselves worship Agni. It is he who will take 
the oblations to the gods. Let Agni be close to the 
sacrifice. The fire-god will preserve our well-being, he 
will grant us wealth and prosperity.,He will make our 
sacrifice a success. 


Agni is immortal. He is the chief among all the 
gods. We welcome Agni to the sacrifice. Please ensure, 
O fire-god, that those who eat too much do not pollute 
our sacrifice. Please banish hatred and evil from our 
sacrifice. When the flames rise high up into the sky, 
we will know that Agni is pleased. We will know that 
Agni will destroy the demons and bless our 
household. 


(This concludes the Agneya Kanda of the Sama Veda 
Samhita.) 


We will now move on to the Aindra Kanda. As the 
name implies, the Aindra Kanda is predominantly 
concerned with hymns (mantra) to Indra. There are 
however some mantras addressed to gods like the 
Maruts, the  Ashvinis, Vishnu, Parjanya, 
Brahmanospati, Aditi, Usha, Dyavaprithivi, Agni, 
Soma, the Vishvadevas, Surya and Savita. 


234 


There are three hundred and fifty-two mantras in 
the Aindra Kanda. These are divided into thirty-six 
sections (khanda). The mantras follow several different 
metres. These are gayatri, vrihati, trishtupa, anushtupa, 
jagati, mahapamkti, pamkti, ushnika, kakupa, virata, 
ashti and ekapada. 


Aindra Kanda 


Please listen to me, all of you who have assembled 
to perform a sacrifice. After you have prepared the 
juice of the soma herb, pray to the powerful Indra. 
Many are the people who pray to the great Indra. 
Chant hymns addressed to him. They will please him 
the way grass pleases a cow. Many are the wonderous 
deeds that Indra has performed. We have prepared for 
him the juice of the soma herb. Let it please him. And 
let him please us by granting us riches. 


O cattle! Come to the place where the sacrifice is 
being held. Yield a lot of milk for the sacrifice. Your 
ears are adored with golden ear-rings, you will give 
us the milk that is like food for us. O assembled sages! 
Chant hymns for the horses, for the cows and for 
Indra. We praise the great Indra who killed the demon 
Vritra. May Indra grant us prosperity. 


O Indra! You are known for your valour. O 
powerful Indra! Grant us the objects of our desire. Our 
sacrifice spreads Indra’s fame. Indra is the lord of all 
riches, let him grant us riches. Let us offer the juice of 
the soma herb to Indra. O Indra! You are the one who 
establishes everyone. Drink the soma juice that is like 
food for you. Be satiated, valiant one. It is for your 
pleasure that we have prepared the soma juice. 


235 


The sun is a manifestation of the great Indra. See 
how he rises, wealthy and powerful. See how he hurls 
his weapons for the welfare of mankind. You have 
arisen, O Indra! Rule over everything. Indra will 
befriend us. He hurls his weapons in all the four 
directions. He will ensure that demons do not decide 
to attack us in the darkness of the night. And even if 
demons do attack us, Indra will be on our side and we 
will repulse the demons. 


O Indra! You are our protector. You are the one who 
grants us the objects of cur desire. You are the one 
who grants us victory over our enemies. Grant us 
riches. We call upon Indra, be it a major battle or a 
minor one. We ask his help when we fight with the 
demon Vritra. Indra will come to our aid with his 
weapon, the vajra. Indra drank the soma juice offered 
by the sage Kadru. He killed the enemy known as 
Sahasravahu (the one with a thousand arms). Al! this 
establishes Indra’s glory. 


O Indra! We are desirous of receiving you in our 
midst. We bow in obeisance before you. Please realise 
that this is what we are trying to say through these 
hymns. The priests have lit a fire in your honour, they 
have prepared a seat for you. May Indra, who is ever 
youthful, befriend them. Destroy all our enemies. 
Remove all our impediments. After that, grant us the 
riches that we want. 


The Maruts have whips in their hands. The sound 
of these whips is like a roar and demonstrates their 
power in the field of battle. (A hymn to the Manruts is 
inserted among hymns to Indra. The Maruts were of 
course, Indra’s companions.) 


236 


O Indra! The juice of tne soma herb is being offered 
at this sacrifice. A hunter with a net in his hand 
concentrates intensely on catching his prey. That 
concentration is rivalled by the concentration of the 
one who is performing this sacrifice. The rivers flow 
towards the ocean, eager to see the ocean. Just like 
that, people are thronging here for the sacrifice. They 
are eager to see you. Union with the gods is our best . 
protection; it will grant us our wishes. We have 
assembled to unite with you. 


O Brahmanaspati! Kakshivana, the son of Ushika, 
is performing this sacrifice. Bring glory to him. 


Indra killed the demon Vritra. It is for him that 
people prepare the soma juice. Indra knows what our 
wishes are. Let Indra come and grace our sacrifice. Let 
him listen to our.chanting. 


O Savita! Grant us this day, progeny and 
prosperity. Let the misfortune that is like a nightmare 
stay away from us. (A hymn to Savita or Surya is 
interpolated. Of course, an earlier hymn does state 
that Surya is one of Indra’s manifestations.) 


Where is the young and powerful Indra? Where is 
the one who thunders? Where is he who does not bow 
down before anyone? Who is the learned one who is 
praying to Indra? In the valleys and at the 
confluences of rivers can be found the learned ones 
who chant hymns to Indra. Excellent indeed are the 
mantras that they chant. Pray to the Indra who is the 
emperor of all men. 


237 


Indra wears a helmet on his head. He comes to 
attend these special sacrifices and drinks soma juice 
mixed with flour and milk. He grants myriad riches. 
Like a cow is drawn to her calf, Indra is drawn to 
sacrifices through hymns. 


During the night the energy of the sun is hidden. It 
is known as Tvashta then and resides in Chandrama’s 
household. 


Indra releases the mighty torrents and is aided by 
Pusha. O drinker of the soma juice! Use your steeds to 
come to our sacrifice. The priests have bathed well 
and are singing praises to Indra. They are making 
offerings to Indra. Through my saqifice I will make 
Indra’s mind turn towards me. That will make me as 
powerful as the sun. The union with Indra will grant 
me foodgrains. My cows will give me a plentiful 
supply of milk and clarified butter. My powers will be 
increased. 


The gods Soma and Pusha are worthy enough to be 
seated in the chariots of the gods. It is they who 
provide men encouragement. 


Those of you who are desirous of performing a 
sacrifice, chant special hymns for Indra. He destroys 
our enemies, he performs wonderous deeds and he 
drinks the soma juice. 

O Mitra! Indra’s steed is known as Hari. He drinks 
the juice of the soma herb. Sing Indra’s praise. (This is 
not a reference to the god Mitra. The word mitra 
means a friend and a friend is being addressed in this 


hymn.) 


238 


O Indra! We are desirous of being your friend, we 
are desirous of singing your praise. The sage Kanva 
sang your glory through his hymns. Let our hymns 
praise the soma juice which hds been extracted for 
Indra’s sake. Let us worship the soma herb. We have 
purified the soma juice and kept it on a pedestal on 
the occasion of the sacrifice. Come hither and drink 
the soma juice. 


At the time of milking, one calls upon the cow that - 
gives one a supply of milk. Like that, every day, we 
call upon Indra. O powerful Indra! I offer this soma 
juice unto you. Accept it and be satiated. The soma 
juice has been kept in big and small containers. Drink 
it up, O great god! In each of my actions, in each of 
my battles, I call upon Indra to come to my aid. 


Those who are going to perform sacrifices, those 
who are my friends! Listen to what I have to say. 
Come and assemble here. Sing Indra’s praise. 


Lord of all wealth, you are worshipped by everyone. 
Drink this soma juice and be pleased. Our Indra is 
great and supreme, he is famous as the wielder of the 
vajra. His valour increases like heaven itself. O Indra! 
Your hands are large. Take in your right hand the 
excellent riches that you may grant to us. Indra is the 
protector of cattle, of truth, and of righteous people. 
Let us pray to Indra so that he may help our sacrifice. 
Let us pray to Indra so that we may get to know him. 


Indra will be our best friend. But what power will 
bring Indra hither? Indra has to be brought here so 
that we may be protected. O Indra! Your path is below 


239 


heaven, and it is along this path that you rule over 
the universe. Traverse a path from there to the place 
of our sacrifice. Come to our sacrifice. Performer of 
wonderful deeds, overwhelm us with riches. You will 
make us happy. This soma juice has been prepared for 
you. It is this soma juice that the powerful Maruts and 
the two Ashvinis drink. 


O goddess! (It is not quite clear who this goddess is, 
the hymns seems to be addressed to Indra’s mother.) 
We do not have any evil intentions. We do not wish to 
harm anyone. We are following the rites that have 
been laid down in the mantras of the Vedas. 


O brahmana (a priest)! You who are learned in the 
knowledge of the Atharva Veda! You can sing sama 
hymns in the vrihati metre. Pray to the god Savita so 
that this sacrifice may be properly performed. 


O goddess Usha! You manifest yourself from 
heaven and are unrivalled in your radiance. You are 
the goddess of truth. We sing many hymns in your 
praise, 


There is no one who can stand up to Indra. He is the 
killer of eight hundred and ten Vritra demons. O 
Indra! Come here. The soma juice is like food for you, 
it pleases you no end. You destroy the most powerful 
of enemies. You are the one who killed the demon 
Vritra..Come to us in your greatness. Come to us for 
our protection. Such is Indra’s amazing strength that 
he twirls the heaven and the earth like mere whisks. O 
Indra! This soma juice has been prepared for you. 
Come to it like a male pigeon goes to a female pigeon. 
Listen to our prayers. 


240 


Let the wind bring peace to our hearts. Let the wind 
bring us the herbs that banish ill health. Let us live for 
long. 


Those who are protected by the learned never come 
to any harm. 


O Indra! Grant us herds of cattle like you have done 
earlier. Grant us horses and chariots. Come to us with 
riches that will bring us glory. The cattle that you 
grant us will bring fame to our sacrifices. The milk 
and the clarified butter that they yield will be used in 
the sacrifices. You have many names, O great Indra! 
whichever is the sacrifice that you go to, you will find 
that hymns are being chanted in your praise. 


O Sarasvati, the goddess of learning! You purify us, 
you grant us foodgrains, you give us riches, you bring 
wisdom to our hearts. Come and grace our sacrifice. 
(This is one of the relatively rare instances where 
Sarasvati is addressed as the goddess of learning.) 


Who is the one who satisfies and pleases Indra? To 
him Indra will grant riches. Come to us Indra. We 
have prepared soma juice for you. Drink it and be 
seated on the throne we have reserved for you. Let us 
benefit from Indra’s protection. Let us be united with 
the gods Mitra, Varuna and Aryama. (Aryama is a 
manifestation of Surya.) 


Destroy our enemies, O Indra! You are the drinker 
of the soma juice, you are the one who wields the vajra. 
Grant us riches. Indra is deserving of worship, he is 
the one who makes sacrifices successful. Indra is a 
valiant warrior, he will be drawn to your sacrifice. As 


241 


a river mingles into the ocean, let this soma juice 
mingle with Indra. Who can be greater than thee, O 
Indra! Men sing sama hymns to please Indra. Men 
worship Indra. Let Indra grant us riches. 


Indra is constant and leamed. Let him banish our 
fears. All the hymns we sing are in praise of Indra. We 
pray to the gods Indra and Pusha so that our welfare 
may be granted, so that they may be our friends and 
grant us foodgrains. Destroyer of enemies, there is no 
one who is superior to you. There is no one who can 
rival you, O Indra! 


I praise the Indra who will grant you salvation. I 
praise the Indra who will frighten Our enemies, | 
praise the Indra who will grant us cattle. I have 
composed these hymns for Indra. Let these hymns be 
acceptable to you. 


A person who is protected by the Maruts, by Mitra 
and by Aryama, will get to walk along the most 
superior of paths, 


O Indra! You have a treasure-house of riches. You 
have preserved it in the ground. Grant us these riches. 
You know that Indra used his valour to kill the demon 
Vritra. He will use that valour to grant us riches. We 
have plenty of time to perform your sacrifice, O great 
Indra! We are waiting for your protection. Indra killed 
all the enemies. He used the foam of the waters to kill 
the demon Namuchi. (Namuchi can also be 
interpreted as a disease that is not easily cured, but 
which may be cured by drinking foam from the waves 
of the ocean.) This soma juice is for the great Indra, do 


242 


let him partake of it. A seat of sacrifidial grass (kusha) ~ 
has been prepared for Indra. Let him sit on it and 
gladden the hearts of his devotees. 


Just as water irrigates the fields, the soma juice 
pleases Indra. O Indra! Descend to us from heaven 
with all your power. As soon as he was born, Indra 
took up arrows in his hand and asked his mother the 
names of the bravest warriors of all. Indra killed the 
demon Vritra, so he is the protector. 


The learned gods Mitra and Varuna guide us along 
the righteous path. The god Aryama also belongs to 
the ranks of the gods. He too shows us the righteous 
path. . 


In the distant eastern sky Usha brings the first 
strokes of radiance. The radiance slowly spreads to the 
four directions. 


The gods Mitra and Varuna are the performers of 
excellent deeds. Let them ensure that our cows provide 
a plentiful supply of milk and clarified butter. The 
Maruts roar when they come to the sacrifice. The great 
Vishnu traversed the universe in three of his footsteps. 
(This is a story that crops up in the Puranas.) 


O Indra! Do not frequent the sacrifices of those who 
extract soma juice with anger in their hearts. But go to 
the sacrifices where soma juice is extracted in the 
proper way. Drink your fill of soma juice. Because our 
hymns sing of the glorious qualities of Indra, our 
hymns themselves are blessed. Indra is the enemy of 
those who do not sing hymns. Indra knows the words 
of our hymns — he hears the tunes. He is the all 


243 


powerful one who possesses many steeds. He is the 
one who frequents sacrifices where soma juice is 
offered. 


O Indra! Come to our sacrifice. There is no need to 
go to other sacrifices and partake of the oblations 
offered there. Just as an youthful husband is devoted 
to his wife, be devoted to our saqcifice. Indra is 
everywhere. Come here god, and acknowledge our 
offerings of soma juice. The priests who are offering 
you the soma juice recite the sacred texts of the 
brahmanas. Befriend them and let there never be a 
parting of ways. Praiseworthy Indra, we are praying 
to you. Be pleased. Valiant god, make our limbs 
strong and powerful. May we be cblé to vanquish all 
our foes. You yourself have fought with and defeated 
powerful enemies. 


Every object in this universe, mobile or immobile, is 
under your suzerainty. We worship you like we 
worship a cow that has not yet been milked. We call 
on Indra when we donate foodgrains. We call on 
Indra when,we fight with demons like Vritra. We seek 
your help when we are engaged in a fight over the 
possession of horses. Pray to Indra. He will grant you 
immense riches. 


O assembled priests! Listen to what I have to say. 
Indra kills the enemies who bring impediments. Indra 
drinks the soma juice and is pleased. Chant hymns to 
him and seek his blessings. I too pray to him to make 
him look upon me with favour. 


We have extracted the soma juice. We have mixed 
it with the milk of cows. Drink the juice, O Indra! Be 


244 


pleased. Be like a brother unto us on the occasion of 
this sacrifice. Show us the righteous path — guide us 
through your wisdom. Come and grant us prosperity. 
Give us cows. Give us also horses. 


O Maruts! The sage Vashishtho prayed to all of 
you. Come to our sacrifice. Sit side by side and drink 
the soma juice we have offered. 


Friends, do not pray to anyone other than Indra. — 
That would be a waste of time. Pray to Indra alone 
and chant his hymns repeatedly. A priest who pleases 
Indra can never be subdued. If the veins of the throat 
are severed and blood gushes out, it is Indra alone 
who can join the severed parts together. Let Indra 
come to our sacrifice in a golden chariot drawn by 
thousands of horses. 


A traveller can cross a desert on a horse bedecked 
with peacock feathers. He faces no impediments. A 
hunter uses his net to catch birds. O Indra! We will 
catch you like the hunter catches the birds. Your 
presence will free us from all impediments, like the 
traveller in the desert. Manifest yourself, O Indra! 
There is no one but you who can bring us happiness. 
You alone are valiant enough to grant us protection. 
You will drink the soma juice. In this sacrifice 
dedicated to the gods, we call upon Indra before the 
sacrifice is started, we call upon him while the 
sacrifice is going on and we call upon him when the 
sacrifice is over. Let my hymns increase Indra’s fame. 
Your devotees are as radiant as the god Agni. The 
great Indra never wastes away. Like a thirsty deer 


245 


hastens to a pond of water, Indra will hasten to the 
sacrifice that the sage Kanva is performing. 


O Indra! Grant us the boons we desire. Grant us 
riches. You are the one who robbed the demons 
(asuras) of their property. Protect the one who prays to 
you. Be seated on the seat he has prepared for you. 


Listen to me, you who wish to perform a sacifice. 
Let the gods Mitra, Aryama and Varuna be seated at 
the sacrifice. After they have been seated, sing for 
them the hymns that have been composed in metrical 


forms. 
a 


O Indra! The officiating priests first pray to you so 
that you may drink the soma juice. The Maruts, 
offspring of Rudra, also acknowledge you to be 
supreme and pray to you. O Maruts! Compose and 
sing hymns to Indra. He killed the demon Vritra. He 
performed wonderous deeds. He freed the waters with 
one stroke of his vajra. Those who are observing the 
sacrifice will sing hymns to Indra composed in the 
vrihati metre. The radiance of Surya has been brought 
to the sacrifice through Indra’s aid. 


O Indra! Grant us wisdom so that we may perform 
the sacrifice. Teach us, the way a father teaches his 
son. Bless us, so that the radiance of the sun may be 
always present at our sacrifice. Be not parted from us, 
come to our sacrifice and be our protector. You are like 
a brother unto us. We are seated on the occasion of 
this sacred sacrifice and desire your presence. Grant us 
power and strength and riches. 


246 


Be our protector. It is known that you are valiant, 
whether you are far or near. A steed with hair on its 
neck is fleet of foot. Our hymns will be as swift as that 
steed and will summon you to the sacrifice. You who 
are observing the sacrifice, chant special hymns for 
Indra. O Indra! Give us three-storeyed houses for 
dwellings. In these houses we will be happy in the 
three seasons. Let there be no need for weapons in . 
these dwellings. The sun is the refuge of all rays. Like 
that, Indra is the refuge of the entire universe. Indra 
divides up the universe among all its subjects. Like a 
son receives his appointed share from his father, we 
demand our share from Indra. 


Indra has a long life. A person who does not 
worship gods receives no foodgrains. Let us worship 
Indra. Let him come to our sacrifice on fleet-footed 
steeds. Let our hymns please and grace Indra. Let his 
presence adorn our hymns. O Indra! You are the lord 
of inferior riches, you are the lord of medium riches 
and you are the lord of superior riches. You can grant 
us all the riches you want. No one can prevent you 
from giving us Cows. 


O Indra! Where have you gone? Where are you 
now? We know that your mind is drawn to many 
places. Come to our sacrifice, we are singing hymns 
for you. We pleased the wielder of the vajra yesterday 
with our offerings of soma juice. We have prepared 
soma juice today as well. Let Indra come here and 
grace our sacrifice. 


Indra is the king of all men. He rides a swift chariot. 
He destroys the soldiers of the foes. He killed the 


247 


demon Vritra. Let us pray to him. O Indra! Free us 
from our fears and make us fearless. Destroy our 
enemies. Destroy hatred. A sacrifice at which soma 
juice is offered is sacred. A person who performs such 
a sacrifice is blessed. Let the pillars of his house be 
firm and strong. Let him have a plentiful supply of 
foodgrains. Let Indra befriend the sages. The demons 
are drinkers of the soma juice. Let Indra destroy their 
Cities. 

Indra has sent the sun. It is true indeed that Indra is 
great. Indra, you are the son of Aditi. We sing of 
Indra’s glory. When Indra befriends a man, that man 
is blessed with chariots drawn by horses, excellent 
cows, abundant foodgrains and handsome jewellery. 
O Indra! Even if heaven expands a hundredfold, it will 
not be able to encompass you. Even if the earth 
expands a hundredfold, it will not be able to bind you. 
O wielder of the vajra! Even if there were to be a 
thousand suns, they would pale into insignificance 
beside you. 


Indra is called upon in the east, the west, the north 
and the south. You have been prayed to for Anu’s aid, 
you have been prayed to for Turvasu’s aid. (Anu and 
Turvasu were the sons of King Yayati.) There is no one 
who can frighten Indra. His devotees are blessed with 
valour. They are freed from their miseries; they can 
donate as much of foodgrains as they want. 


O Indra and O Agni! The goddess Usha has no feet. 
But it is dawn and Usha has developed feet so that she 
can get here before those who are asleep awaken. 
There are thirty muhurtas (unit of time) in a day. Usha 


248 


covers one muhurta in one of her footsteps. O Indra! 
The place where I am performing the sacrifice is not 
very far. Come to the sacrifice. Come with your 
brothers, the other gods. 


Bring Indra to the sacrifice. Let him not be far 
away. Let him be close and bless our sacrifice. Let him 
listen. to our hymns. Let the performers of the sacrifice 
extract soma juice for Indra. Let them make cakes 
(purodasha) for Indra. Let them perform the sacrifice 
to obtain Indra’s favour. We call upon the Indra who 
is omniscient. We call upon the Indra who can destroy 
several enemies at one Stroke. Indra is the source of all 
inspiration. O Indra! Come to our aid. 


O Ashvinis! Grant us the riches that you have the 
power to grant, night and day. What you can grant is 
never diminished. Let what we receive also never be 
diminished. 


O Varuna! Men chant hymns at the time of 


sacrifices. Be pleased with these prayers and protect 
us. 


O sage Medhatithi! Indra harnesses two horses to 
his chariot, he is the wielder of the vajra. His chariot is 
golden, he drinks the soma juice and is gratified. 
Protect your cows after Indra has drunk the soma 
juice. 

Let Indra listen to our hymns and come to drink the 
soma juice. Indra cannot be exchanged for countless 
riches. Indra is greater than my father or my brother. 


He is as great as my mother. May Indra make me 
prosperous. 


249 


O inara! The soma juice has been prepared for you 
and mixed with curds. Come to the sacrifice on your 
steeds and drink the soma juice. Listen to our hymns 
and grant riches to those who sing the hymns. Indra is 
as desirable as a valuable cow that yields a lot of milk. 
O Indra! The loftiest of mountains cannot bar your 
path. No one can prevent you from granting me the 
riches that you want. Who can fathom the mysteries 
of the great Indra? Who can comprehend the 
magnitude of the foodgrains that Indra can grant? 
Adomed with a helmet, Indra drinks soma juice and 
destroys the cities of his enemies. 


Indra punishes the sinners. Let.him protect our 
sacrifice trom sinners who may invade it from the four 
directions. 


O Tvashta, architect of the gods! O Parjanya, the 
god of rains! O Brahmanaspati! O Aditi, mother of the 
gods! O other gods! You are the ones who will remove 
our miseries, you are the ones who will grant us 
protection. Be pleased with our hymns and grant us 
protection. 


Indra is not like a cow that cannot bear calves. 
Indra unites with a devotee who offers him oblations. 
Indra’s boons will grant us riches. O Indra! Harness 
your steeds to your chariot and come with the Maruts 
to our sacrifice. Indra is the wielder of the vajra. To 
him soma juice was offered at earlier sacrifices. To him 
soma juice is being offered now as well. It is for him 
that the hymns are being chanted. 


250 


Usha is the daughter of Surya. Her appearance 
banishes the darkness of the night. The beautiful 
Usha brings radiance. 


O Ashvinis! Men call upon you for riches and 
protection. You go to the person who summons you. 
No dweller of earth can make you appear unless you 
wish to, O Ashvinis! The performer of the sacrifice is 
tired after crushing soma herbs on stone. Make him 
prosperous like a king, ye gods! The soma juice that 
has been prepared for a sacrifice dedicated to you is 
exceedingly sweet. Drink it and drink also the soma 
juice that was prepared yesterday. Grant jewels and 
riches to those who offer you oblations. 


O Indra! I offered you soma juice. I chanted hymns 
to you. Have I angered and offended you by 
frequently asking you for boons? Have you become 
like a tiger enraged. But you are our master. And who 
does not demand boons from his master? 


Indra has come to. the sacrifice riding on his 
powerful steeds. Hasten to prepore soma juice for him. 
O Indra! Grant riches to us insignificant people. We 
will call for your aid at the time of every battle. But 
please do not grant riches to the sinners. O Indra! You 
kill your enemies in battle, you create impediments 
for them. But you remove all our impediments. Indra 
is supreme in heaven, and the dust of the earth 
canfiot endrcle him. Indra has the measure of the 
entire universe. 


Indra loves soma juice that has been mixed with 
miik. We have prepared this so that he may come to 


251 


our sacrifice. We have chanted hymns to him, we 
have got a seat ready for him. Indra will come here 
and protect us. He will grant us riches. Indra 
splintered the clouds and brought forth torrents of 
rain. In the process, he destroyed the demons and 
pleased the pure ocean. We will grasp Indra’s right 
hand so that he may grant us riches. 


When danger threatens, one’s actions must be 
governed by one’s intelligence. It is for this reason that 
our leaders call upon Indra at the time of battle. O 
Indra! You love sacrifices the way one loves a 
beautiful bird. We unite with Indra in the rays of the 
sun. O Indra! Remove the darkness. Fill our eyes with 
energy. Free us from our bondage. 


Agni is the messenger of Varuna. Agni was created 
in the atmosphere (antariksha). Indra resides in the 
atmosphere in the form of a handsome bird with 
beautiful wings. Those who pray to you from the 
deepest recesses of their hearts can see you in the 
atmosphere. It is for Indra that hymns are sung. 


A demon named Krishna reached the banks of the 
Amshumati river. He moved very fast and attacked 
with ten thousand soldiers. The valiant Indra repulsed 
the attack and killed the enemy. When the demon 
Vritra attacked, all the other gods fled in fear. They 
deserted their friend Indra. But Indra adopted the 
Maruts gs his companions and killed Vritra. 


Through Indra’s grace, even the aged remain 
conversant with their duties. Hearken to Indra’s 
mighty deeds. Those who die today are bom 
tomorrow to live on earth yet again. 


252 


O Indra! As soon as you were born, you killed seven 
demons whom none had been able to vanquish. Four 
of them were Krishna, Vritra, Namuchi and 
Shambara. You removed the darkness that prevailed 
over heaven and earth. You make this universe and 
its regions beautiful. O Indra! Make us invindble in 
battle. Men must offer soma juice to the mighty Indra. 
The learned must pray to him. Indra will help those 
who are devoted to him. We call upon Indra for our ° 
protection. Chant hymns to Indra so that you may 
obtain foodygrains. O sages, you who have succeeded 
in controlling your senses! Sing of the glory of Indra. 
Indra’s vajra flashes in the atmosphere. He provides 
sweet water to those who pray to him and water flows 
in abundance on earth. It is this water which sustains 
the milk of the cows and the juices of the herbs. 


Indra is an eagle (suparna) in the atmosphere. He is 
immensely strong and is worshipped by the gods. We 
call upon Indra to come to us so that our welfare may 
be ensured. Indra will come to our aid and will protect 
us. He is a valiant warrior, worthy of being 
summoned before every battle. In his right hand 
Indra holds the vajra. His beard and moustache strike 
terror in the hearts of his enemies. He is the supreme 
god. To his devotees, Indra grants riches. We pray to 
the Indra who killed the demon Vritra. We pray to the 
Indra who grants us foodgrains. We pray to the Indra 
who can kill several enemies at one stroke. 


Our enemies wish to attack us. These sinners 
descend upon us with fierce weapons. But with Indra’s 
grace we will overcome these foes. The learned pray to 


Zo3 


Indra for victory, for water and for rains. Indra is 
summoned when the gods are engaged in a fight. O 
Indra! You are like a mountain. Your sons are valiant 
warriors. Ascend your great chariot and come to us 
with foodgrains. Listen to our hymns, come and 
partake of the oblations we have offered. 


The axle is the fulcrum of the wheel. Like that, 
Indra is the axle of the earth and heaven. Stirred by 
our hymns, Indra will shower down rain from the 
atmosphere. The hymns sung on earth will reach 
Indra’s ears in the atmosphere. Indra will come to our 
sacrifice like a beloved grandson., We will harness 
Indra with our hymns like horses to chariots. 


O Indra! The reciter is chanting your hymns. A 
juggler balances a bamboo pole above him. Exactly 
similarly, the priest has held you aloft above him in 
the course of this sacrifice. Indra’s glory rivals the 
expanse of the great ocean and the hymns sing of this 
glory. O Indra! The pavilion (mandapa) in which the 
sacrifice is being held in full of vessels filled to the 
brim with soma juice. It is for you that the soma juice 
has been extracted. Grant me all the riches that I do 
not have. 


O Indra! Listen to the prayers of the sage Tirashchi. 
Grant me cows and riches. Fulfil me. May the soma 
juice course through your body like the rays of the sun 
course through the atmosphere. Come to the sacrifice 
on your horses, summoned by the hymns of the sage 
Kanva. Also reside in heaven, for we are gratified 
when you rule in heaven. A warrior on a chariot never 
misses his true destination. A cow always reaches its 


254 


calf, Like that, do not forget your destination. You will 
come to our sacrifice. Hasten here speedily. The soma 
juice and the hymns require your presence here. The 
soma juice has been mixed with pure milk for your 
pleasure: Let these offerings of soma juice bring us 
wealth and prosperity. 


All those who wish to perform a sacifice, do not 
forget that Indra is omniscient and omnipotent. It is 
to him that the first offerings of the soma juice must be 
made. Let us have a plentiful supply of the soma juice. 
Let harsh words not impair our sacrifice. May unkind 
words keep their distance. Indra is the preserver of the 
righteous and the destroyer of the evil. We will bring 
him here on his chariot. 


Indra is chief. He comes to the sacrifice to partake 
of the oblations. It is Indra who maintains all the 
other gods. The Maruts act as escorts when Indra goes 
to attend a sacrifice. When Indra is pleased, he 
showers down rain and makes foodgrains grow. Indra 
is the lord of power and wealth. He has no hatred for 
anyone; he blesses everyone. J worship the great 
Indra. He is as swift as a fleet-footed steed. Let him 
bless my mouth, let him bless my other limbs, let him 
grant me a long life. Indra is young and learned. He 
destroys the cities of our foes. He is the one who 
nurtures all good deeds. 


The oblations that are being offered to Indra were 
prepared while three hymns were chanted. (Three is 
obviously being used as a general number.) The 
priests will take this news to Indra. He will bless this 
sacrifice and make it a success. The learned know that 


255 


Indra possesses two horses. He hamesses them to his 
chariot when he comes to attend a sacrifice. Those 
who perform sacrifices worship Indra. He grants the 
desires of his devotees. Let us sing hymns which 
describe the glory of Indra, the one who killed many 
enemies at the same time. The best of my sons and 
friends will chant his hymns. 


Indra is the leader of the universe, no one can stand 
up to him. We call upon Indra. O Maruts! We also call 
upon you. We wish to hear the thunder of your 
chariot-wheels. The one who sings these hymns is 
protected from all enemies. Other men become his 
friends and he is blessed. He is shielded from sin and 
the gods themselves bless him. Indra, the performer of 
wonderous deeds, will grant us what we want. Make 
us great through the grant of riches. 


O Usha of fair complexion! Your arrival heralds the 
dawn when men and animals wake up. The birds take 
to the sky according to their wishes. 


O gods! What is the point of remaining in the sky 
once it is day? What sacrifices are held there? What 
oblations do you receive there? Come and attend our 
sacrifice. Rik and sama mantras are being chanted at 
our sacrifice. They will carry our message to the gods. 


The chief priest prays to Indra. It is Indra who 
defeated the brave soldiers of the enemy. It is Indra 
who is adomed with diverse weapons. It is Indra who 
deserves the best of seats on the occasion of the 
sacrifice. O wielder of the vajra! I have great respect for 
your anger. It is the anger which destroys the evil of 


256 


heart. It is Indra who makes the waters flow for the 
benefit of mankind. The heaven and the earth make a 
path for Indra and the earth trembles at his footsteps. 


Listen to me, residents of the earth. Indra rules over 
heaven through his power. Gather together and chant 
his praise. Indra is to be worshipped like a respected 
guest. He is capable of destroying all enemies alone. O 
Indra! We have embarked on this course of action 
after having sought sanctuary with you. Accept our 
obeisance. Our hymns incessantly glorify the 
immortal Indra. We embrace Indra the way a wife 
embraces her husband. We have assembled together 
to praise him through these mantras. Please the lord of 
heaven so that he may bring us welfare. Let his energy 
encompass the four directions. Pray repeatedly to 
Indra. Let him come to our sacrifice. 


This heaven and this earth abound with water. The 
water sustains all living beings. And the water is 
generated from the supreme god's energy. Aditi, the 
mother of the gods, gave birth to Indra. Indra is the 
greatest of the great, the emperor of all men. Indra 
fills heaven and earth with the radiance of Usha. O 
priests who are performing the saqaifice! Offer 
oblations to Indra and sing hymns for him. It is Indra 
who destroyed the demon Krishna and killed 
Krishna’s wives. Indra holds the vajra in his right 
hand, he is accompanied by the soldiers of the 
Maruts. Let us make Indra our friend so that he may 
protect us. 


When he hears the sama hymns sung at a sacrifice, 
Indra purifies the soma juice that is offered at the 


2ST 


sacrifice. The great Indra is deserving of repeated 
prayers. He brings welfare to men. O Indra! Several 
have been the sacrifices at which you have drunk 
soma juice. There was a sacrifice that was held after 
Vishnu’s arrival. (The meaning of this sentence is not 
dear.) There was another sacrifice that was held by 
Apta Trita. (This is also not at all clear.) At many such 
sacrifices you have gone with the Maruts to drink 
soma juice. Please come to our sacrifice and drink the 
soma juice that we have offered. The priests will offer 
sweet soma juice to Indra and please him. 


I ask all my friends to pray to Indra. He is capable 
of defeating all enemies single-handedly. He is alone 
capable of granting men riches. Who can stand up to 
Indra? He is the lord of everyone. Indra killed the 
demon Vritra through his valour. He killed the demon 
Shambara at the request of King Divodasa. Indra will 
drink our soma juice. The lord of this gigantic universe 
will come to us. We pray that the soma juice will 
increase Indra’s prowess and enable him to kill more 
demons. 


O gods, sons of Aditi! May our sons and grandsons 
have long lives. 


O Indra! You are familiar with the path along 
which sinners cannot bring us impediments. We pray 
to you so that you may show us this path and remove 
all our difficulties. May we be free of dangers and 
disease. 


O gods, sons of Aditi! Let us not suffer from ill- 
health. Banish our enemies and remove all evil 


258 


thoughts from our hearts. Lead us away from 
temptation. 


O Indra! Drink the soma juice. May it please you. 
This stone has been used to crush the soma herbs for 
you. You have no enemies, great Indra. No one can 
rule over you. Your devotees crave that you may be 
like a brother unto them. Listen to me, my friends. 
Indra granted you a lot of riches earlier. Pray to him | 
now for protection. 


O Maruts, who are swift of foot! Come to us and 
protect us from all damage. You are brave warriors, 
the terrible demons tremble when they catch sight of 
you. Do not remain far away from us. 


O Indra! You are the lord of horses, you are the lord 
of cows, your are the ruler of the earth. Come and 
drink the soma juice we have offered. Please ensure 
that evil enemies do not get close to the cowherds. We 
will defeat these enemies with your aid. 


O Maruts! The cows love each other. Notice how 
they lick each other. They are like sisters. Like the 
cows, men should also love each other. 


Indra is the performer of wonderous deeds. He will 
grant us power and prosperity. He will grant us brave 
sons. We pray to Indra so that our wishes may be 
granted. We will make Indra our friend. We have 
gathered together to offer this soma juice to Indra the 
way birds tend to flock together. Just as men crave the 


proximity of superior men, we too crave your 
proximity. 


259 


There are white cows by Indra’s side. These cows 
fulfil the desires of the faithful and yield excellent 
milk. These cows will drink the soma juice we have 
offered. The soma juice has the quality of increasing 
one’s prowess. We have composed hymns in praise of 
the soma juice. We wish that all our enemies on earth 
may be destroyed. Indra will protect us in all our 
battles, be they great or small. Let us please the Indra 
‘who killed Vritra. 


The wielder of the vajra lives on a mountain. He is 
omnipotent. Indra kills those who use unfair and 
fraudulent means to fight with; it is for this reason 
that he used treachery to kill Vritra. (Fhe details are 
not given. But as stated in the Puranas., Indra 
pretended to befriend Vritra and killed him when the 
demon relaxed his vigil as a result of the treaty of 
friendship.) Indra will invade the fortresses of the 
enemies from all four directions. He will destroy the 
enemies with his powerful vajra. All the enemies will 
be forced to bow down in obeisance. 


When a battle is fought, it is the victorious who 
become wealthy. We will harness our horses to our 
chariots in readiness for battle. It is Indra who decides 
who will win and attain glory and riches. We pray to 
Indra so that we may be wealthy. 


O Indra! The guests who have come on the 
occasion of the sacrifice have been fed and are 
satiated. The brahmanas (priests) have begun to recite 
mantras. Harness your steeds and come to the 
sacrifice. Come close, great Indra, so that you can 
hear our hymns better. We have said that you will 


260 


come, do not make us out to be liars. Chandrama 
brightens up the atmosphere with rays, energy flashes 
in the sky in the form of golden lightning. But none of 
them can touch Indra’s feet. 


O Dyavaprithivi! Hearken to our prayers. O 
Ashvinis! Your beloved rishis (sages) are chanting 
hymns. Hearken to our prayers. 


O Agni! You are full of energy and never suffer from’ 
old age. We light you; your flames blaze in heaven. 
Listen to our prayers and grant us foodgrains. At our 
sacrifice we have prepared a special seat for Agni. 
Agni is supreme. 


O Usha! Wake us up from our slumber so that we 
may tread the path to prosperity. O Usha! I am the 
sage Satyashrava, the son of Vaya. Awaken me, you 
who are a lover of truth. 


O Soma! Inspire us so that we may prepare the 
soma juice well. Motivate us to action and give us 
prowess. Like a beautiful cow craves for grass, we 
crave your friendship. 


Indra increases his prowess by drinking soma juice. 
He wears a handsome helmet. He hamesses 
beauteous steeds to his chariot and he holds the vajra 
in his right hand. I know Indra’s chariot well. It is 
stocked with containers full of soma juice. 


I pray to Agni through my hymns so that he may 
grant me foodgrains. Agni resides in a household in 


the form of wealth. Agni frequents the place of a 
sacrifice. 


261 


O gods! O Mitra, Varuna and Aryama! Keep our 
enemies away and improve our lot. Let sin and misery 
stay away from our door. 


Let Indra be present in our vessels together with 
Mitra, Pusha and Bhaga. (Bhaga is a manifestation of 
Surya.) Let Soma be present in our vessels and provide 
us with foodgrains. Let our enemies be destroyed. O 
Soma! You are like the great ocean. Overflow from the 
vessels of the gods. Fill our vessels so that we may 
prosper. Soma is learned. He purifies the water that he 
is mixed with. O Soma! I will pray to you after I have 
extracted your juice. Soma is sacred. He protects the 
king and destroys our enemies. 


Do you know what is the relationship between the 
Maruts and Rudra? (The Maruts are Rudra’s 
offspring.) 


O Agni! The priests are chanting your praise 
through the hymn known as oha. You will grant our 
well-being. 


O Savita! You grant well-being to men. Accept these 
offerings of soma juice mixed with rice. We will attain 
heaven. We will obtain victorious horses. 


O Soma! You are full of energy. Course through our 
vessels. Fill our vessels to the brim. 


O Indra! You are the destroyer of enemies. Grant us 
riches from every direction. Indra is famous and 
leamed. We pray to Indra so that he may kill the 
demon Ahi. O Indra! The gods known as the Ribhus 
have readied your chariot, Tvashta has built the 
wonderful vajra for you. 


262 


Those who perform sacrifices obtain happiness and 
excellent dwellings. Those who do not perform 
sacrifices receive nothing. 


Cows are always pure and sacred. They nurture us. 


O Usha! Come with all your radiance. May cows 
with full udders tread along your path. 


O Indra! We wish to be close to you, we pray to you.’ 
The powerful Maruts worship the youthful Indra. The 
learned sing hymns in praise of Indra. 


O Agni! You are omniscient. You take our offerings 
to the gods. Stay close to us and make us prosper. May 
you grant us riches. Be present at our sacrifice and 
destroy our enemies. 


The night (ratri) is Usha’s sister and Usha makes her 
own sister go away. Through her radiance Usha 
illuminates the proper path. 


May Indra and the other gods guide us in the 
observance of appropriate rites. Offerings made to 
Indra merge into his being the way small roads 
converge to a highway. Let the gods be pleased 
through our prayers and grant us foodgrains and 
power. May we have brave sons. who live for a 
hundred years. Let Indra, Mitra and Varuna grant us 
foodgrains. 


Indra rules over the entire world. Soma juice mixed 
with flour has been kept in three vessels for Indra. 
Indra and Vishnu will drink this soma juice, as they 
drank it earlier. 


263 


Surya brings welfare to a thousand persons. The 
intelligent worship Surya. Surya is like pure energy. 
He is clear and free from darkness. It is Surya who 
sends the radiant Usha. The moon fades away before 
Surya’s radiance. 


O Indra! Come close to us like Agni comes to the 
place of a sacrifice. Come to us the way a victorious 
king returns home. We call upon you the way a son 
calls upon his father for food, the way a battle 
beckons to a brave warrior. Soldiers call to Indra 
before battle. 


I have established Agni to the north of the 
sacrifidal pyre. I pray to the divine and powerful 
Agni. I pray to Indra and Vayu as well. Let my hymns 
and prayers be listened to. Let my words reach the 
ears of the gods. 


A sage named Marut calls to Vishnu and Indra 
through his prayers. Let the Maruts aiso come to grace 
his sociifice. 


The strained soma juice is green of hue. Its energy 
blazes like that of the sun. Many are the forms that 
soma juice adopts. 


I pray to the god Savita, loved by the world. His rays 
light up the region between the earth and heaven. Let 
the golden rays of Savita be everywhere. 

I pray to the god Agni, he is the one who makes a 
sacrifice a success. He is as respected as a learned 
priest. Let these offerings of clarified butter please 
Agni. 


264 


Indra is the driving force of the universe. His deeds 
are praised on earth as they are in heaven. His power 
destroyed that of the demons. Indra freed the waters. 
Let Indra’s power increase and let him accept our 
offerings. 


(This concludes the Aindra Kanda of the Sama Veda 
Samhita. 


We now move on to the Pavamana Kanda. The word 
pavamana means that which has been purified or 
strained. This indicates that this part is concerned 
with the straining of the soma juice. All the mantras of 
this part are addressed to Soma. 


There are one hundred and nineteen mantras in the 
Pavamana Kanda, divided into eleven sections 
(khanda). The mantras follow seven different metres. 
These are gayatri, vrihati, trishtupa, anushtupa, jagati, 
ushnika and kakupa.) 


Pavamana Kanda 


O Soma! Your juice is like food and was born in 
lofty heaven. Let happiness from heaven descend on 
earth. O Soma! Flow in tasty torrents so that Indra 
may be pleased. Flow into our pots. Your juice destroys 
evil sinners and brings happiness to the faithful. 


The mantras of the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda and the 
Sama Veda are being chanted. Cows full of milk have 
been got rea ly for milking. The flow of soma juice is 
green of hue. O Soma! Fill our pots with sweet juice so 
that Indra may be pleased. It is on mountains that the 
soma herb grows and the sacred juice is extracted from 


265 


these herbs. Let the juice flow to its appointed place 
the way a falcon comes home to roost. O juice which 
is green! Come into our vessels so that the Maruts and 
the other gods may be satiated. Strained soma juice is 
superior to everything. The soma herbs are crushed 
between planks and with stones. 


The sacred soma juice has been extracted. It has 
been poured into vessels for the sacrifice. Soma juice is 
mixed with water. The juice flows into water the way a 
buffalo gravitates towards the forest. Let the soma 
juice be sacred, let it make us famous among men. Let 
it destroy our enemies. O Soma! We call upon you. 
Increase our prowess. Increase our inspiration. You 
are strained while the leamed chant sacred hymns. 
Like a chariot driven by a charioteer, you flow into 
our vessels. 


Soma juice is extracted by those who crave for cows, 
horses and brave sons. O Soma! You dazzle our eyes. 
Flow into the vessels so that the straining may begin. 
Let the juice please Indra and Vayu. It is the sacred 
soma juice which created lightning from the divine 
energy of the fire. After extraction, the soma juice is 
Strained to the chanting of sweet hymns. The soma 
juice imparts wisdom. It mingles with the waves of the 
Sindhu (Indus) river. It is to the praiseworthy soma 
juice that hymns are chanted. See how the juice 
courses in our vessels. 


The gods come to drink the juice which has been 
extracted according to superior methods. The juice is 
mixed with water and milk. The sacred soma juice 
destroys enemies and increases one’s wisdom. The 


266 


hymns chanted by priests are like adornments for the 
soma juice. When the soma juice is poured into pots, it 
is offered to Indra. Like a horse harnessed to a chariot 
is released, the soma juice is extracted by crushing 
with wooden planks. It is then released into the vessels 
kept for straining. The juice makes our vessels full and 
attracts the gods. 


The powerful soma juice banishes sinners and its ° 
extraction marks the beginning of the sacrifice. It 
flows into pots the way cows go out to graze. The black 
sediments are removed when the soma juice is 
strained. Let soma juice banish from the sacrifice those 
who are not devoted to the gods. 


O Soma! You furnish the water that gives men life. 
You manifest the energy of the sun. Flow into our 
vessels after the straining. Increase the prowess of the 
demon-slayer Indra. Pots full of soma juice will please 
Indra. The soma juice energises our food and water. 
Let the strained soma juice be stored in our containers. 


Green is the soma juice. It is as radiant as the sun. It 
is like a beloved friend to us. Soma juice will grant us 
happiness and prosperity. It will protect us from our 
enemies. Many are the people who crave for soma 
juice. We too desife to possess it. Soma is the child of 
the mountains. It is crushed, strained and purified for 
Indra. Soma banishes evil thoughts and gives us 
happiness. 


O Soma! You increase our strength in a thousand 
ways. Give us wealth and food. Be plentiful in forests 
and at places where sacrifices are held. Let us hear the 
noise of the soma juice being strained. The soma juice 


267 


is strong and radiant. Let it increase our strength. 
Learned sages strain the soma juice. Let soma juice be 
Strained to please the gods. Let soma juice grant us 
protection. 


O Soma! Your greatness deserves respect. Soma juice 
mixed with water is famous and grants us food. It is 
strained into pots so that it rnay bring us prosperity. 
The sage Ayasya strained soma juice for worshipping 
the gods. Soma destroys one’s enemies, it also destroys 
those who do not give alms. Strained and purified, the 
soma juice glistens on the occasion of a sacrifice. 


Soma is the best offering that is possible. The priests 
crush soma herbs with stones and then mix the juice 
with water. The strained juice, green of hue, flows into 
containers the way a man enters a city. The 
containers for the soma juice are made out of wood. 
Before offering it to the gods, soma juice has to be 
mixed with the waters of the river Sindhu. This sweet 
juice brings happiness and bliss. The strainers for 
straining the juice are made of goat-hair. 


O Soma! I crave for your friendship. My enemies 
make me suffer, destroy them for my sake. You are the 
juice that is extracted with clean hands, you are the 
juice that ripples into containers. O pure juice! You 
grant me many golden riches. You increase our 
wisdom and bring us welfare. Make our sacrifice 
sacred with your pure juice. The juice has been 
purified for Indra, he will come here with the Maruts. 
It will please the gods who come to attend our 
sacrifice. Indra and the Maruts desire the pure soma 
juice. 


268 


O Soma! Come swiftly and flow into our vessels. Be 
purified by the priests of the sacrifice and grant us 
foodgrains. Soma juice is extracted on an auspicious 
day. Hymns are chanted to the juice by a priest who is 
as great as the sage Ushana. The energy that is in the 
juice brings purification. The priests who offer 
oblations sing Rig, Yajur and Sama hymns in praise of 
Soma. Just as a cow goes to a bull, true devotees go to 
the soma juice. The golden juice will be offered to the 
gods. Soma juice grants us intelligence. The juice is the 
creator of heaven, the earth, Agni, Surya, Indra and 
Vishnu. 


Let this praise of soma spread everywhere. Varuna 
is associated with the water. Like that, soma juice is 
associated with the granting of jewels to devotees. 
Soma juice nurtures cattle. It increases our strength. 
The sound of soma juice being strained into wooden 
vessels is sacred. It is soma juice which ensures a flow 
of milk in cows. Anyone who is performing a sacrifice 
chants hymns in praise of Soma. Countless are the 
riches that the soma juice grants.. Soma is always 
present at a sacrifice. Sweet soma juice is mixed with 
water, after being strained in strainers made of goat- 
hair. Indra is pleased with soma juice. 


Soma is the driving force behind armies, it can be 
found in front of chariots. Soldiers who drink soma 
juice are happy. Let sweet streams of soma juice flow. 
It is soma juice which makes Surya so radiant. Pray to 
Soma. We will worship the gods with soma juice and 
obtain riches. Let soma juice, the creator of 
Dyavaprithivi, flow towards Indra. Let soma juice 


269 


grant us riches with both hands. Let soma juice 
sharpen the blades of our weapons. Soma is the best 
offering that one can make at a sacrifice. It grants us 
cows. Let the green soma juice be stirred with our 
fingers. Soma flows into our vessels like a fleet-footed 
steed. 


The rays of the sun adorn soma ‘juice the way 
jewellery adorns a handsome horse. Let our fingers 
crush the soma herbs, let our hands mix soma juice 
with water. Let soma juice listen to our prayers and 
flow into our vessels, like a cowherd heading towards 
a barn. Soma juice is the lord of all power. It destroys 
demons and banishes sinners. Let the pure juice grant 
us power and honour. Soma juice reaches the learned 
Indra. Such are the wonderous deeds that soma juice 
performs. It reaches the gods. It created the energy of 
the sun. Soma juice is dear to everyone’s heart, the first 
hymns on the occasion of a sacrifice are sung to 
Soma. Soma juice flows into water for the mixing, like 
a horse marches into battle. Let the priests chant 
hymns in praise of soma juice. Let us worship the 
juice. 

Listen to me, all those who wish to perform a 
sacrifice. Let not dogs with long tongues get close to 
the vessels of soma juice. Soma juice is the nurturer; it 
is worthy of being drunk. Its radiance illuminates 
heaven and earth. The sweet soma juice is prepared 
for Indra; it is like a friend unto us; it guides us along 
the righteous path. It increases our concentration and 
frees us from sin. It is purified for our sake. 


270 


Countless are the numbers who praise soma juice. 
Countless are the numbers whom soma _ juice 
nourishes. O Soma! Grant us riches. Like a calf 
reaches for its mother, pure water reaches and mixes 
with soma juice. Soma juice defeats our enemies and is 
worthy of respect. The learned praise soma juice 
so that the juice may make our cows full with milk. 
Beautiful is the greenish-brown hue of soma juice. Let 
soma juice reach the gods. The sage Bhrigu banished © 
sacrifices that did not involve a giving of alms. Like 
that, banish dogs from the proximity of vessels of 
soma juice. 


Soma juice grants us prosperity. It thrives when it is 
mixed with water. The great god Soma climbs into 
Surya’s chariot to drcumambulate the earth. Let soma 
juice grace our sacrifice. Let our hymns reach the ears 
of the gods and let our enemies starve from shortage 
of food. The sound of the soma juice in these vessels is 
like the sound of Indra’s vajra. Soma juice is present at 
the sacrifice where cows dripping with milk and 
clarified butter have been brought. Let soma juice fill 
Indra’s belly. Let soma juice be mixed with a lot of 
water; let soma juice be strained through a strainer 
with six holes. 


Soma juice is praised by the priests, it increases the 
power of the gods. Powerful are the priests who have 
crushed soma herbs. It is soma juice which increases 
the glory of Surya and Usha. Twenty-one cows have 
been gathered so that their milk may be mixed with 
soma juice. The number of vessels into which soma 
juice is strained is four. (The twenty-one cows have 


271 


been interpreted to be the twelve months, the five 
seasons, the three lokas (regions) and Aditya taken 
together. The four vessels have been interpreted to 
mean the four directions.) 


O Soma! Keep ill-health away from us. Let sinners 
not be permitted to drink the sacred soma juice. Soma 
juice is as handsome as a king. The sight of soma juice 
in a pot is like the sight of a falcon. The priests mix 
soma juice with the milk of cows. The gods taste soma 
juice mixed with honey and clarified butter. Let gold 
be used to purify the juice. Soma is the lord of 
learning; he is everywhere in the universe. Let soma 
juice increase the drinker’s enthusiasm. 


Let soma juice go to Indra. Friends and priests, come 
and be seated. Let us sing sama hymns in praise of 
soma juice. Adorn the juice with this praise the way a 
child is adorned with ornaments. Soma juice is the son 
of the waters; it is like the life of a sacrifice. Soma juice 
exists in heaven and on earth. O Soma! Grant us 
horses, cows and riches. Let us receive the soma juice 
in the milk of cows. 


We praise the soma juice so that we may obtain 
milk and riches. Grant us sons, Let the all-knowing 
Soma please Indra. Soma is the lord of all foodgrains. 
Let the soma juice flow into pots of honey. Let it reach 
the gods. Let soma juice please the gods. 


O priests! Soma juice is as swift as a horse. Extract 
the soma juice, mix it with water, mix it with milk. It 
will bring you bliss. It will grant you milk, land and 
children. O Soma! You know the secrets of the births of 


272 


the gods. You confer immortality. Soma juice will be 
like an armour that protects us from our enemies. 


(This concludes the Pavamana Kanda of the Sama 
Veda Samhita. 


We now move on to the Aranya (or Aranyaka) Kanaa. 
As mentioned earlier, Vedic literature consists of four 
components - the Samhitas, the Brahmanas, the 
Aranyakas and the Upanishads. The Samhitas have 
mantras, the Brahmanas describe sacrifices and the 
Aranyakas and the Upanishads describe spiritual 
knowledge. The Aranyaka Kanda is so called because it 
encapsulates this spiritual knowledge. There are 
hymns addressed to several gods, but the essential 
message is one of syncretic monotheism. 


There are fifty-five mantras in the Aranya Kanda. 
These are divided into five sections (khanda). The 
mantras follow six different metres. These are vrihati, 
trishtupa, jagati, gayatn, anushtupa and mahapamkti.) 


Aranya Kanda 


O handsome Indra! You hoid the vajra in your 
hand. You grant us riches and increase our prowess. 
Grant us the foodgrains that nourish heaven and 
earth. Indra is the lord of animals and men. He is the 
lord of all objects on earth. He grants riches to those 
who give alms and to those who sing his praise. Great 
indeed is Indra’s generosity; it is famous in heaven 
and on earth. 


O great god! Free us from bondage. O Indra! After 
we hove prayed to you, we pray to Varuna, the son of 
Aditi. O Varuna! Protect us from sin and destruction. 


273 


O Pure Soma! With your aid we will triumph in 
battles. Let us observe the prescribed rites in righteous 
fashion. May Varuna, Aditi, Sindhu, the heaven and 
the earth grant us fame. O goddess! Grant us strength 
and make us successful. 


O Soma! You possess great riches. We have strained 
you for the sacrifice. Please Indra, Mitra and Varuna 
for us. With Soma’s help, we will obtain foodgrains. 
Before the gods were created, the god of foodgrains 
was born. (That is, this is not a specific god, but the 
personification of foodgrains as a god.) The god of 
foodgrains was born from the fire of the sacrifice. He 
will protect us. The god of foodgrains will devour 
greedy men. 


O Indra! The cows are of black, red and diverse 
other hues. Your deeds are so wonderful that you have 
provided them all with white milk. 


Surya is associated with Usha and Surya is the chief 
god. Surya is the one who blazes. The clouds are 
heavy with rain. They thunder. The subjects of earth 
are nourished with foodgrains The gods have created 
the universe so that we can marvei at their power. We 
are born from the wombs of our mothers, created by 
our fathers. That is how creation flourishes. 


Indra harnesses two steeds to his chariot. Indra 
wields the vajra. Indra is adorned with golden 
ornaments. Indra is valiant. He protects us in battles, 
great and small. 


The great sage Vashishtha has the names Pratha 
and Sapratha. To him -hymns are sung in the 


274 


anushtupa metre and oblations offered. The great sage 
Vashishtha pleased Dhata, Savita and Vishnu and 
obtained the name Rathantara. 


O Vayu! Come to us on your chariot known as 
Niyuta. This bright soma juice has been prepared for 
you. Come to our house. 


O Indra! You are the possessor of wonderous riches. 
You were created for the destruction of the demon 
Vritra. You made the earth great and established 
heaven above it. 


The supreme godhead (parameshvara) resides in the 
best of places. May the supreme godhead grant me 
energy, fame and the milk that is used for sacrifices. 


O Soma! You triumph over enemies. May there be a 
plentiful supply of milk with you. May there be 
foodgrains in your possession. May you attain 
immortality in heaven. O Soma! You have created the 
herbs, the water and the cows. You have spread the 
atmosphere above our heads. You have destroyed 
darkness. 


O Agni! You reside at the place of the sacrifice and 
make the sacrifice a success. I bow down before you. 
You wear jewellery and bring the gods to the sacrifice. 


The sages realised that the goddess Usha was 
deserving of praise. They composed twenty-one 
hymns in her honour. Pleased with these hymns, 
Usha made her radiance manifest. 


The second showers of the monsoon mingle with 
the water of the rivers. It is this water which is mixed 
with soma juice and reaches Agni. 


275 


The woman who is the night (ratri) has come to us. 
She is the one who makes us thrive. She makes us 
prosper. Her arrival signals the end of the brightness 
of the day. Ratri makes us thrive by setting the world 
at rest. 


I pray to the Agni who is omnipresent and 
powerful. Our hymns are sung to Agni on the 
occasion of a sacrifice. These beautiful hymns are like 
offerings of soma juice. May they reach the ears of the 
youthful Agni. Let all the gods listen to our hymns. Let 
the heaven, the earth and Agni listen to my hymns. O 
gods! I will not chant hymns that are not deserving of 
your ears. May you be pleased and m4y you grant me 
happiness. 


Let me attain the heaven and the earth. Let Indra 
and Brihaspati make me famous. Let me please the 
god Bhaga. May I attain fame. May I get to make 
speeches at assemblies (sabha). 


I will describe the valour of Indra, the wielder of the 
vajra. He killed the demon named Ahi who was a 
cloud. He splintered the clouds and made water flow 
from them. It is this water that flowed from rivers in 
mountains. 


I am Agni; sacred is my birth. I know all that there 
is to know. My eyes are the path to radiance, my 
mouth is the store of immortality. It is I who am the 
breath of life. It is I who am to be found in the 
atmosphere in the form of Vayu. It is I who am to be 
found in the energy of Surya. I am all the oblations 
that are offered at sacrifices. 


276 


Agni protects the earth, the atmosphere and 
heaven. On earth he is the protector as fire, in the 
atmosphere he is the protector as lightning, and in 
heaven he is the protector as the sun. The Maruts are 
nothing but Agni and lightning is also nothing but 
Agni. Agni is to be found at the place of a sacrifice. 
Through the sacrificial offerings, Agni protects the 
gods. 


O flaming Agni! Your blazing mouth and your fiery 
tongue devour the oblations. You are the lord of 
riches. Grant me wealth in the form of milk and 
foodgrains. Grant me energy. 


Spring (vasanta) is a beautiful season, summer 
(grishma) is also beautiful. In fact, the other seasons, 
monsoon (varsha), early autumn (sharad), late 
autumn (hemanta) and winter (shishira), are also 
beautiful. 


There is a being with a thousand heads, a thousand 
eyes and a thousand feet. He surrounds the earth from 
all directions, he surrounds the universe from all 

‘directions, and yet there is more of him that is left 
over. This being is divided into four parts. Three of 
these parts exist in lofty places and the fourth part is 
manifested on earth. This fourth part embraces the 
four directions on earth. All beings who have been 
born and all beings who will be born are 
manifestations of this being. Three parts of the being 
are imrnortal and exist in heaven, and the fourth part 
sustains all objects on earth. This being is the lord of 
immortality and of foodgrains. He is supreme; he is 
the one who created the earth. 


2/7 


O heaven and earth! These are the two regions 
(lokas) that grant us foodgrains. Grant us unlimited 
riches and make us prosper. Free us from all sin. 


O Indra! Your moustache has become green as a 
result of drinking the green soma juice. Your steeds 
number two and are yellow of hue. You nourish all 
the excellent cows and you are truly learned. We pray 
to you. 


I merge into the energy that is to be found in gold, 
into the energy that is to be found in cows, and into 
the energy that is to be found in true knowledge. 


O Indra! You rule over myriad riches. Grant us 
power and strength. It is within your powers to grant 
us these. Make our sacrifice a success. Let us triumph 
over our enemies in battle. 


O cows! You live with bullocks and calves, you are 
overflowing with milk. Many are the forms that you 
can take. Come to us. May this earth make you 
prosper. Let the waters flow so as to quench your 
thirst. 


O Agni! Grant us a long life. Grant us strength and 
foodgrains. May the demons maintain their distance 
from us. 


O radiant Surya! Drink your fill of the soma juice. It 
is Surya who combines with Vayu to protect all the 
subjects on earth. It is Surya who makes the 
foodgrains grow. O Surya! Let those who perform 
sacrifices thrive. Let them have long lives and let them 
be righteous. The zising sun has in him the energy of 


278 


all the gods. The eyes of Mitra, Varuna and Agni are 
to be found in Surya. As soon as the sun rises, the 
heaven, the atmosphere, and the earth are flooded 
with light. Surya is like the soul of the universe. 


As soon as Surya rises, he first touches the earth. 
The earth is like his mother. Later, Surya ascends to 
heaven and the heaven is like Surya’s father. The 
sun’s rays spread throughout the sky. Until the time of ' 
sunset, Surya’s rays light up heaven. 


Every day is divided into thirty muhurtas (unit of 
time). It is because Surya lights up the universe with 
his rays that he is to be worshipped. As soon as the 
sun rises, the stars and the night which comes with 
them, disappear. The sun’s rays are like the flames of 
a fire that has been lit. O Surya! You will bring all of 
us deliverance. You are the lord of this earth, since 
you are the one who lights it up. 


O Surya! You are the purifier. You are the one who 
nurtures all living beings. We bow down before your 
radiance. You are the one who traverses the 
atmosphere and heaven. Seven pure horses are 
harnessed to Surya’s chariot. These seven rays purify 
us. 


O supreme god! You are omniscient, you know the 
righteous path. Guide us along proper paths, grant us 
wisdom. You are the originator of the primeval 
energy, you are the lord of prosperity. You are the one 
who gives us our senses. 


O Indra! Make this earth overflow with energy and 
foodgrains. You are strong, you are the wielder of the 


272 


vajra. Grant us wealth, strength and foodgrains. Come 
to us and drink this soma juice. Make your devotees 
strong and show us the way to attain prosperity. You 
are learned and radiant, you are the lord of all 
wealth. Guide us along the path to true knowledge. 
Those who pray to you attain the supreme knowledge. 
We pray to you for protection against our foes. You 
are the protector of the righteous. Manifest yourself 
amongst us so that we may attain bliss. 


O Indra! You are the destroyer of the demon Vritra. 
The best of men pray to you. 


O Agni! O Pusha! O other gods! We pray to all of 
you for sustenance. 


(This concludes the Avanya Kanda of the Sama Veda 
Samhita and also concludes the Purvarchika section. 


We now move on to the Uttararchika section. 


There are twenty-one chapters (adhyaya) in 
Uttararchika. A chapter is sometimes divided into 
khandas_ (sections). There are one thousand two 
hundred and twenty-five mantras in Uttararchika. The 
gods to whom these mantras are addressed include 
Soma, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Indra, Usha, the 
Ashvinis, the Maruts, the Vishvadevas, Surya, 
Sarasvati, Savita, Brahmanaspati, Vishvakarma, 
Pusha, Dyavaprithivi, Vishnu, Vayu, Brihaspati and 
the Adityas in general. Amongst the metres which are 
used are gayatri, vrihati, trishtupa, kakupa, ushnika, 
anushtupa and jagati. These constitute the seven basic 
metres, although variations and combinations are 


also used.) 


280 


UTTARARCHIKA 


Listen to me, all those who wish to perform a 
sacrifice. If you wish to offer oblations to the gods, first 
pray to the pure soma juice. The sages who were 
learned in the Atharva Veda mixed soma juice with 
sweet milk for Indra. 


O Soma, bringer of energy! Make our cattle and our 
descendants prosper. Make our horses and herbs 
prosper. May you be purified through the process of 
straining. The soma juice gives us strength; it is 
praised through the chanting of hymns. It is mixed 
with the milk of cows. 


O Soma! You know all that there is to be known. 
Your glory rivals that of Surya. You are strained for 
the welfare of all mankind. You are the storehouse of 
all wisdom. Like a horse dashing out of a stable, your 
flow gushes into the pots used for straining. We strain 
the sweet soma juice into pots with strainers made of 
goat-hair. Water is mixed with the sacred juice. 


O Agni! We are praying to you. Listen to our 
prayers and devour these offerings. Carry these 
offerings to the gods. Come to our sacrifice, be seated 
on the throne we have reserved for you and summon 
the gods to the sacrifice. O Agni! You are handsome. 
You are youthful. We light you with kindlings and 
clarified butter. Burn gloriously. May your fame 
spread. 


O Mitra and Varuna! May our cows be full of 
Clarified butter. May we have a plentiful supply of 
sweet foodgrains. You are the ones who are pure of 


281 


heart. You are the ones who accept oblations and are 
pleased with hymns. Great is your strength and glory. 
O Mitra and Varuna! It is to you that the sage 
Jamadagni prayed. Come and be seated at our 
sacrifice. Make the sacrifice a success. Drink the soma 
juice we have offered. 


O Indra! Come hither. The soma juice has been 
prépared for you. Drink it and be seated. As we chant 
these hymns, may your two steeds bring you here. 
Listen to the hymns we are singing for your benefit. It 
is for you that the priests have extracted the soma 
juice; it is for you that the mantras are being chanted. 


O Indra and Agni! The soma herb grows in the 
loftiests of mountain peaks. It has been gathered for 
you. Come and drink the soma juice. You are the ones 
who help those who perform sacrifices. Drink the 
soma juice that provides nourishment and increases 
one’s enthusiasm. I acknowledge the supreme gods, 
Indra and Agni. Let them grant me the fruits of this 
sacrifice. Let them be satiated with the soma juice | 
have offered. 


O Soma! You are like food. You were born in lofty 
heaven. You increase our valour, you grant us 
happiness, you are to be found on earth in the form of 
foodgrains. You are the one who grants us prosperity. 
We have strained you for the sake of Indra, Varuna 
and the Maruts. O Soma! We pray to you so that we 
may obtain the riches that mankind is entitled to. Let 
the soma juice be strained and mixed with water. Letit 
sparkle in our vessels. Let soma juice flow at our 


sacrifice. 


282 


Soma juice is sweet and loved by the gods. It has 
been extracted on the occasion of the sacrifice, the 
officiating priests have strained the juice. Wonderful 
is the sacrifice at which soma juice is offered. O Soma! 
Flow swiftly into our pots; may we strain you and offer 
you as an oblation. You are our protector and you are 
the one who banishes our enemies. You are the one 
who gives heaven and earth form and creates the 
gods. You are the fount of all wisdom. It is to you that ’ 
the learned sage Ushana prayed. 


O Indra! Come to us the way a mother cow goes to 
her calf. You are the lord of all that is mobile and all 
that is immobile in the universe. We pray to Indra, the 
lord of prosperity. There is no one who can equal you, 
on heaven or on earth. Nor will there ever be an entity 
that can rival you. You are the one who grants us 
horses, you are the one who grants us cattle, you are 
the one who grants us wealth. Be like a true friend 
unto us. O Indra! Grant us strength and be our 
protector. Make us tread along the righteous path and 
grant us happiness. We revere the soma juice because 
it gives you pleasure. 


O Indra! You protect your devotees. That is the 
reason we are praying to you. We chant*hymns in 
your honour. We pray to the. Indra who resides in 
heaven so that our desires may be satisfied. May we 
obtain food, wealth, cows and gifts. Listen to me, all of 
you who are desirous of performing a sacrifice. Sing 
sama hymns composed in the vrihati metre for Indra. 
Let him come to our aid. Indra does not have an equal 
in battle, be it among the gods or among the demons. 


283 


O Soma! We have purified and Strained you so that 
you may please Indra. The strained soma juice has 
flowed into vessels made of gold. The soma juice will 
grant us riches; it will destroy our powerful enemies. O 
Soma! Great is your energy anc your sweetness. Let 
Indra drink the soma juice and become stronger still. 
Look at the sparkling soma juice flow. Look at its green 
hue. May it slake Indra’s thirst. 


The soma juice should be drunk at the time of 
battle. It is after drinking the soma juice that Indra 
grasps his bow and wields his vajra. O friends! Your 
victory is certain now that the soma juice has started 
to flow. It is the soma juice which makes sacrifices 
successful. But let not long-tongued dogs get close to 
the vessels of soma. Soma juice purifies the water with 
which it is mixed; soma juice rides on Surya’s chariot. 
Soma is omniscient; it makes the heaven manifest. 
Hear the ripple of the soma juice flow as the officiating 
priests chant their hymns. 


Listen to me, those of you who wish to perform a 
Sacrifice. Pray to the radiant Agni on the occasion of 
every sacrifice. Agni is learned and immortal. Let us 
welcome him like a dear friend. We pray to Agni so 
that our powers may increase, we pray to Agni so that 
Our welfare may be ensured. Agni protects us in the 
course of battle and Agni carries our oblations to the 
gods. Let Agni increase our wisdom. Let Agni make 
our physical bodies thrive. 


O Agni! Come hither. Listen to the beautiful hymns 
we are chanting for your sake. You will grant us 
strength, you will grant us dwelling-houses. O Agni! 


284 


Your radiance will not harm our eyes, you are the lord 
of all mankind. Accept our offerings. 


O Indra! You are the wielder of the wonderful vajra. 
We are offering you soma juice as we crave for your 
protection. Come to us, you who are the conqueror of 
all your enemies. You are youthful and valiant. 
Everyone knows that we wish you to be our friend. You 
are indeed deserving of praise. Like the rivers flowinto ‘ 
the ocean and make it great, may our hymns increase 
your greatness. Let our hymns be like steeds for 
Indra’s chariot. 


Indra is the drinker of the sora juice, Indra is the 
conqueror of all his enemies, Indra is the performer of 
countless wonderful deeds. Sing Indra’s praise. Many 
are those who call upon Indra to obtain his 
benediction. Indra’s fame has been known from time 
immemorial. The great Indra will come to us and 
grant us riches and foodgrains. O friends! Sing hymns 
so that Indra, the keeper of steeds, may be pleased. O 
Indra! Grant us cows and grant us gold. Those who 
are descended from the sage Kanva are asking for 
your blessings. 


The gods love those who offer soma juice at 
sacrifices. The gods are not fond of the lazy. They are 
pleased at the effort of soma juice being extracted for 
them. Let our suma juice please Indra’s heart. Let our 
hymns please Indra’s ears. We praise Indra, in whom 
can be found all the beauties of the universe. The 
sacrifice will go on for three days. And the gods wil! 
grace the sacrifice by their presence. 


285 


O Indra! Come and drink the soma juice that has 
been reserved for you. May it please you and may 
your myriad rays bless your worshippers. This sacrifice 
is called kundapayya. (At a kundapayya sacrifice, soma 
was drunk from large vessels.) Do not restrict your 
rays, but let them brighten up the sacrifice. O Indra! 
Long indeed are your arms. Bring a lot of riches for us 
in your right hand. We are cognisant of your power, 
grant us protection, O valiant one! There is no one 
among gods or men who can vanquish you. There is 
no one who can match up to the strength of your 
bulls. 


O Indra! Let the soma juice pleaseand satiate you. 
Let not those who scom you, flourish. Aid not those 
who have hatred in their hearts. The officiating priests 
have mixed the soma juice with milk. Like a thirsty 
deer hastening to a pond, come here and slake your 
thirst. The soma juice is like food for you. Come and 
satisfy your hunger. The soma herbs have been 
crushed with stones. The juice has been strained in 
strainers made of goat-hair. The priests have purified 
the juice. They have mixed it with sweetened milk. 
Come and drink the soma juice. Let it be like cakes 
(purodasha) for you. 


Let the soma juice course through Indra’s armpits, 
let it flow through his head, let it fill the pores of his 
body. O friends! Sing sama hymns in Indra’s praise. 
Indra will guide us in our righteous deeds. He will 
grant us wealth, foodgrains and wisdom. Indra is the 
powerful one. He is to be worshipped before 
embarking on any task or before setting out to do 


286 


battle. If Indra listens to our prayers, he will bring us 
protection. O Indra! It is you who bless our soma juice. 
It is you who bless our hymns. Magnificent is your 
greatness. We call upon the Indra who manifests 
himself in the dwelling-nouses of the gods in the sky. 
We call upon the Indra who delivers us’ from 
unhappiness. We. call upon the Indra who conquers 
demons. Let Indra be like a friend unto us and let him 
grace our sacrifice. 


O Agni! You are immortal. It is to you that we are 
praying through these hymns. You give us our 
strength and our senses. You make our sacrifices 
successful. It is you who are our messenger to the gods. 
Agni is radiant. The steeds that are hamessed to his 
chariot devour everything. Let Agni’s flames blaze 
with our sacrificial offerings. The leamed Agni will 
bring the gods to our sacrifice. 


Usha is heaven’s daughter. See how she appears 
and destroys the darkness. Close on Usha’s heels 
comes Surya with his myriad rays. O Usha! After you 


and Surya appear, let us have a plentiful supply of 
foodgrains. 


O Ashvinis! Your subjects are praying to you. Come 
to their aid. Use your powers to protect those who are 
praying to you. You give us inspiration, you provide 
us with an abundant supply of foodgrains. Drive your 
chariot to our sacrifice and stop here. Drink the soma 
juice we have offered to you. 


The soma juice is prepared by the leamed. It fulfils 
all one’s desires. It increases our wisdom. Soma juice 


287 


flows in heaven in seven distinct flows; it is strained 
into pots filled with water. The sacred soma juice fills 
the earth with the radiance of the sun. Green is its hue 
and it has been extracted for the sake of the gods. The 
brahmanoas have prepared the soma juice to the 
chanting of sacred hymns. First the soma juice has to 
be extracted, next it has to be strained. O Soma! 
Frighten away our enemies and grant us riches. Let 
the extracted soma juice be mixed with water. Let it be 
mixed with the milk of cows. The gods will come to 
drink the soma juice. Sing hymns in praise of soma 
juice. 


Soma juice mixed with water increases our wisdom. 
The soma juice enables us to attain gods like Indra, 
Vayu, the Maruts and Vishnu. Mix the soma juice with 
water, mix it with milk. Keep the sweetened soma 
juice in vessels for the gods. The clear soma juice is like 
a beloved son to us. Let it be mixed with water. The 
soma juice will increase our happiness. It will increase 
our wisdom. The sage Trita crushed soma herbs with 
his own hands so that offerings could be made to 
Indra. May soma juice grant us brave sons. It is like 
food for us. Let not harsh words be used about the 
soma juice. Let dogs be kept away from the soma juice. 
Let us follow the sage Bhrigu, who did not permit dogs 
to come near his sacrifices. 


O Soma! You are the prime god. Listen to our 
hymns and use your strength to protect us. You are 
omniscient. May our praise enable you to attain the 
waters of the atmosphere. O Soma! It is because of 
your greatness that the earth stands still. It is because 


288 


of your greatness that cows provide milk. The soma 
juice has been extracted and strained. It increases our 
energy and fame. It destroys our enemies. O Soma! 
We desire that you may be our friend. With you by 
our side, we will vanquish all our enemies. 


O Soma! You use your terrible and sharp weapons 
to destroy your enemies. Protect us from the 
depredations of our enemies. O Soma! You are brave 
and powerful. You fulfil all our desires. You increase 
our strength and nurture righteousness. O god! Great 
is your influence. Your juice multiplies our strength. O 
Soma! You grant us cows and horses and riches. We 
call upon the pure soma juice to increase our energies. 


O Soma! You have been purified by the officiating 
priests. You have been mixed with water and placed 
in pots. Many are your weapons. You grant us valour 
and happiness. Be present at our sacrifice. We desire 
that the strained soma juice may befriend us. Let the 
ripples of the soma juice banish our miseries. O Soma! 
You are the lord of all that there is. Grant us food, 
riches, sons and grandsons. 


We pray to Agni. He is the one who summons the 
gods to the sacrifice. He is the one who is the possessor 
of all wealth. He is the one who will make the sacrifice 
a success. He is the one who will carry our oblations to 
the gods. Agni is the protector of all his subjects. We 
pray to Agni through our hymns. O Agni! You are 
obtained by rubbing two sticks (arani) together. Help 
us by summoning the gods to our sacrifice. 


We call upon Mitra and Varuna. They are sacred 
and strong. Let them come to our sacrifice. Mitra and 


289 


Varuna are the preservers of all that is true. They are 
the fount of all energy. May Mitra and Varuna protect 
us and grant us riches. 


Indra has been praised through sama hymns 
composed in the vrihati metre. We have spoken of his 
glory through our mantras and hymns. Indra is the 
wielder of the vajra. Golden are his omaments. 
Wonderful steeds are harnessed to his chariot. O 
Indra! You are valiant and the provider of countless 
riches. Protect us in battle. It is Indra who has placed 
the sun in heaven. It is Indra who sends the clouds. 
We crave protection and riches from Indra and Agni. 
All amongst us who are learned, pray to the two great 
gods. “ 


O Soma! You grant us prowess. May you please 
Indra, the companion of the Maruts. O Soma! You are 
the bearer of Dyavaprithivi. You are the one who 
monifests to us the great soul. Let me strain your 
green juice with my fingers. May you go into battle. 
May you send Indra into battle. Your noise is like the 
sound made by a red-hued bull. You attain heaven 
and earth. Your roar can be heard above all the other 
sounds of battle. Listen to our hymns and reveal 
yourself to us. The sweetened soma juice becomes even 
more sweet when it is mixed with the milk of cows. 
The juice is mixed with water and strained so that it 
may please Indra. Inspire us, O Soma! Inspire the 
clouds that were released after the demon Vritra was 
killed. Flow in all the four directions that surround us. 


O Indra! We call upon you to provide us with 
foodgrains. We call upon you to protect the best 


290 


amongst men. We call upon you when our enemies 
are created. Come to the aid of our horses in battle. 
You wield the vajra, you dwell in the mountains, you 
are the one who is truly valiant. Your greatness knows 
no bounds es you vanquish your enemies. A 
victorious warrior obtains horses and other objects. 
Like that, after we have prayed to you, grant us cows, 
horses and chariots. 


Indra is the possessor of many riches. He grants ° 
wealth to those who pray to him. Worship Indra. 
Indra kills the enemies of those who give alms. Gifts 
please Indra like the waters of the mountains please a 
thirsty person. O wielder of the vajra! The officiating 
priests offer you soma juice from the first day of the 
sacrifice. Listen to the hymns that are being sung to 
you. Come and be present at the sacrifice. You wear a 
handsome helmet, you rule over steeds, and you 
alone are deserving of worship. Be satiated with the 
soma juice. After the offerings of soma juice, 
foodgrains are also offered to you. 


O Soma! Your strained juice is fit to be served to the 
gods. It grants supreme bliss and destroys evil 
demons. It is you who accompany us in battle. It is 
you who grant us horses and cows. The soma juice 
glistens after it is mixed with the milk of cows. Soma 
juice is the nourisher of all living beings. Its radiance 
dazzles in heaven and on earth. May we have a 
plentiful supply of the pure soma juice. May it increase 
our strength and intelligence. Soma juice increases the 
energy of Usha, of the day and of heaven. Soma juice 
is like the life force of rivers. It is praised by the leamed 
and enters straight into Indra’s heart. 


291 


O Soma! You are learned. You have been strained 
by the officiating priests and poured into pots. The 
sweetened soma juice increases Indra’s fame 
throughout the three worlds. Let the soma juice mingle 
with the air in the pots. May it make Indra our friend. 
Soma juice makes Usha manifest for the welfare of 
mankind. Soma juice makes the rivers flow. Twenty- 
one cows have been milked so that their milk may be 
mixed with the soma juice in the prescribed fashion. 


O Indra! You are unmoved in battle and protect the 
valiant. Grant us riches since you are the lord of all 
wealth. You are the one who transports our oblations 
to the gods. Do not be as lazy as an idle brahmana. But 
drink the soma juice which has been mixed with milk 
and then give us foodgrains and strength. You are the 
protector of the righteous. All hymns sing of the glory 
of Indra. All hymns describe his fame, which is as 
great as the expanse of the ocean. O Indra! Your 
friendship will bring us courage. From time 
immemorial Indra has been worshipped by men. 


The soma juice is strained for obtaining wealth. It 
grants us:strength and destroys sins. It gives us sons, 
grandsons, cows and horses. It increases our wealth 
and makes our cows thrive. It is for these reasons that 
the soma juice is praised. When men perform a 
sacrifice, the hymns that are sung bring down the 
pure soma juice from the atmosphere and make it flow 
into pots. Soma juice is strained so that it may be 
offered to the gods. 


O Soma! Grant us a hundred cows, beautiful horses 
and good fortune. Many are the riches you possess in 


292 


heaven. We wish for your presence at this august 
sacrifice. We desire the gift of riches from one who has 
destroyed powerful enemies and from one who has 
performed many wonderful deeds. May Soma give us 
happiness and wealth. 


Soma herbs were brought down to earth from 
heaven by the great bird Garuda. Let learned priests 
crush the herbs and strain the juice. May the juice be 
mixed with the milk of cows. Green is the colour of the - 
soma juice. May the juice be purified and offered to 
the gods. May it satisfy Indra. 


Agni has a mouth named Juhu. The youthful Agni 
protects the place where the sacifice is held. Agni 
carries our oblations to the gods. O Agni! Please be our 
messenger and carry our words to the gods. Protect the 
offidating priests. You are the one who purifies and 
we are worshipping you. 


I call upon the two great gods Mitra and Varuna. 
May they destroy our enemies with hatred in their 
hearts. Mitra and Varuna make righteous sacrifices 
flourish. May they bless this sacrifice with the light of 
truth. Mitra and Varuna will bring success to our 
endeavours; they will grant us strength. They are the 
ones who live in several places; they are the ones who 
perform wonderous deeds. 


O powerful Maruts! You are the handsome 
companions of the indomitable Indra. The Maruts are 
worthy of worship. 


I call upon Indra and Agni for aid. Those who pray 
to them never come to grief. Agni and Indra destroy 


295 


all enemies, no matter how powerful. They banish 
those with hatred in their hearts. They protect the 
righteous. 


Priests who are clever happily strain the soma juice. 
Purified soma juice is mixed with water in pots. The 
soma juice is extracted for the sake of Mitra and 
Varuna. It is‘strained and mixed with water for the 
sake of Indra. Soma juice is prepared to the chanting 
of hymns from the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda and the 
Sama Veda. Cows that yield milk desire that soma juice 
may be mixed with their milk. The learned wish to 
describe the properties of soma juice. Soma is praised 
through hymns composed in the trishtupa metre. O 
Soma! You will bring us welfare. 


O Indra! You are the wielder of the vajra. There is no 
one who is your equal in heaven or on earth. You 
would be unrivalled even if there were to bea hundred 
heavens, a hundred earths and a thousand suns. 
Indra fulfils everyone through his power. Indra is 
strong; he is always victorious. O Indra! Protect us and 
protect the cows in our cowsheds. We have prepared 
soma juice for you; you will kill our enemies. The 
officiating priests chant your praise. When will Indra 
come to our sacrifice? 


When the sage Kanva prayed to Indra, Indra 
granted him strength and many riches. The learned 
Indra will also grant us riches. He will remedy the 
miseries of all those who are performing this sacrifice. 
O Indra! We pray to you for riches. 


Hymns are being chanted from the Rig Veda, the 
Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda. The officiating priests 


294 


have assembled the cows that will yield milk. Green 
soma juice has been strained into pots. Soma is like the 
son of heaven. Hymns from the Vedas are being 
chanted on the occasion of the sacrifice. 


O Soma! Bring a wealth of riches to us from all the 
four directions. Please make sure that our wishes are 
granted. Sweet is the soma juice when it is strained 
into pots for Indra. This drink which brings bliss will’ 
be offered to the gods. Soma is used on the occasion of 
a sacrifice as Soma is the one who will protect and 
preserve all our hymns. Soma is Indra’s friend. Let 
soma juice be strained into pots in a thousand flows. 
Soma is the lord of all hymns. Let pure soma juice 
course through the veins of all those who drink it. 


At the stroke of dawn, the sun makes himself 
manifest. His rays make rain sprinkle in all the 
worlds. It is his rays that nourish foodgrains. The gods 
use the rays of the sun to create the universe. The sun 
uses the energy of the soma juice to make the herbs 
(oshadhi) thrive. 


Listen to me, those who wish to perform a sacrifice. 
Chant Agni’s praise. The radiant Agni will bring us 
fame through our sons. Let Agni be close to us in our 
food. 


O Indra! We praise the soma juice. It is that which 
satiates you, it is that which makes you invincible in 
battle. It is that which makes your steeds beauteous 
and it is that which enabies you to work towards the 
welfare of the universe. O Indra! Please come and 
attend our sacrifice. Please inspire us the way the sun 


295 


inspires all the elements of this world. O Indra! Your 
devotees worship you today as they have done from 
time immemorial. You are indeed great. Grant us 
sons, cows and riches. Give us the intelligence that 
makes the mird pure. We have composed new hymns 
for you, even though the rites of the sacrifice may be 
old. We pray to the Indra who is exalted through these 
hymns. Our devotion describes his glory. 


O Soma! The milk of cows is divine. It has been used 
to fill the pots. Learned sages have extracted and 
strained the soma juice. Let it be mixed with the milk. 
Green is the hue of the purified soma juice as it flows 
into the pots. Soma sees everything, his rays reach the 
remotest corners of the universe. O Soma! Your 
qualities will make righteousness flourish. You are the 
lord of the universe. 


Pure soma juice makes Agni blaze as lightning. The 
energy of soma juice increases our enthusiasm and 
makes the demons cower. The demons do not get to 
drink soma juice. Soma juice is strained through 
strainers made of goat-hair. I praise the soma juice 
that is strained into pots, the residual black sediment 
does not get to enter the pots. We will vanquish evil 
enemies with the aid of the soma juice. Soma juice 
brings us happiness. The sound of soma juice being 
strained is like the sound of rain. The rays of soma 
juice light up the sky. O Soma! Grant us foodgrains, 
cows, gold, horses, sons and grandsons. Let soma juice 
be purified. Let it fill up heaven and earth like the rays 
of the sun. Just as the water surrounds the earth, let 
soma juice surround all our four directions. 


296 


O Soma! Please be present at the sacrifices that are 
frequented by the gods. Descend to us from heaven 
and purify places that have not been sanctified. It is 
the soma juice that is found in heaven which is 
strained here on earth. It is that which is mixed with 
water. The strained soma juice is like the life force of 
all objects that exist. Let the sweetened and purified 
soma juice be offered to Indra. The green soma herbs 
are crushed with stones. After that, we assemble to 
sing of the glory of soma juice. The husbands who are 
the best extract the soma juice. Sibling sisters extriact 
the soma juice together. Soma juice is everywhere It 
shines with energy. Soma juice is offered to the gads, 
but let it grant us riches. O Soma! You come to us like 
the blessings of the gods. You shower us with rain so 
that foodgrains may grow 


Agni preserves us, Agni encourages the 
performance of righteous deeds. Agni manifests 
himself so that the welfare of living beings might be 
achieved. The flames of the fire-god rise up as 
offerings of clarified butter are made. They reach as 
high as heaven. Agni is the purifier. Agni is present so 
that the sacrifice may be a success. 


O Agni! You were attained by the sage Angirasa 
You are created through the rubbing together of two 
sticks. O Agni! You are known as the offspring of 
prowess. The officiating priests first erect the flags on 
the occasion of the sacrifice. They then light a fire in 
three places. It is Agni who will carry our oblations to 


the gods. Agni has to be apportioned a seat for tine 
sacrifice 


297 


O Mitra and Varuna! You ensure the success of the 
sacrifice. We have extracted and strained the soma 
juice for you. Listen to our prayers. You are full of 
energy and are free of all hatred. You are constant 
and supreme. The pavilion erected for the sacrifice 
has a thousand pillars. Come and be seated here. 
Offerings of clarified butter are made to Mitra and 
Varuna. They are the lords of all wealth; they are the 
sons of Aditi. Mitra and Varuna aid devotees who are 
pure of heart. 


Indra has no enemies. The vajra was created from 
the bones of the sage Dadhichi. Indra used the vajra to 
kill the demon Vritra. The head of the horse was in the 
mountains, next to the lake Sharyanavati. Indra was 
desirous of obtaining the horse’s head and did 
manage to get it. He killed the demons with its aid. 
(This allusion to the head of a horse makes no sense 
unless one knows the related story. Indra imparted to 
the sage Dadhichi some specialised knowledge and 
told the sage that if this knowledge was dinulged to 
others, Dadhichi’s head would fall off. Dadhichi 
taught this knowledge to the two Ashivinis, and 
immediately his head fell off. The two Ashvinis stuck 
a horse’s head to the sage’s torso and revived 
Dadhichi. Hearing of this, Indra beheaded the sage. 
The horse’s head was severed. Subsequently, the 
Ashvinis stuck Dadhichi’s old head back onto his 
torso.) 


During the night, the rays of the sun are to be 
found in the light of the moon. So it has been said. 


298 


O Indra and Agni! Like rain flowing out from 
clouds, hymns in your praise flow out from the 
mouths of the learned. Listen to the hymns and bring 
success to those who pray to you. You are our leaders; 
deliver us from temptation. Make us free of hatred 
and calumny. 


Green is the soma juice which inspires everyone. It 
is extracted for Vayu, the Maruts and the other gods. - 
Purified soma juice always finds a place with the gods. 
When soma juice is strained into pots, it attains the 
god Vayu. We crave the friendship of Soma, day after 
day. Let soma juice destroy the demons who oppress 
me. 


Brown is the colour of the soma juice. Let its energy 
be by my side, night and day. Let sacred soma juics be 
praised by the officiating priests. Golden is the colour 
of soma juice when it is strained into pots. The 
powerful Indra will drink the soma juice. O Soma! 
Quickly bring us immense riches from the four 
directions. 


O Indra! Drink the soma juice. May it satisfy you. 
You are the possessor of many steeds; may the soma 
juice that we have extracted please you as much as 
your steeds do. O Indra! Your horse is named Hari. 
You partook of the soma juice and killed the demon 
Vritra. You are the lord of all riches. Hearken to the 
prayers of the sage Vashishtha. Let us all combine to 
sing the praise of the invincible Indra. Wonderful are 
the deeds that Indra performed. He killed all his 
powerful enemies. 


299 


The first god that the officiating priests see is Indra. 
It is to Indra that the first hymns are addressed. Let the 
hymns be such that they reach Indra’s ears. The 
priests summon Indra to drink the soma juice. Indra is 
the ruler of heaven, he will offer protection to his 
devotees. Indra is the king of men, he is the one who 
rides in a chariot. Indra triumphs over all his enemies. 
Pray to Indra so that he may protect you. He holds the 
vajra in his hand, the flaming vajra which rivals the 
radiant sun. 


Soma juice originated in heaven, but it is obtained 
on earth by crushing soma herbs. Learned are those 
who know how to accomplish this task. Soma makes 
the sacrifice a success; he is the son of heaven. O 
Soma! May those who pray to you with purity in their 
hearts attain you. Soma is divine, may soma juice fast 
attain immortality. 


The sage Dadhyanda possessed many new Cows. 
He used soma juice to make his sacrifice a success. 
Brahmanas who performed sacrifices with the aid of 
soma juice, obtained cows. Soma juice brings bliss to 
the gods on the occasion of a sacrifice. Soma juice is 
strained with strainers made of the hair of sheep. 
(Earlier, it has always been goat-hair.) With the 
chanting of hymns, pure soma juice flows into the 
pots. Hear the sound of the soma juice being strained. 
Mix the pure juice with water. Soma is the originator 
of all hymns. He made the heaven manifest. He is the 
father of the world. Soma is also the creator of Agni, 
Surya, Indra and Vishnu. 


300 


Brahma is supreme among gods. (This is not the 
god Brahma, regarded as the creator in the epics and 
the Puranas. In this context, the word brahma 
probably signifies a title conferred on a poet.) One 
who is facile with words is supreme among poets. A 
sage (rishi) is supreme among brahmanas. A buffalo is 
supreme among animals and a falcon is supreme 
among birds. But purified soma juice is superior to 
them all. The sound of soma juice being strained is like 
the sound of rivers. Soma juice pleases the heart. May 
it be mixed with the milk of cows. 


O officiating priests! Pray to the powerful Agni. 
Agni will bring fame to all.our deeds. Agni brings 
prosperity to all the gods. Let Agni bring us 
foodgrains. 


O Indra! Come and drink the soma juice. It will 
gladden your heart. Indra hamesses wonderful steeds 
to his chariot, he is unrivalled in battle. There is no 
one who possesses horses as handsome as the ones 
that Indra has. O officiating priests! You must pray to 
Indra, you must recite hymns to him. Offer him 
purified soma juice. O Indra! Come and accept our 
oblations. May these please you; may the sweet soma 
juice please you. May you obtain the happiness that 
can only be obtained in heaven. 


O Soma! You are the one who possesses cows, 
riches, gold and valour. You are our leader, valiant 
and learned. The priests are chanting hymns in your 
praise. Pure soma juice brings men strength. Soma 
juice will bring us long lives, gold and wealth. O 
Soma! You hamess your green steeds to your chariot 


301 


and traverse the universe. Your sweet juice is strained 
and mixed with water. Those who perform a sacrifice 
wish to obtain your friendship. 


O Soma! You are omniscient. Your flow is like the 
rays of the sun. You bring us wisdom and wealth. Your 
trail can be seen in the atmosphere. Milk is mixed 
with the purified soma juice. May Indra drink the 
soma juice and be inspired. Soma juice be praised. 


Soma juice needs to be offered to the gods. It must 
be strained in strainers made of sheep-hair. Soma juice 
destroys our enemies, it kills all sinners. Soma juice 
will bring us cows and foodgrains. Soma juice will 
increase our intelligence. It will-bring us fame. Soma 
juice is as wonderful as a king with a pure heart. O 
Soma! Hearken to our prayers. Grant your devotees 
success in the sacrifice and valour. Come and be 
seated on the occasion of the sacrifice. Give us cows, 
horses and foodgrains. May your countless enemies be 
vanquished. May you offer us protection. The tasty 
soma juice has been prepared for Indra. O Soma! The 
sage Angira is praying to you; grant him milk and 
riches. 


O Agni! You devour trees and shrubs with your 
tongue. Your rays can be likened to lightning during 
the monsoon. They can also be likened to the sun at 
the time of dawn. O Agni! Your flames are stirred by 
the wind; they burn everything to ashes. You are 
always young. You increase our intelligence. It is you 
who summon the gods to the sacrifice. We pray to 
Agni so that we may triumph over our enemies. O 
Agni! Come and partake of the oblations we have 
offered. There is no other god to whom we shall pray. 


302 


O Mitra and Varuna! You will certainly offer us 
protection. Grant us wisdom so that we may be 
devoted to you. We are reciting hymns to you so that 
we may be free of all hatred. Make us your friends and 
grant us foodgrains. Protect us well and make us 
flourish. May we vanquish all our enemies. 


O Indra! The vessels are full of soma juice; come | 
and drink it. You are the destroyer of all your enemies. 
Heaven and earth are thrilled when you are pleased. 
O Indra! My hymn.to you may be short; it consists of 
only eight lines. But itis a new hymn. Pray listen to it. 


O Indra and Agni! Devotees are reciting hymns to 
you. Drink the soma juice and bring us happiness. You 
are our leaders. You are the ones who shower us with 
gifts. We are calling upon you for aid; come to us on 
your horses. The pure soma juice has been prepared 
for your sake. 


O Soma! Your powerful juice is stored in wooden 
containers. It is strained and mixed with water so that 
it may be offered to Indra, Vayu, Varuna, Vishnu and 
the Maruts. O Soma! Give us foodgrains for our sons, 
give us countless riches from all the four directions. 
The priests crush the soma herbs, they strain the juice 
in strainers made of sheep-hair. Green is the hue of 
the strained soma juice as it pours into pots. The juice 
brings great happiness. Purified soma juice is mixed 
with the milk of cows. It flows into the pots like rivers 
flowing into the sea. O Soma! Bring us riches and 


bring us fame. May those who pray to you attain long 
lives, 


303 


O Soma and Indra! The two of you are the lords of 
all objects. You are the lords of herds of cattle. Grant 
us wisdom. 


The officiating priests praise Indra, the destroyer of 
the demon Vritra. They crave for his protection, in 
battles great and small. O brave Indra! You are a 
warrior. You are the one who plunders the riches of 
the enemies. You are the one who makes small men 
great. You are the lord of all riches, we pray to you so 
that you may grant us riches. 


O Indra! The time of battle is nigh. Harness your 
brave steeds to your chariot. Decide-on who is to win 
this battle. Bring riches to the victorious. The soma 
juice that is offered at sacrifices is drunk by cows that 
are as white as milk. (The implication probably is that 
soma juice is mixed with milk.) These cows are owned 
by Indra. When Indra is pleased, there will be many 
milk-yielding cows in our kingdom. The cows that are 
beloved by Indra will inspire his vajra. It is Indra’s 
volour that becomes manifest inthe milk of cows. 


Soma dwells in the mountains. Soma juice is 
purified and mixed with clear water by the offidating 
priests. It is made tasty by mixing it with milk, to be 
offered to the gods. Soma juice confers immortality. It 
is desired by the gods. Soma juice is the lord of all 
prosperity. May it reside in our pots of honey. 


Great is the strength of soma juice. It rules over all 
subjects the way a king rules over a kingdom. Like 
water flowing down from heaven, soma juice flows 
into the pots when the priests perform the straining. 


304 


Soma juice is like the life of a sacrifice. It is greater 
than all the oblations that are offered on the occasion 
of o sacrifice. Soma juice is the bridge between earth 
and heaven. 


There was a cave in a valley. It was there that the 
sage Trita obtained the soma herb. Priests began to 
chant Soma’s praise in all the seven metres. O Soma! 
May the sama hymns please you. May you bless Trita 
in all the three worlds and may you bring Indra down 
to his sacrifice. The officiating priests are indeed 
chanting Indra’s praise through their hymns. We will 
sweeten the soma juice and offer it not only to Indra, 
but to Vishnu and the other gods as well. 


O pure soma juice! We who have no hatred in our . 
hearts crush the soma herbs with our fingers and 
extract the green juice. You are the one who bears 
aloft heaven and earth; you will grace our saqifice. 
You are like an armour that confers greatness. The 
soma juice is strained so that it may inspire Indra. It 
brings riches to devotees, destroys demons, and 
oppresses all enemies. The soma herbs are crushed 
with stones. The juice is strained in strainers made of 
sheep-hair. May the energy of the soma juice satiate 
all the gods. 


O Agni! You are always young and always full of 
energy. We have ensured that your flames blaze high. 
When your radiance reaches lofty heaven, grant us 
an abundance of foodgrains. You are the one who 
brings happiness. You are the one who destroys 
enemies. You are the one who protects all subjects. 
O radiant Agni! Oblations are offered to you to the 


305 


chanting of hymns. Grant your devotees an abundant 
supply of foodgrains. 


O resplendent Agni! You are the lord of all strength. 
May our hymns please you. 


Listen to me, all of you who are chanting hymns. 
Chant hymns in praise of the great and learned Indra. 
Chant sama hymns that have been composed in the 
vrihati metre. O Indra! You triumph over all enemies; 
you are the one who made the sun manifest, and you 
are the one who performs all deeds. You are supreme 
among all the gods. All the gods desire your 
friendship. The soma juice has been prepared for you, 
come and drink it. May it make you as radiant as the 
sun. O Indra! Ascend your chariot. Our mantras have 
harnessed your two steeds to the chariot. Come to us 
on your chariot. May your mind be attracted towards 
us. The hymns chanted by the priests will bring Indra 
to the sacrifice. 


O Soma! You are the one who makes the sacrifice a 
success. You are the one who is beloved by the gods. 
You are the one who is the lord of all wealth. You are 
the one who provides inspiration and happiness. 
Many are the riches that are hidden in heaven and 
earth. Soma brings these to his devotees. 


Soma is the lord of heaven. Soma juice brings 
wisdom and intelligence. Green is the juice when it is 
strained in a thousand flows. Hear the beauteous 
noise as the juice is strained into pots and mixed with 
water. Strainers made of hair purify the soma juice. 
Our hymns praise the soma juice. Our priests crush the 


306 


soma herbs. They pray to Soma so that we may obtain 
power and riches. Soma juice will give us cows, horses 
and sons. All the riches that are there in heaven, in 
the atmosphere and on earth will be obtained by 
those who worship Soma. 


O Soma! We crave the proximity of the gods. Bring 
them to us and increase Indra’s strength. Be seated at 
the place that has been reserved for you on the, 
occasion of the sacrifice. Grant us foodgrains and 
water. Once the soma juice has been extracted and 
purified, it is mixed with the milk of cows and witha 
lot of water. Green is the soma juice; may it be praised. 
It glistens like the sun as it flows into pots. O Soma! 
Listen to the hymns that are being chanted for your 
sake. Bring us welfare and happiness and destroy our 
enemies. You are the soul of the sacrifice. Grant us 
cows, horses, foodgrains and sons. O Soma! Shower 
down on us like monsoon showers. 


Soma is worthy of worship. May soma juice bring us 
fame. May it bring us happiness and good fortune. 
May it enable us to triumph over our enemies. May it 
enable us to perform many sacrifices. The priests who 
perform the sacrifice extract soma juice so that it may 
be offered to Indra. Soma juice is used by us to worship 
Surya. Many are the weapons that adorn Soma. Soma 
will grant us happiness and wealth. The purified soma 


juice will increase our welfare and destroy our 
enemies. 


O Soma! Many are the fruits we desire through this 
sacrifice; we chant hymns in your praise so that you 
may grace the sacrifice. Grant us riches and horses. 


307 


Soma juice is like food. The sage Jamadagni has 
praised the soma juice, may it grant him cows and 
foodgrains. 


O Agni! We crave your friendship so that we may 
not be unhappy or oppressed. We have collected sticks 
so that your flames may be lit. We stoke your fires on 
the occasion of every sacrifice. We offer oblations to 
you. Please grant us long lives and make our sacrifice 
a success. Your friendship will protect us from all 
harm. O Agni! We have lit you according to the 
prescribed rites. We have offered oblations to you so 
that you may take them to the gods. We wish the gods 
to be here for the sacrifice. Summon Aditi’s sons here. 


O Mitra and Varuna! After the day has dawned, we 
pray to you. We also pray to Varuna, Aryama and the 
other gods. The learned chant hymns to Mitra and 
Varuna so that they may obtain strength. Mitra and 
Varuna will make the sacrifice a success. O Varuna! 
Since we are praying to you, will you not bring us 
riches? Will you not bring us foodgrains and divine 
bliss? 


O Indra! Destroy all our enemies and bring us 
riches. O Indra and Agni! The two of you are the true 
priests for this sacrifice. You are the ones who deserve 
praise as you are always pure and untainted. You ride 
on chariots, you destroy all enemies, and you can 
never be vanquished. Acknowledge our praise. O 
Indra and Agni! The priests have crushed soma herbs 
for you and extracted the soma juice. 


308 


O Soma! Your sweet juice has been extracted so that 
it may be offered to Indra and the Maruts. The learned 
chant your praise. The priests purify you. Let Mitra, 
Varuna, Aryama and the Maruts drink the pure soma 
juice. Golden is the colour of the juice; may it bring us 
riches. Listen to the sound that soma juice makes 
when it is strained through strainers made of sheep- 
hair. The pure juice is mixed with the milk of cows so ° 
that it may be offered to the gods. The sons of Aditi 
will drink the soma juice. Indra, Vayu and Surya will 
drink the juice; it will mingle into their beings. May 
soma juice be purified so that it can be offered to 
Bhaga, Vayu, Pusha, Mitra and Varuna. 


By Indra’s grace, our cows will give us milk and 
Clarified butter. O Indra! After we have prayed to you, 
grant us all that we desire. The two wheels are the 
driving force behind a chariot. May our hymns be the 
driving force that will motivate you to grant us 
wealth. Wonderful are the deeds that Indra performs. 
He will grant riches to all his devotees. 


We call upon Indra to grant us protection. We call 
upon him every day, the way we call upon our cows at 
the time of milking. Indra is the drinker of the soma 
juice. He will come to our sacrifice and drink the soma 
juice we have offered. He will grant us cows and 
prosperity. He will grant us wisdom, but he will not 
grant the wisdom to others. O Indra! Flood heaven 
and earth with ycur benevolence like the rays that the 
first flush of dawn brings. Aditi, the mother of the 
gods, gave you birth. You are the emperor of all men, 
you are the one who is truly learned. You are the 


309 


receptacle of all power. You are the one who 
vanquishes all enemies. O Indra! There are enemies 
who would like to subjugate us as slaves. Rob them of 
all their power. 


Soma is supreme among all objects, soma herbs can 
be found in the mountains. Look at the soma juice 
flow through the strainers. Soma is omniscient. The 
sweet soma juice is the fount of all happiness. All the 
gods desire to drink soma juice. We have extracted the 
soma juice so that we may obtain riches, cows, 
foodgrains, good sons and servants. The sacred soma 
juice is drunk by Indra, the Maruts, Aryama, Bhaga, 
Mitra and Varuna. May the gods protect us. 


The priests have extracted soma juice so that the 
gods may be pleased. The soma juice has been 
strained and hymns have been chanted in praise of 
Soma. The hymns and oblations have made soma 
juice even more tasty. Soma juice will inspire the 
officiating priests. It will please the gods. Soma juice 
has been mixed with water; it will bring us strength. 
Glistening soma juice has been strained into pots. 
Soma juice has been mixed with water and with curds. 


Soma herbs have been placed on leather obtained 
from bulls. They have been crushed with stones. Soma 
juice will bring me riches from the four directions. 
Indra will drink the soma juice and be pleased. He will 
grant me a son who will become a leader. Surya will 
drink the somajuice and become as powerful as Vayu. 
The flows of the sacred soma juice will make our 
sacrifice a success. Soma juice will grant us seven 
thousand forms of riches, so that we can fight with our 


310, 


enemies. Soma juice will be as fruitful as a tree laden 
with ripe fruit. Soma shoots arrows and kills enemies. 
He will be with us when we kill enemies astride our 
horses. He will be with us when we kill enemies with 
weapons or with our bare hands. Soma juice will be by 
our side when we kill enemies who are sleeping or 
fleeing. 


O Agni! You are deserving of worship. Reside with, 
us and be our protector. Ensure our welfare and grant 
us riches. Great is your radiance. We pray to you so 
that we may obtain happiness, friends and sons. May 
Indra and the other gods look upon us kindly. 


May Indra and the other sons of Aditi make our 
sacrifice a success. May our bodies prosper and may 
we obtain sons and grandsons. May the sons of Adiu. 
and the Maruts banish all manner of illness from our 


proximity. May they guide us in the preparation of 
medicines. 


O learned men! Pray to Indra, the destroyer of 
Vritra. He will listen to your hymns. Even the Maruts 
worship Indra. Who is Indra? He is the one who is 
learned and always youthful. O Indra! May we 
prosper in the shade of your benevolence. 


The sage Ushana was a great poet. He recited the 
Stories of the lives of the gods through his hymns. 
Soma juice was praised in Ushana’s hymns. 


There was a learned sage named Vrishagana. His 
enemies brought him grief. Vrishagana went to the 
place where soma herbs were being crushed. He 
chanted hymns in praise of Soma and started to play 
on a musical instrument known as vana. 


311 


Many are those who have praised the soma juice. 
Many are those who have extracted the juice. Soma 
juice is full of energy; it is green during the day and 
shines during the night. The sound of soma juice being 
strained is like the sound of horses and chariots. 
When soma juice is being strained into pots, its speed 
is like that of chariots. Soma rules over all hymns. The 
seven priests who perform the sacrifice adorn soma 
juice with oblations. 


Soma juice is extracted and purified for the sake of 
Indra. It increases Usha’s energy. Soma juice is like a 
herald who opens the door of the sacrifice, it is the 
fulaum of the sacrifice. Soma juice is the most 
precious object in the universe. 


On the occasion of the sacrifice, soma juice is 
extracted in accordance with the prescribed rites. It is 
mixed with water and strained into pots. Soma juice is 
like truth itself. When soma juice purifies men, Indra 
decides to grace the sacrifice by his presence. Soma 
juice is prepared for Indra, Vayu and the Ashvinis. 
The sweet juice will be offered to Mitra, Varuna and 
Bhaga. Heaven and earth will obtain for us riches and 
foodgrains through the agency of soma juice. Many 
are those who crave soma juice. For, it brings 
happiness. It is soma juice which makes a sacrifice a 
success. O Soma! We pray that you may grant us 
wisdom. We pray for sons and grandsons. 


For the sacrifice, the priests create Agni by rubbing 
two sticks together. Agni is the mouth of the gods, he 
is like the crest of heaven. Agni brings welfare to all of 
mankind and Agni’s flames are lit on the occasion of 


312 


the sacrifice. The fire-god is deserving of worship; he is 
like an emperor to us all. The learned one will be our 
protector. 


O immortal Agni! All the gods and all the priests 
bow before you in obeisance. You are the leader of the 
universe. When your flames light up the region 
between heaven and earth, the gods descend to grace 
the sacrifice. The priests pray to the great god Agni 
who is like the axle of the sacrifice. He is like the flag 
of the sacrifice. It is to Agni that all the oblations are 
offered. 


O priests! Chant sweet hymns for Mitra and 
Varuna. These two gods are full of valour. The hymns 
will bring them to the sacrifice. Mitra and Varuna are 
revered amongst all the gods. It is they who create 
water. They will also grant us riches through their 
energy. 


O radiant Indra! Come to the sacrifice. Soma herbs 
have been crushed and pure soma juice extracted for 
you. The priests are summoning you, hymns are 
being chanted for your sake. You are the possessor of 
proud steeds. Come to the sacrifice and accept our 
oblations. 


Agni is the lord of all riches. His radiance will make 
all of us deaf. Pray to Agni. The priests pour oblations 
into the fire, these oblations will please Indra. Indra 
will grant us rains. O Indra and Agni! Please grant us 
foodgrains and swift-footed horses. 


Indra has been satiated by the soma juice and has 
become our friend. Soma juice has been strained into 


313 


pots and has been mixed with water. O Soma! Those 
who are desirous of performing a sacrifice have 
chanted hymns in your praise. The green soma juice 
has been mixed with the milk of cows. O pure juice! 
Grant us foodgrains and brave sons. 


One who worships Indra on the occasion of a 
Sacrifice never has to undergo any hardship. Cows 
bow in obeisance before Indra. Heaven and earth bow 
down before him. We also pray to the valiant Indra. 


O priests! Sing of the glory of the pure soma juice. 
Soma is the protector of the gods, he is the one who 
increases our happiness. Mix the soma juice with 
water so that it may be offered to the gods, so that it 
may be offered to Mitra and Varuna. Purify and strain 
the soma juice in strainers made of hair. Mix it with 
the milk of cows so that it may give us energy. O 
Soma! The priests have extracted your juice so that 
Indra may be satisfied. Soma juice is extracted far and 
wide, it is extracted on the shores of the lake named 
Sharyanavati! Soma juice is extracted on the banks of 
rivers: The shining juice will bring us valour from 
heaven. It will bring us foodgrains. 


O Agni! The sage Vatsa is praying to you so that 
you may come to his sacrifice. We call upon Agni to 
aid us in battle, we call upon Agni to provide us rain. 
Agni will protect us during our battles. He will give us 
brave sons who will vanquish our foes. 


O Indra! You are the performer of wonderous deeds. 
You are our father and our mother. We ask that you 
may give us happiness. Famed is your valour. Make 


314 


us valiant as well as. You are the wielder of the vajra, 
you are the lord of all wealth. Pray give us wealth with 
both your hands. 


The soma juice has just been extracted; it is still 
young. The breeze will purify it. The priests will chant 
hymns to soma juice. The juice will make a sound 
when it is strained. The sages praise soma juice 
through a thousand hymns. Soma juice will enhance 
Indra’s glory. The milk of cows will be mixed with 
soma juice in pots. Indra will be pleased with soma 
juice and will give us rains. Vayu and the Ashvinis 
will be pleased with our offerings of the pure soma 
juice. They will grant us valour. May soma juice 
summon the gods to the sacrifice. The learned praise 
soma juice. It is shining and green, it is mixed with the 
milk of cows. Soma juice will satiate Indra. It will 
destroy our enemies and bring us prosperity. We will 
receive foodgrains and offsprings. O Soma! Bring 
down the rains from heaven. Make us strong in battle. 


For Indra and Vayu, soma juice is strained through 
Strainers made of hair. The priests chant hymns in 
praise of soma juice. Soma will make us strong and 
powerful. We will obtain foodgrains. Myriad are the 
riches we will get. Soma juice will be offered to the 
great Indra. 


Sweet is the soma juice. It will please Indra. Soma 
juice will réside at the place of the sacrifice. Soma is 
learned and great. He is like the axle of the 
atmosphere. Let soma juice acknowledge our praise; 
let it be mixed with water. The sacred juice will give us 
foodgrains and dwelling-houses. The sound of soma 


315 


juice being strained is like the sound of the musical 
instrument named vana. Mantras from the Rig Veda, 
the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda are being chanted 
in praise of Soma. Soma juice brings happiness. 


Soma destroys our enemies, he destroys the cities of 
our enemies. King Divodasa performed a sacrifice. He 
wished that the demons Shambarasura, Yadu and 
Turvasu might be killed. Indra drank soma juice and 
did the needful. Soma juice brings us rain for the 
welfare of mankind. Surya has a steed named Etasha. 
It is soma juice which hamesses Etasha to Surya’s 
chariot. — ’ 


O gods! You reside among men, you ensure the 
success of sacrifices, and you oppress enemies. Send 
revered Agni to the sacrifice as your messengér. When 
flames burn down a forest and the blaze is fanned by _ 
the wind, Agni’s black route is clear to all. O Agni! 
Your tongues rise high. Your smoke is our messenger 
to heaven. It is thus that we attain the gods. And it is 
your flames that bring down rain. 


We know that Indra destroyed the demon Vritra. 
We know that Indra is truly valiant. Indra was bom so 
that he may shower us with gifts. Indra is praised 
through hymns. He is pleased through offerings of 
soma juice. Indra will bless us with riches. 


O Soma! You are the son of the mountains. Soma 
herbs have been crushed with stones and the juice has 
been extracted. Indra and the other gods drink the 
soma juice. So do the Maruts. The sweet soma juice is 
like heavenly nectar, may it please the wielder of the 


316 


vajra. May it increase the strength of the gods. The 
green soma juice is mixed with the milk of cows. 


O Indra! The priests are summoning you from the 
north, from the south, from the east and from the 
west. King Anu chanted many hymns in your praise. 
Hymns were also chanted to you for the destruction of 
Turvasu. The sages Ruma, Rushama, Shyavaka and 
Kripa have prayed to you. The sage Kanva is praying 
to you. Come and attend the sacrifice. 


O Soma! You have been purified for Indra and 
Vayu, for the other gods. Banish all atheists from the 
sacrifice. 


O Agni! You are like our revered guest. We pray to 
you so that we may obtain riches. There are two forms 
in which Agni can be found in the midst of mankind. 


The first is known as garhapatya and the second is 
known as ahavaniya. 


Indra is ever youthful. He listens to our prayers and 
offers us protection. He preserves our sons. Indra is 
invindble in battle. He is as strong“as a mountain. 
May Indra reside with us and make truth flourish. 
Indra’s fame will spread in heaven-and on earth. O 
Indra! Demolish the cities of our enemies. O wielder of 
the vajra! The demons stole the cows and hid them in 
caves. You rent the caves and rescued the cattle. 


O Soma! You shower down rain. The divine soma 
juice is extracted for Vayu, Mitra, Varuna and the 
Maruts. It increases Indra’s strength. It establishes 
Surya’s energy. From time immemorial, the green 
soma juice has been extracted for the sake of the gods. 


317 


The sage Trita wished to please Indra. He crushed 
soma herbs with his own hands. Soma is the son of 
heaven. Soma juice has been extracted for Indra and 
Vayu. 

Blessed is he who studies the mantras collected by 
the sages. The goddess of learning blesses him with 
milk, clarified butter, honey and water. These mantras 
purify, they bring welfare. These hymns are like 
immortal nectar, preserved by brahmanas leamed in 
the Vedas. These mantras are like the manifestations of 
the gods themselves. Let us be sanctified by them. We 
will be freed through the studying of these hymns. 
They will make us immortal. “fl 


We bow down before the great Agni, the learned 
one who redeems sinners. Agni is praised at every 
sacrifice. Agni protects us. O Agni! You are none other 
than Mitra and Varuna. 


The sage Vatsa is praying to Indra; may Indra’s 
fame spread. The sage Kanva is pleasing Indra 
through his hymns. 


O Agni! May your flames light up well! May our 
oblations be carried to the gods. I praise Agni so that I 
may obtain happiness. 


May Mitra, Aryama, Bhaga and Savita bless me 
with riches. O great gods! Come and grant us our 
wishes and deliver us from sin. Let Aditi, the mother of 
the gods, also listen to our prayers. May soma juice 
please the great Indra. May he crush under his feet 
those with hate in their hearts. May Indra bring us 


prosperity. 


318 


O friends! Pray only to Indra. No one else deserves 
praise. Repeatedly chant hymns to Indra. Sweet are 
the hymns that are chanted for Indra. The sages 
Kanva and Bhrigu succeeded in pleasing Indra. They 
saw him rise like the radiant sun and chanted his 
praise. 


O Indra! You have no enemies from the time of 
your birth. You have no brothers. You do not befriend | 
men simply because they are wealthy. You hate those 
who are atheists and drinkers of wine. You befriend 
those who are learned and guide them along superior 
paths. O Indra! Two horses are harnessed to your 
chariot. Their colour is like that of peacocks and their 
backs are pure white. Your chariot will bring you to 
the sacrifice so that you may be satiated with our 
offerings of soma juice. Indra killed the demon Vritra. 
Indra destroyed ninety-nine cities of his enemies. 


Praised be Surya’s radiance. May Surya make us 
healthy and grant us long lives. The great Surya 
grants us foodgrains and preserves righteousness. 
Surya was appointed to hold up heaven. It is Surya 
who destroyed the demon Vritra. 


O Indra! Protect the righteous. Protect us today, 
tomorrow and the day after. Protect us during night 


and day. Strong are the two arms of he who wields the 
vajra. 


We call upon Sarasvati. She will grant us wives, 
sons and riches. The river Sarasvati is fit to be prayed 
to. (Sarasvati was a goddess in the Vedas, but she was 
not the goddess of learning. She was also a river. It 
was only subsequently that Sarasvati became the 


319 


goddess of learning.) The seven rivers are like 
Sarasvati’s sisters, mingling into her being. 


Savita grants us wisdom and we meditate on 
Savita. 


O Brahmanaspati! Make us learned, may the flow 
of knowledge course through our bodies. 


O Agni! Grant us long lives. Grant us strength and 
foodgrains and banish our enemies. 


O Mitra and Varuna! Bring us riches from heaven 
and earth. Your valour is famed among the gods. May 
Mitra and Varuna multiply our strength. They are the 
lords of foodgrains. We pray to them for rain. Let 
them ascend their chariots and come to our sacrifice. 


Indra is the enemy of the wicked. He is the source of 
all strength. Enemies tremble at Indra’s sight. O 
Indra! This sacrifice is being performed for you. Bless 
us with sons and grandsons. Soma juice has been 
mixed with flour in three vessels for your sake. Come 
with Vishnu and drink the soma juice. May it please 
you. O Indra! You manifest yourself at the time of the 
sacrifice. You desire to raise the burden of the universe 
on your shoulders. You are learned. It is your energy 
that fills the earth and heaven. Indra divided the soma 
juice that was offered into two parts. One part he 
drank himself, the other part he kept for the other 
gods. O Indra! Send the other gods also to drink soma 
juice. 


O Indra! My hymns can rival the hymns that the 
sage Kanva recited for you. Listen to my hymns. They 


320 


are unsurpassed. O Indra! Listen to the hymns that 
the sage Ashva is chanting. There has never been 
anyone who can equal Indra. Nor will there ever be 
anyone who can rival him. O priests! For your sake I 
am summoning the Indra who ceated Usha. I am 
summoning the Indra who created moonbeams. 


The great god Agni desires ladles full of clarified 
butter. Fill the vesseis with oblations, fill them with 
soma juice. The gods have made Agni their aide; Agni 
provides riches to those who perform saczifices. Let 
Agni accept our praise. Bow down before Agni if you 
wish to triumph over your enemies. Agni is the 
purifier. We light his flames on the occasion of the 
sacrifice. We recite hymns composed in the gayatri 
metre to increase Agni’s glory. Let Agni grant us cows 
and horses. 


O Agni! Who is like a brother unto you among 
men? Who is the one who is performing a sacrifice 
dedicated to you? Who knows what you are truly like? 
Where do you reside? You are like a brother and friend 
to men. You are the friend of the priests. O Agni! 
Please Mitra, Varuna and the other gods for our sake. 
You are the one who banishes darkness. Let us light 
Agni’s flames. Let us pour clarified butter into them. 
This first hymn is so that Agni may protect us. This 
second hymn is so that Agni may protect us. This third 
hymn is so that Agni may protect us. This fourth 
hymn is also so that Agni may protect us. 


When the dark night is gone, Agni manifests Usha 
and Surya. Usha is Agni’s sister. We pray to the 
immortal Agni for our welfare. The omniscient Agni is 


321 


the son of power. O Agni! Be our messenger to the 
gods. 


O Indra! Your devotees chant your praise. Your 
devotees include those who perform sacrifices. They 
also indude Ribhu and Rudra. O Indra and Agni! 
Those who read the Vedas sing sama hymns for you. 
You demolish the cities of your enemies. 


O Varuna! Listen to my prayers and make me 
happy. Protect me from all danger. 


O Pusha! Grant me cows, horses, foodgrains, sons 
and servants. Offer me protection. 


O valiant Maruts! I am sweating from the effort of 
chanting hymns dedicated to you. Grant us all our 
wishes. 


O Dyavaprithivi! May heaven and earth listen to 
our prayers. May we obtain the objects that we desire. 
May our sacrifice be a success. 


O Indra! You are great and your friendship will give 
us courage. May we never tire and may your devotees 
attain what they desire. May Turvasu and Yadu be 
pleased. Evil enemies cannot bring Indra any harm. 
Let Indra drink the soma juice. Indra’s glory has been 
praised by a thousand sages. Great is Indra’s expanse. 
He is like a gigantic ocean. 


O Vishnu! I praise your sacred name. May you 
never be far away from us. Many are the rays that 
radiate from your being. | pray to you, I offer you 
oblations. Accept my oblations. 


322 


O Vayu! I am pure of heart. You are the first one to 
whom I am offering soma juice on the occasion of the 
sacrifice. O god! Your steed is named Niyuta. Ascend it 
and come to the sacrifice. O Vayu! You are the one to 
whom soma juice must be offered. You are the lord of 
all power; come to us on your chariot. 


Sacrifices enhance Indra’s glory. It is Indra who 
releases rain from the clouds in the atmosphere. Indra 
splits the clouds. The cows were hidden in caves by the 
demons. Indra released them and gave them to the 
sage Angira. The demons fled in dismay. Indra will 
grant us protection. He will rob our enemies of their 
riches. May Indra’s vajra always be sharp. Vishnu, 
Mitra, Varuna and the Maruts worship Indra. 


Vishnu displayed his valour. He kept his feet in 
three places. It is in those three places that the 
universe rests. Vishnu’s three feet encompass the 
entire universe. Admire Vishnu’s prowess; he is fit to 
be Indra’s friend. (In the Puranas, this is the story of 
Vishnu’s dwarf incarnation. Vishnu, as a dwarf which 
later became gigantic, traversed the universe in three 
of his footsteps.) The great Vishnu is in the loftiest part 
of heaven. From there, his radiance blazes forth. 


O priests! Chant hymns for Indra. Compose hymns 
in the vrihati metre. May Indra grant us riches and 
land. May he grant us the light of the sun. We will 
offer Indra soma juice mixed with milk. 


Agni is the leader of heaven. Pray to him so that 
you may obtain divine wealth. O Agni! Carry our 
oblations to the gods. O sage Sobhare! Agni is the 
bearer of many gifts, he is the one who presides over 


323 


sacrifices. Pray to him. O Indra and Agni! The race of 
the slaves (dasa) ruled in ninety cities. But you rocked 
them all. 


Usha has made her presence felt. She is the one who 
inspires. She has emerged after her sister, the night 
(ratri), has disappeared. Usha is the daughter of Surya; 
she is as beautiful as a mare. Look at Usha’s radiance. 
She is the one who nurtures sacrifices. She is the friend 
of the Ashvinis. Usha is the mother of the sun’s rays. 
Beloved Usha brings light to heaven. 


We praise the Ashvinis. They are the ones who 
destroy our enemies, they are the ones who create 
rivers, they are the ones who grant riches and wisdom. 
O Ashvinis! Your chariot is transported to heaven by 
the birds and we recite hymns for you. 


O Usha! Your arrival signifies the beginning of the 
sacrifice. Grant us many riches so that we may be able 
to take care of our progeny. Usha will give us cows 
and horses, she will make our sacrifice a success. O 
Usha! Bring us good fortune. Harness your red steeds 
to your chariot. Ride your chariot to our sacrifice. 


O Ashvinis! Come to our houses. Come to the place 
where we are hosting the sacrifice. Bring us cows and 
gold. It is now dawn and the horses have woken up. 
They will be harnessed to golden chariots and will 
bring the Ashvinis to our.sacrifice. O Ashvinis! You 
become manifest in heaven. Descend to earth for our 


welfare. 


O Usha! Great is your radiance. Grant me 
knowledge and riches. You have thus borne gifts to 


ra 


324 


men from ancent times. Bring gifts to me as well. You 
are always full of truth. I am Satyashrava, the son of 
Vaya, who is speaking. O daughter of heaven! 
Sunitha, the son of Shuchadratha, is praying to you. 
Bless him and bless Satyashrava, the son of Vaya. 
Grant us riches and manifest yourself for our benefit. 
You are the one who destroys darkness. 


O Ashvinis! The sages are praying to you for power 
and riches. They are adorning your chariots with their | 
hymns. You are the ones who know the secret of 
making wine (madhvi). Please listen to our prayers. 
There is no need to listen to the others who are 
praying to you; come to our sacrifice instead. I wish to 
triumph over my enemies. Aid me in this endeavour. 
O Ashvinis! You are the ones who ride in golden 
chariots, you are the ones who are adorned with 
jewels. Come to us and grant us foodgrains and riches. 


O Surya! You are truly great. O Aditya! (Aditya 
means a son of Aditi.) You are deserving of worship. 
Your greatness is fit to be praised. It brings you fame. 
You are the one who destroys demons. It is for this 
reason that the gods have made you their leader. 


O friends who are chanting hymns! Pray to the 
Indra who destroys enemies and makes the strings of 
their bows break. It is Indra who makes the rivers flow. 
He splinters the clouds and showers us with rain. 
Indra has no enemies. We will offer oblations to Indra 
and please him. May our enemies be destroyed. May 
those who seek to attack us be smitten by Indra’s 
weapons. O Indra! Grant us the boon that we may 
perform wise deeds. Grant us riches. We are singing 


325 


sama hymns to you composed in the gayatri metre. 
The sage Kanva is praying to you. Hearken to his 
Prayers. We have offered soma juice to Indra. We 
thrive and prosper when Indra reigns in heaven. 


I pray to the gods who will be like our friends on the 
occasion of the sacrifice. I chant many hymns to 
them. My sama hymns to them are composed in the 
metres gayatri, trishtupa and jagati. 


Water brings us happiness. It provides us strength 
and foodgrains. Water also grants us divine wisdom. 
O water! We drink you for the sake of happiness. You 
look after us the way a mother looks after her child. O 
water! May we have the power to rear our sons and 
grandsons. 


Let Vayu bring joy to our hearts. Let Vayu grant us 
long lives. O Vayu! You are our father, you are our 
brother and you are our friend. Grant us long lives. In 
your house can be found the heavenly nectar. May we 
obtain a part of that. 


The enemies have the power of terrible bulls, but 
Indra defeats them and makes them cry. Indra 
destroys the evil. Unequalled is Indra’s valour; he can 
demolish thousands of enemies single-handedly. 
Those who lead us into battle will seek Indra’s aid. 
Indra holds arrows in his hand; he is the ene who 
drinks the soma juice. Marvel at the way Indra wields 


his bow. 

O Indra! You are the one who rules over countless 
numbers. You are the one who kills the demons. Come 
here on your chariot and grant us protection. May we 


326 


triumph in battle. Great is your valour. Be seated on 
the chariot that will be victorious. O generals! Indra is 
the one who will destroy the fortresses of the enemies. 
His arms are as strong as the vajra. Place Indra in the 
forefront of the battle. Make him kindly disposed 
towards you before you march into battle. May Indra 
grant us protection. He will be the leader of our 
cohorts. : 


May Indra, Varuna and the Maruts grant us power. 
May the victorious gods ride with us. 


O dark gods who preside over evil! Stay away from 
us, but delude the minds of our enemies. Make their 
hearts full of sorrow and misery. Bring darkness to our 
enemies and make them grieve. 


O warriors! Attack the enemies and be victorious. 
May your arms be strong. May your arrows bé steeped 
in wisdom. They will pierce your foes and kill them 
all. May the enemy soldiers provide food for the 
vultures. Indra and Agni will aid us in battle. 
Brahmanaspati and Aditi will bring us joy in battle. 


O Indra! Kill our enemies, destroy those who dare to 
invade us. Let those who design to make us slaves be 
immersed in darkness. 


Let our arms be like the trunks of elephants, so 
strong that the enemies may be vanquished. O kings! 
We will cover you up with armour. After that, Soma 
will arm you with heavenly nectar. Varuna will grant 
you happiness. All the gods will grant you the joy of 
victory. Your enemies will become as blind as 


327) 


beheaded snakes. Those enemies whom Agni does not 
kill, will be destroyed by Indra. Those who are 
betrayers and traitors will be destroyed by the gods. 
Divine knowledge will be our armour. 


Indra is as fierce as a lion that inhabits the 
mountains. Come to us from a far and destroy our 
enemies with your sharp vajra. 


O gods! We will listen to words of wisdom with our 
ears. O priests! We will see sacred sights with our eyes. 
With our strong bodies, we will pray to the gods. The 
gods have decided our lifespans for us. Till those 
lifespans are over, we will keep on performing good 
deeds. 


May Indra the famous bring us welfare. May the 
leamed Pusha bring us welfare. May the suparna bird 
bring us welfare. May the lord of all knowledge bring 
us welfare. 


(This concludes the Uttararchika section and thus 
concludes the Sama Veda Samhita.) 


I hope you have enjoyed reading the Sama Veda 
Samhita. You will have felt there is some amount of 
repetition. That is undoubtedly true, at least in so far 
as the words are concerned. But the beauty of the 
Sama Veda is not in the words, but in the lyrical 
quality of the metres. That, unfortunately, is 
impossible to convey in a translation. To get a flavour 
of that, you will have to read the text in the original 
Sanskrit. 


The Atharva 
Veda 


The Atharva Veda Samhita 


It is important to understand that there were four 
classes of priests who were required at any sacrifice 
(yajna). The first class consisted of the officiating 
priests or acolytes (hotri). They invoked the gods by 
reciting the mantras, prepared the sacrificial ground 
and the altar, and poured out the libations. The 
hymns of the Rig Veda are for this class of priests. The 
second class of priests consisted of the choristers 
(udgatri). These were the ones who chanted the sacred 
hymns and the hymns of the Sama Veda are for this 
class of priests. The third class of priests consisted of 
the reciters (adhvaryu). While they carried out 
sacrificial rites, they chanted sacred texts and the 
hymns of the Yajur Veda are for this class of priests. 
The fourth class of priests consisted of brahmana 
Overseers. They supervised the sacrifice and the 
hymns of the Atharva Veda are for this class of priests. 


329 


The Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda 
obtain their names from the nature of their contents. 
The name of the Atharva Veda is obtained differently. 
In the Rig Veda, there are references to a person 
named Atharvan. He is said to have been the first 
person to obtain fire by rubbing two pieces of stick 
together. He could also vanquish evil demons 
through his miraculous powers. There were two other 
ancient families named the Angirasa and the 
Bhrigus. The Atharva Veda was first revealed to 
Atharvan, the Angirasa and the Bhrigus. The text 
obtains its name from Atharvan. The Atharva Veda is 
also known as the Brahma Veda. This 4s because the © 
hymns of the text were meant for the brahmana 
overseers. 


Unlike the other Vedas, in addition to prayers, the 
Atharva Veda contains charms and spells. It is almost 
as if the Atharva Veda used to be recited to counteract 
evil influences during the course of a sacrifice. 


There are twenty books or kandas in the Atharva 
Veda. In the first thirteen kandas, the hymns are not 
arranged according to what they contain. There is a 
heterogeneous mix of prayers, charms, spells, 
benedictions and invocations. Kanda fourteen is 
concerned with marriages, kanda fifteen with 
wandering mendicants, kandas sixteen and seventeen 
with conjuring and kanda eighteen with funeral rites. 
Kanda nineteen is a mixed bag of hymns, while kanda 
twenty is primarily culled from the Rig Veda and 
consists of hymns addressed to Indra. A hymn can 
contain more than one verse. Although not arranged 


330 


according to contents, the first seven kandas do have 
some arrangement in terms of the number of verses 
the hymns contain. The hymns of kanda one have 
four verses, and those of kanda two have five. Those of 
kanda three have six, those of kanda four seven. Those 
of kanda five have eight to eighteen verses, those of 
kanda six have three, and those of kanda seven have 
one to eleven verses. In subsequent kandas, there are. 
hymns extending upto eighty verses. 


The distribution of hymns (suktas) and verses 
(mantras) according to kandas is as follows: 


Kandanumber  Numberofsuktas  Numberofmantras _ 
1 35 153 
2 36 207 
3 31 _ Be 
4 40 324 
5 31 376 
6 142 454 
7 118 286 
8 10 259 
9 10 302 

10 10 350 
1 10 373 
12 5 304 
13 188 
14 2 139 
15 28 220 


(Contd.) 


331 


Kanda number Number of suktas Number of mantras 
LLL a ll !!!!|l l= 
16 8 103 
Az, 1 30 
18 4 283 
19 Te: 453 
20 143 928 
740 5962 


The entire Atharva Veda thus consists of around 750 
hymns and around 6000 verses. 


The Gods of the Vedas 

The Vedas cannot really be appreciated without 
some sort of an understanding of the gods mentioned 
in the Vedas. The yods of the Vedas were different in 
nature and character from the gods that one 
encounters in the epics or in the sacred texts known as 
the Puranas. 


The three major gods of the Vedas were Agni, Indra 
or Vayu and Surya. Agni ruled over the earth 
(prithivi), Indra or Vayu ruled over the atmosphere 
(antariksha) and Surya ruled over heaven (dyuloka). 
All other gods were regarded as manifestations of 
these three gods. For example, all gods on earth were 
identified with Agni, all gods in the atmosphere with 
Indra or Vayu, and all gods in heaven with Surya. 
This at least was the version given by Yaska, a 
commentator on the Vedas who lived around 800 B.C. 
There were two other points of view as well. One was 


332, 


that all the various gods were manifestations of the 
same unified supreme godhead. This monotheistic 
point of view can be found particularly in the 
Upanishads. An alternative point of view subscibed to 
polytheism. It was that the various gods could not be 
identified, but were distinct. 


Even within the Vedas, the number of gods varies 
fram place to place. In some places, there are only 
three gods, one ruling over the earth, the second over 
the atmosphere and the third over heaven. The earth, 
the atmosphere and heaven were known as lokas 
(regions), there being three Jokas. In some places, the 
Vedas state that there were 11 gods for each Joka, so 
that there were 33 gods in all. In some cases, there are 
references to 3339 gods. When it came to the age of 
the Puranas, the number of gods increased to thirty- 
three crores. 


Many scholars have suggested that the gods of the 
Vedas are nature gods. That is, forces of nature came 
to be ascribed with divine qualities and transformed 
into divinities. To some extent, this is indeed true. But 
the forces of nature have heen so humanised that 
their original elemental form is sometimes impossible 
to detect. This is known as anthropomorphism. 
Besides, there are also abstract deities with whom no 
forces of nature can readily be identified. 


It is also important to realise that the gods of the 
Vedas cannot easily be compartmentalised into 
pantheons of monotheism or polytheism. What is 
more commonly found is kathenotheism. That is, 
there is more than one god. But whenever a hymn is 


333 


addressed to a particular god, that god comes to be 
ascribed with all the divine qualities. In the course of 
the -hymn, the god in question is regarded as the 
supreme godhead and all the other gods come to be 
regarded as his manifestations. 


The gods of the Vedas can now be catalogued under 
three different headings - gods of heaven (dyuloka), 
gods of the atmosphere (antariksha), and gods of the 
earth (prithivi). 


The chief gods of heaven are Dyouspita, Mitra/ 
Varuna, Surya/Savita/Pusha, Vishnu, the two 
Ashvinis, Usha and Chandrama. Dyouspita is 
regarded as the father of the universe, prithivi being 
regarded as the mother. Dyouspita and the earth are 
together addressed as Dyavaprithivi. Dyouspita 
seems to have been a personification of the sky. The 
gods Mitra and Varuna are almost invariably 
addressed in unison. Mitra seems to have been 
identified with the day and Varuna with the night. 
Mitra is also identified with Surya. In the period of the 
epics and the Puranas, Varuna came to be regarded as 
the lord of the oceans. But this was not the case at the 
time of the Vedas. Surya is the sun-god and Savita is a 
manifestation of Surya at specific points of time. 
Vishnu is a minor god in the Vedas and there are 
indications that Vishnu was also regarded as a 
manifestation of Surya. The two Ashvinis are 
physicians of the gods; they share a common wife 
named Usha (the dawn). In the Vedas, the Ashvinis 
are closely associated with Surya. They may very well 
have been stars (nakshatra) identified with the 


334 


morning and the evening. Another name for the two 
Ashvinis is Nasatya. Usha is the goddess of the dawn. 
She is also addressed as Dakshina (sacificial fee). 
It was at the time of dawn that priests began sacrifices 
and received their fees. Chandrama is a minor god, 
the moon-god. He is closely identified with the god 
Soma. 


The chief gods of the atmosphere are Indra, Aja ; 
Ekapada, Matarishvan/Vayu/Vata, Parjanya, Rudra 
and the Maruts. Indra is the most powerful of all the 
gods. He killed the demon Vritra and is accordingly 
addressed as Vritraha. Purandara is another of his 
names. Aja Ekapada is a minor god and is probably a 
manifestation of either Agni or Surya. Matarishvan, 
Vayu and Vata are all gods of the wind. Parjanya has 
a close relationship with them and is a personification 
of the douds. Parjanya thus rules over herbs and 
rains. The Rudra of the Vedas is not the Rudra of the 
Puranas. In the Vedas, Rudra is a god of the wind. 
Alternatively, he is identified with Agni. The Maruts 
are also wind-gods and are regarded as the offspring 
of Rudra. The number of the Maruts is not 
unambiguously given. In some places, the number 
seems to be 180. In other places, there seem to be 21 
Maruts. The Maruts are close companions of Indra. 


The chief gods of the earth are Agni, Brihaspati/ 
Brahmanaspati, Soma and Sarasvati. Agni is the 
main god of the earth, he is the fire-god. There are 
three different types of fire - ahavaniya, dakshinagni 
and garhapatya. Ahavaniya agni is used to offer 
oblations to the gods, dakshinagni is used to make 


335 


offerings to the ancestors, and garhapatya agni is the 
fire that continually burns in any household. In the 
age of the Vedas, fire was ignited by rubbing two 
pieces of stick (arani) together. These are known as 
uftararani and adhararani. It is not entirely clear 
whether Brihaspati or Brahmanaspati is indeed a god. 
He seems to have been more like a chief priest. He is 
often regarded as the lord of all hymns. It was only in 
a later period that Brihaspati came to be identified 
with a nakshatra. Soma is really a herb, although he is 
also identified with Chandrama. In the Vedas, 
Sarasvati is not the goddess of learning. She is a river, 
also known as Bharati. 


Let us now see what the hymr- of the Atharva Veda 
have to say. Since the Atharva Veda is fairly long, we 
will have to be selective. We cannot be exhaustive. 


KANDA ONE 


Prayer for increasing one’s learning 


Vachaspati, the lord of speech, adopts various 
forms and pervades the three-times-seven objects that 
can be found everywhere. Vachaspati will grant me 
the strength that can be found in these objects. O 
Vachaspati! Come before us with your divine 
intelligence. O lord of all objects! Please me. May the 
knowledge vest with me. A bow that is properly 
strung at the two ends attains its object (of killing the 
enemies). May I be as well strung as a bow. May 
Vachaspati be bound by these words. May the 
knowledge vest with me. The lord of speech has been 


336 


summoned. May he invite us to share in the 
knowledge. May we never be parted from the 
knowledge. 


(What does the expression three-times-seven 
objects mean? Attempts have been made to interpret 
this in a philosophical sense. But more simply, three- 
times-seven only indicates an indefinite number.) 


Prayer for obtaining victory 

We know that Parjanya is the lord of the arrow and 
that he is the lord of the bow. Parjanya is the one who 
nourishes us. The earth (prithivi) is Parjanya’s mother. 
She is well-versed in all the arts. We know that well. 


O mother earth! We are your sons. May we thrive. 
Make our bodies as firm and strong as rocks. May we 
be charitable. May we be free from hatred, and may 
all our enemies be banished. 


O Indra! A cow that is tethered to a tree strains at 
the rope and advances towards her calf. O Indra! May 
Our arrows advance as forcefully. The space between 
heaven and earth is full of energy. May the arrow 
that I have shot hang between heaven and earth (in 


the air). May its energy preserve it from ailment and 
disease. 


Prayer for recovery from illness 


We know that an arrow has five powerful fathers. 
They are Parjanya, Mitra, Varuna, Chandra and 
Surya. May the energies of these five gods enter your 
body and make you well. May the earth pour long life 
into you. May all illness be purged from your body. 


337 


Prayer for obtaining blessings from water 


The water of a river is like a sister and a mother to 
one who performs a sacrifice. The river winds its own 
path. The water is so pure that it seems to be mixed 
with milk and honey. The rays of the sun purify the 
water of the river and the sun is always present in it. 
It is the water that enables us to perform a sacrifice. 
Our cows drink water from the river. We offer 
oblations to the water and sing its praise. The water is 
like a heavenly drink (amrita). In it is the medicine for 
all illnesses. The divine qualities of pure water make 
our cows and steeds strong. 


O water! You bring us happiness. You increase our 
strength and bring us health and wealth. Water is full 
of the juices that increase our welfare. Bring us 
welfare and nourish us the way a mother nourishes 
her children. O water! You are the one who satisfies, 
may you bring us completeness. Make us thrive. 
Grant us the happiness that we desire. You are the 
one who nourishes all living beings. 


May divine water bring us happiness. May divine 
water grant our wishes and bring us peace. The god 
Soma has told us that in water can be found 
medicines and herbs. He has also told us that Agni is 
the one who will ensure our welfare. O water! Grant 
us medicines. Protect our bodies so that we may be 
able to see the sun for many years. May the water of 
deserts bring us happiness. May the water from lakes 
and ponds bring us happiness. May the water from 
wells bring us happiness. May the water from rain 
bring us happiness. 


338 


Prayer for spreading righteousness 


O Agni! Bring the kimidins and yatudhanas here (for 
their destruction). You are the god who destroys all 
the dasyus. You are the one who lives in the best of 
places and you are the lord of all learning. You are 
the one who controls our senses. O Agni! Accept the 
clarified butter that has been offered and destroy the 
evil ones. May the kimidins and the yatudhanas weep 
in misery. O Agni! These oblations have been offered - 
to you and Indra. May Agni accept them first and 
may the strong Indra accept them after that. Let the 
yatudhanas come and say that they are present (so 
that they may be destroyed). O Agni! You are the 
leared one. Let us witness your valour. You are the 
one who guides us along the righteous path. Let the 
evil yatudhanas become acquainted with our wishes. 
Let them come here and be slaughtered. O Agni! 
Begin your task of destruction, we have created you 
for that purpose. O Agni! You will be our messenger 
and will carry our message of destruction to the 
yatudhanas. Tie up the yatudhanas and bring them 
here. Indra will behead them then. 


(The kimidins were evil spirits. The name is derived 
from the fact that they wandered around saying “kim 
idanim” meaning “what now?”, or “kim idam” 
meaning “what is this?” The yatudhanas were evil 
spirits, demons orsorcerers. The word dasyu has now 
come to mean a dacoit. But in the age of the Vedas, it 
signified a class of powerful and superhuman beings 
or malignant spirits opposed to gods and men.) 


339 


This sacrifice will bring the yatudhanas here like a 
river brings with it foam May the sinners, men or 
women, come here and confess. Let us welcome the 
sinners who come. O brihaspati! Keep the sinners 
under restraint. O Agni and Soma! Observe them 
carefully. O gods who are the drinkers of the soma 
juice! Go to the children of the yatudhanas and show 
them the righteous path. May both the eyes of a 
sinner fall from his head. O Agni! You are the learned 
one. You know well the evil ones and their progeny 
who dwell in caves. Impart wisdom to them and 
relieve their misery. 


Prayer for the granting of wishes 


May all the gods, the Vasus, Indra, Pusha, Varuna, 
Mitra and Agni bring this man riches. May the 
Adityas and the Vishvadevas bring this man energy. 
O gods! May this man have power over light and fire, 
gold and the sun. May his enemies be vanquished 
ar.' may he be blessed with happiness. O learned 
ones! Offerings of milk and other object are made to 
‘ndra for the sake of learning. O Agni! May this man 
be blessed with that learning. May he be the best of 
his race. O Agni! Make his sacrifices successful and 
grant him energy and riches. Purify his mind and 
shower down happiness on him. 


Prayer for the pardoning of sins 

Varuna is the supreme godhead. He is the one who 
created the gods. Varuna’s wishes are like truth itself. 
I use the power of my leaming to free this sinner from 


340 


the supreme godhead’s wrath. O Varuna! I bow down 
before your anger. O god! I know well the various sins 
that mankind falls prey to. This man has sought 
refuge with you and will live for a hundred years. This 
is the message that I will announce in a thousand 
assemblies. O man! Many are the lies you have 
uttered. I obtain Varuna’s pardon for all these sins. | 
free you from the wrath of the supreme godhead who, 
is like an immense ocean. O brave one! You can 
announce this wonderful news to other members of 
your tribe. 


Prayer for destroying enemies 


May enemies who try to pierce us with their 
weapons not be able to reach us. May the enemies 
who try to attack us from the four directions not be 
able to reach us. O Indra! May the shower of arrows 
not be able to reach us. May arrows which have 
already been shot, not be able to reach us. May 
arrows which have not yet been shot (but will be), not 
be able to reach us. These are the divine words which 
will destroy our enemies. Enemies who are related to 
us and those who are not related will be destroyed. All 
enemies, be they of superior, equal or inferior races, 
will be destroyed. O Rudra! Vanquish with your 
arrows those who attack us and try to make us their 
slaves. Vanquish those who bear open enmity. And 
vanquish also those whose enmity is implicit. May 
those who hate us not be able to cause us harm. All 
the gods will help to destroy our enemies. These 
divine words will be our armour. 


341 


There are many more prayers in the same vein in 
kanda one. There are prayers for solving urinary 
problems, easing childbirth, curing breathing 
problems and disorders of the blood, keeping 
away thieves, ensuring the welfare of the 
subjects, increasing the piosperity of the 
kingdom, lengthening life expectancy and 
preventing leprosy and disorders of the heart. 
Even though we have skipped these, you will 
have obtained a general idea of the first kanda. 
Let us therefore move on to kanda two. 


KANDA TWO s 


The supreme godhead 


The entire universe is merged in the identity of the 
supreme godhead. But the supreme godhead can be 
visualised only in the innermost recesses of the heart 
and it is there that a true devotee sees him. It is the 
supreme godhead who milked the life force and gave 
birth to all objects. Men who observe religious rites 
know of this manifestation of the supreme godhead, 
and praise him. 


He is in the innermost recesses of the heart; he is 
like a heavenly drink (amrita). It is only the truly 
learned who can describe the nature of the supreme 
godhead. The creator’s three feet are in the innermost 
recesses of the heart and one who realises this is 
learned. 

The supreme godhead is our father. He is the one 


who gave us birth. He is our brother. He is the 
omniscient one who knows all the worlds that 


342 


constitute the universe. It is he who gave all the gods 
their names. It is into the paramatman (the divine 
soul) that the entire universe merges. 


I have roamed all over heaven and earth. Having 
become acquainted with all objects, I have realised 
that the paramatman alone is the truth. I worship him. 
As speech originates with the speaker, so the universe 
originates with the paramatman. He is the preserver 
and the nourisher. He is Agni. 


The gods are the drinkers of amrita. Yet, they too 
seek refuge with the supreme godhead. The 
paramatman alone is truth. This knowledge is as 
sacred as the sacred thread. I have roamed around the 
world and realised this. 


(The creator’s three feet refer to his three acts of 
creation, preservation and destruction.) . 


The paramatman alone is the lord of the universe. 
He is the one who nurtures the world. He is the only 
one in the universe who deserves to be worshipped. O 
divine god! I merge into you through my prayers. | 
bow down in obeisance before you. You are the one 
who resides in heaven. 


He alone is the lord of the universe. He alone is the 
nurturer. He is the source of all happiness. He alone is 
the one who must be served. The paramatman is in 
heaven, but he is worshipped on earth. The sun is like 
his skin and it is he who permeates the sun’s body. 
The paramatman is the one who removes all 
impediments. He is the one to be worshipped. 


343 


The presence of the paramatman can be detected in 
the pure life force. It is in this life force that the 
nurturer of all objects can be found. He is also in the 
atmosphere and, from there, he descends into our 
midst. This is the sacred wisdom that has been 
imparted to me. 


You will see the paramatman in the radiance of the 
stars (nakshatra) and in the strokes of lightning during 
a monsoon. He is the creator. I worship him. O 
goddesses who rule over the life force! I worship you 
because you are the supreme _ godhead’s 
manifestations. = 


O apsaras! You inspire us, remove our woes, satisfy 
our desires and rule over our minds. I worship you as 
manifestations of the paramatman. 


(The word apsara signifies a dancer of heaven. But 
in this context, apsaras connote the goddesses who 
preside over the life force.) 


Prayer for healing 

The herbs grew on the mountain. | brought them 
down from there and prepared medicines for the one 
who is ill. O you who are ill! This medicine is for you. 


O beloved herb! I can prepare countless medicines 
from you. Some of them will stem the flow of blood. 
Others will perform the act of healing. 


The physician digs up the herbs. From those he 
makes medicines that cure wounds and make paitents 
well. 


344 


The physician also collects herbs from the depths of 
the ocean. From those also he makes medicines that 
cure patients. 


I have dug out the herb from the ground. 1 have 
extracted the medicine that will heal the wound. I will 
bring an end to this disease. 


May the water and the herbs ensure our welfare. 
May Indra’s weapons destroy the demons. May the » 
arrows that are shot by the demons be unable to reach 
us. 


Jangida mani 


For the sake of a long life and for the sake of 
happiness, I wear an amulet (mani) made of jangida. 
It will increase my strength and will dry up all 
manner of ill health. 


(The jangida was a plant that was cultivated so that 
charms and amulets could be made out of it.) 


The jangida mani is blessed with a thousand powers. 
It protects the wearer from infantile disorders and the 
wasting away of the body. It protects the wearer from 
dehydration and from the watering of the eyes. 


The jangida mani protects the body from 
dehydration. It prevents digestive disorders. In it is 
the essence of all medicines. May it protect us form all 
evil. 


The learned have told us of the virtues of the 
jangida mani. This amulet will protect us from disease. 


345 


May shana and jangida preserve us from disease. 
One of these is found in the forest and the other is 
grown in the fields. 


(The jangida was cultivated and therefore grew in 
the fields. It is used as a general expression from all 
herbs and plants that were cultivated. The shana is 
cannabis or hemp. It was not cultivated. It grew on its 
own, in the forest. The shana is thus used as a general 
expression for all herbs and plants that did not have 
to be cultivated.) 


This amulet will protect us from violence. It will 
protect us from enemies, demons and disease. May 
the powerful jangida mani grant us lorig lives. 


Indra 

O brave Indra! Be pleased and advance forth. 
Come here on your steeds. The intelligent ones have 
extracted the sweet juice for you. Drink it and be 
pleased. 


(The juice refers to the juice of the soma herb.) 


O Indra! Satiate yourself with the juice that 
deserves to be praised. This is the juice that grants 
divine bliss. It has been extracted for the sake of your 
pleasure. It has been offered to you with sweet words. 


Indra is the one who swiftly descended on his 
enemies. Indra is the one who destroyed the enemies 
who endircled him from all directions. Indra is the one 
who churned the power of his foes. Fortified by soma 
juice, Indra vanquished his enemies. 


346 


O powerful Indra! May the juice which has been 
extracted merge into your being. May it fulfil you. You 
are the ruler. Come to us in your wisdom and listen to 
our prayers. Accept our obeisance. We have 
summoned you for the sake of a big battle. Be pleased 
and reveal your plans to us. 


I have described well the valour of the great Indra. 
The wielder of the vajra performed the brave deeds 
that I have described. He destroyed the enemies who - 
arose. He split asunder the mountains and released 
floods of water. 


Indra killed the enemies who hid in the mountains. 
The vajra is Indra’s weapon. It was made for him by a 
skilled artisan. When Indra released the waters, they 
flowed into the ocean. 


The brave one has drunk the soma juice. He has 
drunk the juice offered to him in three containers. 
Indra grasped the vajra in his hand and slew the 
enemies. 


Agni 

O Agni! The sages are the ones who follow the 
righteous path. May they light your flames every 
month, every season and every year. May your flames 
rise in their divine radiance. Bring radiance to the 
four directions. 


O Agni! You have been lit according to the 
prescribed rites. Blaze forth. May you bring us riches 
and may your devotees be ‘preserved. May the 


347 


brahmanas (priests) who worship you attain fame. But 
may those who do not, be infamous. 


O Agni! These brahmanas acknowledge your 
superiority. Bring us your blessings. You are the one 
who conquers all enemies. You are the one who 
enables us to rise above our vanities. This is your 
household. Come and reside here. 


O Agni! Blaze forth in all your energy. Be like a 
friend unto us. We are like your relations, be seated in 
our midst. Be supreme, like a king among kshatriyas 
(the warrior class). 


O Agni! Enable us to triumphvover hatred and 
enmity. May we not be violent and may we not fall 
prey to temptation. The fact of your presence here is 
like wealth to us. 


Kanda two has many more suktas. For example, 
you may have cursed someone. And you need a 
prayer to withdraw that curse. Apart from 
general prayers for removing impediments, there 
are specific prayers for curing diseases like gout 
and tuberculosis. 


There are prayers for enhancing one’s mental 
and spiritual strength, suktas to be chanted when 
new clothes are donned, prayers for banishing 
robbers and ensuring victory and prosperity. 
There are other prayers that are to be chanted on 
the occasion of weddings. But we will now move 
on to kanda three. 


348 
KANDA THREE 


Prayer for defeating enemies 


Our brave warriors will be as powerful as Agni. 
They will attack our enemies and bum them to ashes. 
Our skilled soldiers will delude our foes and slice off 
their arms. 


O warriors who are not afraid of dying! You are 
indeed brave. Advance, thrust with your weapons and ' 
be victorious. Our strong and brave warriors are 
slicing up our enemies. Our leaders are as powerful as 
Agni, and they are invading our foes. 


O Indra! O Agni! The two of your will aid us in the 
onslaught against our enemies. Burn the evil ones 
into ashes. 


O Indra! Be swift. Use your vajra to slice up the 
enemies. Advance. Kill the enemies who are in the 
front, kill those who are in the middle, and kill those 
who are at the back. Delude the enemies in all the 
directions. 


O Indra! Bring fear into the hearts of our enemies. 
Unite with Agni and Vayu to delude them from the 
four directions. 


Let Indra delude the enemies and let our brave 
warriors kill them. Let Agni burn up the eyes of the 
foes. This is how we will defeat our enemies so that our 
army returns victorious. 


Our soldiers are like our messengers. They will 
invade our enemies and demolish them. Our soldiers 


349 


are skilled. They will delude the minds of the enemies 
and chop up their arms. 


Our army will make the hearts of the enemies 
tremble in fear. The enemies will be driven out of their 
homes; they will be repulsed in every land. 


O Indra! Delude the minds of our enemies and 
come to us with your well wishes. Unite with Agni and 
Vayu to destroy our foes. 


O those who are our enemies! May you start to fight 
amongst yourselves. May you be forced to retreat. 
May your minds be deluded. May all your wishes 
come to nought. 


O disease! May you plague the bodies of our 
enemies. May you get under their skins. Advance and 
invade the enemies. Bring misery to their hearts and 
make them unconscious. 


O warriors who are not afraid of dying! The cohorts 
of our enemies have invaded us. Attack them and 
bring ddrkness to their hearts. 


Prayer for a coronation 

O king! You have been crowned the lord of this 
kingdom. May your ascent be blessed with energy. 
May you be the emperor over all your subjects. All the 
directions are summoning you here. You deserve to be 
a king. Come here and be revered. 


The subjects have acknowledged you as the king for 
the sake of kingdom. The four directions have 
acknowledged you as the king, for the sake of the 


350 


kingdom. Ascend the throne. Be a brave warrior and 
distribute the riches that you will acquire for us. 


Your relations are summoning you with due 
honour. May Agni be your messenger. May your 
wives and sons prosper. Be energetic and accept these 
offerings. 


The Ashvinis, Mitra, Varuna, the Maruts and the 
other gods are summoning you here. Be of a generous ~ 
mind so that you give alms. Be brave so that you may 
acquire riches for us. 


Come to us from places that are far away. May 
heaven and earth ensure your welfare. It is Varuna 
himself who summons you here so that you may be 
king of this kingdom. 


O king of kings! Roam throughout your kingdom as 
an ordinary man. Mix with the elders so that you may 
become learned. If you perform these good deeds, 
people will welcome you into their houses. Observe 
sacrifices in honour of the gods. May you make your 
subjects strong. 


Your righteous and prosperous subjects have come 
together to prepare this throne for you. They have 
summoned you so that you ‘may become their king. 
May you have a good heart and body and may you 
rule for a hundred years. 


Parna mani 


This powerful parna mani (amulet) has come so that 
it may destroy enemies through its power. This. amulet 


351 


is like the strength of the gods and the juice of all 
herbs. May it energise me. 


(The word pama now means leaf. But originally, it 
meant a feather or feather—like leaf. Etymologically, 
para is related to the word fern. This sukta is about an 
amulet made out of the leaves ot the palasha tree.) 


O pena mani! Bring me martial prowess and bring 
me riches. May I regard this kingdom as my own and 
work towards its prosperity. 


It is the gods themselves who left this amulet in the 
trees. They left it there so that I might wear it and live 
for a long time. we 


This pama mani is on my body so that it may ensure 
my welfare. May it give me the best of minds and may 
it make me the most learned of all. 


O para mani! Bring to me all those who are 
intelligent. Bring to me the makers of chariots. Bring 
to me workers in iron. Let such people gather around 
me. 


O parna mani! Bring to me the kings. And bring to 
me those who are the makers of kings. Bring to me the 
ones who preside over villages. Let them all surround 
me. 

O parna mani! You are a leaf, but you are the 


protector of my body. May you increase my valour. I 
will wear your energy on my person for an entire year. 


352. 


Prayer for the unity of the kingdom 


Mitra is the one who spreads his rays throughout 
the world. Mitra is the one who is the originator of the 
seasons. May Mitra come here. May Varuna, Vayu 
and Agni come here. May they bless us with a great 
kingdom that is fit to be lived in. 


Let Dhata and Savita listen to my words. Let Indra 
and the architect Tvashta listen to my words. I call 
upon Aditi, the mother of the gods, to listen to my 
words. May | be a leader of my race. 


I call upon Soma, Savita and all the Adityas with 
my offerings. May I attain superiority. Those in my 
race who are not opposed to me have lit the flames of 
this fire. May the flames of Agni blaze for many years. 


O gods! Stay here. Do not go far away. Nourish us 
and bless us with foodgrains and cows. May all the 
gods grant us our wish that the subjects of the 
kingdom always stay united. 


May the minds of the subjects function as one 
mind. May all their acts be driven by the same desires. 
May their motives be identical. May those amongst 
them who act against one another be united. 


O you who are opposed to me! May your mind be 
like mine. Come to me. May your heart be like mine. 
May your acts be like mine and may you become like 
one who belongs to my own family. 


Others suktas in kanda three are prayers against 
calamity and disease, and for a long life. There 
are prayers that have to be recited when a new 


353 


house is built. There are suktas addressed to 
water and cows. Others ensure prosperity in 
trade and agriculture. Still others increase one’s 
energy and intelligence and control the senses. 
Let us now move on to kanda four. 


KANDA FOUR 


The knowledge of the brahman 


The brahman (the divine essence) first manifested 
itself in the east. Learned is the one who knows this. 
Learned is the one who sees the sun, the moon and 
the stars in the sky and realises the difference between 
that which is true and that which is untrue. 


Man has obtained this divine wisdom from his 
fathers. May this wisdom and knowledge enable man 
to lead a superior life. May this wisdom be dedicated 
to the brahman. May it be used to increase one’s 
energy, to banish sinners, and to perform the purest of 
sacrifices. 


One who thus befriends the brahman learns the true 
nature of the gods. It is from the brahman that all 
forms of knowledge became manifest. It is from the 
brahman that all forms of energy have emanated. 


The brahman determined the true rules according to 
which heaven and earth were established. Heaven 
and earth were made fit for habitation. It was the 
brahman who made heaven, the atmosphere and the 
earth vast and firm. 


354 


Brihaspati is the lord of the universe. From time 
immemorial he has enveloped the universe in the four 
directions. It is his energy that gives rise to the pure 
radiance of day. It is from this radiance that the 
learned glean the wisdom needed to lead a righteous 
life. 


(Brihaspati is being used as a synonym for the 
brahman.) 


The learned know for sure the place where the 
brahman resides. The learned one is born at the same 
time as other men. But the door to true wisdom is 
opened a little bit for the learned one. It is through 
this opening that the one who is learned enters the 
world of learning. Other men remain outside the 
portals in a state.of stupor. 


Men are like the brothers of the gods. Brihaspati is 
the common father. Through devotion to Brihaspati, 
men obtain the knowledge that the brahman is the 
creator. The brahman is learned and powerful, It can 
never be overcome. 


Who should be worshipped? 


Who is the god we should worship? The one who is 
the source of spiritual and other forms of strength. 
The one whom all the gods obey. The one who is the 
lord of all bipeds and quadrupeds. He is the one who 
alone@s worthy of worship. 


Who is the god we should worship? The one who is 
the lord of all beings who breathe and blink. The one 
in whose greatness can be found immortality. To 


355 


shun him is to fall into the clutches of death. He is the 
one who alone is worthy of worship. 


Who is the god we should worship? The one to 
whom two armies pray at the time of battle. The one 
to whom heaven and earth call in times of danger. 
The one to whom the best of paths lead. The one who 
alone is worthy of worship. 


Who is the god we should worship? The one whose 
energy makes heaven, the atmosphere and the earth 
vast. The one whose power makes the sun shine. The 
one who alone is worthy of worship. 


ao 
Who is the god we should worship? The one whose 
greatness makes the snow-clad mountains rise. The 
one whose greatness creates land in the midst of 
oceans. The one whose arms are like the four 
directions. The one who alone is worthy of worship. 


Who is the god we should worship? Prior to 
creation, the water bore the universe in its womb. It is 
the supreme one who instilled the life force in the 
universe through his divine powers. He is the one who 
alone is worthy of worship. 


Who is the god we should worship? The one who 
bore gold and other shining objects in his being. The 
one who was the lord of all the elements before 
creation. The one who bore heaven and the earth. 
The one who alone is worthy of worship. 


Who is the god whom we should worship? The 
creator who instilled the life force in the water at the 
time of creation. The one who alone is worthy of 


worship. 


356 


Prayer for purging poison 


(This is specifically for poison that has entered the 
body from a poison-tipped arrow.) 


At first, the brahmanas were born with ten hands 
and ten mouths. The brahmanas drank the soma juice 
and counteracted the effects of the poison. 


(Brahmanas were often imputed with superhuman 
powers right from birth. The ten heads and ten arms 
is simply a reference to the extraordinary powers of 
brahmanas.) 


I utter these words so that the poison may be 
banished from everywhere in this vast expanse of 
heaven and earth. I utter these words so that the 
poison may be banished from the region where the 
seven rivers flow. 


(The seven rivers are often identified as Indus, 
Sarasvati, Vipasha, Shatadru, Vitasta, Asikli and 
Parushni.) 


O poison! The celestial bird Garuda drank you up 
and you could do him no harm. You could not make 
him mad or unconscious; you were like food for him. 


A brave warrior discharged the arrow with his 
hand. It is the shaft of the arrow that discharged 
poison into your body. But I have removed the poison 
with my words. 


I have removed the poison from the barb, the shaft, 
and the tail of the arrow. I have removed the poison 
from the head, the horn, and the other parts. 


357 


(Before arrows came to be tipped with iron or 
bronze, they were tipped with the horn of deer.) 


O arrow! Your shaft has now become useless. Your 
poison has become useless. Like a dried up tree, the 
bow which discharged this arrow has also become 
useless. 


The efforts of the one who crushed the poisonous 
plants to extract the poison have come to nought. 
The efforts of the one who smeared the poison on the 
arrow have come to nought. The efforts of the one 
who shot the arrow have come to nought. The 
mountain on which the poisonous plant grew has 
also been rendered useless. 


O poisonous plant! What has the one who dug you 
up out of the ground achieved? What has the 
mountain on which you grew achieved? Their efforts 
have all come to nought. 


(The subsequent prayer is for neutralising the 
poison from poisonous plants.) 


The juice of the herb named varana nullifies all 
poison. This juice is like amrita itself and with its help, 
I purge you of all poison. 


May the poison that is in the east be nullified. May 
the poison that is in the north be nullified. May the 
poison that is in the south also be nullified, when I 
mix the sacred juice with curds and apply it. 


O you who have poison in your body! I have made 
a paste with sesamum seeds, curds and Clarified 


358 


butter. I will apply the paste on your stomach and 
feed it to you so that you may regain consciousness. 


O poisonous plant that has led to the 
unconsciousness! I will fling you aside like an arrow. 
The juice of my herb will banish you the way an 
useless uiensil is discarded. 


I repulse the poison with this herb. 


Such is the value of this herb that it is bought in. 
exchange for valuable objects like clothing and 
deerskin. O poisonous plant which has been dug up! 
You will not be able to cause unconsciousness. 


Physicians who are learned know the use of herbs. 
Retain that learning and purge the poison from your 
warriors and children. These are the words that I have 
to say. 


Amongst other prayers in kanda four are those 
that banish enemies, increase one’s strength, 
and cure insomnia. There is a sukta devoted to 
making amulets out of conch-shells. Prayers are 
addressed to trees and to rain. There are prayers 
to herbs and cows. Other suktas increase energy, 
purge sins and cure worms. Let us however move 
on to kanda five. 


KANDA FIVE 


Prayer for victory 


O Agni! May my energy manifest itself in every 
battle. I light your flames so that my body may 
become strong. May all the four directions bow down 


359 


before me. May you be my leader when | strive for 
victory in battle. 


O Agni! Repulse the anger of my enemies and be 
my protector in every direction. May the lowly ones 
who cause me anguish keep their distance. Even if my 
enemies are intelligent, let their evil designs be 
destroyed. 


All the gods, including Indra, the Maruts, Vishnu 
and Agni, will be on my side during battle. May my 
heart be strong in battle. May Vayu be on my side 
during battle. 


May | be able to satisfy my desires. May my 
resolutions be true and firm. May I not fall prey to sin. 
May all the gods offer me protection. 


May the gods grant me riches. May I be blessed by 
them and may I have the strength to summon them. 
The divine priests will grant me these boons. May I be 
protected from disease and may I be a brave warrior. 


The divine directions will grant me vast expanses 
for my benefit. O gods! Bring me happiness. May | 
never suffer from a lack of energy. May I be able to 
perform famous deeds and may I be protected from 
sin. 


O goddesses who are three in number! Please grant 
me a lot of happiness. May the objects which provide 
physical nutrition be available to me and my subjects. 
May I have many children and may my body not 
waste away. O Soma! Preserve me from the 
depredations of my enemies. 


360 


(The three goddesses in question are Ila, Sarasvati 
and Bharati. The reference to the subjects also makes 
it clear that the prayer is being recited by the king.) 


May the supreme godhead who is omnipotent 
grant me the best of happiness. O lord! Grant 
happiness to my subjects. Preserve me from 
destruction and do not forsake me. 


O god who is the creator and preserver! O god who 
is the lord of this universe! O Rudra and O Aditya! O 
two Ashvinis! O other gods! Preserve your devotee 
from destruction. 


May my enemies maintain their distance. Indra 
and Agni will help me when I repel these foes. Aditya, 
Rudra and the other gods who dwell above will be like 
kings to me. They will inspire me and infuse me with 
energy. 


I pray to the Indra who is the protector of my cows, 
horses and other riches. O Indra! Listen to my 


prayers. Aid me in every endeavour and shower me 
with your favours. 


The herb kushtha 


O herb who are named kushtha! You grow on the 
mountains. Descend here from the mountains so that 
you may cure disease. 


(The kushtha was a medicinal plant.) 


The Himalayas are the region where herbs are to be 
found. It is there that the bird Garuda makes his 
home. People know that the home of the herbs is 


361 


there. It is for this reason that they spend such a lot of 
money in going there. 


They go to collect medicinal herbs from the 
Himaiayas. 


Heaven is thrice removed from earth. (This is in the 
sense of it being the third of the regions, the first being 
the earth.) The divine ashvattha tree grows in heaven. 
It is there that the gods first received the immortal 
kushtha plant. (The ashvattha tree is the fig tree. It is 
regarded as sacred.) 


In heaven travel golden boats with ropes made of 
gold. It was there that the gods obtained the kushtha 
plant, like the blossom of amrita itself’ 


The roads there are made of gold and the oars on 
the boats are also of gold. It was on these golden 
boats that the kushtna plant was brought. 


O kushtha plant! Make this patient sit up. Make 
him healthy and remove his ailment. 


You were born from the gods. The soma herb is 
your friend. You are like the breath of life; you cure 
diseases of the eye. Grant this patient happiness. 


You were bom in the Himalayas. You bring welfare 
to mankind. Justly is your praise chanted. 


O kushtha! Great is your name. He who possesses 
you is also great. You cure tuberculosis and other 
forms of illness. 


You cure diseases of the head and the eyes. You 
purge the body of bad blood and increase one’s 
Strength. You have the power of healing. 


362 


Shilachi or laksha 


The night is your mother. The sky is your father 
and your grandfather is the sun himself. You are 
known as shilachi. You are the sister of the gods. 


(The shilachi was a medicinal plant, chiefly used to 
repair fractures. It is subsequently also referred to as 
arundhati. The plant was ascribed with such magical 
powers that it was believed to have had a celestial 
origin, like the kushtha. Hence the use of the . 
expression sister of the gods.) 


He who drinks your juice lives. You are the one 
who protects men. You are the one who nourishes 
and cures. 


Like a man embracing a woman, you climb round 
every tree. You are the one who grants victory anda 
long life. You are also known as sparani. 


(The plant was a creeper.) 


Wounds are caused by rods and by arrows. They 
are caused by crushing. Whatever be the nature of 
the wound, you are the one who heals. Make this 
patient healthy. 


You are to be found in the trees bhadra, plaksha (a 
fig tree), ashvattha, khadira (the acacia) and dhava (a 
shrub). You are to be found in the parna (the palasha) 


and the nyagrodha (a fig tree). You are the plant that 
heals all wounds. Come to me. 


(This presumably means that the shilachi wound 
itself around these trees.) 


363 


You are the bringer of good fortune and golden is 
your hue. Your colour is like that of the sun and you 
make the body healthy. O curer of disease! You heal 
wounds and remove ailments. It is thus that you are 
named nishkriti (relief). 


Golden are you, the bringer of good fortune. You 
grant strength and long is your hair. (The part about 
the hair is not clear; perhaps it refers to the juice 
Possessing strands.) You are known as the plant 
laksha (lac). You are the sister of the water and the 
wind is your soul. 


The shilachi herb is beloved like a daughter. O 
shilachi! You are to be found on the trees on which 
goats feed. You are the one who is drawn by Yama’s 
swift horses. 


(The last sentence is not at all clear. Yama, in this 
context, probably does not mean the god of death, but 
the sun. That is, the sun’s rays (the horses) help the 
plant to grow.) 


You are born out of the horse’s mouth and get 
attached to the trees. (Horses again mean the rays of 
the sun.) You are the healer of wounds. Descend from 
the trees and come to me. 


Other suktas of kanda five describe the knowledge 
of the brahman, help to destroy enemies and 
increase spiritual strength. Prayers are addressed 
to the cows of brahmanas. There are prayers to 
purge snake-poison and there are suktas to cure 
fever and other illnesses such as worms. Long 
life is sought through other prayers. There is 


364 


even a prayer which enables one to frighten 
one’s enemies through the playing of drums. 
But we skip these and move on to kanda six. 


KANDA SIX 
Savita 


O descendant of the sage Atharvan! Sing the praise 
of Savita at night. Chant many hymns to him and 
bear his energy in your heart. 


The world is like an ocean and in this ocean, it is 
Savita who inspires with light of truth. He is the 
youthful one who grants happiness. Chant the praise 
of he who is the originator of non-violent speech. 


Savita is the god who inspires. May we be elevated 
along both the paths and attain happiness. 


(Savita is a manifestation of Surya. The two paths 
are thus those of the rising and the setting sun.) 


Indra. 


O priests who observe sacrifices according to the 
seasons! Extract the soma juice well. Purify it so that it 
may be offered to Indra. Let Indra listen to my hymns 
and my prayers. 


Let the foodgrains which are offered reach Indra! 
Let them go to him the way a bird goes to a tree. 
O Indra! O learned and brave one! Destroy the 
enemies who are evil. 


The soma juice has been extracted for the Indra 
who is the wielder of weapons. He is the drinker of the 
soma juice. He is the famous one who is youthful. 


365 


Prayer for protection 


Let the two gods Indra and Pusha protect me. Let 
Aditi and the Maruts Protect me. Let Parjanya, the 
lord of the clouds, protect me. May all the gods 
protect me. May the seven oceuns Protect me. May 
heaven protect me. 


Heaven and earth will protect me and grant me my 
wishes. The stones and the soma herb wil] preserve me 
from sin. The prosperous goddess of learning will 
protect me. Agni will protect me. 


The Ashvinis will protect me. Usha and Ratri (the 
night) will protect me. O Tvashta! Preserve my house 
and increase my prosperity in every way. 


May Tvashta, Parjanya and Brahmanaspati listen 
to my prayers. May Aditi listen to my prayers with her 
sons and brothers. May all the gods listen to my 
hymns and increase my Strength. May they make me 
victorious. 


May the gods Amsha, Bhaga, Varuna, Mitra, 
Aryama, Aditi and the Maruts offer me protection. 
May the evil hatred of my enemies Stay far away. 
May the gods be close to me and banish my enemies. 


O Ashvinis! Increase my wisdom and grant me 
protection. You are the ones who are swift. Do not err 
in granting me protection. O preserver of the 
universe! Remove all my misery. 


Prayer for a sacrifice 


O Agni! I have offered clarified butter to you as an 
oblation. May your devotee attain great heights. 


366 


Impart your energy to him and make the subjects 
prosper. 


O Indra! May the one who is observing the sacrifice 
be elevated. May this devotee be a leader of his race 
and may he rule over ail. Grant him riches and 
prosperity. May he live for many years and may 
happiness not desert him in his old age. 


O Agni! May our sacrifice be a wonderful success. 
May Soma and Brahmanaspati bless us. 


Prayer for destroying enemies 


O Brahmanaspati! My enemies are not devoted to 
god, but try to demean him. I! am performing a 
sacrifice at which soma juice is being offered. Destroy 
my enemies for me. 


O Soma! The evil ones try to rule over us who are 
righteous. Strike them in their mouths with a vajra. 
Moy they be crushed to pieces. 


O Soma! The worst among men are trying to make 
us their slaves, even though they may be our own kin. 
They are also trying to kill us. Use your power to 
demolish these enemies. You will be like the heaven 
which destroys darkness. 


Prayer for peace 


O Soma! The earth, the sun and other gods tread 
along paths that are not marked by hatred. May we 
also tread the path of non-violence and peace. 


O victorious Soma! You are the one who destroys 
demons for our sake. Bless us. 


367 


O gods! You are the ones who repulse the power of 
the demons. Grant us happiness through your 
powers. 


Prayer for purging snake-poison 

Just as Surya knows the heaven well, I am well 
acquainted with the story of the birth of snakes. Just 
as the sun removes the darkness of the night, I remove 
the snake-poison from your body. 


The brahmanas, the sages and the gods knew how 
to purge snake-poison. That learning has come down 
to us from the past and will be used in the future as 
well. I cleanse you of snake-poison with that 
learning. 


I sprinkle you with the waters of rivers and 
mountains. I sprinkle you with the waters of the rivers 
Parushni and Shipala. May peace descend on your 
face. May peace descend on your heart. 


(The Parushni is now identified as the Iravati or the 
Ravi. It is not possible to identify the Shipala. The 
Shipala probably simply meant a stream in which the 
aquatic plant shaivala grew.) 


The revati herb 

(This is about a herb named revati which can no 
longer be identified. The revati had great efficacy in 
making hair grow and in treating ailments of the 
skin.) 

This is the best region of all in the three worlds. It is 


from here that I have collected the herbs that are used 
for treating ailments of the skin. 


368 


This is the best of all the herbs and the best of all 
the trees. It is as superior as the gods Soma, Bhaga 
and Varuna are superior among the gods who move. 


(An alternative interpretation is also possible. It is 
as follows. The revati herb is as superior as Soma 
(moon) among the stars which move and Varuna 
among the gods.) 


O revati herb! Great are your healing powers. Great ~ 
is your strength. Make us well. Grant us an 
abundance of hair. Make our hair luxuriant. 


Wearing bangles 

O bangles! You are the ones who ensure that norms 
are followed. You are the controls that are exercised 
on the two hands. You are the removers of 
impediments. You ensure progeny. You ensure 
riches. 


O bangles! please ensure that the wearer has 
children. O bangles! Please ensure that the wearer 
has sons. Inspire the children to be bom properly 
from the womb. 


Aditi, the mother of the gods, desired to have sons. 
She wore bangles so that her wish might be granted. 
The architect Tvashta prepared the bangles for her. 
May all women who desire children wear bangles. 


The suktas of kanda six tend to bé short and they 
are quite varied. There are the usual prayers for 
the defeat of the enemies and for ensuring 
protection. There are also prayers addressed to 


369 


specific herbs, death and water. One sukta 
speculates on the cause of rain. Yet another 
Strives for marital harmony. Specific diseases 
like worms and tuberculosis are taken care of. 
There are prayers for spiritual upliftment and the 
avoidance of sin. On can be protected from 
curses through some suktas. Other suktas talk of 
curing illness through solar treatment. There are 
prayers addressed to cows, horses and 
foodgrains. But we will gloss over these and 
move on to kanda seven. 


KANDA SEVEN”. 


The atman 

There are four ways to purify the atman (the human 
soul). The first is to concentrate one’s mind through 
meditation so that one realises the origin of all 
speech. The second is to be always truthful. The third 
is to follow the path of learning. And the fourth is to 
keep chanting the name of the paramatman. These 
are the four ways to purify and elevate the atman. 


One’s birth is successful only if one does all this. 
One then gets to know the nature of the paramatman, 
who is like a parent to all of us. Such a person goes 
beyond the confines of his own atman and encircles 
himself with the power of the three worlds. He 
immerses ‘himself in the paramatman and pervades 
the universe. 


The atman is always youthful. It is always present 
with the physical body and protects a person like a 


370 


father. It comes into the womb of the mother. It is the 
atman which is the link between men and gods. The 
learned worship the etman through their mental 
powers. May those who are thus learned instruct us 
on the nature of the atman. 


The atman is the performer of the best of deeds. The 
atman follows the best of paths so that it can merge 
into the paramatman. The paramatman is sweet and 
immortal. The atman elevates itself through 
meditation so that it can unite with the paramatman. 


The motherland 


Heaven is in the motherland. The atmosphere is in 
the motherland. The motherland is our mother. It is 
our father and our son. All the gods, all the elements, 
and all sorts of people can be found here. All the 
objects that exist are in the motherland. All the 
objects that will exist are also in the motherland. 


This is the land that brings welfare to the performer 
of good deeds. This is the land that is the preserver of 
truth and martial prowess. The motherland is large. 
It never wastes away. It grants us happiness. It is the 
land that guides us on the righteous path and 
provides us with foodgrains. For our protection we 
sing the praise of our motherland. 


This is the land that grants us protection. This is 
the land that gives us radiance and non-violence. It is 
here that we follow the righteous path and obtain 
happiness. Divine boats with golden oars sail in 
heaven. The motherland is like those boats. It is free 
from sin and it brings us welfare. 


371 


We sing the glory of our motherland so that we 
may obtain foodgrains. The vast atmosphere is in the 
lap of this land. May our motherland bring us a 
multitude of happiness. 


May the demons who seek to enslave us reside in 
the depths of the ocean. May our motherland be 
populated by those excellent ones who strive for ue 
independence of their country. I banish the demons 
and populate my motherland with such people. 


Prayer to Sarasvati 


O Sarasvati! Nourish us with your milk so that we 
may obtain happiness, peace and _ spiritual 
upliftment. Your are the one who nurtures 
everything. O goddess! Nurture us so that we may 
thrive. 


The sabha 

(In the Vedic age, the king was aided in his task of 
government by two assembles. These were known as 
the sabha and the samiti. The precise functions of 
these two assemblies are not known. But the samiti 
was a general assembly which everyone attended. 
The sabha was more exclusive and only select 
individuals attended it.) 


The samiti of the villages and the sabha of the state 
are the two bodies that help the king to rule over his 
subjects. The subjects are like the king’s children. 
May the sabha and the samiti not have a difference of 
opinion with the king. May the assemblies educate 
the king. O gods! May I be able to make good 
speeches at the sabha. 


372 


O sabhai I know of your existence. Your are known 
as narishta among people because you do not allow 
the king to come to any harm. May those who are 
members of the sabha advise the king in a truly 
unbiased and neutral fashion. 


The king acknowledges the power of learning of 
those who are members of the sabha. O Indra! iepal ] 
also get to participate in a sabha. 


O members of the sabha! Do not get distracted by 
other thoughts when you are taking part in the work 
of the sabha. If your mind wanders, bring it back to 
the task that is at hand. May all the members of the 
sabha concentrate on their duties and on the king. 


The mother tongue 


Let us not turn away from our mother tongue. May 
we always look upon our mother tongue with favour. 
Those who are desirous of pleasing the gods chant 
prayers to them in the mother tongue. It is the mother 
tongue which performs the function of purification. 
Each word of the mother tongue is bound to us with 
ties of blood. Clarified butter flows through each word 
of the mother tongue. All the sacred arts find 
expression in our mother tongue. May we use our 
mother tongue to describe the glory of the gods. 


Prayer for a long life 

O Agni! Your are the beloved one. You are the one 
who deserves worship. You are always youthful. | 
increase your glory through my oblations. May we 


373 


attain you and may you grant us foodgrains. May 
you grant us long lives. 


Prayer for marital harmony 


May your eyes and mine (the husband and the 
wife) be as sweet as honey. May your eyes and mine 
be tinged with the best of ointments. Keep me in the 
innermost recesses of your heart. And may you and! 
always stay united. 


A wife’s prayer 

I dig up this herb from the ground. This herb will 
attract his attention towards me. This is the herb that 
protects one from all misfortunes and prevents one 
from falling prey to temptation. It will bring him 
back to me and it will grant happiness. 


This herb is named asuri. It is this herb that gave 
Indra the power to rule over the gods. I use it to 
obtain power over my husband so that I may always 
be loved by him. 


O herb! Your obtain your serenity from the moon 
and your energy from the sun. The other gods bestow 
many divine qualities on you. It is for that reason 
that I praise you. 


O husband! Pray let me speak now. Hold your 
tongue. It is I who will speak at home. You will 
certainly get your chance to speak at the sabha. At the 
sabha you belong to everyone. But at home, you are 
mine alone. Do not even mention anyone else’s 
name. 


374 


You may travel far away to the deserted forest. You 
may travel to the other bank of the river. But 
wherever you may be, this herb will tie you up and 
bring you back to me. 


Prayer to Sarasvati 


O goddess Sarasvati! I am offering oblations to you 
through the prescribed religious rites. O goddess! 
Grant me subjects. 


O Sarasvati! I offer these oblations of clarified 
butter to you. These oblations are fit to be accepted, 
please accept them. You have the power to shower us 
with welfare. Please display your grace and make us 
sweet. 


O Sarasvati! You are deserving of worship. Grant 
us your favour and happiness. May you never be 
parted from us. 


Amongst the other suktas in kanda seven are 
prayers to various gods. There are prayers for 
increasing one’s welfare and for obtaining 
protection from enemies. There are suktas for 
ensuring good rainfall and bountiful harvests. 
There are special charms for taking care of 
poison and specific illnesses. There are suktas 
dedicated to cows. However, let us move on to 
kanda eight. 


KANDA EIGHT - 


Charm for the recovery of a man who is dying 


I bow down before the paramatman who adopts the 
form of death to bring an énd to all life. O man! May 


SvS 


your body retain your breath of life with pleasure. 
May this man live for a long time in the immortal 
rays of the sun. 


The god Bhaga has established this man in the best 
of places. The god Soma has established him in the 
best of places. The Maruts have established him in 
the best of places. Indra and Agni have ensured his 
welfare and have established him in the best of 
places. 


O man! May your life, your lifespan, your mind, 
and your breath of life reside in your body. May these 
divine words free you from the noose that is trying to 
drag you into the underworld. May you be elevated. 


O man! Rise up. May you not fall. Free yourself 
from the chains of death. Look upon Agni and Surya 
and continue to live. 


The wind that is in the atmosphere will flow freely 
for your sake. The water will shower down heavenly 
nectar on you. The sun will radiate your body with 
pleasant heat. Death will take pity on you. May you 
not die. 


O man! You will rise and be elevated. You will not 
descend. I am making you powerful so that you may 
have a long life. Your physical body is like a chariot. 
Ascend on it for the sake of the happiness that 
immortality will bring. When you become old, you 
will be learned and wil] impart wisdom to others. 


May your mind not tread along paths that should 
be shunned. Do not forget that you have a debt to 


376 


life. Do not wish to meet your ancestors yet. May all 
the gods protect you on earth. 


Do not grieve over that which is past. That only 
serves to distract you from the present. Come here, 
away from the darkness. Come into the light. I am 
holding your hands. 


The darkness of the night and the radiance of the 
day are the two rulers of time who have been 
appointed by the paramatman. They will show you 
the way. Come here. Do not sorrow. Do not tum 
away from life, towards the opposite direction. 


Do not follow the path that should be shunned. 
That is a dangerous path and should not be followed. 
O man! I am telling you that such a road will lead you 
into darkness. Avoid that path. It will lead you to the 
land of fright. And if you follow the path that I have 
indicated, you will be free from all fear. 


The fire that is in the water will preserve you. The 
fire that men light will preserve you. The leamed fire 
that is in all human bodies will preserve you. The fire 
that is in the lightning of heaven will preserve you. 


May those who eat raw flesh not kill you. Stay 
away from those who bring destruction. Heaven will 
protect you. The earth will protect you. The sun and 
the moon will protect you. The atmosphere will 
protect you from divine anger. 


May all forms of learning protect you. May he who 
does not sleep protect you. May he who does not run 
away protect you. May he who is the protector 
himself protect you. 


377 


Let all of them protect you. Let all of them nurture 
you. I pray to all your protectors. I offer myself to 
them. 


The one who is the creator, the preserver, and the 
protector, takes care of all living beings. He will take 
care of you. Your life will not desert your body. I call 
upon your life force to stay. 


May men who are killers not be able to cause you 
any harm. May darkness not cast shadows on you. 
May evil words not grate on your ears. You will be the 
performer of sacrifices. How can you possibly die? 
Aditya, Indra, Agni and the Vasus will ensure your 
welfare and make you rise. 


Heaven and earth will elevate you. The god who is 
the preserver will elevate you. All the herbs, led by 
their king Soma, will grant you protection. They will 
make you rise above death. 


O gods! May this man continue to reside in this 
world. May he not leave this world and go into the 
world beyond. Applying the numerous powers that | 
have, | will protect this man from death. 


I will make you triumph over death. The god who 
rules over life and foodgrains will nourish you. Let the 
women who have unbraided their hair and are 
crying, cease to weep. Let them not cry for your sake. 
For, it is certain that they need not weep for you. 


I have revived you. I have brought you back. You 
have returned, as good as new. You are complete in 
limb and body. I have got you back your eyesight. I 


378 


have got you back your lifespan, your tenure on the 
earth. 


The darkness has forsaken you and has gone far 
away. Radiance surrounds you from all the four 
directions. I have repulsed death and misery from 
your proximity. I have cured your illness. 


Virat 


(This hymn is about the mystical goddess known as 
Virat or Viraj. According to the Vedas, she was bom 
from the primeval purusha. She is the vital spirit who 
is identified with the creator.) 


Right at the begining, it is certain that Virat was the 
universe. When she emerged, everyone was 
frightened and struck with terror. 


She arose and was transformed into the fire that 
resides in households. Those who realise this, perform 
the duties of householders and observe sacrifices in 
houses. 


She arose and was transformed into sacrificial fire. 
Those who realise this, become the beloved of the 
goddess. They perform sacrifices according to the 
prescribed rites and act as hosts for guests. 


She arose and was transformed into the sabha. 
Those who realise this, deserve to be members of a 
sabha. 


She arose and was transformed into the samiti. 
Those who realise this, deserve to be members of a 
samiti. 


379 


She arose and was transformed into the council of 
ministers. Those who realise this, deserve to be 
ministers and counsel the king. 


She arose and divided herself into four parts in the 
atmosphere. 


Gods and men say that Virat is the source of the 
learning that keeps us all alive. That is the reason for 
praying to her. 


Gods and men call her and pray to her. They say: 
come strength, come force of life, come truth, come 
foodgrains.. 


Indra is like her calf and the gayatri metre is the 
noose with which she is tethered. 


(There follow several verses, which unfortunately, 
are exceedingly obscure. In essence, Virat is 
compared to a cow and there is an extended analogy 
on the milking of this cow so as to obtain various 

, objects.) 
Amongst other suktas in kanda eight are prayers 
to ward off demons and counteract illness. There 
is also a prayer that is used in the course of 
exorcisms. We will skip these and move on to 
kanda nine. 


KANDA NINE 


The honey-lash of the Ashvinis 


(This is probably the best known sukta of the 
Atharva Veda. The Ashvinis were the lords of light, 


380 


who appeared just before dawn. The honey-lash 
seems to have represented the life-giving morning 
breeze, with all its creative powers. The honey-lash 
has also been identified with a cow.) 


The honey-lash was bom from heaven, the 
atmosphere and the earth, from the waters of the 
ocean, from the fire and the wind. In the honey-lash 
is the seed of immortality. All subjects worship it from ‘ 
their hearts and attain happiness. 


The honey-lash has been known as the seed of the 
ocean. In its milk is the form of the universe. The 
breath of life is present wherever the sound of the 
honey-lash is heard. In the honey-lash there is amrita. 


In different parts of earth, different people have 
observed the honey-lash and tried to understand its 
character. The honey-lash was born from the fire and 
from the wind. It is the daughter of the Maruts. 


The honey-lash is the mother of the gods (adityas). 
It is the daughter of the Vasus. In it is immortality. In 
it is the life force of all living beings. Golden is the hue 
of the honey-lash and it sprinkles clarified butter. It is 
the honey-lash which energises the earth. 


The gods made the honey-lash; this is the 
wonderful origin that it has. It is the gods who reared 
the youthful honey-lash as a mother. As soon as it 
was bor it began to observe the world. 


Who can understand the honey-lash and who can 
comprehend its nature? Near its heart is a pot full of 
soma juice. The learned Brahma will take pleasure in 
this soma juice. 


381 


Only he who milks the honey-lash is capable of 
understanding it and comprehending its nature. 
With an unfaltering heart, such a person milks the 
honey-lash. 


The honey-lash thunders in a loud voice. It 
frequents the places where sacrifices are held. It 
presides over sacrifices and provides milk on such 
occasions. The honey-lash alone is capable of 
measuring time. 


The monsoon provides the strong and energetic 
water that satisfies one who is thirsty. The honey-lash 
is the origin of the monsoon. It is the origin of rain 
and of the strength that sustains the learned. 


O ruler and preserver of the world! Your voice is the 
thunder of the clouds. You cast down your strength 
on the ground. Agni and Vayu gave birth to the 
honey-lash. It is the daughter of the Maruts. 


O Ashvinis! You are fond of the soma juice that is 
offered at sacrifices. May my soul also be fond of your 
energy. 

Indra and Agni love the soma juice that is offered at 
sacrifices. O Indra and Agni! May my soul be the 
beloved of your energy. 

Soma is the favourite priest at sacrifices. O Soma! 
May my soul be favoured with your energy. 

May I create the sweetness, may I obtain the 
sweetness. O Agni! I have come with offerings of milk 
for you. Impart your energy to me. 


382 


O Agni! Grant me energy, subjects and length of 
life. May all the gods get to know me. May all the 
sages and Indra get to know me. 


The bees collect honey in their hives. O Ashvinis! 
Like that, may knowledge, energy, strength and 
valour be collected in my being. 


The bees keep adding freshly collected honey to 
that which already exists. O Ashvinis! Like that, may 
new knowledge, new energy, new strength and new - 
valour be added to that which is already there in my 
being. 


The hills and the mountains, the cows and the 
horses, are full of the sweet juice. There is sweetness in 
water collected from the rain. May all this sweetness 
merge into my being. 


O Ashvinis! You are the preservers of that which is 
righteous. May the honey of bees be added to my 
existence. May I be able to energise my speech. 


O prajapati! O preserver of the universe! You are 
strong and your voice is like the thunder of clouds. 
You shower down strength on earth and in heaven. It 
is on this strength that all living beings survive. It is 
this strength that fulfils and sustains them with 
foodgrains. 


If the honey-lash is like a rod , the earth is its base. 
The atmosphere is the stem and heaven is the tip. 
Lightning radiates out of the tip and, right at the top, 
there is a golden point. 


(It is difficult to interpret this.) 


383 


The honey-lash gives rise to seven types of honey. 
He who understands this becomes like sweetness itself. 
These seven types of honey are to be found in 
brahmanas, kings, bulls, cows, rice and wheat. The 
seventh type of honey is honey itself. 


He who knows this becomes sweetness itself. All of 
his possessions are blessed with sweetness. He gets to 
reside in the sweetest of worlds. 


You may hear thunder in the sky. Realise that this 
is the manifestation of Prajapati himself. When you 
hear this, arise and pray to the supreme godhead. 
Pray that he may remember you. One who knows this 
is blessed with the love of all his subjects. Prajapati 
never forgets such a person. 


The other suktas of kanda nine are concerned 
with the consecration of new houses and the 
glorification of cows, bulls and sacrificial goats. 
There are prayers to prevent diseases and a sukta 
on the proper reception of guests. But we move 
on the kanda ten. 


KANDA TEN 


Kena sukta 

(The most famous sukta in kanda ten is known as 
kena sukta. The word kena means “from what”. 
Profound metaphysical and philosophical questions 
are the subject of this sukta. Who created the universe 
that we see? From what was the universe made? 
Where did I come from? Where will I go? These are 
the sort of questions that are asked in this sukta. 


384 


Perhaps it is worth mentioning that there is also an 
upanishad known as the kenopanishad.) 


Who created the structure of men? Who made the 
muscles and who made the calves? Who created the 
flesh and the handsome fingers? Who created the 
senses? And who was it that stuck two legs at the 
base? Who gave form to the central parts of the body? 


Who fixed the calves to the base of the body? Who 
gave form to the upper parts of the body? Who " 
created the two thighs that are separate and then 
fixed them both to the body? Who made the structure 
by which the legs are joined to the body? 


The rotund stomach has four types of intestines 
inside it. Who made the stomach and stuck it on top 
of the legs? What about the thighs and the ankles? 
Who made them all? 


Who was the god who brought human chests and 
necks together? In what direction does he reside? 
Who built: the breasts and who built the shoulders? 
Who was it that strung the bones together? 


Who made the arms of men strong so that they can 
be used to perform, brave deeds? Who is the god who 
fixed the head on the top of the shoulders? 


The two ears, the two nostrils, the two eyes and the 
mouth are like seven doors drilled into the head. Who 
is the person who made these doors? It is owing to the 
glory of the great creator that bipeds and quadrupeds 
follow the paths appointed for them. 


385 


The tongue that speaks a lot has been fixed in the 
centre of the mouth. Powerful speech has been placed 
on the tongue. The creator who did all this is the 
source of all action in the world. But he himself 
remains hidden. Who can comprehend his nature? 


Man has a brain, a head, a forehead and there is a 
b .ck to the head as well. Who is the supreme god who 
made all this and disappeared in heaven? 


The world is full of sweet speech and harsh words. 
It has sleep, danger and impediments. But there is 
also happiness and bliss. Who is the great one who 
made all these? Why did he create the world? 


There is illness and poverty. There is disease and 
evil. How do men fall prey to these? But there is also 
fullness and prosperity. There is superiority and 
intelligence. How do men get inspired to these? 


Who made the water that courses in the human 
body? Who made the water that travels everywhere? 
Who made the water that flows in the rivers and who 
make the water that is red of hue? Who made the 
water that is the colour of iron and who made the 
water that is the colour of smoke? Who made the 
water that is above and below? Who made the water 
that is swift and swirling? 


Who is the creator of all forms? Who is the creator 
of all names? Who is the creator of all fame and 
glory? Who has created speech and who has created 
leaming? Who has endowed human bodies with 


character? 


386 


Who made life? Who made the breath of life? Who 
has endowed man with various traits? 


Who is the god who made men so that they could 
perform sacrifices? Who gave men the power to 
follow the truth? Who gave men the power to lie? 
Where does death come from? And what is the origin 
of immortality? 


Who gave men the physical bodies that are like 
clothing for them? Who decided on their lifespans? 
Who gave them strength? And who decided what 
human speeds should be? 


Who made water? Who created the day so that it 
might give light? Who made the radiance of dawn? 
And who created the evening? 


Who framed the concept of birth so that living 
beings may perpetuate their kind? Who gave living 
beings intelligence and the power to use their 
tongues? Who taught them how to dance? 


Who covered the ground? Who drcumscaibed 
heaven? Who made the mountains great? Who 
inspires men to action? 


Who gives us rain? Who gives us the excellent 
soma juice? From whom do we obtain faith and 
sacrificial power? Who has turned our mind to such 
deeds? 


From whom do we obtain learning? From whom 
do we obtain the ability to attain the paramatman? By 
whose grace does man obtain fire? Who divided time 
into years and other units? 


387 


The lea:ned attain learning. And it is learning that 
attains the paramatman. It is learning that enables 
men to obtain fire. It is learning that enables men to 
measure time. 


How can one please the gods and attain their 
proximity? How can one attain divine qualities and 
please the subjects? Who is the one who is truly a 
kshatriya? And who is the one’who can never be called 
a kshatriya? 


It is through learning that one can please the gods 
and attain their proximity. It is learning that enables 
one to attain divine qualities and please the subjects. 
It is through learning that one truly becomes a 
kshatriya. And it is through learning that one obtains 
the powers that do not characterise a kshatriya. 


Who is the one who specially preserved the earth? 
Who is the one who placed heaven above earth? Who 
placed the vast atmosphere above the earth? 


The brahman specially preserved the earth. The 
brahman is the one who placed heaven above earth. 
The brahman is the one who placed the vast 
atmosphere above the earth. 


The one who successfully meditates controls his 
head and his heart. He raises his life force to the 
centre of his head and even above his head. 


The head of a person who meditates is a treasure 
that is protected by the gods. The head is preserved 
through food, the mind and the breath of life. 


388 


The brahman is spread everywhere. It is known as 
the purusha. The purusha is in every direction. It is to 
be found in the city where the brahman dwells. It is 
because of this that it is known as the purusha. (The 
word pura means city and the word purusha is derived 
from pura.) 


He who is indeed immortal gets to know the city 
where the brahman dwells. The brahman and the 
other gods give such a person eyes, life and subjects. , 


He who knows the purusha, and the city where the 
brahman dwells, is blessed with eyesight till a ripe old 
age. He lives for many years. 


The city of the gods has eight concentric circles 
(chakra) in it. It has nine doors and the city is 
invincible. In that city there is a treasure-house of 
energy. It is this that is known as heaven. 


Heaven has three sides and three focal points. 
(What this means is not clear.) In heaven can be 
found a learned yaksha. (Yakshas were demi-gods.) He 
who knows this is blessed with the knowledge of the 
brahman. 


That city is full of energy. That city removes all 
misery. That city is full of fame and can never be 
conquered. In such a radiant city, the brahman is 
always present. 


Although the kena sukta is the most important 
sukta of kanda ten, there are other suktas in this 
secticn as well. There are prayers for fighting 
demons and for purging poison. There are 


389 


charms for ensuring victory and for ensuring 
that a woman does not have a co-wife. Prayers 
are addressed to cows and there is a sukta that 
describes the brahman. But we will skip these and 
move on to kanda eleven. 


KANDA ELEVEN 


Rudra 


(Although this hymn is addressed to Rudra, he is 
sometimes referred to by other names as well.) 


O Bhava! O Sharva! O creator and O destroyer! 
May the two of you make all of us happy. Please do 
not attack us. The two of you rule over demons 
(bhutc) and animals. We bow down in obeisance 
before you. Do not fix arrows to your bows and shoot 
them at us. Do not exhibit violence towards us bipeds 
and quadrupeds. 


Do not slice up our bodies so that black and hated 
worms may feed on them. May dogs and vultures not 
feed on our dead bodies. May foxes that how! not eat 
our flesh. O ruler over animals! May your flies and 
your crows not savour our dead bodies. Preserve our 
bodies from all manner of destruction. 


O creator of all that there is! I worship the sound of 
your life force. O immortal Rudra! I worship the 
thousand eyes that you possess. I worship the power 
of your energy. 


I worship you from the front. I worship you from 
above and from below’ 1 worship you from every 


390 


direction because you are heaven and you are the 
atmosphere. 


O Pashupati! O Bhava! I worship your mouth. | 
worship your eyes. I worship your skin, your eyesight 
and your back. 


I worship your body, your stomach, your tongue 
and your mouth. I worship your teeth and your 
fragrance. 


May Rudra of the thousand eyes never turn against 
us. May he never use his blue-flamed weapons on us. 


May he who is the creator protect us from all the 
directions. May he surround us the way water 
surrounds the fire. May he not destroy us. We bow 
down before him. 


O Pashupati! You are the creator. | bow down 
before you four times. I bow down before you eight 
times. I bow down before you ten times. I offer these 
five types of animals to you in sacifice. They are 
cows, horses, goats, sheep and humans. 


You are the lord of the four directions. You are the 
lord of heaven and earth. It is to you that the 
powerful atmosphere belongs. All the beings with 
senses belong to you. They are the inhabitants of the 
earth. 


All the worlds belong to the universe. And the 
entire universe is the dwelling-place of the Vasus. But 
it is you who are the lord of the universe. O Pashupati! 
We worship you so that you may grant us happiness. 
May jackels, vultures and dogs keep their distance 


391 


from us. May women who wear their hair unbraided 
and weep in shrill voices also keep their distance. May 
those who are the bringers of sorrow thus keep their 
distance. 


O you who wear a tonsure on your head! You are 
the destroyer of thousands and you are the destroyer 
of millions. Your metallic bow is encrusted with gold. 
In Rudra’s arrows are to be found all the weapons of 
the gods. I bow down in whatever direction Rudra’s 
arrows may be. 


O Rudra! Destroy those who attack us and go into 
hiding. Like an assassin, destroy them when their 
backs are turned. 


O god! You are the creator and the destroyer. You 
are the learned one. You are the one in whom the 
divine powers of creation and destruction are to be 
found. I bow down in whatever direction these two 
powers are found. 


O Rudra! You are the one who comes and you are 
the one who goes. You are the one who stays and you 
are the one who sits. I bow down in obeisance before 


you. 


I worship you in the morning and I worship you in 
the evening. I worship you during the day and I 
worship you in the night. I worship Bhava and I 
worship Sharva. 


I see in front of me the thousand-eyed Rudra. He is 
the learned one who hurls a myriad of weapons. May 
my tongue not utter words which offend the swift- 
footed Rudra. 


392 


Rudra is the possessor of steeds. Rudra is tne one 
who cannot be bound. Rudra is the one who grants 
happiness. Many are the rays that surround him. 
Rudra is the one who demolishes invincible chariots. 
He is the first god to be worshipped. We bow down in 
obeisance before him. 


O Pashupati! Protect us from the weapons of the 
gods. We worship you so that the gods may not be 
enraged with us. May the weapons of the gods not 
come near us. 


Please do not hate us, but bless us with your advice. 
Please do not vent your anger on us, but protect us. 
May we never come into conflict with you. 


O brave warrior! Protect our cows, sheep and goats. 
Protect us humans. Remove all fear from our 
proximity. Destroy only men who are violent. 


I worship the one whose weapons are tuberculosis, 
fever and coughs. I worship the one whose weapons 
make the sound of a powerful steed neighing. I bow 
down before the one whose weapons are sure and 
unfailing. 


I worship the one who is constant in the 
atmosphere. I worship the one who destroys people 
who do not perform sacrifices. I worship the one who 
destroys people who hate the gods. I worship his ten 
different forms of power. 


You are the lord of deer and other animals that live 
in the forests. You are the lord of swans, vultures, 
eagles and other birds. O Pashupati! (Pashupati 


es) 


literally means lord of animals.) Your revered soul is 
to be found in the water. It is for your sake that divine 
water flows down to the earth. 


Your weapons will find their mark on crocodiles, 
pythons, tortoises and other aquatic animals. Your 
weapons will find their mark on fishes. None of them 
are your enemies, but none of them are your friends 
either. You look upon all of them equally. You make 
your presence felt from the eastern to the northern 
ocean. 


O Rudra! May we not suffer from fever. May we not 
suffer from poison. May we not suffer from the divine 
fire. Please ensure that lightning does not strike us, 
May it strike some other place instead. 


Bhava is the lord of the universe. Bhava is the lord 
of heaven, the atmosphere and the earth. Our 
prayers follow Bhava whatever be the direction he is 
in. 

O creator! O king of the gods! You are the lord of all 
the animals. Please those who are praying to you. 
Shower your happiness on those who are devoted and 
on those who believe in the existence of the gods. 
Please all such bipeds and quadrupeds. 


Do not be enraged with those who are our elders. 
Do not be enraged with those who are children. Do 
not be enraged with those who are our equals. Do not 
be enraged with those amongst us who are strong. Do 
not be enraged with our parents. O Rudra! May our 
bodies never suffer from miseries. 


394 


I worship Rudra’s terrible dogs. Terrible are their 
mouths and some of them make a thunderous noise. 
Others make no sound at all. 


O god! I bow down before the fearsome noise of 
your cohorts. I bow down before your soldiers who 
sport long hair. I bow down before your army which 
never suffers from a shortage of food. May our 
welfare be ensured and may we never know fear. 


Other suktas in kanda eleven are on the virtues of 
celibacy and on life. There are prayers addressed 
to foodgrains. There are some hymns on the 
brahman and on warfare. We will bypass these 
and move on to kanda twelve. 


KANDA TWELVE 


The motherland 


There are some acts which protect and nurture the 
motherland and the nation. These are firm 
truthfulness, true knowledge, martial prowess, 
righteousness, skill in performing deeds, performing 
sacrifices and giving dims. Sacred is the motherland. 
It not only nurtures that which is past and all the 
objects of the present, it bears the seed of the future as 
well. Such is our great motherland. 


Our motherland is populated by learned men. It is 
populated by those who are inferior, those who are 
average and those who are superior. But all such 
people forget their differences and live together in 
unity and friendship. Our motherland possesses the 
qualities that banish disease. Our motherland is the 


395 


land where there are many great trees. This is the land 
where we will perform deeds and attain fame. This is 
the land where our intelligence will prosper. 


There are many oceans in our motherland. And 
there are many rivers, Streams, lakes, ponds and 
waterfalls. In our motherland are produced all sorts of 
grains, vegetables and fruit. In this land there are to 
be found many living beings. There are farmers, 
artisans and traders. They have come together to live 
in select habitations. Our motherland is the source of 
all material prosperity. 


a 
In our motherland can be found enterprising and 
hard-working farmers and artisans, In every direction 
that one glances, one finds fields of rice, wheat and 
other grains. Our motherland nourishes many 
different forms of life. It provides us with cows, 
foodgrains and other forms of sustenance. 


In ancient times, the arvas who populated our 
motherland made it famous through their strength, 
intelligence, prowess and riches. The famous warriors 
of yore performed valourous deeds here. In this land 
the learned and_ brave ones conquered the violent 
demons. This is the land where one can find cows, 
horses and other animals and_ birds. May our 
motherland grant us riches, energy, valour and 
learning. 


Our motherland is the nurturer. In it can be found 
gold, silver, diamonds, emeralds and other gems. 
Nuggets of gold, all sorts of objects, all forms of 
vegetation, and all forms of living beings can be 


396 


found in our motherland. It is full of all sorts of men, 
states and kingdoms. Our motherland is the best 
country of all. Its leaders are learned men and brave 
warriors who vanquish enemies. May our motherland 
nurture us with riches. 


The skilled and leamed ones who live here do not 
fritter away their time in slumber and sloth. Like a, 
cow which is milked, our motherland gives us all the 
objects of our desire. Its vast expanse protects us from 
all manner of danger. May this land make us 
complete with bravery, prowess, learning and riches. 


In the beginning, this land was immersed in the 
water of the ocean. Its immortal roots go down to the 
centre of the earth and are preserved through 
righteousness. Vast is the expanse of this land. Its 
heights reach up to heaven. The skilled and the 
learned have lived in this land for generations. May 
there be excellent kingdoms in our motherland. May 
we be blessed with energy, valour and physical 
strength. May we have brave soldiers. 


In this land are to be found learned mendicants 
who roam in every direction. Just as water attains the 
same level everywhere, these hermits look upon all 
with equal favour. They travel carefully, through 
night and day. In our motherland can be found all 
that there is to eat and all that there is to drink. There 
is an abundance of milk and clarified butter. May our 
motherland increase our energy, influence, strength 
and prowess. 


397 


The Ashvinis look after this land of ours. Brave 
warriors have measured the length and breadth of our 
motherland. Great rulers have exhibited their valour 
here. Learned and powerful ones have freed this land 
from all enemies. This motherland is like our mother. 
It provides us with sustenance just as mother provides 
her baby with milk. May this land satisfy the hunger 
and thirst of our children. 


O my motherland! May the mountains and the 
snow-clad peaks that can be found here not bring you 
unhappiness. May these ranges be free of enemies so 
that you can nurture us all. May you be fit for 
agriculture. May trees and plants grow on you in 
abundance. Great is your length and breadth, great is 
your expanse. Many are your different forms. You 
have never been conquered by enemies. Wars and 
battles have brought you no harm. You have never 
been wounded. May I prosper in such a land. 


O land! In your centre can be found men who have 
organised themselves into various groups. You 
provide strength and foodgrains so that such groups 
can be nurtured. May I merge into this society. O 
land! Protect me. You are my mother. I am the son of 
the earth. The water which rains down and nourishes 
us is my father. May I be preserved. 


In this land the Vedas are revered in every direction. 
In this land the best paths to meditation have been 
found. In this land sacrifices and other altruistic deeds 
are performed. The righteous ones are worshipped 
here and the land is uplifted through the performance 
of sacrifices. Wonderful are the words of wisdom that 


398 


have been uttered in this land. We have uplifted this 
land through our deeds. And may this land uplift us 
in turn. 


O motherland! Destroy those who bear hatred 
towards us. Destroy those who bring armies to invade 
us. Destroy those who try to harm us and enslave us. 
Destroy those who seek to kill and slay us. You have 
destroyed such enemies earlier. Destroy them yet, 
again. 


O my motherland! Those of us who are born here 
and those of us who are reared here wish to serve you. 
The bipeds who live here, and rule over the 
quadrupeds, wish to serve you. Those who bask in the 
energy of the sunlight here, wish to serve you. Five 
types of men wish to serve you. 


(The five types of men are priests, warriors, 
tradesmen, artisans and slaves.) 


O my motherland! All of us are your subjects. May 
all of.us be gifted with sweet speech. May we live 
together in harmony. 


This land is the mother of all trees, shrubs, plants 
and creepers. Vast is the expanse of this land. It is here 
that truth, learning, bravery and _ righteousness 
flourish. This land will bring us welfare and 
happiness. May we always serve our motherland. 


O motherland ! This is the place where we all live in 
harmony. May you be great and firm. May brave 
warriors protect you with their intelligence and valour 
from enemies. May we be enriched. May we prosper. 


Sob 


May no one bear enmity towards us. O motherland! 
May you shine like gold. 


In the centre of the earth, there is fire. In herbs that 
provide us nourishment, there is fire. In the water of 
the clouds, there is fire. In lightning, there is fire. In 
glistening stones, there is fire. In the hunger of men, 
there is fire. In foodgrains and in animals, there is fire. 


In the sky, there is fire in the sun. This fire heats us 
all. The radiant fire manifests itself in the atmosphere. 
Many are the forms in which fire is present. Fire loves 
the clarified butter that is offered on the occasion of 
sacrifices. May the fire prevent illness.in every season. 
May fire energise us men. 


Fire is everywhere. Fire is in the earth. May fire 
make me radiant. 


On earth, men offer oblations to the gods through 
sacrifices. Through this medium, mortal men make 
the earth yield a plentiful supply of foodgrains for 
nourishment. This land will grant us strength and 
long lives. This land will grant us intelligence and the 
desire to elevate ourselves. 


O earth! You are the source of all fragrances. It is 
these fragrances that can be found in the herbs. The 
fragrances can be found in the water, and can be 
found in the rays of the sun. These fragrances will 
make us fragrant and will grant us happiness. May 
we not bear hatred towards one another. Mav we live 
together in peace and harmony. 


400 


O earth! Your fragrance has entered the lotuses. It is 
this fragrance that was there when Vayu and the 
‘other gods celebrated Usha’s wedding. Make us 
fragrant through that fragrance. May no one bear 
hatred towards us. 


O earth! Impart your energy to brave men, 
ordinary men, and women. Impart your energy to 
horses, elephants and other quadrupeds. Impart your 
energy to girls who are not yet married. May this’ 
divine energy energise us as well. May no one oppose 
us. 


This land is full of mountains, ranges, stones and 
dust. May this land protect us through learning and 
valour. May we be deserving so that we can live here. 
We worship the golden vein that flows through the 
heart of this land. 


Many are the trees, plants and creepers that 
constantly flourish here. It nurtures all objects 
through its divine qualities. We chant the praise of the 
land that protects us all. 


May we not cause unhappiness to others when we 
are travelling on this land. May we not cause 
unhappiness to others when we are standing or when 
we are seated. May we not cause unhappiness to 
others either on our right or on our left. 


This is the land where the search for the 
paramatman is made. This is the land that the 
paramatman has blessed through his strength and his 
nourishment. In. this vast expanse can be found 
Clarified butter and other objects of food. We pray to 


401 


our motherland so that we may obtain refuge here. 
May all living beings prosper here. 


O earth! May pure water flow here so that we are 
sanctified. May that which we do not like and that 
which causes us harm not get near us. May we be 
purified and devote ourselves to the performance of 
sacred deeds. 


O motherland! May you bring us happiness to the 
north, south, east and west. May you bring us 
happiness to the north-east, north-west, south-east 
and south-west. May you bring us happiness to the 
top and the bottom, the front and the back. May the 
land where I live never cause me to degenerate. 


O motherland ! Protect me from the back, the east 
and the south. May my welfare be ensured. May my 
enemies never get near me and may | be able to 
vanquish them all. 


O my motherland! The happy rays of the sun 
display for me your vast expanse. May | enjoy a long 
life in this great expanse. May my eyesight and other 
senses never dull. May I be able to perform excellent 
deeds throughout my allotted lifespan. 


O my motherland! May you protect me when I tum 
in my sleep to the right or to the left. May you protect 
me when I sleep with my head facing the west. May 
my motherland preserve me from all’ manner of 
destruction. 


O my motherland! I plough you and sow seeds. 
May these seeds soon grow into saplings. May the 


402 


most delicate parts of this land never come to any 
harm. My mind and heart are devoted to you. May 
they never suffer. 


O the vast expanse that is my motherland! In you 
can be found the six seasons - the summer, monsoon, 
early autumn, late autumn, winter and spring. May 
these seasons bring me happiness. In you can be 
found riight and day. May they bring me happiness. © 


This is the land that is graced by the sacred fire. In 
the clouds, the lightning and the atmosphere can be 
seen this sacred fire. In my motherland can be found 
this fire. Brave warriors have revered my motherland. 
They have protected it from the depredations of the 
evil ones. In my motherland there has been the 
pursuit of leaming. Such is my motherland. 


In my motherland can be found houses to dwell in. 
There are objects that can be offered at sacrifices. At 
the sacrifices, the officiating priests are those who are 
learned in the Yajur Veda, the Rig Veda and the Sama 
Veda. At these sacrifices, soma juice is offered to Indra. 


From ancient times, in my motherland righteous 
deeds have been performed. Many types of sacrifices 
have been observed. Alms have been given. And all 
such righteous deeds have been praised through 
hymns. 


May my motherland grant us the riches that we 
desire. May it aid the brave warriors in their 
endeavours. May the brave soldiers advance and 
invade the enemies. 


403 


The inhabitants of this land sing and dance. The 
brave warriors who live here fight to protect their 
‘country. In this land can be heard the sound of horses 
neighing and drums beating. May all enemies be 
banished from my motherland. 


Foodgrains like rice, jowar and wheat grow in my 
motherland. There is no shortage of food. Five types of 
men live here, priests, warriors, farmers, tradesmen 
and slaves. Rains are plentiful here so that crops grow 
easily. The rains nourish this land. I bow in obeisance 
before my motherland. 


The cities in my motherland have been built by the 
gods. In every part of my motherland, men perform 
their duties well. This is the land that produces all 
objects, so that the subjects may thrive. May my 
motherland be beautiful in every direction. 


This is the land that produces gold and silver and 
jewels like diamonds and emeralds. May this earth 
grant us riches and make us like the gods. 


Many are the religions that are followed here. 
Many are the tongues that are spoken here. Many are 
the houses that are there in the cities. This constant 
and firm land will never be destroyed. May my 
motherland grant us cows and riches. 


There are snakes and scorpions in my motherland. 
There are insects whose bites are poisonous. But may 
they not get near us. In my motherland there can be 
found fever, boils and other diseases. But may these 
not cause us harm. May our welfare be ensured and 
may we be happy. 


404 


O my motherland! Here there are wide roads for 
people to travel on. There are routes along which 
chariots can be driven. Carts carry harvests and other 
objects. May the paths be populated by righteous 
people. May robbers and dacoits not frequent them. 
May we be victorious. May our welfare be ensured. 
May we be happy. 


My motherland can bear heavy objects. My 
motherland has both good and evil. Both good and 
evil people eventually die here. May heavy clouds 
shower down rain on my motherland. May the sun 
spread its rays in every direction and bring 
purification. 


©O my motherland! In your forests there are 
carnivorous animals like lions and tigers. There are 
herbivorous animals like deer. There are also mad 
dogs and bears. But may all of these stay away from 
US. 


May violent assassins who populate my 
motherland stay away from us. May those who are 
lazy and indolent stay away from us. May those who 
wish to rob our riches stay away from us. May those 
who are cannibals stay away from us. May demons 
stay away from us. 


There are birds like swans and eagles in my 
motherland. It is here that the wind blows through the 
air and swirls up dust. It is here that storms uproot the 
trees. 


In my motherland can be found the darkness of the 
night. But there is also the radiance of the day. May 
the rains shower down welfare on us. 


405 


May the sky, the atmosphere and the earth bring 
me wisdom. May the sun and the fire bring me 
wisdom. May the gods bring me wisdom and 
learning. May we have the power to spread in every 
direction. 


May I be able to bear the summer and the winter. 
May I be able to bear the happiness and the misery. 
May this land make me victorious in every direction. 
May all my enemies be vanquished. 


This is the divine land that has been made famous 
by the gods, the learned ones and the brave warriors. 
This is the land that has been made famous by those 
who were skilled. O my motherland! You became 
famous in the four directions. May you continue to be 
as famous as of old. 


The villages and the cities that are here will! make 
this land flourish. The forests, the courts, and the 
courts of law will make this land flourish. The 
assemblies and the battles will make this land 
flourish. 


Battles have raised dust in this country of ours. Dust 
has been raised by armies and by troops of horses. But 
my motherland has not been harmed and trees and 
herbs have thrived. 


May that which I say about my motherland and 
my country be sweet and not harsh. May all that I see 
bring me happiness. May | be radiant, energetic and 
learned. May those who wish to rob iny motherland 
be destroyed. 


406, 


May my motherland bring peace and fragrance. 
May the rain that showers bring happiness. May all 
objects of desire be obtuined here. 


Those who are skilled wish to serve my motherland. 
May they obtain foodgrains and all the other objects 
that they desire. 


O my motherland! May you bring happiness. May 
you grant us the objects of our desire. May you be 
praised. May crops grow here in plenty. May 
sacrifices be observed here. May the creator bring you 
completeness. 


O my motherland ! May those who are born here be 
free from all diseases. May we live for a long time. 
May we be leamed. May we able to make you 
offerings. 


O my motherland! Grant us wisdom so that we can 
ensure our welfare. May we be learned all the time. 
May we prosper in your midst. 


Other suktas in kanda twelve are about the 
prevention of tuberculosis, about heaven and 
about cows. But we move on to kanda thirteen. 


KANDA THIRTEEN 


Funeral ceremonies 


O man! This is a woman whose husband has died. 
According to the ancient rites, take her to be your wife. 
I have brought her back from the funeral. May you 
marty her and have children. May she marry you and 
prosper. 


407 


O woman! Stop sorrowing over your dead husband. 
Forget him and come back to the world of the living. 
Marry again and have children. 


I have brought back the woman who followed her 
husband to the cremation ground. She was weeping 
in sorrow. But I have brought her back to the world. 


O woman! You are not yet ready to die. You know 
well the ways of the world. You know well the dictates 
of the gods. This is your new husband. Marry him and 
love him.That is the road to heaven. 


O Agni! You have an intimate connection with the 
water. I sprinkle water on your flames. I pacify all the 
herbs through this action. 


(This refers to the act of putting out the fire on the 
funeral pyre). 


When the dead body has been completely burnt, 
the fire must be put out. Water must be sprinkled on 
the fire. Enough water must be sprinkled so that grass 
grows on the funeral ground again. 


O man! The only energy that can light you up is the 
light that comes from your soul. That is the learning 
you must strive for. 


Come. Arise. Go to the atmosphere where you will 
meet your dead ancestors. That is the region that is 
populated by the ancestors. Drink the soma juice that 
is there and be satiated. 


(These words are addressed to the dead person.) 


408 


O man! May you attain superiority. Take care of 
your body and various parts of your anatomy so that 
you do not suddenly die. In this vast world that is like 
an ocean, go where you will. Live in the land and the 
country that pleases you most. 


May the ancestors who drink soma juice grant me 
energy. May the gods make me complete with 
clarified butter. May I retain my eyesight when I am 
old. May I retain my ability to eat and drink when | 
am old. May I live for many years, may I not die 
before my time. 


Agni will energise me with radiance. The 
paramatman which is omnipresent will invest me with 
wisdom. All the gods will grant me prosperity. The 
water that brings happiness will purify me. 


The night and the day will protect me in every 
direction. The gods who are the destroyers of enemies 
will increase my prosperity. Indra will energise my 
two arms. The one who is the creator will grant me a 
long life. 


The first man to be born was the son of Vivasvan. 
He was the first one to die and go to Yama’s abode. 
Worship King Yama with your oblations. 


(Yama is the god of death. He was the son of 
Vivasvan, Vivasvan being another name for Surya.) 


O ancestors! You will return to your abode after the 
sacrifice is over. But at the sacrifice, we have offered 
you many oblations. Accept them and grant us 
foodgrains and riches. May we be prosperous and 
have brave sons. 


409 


The ancestors are the possessors of divine qualities. 
May they grant us happiness. 


We will purify ourselves through our learning. May 
we be protected from sin and may we have long lives. 
May we be blessed with the best of qualities. May we 
have subjects and other riches. 


May the acts that we have performed bring us sweet 
fruits. We perform this sacrifice so that we may obtain 
our desired objects from the ancestors. May the 
ancestors come to our sacrifice and accept the 
oblations. May they grant us happiness. 


Our ancient ancestors receive thefr energy from the 
power of the saczifice. It is this power that manifests 
the dawn. O Agni! Please use your power as well, so 
that the dawn may become manifest. 


The gods are the performers of wonderous deeds. 
After they were born, they purified themselves 
through meditation. They then lit Agni’s flames. The 
three types of Agni are the harbingers of prosperity. 
They purify the cows and grant us many cattle. 


(The three types of Agni are explained in the 
introduction.) 


One must be acquainted with the account of the 
birth of the gods. One must be acquainted with the 
deeds that bring the gods pleasure. Acts that’ please 
Agni are the acts that are indeed superior. If Agni is 
pleased, the radiant Usha will manifest herself for us. 
The objects that are preserved by the gods will then 
ensure our welfare. We must always pray and perform 
sacrifices so that the objects of our desire are attained. 


410 


Indra and the Maruts will protect us from all 
impediments in the eastern direction. They will 
protect us the way the earth protects the heaven 
above. We worship him who has created all the 
worlds and all the directions.We offer oblations so 
that the gods may be present here on earth. 


Dhata will protect us from all impediments in the 
southern direction. Adidti and all her sons will also, 
protect us. Soma and the other gods will protect us 
from all imepdiments in the northern direction. 


The paramatman bears everything the way the sun 
bears heaven. May the paramatman make my body 
complete in every respect. I worship the paramatman 
to the east, to the south, to the north and to the west. I 
worship him in the upper and the lower directions. 
The paramatman brings to this world water and the 
breath of life. 


May I be preserved from all impediments on earth. 
May | be preserved from all impediments after I die. It 
is for this reason that two separate sets of oblations 
are being offered. May men be blessed with divine 
qualities. 


We chant the mantras that are given in the Vedas. 
May we attain riches. May our oblations reach the 
gods the way a learned person reaches the world of 
learning. May the gods be present here so that they 
may listen to our prayers. 


If men perform sacrifices and follow the righteous 
path, they can purify themselves. Their deeds become 
immortal and they attain the radiance of the sun. 


411 


Who amongst the gods is immortal? To begin with, 
the gods were all mortal. They too died. But the sage 
Brihaspati performed a Sacrifice so that the gods could 
be immortal. The gods conquered death. But the fruits 
of the sacrifice did not percolate down to the world of 
men. Men continue to be mortal, they die. Yama robs 
men of their physical bodies and brings death to 
them. 


O Agni! You are the leamed one. Make these 
oblations fragrant and Carry them to the ancestors. 
May the ancestors devour these oblations. O Agni! 
Please partake of these oblations yourself 


O ancestors! The flames of the fire have been lit on 
the occasion of the Sacrifice. Come and be seated here 
and grant riches for your progeny. Nourish us with 
your blessings. O ancestors! Come to every house. 
Come to every sacrifice. Accept the oblations that are 
Offered at sacrifices. Grant us riches and arant us 
brave sons, 


The ancestors will come to the sacrifice at our 
bidding. They will listen to Our prayers. They will 
protect us and grant us wisdom. All our ancestors, 
from time immemorial, will come to this sacrifice, Let 
us offer them soma juice. Let us have a plentiful 
Supply of oblations for them. 


The ancestors have become like the gods 
themselves. They will come to our Sacrifice with Agni 
and the other gods. O Agni! Please bring the ancestors 
to this sacrifice. 


412 


There are more suktas in kanda thirteen on 
funeral ceremonies. There are also suktas on 
spiritual upliftment. But we move on to kanda 
fourteen. 


KANDA FOURTEEN 
Marriages 


It is truth that makes the motherland flourish. It is ’ 
the sun that makes heaven radiant. 


The gods follow a constant path and the moon is 
constant in the sky. The offerings of soma juice make 
the gods powerful and they descend on earth. The 
energy of soma juice can be found in the stars as well. 


When the soma herbs are crushed, it is certain that 
soma juice will be extracted and drunk. When soma 
juice is drunk, the soma herb does not wither away. 
New leaves continue to be added to the plant the way 
new months are added to the year. But there is a 
divine soma herb as well. No one can drink of that 
divine soma juice. 


When a bride goes to the house of her husband, it is 
her mind that is her best omament. It is with her mind 
that she attains happiness in her husband’s 
household. The earth and heaven will shower her 
with happiness there. To the chanting of the mantras 
from the Vedas, she leaves her father’s house. To the 
chanting of these mantras, she enters her husband’s 
house. These incantations make her and her husband 
complete and ensure their welfare. 


413 


(The connection between soma juice and a bride is 
not at all clear. The implicit suggestion is that soma 
juice is being compared to a bride.) 


The sacrifices that are performed in her husband’s 
house constitute food for the bride. The mantras that 
are chanted there constitute her ornaments. Those 
who accompany the bride when she first goes to her 
husband’s house are like the Ashvinis themselves.The 
one who leads the procession is like Agni. And the 
father of the bride is like Surya. 


When the bride goes to her husband’s house, she 
must ride on a chariot and the chariot must be drawn 
by two excellent bulls. If it is possible, the bulls must 
be white in colour. Mantras from the Vedas must be 
chanted as the chariot is driven. Hymns from the 
Sama Veda must be sung. The bride goes to her 
husband’s house so that husband and wife may 
perform righteous deeds together and thus attain 
heaven. May the two wheels of the chariot be pure. 


The cows which are offered as dowry must first be 
delivered to the bridegroom’s house by the father of 
the bride. It is only after this is done that the marriage 
can be solemnised. For example, the cows can be sent 
when the nakshatra Magha is in the sky. And the 
marriage can be performed when the nakshatra 
Falguni is in the sky. The dowry which is sent to the 
groom’s house must be sent on a chariot. And it must 
be escorted by two individuals who are known to be 
righteous in conduct. They must ascertain the correct 
address and deliver the dowry at the proper house. It 


414 


is these two who will subsequently lead the bridal 
procession to the groom’s house. 


After the dowry has been received, two gentlemen 
from the groom’s house will come to the bride’s house. 
They will ask the bride’s father for the hand of the 
bride. These individuals must be welcomed with due 
respect. And all those who are present will signify 
their assent to the marriage. Surya was the daughter 
of Savita and she was married to the sun. She was - 
driven to her husband’s house in a chariot with three 
wheels. Every bride should go to her husband’s house 
in a chariot. And the chariot’s wheel must be 
excellent. 


If information is required about the prospective 
groom, this information should be sought from those 
who are superior and righteous. It must never be 
sought from those who are inferior. Like a ripe furit 
severed from the stem, the bride is severed from all 
relationship with her father’s house. But her 
relationship with her husband’s house must never be 
severed. The supreme godhead will grant happiness 
and welfare to the bride in her husband’s house. May 


the bride perform righteous deeds in her husbanid’s 
house. 


The god who grants good fortune will hold the 
bride’s hand when the bridal procession goes to the 
groom’s house after the marriage is over. The 
Ashvinis will ride on her chariot when she goes to her 
husband’s house. May the bride be the queen of her 
husband’s house and may she please all those who 


415 


are there. May the wife perform her duties well. May 
her sons be blessed with happiness. 


May the husband and the wife always stay united 
and never be separated. May they play with their 
children. May their house be full of happiness. May 
they live through their appointed lifespans in 
_ Tighteous fashion. 


This couple will have sons who will frisk and frolic 
till they grow up. When they have grown, they will 
perform great deeds so that they become famous 
throughout the world. May these offspring live to a 
ripe old age. 


This couple will perform great deeds and become as 
radiant as Usha. They will perform sacrifices and offer 
oblations to the gods. 


At the time of marriage, excellent clothing must be 
gifted to brahmanas. They must also be donated 
riches. The brahmanas will impart .wisdom to the 
newly married couple through their blessings. If this is 
not done and if the brahmanas are angered, the couple 
is certain to face destruction. 


If the bride is evil, blood flows in her husband’s 
house. If the bride is evil, her father and her relations 
begin to live in her husband’s house and the husband 
feels stifled, as if in a noose. 


A man should never wear a woman’s clothing. If he 
does this, his energy is reduced. A woman is best 
dressed when she wears three articles of clothing. An 
ordinary piece is used for the lower part of the body. A 


416 


decorated piece is used for the upper part of the body. 
And the third piece is a covering that is worn over all 
this. 


May the couple perform righteous deeds. May they 
always speak the truth. May they accumulate a lot of 
riches. May the wife always bear love for her husband 
in her heart. May the husband always address the 
wife in pleasent tones. 2 


May there be cows in the house, may the cows not 
run away. May the cows deliver calves in ever 
increasing numbers. May sacrifices always be 
performed in the household. May the gods bless the 
household and increase the number of cows that are 
there. Let the path that leads to the house be free of all 
. impediments. Let the paramatman bless this 
' household. 


There is energy in the eyes, in riches and in cows. 
May all this energy enter the bride’s body and may 
she be blessed. May she always follow the righteous 
path. Let the energy that is in water and in sacrifices 
enter this bride’s body. May all forms of disease 
maintain their distance. 


May the wife bring a good heart, sons, riches and 
good fortune to her husband. May she please her 
husband through her deeds. May she please her 
father-in-law and her brother-in-law. The ocean is the 
lord of the rivers. Like that, may this bride reign as a 
queen in her husband’s household. May her mother- 
in-law and her sister-in-law be pleased. 


417 


People weep at the time of departure and 
separation. But there should be no crying and weeping 
when a bride leaves her father’s house for her 
husband's. It is in fact a day of great happiness for her 
father and her other relations. The bride is leaving for 
her husband’s house so that she may bring happiness 
there. She will perform righteous deeds there. 


_ The groom accepts the bride’s hand the way the fire 
accepts the earth. May the wife not come to grief. May 
She thrive in wealth and prosperity. The groom 
accepts the bride’s hand for the sake of good fortune. 
The gods have brought these two together. May the 
husband and the wife live together for a hundred 
years. May the husband take care of his wife. 


The weavers have woven excellent clothing for the 
bride; let her wear them. The iearned brahmanas have 
given her their blessings. Indra, Agni and the other 
gods will bless this woman with sons. May the wife 
have long hair so that she may please her husband. 


Let jewellery adorn the bride. Let her be adorned 
with flowers, vermilion and gold. 


This wife is following the path that is laid down by 
the gods. Let her not come to any harm and let her be 
free from the depredations of the demons. May 
wisdom and learning envelope her from every 
direction. May she make her new home as happy as a 
city of the gods. 

There is more in the same vein. In fact, all the 


suktas in kanda fourteen pertain to marriage. But 
we will skip these and pass on to kanda fifteen. 


418 


KANDA FIFTEEN 
The paramatman 


The paramatman is the creator of all objects. He is 
Prajapati, the lord of all objects in the universe. He is 
the only one. He is the one who is great and superior. 
He is the brahman. He is the one who radiates heat 
and he is the source of all truth. 


The paramatman is the god of all gods, he is the 
greatest one. He is the supreme godhead. He is the 
lord of all oceans and he is the one who created 
Indra’s bow. The paramatman’s stomach is blue and 
his back is red. The learned say that with the blue part 
of his body he destroys hated enemies. And with the 
red part he destroys those who bear hatred in their 
hearts. 


The paramatman became great and stood up. 


“Why are you standing? Why don’t you sit? “asked 
the gods. 


“Where will I sit?” asked the paramatman. 


The gods constructed a chair for the paramatman to 
sit on. The four legs of the chair were the four seasons 
of summer, spring, early autumn and the monsoon. 
The metres of sacred hymns were the planks for the 
chair and the mantras from the Vedas were the cane 
with which the chair was woven. The Vedas formed 
the cushions. Those who are learned know all this. 
The paramatman ascended this chair and the gods 
became his protectors. 


419 


The months of spring became his protector in the 
east, those of summer his protector in the south, those 
of the monsoon his protector in the west and those of 
early autumn his protector in the north. The months 
of late autumn protected him in the lower direction 
and those of winter protected him in the upper 
direction. 


The god Bhava picked up his bow and became a 
sentinel in the east. Those who know this are 
protected by the gods Sharva, Phava and Ishana. 
Sharva is the sentinel in the south and Pashupati the 
sentinel in the west. The god Ugra picked up his bow 
and became the sentinel in the north. Rudra is the 
sentinel in the lower direction and the.god Mahadeva 
is the sentinel in the upper direction. 


The paramatman moved downwards and Prithivi, 
Agni, the herbs and the trees bowed down before him. 
The paramatman moved up and Surya, Chandra and 
the stars bowed down before him. The paramatman 
moved in other directions and the vedas bowed down 
before him. So did the metres, the Puranas, the 
different forms of fire, and all animals. The seasons 
and all other objects worshipped him. The various 
gods showed their obeisance. 


The paramatman is the source of brahmanas, 
kshatriyas and all other classes. He is the source of all 
foodgrains. It is he who created the sabha and the 
samiti, soldiers and wealth. 


He who knows all this is indeed learned. Blessed is 
the house where he comes as a guest. Let the king 


420 


welcome such a guest for the welfare of the kingdom. 
Let every householder welcome such a guest. For this 
guest knows of the secrets of the brahman that vests 
with the great Brihaspati. And he also knows of the 
energy that vests with the great Indra. Let sacrifices be 
performed in the household when such a learned 
guest arrives. 


There is much that is obscure in the suktas of 
kanda fifteen. All the suktas pertain to the 
paramatman and to those who are 
knowledgeable about the  paramatman, 
particularly, wandering mendicants. We have 
summarised drastically and move on to kanda 
sixteen. 


KANDA SIXTEEN 


Charms for removing misery and ensuring victory 


The water that is in the clouds has been freed. The 
divine fire has been freed. Let them burst forth. I use 
these to banish my enemies. Let those who pollute my 
body and my spirit be destroyed. Let assassins and 
arsonists be destroyed. Let those who hate me and 
those whom | hate be destroyed. I release the water 
towards the ocean so that all this may be 
accomplished. I release the fire that is in the water so 
that all this may be accomplished. I banish assassins, 
cannibals and others who pollute the body. May the 
divine water cleanse me of all pollution and sin. May I 
not suffer from nightmares. O divine water! Look 
upon me with favour. May your touch sanctify my 


421 


skin. I call upon Agni the purifier. May divine energy 
course through my body. 


May I be blessed with the proximity of sweet speech 
and may my miseries be removed. May I utter sweet 
words. May my ears hear the sacred wisdom that 
ensures welfare. May I never lose my power of 
hearing. May my eyesight always be as sharp as that 
of an eagle. 


May I be the possessor of cattle and a myriad of 
riches. May I be the leader of my peers. May. I be 
handsome and energetic. May I never deviate from 
the righteous path. May I never suffer from a shortage 
of food or weapons. May the water and the wind bring 
me pleasure. May my mind be learned and may my 
heart be pure. May I never know unhappiness. May 
my wisdom be as great as that of ocean. 


I will be the lord of riches and of my peers. My 
atman is immortal. May it not forsake my body. May 
the breath of life not forsake may body. May the sun 
protect me during the day. Agni will protect me from 
the earth, Vayu from the atmosphere, Yama from 
men, and Sarasvati from all objects. May there be no 
one amongst ‘men who wishes to kill me. O water! 
Please ensure my welfare. May I be blessed with all 
qualities. May I be happy night and day. May I be the 
owner of animals. Mitra and Varuna will grant me 
the breath of life. Agni will grant me energy. 


O nightmares! | know well your origin. You are 
created by Yama and you are the son of disease. You 
are the herald of destruction and death. May | be 
protected from nightmares. 


422 


I know well the origin of nightmares. They are the 
sons of defeat and penury. They distort the senses and 
bring death. May I be protected from nightmares. 


Today is the day when we will attain victory. We 
will achieve our goals. May we be free from all sin. O 
Usha! May the nightmares which scare us keep their 
distance. May those who hate us and those who curse 
us keep their distance. May those whom we hate, also 
keep their distance. May Usha be pleased through our 
prayers. May the goddess of learning also be pleased 
through our prayers. 


May penury, misery and other ill fortune desert us 
and characterise our enemies. May diseases and 
other ailments also follow them there. May 
nightmares also leave us for our enemies. 


O Agni! May you and the other gods remove 
impediments from our midst. Take them instead to 
our foes. May our enemies become weak, poor and 
miserable. 


I destroy my enemies through these means. I pierce 
them with poverty, penury and disease. May 
ignorance and defeat descend on my enemies. I make 
them unhappy with the blessings of the gods. I light 
up their homes with fire. All these misfortunes will 
beset my enemies. May those who hate us suffer from 
hatred themselves. May those whom we hate also 
suffer from hatred. 


Those who hate us will be removed from heaven, 
the atmosphere and the earth. O paramatman! | send 
nightmares to my foes. I send evil to my foes. May 


423 


they suffer from these through night and day. May 
they suffer from these whether they be sleeping or 
awake. I kill my enemies once they are thus 
weakened. Kill the enemies. Break their bones and 
shred their muscles. Let them dis. Let them not live. 


We will be victorious. We will be the ones who will 
be on the ascendant. Truth, energy and learning will 
reside with us. We will be blessed with radiance and 
our sacrifices will be successful. May we possess sons, 
Subjects and animals. May our warriors be brave. 


We will invade the enemies who have sinned 
against us. We will curse them with disease. May 
they be robbed of energy, strength and life. 1 will 
dislodge them from the heights they have occupied. 
May they be entangled in the nooses of misfortune, 
poverty, misery, defeat and dissolution of the senses. 
Brihaspati, Prajapati, the sages, the trees, the seasons, 
the months, the days, heaven, the earth, Indra, Agni, 
Mitra and Varuna, will-aid me in this endeavour. The 
enemies will be divested of energy, beauty and life. 


We will be victorious. We will be the ones who will 
be on the ascendant. The armies of the enemies will 
be repulsed. Agni and Soma have told us this. Pusha 
has blessed us. Our atmans will become radiant. The 
energy of the sun will merge into our bodies. We will 
attain prosperity, riches and learning. Our sacrifices 
will be successful. 


Kanda sixteen is a short kanda and all that is 
there has been reproduced above. We now pass 
on to kanda seventeen. 


424 
KANDA SEVENTEEN 


Prayer for victory 


I pray to the gods who are strong, powerful and 
victorious. They triumph over their enemies. They 
are the lords of the earth, the senses and the cattle. 
They are the famous ones. I pray to the gods so that | 
may have a long life. May I be befriended by the gods 
and may I be loved by my people. 


May I be loved by the animals and by my peers. 


O Surya! It is time for you to rise. Rise and encircle 
me with energy from every direction. May those who 
hate me become my slaves, but may I never be 
enslaved. O supreme godhead! Your energy knows no 
bounds. May I become the possessor of cattle and be 
blessed with immortality. O Surya! Rise and make me 
kindly disposed towards the living beings that I can 
see, as well as those that I cannot see. May the sun 
never be forced to retreat. May the sun climb up into 
the sky and shower down happiness on us. May Surya 
look upon us with favour. O Indra! Grant us good 
fortune and protect us with your radiance from all the 
directions. Grant us welfare. May you ascend your 
throne in heaven and drink soma juice. 


O Indra! You are victorious and leamed. You are 
the famous one to whom we pray. You cannot be 
vanquished in heaven or on the earth. There is no 
one who can rival you in the atmosphere. Grant us 
happiness. Tarts of your being can be found in the 
water, the earth and the fire. O Indra! Your energy 
can be found in heaven and in the atmosphere. We 


425 


pray to you and perform sacrifices in your honour. O 
learned one! Grant us happiness. 


O god! You are the one who protects the four 
directions. It is your brilliance that can be seen in the 
sky. Bless this world of ours. Endow it with your 
favours. Show us the path that leads to truth. 


O god! It is your energy that heats up the world. It 
is your energy that removes all impediments. O god! 
You are the great Indra. You are the greatest. You are 
the lord of all subjects. It is for your sake that 
sacrifices are performed. You are radiant and full of 
energy. May your energy be passed-on to us. 


You are radiance itself. May your radiance be 
passed on to us. May we attain learning and become 
the owners of animals. O Surya! I praise you for 
having risen. I worship you for having ascended the 
Sky. I worship your dazzling energy. I worship the 
rising of the sun. I worship the setting of the sun. 


The sun has risen in all its radiance. It will enslave 
Our enemies, but will make sure that we are never 
enslaved. O god! O Surya! Great is your valour. Fulfil 
us with animals and confer immortality on us. Ride 
on a boat with many oars so that you may grant us 
good fortune. Cross the sky so that we may pass from 
day tonight. The learning that we have received from 
Prajapati will be our armour. The energy that we 
have received from Surya will be our strength. We will 
have long lives and be energetic till we are old. 
Arrows that are shot towards us will not be able to kill 
us. We will be protected by the truth. We will be 


426 


protected by the seasons and by the elements. We will 
be protected by the future, untainted by sin and 
death. I bear these sacred words in my body. I make 
my body and my life pure. Agni will protect me in 
every direction. The sun which rises will free me from 
the fear of death. Radiant Usha will bless me with the 
breath .f life. 


Kanda seventeen is also a short kanda and all 
that is there has been reproduced above. We 
pass on to kanda eighteen. 


KANDA EIGHTEEN 


Yama 


(This kanda begins with a conversation between 
Yama and his sister, Yami. In the course of this 
conversation, Yami wishes to marry Yama so that 
they may have children. Since marriage between 
brother and sister is not permitted, Yama refuses. We 
leave out the details of this conversation.) 


The learned use water, air and herbs to perform all 
sorts of tasks. These are the three objects that can be 
found everywhere in the world. They encompass the 
earth and it is to them that many hymns have been 
composed. 


The paramatman is like a fire. From heaven, he 
showers down water on the earth in the form of rain. 
Depending on the season, men use this water for 
different purposes. It is from the water that 
foodgrains are bom. 


427 


The words of the Vedas sing the glory of the 
paramatman. It is the paramatman who protects us 
and keeps us preserved in righteousness. He is like an 
elder brother who teaches us wisdom. It is the 
Paramatman who grants us the objects of our desire. 


Men who desired to be victorious lit the fires of a 
sacrifice. Usha manifested herself in her radiance. 


The learned light a fire on the occasion of a 
Sacrifice. They extract soma juice so that it may be 
offered as an oblation. 


Agni is as vital to a sacrifice as grass is to animals. 
It 1s Agni who grants happiness and fulfils the desires 
of the devotees. 


The sun makes the four directions manifest. Agni 
makes the ancestors manifest and ensures the 
performance of righteous deeds. 


A man who describes the glory of Agni becomes 
famous everywhere. He is blessed with riches, 
foodgrains, animals and chariots. He is brave and 
valorous and lives for a long time. 


O Agni! Listen to the prayers we are chanting. We 
pray that you may bring heaven and earth to us. 
May there be rains through the grace of the gods. O 
Agni! Be a messenger between us and the gods. 


(Some more hymns to Agni follow. Other gods and 
the ancestors are summoned to the sacrifice. These we 


skip.) 


All living beings that are born must eventually die. 
They are born on earth and spend a short time here. 


428 


But after they die, they go to Yama’s abode. It is for 
this reason that we offer oblations to Yama. It is 
impossible to avoid the path that leads to Yama’s 
abode. He who is born must surely die. 


We offer oblations to our ancestors so that they 
may protects us. May they free us from all fear and 
disease. 


May the ancestors come to this sacrifice. May they 
pardon any crimes that we may have committed 
against our fellow men. 


Yama’s mother is named Saranyu. His father’s 
name is Vivasvan. Vivasvan is another name for 
Surya. After the name of his father, Yama is often 
referred to as Vaivasvat in the mantras of the Vedas. 


Our ancestors have earlier traversed the path to 
Yama’s abode. Those who are alive will also trave! 
along that path. May they be happy in Yama’s 
abode. 


The ancestors determine the place where the 
funeral rites for a dead person are to be performed. 
The breath of life has left the dead person’s body. He 
no longer knows the difference between night and 
day. The ancestors have determined the cremation 
ground where the dead body has to be cremated. 
They have also set aside a piace for the dead person in 
Yama’s abode. 


O Agni! The fire of the sacrifice has been lit and 
oblations have been offered. Manifest yourself and 
bring the ancestors here so that they may partake of 


429 


the oblations. We have offered oblations to Yama as 
well. We have Offered oblations to his father, 
Vivasvan. Yama and the ancestors wil] come and be 
seated here. 


Soma juice and other oblations have been offered to 
Yama on the occasion of the sacrifice. Sweet are the 
oblations that have been offered to King Yama. He 
will be pleased with these oblations and will grant us 
long lives. 


As long as water is Present in the dead body, the 
atman does not leave it and go elsewhere. It hovers 
around the dead body. When the dead body is burnt 
by fire, the water disappears. And the atman is freed 
from the shackles of the dead body to go and meet the 
ancestors. 


Yama has two dogs that guard the path to his 
abode. They are terrible of appearance and have four 
eyes each. May those who are still alive be blessed by 
these dogs. These dogs have long noses and they live 
on the breath of life. They are exceedingly strong and 
pursue those who traverse the path to Yama’s abode. 


Yama and Yami were the children of Saranyu. 
When Saranyu was in the form of a mare, she had 
two other children. These were the Ashvinis. 


O Agni! There are four ways to dispose of a dead 
body. It may be buried in the ground, floated in the 
water, cremated by fire, or left on the ground to 
nature. 


When a man is about to die, Yama and his 
ancestors come down to earth. They wish to take the 


430 


dead person’s atman to heaven. The atman can also 
travel to Yama’s abode. That is a wonderful place and 
only those who are deserving can go there. In Yama’s 
abode there are several sections. <A_ section is 
determined for the atman depending on the acts that 
were performed on earth by the person concerned. 


It is Yama who, through his powers, bears the 
ancestors in the atmosphere. Yama is the one who fs 
familiar with the end that will eventually come. O 
men! Offer oblations to Yama so that he may befriend 
you and grant you long lives. 


May the dead person’s atman be happy in Yama’s 
abode. We offer sesamum seeds so that the path to 
Yama’s abode may be free of impediments. 


There is a lack of continuity in the hymns of this 
kanda. Hymns to Yama are interpersed with 
hymns to the ancestors, to Agni and to the other 
gods. There is also a lot that is repetitive. But we 
have reproduced ali the information that there is 
about Yama. We therefore pass on to kanda 
nineteen. 


KANDA NINETEEN 


A sacrifice 


The rivers flow, the winds blow. The birds fly in the 
sky. This sacrifice will increase my power of speech. | 
offer the oblations that will be a source of happiness. 


O powers of the sacrifice! Ensure that this sacrifice 
may be a success. O waters that flow! Ensure that this 


431 


sacrifice is protected. The words that I utter sing of the 
glory of this sacrifice. I offer the oblations that will be 
a source of happiness. 


All the devotees who are taking part in this sacrifice 
will be protected, no matter what their form or age. 
The four directions will chant the glory of this 
sacrifice. I offer the oblations that will be a source of 
happiness. 


Water 

May the water that flows down from the snow-clad 
mountains bring you happiness. May the water that 
flows in the rivers bring you happiness. May the swift- 
flowing streams bring you happiness. May the water 
of the monsoon bring you happiness. 


May the water of the desert bring you happiness. 
May the water that flows in this kingdom bring you 
happiness. May the water that is dug up out of the 
ground bring you happiness. May the water that is 
kept in pots bring you happiness. 


There are those who know how to use water in the 
treatment of ailments. Such people are learned and, 
to them, water is a source of power. 


There is water that showers down from the sky. 
There is water that flows in the streams. If this water 
is used properly, horses thrive. (This suggests that 
water was used not only to treat human ailments, but 
that of horses as well.) 


Water is the object that guarantees our welfare. 
Water banishes all our ailments. Water increases our 


432 


happiness. May water cure all your diseases. 
Acknowledge the power of water. 


Agni 

Agni is to be found in heaven, in the earth and in 
the atmosphere. Agni is also to be found in the trees 
and the herbs. Agni is praised, no matter what the 
source. May Agni grace us by his presence. 


O Agni! It is your glory that is found in the water, 
the forests, the herbs and the animals. Bring all this 
energy together and come to us. May you always be 
with us and may you grant us riches. 


You are famous among the gods as a source of 
happiness. Your presence can be detected in the 
ancestors and in the earth. O Agni! May your powers 
of sustenance be present among men. Use your 
powers to grant us riches. 


It is worth praying to one who has ears. It is worth 
praying to one who is learned and deserving of 
respect. It is for these reasons that I am praying to 
you, O Agni! Grant me words and speech. Grant me 
freedom from all fear. Pacify the anger of the gods. 


Oblations 


The sage Atharvan was the first one to light a fire 
and offer oblations. He was the first one to worship 
the learried Agni. Agni accepted those oblations and 
that was the beginning of all saczifices. I too offer 
oblations to the famous Agni. May Agni accept my 
oblations. 


433 


I pray to the goddess who grants all wishes. She is 
like a mother to my mind and she will remove all my 
impediments. Whatever be the direction I travel in, 
may all my desires be satisfied. May the goddess who 
grants all wishes look upon me with favour. 


O Brihaspati! Use the power of your will to come to 
me. You are the one who should be summoned 
according to the prescribed rites. Come to me and 
grant me good fortune. 


Brihaspati was bor in the line of the great sage 
Angirasa. May Brihaspati become acquainted with 
the power of my words. May he learn what my wishes 
are. Brihaspati is the one who dwells with all the 
gods. May he listen to my prayers and grant me my 
wishes. 


The paramatman 

There is one who is the lord of all animals, birds 
and men. There is one who is the lord of Indra and 
the other gods. He alone is the lord of all the various 
objects that can be found on earth. He is the one who 
is the source of all riches. Pray to him if you wish to 
acquire riches. 


The paramatman alone is the lord of all that is 
mobile and immobile. He is the lord of all objects. 


The paramatman has a thousand arms, a thousand 
eyes and a thousand feet. He surrounds the earth 
from the four directions. But the entire earth is merely 
equivalent to ten of the paramatman’s fingers. 


434 


Three-fourths of the paramatman are to be found in 
heaven. The remaining one-fourth can be found on 
earth in the form of all that is sentient and insentient, 
all that eats and does not eat. 


Wonderful is the paramatman’s greatness. One- 
fourth of his body constitutes all the elements that can 
be found on earth. The remaining three-fourths are 
immortal in heaven. ° 


Everything that has been created is in the 
paramatman. Everything that will be created is also in 
the paramatman. The paramatman is the lord of 
immortality. 


Who amongst all those who ‘are leamed can 
describe the nature of the paramatman? How can one 
describe his mouth or his arms? How can one describe 
his thighs or his feet? 


The brahmanas are like the paramatman’s mouth. 
The kshatriyas are his arms, the vaishyas his waist, and 
the shudras his legs. 


It is the mind of the paramatman that created the 
moon. The sun was born out of his eyes. His mouth 
gave birth to Indra and Agni. His breath of life 
created Vayu. 


The paramatman’s navel created the atmosphere. 
Heaven was made out of this great being’s head. The 
earth was bom from his feet and his ears gave birth to 
the directions. Other worlds were created from other 
parts of the paramatman’s anatomy. 


435 


(There are a few more verses on the paramatman 
which we skip.) 


The nakshatras 


I sing the praise of the nakshatras that decorate 
heaven. They are always on the move, but they never 
decay. They are the swift ones who destroy all evil. 
For the sake of divine happiness, | sing the praise of 
these constant stars. 


O Agni! I pray so that the nakshatras Krittika and 
Rohini may grant me happiness. May the nakshatra 
Mrigashira ensure my welfare and may the nakshatra 
Ardra grant me peace. Punarvasu nakshatra will 
increase my happiness and Pushya nakshatra will 
. develop my power of speech. May the nakshatras 
Ashlesha and Magha manifest themselves and 
elevate me. 


May the two nakshatras known as Purva Falguni 
lead me along the righteous path. (The two 
nakshatras are actually named Purva Falguni and 
Uttara Falguni.) May the nakshatras Hasta and Chitra 
bring me welfare. Svati nakshatra will grant me 
happiness and the nekshatras Radha and Vishakha 
will listen to my prayers. The nakshatras Anuradha, 
Jyeshtha and Mula will preserve me from all manner 
of destruction. 


The nakshatra Purva Ashada will grant me 
foodgrains and the nakshatra Uttara Ashada will 
grant me strength. The nakshatra Abhijit will ensure 
that I am always righteous. I pray to the nakshatras 


436 


Shravana and Shravishtha so that I may be 
nourished. 


Shatabhisha is a great nakshatra and will grant me 
riches. The two nakshatras that are known as 
Proshthapada will ensure my happiness. The 
nakshatras Revati and Ashvayuga will grant me riches 
and Bharani nakshatra will ensure my prosperity. 


(Traditionally, there are twenty-seven nakshatras 
spread along the line of the Zodiac. Their names are 
Ashvini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohini, Mrigashira, Ardra. 
Punarvasu, Pushya, Ashlesha, Magha, Purva Falguni, 
Uttara Falguni, Hasta, Chitra, Svati, Vishakha, 
Anuradha, Jyeshtha, Mula, Purva Ashada, Uttara 
Ashada, Shravana, Dhanishtha, Shatabhisha, Purva 
Bhadrapada, Uttara Bhadrapada and Revati. When 
Abhijit is included as well, the number of nakshatras 
increases to twenty-eight. The list of nakshatras given 
above is however twenty-nine. Ashvayuga is 
obviously Ashvini, Shravishtha is Dhanishtha, and 
Proshthapada is Bhadrapada. The extra nakshatra 
turns out to be Radha.) 


The nakshatras can be seen in heaven, in the 
atmosphere, in the water, on earth, in mountain 
ranges and in the various directions. The moon 
enjoys them one by one. May all these nakshatras 
bring me welfare and happiness. 


(The moon progessively passes through each of 
these nakshatras in the sky. According to legends, the 
moon is also married to the nakshatras.) 


437 


Let the twenty-eight nakshatras ensure my welfare 
and happiness. May they be united with me. | pray 
to them, night and day. 


Moy the time of Sunset ensure my welfare. May 
dawn bring me happiness. May evening also bring 
me happiness. May the day make me happy. May all 
animals and birds be happy. O Agni! Let these 
prayers ensure happiness. You are the immortal one. 
Be pleased and come here. 


O Savita! You are the lord of everything. May | 
never suffer from vanity, strife, slander, hatred and 
disease. May my pots never be empty« 


May sin keep its distance. May I always eat food 
that is pure. O sin! You will be insulted. We are the 
ones that tread along the righteous path. 


O Brahmanaspati! The winds blow in various 
directions. O Indra! Make the winds blow along the 
proper paths. May they bring us happiness. 


May our welfare be ensured. May we know 
freedom from fear. I pray to the day and to the night. 


Peace 

May heaven grant peace. May the earth grant 
peace. May the wide atmosphere grant peace. May 
the waves on the water grant peace. May the herbs 
bring us peace. 

May the acts that we have performed, and the acts 
we are yet to perform, grant peace. May the past and 
the future grant peace. May everything that there is 
bring us peace. 


The goddess of learning resides in the most sacred 
of-places. Her energy enables her to perform terrible 
deeds. May she grant us peace. 


We possess five senses. The mind is like a sixth 
sense and is located in the heart. It is energised 
through the power of learning and can perform 
wonderful deeds. May all these senses grant us peace. 


Moy Mitra bring us happiness. May Varuna bring 
us happiness. May Vishnu and Prajapati bring us 
happiness. May Indra, Brihaspati and Aryama grant 
us peace. 


Mitra and Varuna will grant us peace. Vivasvan 
will grant us peace. The one who is the destroyer will 
grant us peace. The impediments that are there on 
earth and in the atmosphere will grant us peace. The 
planets which travel in heaven will grant us peace. 


The earth will grant us peace. The meteors which 
have fallen on earth will grant us peace. Cows which 
yield milk as red as blood will grant us peace. The 
ground which is cracked and parched will grant us 
peace. 


Stars which have been flung out by meteors will 
grant us peace. The invasion of the ememies will 
grant us peace. The acts of-assassins will grant us 
peace. All violent deeds will be pacified and will grant 
us peace. Bad omens will grant us peace. 


The moon and the planets will grant us peace. The 
sun will grant us peace. Comets and death will grant 
us peace. The terrible Rudra will grant us peace. 


439 


The Vasus will grant us peace. The Adityas will 
grant us peace. Agni will grant us peace. All the gods 
and the sages will grant us peace. Brihaspati will 
grant us peace. 


Brahma, Prajapati, Dhata and all the worlds will 
lead us on the path to happiness. The four Vedas will 
leed us on the path to happiness. The seven great 
sages will lead us on the path to happiness. Agni will 
lead us on the path to happiness. Indra and Brahma 
will grant us happiness. All the gods will grant us 
happiness. 


The seven great sages know about all that is 
peaceful in the universe. May they instruct us on the 
way to attain peace. May we be peaceful. May we 
know freedom from fear. 


The earth will grant us peace, the atmosphere will 
grant us peace; heaven will grant us peace. Water 
will grant us peace. The herbs and the trees will grant 
us peace. May all the gods grant us peace. Let there 
be peace everywhere; let the universe be full of peace. 
May all that is violent, cruel and terrible be banished. 
May all the sin be banished and may everything be 
peaceful. May there be welfare everywhere. May 
there be peace everywhere. 


There are more suktas on peace in this kanda. There 
are prayers for obtaining protection and freedom 
from fear. Some suktas are devoted to charms and 
prayers to specific gods. There are prayers for 
removing ailments and bad dreams. But we move on 
to kanda twenty. 


440 


Kanda twenty is the last kanda of the Atharva Veda 
Samhita. Although it contains a few suktas 
addressed to Agni, Surya, the Maruts and 
Brihaspati, the bulk of the suktas in this kanda 
are devoted to Indra. 


KANDA TWENTY 


Indra 


O Indra! You are the one who is strong. We have 
extracted soma juice for your sake. We call upon you 
to come and drink this sweet juice. 


O Maruts! You are as powerful and valiant as 
heaven itself. Protect our houses and our places of 
sacrifice so that we become invincible. You are the 
protectors. 


We pray to the great god Agni. The grain that has 
been carted by bulls is his food. The milk and clarified 
butter that has been obtained from cows are his food. 
It is to the learned Agni that oblations of soma juice 
are offered. It is for him that out hymns are chanted. 


We are like the grandsons of Indra. We have 
recited beautiful hymns and prepared soma juice 
according to the rites of the season. May the Maruts 


come here and drink the soma juice that we have 
offered. 


We have lit the fire of the sacrifice. We have recited 
excellent mantras. Let Agni come here and drink the 
soma juice we have offered. 


441 


The soma juice has been prepared according to the 
rites of the season. Beautiful hymns have been 
chanted. Let Indra and Brahma come and drink the 
soma juice. 


The soma juice has been extracted according to the 
rites of the season. Beautiful hymns have been 
chanted. May the god of all riches come und drink the 
soma juice. 


O Indra! Come here. It is for you that this juice has 
been extracted. Drink the soma juice that we have 
offered. And be seated on the throne we have reserved 
for you. : 


O Inara! Your steeds have long hair and are 
learned. May they bring you here to the sacrifice. 
Come close and listen to the hymns we are chanting. 


O Indra! Our learned priests are Offering this soma 
juice on the occasion of the sacrifice. You are the 
drinker of the soma juice. You are the wielder of the 
vajra. We are summoning you so that you may come 
here. 


O Indra! You are the one who is dressed in beautiful 
clothing. We are the ones who have extracted the 
soma juice. Come to us. Listen to the prayers we are 
chanting. Drink the juice we have offered. 


O Indra! We sprinkle the soma juice on your lap. 
Let the soma juice course down your body and please 
you. Taste the sweet soma juice with your tongue. 


You are the one who grants myriad gifts. May you 
find this soma juice to be sweet. May your body find 


442 


this soma juice to be sweet. May this soma juice bring 
peace to your heart. 


O Indra! You are the skilled performer of 
wonderous deeds. This soma juice has been mixed 
with the milk of cows. May it unite with you the way 
a wife is united with her husband. 


Indra is the one who possesses a strong neck. Indra 
is the one with a rotund stomach, thick with fat. ’ 
Indra is the possessor of strong arms. This soma juice 
will inspire Indra to kill the demon Vritra. 


O Indra! Advance. Through your powers you have 
become the lord of the universe. You are the destroyer 
of the demon Vritra. Kill the demons. 


O Indra! You hold a rod in your hand and you use 
this to grant riches to your devotees. May the rod be 
long. Grant riches to the devotees who are performing 
this sacrifice. 


O Indra! This soma juice has been extracted for you. 
It has been strained and kept on a seat. Run and 
come here. Drink the soma juice. 


You are the one who possesses powerful cows. You 
are the one who is worshipped by those who are 
powerful. You are the one who vanquishes all 
enemies. O Indra! It is for your pleasure that this 
soma juice has been prepared. It is you who are being 
summoned to the sacrifice. 


O Indra! You are as strong as a horned bull. Your 
strength never wanes. Your strength never 
diminishes. Your are the one who preserves and 


443 


protects. I use your power to stabilise and padfy my 
mind. 


O Indra! You are the strong one. After preparing 
the soma juice, we are calling upon you. Come and 
drink the tasty soma juice. 


You are the one who is praised by many. You are 
the one who provides the inspiration for action. May 
you desire the soma juice. May it satiate you once you 
have drunk it. May the soma juice make you strong. 


O Indra! You are the one who has been praised. 
You are the lord of all the subjects. , Our sacrifice has 
been blessed with riches. Come with all the gods and 
increase the glory of our sacrifice. 


O Indra! You are the one who preserves those who 
are righteous. This is the shining soma juice that has 
been extracted. It bring pleasure. May this soma juice 
be able to reach you. 


O Indra! This soma juice is worthy of being 
accepted. Fill your stomach with this juice. This is the 
soma juice that can be found in heaven. It belongs to 
you. 


O Indra! You are the one who deserves to be 
worshipped. Drink the juice that we have prepared. It 
is this sweet juice that spurs you to all movement. It is 
you who will grani us fame. 


May Indra grant unlimited riches to his devotees. 
May he who drinks soma juice attain greatness. 


444 


O Indra! You are the destroyer of the demon Vritra. 
Come to us, be you far or near. Accept the offerings 
we have made and listen to our prayers. 


O Indra! We call upon you, be you far or near. We 
call upon you from the innermost recesses of our 
being. Come to us. 


O Surya! You are prosperous and as strong as a 
bull. Rise so that Indra may come here. Indra is the ’ 
one who brings welfare to mankind. He is the skilful 
wielder of the vajra. 


Indra is the one who destroys enemies through his 
strength. Indra is the one who demolishes the 
fortresses of the enemies. Indra is the one who killed 
the snake Vritra. 


Indra is like a friend to us and he will ensure our 
welfare. He will grant us horses, cows, grain and 
riches. He will ensure that our cows yield a plentiful 
supply of milk. 


© Indra! You have drunk the soma juice earlier 
Drink it again. May this juice bring you pleasure. 
Listen to the hymns and prayers we are chanting. 
May they increase your power. Manifest the sun and 
grant us foodgrains. O Indra! Destroy our enemies. 
Make the rays of the sun radiate out. 


Come here. You are the one who desires the soma 
juice. The juice is ready. Drink it and be pleased. The 
strong one has been summoned. He will fill his 
stomach with soma juice. He will listen to our prayers 
like a father listens to his son. 


445 


The pot of soma juice is full It is being offered to 
you according to the prescribed rites. This pot of soma 
juice is for your pleasure. May the soma juice 
surround Indra from the four directions. 


There are many more suktas addressed to Indra. 
But this sample will suffice. 


With the end of kanda twenty, we also come to the 
end of the Atharva Veda Samhita. As you will have 
realised, there are many parts that we have skipped. 
We have only been able to give you a limited idea of 
what there is in the Atharva Veda. You will probably 
also have realised that there are many parts where 
alternative interpretations are possible. The Atharva 
Veda is not very straightforward and _ our 
interpretations need not necessarily be the correct 
ones. If you have been stimulated, this is reason 
enough for you to read the entire Atharva Veda in the 
original. 


adhvaryu 
ahavaniya 
amrita 


antariksha 
anuvaka 
apsara 


arani 
aranyaka 
asura 

_ atman 
ayana 
bhakti 
brahman 
brahmana 


dakshina 


dakshinagni 


dasa 
dharma 
diksha 


' dvapara yuga 


dyuloka 
garhapatya 
gayatri 


GLOSSARY 


reciter at a sacrifice 


type of fire 


heavenly = drink 


immortality 


the atmosphere 


jiesson 


celestial 
heaven 


nymph, 


that confers 


dancer 


stick used to generate a fire 


sacred text 
demon 
human soul 


period of six months 


devotion 


the divine essence 


of 


commentary on a veda, also a 


priest 
sacrificial fee 
type of fire 
slave 


righteousness 


initiation 
era 
heaven 
type of fire 
a metre 


ii 


ghrita Clarified butter 

guna quality 

hotri officiating priest at a sacrifice 

jagati a metre 

jnana knowledge 

kali yuga era 

karma action 

kshatriya warrior 

kusha sacrificial grass 

loka region 

manasa spirit 

mandala book 

mani jewel or amulet 

mantra incantation 

masa month 

muhurta unit of time, 48 minutes 

nakshatra star 

nishada hunter 

paksha fortnight 

panis robbers 

papa sin 

paramatman  .- divine soul, the supreme 
- godhead 

parameshvara - the supreme godhead 

pavamana - that which has been purified 

pitris - ancestors 

prithivi - the earth 


punya - good deed 


purana 
purodasha 
purusha 


rajas 
rakshasa 
ratri 

rik 

rishi 

ritu 
sabha 
sama 
samhita 


samiti 
sattva 
satya yuga 
shakha 
shastra 
shraddha 
shruti 
shudra 
soma 
sukta 
suparna 
tamas 
treta yuga 
trishtupa 


iii 


sacred text 

cake 

origin of the universe, supreme 
soul 

quality of passion 
demon 

night 

incantation 

seer, sage 

season 

assembly 

sweet song or hymn 

part of a Veda consisting of 
incantations 

assembly ~ 

quality of truth 

era 

branch or school 

sacred text 

faith, respect or devotion 
revelation 

a serving class 

juice of a herb 

hymn 

eagle 

quality of darkness 

era 

metre 


udgatri 
upanishad 
vaishya 
vajra 
vanaspati 
veda 
Veda 
virat 
vrata 
vrihati 
yaj 

yajna 
yoga 


yupa 


iv 


chorister at a sacrifice 
sacred text 

trader 

Indra’s weapon 


‘tree 


knowledge 

sacred text 

female counterpart of purusha, 
religious rite 

metre 

to sacrifice 

sacrifice 

union, technique of meditation 
that seeks to attain union 


between the human soul and the 
divine essence 


sacrificia! post 


OTHER ImMporTANT Books 


THE ADI-BUDDHA/ Kanai La/ Hazra 
A detailed study of multifarious origins 
of Northern Buddhist Gods and their 
importance in Northern Buddhist world. 
1986 xvi, 227pp., 22 cm. 

$ 12.50 Rs. 125 
APAH—THE SACRED WATERS: An 
Analysis of A Primordial Symbol in 
Hindu Myths/ Frans Baartmans 
A penetrative study of the mythical and 
symbolic aspects of Hinduism with the 
myths of the waters in the focus. 
1990 xii, 363pp., 6 BW Plates, Royal 
8vo. $ 24.00 Rs. 360 
BHAKTI IN RELIGIONS OF THE 
WORLD: With Special Reference to 
Dr Sri Bankey Behariji/ Chhaganial 
Lala 
It is a comparative study of the four main 
religions of the world. This magnum 
Opus in its comprehensive treatment of 
various religions will be of immense 
interest to general readers, researchers 
and academicians alike. 
1986 268pp., 22 cm. 

$ 12.50 Rs. 125 
BUDDHISM: India 50 Years of 
Independence:1947-97 Status, 
Growth and Development Vol.6/D.C. 
Ahir 
Buddhism in India has made tremen- 
dous progress during the period under 
review (1947-1997). As against less 
than two lakh Buddhist population in 
1947, India now in 1997 has nearly 
seventy lakh Buddhists. 
1998 vi, 212pp., 22cm. 

$ 16.70 Rs. 250 
CHARMING KRISHNA: Madhu- 
rastakam by Sri Vallabhacharya/ 
Rozalia Radhika Priya 
Charming Krishna is a colleciton of 48 
paintings inspired by the devotional 


hymn Madhurastakam of Sri 
Vallabhacharya. 
1995 182pp., 48, Crown 4vo 
$ 50.00 Rs. 1250 
A COMPANION TO _ INDIAN 
PHILOSOPHY/ Sures Chandra Banerji 
This book, useful to laymen as well as 
scholars alike is a companion helping 
the readers to have some knowledge 
about the different systems of Indian 
philosophy that has brought glory to 
India.A chapter has been devoted to the 
maxims, used by later writers and 
commentators, to explain philosophical 
matters. 
1996 vill, 496pp., 22 cm. 
$ 30.00 Rs. 600 
CONCEPT OF AVATARS: With Special 
Reference to-Gita/ R K Pandey 
An enlightening exposition of the 
concept of Avatara (incarnation) in the 
light of Gita and Puranas. 
1978 vil, 92pp., 22 cm. $ 3.50 Rs. 35 
THE DOMICILED HINDUS/ Diwan 
Jamiat 
A sociological survey of the Hindus 
domiciled in Baluchistan in the first two 
decades of 20th century. 
1974 ix, 98pp., Tables, 22 cm. 
$ 2.00 Rs. 20 
ETHICS AND ETHOS FOR HAPPY 
AND PROSPEROUS LIFE/ Swami 
Parampanthi 
The book is packed with examples, 
illustrations and techniques to show how 
people can be familially, socially, 
economically and spiritually successful 
and fuifilled.Also in this book, chapters 
on creativity, problem-solving, 
overcoming fear and successful 
husband-wife and parents-child 
relationships. 
1998 xii, 296pp., 22 cm 
$ (PB) 19.30 Rs. (PB) 290 


FIHA-MA FIHA (Table talk of Maulana 
Rumi)/ Bankey Behari (Tr.) Chhagantal 
Lala (Ed.) 
1998 xii 252 pp., 22 cm. 

$ 23.30 Rs. 350 
HERITAGE OF BUDDHISM/D C Ahir 
The book presents biographical sketches 
of all the Buddhist Kings, Saints and 
Scholars and missionary monks. It also 
presents a study about 700 inscriptions 
which have survived at the three great 
stupas. 
1989 x, 319pp., illus, 22 BW Plates, 
22 cm. $ 19.50 Rs. 195 
HINDU SOCIETY AND INFLUENCE 
OF THE GREAT EPICS/R C Gupta 
The book makes an investigation into the 
fundamentals of Hindu thought and says 
that it is not confined to a particular set 
of people but concerns the entire human 
race. 
1991 xii, 427pp.,.22 cm. 

$ 21.30 Rs. 320 
THE HOLY VEDAS/ Bibek Debroy and 
Dipavali Debroy 
1994 vill, 456pp., 22 cm. 

$ 20.00 Rs. 300 
ICONOGRAPHY OF SIVA: With 
Special Reference to Select Temples 
in Northern Andhra/ A Kamala Vasini 
An exclusive study of the Siva 
Iconography, as it obtained to the 
Northern Districts of Andhra Pradesh, 
with special light on twenty-five select 
temples 
1992 xxxvi, 254pp., 2 illus., 48 BW 
Plates, Demy 4vo. $ 47.50 Rs. 950 
THE IMMORTAL SUFI TRIUMVIRATE 
SAHAI-ATTAR-RUMI/Bankey Behari 
(Tr.) Chhaganial Lala (Ed.) 
1998 106pp., 22 cm. $ 15.00 Rs. 150 
IN DEFENCE OF JESUS CHRIST AND 
OTHER AVATARS/ V K Gokak 
The book is an attempt to explain matters 
in defence of God and his many 
incarnations as answer to the points 


raised by th so-called rationalists 
1996 64pp., 7 illus., 22 cm. 
$ (PB) 3.00 Rs. (PB) 30 

IN PRAISE OF KRISHNA: Translation 
of Gitagovinda of Jayadeva / 
Durgadas Mukhopadhyay 
An authentic English rendering of the 
celebrated epic, which is extensively 
used by performing artists in different 
regions of India.Gitagovinda has deeply 
influenced Indian music, dance, theatre 
and painting. 
1990 xii, 124pp., 2 BW Plates, 22 cm. 

$ 12.00 Rs. 120 
INDIA IN PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY/ 
Arthur Lillie , 
Lillie shows the probable influences of 
Saiva-Buddhism on _ Primitive 
Christianity in this study on comparative 
religion. 
1981 xii, 299pp.,illus., 22 cm. 

$ 10.00 Rs. 100 
THE INDIAN TEACHING TRADITION: 
A Psychological and Spiritual Study/ 
Jacques Vigne 
In this book the author has discussed in 
detail the Guru-disciple relationship in 
India, explaining its usefulness in the 
transmission of the spiritual experience, 
and its pitfalls as well.A description of 
the Guru tradition itself with its different 
branches, and then the psychological, 
social and familial context of India is 
presented.An anthology of texts on the 
Guru, from the Upanishads to Shri 
Aurobindo and Nisargadatta Maharaj. 
1997 x, 220pp., 22 cm.$ 20.00 Rs. 300 
INDIAN WISDOM, CHRISTIANITY AND 
MODERN PSYCHCLOGY/ Jacques 
Vigne 
In this book the author shows how 
psychological and spiritual sufferings are 
interwoven, and how tradition with its 
answers Can Collaborate with psychology 
to alleviate them.Dr. Vigne, who has been 


familiar with Christian monasteries as 


well, tries to understand why the spiritual 
transmission in Christanity has been 
more institutional, while in Hinduism it 
has been more from Guru to disciple. 
1997 x, 230pp., 22 cm. $ 20.00 Rs. 300 
JAGATGURU SHANKARACHARYA 
SHRI BHARATI KRISHNA TEERTHA: 
His Life, Thought and Literature/ 
T.G. Pande 
This is the first book giving the life sketch 
of Jagatguru Shri Bharati Krishna 
Teertha and acquaints the readers with 
Swamiji’s thoughts on true dharma, God 
and Man, duties of a man towards his 
country, society and upliftment of the 
poor, helpless and the downtrodden. 
1997 xxiv, 120pp., 5 BW Plates, 22 cm. 
$ (PB) 7.20 Rs. (PB) 72 
KAMADEVA’S PLEASURE GARDEN: 
ORISSA/ Thomas Donaldson 
Drawing material from several ancient 
epics and scriptures, Donaldson goes 
into the lives and loves of Kama in detail, 
explaining his origin, his amatory 
dalliances and above all his frolics as 
the god with arrows. The life of Siva after 
he married Parvati is also described. 
1987 468pp., illus, 126 BW Plates, 
Demy 4vo. $ 47.50 Rs. 950 
KASHMIRI PANDITS AND THEIR 
DIVERSITY: A Socio-Demogenetic 
Profile/ Aloke K Kalla 
Examines the bio-social phenomenon of 
the two groups of Kashmiri pandits who 
moved out of the state owing to waves 
of Islamic persecution, moved out of the 
valley and sought shelter in various 
towns of North India. 
1985 xxiv, 244pp., Tables, figs., 22 cm. 
$ 15.00 Rs. 150 
THE LORD AND HIS DEVOTEE ARE 
ONE: The Goal of Human Life is The 
Realization and the “Manifestation” 
of Divinity/ Pooja Kapahi 
This book is a personal account of the 
Spiritual tranformation of a protest 


women from the west, under the divine 
guidance of Bhagwan Sri Sathya Sai 
Baba. 
1996 $ (PB) 18.00 Rs. (PB) 180 
THE MANTRA OF VISION AN 
OVERVIEW OF SRI AUROBINDO’S 
AESTHETICS/ S Murali 
This book is an overview of Sri 
Aurobindo's Aesthetics, the author has 
taken a holistic attitude and stresses on 
the two aspects of Sri Aurobindo’s 
darsana-the Mantra and Vision- and 
centralises on his spiritual aesthetics. 
1998 xiv, 254pp., 22 cm. 
(Set) $20.00 Rs. 300 

MEETINGS WITH A YOGI/ 
Paramhansa S Maheshwarananda 
The author guides us through the deeply 
human world of yoga vedanta philosophy 
and has put his knowledge into a system 
of yoga in daily life, which teaches us 
how to overcome our weaknesses and 
to know ourselves better and develop our 
potentials. 
1994 x, 376pp., 4 colour plates, 22 cm. 

$ (PB) 10.00 Rs. (PB) 100 
MODERN COMMENTATORS OF 
VEDA/A K Pateria 
The work compares and relates the Vedic 
interpretations of Max Muller, Dayanand 
and Aurobindo. 
1985 iv, 120pp., 22 cm. $ 8.50 Rs. 85 
NAGA CULT IN ORISSA/ Sadhu 
Charan Panda 
It is an inter-disciplinary study of the 
ancient form of serpent worship in 
different parts of the world, in general, 
and folk cult of Nagbacha in Orissa in 
particular. 
1986 xx, 142pp., 24 BW Ills, Tables, 
1 Map, 22 cm. $ 12.50 Rs. 125 
NATHA CULT AND MAHANAD: A 
Study in Syncretisn/ 
PK. Bandyopadhyay 
A significant phenomenon in the Socio- 
Cultural Scenario of India. it is believed 


to have emerged as a mingling of the 
Saivite tradition and a local cult in 
Bengal 
1992 x, 94pp . 12 BW Plates, 22 cm. 

$ 12.00 Rs. 120 
PHILOSOPHY OF BHAKTV/ Chhaganial 
Lala 
This is a book on Bhakti. In Bhakti, 
chanting of the Divine Name, glories and 
Lilas of the Lord is accepted as a 
prominent means of god-realisation. 
Humanity is the key-note of Bhakti. 
Bhakti is higher than Karma, Knowledge 
and Yoga. 
1989 xiii, 207pp., 22 cm. 

$ 17.00 Rs. 170 
PLANTS IN INDIAN TEMPLE ART/ 
Shakti M Gupta 
The book describes in details, the plants 
depicted in Hindu, Buddhist and Jain 
Temples all over India-from the Indus 
valley civilisation to the 17th century- 
trees, creepers, leaves, flowers, foliage, 
fruits etc., sculpted on walls, pillars, and 
doors. 
1996 xiv, 242pp., 249 BW Plates, 34 
Col Plates., 2 charts, Demy 4vo. 

$ 60.00 Rs. 1500 


The PURANAS in 3 Vols./ Dipavali 
Debroy, Bibek Debroy 
Ali the 19 Puranas,which are the sacred 
texts of the Hindus are contained in 3 
volumes,written in lucid. easy to 
understand style. 
Vol.1 : xviti, 602 pp., Vol.2 : xviii, 562 
pp., Vol.3: xviii, 626 pp., 1994 

(Set) $ 48.00 Rs. 1200 


THE RAMA JATAKA IN LAOS: A 
Study in the Phra Lak Phra Lam in 2 
Vols./ Sachchidanand Sahai 

The book consisting of two volumes 
offers a critical comprehensive study and 
an annotated translation of Phra Lak 
Phra Lam. The present study constitutes 
an indispensable source book for the 


study of Buddhism and cultural. 
anthropological understanding of society, 
religion and literature in India and 
Indochina. Vol.1: xii, 348pp., maps., 
Vol.2: viii, 340pp., 1996 
(Set) $ 48.00 Rs. 1200 
TWarauT ar fayacarat cata weH7 
Gare cae 
sa ga q wae & faysqgordt wat 
we Bae Saf 
fara = | 
1996 x + 218 JS 22 BA. 
$ (Wat) 9.00 (dhat) =. 90 
RAMAYANA AROUND THE WORLD/ 
Lallan Prasad Vyas 
This book brings the nectar of World 
Ramayana Conferences to doorsteps of 
those who are keenly interested in the 
studies of Ramayana with a broader 
perspectives. 
1997 x, 250pp., 22 cm. 
$ 20.00 Rs. 300 


RAMAYANA FROM GANGA TO 
BRAHMAPUTRA / Indira Goswami 
This book introduces to the readers in 
India as well as abroad the glorious 
treasure of the two Indian Ramayanas 
one from the valley of Brahmaputra 
created by Madhava Kandali in the 
Assamese language and the other 
composed by Goswami Tulsi Das in 
Awadhi. 
1996 xviii, 358pp., 155 colour Plates, 35 
BW Plates Plates, Demy 4vo. 

$ 100.00 Rs. 2500 
RAMAYANA-INTERNATIONAL 
PERSPECTIVE/Lallan Prasad Vyas 
1998 xii, 116 pp., 22 cm. 

$ 17.50 Rs. 175 

RAMAYANA THEATRE IN INDIA/ 
Rajendra Jain ‘ 
The book presents Lord Rama’s life, 
character and accomplishments in a 


series of emotionally gratifying and 
visually appealing vignettes. It narrates 
the story through cammentaries in 
English, accompanied by appropriate 
illustration in the form of beautiful colour 
photographs of song and action 
sequences. 
1996 110pp., 147 colour Plates 

$ 49.50 Rs. 990 
RAMLILA—IN BALLET/Rajendra Jain 
The book presents Lord Rama’s life, 
character and accomplishments in a 
series of emotionally gratifying and 
visually appealing vignettes. It narrates 
the story through commentaries and 
appropriate illustrations. 
1994 110pp., Royal 2vo. 

$ 50.00 Rs. 1250 

RELIGION AND POLITICS: India 50 
years of Independence 1947-97: Status, 
Growth & Development Vol.17/Syed Ali 
Shafee 
1998 vi, 120 pp., 22 cm. 

$ 18.00 Rs. 180 
RELIGION AND SOCIETY IN SOUTH 


INDIA: A Volume in Honour of Prof. | 


N. Subba Reddy / V Sudarsen, G P 
Reddy and M Suryanaraya 
Contains sixteen articles by world- 
famous anthropologists on the religious 
customs, marriage ceremonies and 
social traditions prevailing in South India. 
1987 xvi, 280pp., 22 cm. 

$ 12.50 Rs. 125 
RELIGION PHILOSOPHY AND 
LITERATURE OF BENGAL 
VAISHNAVISM/ 
Durgadas Mukhopadhyay 
The book offers a comprehensive 
analysis of Bengal Vaishnavism and 
translation of rich literary treasure of the 
erotic-mystic poetry written in Vrojobuli. 
1990 vii, 155pp., 2 illus., 22 cm, 

$ 12.00 Rs. 120 
THE RELIGIONS AND PHILOSO- 
PHIES OF THE EAST/J M Kennedy 
It is about all the religions and 


philosophies that spring from the East. 
1981 xi, 276pp., 22 cm. 
$ 10.00 Rs. 100 
ROYAL PATRONAGE OF BUDDHISM 
IN ANCIENT INDIA/ Kanai Lal Hazra 
A review of the whole gamut of help, 
encouragement and dissemination of 
Buddhism practised by the various royal 
personages. 
1984 xi, 304pp., 2 Maps, Crown 4vo. 
$ 18.30 Rs. 275 
THE RUBAIYAT OF SARMAD 
(Translated into English from Persian)/ 
Bankey Behari (Tr.) Chhaganlal Lala 
(Ed.) 
1998 88 pp., 22 cm. 
$ 12.50 Rs. 125 
SAI BABA ON HUMAN VALUES AND 
EDUCATION/ S P Ruhela 
The book is a collection of statements 
made by Sri Sathya Sai Baba on the 
nature of human life, human value and 
education role of teachers etc., in his 
discourses and writings. 
1996 92pp., 22 cm. 
$ (PB) 4.00 Rs. (PB) 40 
SHRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA: 
Through the eyes of ascientist/MS 
Manhas 
There are numerous commentaries on 
the Gita. This book is unique in the 
sense that it is written by a scientist of 
Indian origin who teaches in the USA 
but has a deep interest in Indian 
religious philosophy.This volume is 
primarily directed towards readers who 
are more exposed to science and 
technology rather than religious 
philosophy. 
1997 xxx, 472pp.,.22 cm. 
$ (PB) 26.70 Rs. (PB) 400 
SRI SATHYA SAI AS KALKI AVTAR/ 
S P Ruhela 
The author attempts to prove in this book 
that Sri Sathya Sai Baba is the Kalki 
Avatar to destroy the widespread 


immorality and evil forces in the TUHFA—The Minstrel Divine/Bankey 
contemporary times. Behari (Tr.) Chhaganlal Lala (Ed.) 
1996 14, 194pp., 9, Demy. 1998 72 pp., 22cm. $ 12.50 Rs. 125 

$ (PB) 9.00 Rs. (PB) 90 TULASIDASA: A BIBLIOGRAPHY/ 
oft ueraftanra: ahaa wee ater: Sudha Verma 


The book offers for the first time a 
saet fet ud Wet ure sentra comprehensive, systematic and 
alea/sy JERI YRETH thoroughly classified corps of research 
Uh sea dey Wy fad Fer weafta materials available on the sixteenth 


5 ‘ -. century hindi poets. 
aera een el ArTe A fed ‘sree TE A908 viii 474pp.. 22 cm 


ar ayet factor feat e | "$15.00 Rs. 225 
1995, 518 Ys, 350 faa VEDA AND VEDANTA—NEW INTER- 
(z) $ 44.00 & 1100 PRETATIONS/N. Jayashanmugam 


STUDIES IN PALIAND BUDDHISM: A Acollection of articles written on several 


: 3 : subjects such as the Veda, the 

Memorial Volume in Honour of Bhikku : ; d 
; ; ’ k dS 

Jagdish Kashyap /A K Narain Upanishads, the Gita, Shankara and Sri 


: i Aurobindo. Each article is an attempt at 
Deals with the various aspects Of shedding a new light upon a well-known 
Buddhism and Pali language in a work, apauruseya or pauruseya. 
scholastic manner. 4998 x, 236pp., 22 cm. 
1979 xadi, 422pp., Crown 8vo. $ 20.00 Rs. 300 
$ 18.00 Rs. 180 VEDANTA: What can it teach?/ 
STUDIES ON PALI COMMENTARIES/ 8.L. Raina 
Kanai Lal Hazra This book presents the rich material on 
The book will be of interest, not only to Vedanta based on Vedas, Vedangas, Up- 
specialists, but also to those who look Vedas,Upanisads, Bhagavad Gita, 
for an authentic picture of the Pali Brahmasutras, Darsanas especially 
Commentaries with an insight into Y°9@: and the treatises on and related to 
5 Vedanta. 
Th . oe 
pooled ough 1995 xvili, 222pp., 22 cm. 
1991 xviii, 388pp., 22 cm. 
$ 21.30 Rs. 320 $ 15.00 Rs. 225 


THE WONDER THAT IS HINDU 
SUNDARAKANDA (Fully Illustrated puaRMasR, h 
with Original Text, Transliteration & ah ed ee 


ae d The author explains the concept of 
Translation in Hindi & English) dharma in its various forms and attempts 
1998 ii + 235 pp., 349 Coloured illus., to establish that it is neither philosophy 


25 cm. $60.00 Rs. 1500 nor religion, neither norality nor law, yet 
THE TIRUMALAVADI TEMPLE: itpervades all these. 


History and Culture Through the 1987 240pp., 22 cm. $ 12.50 Rs. 125 

Ages/ C Mookka Reddy All the prices’ are subject to change without prior notice 
Ttiis monograph is a comprehensive E 

sicdy of historical inscriptions on the 
walis of the Tirumalavadi temple which 
reveal several aspects of the social, 
political, economic and religious 
conditions. 

1986 xii, 236pp., 42 BW Plates., 22 cm. 
$ 16.00 Rs. 160 


geno” 
BRPC (INDIA) LTD. 


(Pub, Div. B.R. Publishing Corporation) 
4222/1, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj 
New Delhi-110 002. Phone: 3259196 
E-mail: brpcitd @del2.vsni.net.in 


~ 


mAl PENA COUNTY LIBRARY 
iy. First St 
Aipena, Mich. 49767 


mat 
ty 


bai 


a 


