A BUDDHIST BIBLE 



jSJTO 





^/NG 


A BUDDHIST 
BIBLE 


Revised and Enlarged 


Edited by Dwight Goddard 



E. P. DUTTON & CO., INC. 
New York 



Copyright , 1938, by E. P . Dutton & Co „ Inc . 

All rights reserved . Printed in the USA . 

2Vo part of this book may be reproduced 
in any form without permission in writing 
from the publisher , except by a reviewer 
who wishes to quote brief passages in con- 
nection with a review written for inclusion in 
magazine or newspaper or radio broadcast . 


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 52-7805 



PREFACE 


The first edition of this Buddhist Bible was published in 
1932. When the need of a new edition became evident, it was 
decided to enlarge it so as to include other Scriptures of like 
importance so as to make it more comprehensive. This in- 
volved making a number of new translations for which we are 
indebted to Bhikshu Wai-tao. We are also indebted and are 
very grateful to a number of other Buddhist Scholars for per- 
mission to use their translations, as noted in the Appendix. 

The compiling of a Buddhist Bible is a very different mat- 
ter from compiling the Christian Bible. In the first place, 
there is no Hierarchy or Ecclesiastic Council to pass upon the 
authenticity of different scriptures, and as to their canonicity. 
In the second place, Christian Scriptures are a closed system 
of doctrines and dogmas that have been inspired by the Holy 
Spirit and are to be accepted in faith. Buddhism, on the con- 
trary, is looked upon as a growing organism whose scriptures 
are of many kinds as the organism has developed under dif- 
ferent racial, temporal and cultural conditions. As disciples fol- 
low the Buddha’s Noble Path and practice dhyana concentra- 
tion and intuitive meditation they have an unfolding expe- 
rience of spiritual insight and.g?race which any one of them 
may describe and elucidate. Some of these expediences are of 
highest value, some of less value. Some are concerned with 
the Dharma, some have to do with the rules of . the Brother- 
hoods, some are philosophical, some psychological, some are 
commentaries and some are commentaries on commentaries. 
In the third place, there is the difference of quantity. In the 
Christian Bible there are sixty-six titles; Buddhist scriptures 
number over ten thousand, only a fraction of which have thus 
far been translated. In the Sung Dynasty about 972 AD a 
Chinese version of these scriptures was published consisting of 
1521 works, in more than 5000 volumes, covering 130,000 
pages. ' 

The nearest approach to canonicity is the Pali Tripitika. 
That was the earliest collection and was supposed to be lim- 



VI 


PREFACE 


ited to the words of Buddha. Southern Buddhists are passion- 
ately devoted to these Pali Scriptures and are inclined to dis- 
parage and dispute the more philosophical scriptures of the 
Northern School that developed later after Buddhism had 
come in contact with other world religions in Persia, Palestine, 
Egypt and Greece. Under these conditions there developed in 
Northern India, and Kashgar, a succession of very able minds, 
Ashvaghosha, Nargajuna, Vasobandhu and his brother As- 
angha from whose writings and teachings there developed 
various important schools of philosophical thought that pro- 
foundly changed the understanding of Buddha’s Dharma. 

Later on as Buddhism spread into China and came under 
the influence of its immemorial culture and practical good 
sense, it took on forms of Taoist naturalism and kindly hu- 
manism, and there developed forms of “salvation by faith in 
Amitabha’s mercy” and rebirth in his Pure Land. While in 
Tibet, coming in contact with its ancient Bon religion, and 
under the climatic conditions of its high altitudes, it took on 
forms of strenuousness and magic and tantric conceptions. 
Later on in Japan owing to political and social conditions in- 
cident to the presence of a limited but powerful noble class 
dominating a suppressed peasantry, which had developed ex- 
tremes of loyalty and obedience and self-control, it took on 
forms of concentrative meditation known as Zen, and a still 
more widely divergent type of the True Pure Land Sect. 

Naturally among these diverse conditions Buddhist scrip- 
tures vary widely, and the quantity of them being so enor- 
mous, they have become segregated into different groups as 
they are favored by different schools of thought and practice. 
The Tien-tai favor the more philosophical scriptures, the Shin- 
gon, the more esoteric, the Ch’an (Zen), the more intellectual, 
and the Pure Land, the more emotional. The present editor 
has been guided in his selection of scriptures for this Buddhist 
Bible by a sincere purpose to make the selection as comprehen- 
sive as possible within its limits and to represent as truly as 
possible the original teachings of the Blessed One both as 
understood by the Southern and more primitive school and 
by the Northern and more philosophical interpreters. He has 
also humbly tried to have the choice vouched for by his own 
spiritual experience in his practice of the Noble Path and es- 
pecially during its Eighth Stage of intuitive Dhyana. 


PREFACE 


vn 


It follows, therefore, that the scriptures thus selected, are 
the generally accepted scriptures of the Dhyana Sects — Ch’an 
in China, Zen in Japan and Kargyupta in Tibet. Of course 
among so enormous a collection of scriptures there are others 
that are favorites also, notably the Saddharma-pundarika (Lo- 
tus of the Perfect Law), and the Avatamsaka, said to be the 
grandest religious document ever written, but these are very 
large books in themselves. The late W. E. Soothil of London 
left a very careful translation of the Lotus that still waits a 
publisher. Dr. Suzuki of Kyoto has made a translation of the 
Gandhavyuha sections of the Avatamsaka that is now in 
process of being published. The inclusion of Laotzu’s Tao- 
teh-king is open to question as it is not strictly a Buddhist 
text, but its teaching has such a close affinity to Buddhist 
teaching and nearly all early Chinese Masters of Buddhism 
were Taoist scholars who, upon becoming Buddhists, did not give 
up their Taoist conceptions and terms, and because the Lao- 
tzuan teaching in the Tao-teh-king has had such a wholesome 
influence on the development of Chinese Buddhism, and, in 
later years, wherever the T ao-teh-king is held in reverence, it 
has tended to restrain individual pride of egoism, religious 
ceremonial, ecclesiasticism, priestcraft and insincerity generally, 
we make no apology for including it. In fact, it is our earnest 
wish that the Tao-teh-king may become one of the foundation 
stones of American and European Buddhism. 

Further introductory notes are reserved for the Appendix 
under the heads of the individual Scriptures, as are also -grate- 
ful appreciation to those who have contributed to the prepara- 
tion and publication of this Bible, especially to those Buddhist 
scholars who have courteously granted the Editor permission 
to use their translations for this purpose. 

Just a closing word as to the rules that have guided the 
Editor in his choice and handling of textual material. He has 
always kept in mind the spiritual needs of his readers. This 
Buddhist Bible is not intended to be a source book for critical 
literary and historical study. It is only intended to be a source 
of spiritual inspiration designed to awaken faith and to develop 
faith into aspiration and full realization. The original texts 
having for centuries been carried in memory and transcribed 
by hand by scribes who were often more loyal to their Master 
than to historical exactness, are often overloaded with inter- 



vm 


PREFACE 


polations and extensions, and in places are confused and ob- 
scure. To carry out the design of the Editor, he has omitted 
a great deal of matter not bearing directly upon the theme of 
the particular Scripture, and has interpreted occasionally where 
it seemed necessary and advisable, in order to provide an 
easier and more inspiring reading. The need for this course 
will become apparent to every earnest minded disciple. 

In these days when Western civilization and culture is 
buffeted as never before by foreboding waves of materialism 
and selfish aggrandisement both individual and national. 
Buddhism seems to hold out teachings of highest promise. For 
two thousand years Dhyana Buddhism has powerfully condi- 
tioned the cultural, ethical and spiritual life of the great 
Oriental nations. It well may be the salvation of Western 
civilization. Its rationality, its discipline, its emphasis on sim- 
plicity and sincerity, its thoughtfulness, its cheerful industry 
not for profit but for service, its love for all animate life, its 
restraint of desire in all its subtle forms, its actual foretastes 
of enlightenment and blissful peace, its patient acceptance of 
karma and rebirth, all mark it out as being competent to meet 
the problems of this excitement loving, materialistic, acquisitive 
and thoughtless age. 

Its basic principle of an eternal process based on unchang- 
ing law and operating in eternal recurrence, leading to mind- 
control, to highest cognition, to purest conceptions of love and 
compassion, to ever clearing insight, to highest perfect wisdom, 
to the self-giving of Bodhisattvas, and Buddhas, to blissful 
peace, is worthy of confidence; and its Noble Path worthy of 
trial. 

The theme of this Buddhist Bible is designed to show the 
unreality of all conceptions of a personal ego. Its purpose is 
to awaken faith in Buddhahood as being one’s true self-nature; 
to kindle aspiration to realize one’s true Buddha-nature; to 
energize effort to follow the Noble Path, to become Buddha. 
The true response to the appeal of this Buddhist Bible is not 
in outward activities, but in self-yielding, becoming a clear 
channel for Buddhahood’s indrawing compassion, that all sen- 
tient beings may become emancipated, enlightened and brought 
to Buddhahood. 



CONTENTS 


TJl OS 

Preface v 

Selections from Pali Sources 

The Historic Buddha, Narasu 3 

The Word of the Buddha, Nyanatiloka . . . . 22 
Tevigga Sutta, Rhys-Davids . . . . . 61 

1 18th Discourse, Chao Kung 73 

Selections from Sanskrit Sources 

Maha-Prajna-Paramita-Hridaya, Goddard .... 85 

The Diamond Sutra, Wai-tao 87 

. The Surangama Sutra, Wai-tao 108 

Lankavatara Scripture, Suzuki and Goddard . . . 277 
The Awakening of Faith, Wai-tao 357 

Selections from Chinese Sources 

Tao-teh-king, Wai-tao 407 

Dhyana for Beginners, Wai-tao . 437 

Sutra Spoken by the Sixth Patriarch, Wong Mou-lam 497 

Selections from Tibetan Sources 

The Life and Hymns of Milarepa, Evans-Wentz . . 561 

The Supreme Path, Evans-Wentz 600 

Selections from Modern Sources 

Homeless Brothers, Yamabe 625 

Practising the Seventh Stage, Goddard 634 

Summary of Buddha’s Dharma 645 

Appendix . . . 659 




SELECTIONS 
FROM PALI SOURCES 



As one upon a rocky mountain standing , 

Beholding all the people round about him 
Plunged in their grief, by birth and age o’er powered, 
E’en thus, O Thou with Wisdom filled, ascending 
To th’ Palace of the Dharma, all beholding, 

Look down, Thou griefless One, upon the people! 

Rise up, O Hero, victor in battle! 

O Caravan-leader , free from debt, go through the world! 
May the Lord deign to teach the Dharma, 

There are those who’ll understand. 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


B UDDHISM, or, as it is known among its followers, the 
pharma, is the religion preached by the Buddhas. A Bud- 
dha is one who has attained Bodhi. By Bodhi is meant an 
ideal state of intellectual and ethical perfection, which can be 
attained by man by purely human means. Of the many that 
have attained Bodhi the one best known to history is Gau- 
tama Sakyamuni. 

Gautama Sakyamuni is generally spoken of as the founder 
of the Dharma. But Sakyamuni himself refers in his dis- 
courses to Buddhas who had preached the same doctrine be- 
for him. Nor can we speak of the Buddha as the founder of 
Buddhism in the same sense as we speak of the founder of 
Christianity or Mahometanism. Their founder is essentially 
a supernatural being; he is the incarnation of the son of God, 
who is no other than God himself. No one can call himself a 
true Christian, who does not accept the divinity of Jesus, and 
who does not believe that Christ rose from the dead after dy- 
ing on the cross to take upon himself the sins of all those 
who believe in him. Mahomet, the founder of the latter re- 
ligion, though not an incarnation of God or any of his rela- 
tions or servants, is yet a privileged human being, who was 
chosen as the special vehicle for the communication of a 
supernatural revelation to mankind, and no man can call 
himself a Mahometan who does not believe that Mahomet is the 
prophet of God. But the Buddha nowhere claims to be any- 
thing more than a human being. No doubt we find him a full 
and perfect man. All the same he is a man among men. He 
does not profess to bring a revelation from a supernatural 
source. He does not proclaim himself a saviour who will take 
upon himself the sins of those that follow him. He professes 
no more than to teach men the way by which they can liber- 
ate themselves as he has liberated himself. He distinctly tells 
us that every one must bear the burden of his own sins, that 
every man must be the fabricator of his own salvation, that 
not even a God can do for man what self-help in the form 

3 



4 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

of self-conquest and self-emancipation can accomplish. We 
read in the Dharmapada, a collection of verses attributed to 
the Blessed Sakyamuni: 

All that we are is the result of what we have thought: it 
is founded on our thoughts, it is made up of our thoughts. 

By oneself evil is done; by oneself one suffers; by oneself 
evil is left undone; by oneself one is purified. Purity and im- 
purity belong to oneself; no one can purify another. 

You yourself must make an effort; the Buddhas are only 
preachers. The thoughtful who enter the way are freed from 
the bondage of sin. 

He who does not rouse himself when it is time to rise, 
who, though young and strong, is full of sloth, whose will and 
thoughts are weak, that lazy and idle man will never find the 
way to enlightenment. 

Strenuousness is the path of immortality, sloth the path of 
death. Those who are strenuous do not die; those who are 
slothful are as if dead already. 

Again in the Mahaparanirvana Sutra the Buddha gives the 
following admonition to Ananda, one of his beloved disciples: 

O Ananda, be ye lamps unto yourselves. Be ye refuges to 
yourselves. Hold fast to the Dharma as a lamp. Hold fast to 
the Dharma as a refuge. Look not for refuge to any one be- 
side yourselves. 

And whosoever, Ananda, either now or after I am dead, 
shall be a lamp unto themselves and a refuge unto themselves 
. . . it is they, Ananda, among the seekers after Bodhi who 
shall reach the very topmost height. 

Not only did the Buddha offer no support to favourable 
interference from supernatural agencies on behalf of man, not 
only did he offer no promise of exemption from suffering and 
sorrow as a reward of simple belief in him, but he went fur- 
ther in admonishing his disciples not to attach importance to 
his individual personality but to remember always the ideal. 
It is said in the Vajracchedika: He who looks for me, i.e., the 
true Tathagata, through any material form, or seeks me 
through any audible sound, that man has entered on an er- 
roneous course, and shall never behold Tathagata. Similarly 
in another place we read: Who say you see me and yet have 
transgressed the Dharma, are not seen by me, but as though 
you were distant by ten thousand miles, whereas the man who 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


5 


keeps the Dharma dwells ever in my sight. The same truth 
is much more impressively brought out in a conversation be- 
tween the Blessed One and the Brahman Drona. Once upon 
a time the latter seeing the Blessed One sitting at the foot of 
a tree, asked him: Are you a deva? And the Exalted One 
answered: I am not. Are you a gandharva? — I am not. 
— Are you a yaksha? — I am not. Are you a man? — I am 
not a man. On the Brahman asking what he might be, the 
Blessed One replied: Those evil influences, those lusts, whose 
non-destruction would have individualised me as a deva, a 
gandharva, a yaksha, or a man, I have completely annihilated. 
Know, therefore, O Brahman, that I am a Buddha. Now the 
practical lesson of this anecdote is obvious. According to 
Hindu ideas a deva, a gandharva, a yaksha could assume a 
human form. It was therefore natural for the Brahman to 
ask if the being in human form before him was a deva, a 
gandharva, or a yaksha. But what perplexed the Brahman 
was that he received a negative answer to each one of his 
questions, and this led him to his general question. Buddha’s 
answer to it was unequivocal. What was of importance in his 
eyes was not his form (rupa) but his character (nama), the 
embodiment in practical life of the ideas of compassion and 
wisdom summed up in the word Bodhi. He was not only 
Sakyamuni, but he was also Tathagata. The eternal truths 
he taught were nothing but what he himself was in the quin- 
tessence of his personality. He was dharmadhatusvabhavat- 
maka, representing in himself the ultimate reality embodied 
in the society of all human beings. No wonder therefore that 
the personality that dominates Buddhism is not Sakyamuni 
but the Buddha. 

Though what is of primary importance is the life in ac- 
cordance with the Dharma, yet the personality of the Great 
Teacher is not without value. In so far as that personality is 
the practical embodiment of his teachings, it serves as a model 
for the disciple to imitate and follow. As the Amitayur-dhyana 
Sutra says: Since they have meditated on Buddha’s body, they 
will also see Buddha’s mind. The Buddha’s mind is his ab- 
solutely great compassion for all beings. But it must at the 
same time be remembered that the teaching of the Blessed 
One does not rest for its validity on any miracle or any special 
event in his life as is the case in many another religion. 



6 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


Should the events in the life of Gautama Sakyamuni turn 
out to be unhistorical, that would not in the least detract 
from the merit of his teachings. As the Blessed One himself 
has said, the teaching carries with it its own demonstration. 

Stripped of mythical embellishments, the principal events in 
the life of Gautama Buddha are easily told. He was bom 
about the middle of the sixth century before the Christian era 
(563 B.G.) in Lumbini Park in the neighbourhood of Kapila- 
vastu, now known as Padeira, in the north of the district of 
Gorakpur. To mark this spot as the birth of the greatest 
teacher of mankind and as a token of his reverence for him. 
Emperor Asoka erected in 239 B.C. a pillar bearing the in- 
scription: Here was the Enlightened One born. 

At Kapilavastu resided the chiefs of the Sakya clan, of 
whom little would have been remembered, had not Siddartha 
been born among them. Gautama’s father, Suddhodana, and 
his mother, Maya, the daughter of Suprabuddha, belonged to 
this clan. The mother of Siddartha died seven days after his 
birth. Under the kind care of his maternal aunt, Prajapati 
Gautami, Siddartha spent his early years in ease, luxury and 
culture. No pains were spared to make the course of his life 
smooth. At the age of sixteen he was married to his cousin, 
Yasodhara, the daughter of the chief of Koli, and they had a 
son named Rahula. For twenty-five years Siddartha saw only 
the beautiful and pleasant. About this time the sorrows and 
sufferings of mankind affected him deeply, and made him re- 
flect on the problem of life. Impelled by a strong desire to 
find the origin of suffering and sorrow and the means of ex- 
tirpating them, he renounced at the age of twenty-nine all 
family ties and retired to the forest, as was the wont in his 
day. 

’T was not through hatred of his children sweet, 

’T was not through hatred of his lovely wife, 

Thraller of hearts — not that he loved them less — 

But Buddhahood more, that he renounced them all. 

After this great renunciation ( abhinishkramana ) the Bodhi- 
sattva, the seeker after Bodhi, placed himself under the spirit- 
ual guidance of two renowned Brahman teachers, Arada Kal- 
ama and Udraka Ramaputra. The former lived at Vaisali and 
was the head of a large number of followers. He was evidently 
a follower of Kapila, the reputed founder of the Sankhya 


THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


7 


system of philosophy, and laid great stress on the belief in an 
atman. He regarded the disbelief in the existence of a soul as 
not tending towards religion. Without the belief in an eternal 
immaterial soul he could not see any way of salvation. Like 
the munga-grass when freed from its homy case, or like the 
wild bird when liberated from its trap, the soul, when freed 
from its material limitations (upadhi), would attain perfect 
release. When the ego discerned its immaterial nature, it 
would attain true deliverance. This teaching did not satisfy 
the Bodhisattva, and he quitted Arada Kalama, and placed 
himself under the tuition of Udraka Ramaputra. The latter, 
probably a follower of the Vaiseshika system, also expatiated 
on the question of I, but laid greater stress on the effects of 
Karma and the transmigration of souls. The Bodhisattva saw 
the truth in the doctrine of Karma, but he could not bring 
himself to believe in the existence of a soul or its transmigra- 
tion. He therefore quitted Udraka also, and went to the 
priests officiating in temples to see if he could leam from 
them the way of escape from suffering and sorrow. But to 
the gentle nature of Gautama the unnecessarily cruel sacri- 
fices performed on the altars of the gods were revolting, and 
he preached to the priests on the futility of atoning for evil 
deeds by the destruction of life and the impossibility of prac- 
tising religion by the neglect of the moral life. 

Wandering from Vaisali in search of a better system Sid- 
dartha came to a settlement of five pupils of Udraka, headed 
by Kaundinya, in the jungle of Uruvilva near Gaya in Ma- 
gadha. There he saw these five keeping their senses in check, 
subduing their passions and practising austere penance. He 
admired their zeal and earnestness, and to give a trial to the 
means employed by them he applied himself to mortification. 
For six years he practised the most severe ascetic penances, 
till his body became shrunken like a withered branch. One 
day after bathing in the river Nairanjana (modern Phalgu) 
he strove to leave the water, but could not rise on account of 
his weakness. However with the aid of the stooping branch 
of a tree he raised himself and left the river. But while re- 
turning to his abode he again staggered and fell to the ground, 
and might perhaps have died, had not Sujata, the eldest 
daughter of a herdsman living near the jungle, who acciden- 
tally passed by the spot where the Bodhisattva had swooned, 


8 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

given him some rice-milk. Having thus refreshed himself he 
perceived that asceticism, instead of leading him to the goal 
he sought, brought about only an enfeeblement of both body 
and mind. Accordingly he gave up all ascetic practices, and 
paying due attention to the needs of the body he entered upon 
a course of reflection and self-examination, trusting to his 
own reason, the light which each one of us carries within him- 
self, to attain the truth. 

“Truth is within ourselves; it takes no rise 
From outward things, whate’er you may believe. 

There is an inmost centre in us all. 

Where truth abides in fulness; and around. 

Wall upon wall, the gross flesh hems it in. 

This perfect clear perception which is truth. 

A baffling and perverting carnal mesh 
Binds it and makes all error: and to know 
Rather consists in opening out a way 
Whence the imprisoned splendour may escape. 

Than in effecting entry for a light 
Supposed to be without.” 

One night, while sitting in deep meditation under a fig 
tree (ficus religiosa), the consciousness of true insight possessed 
him. He saw the mistaken ways of the faiths that then ob- 
tained, he discerned the sources whence earthly suffering 
flowed, and the way that led to their annihilation. He saw 
that the cause of suffering lay in a selfish cleaving to life, and 
that the way of escape from suffering lay in the attainment of 
the ten perfections (daca paramitas). With the discernment of 
these grand truths and their realization in life the Bodhisattva 
became enlightened; he thus attained Sambodhi and became a 
Buddha. Rightly has Sambodhi been called Svabodhanam to 
emphasise the fact that it can be accomplished only by self- 
help without the extraneous aid of a teacher or an Isvara. 
As the poet says, 

“Save his own soul’s light overhead, 

None leads man, none ever led.” 

Now arrived the most critical moment in the life of the 
Blessed One. After many struggles he had found the most 
profound truths, truths teeming with meaning but comprehen- 
sible only by the wise, truths fraught with blessings but dif- 
ficult to discern by ordinary minds (prtagjana). Mankind were 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


9 

worldly and hankering for pleasure. Though they possessed 
the capacity for knowledge and virtue and could perceive the 
true nature of things, they remained in ignorance, entangled 
by deceptive thoughts. Could they comprehend the law of 
Karma, the law of concatenation of cause and effect in the 
moral world? Could they rid themselves of the animistic idea 
of a soul and grasp the true nature of man? Could they over- 
come the propensity to seek salvation through a mediatorial 
caste of priests? Could they understand the final state of 
peace, that quenching of all worldly cravings which leads to 
the blissful haven of Nirvana? Would it be advisable for him 
in these circumstances to preach to all mankind the truths he 
had discovered? Might not failure result in anguish and pain? 
Such were the doubts and questions which arose in his mind, 
but only to be smothered and quenched by thoughts of uni- 
versal compassion. He who had abandoned all selfishness could 
not but live for others. What could be a better way of living 
for others than to show them the path of attaining perfect 
bliss? What could be greater service to mankind than to rescue 
the struggling creatures engulfed in the mournful sea of sam- 
sara? Is not the gift of Dharma the greatest of all gifts? 
When the Perfect One considered how sorrow and suffering 
oppressed all beings, he became very compassionate, and made 
up his mind to preach to all mankind the eternal truths he 
had discovered. 

Amongst the nations I shall go 

And ope the door that to the deathless leads. 

Let those that have ears to hear 

Master the noble path of salvation. 

With this firm resolve he started for Benares which has been 
famous for centuries as the centre of religious life and thought. 
On his way the Blessed One met one of his former acquaint- 
ances, Upaka, a naked Jain monk, who, struck by his majestic 
and joyful appearance, asked: Who is the teacher under whose 
guidance you have renounced the world? The Enlightened One 
replied: I have no master. To me there is no equal. I am the 
Perfect One, the Buddha. I have attained peace. I have ob- 
tained Nirvana. To found the kingdom of righteousness I am 
going to Benares. There I shall light the lamp of life for the 
benefit of those who are enshrouded in the darkness of sin and 
death. Upaka then asked: Do you profess to be the Jina, the 


10 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


conqueror of the world? The Buddha replied: Jinas are those 
who have conquered self and the passions of self, those alone 
are victors who control their passions and abstain from sin. 
I have conquered self and overcome all sin. Therefore am I 
the Jina. 

He whose life is pure, whose thought is good. 

Whose subject senses own him sovereign lord. 

Whose heart and mind no attachment hampers. 

Whose head and heart love and gladness nil, 

Who remorseless ignorance has killed, 

Who pride of egoism has slain, 

Who, from all defilements purged and free. 

Combines truth and valour and resource 
With foresight, kindness and fixed resolve: 

He has all Fetters utterly destroyed 
And made the Conquest glorious and true. 

At Benares he met Kaundinya and his four companions in 
the Deer Park, Isipatana. When these five (the pancha-vag- 
giya) saw the Tathagata coming towards them, they agreed 
among themselves not to rise in salutation, nor greet him, nor 
offer him the customary refreshments, when he came, for he 
had broken his first vow by giving up ascetic practices. How- 
ever, when the Tathagata approached them, they involuntarily 
rose from their seats, and in spite of their resolution greeted 
him and offered to wash his feet and do all that he might re- 
quire. But they addressed him as Gautama after his family. 
Then the Lord said to them: Call me not after my private 
name, for it is a rude and careless way of addressing one who 
has become an Arhat. My mind is undisturbed, whether people 
treat me with respect or disrespect. But it is not courteous for 
others to call one who looks equally with a kind heart upon 
all living beings by his familiar name. Buddhas bring salvation 
to the world, and therefore they ought to be treated with re- 
spect as children treat their fathers. Then he preached to them 
his first great sermon, the Dharmachakrapravartana Sutra, in 
which he explained the Four Great Truths and the Noble 
Eightfold Path, and made converts of them. They received the 
ordination and formed the first nucleus of the holy brotherhood 
of disciples known as the Sangha. Soon after, one night the 
Blessed One met Yacas, the youthful son of a rich merchant 
(Sreshti) of Benares, who was wandering like a madman much 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


11 


distressed by the sorrows of this world. The Tathagata con- 
soled him by pointing out the way to the blessedness of Nir- 
vana, and made him his disciple. Seeing that Yacas had be- 
come a bhikshu, his former fifty-four jovial companions also 
joined the Sangha. The Blessed One sent out these sixty as 
missionaries in different directions to preach his universal reli- 
gion. Shortly afterwards the Buddha had an accession of a 
thousand new disciples by the conversion of three leading fire- 
worshipping ascetics, Uruvilva Kasyapa, Nadi Kasyapa and 
Gaya Kasyapa, all brothers, with all their followers. To these 
he preached on a hill near Gaya a sermon on the fire sacrifice. 
In this discourse he explained how ignorance produced the three 
fires of lust, hatred and delusion, which burnt all living beings, 
and how these three fires might be quenched by the giving up 
of sin and the pursuit of right conduct. 

From Gaya followed by his numerous disciples the Blessed 
One proceeded to Rajagriha, the capital of Magadha. After his 
great renunciation Siddartha passed through Rajagriha, and 
Bimbisara, the king of Magadha, failing to dissuade him from 
his resolve to attain bodhi, requested the Bodhisattva to come 
back to Rajagriha after the accomplishment of his purpose and 
receive him as his disciple. In compliance with this request 
the Blessed One now visited Rajagriha. King Bimbisara, hear- 
ing of the arrival of the World-Honoured, went with his coun- 
sellors, generals and myriads of Magadha Brahmans and Sresh- 
tis to the place where the Blessed One was. When the king 
and his followers saw Uruvilva Kasyapa with the Blessed One, 
they began to question if the latter had placed himself under 
the spiritual guidance of the former. But Kasyapa removed 
their doubt by prostrating himself at the feet of the Blessed 
One, and explained how, after seeing the peace of Nirvana, he 
could no longer find delight in sacrifices and offerings, which 
promised no better rewards than pleasures and women. The 
Blessed One, perceiving the state of mind of his audience, 
preached to them on the inconstancy of the self, the so-called 
lord of knowledge, which, originating from sensation and recol- 
lection, must necessarily be subject to the condition of cessa- 
tion. On hearing this discourse the king and many of those 
that accompanied him took refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma 
and the Sangha, and became lay followers. The king then in- 
vited the Blessed One to the royal palace, entertained him and 



12 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


his bhikshus and presented to the Sangha his pleasure garden, 
the bamboo grove Venuvana , as a dwelling-place for the home- 
less disciples of the Great Teacher. 

A much more important event connected with the Blessed 
One’s stay at Rajagriha was the conversion of Sariputra and 
Maudgalyayana, both pupils of the wandering monk Sanjaya. 
One day as Asvajit, one of the first five that were ordained by 
the Buddha, was going on his alms-seeking round, Sariputra 
saw the noble and dignified mien of Asvajit, and asked him 
who his teacher was and what doctrine he professed. Asvajit 
replied that his teacher was the Blessed One and summed up 
the Tathagata’s teaching in the well-known lines: 

“Whatever things proceed from a cause, 

Of them the Buddha has stated the cause 
And what their dissolution is. 

This is what the Great Sramana teaches.” 

On hearing this Sariputra went to Maudgalyayana and told 
him what he had heard. Then both of them went with all 
their followers to the Tathagata and took their refuge in the 
Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. The Buddha held both 
of them in high estimation for their intelligence and learning. 
Some of the books of the Abhidharma, the philosophical part 
of the Tripitaka, are ascribed to these two learned bhikshus. 
Another worthy acquisition to the faith during the Master’s 
stay in the Bamboo Grove was the Brahman sage, Maha Kasy- 
apa, who had renounced his handsome virtuous wife, his im- 
mense wealth and all his possessions to find out the way of 
salvation. It was he, who, after the parinirvana of the Lord, 
held a council at Rajagriha under the patronage of King Aja- 
tasatru, and collected the Tripitaka, the Buddhist canon, with 
the help of a. large number of bhikshus. He was in fact the 
first patriarch of the Buddhist Church. 

During his active life as a teacher, the Blessed One made 
many converts. High and low, rich and poor, educated and 
illiterate, Brahamans and Chandalas, Jains and Ajivakas, house- 
holders and ascetics, robbers and cannibals, nobles and peasants, 
men and women— all classes and conditions of men furnished 
him with many disciples, both ordained and lay. Among his 
converts were King Prasenajit of Kosala, Panchasikha the fol- 
lower of Kapila, Maha-Katyayana of Benares, King Udayana 
of Kausambi, Kutadanta, the head of the Brahman community 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


*3 


of the village of Danamati, Krishi Bharadvaja of the Brahman 
village of Ekanala, Angulimala the bandit and assassin who 
was the terror of the kingdom of Kosaia, Alavaka the cannibal 
of Atavi, Ugrasena the acrobat, Upali the barber who had the 
honour of reciting the Vinaya collection of the Tripitaka in 
Kasyapa’s Council, and Sunita the scavenger who was despised 
of men. Some of the members of the Sakya clan who were the 
close kith and kin of Siddartha also became the followers of 
Sakyamuni. Suddhodana, the father of Siddartha, became a lay 
disciple, and Rahula, his son, joined the Sangha. Yasodhara, 
the wife of Siddartha, and Prajapathi Gautami, his aunt, both 
joined the order of bhikshunis, which was established with 
some reluctance by the Master owing to the importunities of 
Prajapati Gautami and the intercession of Ananda. Ananda, 
who was the Buddha’s constant companion and personal 
attendant, was one of his cousins. 

Another of his cousins was Devadatta who became notorious 
in later days by attempting to found a new sect of his own 
with severer and stricter rules than those prescribed by the 
Buddha. When he did not succeed in getting many followers, 
even though he had a special Vihara built for him by King 
Ajatasutru, the son of King Bimbisara, he plotted many 
schemes to take the life of Sakyamuni. Murderers were set up 
to kill the Lord, but they were converted as soon as they saw 
him and listened to his preaching. The rock hurled down from 
the Gridhrakuta hill to hit the Master split in twain, and 
haply both pieces passed by without doing him much harm. 
The drunken elephant that was let loose on the royal highway 
just at the time when the Blessed One was coming along that 
path became docile in his presence. After these failures Ajata- 
satru, suffering greatly from the pangs of conscience, sought 
peace in his distress by going to the Blessed One and learning 
the way of salvation. 

Twelve of Buddha’s disciples became famous as preachers. 
These were Ajnata Kaundinya, Asvajit, Sariputra, Maudgalyay- 
ana, Maha Kasyapa, Maha Katayana, Anuruddha, Upale, Pin- 
dola Bharadvaja, Kausthila, Rahula and Puma Maitrayani- 
putra. In the conversation with Subhadra just before his 
death, the Blessed One said: Save in my religion the twelve 
great disciples, who, being good themselves, rouse up the world 
and deliver it from indifference, are not to be found. 


14 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

Among the many patrons and benefactors Of the Buddha 
no names are more famous than those of Anathapindika, the 
supporter of the orphans; Jivaka the physician; Visakha, the 
mother of Migara; and Ambapali, the courtezan of Vaisali. 
Sudatta, called Anathapindika on account of his charities to 
the orphans and the poor, was a merchant of Sravashti of im- 
mense wealth. He bought at an enormous price a magnificent 
park at Aravashti from Prince Jeta, and built the splendid 
Jetavana Vihara for the Buddha and his ordained disciples. 
Jivaka was the renowned physician-in-ordinary to Bimbisara, 
and was appointed by the king to undertake medical attendance 
on Buddha and his followers. It was at his instance that the 
bhikshus, who were previously wearing only cast-off rags, were 
permitted to accept robes from the laity. Visakha was the 
daughter-in-law of Migara, a rich Jain merchant of Sravashti, 
but she was generally known as the mother of Migara, as she 
was the cause of Migara's conversion to the Buddhist faith. 
She was the first to become a matron of the lay sisters, and 
obtained permission from the Lord to provide the chief neces- 
saries of life on a large scale to the bhikshus and bhikshunis. 
Another service of hers was the erection of the Vihara of Purv- 
arama near Sravashti, which in splendour was inferior only to 
the Vihara built by Anathapindika. Ambapali, who was 
beautiful, graceful, pleasant, gifted with the highest beauty of 
complexion, well-versed in dancing, singing and lute playing, 
and through whom Vaisali became more and more flourishing, 
presented to the Master her stately mansion and mango grove 
and became a bhikshuni. 

The great popularity of the Master and the gifts which the 
pious laics bestowed on his followers created a jealousy in 
the hearts of the leaders of heretical sects. These conspired to 
sully the reputation of Sakyamuni and ruin him in the eyes of 
the people. They induced a heretical nun, Chincha, to accuse 
the Master of adultery before the assemblage. Her calumny 
was exposed and she was made to suffer terribly for her mis- 
deed. Not baffled by this failure the heresiarchs made a second 
attempt to slander the Master. This time they induced one 
Sundari, a member of one of the heretical sects, to spread a 
rumour that she passed one night in the bed-chamber of the 
Teacher. After this slander had been made sufficiently public, 
the heretics bribed a gang of drunkards to assassinate Sundari. 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


15 


These scoundrels killed her, and threw her corpse in the bushes 
close to the Jetavana Vihara. The heresiarchs then loudly 
clamoured for the institution of legal proceedings against the 
Lord. Luckily their plan failed owing to the imprudence of the 
assassins, who, reuniting after the murder in a tavern and ex- 
cited by strong drink, quarrelled among themselves and re- 
proached one another of having committed the crime. They 
were immediately arrested by the police and brought before the 
royal tribunal. When they were questioned as to the murder 
of Sundari, the scoundrels openly confessed their guilt, and de- 
clared also the names of those who had employed them to com- 
mit the crime. The king ordered the assassins as well as the 
instigators of the crime to be put to death. On another occa- 
sion the heretics instigated Srigupta to take the life of the 
Master by poisoning his food and misleading him into a pit of 
fire, but by pity and calm forgiveness the Holy One 
Saved Srigupta from spite and crime 
And showed how mercy conquers e’en a foe. 

And thus he taught forgiveness’ rule sublime. 

To free his followers from the world and woe. 

The manner in which the Enlightened One ordinarily spent 
each day was very simple. He used to rise up early, wash and 
dress himself without assistance. He would then meditate in 
solitude till it was time to go on his round for a meal. When 
the time arrived, he would, dressing himself suitably, with his 
bowl in hand, alone or attended by some disciples, visit the 
neighbouring town or village. After finishing his meal in some 
house, he would discourse on the Dharma to the host and his 
family with due regard to their capacity for spiritual enlighten- 
ment, return to his lodgings and wait in the open verandah till 
all his followers had finished their meal. He would then retire 
to his private apartment and, after suggesting subjects for 
thought to some of his disciples, take a short rest during the 
heat of the day. In the afternoon he would meet the folk from 
the neighbouring villages or town assembled in the lecture-hall, 
and discourse to them on the Dharma in a manner appropriate 
to the occasion and suited to their capacities. Then, at the 
dose of the day, after refreshing himself with a bath when 
necessary, he would explain difficulties or expound the doctrine 
to some of his disciples thus spending the first watch of the 
night. Part of the remainder he spent in meditation walking 



16 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

up and down outside his chamber, and the other part sleeping 
in his bed-chamber. During the nine months of fair weather, 
the Lord was wont to go from place to place walking from fif- 
teen to twenty miles a day. During the rainy season he gener- 
ally stayed in the Jetavana Vihara or in the Purvarama. 

The Blessed One’s method of exposition differed entirely 
from those of the Brahmans. Far from presenting his thoughts 
under the concise form so characteristic of the Brahmans, he 
imparted his teaching in the form of sermons. Instead of mys- 
terious teachings confided almost in secret to a small number, 
he spoke to large audiences composed of all those who desired 
to hear him. He spoke in a manner intelligible to all, and 
tried by frequent repetitions to impress his meaning on the least 
attentive minds and the most rebellious memories. He adapted 
himself to the capacities of his hearers. He first talked about 
the merits obtained in alms-giving, about the duties of moral- 
ity, about future happiness, about the danger, the vanity and 
the defilement of lusts, and about the blessings of the abandon- 
ment of lusts. When he saw that the mind of his hearer was 
prepared, unprejudiced, impressionable, free from hindrances 
to the comprehension of the Truth, elated and believing, then 
he preached the special doctrine of the Buddha, namely, suffer- 
ing, the cause of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the 
Path. This profound difference between the Buddha’s method 
and that of the Brahmans, whose most marked trait is prosely- 
tism penetrates to the very essence of Buddhism. 

While his discussions with the learned were more or less 
formal and often coldly logical, in his conversation with ordi- 
nary men the Master generally resorted to similes and parables, 
fables and folklore, historical anecdotes and episodes, proverbs 
and popular sayings. The parable of the mustard-seed, de- 
scribed in the next chapter, illustrates how the Holy One 
brought home plain truths to the minds of simple folk. In the 
conversion of the wealthy Brahman, Krishi Bharadvaja, the 
Buddha worked out the process of agriculture into an elabo- 
rate allegory. One day while staying in the southern district of 
Magadha (Dakshinagiri) the Buddha visited the Brahman vil- 
lage of Ekanala. Bharadvaja was then superintending the 
laborers in his field. With alms-bowl in hand the Blessed One 
approached the Brahman. Some went up and paid reverence to 
the Lord, but the Brahman reproached the Master saying: “O 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


*7 

Sramana, I plough and sow, and having ploughed and sown, I 
eat; it would be better if you were in like manner to plough 
and sow, and then you would also have food to eat.” “O Brah- 
man, replied the Buddha, I too plough and sow, and having 
ploughed and sown, I eat.” But, said the Brahman, “if you 
are a husbandman, where are the signs of it? Where are your 
bullocks, the seed, and the plough?” Then the Teacher an- 
swered: “Faith is the seed I sow; devotion is the rain that 
fertilizes it; modesty is the plough-shaft; the mind is the tie 
of the yoke; mindfulness is my ploughshare and goad. Truth- 
fulness is the means to bind; tenderness, to untie. Energy is 
my team and bullock. Thus this ploughing is effected, destroy- 
ing the weeds of delusion. The harvest that it yields is the 
ambrosia fruit of Nirvana, and by this ploughing all sorrow 
is brought to an end.” Then the Brahman poured milk-rice into 
a golden bowl and handed it to the Lord saying: “Eat, O 
Gautama, the milk-rice. Indeed, thou art a husbandman; for 
thou, Gautama, accomplishest a ploughing, which yields the 
fruit of immortality.” When the Holy One desired to point a 
moral or convey a reproof, he related an anecdote or a fable 
treating its characters as representing the previous existences of 
himself and the other persons concerned. Such anecdotes are 
known as Jatakas or birth-stories. 

More potent than his method and his word was the Blessed 
One’s wonderful personality. When he talked with men, his 
serene look inspired them with awe and reverence, and his 
lovely voice struck them with rapture and amazement. Could 
mere words have converted the robber Angulimala or the can- 
nibal of Atavi? To have come under his spell is to be his for 
ever. He was a winner of hearts. It is not so much because he 
preached the truth that his hearers believed; it is because he 
had won their hearts that his words appeared to them true and 
salutary. A single word from him was enough to reconcile King 
Prasenajit to his Queen Mallika. His heart always overflowed 
with kindness. Was it not the effuence of the Master’s love 
that made Roja the Mallian follow him as a calf does the 
cow? To meet him is to be penetrated by his love ( maitri ) 
and to know him is to love him for ever. 

In his last preaching tour the Master came to the town of 
Pava, and there in the house of Chunda, a worker in metals, 
he had his last repast. After this he became ill and moved to 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


18 

Kusinagara in the eastern part of the Nepalese Terai, where he 
died at the ripe age of eighty about 483 B.C. Even in his last 
moments he received a monk Subhadra, explained to him the 
Noble Eightfold Path, and converted him to the true faith. 
His last words to his disciples were: Decay is inherent in all 
compound things. Seek wisdom and work out your salvation 
with diligence. 

The immediate cause of his death was some poisonous ele- 
ment in the food which Chunda, the blacksmith, offered to him. 
In the record of it, the word used is sukara-maddava, which 
can be translated either the flesh of a wild boar when used for 
food, or, pig-food, a kind of bulbous vegetable, sukara-kanda, 
in which there might have been some variety of poisonous 
mushroom unwittingly concealed. Buddha warned his disciples 
not to partake of it, but out of kindness to Chunda he ate of 
it. 

The remains of the Blessed One were burnt by the Mallas 
of Kusinagara with all the honours and pomp worthy of a king 
of kings. After cremation the relics were carried to the town- 
hall, and guarded there for a week covered by a cupola of lan- 
ces in an enclosure of bows and honoured with garlands, per- 
fumes, music and dances. When Ajatasatru, the king of Mag- 
ada, heard of the death of the Lord at Kusinagara, he sent an 
ambassador to the Mallas of that place to demand of them a 
portion of the relics, as he desired to erect a tumulus (stupa) 
in honour of these relics. The same demand was also made by 
the Licchavis of Vaisali, the Sakyas of Kapilavastu, the Bulis 
of Alahappa, the Koliyas of Ramagrama and the Mallas of 
Pava. A Brahman of Vethadvipa also demanded a share *on 
the plea of his being a Brahman. At first the Mallas of Kusin- 
agara were not willing to satisfy these demands, as the Lord 
attained parinirvana in their territory. But on the advice of 
the Brahman Drona, who pointed out to the Mallas the in- 
decency of quarrelling over the relics of one who had preached 
universal brotherhood, the Mallas of Kusinagara changed their 
mind. Drona was then entrusted with the distribution, and he 
took for himself the urn, over which he desired to erect a 
stupa. After the division the Mauryas of Pippalavana sent 
an envoy demanding some relics, but they had to content 
themselves with the charcoal from the funeral pyre. Those that 
received a share of the relics ( dhatu ) preserved them in dago- 



THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 


19 


bas ( dhathugarbhas ) erected in their respective countries. It is 
said that Emperor Asoka opened these ancient dagobas and 
distributed the relics contained in them all over his wide em- 
pire, and built more than eighty thousand stupas and dagobas 
for their preservation. 

Such is, freed from the fanciful additions of a pious poster- 
ity, the life of the historic Buddha. How much of it is real 
history, is rather difficult to say. But as to the historicity of 
Gautama Sakyamuni himself there can be no doubt. 

Whatever may be the verdict of historic criticism on the de- 
tails of the life of Gautama Sakyamuni, there can be no doubt 
that among the founders of religions he occupies a marked 
place. His dignified bearing, his high intellectual endowments, 
his penetrating glance, his oratorical power, the firmness of his 
convictions, his gentleness, kindness, and liberality, and the 
attractiveness of his character — all testify to his greatness. . . . 
But the impartial philosophic critic finds that Gautama Sak- 
yamuni towers above the founders of all other religions by his 
life, by his personal character, by the methods of propagandism 
he employed, and by his final success. In him were united the 
truest princely qualities with the intelligence of a sage and the 
passionate devotion of a martyr. Though bom of an aristocratic 
and ruling class, Gautama Buddha lived the life of an ordinary 
man, discarding the narrow distinctions of caste, rank and 
wealth. He knew the world. He was son, husband, father, and 
devoted friend. He was not only a man, but never professed 
to be anything more than a man. He gave a trial to the creeds 
of his ancestors, but ultimately made for himself a nobler faith. 
His teaching was perfect, but never pretended to be a super- 
natural revelation. He did not doubt the capacity of man to 
understand the truth, and never had recourse to the arts of 
exorcism. He based all his reasoning on the fact of man’s ex- 
istence, and developed his practical philosophy by the observa- 
tion and minute study of human nature. In an age innocent 
of science he found for the problems of the Whence, the 
Whither and the Why, solutions worthy of a scientific age. His 
aim was to rescue mankind from the fetters of passion and 
avarice and to convince them of an ideal higher than mere 
worldly good. He preached the gospel of renunciation attain- 
able by meditatkfn, a renunciation which did not lead one to 
the dreamy quietism of pantheistic or nihilistic philosophy but 


20 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


to the purification of one’s activity by intellectual and ethical 
enlightenment so as to bring one to the love of all beings by 
faith in an eternal Dharmakaya. 

Among the world’s religious teachers Gautama Sakyamuni 
alone has the glory of having rightly judged the intrinsic great- 
ness of man’s capacity to work out his salvation without ex- 
traneous aid. If the worth of a truly great man consists in his 
raising the worth of all mankind, who is better entitled to be 
called truly great than the Blessed One, who, instead of de- 
grading man by placing another being over him, has exalted 
him to the highest pinnacle of wisdom and love? His figure is 
the noblest, the most perfect that man can ever attain. It was 
genius unequalled among the sons of men that inspired the 
Buddha’s teaching. It was genius commanding in its dictatorial 
strength that held together his order. It was genius, the first 
and last that India saw, that in its lofty aims and universality, 
foreshadowed the possibility of uniting the people into one great 
nationality, if such had ever been possible. Indeed the Tath- 
agata is the Light of the World. No wonder that even those 
who first rejected his teaching had at last to include him in 
their pantheon by making him an avatar of one of the very 
gods whom he had himself discarded! 

Those only are godlike who shrink from sin 

The white-souled tranquil votaries of good. 

No teacher was so godless as Lord Buddha yet none so god- 
like. Though the master of all, he was the universal brother of 
each. While despising the follies of the world, he lived and 
moved among men serenely and lovingly. When surrounded by 
all his retinue of followers, and glorified by the whole world, 
he never once thought that these privileges were his; but went 
on doing good, just as the shower brings gladness yet reflects 
not on its work. Though exalted and adored, he never arrogated 
to himself divinity. The Burmese relate that, hearing all people 
singing his praises, the Blessed One called Ananda and said: 
All this is unworthy of me. No such vain homage can ac- 
complish the words of the Dharma. They who do righteously 
pay me most honour, and please me most. To the unbiassed 
thinker even the legends which enshroud the life of Sakyasimha 
are not without significance. They set before him a truly ad- 
mirable figure: a man of quiet majesty, of wisdom and pleas- 
ant humour, consistent in thought, word and deed, of perfect 



21 


THE HISTORIC BUDDHA 

equanimity and moral fervour, exempt from every prejudice, 
overcoming evil with good, and full of tenderness for all beings. 
In some of the legends, the so-called birth-stories, the Buddha 
is represented as having voluntarily endured infinite trials 
through numberless ages and births, that he might deliver man- 
kind, foregoing the right to enter Nirvana and casting himself 
again and again into the stream of human life and destiny for 
the sole purpose of teaching the way of liberation from sorrow 
and suffering. The ideal of persistent energy thus held up be- 
fore the disciple is intensely human. And even if the virtues of 
the Tathagata are infinitely superior to those of ordinary men, 
still the ideal can serve as a pattern and guide. The disciple can 
always take the Buddha as his model so that the recollection of 
his heroic and saintly life may assist him to be a hero and a 
saint as well. In his unbounded love for all beings Sakyamuni 
stands unparalleled. And it is not a poetic fancy but a pro- 
found philosophic, truth that makes him the best 

“ who loveth best 

All things both great and smalL ,, 


THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


The following selections are taken from the different Pali Scriptures as indi- 
cated by the letters placed in brackets just preceding each selection: (D) Digha- 
Nikaya. (M) Majjhima-Nikaya. (A) Anguttara-Nikaya. (S). Samyutta-Nikaya. 
(Dhp.) Dhammapada. (Ud.) Udana. (It.) Itivuttaka. (Snp.) Sutta-Nipata. 

(M.141) The Perfect One, Brothers, the holy One, the Fully 
Enlightened One, at Isipatana in the deer-park at Benares, has 
established the Supreme Kingdom of Truth, which none can 
overthrow — neither ascetic nor priest, nor heavenly being, nor 
evil spirit, nor god, nor any one whosoever in all the world, — 
by proclaiming, pointing out, making known, establishing, un- 
veiling, explaining and making evident the Four Noble Truths. 

What are these Four Noble Truths? They are the Noble 
Truth of Suffering, the Noble Truth of the Origin of Suffering, 
the Noble Truth of the Extinction of Suffering, and the Noble 
Truth of the Path that leads to the Extinction of Suffering. 
(S.54 (2) ) And the Blessed One said: As long, Disciples, as 
the absolutely true knowledge and insight as regards these Four 
Noble Truths was not quite clear in me, so long was I not sure 
whether I had won to that supreme Enlightenment which is 
unsurpassed in all the world with its heavenly beings, evil 
spirits and gods, amongst all the hosts of ascetics and priests, 
heavenly beings and men. But as soon as the absolutely true 
knowledge and insight as regards these Four Noble Truths had 
become perfectly clear in me, there arose in me the assurance, 
that I had won to that supreme Enlightenment unsurpassed. 
(M.26) And I discovered that profound truth, so difficult to 
perceive, difficult to understand, tranquillising and sublime, 
which is not to be gained by mere reasoning, and is visible 
only to the wise. 

The world however is given to pleasure, delighted with 
pleasure, enchanted with pleasure. Verily such beings will 
hardly understand the law of conditionality, the Dependent 
Origination (paticqa-samuppada ) of everything; incomprehen- 
sible to them will also be the end of all formations, the for- 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


23 


saking of every substratum of rebirth, the fading away of crav- 
ing, detachment, extinction, Nibbana. 

Yet there are beings whose eyes are only a little covered 
with dust: they will understand the truth. 

The First Truth 
The Noble Truth of Suffering 

(D.22) What now is the Noble Truth of Suffering? 

Birth is suffering; Decay is suffering; Death is suffering; 
Sorrow, Lamentation, Pain, Grief and Despair are suffering; not 
to get what one desires is suffering; in short: the Five Aggre- 
gates of Existence are suffering. 

What now is Birth? The birth of beings belonging to this 
or that order of beings, their being born, their conception and 
springing into existence, the manifestation of the aggregates of 
existence, the arising of sense activity: this is called birth. 

And what is Decay? The decay of beings belonging to this 
or that order of beings; their getting aged, frail, grey and 
wrinkled; the failing of their vital force, the wearing out of .the 
senses: — this is called decay. 

And what is Death? The parting and vanishing of beings 
out of this or that order of beings, their destruction, disappear- 
ance, death, the completion of their life-period, dissolution of 
the aggregates of existence, the discarding of the body: — this 
is called death. 

And what is Sorrow? The sorrow arising through this or 
that loss or misfortune which one encounters, the worrying one- 
self, the state of being alarmed, inward sorrow, inward woe: — 
this is called sorrow. 

And what is Lamentation? Whatsoever, through this or that 
loss or misfortune, which befalls one, is wail and lament, wail- 
ing and lamenting, a state of woe and lamentation: — this is 
called lamentation. 

And what is Pain? The bodily pain and unpleasantness, 
the painful and unpleasant feeling produced by bodily contact: 
— this is called pain. 

And what is Grief? The mental pain and unpleasantness, 
the painful and unpleasant feeling produced by mental con- 
tact: — this is called grief. 

And what is Despair? Distress and despair arising through 



SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


*4 

this or that loss or misfortune which one encounters, distress- 
edness and desperateness: — this is called despair. 

And what is the Suffering of not getting what one desires? 
To beings, subject to birth, there comes the desire: O, that we 
were not subject to birth! O, that no new birth was before us! 
Subject to decay, disease, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief 
and despair, the desire comes to them: O, that we were not 
subject to these things! O, that these things were not before 
us! But this cannot be got by mere desiring; and not to get 
what one desires is suffering. 

And what, in brief, are the Five Aggregates connected with 
cleaving? They are bodily form, feeling, perception, (mental) 
formations and consciousness. 

(S.21 (8) ) Any material form, whether one’s own or external, 
gross or subtle, lofty or low, far or near, belongs to the Aggre- 
gate of Bodily Form connected with cleaving; any feeling be- 
longs to the Aggregate of Feeling; any perception belongs to 
the Aggregate of Perception; any formation belongs to the Ag- 
gregate of Formations; all consciousness belongs to the Aggre- 
gate of Consciousness. 

(M.28) What now is the Aggregate of Bodily Form? It is the 
four primary elements and the bodily form derived from them. 

And what are the four primary elements? They are the 
Solid Element, the Fluid Element, the Heating Element, the 
Vibrating Element. 

1. What now is the Solid Element? The solid element may 
be subjective, or it may be objective. And what is the subjec- 
tive solid element? The dependent properties which on one’s 
own person and body are hard and solid, as the hairs of head 
and body, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, kid- 
neys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, stomach, bowels, 
dysentery, excrement, or whatever other dependent properties 
which on one’s own person and body are hard and solid — this 
is called the subjective solid element. Now, whether it be the 
subjective solid element, or whether it be the objective solid 
element: they are both only the solid element. One should 
understand according to reality and true wisdom: — This does 
not belong to me; this am I not; this is not my Ego. 

2. What now is the Fluid Element? The fluid element may 
be subjective, or it may be objective. And “what is the subjec- 
tive fluid element? The dependent properties which on one’s 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


25 


own person and body are watery or cohesive, as bile, phlegm, 
pus, blood, sweat, lymph, tears, serum, spit, nasal mucus, oil of 
the joints, urine, or whatever other dependent properties which 
on one’s own person and body are watery or cohesive — this is 
called the subjective fluid element. Now, whether it be the 
subjective fluid element, or whether it be the objective fluid 
element: they are both only the fluid element. One should 
understand according to reality and true wisdom: — This does 
not belong to me; this am I not; this is not my Ego. 

3. What now is the Heating Element? The heating element 
may be subjective, or it may be objective. And what is the 
subjective heating element? The dependent properties which on 
one’s own person and body are heating and radiating, as that 
whereby one is heated, consumed, scorched, whereby that which 
has been eaten, drunk, chewed or tasted, is fully digested, or 
whatever other dependent properties which on one’s own person 
and body are heating and radiating — this is called the sub- 
jective heating element. Now, whether it be the subjective 
heating element, or whether it be the objective heating ele- 
ment; they are both only the heating element. One should 
understand according to reality and true wisdom — This does 
not belong to me; this am I not; this is not my Ego. 

4. What now is the Vibrating Element? The vibrating ele- 
ment may be subjective, or it may be objective. And what is 
the subjective vibrating element? The dependent properties 
which on one’s own person and body are mobile and gaseous, 
as the upward-going and downward-going winds, the winds of 
stomach and intestines, in-breathing and out-breathing, or 
whatever other dependent properties which on one’s own per- 
son and body are mobile and gaseous — this is called the sub- 
jective vibrating element. Now, whether it be the subjective 
vibrating element, or whether it be the objective vibrating ele- 
ment: they are both only the vibrating element. One should 
understand according to reality and true wisdom: This does not 
belong to me; this am I not; this is not my Ego. 

Just as one calls hut the circumscribed space which comes to 
be by means of wood and rushes, reeds and clay, even so we 
call body the circumscribed space that comes to be by means 
of bones and sinews, flesh and skin. 

Now, though one’s eye be intact, yet if the external forms 
do not fall within the field of vision, and no corresponding 



SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


*6 

conjunction takes place, in that case there occurs no formation 
of the correspondent aspect of consciousness. Or, though one’s 
eye be intact and the external forms fall within the field of vi- 
sion, yet if no corresponding conjunction takes place, in that 
case also there occurs no formation of the corresponding aspect 
of consciousness. If, however, one’s eye is intact, and the ex- 
ternal forms fall within the field of vision, and the correspond- 
ing conjunction takes place, in that case there arises the cor- 
responding aspect of consciousness. 

(M.38) Hence I say: the arising of consciousness is dependent 
upon conditions, and without these conditions no consciousness 
arises. And upon whatsoever conditions the arising of conscious- 
ness is dependent, after these it is called. 

Consciousness, whose arising depends on the eye and forms, 
is called eye-consciousness. 

Consciousness, whose arising depends on the ear and sounds, 
is called ear-consciousness. 

Consciousness, whose arising depends on the olfactory organ 
and odours, is called olfactory-consciousness. 

Consciousness, whose arising depends on the tongue arid 
taste, is called tongue-consciousness. 

Consciousness, whose arising depends on the body and bod- 
ily contacts, is called body-consciousness. 

Consciousness, whose arising depends on the mind and 
ideas, is called mind-consciousness. 

(M.28) Whatsoever there is of form in the consciousness thus 
arisen, that belongs to the aggregate of bodily form connected 
with clinging to existence. Whatsoever there is of feeling there- 
in, that belongs to the aggregate of feeling connected with 
clinging to existence. Whatsoever there is of perception therein, 
that belongs to the aggregate of perception connected with 
clinging to existence. Whatsoever there are of mental forma- 
tions therein, that belongs to the aggregate of rnental forma- 
tions connected with clinging to existence. Whatsoever there is 
of consciousness therein, that belongs to the aggregate of con- 
sciousness connected with clinging to existence. 

And it is impossible that any one can explain the passing 
out of one existence and the entering into a new existence, or 
the growth, increase and development of consciousness, inde- 
pendent of bodily form, feeling, perception and mental forma- 
tions. 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


27 


(S.21 (2) ) All formations are transient ( anicca ); all forma- 
tions are subject to suffering ( dukkha ); all things are without 
an Ego-entity ( anatta ). Form is transient, feeling is transient, 
perception is transient, mental formations are transient, con- 
sciousness is transient. 

And that which is transient is subject to suffering; and of 
that which is transient and subject to suffering and change, 
one cannot rightly say: — This belongs to me; this am I; this 
is my Ego. 

(S.21 (5) ) Therefore, whatever there be of bodily form, of 
feeling, perception, mental formations or consciousness, whether 
one’s own or external, whether gross or subtle, lofty or low, far 
or near, one should understand according to reality and true 
wisdom: — This does not belong to me; this am I not; this is 
not my Ego. 

(S.21 (6) ) Suppose, a man, who can see, were to behold the 
many bubbles on the Ganges as they are driving along. And 
he should watch them and carefully examine them. After care- 
fully examining them, they will appear to him as empty, un- 
real, and unsubstantial. In exactly the same way does the 
monk behold all the bodily forms, feelings, perceptions, mental 
formations and states of consciousness — whether they be of the 
past, or the present, or the future, far or near. And he watches 
them and examines them carefully, and, after carefully examin- 
ing them, they appear to him as empty, void and without an 
Ego. 

(S.ai (3) ) Whoso delights in bodily form, or feeling, or per- 
ception, or mental formations, or consciousness, he delights in 
suffering; and whoso delights in suffering will not be freed 
from suffering. Thus I say. 

(Dhp. 146-48) 

How can you find delight and mirth 
Where there is burning without end? 

In deepest darkness you are wrappedl 
Why do you not seek for the light? 

Look at this puppet here, well rigged, 

A heap of many sores, piled up, 

Diseased and full of greediness. 

Unstable and impermanent! 



SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


28 

Devoured by old age is this frame, 

A prey of sickness, weak and frail; 

To pieces breaks this putrid body. 

All life must truly end in death. 

(A III.35) Did you ever see in the world a man or a woman, 
eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old, frail, crooked as a gable- 
roof, bent down, supported on a staff, with tottering steps, in- 
firm, youth long since fled, with broken teeth, grey and scanty 
hair, or bald-headed, wrinkled, with blotched limbs? And did 
the thought never come to you, that you also are subject to 
decay, that you cannot escape it? 

Did you never see in the world a man or a woman, who, 
being sick, afflicted and grievously ill, and wallowing in one’s 
own filth, was lifted up by some people and put to bed by 
others? And did the thought never come to you, that you also 
are subject to disease, that you cannot escape it? 

Did you never see in the world the corpse of a man or a 
woman, one or two or three days after death, swollen up, blue- 
black in colour, and full of corruption? And did the thought 
never come to you, that you also are subject to death, that 
you cannot escape it? 

(S.14 (1) ) Inconceivable is the beginning of this Samsara, not 
to be discovered a first beginning of beings, who, obstructed by 
ignorance and ensnared by craving, are hurrying and hastening 
through this round of rebirths. 

(S.14 (2) ) Which do you think is more: the flood of tears, 
which weeping and wailing you have shed upon this long way 
— hurrying and hastening through this round of rebirths, united 
to the undesired, separated from the desired — this or the waters 
of the four oceans? 

Long time have you suffered the death of father and 
mother, of sons, daughters, brothers and sisters. And whilst you 
were thus suffering, you have verily shed more tears upon this 
long way, than there is water in the four oceans. 

Which do you think is more: the streams of blood that, 
through your being beheaded, have flowed upon this long way, 
or the waters in the four oceans? 

Long time have you been caught as dacoits or highway men 
or adulterers; and, through your being beheaded verily more 
blood has flowed upon this long way, than there is water in the 
four oceans. 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


29 


But how is this possible? 

Inconceivable is the beginning of this Samsara, not to be 
discovered a first beginning of beings, who, obstructed by ig- 
norance and ensnared by craving, are hurrying and hastening 
through this round of rebirths. 

And thus have you long time undergone suffering, under- 
gone torment, undergone misfortune and filled the graveyards 
full, verily long enough to be dissatisfied with every form of 
existence, long enough to turn away and free yourselves from 
them all. 

The Second Truth 

The Noble Truth of 
The Origin of Suffering 

(D.22) What now is the Noble Truth of the Origin of Suf- 
fering? It is that craving which gives rise to fresh rebirth, and, 
bound up with pleasure and lust, now here, now there, finds 
ever fresh delight. 

There is the Sensual Craving, the Craving for Eternal Exist- 
ence, the Craving for Temporal Happiness. 

But where does this craving arise and take root? Wherever 
in the world there is the delightful and pleasurable, there this 
craving arises and takes root. Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and 
mind are delightful and pleasurable; there this craving arises 
and takes root. 

Forms, sounds, smells, tastes, bodily touches and ideas are 
delightful and pleasurable: there this craving arises and takes 
root. 

Consciousness,, sense contact, the feeling bom of sense con- 
tact, perception, will, craving, thinking and reflecting are de- 
lightful and pleasurable: there this craving arises and takes 
root. 

(M.38) If namely, when perceiving a visible form, a sound, 
odour, taste, bodily contact or an idea in the mind, the object 
is pleasant, one is attracted, and if unpleasant, one is repelled. 

Thus, whatever kind of Feeling one experiences, — pleasant, 
unpleasant or indifferent — one approves of and cherishes the 
feeling and clings to it; and while doing so, lust springs up; 
but lust for feelings means clinging to existence ( upadana ); 
and on clinging to existence depends the (action-) Process of 



30 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


Becoming ( bhava , here kamma-bhava); on the process of be- 
coming depends (future) Birth (jati); and dependent on birth 
are Decay and Death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and des- 
pair. Thus arises this whole mass of suffering. 

This is called the Noble Truth of the Origin of Suffering. 
(M.ig) Verily, due to sensuous craving, conditioned through 
sensuous craving, impelled by sensuous craving, entirely moved 
by sensuous craving, kings fight with kings, princes with prin- 
ces, priests with priests, citizens with citizens; the mother quar- 
rels with the son, the son with the mother, the father with the 
son, the son with the father; brother quarrels with brother, 
brother with sister, sister with brother, friend with friend. Thus 
given to dissension, quarrelling and fighting, they fall upon one 
another with fists, sticks or weapons. And thereby they suffer 
death or deadly pain. 

And further, due to sensuous craving, conditioned through 
sensuous craving, impelled by sensuous craving, entirely moved 
by sensuous craving, people break into houses, rob and plunder, 
pillage whole houses, commit highway robbery, seduce the 
wives of others. Then the rulers have such people caught and 
inflict on them various forms of punishment. And thereby they 
incur death or deadly pain. Now, this is the misery of sen- 
suous craving, the heaping up of suffering in this present life, 
due to sensuous craving, conditioned through sensuous craving, 
caused by sensuous craving, entirely dependent on sensuous 
craving. 

And further, people take the evil way in deeds, the evil 
way in words, the evil way in thoughts; and by taking the 
evil way in deeds, words and thoughts, at the dissolution of the 
body, after death, they fall into a downward state of existence, 
a state of suffering, into perdition and the abyss of hell. But 
this is the misery of sensuous craving, the heaping up of suf- 
fering in the future life, due to sensuous craving, conditioned 
through sensuous craving, caused by sensuous craving, entirely 
dependent on sensuous craving. 

(Dhp.182) 

Not in the air, nor ocean-midst. 

Nor hiding in the mountain clefts, 

Not wilt thou find a place on earth, 

Where thou art freed from evil deeds. 

(S.35) For: owners of their deeds are the beings, heirs of their 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


3i 


deeds, their deeds are the womb from which they sprang, with 
their deeds they are bound up, their deeds are their refuge. 
Whatever deeds they do — good or evil — of such they will be 
the heirs. 

(A.III.33) And wherever the beings spring into existence, there 
their deeds will ripen; and wherever their deeds ripen, there 
they will earn the fruits of those deeds, be it in this life, or be 
it in the next life, or be it in any other future life. 

(S.21 (10) ) There will come a time, when the mighty ocean 
will dry up, vanish, and be no more. There will come a time, 
when the mighty earth will be devoured by fire, perish, and be 
no more. But yet there will be no end to the suffering of be- 
ings, who, obstructed by ignorance and ensnared by craving, 
are hurrying and hastening-through this round of rebirths. 

The Third Truth 

The Noble Truth of 
The Extinction of Suffering 

(D.22) What now is the Noble Truth of the Extinction of 
Suffering? It is the complete fading away and extinction of 
this craving, its forsaking and giving up, the liberation and 
detachment from it. 

But where may this craving vanish, where may it be ex- 
tinguished? Wherever in the world there are delightful and 
pleasurable things, there this craving may vanish, there it may 
be extinguished. 

(S. 12 (66) ) Be it in the past, present or future; whosoever 
of the monks or priests regards the delightful and pleasurable 
things in the world as impermanent ( anicca ), miserable (duk- 
kha) and without an Ego ( an-atta ), as a disease and sorrow, 
it is he who overcomes the craving. 

(It.96) And released from Sensual Craving, released from the 
Craving for Existence, he does not return, does not enter again 
into existence. 

(S.12) For, through the total fading away and extinction of 
Craving ( tanha ) Clinging to Existence ( upadana ) is extin- 
guished; through the extinction of the clinging to existence the 
(action-) Process of Becoming ( Bhava ) is extinguished; 
through the extinction of the process of becoming Rebirth 
(jati) is extinguished; and through the extinction of rebirth 



32 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


Decay and Death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, grief and 
despair are extinguished. Thus comes about the extinction of 
this whole mass of suffering. 

Hence, the annihilation, cessation and overcoming of bodily 
form, feeling, perception, mental formations and consciousness, 
this is the extinction of suffering, the end of disease, the over- 
coming of old age and death. 

(A.III 32) This, truly, is the Peace, this is the Highest, name- 
ly the end of all formations, the forsaking of every substratum 
of rebirth, the fading away of craving, detachment, extinction, 
Nibbana. 

Enraptured with lust, enraged with anger, blinded by de- 
lusion, overwhelmed, with mind ensnared, man aims at his own 
ruin, at the others’ ruin, at the ruin of both parties, and he 
experiences mental pain and grief. But if lust, anger and de- 
lusion are given up, man aims neither at his own ruin, nor at 
the others’ ruin, nor at the ruin of both parties, and he expe- 
riences no mental pain and grief. Thus is Nibbana immediate, 
visible in this life, inviting, attractive and comprehensible to 
the wise. 

(A.III.53) The extinction of greed, the extinction of anger, 
the extinction of delusion: this indeed is called Nibbana. 
(A.VI.55) And for a disciple thus freed, in whose heart dwells 
peace, there is nothing to be added to what has been done, 
and naught more remains for him to do. Just as a rock of 
one solid mass remains unshaken by the wind, even so, neither 
forms, nor sounds, nor odours, nor tastes, nor contacts of any 
kind, neither the desired nor the undesired, can cause such an 
one to waver. Steadfast is his mind, gained is deliverance. 
(A.III.32) And he who has considered all the contrasts on this 
earth and is no more disturbed by anything whatever in the 
world, the peaceful-One, freed from rage, from sorrow and from 
longing, he has passed beyond birth and decay. 

(Ud.VIII.i.) Verily, there is a realm, where there is neither 
the solid, nor the fluid, neither heat nor motion, neither this 
world nor any other world, neither sun nor moon. 

This I call neither arising nor passing away, neither stand- 
ing still, nor being bom, nor dying. There is neither foothold, 
nor development, nor any basis. This is the end of suffering. 
(UckVIII.3) There is an Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated, Un- 
formed. If these were not this Unborn, this Unoriginated, this 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


33 


Uncreated, this Unformed, escape from the world of the bom, 
the originated, the created, the formed, would not be possible. 

But since there is an Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated, 
Unformed, therefore is escape possible from the world of the 
bom, the originated, the created, the formed. 

The Fourth Truth 

The Noble Truth of the Path 
that Leads to the Extinction 
of Suffering 

(S.56) To give oneself up to indulgence in Sensual Pleasure, 
the base, common, vulgar, unholy, unprofitable, and also to 
give oneself up to Self-mortification, the painful, unholy, un- 
profitable; both these two extremes the Perfect One has 
avoided and found out the Middle Path which makes one both 
to see and to know, which leads to peace, to discernment, to 
enlightenment, to Nibbana. 

It is the Noble Eightfold Path, the way that leads to the 
extinction of suffering, namely: 

1. Right Understanding, Samma-ditthi 

2. Right Mindedness, Samma-sankappa 

3. Right Speech, Samma-vaca 

4. Right Action, Samma-kammanta 

5. Right Living, Samma-ajiva 

6. Right Effort, Samma-vayama 

7. Right Attentiveness, Samma-sati 

8. Right Concentration, Samma-samadhi 

This is the Middle Path which the Perfect One has found 
out, which makes one both to see and to know, which leads 
to peace, to discernment, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. 

Free from pain and torture is this path, free from groaning 
and suffering, it is the perfect path. 

(Dhp. 274-75) Truly, like this path there is no other path to 
the purity of insight. If you follow this path, you will put an 
end to suffering. 

(Dhp. 276) But each one has to struggle for himself, the Per- 
fect Ones have only pointed out the way. 

(M. 26) Give ear then, for the Immortal is found. I reveal, 
I set forth the Truth. As I reveal it to you, so act! And that 
supreme goal of the holy life, for the sake of which sons of 



34 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


good families go forth from home to the homeless state: this 
you will, in no long time, in this very life, make known to 
yourself, realise and attain to it. 

First Step 
Right Understanding 

(D, 22) What now is Right Understanding? 

1. To understand suffering; 2. to understand the origin of 
suffering; 3. to understand the extinction of suffering; 4. to 
understand the path that leads to the extinction of suffering. ' 
This is called Right Understanding. 

(M.g) Or, when the noble disciple understands, what demerit 
is and the root of demerit, what merit is and the root of merit, 
then he has Right Understanding. 

What now is demerit? 

1. Destruction of living beings is demerit. 

2. Stealing is demerit. 

3. Unlawful sexual intercourse is demerit. 

4. Lying is demerit. 

5. Tale-bearing is demerit. 

6. Harsh language is demerit. 

7. Frivolous talk is demerit. 

8. Covetousness is demerit. 

9. Ill-will is demerit. 

10. Wrong views are demerit. 

And what is the root of demerit? Greed is a root of demerit; 
Anger is a root of demerit; Delusion is a root of demerit. 
(A.X.174) Therefore, I say, these demeritorious actions are of 
three kinds: either due to greed, or due to anger, or due to 
delusion. 

(M.g) What now is merit ( kusala )? 

1. To abstain from killing is merit. 

2. To abstain from stealing is merit. 

3. To abstain from unlawful sexual intercourse is merit. 

4. To abstain from lying is merit. 

5. To abstain from tale-bearing is merit. 

6 . To abstain from harsh language is merit. 

7. To abstain from frivolous talk is merit. 

8. Absence of covetousness is merit. 

9. Absence of ill-will is merit. 

10. Right understanding is merit. 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


35 


And what is the Root of Merit? Absence of greed is a root 
of merit; absence of anger is a root of merit; absence of delu- 
sion is a root of merit. 

(S.21 (5) ) Or, when one understands that form, feeling, per- 
ception, mental formations and consciousness are transient, 
(subject to suffering and without an Ego) also in that case 
one possesses Right Understanding. 

(M.63) Should anyone say that he does not wish to lead the 
holy life under the Blessed One, unless the Blessed One first 
tells him, whether the world is eternal or temporal, finite or 
infinite; whether the life principle is identical with the body, 
or something different; whether the Perfect One continues after 
death etc. — Such an one would die, ere the Perfect One could 
tell him all this. 

It is as if a man were pierced by a poisoned arrow, and 
his friends, companions, or near relations called in a surgeon, 
but that man should say: I will not have this arrow pulled 
out until I know, who the man is, that has wounded me: 
whether he is a noble, a prince, a citizen, or a servant; or: 
whether he is tall, or short, or of medium height. Verily, such 
a man would die, ere he could adequately learn all this. 

(Snp. 592) Therefore, the man, who seeks his own welfare, 
should pull out this arrow — this arrow of lamentation, pain 
and sorrow. 

(M.63) Eor, whether the theory exists, or whether it does not 
exist, that the world is eternal, or temporal, or finite, or in- 
finite — certainly, there is birth, there is decay, there is death, 
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair, the extinction of 
which, attainable even in this present life, I make known unto 
you. 

(M.2) There is, for instance, an unlearned worldling, void of 
regard for holy men, ignorant of the teaching of holy men, un- 
trained in the noble doctrine. (M.64) And his heart is pos- 
sessed and overcome by Self-Illusion, by Scepticism, by Attach- 
ment to Rule and Ritual, by Sensual Lust and by Ill-will, and 
how to free himself from these things, he does not really know. 
(M.2) Not knowing what is worthy of consideration and what 
is unworthy of consideration, he considers the unworthy and 
not the worthy. 

And unwisely he considers thus: Have I been in the past? 
Or, have I not been in the past? What have I been in the 



g6 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

past? How have I been in the past? From what state and 
into what state did I change in the past? — Shall I be in the 
future? Or, shall I not be in the future? What shall I be in 
the future? How shall I be in the future? From what state 
and into what state shall I change in the future? — And the 
present also fills him with doubt: Am I? Or, am I not? What 
am I? How am I? This being, whence has it come? Whither 
will it go? 

And with such unwise considerations, he falls into one or 
other of the six views, and it becomes his conviction and firm 
belief; I have an Ego; or: I have no Ego; or: With the Ego I 
perceive the Ego; or: With that which is no Ego I perceive 
the Ego; or: With the Ego I perceive that which is no Ego. 
Or, he falls into the following view: This my Ego, which can 
think and feel, and which, now here, now there, experiences 
the fruit of good and evil deeds: — this my Ego is permanent, 
stable, eternal, not subject to change and will thus eternally 
remain the same. 

(M.22) If there really existed the Ego, there would be also 
something which belonged to the Ego. As, however, in truth 
and reality, neither an Ego nor anything belonging to an Ego 
can be found, is it therefore not really an utter fool’s doctrine 
to say: This is the world, this am 1 ; after death I shall be 
permanent, persisting and eternal? 

These are called mere views, a thicket of views, a puppet- 
show of views, a snare of views; and ensnared in the fetter of 
views, the ignorant worldling will not be freed from rebirth, 
from decay and from death, from sorrow, pain, grief and despair; 
he will not be freed, I say,, from suffering. 

(M.2) The learned and noble disciple, however, who has re- 
gard for holy men, knows the teaching of holy men, is well 
trained in the noble doctrine, he understands what is worthy 
of consideration and what is unworthy. And knowing this, he 
considers the worthy and not the unworthy. What suffering is, 
he wisely considers. What the origin of suffering is, he wisely 
considers; what the extinction of suffering is, he wisely con- 
siders; what the path is that leads to the extinction of suffer- 
ing, he wisely considers. 

And by thus considering, three fetters vanish, namely: Self- 
illusion, Scepticism and Attachment to Rule and Ritual. 

(M.22) But those disciples, in whom these three fetters have 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


37 


vanished, they have all entered the Stream .( sotapanna ), have 
for ever escaped the states of woe, and are assured of final 
enlightenment. 

(Dhp. 178) 

More than any earthly power. 

More than all the joys of heaven. 

More than rule o’er all the world. 

Is the Entrance to the Stream. 

(A.X.63) And verily those, who are filled with unshaken faith 
towards me, all those have entered the stream. 

(M.117) Therefore, I say. Right Understanding is of two 
kinds: 

1. The view that alms and offerings are not useless; that there 
is fruit and result both of good and bad actions; that there are 
such things as this life and the next life; that father and 
mother, as also spontaneously bom beings (in the heavenly 
worlds) are no mere words; that there are in the world monks 
and priests, who are spotless and perfect, who can explain this 
life and the next life, which they themselves have understood: 
— this is called the Mundane Right Understanding, which 
yields worldly fruits and brings good results. 

2. But whatsoever there is of wisdom, of penetration, of right 
understanding, conjoined with the Path (of the Sotapanna, 
Sakadagamin, Anagamin or Arahat) — the mind being turned 
away from the world and conjoined with the path, the holy 
path being pursued: — this is called the Ultramundane Right 
Understanding, which is not of the world, but is ultramundane 
and conjoined with the paths. 

(M.117) Now, in understanding wrong understanding as 
wrong, and right understanding as right, one practices Right 
Understanding; and in making efforts to overcome wrong un- 
derstanding, and to arouse right understanding, one practices 
Right effort; and in overcoming wrong understanding with 
attentive mind, and dwelling with attentive mind in possession 
of right understanding, one practises Right Attentiveness. 
Hence, there are three things that accompany and follow upon 
right understanding, namely: right understanding, right effort, 
and right attentiveness. 

Now, if any one should put the question, whether I admit 
any view at all, he should be answered thus: — 

(M.72) The Perfect One is free from any theory, for the Per- 



3 » 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


feet One has understood what the body is, and how it arises, 
and passes away. He has understood what feeling is, and how 
it arises, and passes away. He has understood what perception 
is, and how it arises, and passes away. He has understood 
what the mental formations are, and how they arise, and pass 
away. He has understood what consciousness is, and how it 
arises, and passes away. Therefore, I say, the Perfect One has 
won complete deliverance through the extinction, fading away, 
disappearance, rejection, and getting rid of all opinions and 
conjectures, of all inclination to the vainglory of I and mine. 
(A.III.134) Whether Perfect Ones (Buddhas) appear in the 
world, or whether Perfect Ones do not appear in the world, it 
still remains a firm condition, an immutable fact and fixed law: 
that all formations are impermanent; that all formations are 
subject to suffering; that everything is without an Ego. 

(S.16 (10) ) A bodily form, a feeling, a perception, a mental 
formation, a consciousness, that is permanent and persistent, 
eternal and not subject to change, such a thing the wise men 
in this world do not recognise; and I also say, there is no such 
thing. 

(A.I. 15) And it is impossible that a being possessed of Right 
Understanding should regard anything as an Ego. 

(D.15) Now, if someone should say that feeling is his Ego, 
he should be answered thus: There are three kinds of feeling: 
pleasurable, painful, and indifferent feeling. Which of these 
three feelings now do you consider as your Ego? At the mo- 
ment namely of experiencing one of these feelings, one does 
not experience the other two. These three kinds of feeling are 
impermanent, of dependent origin, are subject to decay and dis- 
| solution, to fading away and extinction. Whosoever, in expe- 
riencing one of these feelings, thinks that this is his Ego, will, 
after the extinction of that feeling, admit that his Ego has be- 
come dissolved. And thus he will consider his Ego already in 
his present life as impermanent, mixed up with pleasure and 
pain, subject to rising and passing away. 

If any one should say that feeling is not his Ego, and that 
his Ego is inaccessible to feeling, he should be asked thus: 
Now, where there is no feeling, is it there possible to say: This 
am I? 

Or, someone might say: Feeling indeed is not my Ego, but 
also it is untrue that my Ego is inaccessible to feeling; for it 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


39 


is my Ego that feels, for my Ego has the faculty of feeling. 
Such a one should be answered thus: Suppose, feeling should 
become altogether totally extinguished; now, if there, after the 
extinction of feeling, no feeling whatever exists, is it then pos- 
sible to say: This am I? 

To say that the mind, or the mind-objects, or the mind- 
consciousness constitute the Ego: such an assertion is un- 
founded. For an arising and a passing away is seen there; 
and seeing the arising and passing away of these things, one 
should come to the conclusion that one’s Ego arises and passes 
away. 

(S.a 1 (7) ) It would be better for the unlearned worldling to 
regard this body, built up of the four elements, as his Ego, 
rather than the mind. For it is evident that this body may 
last for a year, for two years, for three, four, five, or ten years, 
or even for a hundred years and more; but that which is called 
thought, or mind, or mind-consciousness, is continuously, during 
day and night, arising as one thing and passing away as an- 
other thing. 

(S.21 (5) ) Therefore, whatsoever there is of bodily form, of 
feeling, of perception, of mental formations, of consciousness, 
whether one’s own or external, gross or subtle, lofty or low, far 
or near: there one should understand according to reality and 
true wisdom: This does not belong to me; this am I not; this 
is not my Ego. 

(D.9) If now any one should ask: Have you been in the past, 
and is it untrue that you have not been? Will you be in the 
future, and is it untrue that you will not be? Are you, and is 
it untrue that you are not? — you ought to say that you have 
been in the past, and that it is untrue that you have not 
been; that you will be in the future, and that it is untrue that 
you will not be; that you are, and that it is untrue that you 
are not. 

In the past only the past existence was real, but unreal the 
future and present existence. In the future only the future 
existence will be real, but unreal the past and present exist- 
ence. Now only the present existence is real, but unreal the 
past and future existence. 

Verily, he who perceives the Dependent Origination ( patic - 
ca-samuppada) perceives the truth; and he who perceives the 
truth perceives the dependent origination. For, just as from 



SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


4 ° 

the cow comes the milk, from milk curds, from curds butter, 
from butter ghee, from ghee the scum (of ghee); and when it 
is milk, it is not counted as curds or butter or ghee or scum of 
ghee, but only as milk; and when it is curds, it is only counted 
as curds: — even so was my past existence at that time real, 
but unreal the future and present existence; and my future 
existence will be at one time real, but unreal the past and 
present existence; and my present existence is now real, but 
unreal the past and future existence. All these are merely 
popular designations and expressions, mere conventional terms 
of speaking, mere popular notions. The Perfect One, indeed, 
makes use of these, without, however, clinging to them. 

(S.42) Thus, he who does not understand bodily form, feeling, 
perception, mental formations and consciousness according to 
reality (i.e. as void of a personality or Ego), and not their 
arising, their extinction, and the way to their extinction, he is 
liable to believe, either that the Perfect One continues after 
death, or that he does not continue after death, and so forth. 
(A.III.61) Verily, if one holds the view that the vital prin- 
ciple (Ego) is identical with this body, in that case a holy life 
is not possible; or, if one holds the view that the vital principle 
is something quite different from the body, in that case also a 
holy life is not possible. Both these two Extremes the Perfect 
One has avoided and shown the Middle Doctrine, which says: 

On Delusion ( avijja ) depend the (life-affirming) Activities 
(sankhara). — On the Activities depends Consciousness ( vin - 
nana: here, rebirth-consciousness in the womb of the mother). 
— On consciousness depends the Psycho-physical Combination 
( nama-rupa ). — On the psycho-physical combination depends the 
Sixfold Sense-activity ( chal-ayatana ). — On the sixfold sense- 
activity depends the Sensorial Impression ( phassa ). — On the 
sensorial impression depends Feeling ( vedana ). — On feeling de- 
pends Craving (tanha).— On craving depends Clinging to Exist- 
ence (upadana).— On clinging to existence depends the Process 
of Becoming (bhava; here: kamma-bhava, or action process). — 
On the process of becoming depends Rebirth (jati ). — On re- 
birth depends Decay and Death (jara-marana ), sorrow, lamen- 
tation, pain, grief and despair. Thus arises this whole mass of 
suffering. This is called the noble truth of the origin of 
suffering. 

(S.12 ( 6 ) ) In whom, however, Delusion has disappeared and 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


4i 


wisdom arisen, such a disciple heaps up neither meritorious, nor 
demeritorious activities, nor activities leading to immovability, 
(A.III.61) Thus, through the entire fading away and extinction 
of this Delusion, the (life-affirming) Activities are extinguished. 
Through die extinction of the activities Consciousness (rebirth) 
is extinguished. Through the extinction of consciousness, the 
Psycho-physical combination is extinguished. Through the ex- 
tinction of the psycho-physical combination, the sixfold Sense- 
activity is extinguished. Through the extinction of the sixfold 
sense-activity, the Sensorial Impression is extinguished. Through 
the extinction of the sensorial impression. Feeling is extin- 
guished. Through the extinction of feeling. Craving is extin- 
guished. Through the extinction of craving. Clinging to Exist- 
ence is extinguished. Through the extinction of clinging to ex- 
istence, the Process of Becoming is extinguished. Through the 
extinction of the process of becoming. Rebirth is extinguished. 
Through the extinction of rebirth, decay and death, sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief and despair are extinguished. Thus 
takes place the extinction of this whole mass of suffering. This 
is called the noble truth of the extinction of suffering. 

(M.43) Verily, because beings, obstructed by delusion and en- 
snared by craving, now here, now there, seek ever fresh delight, 
therefore it comes to ever fresh rebirth. 

(A.III.33) And the action ( kamma ) that is done out of greed, 
anger and delusion ( lobha , dosa, moha), that springs from 
them, has its source and origin there: — this action ripens wher- 
ever one is reborn; and wherever this action ripens, there one 
experiences the fruits of this action, be it in this life, or the 
next life, or in some future life. 

(M.43) However, through the fading away of delusion, through 
the arising of wisdom, through the extinction of craving, no 
future rebirth takes place again. 

(A.III.33) For the actions, which are not done out of greed, 
anger and delusion, which have not sprung from them, which 
have not their source and origin there: — such actions are, 
through the absence of greed, anger and delusion, abandoned, 
rooted out, like a palm tree tom out of the soil, destroyed, and 
not liable to- spring up again. 

(A.VIII.12) In this respect one may rightly say of me, that I 
teach annihilation, that I propound my doctrine for the pur- 
pose of annihilation, and that I herein train my disciples. For, 



SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


42 

certainly, I teach annihilation, — the annihilation namely of 
greed, anger and delusion, as well as of the manifold evil and 
demeritorious things. 

Second Step 
Right Mindedness 

(D.22) What now is Right Mindedness? 

1. The thought free from lust. 

2. The thought free from ill-will. 

3. The thought free from cruelty. 

This is called right mindedness. 

(M.117) Now, right mindedness, let me tell you, is of two 
kinds: 

1. The thoughts free from lust, from ill-will, and from cru- 
elty:— this is called the Mundane Right Mindedness, which 
yields worldly fruits and brings good results. 

2. But, whatsoever there is of thinking, considering, reason- 
ing, thought, ratiocination, application — the mind being holy, 
being turned away from the world and conjoined with the 
path, the holy path being pursued: — these Verbal Operations 
of the mind are called the Ultramundane Right Mindedness, 
which is not of the world, but is ultramundane and conjoined 
with the paths. 

Now, in understanding wrong-mindedness as wrong and 
right-mindedness as right, one practises Right Understanding; 
and in making efforts to overcome evil mindedness, and to 
arouse right mindedness, one practises Right Effort; and in 
overcoming evil-mindedness with attentive mind, and dwelling 
with attentive mind in possession of right mindedness, one prac- 
tises Right Attentiveness. Hence, there are three things that 
accompany and follow upon right mindedness, namely: right 
undemanding, right effort, and right attentiveness. 

Third Step 

Right Speech 

(A.X. 176) What now is Right Speech? 

1. There, someone avoids lying, and abstains from it. He 
speaks the truth, is devoted to the truth, reliable, worthy of 
confidence, is not a deceiver of men. Being at a meeting, or 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


48 


amongst people, or in the midst of his relatives, or in a society, 
or in the king’s court, and called upon and asked as witness, to 
tell what he knows, he answers, if he knows nothing: I know 
nothing, and if he knows, he answers: I know; if he has seen 
nothing, he answers: I have seen nothing, and if he has seen, 
he answers: I have seen. Thus, he never knowingly speaks a 
lie, neither for the sake of his own advantage, nor for the sake 
of another person’s advantage, nor for the sake of any advan- 
tage whatsoever. 

2. He avoids tale-bearing, and abstains from it. What he has 
heard here, he does not repeat there, so as to cause dissension 
there; and what he has heard there, he does not repeat here, 
so as to cause dissension here. Thus he unites those that are 
divided, and those that are united he encourages. Concord glad- 
dens him, he delights and rejoices in concord; and it is concord 
that he spreads by his words. 

3. He avoids harsh language, and abstains from it. He 
speaks such words as are gentle, soothing to the ear, loving, go- 
ing to the heart, courteous and dear, and agreeable to many. 

4. He avoids vain talk, and abstains from it. He speaks at 
the right time, in accordance with facts, speaks what is useful, 
speaks about the law and the discipline; his speech is like a 
treasure, at the right moment accompanied by arguments, mod- 
erate and full of sense. 

This is called right speech. 

{M.117) Now right speech, let me tell you, is of two kinds: 

1. Abstaining from lying, from tale-bearing, from harsh lan- 
guage, and from vain talk; this is called the Mundane Right 
Speech which yields worldly fruits and brings good results. 

2. But the abhorrence of the practice of this fourfold wrong 
speech, the abstaining, withholding, refraining therefrom, the 
mind being holy, being turned away from the world and con- 
joined with the path, the holy path being pursued; — this is 
called the Ultramundane Right Speech, which is not of the 
world, but is ultramundane and conjoined with the paths. 

Now, in understanding wrong speech as wrong, and right 
speech as right, one practises Right Understanding; and in 
making efforts to overcome evil speech, and to arouse right 
speech, one practises Right Effort; and in overcoming wrong 
speech with attentive mind, and dwelling with attentive mind 
in possession of right speech, one practises Right Attentiveness. 



44 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


Hence, there are three things that accompany and follow upon 
right speech, namely: right understanding, right effort, and 
right attentiveness. 

Fourth Step 
Right Action 

What now is Right Action? 

(A.X. 176) t. There someone avoids the killing of living be- 
ings, and abstains from it. Without stick or sword, conscien- 
tious, full of sympathy, he is anxious for the welfare of all 
living beings. 

2. He avoids stealing, and abstains from it; what another 
person possesses of goods and chattels in the village or in the 
wood, that he does not take away with thievish intent. 

3. He avoids unlawful sexual intercourse, and abstains from 
it. He has no intercourse with such persons as are still under 
the protection of father, mother, brother, sister or relatives, nor 
with married women, nor female convicts, nor even with flower- 
decked (engaged) girls. 

This is called right action. 

(M. 117) Now right action, let me tell you, is of two kinds: 

1. Abstaining from killing, from stealing, and from unlawful 
sexual intercourse: — this is called the Mundane Right Action, 
which yields worldly fruits and brings good results. 

2. But the abhorrence of the practice of this three-fold 
wrong action, the abstaining, withholding, refraining therefrom 
— the mind being holy, being turned away from the world and 
conjoined with the path, the holy path being pursued: — this is 
called the Ultramundane Right Action, which is not of the 
world, but is ultramundane and conjoined with the paths. 

Now, in understanding wrong action as wrong, and right 
action as right, one practises Right Understanding; and in mak- 
ing efforts to overcome wrong action, and to arouse right action, 
one practises Right Effort and in overcoming wrong action 
with attentive mind, and dwelling with attentive mind in pos- 
session of right action, one practises Right Attentiveness. 
Hence, there are three things that accompany and follow upon 
right action, namely: right understanding, right effort, and right 
attentiveness. 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


45 


Fifth Step 
Right Living 

(D. 28) What now is Right Living? 

When the noble disciple, avoiding a wrong living, gets his 
livelihood by a right way of living, this is called right living. 

(M. 117) Now, right living, let me tell you, is of two kinds: 

1. When the noble disciple, avoiding wrong living, gets his 
livelihood by a right way of living: — this is called the Mundane 
Right Living, which yields worldly fruits and brings good re- 
sults. 

2. But the abhorrence of wrong living, the abstaining, with- 
holding, refraining therefrom — the mind being holy, being 
turned away from the world and conjoined with the path, the 
holy path being pursued: — this is called the Ultramundane 
Right Living (lokuttara-samma-ajiva), which is not of the 
world, but is ultramundane and conjoined with the paths. 

Now, in understanding wrong living as wrong, and right 
living as right, one practises Right Understanding: and in mak- 
ing efforts to overcome wrong living, to arouse right living, one 
practises Right Effort; and in overcoming wrong living with 
attentive mind, and dwelling with attentive mind in possession 
of right living, one practises Right Attentiveness. Hence, there 
are three things that accompany and follow upon right living, 
namely: right understanding, right effort, and right attentive- 
ness. 

Sixth Step 
Right Effort 

What now is Right Effort? 

(A. IV. 13, 14) There are Four Great Efforts: the effort to avoid, 
the effort to overcome, the effort to develop, and the effort to 
maintain. 

1. What now is the effort to avoid? There the disciple in- 
cites his mind to avoid the arising of evil, demeritorious things, 
that have not yet arisen; and he strives, puts forth his energy, 
strains his mind and struggles. 

Thus, when he perceives a form with the eye, a sound with 
the ear, an odour with the nose, a taste with the tongue, a con- 
tact with the body, or an object with the mind, he neither 



46 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

adheres to the whole, nor to its parts. And he strives to ward 
off that, through which evil and demeritorious things, greed 
and sorrow, would arise, if he remained with unguarded senses; 
and he watches over his senses, restrains his senses. 

Possessed of this noble Control over the Senses, he expe- 
riences inwardly a feeling of joy, into which no evil thing can 
enter. 

This is called the effort to avoid. 

2. What now is the effort to overcome? There the disciple 
incites his mind to overcome the evil and demeritorious things, 
that have already arisen; and he strives, puts forth hi's energy, 
strains his mind and struggles. 

He does not retain any thought of sensual lust, ill-will or 
grief, or any other evil and demeritorious states, that may have 
arisen; he abandons them, dispels them, destroys them, causes 
them to disappear. 

(M. 20) If, whilst regarding a certain object, there arise, on 
account of it, in the disciple evil and demeritorious thoughts 
connected with greed, anger and delusion, then the disciple (1) 
should, by means of this object, gain another and wholesome 
object. (2) Or, he should reflect on the misery of these 
thoughts: Unwholesome truly are these thoughts! Blamable 
are these thoughts! Of painful result are these thoughts! (3) 
Or, he should pay no attention to these thoughts. (4) Or, he 
should consider the compounded nature of these thoughts. (5) 
Or, with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against the gums, 
he should with his mind restrain, suppress and root out these 
thoughts; and in doing so, these evil and demeritorious 
thoughts of greed, anger and delusion will dissolve and disap- 
pear, and the mind will inwardly become settled and calm, 
composed and concentrated. 

This is called the effort to overcome. 

(A.IV.13,14) 3. What now is the effort to develop? There the 
disciple incites his will to arouse meritorious conditions, that 
have not yet arisen; and he strives, puts forth his energy, 
strains his mind and struggles. 

Thus he develops the Elements of Enlightenment ( boj - 
jhanga), bent on solitude, on detachment, on extinction, and 
ending in deliverance, namely: Attentiveness, Investigation of 
the Law, Energy, Rapture, Tranquillity, Concentration, and 
Equanimity, 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


47 


This is called the effort to develop. 

4. What now is the effort to maintain? There the disciple 
incites his will to maintain the meritorious conditions that have 
already arisen, and not to let them disappear, but to bring 
them to growth, to maturity and to the full perfection of de- 
velopment ( bhavand ); and he strives, puts forth his energy, 
strains his mind and struggles. 

Thus, for example, he keeps firmly in his mind a favourable 
object of concentration that has arisen, as the mental image of 
a skeleton, of a corpse infested by worms, of a corpse riddled 
with holes, of a corpse swollen up. 

This is called the effort to maintain. 

(M. 70) Truly the disciple, who is possessed of faith and has 
penetrated the Teaching of the Master, is filled with the 
thought; May rather skin, sinews and bones wither away, may 
the flesh and blood of my body dry up; I shall not give up 
my efforts so long as I have not attained whatever is attain- 
able by manly perseverance, energy and endeavour! 

This is called right effort. 

(A.IV. 14) 

The effort of avoiding, overcoming, 

Of developing and maintaining: 

Such four great efforts have been shown 
By him, the scion of the sun. 

And he who firmly clings to them 
May put an end to all the pain. 

Seventh Step 
Right Attentiveness 

What now is Right Attentiveness? 

(D. 22) The only way that leads to the attainment of purity, 
to the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, to the end of 
pain and grief, to the entering upon the right path and the 
realisation of Nibbana, is the Four Fundamentals of Attentive- 
ness. And which are these four? 

There the disciple lives in contemplation of the Body, in 
contemplation of Feeling, in contemplation of the Mind, in 
contemplation of Phenomena, ardent, clearly conscious and at- 
tentive, after putting away worldly greed and grief. 



48 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

i. Contemplation of the Body. 

But how does the disciple dwell in the contemplation of the 
body? There the disciple retires to the forest, to the foot of a 
tree, or to a solitary place, sits himself down, with legs crossed, 
body erect, and with attentiveness fixed before him. 

With attentive mind he breathes in, with attentive mind he 
breathes out. When making a long inhalation, he knows: I 
make a long inhalation; when making a long exhalation, he 
knows: I make a long exhalation. When making a short inha- 
lation, he knows: I make a short inhalation; when making a 
short exhalation, he knows: I make a short exhalation. Clearly 
perceiving the entire (breath-) body, I will breathe out: thus 
he trains himself. Calming this bodily function, (kaya-sank- 
hara), I will breathe in: thus he trains himself; calming this 
bodily function, I will breathe out: thus he trains himself. 

Thus he dwells in contemplation of the body, either with 
regard to his own person, or to other persons, or to both. He 
beholds, how the body arises; beholds how it passes away; be- 
holds the arising and passing away of the body. A body is 
there — this clear consciousness is present in him, because of his 
knowledge and mindfulness, and he lives independent, unat- 
tached to anything in the world. Thus does the disciple dwell 
in contemplation of the body. 

(D. 22) And further, whilst going, standing, sitting or lying 
down, the disciple understands (according to reality the expres- 
sions): I go; I stand; I sit; I lie down; he understands any 
position of the body. 

And further, the disciple is clearly conscious in his going and 
coming; clearly conscious in looking forward and backward; 
clearly conscious in bending and stretching (any part of his 
body); clearly conscious in eating, drinking, chewing and tast- 
ing: clearly conscious in discharging excrement and urine; 
clearly conscious in walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep 
and awakening; clearly conscious in speaking and in keeping 
silent. 

And further, the disciple contemplates this body from the 
sole of the foot upward, and from the top of the hair down- 
ward, with a skin stretched over it, and filled with manifold 
impurities: This body consists of hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, 
sinews, bones, marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


49 


lungs, intestines, bowels, stomach, and excrement; of bile, 
phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, lymph, tears, serum, spittle, nasal 
mucus, oil of the joints, and urine. 

Just as if there were a sack, with openings at both ends, 
filled with all kinds of grain, — with paddy, beans, sesamum and 
husked rice — and a man not blind opened it and examined its 
contents, thus: That is paddy, these are beans, this is sesamum, 
this is husked rice; even so does the disciple investigate this 
body. 

And further, the disciple contemplates this body with re- 
gard to the elements: This body consists of the solid element, 
the liquid element, the heating element, and the vibrating ele- 
ment. Just as a skilled butcher or butcher’s apprentice, who has 
slaughtered a cow and divided it into separate portions, should 
sit down at the junction of four highroads; just so does the 
disciple contemplate this body with regard to the elements. 

Thus he dwells in contemplation of the body, either with 
regard to his own person, or to other persons, or to both. He 
beholds, how the body arises; beholds how it passes away; be- 
holds the arising and passing away of the body. A body is 
there: this clear consciousness is present in him, because of his 
knowledge and mindfulness, and he lives independent, unat- 
tached to anything in the world. Thus does the disciple dwell 
in contemplation of the body. 

(M. 119) Once the contemplation of the body is practised, de- 
veloped, often repeated, has become one’s habit, one’s founda- 
tion, is firmly established, strengthened and well perfected, one 
may expect ten blessings: 

Over Delight and Discontent one has mastery; one does not 
allow one’s self to be overcome by discontent; one subdues it 
as soon as it arises. 

One conquers Fear and Anxiety; one does not allow one’s 
self to be overcome by fear and anxiety; one subdues them as 
soon as they arise. 

One endures cold and heat, hunger and thirst, wind and 
sun, attacks by gadflies, mosquitoes and reptiles; patiently one 
endures wicked and malicious speech, as well as bodily pains, 
that befall one, though they be piercing, sharp, bitter, unpleas- 
ant, disagreeable and dangerous to life. 

The four Trances (jhana ), the mind-purifying, bestowing- 
happiness even here: these one may enjoy at will, without 
difficulty, without effort. 



5 ° 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


(1) One may enjoy the different Magical Powers ( iddhi - 
vidha). 

(2) With the Heavenly Ear ( dibba-sota ), the purified, the 
super-human, one may hear both kinds of sounds, the heavenly 
and the earthly, the distant and the near. 

(3) With the mind one may obtain Insight into the Hearts 
of Other Beings (parassa cetoparinna-nana), of other persons. 

(4) One may obtain Remembrance of many Previous Births 
( pubbenivas ’ anussati-nana). 

(5) With the Heavenly Eye ( dibba-cakkhu ), the purified, 
the super-human, one may see beings vanish and reappear, the 
base and the noble, the beautiful and the ugly, the happy and 
the unfortunate; one may perceive how beings are reborn ac- 
cording to their deeds. 

(6) One may, through the Cessation of Passions ( asavak - 
khaya), come to know for oneself, even in this life, the stain- 
less deliverance of mind, the deliverance through wisdom. 

(D. 22) 2. Contemplation of the Feelings. 

But how does the disciple dwell in the contemplation of the 
feelings? 

In experiencing feelings, the disciple knows: I have an 
agreeable feeling, or: I have a disagreeable feeling, or: I have 
an indifferent feeling; or: I have a worldly agreeable feeling, 
or: I have an unworldly agreeable feeling; or: I have a worldly 
disagreeable feeling, or: I have an unworldly disagreeable feel- 
ing; or: I have a worldly indifferent feeling, or: I have an 
unworldly indifferent feeling. 

Thus he dwells in contemplation of the feelings, either with 
regard to his own person, or to other persons, or to both. He 
beholds how the feelings arise; beholds how they pass away; 
beholds the arising and passing away of the feelings. Feelings 
are there: this clear consciousness is present in him, because of 
his knowledge and mindfulness, and he lives independent, un- 
attached to anything in the world. Thus does the disciple dwell 
in contemplation of the feelings. 

3. Contemplation of the Mind. 

(D. 22) But how does the disciple dwell in contemplation of 
the mind? 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


5i 


There the disciple knows the greedy mind as greedy, and the 
not-greedy mind as not-greedy; knows the angry mind as angry, 
and the not-angry mind as not-angry; knows the deluded mind 
as deluded, and the undeluded mind as undeluded. He knows 
the composed mind as composed, and the scattered mind as 
scattered; knows the developed mind as developed, and the un- 
developed mind as undeveloped; knows the surpassable mind 
as surpassable, and the unsurpassable mind as unsurpassable; 
knows the concentrated mind as concentrated, and the uncon- 
centrated mind as unconcentrated; knows the freed mind as 
freed, and the unfreed mind as unfreed. 

Thus he dwells in contemplation of the mind, either with 
regard to his own person, or to other persons, or to both. He 
beholds how the mind arises; beholds how it passes away; be- 
holds the arising and passing away of the mind. Mind is there: 
this clear consciousness is present in him, because of his knowl- 
edge and mindfulness, and he lives independent, unattached to 
anything in the world. Thus does the disciple dwell in con- 
templation of the mind. 

4. Contemplation of the Phenomena. 

But how does the disciple dwell in contemplation of the 
phenomena? 

There the disciple dwells in contemplation of the phe- 
nomena, namely of the Five Hindrances. 

He knows when there is Lust in him: In me is lust; knows 
when there is Anger in him: In me is anger; knows when there 
is Torpor and Drowsiness in him: In me is torpor and drowsi- 
ness; knows when there is Restlessness and Mental Worry in 
him: In me is restlessness and mental worry; knows when there 
are Doubts in him: In me are doubts. He knows when these 
hindrances are not in him: In me these hindrances are not. He 
knows how they come to arise; knows how, once arisen, they 
are overcome; knows how, once overcome, they do not rise 
again in the future. 

And further: the disciple dwells in contemplation of the 
phenomena, namely of the five Aggregates of Existence. He 
knows, what Bodily Form (rupa) is, how it arises, how it 
passes away; knows what Feeling (vedana) is, how it arises, 
how it passes away; knows what Perception ( sanna ) is, how it 
arises, how it passes away; knows what the Mental Formations 


52 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


(sankhara) are, how they arise, how they pass away; knows 
what Consciousness (vinnana) is, how it arises, how it passes 
away. 

And further: the disciple dwells in contemplation of the 
phenomena, namely of the six Subjective-Objective Sense-Fac- 
tors. He knows eye and forms, ear and sounds, nose and 
odours, tongue and tastes, body and touches, mind and ideas; 
and the fetter that arises in dependence on them, he also knows. 
He knows how the fetter comes to arise, knows how the fet- 
ter is overcome, and how the abandoned fetter does not rise 
again in future. 

And further: the disciple dwells in contemplation of the 
phenomena, namely of the seven Elements of Enlightenment. 
The disciple knows when there is Attentiveness in him; when 
there is Investigation of the Law in him; when there is En- 
thusiasm in him; when there is Tranquillity in him; when there 
is Concentration in him; when there is Equanimity in him. He 
knows when it is not in him; knows how it comes to arise, and 
how it is fully developed. 

And further: the disciple dwells in contemplation of the 
phenomena, namely of the Four Noble Truths. He knows ac- 
cording to reality, what Suffering is; knows according to reality, 
what the Origin of suffering is; knows according to reality, 
what the Extinction of suffering is; knows according to reality, 
what the Path is, that leads to the extinction of suffering. 

Thus he dwells in contemplation of the phenomena, either 
with regard to his own person, or to other persons, or to both. 
He beholds how the phenomena arise; beholds how they pass 
away; beholds the arising and passing away of the phenomena. 
Phenomena are there: this clear consciousness is present in him, 
because of his knowledge and mindfulness, and he lives inde- 
pendent, unattached to anything in the world. Thus does the 
disciple dwell in contemplation of the phenomena. 

The only way that leads to the attainment of purity, to the 
overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, to the end of pain and 
grief, to the entering upon the right path and the realisation 
of Nibbana, is these four fundamentals of attentiveness. 

(M. 118) Watching over In- and Out-breathing, practised and 
developed, brings the Four Fundamentals of Attentiveness to 
perfection; the four fundamentals of attentiveness, practised 
and developed, bring the seven Elements of Enlightenment to 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 53 

perfection; the seven elements of enlightenment, practised and 
developed, bring Wisdom and Deliverance to perfection. 

But how does Watching over In- and Out-breathing, prac- 
tised and developed, bring the four Fundamentals of Attentive- 
ness to perfection? 

x. Whenever the disciple (a) is conscious in making a long 
inhalation or exhalation, or (b) in making a short inhalation 
or exhalation, or (c) is training himself to inhale or exhale 
whilst feeling the whole (breath-) body, or (d) whilst calming 
down this bodily function (i.e. the breath) — at such a time the 
disciple is dwelling in contemplation of the body, full of energy, 
clearly conscious, attentive, after subduing worldly greed and 
grief. For, inhalation and exhalation I call one amongst the 
bodily things. 

2. Whenever the disciple is training himself to inhale or ex- 
hale (a) whilst feeling, rapture, or (b) joy, or (c) the mental 
functions, or (d) whilst calming down the mental functions — at 
such a time he is dwelling in contemplation of the feelings, 
full of energy, clearly conscious, attentive after subduing 
worldly greed and grief. For, the full awareness of in- and out- 
breathing I call one amongst the feelings. 

3. Whenever the disciple is training himself to inhale or ex- 
hale (a) whilst feeling the mind, or (b) whilst gladdening the 
mind, or (c) whilst concentrating the mind, or (d) whilst set- 
ting the mind free— at such a time he is dwelling in contem- 
plation of the mind, full of energy, clearly conscious, attentive, 
after subduing worldly greed and grief. For, without attentive- 
ness and clear consciousness, I say, there is no Watching over 
In- and Out-breathing. 

4. Whenever the disciple is training himself to inhale or 
exhale, whilst contemplating (a) impermanency, or (b) the fad- 
ing away of passion, or (c) extinction, or (d) detachment — at 
such a time he is dwelling in contemplation of the phenomena, 
full of energy, clearly conscious, attentive, after subduing 
worldly greed and grief. 

Watching over in- and out-breathing, thus practised and de- 
veloped, brings the four fundamentals of attentiveness to per- 
fection. 

But how do the four fundamentals of attentiveness, prac- 
tised and developed, bring the seven Elements of Enlighten- 
ment to full perfection? 



54 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


1. Whenever the disciple is dwelling in contemplation on 
the body, feelings, mind and phenomena, strenuous, clearly con- 
scious, attentive, after subduing worldly greed and grief — at 
such a time his attentiveness is undisturbed; and whenever his 
attentiveness is present and undisturbed, at such a time he has 
gained and is developing the Element of Enlightenment Atten- 
tiveness; and thus this element of enlightenment reaches fullest 
perfection. 

2. And whenever, whilst dwelling with attentive mind, he 
wisely investigates, examines and thinks over the Law ( dharn - 
ma ) — at such a time he has gained and is developing the Ele- 
ment of Enlightenment Investigation of the Law; and thus this 
element of enlightenment reaches fullest perfection. 

3. And whenever, whilst wisely investigating, examining and 
thinking over the law, his energy is firm and unshaken — at such 
a time he has gained and is developing the Element of En- 
lightenment Energy; and thus the element of enlightenment 
reaches fullest perfection. 

4. And whenever in him, whilst firm in energy, arises super- 
sensuous rapture at such a time he has gained and is devel- 
oping the Element of Enlightenment Rapture; and thus this 
element of enlightenment reaches fullest perfection. 

5. And whenever, whilst enraptured in mind, his body and 
mind becomes tranquil at such a time he has gained and is 
developing the Element of Enlightenment Tranquillity; and 
thus this element of enlightenment reaches fullest perfection. 

6. And whenever, whilst tranquillised in body and happy, 
his mind becomes concentrated — at such a time he has gained 
and is developing the Element of Enlightenment Concentration; 
and thus this element of enlightenment reaches fullest per- 
fection. 

7. And whenever he thoroughly looks with indifference to 
his mind thus concentrated — at such a time he has gained and 
is developing the Element of Enlightenment Equanimity. 

The four fundamentals of attentiveness, thus practised and 
developed, bring the seven elements of enlightenment to full 
perfection. 

But how do the seven elements of enlightenment, practised 
and developed, bring Wisdom and Deliverance to full per- 
fection? 

There the disciple is developing the elements of enlighten- 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


55 


ment: Attentiveness, Investigation of the Law, Energy, Rap- 
ture, Tranquillity, Concentration and Equanimity, bent on de- 
tachment, absence of desire, extinction and renunciation. 

Thus practised and developed do the seven elements of en- 
lightenment bring wisdom and deliverance to full perfection. 
(M. 125) Just as the elephant hunter drives a huge stake into 
the ground and chains the wild elephant to it by the neck, in 
order to drive out of him his wonted forest ways and wishes, 
his forest unruliness, obstinacy and violence, and to accustom 
him to the environment of the village, and to teach him such 
good behaviour as is required amongst men: — in like manner 
also has the noble disciple to fix his mind firmly to these four 
fundamentals of attentiveness, so that he may drive out of 
himself his wonted worldly ways and wishes, his wonted 
worldly unruliness, obstinacy and violence, and win to the True 
and realise Nibbana. 

Eighth Step 
Right Concentration 

(M. 44) What now is Right Concentration? 

Fixation of the mind to a single object, (lit. One-pointedness 
of mind); — this is concentration. 

The four Fundamentals of Attentiveness; — these are the 
objects of concentration. 

The four Great Efforts: — these are the requisites for 
concentration. 

The practising, developing and cultivating of these things: — 
this is the Development of concentration. 

(M. 141) Detached from sensual objects, detached from de- 
meritorious things, the disciple enters into the first trance, 
which is accompanied by Verbal Thought and Rumination, is 
bom of Detachment, and filled with Rapture and Happiness. 
(M. 43) This first trance is free from five things, and five 
things are present: when the disciple enters the first trance, 
there have vanished (the 5 Hindrances): Lust, Ill-will, Torpor 
and Dullness, Restlessness and Mental Worry, Doubts; and 
there are present: Verbal Thought, Rumination, Rapture, Hap 
piness, and Concentration. 

(M. 27) And further: after the subsiding of verbal thought 
and rumination, and by the gaining of inward tranquillisation 



56 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

and oneness of mind, he enters into a state free from verbal 
thought and rumination, the second trance, which is born of 
Concentration and filled with Rapture and Happiness. 

And further: after the fading away of rapture, he dwells in 
equanimity, attentive, clearly conscious, and he experiences in 
his person that feeling, of which the noble Ones say: Happy 
lives the man of equanimity and attentive mind — thus he en- 
ters the third trance. 

And further: after the giving up of pleasure and pain, and 
through the disappearance of previous joy and grief, he enters 
into a state beyond pleasure and pain, into the fourth trance, 
which is purified by equanimity and attentiveness. 

(S. 21 (i) ) Develop your concentration; for he who has con- 
centration understands things according to their reality. And 
what are these things? The arising and passing away of bodily 
form, of feeling, perception, mental formations and con- 
sciousness. 

(M. 149) Thus these five Aggregates of existence must be 
wisely penetrated; delusion and craving must be wisely aban- 
doned; Tranquillity and Insight must be wisely developed. 

(S. 56) This is the Middle Path which the Perfect One has 
discovered, which makes one both to see and to know, and 
which leads to peace, to discernment, to enlightenment, to 
Nibbana. 

(Dhp. 627) And following upon this path you will put an 
end to suffering. 

GRADUAL REALISATION OF THE EIGHTFOLD PATH 
IN THE PROGRESS OF THE DISCIPLE 

(A. IV. 198) Suppose, a householder, or his son, or someone 
reborn in any family hears the law, and after hearing the law 
he is filled with confidence in the Perfect One. And filled with 
this confidence, he thinks: Full of hindrances is household life, 
a refuse heap; but pilgrim life is like the open air. Not easy 
is it, when one lives at home, to fulfill point by point the rules 
of the holy life. How, if now I were to cut off hair and beard, 
put on the yellow robe and go forth from home to the home- 
less life? And in a short time, having given up his more or 
less extensive possessions, having forsaken a smaller or larger 
circle of relations, he cuts off hair and beard, puts on the yel- 
low robe, and goes forth from home to the homeless life. 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


57 


Having thus left the world, he fulfills the rules of the 
monks. He avoids the killing of living beings and abstains from 
it. Without stick or sword, conscientious, full of sympathy, he 
is anxious for the welfare of all living beings. — He avoids steal- 
ing and abstains from taking what is not given to him. Only 
what is given to him he takes, waiting till it is given; and he 
lives with a heart honest and pure. — He avoids unchastity, liv- 
ing chaste, resigned, and keeping aloof from sexual intercourse 
and the vulgar. — He avoids lying and abstains from it. He 
speaks the truth, is devoted to the truth, reliable, worthy of 
confidence, is not a deceiver of men. — He avoids tale-bearing 
.and abstains from it. What he has heard here, he does not 
repeat there, so as to cause dissension there; and what he has 
heard there, he does not repeat here, so as to cause dissension 
here. Thus he unites those that are divided, and those that are 
united he encourages; concord gladdens him, he delights and 
rejoices in concord; and it is concord that he spreads by his 
words. — He avoids harsh language and abstains from it. He 
speaks such words as are gentle, soothing to the ear, loving, 
going to the heart, courteous and dear, and agreeable to many. 
—He avoids vain talk and abstains from it. He speaks at the 
right time, in accordance with facts, speaks what is useful, 
speaks about the law and the discipline; his speech is like a 
treasure, at the right moment accompanied by arguments, mod- 
erate, and full of sense. 

He keeps aloof from dance, song, music and the visiting of 
shows; rejects flowers, perfumes, ointment, as well as every 
kind of adornment and embellishment. High and gorgeous beds 
he does not use. Raw corn and meat he does not accept. 
Women and girls he does not accept. He owns no male and 
female slaves, owns no goats, sheep, fowls, pigs, elephants, cows 
or horses, no land and goods. He does not go on errands and 
do the duties of a messenger. He keeps aloof from buying and 
selling things. He has nothing to do with false measures, met- 
als and weights. He avoids crooked ways of bribery, deception 
and fraud. He keeps aloof from stabbing, beating, chaining, 
attacking, plundering and oppressing. 

He contents himself with the robe that protects his body, 
and with the alms with which he keeps himself alive. Wher- 
ever he goes he is provided with these two things, just as a 
winged bird, in flying, carries his wings along with him. By 



5 » 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


fulfilling this noble Domain of Morality he feels in his heart 
an irreproachable happiness. 

Now, in perceiving a form with the eye — a sound with the 
ear — an odour with the nose — a taste with the tongue — a touch 
with the body — an object with his mind, he sticks neither to 
the whole, nor to its details. And he tries to Ward off that, 
which, by being unguarded in his senses, might give rise to evil 
and demeritorious states, to greed and sorrow; he watches over 
his senses, keeps his senses under control. By practising this 
noble Control of the Senses he feels in his heart an unblem- 
ished happiness. 

Clearly conscious is he in his going and coming; clearly con- 
scious in looking forward and backward; clearly conscious in 
bending and stretching his body; clearly conscious in eating, 
drinking, chewing and tasting; clearly conscious in discharging 
excrement and urine; clearly conscious in walking, standing, sit- 
ting, falling asleep and awakening; clearly conscious in speaking 
and keeping silent. 

Now, being equipped with this’ lofty Morality (sila), 
equipped with this noble Control of the Senses (indriya-sam- 
vara), and filled with this noble Attentiveness and Clear Con- 
sciousness, he chooses a secluded dwelling in the forest, at the 
foot of a tree, on a mountain, in a cleft, in a rock cave, on a 
burial ground, on a woody table-land, in the open air, or on 
a heap of straw. Having returned from his alms-round, he, 
after the meal, sits himself down with legs crossed, body erect, 
with attentiveness fixed before him. 

He has cast away Lust; he dwells with a heart free from 
lust; from lust he cleanses his heart. 

He has cast away Ill-will; he dwells with a heart free from 
ill-will; cherishing love and compassion toward all living be- 
ings, he cleanses his heart from ill-will. 

He has cast away Torpor and Dulness; he dwells free from 
torpor and dulness; loving the light, with watchful mind, with 
clear consciousness, he cleanses his mind from torpor and 
dulness. 

He has cast away Restlessness and Mental Worry; dwelling 
with mind undisturbed, with heart full of peace, he cleanses his 
mind from restlessness and mental worry. 

He has cast away Doubt; dwelling free from doubt, full of 
confidence in the good, he cleanses his heart from doubt. 



THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA 


59 


He has put aside these five Hindrances and learnt to know 
the paralysing corruptions of the mind. And far from sensual 
impressions, far from demeritorious things, he enters into the 
Four Trances. 

(A. IX. 36) But whatsoever there is of feeling, perception, 
mental formations, or consciousness — •: all these phenomena he 
regards as impermanent, subject to pain, as infirm, as an ulcer, 
a thorn, a misery, a burden, an enemy, a disturbance, as empty 
and void of an Ego; and turning away from these things, he 
directs his mind towards the abiding, thus: This, verily, is the 
Peace, this is the Highest, namely the end of all formations, 
the forsaking of every substratum of rebirth, the fading away 
of craving, detachment, extinction, Nibbana. And in this state 
he reaches the cessation of passions. 

(A. IV. 198) And his heart becomes free from sensual passion, 
free from the passion for existence, free from the passion of 
ignorance. Freed am I!: this knowledge arises in the liberated 
one; and he knows: Exhausted is rebirth, fulfilled the Holy 
Life; what was to be done, has been done; naught remains 
more for this world to do. 

(M. 26) 

For ever am I liberated, 

This is the last time that I’m born. 

No new existence waits for me. 

This, verily, is the highest, holiest wisdom: to know that 
all suffering has passed away. 

(M. 140) This, verily, is the highest, holiest peace: appease- 
ment of greed, hatred and delusion. 

I am is a vain thought; I am not is a vain thought; I 
shall be is a vain thought; I shall not be is a vain thought. 
Vain thoughts are a sickness, an ulcer, a thorn. But after over- 
coming all vain thoughts one is called a silent thinker. And 
the thinker, the silent One, does no more arise, no more pass 
away, no more tremble, no more desire. For there Is nothing 
in him that he should arise again. And as he arises no more, 
how should he grow old again? And as he grows no more old, 
how should he die again? And as he dies no more, how should 
he tremble? And as he trembles no more, how should he have 
desire? 

(M. 29) Hence, the purpose of the Holy Life does not consist 
in acquiring alms, honour, or fame, nor in gaining morality. 



60 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

concentration, or the eye of knowledge. That unshakable de- 
liverance of the heart: that, verily, is the object of the Holy 
Life, that is the essence, that is its goal. 

(M. 51) And those, who formerly, in the past, were Holy and 
Enlightened Ones, also those Blessed Ones have pointed out to 
their disciples this self-same goal, as has been pointed out by 
me to my disciples. And those, who afterwards, in the future, 
will be Holy and Enlightened Ones, those Blessed Ones also 
will point out to their disciples this self-same goal, as has been 
pointed out by me to my disciples. 

(D. 22) However, disciples, it may be that (after my passing 
away) you might think: Gone is the doctrine of our Master. 
We have no Master more. But thus you should not think; for 
the Law and the Discipline, which I have taught you, will, 
after my death, be your master. 

The Law be your light. 

The Law be your refuge! 

Do not look for any other refuge! 

Therefore, disciples, the doctrines, which I advised you to 
penetrate, you should well preserve, well guard, so that this 
Holy Life may take its course and continue for ages, for the 
weal and welfare of the many, as a consolation to the world, 
for the happiness, weal and welfare of heavenly beings and 
men. 



TEVIGGA SUTTA 


T 1 HUS have I heard. At one time when the Blessed One was 
^ journeying through Kosala with a great company of Breth- 
ren about five hundred, he came to the Brahman village of 
Manasakata. And there the Blessed One staid in the mango 
grove on the bank of the river Akiravati to the south of 
Manasakata. 

At that time many distinguished and wealthy Brahmans 
were living at Manasakata. Among them were two young men, 
Vasettha and Bharadvaga. One day when they were taking 
exercise after their bath, walking up and down in thoughtful 
mood, they discussed which was the true path to union with 
Brahma and which the false. The young Brahman Vasettha 
spake thus: I think that the path that has been announced by 
the Brahman Pokkarasati is the straight path, the direct way 
which leads him who acts according to it into a state of union 
with Brahma. 

The young Brahman Bharadvaga said: I think the path 
announced by the Brahman Tarukkha is the straight path, 
the direct way which leads him who acts according to it into a 
state of union with Brahman. But neither was able to con- 
vince the other. Then the young Brahman Vasettha said to 
the young Brahman Bharadvaga: There is a Samana named 
Gotami of the Sakya clan who left them to adopt a religious 
life. He is now staying in the Mango grove near by. This 
venerable Gotama is of high reputation, he is even said to be 
“a fully enlightened One,” blessed and worthy, abounding in 
wisdom and goodness, happy, with knowledge of the world, 
unsurpassed as a guide to erring mortals, a teacher of gods and 
men, a blessed Buddha. Come, Bharadvaga, let us go to the 
place where this Samana Gotama is staying, let us ask him 
and what he declares let us bear in mind. Very well, assented 
Bharadvaga. 

Then the young Brahman Vasettha and the young Brahman 
Bharadvaga went on to the place where the Blessed One was 
staying. When they had come there they exchanged with the 

61 



62 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


Blessed One greetings and compliments of friendship and civil- 
ity and sat down beside him. When they were thus seated the 
young Brahman said to the Blessed One: 

As we were taking exercise, walking up and down, there 
sprang up a conversation between us as to which was the true 
path to union with Brahma. I said it was the one announced 
by the Brahman Pokkarasati; Bharadvaga said that it was the 
way announced by the Brahman Tarukka. Not being able to 
agree, we decided to refer the dispute to you. 

Then the Blessed One said to the two young Brahmans: 
Vasettha, you said that it was the path taught by the Brah- 
man Pokkarasati; Bharadvaga, you said that it was the way 
taught by the Brahman Tarukka. Where-in, then, Vasettha, 
is there a strife, a dispute, a difference of opinion between you? 

Vasettha replied: Various Brahmans, Gotama, teach various 
paths to union with Brahma: Is one true and another false, 
or are all saving paths? Are they all paths which will lead one 
who acts according to them into a state of Union with Brah- 
ma? Is it like the different roads that come into a village and 
that all meet in the center? Is it in that sense that all the 
various teachings of the Brahmans are to be accepted? Are 
they all saving paths? Are they all paths which will lead one 
who acts according to them into a state of union with Brahma? 

The Blessed One replied: Vasettha, do you think that all 
these various paths lead aright? 

I think so, Gotama. 

Would you be willing to assert that they all lead aright, 
Vasettha? 

So I say, Gotama. 

But then, Vasettha, is there a single one of the Brahmans 
versed in the Three Vedas who has ever seen Brahma face to 
face? 

No, indeed, Gotama. 

But is there then, Vasettha, a single one of the teachers of 
the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas who has ever seen 
Brahma face to face? 

No, indeed, Gotama. 

But is there then, Vasettha, a single one of the pupils of 
the teachers of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas who 
has seen Brahma face to face? 

No, indeed, Gotama. 



TEVIGGA SUTTA 


63 


But, Vasettha, is there a single one of the ancestors of all 
these Brahmans, back to the seventh generation, who has seen 
Brahma face to face? 

No, indeed, Gotama. 

Well, then, Vasettha, There are the ancient Rishis of the 
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas, the authors of the verses, 
the utterers of the verses, whose ancient form of words are 
still chanted, uttered, or composed by the Brahmans of today, 
intoning and reciting them as has been done for ages, did they 
ever speak thus, saying: We know it, we have seen it, where 
Brahma is, whence Brahma came, whither Brahma goes? 

Not so, Gotama. 

Then you assert, Vasettha, that not one of the Brahmans, 
nor their teachers, nor their teacher’s pupils, nor their ancestors 
back for seven generations, has ever seen Brahma face to face. 
And that even the Rishis of old, the authors and utterers of 
the ancient form of words which the Brahmans of today so 
carefully intone and recite precisely as they have been handed 
down, that even they did not pretend to know or to have seen 
where or whence or whither Brahma is. And yet, Vasettha, 
these Brahmans pretend that they can show the path to union 
with that which they have not seen and which they know not, 
saying: This is the straight path, this is the direct way, which 
leads him, who acts according to it, into a state of union with 
Brahma. Now what think you, Vasettha, does it not follow 
that this being so, that the talk of these Brahmans versed 
though they be in the Three Vedas, is foolish talk. 

Yes, Gotama, this being so, it follows that the talk of these 
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas is foolish talk. 

Vasettha, it is like a string of blind men clinging to one 
another, the foremost can not see the way, neither can the 
middle one, nor the hindmost. Even so, methinks, Vasettha, 
that the talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas, is 
but blind talk. The first sees not, the middle one sees not, the 
hindmost sees not. The talk, then, of these Brahmans turns 
out to be ridiculous, mere words, vain and empty. 

Just, Vasettha, as if a man should say. How I long for, 
how I love the most beautiful woman in this land! And 
people should ask him. Well, good friend! this most beautiful 
woman in the land whom you thus love and long for, do you 
know whether she is a noble lady or a Brahman woman, or of 



64 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

the trader caste, or a sudra? But when so asked he should 
answer. No, I do not know. And when people should ask him. 
Well, good friend! this most beautiful woman in all the land 
■whom you so love and long for, do you know her name, or 
her family name, whether she is tall or short, dark or of me- 
dium complexion, black or fair, or in what village or town or 
city she dwells? But when so asked, he should answer, I do 
not know. And when people should say to him, So then, good 
friend, whom you know not, neither have seen, how do you 
love and long for her? And then when so asked, he should 
answer. Nevertheless, I love her. Now what think you, Vaset- 
tha? Would it not turn out, that being so, that the talk of 
that man was foolish talk? 

In sooth, Gotama, it would turn out, that being so, that 
the talk of that man was foolish talk. 

And just even so, Vasettha, though you say that the Brah- 
mans and all connected with them, have never seen Brahma, 
Now what think you, Vasettha, does it not follow that this be- 
ing so, the talk of the Brahmans versed though they be in the 
three Vedas, is foolish talk? 

In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the talk of 
the Brahmans versed in the Vedas, is foolish talk. 

Very good, Vasettha. Verily then, Vasettha, that Brahmans 
versed in the Three Vedas should be able to show the way to 
a state of union with that which they do not know, neither 
have seen — such a condition of things has no existence. 

Just as if a man should make a stairway in a place where 
four roads met, Vasettha, and people should say to him. Well, 
good friend, where are you going to build your mansion for 
which you are building this stairway? Will it face the east, or 
the south, or the west, or the north? How large will it be? 
Large or small or of medium size? And when so asked he 
should answer, I do not know. And people should say to him. 
But then, good friend, are you making a stairway and do not 
have any idea in your mind as to what the mansion is to be 
like? And when so asked, he should answer, Yes. Now what 
think, you, Vasettha? Would it not turn out, that being so, 
that the thing which the man was doing was a foolish thing to 
do? 

In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it would be a foolish thing 
jie was doing. 



TEVIGGA SUTTA 


65 


And just even so, Vasettha, The way to union with Brahma 
which the Brahmans are proclaiming without having seen 
Brahma or knowing anything about him, is just as foolish. Is 
it not so? 

In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the talk of 
the Brahmans is foolish. 

Very good, Vasettha, for these Brahmans to proclaim a way 
to union with Brahma which they do not know, neither have 
seen — such a condition of things has no existence. 

Again, Vasettha. If this river Akiravati were full of water 
even to (the brim and overflowing, and a man should come up 
and want to cross over because he had business on the other 
side, and he standing on this bank should say, Come hither, 
O further bank! come over to this side! Now wh^t think you, 
Vasettha, would the further bank of the river, because of the 
man’s invoking and praying and hoping and praising, come 
over to this side? 

Certainly not, Gotama. 

In just the same way, Vasettha, do the Brahmans versed in 
the Three Vedas, — omitting the practice of those qualities 
which really make a man a Brahman and adopting the practice 
of those qualities which really make men not Brahmans — say 
thus, Indra we call upon thee, Soma we call upon thee, Varuna 
we call upon thee, Isana we call upon thee, Pragapati we call 
upon thee, Brahma we call upon thee, Mahiddhi we call upon 
thee, Yama we call upon thee! Verily, Vasettha, that those 
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas, but omitting the practice 
of those qualities which really make a man a Brahman, and 
adopting the practice of those qualities which really make men 
not Brahmans — that they, by reason of their invoking and 
praying and hoping and praising, should, after death and when 
the body is dissolved, become united with Brahma — verily such 
a condition of things has no existence. 

Just, Vasettha, as if this river Akiravati were full, even to 
the brim and overflowing, and a man with business on the 
other side should come up and want to cross over. Now, sup- 
pose this man was bound with a heavy chain his arms behind 
his back, what think you, Vasettha, would that man be able to 
get over the river Akiravati to the further bank? 

Certainly not, Gotama. 

In the same way, Vasettha, there are five things leading to 



66 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


desire and lust which are called in the discipline of the Noble 
Path a “chain” and a “bond.” What are the five? Forms per- 
ceptible to the eye — desirable, agreeable, pleasant, attractive 
forms — that cause delight and are accompanied by desire and 
lust. Sounds of the same kind perceptible to the ear; odours 
of the same kind perceptible to the nose; tastes of the same 
kind that are perceptible to the tongue; substances of die same 
kind perceptible to the body by touch. These five things pre- 
disposing to passion are called in the discipline of the Noble 
One, a “chain” and a “bond.” And these five things predis- 
posing to lust, Vasettha, do the Brahmans versed in the Three 
Vedas cling to; they are infatuated by them, guilty of them, 
see not the danger of them, know not how unreliable they 
are, and so enjoy them. 

And verily, Vasettha, that Brahmans versed in the Three 
Vedas but omitting the practice of those qualities which really 
make a man a Brahman, and adopting the practice of those 
qualities which make men non-Brahmans — clinging to those 
five things that predispose to passion, infatuated by them, 
guilty of them, seeing not their danger, knowing not their un- 
reliability, and so enjoying them — that these Brahmans after 
death on the dissolution of the body, become united with 
Brahma — such a condition of things has no existence. 

Again Vasettha, if this river Akiravati were full of water 
even to the brim and overflowing, and a man with business on 
the other side should come up and want to cross over, and sup- 
pose he should lie down and cover himself dtp even to his head, 
and go to sleep. What think you, Vasettha? Would that man 
be able to get over from this bank of the river to the further 
bank? 

Certainly not, Gotama. 

Vasettha, in the discipline of the Noble Path, there are these 
five hindrances, which are called, “veils,” “hindrances,” “ob- 
stacles,” and “entanglements.” What are the five? The hin- 
drance of lustful desire, the hindrance of malice, the hindrance 
of sloth and idleness, the hindrance of pride and self-righteous- 
ness, the hindrance of doubt. These are the five hindrances 
that in the discipline of the Noble Path are called veils and 
hindrances and obstacles and entanglements. Now with these 
five hindrances, Vasettha, the Brahmans versed in the Three 
Vedas are veiled, hindered, obstructed, entangled. And verily, 



TEVIGGA SUTTA 


67 


Vasettha, the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas but omitting 
the practice of those qualities which really make a man a Brah- 
man and adopting the practice of those qualities which make 
men non-Brahmans — veiled, hindered, obstructed, entangled — 
that these Brahmans after death on the dissolution of the body 
become united to Brahma — such a condition of things has no 
existence. 

Now, Vasettha, when you have been among Brahmans, 
listening as they talked among themselves, learners and 
teachers and those aged and well stricken in years, what have 
you learned from them and of them? Is Brahma in possession 
of wives and wealth, or is he not? 

He is not, Gotama. 

Is his mind full of anger, or is it free from anger? 

Free from anger, Gotama. 

Is his mind full of malice or free from malice? 

Free from malice, Gotama. 

Is his mind depraved, or pure? 

It is pure, Gotama. 

Has he self-mastery, or has he not? 

He has, Gotama. 

Now what think you, Vasettha? Are the Brahmans versed 
in the Three Vedas, are they in possession of wives and wealth, 
or are they not? 

They are, Gotama. 

Have they anger in their hearts? 

They have, Gotama. 

Do they bear malice, or do they not? 

They do, Gotama. 

Are they pure in heart or are they not? 

They are not, Gotama. 

Then you say, Vasettha, that the Brahmans are in pos- 
session of wives and wealth, and that Brahma is not. Can there 
be agreement and likeness between the Brahmans with their 
wives and property and Brahma who has none of these things? 

Certainly not, Gotama. 

Very good, Vasettha. But verily, that these Brahmans 
versed in the Three Vedas, who live married and wealthy 
should, after death when the body is dissolved, become united 
with Brahma who has none of these things — such a condition 
of things has no existence. 



68 SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 

You say, Vasettha, that the Brahmans bear anger and 
malice in their hearts, and are sinful and uncontrolled, while 
Brahma is free from anger and malice, and is sinless, and has 
self-mastery. How can there be concord and likeness between 
Brahmans and Brahma? 

There can not be, Gotama. 

Very good, Vasettha. That these Brahmans versed in the 
Vedas and yet bearing anger and malice in their hearts, sinful 
and uncontrolled, should after death, when the body is dis- 
solved, become united with Brahma who is free from anger 
and malice, sinless and has self-mastery — such a condition of 
things has no existence. 

So, Vasettha, the Brahmans, versed though they be in the 
Three Vedas, while they rest in confidence are really sinking. 
They think they are crossing over into some happier land, but 
so sinking they can only arrive at despair. Therefore, the three- 
fold knowledge of the Brahmans in the Vedas is a waterless 
desert, their knowledge a pathless waste, their knowledge their 
destruction. 

When he had finished speaking, the young Brahman Vaset- 
tha said to the Blessed One: It has been told me, Gotama, 
that the Samana Gotama knows the way to a state of Union 
with Brahma. Can you teach us? 

What do you think, Vasettha, is the village of Manasakata 
near from this place or far from it? 

Manasakata is not far from here, it is quite near. 

Vasettha, supposing there was a man bom in this village of 
Manasakata and who never to this time had left it, and people 
should ask him the way to Manasakata. Would that man born 
and brought up there be in any doubt or uncertainty about the 
way? 

Certainly not, Gotama. He would be perfectly familiar with 
every road leading to his native village. 

That man, Vasettha, bom and brought up in Manasakata 
might, if he were asked the way to Manasakata, fall into doubt 
and difficulty, but with the Tathagata, when asked about the 
path which leads to the world of Brahma, there can be neither 
doubt nor difficulty. For Brahma, the world of Brahma, the 
path Tyhich leadeth to the world of Brahma, I fully know. 
Yea, I know it even as one who was bom there and lives 
there. 



TEVIGGA SUTTA 


69 


When he had thus spoken, Vasettha the young Brahman 
said to the Blessed One: So it has been told me, Gotama, 
even that the Samana Gotama knows the way to a state of 
union with Brahma. It is well! Let the venerable Gotama be 
pleased to show us the way to a state of union with Brahma; 
let the venerable Gotama save the Brahman race. 

Listen then, Vasettha, and I will speak. 

So be it. Lord. 

Then the Blessed One spake and said: — Know, Vasettha, 
that from time to time a Tathagata is bom into the world, 
a fully Enlightened One, blessed and worthy, abounding in 
wisdom and goodness, happy with knowledge of the worlds, 
unsurpassed as a guide to erring mortals, a teacher of gods and 
men, a Blessed Buddha. He thoroughly understands this uni- 
verse, as though he saw it face to face, — the world below with 
all its people, the worlds above, of Mara and of Brahma — 
and all creatures, Samanas and Brahmans, gods and men, and 
from that knowledge makes it known and teaches others. The 
Truth does he proclaim both in its letter and in its spirit, 
lovely in its origin, lovely in its progress, lovely in its consum- 
mation. A higher life doth he make known in all its purity 
and in all its perfectness. 

A householder or one of his sons, or a man of inferior birth 
in any caste, listens to the truth he proclaims. On hearing the 
truth, faith in the Tathagata is awakened and when that faith 
is strengthened he thus considers within himself: Full of hin- 
drance is the household life, a path defiled by passion, free as 
the air is the life of him who has renounced all worldly things. 
How difficult it is for the man who dwells at home to live the 
higher life in all its fullness, in all its purity, in all its per- 
fection. Let me then, shave my head and face, let me clothe 
myself in the garment of a mendicant and go forth from a 
household life into the homeless life. Then before long, for- 
saking his portion of the family property, be it great or be it 
small; forsaking his relatives, be they many or few, he shaves 
his head, clothes himself in the mendicant’s robe, and goes 
forth from the household life into the homeless state. 

When he has thus become a recluse, he passes a life of re- 
straint according to rules of the Patimokkha; uprightness is 
his delight, he sees danger in the least of those things he 
should avoid; he adopts and trains himself in the Precepts; 



7 ° 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


he encompasses himself with purity in word and deed; he sus- 
tains his life by means that are unselfish and kind; good is his 
conduct, guarded the door of his senses; mindful and self- 
possessed, he is altogether happy. 

* # # 

Now, Vasettha, wherein is his conduct good? Herein, O 
Vasettha, putting away all unkindness to sentient -beings he 
abstains from destroying life. He lays aside the cudgel and 
sword and, full of humility and pity, he is compassionate and 
kind to all creatures that have life. Putting away the desire 
for things which are not his, he abstains from taking anything 
that is not freely given him. He has only what has been given 
him, therewith is he content, and he passes his life in honesty 
and in purity of heart. Putting away all thoughts of lust, he 
lives a life of chastity and purity. Putting away all thoughts 
of deceiving, he abstains from all prevarications; he speaks 
truthfully, from the truth he never swerves; faithful and 
trustworthy, he never injures his fellow men by deceit. 

Putting away all judgment of others, he abstains from 
slander. What he hears he repeats not elsewhere to raise a 
quarrel; what he hears elsewhere he repeats not here to raise 
a quarrel. Thus he brings together those who are divided, he 
encourages those who are friendly; he is a peacemaker, a lover 
of peace, impassioned for peace, a speaker of words that make 
for peace. Putting away all bitter thoughts, he abstains from 
harsh language. Whatever is humane, pleasant to the ear, 
kindly, reaching to the heart, urbane, acceptable to the people, 
appreciated by the people — such are the words he speaks. Put- 
ting away all foolish thoughts, he abstains from vain conver- 
sation. He speaks in season, he speaks truthfully, consistently, 
wisely, with restraint. He speaks only when it is appropriate 
for him to speak, words that are profitable, well sustained, well 
defined, full of wisdom. 

Besides being kind to all animate life, he refrains from in- 
juring insects or even herbs. He takes but one meal a day; 
abstaining from food at all other times. He abstains from at- 
tending dances, concerts and theatrical shows. He abstains 
from wearing, using or adorning himself with garlands, scents 
and ointments, he abstains from large and soft beds. He ab- 
stains from accumulating silver or gold, from coveting great 



TEVIGGA SUTTA 


1 1 


harvests, herds of cattle; he abstains from the getting of maids 
and women attendants, slaves either men or women; he ab- 
stains from gathering herds of sheep or goats, fowls or swine, 
elephants, cattle, horses and mares. He abstains from the get- 
ting of fields and lands. 

He refrains from accepting commissions to carry messages, 
he refrains from all buying and selling, he abstains from the 
use of all trade deceptions, false weights, alloyed metals, false 
measures. He abstains from all bribery, cheating, fraud and 
crooked ways. He refrains from all banditry, killing or maim- 
ing, abducting, highway robbery, plundering villages, or obtain- 
ing money by threats of violence. These are the kinds of good- 
ness he practices. 

* # # 

The true Samana, he who is seeking the way to the Brahma 
World, lets his mind pervade all quarters of the world with 
thoughts of Love; first one quarter then the second quarter, 
then the third quarter and so the fourth quarter. And thus 
the whole wide world, above, below, around, and everywhere, 
does he continue to pervade with thoughts of love, far-reach- 
ing, beyond measure, all-embracing. 

Just, Vasettha, as a mighty trumpeter makes himself heard — 
and that without difficulty — in all four directions; even so of 
all things that have form or life, there is not one that he 
passes by or leaves aside; he regards them all with mind set 
free and filled with deep-felt love. Verily, Vasettha, this is the 
way to a state of union with Brahma. He lets his mind per- 
vade one quarter of the world with thoughts of pity, sympathy, 
and equanimity, and so the second, and so the third, and so the 
fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around 
and everywhere, does he continue to pervade with heart of pity, 
sympathy and equanimity, far-reaching, beyond measure, all 
embracing. 

Just, Vasettha, as a mighty trumpeter makes himself heard — 
and that without difficulty — in all four directions, even so of 
all things that have form or life, there is not one that he 
passes by or leaves aside, but he regards them all with mind 
set free and filled with deep-felt pity, sympathy and equa- 
nimity. Verily, Vasettha, this is the way to a state of union 
with Brahma. 



72 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


Now what think you, Vasetta, will the Bhikkhu who lives 
thus be in possession of women and wealth, or will he not? 

He will not, Gotama. 

Will he be full of anger, or will he be free from anger? 

He will be free from anger, Gotama. 

Will his mind be full of malice, or free from malice? 

Free from malice, Gotama. 

Will his mind be lustful or pure? 

It will be pure, Gotama. 

Will he have self-mastery or will he not? 

Surely he will, Gotama. 

Vasettha, you say that the Bhikkhu is free from household 
cares and that Brahma is free from household cares. Is there 
then agreement and likeness between the Bhikkhu and Brahma? 

There is, Gotama. 

Very good, Vasettha! Then in sooth, that the Bhikkhu who 
is free from household cares should, after death, when the body 
is dissolved, become united with Brahma, who is the same — 
such a condition of things is in every way, possible. 

And you say, Vasettha, that the Bhikkhu is free from anger, 
free from malice, pure in mind, and master of himself; and 
that Brahma is likewise free from anger, free from malice, pure 
in mind, and master of himself. Then in sooth, Vasettha, that 
the Bhikkhu who is free from anger, free from malice, pure in 
mind, and master of himself should after death, when the body 
is dissolved, become united with Brahma, who is the same — 
such a condition of things is in every way possible. 

When the Blessed One had thus spoken, the two young 
Brahmans, Vasettha and Bharadvaga addressed the Blessed 
One, saying: — 

Most excellent. Lord, are the words of thy mouth, most 
excellent! It is just as if a man were to set up what was 
thrown down, or to reveal that which was hidden away, or were 
to point out the right road to him who has gone astray, or 
were to bring a lamp into the darkness so that those who have 
eyes can see: — just even so, Lord, has the truth been made 
known to us by the Blessed One. And we betake ourselves. 
Lord, to the Blessed One, to the Truth, and to the Brother- 
hood, as our refuge. May the Blessed One accept us as dis- 
ciples, as true believers, from this day forth, as long as life 
shall last. 



ii 8 th. Discourse 

TAKEN FROM THE COLLECTION OF 
MIDDLE DISCOURSES 

Introspective Breathing Exercises 

T HUS have I heard. Once the Exalted One was staying near 
Savatthi, in the Eastern Grove, on the terrace of Migara’s 
mother, together with many well-known elders of the Order, 
with many well-known disciples, with the Venerable Sariputto 
and the Venerable Mahamoggallano, the Venerable Mahakas- 
sapo and the Venerable Mahakaccayano, the Venerable Maha- 
kotthito and the Venerable Mahakappino, the Venerable Maha- 
cundo and the Venerable Anuruddho, the Venerable Revato 
and the Venerable Anando and with other well-known elders 
and disciples. 

On this occasion the elders of the Order instructed and 
taught the novices. Some of the elders instructed and taught 
maybe ten of the new monks, other elders instructed and 
taught about twenty, still others of the elders instructed and 
taught thirty, and still others of the elders instructed and 
taught about forty of the novices. And these young monks, 
thus instructed and taught by the elders of the Order realized 
a great and gradually perceptible result. 

And just at this time, it was a holy day on the fifteenth 
day of the month during the night of plain full moon, the 
Exalted One was seated in the midst of the assembly of monks 
under the canopy of heaven. And the Exalted One beheld the 
silent, calm assembly of monks and spoke to them as follows: 

“I have become perfect, o Monks, on this Path, I have be- 
come perfect of mind, o Monks, on this Path: and you also, 
o Monks, you must become more and more perfect to achieve 
what you have not yet achieved, to attain what you have not 
yet attained, to realize what you have not yet realized. And 
now on the last autumnal full-moon day I will quit Savatthi.” 
When the monks living in the country heard: ‘The Exalted 

73 



74 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


One, it is said, will soon quit Savatthi, he will leave Savatthi 
on the last autumnal full-moon day,’ then these monks living 
in the country turned their steps towards Savatthi to visit the 
Exalted One. 

The elder monks were still continuing to instruct and teach 
more and more in detail the new monks arriving. Some of the 
elder of the Order instructed and taught may be ten of the 
new monks, other elders instructed and taught about twenty, 
still others of the elders instructed and taught thirty, and still 
others of the elders instructed and taught about forty of the 
novices. And these young monks, thus instructed and taught 
by the elders of the Order realized a great and gradually per- 
ceptible result. 

When the time was come, it was a holy day, on the fif- 
teenth day of the month, on the last autumnal plain full-moon 
night the Exalted One took His seat in the midst of the as- 
sembly of monks under the canopy of heaven; And the Exalted 
One beheld the silent, calm assembly of monks and spoke to 
them as follows: 

“Not a word is spoken, o Monks, by this assembly, not a 
word is uttered, o Monks, by this assembly, this assembly con- 
sists of pure kernel. Such is, o Monks, this fraternity of dis- 
ciples, such is, o Monks, this assembly, that it is worthy of 
offerings, of oblations, of gifts and homage and is the noblest 
community in the world. Such is, o Monks, this fraternity of 
disciples, such is, o Monks, this assembly, that a small gift 
given to it becomes great, and a great gift given to it becomes 
greater still. Such is, o Monks, this fraternity of disciples, such 
is, o Monks, this assembly, that it is difficult to find one like it 
in the world. Such is, o Monks, this fraternity of disciples, 
such is, o Monks, this assembly, that one is glad to walk many 
miles to behold it, and even if it be only from behind. 

"Such is, o Monks, this fraternity of disciples, such is, o 
Monks, this assembly, that, o Monks, there are among these 
disciples some monks who are Perfect Ones, who have reached 
the end of all illusion, who have arrived at the goal, who have 
accomplished the task, have cast off the burden, have won their 
deliverance, who have destroyed the fetters of existence, and 
who, through supreme knowledge, have liberated themselves: 
there are such monks, o Monks, among these disciples. There 
are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks who, after 



u8TH DISCOURSE 


75 


the destruction of the five downward leading fetters, will rise 
(to higher worlds) to attain extinction from there, not to return 
to that world anymore: there are such monks, o Monks, among 
these disciples. There are, o Monks, among these disciples some 
monks, who after the destruction of the three fetters, eased from 
desire, hatred and illusion, almost purified, will return only once 
more, and returning only once more to this world will make an 
end to suffering: there are such monks, o Monks, among these 
disciples. There are, o Monks, among these disciples some 
monks, who after the destruction of the three fetters have en- 
tered the stream, escaped from the downfall, consciously hasten- 
ing towards full Awakening: there are such monks, o Monks, 
among these disciples. 

“There are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks, 
who persevere assiduously as conquerors of the Four Founda- 
tions of Introspection: there are such monks, o Monks, among 
these disciples. There are, o Monks, among these disciples some 
monks, who persevere assiduously as masters of the Four Great 
Efforts: there are such monks, o Monks, among these disciples. 
There are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks, who 
persevere assiduously as conquerors of the Four Domains of 
Power, of the Five Faculties and the Five Attributes, the Seven 
Factors of Enlightenment and of the Noble Eightfold Path: 
there are such monks, o Monks, among these disciples. 

“There are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks, 
who persevere assiduously in the practice of Boundless Kind- 
ness: there are such monks, o Monks, among these disciples. 
There are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks, who 
persevere assiduously in the practice of Boundless Compassion, 
Joyful Serenity and Perfect Equanimity: there are such monks, 
o Monks, among these disciples. 

“There are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks, 
who persevere assiduously as conquerors of awe: there are such 
monks, o Monks, among these disciples. There are, o Monks, 
among these disciples some monks, who persevere assiduously in 
the perception of transitoriness: there are such monks, o 
Monks, among these disciples. 

“There are, o Monks, among these disciples some monks, 
who persevere assiduously as conquerors of introspective breath- 
ing exercises. Inhalation and exhalation, o Monks, practised 
and cultivated introspectively causes the attainment of high rec- 



76 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


ompense, of high advancement. Inhalation and exhalation, o 
Monks, practised and cultivated introspectively causes the un- 
foldment of the Four Foundations of Introspection; the Four 
Foundations of Introspection, practised and cultivated assidu- 
ously, cause the enfoldment of the Seven Factors of Enlight- 
enment; the Seven Factors of Enlightenment, practised and 
cultivated introspectively, cause the enfoldment of Knowledge 
that liberates. 

“But how, o Monks, must inhalation and exhalation be prac- 
tised and cultivated introspectively that it causes high recom- 
pense, high advancement? 

“A monk, o Monks, goes into a forest, or to the foot of a 
great tree, or to a lonely place, and there sits down, cross- 
legged, holding his body upright, and practises Introspection. 

“He breathes in attentively, and attentively breathes out. 

Drawing in a long breath, he knows: ‘I am drawing in a 
long breath,’ exhaling a long breath, he knows: ‘I am exhaling 
a long breath.’ 

Drawing in a short breath, he knows: ‘I am drawing in a 
short breath,’ exhaling a short breath, he knows: ‘I am exhal- 
ing a short breath.’ 

‘Perceiving the whole body, will I breathe in, perceiving the 
whole body, will I breathe out,’ thus he practises. 

‘Calming down this body compound, will I breathe in, calm- 
ing down this body compound, will I breathe out,’ thus he 
practises. 

‘Serenely feeling will I breathe in, serenely feeling will I 
breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

‘Blissfully feeling will I breathe in, blissfully feeling will 
I breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

‘Perceiving the thought connection, will I breathe in, per- 
ceiving the thought connection, will I breathe out,’ thus he 
trains himself. 

‘Calming down this thought connection, will I breathe in, 
calming down this thought connection, will I breathe out,’ thus 
he trains himself. 

‘Perceiving the thoughts will I breathe in, perceiving the 
thoughts will I breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

‘Enlivening the thoughts will I breathe in, enlivening the 
thoughts will I breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 



u8TH DISCOURSE 


77 

‘Concentrating the thoughts will I breathe in, concentrating 
the thoughts will I breathe out/ thus he trains himself. 

‘Dissolving the thoughts will I breathe in, dissolving the 
thoughts will I breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

‘Perceiving impermanence will I breathe in, perceiving im- 
permanence will I breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

‘Rejecting attraction will I breathe in, rejecting attraction 
will I breathe out/ thus he trains himself. 

‘Perceiving eradication will I breathe in, perceiving eradica- 
tion will I breathe out/ thus he trains himself. 

‘Perceiving estrangement will I breathe in, perceiving es- 
trangement will I breathe out/ thus he trains himself. 

“Thus, o Monks, must inhalation and exhalation be prac- 
tised and .cultivated introspectively that it may bestow high 
recompense, high advancement. 

“But how, o Monks, must inhalation and exhalation be prac- 
tised and cultivated introspectively in order to establish the 
Four Foundations of Introspection? 

“At a time, o Monks, when the monk drawing in a long 
breath knows ‘I am drawing in a long breath/ exhaling a long 
breath knows ‘I am exhaling a long breath,’ drawing in a short 
breath knows ‘I am drawing in a short breath/ exhaling a short 
breath knows ‘I am exhaling a short breath’; ‘Perceiving the 
whole body will I breathe in, perceiving the whole body will 
I breathe out/ thus trains himself; ‘Calming down this body 
compound will I breathe in, calming down this body compound 
will I breathe out/ thus trains himself; at such a time, o 
Monks, the monk examining the body observes the body, unre- 
mittingly, with perspicacity and insight, after having conquered 
worldly desires and worry. I call this, o Monks, a transforma- 
tion of the body, namely inhalation and exhalation. Thus, 
therefore, o Monks, at such a time, the monk examining the 
body observes the body, unremittingly, with perspicacity and 
insight, after having conquered worldly desires and worry. 

“At a time, o Monks, when the monk thus trains himself: 
‘Serenely feeling will I breathe in, serenely feeling will I 
breathe out’; ‘blissfully feeling will I breathe in, blissfully feel- 
ing will I breathe out’; ‘perceiving the thought connection will 
I breathe in, perceiving the thought connection will I breathe 
out’; ‘calming down this thought connection will I breathe in, 


78 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


calming down this thought connection will I breathe out’; at 
such a time, o Monks, a monk examining feeling observes feel- 
ing, unremittingly, with perspicacity and insight, after having 
conquered worldly desires and worry. I call this, o Monks, a 
transformation of feelings, while observing feelings, namely to 
observe attentively the feelings when breathing in and out; 
thus, therefore, o Monks, at such a time the monk examin- 
ing feelings observes the feelings, unremittingly, with perspi- 
cacity and insight, after having conquered worldly desires and 
worry. 

“At a time, o Monks, when the monk thus trains himself: 
‘Perceiving the thoughts will I breathe in, perceiving the 
thoughts will I breathe out’; ‘enlivening the thoughts will I 
breathe in, enlivening the thoughts will I breathe nut’; ‘con- 
centrating the thoughts will I breathe in, concentrating the 
thoughts will I breathe out’; ‘dissolving the thoughts will I 
breathe in, dissolving the thoughts will I breathe out’: at such 
a time, o Monks, a monk examining thoughts observes the 
thoughts, unremittingly, with perspicacity and insight, after 
having conquered worldly desires and worry. It is impossible, 
o Monks, this I declare, that a heedless man, who does not 
think clearly, could practise the in and out breathing intro- 
spectively. Thus, therefore, o Monks, at such a time, the monk 
examining thoughts observes the thoughts, unremittingly, with 
perspicacity and insight, after having conquered worldly desires 
and worry. 

“At a time, o Monks, when the monk thus trains himself: 
‘Perceiving impermanence will I breathe in, perceiving imper- 
manence will I breathe out’; ‘rejecting attraction will I breathe 
in, rejecting attraction will I breathe out’; ‘perceiving eradica- 
tion will I breathe in, perceiving eradication will I breathe out’; 
‘perceiving estrangement will I breathe in, perceiving estrange* 
ment will I breathe out’: at such a time, o Monks, a monk 
examining phenomena observes phenomena, unremittingly, 
with perspicacity and insight, after having conquered worldly 
desires and worry. And he recognizes with wisdom, how 
worldly desires, and worry are being overcome, and attains 
peace. Thus, therefore, o Monks, at such a time, the monk ex- 
amining phenomena observes phenomena, unremittingly, with 
perspicacity and insight, after having conquered worldly de- 
sires and worry. 



1 18TH DISCOURSE 


79 


“Thus must, o Monks, inhalation and exhalation be prac- 
tised and cultivated introspectively in order to establish the 
Four Foundations of Introspection. 

“And how, o Monks, must the Four Foundations of Intro- 
spection be practised and cultivated in order that they may 
effect the Seven Factors of Enlightenment? 

“At a time, o Monks, when the monk examining the body 
observes the body, unremittingly, with perspicacity and insight, 
after having conquered worldly desires and worry, at such a 
time he has Introspection present immovable; at a time, o 
Monks, when the monk has Introspection present immovable, 
at such a time he has effected the Awakening of Introspection, 
he has accomplished the Awakening of Introspection, at such 
a time the Awakening of Introspection is being fully unfolded 
by him. Abiding thus reflective he fathoms the meaning, an- 
alyses it, penetrates into its depths; at a time, o Monks, when 
the monk abides thus reflective, fathoming the meaning with 
wisdom, analysing it, penetrating into its depths, at such a 
time he has effected the Awakening of Penetration, he has ac- 
complished the Awakening of Penetration, at such a time the 
Awakening of Penetration is being fully unfolded by him. 
Thus fathoming the meaning with wisdom, analysing it, pene- 
trating into its depths, he effects Energy immovable; at a time, 
o Monks, when the monk thus fathoming the meaning with 
wisdom, analysing it and penetrating into its depths, effects 
Energy immovable, at such a time he realizes the Awakening 
of Energy, he accomplishes the Awakening of Energy, at such 
a time the Awakening of Energy is being fully unfolded by 
him. Having realized Energy, a supramundane Serenity arises 
in him; at a time, o Monks, when the monk has realized 
Energy and supramundane Serenity arises in him, at such a 
time he has effected the Awakening of Serenity, he accom- 
plishes the Awakening of Serenity, at such a time the Awaken- 
ing of Serenity is being fully unfolded by him. Being filled 
with Serenity he becomes gentle in body and gentle in mind; 
at a time, o Monks, when the monk is filled with Serenity 
and is gentle in body, gentle in mind, at such a time he has 
effected the Awakening of Gentleness, he has accomplished the 
Awakening of Gentleness, at such a time the Awakening of 
Gentleness is being fully unfolded by him. Having subdued 
his body with serene Gentleness, his mind becomes concen- 



8o 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


trated; at a time, o Monks, when the monk has subdued his 
body with serene Gentleness and when his mind has become 
concentrated, at such a time he has effected the Awakening of 
Concentration, he has accomplished the Awakening of Con- 
centration, at such a time the Awakening of Concentration is 
being fully unfolded by him. Having thus become of concen- 
trated mind, he attains peace; at a time, o Monks, when the 
monk has thus become concentrated of mind and has attained 
peace, at such a time he has effected the Awakening of Even- 
Mindedness, he has accomplished the Awakening of Even- 
Mindedness, at such a time the Awakening of Even-M indedness 
is being fully unfolded by him. 

“At a time, o Monks, when the monks examining feelings 
observes the feelings, examining thoughts observes the thoughts, 
examining phenomena observes phenomena, unremittingly, 
with perspicacity and insight, after having conquered worldly 
desires and worry, at such a time he has Introspection present 
immovable; at a time, o Monks, when the monk has Introspec- 
tion present immovable, at such a time he has effected the 
Awakening of Introspection, he has accomplished the Awaken- 
ing of Introspection, at such a time the Awakening of Introspec- 
tion is being fully unfolded by him. Abiding thus reflective he 
fathoms the meaning, analyses it, penetrates into its depths; 
at a time, o Monks, when the monk abides thus reflective, 
fathoming the meaning with wisdom, analysing it, penetrating 
into its depths, at such a time he has effected the Awakening 
of Penetration, he has accomplished the Awakening of Pene- 
tration, at such a time the Awakening of Penetration is being 
fully unfolded by him. Thus fathoming the meaning with wis- 
dom, analysing it, penetrating into its depths, he effects Energy 
immovable; at a time, o Monks, when the monk thus fathom- 
ing the meaning with wisdom, analysing it and penetrating into 
its depths, effects Energy immovable, at such a time he realizes 
the Awakening of Energy, he accomplishes the Awakening of 
Energy, at such a time the Awakening of Energy is being 
fully unfolded by him. Having realized Energy, a supramun- 
dane Serenity arises in him; at a time, o Monks, when the 
monk has realized Energy and supramundane Serenity arises 
in him, at such a time he has effected the Awakening of Seren- 
ity, he accomplishes the Awakening of Serenity at such a time 
the Awakening of Serenity is being fully unfolded by him. Be- 



n8TH DISCOURSE 


81 


ing filled with Serenity he becomes gentle in body and gentle 
in mind; at a time, o Monks, when the monk is filled with 
Serenity and is gentle in body, gentle in mind, at such a time 
he has effected the Awakening of Gentleness, he has accom- 
plished the Awakening of Gentleness, at such a time the 
Awakening of Gentleness is being fully unfolded by him. Hav- 
ing thus subdued his body with serene Gentleness, his mind 
becomes concentrated; at a time, o Monks, when the monk has 
subdued his body with serene Gentleness and when his mind 
has become concentrated, at such a time he has effected the 
Awakening of Concentration, he has accomplished the Awak- 
ening of Concentration, at such a time the Awakening of Con- 
centration is being fully unfolded by him. Having thus be- 
come of concentrated mind, he attains peace; at a time, o 
Monks, when the monk has thus become concentrated of mind 
and has attained peace, at such a time he has effected the 
Awakening of Even-M indedness, he has accomplished the 
Awakening of Even-Mindedness, at such a time the Awaken- 
ing of Even-mindedness is being fully unfolded by him. 

“Practising thus and cultivating thus, o Monks, the Four 
Foundations of Introspection, they cause the development of 
the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. 

“And how, o Monks, must the Seven Factors of Enlighten- 
ment be practised and cultivated that they effect the Knowl- 
edge that liberates? 

“A monk, o Monks, practises the Awakening of Introspec- 
tion, effected in solitude, effected by detachment, effected by 
renunciation, ending in finality; practises the Awakening of 
Penetration, effected in solitude, effected by detachment, ef- 
fected by renunciation, ending in finality; practises the Awak- 
ening of Energy, effected in solitude, effected by detachment, 
effected by renunciation, ending in finality; practises the Awak- 
ening of Serenity, effected in solitude, effected by detachment, 
effected by renunciation, ending in finality; practises the Awak- 
ening of Gentleness, effected in solitude, effected by detach- 
ment, effected by renunciation, ending in finality; practises the 
Awakening of Concentration, effected in solitude, effected by 
detachment, effected by renunciation, ending in finality; prac- 
tises the Awakening of Even-Mindedness, effected in solitude, 
effected by detachment, effected by renunciation, ending in 
finality. 



82 


SELECTIONS FROM PALI SOURCES 


“Practising thus and cultivating thus, o Monks, the Seven 
Factors of Enlightenment, the Knowledge that liberates 
ensues.” 

Thus spoke the Exalted One. Well content were those 
monks with the words of the Exalted One. 



SELECTIONS 

FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 



■Everything changes , everything passes > 

Things appearing > things disappearing . 

But when all is over — everything having appeared and 
having disappeared , 

Being and extinction both transcended . — 

Still the basic emptiness and silence abides , 

And that is blissful Peace. 



MAHA-PRAJNA-PARAMITA-HRIDAYA 


T HUS have I heard. At one time the Blessed One together 
with many of the highest Bodhisattvas and a great com- 
pany of Bhikshus was staying at Rajagaha on Mt. Gridhra- 
kuta. The Blessed One was sitting apart absorbed in Samadhi 
and the Noble Avalokitesvara was meditating on the profound 
Prajna-paramita. The Venerable Sariputra, influenced by the 
Blessed One absorbed in Samadhi, spoke thus to the Noble 
Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara: — If a son or daughter wishes to 
study the profound Prajna-paramita, how is he to do so? 

The Noble Avalokitesvara replied to the Venerable Sari- 
putra, saying: — If a son or daughter wishes to study the pro- 
found Prajna-paramita, he must first get rid of all ideas of ego- 
selfness. Let him think thus: Personality? What is personality? 
Is it an enduring entity? or is it made up of elements that 
pass away? Personality is made up of the five grasping aggre- 
gates: form, sensation, perception, discrimination, consciousness, 
all of which are by nature empty of any self-substance. Form 
is emptiness, emptiness is not different from form, neither is 
form different from emptiness, indeed, emptiness is form. Also, 
sensation is emptiness, emptiness is not different from sensation, 
neither is sensation different from emptiness, indeed, emptiness 
is sensation. Also, perception is emptiness, emptiness is not 
different from perception, neither is perception different from 
emptiness, indeed, emptiness is perception. Also, discrimination 
is emptiness, emptiness is not different from discrimination, 
neither is discrimination different from emptiness, indeed, 
emptiness is discrimination. Also, consciousness is emptiness, 
emptiness is not different from consciousness, neither is con- 
sciousness different from emptiness, indeed, emptiness is con- 
sciousness. 

Thus, O Sariputra, all things having the nature of emptiness 
have no beginning and no ending. They are neither faultless 
nor not faultless; they are neither perfect nor imperfect. In 
emptiness there is no form, no sensation, no perception, no 

85 



f 

86 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

discrimination, no consciousness. There is no eye, no ear, no 
nose, no tongue, no sensitiveness to contact, no mind. There is 
no sight, no sound, no smell, no taste, no touch, no mental 
process, no object, no knowledge, no ignorance. There is no 
destruction of objects, there is no cessation of knowledge, no 
cessation of ignorance. There is no Noble Four-fold Truths: 
no pain, no cause of pain, no cessation of pain, no Noble Path 
leading to the cessation of pain. There is no decay and no 
death, and no destruction of the notion of decay and death. 
There is no knowledge of Nirvana, there is no obtaining of 
Nirvana, there is no not obtaining of Nirvana. 

Why is there no obtaining of Nirvana? Because Nirvana 
is the realm of no “thingness.” If the ego-soul of personality 
was an enduring entity it could not obtain Nirvana. It is 
only because personality is made up of elements that pass 
away, that personality may attain Nirvana. So long as man is 
seeking highest perfect Wisdom, he is still abiding in the realm 
of consciousness. If he is to realize Nirvana, he must pass be- 
yond consciousness. In highest samadhi having transcended 
consciousness, he has passed beyond discrimination and knowl- 
edge, beyond the reach of change or fear; he is already enjoy- 
ing Nirvana. The perfect understanding of this and the patient 
acceptance of it is the highest perfect Wisdom that is Prajna- 
paramita. All the Buddhas of the past, present and future 
having attained highest samadhi, awake to find themselves realiz- 
ing Prajna-paramita. 

Therefore, O Sariputra, every-one should seek self-realization 
of Prajna-paramita, the Transcendent J’ruth, the unsurpassable 
Truth, the Truth that ends all pain, the Truth that is forever 
True. O Prajna-paramita! O Transcendent Truth that spans 
the troubled ocean of life and death: safely carry all seekers 
to the other shore of Enlightenment. 

Listen to the Mantra, the Great, Mysterious Mantra: — Gate, 
gate, paragate, parasamgate, bodhi, svaha! Gone, gone, gone, to 
that other shore; safely passed to that other shore, O Prajna- 
paramita! So may it be. 



. THE DIAMOND SUTRA 
Introduction 

(x) Thus have I heard. At one time the Lord Buddha was 
sojourning in the kingdom of Shravasti, staying in the Jeta- 
vana Grove which Anatha-pindika had given to the Brother- 
hood, and with him were assembled twelve hundred and fifty 
experienced Bhikshus. 

As the hour drew near for the morning meal, the Lord 
Buddha and his disciples put on their street robes and carrying 
their alms bowls went toward the city of Shravasti and begged 
their food from door to door. After they had returned to the 
Jeta Grove, they laid aside their street garments, bathed their 
feet, partook of the morning meal, put away their begging 
bowls for another day, and afterward seated themselves about 
the Lord Buddha. 

(s) The Venerable Subhuti rose from his seat in the midst of 
the assembly, arranged his robes so the right shoulder was ex- 
posed, kneeled upon his right knee, pressed the palms of his 
hands together and, bowing respectfully to the Lord Buddha, 
said: — 

Tathagata, Honored of the worlds, our beloved Lord! May 
thy mercy be upon us to take good care of us and to give us 
good instruction. 

The Lord Buddha replied to Subhuti, saying: — Indeed, I 
will take good care of every Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and give 
them the best of instruction. 

Subhuti replied: — Honored of the worlds! We are very glad 
to listen to thy blessed instruction. Tell us what we shall say 
when good pious men and women come to us enquiring how 
they should begin the practice of seeking to attain Highest 
Perfect Wisdom (Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi). What shall we 
tell them? How are they to quiet their drifting minds and sub- 
due their craving thoughts? 

The Lord Buddha replied to Subhuti, saying: — You have 
made a good request, Subhuti. Listen carefully and I will an- 

87 



88 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


swer your question so that all the Brotherhood will understand. 
As good and pious men and women come to you wishing to 
begin the practice of seeking to attain highest perfect Wisdom, 
they will simply have to follow what I am about to say to 
you, and very soon they will be able to subdue their discrimina- 
tive thoughts and craving desires, and will be able to attain 
perfect tranquillity of mind. 

The Practice of Charity 
(The Dana Paramita) 

(3) Then the Lord Buddha addressed the assembly. Every 
one in the world, beginning with the highest Bodhisattva-Ma- 
hasattvas, should follow what I am going to teach you, for 
this teaching will bring deliverance to everyone whether hatched 
from an egg, or formed in a womb, or evolved from spawn, or 
produced by metamorphosis, with or without form, possessing 
mental faculties or devoid of mental faculties, or both devoid 
and not devoid, or neither devoid or not devoid, and lead them 
toward perfect Nirvana. Though the sentient beings thus to 
be delivered by me are innumerable and without limit yet, in 
reality, there are no sentient beings to be delivered. And why, 
Subhuti? Because should there exist in the minds of Bodhisat- 
tva-Mahasattvas such arbitrary conceptions of phenomena as 
the existence of one’s own ego-selfness,. the ego-selfness of an- 
other, self-ness as divided into an infinite number of living 
and dying beings, or selfness as unified into one Universal 
Self existing eternally, they would be unworthy to be called 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas. 

(4) Moreover, Subhuti, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, in teach- 
ing the Dharma to others, should first be free themselves from 
all the craving thoughts awakened by beautiful sights, pleasant 
sounds, sweet tastes, fragrance, soft tangibles, and seductive 
thoughts. In their practice of charity, they should not be in- 
fluenced by any of these seductive phenomena. And why? Be- 
cause, if in their practice of charity they are uninfluenced by 
Such things they will realize a blessing and merit that is in- 
estimable and inconceivable. What think you, Subhuti? Is it 
possible to estimate the distance of space in the eastern 
heavens? 


THE DIAMOND SUTRA 89 

No, Blessed One I It is impossible to estimate the distance 
of space in the eastern heavens. 

Subhuti, is it possible to estimate the limits of space in the 
northern, southern and western heavens? Or to any of the 
four comers of the universe, or above or below? 

No, Honored of the worlds! 

Subhuti, it is equally impossible to estimate the blessing and 
merit that will come to the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who prac- 
tices charity uninfluenced by any of these arbitrary conceptions. 
This truth should be taught in the beginning and to everybody. 
(19) The Lord Buddha continued. What think you, Subhuti? 
If a disciple should bestow as alms an abundance of the seven 
treasures sufficient to fill the three thousand great worlds, 
would he thereby acquire a considerable blessing and merit? 

Subhuti replied: — Honored of the worlds! Such a disciple 
would acquire a very considerable blessing. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Subhuti, if such a blessing and 
merit had any substantiality, if it was anything other than a 
mere expression, the Tathagata would not have used the words, 
‘blessing and merit.’ 

(13 B) What think you, Subhuti? Are the atoms of dust that 
comprise the three thousand great universes very numerous? 

Very numerous indeed. Blessed Lord! 

Subhuti, when the Tathagata speaks of ‘atoms of dust,’ it 
does not mean that he has in mind any definite or arbitrary 
conception, he merely uses the words as a figure of speech. It 
is just the same with the words, ‘the great universes,’ they do 
not assert any definite or arbitrary idea, he merely uses the 
words as words. 

(13 D) Subhuti, if any good and pious disciple, man or 
woman, for the sake of charity has been sacrificing his or her 
life for generation after generation as many as the grains of 
sand in the three thousand great universes, and another disciple 
has been simply studying and observing even one stanza of this 
Scripture and explaining it to others, his blessing and merit will 
be far greater. 

(8) What think you, Subhuti? If a disciple bestowed in 
charity an abundance of the seven treasures sufficient to fill the 
three thousand great universes, would there accrue to that per- 
son a considerable blessing and merit? 



go SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Subhuti replied: — A very considerable blessing and merit. 
And why? Because what the Lord has referred to as ‘blessing 
and merit’ does not refer to any objective value or quantity; he 
only refers to them in a relative sense. 

The Lord Buddha continued: If there is another disciple 
who, after studying and observing even a single stanza of this 
Scripture, explains its meaning to others, his blessing and 
merit will be- much greater. And why? Because from these ex- 
planations Buddhas have attained Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi 
and their teachings are based upon this sacred Scripture. But, 
Subhuti, as soon as I. have spoken of these Buddhas and their 
Dharmas, I must recall the words, for there are no Buddhas 
and no Dharmas. 

(14 C) The Lord Buddha then continued. When a Bodhisat- 
tva-Mahasattva begins the practice of attaining Anuttara-sam- 
yak-sambodhi, he must give up, also, all clinging to arbitrary 
conceptions about phenomena. When engaged in thinking, he 
should definitely exclude all thoughts connected with the phe- 
nomena of sight, sound, taste, smell, touch, and all discrim- 
inations based upon them, keeping his thinking independent 
of all such arbitrary conceptions of phenomena. The mind is 
disturbed by these discriminations of sense concepts and the fol- 
lowing arbitrary conceptions about them and, as the mind be- 
comes disturbed, it falls into false imaginations as to one’s self 
and its relation to other selves. It is for that reason that the 
Tathagata has constantly urged the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
in their practice of charity not to be influenced by any arbi- 
trary conceptions of phenomena such as sights, sounds, etc. 

The Bodhisattva-Mahasattva should also bestow alms, unin- 
fluenced by any preconceived thoughts as to self and other 
selves and for the sole purpose of benefiting sentient beings, 
always remembering that both the phenomena and sentient be- 
ings are to be considered as mere expressions. Nevertheless, 
Subhuti, the teaching of the Tathagata are all true, credible, 
immutable: they are neither extravagant nor chimerical. The 
same is true of the attainments of the Tathagatas — they should 
be considered as neither realities nor as unrealities. 

Subhuti, if a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, in practising charity, 
conceives within his mind any of these arbitrary conceptions 
discriminating himself from other selves, he will be like a man 
walking in darkness and seeing nothing. But if the Bodhisat- 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 




tva-Mahasattva, in his practice of charity, has no arbitrary con- 
ceptions of the attainment of the blessing and merit which he 
will attain by such practice, he will be like a person with good 
eyes, seeing all things clearly as in the bright sunshine. 

If in future ages there should be any good and pious dis- 
ciple, either man or woman, able to faithfully observe and 
study this Scripture, his success and attainment of inestimable 
and illimitable blessing and merit will be instantly known and 
appreciated by the Transcendental Eye of the Tathagata. 

The Practice of Selfless Kindness 
(Sila Paramita) 

(23 B) Subhuti, when a disciple is moved to make objective 
gifts of charity, he should also practice the Sila Paramita of 
selfless kindness, that is, he should remember that there is no 
arbitrary distinction between one’s own self and the selfhood of 
others and, therefore, he should practice charity by giving, ,not 
objective gifts alone, but the selfless gifts of kindness and sym- 
pathy. If any disciple will simply practice kindness, he will 
soon attain Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. 

Subhuti, by what I have just said about kindness, the 
Tathagata does not mean that a disciple when making gifts 
should hold in his mind any arbitrary conceptions about kind- 
ness, for kindness after all is only a word and charity should 
be spontaneous and selfless. 

(24) The Lord Buddha continued: — Subhuti, if any disciple 
heaped together the seven treasures forming an elevation as 
high as Mount Sumeru and as many Mount Sumerus as there 
are in the three thousand great universes, and bestowed them 
in charity, his merit would be less than what would accrue to 
the disciple that simply observed and studied this Scripture 
and in the kindness of his heart explained it to others. The 
latter disciple would accumulate greater blessing and merit in 
comparison of a hundred to one, yes, of a hundred thousand 
myriads to one. Nothing can be compared with it. 

(25) The Lord Buddha continued: — Do not think, Subhuti, 
that the Tathagata would consider within himself: — I will de- 
liver human beings. That would be a degrading thought. Why? 
Because really there are no sentient beings to be delivered by 
the Tathagata. Should there be any sentient beings to be de- 



9* SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


livered by the Tathagata, it would mean that the Tathagata 
was cherishing within his mind arbitrary conceptions of phe- 
nomena such as one’s own self, other selves, living beings and 
an universal self. Even when the Tathagata refers to himself, 
he is not holding in his mind any such arbitrary thought. Only 
terrestrial human beings think of selfhood as being a personal 
possession. Subhuti, even the expression ‘terrestrial beings’ as 
used by the Tathagata does not mean that there are any such 
beings. It is used only as a figure of speech. 

(^8) The Lord Buddha continued: — Subhuti, if a disciple be- 
stowed as alms an abundance of the seven treasures sufficient 
to fill as many worlds as there are grains of sand in the Ganges 
river, and if another disciple, having realized the principle of 
the egolessness of all things and thereby had attained perfect 
self-lessness, the self-less disciple would have more blessing and 
merit than the one who merely practiced objective charity. And 
why? Because Bodhisatta-Mahasattvas do not look upon their 
blessing and merit as a private possession. 

Subhuti enquired of the Lord Buddha: — What do the words 
‘Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas do not look upon their blessing and 
merit as a private possession’ mean? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — As those blessing and merit 
have never been sought in any covetous spirit by Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas, so by that same spirit they do not look upon them 
as a private possession, but as the common possession of all ani- 
mate beings. 

The Practice of Humility and Patience 
(The Kshanti Paramita) 

(9) What do you think, Subhuti? Supposing a disciple who 
has attained the degree of Crotapanna (entered the stream), 
could he make any such arbitrary assertion as, ‘I have entered 
the stream’? 

Subhuti replied: — No, honored of the worlds! Because, 
while, by that measure of attainment, it means that he has en- 
tered the Holy Stream, yet, speaking truly, he has not entered 
anything, nor has his mind entertained any such arbitrary con- 
ception as form, sound, taste, odor, touch and discrimination. 
It is because of that degree of attainment that he is entitled to 
be called a Crotapanna. 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


93 


What think you, Subhuti? Suppose a disciple has attained 
the degree of Sakradagamin (One more return), could he make 
any such arbitrary assertion as, ‘I have attained the degree of 
Sakradagamin? 

No, Honored of the worlds. Because by the degree of Sak- 
radagamin, it is meant that he is to be reborn but once more. 
Yet speaking truly, there will be no rebirth either in this world 
or in any other world. It is because he knows this that he is 
to be called a Sakradagamin. 

What think you, Subhuti? Suppose a disciple has attained 
the degree of Anagamin (Never to return), could he hold with- 
in his mind any such arbitrary conception as, ‘I have attained 
the degree of Anagamin? 

No, Honored of the worlds! Because by the degree of Ana- 
gamin it means that he is never to return, yet, speaking truly, 
one who has attained that degree never cherishes any such arbi- 
trary conception and for that reason, he is entitled to be called, 
an Anagamin. 

What think you, Subhuti? Suppose a disciple has attained 
the degree of Arahat (Fully enlightened), could he entertain 
within his mind any such arbitrary conception as, ‘I have be- 
come an Arahat? 

No, Honored of the worlds! Because speaking truly, there 
is no such thing as a fully enlightened one. Should a disciple 
who has attained such a degree of enlightenment, cherish with- 
in his mind such an arbitrary conception as, ‘I have become an 
Arahat,’ he would soon be grasping after such things as his 
own selfhood, other selves, living beings and a universal self. O 
Blessed Lord! Thou hast said that I have attained the samadhi 
of ‘non-assertion’ and, therefore, have reached the climax of 
human attainment and, because of it, am an Arahat. If I had 
cherished within my mind the thought, 'I am an Arahat free 
from all desire’! my Lord could not have declared that Subhuti 
delights himself in the practice of silence and tranquillity. But, 
speaking truly, I have cherished no such arbitrary thought, so 
my Lord could truly say, ‘Subhuti delights himself in the prac- 
tice of silence and tranquillity.’ 

(10) What think you, Subhuti? When the Tathagata in a 
previous life was with Dipankara Buddha, did I receive any 
definite teaching or attain any definite degree of discipline be- 
cause of which I later become a Buddha? 



94 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


No, Honored of the worlds! When Tathagata was a dis- 
ciple of Buddha Dipankara, speaking truly, he received no 
definite teaching nor did he attain any definite excellence. 

What think you, Subhuti? Do the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
embellish the Buddha-lands to which they go? 

No, Honored of the worlds! And why? Because what the 
Lord means by the expression, ‘embellishment of the Buddha- 
lands’ is self contradictory, for Buddha-lands thus embellished 
could no longer be called Buddha-lands. Therefore, the expres- 
sion, ‘embellishment of the Buddha-lands’; is merely a figure 
of speech. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — For this reason, Subhuti, the 
minds of all Bodhisattvas should be purified of all such concep- 
tions as relate to seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, touching 
and discriminating. They should use the mental faculties spon- 
taneously and naturally, but unconstrained by any preconcep- 
tions arising from the senses. 

Subhuti, supposing a man had a body as large as Mount 
Sumeru. What think you? Would his body be counted great? 

Exceedingly great. Honored of the worlds! Because what 
the Lord Buddha really means by the expression, ‘the greatness 
of the human body,’ is not limited by any arbitrary conception 
whatever, so it can rightly be called, ‘great.’ 

(14 B) In what has been said in the foregoing about the 
Third Paramita of Patience, the Tathagata does not hold in his 
mind any arbitrary conceptions of the phenomena of patience — 
he merely refers to it as the Third Paramita. And why? Be- 
cause when, in a previous life, the Prince of Kalinga severed 
the flesh from my limbs and my body, even then I was free 
from any such ideas as my own self, other selves, living beings, 
a universal self. Because if, at the time of my suffering, I had 
cherished any of these arbitrary ideas, inevitably, I would have 
fallen into impatience and hatred. 

Besides, Subhuti, I recall that during my five hundred pre- 
vious lives, I had used life after life to practice patience and to 
look upon my life humbly as though it was some saintly being 
called upon to suffer humility. Even then my mind was free 
from any such arbitrary conceptions of phenomena as my own 
self, other selves, living beings, and a universal self. 

(16) The Blessed One resumed: — Subhuti, should there be 
among the faithful disciples some who have not yet matured 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


95 


their karma and who must first suffer the natural retribution of 
sins committed in some previous life by being degraded to a 
lower domain of existence and should they earnestly and faith- 
fully observe and study this Scripture and because of it be 
despised and persecuted by the people, their karma will im- 
mediately be matured and they will at once attain Anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi. 

Subhuti, I recall that long ago, numberless asamkhyas of 
kalpas before the advent of Dipankara Buddha, without any 
fault having been committed by me, I served and worshipped 
with offerings and received spiritual instruction and discipline 
from eight hundred and four thousand myriads of Buddhas, yet 
in the far off ages of the last kalpa of this world, if a disciple 
shall faithfully observe, study and put into practice the teach- 
ings of this Scripture, the blessing that he by so doing will 
gain, will far exceed that acquired by me during those long 
years of service and discipline under those many Buddhas. Yes, 
it will exceed my poor merit, in comparison as ten myriads to 
one. Yes, even more; as uncounted myriads to one. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Subhuti, in contrast to what 
I have said as to the inestimable blessing that will come -to 
earnest disciples who observe and study and practice this Scrip- 
ture in that far off last kalpa, I must tell you, that probably 
there will be some disciples who upon hearing this Scripture 
will become bewildered in their minds and will, not believe it. 
Subhuti, you should remember that just as the Dharma of this 
Scripture transcends human thought, so the effect and the final 
result of studying it and putting it into practice is also inscrut- 
able. 

The Practice of Zeal and Perseverance 
(The Virya Paramita) 

(11) What think you, Subhuti? If there are as many Ganges 
Rivers as there are grains of sand in the River Ganges, will 
these rivers be very numerous? 

Exceedingly numerous, my Lord. 

Supposing there were these innumerable rivers, how im- 
measurable would be their grains of sand! And yet, Subhuti, 
if a good and pious disciple, either man or woman, should be- 
stow as alms an amount of the seven treasures equal to those 



96 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


grains of sand, would the merit that would accrue to him be 
a considerable blessing and merit? 

A very considerable merit. My Lord. 

Subhuti, if another disciple after studying and observing 
even one stanza of this Scripture, should explain it to others 
his blessing and merit would be greater. 

(12) Moreover, Subhuti, if any disciple in any place should 
teach even one stanza of this Scripture, that place would be- 
come sacred ground and would be held in reverence, and would 
be enriched by offerings from gods, devas an'd spirits, as though 
it was a sacred pagoda or temple. How much more sacred 
would the place become if a disciple studied and observed the 
whole of this Scripture! Be assured, Subhuti, that such a dis- 
ciple will succeed in the attainment of Anuttara-samyak-sam- 
bodhi, and the place where this Scripture is reverenced will be 
like an altar consecrated to Buddha, or to one of his honored 
disciples. 

(15) The Lord Buddha continued: — Subhuti, should there be 
any good pious disciple, man or woman, who in his zeal to 
practice charity is willing to sacrifice his life in the morning, 
or at noon-tide, or in the evening, on as many occasions as 
there are grains of sand in the river Ganges, even if these oc- 
casions recur for a hundred thousand myriad kalpas, would his 
blessing and merit be great? 

It would be great, indeed, Lord Buddha. 

Supposing, Subhuti, another disciple should observe and 
study this Scripture in pure faith, his blessing and merit would 
be greater. And if still another disciple, besides observing and 
studying this Scripture, should zealously explain it to others 
and copy it and circulate it, his blessing and merit would be 
far greater. 

In other words, Subhuti, this Scripture is invested with a 
virtue and power that is inestimable, illimitable and ineffable. 
The Tathagata elucidates this Scripture only to those disciples 
who are earnestly and perseveringly seeking the perfect realiza- 
tion of Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi and attaining the Bodhi- 
sattva stages of compassion that characterize the Mahayana. As 
disciples become able to zealously and faithfully observe and 
study this Scripture, explain it to others and circulate it widely, 
the Tathagata will recognize and support them until they shall 
succeed in the attainment of its inestimable, illimitable and 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


97 


wonderful virtues. Such disciples will share with the Tatha- 
gata its burden of compassion and its reward of Anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi. 

And why, Subhuti, is this promise limited to the Mahayana 
disciples? It is because the Hinayana disciples have not yet 
been able to free themselves from such arbitrary conceptions of 
phenomena as one’s own selfhood, other personalities, living 
beings and a universal self and, therefore, are not yet able to 
faithfully and earnestly observe and study and explain this 
Scripture to others. 

Listen, Subhuti! Wherever this Scripture shall be observed 
and studied and explained, that place will become sacred ground 
to which countless devas and angels will bring offerings. Such 
places, however humble they may be, will be reverenced as 
though they were famous temples and pagodas, to which count- 
less pilgrims will come to offer worship and incense. And over 
them the devas and angels will hover like a cloud and will 
sprinkle upon them an offering of celestial flowers. 

The Practice of Tranquillity 
(The Dhyana Paramita) 

(17) Then Subhuti enquired of the Lord Buddha, saying: 
Supposing a good pious disciple, either man or woman, having 
begun the practice of attaining Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi 
(should still find his mind disturbed), how is he to keep his 
mind tranquil, how is he to wholly subdue his wandering 
thoughts and craving desires? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Subhuti, any good pious dis- 
ciple who undertakes the practice of concentrating his mind in 
an effort to realize Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, should cherish 
only one thought, namely, when I attain this highest perfect 
Wisdom, I will deliver all sentient beings into the eternal peace 
of Nirvana. If this purpose and vow is sincere, these sentient 
beings are already delivered. And yet, Subhuti, if the full 
truth is realized, one would know that not a single sentient 
being has ever been delivered. And why, Subhuti? Because 
if the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas have kept in mind any such 
arbitrary conceptions as one’s own self, other selves, living be- 
ings, or a universal self, they could not be called Bodhisattva- 



98 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Mahasattvas. And what does this mean, Subhuti? It means 
that there are no sentient beings to be delivered and there is 
no selfhood that can begin the practice of seeking to attain 
Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. 

What think you, Subhuti? When the Tathagata was with 
Buddha Dipankara did he have any such arbitrary conception 
of the Dharma as would warrant him in seeking to attain 
Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi intuitively? 

No, Blessed Lord. As I understand what thou hast said to 
us, when the Lord Buddha was with Buddha Dipankara, he 
had no such arbitrary conception of the Dharma as would war- 
rant him in seeking to attain Arnuttara-samyak-sambodhi 
intuitively. 

The Lord Buddha was much pleased with this and said: — 
You are right, Subhuti. Speaking truly there is no such arbi- 
trary conception of the Dharma as that. If there had been, 
Dipankara Buddha would not have foretold that in some future 
life, I would attain Buddhahood under the name of Shakya- 
muni. What does this mean, Subhuti? It means that what I 
attained is not something limited and arbitrary that can be 
called, ‘Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi,’ but is Buddhahood whose 
essence is identical with the essence of all things and is what 
it is — universal, inconceivable, inscrutable. 

Supposing, Subhuti, there should still be a disciple who 
asserts that the Tathagata had some ideas about the Dharma 
that warranted him in seeking to attain Anuttra-samyak-sam- 
bodhi. Be it understood, Subhuti, that the Tathagata truly had 
no ideas of the Dharma that warranted him in seeking to at- 
tain Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. 

The Lord Buddha emphasized this by saying: — Subhuti, the 
Buddhahood to which the Tathagata attained is both the same 
as Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi and not the same. This is only 
another way of saying that the phenomena of all things is of 
one ‘suchness’ with Buddhahood and Anuttara-samyak-sam- 
bodhi, and that it is neither reality nor unreality but abides to- 
gether with all phenomena in emptiness and silence, inconceiv- 
able and inscrutable. Subhuti, that is why I say that the 
Dharma of all things can never be embraced within any arbi- 
trary conception of phenomena however universal that con- 
ception may be. That is why it is called the Dharma and why 
there is no such thing as the Dharma. 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


99 


Subhuti, suppose I should speak of the largeness of the hu- 
man body, what would you understand by it? 

Honored of the worlds! I should understand that the Lord 
Buddha was not speaking of the largeness of the human body 
as an arbitrary conception of its phenomenality. I should un- 
derstand that the words carried only an imaginary meaning. 

Subhuti, it is just the same when Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
speak of delivering numberless sentient beings. If they have 
in mind any arbitrary conception of sentient being or of definite 
numbers, they are unworthy to be called Bodhisattva-Mahasatt- 
vas. And why, Subhuti? Because the very reason why they 
are called Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas is because they have aban- 
doned all such arbitrary conceptions. And what is true of one 
arbitrary conception is true of all conceptions. The Tathagata’s 
teachings are entirely free from all such arbitrary conceptions 
as one’s own self, other selves, living beings or a universal self. 

To make this teaching more emphatic, the Lord Buddha con- 
tinued: — If a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva was to speak like this: — 
I will add embellishments to the Buddha-lands, he would be un- 
worthy to be called a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva. And why? Be- 
cause the Tathagata has explicitly taught that when a Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattva uses such words, they must not hold in mind 
any arbitrary conception of phenomena; they are to use such 
expressions merely as so many words. 

Subhuti, it is only those disciples whose understanding can 
penetrate deeply enough into the meaning of the Tathagata’s 
teachings concerning the egolessness of both things and living 
beings, and who can clearly understand their significance, that 
are worthy to be called Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas. 

(18) The Lord Buddha then enquired of Subhuti, saying: 
What think you? Does the Tathagata possess a physical eye? 

Subhuti replied: — Surely, Blessed Lord, he possesses a phys- 
ical eye. 

Does he possess the eye of enlightenment, Subhuti? 

Certainly the Tathagata possesses the eye of enlightenment; 
he would not be the Lord Buddha otherwise. 

Does the Tathagata possess the eye of transcendental intelli- 
gence? 

Yes, Blessed Lord, the Tathagata possesses the eye of tran- 
scendental intelligence. 

Does the Tathagata possess the eye of spiritual intuition? 



ioo SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Yes, Blessed Lord, the Tathagata possesses the eye of spirit- 
ual intuition. 

Does the Tathagata possess the eye of a Buddha’s love and 
compassion for all sentient life, Subhuti? 

Subhuti assented and said: — Blessed Lord, thou lovest 
all sentient life. 

What think you, Subhuti? When I referred to the grains of 
sand in the river Ganges, did I assert that they were truly 
grains of sand? 

No, Blessed Lord, you only spoke of them as grains of sand. 

Subhuti, if there were as many Ganges rivers as there are 
grains of sand in the river Ganges, and if there were as many 
Buddha-lands as there are grains of sand in all of these in- 
numerable rivers, would these Buddha-lands be considered as 
very numerous? 

Very numerous, indeed. Lord Buddha. 

Listen, Subhuti. Within these innumerable Buddha-lands 
there are every form of sentient beings with all their various 
mentalities and conceptions, all of which are fully known to 
the Tathagata, but not one of them is held in the Tathagata’s 
mind as an arbitrary conception of phenomena. They are 
merely thought of. Not one of this vast accumulation of con- 
ceptions from beginningless time, through the present and into 
the never ending future, not one of them is graspable. 

(30) The Lord Buddha resumed: — Subhuti, if any good and 
pious disciple, either man or woman, were to take the three 
thousand great universes and grind them into impalpable 
powder and blow it away into space, what think you, Subhuti? 
do you think this powder would have any individual existence? 

Subhuti replied: — Yes, Blessed Lord, as an impalpable pow- 
der infinitely dissipated, it might be said to have a relative ex- 
istence, but as the Blessed One uses the words, it has no exist- 
ence — the words have only a figurative meaning. Otherwise the 
words would imply a belief in the existence of matter as an 
independent and self-existent entity, which it is not. 

Moreover, when the Tathagata refers to the ‘three thousand 
great universes,’ he could only do so as a figure of speech. And 
why? Because if the three thousand great universes really ex- 
isted, their only reality would consist in their cosmic unity. 
WTiether as impalpable powder or as great universes, what mat- 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


101 


ters it? It is only in the sense of the cosmic unity of ultimate 
essence that the Tathagata can rightfully refer to it. 

The Lord Buddha was much pleased with this reply and 
said: — Subhuti, although terrestrial human beings have always 
grasped after the arbitrary conception of matter and great uni- 
verses, the conception has no true basis — it is an illusion of 
mortal mind. Even when it is referred to as ‘cosmic unity’ it 
is something inscrutable. 

(31) The Lord Buddha continued: — If any disciple were to 
say that the Tathagata, in his teachings, has constantly re- 
ferred to himself, other selves, living beings, an Universal Self, 
what think you Subhuti? would that disciple have understood 
the meaning of what I have been teaching? 

Subhuti replied: — No, Blessed Lord. That disciple would 
not have understood the meaning of the Lord’s teachings. For 
when the Lord has referred to them he has never referred to 
their actual existence; he has only used the words as figures 
and symbols. It is only in that sense that they can be used, 
for conceptions, and ideas, and limited truths, and Dharmas 
have no more reality than have matter and phenomena. 

Then the Lord made this more emphatic by saying: — Sub- 
hud, when disciples begin their practice of seeking to attain 
Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, they ought thus to see, to perceive, 
to know, to understand, and to realize that all things and all 
Dharmas are no-things, and, therefore, they ought not to con- 
ceive within their minds any arbitrary conceptions whatever. 

(32) The Lord Buddha continued: — Subhuti, if any disciple 
bestowed upon the Tathagatas as alms an abundance of the 
seven treasures sufficient to fill the innumerable and illimitable 
worlds; and if another disciple, a good and pious man or 
woman, in his practice of seeking to attain Anuttara-samyak- 
sambodhi should earnestly and faithfully observe and study 
even a single stanza of this Scripture and explain it to others, 
the accumulated blessing and merit of that latter disciple would 
be relatively greater. 

Subhuti, how is it possible to explain this Scripture to 
others without holding in mind any arbitrary conception of 
things and phenomena and Dharmas? It can only be done, 
Subhuti, by keeping the mind in perfect tranquillity and in 
self-less oneness with the ‘suchness’ that is Tathagatahood. And 



102 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


why? Because all the mind’s arbitrary conceptions of matter, 
phenomena, and of all conditioning factors and all conceptions 
and ideas relating thereto are like a dream, a phantasm, a 
bubble, a shadow, the evanescent dew, the lightning’s flash. 
Every true disciple should thus look upon all phenomena and 
upon all the activities of the mind, and keep his mind empty 
and self-less and tranquil. 

The Practice of Wisdom 
(The Prajna Paramita) 

(7) What think you, Subhuti? Has the Tathagata attained 
anything that can be described as Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi? 
Has he ever given you any such teaching? 

Subhuti replied: — As I understand the teaching of the Lord 
Buddha, there is no such thing as Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, 
nor is it possible for the Tathagata to teach any fixed Dharma. 
And why? Because the things taught by the Tathagata are, 
in their essential nature, inconceivable and inscrutable; they 
are neither existent nor non-existent; they are neither phenom- 
ena nor noumena. What is meant by this? It means that 
Buddhas and Bodhistattwas are not enlightened by fixed teach- 
ings but by an intuitive process that is spontaneous and natural. 
(26) Then the Lord Buddha enquired of Subhuti: — What 
think you, Subhuti? Is it possible to recognize the Tathagata 
by the thirty-two marks of physical excellence? 

Subhuti replied: — Yes, Honored of the worlds: — The Tatha- 
gata may be thus recognized. 

Subhuti, if that is so then Chakravartin, the legendary king 
of the world (who also had the thirty-two marks of excellence) 
would be classed among the Tathagatas. 

Then Subhuti, realizing his error, said: — Honored of the 
worlds! Now I realize that the Tathagata can not be rec- 
ognized merely by his thirty-two marks of physical excellence. 

The Lord Buddha then said: — Should anyone looking at an 
image or a likeness of the Tathagata, claim to know the Tatha- 
gata and should offer worship and prayer to him, you should 
consider such a person a heretic who does not know the true 
Tathagata. 

(5) What think you, Subhuti? Is it possible even to see the 
Tathagata in the phenomena of his physical appearance? 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


103 


No, Honored of the worlds! It is impossible even to see the 
Tathagata in the phenomena of his physical appearance. And 
why? Because the phenomena of his physical appearance is not 
the same as the essential Tathagata. 

You are right, Subhuti. The phenomena of the physical 
appearance is wholly illusion. It is not until a disciple under- 
stands this that he can realize the true Tathagata. 

(13 C) What think you, Subhuti? Can one grasp the Tatha- 
gata’s personality by its thirty-two marks of physical excellence? 

No, Blessed One! We can not grasp the Tathagata’s won- 
derful personality by its thirty-two marks of excellence. And 
why? Because what the Tathagata has expressed as ‘thirty- 
two marks of physical excellence’ does not convey any definite 
or arbitrary assertions as to the qualities of a Buddha. The 
words are used merely as a figure of speech. 

(29) The Lord said: — Subhuti, if any disciple were to say 
that the Tathagata is now coming or now going, or is now 
sitting up or is now lying down, he would not have understood 
the principle that I have been teaching. And why? Because 
while the word, Tathagata, means ‘He who has thus come’ and 
‘He who has thus gone,’ the true Tathagata is never coming 
from anywere, nor is he going anywhere. The name, Tathagata, 
is merely a word. 

(20) Again the Lord Buddha enquired of Subhuti, saying: 
Can the Tathagata be fully known through any manifestation 
in form (of either body or idea)? 

No, Honored of the worlds! The Tathagata can not be 
fully known by any manifestation in form. And why? Because 
the phenomena of form is inadequate to incarnate Buddhahood. 
It can only serve as a mere expression, a hint of that which is 
inconceivable. 

What think you, Subhuti? Can the Tathagata be fully 
known by any or all of his transcendental transformations? 

No, Honored of the worlds! The Tathagata can not be fully 
known by even all of his transcendental transformations. And 
why? Because what the Tathagata has just referred to as 
‘transcendental transformations’ is merely a figure of speech. 
Even the highest Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are unable to fully 
realize even by intuition that which is essentially inscrutable. 

(27) The Lord Buddha continued: — Subhuti, do not think 
the opposite either that when the Tathagata attained Anuttara- 



104 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


samyak-sambodhi it was not by means of his possession of the 
thirty-two marks, of physical excellence. Do not think that. 
Should you think that, then when you begin the practice of 
seeking to attain Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi you would think 
that all systems of phenomena and all conceptions about phe- 
nomena are to be cut off and rejected. Do not think that. And 
why? Because when a disciple practices seeking to attain Anut- 
tara-samyak-sambodhi, he should neither grasp after such arbi- 
trary conceptions of phenomena nor reject them. 

(si) The Lord Buddha then warned Subhuti, saying: — Sub- 
huti, do not think that the Tathagata ever considers within his 
own mind: I ought to enunciate a system of teaching for the 
elucidation of the Dharma. You should never cherish such an 
unworthy thought. And why? Because if any disciple should 
harbor such a thought, he would not only be misunderstanding 
the teaching of the Tathagata but he would be slandering him 
as well. Moreover, what has just been referred to as ‘a system 
of teaching’ has no meaning, as Truth can not be cut up into 
pieces and arranged into a system. The words can only be used 
as a figure of speech. 

Thereupon the Venerable Subhuti, because of his enlight- 
ened and transcendental intelligence, addressed the Lord Bud- 
dha, saying: — Blessed Lord! In ages to come when any sentient 
beings shall happen by chance to hear this Scripture will they 
awaken within their minds the essential elements of faith? 

The Lord Buddha said: — Subhuti, why do you still hold 
within your mind such arbitrary conceptions? There are no 
such things as sentient beings, neither are there any non-sen- 
tient beings. And why, Subhuti? Because what you have in 
mind as sentient beings are unreal and non-existent. When the 
Tathagata has used such words in his teachings, he has merely 
used them as figures of speech. Your question, therefore, is 
irrelevant. 

(22) Subhuti, again enquired: — Blessed Lord! When thou 
didst attain Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi didst thou feel within 
thy mind that nothing had been acquired? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — That is it precisely, Subhuti. 
When I attained Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, I did not feel, as 
grasped within my mind, any arbitrary conception of Dharma, 
not even the slightest. Even the words Anuttara-samyak-sam- 
bodhi are merely words. 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


105 


(23 A) Moreover, Subhuti, what I have attained in Anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi is the same as what all others have attained. 
It is something that is undifferentiated, neither to be regarded 
as a high state, nor is it to be regarded as a low state. It is 
wholly independent of any definitive or arbitrary conceptions 
of an individual self, other selves, living beings or an Universal 
Self. 

Conclusion 

(6) Subhuti respectfully enquired of the Lord Buddha: — 
Honored of the worlds! In future days, if a disciple hears this 
teaching or a part of it — a section or a sentence — will it awaken 
true faith in his mind? 

Subhuti, do not doubt it. Even at the remote period of five 
hundred years after the nirvana of the Tathagata, there will 
be those who, practicing charity and keeping the precepts, will 
believe in sections and sentences of this Scripture and will 
awaken within their minds a true pure faith. You should 
know, however, that such disciples, long ago, have planted roots 
of goodness, not simply before one Buddha shrine, or two, or 
five, but before the shrines of a hundred thousand myriad as- 
amkyas of Buddhas, so that when they hear sentences and 
sections of this Scripture there will instantly awaken within 
their minds a pure true faith. 

Subhuti, the Tathagata knows that the sentient beings who 
awaken faith after hearing sentences and sections of this Scrip- 
ture will accumulate blessing and merit that are inestimable. 
How do I know this? Because these sentient beings must have 
already discarded such arbitrary conceptions of phenomena as 
one’s own self, other selves, living beings and Universal Self. 
If they had not, their minds would inevitably grasp after such 
things and then they would not be able to practice charity nor 
keep the precepts. 

Moreover, these sentient beings must have also discarded all 
arbitrary ideas relating to the conceptions of a personal self, 
other personalities, living beings and a Universal Self, because 
if they had not, their minds would inevitably grasp after such 
relative ideas. Futher, these sentient beings must have already 
discarded all arbitrary ideas relating to the conception of the 
non-existence of a personal self, other personalities, living beings 
and a Universal Self. If they had not, their minds would still 



io6 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


be grasping after such ideas. Therefore, every disciple who is 
seeking Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi should discard, not only 
conceptions of one’s own selfhood, other selves, living beings 
and a Universal Selfhood, but should discard, also, all ideas 
about such conceptions and all ideas about the non-existence of 
such conceptions. 

While the Tathagata, in his teaching, constantly makes use 
of conceptions and ideas about them, disciples should keep in 
mind the unreality of all such conceptions and ideas. They 
should recall that the Tathagata, in making use of them in ex- 
plaining the Dharma always uses them in the resemblance of a 
raft that is of use only to cross a river. As the raft is of no 
further use after the river is crossed, it should be discarded. 
So these arbitrary conceptions of things and about things should 
be wholly given up as one attains enlightenment. How much 
more should be given up conceptions of non-existent things 
(and everything is non-existent). 

(14 A) As Subhuti listened intently to the words of the Lord 
Buddha, the teaching of the Scripture penetrated into the 
depths of his understanding and he fully realized that it was 
the true Path to enlightenment. The tears came to his eyes as 
he realized this and he said: — O Blessed Lord! I have never 
before realized this profound Scripture. Thou hast opened my 
eyes to its Transcendental Wisdom. 

Honored of the worlds! What has been taught us concern- 
ing the true significance of phenomena carries no arbitrary or 
limited meaning. The teaching is, as you say, a raft that will 
carry us to the other shore. Noble Lord! when as at present, 
I have the chance of hearing this Scripture, it is not difficult 
for me to concentrate my mind upon it and to clearly under- 
stand its significance, and it awakens within my mind a pure 
faith. In future time— after five centuries — if there be any 
ready to hear it and ready to attain enlightenment, able to 
concentrate their minds upon it, able to realize a clear under- 
standing of it, able to awaken a pure faith in it, such a disciple 
will hereby become a wonderful and preeminent disciple. And 
if there is such a disciple the reason he will be able to awaken 
a pure faith will be because he has ceased to cherish any arbi- 
trary conceptions as to his own selfness, the selfhood of others, 
of living beings, of an Universal Self. Why is this so? It is 
because, if he is cherishing any arbitrary conception as to his 



THE DIAMOND SUTRA 


107 

own selfhood, he will be cherishing something that is non-ex- 
istent. It is the same as to all arbitrary conceptions of other 
personalities, living beings, on an Universal Self. They are all 
expressions of things that are non-existent. If a disciple is able 
to discard all arbitrary conceptions of phenomena or about phe- 
nomena, he will immediately become a Buddha. 

__ The Lord Buddha was much pleased with this reply, saying: 
True indeed! If a disciple having heard this Scripture is not 
surprised, nor frightened, nor does not shrink from it, you 
should know that he is worthy to be regarded as a truly won- 
derful disciple. 

(13 A) Subhuti said to the Blessed One: — By what name shall 
this scripture be known, so that it will be understood and hon- 
ored and studied? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — This Scripture shall be known 
as the Vajracchedika Prajna Paramita. By this name it shall be 
reverenced, studied and observed. What is meant by this name? 
It means that when the Lord Buddha named it Prajna Para- 
mita, he did not have in mind any definite or arbitrary concep- 
tion and so he thus named it. It is the Scripture that is hard 
and sharp like a diamond that will cut away all arbitrary con- 
ceptions and bring one to the other shore of enlightenment. 

What think you, Subhuti? Has the Tathagata given you 
any definite teaching in this scripture? 

No, Blessed Lord! The Tathagata has not given us any 
definite teaching in this Scripture. 

* # * 

(32 B) When the Lord Buddha had finished the teaching 
recorded in this Scripture, the Venerable Subhuti, together with 
all the assembled Bhikshus and Bhikshuni and disciples both 
men and women, and all the devas and angels, greatly re- 
joiced and, thereafter, sincerely believing the teaching, heartily 
accepted it, faithfully observed it, and zealously practised it. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 
Introduction 

T HUS have I heard. Upon a memorable occasion, the Lord 
Buddha while staying at the Jetavana Meditation Hall in 
the city of Sravasti delivered a discourse to twelve hundred 
Great Disciples who were all great Arhats and free from all 
intoxicants, that is, they were all perfectly emancipated from 
sensual attachments and defilements. They were true heirs of 
their Lord Buddha and worthy to share meir Lord’s respon- 
sibility for the ever-continuing preaching of the Lord’s Bharma. 
They had all transcended phenomenal existence and could 
manifest their gracious presence by a Buddhist influence wher- 
ever they sojourned. They were so highly advanced in the tran- 
scendental attainments that they were perfectly qualified to re- 
ceive the Bharma from their Lord and Master and had so 
greatly profited from the Lord’s teaching that they knew well 
how, with the Lord Buddha, to themselves turn the mysterious 
wheel of the true Bharma. They had kept the Precepts with 
such strict observance and perfect purity as to be qualified as 
perfect models for this triple world. They could assume in- 
numerable appearance-bodies in response to the earnest prayer 
of any sentient being to rescue them and to perfect their eman- 
cipation. They were also willing to extend their helping hands 
into the future, so that all sentient beings in the future might 
become emancipated and free from all their fetters of earthly 
defilement. 

Among the Great Bhikshus present, acting as leaders, were 
the wise Sariputra, the Great Maudgalyayana, the Great Kaus- 
tila, Puma Metaluniputra, Subhuti, Upanishada, and many 
others equally well known and highly regarded. In addition 
there were present many Pratyeka-Buddhas, who had mastered 
the teachings and perfected the practices, together with innu- 
merable novice disciples. They all came to pay homage to Lord 
Buddha and also to associate themselves with all the great 
Bhikshus and their disciples in this great Bharma assembly. 

108 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


109 

which had gathered for the “Summer Devotion” where they 
could make public confession and practice Dhyana together. 

Besides the great company of Bhikshus and Disciples that 
had gathered from far and near, there were present Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattvas from all the ten quarters of the Universe 
who had come to pay their highest respect to the Lord Shakya- 
muni Buddha as though it was an offering to a loving parent. 
Moreover, they came to entreat the Lord Buddha for some high 
teaching that would solve their mental puzzles and help them 
to get rid of the troublesome doubts which they occasionally 
experienced in their meditations. 

Then the Lord Buddha ascended the Honorable Throne of 
Dharma and immediately became absorbed in profound con- 
templation with such noble solemnity and tranquillity that the 
whole company were spellbound by its profound silence and 
mystery. At the same time all the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, 
as numerous as the particles of sand in the river Ganges, with 
Manjusri the Great Bodhisattva at their head, gathered about 
the Lord Buddha and merged their deep meditation with the 
Lord Buddha’s perfect Samadhi. Seldom, indeed, had any of 
them ever before experienced such serenity and quietness as 
then pervaded this Great Dharma Assembly. Wonderful music 
like the songs of the Kalavinka and Jiva-jiva birds seem to 
come from the Lord Buddha’s perfect Samadhi and to fill the 
air with its heavenly music, and floating away to pervade the 
ten quarters of the Universe. 

Upon this occasion, Prasenajit the King of Sravasti in cele- 
bration of the anniversary of his father’s death, prepared a 
special feast of choice vegetables and dainties, and came per- 
sonally to call upon the Lord Buddha and to invite him and 
all the Great Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas to attend a reception 
at the royal palace. At the same time the elders and wealthy 
laymen of the city added to the King’s celebration by preparing 
jointly another feast and invited all the Disciples of the Lord 
Buddha to attend while the Lord and the Great Disciples were 
with the King. The Lord Buddha, knowing all about it, bade 
his Great Disciple Manjusri to first lead part of the Bodhisat- 
tvas-Mahasattva and Arhats to attend the Laymen’s homes and 
to receive their offerings. 

Ananda was the only one of the Great Disciples who was 
noticeably absent. Owing to a previous engagement in a distant 



no SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


district, he had not yet returned. He was quite alone and when 
he reached the Meditation Hall upon his return, he found it 
deserted, not a single disciple about, nor were there any offer- 
ings from their patrons in sight. Then Ananda, thoughtful as 
ever, took his alms bowl and entered into the city begging 
food from house to house in regular order, his only thought 
being to receive the offerings from all alike even to the last 
danapati. It mattered nothing to Ananda whether the offer- 
ing was small or generous, attractive or repulsive, whether the 
giver was of the Kshatriya caste or the Candra caste, to him 
the all important thing was to practice kindness and compassion 
on all alike with no discrimination whatever. He sought only 
to attain the inestimable merit of delivering all sentient beings, 
treating them all alike. 

Ananda had heard that the Lord on one occasion had re- 
buked Subhuti and Mahakatyayana for showing discrimination 
towards Arahats in their practice of begging. He greatly ad- 
mired the Lord’s liberal mind and determined that he would 
not commit the same fault himself. He -was proud of his good 
name and did not wish to give cause for people having suspi- 
cions or for slandering about himself, so he quietly crossed the 
dried moat that surrounded the city, entered the city-gate with 
solemn gravity. He was a noticeable figure in his neat attire 
and solemn manner as if he was on a special mission to re- 
ceive some ceremonial offering. 

While Ananda was begging in orderly succession, he came to 
the house of a prostitute named Maudenka who had a beauti- 
ful daughter named Pchiti. This young maiden was attracted 
by Ananda’s youthful and attractive person and pleaded earn- 
estly with her mother to conjure the young monk by the magic 
spell of “bramanyika” This the mother did and Ananda com- 
ing under the spell of its magic became fascinated by the charm 
of the young maiden and entered the house and her room. 

As soon as the feast was ended, the Lord Tathagata re- 
turned to the Meditation Hall in the Jeta Grove. King Pra- 
senajit and his royal ministers and many of the prominent 
elders and wealthy laymen of the city returned with the Lord 
to listen further to his wonderful and precious teaching, the like 
of which they had never before heard. The Lord as usual first 
sitting quietly became absorbed in Samadhi, radiating from the 
crown of his head rays of soft and tender brightness, like lotus 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


in 


petals surrounded by innumerable leaves. In the center of the 
Lotus petals there was a vision of the Nirmanakaya Buddha 
sitting with feet crossed intuiting and radiating the intrinsic 
Dharani. 

The Lord Buddha had known all along what was happening 
to Ananda and now called Manjusri and bade him repeat the 
Great Dharani at the place where Ananda was yielding to 
temptation. As soon as Manjusri reached the house, the magic 
spell lost its power and Ananda returned to self-control. Man- 
jusri encouraged Ananda and Pchiti and they returned with 
him to meet the Lord Buddha. 


Chapter One 

The Many Manifestations of the Wonderful Essence-Mind, 
and of the Perfect Principle of the Three Excellencies within 
the All-Inclusive Unity of the Womb of Tathagata. 

( False Mind vs T rue Mind.) 

When Ananda came into the presence of the Lord Buddha, 
he bowed down to the ground in great humility, blaming him- 
self that he had not yet fully developed the potentialities of 
Enlightenment, because from the beginning of his previous lives, 
he had too much devoted himself to study and learning. He 
earnestly pleaded with the Lord Buddha and with all the other 
Tathagatas from the ten quarters of the Universe, to support 
him in attaining perfect Enlightenment, that is, to support him 
in his practice of the Three Excellencies of Dhyana, Samadhi 
and Samapatti, by some most fundamental and expedient 
means. 

At the same time, all of the Bodhisattvas-M ahasattva, as 
numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, together with all 
the Arhats, Pratyeka-Buddhas, from all the ten quarters, with 
one accord and with gladness of heart, prepared to listen to the 
instruction to be given to Ananda by the Lord Buddha. With 
one accord they paid homage to the Lord and then resuming 
their seats, waited in perfect quietness and patience to receive 
the sacred teaching. 

Then the Lord Buddha spoke to Ananda, saying: — Ananda, 



ii2 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


you and I are from the same ancestral blood and we have al- 
ways cherished a fraternal affection for each other. Let me 
ask you a few questions and you answer me spontaneously and 
freely. When you first began to be interested in Buddhism 
what was it that impressed you in our Buddhist way of life 
and most influenced you to forsake all worldly pleasures and 
enabled you to cut asunder your youthful sexual cravings? 

Ananda replied: — Oh, my Lord! The first thing that im- 
pressed me were the thirty-two marks of excellency in my 
Lord’s personality. They appeared to me so fine, as tender and 
brilliant, and transparent as a crystal. 

From that time I have constantly thought about them and 
have been more and more convinced that these marks of ex- 
cellence would be impossible for anyone who was not free from 
all sexual passion and desire. And why? Because when any- 
one becomes inflamed by sexual passion, his mind becomes dis- 
turbed and confused, he loses self-control and becomes reckless 
and crude. Besides, in sexual intercourse, the blood becomes 
inflamed and impure and adulterated with impure secretions. 
Naturally from such a source, there can never originate an 
aureole of such transcendently pure and golden brightness as 
I have seen emanating from the person of my Lord. It was be- 
cause of this that I admired my Lord and it was this that in- 
fluenced me to become one of thy true followers. 

The Lord Buddha then said: — Very good, Ananda! All of 
you in this Great Dharma Assembly ought to know and ap- 
preciate that the reason why sentient beings by their previous 
•lives since beginningless time have formed a succession of 
deaths and rebirths, life after life, is because they have never 
realized the true Essence of Mind and its self-purifying bright- 
ness. On the contrary they have been absorbed all the time 
busying themselves with their deluding and transient thoughts 
which are nothing but falsity and vanity. Hence they have 
prepared for themselves the conditions for this ever returning 
cycle of deaths and rebirths. 

Ananda, if you are now desirous of more perfectly under- 
standing Supreme Enlightenment and the enlightening nature 
of pure Mind-Essence, you must learn to answer questions 
spontaneously with no recourse to discriminating thinking. For 
the Tathagatas in the ten quarters of the universes have been 
delivered from the ever returning cycle of deaths and rebirths 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 113 

by this same single way, namely, by reliance upon their intui- 
tive minds. 

It is because of the straight-forwardness of their minds and 
the spontaneity of their mentations that the Tathagatas have 
ever remained, from beginningless time to endless time, of one 
pure Suchness, undisturbed by any complexity within their 
minds nor any rising thoughts of discrimination. 

Then the Lord Buddha said: — Ananda, I want to question 
you; please listen carefully. You have just said that at the 
time your faith in me was awakened, that it was due to seeing 
the thirty-two marks of excellence. Let me ask you: What was 
it that gave you the sensation of seeing? What was it that 
experienced the sensation? And who was it that experienced 
the feeling of being pleased? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord! At the time I experienced the 
sensation of being pleased, it was both through my eyes and 
my mind. When my eyes saw my Lord’s excellencies, my mind 
immediately experienced a feeling of being pleased. It was then 
that I made up my mind to become thy disciple so that I 
might be delivered from the cycle of deaths and rebirths. 

The Lord said: — From what you have just said, Ananda, 
your feeling of being pleased originated in your eyes and mind. 
But if you do not know where lies the perception of sight and 
where the activities of the mind originate, you will never be 
able to subjugate your worldly attachments and contaminations. 
It is like a king whose city was pestered by robbers and who 
tried to put an end to the thieving but was unsuccessful be- 
cause he could not locate the secret hiding place of the robbers. 
So it is in the lives of human beings who are always being 
troubled by worldly attachments and contaminations, causing 
their perception of sight to become inverted and unreliable and 
seducing their thoughts and causing them to wander about 
ignorantly and uncontrolled. Ananda, let me ask you? Refer- 
ring to your eyes and mind, do you know their secret hiding 
place? 

Ananda replied: — Noble Lord! In all the ten different 
orders of life, the eyes are in the front of the face, as are my 
Lord’s clear lotus eyes, and mine also. The same is true of the 
other sense organs, they are on the surface of the body, but 
the mind is hidden within the body. 

The Lord Buddha interrupted: — Ananda, you are now sit- 



ii4 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ting in the Lecture Hall, are you not? And when you are 
looking out to the Jetavana Grove, can you tell me where the 
hall and the grove are situated? 

Certainly, my Lord. This quiet and splendid Lecture Hall 
and the Jetavana Grove are both situated in Anathapindika’s 
beautiful park. 

Now, Ananda, what do you see first, the people in this hall 
or the park outside? 

I first see my Lord, then I see the noble audience, and 
other things in turn, and only afterward do I see the grove 
and the lovely park outside. 

True, Ananda! Now tell me, while you are looking outside 
at the grove and park, what is it that enables you to distin- 
guish the different views that your eyes see? 

Noble Lord! It is because the windows and doors of the 
lecture hall are open wide. That is why I can see the distant 
views from inside the hall. 

Then the Blessed Lord, in view of the great audience, 
reached out his golden hand and softly stroked Ananda’s head, 
at the same time speaking to both him and the great assembly, 
saying: — 

There is a particular Samadhi called. The Highest Samadhi, 
which was the Lord Buddha’s Crowning Experience, and by it 
he attained a perfect realization of all manifestations and trans- 
formations. It was a wonderful door that opened to the mys- 
terious Path that all the Tathagatas of all the ten quarters of 
all the universes have followed. It is of this Highest Samadhi 
that I am going to speak. Listen very carefully. 

Then Ananda and the great audience bowed to the ground 
in deep adoration and then resumed their seats and waited 
humbly for the Master’s solemn teaching. 

The Lord Buddha then addressed Ananda and the great 
assembly, saying: — 

Ananda, you have just said that from the inside of the 
lecture hall you can look out to the grove and the distant park 
because the windows and doors are open wide. It is possible 
that there are somg within this very audience that only see 
these outside things and who are unable to see the Lord Tatha- 
gata within. 

Ananda interrupted: — But my Lord, how. can it be that 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


n 5 

anyone in this hall who can see the grove and streams without 
can fail to see the Lord within? 

It does seem absurd, Ananda, but it is just that way with 
you. You say that your mind exists within your body and that 
it is quite clear of all obstructions, but if this clear mind really 
exists within your body, then you ought to see the inside of 
your body first of all. But there are no sentient beings who 
can do this, that is, see both the inside and outside of their 
bodies. Though they may not see all the inside things — such 
as the heart, stomach, liver, kidneys, etc. — but at least they 
ought to see the growth of the finger-nails, the lengthening of 
the hair, the knotting of the sinews, the throbbing of the pulse. 
If the mind is within the body, why does it not see these 
things? But if the mind is within the body and can not see 
the things within, how can it see the things without the body? 
So you must see that what you have said about the perceiving 
mind, abiding within the body, is untrue. 

With a respectful bow, Ananda said to the Lord: — Listening 
to the words of my Lord, I begin to realize that my mind, after 
all, may be outside my body. It may be like a lamp. If the 
lamp is within the room, it will certainly illumine the room 
first and then shining through the open door and windows will 
illumine the yard outside. If it was like that, why is it that 
one seeing only outside objects does not see the things within? 
It must be that the mind is like a lamp placed outside of a 
room, for then it would be dark within. If one can clearly 
understand what his mind is, he would no longer be puzzled, 
but would have the same intelligence and understanding that 
the Buddhas have. Would it not be so, my Lord? 

The Lord replied: — Ananda, this morning all of the Bhik- 
shus followed me to the city of Sravasti begging for food in 
regular order and afterwards all returned to this Grove. I was 
fasting at the time, but the others ate the food. What think 
you, Ananda? If only one of the Bhikshus ate the food, would 
the others be satisfied of their hunger? 

Ananda replied: — No, my Lord, and why? Because, al- 
though all of these Bhikshus are Arahats, yet their physical 
bodies are individually separated. How could it be, that one 
Bhikshu eating, could satisfy the hunger of all? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda if your perceiving, un- 



n6 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

derstanding mind is really outside your body, then what the 
mind perceives could not be felt by the body, and what the 
body feels could not be perceived by the mind. Look at my 
hand, Ananda. When your eyes are looking at it, does your 
mind make any discriminations about it? 

Yes, my Lord, it makes discriminations. 

The Lord continued: — But if your mind and body are in 
mutual correspondence, how can it possibly be said, that the 
mind exists outside the body? Therefore, Ananda, you ought 
to know that what you have just said about the mind existing 
outside the body is impossible. 

Then Ananda said: — According to what my Lord says, the 
perceiving mind does not exist within the body because it does 
not see the things within, neither does it exist outside the 
body, because the mind and body are in mutual correspondence 
and therefore cannot be isolated from each other. Yet it seems 
to me that the perceiving mind must be in some locality. 

Then the Lord Buddha questioned Ananda further: — But 
Ananda, where is its abiding place? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord, since this perceiving mind can- 
not know the inside of its own body, but can see outside ob- 
jects, it seems to me now, that it must be concealed in the 
sense organ itself. It may be like a man covering his eyes with 
a crystal bowl; though his eyes are covered yet there is no 
hindrance to his sight — the eye can still see clearly and make 
distinctions as usual. The reason that it does not see the in- 
side of the body is because it is a part of the organ of the eye, 
and the reason it can see outside objects clearly is because it is 
hidden in the organ of the eye. 

But, Ananda, you have just said that this perceiving mind 
concealed within the organ of the eye is like a crystal bowl 
covering the eyes. Now suppose a man has covered his eyes 
with a crystal bowl, but is still able to see outer objects such 
as mountains, rivers, etc., tell me, does he see the crystal bowl, 
also? 

Yes, my Lord, while the man is covering his eyes with the 
crystal bowl, he sees the crystal bowl, also. 

'The Lord said: — Ananda, if your mind is just the same as 
the crystal bowl covering the eyes, why does your mind, while 
seeing the outside mountains and rivers, not see your own 
eyes, too? Or, supposing your mind does see your eyes, then 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


117 

your eyes will be regarded as any other objective thing and 
they will no longer be regarded as a dependent organ. Or, if 
the mind cannot see everything, then how can it be said of 
the perceiving mind, that it is concealed within the organ of 
the eyes in the resemblance of a crystal bowl covering the eyes? 
Therefore, Ananda, what you have asserted, that this perceiving 
mind is concealed within the organ of the eyes like a crystal 
bowl covering the eyes, is impossible also. 

Then Ananda said to the Lord Buddha: — Honored of the 
worldsl It may be like this: — As all sentient beings have their 
intestines inside the body and the opening outside the body, 
the intestines are hidden to their sight but the opening is 
visible. While I am standing before you and open my eyes, I 
see your brightness — this means to see the outside. When my 
eyes are closed, I see the hiddenness — this means to see the 
inside. 

The Lord interrupted: — Ananda, when you close your eyes, 
you say you see the hiddenness, but this hidden condition, is 
it in an opposing direction to your eyes, or is it not? If it is 
directly opposed to your eyes, then the hiddenness must be in 
front of your eyes and then it cannot be thought of as a part 
of your inside. Or suppose it is meant as part of your inside, 
then when in any dark room, without the light of any such 
thing as sun, moon, or lamp, the whole dark space of the room 
might be regarded as your intestines or your heart. Or, if it is 
in a direction not opposite to your eyes, then how does it hap- 
pen that the sight of your eyes is being affected at all? 

Or, if you put aside this outside perception of sight and 
say that it is to be regarded as being in an inside opposite 
direction to your eyes, so that when you shut your eyes, you 
see darkness only, which would mean to see your inside body. 
But when you open your eyes and see the brightness, why do 
you not see your own face, also? If you do not see your own 
face, it would mean that the face is not in an inside opposite 
direction to your eyes. Or, supposing you can see your own 
face, then both this perceiving mind and the organ of sight 
must be in the open space, or they can no longer be thought 
of as being in an inside opposite direction. 

If your perceptive mind is supposed to be in the open 
space, naturally it can not belong to the body, and then, when 
the Lord Tathagata is in sight of your face which would mean 



ii8 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


that he is a part of your body, your eyes will, of course, get 
the perception, but the others parts of your body could not get 
into consciousness at the same time. 

Or, if you persistently claim that the body and the eyes 
have each a separate consciousness, then there would be two 
perceiving minds, which would mean that your single person- 
ality would see two Buddhas. Therefore you should under- 
stand that it is utterly absurd for you to say that to see into 
the dimness of the eyes is the same as seeing into the inside 
of the body. 

Then Ananda said to the Lord Buddha: — I have constantly 
learned from the instruction of my Lord and from the teaching 
of all four classes of Thy disciples that all the existences of 
phenomena are simply the manifestation of the mind itself and 
vice versa that all the existences of mind are the manifesta- 
tion of phenomena. Now it seems to me that this thinking 
mind is really the essence of my mind, and that wherever it 
happens to meet outer objects, there is a manifestation of 
mind. That is, the perceiving mind is neither inside, nor out- 
side, nor between the body. 

The Lord interrupted, saying: — What you are just saying — 
that all the manifestations of thoughts are simply meant as 
all the existences of phenomena and that wherever the mind 
happens to meet outer objects, there is its manifestations. But 
if your mind has no substantiality of its own, how can it meet 
any outer objects? Or, if it should be that in spite of the 
mind having no substantiality of its own, it might happen to 
meet outer objects, then there would be another newly assumed 
datum of nineteen spheres of mentation, namely, the six ob- 
jects, the six sense organs, the six perceptions, plus this newly 
assumed normality of thought considered as a “thing in itself.” 
And then there must be assumed a new datum of seven ob- 
jects, — the object of sight, the object of hearing, of smelling, 
of tasting, of touching, of the unified object of thought, plus 
this outer “thing of itself.” No, your suggestion is by no means 
the right interpretation. 

Ananda, your interpretation that the perceiving mind has a 
substantiality of its own at the point where the object and 
thought meet, would put fetters to your mind, like putting 
fetters to your hands and feet. Let me ask you in this way: 
does your mental consciousness arise within or without your 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


119 


body? If it arises within, yon should be able to know the in- 
side of your body; if it comes from outside your body, you 
should be able to first see your own face, 

Ananda replied: — My Lord! I see with my eyes and I per- 
ceive with my mind. That does not mean that they arfe inter- 
changeable. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Ananda, if your eyes can 
see by themselves, then supposing you are within a room, can 
the door share the perception of seeing? If the door shares 
with the eyes this perception of seeing, then all dead bodies 
that still have eye organs intact, should continue to see things. 
If they can still perceive, how can it be said that they are 
dead bodies. 

Ananda, if we grant that your perceiving mind has some 
kind of substantiality, is it one body or many bodies? Is it 
located in one place in your body or is it distributed all over 
the body? If it is one body, then if you bind one limb the 
others will feel bound. If they all feel bound, then there can 
be no sure knowledge of the exact place of the binding. Or, 
if the perception of being bound is located in one place, then 
the perceiving mind cannot be considered as one localized body. 
Or if the perceiving mind is considered to be many bodies or 
involved in many bodies, it would mean that there must be as 
many personalities, and the question would arise, which of these 
localized perceiving minds rightly belongs to you. Or if your 
mind is considered as being uniformally distributed over all 
parts of your body, then if your limb was tightly bound, then 
the whole body would feel the suffering. Or if not uniformally 
distributed, but only on some parts of the body, then if you 
touch your head and at the same touch your feet, one would 
know it and the other would not. We know that this is not 
so. Therefore, Ananda, you must see that your suggestion that 
wherever the mind happens to meet outer objects, there is 
localized a manifestation of mind is unreasonable. 

Then Ananda said to the Lord Buddha: — Now I recall 
hearing my Lord Buddha say, at a time when he was teaching 
Brother Manjusri and other princes of the Dharma, that the 
mind neither abides inside nor outside the body. It seems to 
me, if it is inside and we cannot see the inside, and if it was 
outside we ought not to feel the outside. We know that we 
cannot see the inside of the body, so it must mean that the 


120 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


mind is not abiding inside the body; it must mean that in 
some way our mind and body are in mutual correspondence 
with each other through the faculty of perception, and that 
would mean that it is not abiding outside the body. Now, My 
Lord, I see that since our mind and body are in mutual cor- 
respondence and yet we cannot see the inside of our body, it 
must be that the perceiving understanding mind must be abid- 
ing between these things. 

The Lord Buddha resumed: — Ananda, now you think that 
the mind must be abiding between somethings. Let us consider 
it. If it is abiding between somethings, there must be some 
particular place where it is abiding. We can pot conceive of an 
indefinite abiding place. Now Ananda, supposing you guess 
between what things it is located. Is it located between outside 
things and our bodies? Then it would be on the surface of the 
body and could not mean any place within the body. If it is 
located between parts of our body, then it would be within 
the body. Or, if it is between external things, what is its 
standard of direction? Suppose we take the case of a man: if 
he is standing between things looking toward the east, he must 
be standing in the west; or if he is looking toward the west, 
he must be standing in the east; or if he is looking toward the 
south, he must be standing in the north. If the mind is be- 
tween things but has no standard of direction, it is the same as 
saying that it has no existence; or even if it has some standard 
of direction, there can be no certainty about it (if by just 
turning he can be either in east or west or north or south). 
If the standard is uncertain, the mind will be confused 
naturally. 

Ananda replied: — What I said of the mind being “between 
somethings,” is not meant in that sense. On one occasion my 
Lord has said: — “As causal conditions, eyes and sights are mu- 
tually attracted,” but there must be something that is mani- 
fested in the consciousness that is dependent upon the eyes. 
That is what I meant by the mind being "between somethings.” 
The eyes note discriminations while objects and sights are in- 
sensible things. As consciousness develops between them, the 
conceiving mind must be localized between them. 

The Lord Buddha interrupted, saying: — Ananda, if it is 
stated that the mind is existing between the sense organ and 
the object, then, let me ask, is the essence of mind separated 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


121 


into two parts or not? If it is, the object and essential mind 
will be confusingly mingled, and as the object can not be ex- 
actly the same as essential mind which possesses the conscious- 
ness, they must be opposite to each other. How then can you 
say, that the mind exists between them? 

If the statement that the mind is separated into two parts 
has no ground, then the statement that the insensible object 
is imperceptive, means just the same as saying that it has no 
essence itself and must be, therefore, imperceptible. So the ex- 
pression “between somethings,” has no meaning. Therefore, 
Amanda, you must admit that the statement that the mind 
exists between somethings, is an absurd statement that is in- 
capable of interpretation. 

Ananda then addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Noble 
Lord! Some time ago when my Lord was discussing the in- 
trinsic Dharma with the four great Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, 
Maudgalyayana, Subhuti, Puma, and Sariputra, I overheard my 
Lord to say, that the essence of the discerning, perceiving, con- 
scious mind existed neither inside nor outside, nor between, in 
fact, that it had no location of existence. Since my Lord has 
interpreted this in his teachings just now, I have ceased to 
grasp any arbitrary conception as to the location of mind, but 
if this is true, and it is something intangible, in what sense can 
it be thought of as “my mind.” 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, as to what you have 
just said that the essence of the discerning, perceptive, con- 
scious mind has no definite location anywhere, the meaning is 
clear; it is neither in this world, in the vast open spaces, 
neither in water, nor on land, neither flying with wings, nor 
walking, nor is it anywhere. But when you say that your 
mind no longer grasps any arbitrary conception of the existence 
of the phenomena of mind, what do you mean by it? Do you 
mean that the phenomena have no true existence, or that they 
have no tangible existence? If you mean that they have no 
true existence, that would mean that they are like hair on a 
tortoise, or like horns on a rabbit. But so long as you retain 
this notion of not grasping, you cannot mean perfect non-ex- 
istence. But what do you mean? Of course if your mind is 
perfectly blank, it must mean, as far as you are concerned, 
absolute non-existence, but if you are still cherishing some 
arbitrary conception of phenomena, you must mean some kind 



122 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


of existence. How is it then, that so long as the notion of not- 
grasping of anything, as for instance, the notion of “my mind,” 
that you mean its non-existence? Therefore, Ananda, you 
ought to see that what you have just said concerning the non- 
existence of anything just because you no longer cherish a con- 
ception of it within your mind, and that would mean the non- 
existence of a discerning, perceptive, conscious mind, would be 
quite absurd, would it not? 

Thereupon, Ananda rose from his place in the midst of the 
assembly, adjusted his ceremonial scarf, knelt upon his right 
knee, placed the palms of his hands together, and respectfully 
addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — 

My Noble Lord! I have the honor of being thy youngest 
relative and thou hast always treated me with affectionate kind- 
ness. Although I am now only one of your many converts, 
thou dost still continue to show thy affection for me. But in 
spite of all I have gained mentally, I have not become liberated 
from contaminations and attachments and consequently I could 
not overcome the magic spell at the home of a harlot. My mind 
became confused and I was at the point of drowning in its 
defilement. I can see now that it was wholly due to my ignor- 
ance as to the right realization of what is true and essential 
Mind. I pray thee, Oh my Lord, to have pity and mercy upon 
me and show me the right Path to the spiritual graces of the 
Samapatti so that I may attain to self-mastery and become 
emancipated from the lure of evil myself, and be able to free 
all heretics from the bonds of their false ideas and craft. 

# # # 

When Ananda had finished his plea, he bowed humbly be- 
fore the Lord Buddha, with hands and forehead touching the 
ground, and the whole audience, awed into intense excitement, 
waited with earnest and reverential hearts for the response of 
the Blessed One. 

Suddenly in the Meditation Hall, filled with its awed and 
expectant throng, there appeared a most marvelous sight that 
transcended everything that had ever been seen before. The 
Hall was filled with a radiant splendor that emanated from 
the moon-life face of the Blessed One, like hundreds of thou- 
sands of sunbeams scintillating everywhere, and wherever the 
rays reached immediately there were seen celestial Buddha- 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


123 


lands. Moreover, the person of the Lord Buddha was vibrant 
with the six transcendental motions simultaneously manifesting 
and embracing all the Buddha-lands of the ten quarters of all 
the universes, as numerous as the finest particles of dust in the 
sunlight. And this all-embracing, blessed and transcendent 
glory united all these innumerable Buddha-lands into one single 
whole, and all the great Bodhisattvas of all these innumerable 
Buddha-lands were seen to be each in his own place with hands 
raised and pressed together expectantly waiting for the words 
of the Blessed One. 

Then the Lord Buddha addressed the assembly, saying: — 
Ananda, from beginningless time, from life to life, all sentient 
beings have had their disturbing illusions that have been mani- 
fested in their natural development each under the conditioning 
power of his own individual karma, such as the seed-pod of 
the okra which when opening always drops three seeds in each 
group. The reason why all devoted disciples do not at once at- 
tain to supreme enlightenment is because they do not realize 
two primary principles and because of it some attain only to 
Arhatship, or to Pratyakaship, and some to even lower attain- 
ments, to the state of devas and heretics, and some to Mara 
kings and their dependents. The reason for these great differ- 
ences is because, not knowing these two basic principles, they 
become confused in mind and fall into wrong practices. It is 
as if they were trying to cook fine delicacies by boiling stones 
or sand, which of course they could never do if they tried for 
countless kalpas. 

What are these two fundamental principles, Ananda? The 
First Fundamental Principle is the primary cause of the succes- 
sion of deaths and rebirths from beginningless time. (It is the 
Principle of Ignorance, the outgoing principle of individuation, 
manifestation, transformation, succession and discrimination.) 
From the working out of this Principle there has resulted the 
various differentiation of minds of all sentient beings, and all 
the time they have been taking these limited and perturbed 
and contaminated minds to be their true and natural Essence 
of Mind. 

The Second Fundamental Principle is the primary cause of 
the pure unity of Enlightenment and Nirvana that has existed 
from beginningless time. (It is the Principle of integrating 
compassion, the in-drawing, unifying principle of purity, har- 



124 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


mony, likeness, rhythm, permanency and peace.) By the In- 
drawing of this Principle within the brightness of your own 
nature, its unifying spirit can be discovered and developed and 
realized under all varieties of conditions. The reason why this 
unifying spirit is so quickly lost amongst the conditions Is be- 
cause you so quickly forget the brightness and purity of your 
own essential nature, and amid the activities of the day, you 
cease to realize its existence. That is why, Ananda, you and all 
sentient beings have fallen through ignorance into misfortune 
and into different realms of existence. 

Now, Ananda, you wish to know the right road to Sama- 
patti, so as to escape from the cycle of deaths and rebirths. Is 
it not so, Ananda? Then let me ask you some more questions. 
The Lord Tathagata raised one of his arms with hand and 
fingers clenched, saying: — Ananda, do you see this? 

Yes, I see It, my Lord. 

What do you see, Ananda? 

I see my Lord raising one of his arms with hand clenched 
and its brightness blinds my eyes and warms my heart. 

With what do you see it, Ananda? 

I see it with my eyes, of course. 

Then the Lord Buddha said: — Ananda, you have just an- 
swered me by saying that when the Tathagata by clenching 
his fingers made a shining fist, that its brightness shone into 
your eyes and warmed your heart. Very good. Now I will ask 
you: — While my fist is shining brightly and while you are 
looking at it closely, what is it that reveals the existence of 
your mind? 

Ananda replied: — You are now asking me about the exist- 
ence of my mind. To answer that question I must use my 
thinking and reasoning faculty to seaich and find an answer. 
Yes, now I understand. This thinking and reasoning being is 
what is meant as “my mind.” 

The Lord Buddha rebuked Ananda sharply and said: — 
Surely that is nonsense, to assert that your being is your mind. 

Ananda stood up with hands pressed together and said 
with astonishment: — Why, my Lord, if my being is not my 
mind, what else can be my mind? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — The notion that your being is 
your mind, is simply one of the false conceptions that arises 
from reflecting about the relations of yourself and outside 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


125 


objects, and which obscures your true and essential Mind. It 
is because, since from beginningless time down to the present 
life, you have been constantly misunderstanding your true and 
essential Mind. It is like treating a petty thief as your own 
son. By so doing you have lost consciousness of your original 
and permanent Mind and because of it have been forced to 
undergo the sufferings of successive deaths and rebirths. 

Ananda, in dismay and confusion, said to the Lord: — I am 
your beloved cousin and owing to my appreciation of your 
marks of excellence, you have permitted me to become your 
disciple. So, in regard to my mind, it is not simply that my mind 
has offered adoration to my Lord Tathagata, but it has also 
offered praise to all the Buddhas and learned Masters of all 
the innumerable Buddha Lands. More than that, it is my 
mind that has been attempting all manner of difficult practices 
with great resolution and courage. These are all activities of 
my mind as well as of myself. How can they be separated? 
Even my evil acts of slandering the Dharma, neglecting good 
practices, these also are activities of my mind as well as of myself. 
Myself is my mind. If these acts can be shown to be not the 
activities of my mind, then I would be mindless, just like any 
other image made from a log or from earth. Or, if I should 
give up my perceptions and consciousness, there would be 
nothing left that could be regarded as my self or as my mind. 
What do you mean, my Lord, when you say that my being is 
not my mind? As you can see, I am astonished and confused. 
And this audience, they are also in doubt. Pray have mercy 
upon us all and explain yourself clearly for we are only ignorant 
disciples. 

Thereupon the Blessed Lord laid his hand affectionately 
upon the head of Ananda and proceeded to explain the true 
and Essence nature of Mind, desiring to awaken in them a con- 
sciousness of that which transcended phenomena. He explained 
to them how necessary it was to keep the mind free from all 
discriminating thoughts of self and not-self if they were to cor- 
rectly understand it. 

He continued: — Ananda and all my Disciples! I have al- 
ways taught you that all phenomena and their developments 
are simply manifestations of mind. All causes and effects, from 
great universes to the fine dust only seen in the sunlight come 
into apparent existence only by means of the discriminating 



126 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


mind. If we examine the origin of anything in all the universe, 
we find that it is but a manifestation of some primal essence. 
Even the tiny leaves of herbs, knots of thread, everything, if 
we examine them carefully we find that there is some essence 
in its originality. Even open space is not nothingness. How 
can it be then that the wonderful, pure, tranquil and enlight- 
ened Mind, which is the source of all conceptions of manifested 
phenomena, should have no essence of itself. 

If you must niggardly grasp this perceptive mind of dis- 
criminating consciousness that is dependent upon the different 
sense organs as being the same as Essential Mind, then the 
discriminative mind would have to forsake all those activities 
responding to any kind of form, sight, sound, odor, taste, touch, 
and seek for another and more perfect self-nature. You are 
now listening to my teaching and your minds are making dis- 
criminations by means of the sounds rising from my speaking, 
but when the sounds cease and all the perceptions arising from 
the sounds come to an end, still the mind goes on discriminat- 
ing the memory of those sounds and you find it difficult to keep 
your mind in emptiness and tranquillity. This does not mean 
that I am instructing you not to grasp at these following ac- 
tivities, but I am instructing you to study their nature more 
closely. If your mind, after the object is removed from sight, 
still has its discriminating nature, does it necessarily mean that 
your discriminating mind has lost its substantiality? Does it 
not rather mean that you are now discriminating merely the 
shadows and reflections of unreal things which had their origin 
in objects in the presence of your sight? Objects certainly are 
not permanent,* as they vanish, does your mind vanish, also, 
and become like hair on a tortoise, or a horn on a rabbit? If 
mind vanishes, then the Dharmakaya would be exterminated 
and who would be devoted to the practice of attaining perse- 
verence in getting rid of the developments arising from the con- 
ceptions of phenomena? At this, Ananda and the great audi- 
ence became more confused and speechless. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Ananda, if in this world dis- 
ciples practiced meditation assiduously, though they attained 
all the nine stages of calmness in Dhyana, yet do not accom- 
plish the attainment of Arhats free from the intoxicants arising 
from worldly contaminations and attachments, it is wholly 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


127 


due to their grasping this deceiving conception of discriminative 
thinking that is based on unrealities and mistaking the delusion, 
as being a reality. Ananda, although you have learned a great 
deal, you are not yet ready for the maturity of Buddhahood. 

# # # 

When Ananda heard this solemn teaching, he became very 
sorrowful and with tears falling, with forehead, hands and feet 
touching the ground, he paid homage to the Lord. Then kneel- 
ing, he said: — 

Noble Lord! Since I determined to follow thee and become 
thy disciple, I have always thought that I could rely upon thy 
supernormal strength and that it would not be difficult to put 
thy teachings into practice. I expected that the Lord would 
favor me with an experience of Samadhi in this body; I did 
not appreciate that the body and mind were different and could 
not be substituted for each other, so I have likely lost my own 
mind. Although I have become a disciple of Buddha, my heart 
is not yet absorbed in Enlightenment. I am like a prodigal 
son who has forsaken his father. I now see that in spite of 
my learning, if I am not able to put it into practice, I am no 
better than an unlearned man. It is like a man talking about 
food, but never eating and becoming satisfied. We are all en- 
tangled in these two hindrances: knowledge and learning, and 
vexation and suffering. I can now see that it is all due to our 
ignorance of the eternal and tranquil nature of true Mind. 
Pray, my Lord Tathagata, have mercy upon us all; show us 
clearly the mysterious, enlightening Mind, and open our true 
eye of Enlightenment. 

Suddenly from the holy symbol on the breast of the Lord 
Tathagata, there shown forth a glorious, blazing brightness, 
which radiated forth brilliantly into hundreds and thousands 
of colored rays reaching to the ten quarters of the universes, 
which were instantly turned into innumerable Buddha-lands, 
and glorified all the holy shrines of the Tathagata, in all the 
ten quarters of the universes. And, finally, the scintillating 
splendor returned to rest on the crown of Ananda and upon 
the crown of each one in the assembly. . . 

Then the Lord Buddha addressed Ananda, saying:— For the 
sake of all I will lift the luminous beacon of the Dharma so 



128 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

that by its light all sentient beings may realize the wonderful, 
mysterious nature of the pure enlightening Mind and acquire 
its true intrinsic Eye. 

First, let me question you, Ananda. You saw my fist and it 
seemed bright to you. By what means did its' brightness mani- 
fest itself? By what means was it seen, and by what means 
was the thought of brightness conceived? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord, the brightness comes from the 
whole luminous body of my Lord which is as brightly shining 
as a valley filled with rabies. Your holy body, shining as it 
does, could not have originated except from Purity itself. Your 
hand being clenched was in the form of a fist, I saw it with 
my eyes, my mind conceived its brightness. 

The Buddha said: — You say that it takes the movement of 
my fingers and the seeing of your eyes to give you the con- 
ception of a fist. Does that mean that the nature of the 
movement of the fingers and the seeing of the eyes and the 
thinking of the mind are all alike? 

Ananda replied: — Yes, my Lord. If you had no hand, or I 
had no eyes, there could be no conception of a fist. There must 
be the meeting of the two conditions. 

The Lord Buddha interrupted: — You state that the move- 
ment of the hand and the seeing of the eyes being in agree- 
ment, the mind conceives a fist. Is that wholly true? If a man 
loses his hand he loses it forever, but if a man loses his eyes, 
he does not wholly lose the sense of sight, nor does he lose the 
conception of a fist. Suppose you meet a blind man on the 
road and you ask him, “In your blindness, what do you see?” 
He will give you some such answer as this: — “I can only see 
darkness, nothing else.” This means that the objects within the 
range of his former sight have become darkened; there is 
no loss of his conception of sight but the conception is of 
darkness. 

Ananda asked: — My Lord, if the blind man can only per- 
ceive darkness, how can it mean that he still possesses the 
perception of sight? 

The Buddha replied: — Ananda, this blind man of no eyes 
simply sees darkness just as any seeing man who is shut up in 
a dark room sees darkness. Close your eyes, Ananda, what do 
you perceive but darkness? 

Ananda had to admit that as far as perceiving darkness was 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


129 


concerned there was no difference between the blind man, the 
man in a dark room and himself with his eyes closed. 

The Buddha resumed: — If the blind man seeing only dark- 
ness suddenly recovers his sight and again sees objects, we say 
that he sees them by means of his eyes. A lamp is suddenly 
brought into the dark room and we say that the man again 
sees objects by means of the lamp. That is not strictly true for 
while the lamp does reveal objects, it is the eyes that perceive 
them. If it were otherwise and the seeing belonged to the lamp 
then it would no longer be a lamp and the seeing would have 
no relation to him. In a true sense, however, it is neither the 
lamp nor the eyes that perceives objects. 

Although this was the second instruction that Ananda had 
had on this subject, he did not yet understand it and sat dazed 
hoping for a clearer interpretation of it in the kind and gentle 
tones of the Master and he waited with a pure and expectant 
heart for the Blessed One’s further explanation. 

The Lord Buddha, in great kindness, let his hand rest 
kindly on the head of Ananda and said to him: — Ananda, at 
the beginning of my perfect Enlightenment I went to the Deer 
Forest at Samath where Kaundinya and his four disciples were 
staying and gave them my first teaching. The teaching was 
this: — The reason why all sentient beings fail to attain en- 
lightenment and Arhatship is because they have been led astray 
by false conceptions regarding phenomena and objects, which 
defiled their minds. Since that time they have understood the 
import of that teaching and have become enlightened. 

Then Kaundinya rose from his seat and addressed the Lord, 
saying: — Blessed Lord! I am now the oldest in this assembly 
and am credited with having the best understanding of the 
Dharma. I attained Arhatship by realizing the significance of 
objective things. I was like a traveler seeking lodgings where I 
could satisfy my hunger and take my rest, but, like a traveler 
after he had satisfied his hunger and taken his rest, he could 
no longer stay there for a comfortable rest but must set out 
on another day’s journey. If he was the inn-keeper he could 
do so, but the traveler is the symbol of impermanency. We 
may also draw a lesson from the sky. After a rain it is fresh 
and clear and the sun’s rays penetrating the clouds light up the 
dust particles moving about in the air. We think of open 
space as a symbol of motionlessness and permanency, while we 



130 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


think of dust particles as symbols of motion and impermanency. 

The Lord Buddha was much pleased by the words of Kaun- 
dinya and said:- — So it is, so it is, Kaundinya! Then raising his 
hand, he opened his fingers and then closed them, saying: — 
What do you see, Ananda? 

Ananda replied: — I see my Lord standing before the as- 
sembling opening and closing his beautiful fingers. 

The Lord resumed: — As you watch the fingers of my hand 
opening and closing, does the perception of motion belong to 
my hand or to your eyes? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord, while thy precious hand is 
opening and closing I recognize the motion as belonging to thy 
hand and not to my eyes. 

The Lord enquired: — Ananda, what is in motion and what 
is still? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord, it is thy fingers that are in 
motion, but as to the perception of my eyes, while it can not 
be said that it possesses the nature of absolute stillness, it can 
hardly be said that it is in motion. 

The Lord Buddha was pleased with this reply and said: 
So it is, Ananda. Then the Lord Buddha caused a bright beam 
of light to dart from his hand and fall on Ananda’s right side. 
Ananda quickly turned his head to look at it. Then the Lord 
caused another beam of light to fall on Ananda’s left, and 
Ananda quickly turned his head to look at that. Then the Lord 
Buddha questioned Ananda, saying: — Ananda, what caused you 
to turn your head about? 

My Lord, it was because I saw a shining beam of light 
springing from my Lord's hand and darting first to my right 
and then to my left, and I turned my head to look at it. 

Ananda, you say that when your eyes followed the light, 
you turned your head from right to left. Tell me was it your 
head or the perception of your sight that moved? 

My Lord, it was my head that moved. As to the per- 
ception of sight, while it can not be said that it has the nature 
of motionlessness, neither can it be said that it has no motion. 

The Lord was pleased with this reply and said: — So it is, 
Ananda. When I was looking at you as sentient beings do, it 
was your head that was moving about but my perception of 
sight did not move, and when you were looking at me, it was 
my hand opening and closing, not your “seeing" that moved. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


131 

Ananda, can you not see the difference in nature in that which 
moves and changes, and that which is motionless and unchang- 
ing? It is body which moves and changes, not Mind. Why do 
you so persistently look upon motion as appertaining to both 
body and mind? Why do you permit your thoughts to rise and 
fall, letting the body rule the mind, instead of Mind ruling the 
body? Why do you let your senses deceive you as to the true 
unchanging nature of Mind and then to do things in a reversed 
order which leads to motion and confusion and suffering? As 
one forgets the true nature of Mind, so he mistakes the re- 
flections of objects as being his own mind, thus binding him to 
the endless movements and changes and suffering of the recur- 
ring cycles of deaths and rebirths that are of his own causing. 
You should regard all that changes as “dust-particles” and that 
which is unchanging as being your own true Nature of Mind. 

Then Ananda and all the assembly realized that from be- 
ginningless time, they had forgotten and ignored their own true 
nature, had misinterpreted conditional objects, and had con- 
fused their minds by false discriminations and illusive reflec- 
tions. They felt like a little baby that had found its mother’s 
breast, and became calm and peaceful in spirit. In this spirit 
they pressed their hands together and made devout obeisance 
to the Blessed One. They besought the Lord Tathagata to teach 
them how to make right distinctions between body and mind, 
between the real and the unreal, between that which is true 
and that which is false, between the manifested natures of 
deaths and rebirths on the one hand, and the intrinsic nature 
of that which is un-born and never dies on the other hand; 
the one appearing and disappearing, the other forever abiding 
within the essence of their own mind. 

(Questions of King Prasenajit.) 

His Highness King Prasenajit who was in the assembly, 
stood up and addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Honorable 
Lord, formerly before I had been under the instruction of my 
Lord, I visited Katyayana and Vairotiputra (two heretic 
teachers). They both taught that after one’s death, the de- 
struction of body and mind meant Nirvana. Afterwards, I have 
been occasionally with my Lord, I have had doubts within 
my mind and even now the matter is not clear. How can I 
clearly understand and realize this state of non-death and non- 



132 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


rebirth. I think that all the disciples present who have not yet 
attained Arhatship, are equally desirous of more perfectly un- 
derstanding this profound teaching from my Lord Buddha. 

The Lord addressed the King, saying: — Your Majesty! May 
I have the honor of asking you some questions about your 
present body. Is your Majesty’s body as permanent and en- 
during as gold and steel, or is it impermanent and destructible? 

Oh, my Lord, my present body of flesh will soon come to 
destruction. 

Your Majesty! While your body has not yet come to de- 
struction, how do you know that it ever will? 

My Lord, it is true that this body has not yet come to 
total destruction, but as I have watched it and reflected about 
it, I have seen it constantly changing and needing constant 
renewal. It seems as though it was slowly being changed into 
ashes, gradually decreasing and fading away. From this I am 
convinced that it will ultimately come to destruction. 

Yes, your Majesty, it is all too true. You are growing old 
and your health is becoming imperfect. Tell me a little about 
your present appearance as compared with your boyhood. 

Your Lordship! When I was a boy, my skin was tender 
and smooth, in young manhood my blood and energy were in 
full supply, now as I am getting old, my strength is failing, 
my appearance is languid and dull, my brain is dull and un- 
certain, my hair has become grey and white, my face wrinkled. 
All these changes certainly show that I can not live much 
longer. How can I compare my present with my youth? 

The Lord Buddha replied kindly: — Your Majesty, do not be 
discouraged, your appearance will not become decrepit as 
quickly as all that. 

Your Lordship! It is true that these changes have been go- 
ing on so secretly that I have hardly felt them, but as winters 
and summers pass I know that I have been gradually changing 
into my present condition. At twenty I was young for my age 
but my appearance was very different than at ten; at thirty I 
was older; at forty, still older; and now after twenty years I 
am sixty and am what I am. 1 recollect that at fifty years of 
age I felt comparatively young and strong. Your Lordship! I 
am conscious that these processes and changes are still going 
on secretly and that in a brief time, perhaps ten limited years, 
the end will come. 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


m 


Moreover, your Lordship, as I think about these changes, I 
see that it is not a matter of changes in one or two decades, 
the process is going on yearly. And not only yearly, but month 
by month, yes, day by day. Now I think of it, the changes are 
going on faster than that even, breath by breath, changes in- 
cessantly going on faster than thought. In the end my body 
will be given over to destruction. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Your Majesty from watching this 
process of change going on you have become convinced that 
ultimately your body will be given over to destruction. At the 
time of the destruction of your body, do you think there is 
anything within your body that is not destructible? 

The King Prasenajit pressed his hands together and replied 
soberly: — Certainly, your Lordship, I do not know. I wish I 
did. 

The Lord Buddha said: Your Majesty! I will now show 
you the nature of no-dying and no-rebirth. At the time you 
first saw the river Ganges, your Majesty, how old were you? 

The King replied: — I can remember when my mother 
brought me there to worship the Deva god. I was then just 
three years old. I can remember when we crossed the river; I 
can remember hearing it called the Ganges. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Your Majesty! You were three 
years old at that time. As you have said, when ten years had 
passed, you were older, and down to the age of sixty the proc- 
esses of change have been going on year after year, month 
after month, day after day and thought after thought. Your 
Majesty, you said that when you first saw the river Ganges, 
you were three years of age. Tell me, when you were thirteen 
years of age and saw the Ganges, how did it appear to you? 
Was the sight of it, your mind’s perception of the sight, any 
different? 

The King replied: — My sight of it was just the same as 
when I was three years of age. And now at my present age of 
sixty-two, while the sight of my eyes is not as good, my per- 
ception of the sight is just the same as ever. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Your Majesty! You have 
been saddened by the changes in your personal appearance 
since your youth — your greying hair and wrinkled face — but 
you say that your perception of sight compared with it when 
you were a youth, shows no change. Tell me. Your Majesty, 


134 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

is there any youth and old age in the perception of sight? 

Not at all, your Lordship. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Your Majesty! Though your 
face has become wrinkled, in the perception of your eyes, there 
are no signs of age, no wrinkles. Then, wrinkles are the symbol 
of change, and the un-wrinkled is the symbol of the un-chang- 
ing. That which is changing must suffer destruction, of course, 
but the un-changing is naturally free from deaths and re- 
births. How is it. Your Majesty, that the un-changing per- 
ception of Mind still suffers the illusion of deaths and rebirths 
and you are still clinging to the teaching of the heretic, who 
claimed that after the death of the body, everyone was com- 
pletely destroyed? 

After listening to this wonderful instruction that implied 
that after one’s death something survived to reappear in a new 
body, the King and the whole assembly were much cheered and 
filled with joy. It was a most interesting occasion. 

( Questions by Ananda.) 

Then Ananda, after paying the usual reverence to the Lord 
Buddha, rose in his place and addressed the Lord, saying: — 

Noble Lord! If the perception of the eyes and ears is free 
from death and re-birth, why did my Lord say that we had 
forgotten our true nature of mind and acted in a state of “re- 
versed confusion”? Pray, my Lord, have pity on us all and 
purify our contaminated minds and clear away our attachments 
to them. 

Immediately the Lord Buddha stretched out his arm with 
fingers pointing downward in some mystic “mudra.” He said 
to Ananda: — As you are looking at my fingers, are they in an 
upright position or in a reversed position? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord! Most people in this world 
would say that they were in a reversed position, but because 
the fingers are arranged in some mystic mudra, I do not know 
which is the upright position and which is the reverse. 

The Lord replied: — Ananda, if human beings regard this as 
in a reversed position, what would they regard as an upright 
position? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord, if you were to turn the hand 
so that the fingers were pointing up, that they would call an 
upright position. 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


135 


The Lord Buddha suddenly turned his hand and said to 
Ananda:— If this interpretation of positions, reversed or up- 
right, is simply made by turning the hand so that the fingers 
are pointing either up or down without any change in the lo- 
cation of the hand, that is, as viewed by beings in this world, 
then you should know that the essence of the Lord Tathagata’s 
true body, the pure Dharmakaya, may be interpreted differently 
by viewing it from different view points of attainment, as being 
either the Lord Tathagata’s “True Omniscience” (upright po- 
sition), or as the body of one’s own mind, the “reversed 
position.” 

Now, Ananda, concentrate your mind on this and explain it 
to me; — When you say that your mind is in the reversed po- 
sition, in what position is your body to be regarded? Is the 
body, also, in a reversed position? 

At this question, Ananda and the whole assembly were con- 
fused and stared up at him with open mouths. What did he 
mean by a reversed position of both their body and mind? 

In great compassion of heart, the Lord Buddha pitied An- 
anda and the great assembly. He spoke to them reassuringly, 
and his voice was like the subdued sound of the ocean’s bil- 
lows: — My good, faithful disciples! Have I not been constantly 
teaching you that all of the causes and conditions that char- 
acterize changing phenomena and the modes of the mind, and 
of the different attributes of the mind, and the independently 
developed conditions of the mind, are all simply manifestations 
of the mind; and all of your body and mind are but manifes- 
tations of the wonderful, enlightening, and true nature of the 
all-embracing and mysterious Essence of Mind. 

My good, faithful disciples! Why do you so easily forget 
this natural, wonderful, and enlightening Mind of perfect Purity 
— this mysterious Mind of radiant Brightness? And why are 
you still bewildered in your realizing consciousness? Open space 
is nothing but invisible dimness; the invisible dimness of space 
is mingled with darkness to look like forms; sensations of form 
are mingled into illusive and arbitrary conceptions of phe- 
nomena; and from these false conceptions of phenomena, is 
developed the consciousness of body. So, within the mind, 
these jumblings of causes and conditions, segregating into groups 
and coming into contact with the world’s external objects, there 
is awakened desire or fear which divides the mind and causes 



136 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


it to sink into either indulgence or anger. All of you have been 
accepting this confusing conception of phenomena as being 
your own nature of mind. As soon as you accepted it as your 
true mind, is it any wonder that you became bewildered and 
supposed it to be localized in your physical body, and that all 
the external things, mountains, rivers, the great open spaces, 
tod the whole world, were outside the body. Is it any wonder 
that you failed to realize that everything you have so falsely 
conceived has its only existence within your own wonderful, en- 
lightening Mind of True Essence. 

In likeness you have abandoned all the great, pure, calm 
oceans of water, and clung to one bubble which you not only 
accept but which you regard as the whole body of water in all 
the hundreds of thousands of seas. In such bewilderment, you 
reveal yourselves as fools among fools. Though I move my 
fingers up or down, there is no change in the hand itself, but 
the world makes a distinction, and says that now it is upright, 
now it is reversed. Those who do this are greatly to be pitied. 

Ananda was profoundly moved by this teaching and thfough 
the kindness of the Lord Buddha was delivered from his foolish 
bewilderment. He sincerely repented and pressing his hands 
together reverenced the Lord Buddha, saying: — My Noble 
Lord! Though I have been listening to the Lord’s wonderful 
teaching and have realized that this wonderful Enlightening 
Mind is by nature perfect in itself and is the permanent 
ground of my changing mind, but, as 1 have been listening to 
this Teaching of the Dharma, I think of my concentrating 
mind. I know that it is of a higher order than my conditional 
mind, but I dare not recognize it as being the pure, original 
ground of my mind. Pray, my Lord, have pity upon us all and 
kindly declare to us the complete teaching and remove this root 
of suspicion and doubt, so that we may attain to supreme 
Enlightenment. 

The Lord Buddha replied to Ananda, saying: — Ananda, 
from what you have just said, I can see that you have been 
listening to my teaching with your conditional mind, and so 
my teachings have become conditional, also. It shows that you 
have not yet fully realized the pure Essence of your mind. It 
is like a man calling the attention of another man to the moon 
by pointing his finger toward it. The other man ought to look 
at the moon, but instead he looks at the finger and by so do- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


137 

ing, not only misses the moon but misses the finger, also* And 
why? Because he has taken the finger to be the moon. Not 
only that, he has failed to notice the difference between dark- 
ness and brightness. And why? Because he takes the dark 
finger to be the moon’s brightness. That is why he does not 
know the difference between darkness and brightness. Ananda, 
you are just as foolish as that man. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Ananda, if you take that 
which discriminates my teaching as your mind, then when it 
lays aside its conceptions of the discriminated teaching, the 
mind should still retain its own discriminating nature, which 
it does not. It is like a traveller seeking an inn where he may 
rest for a short time but not permanently. But the inn-keeper 
lives there permanently, he does not go away. It is the same 
with this difficulty. If the discriminating mind is your true 
Mind, it should never change. How can it be your true Mind 
when, as soon as the sound of my voice ceases, it has no dis- 
criminating nature? 

Ananda, this is true not only as regards discriminations of 
sound, but also of sight and all other sensations, and if the 
mind is free from all conceptions of phenomena, inherently it 
must be free from discriminations in its own nature. And even 
if there is no discriminated object before it, the mind is neither 
vacuity nor phenomena. If it can be, that when you leave off 
all the conditions of phenomena, there shall remain no dis- 
criminating nature of mind, then both your mind and its Es- 
sence will have one individual and original nature, which would 
be their own and true reality. 

Ananda said to the Lord Buddha: — Noble Lord, if both my 
mind and its Essence have one originality, why does the won- 
derful, enlightening original Mind, which has just been pro- 
claimed by the Lord Buddha as being one with my discrimi- 
nating mind, not return to its original state? Have pity upon 
us, my Lord, and explain it more clearly. 

The Lord Buddha replied, saying: — Ananda, as you look at 
me with this enlightening Essence of sight, its perception of 
sight is the same thing and yet is not the same as the En- 
lightening Mind of the wonderful Essence. It is just like a re- 
production of the true moon — that is, it is not merely a shadow 
of the moon. Now, Ananda, listen and I will show you the 
originality that has no need of returning at all. 



i$8 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Let us consider this great Lecture Hal! which opens toward 
the east: when the crimson sun rises, it is filled with a glorious 
brightness; but when it is mid-night and no moonlight, and 
the sky overcast by clouds and mist, then there is dense dark- 
ness, Again, because it has doors and windows, the interior is 
visible, but if there were no doors or windows, the perception 
of sight would be hindered. Where there is only space, then 
there is only a common emptiness, but when discriminations 
are made, they straight away condition the sight. When the 
air is shut in by walls, it soon becomes close and gloomy and 
permeated with dust; when clear fresh air comes in, the dust 
soon disappears and the room becomes clear and refreshing to 
the eyes. 

Ananda, during your life you have experienced many 
changes; I am now going to return these changes to their re- 
spective originalities. What do I mean by their respective 
originalities, Ananda? I will explain. In this Lecture Hall, 
first let us return the brightness to the crimson sun. Why? 
Because if there were no sun, there would be no brightness. 
That is, the origin of the brightness is in the sun, so let us 
return the brightness to the sun. Let us do the same with the 
other conditions; darkness returns to the dim moon, passage of 
light returns to the doors and windows, hindrance to light re- 
turns to the dense walls of the house, conditions return to 
discriminations, space returns to emptiness, closeness and 
gloominess return to dust and clearness and freshness return to 
the purifying air. Thus all the existencies in the world may be 
included in these eight kinds of phenomena. 

Now, Ananda, let us consider the perceiving mind which 
distinguishes these eight kinds of phenomena and which we 
have already found has its ground in the enlightening nature 
of the Essence of Mind; to which one of these eight phe- 
nomena shall it be returned? If you return the faculty of per- 
ceiving to brightness, then when there is no brightness, there 
will be no perception of darkness. Though there may be all 
degrees of illumination between brightness and darkness, per- 
ception in its self-nature possesses no differentials. (Therefore, 
we can not return perceiving, which belongs to our Essence of 
Mind to the phenomena of brightness or any other of the eight 
classes of phenomena noted above.) Thus we see that those 
things which can be returned to their originalities do not be- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


139 

long to your own true nature; and that which we can not re- 
turn to its originality, is the only thing which truly belongs to 
us. This shows that your mind has its own mysterious nature 
of brightness and purity, and when you try to refer your mind 
to the various classes of phenomena, you simply deceive and 
bewilder yourself, and, by so doing, you have lost your own 
true nature and have suffered endless misfortunes, like a 
vagrant adrift on the ocean of deaths and rebirths. That is 
why, I look upon you as being most pitiable. 

Ananda was still in doubt as to the true nature of his mind, 
and begged the Lord Buddha for further elucidation, saying: — 
My Lord, though I now can see that the nature of the mind’s 
perceiving is constant and does not need to be referred to any 
originality in phenomena, but how can I fully realize that it 
is my true and essential nature? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, you have not yet at- 
tained to the pure state of freedom from the intoxicants, but 
you have, with the aid of my Transcendental Power, advanced 
to the first attainment of Dhyana and thus acquired the state 
of Perfect Intelligence. In the state of Freedom from Intoxi- 
cants, Anuruddha looking upon the countries of this world, sees 
them as clearly as he sees an amala fruit lying in the palm of 
his hand. In that state the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, looking 
beyond this world, have seen with like clearness, all the worlds, 
even hundreds of thousands of worlds. It is the same with the 
Tathagatas of the ten quarters of all the universes. Their sight 
reaches everywhere; they see clearly all the Buddha-lands of 
Purity, greater in number than the fine particles of dust. But 
the perception of the eyes belonging to ordinary sentient beings 
cannot pierce through the thickness of a tenth of an inch. 

Let us consider the palaces of the Four Heavenly Kings! 
How great the distances. How different the conditions of water 
and earth and air. In those Heavenly Realms there may be 
seen similarities to light and darkness, and all other phenomena 
of this world, but that is because of the lingering memory of 
objects seen in this world. Under those Heavenly conditions, 
you would still have to continue making distinctions between 
yourself and objects. But, Ananda, I challenge you, by the 
perception of your sight, to detect which is my True Essence 
and which manifestation. 

Ananda, let us go to the extreme limit of our sight — to the 



140 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


palaces of the sun and moon — do you see anything there that 
belongs to our nature? Coming nearer to the Seven Golden 
Mountains that surround Mt. Sumaru, look carefully, what do 
you see? We see all sorts of brightness and glory, but nothing 
that belongs to our nature. Moving nearer, we come to the 
massing clouds, the flying birds, the hurrying winds, the rising 
of dust, the mountains, the familiar woods, trees, rivers, herbs, 
vegetables, animals, none of which belongs to our nature. 

Ananda, regarding all these things, far or near, as perceived 
by the pure Essence of your perceiving eyes, they have different 
characteristics, but the perception of our eyes is always the 
same. Does this not mean, that this wonderful perception of 
sight is the true nature of our minds? 

Ananda, if the perception of sight is not your own nature, 
but is to be regarded as an object, then since it is to be re- 
garded as an object, my perception of sight is to be regarded 
as an object also, and you should be able to see my perception 
of sight. Moreover, if when you see the same thing that I do, 
you regard it as seeing my perception of sight, then since you 
have seen the sphere of my seeing, you should also see the 
sphere of my not seeing. Why can you not do so? Further- 
more, if you falsely say that you see the sphere of my not 
seeing, it is then simply your own sphere of not seeing and it 
can not be the phenomena of my not seeing. And if not, how 
can it be that the phenomena of your not seeing is to be re- 
garded as mine? Therefore, if you really do not see the sphere 
of my not seeing, then the selfness of this perception of sight 
can not be an object that can be seen with the eyes and 
touched with the hands. And if it is not an object, then why 
is it not your own true nature? If you still falsely regard your 
perception of sight as an object, the object should be able to 
see you, too. If you try to explain it in this way, the sub- 
stantiality of an object and the selfness of the perception of 
sight of the object would be hopelessly jumbled together. No 
one would be able to tell which is subject and which object. 

Ananda, as the nature of the perception of sight is uni- 
versal, how can it be regarded as otherwise than your own true 
nature? What does it mean, Ananda, that you do not recognize 
the true nature that naturally belongs to you, and on the con- 
trary, you are asking me to show you another reality? 

Ananda said to the Blessed One: — Noble LordI If the na- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


141 


ture of the perception of my sight is my true nature and not 
any different, then when my Lord and I (in a Samapatti state) 
were visiting the transcendental, mystical, and magnificent pal- 
aces of the Four Heavenly Kings and were sojourning in the 
palaces of the sun and moon, the perception of our sight was 
then perfect and universal, reaching and including every part 
of the Saha world. But when we returned to this Jetavena 
Grove we see only this Hall — a still, quiet place with doors 
and windows — and when we look out from within, we are able 
to see only the veranda and eaves. Now I learn from my Lord, 
that the essence of the perception of sight naturally permeates 
the whole universe. If that is so, why is it that now our per- 
ception of sight only embraces this little hall and nothing more? 
What does it mean, my Lord? Does it mean that the percep- 
tion of sight is reduced from universality to the finiteness of 
mortal mind? Or is it that the perception of sight is parti- 
tioned off by walls and houses? I do not see where the point 
of your explanation lies. Please explain it more clearly, for we 
are very ignorant and stupid. 

The Lord Buddha replied: — As all things in the uni- 
verse, either great or small, external or internal, are objects in 
the presence of our sight, so it would not be right to say that 
our perception of sight has the potentiality of enlarging and 
reducing. For instance, take an empty square vessel. When 
you consider the space in the square vessel, is that square space 
fixed or changeable? If it is fixed, then if you put a round 
vessel inside of it, the square space would not permit the ad- 
mission of the round vessel; or if it is changeable, then the 
space in the square vessel would no longer appear square. You 
said that you did not see where the point lies. Well here is 
the point: it is the nature of space to be neither fixed nor 
changeable (and the same is true of the mind’s perception), as 
I have stated before, so it is absurd for you to repeat your 
question. 

Or, Ananda, (if you are still unconvinced) suppose you fill 
the square vessel with objects and then remove the vessel’s 
squareness; are you still troubled as to the existence of shape 
in open space? Supposing that it is true that when we re- 
entered the Hall, the perception of our sight became limited, 
and when we look at the sun, it appears to lengthen to reach 
the surface of the sun. Or when we build a wall or a house, it 



142 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

appears to set apart or limit the perception of our sight, but 
when we make a hole in the wall, is the perception of our 
sight unable to look through and beyond? The point of my 
explanation is that changeableness is not an attribute of our 
perception of sight. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Anandal Since beginningless 
time sentient beings have been led astray by mistaking the na- 
ture of their mind to be the same as the nature of any other 
object. As they thus lose their true and essential Mind their 
minds become bewildered by outer objects and the perception of 
their sight becomes changeable to conform to the dimensions of 
its visual field and to become limited strictly according to outer 
conditions. But if you can learn to see things by your true 
and essential Mind, right away you will become equal to all 
the Tathagatas — both your mind and your body will become 
perfectly enlightened and you will be in the same state of 
tranquillity and stillness as though you were sitting under the 
Bodhi tree. So perfectly universalized will your mind have be- 
come that even at the point of a single hair all the kingdoms 
of the ten quarters of the universe will be seen. 

Ananda said: — Noble Lord, if the Essence of the perception 
of sight is my wonderful, enlightening Mind, then this wonder- 
ful Mind must be something which we can consider, and if the 
perception of sight is my true Essence, then what becomes of 
my present body and mind? I feel that both my body and 
mind have their separate existence, and yet this Essential per- 
ception of sight, even in its concentrated state of stillness, ap- 
pears to make no discrimination of my body. If this Essential 
Nature of my perception of sight is truly my Mind then it 
should be able to show me in the presence of my sight, that 
it is my true self, but if it does, what becomes of my body, 
does it belong to me or not? This would seem to be contrary 
to what my Lord has previously said, that the object could not 
see the mind. We beg, my Lord to have pity upon us and 
enlighten our ignorant minds. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Ananda, what you have just ques- 
tioned, as to whether the perception of sight is something that 
can be considered as standing in your presence, is not true. If 
it was really present before your sight and you could really see 
it, then as the Essence of the perception of sight has a loca- 
tion, it will no longer be without a point of direction. 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


M3 


Suppose we were sitting in the Jetavana grove and our sight 
reached everywhere in the grove— to the streams, to the Royal 
Palace and its mansions, up to the sun and the moon and 
down to the River Ganges. All of these different phenomena, 
which we are supposing you are indicating with your hand as 
being within the purview of our sight, each has its distinctive 
characteristic; the grove is shady, the sun is bright, the wall 
is an obstacle to light, the opening in the wall is a passage for 
the light, and the same is true even of the smaller things, the 
trees, herbs, fine grasses etc. Though in dimensions they all 
differ from one another, so long as it has appearance, there is 
nothing that is beyond the range of our sight or description. 
If the perception of sight is present before your sight, you 
should be able to point to me, which is your perception of 
sight and describe it to me. 

If it is space that is the perception of sight, you ought to 
know, and if we were to remove perception of sight, what 
would you substitute for space? If one of the many objects is 
the perception of sight and has now become the perception of 
sight, what other object will you substitute for the first? Sup- 
pose you look closely, analyze all the phenomena before you, 
pick out the essential and enlightening, pure and wonderful 
nature of the perception of sight, and show it to me just as 
describable and tangible as the other things. 

Ananda said to the Lord: — My Lord! Standing in the Lec- 
ture Hall of this imposing building and looking out into the 
far distances, to the vista of the Ganges, up to the sun and 
the moon, looking everywhere my hand can point and my sight 
can reach, there is nothing in sight but objects, and I see noth- 
ing that is analogous to my perception of sight. It is just as 
my Lord has taught us. I am simply a junior Arhat not yet 
free from the intoxicants, but it is the same with the Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattvas, we are all alike unable to detect the pres- 
ence of anything to be called the perception of sight among 
all the appearances of phenomena, nor are we able to point 
out an analogous something that transcends all objects. 

The Lord Buddha was greatly pleased with this reply and 
said: — So it is, Ananda, so it is! There is neither the Essence 
of the perception of sight, nor any other essential nature tran- 
scending all objects. There is no such “thing” as the perception 
of sight. Now let me ask you some more questions. 



144 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Suppose Ananda, that you and I are again sitting in the 
Jeta grove, looking out over the gardens, even to the sun and 
moon, and seeing all the multitudinous objects, and no such 
thing as perception of sight can be pointed out to us. But, 
Ananda, among all these multitudinous phenomena, can you 
show me anything which does not belong to the perception of 
sight? 

Ananda replied: — Noble Lord! True, I see every part of 
the Jeta grove, but see nothing which does not belong to per- 
ception of sight. And why? Because if the trees in the grove 
do not belong to the perception of sight, we could not call 
them trees. But if the trees belong to the perception of sight, 
why do we still call them trees? It is the same with space. If 
it does not belong to the perception of sight, we could not see 
space, and if it does belong to the perception of sight, why 
should we still call it space? I am convinced now that all ob- 
jects whatsoever, be they little or big, wherever there are mani- 
festations and appearances, all belong to the perception of 
sight. 

Again, the Lord Buddha expressed agreement, saying: — So 
it is, Ananda, so it isl 

Then all the junior disciples, except the older ones among 
them who had finished the practice of meditation, having 
listened to the discussion and not understanding the significance 
of the conclusion, became confused and frightened and lost 
control of themselves. 

The Lord Tathagata, recognizing that the junior disciples 
were thrown into perplexity and discouragement by the teach- 
ing, took pity upon them and consoled them, saying to Ananda 
and to all of them: — 

My good, pious disciples! Do not be disturbed by what has 
been taught. All that the supreme Teacher of the Dharma has 
taught are true and sincere words, they are neither extravagant 
nor chimerical. They are not to be compared with the puzzling 
paradoxes given by the famous heretic teachers. Do not be 
disturbed by what has been taught, but ponder upon it seri- 
ously and never give yourself up either to sadness or delight. 

Thereupon the great disciple Manjusri, regarded by all as a 
Prince of the Lord's Dharma, took pity upon the confused 
ones among the Brothers, rose in his place and bowing with 
great reverence at the feet of the Lord Buddha, said to him: — 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


145 


Blessed Lord! There are some among the Brothers in this As- 
sembly who have not yet fully realized the significance of these 
two seemingly ambiguous interpretations relating to whether 
phenomena and space belong to perception of sight, which 
have been presented by my Lord Tathagata. 

Blessed Lord! If the conditioning causes in the presence 
of our sight, such as phenomenal objects, space etc., are meant 
as belonging to the perception of sight, they should have re- 
lations to be pointed out; or, if they are not meant as belong- 
ing to the perception of sight, they should not be seen by our 
sight. The Brothers do not see the point of the teaching and, 
therefore, have become confused and frightened. It does not 
mean that the roots of the Brothers’ goodness in previous lives 
are too weak for such profound teaching, but for them the 
explanation needs to be very plain. I pray the Blessed Lord 
to be kind enough to bring out the Truth more simply as to 
what relations there are lying between the phenomenal objects 
and the Essence of the perception of sight. What are their 
origins, and how is the ambiguity as to whether they belong or 
do not belong, to be gotten rid of. 

Then the Lord Buddha replied: — Manjusri and all my good 
pious Disciples! The Tathagatas in the ten quarters of the 
universe, together with all the great Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, 
as they are intrinsically abiding in Samadhi, regard all of the 
perceptions of sight, their causes and conditions, and of all 
conceptions of phenomena, as being visionary flowers in the air, 
having no true nature of existence within themselves. But they 
regard the perceiving of sight as belonging to the Essence of 
the wonderful, pure, enlightening Mind (. Bodhi ). Why should 
there be any ambiguity as to belonging or not belonging, be- 
tween the perception of sight and the perceiving of objects? 

Manjusri, let me ask you, supposing there is another Man- 
jusri, just such as you are. What do you think? Is there truly 
another Manjusri? Or is it an impossible supposition. 

Blessed Lord, it is just as you say, it is impossible. I am 
the true Manjusri; it is impossible to have another of me. And 
why? Because if it was possible to have another in perfect 
likeness, there would be two Manjusris, but I would still be the 
one and true Manjusri. There is no ambiguity of one or two. 

The Lord Buddha was pleased with this reply and con- 
tinued: — It is just the same with this wonderful, enlightening 


146 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

perception of sight, the seeing of objects, as well as objects 
themselves, they all intrinsically belong to the pure, perfect, 
Essential Mind of the wonderful, enlightening, Supreme Bodhi. 
But they have been discriminated as phenomena of sight, space, 
the perception of seeing, hearing etc. It is just like a man with 
defective eyes seeing two moons at the same time. Who can 
tell which is the true moon? Manjusri, there is only one true 
moon; there can be no ambiguity of one being true and the 
other untrue. Therefore,- when one is looking upon these mani- 
festations arising from the senses in contact with objects, he 
must remember that they are all illusion and then there will 
be no ambiguity. But if the feeling still persists that there is 
some ambiguity as to whether the essence of the perceiving 
mind is the wonderful, enlightening Mind of the True Essence 
or not, the wonderful enlightening Mind itself can free you 
from the ambiguity as to whether it is the True Mind or not. 

Ananda said: — Noble Lord! My Lord Dharma has said that 
the perceptions and their causes are universally permeating the 
ten quarters, that by nature they are tranquil and. permanent, 
and that their nature is devoid of deaths and rebirths. If this 
is so, then what is the difference between it and the heretical 
teachings, such as the doctrine of “emptiness/' the doctrine of 
“naturalism," and similar teaching, all of which teach that there 
is a “True Ego" universally permeating the ten quarters? My 
Lord has also given teachings to the wise Saraputra, our 
Brother, and to many others, on Mount Lankara, in which he 
explained to them that, while the heretics were always talking 
about “naturalism," my Lord taught the principle of “causes 
and conditions," which was fundamentally different from the 
teachings of the heretical philosophers. Now when I learn from 
my Lord's teaching that this nature of perception of sight is 
also natural in Its origin, is devoid of death and rebirth, and is 
perfectly free from all sorts of illusive reversions, it does not 
seem to belong to your principle of “causes and conditions." 
How can it be distinguished from the “naturalism" taught 
by the heretics? Pray explain this to us, so that we do not 
fall into their heresy, and so that we may realize the wonder- 
ful, enlightening, and intelligent nature of our True Mind. 

The Lord Buddha replied, saying:— Ananda, I have already 
explained it to you and shown you the Truth, but you have 
not realized it. On the contrary your mind is bewildered and 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


147 


you have mistaken my teaching of Mind-essence, as being 
“naturalism/* Ananda, if your perception of sight belonged to 
“naturalism/* then we should examine into the essence of its 
nature. Let us do so. In this wonderful, enlightening percep- 
tion of sight, what 'would you take as belonging to itself? Does 
your perception of sight take its brightness from its own na- 
ture? Does it take its darkness from its own nature? Does it 
take its limitlessness from its own nature? Or its being limited 
by impenetrable objects as belonging to its own nature? 

Ananda, if brightness belongs to it by nature, then it should 
not see darkness. If its ability to see everywhere in space be- 
longs to it, then it should not be hindered by impenetrable ob- 
jects. The opposite of this is true also. If darkness belongs to 
its nature, then there should be no brightness in the perception 
of sight. How then could it see the phenomena of brightness? 

Then Ananda said to the Lord Buddha: — Noble Lord! If 
this wonderful perception of sight can not be explained as be- 
longing to the principle of “naturalism/* then how can it be 
explained as belonging to the principle of “cause and condi- 
tion"*? When I come to study the question of how the per- 
ception of sight can arise from causes and conditions, my mind 
is still confused. I beg my Lord to explain it for us once more. 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, as to what you have 
just asked me about the nature of cause and condition, I would 
rather ask you a few questions first. Supposing the nature of 
your perception of sight was before us now for our examina- 
tion. How could it be manifested to us? Would it be because 
of its brightness? Or its darkness? Or because of the clearness 
of space? Or because of the impenetrability of objects? 

If the perception of sight is manifested by reason of its 
brightness, then we could not see darkness, or vice versa. And 
the same would be true if our perception of sight was mani- 
fested by the clearness of space, or the impenetrability of ob- 
jects. Again, Ananda. Is the perception of sight manifested 
by the condition of brightness? Or the condition of darkness? 
Or the condition of the clearness of space? Or under the con- 
dition of impenetrable objects? If it is manifested under the 
condition of brightness, then it could not see darkness. And the 
same would be true of the opposite, or of open space and its 
opposite, impenetrable objects. 

Ananda, you ought to realize that the nature of this es- 



148 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


sentially wonderful, intelligent, enlightening, perception of sight 
belongs to neither cause nor condition, to neither nature nor 
phenomena, to neither the ambiguities of being or not being, or 
of nothingness or not nothingness. Neither does the conception 
of sight belong to any conception of phenomena, and yet it 
embraces all phenomena. 

Now, Ananda, after all these arguments, how can you dis- 
criminate within your mind, and how can you make distinctions 
and give them all those worldly fictitious names? You might 
as well try to take a pinch of space, or rub space with your 
hand. You would use up your strength and the air in the 
space would remain undisturbed. How would it be possible for 
you to catch and hold even a tiny bit of space? The same is 
true of your perception of sight. 

Then Ananda said to the Lord Buddha: — Noble Lord! If 
this wonderful, enlightening nature of perception of sight, be- 
longs neither to its own nature, nor to causes and conditions, 
then why did my Lord once explain to the Bhikshus that the 
nature of perception of sight is under four kinds of conditions, 
namely, space, brightness, mind and eyes? What did you mean 
by that explanation? 

The Lord Buddha replied, saying: — Ananda! What I said 
about the causes and conditions in this phenomenal world, was 
not my supreme, intrinsic Teaching. Let me ask you again, 
Ananda: — When the people of this world say they can see 
this and that, what do they mean by it, Ananda? 

My Lord, they mean that by the light of the sun or the 
moon or a lamp, they are able to see, and when devoid of the 
light of sun, moon or lamp, they are unable to see. 

Suppose, Ananda, there is no light and they are unable to 
see things, does that mean that they cannot see the darkness? 
If it is possible to see darkness when it is too dark to see 
things, it simply means there is no light; it does not mean 
they can not see. Supposing, Ananda, they were in the light 
and could not see the darkness; does that mean, also, that they 
can not see? Here are two kinds of phenomena, light and dark- 
ness, and of both you say, ‘he can not see.’ If these two kinds 
of phenomena are mutually exclusive, then he can not see at 
all and that would mean, as far as the perception of sight is 
concerned, a temporary discontinuance of existence. But the 
fact is not so. Therefore, it is quite clear that you must mean 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


149 


that he can not see at all. I am puzzled to know just what 
you do mean, when you say, “he can not see in the darkness/" 

Listen, now Ananda, to what I am going to teach you. 
When you are seeing light, it does not mean that the per- 
ception of sight belongs to light, and when you are seeing 
darkness, it does not mean that the perception of sight belongs 
to darkness. It is just the same when you see through clear 
space, or can not see through impenetrable objects, Ananda, 
you should understand the significance of those four things, for 
when you are speaking of the perception of sight you are not 
referring to the phenomena of seeing with the eyes, but to the 
intrinsic perception of sight that transcends the experiential 
sight of the eyes, and is beyond its reach. Then how can you 
interpret this transcendental perception of sight as being de- 
pendent upon causes and conditions, or nature, or a synthesis 
of all of them? Ananda, are you of all the Arahats so limited 
in understanding that you cannot comprehend that this Per- 
ception of Sight is pure Reality itself? This is a profound 
teaching and I want all of you to ponder upon it seriously. Do 
not become tired of it, nor indolent in realizing it. While it 
is the most profound of all teachings, it is the surest way to 
Enlightenment. 

Still Ananda was not satisfied and said to the Lord 
Buddha: — Noble Lord! Although my Lord has explained to us 
the principles of causes and conditions, of naturalism, and all 
the phenomena of conformity, and non-conformity, yet we do 
not fully realize any of them, and now as we listen to the 
teachings of our Lord about Perception of Sight, we become 
more puzzled than ever. We do not understand what you 
mean when you say that our mental perception of sight is not 
our intrinsic Perception of Sight. Pray, my Lord, have mercy 
upon us; give us the true eye of T ranscendental Intelligence 
and reveal to us more clearly our Intuitive Mind of Brightest 
Purity. At this Ananda was so far overcome that he broke into 
sobs and bowed down to the ground waiting for the Lord's 
further instruction. 

Thereupon the Blessed One had pity for Ananda and for 
all the younger members of the Assembly, and solemnly recited 
the Great Dharani which is the mystic way to the full attain- 
ment of Samadhi. ■ ■ 

Then he said: — Ananda! Though you have an excellent 


150 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


memory, it seems to serve only to increase your knowledge. 
You are still a long way from the mysterious insight and re- 
flection that accompany the attainment of Samapatti. Now, 
Ananda, listen carefully to me and I will teach you more 
particularly, not for your sake alone, but for the sake of all 
true disciples in the future, so that all alike may reap the fruit 
of Enlightenment. 

The reason why all sentient beings in this world have ever 
been bound to the cycle of deaths and re-births is because of 
two reverse, discriminative and false perceptions of the eyes 
which spring up everywhere to bind us to this present life and 
keep us turning about in the cycle of deaths and re-births by 
every wind of karma. What are these two reverse perceptions 
of the eyes? One is the false perception of the eyes that is 
caused by individual and particular karma of any single sen- 
tient being. The other is the false perception of eyes that is 
caused by the general karma of many sentient beings. 

Ananda, what is meant by the false perceptive karma that 
is caused by the individual and particular karma of single sen- 
tient beings? Supposing in this world there was someone who 
was suffering from inflamation of the eyes, so that when he 
looked at the light of a lamp in the night time, he would see a 
strange halo of different colors, surrounding the light. What 
do you think, Ananda? Is this strange bright halo caused by 
the lamp, or does it belong to the perception of the eyes? If it 
belongs to the lamp, then why do others with healthy eyes 
not perceive it? If it belongs to the perception of the eyes, 
then why does not every one see it? What is the strange sight 
only perceived by the single individual with the inflamed eyes? 

Again, Ananda. If this halo that surrounds the light, exists 
independently of the lamp, then other objects near by should 
have like halos about them, screen, curtain, desk, table etc. If 
it exists independently of the perception of the eyes, then it 
ought not to be seen by the eyes at all. How is it, that only 
the inflamed eyes see it? 

Ananda, you should know that the sight really belongs to 
the lamp, but the halo is caused by the inflamation of the par- 
ticular eyes, for the halo and the perception are both under 
the condition of the inflammation, but the nature that perceives 
the effect of the inflammation of the eyes is not sick itself. So, 
in conclusion, it should not be said that the halo belongs ex- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


1 5 l 

clusively either to the lamp or to the perception of the eyes, 
nor should it be said that it belongs neither to the lamp nor 
to the perception of the eyes. It is just the same as the re- 
flection of the moon in still water: it is neither the real moon 
nor its double. And why? Because the reproduction of any 
sight is always accounted for by causes and conditions, so that 
the learned and intelligent do not say that the origin of any 
sight that can be accounted for by causes and conditions, be- 
longs to the object, nor does not belong to the object. It is the 
same with the sight caused by the inflamed eyes, which should 
not be said to be either independent of the perception of the 
eyes nor not independent of the perception of the eyes. Would 
it not be absurd to try and distinguish what part of the sight 
belongs to the eyes and what part belongs to the lamp? Would 
it not be more absurd to try and distinguish which part of the 
sight does not belong to the lamp and which part does not be- 
long to the inflamed eyes? 

Ananda! Now let us consider, what is meant by false per- 
ception of eyes that is caused by the general karma of many 
sentient beings. In this world there are many thousands of 
kingdoms, great and small. Supposing we think that in one of 
the smallest of these kingdoms, all of the people are under 
the influence of a common bad condition of mind, that is, they 
all see many sorts of unpropitious signs that are not seen by 
any other people — two suns, two moons, or different eclipses of 
the sun or moon, or halos about the sun or moon, or comets, \ 
with or without tails, or flying meteors seen only for an instant, 
or gloomy shadows like a great ear near the sun or moon, or . 
sometimes rainbows seen early or late. Supposing that all these 
strange phenomena of evil omen are seen only by this small 
kingdom, and have never been seen or heard of by any other 
people. Now, Ananda, we will consider these two examples to- 
gether. First let us refer to the individual and particular false 
perception of eyes as seen by a single individual in the strange 
halo about the night lamp. Though it appeared to belong to 
the conditions in the presence of sight yet, after all, it belonged 
to the perception of the inflamed eyes. The imaginary halo 
meant only the sickness of the perception of eyes; it had noth- 
ing whatever to do with sight in itself. That is, the nature of ; 
the perception of the eyes that sees an imaginary halo is not j 
responsible for the viewing mistakes. For instance, Ananda, 


i 5 * SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


when you are viewing the whole appearance of a country, 
seeing its mountains, rivers, kingdoms, people etc., they seem 
to be discriminated particulars of fact, but in truth, they are 
all made up by the original, beginningless, sickness of perceiv- 
ing eyes. To both the visual condition of the eyes and the 
perception of the eyes these particular sights seem manifested 
in our presence, but to our intuitive, enlightened nature it Is 
seen to be, what it truly is, a morbid sight indicative of sick 
eyes. So any and all perceptions of enlightened nature, for in- 
stance, even the particular perception of eyes itself, are seen 
to be simply an obscuring mist. But our fundamental, intuitive, 
enlightening Mind that perceives this perception of eyes and its 
visual conditions can by no means be regarded as something 
imaginary and morbidly sick. Therefore, we must be careful not 
to plunge this intuitive nature that perceives this morbid mist 
that is discriminated by the perception of inflamed eyes into 
the same morbid mist. We must be careful to distinguish be- 
tween the perception of our eyes and the intrinsic Perception 
of Sight by our enlightened Mind that is conscious of the fal- 
lible perception of the eyes. 

Since this intrinsic Sight is not identical with the perception 
of the sight as perceived by the eyes, how can the perceptions 
of morbid sight, such as your common seeing, hearing, perceiv- 
ing and discriminating, how can you continue to call it your 
True Mind, Ananda? Thus when you are regarding yourself, 
or me, or any of the ten species of sentient beings In this 
world, you are simply regarding the morbid mist of the per- 
ception of the eyes; it is not the true, unconditioned Sight. 
The nature of this intrinsic Sight naturally manifests no mor- 
bid mist in its transcendental Perceiving and, accordingly, your 
intrinsic Mind is not the same as your perceiving, experiential 
mind. 

Ananda! Let us now regard those sentient beings with their 
general, common and false perception of eyes and compare them 
with this one person who is suffering under his individual and 
particular karma of false perception of eyes. This inflamed-eye 
individual who perceived an imaginary halo about the light, 
caused by the morbid mist in his perceiving mind, is perfectly 
typical of all the people in that little kingdom who saw the 
imaginary unpropitious signs in the heavens caused by the gen- 
eral and common karma of false perceptions of eyes. They are 



■THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


153 


alike developments of a false perception of sight since begin- 
ningless time. For instance, in this great world with its con- 
tinents and oceans, in the social world with all its races of 
people and kingdoms, all of these sentient beings and all the 
natural phenomena all have their origin in the intuitive, en- 
lightening, non-intoxicating, mysterious, intrinsic Mind, but 
they are all manifestations of the false, morbid conditions that 
belong respectfully to the perceptions of the eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, touch, discrimination, emotion, thinking. All these sen- 
tient beings are ever subject to the sufferings of an unceasing 
cycle of deaths and rebirths according to the general principle of 
causes and conditions. 

Anandal If you can remain perfectly independent of these 
false perceptions and of all conformity and non-conformity to 
them, then you will have exterminated all the causes leading 
to deaths and rebirths and, besides, you will have attained a 
perfectly matured enlightenment that is of the nature of non- 
death and non-rebirth. This is the pure Intrinsic Mind, the 
ever abiding Intuitive Essence. 

( Questions that arise in view of the sole Reality 
of Essential Mind.) 

Then the Lord Buddha continued, saying: — Anandal 
Though you had previously realized that the mysterious en- 
lightening nature of Intuitive Essence was subject to neither 
cause nor condition nor nature, yet you were not clear as to its 
intuitive origin which is made up neither by conformity to 
causes and conditions, nor by non-conformity to them. 

You still appear to be in bondage to the objects that are 
in your presence and are still constrained to conform to the 
false conceptions of the world, for you still cherish doubts with- 
in your mind when you hear that your enlightening Mind is 
not to be attained by conformity to the principle of cause and 
condition. Let me ask you some more questions. Tell me, 
Ananda. Regarding your present mysterious and pure Essence 
of the perception of your eyes, is it in conformity with bright- 
ness, or is it in conformity with darkness? Is it in conformity 
with the clearness of space, or is it in conformity with the im- 
penetrability of obstacles? If it is in conformity with bright- 
ness, then when you are seeing the brightness which is mani- 
fested in your presence, can you detect what part of the bright- 


154 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ness is mixed up with the perception of eyes? It is quite clear 
that there is the perception of eyes, but when you are seeing 
the brightness, do you notice what kind of appearance comes 
from the brightness to be mixed up with your perception of 
eyes? If the viewing of brightness does not belong to the per- 
ception of eyes, then how is it you can see brightness at all? 
If it does belong to the perception of eyes, then how is it that 
there is some nature that perceives the perception of eyes? If 
it is asserted that the perception of eyes is perfect by itself, 
then what part of it is in conformity with brightness? If bright- 
ness is perfect by itself, then it should be in conformity with 
the perception of eyes. Thus the perception of eyes must be a 
different thing from brightness. If they are blurred together, 
then each of them would lose something of its own nature. 
Since by blurring they lose something of their own natures, the 
perception of eyes would, by no means, be in conformity with 
brightness. And the same deduction can be made as to the 
other phenomena, darkness, space and impenetrable objects. 

Again, Ananda. As regards your mysterious, pure Essence of 
the perception of Sight, is it compounded with brightness, or is 
it compounded with darkness, or with space, or with impene- 
trable objects? If the perception of sight is compounded with 
brightness, then, supposing you were in darkness, and the phe- 
nomena of brightness had disappeared so that it does not be- 
come mixed with darkness, how is it that you can still see 
darkness? Or, when you are seeing darkness and the perception 
of eyes does not combine with darkness, then when it combines 
with brightness, how can it see brightness, also? Since the per- 
ception of eyes has not seen brightness, then how is it that 
the perception of eyes can distinguish brightness from darkness. 
And the same deduction can be made with the other phenomena 
of darkness, space and impenetrable objects. 

Then Ananda interposed, saying to the Lord Buddha: — 
Noble Lord! It seems to me that this mysterious, intuitive 
Nature and all of these conditioning objects and thoughts of 
the mind must be in some kind of mutual conformity, or mixed 
compound. 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, you have just now 
asserted that the intuitive Nature is not in conformity nor in 
compound with other phenomena. I will ask you some more 
questions. As to what you have just said, that this Mysterious 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


155 


Essence of the perception of Sight is neither in conformity nor 
in compound with other phenomena. Do you mean by this, 
that it is not in conformity with brightness, nor with darkness, 
nor space, nor impenetrable objects? If it is not in conformity 
with brightness, then the perception of eyes and brightness 
must have each their individual and exclusive sphere. Can you 
show the boundary line between them, which part belongs to 
perception of eyes and which to brightness? If within the 
sphere of brightness, there must be no admission of the per- 
ception of eyes, how could they influence each other as the 
perception of eyes would naturally not know the proper limits 
of manifested brightness. And if perception of eyes could not 
know, how could you? The same can be said of all other phe- 
nomena, darkness, space and impenetrable objects. 

Again, Ananda. If it is true as suggested by you, that the 
Essence of this mysterious perception of Sight is neither in con- 
formity or in combination with conditions, then do you mean 
that it is not in conformity with brightness, nor with darkness, 
nor space, nor impenetrable objects? If the perception of eyes 
is not in combination with brightness, then they would be like 
two diverging horns. They would be like the relation of the ear 
and brightness which do not influence each other at all. Since 
the perception of eyes does not know the exact location where 
brightness manifests itself, how can it make distinctions between 
combining and not combining? And the same can be said of 
the other phenomena, darkness, space and impenetrable objects. 

Ananda, you have not yet realized that the True Nature of 
all transitory perceptions of sights of objects and fleeting illu- 
sions that become manifest when they are in the presence of 
objects and which disappear when out of the presence of ob- 
jects, IS this mysterious, enlightening, intuitive Essence. This 
is true of all these five sense ingredients, six kinds of percep- 
tions, and is true from all the twelve locations of contact be- 
tween consciousness and objects, into the eighteen spheres of 
mentation in contact with objects through the sense organs. 
When they are in conformity or in combination with causes and 
conditions, they manifest these fleeting, illusive conceptions, and 
when they are disconnected from causes and conditions, the 
illusions disappear. As you do not realize the foregoing — that 
the true nature of the perceptions of the senses is the Intuitive 
Essence of Mind — how can you realize that all the phenomena 


156 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


of death and rebirth — their appearing, going to and fro, disap- 
pearing — is simply the permanent, mysterious, enlightening, 
unchanging, all-perfect, Wonderful Mind-Essence of Tathagata s 
Womb (wherein all is in perfect purity and unity and poten- 
tiality)? 

If you still think that these conceptions of the senses and 
discriminations concerning them have some self-nature of their 
own then you should seek for it within the purity of this Per- 
manent Reality, but not a sign of their individual character- 
istics or of conceptions concerning them will you find there. 

Ananda! What is involved in the assertion that the five sense- 
ingredients and discriminations concerning them belong to 
the mysterious Mind-Essence of Tathagata’s Womb? Suppose a 
man with good fresh eyes looks steadily into the bright shining 
space of the sky without glancing about or winking. After long 
staring, there arise contaminations of the eyes and in the emp- 
tiness of space, he sees fantastic blossoms and many other 
strange phantasms. These fantastic blossoms that the contam- 
inated eyes see in the open space of the sky come neither 
from the sky nor from the eyes. If you suppose they come 
from the sky then, when they disappear, they must return to 
the sky. However, as soon as you have the notion of coming 
from and going to then the sky is no longer open space. If 
open space is not open space then the fantastic blossoms could 
not have come into manifestation nor disappear. 

Ananda, you should know that all the sights of the eyes are 
like that. Since beginningless time, sentient beings have been 
regarding the purity of Intuitive Mind-Essence and their eyes 
have become contaminated and they see the myriads of sense 
conceptions and from liking them birth after birth and grasping 
them by force of habit the false conceptions of the senses have 
seemingly become real, and have set up a conception of Ananda 
and that which is not Ananda, and resent the coming in of the 
true Ananda. 

If you suppose that these fantastic blossoms come from the 
eyes, they should also return to the eyes, but do they? If they 
come from the eyes naturally they would have the nature of 
perception of sight and, going out from these eyes, having 
the perception of sight, they should see their own eyes. If 
they did not have the nature of seeing when they went out, 
they would be the objects and would cast shadows on the sky, 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


157 


and when they return to the eyes they should cast shadows in 
their own eyes. According to our supposition, the eyes that saw 
the clear space of the sky were good, fresh eyes, now when they 
have seen the fantastic blossoms they have shadows in them; 
how can they be called, good, fresh eyes? Therefore, Ananda, 
you should know that the ingredients of sight are false and 
and illusion; they are neither manifested naturally by causes 
and conditions, nor do they arise spontaneously from their own 
nature. 

Suppose, Ananda, a man sitting at ease, with hands and feet 
at rest, and all the bones of his body in harmony and comfort, 
with his mind in a state of tranquillity, neither happy nor un- 
happy, sitting almost unconscious of his own existence. With 
no especial purpose in mind, he rubs the palms of his two 
hands together and forthwith there arises from his hands per- 
ceptions of roughness, smoothness, coldness, warmness. So you 
should know that the ingredients of the perception of touch 
are fanciful and illusion, also. Ananda, all these fantastic feel- 
ings that arise from rubbing the hands together, neither come 
from the air nor from the palms of the hands. If it comes from 
the air, since it can touch the palms of the hands, why does it 
not touch the body elsewhere? What caused the selection? Or, 
if it comes from the palms, why does this feeling-perception not 
arise until the palms are pressed together? Because of its 
arising from the palms when they are pressed together, they 
naturally become conscious of each other, and when the palms 
are separated, the perception of touch naturally retreats into 
the body. Naturally there is something in the body that is 
passing to and fro, but how is it that the body has to wait 
until the hands are pressed together before it becomes conscious 
of a perception of touch? Therefore, Ananda, you should know 
that the perception ingredients of touch are fanciful and illu- 
sion that are neither manifested by causes and conditions, nor 
do they arise spontaneously from their own nature. 

Ananda, suppose a man speaks of sour plums, he imme- 
diately is conscious of saliva flowing out from his tongue, or as 
he thinks of falling from a high cliff, he immediately feels a 
trembling in his feet. It is just the same with all thinking in- 
gredients of perception. In this case it neither comes from the 
plum, nor from an actual plum going into his mouth. If sour- 
ness is manifested by a plum, then it must be speaking for 


158 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


itself, how is it that it was perceived in this case by some one 
speaking about it? Or, if the perception arises from the going 
into the mouth, then it should be heard by the mouth; why 
did the saliva have to wait until the ear heard of the sour- 
ness? If it was the ear that heard it why did not the saliva 
come out of the ear? The same is true of the effect of thinking 
of falling from a steep cliff. Therefore, Ananda, you should 
know that the thinking ingredients of perception are fanciful 
and illusion, they are neither manifested naturally by causes 
and condition, nor spontaneously by their own nature. 

Ananda! A river flows on with no gaps between the water 
that goes before and the water that flows after, so is the cur- 
rent of the activity-ingredients of our perceptions. The nature 
of such an everflowing current of water neither arises from the 
air nor from the waters; it is neither of the nature of water or 
air, nor is it independent of them. If it arises from the air, 
then all the infinite spaces of the ten quarters of the universe 
would become torrents of water and the whole universe would 
suffer denudation. If it is manifested by means of water alone, 
then the substance and potentialities of water would be mani- 
fested for once only, it wouldn’t be a current. If it arises from 
the nature of water, then when water is stilled, the current 
would be of some other substance than water. Therefore, An- 
anda, you should know that the action-ingredients of perception 
are not manifested naturally by causes and conditions nor spon- 
taneously by their own nature. 

Ananda, suppose a man fills a jar with air in his native 
country, plugs up the mouth of the jar and journeys many 
hundred of miles to a distant country, for the purpose of bring- 
ing some of his native air to that far country. This is in like- 
ness to the conscious-ingredient of perception. When the jar is 
opened the air mingles with the other air and can neither be 
said to come from the native country nor to be the pure air of 
the far country. If it came from the native country, then the 
air there should be decreased, and the air in the far country 
increased, but on the contrary, when he opens the jar he sees 
nothing going in and nothing coming out. Therefore, Ananda, 
you should know that the conscious ingredients are fanciful and 
illusive; they are neither manifested naturally by causes and 
conditions, nor spontaneously by their own nature. 

Then the Lord Buddha asked Ananda: — Ananda, if we 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


159 


think of Ultimate Reality as the Womb of Tathagata from 
which every manifestation emerges, in what sense can it be 
said that the six sense perceptions belong to this true, myste- 
rious Mind-Essence? 

Let me explain this relation to you. Referring to what I 
said to you a little while ago, that long staring at the clear 
bright sky was the cause of contaminations in the perception 
of the eyes. In that teaching, both the perception of the eyes 
and the contaminated state were shown to be restraints placed 
upon the pure Wisdom ( Bodhi ) nature. It is because of this 
constraint placed upon it by the two opposing but false notions 
of brightness and darkness that the perception of sight, which 
perceives the phenomenal object, is spoken of as having the 
nature of perceiving sights. But this perception of sight, apart 
from brightness and darkness, has no substantiality of existence. 
I will show this to be a fact. Ananda, you know very well 
that this perception of sight is independent of brightness and 
darkness, nor does it have its origin in the sense organ (which 
only records sensation), nor does it arise from the surrounding 
space. Because, if it comes from brightness, then it could not 
perceive darkness; and if it comes from darkness, it ought not 
to perceive brightness any more. If it comes from the sense- 
organ, its sensations will vary, but it will know nothing of 
brightness or darkness. Such is the essence of the perception of 
sight that it has no nature of its own. Because, if it comes 
from space, then as it goes forth to view an object in its pres- 
ence, so it should be able to view the eye-organ on its return. 
If it comes from space, moreover, then space must have its own 
organ of sight, and what relation would it have with your 
eyes? Therefore, Ananda, you should know that the perception 
of the eyes is false and fantastic and that it is neither mani- 
fested by causes and conditions, nor spontaneously by its own 
nature, (for it has no nature of its own). 

(The same is proven in the text , to hold true as to the un- 
substantiality and falsity of the perception of the other senses, 
of hearing, tasting, and smelling.) 

Ananda, supposing a man has one warm hand and the other 
cold, and they touch each other. If the coldness exceeds the 
warmth, then both hands will become cold, or if the warm 
hand is greater in force, both hands will become warm. Thus 
by means of this perception of two sensations at the same 



160 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


time, and of the one being greater than the other, the condi 
tions are set up by the phenomena of contamination, the same 
being manifested by means of the contact of two hands in dif- 
ferent degrees of warmth and coldness. This perception of two 
hands and their contaminations are both to be included in the 
contaminated state manifested on account of the constraint of 
the Wisdom nature. It is by means of the conflict between 
these two false notions of separation and contact that there is 
manifested the sense of touching, which perceives the notion 
of contact, which provides the basis of the perception of touch- 
ing. If this perception of touching can be shown to be inde- 
pendent both of the unpleasant notion of separation and the 
pleasant notion of contact, then it has no substantiality of ex- 
istence after all. I will now show this to be a fact. But first 
you should know that this perception of touch does not come 
from separation or contact, nor does it reveal its existence by 
means of a feeling of unpleasantness or of pleasantness, nor 
does it arise spontaneously from its own sense of touch, and, 
finally, it is not manifested from space, either. And why? Be- 
cause if the perception of touch comes when it is in contact 
with something then when it is separated from something, the 
perception of touching should have disappeared but, as it is, 
it still perceives its separation. And the same is true in regard 
to the phenomena of unpleasantness and pleasantness for, if 
the perception of touch springs up from the sense of body 
there can be none of these four phenomena of separation; con- 
tact, unpleasantness and pleasantness. And, moreover, the per- 
ception of your body naturally has no nature of its own. If 
the perception of touch must be regarded as springing out of 
space, and space would be availing itself of the perception of 
touch, and then, what would be the relation between the per- 
ceptions arising out of space and the perceptions arising within 
our own bodies? Therefore, Ananda, you should know that the 
perception of the sense of touch is false and fantastic, that it 
is neither manifested by cause and condition, nor spontaneously 
by its own nature. 

Then the Lord Buddha, continued: — Ananda, when a man 
becomes weary, he lies down to sleep; when his sleep is satis- 
fied, he wakes up; when he opens his eyes, he sees objects and 
begins to think about them; when he loses his memory he be- 
comes worried. These are to be considered as reversed concep- 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


161 

tions of death and re-birth, and transformations and continuity, 
which develop in a more orderly succession and to which the 
mind becomes accustomed. These phenomena (analogous to the 
phenomena connected with the senses of seeing, hearing, smell- 
ing, tasting, touching) are connected with the mental or think- 
ing sense. The perception of thinking (or the consciousness of 
thinking), with its contaminations is to be included with the 
other sense perceptions and their contaminations, as being re- 
straints placed upon our Bodhi nature. 

It is because of being placed between two false notions, 
such as death and re-birth, that the perception of thinking be- 
comes manifested. The mind-sense, (considered as an object) 
in contact with the other senses receives notions of ideas, and 
thoughts and recollections, which being in reversed order (i.e. 
moving toward diversity) are ever moving away from True 
Mind (which is in a state of primal and unchanging unity and 
purity), and thus will never reach their source in the Wisdom 
of True Mind. This is characteristic of all conscious and dis- 
criminative thinking. 

If this perception of thinking becomes separated from the 
dualism of phenomena, such as deaths and rebirths* waking and 
sleeping, etc., it loses all substantiality. I will now prove this 
to be a fact. 

Ananda, you should know that this sense of thinking does 
not come from waking and sleeping, nor from deaths and re- 
births, nor from its own nature, nor from space. And why? 
Because if the perception of thought comes from the awakened 
state, then when sleep predominates it should disappear com- 
pletely, and who would be the one to awake? If the percep- 
tion of thinking exists only when we are in the presence of 
something, then when nothing is present, it would be in re- 
semblance to non-existence, and who is it that would suffer 
death? If it is manifested from death, then thinking would im- 
mediately disappear with the approach of death and, thus, who 
would be able to recognize his rebirth? If the perception of 
thinking springs from its own nature, then the two phenomena 
of waking and sleeping would be like the opening and closing 
of the lotus flower. If it is independent of both waking and 
sleeping, it would be like the visionary flowers seen in the air 
by inflamed eyes, which have no substantiality whatever. If it 
is manifested from space, it would naturally belong to the per- 


162 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ception of space and what, then, would be its relation to our 
sense of thinking? Therefore, Ananda, you should know that 
the perception of thinking is false and fantastic, that it Is not 
manifested by causes and conditions, .nor spontaneously by its 
own nature. 

* # # 

Then the Lord Buddha continued, saying: — Again, Ananda, 
what is meant when it is said that the twelve locations of con- 
tact between consciousness and objects belong by nature to the 
Mysterious Mind-Essence considered as the Womb of Tatha- 
gata? 

Ananda, suppose you are looking at the Jetavana grove and 
at all its beautiful springs and pools. What think you? Is it 
that all these sights develop the perception of the eyes, or Is it, 
that the eye-sense develops the sights. If it is that the sense 
of the eyes develops sights, then when it sees space, as space is 
of different nature from sight, then sight should disappear. If 
the nature of sight disappears, then all the manifestations of 
sight would become as naught. If all the phenomena of sight 
become as naught, how can we be sure of the substantiality of 
space? And the reverse is true also, namely, If all the phe- 
nomena of space become naught, how can we be sure of the 
substantiality of the sights we see? Moreover, if the different 
sight-objects develop the perception of the eyes, then when the 
eyes look at space (as the nature of space is different from 
that of sight) then the perception of sights should immediately 
disappear. Should the perception of sight disappear, then all 
the sight-objects would become non-existent. How, then, can 
we be sure of the phenomena of space and sights? Therefore, 
Ananda, you should know that the perception of the eyes and 
the sight-objects it sees and space itself, are all devoid of loca- 
tion, which simply means that both the locations of the sight- 
objects and the perception of these eyes are alike false and 
fantastic being neither manifested by causes and conditions, nor 
spontaneously by their own nature. 

(The same is proven in the text , to hold true as to the un- 
substantiality and falsity of the perception of the location of 
contact of the other sense-objects, also.) 

Ananda, suppose you have been conceiving within your 
mind under the conditions of some system of thought regarded 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


163 

as the cause of the conceptions of the sense, and that you 
have always discriminated among these conceptions by three 
attributes, namely, good thoughts, bad thoughts and disinter- 
ested thoughts. Are these attributes developed within the mind, 
or in some other locality independent of the mind? If they 
are developed within the intuitive sense of the mind, then they 
can not be the same things as the sense-objects themselves, nor 
as the influences that condition the mind. If this system of 
conceptions is considered as being developed in some other lo- 
cality independent of the mind, then is the nature of its at- 
tributes to be rightly called, perceiving? If they are to be called 
perceiving, then it must be our mind that does the perceiving 
and not some other mind outside our mind. If the perception 
belongs to some other mind, as the mind is not an object, how 
can its perception be the same as your perception? Or, if it 
just means yourself, as being different from your mind, then 
that would mean that you are two different personalities, or at 
least that you have two different minds. If the nature of the 
attributes of our system of conceptions is unperceptive then, 
as this system (considered as an inner object) has none of the 
characteristics of sight, sound, odor, taste, touch, independence, 
conformity, coldness, warmness, where can we locate it? As it 
has no definite location either in space or form where, in all 
this terrestrial world can it have location? And since it is not 
a condition that influences the mind, how can it have a loca- 
tion, anyway? Therefore, Ananda, you should know that the 
system of sense-conceptions as well as the conceptions of think- 
ing are devoid of any location. This means that the locations 
of contact of the conceptions within the mind and the system 
of sense-conceptions are alike false and fantastic; they are 
neither manifested by causes and conditions or spontaneously by 
their own nature. 

The Lord Buddha continued to question Ananda, saying: — 
What is meant by the assertion that the eighteen spheres of 
mentation (sense-organs, sense-minds, and sense-perceptions) 
all belong to the mysterious Essence of Tathagata’s Womb? 

We have already shown that the perception of sight is de- 
pendent upon the eyes and their power of seeing in combina- 
tion with the object of sight. Let me ask you, is this conscious- 



164 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ness that is dependent upon the eyes, developed solely by means 
of the eyes and limited by the eyes, or is it developed solely 
by means of sight and bounded by sight? If the consciousness 
of sight is developed by means of the eyes only, then as it is 
independent of sight and space, it can not make any discrimina- 
tion and thus, in spite of your consciousness, of what avail 
will it be? Moreover, as the perception of sight does not be- 
long to colors — green, yellow, red, and white — it can not mani- 
fest any appearance and, thus, what shall be its boundary lines? 
Or if the perception of sight is developed by means of sight 
then, as there is only space and no sight, your consciousness of 
it will be annihilated and how can you know anything of the 
nature of space? And if, when the sight changes, you are con- 
scious of the change, it would mean that the sight itself is 
changing. But as your consciousness does not change, what 
will be the line between it and your perception of sight? Or, 
if your consciousness is subject to change along with the 
changes of sight, then any phenomena of differences will dis- 
appear. Or, if your consciousness is permanent and unchange- 
able, then, as it is developed from sight, it should not recognize 
any location of space. Or, if consciousness is developed by both 
eyes and sight, then one part of your consciousness, the part 
developed from the eyes will be sensitive, and the other part 
developed from the sight will be insensitive. So, when the 
sense of your eyes and the sight are in contact, one part of 
your consciousness will be perceptive and one part unpercep- 
tive, it would mean that if these two parts of consciousness be- 
come separated from each other, then they must both be in- 
dependent of the mind. And when the sense of your eyes and 
the sight are in separation, one part of your consciousness will 
return to your eyes and one part will return to the sight. That 
would mean that these two parts of your consciousness are in 
separate contacts with your eyes and the sight. Thus, the body 
and its attributes are confusingly mixed and what shall be their 
boundary lines? 

Therefore, Ananda, you should know that these three lo- 
calities where the perception of sight is under the conditions of 
the sense of the eyes and the sight, and where the perception of 
sight arises from your consciousness dependent upon eyes are all 
devoid of any substantial existence, so these three phenomena 
of the perception of sight, the sight itself, and the sphere of 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 165 

mentation about sight are neither manifested by causes and 

conditions, nor spontaneously by their own nature 

{In the text, the same is proven to hold true as to the rela- 
tion of the other senses , hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, 
and are omitted.) 

Again, Ananda, you have understood that the perceptions of 
the thinking mind are under the conditions of the thinking 
mind and of its conceptions of phenomena, and that it is mani- 
fested from the consciousness dependent upon the thinking 
mind. Is this consciousness that is dependent upon the thinking 
mind developed by means of the thinking mind and bounded by 
the thinking mind? Or is it developed by means of its concep- 
tions of phenomena and bounded by its conceptions of phe- 
nomena? If it is developed by means of the thinking mind, 
then within your thinking mind, there must be some conscious- 
ness that discovers your thinking mind. Should there be no 
such kind of thoughts, the thinking mind would not have been 
developed. Should it then be independent of any such condi- 
tions, it would have no appearances of thinking and what, 
then, would be the use of consciousness? Moreover, in referring 
to your conscious mind and to all its attributes of thinking and 
discriminating are they in unity, or are they different things? 
If they are in unity with the thinking mind, then they are no 
different from the thinking mind and how could they have any 
other manifestations? If they are not in unity with the think- 
ing mind, then they are different things and separated from one 
another, in which case the thinking mind would be unconscious 
of them. Should the thinking mind be unconscious of them, 
then how could the thinking mind be developed? If the think- 
ing mind is conscious of them, then what is it that is conscious 
of the thinking mind? Thus, whether consciousness and its at- 
tributes are in unity with the thinking mind or in separation 
from it, there is no such kind of existence and how can con- 
sciousness then be bounded by spheres? If this consciousness 
that is dependent upon the thinking mind is developed by 
means of thoughts about phenomena, then all the phenomena 
of the world belong to the five sense objects. For instance, 
supposing you are attending to the five phenomena of sight, 
sound, odour, taste and touch, which are very distinctive in 
their manifestations, and if these five kinds of phenomena go 
with their respective sense organs, it shows that they are not 



166 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


managed by the thinking mind. If it is asserted that conscious- 
ness must be developed by conceptions of phenomena, then 
please concentrate your reflections and tell me what is the ap- 
pearance in your thinking mind of these conceptions of phe- 
nomena. If you set aside all such phenomena as sight, space, 
motion, silence, transmissibility, non-transmissibility, combina- 
tion, separation, death, rebirth, then you will never be able to 
think out the appearance of consciousness. As soon as con- 
sciousness appears, then all such phenomena as sight, space, 
motion, etc., will be manifested also; and as soon as conscious- 
ness disappears, all such phenomena as sight, space, motion, etc., 
will disappear, too. As there is, thus, no substantial existence 
of the objects of the phenomena of conception, which we are 
regarding as the cause of consciousness, it shows clearly that 
there is also no substantial nature and manifestation for the 
consciousness that is manifested by means of the objects of the 
phenomena of conception. Since consciousness possesses no sub- 
stantial nature, manifestation, nor existence, how can its sphere- 
be revealed? Therefore, Ananda, you should know that these 
three localities where the perception of the thinking mind, as 
being under the conditions of the sense of the thinking mind 
and of its conceptions of phenomena, develops its thinking 
process, the thinking process, the consciousness dependent upon 
it, and its sphere, are all devoid of any substantial existence. 
So these three phenomena, the perceptions of the thinking 
mind, its conceptions about them, and its sphere of thinking, 
are neither manifested by causes and conditions, nor spontane- 
ously by its own nature. 

(Relations of Perceptions to the Four Great Elements) 

Then Ananda addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Noble 
Lord! You have always taught us that all the variety of 
changes in the world are manifested by means of conformity 
and combination of the Four Great Elements, according to the 
principle of causes and conditions. How is it that now, the 
Lord Tathagata rejects both the principle of naturalism and 
the principle of causes and conditions? I am confused as to 
what you are trying to teach. Pray, Noble Lord, have pity 
upon us once more and show us the true and perfect teaching 
of the Middle Way which is free from all ambiguous statements. 

Thereupon the Blessed Lord addressed the disciples, say- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


167 


ing: — Ananda, at first you disliked the Hinayana attainments of 
Arahatship and Pratyaka-Buddha, and devoted all your effort to 
seeking Supreme Enlightenment. How does it come that you 
are still troubling your mind with those fictitious statements 
and false conceptions of causes and conditions? Though it is 
true that you are quite learned, you are like the man who 
knew the names of drugs, but when medicines were brought to 
him he could not tell their different properties and virtues. 
Ananda, you are to be pitied. Now listen to me attentively and 
I will answer your question by explaining clearly the distinc- 
tions in detail. And not for you only, Ananda, but for the sake 
of all the disciples of the future who will practice Mahayana, 
so that all will be able to attain to the Ultimate Principle of 
Reality. 

Ananda, by his perfect silence and attention, showed him- 
self ready for the teaching from the Blessed Lord Buddha. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Ananda, it is just as you have 
said, all the varieties and changes in this world are manifested 
by means of the conformities and combinations of the Four 
Great Elements (earth, water, fire, air). If the substance of 
these Great Elements is of the nature of non-conformity and 
non-combination, then they can not mingle together in con- 
formity, just as space cannot be in conformity with sights. Or, 
if the great Elements are in conformity and combination with 
one another, they will be like all other transformations, which 
are forever in process of completing one another, but from be- 
ginning to end incessantly passing from death to rebirth, and 
from rebirth to death, like a blazing wheel. 

Ananda! The manifestations of the Four Great Elements 
are like water being continually frozen into ice and just as 
repeatedly thawed into water again. Suppose we consider the 
nature of the earth element. In a crude and coarse form it 
covers the globe, but in a highly refined form it is the 
infinitesimal dust of space, and even everything that the eyes 
can see can be reduced into its seven primal elements. If we 
analyze this infinitesimal dust of space, we will more and more 
approximate the purity of space, but will not bring us its ab- 
solute vacuum. You should know, Ananda, that if this infini- 
tesimal dust of space should be truly reduced to the purity and 
emptiness of space, it would be out of this inconceivable purity 
that the phenomena of sight is manifested also. You have just 



168 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


now asked me, how it is that by means of conformity and com- 
bination all sorts of transformations in this world are mani- 
fested. Let us first examine this most refined dust that is ap- 
proximately close to the nature of open space and what do we 
find. Ananda, how much space, reduced to finest particles, do 
you think it would take in conformity and combination to be- 
come that most refined dust? No, however much space be con- 
densed, its proximities can never become the proximities of 
finest dust, and however much finest dust be analyzed it can 
never become by conformity and combination the purity of 
space. Moreover, in regard to perceiving these finest particles 
of dust that approximate the purity of space, how many ele- 
ments of the perception of sight will it take in combination 
to perceive pure space? And even if the phenomena of sights 
are combined together, it will not become space; and if the 
elements of space be combined, it will not become sights. 

Indeed, Ananda, you are foolish to ask such questions, for 
in the Tathagata’s Womb, the intrinsic nature of sight is the 
real emptiness of space, the true vacuum, while the intrinsic 
nature of space is the real sight, the true essence. In the Ta- 
thagata’s Womb, space and sights are of perennial freshness and 
purity, permeating everywhere throughout the phenomenal uni- 
verses, and are being forever manifested spontaneously and per- 
fectly in accordance with the amount of karma accumulated 
under the conscious activity of sentient beings. However, people 
of the world being ignorant of this principle, become bewildered 
in the entanglements of cause and conditions and naturalism, 
which are wholly the discriminations of their mental conscious- 
ness, and are merely figurative words having no meaning in 
reality. 

Ananda, now let us consider the nature of the water-ele- 
ment. By nature water is impermanent, whether in the current 
of rivers or in the waves of the sea. Where does water orig- 
inate? The great masters of Magic in the City of Sravasti at- 
tempt to get it pure from the moon to mix with their magical 
medicines. They wait until there is bright moonlight and they 
hold out a receptacle, which they call the magical pearl, to re- 
ceive this pure moon-water. What do you think about it, 
Ananda? Does this water come from the magical pearl, or 
does it come out of space, or does it really come from the 
moon? If the water comes from the moon, then the pearls in 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 169 

any far distant place could be made to give out water, and all 
the forests where these pearls are found, and all the lands 
where they are found should effuse water, and it would be un- 
necessary, on a moonlight night, to carry a bucket to a well. 
But if you had such a pearl and no water come from it, it 
would be proof that water does not come from the moon. 

Or if the water comes from the magical pearl, then the said 
pearl should effuse water constantly and it would be unneces- 
sary to wait for a bright moonlight. If the water comes from 
the empty space between the moon and the pearl, then, as 
space is boundless and if water was equally boundless, then all 
sentient beings on earth or in sky would be in danger of drown- 
ing. Why is it that there are still living beings in water, earth 
and air? . Think carefully, Ananda; here is the moon moving 
silently in the sky, the Master of Magic standing with the 
magical pearl in his hand, and remember the vast space be- 
tween the moon and the pearl, — they are neither in conformity 
nor in combination. From where does the water come? Surely 
it can not come from nowhere. And then, again, consider that 
wherever a master of magic may be standing in the moonlight 
in some one place there water appears, supposing there are 
magicians all over the world and water is appearing everywhere, 
what would that signify? 

Ananda! Why is it that you still remain in ignorance that 
in the Tathagata’s Womb the intrinsic nature of water is the 
real emptiness, while the intrinsic nature of space is the real 
water-essence. In the Womb of Tathagata both water and 
space abide in freshenss and purity and permeate everywhere 
throughout the universes and is being manifested freely, and 
perfectly corresponding to the accumulation of karma by the 
conscious activity of sentient beings. 

However, people of this world, being ignorant of this, and 
by regarding water as being manifested by causes and condi- 
tions, or spontaneously by its own nature, have become be- 
wildered. Whereas, all of these false presuppositions and prej- 
udices are simply the discriminations made by their own 
mental consciousness, and' are merely figurative words having 
no basis in reality. 

Now, Ananda, let us consider the element of fire. Fire has 
not its own individual nature, but is dependent upon other 
considerations. If you were to look toward the city of Sravasti 


170 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


at the time people are getting ready to prepare the noon meal, 
you would see every householder bring his lens into the sun- 
light to kindle a fire. They all do the same thing, but each 
acts individually. In like manner this assembly of twelve hun- 
dred and fifty Bhikshus gather here for one purpose, but each 
has his own individuality, each has his own body and his own 
family name, such as Sariputra bom in a Brahmin family, 
Urbinzuru bom in the family of Kasyapa, down to you, the 
last of all, Ananda, bom in the family of Gotama. (All of 
these instances are examples of individuality under the condi- 
tions of conformity and combination.) 

If the quality of fire is developed by means of conformity 
and combination, then as one holds out his lens to the heat 
of the sunlight in order to kindle a fire, does the fire come from 
the glass, or does it come from the wormwood fiber that the 
heat kindles, or does the fire come from the sun, Ananda? If 
the fire comes from the sun and kindles the wormwood fiber, 
why is not the whole forest of wormwood trees kindled also? 
If it comes from the lens and is hot enough to kindle the 
wormwood, why is the lens itself not burnt? As it is, there is 
no fire until your hand holds out the lens between the sun 
and the fiber. Again, Ananda, think carefully. Here are certain 
conditions that being present, fire arises: you are holding a 
lens in your hand, the sunlight is coming from the sun, the 
wormwood fiber has grown from the ground, but where does 
the fire come from, and how does it sojourn here? Moreover, 
the lens and the sun are separated from each other by a very 
great distance. There seems to be no conformity nor any com- 
bination, but it can not be that the fire comes from nowhere. 

Ananda, why is it that you still remain in ignorance that 
in the Tathagata’s Womb the intrinsic nature of fire is the real 
emptiness, while the intrinsic nature of space is the real fire- 
essence. In the Womb of Tathagata both fire and space 
abide in freshness and purity and permeate everywhere through- 
out the universes and are being manifested freely and per- 
fectly corresponding to the accumulation of karma by the con- 
scious activity of sentient beings. You should therefore know, 
Ananda, that wherever people in this world hold out lenses 
fire may be kindled, and as fire may be kindled everywhere, 
there is the place where fire originates. However, people of 
this world being ignorant of this, and by regarding fire as be- 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


171 

ing manifested by causes and conditions, or spontaneously by 
reason of its own nature, have become bewildered. Whereas, 
all of these false presuppositions and prejudices are simply the 
discriminations made by their own mental consciousness, and 
are merely figurative words having no meaning in reality. 

Ananda, let us now consider the nature of wind. It has no 
(visible) substantiality and it has no permanency either when 
in motion or in quietness. For instance, whenever you enter 
the assembly your garments are well arranged, but as you enter 
the lower corner of your robe is moving and a little breeze 
from it blows on the faces of the brothers sitting close by. 
What think you, Ananda, does this little breeze come from the 
lower corner of your robe, or does it come from the air-space 
between them, or does it come from the nearby faces? If it 
came from your garment, then it must have been in a moving 
state when you put it on, and why did not your garment fly 
away from you? If the breeze comes from the garments, then 
as I stand before you teaching the Dharma with my scarf 
hanging quietly from my shoulder, where is the breeze? Can 
you find its hiding place? Or if it comes from the space of air, 
why do your scarfs hang motionless? Moreover, as the nature 
of space is permanent, the breeze if it comes from space should 
be blowing constantly. As there is no breeze, does it mean that 
there is no space, either? If the breeze comes and goes, what 
is its appearance as it comes and goes? If it comes and goes, 
then space would have its deaths and rebirths, and could no 
longer be called space. If it is called space, how can it give out 
wind from its emptiness? If the breeze that is felt on one’s 
face, comes from that face, then it should be felt by your face. 
As it is your garment, why does not the breeze blow toward 
you, why does it blow away from you? And again, Ananda, 
as you think about these things, the arrangement of your gar- 
ment, the nearby faces, the stillness of the air, space taking no 
part in the moving breeze, what originates the breeze and just 
where does it come from? Moreover, the natures of the breeze 
and space are widely divergent, they are neither in conformity 
nor in combination with each other; and yet the breeze must 
come from somewhere; it is not its nature to come from 
nowhere. 

Ananda! Why is it that you still remain in ignorance that 
in the Tathagata’s Womb the intrinsic nature of wind is the 


172 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

real emptiness, while the intrinsic nature of space is the real 
wind-essence. In the Womb of Tathagata both wind and space 
abide in freshness and purity and permeate everywhere through- 
out the phenomenal universes and are being manifested freely, 
and perfectly correspond to the amount of karma accumulated 
by the conscious activity of sentient beings. And then, again, 
wherever a single person arranges his garment there comes out 
a breeze, and when all the world arrange their garments, wind 
arises everywhere. If wind comes out everywhere, where can 
be the particular locality that is the origin of wind? 

However, people of the world, being ignorant of this, and 
by regarding wind as being manifested by causes and condi- 
tions, or spontaneously by its own nature, have become be- 
wildered. Whereas, all of these false presuppositions and preju- 
dices are simply the discriminations made by their own mental 
consciousness; they are merely figurative words that have no 
basis in reality. 

Ananda, the nature of space possesses no form and is mani- 
fested by colors only. For instance, at a distance from the river 
all the newly built homes in the city of Sravasti, whether be- 
longing to the Ksatriya family, or to some Brahman family, 
or to a Sudra, or to a Bradha, or to a Chandra family, each 
has to dig a well for their supply of water. As they dig up 
one foot of earth, there is one foot of air space left open, and 
so they go on digging even down to ten feet, but there is al- 
ways the same number of feet of open space left open. The 
amount of open space left open is entirely in proportion to the 
amount of digging up of earth. What think you, Ananda? 
Does the space left open come from the earth that has been re- 
moved, or does it come by means of the digging, or does it just 
come by itself, without any cause? If it comes just simply by 
itself without any other cause, why do we have to remove the 
earth before it comes into sight? Instead of space we see the 
impassable earth everywhere. If it comes from the earth, then 
as the earth is dug up, we should see the space coming to take 
its place. If we do not see space coming in to take the place 
of the earth as it is being removed, how can we say that the 
space comes from outside of the earth? If there is neither com- 
ing out of earth nor coming in of space, then we might say 
that both earth and space are alike, but if there was no dif- 
ference between them, there would be a sameness, but as the 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


173 


earth Is dug up, why does the space not come up also? Or If 
the space comes out by the digging, then as space Is dug up, 
why should the earth come up too? If It does not come out 
by digging, then while the earth Is being removed, why do we 
see space left in the hole? Ananda, you should concentrate 
your mind, reflect, and give intense insight upon these condi- 
tions of digging, earth coming out, and space filling up the 
place, trying to realize where the space comes from. As digging 
is a matter of fact while space is a phenomena of emptiness, 
there can be no correspondence between them, nor are they in 
mutual accomodation, that Is, they are neither in conformity 
nor in combination with each other, and yet It can not be that 
the nature of space comes from nowhere. Moreover, if the na- 
ture of space is perfect and permeates all the universes, then 
you should know that, in our consideration, space together 
with earth, water, fire, and wind, are to be regarded as the 
Five Great Elements, whose essential nature is perfect, and all- 
in-unity, and all alike belonging to the Tathagata’s Womb, and 
all alike devoid of deaths and rebirths. 

Ananda, your mind appears to be still in a state of be- 
wilderment, you do not realize even that essence of the Four 
Great Elements belongs to the Womb of Tathagata. You should 
carefully observe as to whether space comes out from some un- 
seen place, or comes in from something seen outside, or does 
it neither come out from or come into? You are ignorant 
that within the Tathagata’s Womb the intuition of Essence is 
the real emptiness, while the intrinsic nature of space is real 
Enlightenment. Within Tathagata’s Womb they are ever in 
freshness and purity, permeating everywhere throughout the 
phenomenal universes, and are being manifested freely and 
perfectly in correspondence to the amount of karma accumu- 
lated by the conscious activity of sentient beings. 

For instance, Ananda, when there is one well dug, space is 
manifested to the limit of one well, and when all the ten 
quarters of the universes become empty, the space of emptiness 
is manifested all throughout the universes, also. If the space of 
emptiness is perfectly permeating everywhere throughout the 
ten quarters of the universes, then where can the space of emp- 
tiness be seen and located? But the world is all in ignorance 
and bewilderment because they have always regarded the space 
of emptiness as being manifested by causes and conditions, or 



174 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


spontaneously by its own nature, whereas, all of these false pre- 
suppositions and prejudices are simply discriminations made by 
their own mental consciousness; they are merely figurative 
words that have no basis in reality. 

Ananda! The perception of sight is to be regarded in the 
same way. It has no substantiality of itself and its existence is 
dependent upon sights and space. For instance, here in the 
Grove of Jetavana it is daybreak in the morning and it be- 
comes dark after sunset; at midnight, when there is moonlight, 
we have brightness and when there is no moonlight, there is 
darkness. The distinctions of brightness and darkness are noted 
by our perception of sight. What do you think, Ananda? Is 
this perception of sight in one unity with brightness, darkness 
and space, or is it not in unity with them? Is it of the same 
substantiality with them; is it of different substantiality from 
them; or is it not of different substantiality? If our perception 
of sight is in unity with brightness, darkness and space, then as 
brightness and darkness are in mutual correspondence as re- 
gards their appearing and disappearing, so when it is dark there 
is no brightness, and when it is light there is no darkness. If 
perception of sight is in unity with darkness, then when it is 
bright, it must follow that there is no perception of sight. Or 
if it is in unity with brightness, then when it is dark, there 
ought not to be any perception of sight either? If it disappears 
when it is both dark and bright, how can it note the difference 
between brightness and darkness? Or, if there is a difference 
between perception of sight and brightness and darkness, and 
perception of sight has no appearing and no disappearing, then 
how can they be in unity with them? If perception of sight 
is not in unity with brightness and darkness, then leaving 
brightness, darkness and space out of account, suppose you try 
to analyze this perception of sight and tell me what it appears 
like. Independent of brightness, darkness and space, perception 
of sight would be non-existent, like the tortoise’s hair or the 
horns of a rabbit. Let us grant that these phenomena of bright- 
ness, darkness and space, are different from one another, then 
from which one of the three phenomena is perception of sight 
manifested? Brightness and darkness are in contrast with each 
other, how can it be said that perception of sight is in unity 
with both of them or with either one of them? If perception 
of sight is independent of all three of these different phenomena. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


175 


it must be devoid of existence entirely, and if it is, how can it 
be asserted that it is not in unity with them? The spheres of 
space and sight by their nature are devoid of any limits, how 
can it be said that there are distinctions between them? If it 
is asserted that when perception of sight sees brightness and 
when it sees darkness that its nature does not undergo any 
change, how can it be said that there is no distinction between 
them? 

Ananda! You shopld observe carefully, scrutinize the details, 
concentrate your attention, bring into use your profound insight, 
upon all these conditions of brightness when the sun is shining, 
darkness when there is no moon, sight passing through space 
unhindered and being hindered by the opaqueness of the great 
earth. In all these varied conditions by what means is percep- 
tion of sight manifested? From all these things perception of 
sight appears to be false and empty, it is neither in conformity 
with brightness, darkness and space, nor in combination with 
them, and yet it can not be that perception of space comes 
from nowhere. 

Ananda! If perception of sight, hearing, understanding, etc., 
has a nature that is unlimited and perfect, permeating every- 
where throughout the universes, and by nature unchangeable, 
then you should know that the natures of the multitudinous 
and different perceptions, infinite, unmovable space, together 
with the movable elements of earth, water, fire, and wind, are 
to be regarded as the Six Great Elements. Their essential na- 
tures are perfect and in one unity, and they all belong to the 
Womb of Tathagata, and are devoid of deaths and rebirths. As 
your mind-essence has fallen out of attention, you have failed 
to realize that all your perceptions of sight, hearing, under- 
standing and feeling, belong by reason of their nature to Tatha- 
gata’s Womb. You should meditate upon this and note 
whether your perceptions of sight, hearing, understanding and 
feeling, belong to deaths and rebirths, or belong to one great 
unity. Do they belong to different natures, or belong to non- 
death and non-rebirth, or do they belong to not one unity and 
not different natures? You have never yet fully realized that 
within the Womb of Tathagata the essential nature of percep- 
tion of sight is intuitive and enlightening, and that the in- 
tuition of the one and all embracing Essence, manifests its 
faculty of seeing, hearing, understanding and feeling every- 



176 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


where, and that the essential nature of perception of sight, 
within Tathagata’s Womb is ever in freshness and purity, per- 
meating everywhere throughout the universes, and are being 
manifested freely and perfectly in correspondence to the amount 
of karma accumulated by the conscious activity of sentient 
beings. 

For instance, referring to one of our sense organs, the sense 
of sight, the perception of sight reaches to every part of the 
phenomenal universes, and the same is true of all the sense 
organs, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, touching and con- 
sciousness, the wonderful qualities of their perception reaching 
everywhere and permeating everywhere throughout the ten 
quarters of all the phenomenal universes. However, all the 
people of the world being ignorant of this, and by regarding 
perception of sight as being manifested by causes and condi- 
tions, or spontaneously by its own nature, have become be- 
wildered. Whereas, all these false presuppositions and prejudices 
are simply the discriminations made by their mental conscious- 
ness; they are merely figurative words and figures of speech 
that have no basis in reality. 

Ananda! Consciousness has no originality of its own. It is 
an illusive manifestation developed by means of the six objects 
of sense. Suppose you were looking over this assembly, without 
making any particular distinctions, letting the different persons 
present be reflected in your mind as in a looking glass. Your 
consciousness would, nevertheless, make acknowledgement of 
the different ones, saying in orderly succession: — This is Brother 
Manjusri, this is Brother Purna, this is Brother Maudgaly- 
ayana, this is Brother Subhuti, this is Brother Sariputra, etc. 
What think you, Ananda? Is this discriminating consciousness 
manifested from the phenomena, or is it manifested from space, 
or is it manifested spontaneously without any cause? 

If the nature of your consciousness is manifested from the 
perception of eyes, let us suppose there is no brightness, no 
darkness, no sight and no space. If these are not existent then, 
naturally, there will be no perception of sight, and if there is 
no perception of sight by your eyes, how can any consciousness 
arise? Or, if the nature of your consciousness is manifested 
from phenomena, but not from the perception of your eyes, 
then as there can be no perception of brightness, there can be 
no perception of darkness, either. If there is no perception of 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


177 


either brightness or darkness, there can be no sight and no 
space. If there is no phenomena of either sight or space, from 
what can consciousness be manifested? Or, if the nature of 
your consciousness is manifested from the emptiness of space, 
then, as there is no phenomena, so there can be no perception 
of eyes and nothing to distinguish, and of course, consciousness 
could not say, this is brightness, this is darkness, this is sight 
or this is space. If consciousness belongs to non-phenomena, 
then there will be no condition in its presence and, thus, all 
perceptions of sight, hearing, understanding, feeling, will be 
devoid of location and therefore of all existence. If there can 
be no existence under these two conditions of no phenomena 
and no perception of sight, is it possible to have existence under 
any other conditions? If it is possible, then the conditions 
must be different in nature from the phenomena of sight, or 
the phenomena of space and the resulting consciousness will be 
something different from consciousness based upon distinctions 
of sight, hearing, etc. Or if the nature of your consciousness is 
manifested spontaneously without any particular cause, why 
do you not see the bright moon in some abnormal way? 

Ananda! You should ponder upon this question very care- 
fully, concentrate your attention, make use of your profound 
insight, scrutinizing such details of conditions as the teaching 
that perception of seeing is dependent upon eyes, perception 
of phenomena is derived from conditions within one’s presence, 
that existence means describable forms and that non-existence 
means the absence of phenomena. These conditions of con- 
sciousness: — from what cause are they developed? It can not 
be that they come from nowhere. As to those disciples who 
have not yet attained to the state of absorption into the Womb 
of Tathagata, their consciousness belongs to activity and the 
perception of sight to tranquillity, so accordingly, peception of 
sight and the consciousness dependent upon it are neither 
manifested by means of conformity to something, nor by com- 
bination with something; and it is just the same with the other 
perceptions of hearing, understanding, and feeling, and with 
their corresponding consciousness. 

Ananda! If your conscious mind is not manifested from any 
source, then you should know that both discriminative con- 
sciousness and the different perceptions of seeing, hearing, un- 
derstanding, and feeling, are all existing in perfection and tran- 



178 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


quillity the nature of which is unmanifested from any outer 
source, and that all of them — perceptions, consciousness, to- 
gether with earth, water, air, fire and space — are to be re- 
garded as the Seven Great Elements. Their essential nature is 
perfect and in unity within the Womb of Tathagata and, there- 
fore, they are free from deaths and rebirths. 

Ananda! The reason you have never been able to realize 
that your perceptions of seeing, hearing, understanding and feel- 
ing, and your mental faculties for discriminating phenomenal 
objects and developing thoughts relating to them, all belong to 
your own Womb of Tathagata. You should meditate upon 
these questions, namely, whether the six different localities of 
consciousness, dependent upon the sense organs, are all one 
consciousness or different? Whether they exist in the emptiness 
of space or have phenomenal existence? Whether they are in 
a state of non-unity and non-difference, or in a state of non- 
space and non-existence? Naturally, you have never known 
that within your Womb of Tathagata the essential nature of 
consciousness is enlightening and intelligent, that your enlight- 
ened intuition is your true Essence of Consciousness, and that 
this wonderful intuition abides in tranquillity permeating 
everywhere throughout the phenomenal worlds and embracing 
all the ten quarters of the universes. Why do you still raise ques- 
tions as to its locality of existence? Moreover, it is manifested 
freely and perfectly in correspondence with the amount of 
karma accumulated by the conscious activity of sentient beings. 
But the people of the world, being ignorant of this, and by 
regarding the nature of consciousness as being manifested by 
causes and conditions, or spontaneously by its own nature, have 
become bewildered. Whereas, all these false presuppositions 
and prejudices are simply the discriminations made by their 
conscious minds; they are but figurative words and figures of 
speech that have no basis in reality. 

(Questions by Puma answered.) 

Thereupon Ananda and all the assembly, having received 
this wonderful and profound instruction from the Lord Tatha- 
gata and having attained to a state of perfect accommodation 
of mind and perfect emancipation of mind from all remem- 
brances, thinking and desires, became perfectly free in both 
body and mind. Each one of them understood clearly that the 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


179 


Mind can reach to all the ten quarters of the universes and 
that their perception of sight can reach to all the ten quarters 
also. It was just as clear to them as though it was a blade of 
grass held in their hand. They saw that all the worldly phe- 
nomena was nothing but their own wonderful, intelligent, orig- 
inal Mind of Enlightenment embracing all the ten quarters of 
the universes. In contrast to this wonderful, all-embracing Mind 
of Enlightenment, their physical bodies begotten from their par- 
ents seemed like specks of dust blowing about in the open space 
of the ten quarters of the universes. Who would notice their 
existence or their non-existence? Their physical bodies were like 
a speck of foam floating about on a vast and trackless ocean, 
with nothing distinctive about them to indicate from whence 
they came, and if they disappeared, whither they went. They re- 
alized very clearly, that they, at last, had acquired their own won- 
derful Mind, a Mind that was Permanent and Indestructible. 

Therefore the whole assembly with palms pressed together 
in adoration made obeisance to the Lord Buddha in greatest 
respect and sincerity as though for the first time they had real- 
ized his transcendent worth. 

Then they together chanted the following verses, praising the 
glory of the Lord Tathagata and voicing their sincere devotion 
to him: 

Oh, Most Blessed One! Thou who hast ever been absorbed 
in tranquil concentration of Dhyana, inspiring wonder and awe. 

Oh, Honored of the Worlds! Thou art the King of Highest 
Samadhil 

Oh, Blessed Lord! We beseech Thee, to dissipate all our 
upset and confused conceptions that have been developing for 
milliards of kalpas, so that we may attain to the pure state of 
Dharmakaya. 

Oh, Blessed Lord! We beseech Thee, that in this life we 
may attain to the glory of Supreme Enlightenment; and grant 
us, we beseech Thee, that in a following rebirth we may return 
to this world, for the deliverance of all sentient beings. 

O Blessed Lord! As an expression of our gratitude to our 
Lord Buddha, we dedicate our lives to the emancipation of all 
sentient beings in all the worlds. 



i8o SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Oh, Blessed Lord! We beseech Thee to witness our vow 
to be the pioneers of Liberation to those confined to the five 
evil worlds of impurities. 

Oh, Blessed Lord! So long as any sentient being shall fail 
to attain Buddhahood, we vow never to accomplish our own 
Nirvana. 

Oh, Lord, the Greatest of Heros, Almighty, Most Compas- 
sionate! We beseech Thee to teach us through meditation, how 
to get rid of all the defilements of illusive thoughts, reflections 
and desires. 

Oh, Blessed Lord! We beseech Thee to help us to attain 
to Highest Perfect Enlightenment, and to quickly develop the 
power to concentrate our minds in Dhyana, to the end that all 
sentient beings in all the universes may become tranquil and 
enlightened, also. 

Oh, Blessed Lord! Though the purity of our minds may 
be disturbed by vagrant thoughts, we beseech Thee, Oh Lord, 
that our diamond-like Essential Mind may never again be 
disturbed. 

Thereupon, Purna Metaluniputra rose from his seat, ar- 
ranged his robe, knelt upon his right knee, with the palms of 
his hands together, addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — 
Blessed Lord of Highest Majesty! Thou has fully enunciated 
the Dharma-teaching of first importance — the nature of our 
True Mind — and thou hast done it for the sake of all sentient 
beings. The Lord has honored me by looking upon me as be- 
ing the foremost teacher of the Dharma among the Disciples, 
but as I listened to the perfect teaching of the Lord Tathagata, 
I seemed like a deaf person listening to a far away mosquito, 
too far away to be seen. Though the instruction of the Lord 
was clear and purified my mind of its illusions, nevertheless, I 
could not grasp all thy profound teaching nor was my mind 
completely freed from its doubts and suspicions. 

Oh, Blessed Lord! There are among us many Brothers like 
Ananda who have attained a measure of realization and en- 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 181 

lightenment, but have not yet been able to discard all of their 
habitual sentiments, emotions and desires. Then there are some 
of us, though we have completely discarded our habitual in- 
toxicants, as we listened to the Lord’s instruction, so profound 
was it, that some of our doubts still remained, for which we are 
humbly repentant. 

Blessed Lordl The thing that troubles us, that we do not 
fully understand, is this: If all of the sense organs, objects of 
sense, ingredients of sensation, location of perception between 
objects and consciousness, and spheres of mentation about ob- 
jects, are all to be considered as manifestations of the Womb 
of Tathagata which by its essential nature ever abides in fresh- 
ness and purity, how have all the conditional phenomena of 
rivers, mountains, earth, etc., which from beginningless time 
have been going on in successively changing processes, how have 
they ever come into manifestation? 

And one more question. The Lord Tathagata has said that 
all of the four great Elements of Earth, Water, Fire, and Wind, 
are perfect and accommodating in their nature and are permeat- 
ing everywhere throughout the phenomenal universes, how 
can they be permeating everywhere and, at the same time, be 
in perfect tranquillity? 

Blessed Lord! If the nature of Earth is universal, how can 
it, at the same time and in the same space, co-exist with water? 
Or, if the nature of water is universal, how can fire exist at the 
same time; that is, if water and fire are present universally in 
the same space and at the same time, how is it that they do 
not destroy each other? Or, as the nature of earth is dense and 
impassable and the nature of space is empty and passable, how 
can the two different and opposing natures be mutually uni- 
versal at the same time? These things are too difficult for us 
to comprehend, I pray the Lord Tathagata to have compassion 
upon us and solve these puzzling questions. 

Having finished his plea, the Disciple Purna with forehead, 
hands and knees touching the ground, waited humbly and ex- 
pectantly for the Lord Buddha to resume his instruction. 

Then the Blessed Lord replies to Purna and to all the ad- 
vanced Disciples who had attained to self-mastery and Arhat- 
ship, saying: — Today I will explain the essential nature of True 
Transcendency, so that all of those who have attained the uni- 
versalized nature of Arhatship, and all those who have attained 


182 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Arhatship but have not yet wholly discarded the conception 
of their own selfhood as being separate from the selfhood of 
others, to attain to the true seclusion for their practice of Dhy- 
ana and to the attainment of Nirvana. Please listen carefully 
to this teaching. Then Puma and all the other advanced Dis- 
ciples waited humbly and expectantly for the Lord's instruction. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Purna! Referring to your first 
question as to how the phenomena of rivers, mountains, earth 
etc., can come into manifestation if the sense organs, objects of 
sense, ingredients of sensation, location of perceptions between 
objects and consciousness, and spheres of mentation, are ever 
abiding in the freshness and purity of the Womb of Tatha- 
gata. In my previous instruction, I made clear to you that the 
Essential Intuitive Mind possessed its own mysterious Enlight- 
ening Nature, and that the attainment to this Essential Intui- 
tive Mind unveils this mysterious Enlightening Nature. Did 
you not understand? 

Purna replied: — Yes, Blessed Lord! I have tried to under- 
stand thy teaching interpreting this principle, but still it is 
not clear. 

The Lord Buddha enquired of him: — Purna, when I spoke 
of the enlightening nature of Intuitive Mind, what did I mean 
by it? Did I mean that as our Essential nature is enlightening 
of itself so we called it “Intuitive Mind”? Or does it mean 
that as our Intuitive Mind is not enlightening by itself so we 
speak of it as “the Enlightened Mind of Intuition?” 

Purna replied: — Blessed Lord! If this un-enlightened mind 
is to be regarded as the same as our Intuitive Mind, what 
would there be to be enlightened? 

Purna, the Lord Buddha interrupted, if there is nothing to 
be enlightened then there would be no enlightening nature of 
intuition, either. So long as you cherish and discriminate such 
arbitrary conceptions as “there is some nature of non-intuitive,” 
or “there is no nature of non-enlightening” you only reveal 
your ignorance — they do not belong to your enlightening mind 
of tranquillity and Intuition — for the Essential Nature of In- 
tuition is naturally enlightening by itself. It is because of these 
arbitrary conceptions that these false expressions concerning the 
Enlightened Mind of Intuition, take their rise. However, In- 
tuitive Mind is not enlightened by something else— it is self- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


183 


enlightening. As soon as it is supposed to be enlightened by 
something else, there rises false conceptions as to this something 
else and then following there rises fantastic conceptions of func- 
tions and processes. Because of this from the perfect unity of 
Intuitive Mind innumerable varieties have been manifested and 
as there are distinctions among them so classifications among 
these varieties are developed. From this arises conceptions of 
likes and unlikes, and then conceptions of non-likes and non- 
unlikes, and the mind is thrown into a medley of bewildering 
puzzles which in time become attached to the mind and con- 
taminate it. At the end, these attachments and contaminations 
within your mind develop the consciousness of differences be- 
tween self and the not-self of objects and thus the pure mind 
becomes entangled in the snarls of attachments and contamina- 
tions. Because of their defilement, there rises the disturbing 
manifestation of an external world, but when they are stilled, 
there remains only empty space, abiding in perfect unity. The 
world is a medley of unreal and transitory diversities that con- 
taminate the mind and it is out of these arbitrary conceptions 
of phenomena that the very conception of unity and diversity 
arises. But Essential Mind is wholly devoid of conceptions 
and therefore recognizes neither unity nor diversity. 

Moreover, Purna, these two opposites — the Pure Reality of 
Intuitive Mind by its very self-nature ceaselessly drawing every- 
thing into its perfect Unity and Tranquillity, and the unreal 
and transitory medley of diverse and conflicting differences for- 
ever tending to variety and multiplicities — these two opposing 
conceptions arising from the discrimination of Ignorance bring 
into existence a vibratory motion that by reason of desire and 
grasping and the perpetuating influence of habit energy, ac- 
counts for all the basic conceptions of the primary Elements, 
the solidity of Earth, the fluidity of Water, the heat of Fire and 
the motivity of Wind. Amid them it is the nature of Fire to 
move upward and the nature of Water to move downward, and 
from these two Elements being in reciprocal development there 
are the manifestations of rivers, and volcanoes and land. As 
Water takes precedence, oceans appear and when Fire takes 
precedence, continents and islands. The great ocean is also in 
reciprocal development with the illusive conception of fire 
within the mind, and reveals the fact that the blazing Fire is 



184 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


arising continuously. The continents and islands are also in a 
reciprocal development with the false conception of water within 
the mind, revealing the fact that rivers and streams are ever 
flowing. Or if the false conception of water is running very 
slowly within the mind, and the flame of fire is in a high state 
of activity, then there rises the high mountains and volcanoes 
which after all are only combinations of the false conceptions 
of water and fire within the mind. So if we strike flint, sparks 
of fire shoot out, and if we melt rocks, they will become 
liquid. If the false conception of water within the mind pre- 
dominates over the false conception of earth, then the phe- 
nomena of grass and trees rises. As grass and trees are also 
false conceptions of the mind, as soon as they are compressed 
they become water again. Thus all these false conceptions of 
phenomena have their reciprocal developments and successive 
manifestations within the mind, and by means of causes and 
conditions there rises the false conception of the reciprocal con- 
tinuance of the world’s existence. 

Again, Purna! It is quite all right for you to have these 
false conceptions but the fault you have always committed is 
this, that you have cherished a false conception of the nature 
of Enlightenment which has conditioned your realization of 
truth. Because of this false assumption as to the nature of 
Enlightenment, the reasoning power of the intellectual mind 
can never go beyond the category of discriminated illusions. 
For instance: — the perception of hearing cannot go beyond the 
nature of sound, the perception of seeing cannot go beyond the 
nature of sights, and the same as to other perceptions. And 
thus the function of the mind is divided into its six divisions 
of sensitiveness of the sense organs, sensation, perception, dis- 
crimination, consciousness and discriminative thinking. As all 
of these activities of the mind rise from the first activities of 
the sense organs, so all the activities of the mind are but the 
working over of material that has originated within its own 
nature. These thoughts of the mind later become the founda- 
tion for the recurring cycles of deaths and rebirths in the mani- 
festations of all the different orders of sentient life. Life that 
comes from eggs and gives suck to its young comes into en- 
tanglement and suffering by means of Karma accumulated by 
different sentient beings, and the spawns and life produced by 
metamorphosis come into transformations by means of separa- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 185 

tion and combination of their elements under the influence of 
causes and conditions. 

• * * 

After such a manner have the four orders of sentient life 
been ever wandering in the recurring cycles of deaths and re- 
births wholly in close correspondence to the conditions of karma 
accumulated by them in previous lives. The lives that come 
from eggs were conceived by means of mutual intercourse that 
had been inspired by thoughts of each other; lives that are 
born from wombs, conceive by means of lust and concupiscence; 
lives that come from spawn come by the conjunction of con- 
formable cells; lives that come by metamorphosis come by 
means of transformation and separation of cells. Because of 
these causes and conditions there rises the false conception of a 
reciprocal continuance of sentient lives. 

Again, Pumal When mutual thinking and lustful desire com- 
bine the attraction is so intense that the two cannot be sepa- 
rated and, thus, parenthood and posterity will ever continue 
their reciprocal rebirths because of this lustful desire. So great 
is this lust and greed that it can not be restrained and thus, 
all these four great orders of life prey upon each other accord- 
ing to their relative strength — the bodies of the weak becoming 
the prey of the strong. Thus the killing of sentient beings is 
always because of greed in some form. When a man kills a 
sheep for food, the sheep gives rebirth to a man and the man 
gives rebirth to a sheep, and so the reciprocal killing goes on 
ever increasing without termination through innumerable kal- 
pas of time. This awful suffering and retribution is all because of 
greed. So the proverb runs: — “You owe me your life, but I 
must repay the debt.” Because of these causes and conditions 
all sentient lives have been fast bound to the cycle of deaths 
and rebirths after hundreds and thousands of kalpas. Another 
proverb says: — “You love my inner heart, but I love your outer 
beauty,” so because of all these causes and condition, all sentient 
beings have been entangled in cycle of deaths and rebirths for 
hundreds and thousands of kalpas. All this suffering and retri- 
bution is based upon lust, greed and killing, and because of the 
causes and conditions arising from them, there is the false con- 
ception of the continuity of karmas and their inevitable fruit. 

Again, Purnal The pure Essence of Mind leads toward en- 



186 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


lightenment and peace, but these three deluding entanglements 
of lust, greed and killing, are the very reverse and lead toward 
entanglement, strife, suffering, deaths and rebirths and all rise 
from the illusive thinking of the discriminating mind. Because 
of this false thinking there becomes manifest all the false phe- 
nomena that fall within the range of the sense organs. Thus 
all these conditional phenomena of rivers, mountains, earth, 
etc., and their successive and endless changes arise, and all are 
based upon the illusions of the thinking mind without any 
other interpretation. 

Puma addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! 
If this wonderful Intuitive Mind of Essence by nature belongs 
to mystery, enlightenment and intelligence and is in the same 
state of permanency as the Tathagata’s Mind of Essence with- 
out any decrease or increase in its perfection, how can there 
be, suddenly, the manifestation of the conditional phenomena 
of rivers, mountains, earth, etc.? Moreover, as the Lord Tatha- 
gata’s Mind has attained to the state of Brightest Enlighten- 
ment and Transcendental Emptiness how can there appear 
within thy Mind, all of these limited and conditional and en- 
tangling conceptions of rivers, mountains, earth, etc.? 

The Lord Buddha interrupted Purna to enquire: — Suppose 
a person comes to a strange and unknown village and becomes 
confused as to which is north and which is south. Is this coft- 
fusion of mind derived from the mind’s misconception or from 
the mind’s right understanding? 

Puma replied: — Blessed Lord! A person going astray under 
those conditions becomes confused as to the direction, neither 
because of his bewilderment, nor because of his right under- 
standing. And why? Because as the confusion in his mind has. 
no real basis, how can it be said to have been caused by his 
bewilderment? And as the right understanding never changes 
nor makes a mistake, how can it be said that the bewilderment 
was caused by his right understanding? 

The Lord Buddha then asked Puma: — Suppose the person 
who has lost his sense of direction recovers it by some chance. 
Does he still have misconceptions about the directions of this 
unknown village? 

Puma replied: No, Blessed Lord. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — It is just the same with the 
Tathagata in all the ten quarters of the universes. Your mis- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


187 

conceptions about them have no basis in fact. The essential na- 
ture of your mind is the purity of perfect emptiness. Though 
your mind has ever been under illusions, in reality it can suffer 
no bewilderment; it only seems to be under a cloud of fascinat- 
ing sentiments and false perceptions. As soon as the mind 
realizes that it is being deceived, the misconceptions disappear 
and its right understanding will never again be disturbed. The 
bewildered mind resembles a person who suffers from some opti- 
cal hallucination and he thinks that he sees, for instance, fan- 
tastic forms of blossoms in empty space. But if his eyes clear, 
the fantastic blossoms vanish. Suppose there was by chance 
some simpleton who wanted to see the fantastic blossoms and 
went peering about. What would you think of such a person. 
Puma? Is he a fool? Or a half-witted man? 

Puma replied: — In empty space there can be no blossoms, 
of course, but by means of false perceptions of seeing they cer- 
tainly appear and disappear, that is, the perception of seeing is 
in a state of reversion. If the man continues peering about for 
the fantastic blossoms, he will soon become insane, and who can 
say then whether he is a fool or a half-wit? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Purna, it is all right for you to 
interpret the foolish man in that way, but why do you remain 
in doubt about the intelligence of the Tathagata’s mysterious 
Enlightenment in realizing the emptiness of all phenomena? 
Why should you still see manifestations of rivers, mountains, 
earth, etc.? 

Puma, the ordinary unenlightened mind resembles gold hid 
in its ore, but as soon as the gold is extracted, it can never 
again be hidden in its ore. It further resembles the condition 
of wood that is being burned into ashes: it can never again be 
changed back into wood. It is just the same with all the Bud- 
dha-Tathagatas’ experience of Enlightenment and Nirvana. 

Puma, you also asked me about the nature of the Four 
Great Elements — earth, water, fire and wind — if their nature is 
perfect and accommodating and permeates everywhere through- 
out all the phenomenal universes, why do not the nature of 
water and fire mutually destroy one another? And also, you 
asked about the -natures of empty space and the great earth 
that are permeating everywhere throughout all the phenomenal 
universes, how can they keep their natures distinct and avoid 
becoming involved in each other? 



i8 8 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


As empty space is not made up of a mass of innumerable 
phenomena, it offers no objection to the manifestation of phe- 
nomena. Let me explain this. When the sun shines, the vast 
ethereal world becomes clear; when the sky is overcast with 
clouds, it becomes dark and gloomy; when the wind blows, 
there is motion; after a rain it is fresh and pure; when the 
atmosphere becomes laden with moisture, it becomes sultry; 
when there is much dust it becomes impure; after a shower has 
washed out the dust, it is clear and transparent. What do you 
think, Puma? Are all these conditional phenomena manifested 
by themselves, or by the empty space? If they are manifested 
by themselves, then when the sun is shining, the brightness be- 
longs to the sun and in all the ten quarters of the universes, 
the brightness belongs to the sunshine. If this is the explana- 
tion, how is it that you still see the round sun in the sky. If 
the brightness belongs to the sky, then the sky should shine of 
itself, and how is it that the brightness never appears until the 
sun rises? If the brightness belongs to both the sky and sun, 
then which part of the brightness belongs to the sun and which 
part to the sky? Again, if the brightness is manifested by con- 
formity and combination of the sky and sun, then when the 
sun goes down, thy sky should still retain part of the bright- 
ness. Why is it that after the sun sets, the night becomes 
dark? Therefore the brightness belongs neither to the sky nor 
to the sun. However, if there is neither sun nor sky, how can 
brightness become manifest? Therefore, we must conclude that 
brightness is neither dependent nor independent of either sky 
or sun. 

Purnal It is just the same with the intelligence of the true 
mysterious Mind of Intuition. The Mind of Intuition has uni- 
versal intelligence and because of it conception of space is em- 
braced within it but undifferentiated and thus the manifestation 
of emptiness responds to the perception of your sight. Because 
the Four Great Elements are present within the pure universal 
intelligence of the Intuitive Mind, the manifestation of them re- 
sponds to the perception of your sight. What is the significance 
of this, Puma? Take for instance the reflection of the sun in 
the water. Two persons, looking at the reflection, go away in 
opposite direction, one toward the east, the other toward the 
west, but the reflection of the sun in the water follows both 
of them. In the beginning they would have agreed that there 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


189 

was only one sun, but now we have two persons each asserting 
that the sun is following himself, therefore there must be two 
suns. But why then is there only one sun in the sky? All such 
deductions and assertions are false and empty because they 
have no basis of proof. 

Puma! All the phenomena arising from sight are false and 
illusion — they are both indescribable and inexplicable. We 
might as well wish for the fantastic blossoms in the air to bear 
fruit. How foolish it is to seek the reason for their transient 
appearance and disappearance. Nevertheless, the Essential Na- 
ture of Perception of Sight is real and true, because it IS the 
mysterious, intelligent luminosity of the Intuitive Mind of En- 
lightenment. As the perception does not belong to the element 
fire or water, of what use is it for you to ask about the principle 
of their mutual involvement in each other’s phenomena. 

Purna! It is because you regard the conceptions of empty 
space and all the sights as being reciprocally overlapping and 
substituting for one another in the Tathagata’s Womb, and so, 
accordingly, the Tathagata’s Womb" permeates everywhere 
throughout the phenomenal world in forms of emptiness and 
sights. And, therefore, from the Tathagata’s Womb are mani- 
fested all such fantastic visions as the movement of wind, the 
transparency of the sky, the brightness of the sun, the gloomi- 
ness of the clouds, etc. But it is because of the ignorance and 
stupidity of sentient beings they turn away from their own en- 
lightening nature and hanker after worldly objects thus accu- 
mulating the defilements of attachments and contaminations. 
Thus arise the manifestations of the phenomenal world. 

But I concentrate my mind so as to ignore all these con- 
taminations and return to the mysterious, enlightening nature 
of non-death and non-rebirth so as to be in conformity with the 
Womb of Tathagata. Accordingly the Tathagata’s Womb be- 
comes the clear intelligence of the true and mysterious Mind of 
Intuition that throws its perfect reflection and insight into all 
the phenomenal world. Therefore, in Tathagata’s Womb One- 
ness has the same meaning as Infinity, and Infinity has the 
same meaning as Oneness, the minimum is embraced in the 
maximum and the maximum in the minimum. The tranquillity 
and peacefulness of my concentration of mind in Samadhi pre- 
vails all over the ten quarters of the universes, my body em- 
braces the vast spaces of the ten quarters, and even within a 



igo SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


single pore o£ my skin there is a Buddha-land with a Buddha 
sitting on a seat no larger than a particle of dust, absorbed in 
Samadhi, but endlessly radiating therefrom all the forces of 
Life-giving Truth and ceaselessly drawing inward into its per- 
fect unity all of its multitudinous manifestations. Since I have 
ignored and forgotten all worldly objects, I have fully realized 
this mysterious, enlightening Nature of the Pure Essence of 
Mind. 

Nevertheless, the Womb of Tathagata is pure and perfect, 
all embracing but free from distinctions. In it is neither the 
finite mind, nor empty space, nor the earth, nor water, nor 
wind, nor fire, nor the senses, nor the whole body, nor sensa- 
tions, nor perceptions, nor the sphere of conscious discrimina- 
tions, nor the sphere of consciousness that is dependent upon 
the thinking mind. It is neither the enlightening nature of the 
Intuitive Mind, nor the non-enlightening nature of the intel- 
lectual mind, nor the mental state that discards all ideas relat- 
ing to enlightenment and non-enlightenment. It is neither de- 
cay nor death, nor the state that discards all ideas of decay and 
death; it is neither suffering, the cause of suffering, the ending 
of suffering, nor the Noble Path leading to Enlightenment. It is 
neither Wisdom, nor attainment; neither the giving of gifts, 
nor the keepings of precepts, nor humble patience, nor zealous 
perseverance, nor the tranquil concentration of mind, nor Prajna 
( paramita ), nor Emancipation (paramitta). It is neither Tatha- 
gata, nor Arhat, nor Highest Perfect Wisdom (anuttara-samyak- 
sambodhi ), nor Pari-nirvana. It is neither eternity, nor hap- 
piness, nor ego-consciousness, nor purity, nor anything else. 
All these differentiations are but arbitrary conceptions — merely 
figures of speech — not only do they not convey the true mean- 
ing of Emancipation, neither do they convey the true meaning 
of every day life. 

(Note; Consider the relation of the radio instrument to the 
surrounding atmosphere . The air is burdened with all manner 
of vibrations, not kept distinct, but blended into some complex 
rhythm that is ceaselessly changing, from which the radio by 
its receiving mechanism selects the vibrations it desires and 
transforms them into what the ear interprets to be speech or 
music .) 

Nevertheless, if you rightly realize the true meaning of the 
Tathagata’s Womb in its mysterious nature of the natural En- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


191 


lightening Mind, you will also realize that this mysterious na- 
ture is also the thinking mind; empty space; earth, water, wind 
and fire; the sense organs, the whole body, sensations, percep- 
tions, discriminations, the sphere of consciousness dependent up- 
on the senses; enlightenment and non-enlightenment; the state 
that is neither enlightenment nor non-enlightenment; it is the 
state of decay and death, and the absence of all ideas about 
decay and death; it is suffering, the cause of suffering, the end- 
ing of suffering and the Noble Path that leads to enlighten- 
ment; it is Wisdom, it is all the transcendental attainments 
and graces ( samapatti ); it is the giving of gifts, keeping the 
precepts in selfless kindness, practising humble patience, and 
zealous perseverance, and tranquil concentration of mind and 
Wisdom and Emanciapation. It is Tathagata, the Arhats, Anut- 
tara-samyak-sambodhi, and Pari-nirvana. It is Eternity, and 
Blissful Peace, and ego-consciousness, and Perfect Unity and 
Purity. And because Tathagata’s Essential Mind contains all 
these, it not only conveys the true meaning of Emancipation but 
of every day life as well. 

If you fully realize the intrinsic significance of Tathagata’s 
Womb in its mysterious nature of Enlightening Mind, then 
you will realize that it embraces both the negative aspects and 
affirmative aspects as just outlined. You will realize that Tatha- 
gata’s Womb and the pure Mind of Enlightenment and the 
Mind of Intuition (A laya-vijnana) are of one Essence, radiant 
in Wisdom, integrant in Compassion, vibrant with Purpose and 
Life but unmanifest and in perfect balance and thus abiding in 
perfect and blissful Peace. 

Puma! The mysterious nature of the Pure Enlightening 
Mind is profound and inconceivably mysterious, how can sen- 
tient beings in the Triple World, even the “salvation-for-them- 
selves” Arhats and Pratyake-Buddhas, how can they with their 
limited minds fathom the Supreme Enlightenment of the Lord 
Tathagata? And how can they merge their mundane under- 
standing with the inscrutable intelligence and insight of the 
Lord Tathagata? Consider the sweet harmonies that come from 
the violin, zither, harp or guitar. They do not come of them- 
selves: they only come when some skilful musician plays upon 
them. It is the same with your minds and “the minds of all 
sentient beings. Each one of you has full possession of the true 
Mind-Essence of Buddhahood whose transcendently glorious 



192 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


brightness may shine forth as quickly as the sweet harmonies 
come from the musical instruments when a Master’s hand plays 
upon them. Nevertheless, as soon as you attempt to use your 
mind, the conditioning effects of your defilements, attachments 
and hindrances, at once reveal themselves. This is wholly due to 
your lack of diligence in your practice of seeking Supreme En- 
lightenment, as conditioned by your inclination toward the 
simpler teachings of the Hinayana school, and your self-com- 
placency because of your imperfect attainments. 

Then Puma addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed 
Lord! I can see that thy true mysterious and pure Mind of 
Perfect Enlightenment and my own imperfect mind are one in 
Essence, but as the false conceptions within my mind have been 
accumulating since beginningless time, I have continued in the 
cycle of deaths and rebirths for innumerable kalpas. Though I 
have now acquired some measure of attainment, I have not yet 
attained Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Blessed Lord! Thou hast 
just taught us that as soon as we get rid of all illusions of 
thought that the mysterious Essential Mind of Permanency 
alone remains. May I enquire of thee, Lord Tathagata, by what 
causes do sentient beings cling to their illusions of thoughts 
which so over-shadow the mysterious Brightness of their Es- 
sential Mind and cause them to fall into the vast ocean of 
defilements? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Puma, although you have got- 
ten rid of most of your uncertainties about the teaching of 
Emancipations, yet you still grasp the delusion of an arbitrary 
discrimination between Ignorance and Enlightenment. To clear 
this in your mind, I will ask you some questions about a pres- 
ent happening near us. You have doubtless heard about the in- 
sane man, Yayattadha in this very city of Sravasti. One morn- 
ing he looked into a mirror and saw his head but it had no 
eyes nor eyebrows. He became very angry with his own head 
and blamed it as being the head of a goblin because it had no 
eyes nor eyebrows, and ran away quite crazy. What do you 
think, Purna? Did the man have any good reason for becoming 
crazy? 

Puma replied: — It seems to me, Blessed Lord, that he had 
no other reason than this, that he was crazy already. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Purna! Our mysterious Intuitive 
Nature is perfect and enlightening and its natural perfection is 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


*93 


intelligent and profound. Since the True Nature is free from all 
illusions, so the illusions are naturally devoid of any reality, and, 
therefore, have no source of existence. If they have no source 
of existence, they are no longer illusions even. All these 
thought-illusions have been raised by means of their own re- 
ciprocal manifestations and thus the piling up of delusion upon 
delusions has been going on for kalpa after kalpa as many as 
the particles of dust in the air. Though the Buddhas have 
disclosed their falsity, yet sentient beings cannot at once realize 
their falsity and return to their natural state of enlightenment. 
The source of these delusions is nowhere else but within one’s 
own mind. As soon as you understand the source of a delusion, 
the deluding conception loses its hold upon existence. If within 
your mind you provide no source for these false conceptions, 
there will be none to be discarded. Those who have attained 
enlightenment are as if awakening from sleep, and their past 
life seems only a dream. However clear one’s memory may be, 
it is impossible to reproduce any dreamed of object — no matter 
under what conditions or causes. It would be more impossible 
for you to grasp that which has no hold whatever upon its 
own source of existence. Like the insane man of Sravasti who 
ran away because of the wholly imaginary and fantastic 
thoughts of his mind, with no other cause or conditions. If this 
insanity was suddenly cured, his consciousness of his head would 
just as suddenly be recovered, and no matter whether his in- 
sanity is cured or not, his head is on his body. Puma, the 
illusions of the mind are just as fantastic and have no more 
basis for existence. So if your mind is to remain tranquil and 
undisturbed, there must be no discriminations of the three de- 
luding phenomena of interrelating continuity, namely, the con- 
ception of the world’s existence, the conception of the ego-per- 
sonality, and the conception of karma and its forth-coming fruit. 
If you cease all killing, robbery and lust, whose actions are the 
cause of karma, then the three great causes for the existence of 
interrelated continuity of existence will cease. Thus, within your 
mind, your madness will clear of itself, and when your mad- 
ness clears, Enlightenment is already present. For the essential 
nature of your Transcendental, Pure and Enlightening Mind is 
present everywhere, permeating the whole phenomenal world. 
It is not acquired from any other person, nor by any method 
of hard and diligent devotion to ascetic practices and attain- 



194 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ments. Sentient beings are like a man with a magic gem hidden 
in his garment of which he is ignorant. He becomes poor and 
ragged and hungry and wanders about to far countries. Although 
he is actually suffering from poverty, he still possesses the magic 
gem. One day a very wise man tells the poor man of his magic 
gem and forthwith the poor man becomes a millionaire. It is 
the same with your own nature of Intuitive Mind. You should 
forthwith realize that this magic gem of Enlightening Essence 
of Mind, is not to be acquired from some difficult source, but is 
already within your possession. 

(Instructions to Ananda.) 

Then Ananda from his place in the Assembly bowed down 
in reverence to the Lord Buddha and asked him: — Noble Lord! 
You have just taught us that if we get rid of the three causes 
of karma (killing, stealing and lust) that the three great causes 
for the interrelated continuity of existence will never appear 
again; that as soon as this madness is cleared away. Enlight- 
enment will be acquired, not from some outside source, but will 
be revealed within the mind itself. This seems to come clearly 
under the principle of causes and conditions to which my Lord 
Buddha objects. As for myself, I certainly acquired realization 
by means of causes and conditions. And not only myself but 
all of us practicing junior Arhats and all our elder Brothers, 
the senior Arhats, the Venerable Maudgalyayana, Sariputra, 
Subhuti, and many others, after listening to the Lord’s instruc- 
tion, began their practicings of devotion, acquired their realiza- 
tion, and attained perfect non-recession; are these not causes 
and conditions? But, now, the Lord Buddha seems to be teach- 
ing that Enlightenment appears spontaneously and from no 
cause nor condition. To me this appears to be somewhat like 
the teaching of the heretic Kusali of Sravasti who teaches that 
naturalism is the supreme principle of all natures. Pray, my 
Lord, have great kindness toward us and clear away the un- 
certainty. 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda! In regard to the in- 
sane man in Sravasti should the causes and conditions of his in- 
sanity be removed, the nature of his non-insanity would be re- 
vealed and thus the heretical teaching of causes and conditions 
and of naturalism would fall short of the true interpretation. 
Ananda! If that insane man of Sravasti has his head accord- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


*95 


ing to the principle of naturalism, then as his head belongs to 
his nature so everything he thinks can not be otherwise inter- 
preted than as being the natural manifestation of his mind, then 
why was he by causes and conditions frightened and became 
mad and run away? Or, if his natural head causes him to go 
insane by means of causes and conditions, then why does he not 
also lose his natural head, by means of causes and conditions? 
How since his own head has not been lost, but there rises 
in it the illusion of fright an$ madness, and his head shows 
not the slightest change, how is it to be said that the madness 
comes from causes and conditions? Does this not clearly ex- 
plain that no principle of causes and conditions, or of natur- 
alism, can reveal the true nature of mind? Or, if the man’s in- 
sanity primarily belonged to his nature and he possessed mad- 
ness and fright from the beginning, before he became suddenly 
mad and frightened, where did his madness conceal itself? Or, 
if by nature he is not insane and his head is normal, then why 
was he suddenly carried away by a fit of madness? Or, if he 
realized that his head was normal and that he had been carried 
away by a fit of madness, then the principles of both cause and 
condition and naturalism are mere talk. I have explained that 
as soon as the three conditions of killing, stealing and impurity 
have been gotten rid of, the mind becomes enlightened. When 
the mind of enlightenment is attained, then the mind of vari- 
ability and ignorance disappears. But if you keep these con- 
ceptions in mind simply as arbitrary conceptions, then they 
are mere whimsical talk. When one has discarded the last arbi- 
trary conception of death and rebirth, then he has attained to 
a state of perfect emptiness. As one is able to get rid of the 
thought that he is practicing meditation, then he is truly ad- 
vancing toward enlightenment. Indeed, this is no whimsical 
talk. But even if the mind is free from the thought that one 
is practicing meditation, and one has advanced on the path of 
enlightenment, and even if one has attained to a perfect state 
of emptiness, it cannot be said that it has been accomplished 
according to a principle of naturalism. For so long as the mind 
cherishes any arbitrary conception, such as, that a perfect state 
of emptiness of mind belongs to the principle of naturalism, then 
there will develop along with it the arbitrary conception that as 
soon as the natural mind is developed that its variability and 
ignorance will disappear. This above all else is whimsical talk 



196 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


of a variable and ignorant mind. My teaching of the non-vari- 
ability of the true Mind is a teaching that does not belong to 
whimsical speaking, neither does it belong to the principle of 
naturalism either. Or, if one thinks that the non-variability of 
true Mind is a kind of naturalism, that would be like mixing up 
natural phenomena into one all-inclusive compost and thinking 
of it under the category of combination and conformity, and the 
thinking of its opposite — non-combination and non-conform- 
ity — as being of the nature of originality. Such thnking is 
whimsical, indeed; it belongs to a habit of contrasting dualistic, 
and therefore false, conceptions. In regard to the nature of 
originality, it should be understood that, although it is invaria- 
ble, yet it yields freely to conditions, so that it can not be re- 
garded as coming under any law of naturalism. In regard to the 
phenomena manifested by combination and conformity, though 
they, also, yield to conditions, yet their body considered as a 
whole, suffers no change, so that these phenomena also, in their 
essence, do not come under the principle of combination and 
conformity. When interpreted in this way even these things are 
no longer whimsical words but are a true teaching, although 
they are a long way from Enlightenment and Nirvana. 

Listen, Ananda! Although you hold in memory all the pure 
and profound teachings of the twelve classes of the Sacred 
Scriptures, if you use yodr learning only for flippant talk, of 
what value is it? To attain wisdom, you must practice mind- 
fulness and concentration of mind in Dhyana for many, many 
kalpas. Although you have spoken glibly about the principles 
of causes and conditions, and naturalism,’ and although you are 
commonly regarded as the most learned man in the assembly, 
yOur learning and thinking only increases your knowledge and 
you become more and more cultured with the multiplying of 
the kalpas, and as a consequence, you could not escape from the 
seductive allurement of Pchiti, the beautiful maiden. And why 
was it, Ananda, that by my transcendental power her sexual 
lust was immediately calmed and she became one of my most 
zealous disciples, and you found escape from your dangerous 
entanglement and receive this opportunity of instruction? 

Therefore, Ananda, though you have kept in mind all the 
wonderful and systematic and profound teachings of the Tatha- 
gata for many kalpas, it would have been far better for you if 
you had practiced even for one day the lesson of resistance to 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


197 


the earthly passions of lust and hatred. Pchiti responded to her 
lesson and when her lust was quieted by my transcendental 
power she became a true Bhikshuni in our assembly. Both she 
and Yasdra, the mother of Rahula, have matured their karma 
of previous lives and now realize the causes of their sufferings 
in previous lives from yielding to loving desires and greediness. 
So each of you, after many kalpas of suffering, by simply yield- 
ing to a single lesson have found emancipation. She has at- 
tained the stage of an Anagamin disciple and you have been 
assured of your future attainment of Arhat. Oh, Ananda, why 
do you still linger about, merely listening to my teachings, and 
deceiving yourself by thinking up foolish questions? 


Chapter Two 

Interpretation of Non-Death and Non-Rebirth, the Wonderful 
Door of the Three Reflections and the Fundamental 
Cause of Practice. 

(Questions by Ananda as to how to attain Enlightenment.) 

After having listened to the Lord Buddha’s instruction, 
Ananda and all the Disciples, discarding all their doubts and 
illusions, realized the true reality of their minds and, because 
of it, became calm and refreshed as never before. Ananda, as 
usual, being the natural spokesman, bowed down with great 
sadness at the feet of the Lord Buddha, and addressing him, 
said: — 

Glorious Lord of great Compassion and Purity! Thou hast 
skilfully unveiled my heart and encouraged me by many ex- 
pedient means even as thou hast delivered all who were drown- 
ing in the depths of the great Ocean of Suffering. Blessed 
Lord! Listening to thy sacred teaching we have come to un- 
derstand that the Mysterious, Intuitive, Enlightening Mind of 
the Lord Tathagata’s Womb is Universal and embraces all the 
Buddha-lands in its pure, tranquil, glorious, profound Enlight- 
enment. But I have failed to enter into this Enlightenment 
and the Lord Tathagata has blamed me for it, saying that it 



198 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


was because of my very learning that I have been prevented 
from entering. I am like a man who has inherited a magnificent 
palace through the munificence of some heavenly king, but who 
is unable to take possession of it without first passing through 
the door of Enlightenment. We pray thee. Lord Buddha, be- 
cause of thy great compassion to show us the way to enter into 
this inheritance of Enlightenment. Teach us, unenlightened as 
we are, how to give up the ideas we have accumulated by our 
learning and how to attain the goal of the Lord Tathagata's 
perfect Enlightenment. Show us the right starting point for 
our devotion and our disciplinary practice, show us how to 
get rid of all entangling conditions and thus to encourage all 
of us who are still practicing Arhats to concentrate our minds 
on the right path so that we may surely attain the intelligence 
and insight of our Lord Buddha. Then Ananda, having finished 
his plea, first bowed to the ground, and then together with all 
the great assembly, waited for the Lord Buddha to continue his 
sacred instruction. 

Thereupon the Blessed Lord, taking pity upon his Disciples 
who were yet in the Pratyaka and practicing stage of Arhatship 
and for the sake of all later disciples in the decadent periods 
that were to follow his Nirvana, that they too might attain 
Supreme Enlightenment, gave the following instruction. 

Ananda I When you have fully made up your minds to at- 
tain this true Mind of Enlightenment and have determined 
never to tire seeking for the Lord Tathagata’s profound Sa- 
madhi, there are two definite principles for beginning practice 
that must from the first be fully understood and appreciated. 

The first definite principle for beginning practice is this. If 
you are successfully to give up your old idea of Arhatship, that 
is, of gaining Enlightenment and Nirvana for yourself, and to 
begin the practice for attaining the ideal of Bodhisattvaship, 
that is, enlightenment for the sake of all sentient life, and to 
enter with perfect realization into the Buddha’s perfect Intel- 
ligence and Insight, you must, first of all, (A) observe and 
see clearly that your starting point of motive and purpose is in 
full accord with the eventual fruit of Enlightenment. If, at the 
beginning, you take the varying and momentary thoughts of 
your mind as your starting point for seeking Buddha’s perfect 
and un-varying Mind of Enlightenment, there is no such 
agreement. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


199 


From the beginning you must recollect that all conditional 
phenomena are transitory and passing. Have you any doubt of 
this? Can you think of any exception? Take for example, 
pure space. Have any of you ever heard of space coming to 
corruption and destruction? No, because pure space is free 
from conditions and, therefore, is indestructible. 

Compare this with your body, Ananda. Within your body 
there is an element of hardness, of Earth; there is an element 
of fluidity, of Water; there is an element of warmth, of Fire; 
and an element of breathing and motion, the element of Wind. 
The body is in bondage to these Four Great Elements, and 
these four bonds divide your tranquil, mysterious, intuitive, en- 
lightening Mind into such divisions as the sensations and per- 
ceptions of seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling and touching, and 
of the following conceptions and discriminations of thought, 
that cause your enlightening Mind to fall into the correspond- 
ing five defilements of this evil world from its beginning and 
will continue to do so to its end. 

What are these five defilements, Ananda? What is their 
nature? Consider the difference between fresh, pure spring 
water, and such substances as dust, ashes and sand. If these 
are mixed, the water becomes dirty and opaque. It is just the 
same with the five defilements and the mind. 

Ananda, when you look into the vast space that stretches 
beyond the universe, the nature of space and the nature of 
the perception of sight do not interfere with each other, but 
mingling together there is no boundary line to limit their in- 
dividuality. But if there is only empty space, with no suns nor 
planets in it, then space loses its substantiality. And the con- 
ception of sight looking into space with nothing to see, loses its 
sensibility. But as there are these two arbitrary conceptions of 
false phenomena — suns and planets moving in space, and the 
false perception of sight, all interwoven together, — so there are 
all the uncounted false manifestations of differences in the uni- 
verses. This is the first defilement of individuation which is 
the basis of ignorance. 

Next, the substantiality of the body is made up of the Four 
Great Elements, and the processes of the mind — seeing, hearing, 
tasting, smelling, touching, perceiving, discriminating — ming- 
ling with the processes of the body and they become interwoven 
together into the false imaginations that are the second defile- 



200 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ment, called the defilement of erroneous views concerning form. 

Again, within your mind there are the processes of con- 
sciousness, such as memory, moods, emotions, incidental to the 
recitation of the daily ritual, desires, etc., and there is the pure 
intuition of the Intuitional Mind. They, also, mingle together 
and give rise to false imaginations which form the third defile- 
ment, the conditioning defilement of the two kinds of evil de- 
sires ( klesas ). 

Again, your mind is continually in a process of change from 
morning to night and every time your thoughts change, you 
seek to manifest and perpetuate them by some sort of creative 
activity in this terrestrial world. And every time your actions, 
conditioned by your karma, take form, they transform sentient 
lives also. Thus these interwoven false imaginations and these 
objective illusions manifested by them make up the fourth de- 
filement which is called the evil defilement of sentient beings 
grasping the things they desire. 

Again, since your perceptions of seeing, hearing, touching, 
thinking, having no differences in their nature, but because of 
their attributes of form and appearance and individuation are 
placed in opposition and relation to one another revealing ab- 
normal differences and distinctions which, in the pure Essence 
of Mind, are mutually accomodating, but which when mani- 
fested in form and appearance are found to be mutually incom- 
patible. Thus there arise internal and external conflicts which, 
although imaginary, form the fifth defilement, the defilement 
of weariness, suffering, growing old and decrepitude. 

Ananda! If you wish your sense perceptions and conscious 
understanding to be in harmony with the permanent joy of the 
Tathagata’s natural purity, you must first pull up these roots 
of death and rebirth which have been surreptitiously planted 
by these five kinds of defilements, namely, the defilements of 
discriminating ignorance, of form, of desire, of grasping, of de- 
crepitude, and then begin the practice of concentration of your 
attention on the pure and Essential Mind of non-death and non- 
rebirth. It is by means of your tranquillity of mind that you 
are able to transmute this false mind of death and rebirth into 
the true and clear Intuitive Mind and, by so doing, to realize 
the primal, enlightening and intuitive Essence of Mind. You 
should make this your starting point for practice. Having thus 
harmonized your starting point with your goal, you vfill be able 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 201 

by right practice to attain the true goal of perfect Enlighten- 
ment. 

If you wish to tranquillize your mind and restore its original 
purity, you must proceed as if you were purifying a jar 
of muddy water. You first let it stand until the sediment set- 
tles to the bottom when the water will become pure, which 
corresponds with the state of mind before the defilements of 
the evil passions had troubled it. Then you carefully strain off 
the pure water which is the state of the mind after the five 
defilements of ignorance, form, desire, grasping, decreptitude, 
have been wholly removed. When the mind becomes tranquil- 
lized and concentrated into perfect unity, then all things will 
be seen, not in their separateness, but in their unity wherein 
there is no place for the evil passions to enter, and which is 
in full conformity with the mysterious and indescribable purity 
of Nirvana. 

(B) The second definite principle for beginning practice is 
this: — If you are to successfully give up your old ideal of Ar- 
hatship and to begin the practice for attaining Bodhisattva- 
ship, that is, of attaining Enlightenment for the sake of all sen- 
tient life, you must face with great courage the requirement for 
becoming a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, namely, to abandon all de- 
pendence upon conditional phenomena which includes all con- 
ceptions relating to your own ego-selfness, and to examine care- 
fully and with determination into the roots of all passionate 
desires (klesas); that is, as to who it is, or what it is, that 
develops these passionate desires, and who it is and what it is 
that suffers these karmas and rebirths through the beginningless 
kalpas. 

Anandal Unless from the very beginning of your practice 
for the attainment of Enlightenment, you do not look into the 
roots of these klesas, you will never be able to understand the 
deceptiveness of the sense organs and sense minds and the dis- 
criminating thoughts relating to them and to the objects of 
sense, and to the general topsy-turviness of mind. If you fail 
to discover and to understand this point, how will you other- 
wise be able to subdue your vagrant thoughts and vexations of 
mind, and be able to successfully ascend to the throne of 
Tathagata? 

Anandal If you watch a man untangle knots in a rope, 
you will notice that he first studies the interweaving of the 



202 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


rope to find out which strand to unloosen first. But space is 
different. Space has no body nor form, so there can be no 
knots in space to untangle. But in your organism there are six 
thieves: — eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and discriminating mind, 
to steal away precious values of truth and leave you in bond- 
age to false imagination. Consequently from beginningless time 
all sentient beings in this phenomenal world have developed 
knots and bonds and entanglements which render it impossible 
for them to transcend this world, until these knots be first 
disentangled. 

Ananda! What do you understand when I speak of the 
world of sentient beings? Do I mean just thinking people? 
No, I mean the whole complicated process of change that has 
been going on endlessly and its ever-shifting manifestations and 
positions. For instance, the positions of the phenomena being 
momentarily manifested, we speak of as being east, or west, 
north, south, south-east, north-east, south-west and north-west, 
and also above and below. Moreover, this endless process of 
change has been going on in the past, is going on at present, 
and will be going on into the endless future. Because of the 
vast, incalculable number and permutations of these changes, 
everywhere and forever, the false and arbitrary conceptions of 
all sentient minds have been ever-flowing and interweaving to- 
gether in a most bewildering process of manifestation and evo- 
lution and involution, and this ever-shifting and bewildering 
process of change makes up the world of sentient beings. 

Though the nature of this world may be divided into the 
ten directions and their positions may be made definitely clear, 
but as people are ignorant and thoughtless and careless, they 
only think of these locations in a very general way and fail to 
realize that there is another direction than east and west and 
north and south which is of more importance because it takes 
in all the rest. This is the direction toward the center. Then 
they fail to remember that each of these directions is mutually 
related to a fourth direction of time that in its turn is in three 
directions, past, present and future. And each of these is re- 
lated to the ten realms of existence and each of these has its 
ten points of direction/which makes in all twelve hundred, and 
each of our six senses has its own twelve hundred. Then you 
must remember that none of these senses see everything and 
always, so that their single and combined report to the per- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


203 


ceiving and discriminating mind is never perfect nor complete. 
Each conception has its measure of merit and no more. 

* # * 

(Then follows several pages elaborating this thought of the 
incompleteness and imperfection of all sense originating concep- 
tions, which are here omitted.) 

Ananda! If you wish to discriminate rightly between the 
desire-current of your mind as it sets outwardly towards dif- 
ferent forms and their inevitable suffering and death and re- 
birth, and the returning current of compassion that sets inward 
toward the source of non-death and non-rebirth at the center, 
you will have to test each one of them with the pure Mind 
Essence to find out which one is opposed to it and which one 
is in harmony with it. I have tried to bring this out clearly so 
that you may be able to distinguish them and be able to aban- 
don the one that is deceiving and false and that has been accu- 
mulating karma since beginningless time, and to follow after 
and to develop your perfect and accommodating nature so that 
every day under every circumstance, you may part company 
from the deceiving and enslaving defilements. I have brought 
out this distinction very clearly in order to help your advance- 
ment by a more perfect daily practice. 

As for the Tathagatas of the ten quarters of all the uni- 
verses, they can practice in any one of the eighteen spheres of 
mentation and in any one of them find Supreme and Perfect 
Enlightenment, for to them there are no distinctions of attain- 
ment. But because of your ignorance and deterioration you be- 
come confused amid these eighteen spheres of mentation and 
are unable to regain your native intelligence. Therefore, I have 
made this clear statement so that you may all enter by this 
one door to Enlightenment, and may be able to attain to one 
unity of Mind free from all deceiving thoughts, and having 
gained this unity, all these perceptions of the senses will be- 
come purified simultaneously. 

Then Ananda addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — 

Noble Lord! How is it that in making progress against the 
forth-going desire current of death and rebirth, that by enter- 
ing the one door of deep concentration of mind, we purify all 
six of the perceiving sense-minds simultaneously? 



204 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda! Having attained the 
degree of Crotapana, you are supposed to have gotten rid of 
all the delusions belonging to the sight perception of sentient 
beings and to have reached the enlightenment-stage df your 
sight faculty. However, you have not yet gotten rid of the 
fantastic habit of dividing things that by their nature are in- 
divisible, which had developed in the sense organs since be- 
ginningless time. Such fantastic habits will be overcome as you 
reach the enlightenment stage of your practice, by the realiza- 
tion of the perfect unity of Mind Essence that transcends all 
divisions. 

There still remains within your sense-mind individualized 
delusions arising from ignorance regarding the process of grow- 
ing, continuing, changing, and disappearing, of the mind’s per- 
ceptions. I now want to ask you, Ananda, whether these sense- 
minds are to be considered as six little minds, or as one unified 
Mind? If they are to be considered as only one unified Mind, 
how is it that the ear cannot see, or the eye hear, or the head 
walk, or the feet talk? Or if the sense-minds are definitely six 
in number, which one of your six senses is it that receives my 
teaching as I explain to you the mystery of this profound door 
of Dharma, and which one of them is it that accepts it? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord! I received your teaching 
through my ears. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Ananda, as my teaching is partic- 
ularly heard by your hearing sense, what relation has it to 
your body and to your thinking mind? Having received my 
teaching with your ears, how was it that your mouth asked 
the question and your body rose up to show me reverence? 
You should think about this very carefully. There can be no 
doubt about the fact that the teaching was received at first by 
one of the senses, but there is a question as to whether the 
mind that perceived the teaching and accepted it was one or 
six. Ananda, you should clearly understand that your sense- 
minds, in truth, are neither one nor six. The confusing dif- 
ferentiation is explained by the fact that since from beginning- 
less time the mind has fallen into the habit of seeing divisions 
where there are no divisions until it is in a chronic state of 
topsy-turviness, and among its illusions this arbitrary concep- 
tion of one and six has arisen to cloud over your originally per- 
fect and tranquil Mind-Essence. You have succeeded in discard- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


205 


ing all attachments and contaminations belonging to the six 
sense-perceptions, but you have not yet regained a clear realiza- 
tion of the original and intrinsic unity of your true Mind. 

The same is true as to space. When you leave objects out 
of account and think only of clear space, you have no difficulty 
in recognizing that space is a perfect unity. But when you 
think of it in relation to objects, you note differences and also 
divide up space. But space can not be divided simply for 
your convenience; it is absurd to even question whether it is 
unity or not-unity. It is the same with your six sense-minds — 
whether they are one or six — they are pure Essence of Mind 
which in its nature is as undifferentiated and universal as space. 

By means of the opposing phenomena of brightness and 
darkness, the natural unity and tranquillity of your mind is 
disturbed and deceived, and perception of sight is registered 
within the wonderful, perfect and Essential Mind. The essential 
nature of this inner perception of sight is a reflection of outer 
sights and by weaving different sights together there is mani- 
fested an undifferentiated, transcendental organ of sight that is 
to be regarded as the real substantiality of the eye-sense. More- 
over, there is a subsidiary of this transcendental eye-sense, 
namely, consciousness dependent upon it, which consciousness 
is not to be differentiated from the consciousness of the other 
senses — of hearing, smelling, tasting and touching — and the 
unity of which in the Mind’s pure Essence, gives rise, within 
the mortal mind, to wandering thoughts about every phe- 
nomena. Thus there is going on between the specialized sense- 
organ and the unified transcendental sense-mind a constant suc- 
cession of receiving and projecting, causing and being effected. 

In like manner by means of the mutual conflict of the two 
phenomena of motion and stillness, your natural tranquillity of 
mind is contaminated and perception of hearing is manifested 
within your wonderful perfect and Essential Mind. The es- 
sential nature of this inner perception of hearing reflects the 
outer sounds and, by merging them together, manifests a tran- 
scendental organ of hearing, which is to be regarded as the real 
substantiality of the ears. Moreover, there is a subsidiary of this 
transcendental ear-organ, namely, the consciousness dependent 
upon it and the other four objects of seeing, smelling, tasting, 
and touching, which raises wandering thoughts after every phe- 
nomena of sounds. 



206 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

And again, by means of the mutual conflict of the two phe- 
nomena of passibility and impassibility, your natural tranquillity 
of mind is contaminated and perception of smelling is mani- 
fested within your wonderful, perfect and Essential Mind. The 
essential nature of this inner perception of smelling reflects 
outer odours and, by merging them together, manifests a tran- 
scendental organ of smelling. The originality of this transcen- 
dental smelling-organ is to be thought of as the real substanti- 
ality of the nose. Moreover, there is a subsidiary of this tran- 
scendental smelling-organ, namely, the consciousness dependent 
upon it and the other four objects of seeing, hearing, tasting 
and touching, which raises wandering thoughts after every phe- 
nomena of smelling. 

And again, by the interweaving of the two phenomena of 
variability and invariability, your natural tranquillity of mind 
is contaminated and perception of tasting is manifested within 
your wonderful, perfect and Essential Mind. The essential na- 
ture of this inner perception of tasting reflects the outer tastes 
and, by merging them together, manifests a transcendental 
organ of tasting. The originality of this transcendental organ 
of tasting is to be thought of as the real substantiality of the 
tongue. Moreover, there is a subsidiary of this transcendental 
tongue-organ, namely, consciousness dependent upon it and the 
other four objects of seeing, hearing, smelling and touching, 
which raises wandering thoughts after every phenomena of taste. 

And again, by means of the irritation of the two phenomena 
of separation and touching, your natural tranquillity of mind 
is contaminated and perception of touching is manifested within 
your wonderful, perfect and Essential Mind. The essential 
nature of this inner perception of touching reflects the outer 
contacts and, by merging them together, manifests a transcen- 
dental feeling-organ. The originality of this transcendental feel- 
ing-organ is to be thought of as the re^I substantiality of the 
sense of touch. Moreover, there is a subsidiary of this tran- 
scendental feeling-organ, namely, consciousness dependent upon 
it and the other four objects of seeing, hearing, smelling and 
tasting, which raises wandering thoughts after every phenomena 
of feeling. 

And again, by means of the reciprocal continuity of appear- 
ing and disappearing (birth and death), your natural tranquil- 
lity of mind is contaminated and manifests discriminating 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


207 


thoughts within your wonderful, perfect and Essential Mind. 
The essential nature of these discriminating thoughts reflects 
the conception of individualized phenomena and, by grouping 
the different phenomena together, there is formed a transcen- 
dental thinking-organ which is to be thought of as the real sub- 
stantiality of the discriminating mind. Moreover, there is a sub- 
sidiary of the discriminating mind, namely, consciousness de- 
pendent upon it and upon the other five objects of seeing, hear- 
ing, smelling, tasting and feeling which raises wandering 
thoughts about any and all the phenomena of discriminating 
cognition. 

These transcendental sense-organs, corresponding to the six 
physical sense-organs, are not six but one, and that One is the 
wonderful, mysterious, Essence-Mind of Intuition. In this uni- 
fied transcendental Mind all sense-perceptions are perfectly ac- 
commodated in its perfect unity. When any one of the sense- 
conceptions is seen to be unreal and fantastic, then the tran- 
scendental sense-mind being perfectly accommodating and uni- 
fied, realizes that all sense-perceptions are unreal and fantastic, 
and the transcendental mind-organ being the real substantiality 
of the physical mind-organ and the consciousness dependent 
upon it, projects its unified consciousness so that all the sense 
minds are purified at one and the same time. 

Anandal Such are the six kinds of transcendental sense- 
minds that are manifested by means of the intuitive, enlighten- 
ing nature of your true Mind when it is possessed and deceived 
by the false perceptions of the different sense functions. As 
soon as you lose the true nature of the actual perceptions, you 
cling to false imaginations and the manifest false conceptions. 
Thus, when you ignore both brightness and darkness, there will 
be no substance to the perception of sight; when you ignore 
both motion and motionlessness, there will be no substance to 
the conception of hearing; when the discriminated notions of 
passibility and impassibility are ignored, the perception of smell- 
ing will have no substance; when there is no clinging to the 
notion of variability, the perception of taste will remain un- 
developed; when there is no clinging to the notion of separa- 
tion and contact, naturally there will be no perception of feel- 
ing; and when there is no clinging to the conception of an ego- 
self and of death and rebirth, there will be no further special- 
ization and development of any of the six different sense per- 



308 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

ceptions, nor of their disappearance either, then where can a 
discriminating mind take up its abode? 

If you simply do not follow after these twelve notions of 
conditioning phenomena, namely, motion and stillness, separa- 
tion and contact, variability and constancy, appearing and dis- 
appearing, passing or impenetrability, brightness and darkness, 
or should ignore any pair of them, you will be free from bond- 
age to all mental contaminations* You will become concentrated 
in mind, you will return to your natural Essence of Mind, you 
will manifest your original and innate enlightening brightness. 
As soon as you unveil your enlightening nature, by ceasing to 
cling to any pair of these conditioning phenomena, the other 
five contaminating attachments of sense perception will all lose 
their force and your mind will become perfectly free. 

Ananda! When the intuitive and Essential Mind becomes 
free from contamination, it derives its discriminations and ideas, 
not by means of contact with objects in its presence, nor in 
the order and limited manner of the senses, but while it con- 
tinues the use of the sense-organs for its purposes, henceforth 
the senses conceptions become universalized and mutually 
available. 

Ananda, have you noticed in this assembly that Anaruddha 
sees things that his eyes can not see? This transcendental per- 
ception is temporarily reflected to him from the brightness of 
the Tathagata. The physical sense perception by its very na- 
ture is limited and does not possess any substantiality. For in- 
stance: The Arhats who have attained tranquillity and the 
Samapatti of perfect emancipation from desires and suffering, 
such as the great Katyayana who is present with us today, have 
long ago discarded the use of their thinking minds, which if 
clung to only serve to develop the arbitrary conception of an 
ego-self. They are perfectly intelligent but they apprehend 
knowledge, not by means of their thinking minds, but directly 
by intuition. 

Ananda! When you have cut off all dependence upon the 
sense organs, your inner awareness will become as clear as 
crystal, manifesting its authentic brightness. Then all vagrant 
thoughts and transitory objects and the ever varying phenomena 
of this terrestrial world will melt away like ice when boiling 
water is poured upon it. In a moment, by a single act of true 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


209 

mindfulness, your inward awareness will become transcendental 
intelligence. 

Anandal It is as though a worldly man should focus all 
his senses in his eyes and after that see things only with his 
eyes. Then if he closes his eyes suddenly, there will be only a 
perception of darkness and all the other senses would become 
darkened, also. Such a man would become unconscious of any 
difference between his head and his feet. Now, if the man 
moves his hand over his body, although he does not see any- 
thing with his eyes, as soon as he discriminates his head from 
his feet by the sense of touch, the perception of all the sense 
organs will become as usual. 

As brightness is a necessary condition for seeing, darkness 
prevents seeing, but if you can manifest the seeing faculty in- 
dependent of brightness, darkness can never cause gloominess. 
When objects of sense experience are all ignored, then the tran- 
scendental brightness of Intuition will shine forth mysteriously, 
and you will have found the true source of cognition and 
tranquillity. 

# # * 

Ananda then said to the Lord Buddha: — Noble Lord! It 
has been said by thee, that if we wish to seek permanency of 
enlightenment, we must at the very beginning become ac- 
quainted with the different degrees of attainment, such as: 
Nirvana, Bodhi, Tathata, Mind Essence, Alaya Vijnana, the 
Emptiness of the Womb of Tathagata, the highest perfect Wis- 
dom of the All-embracing Mirror. Though these are different in 
name, yet in nature, they are all pure, perfect and free, and 
their substantiality is as pure and as hard and as condensed as 
the diamond, which is pure and hard and permanent by na- 
ture. If the perception of seeing and hearing should omit all 
the conditions of brightness and darkness, motion and motion- 
lessness, they would have none of their characteristic substan- 
tiality. The same would be true of the thinking mind. If it 
ignored all the perceptions of objects in its presence, there would 
be nothing left of it; it would be non-existent. Then how can 
we take the Samapatti of extermination of thoughts and desires 
as the starting point for our practices when we seek to acquire 
the Tathagata’s seven fruits of permanency? 



210 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


My Lordl If the phenomena of brightness and darkness are 
excluded, the perception of sight would disappear. If there are 
no conceptions of objects in its presence, the thinking mind 
would revert to nothingness, also. If its causes and results are 
considered carefully in this light, are you not forced to see that 
originally there is neither a thinking mind nor any attribute of 
it. If that is true then who is it that seeks to attain Supreme 
Enlightenment? At one time, my Lord Tathagata said that the 
mind was tranquil, perfect, permanent and Essential, in its na- 
ture, but later my Lord said that speaking truly all expressions 
referring to Mind were nothing but figures of speech. How, 
then, can it be said that even the Lord Tathagata is an au- 
thentic Teacher? If there is no Mind, how are we to use it to 
get rid of false conceptions and attain the true? Pray, my Lord, 
in great kindness enlighten our ignorance and stupidity. 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, though you have 
learned many things by your wonderful brain, you have not 
yet fully attained to perfect mind-control. Your mind under- 
stands the causes and relations of your topsy-turvy thoughts, 
but when this true “topsy-turvy” thought is presented to you, 
you fail to understand it. I am afraid that your faith in my 
teaching is not well grounded. To help you clear away these 
uncertainties, I will ask you a few simple questions. 

Then the Lord Buddha struck his gong and asked Ananda 
if he had heard the sound of it. 

Ananda replied that he had. After the vibration of the 
sound had died away, the Lord Buddha enquired: — Do you 
still hear? Ananda replied that he no longer heard it. 

The Lord Buddha struck the gong again and asked: — Did 
you hear the striking of the gong? Ananda replied: — Yes, 
Blessed Lord. 

Then the Lord Buddha said to An&nda: — Why do you reply 
at one time that you hear and at another time that you do 
not hear? 

Ananda replied at once: — Blessed Lord, when the gong was 
struck I heard the sound, but when the vibrations died away 
the sound ceased. That is what I meant when I said at one 
time that I heard, and at another that I did not hear. 

Again, the Lord Buddha struck the gong and enquired of 
Ananda if he could still hear. Ananda replied that he could. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


211 


After a while when the sound had ceased, the Lord Buddha 
enquired again: — Do you still hear? 

Ananda replied, a little impatiently: — No, Blessed Lord, the 
sound has ceased, how can I hear? 

Then the Lord Buddha said: — Ananda, what is the meaning 
of it all? At one time you say you hear and at another time 
you say you do not hear? 

Ananda replied: Blessed Lord when the gong is struck, there 
is sound. After a time the sound ceases, then there is no sound. 

The Lord Buddha interrupted, saying: Ananda, why do 
you make such confused statements? 

Ananda retorted: — Blessed One, why do you charge me with 
making confused statements, when I speak only of facts? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, why, indeed! When I 
asked whether you had heard the sound of the gong, you re- 
plied that you had heard it, but when I asked you if you could 
still hear, you replied at one time that you could, and at an- 
other time that you could not. You do not seem to realize 
that the sound of the gong, the hearing of the sound, and the 
perception of the hearing are three different things, for you 
replied without any recognition of the difference. That is why 
I said that you were making confused statements. 

There is a difference between “sound” and “no-sound,” and 
“hearing” and “no-hearing.” Sound and no sound are momen- 
tary, while hearing and no-hearing are permanent. Sound and 
no-sound are imaginary, hearing belongs to the pure Essence of 
Mind. Ananda, you speak in error when you say there is no 
more hearing just because the sound ceases. If it is true that 
hearing ends with the cessation of noise, it would mean that 
the ear-organ had been destroyed. When the gong was struck 
again it would no longer have been heard, but you heard it 
so it means that you could hear all along. So you should rec- 
ognize that your hearing of the sound and your not hearing of 
it are related to the existence or non-existence of the sound, 
and not to the perception of the ear. If you remember this, 
your hearing nature will not seem to you to become at one time 
existent and at another time non-existent. 

Should the hearing nature really vanish, then by whom will 
the vanis h ing be realized? Therefore, Ananda, the sound-object 
within the scope of the hearing nature has its own death and 



212 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


rebirth. It is not when you note the existence of the sound or 
the non-existence of the sound, that you should think that 
your hearing nature is in existence or not in existence. 

As your mind is still in a topsy-turvy condition, when it 
mistakes the sound to be the same as your hearing nature, it is 
no wonder that your mind is bewildered in the entanglements 
caused by mistaking the nature of permanency as being the 
same as destructibility. Therefore, it is not right for you to say 
that as soon as hearing is separated from such conditions as 
motion and motionlessness, impassability and passability, that 
the perception of hearing has no essential nature of its own. 
The hearing faculty can be likened to a sleepy fellow of this 
world, sleeping soundly on his bed. During his sleep, some of 
his family are batting their clothes as they wash them, and 
some were hulling rice by pounding it and the sound of the 
batting and the pounding mingle with his dreams and are but 
the rat-a-pan and the dum-dum of a drum. In his dream he 
wondered why the ding-dong should sometimes sound like com- 
ing from wood and sometimes like coming from stone. When 
he awoke, he immediately realized that the sound came from 
batting clothes on wood and pounding rice on stone. He told 
his family about his dream and how bewildered he was by such 
sounds coming from a drum. 

Anandal In his dream the man did not think of concep- 
tions of motion and motionlessness in relation to the sounds, 
or of passability and impassability in relation to the organ of 
hearing, but though his body was asleep, yet the essential part 
of hearing was as clear as ever. By means of this illustration, 
you must see that in spite of the destruction of your body and 
the gradual exhaustion of the vitality of your life, that the 
essential nature of the hearing-conception is not destroyed nor 
caused to vanish. 

Therefore, as all sentient beings from beginningless time 
have always hankered after beautiful sights and musical sounds, 
filling their thinking minds with thought after thought and 
causing it to be always active, and never realizing that by na- 
ture it was pure, mysterious, permanent and Essential, thus 
causing them, instead of following the path of permanency, to 
follow the current of transitory deaths and rebirths. Conse- 
quently there has been life after life ever recurring and ever 
filled with contaminations, impermanency and suffering. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 213 

Ananda, if you could only learn to get free from this bond- 
age to deaths and rebirths and from this fear of impermanency, 
and learn to concentrate your mind on its true and permanent 
nature of Permanency, then the eternal Brightness would il- 
lumine you and all the individualized and discriminated per- 
ceptions of objective phenomena, sense-organs, false imagina- 
tions, self and not-self, would vanish, for the phenomena of 
the thinking mind are only empty and transitory things, the 
differentiated emotions of your mortal consciousness are only 
passing phenomena. If you can learn to ignore these two 
fundamental illusions — deaths and rebirths and the fear of im- 
permanency — and hold fast to the Permanency that the Eye 
of Dharma perceives, then you need have no fear of failure in 
the attainment of Supreme Enlightenment. 

* # * 

Ananda addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Noble Lord! 
Though my Lord has shown us the negative teaching of our 
bondage to deaths and rebirths and their inevitable suffering, 
yet when we notice human beings struggling to untangle the 
knots that bind them to deaths and rebirths, we know that 
they will never be able to unsnarl the knots until they are 
given some clear and positive teaching that will lead them to 
Emancipation from the bondage and fear and suffering and to 
the attainment of Buddhahood. This need is also true of my- 
self and of other practicing Arhats. Though we have acquired 
a measure of enlightenment and are honored as hermit sages 
yet, nevertheless, we are like men sick with remittent fever, 
we seem to gain only to fall back again into the old weakness 
and bondage and suffering. Pray, my Lord, have great mercy 
on our stupidity and be kind enough to show us in great detail 
and clearness how to untangle the knots that bind us. Your 
further teaching will not only help us, but will, through us, 
help all sentient beings of the future, so that we may all be- 
come free together and never again fall into the Three Great 
Realms of Passion, Anger and Infatuation. 

As soon as Ananda had made this entreaty, the whole as- 
sembly with one accord paid to the Lord Buddha highest obei- 
sance and waited in great expectation for further perfect teach- 
ing. Thereupon, the Blessed Lord having great pity, not only 
for Ananda and those present, but for the sake of all future 



814 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


disciples, sowed the good seed of Emancipation that would 
eventuate in the development of the Eye of Enlightenment. 
The Blessed Lord tenderly laid his golden hand of sandal wood 
fragrance upon the head of. Ananda. Immediately all the in- 
numerable Buddha-lands of all the ten quarters of the universe 
became rhythmic with the six kinds of mysterious vibrations, 
and all the Tathagatas existent in all these Buddha-lands 
emitted from the crowns of their heads rays of glorious 
splendor, and the rays of this glorious brightness simultaneously 
reached to the Jeta Grove where they were assembled and rested 
like a crown on the head of the Lord Tathagata. The whole 
assembly were overwhelmed with amazement and adoration and 
awe. 

At the same time, mystic voices were heard coming from 
the innumerable Tathagatas in all the innumerable Buddha- 
lands and blending their varied tones into one melodious voice, 
seeming to say: — Well, indeed! Ananda! If you wish to un- 
derstand your deep ignorance which is the secret of the knots 
that hold you fast bound in the cycle of deaths and rebirths, 
you must first understand your six sense-organs — eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, body and discriminating mind, for if you wish 
to realize Supreme Enlightenment and its Samapatti graces 
of tranquillity, peace, joy, calmness, freedom, transcendency 
and permanency, they must be sought nowhere else but in these 
six sense-organs of your own body. 

Although Ananda had heard this sacred teaching many 
times before, its full significance was not yet fully clear to 
him, so he knelt before the Lord Buddha and humbly 
entreated him, saying: — What does this mystic message that 
has come from all the Buddha-lands mean, when it says that 
both the secret of bondage to the cycle of deaths and rebirths, 
and the secret of the attainment of perfect peace, joy, tran- 
scendency and eternality, lie within my own sense-organs and 
nowhere else? What is its deep meaning? 

The Lord Buddha interrupted, saying: — Ananda! The sense 
organs and their objects, and bondage and emancipation all 
belong to one single thing, which is your human conceptions 
which are false and deceptive and transitory, just like the fan- 
tastic blossoms seen in the air by clouded eyes. The perceptions 
of the senses arise from objects, and their phenomena are mani- 
fested under the conditions of the sense organs. All sense per- 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


215 


ceptions, all discriminated ideas relating to them, all manifesta- 
tions are mind-made and have no essential nature of their own — 
they are as empty as the center of reeds — consequently, as soon 
as you perceive anything, your seeing it, your discrimination of 
it, your desire for it, your grasping it, become the knots that 
bind you to ignorance and the cycle of deaths and rebirths. On 
the contrary when your eyes perceive anything, if you let the 
sensation of seeing pass unheeded, not letting any discriminat- 
ing thoughts of judgment arise in your mind, this unties all 
knots and is the genuine freedom that is non-intoxicating and 
is Nirvana. This being true, how can any trace of conception 
remain in your Mind? Indeed, it must not be allowed to re- 
main to defile its pure Essence. 

* * # 

Then the Blessed One in order to emphasize his teaching 
summed it up as follows:— 

In comparison with Mind-Essence, all conditioned things 
are as empty as space. Existing as they do under conditions, 
they are false and fantastic; unconditioned things, having 
neither appearance nor disappearance, are as imaginary as blos- 
soms seen in the air. As we are obliged to use false expressions 
to interpret the essence of things, so both the false expressions 
and the essence of things as thus interpreted by the false ex- 
pressions become a pair of falsities. It is clear to see that the 
intrinsic Essence is neither the essence as interpreted, nor the 
non-essence of the interpretation. How can it be asserted that 
there is trueness in either the thing as perceived, or in the 
phenomena of perceiving? 

Therefore, as there is no reality at the heart either of the 
sense-organs and of the objects seen, or of the perceiving con- 
sciousness, they must all be as empty as the heart of reeds. As 
all the knots of the mind and all unloosening of knots has the 
same basis of unreality, it matters not whether we think of 
them as sacred or vulgar, there is but one path to emancipa- 
tion and that is to escape from their bondage altogether. 

If you are considering the nature of the center of reeds, it 
matters not whether you interpret the center as emptiness or as 
non-emptiness — either would be a misinterpretation. If anyone 
is puzzled by the saying that both are false, it is because of 
his ignorance. If one is not puzzled, it is because he has at- 



2 16 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


tained emancipation. The unloosening of knots is a gradual 
process, one must begin with the knots of the five sense-organs, 
after which the knots of the sixth sense — the perceiving and 
discriminating mind — will loosen of themselves. Therefore, it is 
wise to begin with the sense organ that is most yielding and 
accomodating and by means of it, it will be easier to enter 
the true Stream of Life that flows into highest perfect Wisdom 
(i anuttam-samyak-samhodhi ). 

Although the Alaya-vijnana (the universal or “storage 9 * 
Mind) is immaculate in its self-nature, as it receives the seed 
of the false thinking, it becomes contaminated and becomes as 
wild and unmanageable as the current of a torrent. Because 
one easily falls into attachment to arbitrary conceptions, such 
as reality interpreted by false expressions and illusions of non- 
reality, I have not always interpreted things in this way. Since 
all conceptions of phenomena are nothing but activities of the 
mind, so, speaking truly, the mind is not a fantastic thing but 
it becomes a fantastic thing. If you are not in bondage to 
these contaminations of your own mind, there will be neither 
arbitrary conceptions of fantastic things, or of things that are 
not fantastic. 

As there is no rising in your Essential Mind of such arbi- 
trary conceptions as non-fantastic things, why should they be 
raised at all? This teaching is the wonderful “Lotus Flower." 
It is as gloriously enlightening as the diamond ( Vajra-raja ), 
as mysteriously potent as highest Samadhi. This is the In- 
comparable Teaching! Anyone practicing it with sincerity and 
earnestness will outdo the graduate disciples in a single mo- 
ment, as suddenly as a rap on the door. Such a one will be- 
come Honored of all the Worlds! Indeed! This Teaching is 
the only path to Nirvana. 

# # # 

When the Lord Tathagata had finished this supreme in- 
struction, whose profound and comprehensive thoughts had 
been expressed in well chosen words and beautiful style, An- 
anda and the whole assembly were enlightened and they 
praised the Lord Buddha for his sacred teaching. 

But Ananda was not yet satisfied. In reverential manner 
and spirit, he addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Noble 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


217 


Lord! Though I have listened carefully to my Lord’s noble 
and compassionate teaching about the exclusive unity and one- 
ness of the pure, mysterious and eternal Essence, I do not yet 
fully realize its meaning. It seems to teach that as soon as the 
six sense-organs have become emancipated from their contam- 
inations and attachments that the remaining arbitrary concep- 
tions of the thinking mind will fall way of themselves leaving 
only the one intrinsic Essence, and that this process of eman- 
cipation will proceed in an orderly and spontaneous fashion. 
Pray, my Lord, have great forbearance with us less advanced 
disciples and, for the sake of all future disciples, repeat this 
instruction in more detail, so that it may purify our minds and 
the minds of all future disciples. 

The Lord Tathagata arranged his garments and taking a 
silk handkerchief proceeded to tie a knot in it and showed it 
to the assembly, saying, What is this? 

With one accord, they replied: — It is a silk handkerchief in 
which you have tied a knot. 

The Lord Tathagata tied another knot in the handkerchief 
and said: — What is this: 

They replied: — It is another knot. Blessed Lord. 

Again the Lord tied other knots until there were six. Then 
showing the handkerchief to the assembly, and indicating the 
knots one by one, he asked what is this? And what is this? 
And to each question Ananda and the other answered as be- 
fore: — It is a knot. 

Then the Lord Buddha said: — Ananda! When I showed 
you the first knot, you called it a knot, and when I showed 
you the second and the third and so on, you still insisted they 
were all knots. 

Ananda replied:— Noble Lord! The handkerchief is made 
of silk threads of different colors and is woven into a single 
piece, but when it is tied into a knot, it is right to call it a 
knot, also, and if the Lord were to tie it into a hundred knots, 
each one would be a knot. However, my Lord, has only tied 
it six times — not seven or five — so there are only six knots. 
Why does my Lord seem to recognize only the first tying as a 
knot? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda, you are right in saying 
that this beautiful handkerchief is one piece and that when I 
tied it six times there were six knots. Now look at it closely. 



2 18 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


The silk handkerchief is the same piece of woven silk, the ty- 
ing has not changed it in the slightest, except in appearance — 
it is still a handkerchief. Now think, Ananda. When the hand- 
kerchief was tied the first time, the first knot appeared; and 
then later and successively, the second knot and the third to 
the sixth. If I now take this sixth knot and begin to count 
them backward, the sixth knot becomes the first, does it not? 

Ananda replied: — No, my Lord, when the handkerchief was 
tied six times, the last tying was the sixth knot; it can by no 
means be called the first knot. No matter what you say, there 
is no possibility of confusing the order of the knots — it is and 
always will be the sixth knot. 

The Lord Buddha agreed to this, saying: — So it is, Ananda. 
The six knots may not all be exactly alike, but when you seek 
the root of their different forms, they are all arrangements of 
the single handkerchief. You can not confuse the single hand- 
kerchief, you may confuse the knots, their differences and order, 
but you can not confuse the handkerchief because it is a single 
whole. The same is true of your six sense-organs — they are 
knots tied in the essential unity of your mind and out of its 
unity there appears the variety. 

The Lord Buddha continued: — Ananda, if you do not like 
to have knots tied in the handkerchief but prefer its original 
state, what would you do? 

Ananda replied: — Noble Lord! As long as the knots exist 
in the handkerchief there will be the possibility of a discussion 
about them — which is first and which second — but when the 
knots are all untied, there can be no further discussion about 
them because they will all have disappeared and only the 
beautiful handkerchief will remain in its original state of 
oneness. 

The Lord Buddha was pleased with this reply and said: — 
That is true, Ananda. The same is true about the relation of 
the six organs of sense to the Essential Mind. As the six sense- 
organs become freed from their contaminations, the remaining 
arbitrary conceptions of the discriminating mind will disappear 
also. It is because your mind, having become diseased and be- 
wildered because of the false sense-conceptions accumulated 
since beginningless time, has developed many desires, attach- 
ments and habits. From these there have arisen, incident to 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


219 


the ever changing processes of life, arbitrary conceptions con- 
cerning self and not-self and as to what is true and what is 
not true. These arbitrary conceptions have not developed in a 
normal way from your pure Mind Essence, but in an abnormal 
way because of the prior false conceptions that had their origin 
in the sense-organs, like the sight of blossoms in the air that 
come to diseased minds. They falsely appear to have had their 
origin in the enlightening and Essential Mind but, in truth, 
they have arisen because of diseased conditions. 

The same is true, also, of all conceptions, objective and 
component — universes, mountains, rivers, trees, sentient beings, 
and deaths and rebirths. Even discriminating thoughts of 
Mind-Essence and Nirvana, everything, all of which are nothing 
but phenomena analogous to blossoms seen in the air by dis- 
eased eyes and all of which have been manifested by the en- 
slaved, bewildered and ever active, topsy-turvy mind, 

Ananda then said to the Lord Buddha: — Noble Lord! If 
these ever-rising, changing, arbitrary conceptions of phenomena 
are like knots tied in a handkerchief, how can the knots be 
unloosed? 

The Lord Tathagata took the handkerchief with the knots 
still tied in it and tugged at it in a blind, foolish way that only 
served to tighten the knots and asked Ananda if the knots 
could be unloosened in that way. 

Ananda replied: — No, my Lord. 

Then the Lord tugged at the knots in another wrong way 
and again asked if the knots could be unloosed in that way. 

Ananda replied: — No, my Lord. 

The Lord Buddha said: — I have tried now that way and 
now this way, but with no success in unloosening the knots. 
How would you untie them, Ananda? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord, I would first study the knot 
and find out how it was tied, then it could easily be untied. 

The Lord Buddha was pleased with this reply and said: — 
Right you are, Ananda! If you wish to untie a knot, you 
must first understand how it was tied. The lesson which I 
have been teaching you — that all things are manifested by 
causes and conditions— does not refer to these crude terrestrial 
phenomena of conformity and combination alone, but is the 
principle that the Tathagata has discovered from the Dharma 



220 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


of Emancipation which applies to both the terrestrial and tran- 
scendental worlds. For he knows the originality of all phe- 
nomena and accordingly he can make any manifestation he 
pleases to meet any situation or condition. He even knows 
each single drop of rain that falls on the sands of the River 
Ganges. For instance, in our presence there are all sorts of 
conditions — the straightness of pine trees, the crookedness of 
shrubs, the whiteness of storks, the blackness of magpies, etc. — 
the Tathagata knows the cause of each. 

Therefore, Ananda, you may select any one of your six 
sense organs that you please, and if the bondage to that sense 
organ is destroyed, the arbitrary conceptions of all objects in 
the discriminating mind will be destroyed at the same time. 
Once being convinced that any single sense conception, or a 
thought based upon one, is unreal and fantastic, one’s de- 
pendence upon sense conceptions in general is destroyed. After 
all the delusions of sense conceptions have been thus destroyed, 
there will remain only the true Essence of Mind. 

Ananda! Let me ask you another question. This handker- 
chief has six knots tied in it. If I untie them can they all be 
untied at once? 

No, my Lord. The knots were originally tied one by one 
in a certain order, so when we come to untie them we must 
follow the reverse order. For although the knots were made 
in one handkerchief, they were not made at one time and can 
not be untied at one time. 

, Again the Lord Buddha was pleased at the reply and 
said: — It is the same with the disentanglements of the con- 
ceptions of the six senses. The first knot of false conceptions 
that must be untied, is the one relating to the false concep- 
tion of an ego-personality, one must first of all attain a realiza- 
tion of its utter non-reality. When this realization of the un- 
reality of one’s own ego-personality is perfectly attained it 
becomes enlightening, then the next knot to be untied is the 
one relating to personal attainments of any kind. This arbi- 
trary conception must be untangled and its unreality fully re- 
alized. These two entanglements — belief in an ego-personality 
and the conception of personal attainment — must be utterly 
destroyed and never again permitted to rise to defile the true 
Essential Mind. This accomplishment may be called the Bodhi- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


221 


sattva-Mahasattva’s attainment of the Perseverance in the 
Dharma of non-rebirth through the Practice of their Samadhi. 

(NOTE. The following section is found at the close of the 
Sixth Chapter, where it is evidently out of place , and is inserted 
here, where it is more appropriate.) 

Having listened to this instruction from the Lord Buddha, 
Ananda rose in his place, and bowed down in profound obei- 
sance to express both his gratitude and his sincere purpose to 
observe what had been said to them. He said to the Lord 
Buddha: — My Noble Lord! Referring to my Lord’s teachings 
concerning the five sense-ingredients of the mind, thou hast 
taught us that at the base of the discriminating mind, there 
are five aggregates of conceptions all of which are unsubstantial 
and illusions, but which the mind assumes to be its own orig- 
inal mind. My Lord has not yet given us any detailed instruc- 
tion as to how these five groups of conceptions are to be con- 
trolled under ordinary conditions. Are these sense-ingredients 
to be discarded at one time, or is it by gradual steps? And 
what are the boundary lines between the five groups? Have 
mercy upon us, my Lord, and instruct us clearly so that in 
the future we may be a guiding eye to all sentient beings in 
this last kalpa. 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Ananda! The true Essence of 
the wonderful enlightening Mind is self-intuiting, perfectly ac- 
commodating, and pure. In its nature it has no such defilements 
as conceptions of deaths and rebirths, contaminations and taints, 
neither has it any such attribute as emptiness. All these are 
arbitrary conceptions that have arisen from prior false con- 
ceptions. But the original immaculate intuitive and enlighten- 
ing Essence becomes defiled by the accumulating of these false 
conceptions and because of them manifests all the phenomena 
of the world. It is just like the insane Igratta who becoming 
ignorant of his true head was deceived by the shadow of a 
false head, which had no basis in fact and was wholly an hal- 
lucination. Upon this illusive conception he built up the causes 
and conditions that controlled him. So those who are ignorant 
of the real cause build up in their mind an imaginary cause. 
Even the nature of space which we think of as empty is an 



228 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


imaginary conception. So it is with every cause, condition and 
nature, it is always a mental illusion cherished by sentient 
beings. 

Ananda! When you come to know where illusion has its 
rise, then you will clearly understand these universally false 
causes and conditions. If there are no illusions, of course, there 
would be no more talk about causes and conditions. And fur- 
thermore, if ignorant people had only true nature from which 
to make deductions, what would they have to talk about, any- 
way? Therefore I show you this interpretation in order to 
have you see clearly that at the base of the five-sense ingre- 
dients there are always false conceptions. 

Ananda! Regarding your body. It is first begun by the 
conception of your parents, but if your karmic mind had not 
been in affinity with your parents’ minds it would not have 
found lodgment in your parents’ conception. As I have said, 
when any one thinks of vinegar, saliva immediately rises in 
the mouth; when one stands on the edge of a precipice, his 
feet begin to tremble. Therefore, Ananda, you ought to know 
that your present body is your first manifestation in substance 
of your false conceptions that have been accumulated in your 
karma. It may be called the first false conception of “firmness.*’ 

Again, in likeness to the trembling that comes to the feet 
when one stands on a lofty place, so in the presence of causes 
and conditions that can influence your body, there is corre- 
sponding reaction in the body. You have two kinds of concep- 
tions always running about in your mind, a pleasant one that 
rises when these causes and conditions are propitious and to 
your advantage, and an unpleasant one that rises when the 
causes and conditions are disadvantageous or painful. This may 
be called the second false conception of “discrimination” or 
“knowledge.” 

By means of conceptions your physical body is always in 
bondage to the thinking mind, and this is because there is an 
affinity between the discriminating mind and the body. This is 
true of all the arbitrary conceptions of phenomena, of all mani- 
festations of mental activities, of all the graspings of the phys- 
ical body, they all react in response with the changing 
thoughts of the discriminating mind. For instance: when you 
are awakening, it simply means that you have begun to think 
again; when you are sleeping you dream according to some un- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


223 


conscious mental strain of passion that is agitating your mind. 
This may be called the third false conception of “accommoda- 
tion” or “response” or “activity.” 

As the process of changes in everything is forever going on, 
there are secret and unconscious displacements throwing things 
out of balance, such as the growth of the nails, the rhythm of 
exhausting and expanding breathing, the wrinkling of the brow, 
the alternation of the days and nights, the causes of which we 
never bother about and never fully realize. Ananda, if all of 
these changes have no affinity with you, no relation to you, 
how is it that your body is ever responding to the correspond- 
ing changes that we call growth? Or if your body has affinity 
with them, why do you remain in ignorance of the reason for 
the affinity? The reason lies because all of these changing 
causes and conditions and reactions are but the shadows of the 
activities of your own mind and your own mind is but a 
shadow of Essential Mind as defiled by the mind's activities. 
This may be called the fourth false conception of “secrecy” and 
“silence.” 

Then by your practice of Dhyana there comes into your 
mind an enlightening essential point of tranquillity and stabil- 
ity, and you take that point of tranquillity as a permanently 
abiding place. If it has its location in the body, it cannot be 
other than the perceptions of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, 
feeling and thinking. If they are the true Essence, there would 
be no more falsity anywhere. But is that true? Supposing you 
saw some strange sight but for many years put it completely 
out of your mind, and then after a long time, you again saw 
the strange sight and it brought back to your memory all that 
you had seen before. Then within this tranquil Essence of 
Stability, does your thinking mind, which is always in activity 
as conditioned by its contaminations, does it have any precise 
account of it? 

Ananda! You ought to know that this, kind of limited 
tranquillity is not real or true. It is in likeness to the current 
of a deep river which, as you glance at it, seems to be quiet 
and motionless but in fact is steadily and relentlessly moving 
onward. If it^does not have its source in the false conceptions 
of the senses," how is it that it receives all the habitual illu- 
sions? If it were not possible for your sense-organs, which had 
their source in the pure Essence of Mind but which had be- 



5>2 4 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


come differentiated through Ignorance, to return to their orig- 
inal pureness and oneness in Mind-Essence, how could these 
habitual illusions ever lose their existence? But now through 
your practice of Dhyana jyour sense-organs are losing their in- 
dividual differences as they become increasingly merged into the 
pure Essence of Mind, and with this merging the habitual illu- 
sions lose their existence, also. In your present state of attain- 
ment these habitual illusions have become fine and incon- 
spicuous, but they are not yet perfectly exterminated, so in 
such a state the mind will still be under a certain dependence 
upon the sense-organs and yet there will be times of insight 
and tranquillity. But this partial state of tranquillity is not 
the perfect state of Enlightenment for in that perfect state all 
dependence upon the senses is ended and with it all differentia- 
tions and discriminations that are based upon sense-conceptions 
will be ended also. 

For instance, in our ordinary meditation before enlighten- 
ment we will often enter into it with a clear and tranquil 
mind, but the mind is still in a conditional state of false con- 
ceptions. This dependence upon a partial state of tranquillity 
as being the perfect attainment is the fifth refined and concen- 
trated thought of “topsy-turviness” of mind. 

Ananda! These five sense-ingredients are made up out of 
these five kinds of false conceptions. Your wish to know the 
boundaries of the spheres of causes is easily answered. Form 
and space are the boundary of sights; contact and separation 
are the boundaries of tangible things; remembering and for- 
getting are the boundaries of conceptions; appearing and dis- 
appearing (birth and death) are the boundaries of activities; 
false tranquillity and true tranquillity are the boundaries of 
consciousness. 

These five sense-ingredients are developed by leaps and 
bounds. They are manifested by reason of consciousness, and 
they disappear by the discarding of sights. There is but one 
principle involved and may be immediately realized so the ar- 
bitrary conceptions of both principle and realization may be 
discarded at one and the same time, but the resultant memories 
of the conceptions can not be instantly discarded — they have to 
be gradually dissolved into emptiness by ignoring and forget- 
ting them. I have now shown you how the knots in the kalpa 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


225 

handkerchief can be untangled. It should be clear to you. Do 
not ask again? 

Now you ought to be prepared to interpret this principle, 
which is the source of false conceptions and is also the source 
of mental enlightenment, to all disciples of this latter period so 
as to enable them to realize the emptiness of their illusions, to 
develop their deep abhorrence of their own ego-personality, to 
understand that there is complete emancipation in Nirvana, so 
that they will no longer cling to this triple world of suffering. 

Ananda! If any disciple should gather all the seven treas- 
ures sufficient to fill the open spaces of the ten quarters of all 
the universes, and offer them to all the innumerable Buddhas, 
and offer to them services of adoration with all his heart, what 
think you, Ananda? Would this disciple accumulate great merit 
by such an offering? 

Ananda replied: — My Lord! It is impossible to comprehend 
the vastness of the open space of the universe, or to compre- 
hend the amount of treasure sufficient to fill it. Once there 
was a disciple who acquired the rank of a great world-ruler by 
the gift of a few cash, how much more would be the merit to 
one making such an unthinkable offering of treasure to all the 
Buddhas of all the innumerable Buddha-lands. 

The Lord Buddha said: — Ananda! The words and the in- 
struction of all the Buddhas and Tathagatas are true and re- 
liable, so if any Disciple should teach them to novice-disciples 
in the last kalpa, his sins would be annulled and would disap- 
pear with the speed of a single thought. This would be true 
if he had been able by only a single thought to show this 
Door of Dharma to a single human being, even if he had com- 
mitted the four great offenses, or the ten minor offenses of a 
Bhikshu, or even had passed over into the hell of Avichi of 
this world. Yes, it would be true even if he had passed into 
the hells of Avichi in all the ten quarters of all the universes. 
His deed of merit — teaching novice disciples this door of 
Dharma— would change his memory of suffering in the hells of 
Avichi until they would seem to be memories of a happy 
paradise, and he would accumulate merit that would exceed the 
merit of the former disciple who gave the immeasurable treas- 
ure to all the Buddhas, by a hundred times, yes, by a thousand 
times, by myriads of times. 



226 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


(NOTE. The text of the Second Chapter is now resumed.) 

* # # 

(Spiritual Experiences of Highest Bodhisattvas.) 

Ananda and the assembly having listened to the Lord Bud- 
dha’s instruction became thoroughly perfected in their intuitive 
intelligence and henceforth discarded all their suspicions and 
doubts. With one accord they bowed to the ground in humble 
obeisance and gratitude, saying: — Blessed Lord! This day both 
our bodies and minds have become transparently clear and we 
feel that we shall soon attain to a perfect state of freedom. 
Nevertheless, though we have realized thy teaching, that as 
soon as the six sense-organs have been liberated from their at- 
tachments and contaminations, the remaining arbitrary concep- 
tions of the discriminating mind will disappear also, and the 
mind will attain to a state of perfect clarity, but we do not 
feel that we have as yet attained to this state of perfectly 
unified awareness. 

Oh Blessed Lord! We have been wandering about in the 
desolate wilderness of this world for many kalpas, recognizing 
no sign of our Lord’s parental love. We were as a nursing in- 
fant whose mother had left him for a time and who suddenly 
sees his loving mother returning to him. If we, by this ex- 
traordinary chance, should attain to Perfect Enlightenment and 
realize all of thy profound teachings so that they become a nat- 
ural part of our minds, our own innate self-realization, then 
we feel it would be the same state that our Lord attained 
under the Bo-tree, which our Lord has not yet described to 
us. Pray, oh Lord, have great love for us and show us the 
way to thy secret and solemn Perfectness, so that we may re- 
ceive it as our Lord’s crowning instruction. When they had 
made this entreaty, they waited humbly and patiently, their 
devout and concentrated minds in profound tranquillity, for 
the Lord’s final and most secret instruction. 

Thereupon, the Blessed Lord revealed to the assembled 
highest Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas and Great Arhats free from 
all intoxicants, this most sacred teaching. He said: — 

Honored Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas and Great Arhats! You 
have now been under my instruction for a long time and have 
attained to perfect emancipation. As an introduction to what 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 227 

I am about to say, I want to enquire of each one of you as to 
how you attained Samadhi. When you began to realize, in the 
early stages of your devotion and practice, the falseness of the 
eighteen spheres of mentation in contact with objects by the 
sense organs, which one of the spheres first became thoroughly 
enlightened by means of which you attained to Samadhi? 

The five Bhikshus, who were first converted, with Kaun- 
dinya at their head rose from their seats and bowed at the feet 
of the Lord Buddha and said: — When I and my four. com- 
panions were at Sarnath and Kikuta, and had evidence of our 
Lord’s enlightenment through our Lord’s first sermon, we all 
realized the Four Noble Truths. As to the means for my first 
attainment of samadhi, I recall that after thou had approved 
my attainment of an advanced state of transcendental intel- 
ligence, my Lord Tathagata gave me the name of Aprajna 
(which means, “nothing is known”). It was while I was con- 
centrating my mind in my practice of dhyana on the concep- 
tion of the transcendental sound of the Dharma, that I at- 
tained my first experience of samadhi and became an Arhat. 

This is my reply to my Lord’s enquiry as to which one of 
the eighteen spheres of mentation in contact with sense organs, 
it was, that we arrived at samadhi. In my case it was through 
the mysterious sound of the Dharma. 

* * * 

Then Upanishad rose from his seat, bowed at the feet of 
the Lord Buddha and said: — Blessed Lord! I was also one of 
thy earliest disciples and a witness of my Lord’s Enlighten- 
ment. I was in the habit of practicing meditation upon the im- 
purity of my physical body. I became greatly disgusted with 
it and disliked it exceedingly. Later I realized that it is the 
nature of all living bodies to be impure, and that after my 
death my own corpse and bones would decay and then return 
to dust and vanish in thin air. It was by means of this realiza- 
tion that I attained to enlightenment and perfect emancipation, 
and it was the reason my Lord, after he had recognized my 
attainment of transcendental intelligence gave me the name of 
Nishad. It was because the sight of objects within my mind 
had all been discarded and it was by means of the realization 
that all sights of objects were as empty as clear space, that I 
attained Arhatship. As to the means by which I first attained 


228 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


samadhi, it was by reason of this attainment of transcendental 
sight and concentrating my mind on it, that I arrived at a per- 
fect harmonization of the eighteen spheres of mentation in con- 
tact with sense-objects through the sense organs. 

# * # 

Then the boy called by the name of Gandha-prabasa-alam- 
kara, rose from bis seat and bowed down to the Lord Buddha 
and said: — My Blessed Lord! One day, after I had been liken- 
ing thoughtfully to thy teaching in regard to practising earnest 
insight into the true nature of all conditional things, I left thy 
presence when it was almost dark. The dining hall was quite 
deserted and the brothers were lighting incense before the great 
Altar, in the distance. Suddenly I noticed the sweet fragrance 
of the incense, and the thought came to me that the fragrance 
was neither wood, nor air, nor smoke, nor flame; when it was 
present it came from nowhere and when it vanished, there was 
no fixed place for its abode. It was by means of the insight 
that came to me at that time that all my arbitrary thoughts 
about the nature of things were discarded and I became per- 
fectly emancipated from all attachments and contaminations. 
It was because of this attainment that my Lord Tathagata con- 
• firmed my attainment and gave me my name. Since then all 
discriminations of smells from objects have ceased and a reali- 
zation of the meaning of transcendental fragrance has taken 
their place and has become developed and unified and myste- 
riously intuitional. Thus I attained to Arhatship by means of 
this pure insight directed toward sweet scents. As my Lord has 
asked us which of the sense activities was the channel for our 
individual accommodation and unification of the eighteen 
spheres of mentation in contact with sense objects, I reply that 
in my case, it was the attainment of perfect insight coming 
through the sense of smell. 

* * * 

Then Baisajagara and Baisajattama, together with their five 
hundred Brahmayika followers, rose from their seats and bowed 
down to the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! For many 
generations, we two brothers have been in a line of skilful and 
beneficent physicians, and during that time have tasted a vast 
number of different drugs, herbs, woods, metals, etc. We have 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


229 


learned to discriminate their different tastes — sour, bitter, salt, 
fresh, sweet, peppery, etc. — their different qualities in conform- 
ity and in combinations, their permanence or variability, their 
effect in initiating coldness or inflammation, or their action, 
such as poisonous or healing. After we had become thy dis- 
ciples, we understood the true nature of the different discrimi- 
nations of taste — neither belonging to existence nor to non-ex- 
istence, neither to body nor to mind, nor independent of both 
body and mind. As we were meditating on the originality of all 
these differences in tastes, we became enlightened. 

Our Lord Buddha confirmed our attainment and gave us the 
rank of Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas and we became princes of our 
Lord’s Dharma in this great company of followers. As our 
Lord has enquired about our individual experience of perfect 
unification of our eighteen spheres of mentation in contact with 
objects through the sense-organs, ours was through the sense 
of taste. 

* * # 

Then Bhadrapala, with his sixteen personal followers all 
enlightened Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, rose from their seats and 
bowed down to the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! I 
was first taught many aeons ago by Buddha Bhismagarjitas- 
vararaga and was converted at that time. One day, which hap- 
pened to be the bath holiday, I entered the bath and sud- 
denly realized, through the sense of touch, the true originality 
of water: that it neither washed away dirtiness nor cleansed 
my physical body. With this insight I realized the true and 
essential, nature of my heart and mind. With this realization, 
there seemed nothing abiding anywhere in existence but calm- 
ness and peacefulness. This experience remains in my con- 
sciousness even to this day. Since I have become a follower of 
my Lord and been reconverted by thy teachings, that early ex- 
perience has continued to help me in attaining perfect emanci- 
pation from all attachments and contaminations. Because of it, 
my Lord approved my attainment and gave me the name 
of Bhadrapala, which means: “transcendental sense of touch, 
brightly enlightened.” It was thus that I attained the per- 
manent abidingness of a Dharma Prince. As my Lord has en- 
quired of us as to our individual experience in first attaining 
perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in 



230 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


contact with sense-objects through sense-organs, I would testify 
that my attainment was accomplished through insight into the 
true originality of the sense of touch. 

# * # 

Then Maha-Kasyapa with the Bhikshuni Suvarna and other 
nuns of his spiritual family, rose from their seats and bowed 
down to the Lord, Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! In previous 
kalpas when Buddha Kandrasuryapradipa was living I served 
him faithfully and listened to his teaching and practiced it 
faithfully. After he passed into Nirvana, I continued to make 
offerings to his sacred relics and kept his image freshly gilded, 
so that his teaching, like a lamp, continued to illumine my 
life by its brightness. By my faithful reverence for his relics 
and his image, my mind was illumined by a purple-golden 
brightness that reflected itself in all my following lives and be- 
came a permanent purple-golden brightness within my body. 
This Bhikshuni Suvarna and her sister nuns began their prac- 
tice with me in those by-gone days and have continued to be 
in my spiritual family ever since. 

In the course of my previous lives, I gradually gained in- 
sight into the destructibility of all the six objects of sense in 
the Samsara world and observed their emptiness and transitori- 
ness. I continued to practice concentration by means of this 
principle of the inherent emptiness and tranquillity of the es- 
sence of all things until no thought remained within my mind 
to disturb it. Thus, both my body and mind became emanci- 
pated from the accumulated defilements of a thousand kalpas 
and they disappeared as suddenly as the rap on a door. Thus 
I attained to Arhatship by means of the thoughts that arose 
from meditation upon the Dharma of Emptiness, and my Lord 
confirmed my attainment of enlightenment in all transcendental 
Truth and freedom from all the intoxicants of life, and has 
honored me with highest rank among his followers. As my 
Lord has enquired of us which one of our eighteen spheres of 
mentation in contact with objects through our sense-organs, it 
was, I would answer, it was through my meditation upon the 
originality of phenomena, that I first advanced toward enlight- 
enment. 

* * * 

Then Anaruddha rose from his seat, bowed down to the 


THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


231 


Lord Buddha and said: — Blessed Lord! When I first became 
a convert, I was inclined to sleepiness. My Lord rebuked me 
for the bad habit and warned me that if I continued it, I 
might become some kind of animal in my next birth. I took 
this rebuke to heart and for seven days kept my self from 
sleep entirely. From weeping and loss of sleep my eyes became 
over-wearied and I lost my sight. My Lord then taught me a 
better way for overcoming the bad jjabit and showed me how 
to recover my pleasant sight. From this experience I not only 
attained intuitive insight and enlightenment, but attained to 
the Diamond Samadhi, as well. Since then I have the tran- 
scendental power of seeing all the ten quarters of the universe, 
and I can see the spirit-essence of anything at any distance, 
as clearly as I see a fruit held in my hand. My Lord Tatha- 
gata recognized my attainment and confirmed my attainment of 
Arhatship. As my Lord has enquired of us about our personal 
experience in gaining perfect accommodation of the eighteen 
spheres of mentation in contact with objects through the sense- 
organs, I would testify that my first thoroughly perfect accom- 
modation came to me through the return of sight to my sick 
eyes. 

Then Suddhipanthaka rose from his seat and bowing down 
to the Lord Buddha, said:— Blessed Lord! Before I met thee, 
I had never recited scriptures or put their teaching into prac- 
tice because my memory was very poor. After I met my Lord 
Buddha, I listened to his teaching and became converted. I 
tried to remember the teaching, even a single verse of it, by 
repeating it over and over even for a hundred days but failed. 
If I succeeded in remembering the first part, I would forget 
the last part, and if I remembered the last part, I would for- 
get the first part. My Lord Tathagata took pity upon my stu- 
pidity, and taught me to sit quietly with empty and tranquil 
mind simply trying to regulate my in and out breathing. Since 
then I have always concentrated my mind on my breathing 
which has gradually become more and more gentle and peace- 
ful. At the same time the defilements of my mind caused by 
conceptions of re-birth, continuance, change and death, gradu- 
ally disappeared and my mind became enlightened. In time I 
acquired entire freedom from all attachments and contamina- 


832 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


tions and my mind became enlightened, so that I attained the 
degree of Arhat. I have since then become permanently tran- 
quil under the influence of my Lord Buddha. Later my Lord 
confirmed my attainment of perfect emancipation. In reply to 
my Lord’s enquiry, I witness that my approach to the unifica- 
tion of the eighteen spheres of mentation was by concentration 
of mind upon my in and out breathing, by reason of which I 
attained to perfect emptiness of thinking. 

* * * 

Then Gavampati rose from his seat and bowing down to 
the Lord Buddha, said: — Blessed Lord! Long ago in past kal- 
pas, I made fun of holy disciples and by so doing committed 
the sin of blasphemy and drew upon myself the karma of 
chewing my cud like a cow, for many recurring lives. My 
Lord Tathagata in great kindness showed me the door of 
Dharma that leads to purity and humbleness of heart, whereby 
I was able to annihilate all my contaminations and arbitrary 
conceptions and to attain absorption in samadhi. From my 
long experience I was led to concentrate upon the nature of 
the tastes of the tongue, that they were neither a kind of mat- 
ter, nor a kind of essence, and suddenly by one transcendental 
clearing of mind, I attained to perfect freedom from all the 
mind’s attachments and contaminations, so that internally I 
was free from all arbitrary conceptions both of body and mind, 
and externally I was free from attachment to all worldly things, 
and lastly I was able to live remote from all the defilements of 
the triple world. I felt like a bird that had escaped from the 
confinement of its cage. The intuitive insight of my Dharma 
Eye had suddenly become purified and clear. This attainment 
of perfect emancipation was confirmed by my Lord Tathagata. 
In reply to his enquiry, I would answer, that my first thor- 
oughly perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of men- 
tation was by means of the return of my tasting faculty to its 
original intelligence. 

# # # 

Then Pilankapatha rose from his seat and bowing down to 
the Lord Buddha, said; — Blessed Lord! When I first tried to 
follow my Lord in the practice for enlightenment, I often 
heard his teaching that among all the world’s attractions, there 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


233 


was nothing truly worthy of enjoyment because everything 
sooner or later led to suffering. One day when I was in the 
city begging food, with my mind fixed on the Dharma door, 
suddenly a poisonous point wounded my foot and my whole 
body throbbed with pain. This led me to remember that it 
was only because of sensations and perceptions that I felt pain. 
Although I felt the pain in my whole body, yet I was mind- 
ful that in my pure and Essential Mind there was no pain and 
no perception of feeling pain. I was mindful, also, that as 
there was only one body such as mine, how was it possible to 
have two different sets of feelings — pain in my foot because of 
the poison, and joy in my deeper mind because of my intuitive 
insight into the Dharma Door. Holding my mind in concentra- 
tion on this question, suddenly my body and mind became 
empty of all arbitrary thoughts about things, and in three 
weeks, all attachments and contaminations vanished from my 
mind, and I attained the degree of Arhat, which was confirmed 
by my Lord when he noticed that I had advanced to perfect 
emancipation of mind. As my Lord has enquired of us as to 
our first perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of men- 
tation in contact with objects through our sense-organs, I would 
answer that in my case, it was by the perfect unconsciousness 
of my physical body and my return to its primal state of per- 
fect intuition of its intrinsic Essence of Mind. 

* # * 

Then Subhuti rose from his seat and bowing down to the 
Lord Buddha, said: — Blessed Lord! I attained to a pure state 
of mental freedom many kalpas ago and I recall that my re- 
births have been as many as the sands of the Ganges. In this 
life while still in my mother’s womb, I already realized the 
pure emptiness of Essential Mind and gradually, as I grew up, 
I progressively realized the pure emptiness of all the ten quar- 
ters of the universe, and there developed within my mind the 
wish that all sentient beings might also, attain to the realiza- 
tion, each of his own Mind-essence. At last, through the in- 
spiration of my Lord’s teaching concerning the principle of the 
perfect and true emptiness of the wonderful, mysterious Mind 
Essence and of its highest perfect Wisdom, instantly, thereafter, 
I became absorbed into my Lord’s gloriously radiant Ocean of 
Mind, so that my mind became like the mind of my Lord, 



234 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

sharing in a measure, his insight and his intelligence. Because 
of this attainment my Lord recognized my having attained to 
a perfect state of emancipation, that is, I had attained to the 
pure emptiness of Mind-Essence. In this attainment I am first 
among all this assembly. In reply to my Lord’s enquiry, I 
reply, that my first thoroughly perfect accommodation of the 
eighteen spheres of mentation was the realization by means of 
the recollecting and mindfulness faculty, of the non-existence 
of all phenomena, by the exclusion from my thinking of all 
arbitrary conceptions of phenomena. 

Then Sariputra rose from his seat and bowing down before 
the Lord Buddha, said: — Blessed Lord! Since many kalpas, as 
many as the sands of the Ganges, my mind has continued its 
purity and because of it, there have been many pure rebirths. 
As soon as my eyes perceived the differences in the ever-flow- 
ing process of changes both in this world and in the Way of 
Emancipation, my mind immediately understood them and, 
because of it, I acquired the attainment of perfect freedom. 
When I was bn the road one day, I met the brothers Kasyapa 
who kindly explained the principle of the Lord’s teaching — that 
everything rose from causes and conditions and therefore was 
empty and transitory — and I realized the infinitude of Pure 
Mind Essence. From that time I followed my Lord and my 
perception of mental sight became transcendental and perfectly 
enlightened, so that I instantly acquired an attainment of great 
fearlessness and confidence. Because of it I attained to the 
degree of Arhat and became, in fact, the first Prince of my 
Lord Buddha, begotten by the Lord’s true words and nour- 
ished and transformed by his intrinsic Dharma. In reply to my 
Lord’s enquiry as to our first experience of attainment, I 
would answer that my first thorough accommodation of the 
eighteen spheres of mentation in contact with objects through 
the sense-organs, was by reason of the transcendent brightness 
within my own mind whose shining beams illuminated my in- 
telligence and reached as far as my insight could penetrate. 

* * * 

Then Samantabhadra rose from his seat and bowing down 
to the Lord Buddha, said: — I became a Prince of my Lord’s 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


235 


Dharma many long kalpas ago, and all of the innumerable 
Tathagatas of the ten quarters of the universe, taught their 
disciples, who had the qualifications for becoming "Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas, to practice the devotion of Samantabhadra’s un- 
ceasing compassion for all sentient beings for his name’s sake. 
The transcendental and intrinsic hearing of my Essential Mind 
became very pure and transparent, so that I could use it to 
discriminate the understanding and ideas of all sentient beings. 
Should there be any sentient beings in whatever quarter of 
the universe — past, present or future — to develop the devotion 
of Samantabhadra’s unceasing compassion within his mind, I 
would become aware of its vibrations through the transcen- 
dental sensitiveness of my hearing and I would thereupon ride 
to them on the mysterious elephant of six tusks, in a hundred 
thousand different manifestations of my likeness, at the same 
time, to attend upon them each in his own place. Whatever 
might be his hindrances, however deep or serious, able to ap- 
preciate my presence or not, I would be near him to lay my 
hand upon his head, to give him encouragement and support, 
peacefulness and comfort, so that he might accomplish his su- 
preme attainment. As my Lord has enquired of us as to our 
first attainment of accommodating our eighteen spheres of 
mentation in contact with sense-objects through our sense- 
organs, I would say that in my case it was through the intrin- 
sic hearing of my Essential Mind and its spontaneous under- 
standing and response. 

* * * 

Then Sandrananda rose from his seat and bowed down to 
the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! I became a convert 
under the instruction of my Lord Buddha. Since then, though 
I have kept all the precepts, my mind continues in a constant 
state of diffusion and I have not yet been able to attain sam- 
adhi. Consequently I have not yet acquired immunity from 
the intoxicants of this world. My Lord taught brother Kaustila 
and myself to concentrate attention on the tip of our nose, and 
as I did this, I began to notice, after three weeks, that my in 
and out breathing through the nose seemed to be like smoke 
coming out of a chimney. At the same time my body and 
mind became bright internally and I could see the whole world 
becoming clear and transparent like a crystal ball. Later on. 



236 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


the appearance of smoke coming from the nose gradually van- 
ished and my breathing became luminous and shining. Then 
my mind became enlightened and I attained to a state of 
non-intoxication. My in and out breathing became brighter and 
seemed to pervade the whole universe. After that^I attained 
to the degree of Arhat and my Lord Buddha said that I will 
soon attain enlightenment. In reply to my Lord's enquiry, I 
would say, that my first accommodation to the eighteen spheres 
of mentation was through observing my in and out breathing 
through the nose, by reason of which, after long practice, it be- 
came bright and shining which as it developed eradicated all 
the intoxicants of attachment and contaminations. 

# # # 

Then Puma Metaluniputra rose from his seat and bowed 
down to the feet of the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! 
For an infinity of kalpas I have had great freedom in preach- 
ing the Dharmas of emptiness and suffering and because of it 
have realized my own Essence of Mind. In the course of my 
preaching I have interpreted profoundly and wonderfully the 
many Dharma Boors, with great confidence and with no feeling 
of fear, everywhere and before great assemblies. Because of my 
eloquence, my Lord has encouraged me to make use of it in 
propagating the Bharma by means of the wheel of my voice. 
Since these ancient days, since the Lord has been among us, 
I have offered my services in turning the Dharma Wheel, and 
have lately attained to the degree of Arhat by means of the 
development of my hearing by reason of which I am conscious 
of the transcendental sound of the Dharma, reverberating like 
the roar of a lion. Consequently, my Lord has honored me by 
regarding me as the greatest preacher of his Mysterious Dharma. 

As my Lord has enquired of us which was our earliest ac- 
commodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in contact 
with objects through sense organs, I would answer that my 
first thorough accommodation of mentation, was the subjuga- 
tion of my internal attachments and enemies and the extermi- 
nation of all intoxicants by means of the intrinsic sound of the 
Mysterious Dharma. 

* # # 

Then Uparli rose from his seat and bowed down to the 
Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! I followed my Lord 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


2S7 


when he escaped from the palace and lived an ascetic life in 
the forest. For six years I watched him as he practiced ascet- 
icism and subjugated all Maras and heretics and exterminated 
all the intoxicants of worldly desires and cupidities. By the ex- 
ample of my Lord and by his instruction I became able to 
keep with purity all the Precepts, and the 3,000 rules of eti- 
quette and the 80,000 refinements of the rules for the conduct 
of Buddhists, so that thereby both my body and mind became 
pure and tranquil, and I attained to Arhatship. I am regarded 
by all as the model of perfect behavior among all the Disciples. 

As my Lord has enquired of us as to which was our most 
perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in 
contact with objects through the sense organs, I would answer 
that my first perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of 
mentation was the pure keeping of both my body and mind, so 
that my body acquired perfect health and my mind perfect 
intelligence. 

# # * 

Then the great Maudgalyayana rose from his seat and 
bowed down to the Lord Buddha, saying: — Blessed Lord! 
When I was begging on the road I met the three Kasyapa 
brothers who taught me the Lord Tathagata’s profound prin- 
ciple of causes and conditions. I was greatly influenced by the 
teaching, and very soon acquired and realized particularly clear 
intelligence. My Lord was so kind as to bestow on me the true 
robe for my true body, my beard and head were shaved and I 
became a follower of my Lord. Since then my transcendental 
powers have become wonderfully developed, I have made visits 
to all the ten quarters of the universe, without hindrance by 
space, passing instantly from one Buddha-land to another with- 
out being conscious of how it was done. I thus attained the 
degree of Arhat and was accounted by all and by my Lord 
Tathagata as being highest among the disciples in perfect en- 
lightenment, great purity of mind, spontaneity and fearlessness 
in manifestation of transcendental powers. 

As my Lord has enquired of us which was our most perfect 
accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in contact 
with objects through the sense organs, I would answer that my 
first perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of menta- 
tion was my mind becoming abstracted in tranquil reflection 



238 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


that mysteriously developed its enlightening brightness, as if 
my mind that had been a muddy stream had suddenly become 
clear and transparent like a crystal ball. 

* * * 

Then Ushusma with his hands pressed together, bowed in 
his place, and addressed the Lord Buddha, said: — Blessed Lord! 
I recall that in numerous past kalpas my heart was always full 
of lustful covetousness. At one time there was a Buddha called 
Akasaraga who taught that those who cherished lustful 
thoughts would be consumed in a burning flame. He taught 
me how to practice intuitive insight by reflecting upon parts of 
my body and skeleton and as to the susceptibility of my body 
to heat and cold. By this method my lustful thoughts were 
sublimated into burning torches of wisdom and intelligence. 
Since then I have been called, Ushusma, the blazing torch, and 
in due time I attained Arhatship owing to my samadhis radiat- 
ing a blazing brightness. At that time I made a great vow that 
if any Bodhisattva-Mahasattva attained Buddhahood in my 
time, I would be his guardian knight, protecting him from all 
enemies and maras. As my Lord has enquired of us which was 
our most perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of 
mentation in contact with objects through the sense organs, I 
answer that my first thoroughly perfect accommodation was my 
keen insight into the states of coldness and warmth of my 
body, and the darkness and brightness of my mind by which 
there developed within my spirit a blazing glory of wisdom 
that illumined my mind until I attained my supreme enlight- 
enment. 

# * # 

Then Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Dharanindhara, rose in his 
place and bowed at the feet of the Lord Buddha and saying: — 
Blessed Lord! I recollect that ages ago, when I was only a 
bhikshu, there appeared in the world the Tathagata Samanta- 
prabhasa. He taught me to concentrate on the element of 
Earth, and I made the vow to always labor near the earth. 
Whenever I came to a place in the road that was too narrow 
or obstructed, or made impassable because of a gap, I made it 
my task, to widen it, clear it and to fill up the gaps, or remedy 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


239 


any other inconvenience that might be dangerous or cause 
trouble to travellers or passing carts. While I was busied with 
this laborious task, many Buddhas appeared and passed away. 
At other times, if I noticed any over-burdened, I would of- 
fer to help them carry their heavy loads, and when we reached 
our destination, I would lay the burden down carefully and go 
away without demanding any compensation. When the Buddha 
Vessabhu appeared there were frequent severe famines. At 
that time I often served as a carrier and no matter how far 
the distance, I never asked for more than one penny. Some- 
times the cart and the ox would become mired in the muddy 
roads and I would use my transcendental strength to help drag 
the cart and thus relieve the poor ox. On one occasion the 
great King of the country prepared a vegetable feast in honor 
of Buddha Vessabhu, and I levelled the road over which he 
must pass in coming and waited upon him while he was there. 
The Buddha Vessabhu noticed me and instructed me, saying: — 
“First level your own mind, then every part of the earth will 
become level.” Instantly I became enlightened and since then 
I have realized that the dust that made up the great earth and 
that made up my body were the same. I also realized that it 
was of the nature of dust particles not to be in contact with 
each other, and even when a sword cut through a body that it 
never came in contact with the particles of dust that made up 
the body. I also realized that it was an essential part of all 
phenomena that there was no re-birth, only an endless suc- 
cession of non-rebirth. Thereby I attained Arhatship, and ever 
since there has been a constant advancement of attainment, 
until now I abide in the seat of a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, 
and wherever in the ten quarters of the Universe a Buddha is 
to discourse on the wonderful lotus-like Dharma in his perfect 
insight and intelligence, I am the first to be present occupying 
a front seat and ready to corroborate his teaching. As my Lord 
has enquired of us what was our first thoroughly perfect accom- 
modation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in contact with 
objects through the sense organs, that my first insight into the 
fact that there was no difference between the Earth Element 
of my body and the Earth Element of its sphere of mentation 
for they were both only fantastic manifestations from the 
Womb of Tathagata, and when my conception of their unreality 



240 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


was attained, my intelligence became perfectly clear and I re- 
alized supreme Enlightenment. 

# * # 

Then the lad Chandra-prabhasa, rose from his seat and 
bowed at the feet of the Lord Buddha and said: — Blessed 
Lord! I remember that many kalpas ago there was a Buddha 
named Apoyika who appeared in this world teaching all Bod- 
hisattvas to practice concentration upon the nature of the Ele- 
ment Water and thus to attain Samadhi by that means. Fol- 
lowing his instruction I meditated upon the fluidities within 
my body, concentrating my mind on the snivel and spittal, on 
the blood, the semen, the mucus, the urine, the pus exuding 
from sores, and my mind was filled with loathing. One day it 
came to me that the liquidity of the fragrant oceans in which 
the Fairy Isles of the Blest were immersed, were of the same 
essential nature as the disgusting fluids within my body. But 
for a long time I could not get rid of the idea of the substan- 
tial nature of my body. One day as I sat meditating in my 
room, a disciple of mine peeked through a crack into the room 
where I was seated and to his amazement it appeared to be # 
filled with clear water with nothing else in sight. As he was 
an ignorant and foolish boy, he threw a broken tile into the 
room and ran away. When I emerged from meditation and re- 
sumed my normal consciousness, my mind was filled with a 
strange forboding and heartache. I mused to myself, “Why is 
it that I, who am released from all kinds of sickness and 
troublesome emotions, should suddenly be filled with forboding 
and heartache? Can it be, that I am slipping backward and 
am losing the attainment that I had gained?” When the boy 
noticed my dejection he told me what he had seen and done. 
I bade him, that if ever again he peered into my room when 
I was absorbed in concentration of mind, and saw the same 
appearance of water, that he was to enter the room, pick up 
the broken tile, carry it out and throw it away. The boy being 
thus ordered, did as I said, and when I was in meditation re- 
turned and seeing the room filled with pure water, went into 
the room and seeing the broken tile, picked it up, went out 
quietly and threw it away. As I rose from my meditation and 
resumed my natural consciousness my mind was as calm and 
peaceful as ever. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


241 

But after that for a long time I never made any advance- 
ment in spiritual attainment. Aeons went by, Buddha after 
Buddha appearing and passing, still I continued to think of my 
body and never could put the idea of my self-ness out of my 
consciousness. After a long, long time, there appeared a Tatha- 
gata named Raga who had the transcendental power of being 
able to pass through mountains and oceans and any obstacle 
with perfect ease and freedom. From him I realized more per- 
fectly the essential nature of my body and mind, that it was 
essentially like the fluidity of the Oceans of Fragrance that 
surrounded the Isles of the Blest. I came to realize that I had 
been all along throwing the broken shards of my thoughts of 
personality into the pure limpidity of my essential nature. 
From this experience and attainment, I received from my Lord 
the name of the Boy-Virgin, the ever Youthful One, cherish- 
ing no attachments and therefore free from all evolving con- 
ceptions, who being ever young yet was able to participate in 
the councils of the elders. 

As my Lord has enquired of us which was our first and 
most thorough accommodation of the eighteen spheres of menta- 
tion in contact with objects through the sense organs, I would 
answer that it was by means of my concentration on the na- 
ture of the Element Water by which I came to realize the pure 
fluidity of my essential nature, by reason of which I have ac- 
quired the transcendental power in my states of concentration 
of passing through all things, to all places, in all times, and 
thus acquired the perseverance of non-rebirth, and accomplished 
my Enlightenment. 

* # *•• 

Then the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Akshobhya rose from his 
seat and bowed to the feet of the Lord Buddha, saying: — 
Blessed Lord! My Lord Tathagata and I had already acquired 
a transcendental body of infinitude at the timfe, long ago dur- 
ing the advent of the Buddha Camatha-prabhasa. At that 
time I had in possession four precious pearls having the tran- 
scendental penetrating power of the Element of Fire, by reason 
of which everything was luminously clear to my intuitive in- 
sight, even to the farthermost Buddhalands of the most remote 
Universe. In the light of these magic pearls everything be- 
came as empty and transparent as pure space. Moreover, within 



242 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


my mind, there manifested a great mirror that was marvelously 
self-illuminating that radiated ten kinds of wonderful, glorious, 
far-reaching brightness, that illumined the ten quarters of the 
universes as far reaching as the infinitude of all embracing 
space. In this marvelous mirror were reflected all the royal 
continents of the Blessed and like the mingling of different 
colored lights, merged with my body into the pure brightness 
and clarity of infinite space, there being no hindrance to their 
entrance or passing. By this magical power, I was able to enter 
into all the Buddhalands and engage in all their Buddha- 
services of adoration with great ease and perfect accommodation. 
This transcendental power was due to my deep intuitive in- 
sight into the source of the Four Great Elements, by reason of 
which I was able to see that they were nothing but the ap- 
pearing and disappearing of false imaginations, which were in- 
trinsically as empty as pure space and with no more differen- 
tiation than pure space. And I realized that all the innumer- 
able Buddhalands within and without the mind were of the 
same inconceivable purity. From this intuitive insight I con- 
sequently acquired the samadhi of perseverance of non-rebirth. 

As my Lord has enquired of us which was our most thor- 
ough accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in 
contact with objects through the sense organs, I would answer 
that in my case it was through my perfect intuitive insight 
into the infinity of open space as illumined by the Element 
of Fire, and by that power I attained to the highest Samadhi 
and the Transcendental power of Samapatti. 

# # * 

Then the Prince of the Lord’s Dharma, Vejuria, arose from 
his seat and bowed down at the feet of the Lord Buddha and 
said: — Blessed Lordl I recall that many* many kalpas ago there 
appeared in the world a Buddha called Amitayus, teaching all 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas the intuitive and essential nature of 
the wonderful Essence of Mind, and urging them to concen- 
trate their minds on. the essential sameness of this Samsara 
world and all sentient beings in it, that they were all alike 
manifestations of the Element of Wind (or Ether) and its 
rhythmic-vibrations revealing and manifesting all else. In my 
practice of Dhyana I concentrated on this and reflected on how 
the great world was upheld in space, on how the great world 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


243 


was kept in perpetual motion, on how my body was kept in 
motion, moving and standing, on the rhythmic vibration of its 
life established and maintained by breathing, upon the move- 
ment of the mind, thoughts rising and passing, I reflected upon 
these various things and marvelled at their great sameness with- 
out any difference save in the rate of vibration. I realized that 
the nature of these vibrations had neither any source for their 
coming, nor destination for their going, and that all sentient 
beings as numerous as the infinitessimal particles of dust in the 
vast spaces, were each in his own way topsy-turvy balanced 
vibrations, and that each and every one was obsessed with the 
illusion that he was a unique creation. All sentient beings in 
all the three thousand Great Chillicosms, are obsessed with this 
hallucination. They are like innumerable mosquitos shut up in 
a vessel and buzzing about in wildest confusion. Sometimes 
they are roused to madness and pandemonium by the narrow 
limits of their confinement. After meeting my Lord Buddha, I 
attained to a state of intuitive realization and non-rebirth per- 
severance, whereupon my mind became Enlightened and I was 
able to view the Buddhaland of Immovability in the Eastern 
Heavens, which is the Pure Land of Buddha Amitayus. I was 
acknowledged as a Prince of the Lord’s Dharma and vowed to 
serve all Buddhas everywhere, and because of my Enlighten- 
ment and great vow, my body and mind became perfectly 
rhythmic and alive and sparkling, mingling with all other vi- 
brations without hindrance to its perfect freedom. 

As my Lord has enquired of us as to which was our first 
thoroughly perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of 
mentation in contact with objects through the sense-organs, I 
will say that in my case it was through my intuitive insight 
into the nature of the Element of Ether, and how by its bal- 
anced and rhythmic vibrations everything was embraced in per- 
fect purity in the Enlightening Mind, and how concentrating 
my mind upon it I attained Samadhi and in that Samadhi I 
realized the perfect oneness of all the Buddhas in the purity 
of the Wonderful Mind Essence, that is the Bliss-body of 
Buddhahood. 

* * * 

Then Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Maitreya rose from his seat 
and bowing down to the Lord Buddha said: — Blessed Lord! I 



244 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


recall that many, many kalpas ago there was a Buddha ap- 
peared in this world called Chandra-surya-pradipa-prabhasa 
whom I followed as his disciple. At that time I was inclined 
to the worldly life and liked to associate with the nobility. The 
Lord Buddha, noticing it, instructed me to practice meditation 
concentrating my mind on its consciousness. I followed his in- 
struction and attained samadhi. Since then I have served num- 
berless other Buddhas using this same method and by it have 
now discarded all desire for worldly pleasures. By the time 
Buddha Dipankara appeared in the world I had attained to the 
supreme, wonderful, perfect Samadhi of Transcendental Con- 
sciousness. By this highest Samadhi I was conscious of infinite 
space, and realized that all of the Tathagata-lands whether 
pure or impure, existent or non-existent were nothing but the 
manifestation of my own mind. My Lord! Because of my per- 
fect realization that all such skillful devices of the Tathagatas 
were nothing but evolvements of my own mental consciousness, 
the essential nature of my consciousness flowed out in innum- 
erable manifestations of Tathagatas, and I came to be selected 
as the next Coming Buddha, after my Lord Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 

As my Lord has enquired of us as to our first perfect ac- 
commodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in contact 
with objects through the sense organs, I answer that my first 
perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation 
was by my perfect realization that all the ten quarters of the 
universes were nothing but activities of my own consciousness. 
It was by that that my consciousness became perfectly enlight- 
ened and that the limits of my mind dissolved until it em- 
braced all Reality. Forsaking all prejudices of conditional and 
unconditional assertions and denials, I acquired perfect non- 
birth perseverance. 

# # # 

Then Maha-sthama-prapta, Prince of the Lord’s Dharma, 
rose from his seat and bowed down to the feet of the Lord 
Buddha, together with the fifty-two members of his Brother- 
hood of Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, and said: — Blessed Lord! I 
recall that in a past kalpa long ago, as many kalpas ago as 
there are grains of sand in the river Ganges, there appeared in 
this world a Buddha called, Amitabha-prabhasa Buddha, whose 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 245 

Buddha-land was in the Eastern Heavens. In that kalpa there 
were twelve Tathagatas followed each other in close succession, 
the last one being called Buddha Chandra-surya-gomin, who 
taught me to practice meditation upon the name of Amitabha, 
saying: Namo-Armitabha-Buddhaya. The value of this practice 
lay in this: So long as one person practices his own method 
and another practices a different method, they balance off each 
other and meeting it is just the same as not meeting. Whereas 
if two persons practise the same method their mindfulness 
would become deeper and deeper, and they would remember 
each other and develop affinites for each other life after life. 
It is the same with those who practice concentrating on the 
name of Amitabha — they develop within their minds Amitab- 
ha’s spirit of compassion toward all sentient life. Moreover, 
whoever recites the name of Amitabha Buddha, whether in the 
present time, or in future time, will surely see the Buddha 
Amitabha and never become separated from him. By reason of 
that association, just as one associating with a maker of per- 
fumes becomes permeated with the same perfumes, so he will 
become perfumed by Amitabha’s compassion, and will become 
enlightened without any other expedient means. 

Blessed Lord! My devotion to reciting the name of Amit- 
abha had no other purpose than to return to my original na- 
ture of purity and by it I attained to the state of non-rebirth 
perseverance. Now in this life, I have vowed to teach my dis- 
ciples to concentrate their minds by means of reciting the name 
of Amitabha (Namo-Amitabha-Buddhaya), and also I teach 
them to wish to be bom in his Land of Purity and to make 
that their only Refuge. 

As my Lord has asked us which is our first perfect accom- 
modation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in contact with 
objects through the sense organs, I answer that my first per- 
fect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation, was 
that I recognized no separation or differences among my six 
senses, but merge them into one transcendental sense from 
which arises the purity of T ranscendental Wisdom, by reason 
of which I attained highest Samadhi and the graces of 
Samapatti. 

# # # 

Then the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Avalokitesvara rose from 
his seat and bowing down to the Lord Buddha said: — Blessed 



246 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Lord! I recall that ages ago, as numerous as the sands of the 
river Ganges, that there was present in the world a Buddha 
called Avalokitesvara by whose instruction I was encouraged 
to begin seeking Enlightenment. I was taught to begin prac- 
tising by concentrating my mind on the true nature of Tran- 
scendental hearing, and by that practice I attained samadhi. 
As soon as I had advanced to the stage of Entering the Stream, 
I determined to discard all thoughts discriminating as to where 
I was or had been. Later I discarded the conception of ad- 
vancing altogether, and the thought of either activity or quiet- 
ness in this connection did not again arise in my mind. Con- 
tinuing my practice, I gradually advanced until all discrimi- 
nation of the hearing nature of my self-hood and of the in- 
trinsic Transcendental Hearing was discarded. As there ceased 
to be any grasping in my mind for the attainment of intrinsic 
hearing, the conception of Enlightenment and enlightened na- 
ture were all absent from my mind. When this state of per- 
fect Emptiness of Mind was attained, all arbitrary conceptions 
of attaining to Emptiness of Mind and of enlightened nature, 
were discarded. As soon as all arbitrary conceptions of rising 
and disappearing of thoughts were completely discarded, the 
state of Nirvana was clearly realized. Then, all of a sudden, 
my mind became transcendental to both celestial and terrestrial 
worlds and there was nothing in all the ten quarters but empty 
space, and in that state I acquired two wonderful Transcend- 
encies. The first was a Transcendental Consciousness that my 
mind was in perfect conformity with the Essential, Mysterious 
Enlightening Mind of all the Buddhas in all the ten quarters, 
and also it was in like perfect conformity with the Great Heart 
of Compassion of all the Buddhas. The second transcendency 
was that my mind was in perfect conformity with the minds 
of all sentient beings of the Six Realms and felt with them 
the same earnestness and longing for deliverance. 

Blessed Lord! Because of my adoration for that Buddha 
Avalokitesvara, he taught me how to attain the Diamond Sam- 
adhi by the single method of concentrating my mind upon 
Transcendental Hearing. And moreover, he helped me to attain 
the same compassionate capacity that all the Tathagatas had, 
'by reason of which I attained the thirty-two kinds of trans- 
formations that are instantaneously available in response to the 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


247 

prayers for deliverance from any part of the world at any time. 


These transformations have all been attained and exercised 
with perfect freedom and spontaneity in the mysterious Dia- 
mond Samadhi which I had attained by concentrating my mind 
in the practice of Dhyana on the nature of T ranscendental 
Hearing. 

Blessed Lordl I have also, because of the mysterious powers 
that accompany the Diamond Samadhi and because of my be- 
ing in perfect conformity and with the same earnestness and 
longing for deliverance with all sentient beings, in the Six 
Realms of all the ten quarters of all the universes, past, pres- 
ent and future, been able to bestow upon all sentient beings 
the same Fourteen kinds of Fearlessness, which animate my 
own mind 

As my attainment to the original nature of perfect accom- 
modation is wonderfully developed from the hearing organ to 
include all the sense organs and discriminating mind, my body 
and mind profoundly and mysteriously embrace all the phe- 
nomenal world, so that if any disciple should recite my name, 
his blessing and merit would be like and equal to that of any 
Prince of the Lord’s Dharma, whether he uses the same name or 
some other name. Blessed Lord! The reason why their merit 
is like and equal for one to recite my name, and for another to 
recite some other name, is because of my practice of Dhyana by 
which I acquired the True and Perfect Accommodation. 

Blessed Lord! This is what is meant by the Fourteen kinds 
of Fearlessness of Powers of Deliverance which bring blessing to 
all sentient beings. But in addition to the acquirement of per- 
fect accommodation by means of my attainment of Supreme 
Enlightenment, I have also acquired another Four Kinds of 
Inconceivable, Wonderful T ranscendencies of Spontaneity. 

The First is as it is because when I first attained to my 
Transcendental Hearing my mind became abstracted into its 
essential nature, and all the natural powers of hearing, seeing, 
smelling, tasting, touching and understanding attained to a state 
of pure, glorious, Enlightenment of perfect, mutuality and ac- 
commodation in one perfect unity of Awareness. Because of 



248 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

this, I have acquired this great Transcendental Freedom, so. 
that when I give deliverance to sentient beings, I can trans- 
form myself into wonderful appearances, and besides I can ut- 
ter innumerable, mysterious, Dharanis 

Sometimes I appear in a form of kindness, or in a form of 
justice, or in a state of concentration, or in a state of intelli- 
gence. But in all, I do it for the sake of deliverance and pro- 
tection of sentient beings so that they might acquire a like 
Great Freedom. 

The Second inconceivable, wonderful Transcendency of 
Spontaneity is as it is because of my emancipation of hearing and 
thinking from the contaminations of the six sense-objects. It 
is as if sound were passing through walls without any hin- 
drance. Thus I can skillfully transform into different kinds of 
appearances and recite different Dharanis, and can transform 
these appearances and recitation of Dharanis to give the Tran- 
scendental Power of Fearlessness to sentient beings. Thus in all 
the countries of the ten quarters I am known as the Giver of 
Transcendental Power of Fearlessness. 

The Third inconceivable, wonderful Transcendency of Spon- 
taneity is as it is because of my practice upon the pure, orig- 
inal Essence of perfect Accommodation, so that wherever I go, 
I lead sentient beings to willingness to sacrifice their lives and 
valuable possessions in order to pray for my compassion and 
mercy. 

The Fourth inconceivable, wonderful Transcendency of 
Spontaneity is as it is because of my acquirement of the Buddha’s 
Intrinsic Mind and because of my attainment of the supremacy 
so that I can give all different kinds of offerings to all of the 
Tathagatas of all the ten quarters of the universes. 

As my Lord has enquired of us as to what was our first 
perfect accommodation of the eighteen spheres of mentation in 
contact with objects through the sense organs, I answer that 
my first perfect accommodation was when I attained to the 
state of perfectly accommodating reflection of Samadhi by means 
of my Intrinsic Hearing and Transcendental Mental Freedom 
from objective contaminations, so that my mind became ab- 
stracted and absorbed into the Divine Stream and thus ac- 
quired the Diamond Samadhi and attained Enlightenment. 

Blessed Lord! In those far off days, my Lord the Buddha 
Avalokitesvara, praised me for my skillful acquirement of the 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA. 


249 


all-accommodating Door of Dharma, and in one of his great 
Assemblies, he announced that I, too, should be called Avalo- 
kitesvara, The Hearer and Answerer of Prayer, the Bodhisattva 
of Tenderest Compassion. As such my transcendental Hearing 
reaches to the ten quarters of all the universes, and the name 
of Avalokitesvara prevails over all extremes of human suffering 
and danger. 

* # * 

' ' * 

(Manjusri’s Summation) 

Thereupon the Blessed Lord, sitting upon his throne in the 
midst of the Tathagatas and highest Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
from all the Buddha-lands, manifested his Transcendent Glory 
surpassing them all. From his hands and feet and body radiated 
supernal beams of light that rested upon the crowns of each 
Tathagata, Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, and Prince of the Dharma, 
in all the ten quarters of all the universes, in number more 
numerous than the finest particles of dust. Moreover, from the 
hands and feet and bodies of all the Tathagatas, Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas and Princes of the Lord’s Dharma, in all the ten 
quarters of the universes, went forth rays of glorious brightness 
that converged upon the crown of the Lord Buddha and upon 
the crowns of all the Tathagatas, Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas and 
Arhats present in the assembly. At the same time all the trees 
of the Jeta Park, and all the waves lapping on the shores of its 
lakes, were singing the music of the Dharma, and all the inter- 
secting rays of brightness were like a net of splendor set with 
jewels and over arching them all. Such a marvelous sight had 
never been imagined and held them all in silence and awe. Un- 
wittingly they passed into the blissful peace of the Diamond 
Samadhi and upon them all there fell like a gentle rain the 
soft petals of many different colored lotus blossoms — blue and 
crimson, yellow and white — all blending together and being re- 
flected into the open space of heaven in all the tints of the 
spectrum. Moreover, all the differentiations of mountains and 
seas and rivers and forests of the Saha World blended into 
one another and faded away leaving only the flower-adorned 
unity of the Primal Cosmos, not dead and inert but alive with 
rhythmic life and light, vibrant with transcendental sounds of 
songs and rhymes, melodiously rising and falling and merging 
and then fading away into silence. 



250 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Then the Lord Tathagata addressed Manjusri, Prince of the 
Dharma, saying: — Manjusri! You have now heard what these 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of greatest and highest attainments 
have testified regarding the expedient means that were in- 
volved, and the results seen in spiritual graces and powers of 
Samapatti, that followed in their devout lives and practices. 
Each one stated that the beginning was seen in the perfect 
accommodation of some one mental sphere in contact with its 
sense object, and from that followed the perfect accommodation 
of all the spheres of mentation and the attainment of Samadhi, 
Samapatti, and the perfect awareness of their Intuitive and 
Essential Mind. So we see that their devotions and practices, 
in spite of their variations, all eventuated in the same good 
result irrespective of their attainments and the times involved. 

I want Ananda to fully understand and realize these dif- 
ferent attainments of enlightenment and note which of them is 
adapted to him. And I wish, also, that after my Nirvana, as 
future disciples of this world wish to attain highest Anuttara- 
Samyak-Sambodhi, that from these experiences they may know 
which door of expedient means appears to each most easily 
entered. 

Having listened to the kind instruction of the Blessed Lord, 
Manjusri, Prince of the Lord’s Dharma, rose from his seat, 
bowed down to the Lord Buddha and, sobered by the influence 
of the Lord’s profound dignity, uttered the following stanzas: — 

* # # 

The Nature of Enlightening Intuition — wide as the oceans — 
is perfectly limpid and accommodating, and this Enlightening 
Intuition of perfect accommodation is profound and inconceiv- 
ably mysterious. 

# # # 

As soon as this original and perfectly limpid and all em- 
bracing Enlightening Intuition becomes reflected upon objects, 
it becomes illusive and loses its true Nature. Then as differen- 
tiations are manifested, space fantastically appears and by 
means of space, whole universes come into manifestation. Ar- 
bitrary conceptions seem to corroborate the existence of the 
universes and finally, that which becomes perceptive and sens- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


251 


ible of the universe becomes regarded as a sentient being hav- 
ing an ego-personality. 

# * # 

The conception of empty space as existing in the Enlight- 
ening Nature of Mind Essence is but foam tossed about by 
the waves of a great sea. As it is under the conditions of this 
transient foam that the innumerable conceptions of universes 
and all that appertains to them which belongs to the intox- 
icant nature of sentient beings exists, as soon as this foam dis- 
appears, there is no more space and hence no more universes 
and all the three realms of sentient life, body, mind and ego- 
personality, vanish into nothingness. 

As sentient beings wish to return to their origin where their 
nature will be in perfect unity there are many different ways 
that may be used as expedient means for attaining it. But 
there is one way, no matter what the conditions for practicing 
it may be— difficult or not difficult — that is available to all, 
that is accommodating to all, that, though the period of prac- 
ticing may vary with different disciples, is sure to bring them 
to the goal. It is the Noble Path of the Blessed One that 
leads to the perfect Intuition of Samadhi. 

# * # 

Since the perception of sight and the arbitrary conceptions 
of sight in the novice’s mind are entangled with the phenomena 
of objects of sight, he can seldom see things clearly and truly 
no matter how comprehensive and bright his thinking mind 
may be. It will always be difficult for him to seek perfect ac- 
commodation through the sense of sight. 

#:,r 

Moreover, since the novice is easily attached to the sound 
of words, to a refined style of composition and speaking, to 
nice distinctions of meaning, he will find it difficult to realize 
the principle that one intrinsic unity embraces all phenomena. 



252 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


so how can he hope to attain by the sound of words, the es- 
sential nature of perfect accommodation? 

# # # 

The phenomena of fragrance and the smelling sensation are 
perceived by means of the conception of smelling so when the 
sensation and the perception are separated there can be no con- 
ception of fragrance. Since the novice does not realize the per- 
manency of his intrinsic smelling nature, it will be difficult for 
him to attain the essential nature of perfect accommodation 
through the sense of smelling. 

# # # 

The quality of taste is not lasting, it exists only as we use 
it. So long as the novice makes distinctions of taste and does 
not realize the permanency of his intrinsic tasting nature, there 
is little ground for him to hope to attain the essential nature 
of perfect accommodation by means of his sense of taste. 

# * # 

Feeling arises from the contact of the body with* something; 
when there is no contact there is no feeling. Since the novice 
finds it difficult to keep his mind unperturbed by contacts and 
does not realize the permanency of his intrinsic feeling nature, 
there is little ground for him to expect to attain the essential 
nature of perfect accommodation by means of the feeling 
faculty. 

* * # 

As soon as one admits conceptions of objects into his mind, 
there is the assumption that the objects exist. Since the novice 
does not realize that both cause and effect of existence go along 
with his discriminating nature, so there is little ground for 
him to hope to attain the nature of perfect accommodation by 
means of discriminative thinking. 

# # # 

Every novice has seen his essential nature but has not re- 
alized it. It is as though he saw the front only and failed to 
see the back, thus seeing only one half of the universe. There 
is little ground for him to expect to attain the essential nature 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


253 


of perfect accommodation by looking at the appearance of 
things. 

Breathing is a spontaneous activity of the organism but it 
is conditioned by moods and emotions. The novice has not 
attained to a refined state of in and out breathing because the 
mind and the breathing are not yet united into an evenly bal- 
anced state of tranquillity which is difficult to attain so it will 
be difficult for him to attain the essential nature of perfect ac- 
commodation by merely concentrating his mind on his in and 
out breathing. 

# * # 

As the tongue of a novice is just like that of any other 
human being his sense of taste lasts only as long as he ex- 
periences the taste and when the taste disappears his conscious- 
ness of it dependent upon the tongue disappears with it, hence 
there is little ground for him to hope to attain the nature of 
perfect accommodation by means of the sense of taste. 

* * * 

As the novice develops his sense of feeling when in contact 
with something consciousness is dependent upon the body and 
disappears when separated from it. Consequently the feeling 
and not-feeling of his body do not belong to the Intuition of 
Perfect Accommodation, because the sphere of feeling and not- 
feeling and the capacity to feel can not be abstracted for sep- 
arate realization. So there is no ground for one to hope to at- 
tain the essential nature of perfect accommodation by means of 
the sense of touch. 

* * * 

As the organ of the discriminating mind is filled with con- 
flicting thoughts, the novice cannot know his own transparent 
and tranquil mind, and since his conflicting thoughts cannot 
entirely be gotten rid of, there is no ground for him to hope 
to attain the essential nature of perfect accommodation by 
means of his thinking mind. 

* * * 

As the consciousness dependent upon the eyes exists by 
means of the eye-organ, its sensations, and its consciousness of 


254 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


sight, when we come to examine its originality, there is no 
ground for confidence in it. And since the novice cannot prove 
to himself its validity, there is no ground for hope from the 
sense of sight for him to attain the essential nature of perfect 
accommodation. 

# # # 

The hearing nature of the Essential Mind reaches to all the 
ten quarters of the universes and is the source of some of the 
great Transcendental Powers, but since the novice has not at- 
tained to these transcendental powers, there is no ground for 
him to hope to attain the essential nature of perfect accom- 
modation by means of his hearing nature. 

* # # 

In the practice of Dhyana, many novices seek concentration 
of mind by fixing attention on the tip of the nose, but as this 
is only a temporary means that is useful to some drifting and 
confused minds, it can never be relied upon as a permanent 
means for attaining the nature of perfect accommodation. 

# # # 

If a novice reflects upon the Four Great Elements beginning 
with Earth, his mind will always think of hardness and im- 
penetrability which is simply conditional reflection and not en- 
lightenment from his intuitive mind, so there is no reason for 
him to seek to attain the essential nature of perfect accom- 
modation by that means. 

# # # 

If a novice disciple meditates upon the Element of Water, 
his mind will always be thinking of fluidity and impermanence 
which are simply relational reflections and not enlightenment 
from his intuitive mind, and since he is not free from the na- 
ture of water himself, it can not be the expedient means for 
him to practice concentration upon it expecting thereby that 
he will attain the essential nature of perfect accommodation. 

* # # 

If the novice meditates upon the Element of Fire, he 
simply comes to regard it with disgust and tries to avoid it. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


255 


Since he is not free from the nature of fire himself, it can not 
be the expedient means for him to practice concentration upon 
it expecting that thereby he will attain the essential nature of 
perfect accommodation. 

# # # 

If the novice disciple meditates upon the universal nature 
of the Element of Wind, his reflections can not be free from 
thoughts of the relativity of motion and rest; as his mind is 
occupied by thoughts of these relations, it cannot be supreme 
Enlightenment. How can it be that he can attain the essential 
nature of perfect accommodation by such means? 

# # * 

If a novice disciple meditates upon the notion of pure 
Space, his reflections will naturally become thin and hazy. 
Such reflections can not be of the nature of Enlightenment. 
How can it be said that he can attain the essential nature of 
perfect accommodation by such means? 

# # # 

If the novice disciple meditates upon the nature of con- 
sciousness, his reflections will partake of the nature of imper- 
manence as his thoughts rise and pass away and become unreal 
and fantastic. How can it be said that he can attain to the es- 
sential nature of perfect accommodation by such means? 

# # # 

If the novice disciple meditates upon the teaching that all 
things are impermanent, then his reflections will belong to the 
cycle of deaths and rebirths. Thus the subject of his reflections 
will not be in conformity with the permanence of True En- 
lightenment. How can he ever attain the essential nature of 
perfect accommodation by such means? 

# # # 

There are sermons that are given without the sounds of 
words that are enlightening to those advanced disciples whose 
minds have been disciplined in previous lives, but which are 
useless to novices who are dependent upon words and defini- 
tions and style to keep up their interest; the novice can not 



256 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

depend upon them for his attaining the essential nature of per- 
fect accommodation. 

• • • 

The keeping of the Precepts is a necessary part of the prac- 
tice of Dhyana, but the novice can not depend upon them 
alone to bring him to the nature of perfect accommodation. 

• * # 

The seeds of Transcendental Powers are planted in previous 
lives, so the novice can not attain them in this life. The reason 
for this is because he is always making discriminations about 
phenomena in his consciousness dependent upon the thinking 
mind and as soon as he recollects any phenomena his mind be- 
comes perturbed, so there is no chance of his attaining the es- 
sence of the nature of perfect accommodation by means of 
T ranscendental Powers. 

• # * 

Just because the discriminating and thinking mind is tem- 
porarily peaceful because of fortuitous circumstances, it does 
not follow that its transient peace is the basic and permanent 
peace of the perfect accommodation of the pure mind essence. 

* # * 

Then Manjusri addressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — 
Blessed Lord! Since my Lord has descended from the Deva 
Realms to this Saha World, he has helped us most by his 
wonderful enlightening Teaching. At first we receive this 
Teaching through our sense of hearing, but when we are fully 
able to realize it, it becomes ours through a Transcendental 
and Intuitive Hearing. This makes the awakening and perfect- 
ing of a Transcendental Faculty of Hearing of very great im- 
portance to every novice. As the wish to attain Samadhi deep- 
ens in the mind of any disciple, he can most surely attain it 
by means of his T ranscendental Organ of Hearing. 

For many a kalpa — as numerous as the particles of sand 
in the river Ganges — Avalokitesvara Buddha, the hearer and 
answerer of prayer, has visited all the Buddha-lands of the ten 
quarters of the universe and has acquired Transcendental 
Powers of boundless Freedom and Fearlessness and has vowed 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


257 


to emancipate all sentient beings from their bondage and suf- 
fering. How sweetly mysterious is the Transcendental Sound of 
Avalokitesvara! It is the pure Brahman Sound. It is the sub- 
dued murmur of the sea-tide setting inward. Its mysterious 
Sound brings liberation and peace to all sentient beings who 
in their distress are calling for aid; it brings a sense of per- 
manency to those who are truly seeking the attainment of 
Nirvana’s Peace. 

While I am addressing my Lord Tathagata, he is hearing, 
at the same time, the transcendental Sound of Avalokitesvara. 
It is just as though, while we are in the quiet seclusion of our 
Dhyana practice, there should come to our ears the sound of 
the beating of drums. If our minds, hearing the sounds, are 
undisturbed and tranquil, this is the nature of perfect 
accommodation. 

# * * 

The body develops feeling by coming in contact with some- 
thing, and the sight of eyes is hindered by the opaque- 
ness of objects, and similarly with the sense of smell and of 
taste, but it is different with the discriminating mind. Thoughts 
are rising and mingling and passing. At the same time it is 
conscious of sounds in the next room and sounds that have 
come from far away. The other senses are not so refined as 
the sense of hearing; the nature of hearing is the true reality 
of Passability. 

* # * 

The essence of sound is felt in both motion and silence, it 
passes from existent to non-existent. When there is no sound, 
it is said there is no hearing, but that does not mean that 
hearing has lost its preparedness. IndeedI When there is no 
sound, hearing is most alert, and when there is sound the hear- 
ing nature is least developed. If any disciple can be freed from 
these two illusions of appearing and disappearing, that is, from 
death and rebirth, he has attained the true reality of 
Permanency. 

# * * 

Even in dreams when all thinking has become quiescent, 
the hearing nature is still alert. It is like a mirror of enlight- 



258 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

enment that is transcendental o£ the thinking mind because it 
is beyond the consciousness sphere of both body and mind. In 
this Saha world, the doctrine of intrinsic. Transcendental Sound 
may be spread abroad, but sentient beings as a class remain 
ignorant and indifferent to their own Intrinsic Hearing. They 
respond only to phenomenal sounds and are disturbed by both 
musical and discordant sounds. 

# # # 

Notwithstanding Ananda’s wonderful memory, he was not 
able to avoid falling into an evil way. He has been adrift on 
a merciless sea. But if he will only turn his mind away from 
the drifting current of thoughts, he may soon recover the sober 
wiseness of Essential Mind. Ananda! Listen to me! I have 
ever relied upon the teaching of the Lord Buddha to bring 
me to the indescribable Dharma Sound of the Diamond 
Samadhi. Ananda! You have sought the secret lore from all 
the Buddha-lands without first attaining emancipation from the 
desires and intoxications of your own contaminations and at- 
tachments, with the result that you have stored in your memory 
a vast accumulation of worldly knowledge and built up a tower 
of faults and mistakes. 

# # # 

You have learned the Teachings by listening to the words 
of the Lord Buddha and then committing them to memory. 
Why do you not learn from your own self by listening to 
sound of the Intrinsic Dharma within your own Mind and 
then practicing reflection upon it? The perception of Tran- 
scendental Hearing is not developed by any natural process 
under the control of your own volition. Some time when you 
are reflecting upon your Transcendental Hearing, a chance 
sound suddenly claims your attention and your mind sets it 
apart and discriminates it and is disturbed thereby. As soon 
as you can ignore the phenomenal sound the notion of a Tran- 
scendental Sound ceases and you will realize your Intrinsic 
Hearing. 

# * * 

As soon as this one sense perception of hearing is returned 
to its originality and you clearly understand its falsity, then the 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


259 


mind instantly understands the falsity of all sense perceptions 
and is at once emancipated from the bondage of seeing, hear- 
ing, smelling, tasting, touching and thinking, for they are all 
alike illusive and delusive visions of unreality, and all the three 
great realms of existence are seen to be what they truly are, 
imaginary blossoms in the air. 

# * # 

As soon as the deceiving perception of hearing is emanci- 
pated, then all objective phenomena disappear and your In- 
tuitive Mind of Essence becomes perfectly pure. As soon as you 
have attained to this Supreme Purity of Mind-Essence, its In- 
trinsic Brightness will shine out spontaneously and in all direc- 
tions and, as you are sitting in tranquil dhyana, the mind will 
be in perfect conformity with Pure Space. 

* # # 

Ananda! As you return to the phenomenal world, it will 
seem like a vision in a dream. And your experience with the 
maiden Pchiti will seem like a dream, and your own body will 
lose its solidity and permanency. It will seem as though every 
human being, male and female, was simply a manifestation by 
some skillful magician of a manikin all of whose activities were 
under his control. Or each human being will seem like an auto- 
matic machine that once started goes on by itself, but as soon 
as the automatic machine loses its motive power, all its ac- 
tivities not only cease but their very existence disappears. 

* * * 

So it is with the six sense organs, which are fundamentally 
dependent upon one unifying and enlightening spirit, but which 
by ignorance have become divided into six semi-independent 
compositions and conformities. Should one organ become 
emancipated and return to its originality, so closely are they 
united in their fundamental originality, that all the other or- 
gans would' immediately cease their activities also. And all 
worldly impurities will be purified by a single thought and you 
will attain to the wonderful purity of perfect Enlightenment. 
Should there remain some minute contamination of ignorance, 
you should practice the more earnestly until you attain to per- 


2 6o SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


feet Enlightenment, that is, to the Enlightenment of a 
Tathagata. 

* * * 

All the Brothers in this Great Assembly, and you too, An- 
anda, should reverse your outward perception of hearing and 
listen inwardly for the perfectly unified and intrinsic sound of 
your own Mind-Essence, for as soon as you have attained per- 
fect accommodation, you will have attained to Supreme 

Enlightenment. 

« * * 

This is the only way to Nirvana, and it has been followed 
by all the Tathagatas of the past. Moreover, it is for all the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of the present and for all in the fu- 
ture if they are to hope for Perfect Enlightenment. Not only 
did Avalokitesvara attain Perfect Enlightenment in long ages 
past by this Golden Way, but in the present, I also, am one 
of them. 

* * * 

My Lord enquired of us as to what expedient means each 
one of us had employed to follow this Noble Path to Nirvana. 
I bear testimony that the means employed by Avalokitesvara is 
the most expedient means for all, since all other means must 
be supported and guided by the Lord Buddha’s T ranscendental 
Powers. Though one forsake all his worldly engagements, yet 
he cannot always be practicing by these various means; they 
are special means suitable for junior and senior disciples, but 
for laymen, this common method of concentrating the mind on 
its sense of hearing, turning it inward by this Door of Dharma 
to hear the Transcendental Sound of his Essential Mind, is 
most feasible and wise. 

* * * 

Oh Blessed Lord! I am bowing down before my Lord 
Tathagata’s Intrinsic Womb, which is immaculate and ineffable 
in its perfect freedom from all contaminations and taints, and 
I am praying my Lord to extend his boundless compassion for 
the sake of all future disciples, so that I may continue to teach 
Ananda and all sentient beings of this present kalpa, to have 
faith in this wonderful Door of Dharma to the Intrinsic Hear- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


261 

ing of his own Mind Essence, so surely to be attained by this 
most expedient means. If any disciple should simply take this 
Intuitive Means for concentrating his mind in Dhyana Prac- 
tice on this organ for Transcendental Hearing, all other sense 
organs would soon come into perfect harmony with it, and thus, 
by this single means of Intrinsic Hearing, he would attain per- 
fect accommodation of his True and Essential Mind. 

(Importance of Keeping the Precepts.) 

Then Ananda and all the great assembly were purified in 
body and mind. They acquired a profound understanding and 
a clear insight into the nature of the Lord Buddha’s Enlight- 
enment and experience of highest Samadhi. They had confi- 
dence like a man who was about to set forth on a most im- 
portant business to a far-off country, because they knew the 
route to go and to return. All the disciples in this great as- 
sembly realized their own Essence of Mind and purposed, hence- 
forth, to live remote from all worldly entanglements and taints, 
and to live continuously in the pure brightness of the Eye of 
Dharma. 

Then Ananda, rising in the midst of the assembly, straight- 
ened his robe, with the palms of his hands pressed together, 
knelt before the Lord Buddha. In the depths of his nature he 
was already enlightened and his heart was filled with happiness 
and compassion for all sentient beings and, especially, did he 
desire to benefit them by his newly acquired wisdom. He ad- 
dressed the Lord Buddha, saying: — Oh my Lord of Great 
Mercy! I have now realized the True Door of Dharma for the 
attainment of Enlightenment, and have no more doubt about 
its being the only Door to Perfect Enlightenment. My Lord 
has taught us that those who are only starting the practice of 
Bodhisattvaship and have not yet delivered themselves, but who 
already wish to deliver others, that this is a sign of Bodhisat- 
tvaship. And when those who have attained Enlightenment 
have a deep purpose to enlighten others, that this is a sign of 
the Lord Tathagata’s descent from the Pure Land for the de- 
liverance of all the world. Although I have not yet delivered 
myself, I already wish to deliver all ‘sentient beings of this 
present kalpa. Noble Lord! Sentient beings of this age and 
world are gradually becoming more and more alienated from 
my Lord’s favor, and the propagation of heretical teachings, de- 



262 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ceiving people and leading them astray, more and more flour- 
ishes. I want to persuade them to concentrate their minds in 
dhyana for the attainment of Samadhi. What can I do to help 
them arrange a True Altar to Enlightenment within their minds 
so that they may be kept far away from all deceiving tempta- 
tions and in whose progress there shall be no retrogression or 
discouragement in the attainment of Enlightenment? 

In response to this appeal, the Blessed One addressed the 
assembly: — Ananda has just requested me to teach how to ar- 
range a True Altar of Enlightenment to which sentient beings 
of this last kalpa may come for deliverance and protection. 
Listen carefully as I explain it to you. 

Ananda and all in this assembly! In explaining to you the 
rules of the Vinaya, I have frequently emphasized three good 
lessons, namely, (1) the only way to keep the Precepts is first 
to be able to concentrate the mind; (2) by keeping the Pre- 
cepts you will be able to attain Samadhi; (3) by means of 
Samadhi one develops intelligence and wisdom. Having learned 
these three good lessons, one has gained freedom from the in- 
toxicants and hindrances. 

Ananda, why is concentration of mind necessary before one 
can keep the Precepts? And why is it necessary to keep the 
Precepts before one can rightly practice dhyana and attain Sa- 
madhi? And why is the attainment of Samadhi necessary be- 
fore one may attain true intelligence and wisdom? Let me ex- 
plain this to you. All sentient beings in all the six realms of 
existence are susceptible to temptations and allurements. As 
they yield to these temptations and allurements, they fall into 
and become fast bound to the recurring cycles of deaths and re- 
births. Being prone to yield to these temptations and allure- 
ments, one must, in order to free himself from their bondage 
and their intoxication, concentrate his whole mind in a resolu- 
tion to resist them to the uttermost. The most important of 
these allurements are the temptations to yield to sexual 
thoughts, desires and indulgence, with all their following waste 
and bondage and suffering. Unless one can free himself from 
this bondage and these contaminations and exterminate these 
sexual lusts, there will be no escape from the following suffer- 
ing, nor hope of advancement to enlightenment and peaceful- 
ness. No matter how keen you may be mentally, no matter 
how much you may be able to practice dhyana, no matter to 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


263 


how high a degree o£ apparent samadhi you may attain, unless 
you have wholly annihilated all sexual lusts, you will ultimately 
fall into the lower realms of existence. In these lower Mara 
realms of existence there are three ranks of evil ones: — the 
Mara king, evil demons, and female fiends, and all of them 
have each his and her own double who disguise themselves as 
“angels of light” who have attained supreme Enlightenment. 

After my Parinirvana, in the last kalpa of this world, there 
will be plenty of all these kinds of evil spirits everywhere. 
Some of them will beset you openly with avarice and con- 
cupiscence and others of them will pose as holy and learned 
masters. No one will escape their machinations to lure them 
into the swamps of defilement and thus to lose the Path to 
Enlightenment. Therefore, Ananda, and all of you, should per- 
sistently teach the people of this world to attain perfect con- 
centration of mind, so that they may be enabled to keep the 
precept of purity and thus be able to practice dhyana success- 
fully and attain Samadhi. This is the clear teaching of all the 
Blessed Buddhas of the past, and it is my instruction at the 
present and it will be the instruction of all Tathagatas of the 
future. 

Therefore, Ananda, a man who tries to practice dhyana 
without first attaining control of his mind is like a man trying 
to bake bread out of a dough made of sand; bake it as long as 
he will, it will only be sand made a little hot. It is the same 
with sentient beings, Ananda. They can not hope to attain 
Buddhahood by means of an indecent body. How can they hope 
to attain the wonderful experience of Samadhi out of bawdi- 
ness? If the source is indecent, the outcome will be indecent; 
there will ever be a return to the never-ending recurrence of 
deaths and rebirths. Sexual lust leads to multiplicity; control 
of mind and Samadhi leads to enlightenment and the unitive 
life of Buddhahood. Multiplicity leads to strife and suffering; 
control of mind and dhyana leads to the blissful peace of Sa- 
madhi and Buddhahood. 

Inhibition of sexual thoughts and annihilation of sexual 
lusts is the path to Samadhi, and even the conception of in- 
hibiting and annihilating must be discarded and forgotten. 
When the mind is under perfect control and all indecent 
thoughts excluded, then there may be a reasonable expectation 
for the Enlightenment of the Buddhas. Any other teaching 



264 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


than this is but the teaching of the evil Maras. This is my 
first admonition as to keeping the Precepts. 

The next important hindrance and allurement is the ten- 
dency of all sentient beings of all the six realms of existence 
to gratify their pride of egoism. To gain this one is prone to 
be unkind, to be unjust and cruel, to other sentient beings. 
This tendency lures them into the bondage of deaths and re- 
birth, but if this tendency can be controlled they will no longer 
be lured into this bondage for right control of mind will enable 
them to keep the Precept of kindness to all animate life. The 
reason for practicing dhyana and seeking to attain Samadhi is 
to escape from the suffering of life, but in seeking to escape 
from suffering ourselves, why should we inflict it upon others? 
Unless you can so control your minds that even the thought 
of brutal unkindness and killing is abhorrent, you will never be 
able to escape from the bondage of the world’s life. No matter 
how keen you may be mentally, no matter how much you may 
be able to practice dhyana, no matter to how high a degree of 
Samadhi you may attain, unless you have wholly annihilated 
all tendency to unkindness toward others, you will ultimately 
fall into the realms of existence where the evil ghosts dwell. 

There are three ranks of these ghosts: — the highest are the 
mighty ghosts, the next are the Yaksha ghosts who fly in the 
air, and the lowest are the Raksha ghosts that live under the 
earth. Each of these ghosts has his double that disguises itself 
as having attained enlightenment. After my Parinirvana in 
the last kalpa these different kinds of ghosts will be encoun- 
tered everywhere deceiving people and teaching them that they 
can eat meat and still attain enlightenment. But how can any 
faithful follower of the Lord Tathagata kill sentient life and 
eat the flesh? 

You of this great assembly ought to appreciate that those 
human beings who might become enlightened and attain Sa- 
madhi, because of eating meat, can only hope to attain the 
rank of a great Raksha and until the end of their enjoyment 
of it must sink into the never ceasing round of deaths and re- 
births. They are not true disciples of Buddha. If they kill sen- 
tient beings and eat the flesh, they will not be able to escape 
from this triple world. Therefore, Ananda, next to teaching the 
people of the last kalpa to put away all sexual lust, you must 
teach them to put an end to all killing and brutal cruelty. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


265 


If one is trying to practice dhyana and is still eating meat, 
he would be like a man closing his ears and shouting loudly 
and then asserting that he heard nothing. The more one con- 
ceals things, the more apparent they become. Pure and earnest 
bhikshus and Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, when walking a nar- 
row path, will never so much as tread on the growing grass 
beside the path. How can a bhikshu, who hopes to become a 
deliverer of others, himself be living on the flesh of other sen- 
tient beings? 

Pure and earnest bhikshus, if they are true and sincere, will 
never wear clothing made of silk, nor wear boots made of 
leather because it involves the taking of life. Neither will they 
indulge in eating milk or cheese because thereby they are de- 
priving the young animals of that which rightly belongs to 
them. It is only such true and sincere bhikshus who have re- 
paid their karmic debts of previous lives, who will attain true 
emancipation, and who will no more be bound to wander to 
this triple world. To wear anything, or partake of anything 
for self-comfort, deceiving one’s self as to the suffering it causes 
others or other sentient life, is to set up an affinity with that 
lower life which will draw them toward it. So all bhikshus 
must be very careful to live in all sincerity, refraining from 
even the appearance of unkindness to other life. It is such 
true hearted bhikshus who will attain a true emancipation. 
Even in one’s speech and especially in one’s teaching, one must 
practice kindness for no teaching that is unkind can be the 
true teaching of Buddha. Unkindness is the murderer of the 
life of Wisdom. This is the second admonition of the Lord 
Buddha as to the keeping of the Precepts. 

Then there is the Precept of not taking anything that does 
not rightfully belong to one, not coveting it or even admiring 
it. One must learn to keep this precept in all sincerity if he is 
to hope for escape from the chain of deaths and rebirths. The 
purpose of your practice of dhyana is to escape from the suf- 
fering of this mortal life. No matter how keen you may be 
mentally, no matter how much you may be able to practice 
dhyana, no matter to how high a degree of apparent Samadhi 
you may attain, unless you refrain from covetousness and steal- 
ing, you will fall into the realm of heretics. 

There are three grades of these heretics: — the first grade are 
the spiritual heretics tempting one to rank and privilege and 



266 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


power and egoistic pride. The second grade are mental goblins 
tempting one to false ideas that will enhance one’s knowledge 
and erudition. The third grade are the common heretics of this 
world who teach among human beings what is not the true 
Dharma. You will be beset by these heretics on every hand, 
within and without. And each one of these heretic goblins will 
have his double who disguises himself as one who has attained 
supreme enlightenment and who sets himself up as a teacher 
of highest truth. After my Parinirvana, in the last kalpa of this 
world, there will be plenty of these goblin-heretics about, hid- 
ing themselves within the very personalities of the saints, the 
better to carry out their deceiving tricks. Sometimes they gain 
control of some great and good master and teach under the 
prestige of his name. They often assert that they have received 
their Dharma from seme notable Master, deceiving ignorant 
people, discouraging them and even causing them to go insane. 
In such deceptive ways do they spread their false and destruc- 
tive heresies. 

For all these various reasons, I teach my bhikshu-brothers 
not to covet comforts and privileges, but to beg their food, 
not here and there, or now and then, but to make it a regular 
habit so that they will be better able to overcome the greediness 
and covetousness that hinders their progress toward enlighten- 
ment. I teach them not to cook their own food even, but to 
be dependent upon others for even the poorest living so that 
they will realize their oneness with all sentient life and are but 
sojourners in this triple world. Under these conditions, how can 
bad men be tempted to put on our Buddhist garments and to 
offer the Dharma of all the Tathagatas as goods for sale? To 
do this is to accumulate all kinds of evil karma. Nevertheless, 
these heretics insist that their selfish and acquisitive acts are 
in conformity with Buddha’s teaching and that Buddhism al- 
lows them to teach and act in these acquisitive ways. By so do- 
ing they defame the true Buddhist Bhikshus who have been 
tested and tried in some formal religious ceremony. On the 
contrary, they only reveal themselves as belonging to some 
heretical sect but, meanwhile, they have deluded and bewildered 
and turned astray or hindered many sentient beings so that 
they fall into the hells of suffering. 

If after my Parinirvana there shall be bhikshus who under- 
take to practice dhyana and to attain Samadhi and who prove 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 5567 

their sincerity and earnestness by some sacrifice before an image 
of the Tathagata, such as cutting off a part of their body, or 
burning a finger, or even burning one spot on their head with 
incense, such disciples immediately pay all their karmaic debts 
accumulated from beginningless time, and they will be imme- 
diately emancipated from the bondage of this triple world. Al- 
though such disciples will not at once attain Supreme Enlight- 
enment, yet they reveal their right resolution and are on the 
right Path by the practice of dhyana. 

But if they are not enough in earnest to sacrifice even the 
slightest comfort, even if they attain a measure of tranquillity, 
they will have to be reborn in a human body for the payment 
of the debts of previous lives. Thus I, myself, suffered for 
about three months to eat the rye in horse’s fodder, so hungry 
was I, in recompense of the debt of an earlier life. Thus you 
must teach the people of this world who are practicing dhyana 
in the hope of attaining Samadhi, that they must abstain from 
stealing and covetousness. 

Therefore, Ananda, if any of my disciples who are trying to 
practice dhyana, do not abstain from stealing and covetousness, 
their efforts will be like trying to fill a leaking pot with water; 
no matter how long they try, they will never succeed. So all 
of you, my bhikshu disciples, with the exception of your poor 
garments and your begging bowls should have nothing more in 
possession. Even the food that is left over from your begging 
after you have eaten should be given to hungry sentient 
beings and should not be kept for the next meal. Moreover, 
you should look upon your own body, its flesh, blood and bone, 
as not being your own but as being one with the bodies of all 
other sentient beings and so be ever ready to sacrifice it for the 
common need. Even when men beat you and scold you, you 
must accept it patiently and with hands pressed together bow 
to them humbly. Furthermore, you should not accept one 
teaching, or one principle, that is easy and agreeable, and re- 
ject the rest of the Dharma; you should accept all with equit- 
able mind lest you misinterpret the Dharma to the new con- 
verts. Thus living, the Lord Buddha will confirm your attain- 
ment as one who has acquired the true Samadhi. As you teach 
the Dharma to others, be sure that your teaching is in agree- 
ment with the above so that it may be regarded as a true 
teaching of Buddha, otherwise it would be as heretical as the 



268 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


deceptive words of the goblin-heretics who are murderers of 
the life of Wisdom. This is the third admonition of the' Lord 
Buddha as it relates to the Precepts. 

Then there is the Precept of not deceiving nor telling lies. 
If the sentient beings of the six realms of existence should re- 
frain from killing, stealing and adultery, and should refrain 
from even thinking about them, but should fail to keep the 
Precept of truthfulness and not tje sincere in their practice of 
dhyana and their attainment of Samadhi, there would be no 
emancipation for them; they would fall into the ranks of the 
Maras who are satisfied with any slight attainment and who 
boast of it, or they would fall into the ranks of Maras who be- 
come prejudiced and egoistically assertive, and what is of more 
importance they would lose their seed of Buddhahood. 

Such disciples presumptuously assume an attainment before 
they have attained it; they assume realization before they have 
realized it; they affect to be the most respected and competent 
masters, and speak to the people loftily, boasting: — “I have at- 
tained to the degree of Crotapanna, or to the degree of Sak- 
radagamin, or to the degree of Anagamin, or to the degree of 
Arhat, or to the degree of Pratyaka-Buddha. ’ ’ They claim to 
have attained to the Ten Gradual Grounds of Tranquillity, or 
to the degree of those Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who have at- 
tained to the stage of No Recension. Moreover, they covet the 
respect of people, they like to see them humble in their pres- 
ence, they greedily watch for offerings from the people. Such 
disciples are to be regarded as no better than un-believers, no 
better than hardened Icchantikas. They not only lose their own 
seed of Buddhahood, they destroy the seed of Buddhahood in 
others. Such disciples progressively lose their nature of kindness 
and gradually lose the measure of understanding that they had 
attained and shall at last sink into the Sea of the Three Kinds 
of Suffering, namely, (1) the suffering of pain, (2) the loss of 
enjoyment, (3) the suffering of decay. They will not attain to 
Samadhi for a long, long time in after lives. 

Nevertheless, Ananda, in the time after my Parinirvana, I 
urge all of you Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas and Arhats to choose 
to be reborn in the last kalpas wholly for the sake of deliver- 
ing all sentient beings. You should make use of all manner 
of transformations, such as disciples, laymen, kings, lords, min- 
isters, virgins, boy-eunuchs, and even as harlots, widows, adul- 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


269 


terets, thieves, butchers, pedlers, etc., so as to be able to mingle 
with all kinds of people and to make known the true emanci- 
pation of Buddhism and the following peace of Samadhi. You 
must never speak of your own true rank of Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva and Arhat, you must never reveal the Lord Buddha’s 
Secret Cause of Attainment, nor speak without discretion be- 
fore those who are not practicing meditation. Except toward 
the end of your mortal life, you may disclose to your most 
worthy disciples the secret teachings and instruction, lest the 
evil heretics disturb and lure them away by their lies. To teach 
the world to observe the Precept of truthful sincerity, to prac- 
tice dhyana with sincerity and to attain a true Samadhi, this 
is the clear and true instruction of the Lord Buddha. 

Therefore, Ananda, if any disciple does not abstain from 
deceit, he is like a man moulding human dung instead of carv- 
ing sweet-smelling sandalwood. I have always taught my bhik- 
shu Brothers to keep their intuitive minds in straightforward 
sincerity as their true Altar of Enlightenment, and at all times, 
whether walking, standing, sitting or lying down, there should 
be no falsehood in your life. How disgraceful is it for heretics 
whose lives are filled with deceit to present themselves as hav- 
ing attained supreme enlightenment. They are like poverty 
stricken people who pretend to be kings or wealthy merchants, 
only to shame and destroy their own lives. For any such dis- 
ciple who dares to represent himself as a Prince of the Dharma, 
there will be a terrible retribution. 

It has always been a truism that any disease in a seed will 
reveal itself in diseased and abortive fruit. Such a disciple, 
seeking to attain the Lord Buddha’s Enlightenment can be 
likened to a man trying to bite his own navel. How impossible 
for them to attain true Enlightenment. But bhikshus whose 
lives are as straight as the chord of a bow will certainly attain 
Samadhi. They need never fear the wiles of the Maras. They 
are the bhikshus who are certain to attain the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva’s supreme understanding and insight. Any lesson 
or instruction that is in agreement with the foregoing can be 
relied upon as being a true teaching of the Lord Buddha. 
Differing from it, it is simply a false teaching of the heretics 
who have always been murderers of the Life of Wisdom. This 
is the fourth admonition of the Lord Buddha. 



270 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


(The Great DharanL) 

Ananda! As you have asked me as to the best method for 
concentrating the mind of those who have difficulty in following 
the common methods, I will now reveal to you the Lord Bud- 
dha’s Secret Method for the attainment of Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvahood. But you must remember that it is of first 
importance to fully observe the Four Precepts as explained 
above. To become a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, one must have a 
nature as pure and clear and repellent as frost and ice, so that 
no false growths of leaves and branches shall sprout out from 
the true Mind, such as the three poisons of lust, hatred and in- 
fatuation; or the four wickednesses of the mouth: falsehood, 
slander, obscene words, and flattery. 

Ananda! If any of the disciples in the last kalpa should be 
unable to overcome their old habits, you may teach them to 
recite this Dharani of mine. It is called. The Supreme Dha- 
rani of the Radiating Brightness of the Lord Buddha’s Crown- 
ing Experience. It is the invisible transcendental power that 
rays out from the Tathagata’s Wisdom Eye manifesting the un- 
conditioned Essential Mind of the Lord Buddha. It is the tran- 
scendental radio-activity of Power and Glory that was revealed 
in me at the time of my Highest Samadhi, at the hour of my 
Perfect Enlightenment, as I sat amid the marvelous Lotus 
Blossoms under the Bodhi-tree. 

Listen, Ananda! At the time you were helpless under the 
magic charm of the maiden Pchiti, what was it that released 
you and restored your control of mind? Your coming under 
her control was not a chance happening of this life, or of this 
kalpa alone: you had been in affinity with her for many a 
kalpa. Suddenly, when Manjusri repeated this Dharani, the 
bonds that bound you to her were destroyed, her passion for 
you was ended, and by once listening to my teaching she be- 
came enlightened. Although she was a prostitute and appar- 
ently had no interest in the Dharma, by the invisible power of 
my transcendental Dharani, she immediately attained to the 
perfection of all dhyana practice. What this Dharani did for 
her and for you, it can do for all others. Rest assured all my 
Bhikshu Brothers in this great assembly, you who are earnestly 
seeking Supreme Attainment, rest assured that, by the power 
of this Great Dharani, you will attain Buddhahood. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


271 


Then Ananda bowed down to the feet of the Lord Buddha 
and said: — My Noble Lord! The reason I have not yet at- 
tained perfect Emancipation from arbitrary conceptions of phe- 
nomena, since becoming thy disciple; is because of my pride in 
being known as thy favorite cousin and because of my excep- 
tional learning, so when I was brought under the spell of the 
old woman’s magic, in spite of the conscious purpose of my 
mind, I was unable to free myself from it. Fortunately my 
Lord sent Brother Manjusri to deliver me by means of the 
spiritual power of my Lord’s Great Crown Dharani. Unfor- 
tunately I had not mastered it and now pray* My Lord, to 
kindly repeat it again so that I and all the other practicing dis- 
ciples in this assembly and, through us, all the disciples of 
the future who are still in the cycle of deaths and rebirths, 
shall all become free in both mind and body in the time of 
danger. 

The whole audience having heard Ananda’s sincere plea to 
the Lord, rose from their seats and made obeisance to the Lord 
and then waited attentively to hear the Lord’s sacred Dharani. 
As they waited in solemn silence there appeared a most won- 
derful sight. From the crown of the Blessed One’s head there 
streamed forth a glorious splendor in the likeness of a wonder- 
ful lotus blossom, and in the midst of the abundant foliage and 
seated in the cup of the blossom was the Lord Tathagata’s 
Nirmanakaya (appearance body). From the crown of the Lord’s 
head there radiated outward uncounted beams of light that shot 
outward in all the ten directions, and in each of the bright 
beams of light were figures of transcendently mysterious Vajra- 
gods permeating everywhere in the open spaces of the universes 
and suggesting the lightning-like potencies of all the transcen- 
dental powers. Each of the Vajra-gods was standing upright and 
alert with his symbol in his hand, ready and waiting but al- 
ready victorious. 

The assembly was transported with awe and fear and ad- 
miration. With one spontaneous movement their hearts went 
forth in an adoring prayer for its blessed, compassionate, and 
protective Providence to guard them from its awful but Bene- 
ficent Power. 

As the vision faded away, the great assembly remained in 
solemn silence waiting to hear the Lord’s Transcendental Dha- 
rani. The Lord Buddha standing in their midst. Brightness 



272 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


and Power radiating from the crown of his head, uttered the 
Great Crown Dharani.* 

* Then follows several pages of the long and mysterious Dharani made up 
of Sanskrit words, Chinese paraphrases, names of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Deva- 
gods, etc., more or less of obscure meaning, all of which but the opening and 
closing lines are omitted. The lines in capital letters is considered the “heart” 
of the long Dharani and is commonly the part that is remembered and recited 
by those who cannot remember the whole. 

THE GREAT DHARANI 

Adoration to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas; 

Obeisance to their perfect Enlightenment and perfect tran- 
quillity. 

Adoration to all living Arhats; 

Adoration to the millions of Disciples who make up the 
Sangha. 

Adoration to those who have “entered the stream”; 
Adoration to those who have but “one more return”; 
Adoration to those who "will never more return to this 
world”; 

Obeisance to their perfect Righteousness. 

Obeisance to the Tri-Ratna, — to Buddha, Dharma, Sanghal 

Adoration to the Blessed Ones — exalted, firm, steady, 
powerful — the Kings among Tathagatas! 

Obeisance to their Perfect Wisdom! 

Adoration to the Blessed Amitabha Tathagata; 

Adoration to the Blessed Akshobya Tathagata; 

Obeisance to their Perfect Wisdom! 

Adoration to the Blessed Master of Healing, 

The Glorious Bhairaviya, the kingly Tathagata. 

Adoration to the Blessed One, Sambhasana, the Sala tree 
Among trees, the kingly Tathagata. 

Adoration to the Blessed One, Shakyamuni Tathagata; 
Adoration to their highest Perfect Wisdom! 

Adoration to the Blessed Princes among Tathagatas, — 
To the Blessed Pundarika Prince; 

To the Blessed Vajra Prince; 

To the Blessed Muni Prince; 

To the Blessed Garbha Prince. 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


273 

Adoration to the Heavenly Devas and Rishis — accom- 
plished and disciplined executors of this Dharani — 
Adoration to their transcendental power, their discipline, 
their resources. 

Adoration to Brahman, to Indra, to the Blessed Rudra, 
and to their consorts, Indrani and Sahai. 

Adoration to Narayana, Lord of this world. Lord of the 
five great Mudras, and to his consort. 

# # * 

OM! OH, THOU WHO HOLDEST THE SEAL OF 
POWER, RAISE THY DIAMOND HAND, BRING 
TO NAUGHT, DESTROY, EXTERMINATE! 

OH, THOU SUSTAINER, SUSTAIN ALL WHO ARE IN 
EXTREMITY! 

OH, THOU PURIFIER, PURIFY ALL WHO ARE IN 
BONDAGE TO SELF! 

OM! MAY THE ENDER OF ALL SUFFERING BE VIC- 
TORIOUS! 

OM! OH, THOU PERFECTLY ENLIGHTENED, EN- 
LIGHTEN ALL SENTIENT BEINGS! 

OH, THOU WHO ART PERFECT IN WISDOM AND 
COMPASSION, EMANCIPATE ALL BEINGS, 

AND BRING THEM TO BUDDHAHOOD! OM! 

Adoration to Tathagata, Sugata, Buddha, of Perfect Wis- 
dom and Compassion, Thou who hast accomplished, is accom- 
plishing, and will accomplish, all these Words of Mystery! 
SVAHA! So be it! 

( Final Words.) 

When the Lord finished his recitation of the Great Crown 
Dharani, he resumed his instruction to Ananda, saying: — This 
mysterious Agadha Dharani of Siddhartha Pdara which is the 
quintessence of the Brightness and Power raying out from the 
Lord Buddha’s Crown is One with the Brightness and Power 
emanating from all the Buddhas in all the ten quarters of all 
the universes. It is the Samhhogakaya, the Bliss-body of Bud- 
dhahood, radiantly Wise and Potential and ceaselessly Com- 
passionate drawing all sentient life into its All-embracing 
Wholeness and Unity and Peacefulness. It was by means of 



s>74 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


this Transcendental Power, the quintessence of The Lord Bud- 
dha's Perfect Samadhi and Boundless Samapatti, that all the 
Tathagatas, past, present and future, of all the universes had 
attained Anuttara Samyak Sambodhi, had been able to subdue 
all the Maras and heretics, were sitting on their thrones in the 
Glorious Lotus Blossoms and forever giving response to the 
needs of all sentient life in all the kingdoms of existence, past, 
present and future. 

By means of it all the Tathagatas were ceaselessly turning 
the Wheel of the Intrinsic Dharma; by means of it all the 
Tathagatas were in close fellowship with each individual dis- 
ciple, comforting, encouraging, guiding, strengthening; no mat- 
ter how immature disciples may be, they would be given as- 
surance of their ultimate attainment of Buddhahood. By 
means of it, all the Tathagatas of the ten quarters have been 
able to give deliverance to those unfortunate disciples whose 
karma has brought them into suffering, even into the suffering 
of the lowest hells where are the hungry demons. Much more 
have been able by means of it to support and comfort 
the disciples in the midst of their common suffering of blind- 
ness, deafness and dumbness, the cruelty of enemies, separation 
from beloved ones, unfulfilled wishes, and the suffering arising 
from the ungratified desires of the five sense-ingredients. By 
means of it all the Tathagatas have been able to protect the 
disciples from harm by natural calamities, from war and rob- 
bery and famine and imprisonment; from violent storms, con- 
flagrations, floods, drought, poverty. Whenever this Great Dha- 
rani is recited in faith, every suffering must give way and come 
to an end. 

By means of it all the Tathagatas have supported the great 
Masters, to give their lectures with spontaneity and correctness, 
to supply their money necessities, to protect them from harm 
whether walking sitting or lying down, and to bring them to 
places of honor among the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas as Princes 
of the Lord’s Dharma. By means of it all the Tathagatas have 
been able to encourage beginners among the disciples, and those 
who have become frightened by the difficulties of the profound 
teachings of the Dharma. 

By means of it all the Tathagatas have been able to attain 
their own Supreme Enlightenment, each under his own Spirit- 
ual Bodhi-tree, and finally to attain their Great Nirvana. And 



THE SURANGAMA SUTRA 


^75 


by means of this Great Bharani, after the passing of the Tatha- 
gatas, to consign to all disciples the duty and privilege of the 
practices of the Dharma so that it shall continue permanently 
in existence and the Precepts strictly observed and the disciples 
living in purity. 

Should any disciple from morning until evening recite this 
Great Bharani without any omissions or. additions, his merit 
will be unlimited even after innumerable kaipas. Should any 
of the practicing disciples who have not yet cut off their con- 
cern with deaths and rebirths, seriously attempt to attain Ar- 
hatship and to practice dhyana, without first relying on the 
power of this Great Bharani, it would be hopeless for him to 
avoid the deceptions and machinations of the Maras. 

Ananda, should any sentient beings in any of the kingdoms 
of existence, copy down this Dharani on birch-bark or palm- 
leaves or paper made of papyrus or of white felt, and keep it 
safely in some scented wrapping, this man no matter how faint- 
hearted or unable to remember the words for reciting it, but 
who copies it in his room and keeps it by him, this man in 
all his life will remain unharmed by any poison of the Maras. 


(NOTE. From now on the literary style changes from the convincing ra- 
tional character it has had and becomes more or less superstitious, irrational, 
unconvincing, and, to us of a more scientific age, is useless for our present purpose 
of winning by its spiritual power followers for the Lord Buddha. It is an ex- 
ample that is frequent in the Buddhist literature of the same apparent age, of 
“extending” or amplifying the text by including or interpolating additional 
matter that some less capable scribe thinks to be worth adding . 

At this point we are about two-thirds through the Text, in the midst of the 
Second Chapter, the balance of which is omitted. Chapter III is also omitted. 
Chapter IV is very short and is given entirely. It is devoted to the title of the 
Sutra and might well have been the end. Chapter V is devoted to a mythical 
description of the Seven Realms of Existence and is omitted. Chapter VI, while 
being more appropriate, also gives one the impression that it is something 
added. All but the closing paragraph is omitted. 



276 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


Chapter IV 

Giving the Title of This Great Sutra, so as to Reveal Its 
Importance, Its Aim and Availability and Perfect 
Accommodation. 

At this time, Manjusri, Prince of the Lord’s Dharma rose 
in his place, bowed down to the Lord Buddha and addressed 
him, saying: — 

Our Blessed Lord! What shall we call this Instruction, so 
that we and all future disciples may study it intelligently and 
observe its teachings? 

The Lord Buddha replied: — Manjusri! This Sutra should 
be designated as The Lord Buddha’s Crown of Siddhartha 
Pdara; or the Pure and Ocean-wide Eye of all the Tathagatas 
of the Ten Quarters; or as the Relationship-Cause of the 
Emancipation of Ananda and the Bhikshuna Pchiti, so that 
they Acquired their Enlightenment of Mind and entered into 
the Ocean of Omniscience; or as the Perfect Teaching of the 
Practices and Attainments of the Tathagata’s Secret Path; or 
as the Great, Immense and All-embracing Kingship of the 
Wonderful Lotus; or as the Great Dharani of the Buddhas of 
the Ten Quarters; or as the Initiating Lectures which Eluci- 
date the Permanent Dhyana Practice of all the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas. 

Manjusri! As you read this Great Sutra which I have in- 
terpreted with great care, you should consider and study all 
these different titles, for each has its significance. 


As the Lord Buddha finished his instruction as recorded in 
this exceedingly long Sutra, there was great rejoicing in the 
hearts of all those present, bhikshus and bhikshuni, lay dis- 
ciples of both sexes, the heavenly Devas and Asuras, Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattvas of both this world and all the ten quarters 
of the universe, Pratyaka-buddhas, Arhats, divine Gods, super- 
natural Cherubim, of the heavenly realms, newly converted 
mighty Gods. All made sincere and humble obeisance to the 
Lord Buddha and departed with grateful and joyful hearts. 

The End 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 

SELF-REALISATION OF 
NOBLE WISDOM 


Chapter I 
Discrimination 

T HUS have I heard. The Blessed One once appeared in the 
Castle of Lanka which is on the summit of Mt. Malaya in 
the midst of the great Ocean. A great many Bodhisattva-Ma- 
j hasattvas. had miraculously assembled from all the Buddha- 

lands, and a large number of bhikshus were gathered there. 
The Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas with Mahamati at their head 
were all perfect masters of the various Samadhis, the tenfold 
j Self-mastery, the ten Powers, and the six Psychic Faculties. 

Having been anointed by the Buddha’s own hands, they all 
well understood the significance of the objective world; they all 
i knew how to apply the various means, teachings and disciplin- 

ary measures according to the various mentalities and behaviors 
j of beings; they were all thoroughly versed in the five Dharmas, 

i the three Svabhavas, the eight Vijnanas, and the twofold Ego- 

i lessness. 

i The Blessed One, knowing of the mental agitations going on 

in the minds of those assembled (like the surface of the ocean 
| stirred into waves by the passing winds), and his great heart 

j moved by compassion, smiled and said: In the days of old the 

[ Tathagatas of the past who were Arhats and fully-enlightened 

( Ones came to the Castle of Lanka on Mount Malaya and dis- 

1 coursed on the Truth of Noble Wisdom that is beyond the rea- 

| soning knowledge of the philosophers as well as being beyond 

I the understanding of ordinary disciples and masters; and which 

| is realisable only within the inmost consciousness; for your 

I sakes, I too, would discourse on the same Truth. All that is 

seen in the world is devoid of effort and action because all 
l things in the world are like a dream, or like an image miracu- 

1 *77 



278 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


lously projected. This Is not comprehended by the philosophers 
and the ignorant, but those who thus see things see them truth- 
fully. Those who see things otherwise walk in discrimination 
and, as they depend upon discrimination, they cling to dualism. 
The world as seen by discrimination is like seeing one’s own 
image reflected in a mirror, or one’s shadow, or the moon re- 
flected in water, or an echo heard in the valley. People grasp- 
ing their own shadows of discrimination become attached to this 
thing and that thing and failing to abandon dualism they go 
on forever discriminating and thus never attain tranquillity. By 
tranquillity is meant Oneness, and Oneness gives birth to the 
highest Samadhi which is gained by entering into the realm of 
Noble Wisdom that is realisable only within one’s inmost con- 
sciousness. 

Then all the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas rose from their seats 
and respectfully paid him homage and Mahamatl the Bodhisat- 
tva-Manasattva sustained by the power of the Buddhas drew 
his upper garment over one shoulder, knelt and pressing his 
hands together, praised him in the following verses: 

As thou reviewest the world with thy perfect intelligence and 
compassion , it must seem to thee like an ethereal flower of 
which one cannot say: it is born, it is destroyed , for the 
terms being and non-being do not apply to it . 

As thou reviewest the world with thy perfect intelligence and 
compassion , it must seem to thee like a dream of which it 
cannot be said: it is permanent or it is destructible, for be- 
ing and ?ion-being do not apply to it . 

As thou reviewest all things by thy perfect intelligence and 
compassion , they must seem to thee like visions beyond the 
reach of the human mind , as being and non-being do not 
apply to them. 

With thy perfect intelligence and compassion which are beyond 
all limit, thou comprehendest the egolessness of things and 
persons, and art free and clear from the hindrances of pas- 
sion and learning and egoism. 

Thou dost not vanish izito Nirvana, nor does Nirvana abide in 
thee, for Nirvana transcends all duality of knowing and 
known, of being and non-being. 

Those who see thee thus, serene and beyond conception, will 
be emancipated from attachment, will be cleansed of all de- 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 279 

filement, both in this world and in the spiritual world be- 
yond. 

In this world whose nature is like a dream , there is place for 
praise and blame, but in the ultimate Reality of Dharmakaya 
which is far beyond the senses and the discriminating mind, 
what is there to praise? O thou most Wise! 

* # * 

Then said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva: O blessed 
One, Sugata, Arhat and Fully-enlightened One, pray tell us 
about the realisation of Noble Wisdom which is beyond the 
path and usage of the philosophers; which is devoid of all 
predicates such as being and non-being, oneness and otherness, 
bothness and not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity 
and non-eternity; which has nothing to do with individuality 
and generality, nor false-imagination, nor any illusions arising 
from the mind itself; but which manifests itself as the Truth 
of Highest Reality. By which, going up continuously by the 
stages of purification, one enters at last upon the stage of 
Tathagatahood, whereby, by the power of his original vows un- 
attended by any striving, one will radiate its influence to infinite 
worlds, like a gem reflecting its variegated colors, whereby I 
and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas will be enabled to bring all 
beings to the same perfection of virtue. 

Said the Blessed One: Well done, well done, Mahamati! 
And again, well done, indeed! It is because of your compassion 
for the world, because of the benefit it will bring to many peo- 
ple both human kind and celestial, that you have presented 
yourself before us to make this request. Therefore, Mahamati, 
listen well and truly reflect upon what I shall say, for I will in- 
struct you. 

Then Mahamati and the other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
gave devout attention to the teaching of the Blessed One. 

Mahamati, since the ignorant and simple-minded, not know- 
ing that the world is only something seen of the mind itself, 
cling to the multitudinousness of external objects, cling to the 
notions of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, both- 
ness and not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and 
non-eternity, and think that they have a self-nature of their 
own, all of which rises from the discriminations of the mind 
and is perpetuated by habit-energy, and from which the, are 



280 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


given over to false imagination. It is all like a mirage in which 
springs of water are seen as if they were real. They are thus 
imagined by animals who, made thirsty by the heat of the 
season, run after them. Animals, not knowing that the springs 
are an hallucination of their own minds, do not realise that 
there are no such springs. In the same way, Mahamati, the 
ignorant and simple-minded, their minds burning with the fires 
of greed, anger and folly, finding delight in a world of multi- 
tudinous forms, their thoughts obsessed with ideas of birth, 
growth and destruction, not well understanding what is meant 
by existent and non-existent, and being impressed by the erro- 
neous discriminations and speculations since beginningless time, 
fall into the habit of grasping this and that and thereby be- 
coming attached to them. 

It is like the city of the Gandharvas which the unwitting 
take to be a real city though it is not so in fact. The city ap- 
pears as in a vision owing to their attachment to the memory 
of a city preserved in the mind as a seed; the city can thus be 
said to be both existent and non-existent. In the same way, 
clinging to the memory of erroneous speculations and doctrines 
accumulated since beginningless time, they hold fast to such 
ideas as oneness and otherness, being and non-being, and their 
thoughts are not at all clear as to what after all is only seen 
of the mind. It is like a man dreaming in his sleep of a coun- 
try that seems to be filled with various men, women, elephants, 
horses, cars, pedestrians, villages, towns, hamlets, cows, buffalos, 
mansions, woods, mountains, rivers and lakes, and who moves 
about in that city until he is awakened. As he lies half awake, 
he recalls the city of his dreams and reviews his experiences 
there; what do you think, Mahamati, is this dreamer who is 
letting his mind dwell upon the various unrealities he has seen 
in his dream, — is he to be considered wise or foolish? In the 
same way, the ignorant and simple-minded who are favorably 
influenced by the erroneous views of the philosophers do not 
recognise that the views that are influencing them are only 
dream-like ideas originating in the mind itself, and consequently 
they are held fast by their notions of oneness and otherness, of 
being and non-being. It is like a painter’s canvas on which 
the ignorant imagine they see the elevations and depressions of 
mountains and valleys. 

In the same way there are people today being brought up 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 281 

under the influence of similar erroneous views of oneness and 
otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, whose mentality is be- 
ing conditioned by the habit-energy of these false-imagining 
and who later on will declare those who hold the true doctrine 
of no-birth which is free from the alternatives of being and 
non-being, to be nihilists and by so doing will bring themselves 
and others to ruin. By the natural law of cause and effect 
these followers of pernicious views uproot meritorious causes 
that otherwise would lead to unstained purity. They are to be 
shunned by those whose desires are for more excellent things. 

It is like the dim-eyed ones who seeing a hairnet exclaim 
to one another: “It is wonderful! Look, Honorable Sirs, it is 
wonderful!” But the hairnet has never existed,* in fact, it is 
neither an entity, nor a non-entity, for it has both been seen 
and has not been seen. In the same manner those whose minds 
have been addicted to the discriminations of the erroneous views 
cherished by the philosophers which are given over to the real- 
istic views of being and non-being, will contradict the good 
Dharma and will end in the destruction of themselves and 
others. 

It is like a wheel of fire made by a revolving firebrand 
which is no wheel but which is imagined to be one by the ig- 
norant. Nor is it not-a-wheel because it has not been seen by 
some. By the same reasoning, those who are in the habit of 
listening to the discriminations and views of the philosophers 
will regard things born as non-existent and those destroyed by 
causation as existent. It is like a mirror reflecting colors and 
images as determined by conditions but without any partiality. 
It is like the echo of the wind that gives the sound of a hu- 
man voice. It is like a mirage of moving water seen in a 
desert. In the same way the discriminating mind of the igno- 
rant which has been heated by false-imaginations and specula- 
tions is stirred into mirage-like waves by the winds of birth, 
growth and destruction. It is like the magician Pisaca, who by 
means of his spells makes a wooden image or a dead body to 
throb with life, though it has no power of its own. In the 
same way the ignorant and the simple-minded, committing 
themselves to erroneous philosophical views become thoroughly 
devoted to the ideas of oneness and otherness, but their confi- 
dence is not well grounded. For this reason, Mahamati, you 
and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should cast off all discrimi- 



282 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


nations leading to the notions of birth, abiding and destruc- 
tions, of oneness and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, 
of being and non-being and thus getting free of the bondage 
of habit-energy become able to attain the reality realisable 
within yourselves of Noble Wisdom. 

* # * 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Why is it that 
the ignorant are given up to discrimination and the wise are 
not? 

The Blessed One replied: It is because the ignorant cling 
to names, signs and ideas; as their minds move along these 
channels they feed on multiplicities of objects and fall into the 
notion of an ego-soul and what belongs to it; they make dis- 
criminations of good and bad among appearances and cling to 
the agreeable. As they thus cling there is a reversion to ig- 
norance, and karma born of greed, anger and folly, is accumu- 
lated. As the accumulation of karma goes on they become 
imprisoned in a cocoon of discrimination and are thenceforth 
unable to free themselves from the round of birth and death. 

Because of folly they do not understand that all things are 
like maya, like the reflection of the moon in water, that there 
is no self-substance to be imagined as an ego-soul and its be- 
longings, and that all their definitive ideas rise from their false 
discriminations of what exists only as it is seen of the mind 
itself. They do not realise that things have nothing to do with 
qualified and qualifying, nor with the course of birth, abiding 
and destruction, and instead they assert that they are born of 
a creator, of time, of atoms, of some celestial spirit. It is be- 
cause the ignorant are given up to discrimination that they 
move along with the stream of appearances, but it is not so 
with the wise. 


Chapter II 

False-Imagination and Knowledge of 
Appearances 

Then Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva spoke to the 
Blessed One, saying: You speak of the erroneous views of the 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 283 

philosophers, will you please tell us of them, that we may be 
on our guard against them? 

The Blessed One replied, saying: Mahamati, the error in 
these erroneous teachings that are generally held by the philos- 
ophers lies in this: they do not recognise that the objective 
world rises from the mind itself; they do not understand that 
the whole mind-system also rises from the mind itself; but 
depending upon these manifestations of the mind as being real 
they go on discriminating them, like the simple-minded ones 
that they are, cherishing the dualism of this and that, of be- 
ing and non-being, ignorant of the fact that there is but one 
common Essence. 

On the contrary my teaching is based upon the recognition 
that the objective world, like a vision, is a manifestation of the 
mind itself; it teaches the cessation of ignorance, desire, deed 
and causality; it teaches the cessation of suffering that arises 
from the discriminations of the triple world. 

There are some Brahman scholars who, assuming something 
out of nothing, assert that there is a substance bound up with 
causation which abides in time, and that the elements that 
make up personality and its environment have their genesis 
and continuation in causation and after thus existing, pass 
away. Then there are other scholars who hold a destructive 
and nihilistic view concerning such subjects as continuation, 
activity, breaking-up, existence. Nirvana, the Path, karma, frui- 
tion and Truth. Why? Because they have not attained an in- 
tuitive understanding of Truth itself and therefore they have 
no clear insight into the fundamentals of things. They are like 
a jar broken into pieces which is no longer able to function as 
a jar; they are like a burnt seed which is no longer capable of 
'sprouting. But the elements that make up personality and its 
environment which they regard as subject to change are really 
incapable of uninterrupted transformations. Their views are 
based upon erroneous discriminations of the objective world; 
they are not based upon the true conception. 

Again, if it is true that something comes out of nothing and 
there is the rise of the mind-system by reason of the combina- 
tion of the three effect-producing causes, we could say the same 
of any non-existing thing: for instance, that a tortoise could 
grow hair, or sand produce oil. This proposition is of no avail; 
it ends in affirming nothing. It follows that the deed, work 



a8 4 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


and cause of which they speak is of no use, and so also is their 
reference to being and non-being. If they argue that there is 
a combination of the three effect-producing causes, they must 
do it on the principle of cause and effect, that is, that some- 
thing comes out of something and not out of nothing. As long 
as a world of relativity is asserted, there is an ever recurring 
chain of causation which cannot be denied under any circum- 
stance, therefore we cannot talk of anything coming to an end 
or of cessation. As long as these scholars remain on their philo- 
sophical ground their demonstration must conform to logic and 
their textbooks, and the memory-habit of erroneous intellection 
will ever cling to them. To make the matter worse, the simple- 
minded ones, poisoned by this erroneous view, will declare this 
incorrect way of thinking taught by the ignorant, to be the 
same as that presented by the All-knowing One. 

But the way of instruction presented by the Tathagatas is 
not based on assertions and refutations by means of words and 
logic. There are four forms of assertion that can be made con- 
cerning things not in existence, namely, assertions made about 
individual marks that are not in existence; about objects that 
are not in existence; about a cause that is non-existent; and 
about philosophical views that are erroneous. By refutation is 
meant that one, because of ignorance, has not examined prop- 
erly the error that lies at the base of these assertions. 

The assertion about individual marks that really have no 
existence, concerns the distinctive marks as perceived by the 
eye, ear, nose, etc., as indicating individuality and generality 
in the elements that make up personality and its external 
world; and then, taking these marks for reality and getting at- 
tached to them, to get into the habit of affirming that things 
are just so and not otherwise. 

The assertion about objects that are non-existent is an asser- 
tion that rises from attachment to these associated marks of 
individuality and generality. Objects in themselves are neither 
in existence nor in non-existence and are quite devoid of the 
alternative of being and non-being, and should only be thought 
of as one thinks of the horns of a hare, a horse, or a camel, 
which never existed. Objects are discriminated by the ignorant 
who are addicted to assertion and negation, because their intel- 
ligence has not been acute enough to penetrate into the truth 
that there is nothing but what is seen of the mind itself. 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 285 

The assertion of a cause that is non-existent assumes the 
causeless birth of the first element of the mind-system which 
later on comes to have only a maya-like non-existence. That is 
to say, there are philosophers who assert that an originally un- 
born mind-system begins to function under the conditions of 
eye, form, light and memory, which functioning goes on for a 
time and then ceases. This is an example of a cause that is 
non-existent. 

The assertion of philosophical views concerning the elements 
that make up personality and its environing world that are 
non-existent, assume the existence of an ego, a being, a soul, a 
living being, a “nourisher,” or a spirit. This is an example of 
philosophical views that are not true. It is this combination of 
discrimination of imaginary marks of individuality, grouping 
them and giving them a name and becoming attached to them 
as objects, by reason of habit-energy that has been accumulat- 
ing since beginningless time, that one builds up erroneous views 
whose only basis is false-imagination. For this reason Bodhisat- 
tvas should avoid all discussions relating to assertions and nega- 
tions whose only basis is words and logic. 

Word-discrimination goes on by the coordination of brain, 
chest, nose, throat, palate, lips, tongue, teeth and lips. Words 
are neither different nor not-different from discrimination. 
Words rise from discrimination as their cause; if words were 
different from discrimination they could not have discrimination 
for their cause; then again, if words are not different, they 
could not carry and express meaning. Words, therefore, are 
produced by causation and are mutually conditioning and 
shifting and, just like things, are subject to birth and destruc- 
tion. 

There are four kinds of word discrimination, all of which 
are to be avoided because they are alike unreal. First there 
are the words indicating individual marks which rise from dis- 
criminating forms and signs as being real in themselves and, 
then, becoming attached to them. There are memory-words 
which rise from the unreal surroundings which come before the 
mind when it recalls some previous experience. Then there are 
words growing out of attachment to the erroneous distinctions 
and speculations of the mental processes. And finally, there are 
words growing out of inherited prejudices as seeds of habit- 
energy have accumulated since beginningless time, or which had, 



286 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


their origin in some long forgotten clinging to false-imagination 
and erroneous speculations. 

Then there are words where there are no corresponding ob- 
jects, as for instance, the hare’s horns, a barren woman’s child, 
etc. — there are no such things but we have the words, just the 
same. Words are an artificial creation; there are Buddha-lands 
where there are no words. In some Buddha-lands ideas are indi- 
cated by looking steadily, in others by gestures, in still others 
by a frown, by a movement of the eyes, by laughing, by yawn- 
ing, by the clearing of the throat, or by trembling. For in- 
stance, in the Buddha-land of the Tathagata Samantabhadra, 
Bodhisattvas, by a dhyana transcending words and ideas, at- 
tain the recognition of all things as un-born and they, also, 
experience various most excellent Samadhis that transcend 
words. Even in this world such specialised beings as ants and 
bees carry on their activities very well without recourse to 
words. No, Mahamati, the validity of things is independent of 
the validity of words. 

Moreover, there are other things that belong to words, 
namely, the syllable-body of words, the name-body of words, 
and the sentence-body of words. By syllable-body is meant 
that by which words and sentences are set up or indicated: 
there is a reason for some syllables, some are mnemonic, and 
some are chosen arbitrarily. By name-body is meant the object 
depending upon which a name-word obtains its significance, or 
in other words, name-body is the “substance” of a name-word. 
By sentence-body is meant the completion of the meaning by 
expressing the word more fully in a sentence. The name for 
this sentence-body is suggested by the footprints left in the 
road by elephants, horses, people, deer, cattle, goats, etc. But 
neither words nor sentences can exactly express meanings, for 
words are only sweet sounds that are arbitrarily chosen to rep- 
resent things, they are not the things themselves, which in turn 
are only manifestations of mind. Discrimination of meaning 
is based upon the false-imagination that these sweet sounds 
which we call words and which are dependent upon whatever 
subjects they are supposed to stand for, and which subjects 
are supposed to be self-existent, all of which is based on error. 
Disciples should be on their guard against the seductions of 
words and sentences and their illusive meanings, for by them 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 287 

the ignorant and the dull-witted become entangled and helpless 
as an elephant floundering about in the deep mud. 

Words and sentences are produced by the law of causation 
and are mutually conditioning, — they cannot express highest 
Reality. Moreover, in highest Reality there are no differentia- 
tions to be discriminated and there is nothing to be predicated 
in regard to it. Highest Reality is an exalted state of bliss, it 
is not a state of word-discrimination and it cannot be entered 
into by mere statements concerning it. The Tathagatas have a 
better way of teaching, namely, through self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom. 

* * # 

Mahamati asked the Blessed One: Pray tell us about the 
causation of all things whereby I and other Bodhisattvas may 
see into the nature of causation and may no more discriminate 
it as to the gradual or simultaneous rising of all things? 

The Blessed One replied: There are two factors of causation 
by reason of which all things come into seeming existence: — 
external and internal factors. The external factors are a lump 
of clay, a stick, a wheel, a thread, water, a worker, and his 
labor, the combination of all of which produces a jar. As with 
a jar which is made from a lump of clay, or a piece of cloth 
made from thread, or matting made from fragrant grass, or a 
sprout growing out of a seed, or fresh butter made from sour 
milk by a man churning it; so it is with all things which ap- 
pear one after another in continuous succession. As regards the 
inner factors of causation, they are of such kinds as ignorance, 
desire, purpose, all of which enter into the idea of causation. 
Bom of these two factors there is the manifestation of person- 
ality and the individual things that make up its environment, 
but they are not individual and distinctive things: they are 
only so discriminated by the ignorant. 

Causation may be divided into six elements: indifference- 
cause, dependence-cause, possibility-cause, agency-cause, objec- 
tivity-cause, manifesting-cause. Indifference-cause means that if 
there is no discrimination present, there is no power of combina- 
tion present and so no combination takes place, or if present 
there is dissolution. Dependence-cause means that the elements 
must be present. Possibility-cause means that when a cause is 



288 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

to become effective there must be a suitable meeting of condi- 
tions both internal and external. Agency-cause means that 
there must be a principle vested with supreme authority like a 
sovereign king present and asserting itself. Objectivity-cause 
means that to be a part of the objective world the mind-system 
must be in existence and must be keeping up its continuous 
activity. Manifesting-cause means that as the discriminating 
faculty of the mind-system becomes busy individual marks will 
be revealed as forms are revealed by the light of a lamp. 

All causes are thus seen to be the outcome of discrimina- 
tion carried on by the ignorant and simple-minded, and there 
is, therefore, no such thing as gradual or simultaneous rising of 
existence. If such a thing as the gradual rising of existence is 
asserted, it can be disproved by showing that there is no basic 
substance to hold the individual signs together which makes a 
gradual rising impossible. If simultaneous rising of existence is 
asserted, there would be no distinction between cause and effect 
and there will be nothing to characterise a cause as such. 
While a child is not yet born, the term father has no signifi- 
cance. Logicians argue that there is that which is born and that 
which gives birth by the mutual functioning of such causal 
factors as cause, substance, continuity, acceleration, etc., and so 
they conclude that there is a gradual rising of existence; but 
this gradual rising does not obtain except by reason of attach- 
ment to the notion of self-nature. 

When ideas of body, property and abode are seen, discrimi- 
nated and cherished in what after all is nothing but what is 
conceived by the mind itself, an external world is perceived 
under the aspects of individuality and generality which, how- 
ever, are not realities, and, therefore, neither a gradual nor a 
simultaneous rising of things is possible. It is only when the 
mind-system comes into activity and discriminates the manifes- 
tations of mind that existence can be said to come into view. 
For these reasons, Mahamati, you must get rid of notions of 
gradation and simultaneity in the combination of causal 
activities. 

* * • 

Mahamati said: Blessed One, To what kind of discrimina- 
tion and to what kind of thoughts should the term, false-im- 
agination, be applied? 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


289 


The Blessed One replied: So long as people do not under- 
stand the true nature of the objective world, they fall into the 
dualistic view of things. They imagine the multiplicity of ex- 
ternal objects to be real and become attached to them and are 
nourished by their habit-energy. Because of this a system of 
mentation — mind and what belongs to it — is discriminated and 
is thought of as real; this leads to the assertion of an ego-soul 
and its belongings, and thus the mind-system goes on function- 
ing. Depending upon and attaching itself to the dualistic habit 
of mind, they accept the views of the philosophers founded 
upon these erroneous distinctions, of being and non-being, ex- 
istence and non-existence, and there evolves what we call, false- 
imaginations. 

But, Mahamati, discrimination does not evolve nor is it put 
away because, when all that is seen is truly recognised to be 
nothing but the manifestation of mind, how can discrimination 
as regards being and non-being evolve? It is for the sake of the 
ignorant who are addicted to the discrimination of the multi- 
plicity of things which are of their own mind, that it is said by 
me that discrimination takes its rise owing to attachment to 
the aspect of multiplicity which is characteristic of objects. 
How otherwise can the ignorant and simple-minded recognize 
that there is nothing but what is seen of the mind itself, and 
how otherwise can they gain an insight into the true nature of 
mind and be able to free themselves from wrong conceptions of 
cause and effect? How otherwise can they gain a clear concep- 
tion of the Bodhisattva stages, and attain a “turning-about” in 
the deepest seat of their consciousness, and finally attain an in- 
ner self-realisation of Noble Wisdom which transcends the five 
Dharmas, the three Self-natures, and the whole idea of a dis- 
criminated Reality? For this reason is it said by me that dis- 
crimination takes its rise from the mind becoming attached to 
the multiplicities of things which in themselves are not real, 
and that emancipation comes from thoroughly understanding 
the meaning of Reality as it truly is. 

False-imaginations rise from the consideration of appear- 
ances: things are discriminated as to form, signs and shape; as 
to having color, warmth, humidity, motility or rigidity. False- 
imagination consists in becoming attached to these appearances 
and their names. By attachment to objects is meant, the get- 
ting attached to inner and outer things as if they were real. 



290 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

By attachment to names is meant, the recognition in these in- 
ner and outer things of the characteristic marks of individuation 
and generality, and to regard them as definitely belonging to 
the names of the objects. 

False-imagination teaches that because all things are bound 
up with causes and conditions of habit-energy that has been 
accumulating since beginningless time by not recognising that 
the external world is of mind itself, all things are comprehensible 
under the aspects of individuality and generality. By reason of 
clinging to these false-imaginations there is multitudinousness 
of appearances which are imagined to be real but which are 
only imaginary. To illustrate: when a magician depending on 
grass, wood, shrubs and creepers, exercises his art, many shapes 
and beings take form that are only magically created; sometimes 
they even make figures that have bodies and that move and 
act like human beings; they are variously and fancifully dis- 
criminated but there is no reality in them; everyone but chil- 
dren and the simple-minded know that they are not real. Like- 
wise based upon the notion of relativity false-imagination per- 
ceives a variety of appearances which the discriminating mind 
proceeds to objectify and name and become attached to, and 
memory and habit-energy perpetuate. Here is all that is neces- 
sary to constitute the self-nature of false-imagination. 

The various features of false-imagination can be distin- 
guished as follows: as regards words, meaning, individual marks, 
property, self-nature, cause, philosophical views, reasoning, birth, 
no-birth, dependence, bondage and emancipation. Discrimina- 
tion of words is the becoming attached to various sounds carry- 
ing familiar meanings. Discrimination of meaning comes when 
one imagines that words rise depending upon whatever subjects 
they express, and which subjects are regarded as self-existent. 
Discrimination of individual marks is to imagine that whatever 
is denoted in words concerning the multiplicities of individual 
marks (which in themselves are like a mirage) is true, and 
clinging tenaciously to them, to discriminate all things accord- 
ing to such categories as, warmth, fluidity, motility, and solid- 
ity. Discrimination of property is to desire a state of wealth, 
such as gold, silver, and various precious stones. 

Discrimination of self-nature is to make discriminations ac- 
cording to the views of the philosophers in reference to the 
self-nature of all things which they imagine and stoutly main- 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


291 


tain to be true, saying: “This is just what it is and it cannot 
be otherwise.” Discrimination of cause is to distinguish the no- 
tion of causation in reference to being and non-being and to 
imagine that there are such things as “cause-signs.” Discrimina- 
tion of philosophical views means considering different views 
relating to the notions of being and non-being, oneness and 
otherness, bothness and not-bothness, existence and non-exist- 
ence, all of which are erroneous, and becoming attached to 
particular views. Discrimination of reasoning means the teach- 
ing whose reasoning is based on the grasping of the notion of 
an ego-substance and what belongs to it. Discrimination of 
birth means getting attached to the notion that things come 
into existence and pass out of existence according to causation. 
Discrimination of no-birth is to see that causeless substances 
which were not, come into existence by reason of causation. 
Discrimination of dependence means the mutual dependence 
of gold and the filament made of it. Discrimination of bondage 
and imagination is like imagining that there is something bound 
because of something binding, as in the case of a man who 
ties a knot and loosens one. 

These are the various features of false-imagination to which 
all the ignorant and simple-minded cling. Those attached to 
the notion of relativity are attached to the notion of the multi- 
tudinousness of things which arises from false-imagination. It 
is like seeing varieties of objects depending upon maya, but 
these varieties thus revealing themselves are discriminated by 
the ignorant as something other than maya itself, according to 
their way of thinking. Now the turth is, maya and varieties of 
objects are neither different nor not different; if they were dif- 
ferent, varieties of objects would not have maya for their char- 
acteristic; if they are not different there would be no distinc- 
tion between them. But as there is a distinction these two — 
maya and varieties of objects — are neither different nor not- 
different, for the very good reason: they are one thing. 

'■ -Or'/, ;; 

Mahamati said to the Blessed One: Is error an entity or 
not? The Blessed One replied: Error has no character in it 
making for attachment; if error had such a character no libera- 
tion would be possible from its attachment to existence, and 
the chain of origination would only be understood in the sense 



2 9 2 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

of creation as upheld by the philosophers. Error is like maya, 
also, and as maya is incapable from producing other maya, so 
error in itself cannot produce error; it is discrimination and at- 
tachment that produce evil thoughts and faults. Moreover, 
maya has no power of discrimination in itself; it only rises 
when invoked by the charm of the magician. Error has in it- 
self no habit-energy; habit-energy only rises from discrimina- 
tion and attachment. Error in itself has no faults; faults are 
due to the confused discriminations fondly cherished by the ig- 
norant concerning the ego-soul and its mind. The wise have 
nothing to do either with maya or error. 

Maya, however, is not an unreality because it only has the 
appearance of reality; all things have the nature of maya. It 
is not because all things are imagined and clung to because of 
the multitudinousness of individual signs, that they are like 
maya; it is because they are alike unreal and as quickly appear- 
ing and disappearing. Being attached to erroneous thoughts 
they confuse and contradict themselves and others. As they do 
not clearly grasp the fact that the world is no more than mind 
itself, they imagine and cling to causation, work, birth and in- 
dividual signs, and their thoughts are characterised by error 
and false-imaginations. The teaching that all things are char- 
acterised by the self-nature of maya and a dream is meant to 
make the ignorant and simple-minded cast aside the idea of 
self-nature in anything. 

False-imagination teaches that such things as light and 
shade, long and short, black and white are different and are to 
be discriminated; but they are not independent of each other; 
they are only different aspects of the same thing, they are terms 
of relation not of reality. Conditions of existence are not of a 
mutually exclusive character; in essence things are not two 
but one. Even Nirvana and Samsara’ s world of life and death 
are aspects of the same thing, for there is no Nirvana except 
where is Samsara, and no Samsara except where is Nirvana. 
All duality is falsely imagined. 

Mahamati, you and all the Bodhisattvas should discipline 
yourselves in the realisation and patient acceptance of the truths 
of the emptiness, un-bomness, no self-natureness, and the non- 
duality of all things. This teaching is found in all the sutras 
of all the Buddhas and is presented to meet the varied dis- 
positions of all beings, but it is not the Truth itself. These 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


293 


teachings are only a finger pointing toward Noble Wisdom. 
They are like a mirage with its springs of water which the deer 
take to be real and chase after. So with the teachings in all 
the sutras: They are intended for the consideration and guid- 
ance of the discriminating minds of all people, but they are not 
the Truth itself, which can only be self-realised within one’s 
deepest consciousness. 

Mahamati, you and all the Bodhisattvas must seek for this 
inner self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, and not be captivated 
by word-teaching. 


Chapter III 

Right Knowledge or Knowledge of 
Relations 

Then Mahamati said: Pray tell us. Blessed One, about the 
being and the non-being of all things? 

The Blessed One replied: People of this world are depend- 
ent in their thinking on one of two things: on the notion of 
being whereby they take pleasure in realism, or in the notion 
of non-being whereby they take pleasure in nihilism; in either 
case they imagine emancipation where there is no emancipation. 
Those who are dependent upon the notion of being, regard the 
world as rising from a causation that is really existent, and that 
this actually existing and becoming world does not take its rise 
from a causation that is non-existent. This is the realistic view 
as held by some people. Then there are other people who are 
dependent on the notion of the non-being of all things. These 
people admit the existence of greed, anger and folly, and at 
the same time they deny the existence of the things that pro- 
duce greed, anger and folly. This is not rational, for greed, 
anger and folly are no more to be taken hold of as real than 
are things; they neither have substance nor individual marks. 
Where there is a state of bondage, there is binding and means 
for binding; but where there is emancipation, as in the case 
of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, masters and disciples, who have 
ceased to believe in both being and non-being, there is neither 
bondage, binding nor means for binding. 



294 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

It is better to cherish the notion of an ego-substance than 
to entertain the notion of emptiness derived from the view of 
being and non-being, for those who so believe fail to understand 
the fundamental fact that the external world is nothing but a 
manifestation of mind. Because they see things as transient, 
as rising from cause and passing away from cause, now divid- 
ing, now combining into the elements which make up the ag- 
gregates of personality and its external world and now passing 
away, they are doomed to suffer every moment from the 
changes that follow one after another, and finally are doomed 
to ruin. 

• • * 

Then Mahamati asked the Blessed One, saying: Tell us. 
Blessed One, how all things can be empty, un-bom, and have 
no self-nature, so that we may be awakened and quickly realise 
highest enlightenment? 

The Blessed One replied: What is emptiness, indeedl It is 
a term whose very self-nature is false-imagination, but because 
of one’s attachment to false-imagination we are obliged to talk 
of emptiness, no-birth, and no-self-nature. There are seven 
kinds of emptiness: emptiness of mutuality which is non-exist- 
ence; emptiness of individual marks; emptiness of self-nature; 
emptiness of no-work; emptiness of work; emptiness of all 
things in the sense that they are unpredicable; and emptiness 
in its highest sense of Ultimate Reality. 

By the emptiness of mutuality which is non-existence is* 
meant that when a thing is missing here, one speaks of its be- 
ing empty here. For instance: in the lecture hall of Mrigarama 
there are no elephants present, nor bulls, nor sheep; but as to 
monks there are many present. We can rightly speak of the 
hall as being empty as far as animals are concerned. It is not 
asserted that the lecture hall is empty of its own characteristics, 
or that the monks are empty of that which makes up their 
monkhood, nor that in some other place there are no elephants, 
bulls, nor sheep to be found. In this case we are speaking of 
things in their aspect of individuality and generality, but from 
the point of view of mutuality some things do not exist some- 
where. This is the lowest form of emptiness and is to be sed- 
ulously put away. 

By emptiness of individual marks is meant that all things 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


295 


have no distinguishing marks of individuality and generality. 
Because of mutual relations and interactions things are super- 
ficially discriminated but when they are further and more care- 
fully investigated and analysed they are seen to be non-existent 
and nothing as to individuality and generality can be predicated 
of them. Thus when individual marks can no longer be seen, 
ideas of self, otherness and bothness, no longer hold good. So 
it must be said that all things are empty of self-marks. 

By emptiness of self-nature is meant that all things in their 
self-nature are un-bom; therefore, is it said that Slings are 
empty as to self-nature. By emptiness of no-work is meant that 
the aggregate of elements that makes up personality and its 
external world is Nirvana itself and from the beginning there is 
no activity in them; therefore, one speaks of the emptiness of 
no-work. By emptiness of work is meant that the aggregates 
being devoid of an ego and its belongings, go on functioning 
automatically as there is mutual conjunction of causes and con- 
ditions; thus one speaks of the emptiness of work. By empti- 
ness of all things in the sense that they are unpredicable is 
meant that, as the very nature of false-imagination is inexpres- 
sible, so all things are unpredicable, and, therefore, are empty in 
that sense. By emptiness in its highest sense of the emptiness 
of Ultimate Reality is meant that in the attainment of inner 
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom there is no trace of habit- 
energy generated by erroneous conceptions; thus one speaks 
of the highest emptiness of Ultimate Reality. 

When things are examined by right knowledge there are no 
signs obtainable which would characterise them with marks of 
individuality and generality, therefore, they are said to have no 
self-nature. Because these signs of individuality and generality 
are seen both as existing and yet are known to be non-existent, 
are seen as going out and yet are known not to be going out, 
they are never annihilated. Why is this true? For this reason; 
because the individual signs that should make up the self-na- 
ture of all things are non-existent. Again in their self-nature 
things are both eternal and non-eternal. Things are not eternal 
because the marks of individuality appear and disappear, that 
is, the marks of self-nature are characterised by non-etemality. 
On the other hand, because things are un-bom and are only 
mind-made, they are in a deep sense eternal. That is, things 
are eternal because of their very non-etemality. 



296 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

Further, besides understanding the emptiness of all things 
both in regard to substance and seif-nature, it is necessary for 
Bodhisattvas to clearly understand that all things are un-bom. 
It is not asserted that things are not born in a superficial sense, 
but that in a deep sense they are not bom of themselves. All 
that can be said, is this, that relatively speaking, there is a con- 
stant stream of becoming, a momentary and uninterrupted 
change from one state of appearance to another. When it is 
recognised that the world as it presents itself is no more than 
a manifestation of mind, then birth is seen as no-birth and all 
existing objects, concerning which discrimination asserts that 
they are and are not, are non-existent and, therefore, un-bom; 
being devoid of agent and action things are un-born. 

If things are not born of being and non-being, but are 
simply manifestations of mind itself, they have no reality, no 
self-nature: — they are like the horns of a hare, a horse, a don- 
key, a camel. But the ignorant and the simple-minded, who 
are given over to their false and erroneous imaginings, discrimi- 
nate things where they are not. To the ignorant the character- 
istic marks of the self-nature of body-property-and-abode seem 
to be fundamental and rooted in the very nature of the mind 
itself, so they discriminate their multitudinousness and become 
attached to them. 

There are two kinds of attachment: attachment to objects 
as having self-nature, and attachment to words as having self- 
nature. The first takes place by not knowing that the external 
world is only a manifestation of the mind itself; and the second 
arises from one’s clinging to words and names by reason of 
habit-energy. In the teaching of no-birth, causation is out of 
place because, seeing that all things are like maya and a dream, 
one does not discriminate individual signs. That all things are 
un-bom and have no self-nature because they are like maya 
is asserted to meet the thesis of the philosophers that birth is 
by causation. They foster the notion that the birth of all things 
is derived from the concept of being and non-being, and fail 
to regard it as it truly is, — as caused by attachment to the 
multitudinousness which arises from discriminations of the min d 
itself. 

Those who believe in the birth of something that has never 
been in existence and, coming into existence, vanishes away, 
are obliged to assert that things come to exist and vanish away 



the lank avatar a scripture 


297 


by causation — such people find no foothold in my teachings. 
When it is realised that there is nothing born, and nothing 
passes away, then there is no way to admit being and non- 
being, and the mind becomes quiescent. 

# # # 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: The philosophers 
declare that the world rises from causal agencies according to 
a law of causation; they state that their cause is unborn and 
is not to be annihilated. They mention nine primary elements: 
Ishvara the Creator, the Creation, atoms, etc., which being ele- 
mentary are unborn and not to be annihilated. The Blessed 
One, while teaching that all things are un-born and that there 
is no annihilation, also declares that the world takes its rise 
from ignorance, discrimination, attachment, deed, etc., working 
according to a law of causation. Though the two sets of ele- 
ments may differ in form and name, there does not appear to 
be any essential difference between the two positions. If there 
is anything that is distinctive and superior in the Blessed One's 
teaching, pray tell us, Blessed One, what it is? 

The Blessed One replied: My teaching of no-birth and no- 
annihilation is not like that of the philosophers, nor is it like 
their doctrine of birth and impermanency. That to which the 
philosophers ascribe the characteristic of no-birth and no-anni- 
hilation is the self-nature of all things, which causes them to 
fall into the dualism of being and non-being. My teaching 
transcends the whole conception of being and non-being; it has 
nothing to do with birth, abiding and destruction; nor with 
existence and non-existence. I teach that the multitudinousness 
of objects have no reality in themselves but are only seen of 
the mind and, therefore, are of the nature of maya and a 
dream. I teach the non-existence of things because they carry 
no signs of any inherent self-nature. It is true that in one 
sense they are seen and discriminated by the senses as individ- 
ualised objects; but in another sense, because of the absence of 
any characteristic marks of self-nature, they are not seen but 
are only imagined. In one sense they are graspable, but in an- 
other sense, they are not graspable. 

When it is clearly understood that there is nothing in the 
world but what is seen of the mind itself, discrimination no 
more rises, and the wise are established in their true abode 



298 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

which is the realm of quietude. The ignorant discriminate and 
work trying to adjust themselves to external conditions, and are 
constantly perturbed in mind; unrealities are imagined and dis- 
criminated, while realities are unseen and ignored. It is not so 
with the wise. To illustrate: What the ignorant see is like the 
magically-created city of the Gandharvas, where children are 
shown streets and houses, and phantom merchants, and people 
going in and coming out. This imaginary city with its streets 
and houses and people going in and coming out, are not 
thought of as being born or being annihilated, because in their 
case there is no question as to their existence or non-existence. 
In like manner, I teach, that there is nothing made nor un- 
made; that there is nothing that has connection with birth 
and destruction except as the ignorant cherish falsely imagined 
notions as to the reality of the external world. When objects 
are not seen and judged as they truly are in themselves, there 
is discrimination and clinging to the notions of being and non- 
being, and individualised self-nature, and as long as these no- 
tions of individuality and self-nature persist, the philosophers 
are bound to explain the external world by a law of causation. 
This position raises the question of a first cause which the 
philosophers meet by asserting that their first cause, Ishvara 
and the primal elements, are un-born and un-annihilate; 
which position is without evidence and is irrational. 

Ignorant people and worldly philosophers cherish a kind of 
no-birth, but it is not the no-birth which I teach. I teach the 
un-bornness of the un-born essence of all things which teaching 
is established in the minds of the wise by their self-realisation 
of Noble Wisdom. A ladle, clay, a vessel, a wheel, or seeds, or 
elements — these are external conditions; ignorance, discrimina- 
tion, attachment, habit, karma, — these are inner conditions. 
When this entire universe is regarded as concatenation and as 
nothing else but concatenation, then the mind, by its patient 
acceptance of the truth that all things are un-bom, gains 
tranquillity. 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


*99 


Chapter IV 

Perfect Knowledge, or Knowledge of 
Reality 

Then Mahamati asked the Blessed One: Pray tell ns. 
Blessed One, about the five Dharmas, so that we may fully 
understand Perfect Knowledge? 

The Blessed One replied: The five Dharmas are: appear- 
ance, name, discrimination, right-knowledge and Reality. By 
appearance is meant that which reveals itself to the senses and 
to the discriminating-mind and is perceived as form, sound, 
odour, taste, and touch. Out of these appearances ideas are 
formed, such as clay, water, jar, etc., by which one says: this 
is such and such a thing and is no other, — this is name. When 
appearances are contrasted and names compared, as when we 
say: this is an elephant, this is a horse, a cart, a pedestrian, a 
man, a woman, or, this is mind and what belongs to it, — the 
things thus named are said to be discriminated. As these dis- 
criminations come to be seen as mutually conditioning, as empty 
of self-substance, as un-born, and thus come to be seen as they 
truly are, that is, as manifestations of the mind itself, — this is 
right-knowledge. By it the wise cease to regard appearances 
and names as realities. 

When appearances and names are put away and all discrimi- 
nation ceases, that which remains is the true and essential na- 
ture of things and, as nothing can be predicated as to the na- 
ture of essence, it is called the “Suchness” of Reality. This 
universal, undifferentiated, inscrutable, “Suchness” is the only 
Reality but it is variously characterised as Truth, Mind-essence, 
Transcendental Intelligence, Noble Wisdom, etc. This Dharma 
of the imagelessness of the Essence-nature of Ultimate Reality 
is the Dharma which has been proclaimed by all the Buddhas, 
and when all things are understood in full agreement with it, 
one is in possession of Perfect Knowledge, and is on his way 
to the attainment of the Transcendental Intelligence of the 
Tathagatas. 

# # * 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: Are the three 
self-natures, of things, ideas, and Reality, to be considered as 



300 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


included in the Five Dharmas, or as having their own charac- 
teristics complete in themselves. 

The Blessed One replied: The three self-natures, the eight- 
fold mind-system, and the twofold egolessness are all included 
in the Five Dharmas. The self-natures of things, of ideas, and 
of the sixfold mind-system, correspond with the Dharmas of 
appearance, name and discrimination; the self-nature of Uni- 
versal Mind and Reality corresponds to the Dharmas of right- 
knowledge and “Suchness.” 

By becoming attached to what is seen of the mind itself, 
there is an activity awakened which is perpetuated by habit- 
energy that becomes manifest in the mind-system. From the 
activities of the mind-system there rises the notion of an ego- 
soul and its belongings; the discriminations, attachments, and 
notion of an ego-soul, rising simultaneously like the sun and 
its rays of light. 

By the egolessness of things is meant that the elements that 
make up the aggregates of personality and its objective world 
being characterised by the nature of maya and destitute of any- 
thing that can be called ego-substance, are therefore un-bom 
and have no self-nature. How can things be said to have an 
ego-soul? By the egolessness of persons is meant that in the 
aggregates that make up personality there is no ego-substance, 
nor anything that is like ego-substance nor that belongs to it. 
The mind-system, which is the most characteristic mark of per- 
sonality, originated in ignorance, discrimination, desire and 
deed; and its activities are perpetuated by perceiving, grasping 
and becoming attached to objects as if they were real. The mem- 
ory of these discriminations, desires, attachments and deeds is 
stored in Universal Mind since beginningless time, and is still 
being accumulated where it conditions the appearance of per- 
sonality and its environment and brings about constant change 
and destruction from moment to moment. The manifestations 
are like a river, a seed, a lamp, a cloud, the wind; Universal 
mind in its voraciousness to store up everything, is like a mon- 
key never at rest, like a fly ever in search of food and without 
partiality, like a fire that is never satisfied, like a water-lifting 
machine that goes on rolling. Universal mind as defiled by 
habit-energy is like a magician that causes phantom things and 
people to appear and move about. A thorough understanding 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 301 

of these things is necessary to an understanding of the egoless- 
ness of persons. 

There are four kinds of Knowledge: Appearance-knowledge, 
relative-knowledge, perfect-knowledge, and Transcendental In- 
telligence. Appearance-knowledge belongs to the ignorant and 
simple-minded who are addicted to the notion of being and 
non-being, and who are frightened at the thought of being un- 
born. It is produced by the concordance of the triple combina- 
tion and attaches itself to the multiplicities of objects; it is 
characterised by attainability and accumulation; it is subject to 
birth and destruction. Appearance-knowledge belongs to word- 
mongers who revel in discriminations, assertions and negations. 

Relative-knowledge belongs to the mind-world of the philos- 
ophers. It rises from the mind’s ability to consider the rela- 
tions which appearances bear to each other and to the mind 
considering them, it rises from the mind’s ability to arrange, 
combine and analyse these relations by its powers of discursive 
logic and imagination, by reason of which it is able to peer 
into the meaning and significance of things. 

Perfect-knowledge belongs to the world of the Bodhisattvas 
who recognise that all things are but manifestations of mind; 
who clearly understand the emptiness, the un-bomness, the ego- 
lessness of all things; and who have entered into an under- 
standing of the Five Dharmas, the twofold egolessness, and into 
the truth of imagelessness. Perfect-knowledge differentiates the 
Bodhisattva stages, and is the pathway and the entrance into 
the exalted state of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 

Perfect-knowledge (jnana ) belongs to the Bodhisattvas who 
are entirely free from the dualisms of being and non-being, no- 
birth and no-annihilation, all assertions and negations, and who, 
by reason of self-realisation, have gained an insight into the 
truths of egolessness and imagelessness. They no longer dis- 
criminate the world as subject to causation: they regard the 
causation that rules the world as something like the fabled city 
of the Gandharvas. To them the world is like a vision and a 
dream, it is like the birth and death of a barren-woman’s child; 
to them there is nothing evolving and nothing disappearing. 

The wise who cherish Perfect-knowledge, may be divided 
into three classes: disciples, masters and Arhats. Common dis- 
ciples are separated from masters as common disciples continue 



302 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


to cherish the notion of individuality and generality; masters 
rise from common disciples when, forsaking the error of indi- 
viduality and generality, they still ding to the notion of an 
ego-soul by reason of which they go off by themselves into 
retirement and solitude. Arhats rise when the error of all dis- 
crimination is realised. Error being discriminated by the wise 
turns into Truth by virtue of the “turning-about” that takes 
place within the deepest consciousness. Mind, thus emancipated, 
enters into perfect self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 

But, Mahamati, if you assert that there is such a thing as 
Noble Wisdom, it no longer holds good, because anything of 
which something is asserted thereby partakes of the nature of 
being and is thus characterised with the quality of birth. The 
very assertion: “All things are un-born” destroys the truthful- 
ness of it. The same is true of the statements: “All things are 
empty,” and “All things have no self-nature,” — both are un- 
tenable when put in the form of assertions. But when it is 
pointed out that all things are like a dream and a vision, it 
means that in one way things are perceived, and in another 
way they are not perceived; that is, in ignorance they are per- 
ceived but in Perfect-knowledge they are not perceived. All as- 
sertions and negations being thought-constructions are un-bom. 
Even the assertion that Universal Mind and Noble Wisdom are 
Ultimate Reality, is thought construction and, therefore, is un- 
born. As “things” there is no Universal Mind, there is no 
Noble Wisdom, there is no Ultimate Reality. The insight of 
the wise who move about in the realm of imagelessness and its 
solitude is pure. That is, for the wise all “things” are wiped 
away and even the state of imagelessness ceases to exist. 


Chapter V 
The Mind System 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: Pray tell us. 
Blessed One, what is meant by the mind ( citta )? 

The Blessed One replied: All things of this world, be they 
seemingly good or bad, faulty or faultless, effect-producing or 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 303 

not effect-producing, receptive or non-receptive, may be divided 
into two classes: evil out-flowings and the non out-flowing 
good. The five grasping elements that make up the aggregates 
of personality, namely, form, sensation, perception, discrimina- 
tion, and consciousness, and that are imagined to be good and 
bad, have their rise in the habit-energy of the mind-system, — 
they are the evil out-flowings of life. The spiritual attainments 
and the joys of the Samadhis and the fruitage of the Samapat- 
tis that come to the wise through their self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom and that culminate in their return and participation in 
the relations of the triple world are called the non out-flowing 
good. 

The mind-system which is the source of the evil out-flowings 
consists of the five sense-organs and their accompanying sense- 
minds (vijnanas) all of which are unified in the discriminating- 
mind ( manovijnana ). There is an unending succession of sense- 
concepts flowing into this discriminating or thinking-mind which 
combines them and discriminates them and passes judgment 
upon them as to their goodness or badness. Then follows 
aversion to or desire for them and attachment and deed; thus 
the entire system moves on continuously and closely bound to- 
gether. But it fails to see and understand that what it sees 
and discriminates and grasps is only a manifestation of its own 
activity and has no other basis, and so the mind goes on er- 
roneously perceiving and discriminating differences of forms and 
qualities, not remaining still even for a minute. 

In the mind-system there are three modes of activity dis- 
tinguishable: the sense-minds functioning while remaining in 
their original nature, the sense-minds as producing effects, and 
the sense-minds as evolving. By normal functioning the sense- 
minds grasp appropriate elements of their external world, by 
which sensation and perception arise at once and by degrees in 
every sense-organ and every sense-mind, in the pores of the 
skin, and even in the atoms that make up the body, by which 
the whole field is apprehended like a mirror reflecting objects, 
and not realising that the external world itself is only a mani- 
festation of mind. The second mode of activity produces effects 
by which these sensations react on the discriminating mind to 
produce perceptions, attractions, aversions, grasping, deed and 
habit. The third mode of activity has to do with the growth, 
development and passing of the mind-system, that is, the mind- 



304 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

system is in subjection to its own habit-energy accumulated 
from beginningless time, as for instance: the “eyeness” in the 
eye that predisposes it to grasp and become attached to multi- 
ple forms and appearances. In this way the activities of the 
evolving mind-system by reason of its habit-energy stirs up 
waves of objectivity on the face of Universal Mind which in 
turn conditions the activities and evolvement of the mind-sys- 
tem. Appearances, perception, attraction, grasping, deed, habit, 
reaction, condition one another incessantly, and the functioning 
sense-minds, the discriminating-mind and Universal Mind are 
thus bound up together. Thus, by reason of discrimination of 
that which by nature is maya-like and unreal false-imagination 
and erroneous reasoning takes place, action follows and its 
habit-energy accumulates thereby defiling the pure face of Uni- 
versal Mind, and as a result the mind-system comes into func- 
tioning and the physical body has its genesis. But the discrimi- 
nating-mind has no thought that by its discriminations and at- 
tachments it is conditioning the whole body and so the sense- 
minds and the discriminating-mind go on mutually related and 
mutually conditioned in a most intimate manner and building 
up a world of representations out of the activities of its own 
imagination. As a mirror reflects forms, the perceiving senses 
perceive appearances which the discriminating-mind gathers to- 
gether and proceeds to discriminate, to name and become at- 
tached to. Between these two functions there is no gap, never- 
theless, they are mutually conditioning. The perceiving senses 
grasp that for which they have an affinity, and there is a trans- 
formation takes place in their structure by reason of which the 
mind proceeds to combine, discriminate, apprise, and act; then 
follows habit-energy and the establishing of the mind and its 
continuance. 

The discriminating-mind because of its capacity to discrimi- 
nate, judge, select and reason about, is also called the think- 
ing, or intellectual-mind. There are three divisions of its 
mental activity: mentation which functions in connection with 
attachment to objects and ideas, mentation that functions in 
connection with general ideas, and mentation that examines 
into the validity of these general ideas. The mentation which 
functions in connection with attachment to objects and ideas 
derived from discrimination, discriminates the mind from its 
mental processes and, accepts the ideas from it as being real 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


3°r> 

and becomes attached to them. A variety of false judgments 
are thus arrived at as to being, multiplicity, individuality, value, 
etc., a strong grasping takes place which is perpetuated by 
habit-energy and thus discrimination goes on asserting itself. 

These mental processes give rise to general conceptions of 
warmth, fluidity, motility, and solidity, as characterising the 
objects of discrimination, while the tenacious holding to these 
general ideas gives rise to proposition, reason, definition, and 
illustration, all of which lead to the assertions of relative knowl- 
edge and the establishment of confidence in birth, self-nature, 
and -an ego-soul. 

By mentation as an examining function is meant the intel- 
lectual act of examining into these general conclusions as to 
their validity, significance, and truthfulness. This is the faculty 
that leads to understanding, right-knowledge and points the 
way to self-realisation. 

# # # 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: Pray tell us. 
Blessed One, what relation ego-personality bears to the mind- 
system? 

The Blessed One replied: To explain it, it is first necessary 
to speak of the self-nature of the five grasping aggregates that 
make up personality, although as I have already shown they 
are empty, un-born, and without self-nature. These five grasp- 
ing aggregates are: form, sensation, perception, discrimination, 
consciousness. Of these, form belongs to what is made of the 
so-called primary elements, whatever they may be. The four 
remaining aggregates are without form and ought not to be 
reckoned as four, because they merge imperceptibly into one 
another. They are like space which cannot be numbered; it is 
only due to imagination that they are discriminated and likened 
to space. Because things are endowed with appearances* of be- 
ing, characteristic-marks, perceivableness, abode, work, one can 
say that they are bom of effect-producing causes, but this can 
not be said of these four intangible aggregates for they are 
without form and marks. These four mental aggregates that 
make up personality are beyond calculability, they are beyond 
the four propositions, they are not to be predicated as existing 
nor as not existing, but together they constitute what is known 
as mortal-mind. They are even more maya-like and dream-like 



3 o6 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


than are things, nevertheless, as discriminating mortal-mind they 
obstruct the self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. But it is only 
by the ignorant that they are enumerated and thought of as 
an ego-personality; the wise do not do so. This discrimination 
of the five aggregates that make up personality and that serve 
as a basis for an ego-soul and ground for its desires and self- 
interests must be given up, and in its place the truth of im- 
agelessness and solitude should be established. 

* * # 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Pray tell us. 
Blessed One, about Universal Mind and its relation to the 
lower mind-system? 

The Blessed One replied: The sense-minds and their cen- 
tralised discriminating-mind are related to the external world 
which is a manifestation of itself and is given over to perceiv- 
ing, discriminating, and grasping its maya-like appearances. 
Universal Mind ( Alaya-vijnana ) transcends all individuation 
and limits. Universal Mind is thoroughly pure in its essential 
nature, subsisting unchanged and free from faults of imper- 
manence, undisturbed by egoism, unruffled by distinctions, de- 
sires and aversions. Universal Mind is like a great ocean, its 
surface ruffled by waves and surges but its depths remaining 
forever unmoved. In itself it is devoid of personality and all 
that belongs to it, but by reason of the defilement upon its 
face it is like an actor and plays a variety of parts, among 
which a mutual functioning takes place and the mind-system 
arises. The principle of intellection becomes divided and mind, 
the functions of mind, the evil out-flowings of mind, take on 
individuation. The sevenfold gradation of mind appears: 
namely, intuitive self-realisation, thinking-desiring-discriminat- 
ing, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, touching, and all their 
interactions and reactions take their rise. 

The discriminating-mind is the cause of the sense-minds and 
is their support and with them is kept functioning as it de- 
scribes and becomes attached to a world of objects, and then, 
by means of its habit-energy, it defiles the face of Universal 
Mind. Thus Universal Mind becomes the storage and clearing 
house of all the accumulated products of mentation and action 
since beginningless time. 

Between Universal Mind and the individual discriminating- 



THE LANKA VAT ARA SCRIPTURE 


3<>7 


mind is the intuitive-mind ( manas ) which is dependent upon 
Universal Mind for its cause and support and enters into rela- 
tions with both. It partakes of the universality of Universal 
Mind, shares its purity, and like it, is above form and momenta- 
riness. It is through the intuitive-mind that the good non-out- 
flowings emerge, are manifested and are realised. Fortunate 
it is that intuition is not momentary for if the enlightenment 
which comes by intuition were momentary the wise would 
lose their “wiseness” which they do not. But the intuitive-mind 
enters into relations with the lower mind-system, shares its 
experiences and reflects upon its activities. 

Intuitive-mind is one with Universal Mind by reason of its 
participation in Transcendental Intelligence ( Arya-jnana ), and 
is one with the mind-system by its comprehension of different- 
iated knowledge (vijnana). Intuitive-mind has no body of its 
own nor any marks by which it can be differentiated. Uni- 
versal Mind is its cause and support but it is evolved along 
with the notion of an ego and what belongs to it, to which it 
clings and upon which it reflects. Through intuitive-mind, by 
the faculty of intuition which is a mingling of both identity 
and perceiving, the inconceivable wisdom of Universal Mind is 
revealed and made realisable. Like Universal Mind it can not 
be the source of error. 

The discriminating-mind is a dancer and a magician with 
the objective world as his stage. Intuitive-mind is the wise 
jester who travels with the magician and reflects upon his emp- 
tiness and transiency. Universal Mind keeps the record and 
knows what must be and what may be. It is because of the 
activities of the discriminating-mind that error rises and an ob- 
jective world evolves and the notion of an ego-soul becomes 
established. If and when the discriminating-mind can be gotten 
rid of, the whole mind-system will cease to function and Uni- 
versal Mind will alone remain. Getting rid of the discriminat- 
ing-mind removes the cause of all error. 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Pray tell us. 
Blessed One, what is meant by the cessation of the mind- 
system? 

The Blessed One replied: The five sense-functions and their 
discriminating and thinking function have their risings and 



308 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

complete endings from moment to moment. They are born 
with discrimination as cause, with form and appearance and 
objectivity closely linked together as condition. The will-to-live 
is the mother, ignorance is the father. By setting up names 
and forms greed is multiplied and thus the mind goes on mutu- 
ally conditioning and being conditioned. By becoming attached 
to names and forms, not realising that they have no more basis 
than the activities of the mind itself, error rises, false-imagina- 
tion as to pleasure and pain rises, and the way to emancipation 
is blocked. The lower system of sense-minds and the discrimi- 
nating-mind do not really suffer pleasure and pain — they only 
imagine they do. Pleasure and pain are the deceptive reactions 
of mortal-mind as it grasps an imaginary objective world. 

There are two ways in which the ceasing of the mind-system 
may take place: as regards form, and as regards continuation. 
The sense-organs function as regards form by the interaction of 
form, contact and grasping; and they cease to function when 
this contact is broken. As regards continuation, — when these 
interactions of form, contact and grasping cease, there is no 
more continuation of the seeing, hearing and other sense func- 
tions; with the ceasing of these sense functions, the discrimina- 
tions, graspings and attachments of the discriminating-mind 
cease; and with their ceasing act and deed and their habit- 
energy cease, and there is no more accumulation of karma-de- 
filement on the face of Universal Mind. 

If the evolving mortal-mind were of the same nature as 
Universal Mind the cessation of the lower mind-system would 
mean the cessation of Universal Mind, but they are different 
for Universal Mind is not the cause of mortal-mind. There is 
no cessation of Universal Mind in its pure and essence-nature. 
What ceases to function is not Universal Mind in its essence- 
nature, but is the cessation of the effect-producing defilements 
upon its face that have been caused by the accumulation of the 
habit-energy of the activities of the discriminating and thinking 
mortal-mind. There is no cessation of Divine Mind which, in 
itself, is the abode of Reality and the Womb of Truth. 

By the cessation of the sense-minds is meant, not the ces- 
sation of their perceiving functions, but the cessation of their 
discriminating and naming activities which are centralised in 
the discriminating mortal-mind. By the cessation of the mind- 
system as a whole is meant, the cessation of discrimination, the 



the lankavatara scripture 


3°9 

clearing away of the various attachments, and, therefore, the 
clearing away of the defilements of habit-energy in the face of 
Universal Mind which have been accumulating since beginning- 
less time by reason of these discriminations, attachments, erron- 
eous reasonings, and following acts. The cessation of the con- 
tinuation aspect of the mind-system as a whole, takes place 
when there is the cessation of that which supports the mind- 
system, namely, the discriminating mortal-mind. With the ces- 
sation of mortal-mind the entire world of maya and desire dis- 
appears. Getting rid of the discriminating mortal-mind is 
Nirvana. 

But the cessation of the discriminating-mind can not take 
place until there has been a "turning-about” in the deepest 
seat of consciousness. The mental habit of looking outward by 
the discriminating-mind upon an external objective world must 
be given up, and a new habit of realising Truth within the in- 
tuitive-mind by becoming one with Truth itself must be estab- 
lished. Until this intuitive self-realisation of Noble Wisdom is 
attained, the evolving mind-system will go on. But when an 
insight into the five Dharmas, the three self-natures, and the 
twofold egolessness is attained, then the way will be opened 
for this “turning-about” to take place. With the ending of 
pleasure and pain, of conflicting ideas, of the disturbing inter- 
ests of egoism, a state of tranquillisation will be attained in 
which the truths of emancipation will be fully understood and 
there will be no further evil out-flowings of the mind-system 
to interfere with the perfect self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 


Chapter VI 

Transcendental Intelligence 

Then said Mahamati: Pray tell us, Blessed One, what con- 
stitutes T ranscendental Intelligence? 

The Blessed One replied: Transcendental Intelligence is the 
inner state of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. It is realised 
suddenly and intuitively as the "turning-about” takes place in 
the deepest seat of consciousness; it neither enters nor goes 
out — it is like the moon seen in water. Transcendental Intelli- 



3 io SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


gence is not subject to birth nor destruction; it has nothing to 
do with combination nor concordance; it is devoid of attach- 
ment and accumulation; it transcends all dualistic conceptions. 

When Transcendental Intelligence is considered, four things 
must be kept in mind: words, meanings, teachings and Noble 
Wisdom (Arya-prajna). Words are employed to express mean- 
ings but they are dependent upon discriminations and memory 
as cause, and upon the employment of sounds or letters by 
which a mutual transference of meaning is possible. Words 
are only symbols and may or may not clearly and fully ex- 
press the meaning intended and, moreover, words may be un- 
derstood quite differently from what was intended by the 
speaker. Words are neither different nor not different from 
meaning and meaning stands in the same relation to words. 

If meaning is different from words it could not be made 
manifest by means of words; but meaning is illumined by words 
as things are by a lamp. Words are just like a man carrying 
a lamp to look for his property, by which he can say: this is 
my property. Just so, by means of words and speech originat- 
ing in discrimination, the Bodhisattva can enter into the mean- 
ing of the teachings of the Tathagatas and through the meaning 
he can enter into the exalted state of self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom, which, in itself, is free from word discrimination. 
But if a man becomes attached to the literal meaning of words 
and holds fast to the illusion that words and meaning are in 
agreement, especially in such things as Nirvana which is un- 
born and un-dying, or as to distinctions of the Vehicles, the 
five Dharmas, the three self-natures, then he will fail to under- 
stand the true meaning and will become entangled in assertions 
and refutations. Just as varieties of objects are seen and dis- 
criminated in dreams and in visions, so ideas and statements are 
discriminated erroneously and error goes on multiplying. 

The ignorant and simple-minded declare that meaning is 
not otherwise than words, that as words are, so is meaning. 
They think that as meaning has no body of its own that it 
cannot be different from words and, therefore, declare meaning 
to be identical with words. In this they are ignorant of the 
nature of words, which are subject to birth and death, whereas 
meaning is not; words are dependent upon letters and meaning 
is not; meaning is apart from existence and non-existence, it 
has no substratum, it is un-born. The Tathagatas do hot teach 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


8 “ 


a Dharma that is dependent upon letters. Anyone who teaches 
a doctrine that is dependent upon letters and words is a mere 
| prattler, because Truth is beyond letters and words and books. 

This does not mean that words and books never declare 
what is in conformity with meaning and truth, but it means 
that words and books are dependent upon discriminations, while 
meaning and truth are not; moreover, words and books are sub- 
ject to the interpretation of individual minds, while meaning 
and truth are not. But if Truth is not expressed in words and 
' books, the scriptures which contain the meaning of Truth would 

| disappear, and when the scriptures disappear there will be no 

more disciples and masters and Bodhisattvas and Buddhas, and 
there will be nothing to teach. But no on^ must become at- 
tached to the words of the scriptures because even the canonical 
texts sometimes deviate from their straightforward course owing 
. to the imperfect functioning of sentient minds. Religious dis- 

! courses are given by myself and other Tathagatas in response 

I to the varying needs and faiths of all manner of beings, in 

j order to free them from dependence upon the thinking function 

1 of the mind-system, but they are not given to take the place 

: of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. When there is recognition 

j that there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the mind 

itself, all dualistic discriminations will be discarded and the 
truth of imagelessness will be understood, and will be seen to 
be in conformity with meaning rather than with words and let- 
j ters. 

The ignorant and simple-minded being fascinated with their 
; self-imaginations and erroneous reasonings, keep on dancing and 

j leaping about, but are unable to understand the discourse by 

| words about the truth of self-realisation, much less are they 

able to understand the Truth itself. Clinging to the external 
world, they cling to the study of books which are a means only, 
and do not know properly how to ascertain the truth of self- 
realisation, which is Truth unspoiled by the four propositions. 
Self-realisation is an exalted state of inner attainment which 
transcends all dualistic thinking and which is above the mind- 
system with its logic, reasoning, theorising, and illustrations. 
The Tathagatas discourse to the ignorant, but sustain the Bod- 
hisattvas as they seek self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 

Therefore, let every disciple take good heed not to become 
j attached to words as being in perfect conformity with meaning, 



3 12 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

because Truth is not in the letters. When a man with his 
finger-tip points to something to somebody, the finger-tip may 
be mistaken for the thing pointed at; in like manner the ig- 
norant and simple-minded, like children, are unable even to 
the day of their death to abandon the idea that in the finger- 
tip of words there is the meaning itself. They cannot realise 
Ultimate Reality because of their intent clinging to words 
which were intended to be no more than a pointing finger. 
Words and their discrimination bind one to the dreary round 
of rebirths into the world of birth-and-death; meaning stands 
alone and is a guide to Nirvana. Meaning is attained by much 
learning, and much learning is attained by becoming conver- 
sant with meaning and not with words; therefore, let seekers 
for truth reverently approach those who are wise and avoid the 
sticklers for particular words. 

As for teachings: there are priests and popular preachers 
who are given to ritual and ceremony and who are skilled in 
various incantations and in the art of eloquence; they should 
not be honored nor reverently attended upon, for what one 
gains from them is emotional excitement and worldly enjoy- 
ment; it is not the Dharma. Such preachers, by their clever 
manipulation of words and phrases and various reasonings and 
incantations, being the mere prattle of a child, as far as one 
can make out and not at all in accordance with truth nor in 
unison with meaning, only serves to awaken sentiment and 
emotion, while it stupefies the mind. As he himself does not 
understand the meaning of all things, he only confuses the 
minds of his hearers with his dualistic views. Not understand- 
ing himself, that there is nothing but what is seen of the mind, 
and himself attached to the notion of self-nature in external 
things, and unable to know one path from another, he has no 
deliverance to offer others. Thus these priests and popular 
preachers who are clever in various incantations and skilled in 
the art of eloquence, themselves never being emancipated from 
such calamities as birth, old age, disease, sorrow, lamentation, 
pain and despair, lead the ignorant into bewilderment by means 
of their various words, phrases, examples, and conclusions. 

Then there are the materialistic philosophers. No respect nor 
service is to be shown them because their teachings, though 
they may be explained by using hundreds of thousands of words 
and phrases, do not go beyond the concerns of this world and 


THE LANKA VATARA SCRIPTURE 


3!3 


this body and in the end they lead to suffering. As the ma- 
terialists recognise no truth as existing by itself, they are split 
up into many schools, each of which clings to its own way of 
reasoning. 

But there is that which does not belong to materialism and 
which is not reached by the knowledge of the philosophers who 
cling to false-discriminations and erroneous reasonings because 
they fail to see that, fundamentally, there is no reality in ex- 
ternal objects. When it is recognised that there is nothing be- 
yond what is seen of the mind itself, the discrimination of be- 
ing and non-being ceases and, as there is thus no external 
world as the object of perception, nothing remains but the soli- 
tude of Reality. This does not belong to the materialistic phi- 
losophers, it is the domain of the Tathagatas. If such things are 
imagined as the coming and going of the mind-system, vanish- 
ing and appearing, solicitation, attachment, intense affection, a 
philosophic hypothesis, a theory, an abode, a sense-concept, 
atomic attraction, organism, growth, thirst, grasping, — these 
things belong to materialism, they are not mine. These are 
things that are the object of worldly interest, to be sensed, 
handled and tasted; these are the things that attract one, that 
bind one to the external world; these are the things that ap- 
pear in the elements that make up the aggregates of personal- 
ity where, owing to the procreative force of lust, there arise all 
kinds of disaster, birth, sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, dis- 
ease, old age, death. All these things concern worldly interests 
and enjoyment; they lie along the path of the philosophers, 
which is not the path of the Dharma. When the true egoless- 
ness of things and persons is understood, discrimination ceases 
to assert itself; the lower mind-system ceases to function; the 
various Bodhisattva stages are followed one after another; the 
Bodhisattva is able to utter his ten inexhaustible vows and is 
anointed by all the Buddhas. The Bodhisattva becomes master 
of himself and of all things by virtue of a life of spontaneous 
and radiant effortlessness. Thus the Dharma, which is Tran- 
scendental Intelligence, transcends all discriminations, all false- 
reasonings, all philosophical systems, all dualism. 

* * * 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: In the Scriptures 
mention is made of the Womb of T athagatahood and it is 



3H SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


taught that that which is bom of it is by nature bright and 
pure, originally unspotted and endowed with the thirty-two 
marks of excellence. As it is described it is a precious gem but 
wrapped in a dirty garment soiled by greed, anger, folly and 
false-imagination. We are taught that this Buddha-nature im- 
manent in every one is eternal, unchanging, auspicious. Is not 
this which is bom of the Womb of Tathagatahood the same 
as the soul-substance that is taught by the philosophers? The 
Divine Atman as taught by them is also claimed to be eternal, 
inscrutable, unchanging, imperishable. Is there, or is there not 
a difference? 

The Blessed One replied: No, Mahamati, my Womb of 
Tathagatahood is not the same as the Divine Atman as taught 
by the philosophers. What I teach is Tathagatahood in the 
sense of Dharmakaya, Ultimate Oneness, Nirvana, emptiness, 
unbornness, unqualifiedness, devoid of will-effort. The reason 
why I teach the doctrine of Tathagatahood is to cause the ig- 
norant and simple-minded to lay aside their fears as they listen 
to the teaching of egolessness and come to understand the state 
of non-discrimination and imagelessness. The religious teach- 
ings of the Tathagatas are just like a potter making various 
vessels by his own skill of hand with the aid of rod, water 
and thread, out of the one mass of clay, so the Tathagatas by 
their command of skillful means issuing from Noble Wisdom, 
by various terms, expressions, and symbols, preach the twofold 
egolessness in order to remove the last trace of discrimination 
that is preventing disciples from attaining a self-realisation of 
Nohle Wisdom. The doctrine of the Tathagata-womb is -dis- 
closed in order to awaken philosophers from their clinging to 
the notion of a Divine Atman as transcendental personality, 
so that their minds that have become attached to the imaginary 
notion of “soul” as being something self-existent, may be quickly 
awakened to a state of perfect enlightenment. All such notions 
as causation, succession, atoms, primary elements, that make 
up personality, personal soul. Supreme Spirit, Sovereign God, 
Creator, are all figments of the imagination and manifestations 
of mind. No, Mahamati, the Tathagata’s doctrine of the Womb 
of Tathagatahood is not the same as the philosopher’s Atman. 

The Bodhisattva is said to have well grasped the teachings 
of the Tathagatas when, all alone in a lonely place, by means 
of his Transcendental Intelligence, he walks the path leading 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


3i5 

to Nirvana. Thereon his mind will unfold by perceiving, think- 
ing, meditating, and, abiding in the practise of concentration 
until he attains the “turning about” at the source of habit- 
energy, he will thereafter lead a life of excellent deeds. His 
mind concentrated on the state of Buddhahood, he will become 
thoroughly conversant with the noble truth of self-realisation; 
he will become perfect master of his own mind; he will be like 
a gem radiating many colors; he will be able to assume bodies 
of transformation; he will be able to enter into the minds of 
all to help them; and, finally, by gradually ascending the stages 
he will become established in the perfect T ranscendental Intel- 
ligence of the Tathagatas. 

Nevertheless, Transcendental Intelligence ( Arya-jnana ) is 
not Noble Wisdom (Arya-prajna) itself; it is only an intuitive 
awareness of it. Noble Wisdom is a perfect state of imageless- 
ness; it is the Womb of “Suchness”; it is the all-conserving 
Divine Mind (Alaya-vijnana) which in its pure Essence forever 
abides in perfect patience and undisturbed tranquillity. 


Chapter VII 
Self-Realisation 

Then said Mahamati: Pray tell us. Blessed One, what is the 
nature of Self-realisation by reason of which we shall be able 
to attain Transcendental Intelligence? 

The Blessed One replied: T ranscendental Intelligence rises 
when the intellectual-mind reaches its limit and, if things are 
to be realised in their true and essence nature, its processes of 
mentation, which are based on particularised ideas, discrimina- 
tions and judgments, must be transcended by an appeal < to 
some higher faculty of cognition, if there be such a higher 
faculty. There is such a faculty in the intuitive-mind (Manas), 
which as we have seen is the link between the intellectual- 
mind and Universal Mind. While it is not an individualised 
organ like the intellectual-mind, it has that which is much bet- 
ter, — direct dependence upon Universal Mind. While intuition 
does not give information that can be analysed and discrimi- 



gi6 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


nated, it gives that which is far superior, — self-realisation 
through identification. 

# # # 

Mahamati then asked the Blessed One, saying: Pray tell us. 
Blessed One, what clear understandings an earnest disciple 
should have if he is to be successful in the discipline that leads 
to self-realisation? 

The Blessed One replied: There are four things by the ful- 
filling of which an earnest disciple may gain self-realisation of 
Noble Wisdom and become a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva : First, 
he must have a clear understanding that all things are only 
manifestations of the mind itself; second, he must discard the 
notion of birth, abiding and disappearance; third, he must 
clearly understand the egolessness of both things and persons; 
and fourth, he must have a true conception of what consti- 
tutes self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. Provided with these 
four understandings, earnest disciples may become Bodhisattvas 
and attain Transcendental Intelligence. 

As to the first; he must recognise and be fully convinced 
that this triple world is nothing but a complex manifestation of 
one’s mental activities; that it is devoid of selfness and its be- 
longings; that there are no strivings, no comings, no goings. 
He must recognise and accept the fact that this triple world is 
manifested and imagined as real only under the influence of 
habit-energy that has been accumulated since the beginningless 
past by reason of memory, false-imagination, false-reasoning, 
and attachments to the multiplicities of objects and reactions 
in close relationship and in conformity to ideas of body- 
property-and-abode. 

As to the second; he must recognise and be convinced that 
all things are to be regarded as forms seen in a vision and a 
dr^arn, empty of substance, un-born and without self-nature; 
that all things exist only by reason of a complicated network 
of causation .which owes its rise to discrimination and attach- 
ment and which eventuates in the rise of the mind-system and 
its belongings and evolvements. 

As to the third; he must recognise and patiently accept the 
fact that his own mind and personality is also mind-constructed, 
that it is empty of substance, unborn and egoless. With these 


THE LANKA VATARA SCRIPTURE 


3*7 

three things clearly in mind, the Bodhisattva will be able to 
enter into the truth of imagelessness. 

As to the fourth; he must have a true conception of what 
constitutes self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. First, it is not 
comparable to the perceptions attained by the sense-mind, 
neither is it comparable to the cognition of the discriminating 
and intellectual-mind. Both of these presuppose a difference 
between self and not-self and the knowledge so attained is 
characterised by individuality and generality. Self-realisation is 
based on identity and oneness; there is nothing to be discrimi- 
nated nor predicated concerning it. But to enter into it the 
Bodhisattva must be free from all presuppositions and attach- 
ments to things, ideas and selfness. 

* * * 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Pray tell us, 
Blessed One, concerning the characteristics of deep attachments 
to existence and as to how we may become detached from 
existence? 

The Blessed One replied: When one tries to understand the 
significance of things by means of words and discriminations, 
there follow immeasurably deep-seated attachments to existence. 
For instance: there are the deep-seated attachments to signs of 
individuality, to causation, to the notion of being and non- 
being, to the discrimination of birth and death, of doing and 
not-doing, to the habit of discrimination itself upon which the 
philosophers are so dependent. 

There are three attachments that are especially deep-seated 
in the minds of all: greed, anger and infatuation, which are 
based on lust, fear and pride. Back of these lies discrimination 
and desire which is procreative and is accompanied with excite- 
ment and avariciousness and love of comfort and desire for 
eternal life; and, following, is a succession of rebirths on the 
five paths of existence and a continuation of attachments. But 
if these attachments are broken off, no signs of attachment nor 
of detachment will remain because they are based on things 
that are non-existent; when this truth is clearly understood 
the net of attachment is cleared away. 

But depending upon and attaching itself to the triple com- 
bination which works in unison there is the rising and the con- 
tinuation of the mind-system incessantly functioning, and be- 



gi8 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


cause of it there is the deeply-felt and continuous assertion of 
the will-to-live. When the triple combination that causes the 
functioning of the mind-system ceases to exist, there is the 
triple emancipation and there is no further rising of any com- 
bination. When the existence and the non-existence of the ex- 
ternal world are recognised as rising from the mind itself, then 
the Bodhisattva is prepared to enter into the state of imageless- 
ness and therein to see into the emptiness which characterises 
all discrimination and all the deep-seated attachments resulting 
therefrom. Therein he will see no signs of deep-rooted attach- 
ment nor detachment; therein he will see no one in bondage 
and no one in emancipation, except those who themselves cher- 
ish bondage and emancipation, because in all things there is 
no “substance” to be taken hold of. 

But so long as these discriminations are cherished by the 
ignorant and simple-minded they go on attaching themselves to 
them and, like the silkworm, go on spinning their thread of 
discrimination and enwrapping themselves and others, and are 
charmed with their prison. But to the wise there are no signs 
of attachment nor of detachment; all things are seen as abiding 
in solitude where there is no evolving of discrimination. Maha- 
mati, you and all the Bodhisattvas should have your abode 
where you can see all things from the view-point of solitude. 

Mahamati, when you and other Bodhisattvas understand 
well the distinction between attachment and detachment, you 
will be in possession of skillful means for avoiding becoming at- 
tached to words according to which one proceeds to grasp mean- 
ings. Free from the domination of words you will be able to 
establish yourselves where there will be a “turning about” in 
the deepest seat of consciousness by means of which you will 
attain self-realisation of Noble Wisdom and be able to enter 
into all the Buddha-lands and assemblies. There you will be 
stamped with the stamp of the powers, self-command, the 
psychic faculties, and will be endowed with the wisdom and 
the power of the ten inexhaustible vows, and will become ra- 
diant with the variegated rays of the Transformation Bodies. 
Therewith you will shine without effort like the moon, the sun, 
the magic wishing-jewel, and at every stage will view things as 
being of perfect oneness with yourself, uncontaminated by any 
self-consciousness. Seeing that all things are like a dream, you 
will be able to enter into the stage of the Tathagatas and be 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


319 

able to deliver discourses on the Dharma to the world of beings 
in accordance with their needs and be able to free them from 
all dualistic notions and false discriminations. 

Mahamati, there are two ways of considering self-realisation: 
namely, the teachings about it, and the realisation itself. The 
teachings as variously given in the nine divisions of the doc- 
trinal works, for the instructions of those who are inclined to- 
ward it, by making use of skillful means and expedients, are 
intended to awaken in all beings a true perception of the 
Dharma. The teachings are designed to keep one away from all 
the dualistic notions of being and non-being and oneness and 
otherness. 

Realisation itself is within the inner consciousness. It is an 
inner experience that has no connection with the lower mind- 
system and its discriminations of words, ideas and philosophical 
speculations. It shines out with its own clear light to reveal 
the error and foolishness of mind-constructed teachings, to 
render impotent evil influences from without, and to guide one 
unerringly to the realm of the good non-outflowings. Maha- 
mati, when the earnest disciple and Bodhisattva is provided 
with these requirements, the way is open to his perfect attain- 
ment of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, and to the full en- 
joyment of the fruits that arise therefrom. 

* # * 

Then Mahamati asked the Blessed One, saying: Pray tell us. 
Blessed One, about the One Vehicle which the Blessed One 
has said characterises the attainment of the inner self-realisa- 
tion of Noble Wisdom? 

The Blessed One replied: In order to discard more easily 
discriminations and erroneous reasonings, the Bodhisattva 
should retire by himself to a quiet, secluded place where he may 
reflect within himself without relying on anyone else, and there 
let him exert himself to make successive advances along the 
stages; this solitude is the characteristic feature of the inner 
attainment of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 

I call this the One Vehicle, not because it is the One 
Vehicle, but because it is only in solitude that one is able to 
recognise and realise the path of the One Vehicle. So long as 
the mind is distracted and is making conscious effort, there 
can be no culmination as regards the various vehicles; it is 



320 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


only when the mind is alone and quiet that it is able to for- 
sake the discriminations of the external world and seek realisa- 
tion of an inner realm where there is neither vehicle nor one 
who rides in it. I speak of the three vehicles in order to carry 
the ignorant. I do not speak much about the One Vehicle be- 
cause there is no way by which earnest disciples and masters 
can realise Nirvana, unaided. According to the discourses of 
the Tathagatas earnest disciples should be segregated and dis- 
ciplined and trained in meditation and dhyana whereby they 
are aided by many devices and expedients to realise emanci- 
pation. It is because earnest disciples and masters have not 
fully destroyed the habit-energy of karma and the hindrances of 
discriminative knowledge and human passion that they are often 
unable to accept the twofold egolessness and the inconceivable 
transformation death, that I preach the triple vehicle and not 
the One Vehicle. When earnest disciples have gotten rid of all 
their evil habit-energy and been able to realise the twofold 
egolessness, then they will not be intoxicated by the bliss of 
the Samadhis and will be awakened into the super-realm of 
the good non-outflowings. Being awakened into the realm of 
the good non-outflowings, they will be able to gather up all the 
requisites for the attainment of Noble Wisdom which is beyond 
conception and is of sovereign power. But really, Mahamati, 
there are no vehicles, and so I speak of the One Vehicle. Ma- 
hamati, the full recognition of the One Vehicle has never been 
attained by either earnest disciples, masters, or even by the 
great Brahma; it has been attained only by the Tathagatas 
themselves. That is the reason that it is known as the One 
Vehicle. I do not speak much about it because there is no 
way by which earnest disciples can realise Nirvana unaided. 

* * * 

Then Mahamati asked the Blessed One, saying: What are 
the steps that will lead an awakened disciple toward the self- 
realisation of Noble Wisdom? 

The Blessed One replied: The beginning lies in the recogni- 
tion that the external world is only a manifestation of the ac- 
tivities of the mind itself, and that the mind grasps it as an 
external world simply because of its habit of discrimination and 
false-reasoning. The disciple must get into the habit of looking 
at things truthfully. He must recognise the fact that the world 


the lankavatara scripture 


321 


has no self-nature, that it is un-bom, that it is like a passing 
cloud, like an imaginary wheel made by a revolving firebrand, 
like the castle of the Gandharvas, like the moon reflected in the 
ocean, like a vision, a mirage, a dream. He must come to 
understand that mind in its essence-nature has nothing to do 
with discrimination nor causation; he must not listen to dis- 
courses based on the imaginary terms of qualifications; he must 
understand that Universal Mind in its pure essence is a state 
of imagelessness, that it is only because of the accumulated de- 
filements on its face that body-property-and-abode appear to 
be its manifestations, that in its own pure nature it is unaf- 
fected and unaffecting by such changes as rising, abiding and 
destruction; he must fully understand that all these things come 
with the awakening of the notion of an ego-soul and its con- 
scious mind. Therefore, Mahamati, let those disciples who 
wish to realise Noble Wisdom by following the Tathagata Vehi- 
cle desist from all discrimination and erroneous reasoning about 
such notions as the elements that make up the aggregates of 
personality and its sense-world or about such ideas as causation, 
rising, abiding and destruction, and exercise themselves in the 
discipline of dhyana that leads to the realisation of Noble 
Wisdom. 

To practice dhyana, the earnest disciple should retire to a 
quiet and solitary place, remembering that life-long habits of 
discriminative thinking cannot be broken off easily nor quickly. 
There are four kinds of concentrative meditation (dhyana): 
The dhyana practised by the ignorant; the dhyana devoted to 
the examination of meaning; the dhyana with “suchness” 
(tathata) for its object; and the dhyana of the Tathagatas. 

The dhyana practised by the ignorant is the one resorted to 
by those who are following the example of the disciples and 
masters but who do not understand its purpose and, therefore, 
it becomes “still-sitting” with vacant minds. This dhyana is 
practised, also, by those who, despising the body, see it as a 
shadow and a skeleton full of suffering and impurity, and yet 
who cling to the notion of an ego, seek to attain emancipa- 
tion by the mere cessation of thought. 

The dhyana devoted to the examination of meaning, is the 
one practised by those who, perceiving the untenability of such 
ideas as self, other and both, which are held by the philoso- 
phers, and who have passed beyond the twofold-egolessness, 



322 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


devote dhyana to an examination of the significance of egoless- 
ness and the differentiations of the Bodhisattva stages. 

The dhyana with Tathata, or “Suchness,” or Oneness, or 
the Divine Name, for its object is practised by those earnest 
disciples and masters who, while fully recognising the twofold 
egolessness and the imagelessness of Tathata, yet cling to the 
notion of an ultimate Tathata. 

The dhyana of the Tathagatas is the dhyana of those who 
are entering upon the stage of Tathagatahood and who, abiding 
in the triple bliss which characterises the self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom, are devoting themselves for the sake of all beings to 
the accomplishment of incomprehensible works for their eman- 
cipation. This is the pure dhyana of the Tathagatas. When all 
lesser things and ideas are transcended and forgotten, and there 
remains only a perfect state of imagelessness where Tathagata 
and Tathata are merged into perfect Oneness, then the Buddhas 
will come together from all their Buddha-lands and with shin- 
ing hands resting on his forehead will welcome a new 
Tathagata. 


Chapter VIII 

The Attainment of Self-Realisation 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Pray tell us more 
as to what constitutes the state of self-realisation? 

The Blessed One replied: In the life of an earnest disciple 
there are two aspects that are to be distinguished: namely, the 
state of attachment to the self-natures arising from discrimina- 
tion of himself and his field of consciousness to which he is 
related; and second, the excellent and exalted state of self- 
realisation of Noble Wisdom. The state of attachment to the 
discriminations of the self-natures of things, ideas and selfhood 
is accompanied by emotions of pleasure or aversion according 
to experience or as laid down in books of logic. Conforming 
himself to the egolessness of things and holding back wrong 
views as to his own egoness, he should abandon these thoughts 
and hold himself firmly to the continuously ascending journey 
of the stages. 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


323 


The exalted state of self-realisation as it relates to an earn- 
est disciple is a state of mental concentration in which he seeks 
to identify himself with Noble Wisdom. In that effort he must 
seek to annihilate all vagrant thoughts and notions belonging 
to the externality of things, and all ideas of individuality and 
generality, of suffering and impermanence, and cultivate the 
noblest ideas of egolessness and emptiness and imagelessness; 
thus will he attain a realisation of truth that is free from pas- 
sion and is ever serene. When this active effort at mental con- 
centration is successful it is followed by a more passive, recep- 
tive state of Samadhi in which the earnest disciple will enter 
into the blissful abode of Noble Wisdom and experience its 
consummations in the transformations of Samapatti. This is an 
earnest disciple’s first experience of the exalted state of realisa- 
tion, but as yet there is no discarding of habit-energy nor es- 
caping from the transformation of death. 

Having attained this exalted and blissful state of realisation 
as far as it can be attained by disciples, the Bodhisattva must 
not give himself up to the enjoyment of its bliss, for that would 
mean cessation, but should think compassionately of other be- 
ings and keep ever fresh his original vows; he should never 
let himself rest in nor exert himself in the bliss of the 
Samadhis. 

But, Mahamati, as earnest disciples go on trying to advance 
on the path that leads to full realisation, there is one danger 
against which they must be on their guard. Disciples may not 
appreciate that the mind-system, because of its accumulated 
habit-energy, goes on functioning, more or less unconsciously, 
as long as they live. They may sometimes think that they can 
expedite the attainment of their goal of tranquillisation by 
entirely suppressing the activities of the mind-system. This 
is a mistake, for even if the activities of the mind are sup- 
pressed, the mind will still go on functioning because the seeds 
of habit-energy will still remain in it. What they think is ex- 
tinction of mind, is really the non-functioning of the mind’s ex- 
ternal world to which they are no longer attached. That is, 
the goal of tranquillisation is to be reached not by suppressing 
all mind activity but by getting rid of discriminations and 
attachments. 

Then there are others who, afraid of the suffering incident 
to the discriminations of life and death, unwisely seek Nirvana. 



324 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


They have come to see that all things subject to discrimination 
have no reality and so imagine that Nirvana must consist in 
the annihilation of the senses and their fields of sensation; 
they do not appreciate that birth-and-death and Nirvana are 
not separate one from the other. They do not know that Nir- 
vana is Universal Mind in its purity. Therefore, these stupid 
ones who cling to the notion that Nirvana is a world by itself 
that is outside what is seen by the mind, ignoring all the teach- 
ings of the Tathagatas concerning the external world, go on 
rolling themselves along the wheel of birth-and-death. But 
when they experience the “tuming-about” in their deepest con- 
sciousness which will bring with it the perfect self-realisation of 
Noble Wisdom, then they will understand. 

The true functioning of the mind is very subtle and difficult 
to be understood by young disciples, even masters with all 
their powers of right-knowledge and Samadhis often find it 
baffling. It is only the Tathagatas and the Bodhisattvas who 
are firmly established on the seventh stage who can fully under- 
stand its workings. Those earnest disciples and masters who 
wish to fully understand all the aspects of the different stages 
of Bodhisattvahood by the aid of their right-knowledge must 
do so by becoming thoroughly convinced that objects of dis- 
crimination are only seen to be so by the mind and, thus, by 
keeping themselves away from all discriminations and false 
reasonings which are also of the mind itself, by ever seeking to 
see things truly ( yathabhutam ), and by planting roots of good- 
ness in Buddha-lands that know no limits made by differen- 
tiations. 

To do all this the Bodhisattva should keep himself away 
from all turmoil, social excitements and sleepiness; let him keep 
away from the treatises and writings of worldly philosophers, 
and from the ritual and ceremonies of professional priestcraft. 
Let him retire to a secluded place in the forest and there devote 
himself to the practise of the various spiritual disciplines, 
because it is only by so doing that he will become capable 
of attaining in this world of multiplicities a true insight into 
the workings of Universal Mind in its Essence. There surround- 
ed by his good friends the Buddhas, earnest disciples will 
become capable of understanding the significance of the mind- 
system and its place as a mediating agent between the external 
world and Universal Mind and he will become capable of 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


325 


crossing the ocean of birth-and-death which rises from igno- 
rance, desire and deed. 

Having gained a thorough understanding of the mind- 
system, the three self-natures, the twofold egolessness, and 
established himself in the measure of self-realisation that goes 
with that attainment, all of which may be gained by his right- 
knowledge, the way will be clear for the Bodhisattva’s further 
advance along the stages of Bodhisattvahood. The disciple 
should then abandon the understanding of mind which he has 
gained by right-knowledge, which in comparison with Noble 
Wisdom is like a lame donkey, and entering on the eighth 
stage of Bodhisattvahood, he should then discipline himself in 
Noble Wisdom according to its three aspects. 

These aspects are: First, imagelessness which comes forth 
when all things belonging to discipleship, mastership, and 
philosophy are thoroughly mastered. Second, the power added 
by all the Buddhas by reason of their original vows including 
the identification of their lives and the sharing of their merit 
with all sentient lives. Third, the perfect self-realisation that 
thus far has only been realised in a measure. As the Bodhi- 
sattva succeeds in detaching himself from viewing all things, 
including his own imagined egoness, in their phenomenality, 
and realises the states of Samadhi and Samapatti whereby he 
surveys the world as a vision and a dream, and being sustained 
by all the Buddhas, he will be able to pass on to the full at- 
tainment of the Tathagata stage, which is Noble Wisdom itself. 
This is the triplicity of the noble life and being furnished with 
this triplicity the perfect self-realisation of Noble Wisdom has 
been attained. 

* # # 

Then Mahamati asked the Blessed One, saying: Blessed 
One, is the purification of the evil out-flowings of the mind 
which come from clinging to the notions of an objective world 
and an empirical soul, gradual or instantaneous? 

The Blessed One replied: There are three characteristic out- 
flows of the mind, namely, the evil out-flowings that rise from 
thirst, grasping and attachment; the evil out-flowings that arise 
from the illusions of the mind and the infatuations of egoism; 
and the good non-outflowings that arise from Noble Wisdom. 
The evil out-flowings that take place from recognising an ex- 



3 20 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


ternal world, which in truth is only a manifestation of mind, 
and from becoming attached to it, are gradually purified and 
not instantaneously. Good behavior can only come by the 
path of restraint and effort. It is like a potter making pots 
that is done gradually and with attention and effort. It is like 
the mastery of comedy, dancing, singing, lute-playing, writing, 
and any other art; it must be acquired gradually and labori- 
ously. Its reward will be a clearing insight into the emptiness 
and transiency of all things.- 

The evil out-flowings that arise from the illusions of the 
mind and the infatuations of egoism, concern the mental life 
more directly and are such things as fear, anger, hatred and 
pride; these are purified by study and meditation and that, 
too, must be attained gradually and not instananeously. It is 
like the amra fruit that ripens slowly; it is like grass, shrubs, 
herbs and trees that grow up from the earth gradually. Each 
must follow the path of study and meditation by himself gradu- 
ally and with effort, but because of the original vows of the 
Bodhisattvas and all the Tathagatas who have devoted their 
merits and identified their lives with all animate life that all 
may be emancipated, they are not without aid and encourage- 
ment; but even with the aid of the Tathagatas, the purification 
of the evil out-flowings of the mind are at best slow and grad- 
ual, requiring both zeal and patience. Its reward is the grad- 
ual understanding of the twofold egolessness and its patient 
acceptance, and the feet well set on the stages of Bodhisattva- 
hood. 

But the good non-outflowings that come with self-realisation 
of Noble Wisdom, is a purification that comes instantaneously 
by the grace of the Tathagatas. It is like a mirror reflecting 
all forms and images instantaneously and without discrimina- 
tion; it is like the sun or the moon revealing all forms instan- 
taneously and illuminating them dispassionately with its light. 
In the same way the Tathagatas lead earnest disciples to a 
state of imagelessness; all the accumulations of habit-energy 
and karma that had been collecting since beginningless time be- 
cause of attachment to erroneous views which have been enter- 
tained regarding an ego-soul and its external world, are cleared 
away, revealing instantaneously the realm of Transcendental 
Intelligence that belongs to Buddhahood. Just as Universal 
Mind defiled by accumulations of habit-energy and karma re- 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


327 


veals multiplicities of ego-souls and their external worlds of 
false-imagination, so Universal Mind cleared of its defilements 
through the gradual purifications of the evil out-flowings that 
come by effort, study and meditation, and by the gradual self- 
realisation of Noble Wisdom, at the long last, like the Dharmata 
Buddha shining forth spontaneously with the rays that issue 
from its pure Self-nature, shines forth instantaneously. By it 
the mentality of all Bodhisattvas is matured instantaneously: 
they find themselves in the palatial abodes of the Akanistha 
heavens, themselves spontaneously radiating the various treas- 
ures of its spiritual abundance. 


Chapter IX 

The Fruit of Self-Realisation 

Mahamati asked the Blessed One: Pray tell us. Blessed One, 
what is the fruitage that comes with self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom? 

The Blessed One replied: First, there will come a clearing 
insight into the meaning and significance of things and follow- 
ing that will come an unfolding insight into the significance of 
the spiritual ideals (Paramitas) by reason of which the Bodhi- 
sattvas will be able to enter more deeply into the abode of 
imagelessness and be able to experience the higher Samadhis 
and gradually to pass through the higher stages of Bodhisatt- 
vahood. 

After experiencing the “turning-about” in the deepest seat 
of consciousness, they will experience other Samadhis even to 
the highest, the Vaj ravimbopama, which belongs to the Tatha- 
gatas and their transformations. They will be able to enter 
into the realm of consciousness that lies beyond the conscious- 
ness of the mind-system, even the consciousness of Tathagata- 
hood. They will become endowed with all the powers, psychic 
faculties, self-mastery, loving compassion, skillful means, and 
ability to enter into other Buddha-lands. Before they had at- 
tained self-realisation of Noble Wisdom they had been in- 
fluenced by the self-interests of egoism, but after they attain 
self-realisation they will find themselves reacting spontaneously 



328 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


to the impulses of a great and compassionate heart endowed 
with skillful and boundless means and sincerely and wholly de- 
voted to the emancipation of all beings. 

* • * 

Mahamati said: Blessed One, tell us about the sustaining 
power of the Tathagatas by which the Bodhisattvas are aided 
to attain self-realisation of Noble Wisdom? 

The Blessed One replied: There are two kinds of sustaining 
power, which issue from the Tathagatas and are at the service 
of the Bodhisattvas, sustained by which the Bodhisattvas should 
prostrate themselves before them and show their appreciation 
by asking questions. The first kind of sustaining power is the 
Bodhisattva’s own adoration and faith in the Buddhas by reason 
of which the Buddhas are able to manifest themselves and 
render their aid and to ordain them with their own hands. The 
second kind of sustaining power is the power radiating from 
the Tathagatas that enables the Bodhisattvas to attain and to 
pass through the various Samadhis and Samapattis without 
becoming intoxicated by their bliss. 

Being sustained by the power of the Buddhas, the Bodhi- 
sattva even at the first stage will be able to attain the 
Samadhi known as the Light of Mahayana. In that Samadhi 
Bodhisattvas will become conscious of the presence of the Tatha- 
gatas coming from all their different abodes in the ten quarters 
to impart to the Bodhisattvas their sustaining power in various 
ways. As the Bodhisattva Vajragarbha was sustained in his 
Samadhis and as many other Bodhisattvas of like degree and 
virtue have been sustained, so all earnest disciples and masters 
and Bodhisattvas may experience this sustaining power of the 
Buddhas in their Samadhis and Samapattis. The disciple’s faith 
and the Tathagata’s merit are two aspects of the same sustain- 
ing power and by it alone are the Bodhisattvas enabled to be- 
come one with the company of the Buddhas. 

Whatever Samadhis, psychic faculties and teachings are 
realised by the Bodhisattvas, they are made possible only by 
the sustaining power of the Buddhas; if it were otherwise, the 
ignorant and the simple-minded might attain the same fruitage. 
Wherever the Tathagatas enter with their sustaining power 
there will be music, not only music made by human lips and 
played by human hands on various instruments, but there will 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 329 

be music among the grass and shrubs and trees, and in moun- 
tains and towns and palaces and hovels; much more will there 
be music in the hearts of those endowed with sentiency. The 
deaf, dumb and blind will be cured of their deficiencies and 
will rejoice in their emancipation. Such is the extraordinary 
virtue of the sustaining power imparted by the Tathagatas. 

By the bestowal of this sustaining power, the Bodhisattvas 
are enabled to avoid the evils of passion, hatred and enslaving 
karma; they are enabled to transcend the dhyana of the begin- 
ners and to advance beyond the experience and truth already 
attained; they are enabled to demonstrate the Paramitas; and 
finally, to attain the stage of T athagatahood. Mahamati, if it 
were not for this sustaining power, they would relapse into the 
ways and thoughts of the philosophers, easy-going disciples and 
the evil-minded, and would thus fall short of the highest attain- 
ment. For these reasons, earnest disciples and sincere Bodhi- 
sattvas are sustained by the power of all the Tathagatas. 

* * * 

Then said Mahamati: It has been said by the Blessed One 
that by fulfilling the six Paramitas, Buddhahood is realised. 
Pray tell us what the Paramitas are, and how they are to be 
fulfilled? 

The Blessed One replied: The Paramitas are ideals of spirit- 
ual prefection that are to be the guide of the Bodhisattvas on 
the path to self-realisation. There are six of them but they are 
to be considered in three different ways according to the prog- 
ress of the Bodhisattva on the stages. At first they are to be 
considered as ideals for the worldly life; next as ideals for the 
mental life; and, lastly, as ideals of the spiritual and unitive 
life. 

In the worldly life where one is still holding tenaciously to 
the notions of an ego-soul and what concerns it and holding 
fast to discriminations of dualism, if only for worldly benefits, 
one should cherish ideals of charity, good behavior, patience, 
zeal, thoughtfulness and wisdom. Even in the worldly life the 
practice of these virtues will bring rewards of happiness and 
success. 

Much more in the mind-world of earnest disciples and 
masters will their practice bring joys of emancipation, enlight- 
enment and peace of mind, because the Paramitas are grounded 



330 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

on right-knowledge and lead to thoughts of Nirvana, even if 
the Nirvana of their thoughts is for themselves. In the mind- 
world the Paramitas become more ideal and more sympathetic; 
charity can no longer be expressed in the giving of impersonal 
gifts but will call for the more costly gifts of sympathy and 
understanding; good behavior will call for something more than 
outward conformity to the five precepts because in the light 
of the Paramitas they must practise humility, simplicity, re- 
straint and self-giving. Patience will call for something more 
than forbearance with external circumstances and the tempera- 
ments of other people: it will now call for patience with one’s 
self. Zeal will call for something more than industry and out- 
ward show of earnestness: it will call for more self-control in 
the task of following the Noble Path and in manifestating the 
Dharma in one’s own life. Thoughtfulness will give way to 
mindfulness wherein discriminated meanings and logical deduc- 
tions and rationalisations will give way to intuitions of signifi- 
cance and spirit. The Paramita of Wisdom ( Prajna ) will no 
longer be concerned with pragmatic wisdom and erudition, but 
will reveal itself in its true perfectness of All-inclusive Truth 
which is Love. 

The third aspect of the Paramitas as seen in the ideal per- 
fections of the Tathagatas can only be fully understood by 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who are devoted to the highest 
spiritual discipline and have fully understood that there is noth- 
ing to be seen in the world but that which issues from the 
mind itself; in whose minds the discrimination of dualities has 
ceased to function; and seizing and clinging has become non- 
existent. Thus tree from all attachments to individual objects 
and ideas, their minds are free to consider ways of benefiting 
and giving happiness to others, even to all sentient beings. To 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas the ideal of charity is shown in 
the self-yielding of the Tathagata’s hope of Nirvana that all 
may enjoy it together. While having relations with an objective 
world there is no rising in the minds of the Tathagatas of dis- 
criminations between the interests of self and the interests of 
others, between good and evil, — there is just the spontaneity 
and effortless actuality of perfect behavior. To practise patience 
with full knowledge of this and that, of grasp and grasping, 
but with no thought of discrimination nor of attachment, — that 
is the Tathagatas Paramita of Patience. To exert oneself with 


THE LANKA VATARA SCRIPTURE 


33i 

energy from the first part of the night to its end in conformity 
with the disciplinary measures with no rising of discrimination 
as to comfort or discomfort, — that is the Tathagata’s Paramita 
of Zeal. Not to discriminate between self and others in thoughts 
of Nirvana, but to keep the mind fixed on Nirvana, — that is 
the Paramita of Mindfulness. As to the Prajna-Paramita, which 
is Noble Wisdom, who can predicate it? When in Samadhi 
the mind ceases to discriminate and there is only perfect and 
love-filled imagelessness, then an inscrutable “tuming-about” 
will take place in the inmost consciousness and one will have 
attained self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, — that is the highest 
Prajna-Paramita. 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: You have spoken 
of an astral-body, a “mind-vision-body” ( manomayakaya ) which 
the Bodhisattvas are able to assume, as being one of the fruits 
of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom: pray tell us. Blessed One, 
what is meant by such a transcendental body? 

The Blessed One replied: There are three kinds of such 
transcendental bodies: First, there is the one in which the Bo- 
dhisattva attains enjoyment of the Samadhis and Samapattis. 
Second, there is the one which is assumed by the Tathagatas 
according to the class of beings to be sustained, and which 
achieves and perfects spontaneously with no attachment and 
no effort. Third, there is the one in which the Tathagatas re- 
ceive their intuition of Dharmakaya. 

The transcendental personality that enters into the enjoy- 
ment of the Samadhis comes with the third, fourth and fifth 
stages as the mentations of the mind-system become quieted 
and waves of consciousness are no more stirred on the face of 
Universal Mind. In this state, the conscious-mind is still aware, 
in a measure, of the bliss being experienced by this cessation of 
the mind’s activities. 

The second kind of transcendental personality is the kind 
assumed by the Bodhisattvas and Tathagatas as bodies of trans- 
formation by which they demonstrate their original vows in the 
work of achieving and perfecting; it comes with the eighth 
stage of Bodhisattvahood. When the Bodhisattva has a thor- 
ough-going penetration into the maya-like nature of things and 
understands the dharma of imagelessness, he will experience the 



33 2 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

“tuming-about” in his deepest consciousness and will become 
able to experience the higher Samadhis even to the highest. By 
entering into these exalted Samadhis he attains a personality 
that transcends the conscious-mind, by reason of which he ob- 
tains supernatural powers of self-mastery and activities because 
of which he is able to move as he wishes, as quickly as a 
dream changes, as quickly as an image changes in a mirror. 
This transcendental body is not a product of the elements and 
yet there is something in it that is analogous to what is so 
produced; it is furnished with all the differences appertaining 
to the world of form but without their limitations; possessed 
of this “mind-vision-body” he is able to be present in all the 
assemblages in all the Buddha-lands. Just as his thoughts move 
instantly and without hindrance over walls and rivers and trees 
and mountains, and just as in memory he recalls and visits the 
scenes of his past experiences, so, while his mind keeps func- 
tioning in the body, his thoughts may be a hundred thousand 
yojanas away. In the same fashion the transcendental per- 
sonality that experiences the Samadhi Vajravimbopama will be 
endowed with supernatural powers and psychic faculties and 
self-mastery by reason of which he will be able to follow the 
noble paths that lead to the assemblages of the Buddhas, mov- 
ing about as freely as he may wish. But his wishes will no 
longer be self-centered nor tainted by discrimination and attach- 
ment, for this transcendental personality is not his old body, 
but is the transcendental embodiment of his original vows of 
self-vielding in order to bring all beings to maturity. 

The third kind of transcendental personality is so ineffable 
that it is able to attain intuitions of the Dharmakaya, that is, 
it attains intuitions of the boundless and inscrutable cognition 
of Universal Mind. As Bodhisattva-Mahhsattvas attain the 
highest of the stages and become conversant with all the treas- 
ures to be realised in Noble Wisdom, they will attain this in- 
conceivable transformation-body which is the true nature of all 
the Tathaga'tas past, present and future, and will participate in 
the blissful peace which pervades the Dharma of all the 
Buddhas. 


THE LANKA VATARA SCRIPTURE 


333 


Chapter X 

Discipleship: Lineage of the Arhats 

Then Mahamati asked the Blessed One: Pray tell us how 
many kinds of disciples there are? 

The Blessed One replied: There are as many kinds of dis- 
ciples as there are individuals, but for convenience they may 
be divided into two groups: disciples of the lineage of the 
Arhats, and disciples known as Bodhisattvas. Disciples of the 
lineage of the Arhats may be considered under two aspects: 
First, according to the number of times they will return to this 
life of birth-and-death; and second, according to their spiritual 
progress. Under the first aspect, they may be subdivided into 
three groups: The “Stream-entered,” the “Once-returning,” and 
the “Never-returning.” 

The Stream-entered are those disciples, who having freed 
themselves from the attachments to the lower discriminations 
and who have cleansed themselves from the twofold hindrances 
and who clearly understand the meaning of the twofold egoless- 
ness, yet who still cling to the notions of individuality and gen- 
erality and to their own egoness. They will advance along the 
stages to the sixth only to succumb to the entrancing bliss of 
the Samadhis. They will be reborn seven times, or five times, 
or three times, before they will be able to pass the sixth stage. 
The Once-returning are the Arhats, and the Never-returning 
are the Bodhisattvas who have reached the seventh stage. 

The reason for these gradations is because of their attach- 
ment to the three degrees of f aise-imagination : namely, faith 
in moral practices, doubt, and the view of their individual per- 
sonality. When these three hindrances are overcome, they will 
be able to attain the higher stages. As to moral practices: the 
ignorant, simple-minded disciples obey the rules of morality, 
piety and penance, because they desire thereby to gain worldly 
advancement and happiness, with the added hope of being re- 
born in more favorable conditions. The Stream-entered ones 
do not cling to moral practices for any hope of reward for 
their minds are fixed on the exalted state of self-realisation; the 
reason they devote themselves to the details of morality is that 



334 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


they wish to master such truths as are in conformity with the 
undefiled out-flowings. As regards the hindrance of doubt in 
the Buddha’s teachings, that will continue so long as any of 
the notions of discriminations are cherished and will disappear 
when they disappear. Attachment to the view of individual 
personality will be gotten rid of as the disciple gains a more 
thorough understanding of the notions of being and non-be- 
ing, self-nature and egolessness, thereby getting rid of the at- 
tachments to his own selfness that goes with those discrimina- 
tions. By breaking up and clearing away these three hindrances 
the Stream-entered ones will be able to discard all greed, anger 
and folly. 

As for the Once-returning Arhats; there was once in them 
the discrimination of forms, signs, and appearances, but as they 
gradually learned by right knowledge not to view individual 
objects under the aspect of quality and qualifying, and as they 
became acquainted with what marks the attainment of the prac- 
tice of dhyana, they have reached a stage of enlightenment 
where in one more rebirth they will be able to put an end to 
the clinging to their own self-interests. Free of this burden of 
error and its attachments, the passions will no more assert 
themselves and the hindrances will be cleared away forever. 

Under the second aspect disciples may be grouped according 
to the spiritual progress they have attained, into four classes, 
namely, disciples ( sravaka ), masters (pratyekabuddha ), Arhats, 
and Bodhisattvas. 

The first class of disciples mean well but they find it dif- 
ficult to understand unfamiliar ideas. Their minds are joyful 
when studying about and practising the things belonging to ap- 
pearances that can be discriminated, but they become confused 
by the notion of an uninterrupted chain of causation, and they 
become fearful when they consider the aggregates that make 
up personality and its object world as being maya-like, empty 
and egoless. They were able to advance to the fifth or sixth 
stage where they are able to do away with the rising of pas- 
sions, but not with the notions that give rise to passion and, 
therefore, they are unable to get rid of the clinging to an ego- 
soul and its accompanying attachments, habits and habit-energy. 
In this same class of disciples are the earnest disciples of other 
faiths, who clinging to the notions of such things as, the soul 
as an eternal entity. Supreme Atman, Personal God, seek a 


THE LANRAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


335 


Nirvana that is in harmony with them. There are others, more 
materialistic in their ideas, who think that all things exist in 
dependence upon causation and, therefore, that Nirvana must 
be in like dependence. But none of these, earnest though they 
be, have gained an insight into the truth of the twofold ego- 
lessness and are, therefore, of limited spiritual insight as regards 
deliverance and non-deliverance ; for them there is no emanci- 
pation. They have great self-confidence but they can never 
gain a true knowledge of Nirvana until they have learned to 
discipline themselves in the patient acceptance of the twofold 
egolessness. 

The second class of masters are those who have gained a 
high degree of intellectual understanding of the truths concern- 
ing the aggregates that make up personality and its external 
world but who are filled with fear when they face the signifi- 
cance and consequences of these truths, and the demands which 
their learning makes upon them, that is, not to become at- 
tached to the external world and its manifold forms making for 
comfort and power, and to keep away from the entanglements 
of its social relations. They are attracted by the possibilities 
that are attainable by so doing, namely, the possession of mi- 
raculous powers such as dividing the personality and appearing 
in different places at the same time, or manifesting bodies of 
transformation. To gain these powers they even resort to the 
solitary life, but this class of masters never get beyond the se- 
ductions of their learning and egoism, and their discourses are 
always in conformity with that characteristic and limitation. 
Among them are many earnest disciples who show a degree of 
spiritual insight that is characterised by sincerity and undis- 
mayed willingness to meet all the demands that the stages 
make upon them. When they see that all that makes up the 
objective world is only manifestation of mind, that it is without 
self-nature, un-bom and egoless, they accept it without fear, 
and when they see that their own ego-soul is also empty, un- 
born and egoless, they are untroubled and undismayed, with 
earnest purpose they seek to adjust their lives to the full de- 
mands of these truths, but they cannot forget the notions that 
lie back of these facts, especially the notion of their own con- 
scious ego-self and its relation to Nirvana. They are of the 
Stream-entered class. 

The class known as Arhats are those earnest masters who 



336 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

belong to the once-returning class. By their spiritual insight 
they have reached the sixth and seventh stages. They have 
thoroughly understood the truth of the twofold egolessness and 
the imagelessness of Reality; with them there is no more dis- 
crimination, nor passions, nor pride of egoism; they have gained 
an exalted insight and seen into the immensity of the Buddha- 
lands. By attaining an inner perception of the true nature of 
Universal Mind they are steadily purifying their habit-energy. 
The Arhat has attained emancipation, enlightenment, the Dhy- 
anas, the Samadhis, and his whole attention is given to the 
attainment of Nirvana, but the idea of Nirvana causes mental 
perturbations because he has a wrong idea of Nirvana. The 
notion of Nirvana in his mind is divided: he discriminates 
Nirvana from self, and self from others. He has attained some 
of the fruits of self-realisation but he still thinks and discourses 
on the Dhyanas, subjects for meditation, the Samadhis, the 
fruits. He pridefully says: “There are fetters, but I am disen- 
gaged from them.” His is a double fault: he both denounces 
the vices of the ego, and still clings to its fetters. So long as 
he continues to discriminate notions of dhyana, dhyana prac- 
tice, subjects for dhyana, right-knowledge and truth, there is a 
bewildered state of mind, — he has not attained perfect emanci- 
pation. Emancipation comes with the acceptance of imageless- 
ness. 

He is master of the Dhyanas and enters into the Samadhis, 
but to reach the higher stages one must pass beyond the Dhy- 
anas, the immeasurables, the world of no-form, and the bliss 
of the Samadhis into the Samapattis leading to the cessation of 
thought itself. The dhyana-practiser, dhyana, the subject of 
dhyana, the cessation of thought, once-returning, never-return- 
ing, all these are divided and bewildering states of mind. Not 
until all discrimination is abandoned is there perfect emancipa- 
tion. Thus the Arhat, master of the dhyanas, participating in 
the Samadhis, but unsupported by the Buddhas yields to the 
entrancing bliss of the Samadhis — and passes to his Nirvana. 

Disciples and masters and Arhats may ascend the stages up 
to the sixth. They perceive that the triple world is no more 
than mind itself; they perceive that there is no becoming at- 
tached to the multiplicities of external objects except through 
the discriminations and activities of the mind itself; they per- 
ceive that there is no ego-soul; and, therefore, they attain a 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


337 


measure of tranquillisation. But their tranquillisation is not 
perfect every minute of their lives, for with them there is some- 
thing effect-producing, some grasped and grasping, some linger- 
ing trace of dualism and egoism. Though disengaged from the 
actively functioning passions, they are still bound in with the 
habit-energy of passion and, becoming intoxicated with the wine 
of the Samadhis, they still have their abode in the realm of 
the out-flowings. Perfect tranquillisation is possible only with 
the seventh stage. So long as their minds are in confusion, 
they cannot attain to a clear conviction as to the cessation of 
all multiplicity and the actuality of the perfect oneness of all 
things. In their minds the self-nature of things is still discrimi- 
nated as good and bad, therefore, their minds are in confusion 
and they cannot pass beyond the sixth stage. But at the sixth 
stage all discrimination ceases as they become engrossed in the 
bliss of the Samadhis wherein they cherish the thought of Nir- 
vana and, as Nirvana is possible at the sixth stage, they pass 
into their Nirvana, but it is not the Nirvana of the Buddhas. 


Chapter XI 

Bodhisattvahood and Its Stages 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Will you tell us 
now about the disciples who are Bodhisattvas? 

The Blessed One replied: The Bodhisattvas are those earn- 
est disciples who are enlightened by reason of their efforts to 
attain self-realisation of Noble Wisdom and who have taken 
upon themselves the task to enlighten others. They have gained 
a clear understanding of the truth that all things are empty, 
un-bom, and of a maya-like nature; they have ceased from 
viewing things discriminatively and from considering them in 
their relations; they thoroughly understand the truth of two- 
fold egolessness and have adjusted themselves to it with patient 
acceptance; they have attained a definite realisation of image- 
lessness; and they are abiding in the perfect-knowledge that 
they have gained by self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 

Well stamped by the seal of “Suchness” they entered upon 



338 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


the first of the Bodhisattva stages. The first stage is called the 
Stage of Joy ( Pramudita ). Entering this stage is like passing 
out of the glare and shadows into a realm of “no-shadows”; 
it is like passing out of the noise and tumult of the crowded 
city into the quietness of solitude. The Bodhisattva feels within 
himself the awakening of a great heart of compassion and he 
utters his ten original vows: To honor and serve all Buddhas; 
to spread the knowledge and practice of the Dharma; to wel- 
come all coming Buddhas; to practise the six Paramitas; to per- 
suade all beings to embrace the Dharma; to attain a perfect 
understanding of the universe; to attain a perfect understand- 
ing of the mutuality of all beings; to attain perfect self-realisa- 
tion of the oneness of all the Buddhas and Tathagatas in self- 
nature, purpose and resources; to become acquainted with all 
skillful means for the carrying out of these vows for the eman- 
cipation of all beings; to realise supreme enlightenment through 
the perfect self-realization of Noble Wisdom, ascending the 
stages and entering Tathagatahood. 

In the spirit of these vows the Bodhisattva gradually 
ascends the stages to the sixth. All earnest disciples, masters 
and Arhats have ascended thus far, but being enchanted by the 
bliss of the Samadhis and not being supported by the powers 
of the Buddhas, they pass to their Nirvana. The same fate 
would befall the Bodhisattvas except for the sustaining power 
of the Buddhas, by that they are enabled to refuse to enter 
Nirvana until all beings can enter Nirvana with them. The 
Tathagatas point out to them the virtues of Buddhahood which 
are beyond the conception of the intellectual-mind, and they 
encourage and strengthen the Bodhisattvas not to give in to 
the enchantment of the bliss of the Samadhis, but to press on 
to further advancement along the stages. If the Bodhisattvas 
had entered Nirvana at this stage, and they would have done 
so without the sustaining power of the Buddhas, there would 
have been the cessation of all things and the family of the 
Tathagatas would have become extinct. 

Strengthened by the new strength that comes to them from 
the Buddhas and with the more perfect insight that is theirs 
by reason of their advance in self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, 
they re-examine the nature of the mind-system, the egolessness 
of personality, and the part that grasping and attachment and 
habit-energy play in the unfolding drama of life; they re-ex- 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


339 


amine the illusions of the fourfold logical analysis, and the 
various elements that enter into enlightenment and self-realisa- 
tion, and, in the thrill of their new powers of self-mastery, the 
Bodhisattvas enter upon the seventh stage of Far-going {Du- 
ran gam a). 

Supported by the sustaining power of the Buddhas, the 
Bodhisattvas at this stage enter into the bliss of the Samadhi 
of perfect tranquillisation. Owing to their original vows they 
are transported by emotions of love and compassion as they be- 
come aware of the part they are to perform in the carrying out 
of their vows for the emancipation of all beings. Thus they do 
not enter into Nirvana, but, in truth, they too are already in 
Nirvana because in their emotions of love and compassion there 
is no rising of discrimination; henceforth, with them, discrimina- 
tion no more takes place. Because of T ranscendental Intel- 
ligence only one conception is present — the promotion of the 
realisation of Noble Wisdom. Their insight issues from the 
Womb of Tathagatahood and they enter into their task with 
spontaneity and radiancy because it is of the self-nature of 
Noble Wisdom. This is called the Bodhisattva’s Nirvana — the 
losing oneself in the bliss of perfect self-yielding. This is the 
seventh stage, the stage of Far-going. 

The eighth stage, is the stage of No-recession ( Acala ). Up 
to this stage, because of the defilements upon the face of Uni- 
versal Mind caused by the accumulation of habit-energy since 
beginningless time, the mind-system and all that pertains to it 
has been evolved and sustained. The mind-system functioned 
by the discriminations of an external and objective world to 
which it became attached and by which it was perpetuated. 
But with the Bodhisattva’s attainment of the eighth stage there 
comes the “tuming-about” within his deepest consciousness 
from self-centered egoism to universal compassion for all beings, 
by which he attains perfect self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 
There is an instant cessation of the delusive activities of the 
whole mind-system; the dancing of the waves of habit-energy 
on the face of Universal Mind are forever stilled, revealing its 
own inherent quietness and solitude, the inconceivable Oneness 
of the Womb of Tathagatahood. 

Henceforth there is no more looking outward upon an ex- 
ternal world by senses and sense-minds, nor a discrimination of 
particularised concepts and ideas and propositions by an intel- 



340 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


lectual-mind, no more grasping, nor attachment, nor pride of 
egoism, nor habit-energy. Henceforth there is only the inner 
experience of Noble Wisdom which has been attained by enter- 
ing into its perfect Oneness. 

Thus establishing himself at the eighth stage of No-reces- 
sion, the Bodhisattva enters into the bliss of the ten Samadhis, 
but avoiding the path of the disciples and masters who yielded 
themselves up to their entrancing bliss and who passed to their 
Nirvanas, and supported by his vows and the Transcendental 
Intelligence which now is his and being sustained by the power 
of the Buddhas, he enters upon the higher paths that lead to 
Tathagatahood. He passes through the bliss of the Samadhis 
to assume the transformation body of a Tathagata that through 
him all beings may be emancipated. Mahamati, If there had 
been no Tathagata-womb and no Divine Mind then there would 
have been no rising and disappearance of the aggregates that 
make up personality and its external world, no rising and dis- 
appearance of ignorant people nor holy people, and no task for 
Bodhisattvas; therefore, while walking in the path of self-reali- 
sation and entering into the enjoyments of the Samadhis, you 
must never abandon working hard for the emancipation of all 
beings and your self-yielding love will never be in vain. To 
philosophers the conception of Tathagata-womb seems devoid 
of purity and soiled by these external manifestations, but it 
is not so understood by the Tathagatas, — to them it is not a 
proposition of philosophy but is an intuitive experience as real 
as though it was an amalaka fruit held in the palm of the 
hand. 

With the cessation of the mind-system and all its evolving 
discriminations, there is cessation of all strain and effort. It is 
like a man in a dream who imagines he is crossing a river and 
who exerts himself to the utmost to do so, who is suddenly 
awakened. Being awake, he thinks: “Is this real or is it un- 
real?” Being now enlightened, he knows that it is neither real 
nor unreal. Thus when the Bodhisattva arrives at the eighth 
stage, he is able to see all things truthfully and, more than 
that, he is able to thoroughly understand the significance of all 
Ithe dream-like things of his life as to how they came to pass 
and as to how they pass away. Ever since beginningless time 
the mind-system has perceived multiplicities of forms and condi- 
tions and ideas which the thinking-mind has discriminated and 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 341 

ithe empirical-mind has experienced and grasped and clung to. 
From this has risen habit-energy that by its accumulation has 
conditioned the illusions of existence and non-existence, individ- 
uality and generality, and has thus perpetuated the dream-state 
of false-imagination. But now, to the Bodhisattvas of the 
eighth stage, life is past and is remembered as it truly was — 
a passing dream. 

As long as the Bodhisattva had not passed the seventh 
stage, even though he had attained an intuitive understanding 
of the true meaning of life and its maya-like nature, and as to 
how the mind carried on its discriminations and attachments 
yet, nevertheless, the cherishing of the notions of these things 
had continued and, although he no longer experienced within 
himself any ardent desire for things nor any impulse to grasp 
them yet, nevertheless, the notions concerning them persisted 
and perfumed his efforts to practise the teachings of the Bud- 
dhas and to labor for the emancipation of all beings. Now, 
in the eighth stage, even the notions have passed away, and 
all effort and striving is seen to be unnecessary. The Bodhi- 
sattva’s Nirvana is perfect tranquillisation. but it is not extinc- 
tion nor inertness; while there is an entire absence of discrimi- 
nation and purpose, there is the freedom and spontaneity of 
potentiality that has come with the attainment and patient ac- 
ceptance of the truths of egolessness and imagelessness. Here is 
perfect solitude, undisturbed by any gradation or continuous 
succession, but radiant with the potency and freedom of its 
self-nature which is the self-nature of Noble Wisdom, bliss- 
fully peaceful with the serenity of Perfect Love. 

Entering upon the eighth stage, with the “turning-about” 
at the deepest seat of consciousness, the Bodhisattva will be- 
come conscious that he has received the second kind of Tran- 
scendental-body ( Manomayakaya ). The transition from mortal- 
body to Transcendental-body has nothing to do with mortal 
death, for the old body continues to function and the old mind 
serves the needs of the old body, but now it is free from the 
control of mortal mind. There has been an inconceivable trans- 
formation-death ( acintya-parinama-cyuti ) by which the false- 
imagination of his particularised individual personality has 
been transcended by a realisation of his oneness with the uni- 
versalised mind of Tathagatahood, from which realisation there 
will be no recession. With that realisation he finds himself 



342 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


amply endowed with all the Tathagata’s powers, psychic facul- 
ties, and self-mastery, and, just as the good earth is the support 
of all beings in the world of desire ( karmadhatu ), so the Ta- 
thagatas become the support of all beings in the Transcendental 
World of No-form. 

The first seven of the Bodhisattva stages were in the realm 
of mind and the eighth, while transcending mind, was still in 
touch with it; but in the ninth stage of Transcendental Intel- 
ligence (Sadhumati), by reason of his perfect intelligence and 
insight into the imagelessness of Divine Mind which he had 
attained by self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, he is in the realm 
of Tathagatahood. Gradually the Bodhisattva will realise his 
T athagata-nature and the possession of all its powers and psy- 
chic faculties, self-mastery, loving compassion, and skillful 
means, and by means of them will enter into all the Buddha- 
lands. Making use of these new powers, the Bodhisattva will 
assume various transformation-bodies and personalities for the 
sake of benefiting others. Just as in the former mental life, 
imagination had risen from relative-knowledge, so now skillful- 
means rise spontaneously from Transcendental Intelligence. It 
is like the magical gem that reflects instantaneously appropriate 
responses to one’s wishes. The Bodhisattva passes over to all 
the assemblages of the Buddhas and listens to them as they 
discourse on the dream-like nature of all things and concerning 
the truths that transcend all notions of being and non-being, 
that have no relation to birth and death, nor to etemality nor 
extinction. Thus facing the Tathagatas as they discourse on 
Noble Wisdom that is far beyond the mental capacity of dis- 
ciples and masters, he will attain a hundred thousand Sama- 
dhis, indeed, a hundred thousand nyutas of kotis of Samadhis, 
and in the spirit of these Samadhis he will instantly pass from 
one Buddha-land to another, paying homage to all the Bud- 
dhas, being born into all the celestial mansions, manifesting 
Buddha-bodies, and himself discoursing on the Triple Treasure 
to lesser Bodhisattvas that they too may partake of the fruits 
of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, 

Thus passing beyond the last stage of Bodhisattvahood, he 
becomes a Tathagata himself endowed with all the freedom of 
the Dharmakaya. The tenth stage belongs to the Tathagatas. 
Here the Bodhisattva will find himself seated upon a lotus- 
like throne in a splendid jewel-adorned palace and surrounded 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


343 


by Bodhisattvas of equal rank. Buddhas from all the Buddha- 
lands will gather about him and with their pure and fragrant 
hands resting on his forehead will give him ordination and 
recognition as one of themselves. Then they will assign him a 
Buddha-land that he may possess and perfect as his own. 

The tenth stage is called the Great Truth Cloud (Dharma- 
megha), inconceivable, inscrutable. Only the Tathagatas can 
realise its perfect Imagelessness and Oneness and Solitude. It 
is Mahesvara, the Radiant Land, the Pure Land, the Land of 
Far-distances; surrounding and surpassing the lesser worlds of 
form and desire (karmadhatu), in which the Bodhisattva will 
find himself at-one-ment. Its rays of Noble Wisdom which is 
the self-nature of the Tathagatas, many-colored, entrancing, 
auspicious, are transforming the triple world as other worlds 
have been transformed in the past, and still other worlds will 
be transformed in the future. But in the Perfect Oneness of 
Noble Wisdom there is no gradation nor succession nor effort. 
The tenth stage is the first, the first is the eighth, the eighth is 
the fifth, the fifth is the seventh: what gradation can there be 
where perfect Imagelessness and Oneness prevail? And what is 
the reality of Noble Wisdom? It is the ineffable potency of 
the Dharmakaya; it has no bounds nor limits; it surpasses all 
the Buddha-lands, and pervades the Akanistha and the 
heavenly mansions of the Tushita. 


Chapter XII 

Tathagatahood Which Is Noble Wisdom 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: It has been taught 
in the canonical books that the Buddhas are subject to neither 
birth nor destruction, and you have said that “the Un-bom” is 
one of the names of the Tathagatas; does that mean that the 
Tathagata is a non-entity? 

The Blessed One replied: The Tathagata is not a non-entity 
nor is he to be conceived as other things are as neither bom 
nor disappearing, nor is he subject to causation, nor is he with- 
out significance; yet I refer to him as “The Un-bom.” There 
is yet another name for the Tathagata, “The Mind-appearing 



344 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


One” ( Manomayakaya ) which his Essence-body assumes at will 
in the transformations incident to his work of emancipation. 
This is beyond the understanding of common disciples and 
masters and even beyond the full comprehension of those Bod- 
hisattvas who remain in the seventh stage. Yes, Mahamati, 
“The Un-bom” is synonymous with Tathagata. 

Then Mahamati said: If the Tathagatas are un-bom, there 
does not seem to be anything to take hold of — no entity — or is 
there something that bears another name than entity? And 
what can that “something” be? 

The Blessed One replied: Objects are frequently known by 
different names according to different aspects that they present, — 
the god Indra is sometimes known as Shakra, and sometimes 
as Purandara. These different names are sometimes used inter- 
changeably and sometimes they are discriminated, but different 
objects are not to be imagined because of the different names, 
nor are they without individuation. The same can be said of 
myself as I appear in this world of patience before ignorant 
people and where I am known by uncounted trillions of names. 
They address me by different names not realising that they 
are all names of the one Tathagata. Some recognise me as 
Tathagata, some as The Self-existent One, some as Gautama 
the Ascetic, some as Buddha. Then there are others who rec- 
ognise me as Brahma, as Vishnu, as Ishvara; some see me as 
Sun, as Moon; some as a reincarnation of the ancient sages; 
some as one of “the ten powers”; some as Rama, some as 
Indra, and some as Varuna. Still there are others who speak of 
me as The Un-bom, as Emptiness, as “Suchness,” as Truth, 
as Reality, as Ultimate Principle; still there are others who see 
me as Dharmakaya, as Nirvana, as the Eternal; some speak of 
me as sameness, as non-duality, as un-dying, as formless; some 
think of me as the doctrine of Buddha-causation, or of Eman- 
cipation, or of the Noble Path; and some think of me as Di- 
vine Mind and Noble Wisdom. Thus in this world and in other 
worlds am I known by these uncounted names, but they all 
see me as the moon is seen in water. Though they all honor, 
praise and esteem me, they do not fully understand the mean- 
ing and significance of the words they use; not having their 
own self-realisation of Truth they cling to the words of their 
canonical books, or to what has been told them, or to what 
they have imagined, and fail to see that the name they are 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


345 


using is only one of the many names of the Tathagata. In 
their studies they follow the mere words of the text vainly 
trying to gain the true meaning, instead of having confidence 
in the one “text” where self-confirming Truth is revealed, that 
is, having confidence in the self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 

# * * 

Then said Mahamati: Pray tell us. Blessed One, about the 
self-nature of the Tathagatas? 

The Blessed One replied: If the Tathagata is to be described 
by such expressions as made or un-made, effect or cause, we 
would have to describe him as neither made, nor un-made, nor 
effect, nor cause; but if we so described him we would be guilty 
of dualistic discrimination. If the Tathagata is something made, 
he would be impermanent; if he is impermanent anything 
made would be a Tathagata. If he is something un-made, 
then all effort to realise Tathagatahood would be useless. That 
which is neither an effect nor a cause, is neither a being nor a 
non-being, and that which is neither a being nor a non-being is 
outside the four propositions. The four propositions belong to 
worldly usage; that which is outside them is no more than a 
word, like a barren-woman’s child; so are all the terms con- 
cerning the Tathagata to be understood. 

When it is said that all things are egoless, it means that all 
things are devoid of self-hood. Each thing may have its own 
individuality — the being of a horse is not of cow nature — it is 
such as it is of its own nature and is thus discriminated by the 
ignorant, but, nevertheless, its own nature is of the nature of a 
dream or a vision. That is why the ignorant and the simple- 
minded, who are in the habit of discriminating appearances, 
fail to understand the significance of egolessness. It is not until 
discrimination is gotten rid of that the fact that all things are 
empty, un-bom and without self-nature can be appreciated. 

Mahamati, all these expressions as applied to the Tathagatas 
are without meaning, for that which is none of these is some- 
thing removed from all measurement, and that which is removed 
from all measurement turns into a meaningless word; that 
which is a mere word is something un-bom; that which is un- 
born is not subject to destruction; that which is not subject 
to destruction is like space and space is neither effect nor cause; 
that which is neither effect nor cause is something uncondi- 



346 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

tioned; that which is unconditioned is beyond all reasoning; 
that which is beyond all reasoning, — that is the Tathagata. The 
self-nature of Tathagatahood is far removed from all predicates 
and measurements; the self-nature of Tathagatahood is Noble 
Wisdom. 

# * # 

Then Mahamati said to the Blessed One: Are the Tatha- 
gatas permanent or impermanent? 

The Blessed One replied: The Tathagatas are neither per- 
manent nor impermanent; if either is asserted there is error 
connected with it. If the Tathagata is said to be permanent 
then he will be connected with the creating agencies for, accord- 
ing to the philosophers, the creating agencies are something 
uncreated and permanent. But the Tathagatas are not con- 
nected with the so-called creating agencies and in that sense he 
is impermanent. If he is said to be impermanent then he is 
connected with things that are created for they also are im- 
permanent. For these reasons the Tathagatas are neither per- 
manent nor impermanent. 

Neither can the Tathagatas he said to be permanent in the 
sense that space is said to be permanent, or that the horns of a 
hare can be said to be permanent for, being unreal, they exclude 
all ideas of permanency or impermanency. This does not apply 
to the Tathagatas because they come forth from the habit- 
energy of ignorance which is connected with the mind-system 
and the elements that make up personality. The triple world 
originates from the discrimination of unrealities and where dis- 
crimination takes place there is duality and the notion of per- 
manency and impermanency, but the Tathagatas do not rise 
from the discrimination of unrealities. Thus, as long as there 
is discrimination there will be the notion of permanency and 
impermanency; when discrimination is done away with. Noble 
Wisdom, which is based on the significance of solitude, will be 
established. 

However, there is another sense in which the Tathagatas 
may be said to be permanent. Transcendental Intelligence ris- 
ing with the attainment of enlightenment is of a permanent 
nature. This Truth-essence which is discoverable in the enlight- 
enment of all who are enlightened, is realisable as the regulative 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 347 

and sustaining principle of Reality, which forever abides. The 
Transcendental Intelligence attained intuitively by the Tatha- 
gatas by their self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, is a realisa- 
tion of their own self-nature, — in this sense the Tathagatas are 
permanent. The eternal-unthinkable of the Tathagatas is the 
“suchness” of Noble Wisdom realised within themselves. It is 
both eternal and beyond thought. It conforms to the idea of a 
cause and yet is beyond existence and non-existence. Because 
it is the exalted state of Noble-Wisdom, it has its own char- 
acter. Because it is the cause of highest Reality, it is its own 
causation. Its etemality is not derived from reasonings based on 
external notions of being and non-being, nor of eternality nor 
non-eternality. Being classed under the same head as space, ces- 
sation, Nirvana, it is eternal. Because it has nothing to do with 
existence and non-existence, it is no creator; because it has 
nothing to do with creation, nor with being and non-being, 
but is only revealed in the exalted state of Noble Wisdom, it 
is truly eternal. 

When the twofold passions are destroyed, and the twofold 
hindrances are cleared away, and the twofold egolessness is fully 
understood, and the inconceivable transformation death of the 
Bodhisattva is attained — that which remains is the self-nature 
of the Tathagatas. When the teachings of the Dharma are 
fully understood and are perfectly realised by the disciples and 
masters, that which is realised in their deepest consciousness is 
their own Buddha-nature revealed as Tathagata. 

In a true sense there are four kinds of sameness relating to 
Buddha-nature: there is sameness of letters, sameness of words, 
sameness of meaning, and sameness of Essence. The name Bud- 
dha is spelt: B-U-D-D-H-A; the letters are the same when 
used for any Buddha or Tathagata. When the Brahmans teach 
they use various words, and when the Tathagatas teach they 
use the very same words; in respect to words there is a same- 
ness between us. In the teachings of all the Tathagatas there 
is a sameness of meaning. Among all the Buddhas there is a 
sameness of Buddha-nature. They all have the thirty-two marks 
of excellence and the eighty minor signs of bodily perfection; 
there is no distinction among them except as they manifest 
various transformations according to the different dispositions 
of beings who are to be disciplined and emancipated by various 



348 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

means. In the Ultimate Essence which is Dharmakaya, all the 
Buddhas of the past, present and future, are of one sameness. 

* * * 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: It has been said 
by the Blessed One that from the night of the Enlightenment 
to the night of the Farinirvana, the Tathagata has uttered no 
word nor ever will utter a word. In what deep meaning is 
this true? 

The Blessed One replied: By two reasons of deepest mean- 
ing is it true: In the light of the Truth self-realised by Noble 
Wisdom; and in the Truth of an eternally-abiding Reality. The 
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom by all the Tathagatas is the 
same as my own self-realisation of Noble Wisdom; there is no 
more, no less, no difference; and all the Tathagatas bear wit- 
ness that the state of self-realisation is free from words and 
discriminations and has nothing to do with the dualistic way 
of speaking, that is, all beings receive the teachings of the Ta- 
thagatas through self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, not through 
words of discrimination. 

Again Mahamati, there has always been an eternally-abiding 
Reality. The “substance” of Truth (dharmadhatu) abides for- 
ever whether a Tathagata appears in the world or not. So does 
the Reason of all things ( dharmata ) eternally abide; so does 
Reality ( paramartha ) abide and keep its order. What has been 
realised by myself and all other Tathagatas is this Reality 
( Dharmakaya ), the eternally-abiding self-orderliness of Reality; 
the “suchness” ( tathata ) of things; the realness of things 
(bhutata); Noble Wisdom which is Truth itself. The sun ra- 
diates its splendor spontaneously on all alike and with no words 
of explanation; in like manner do the Tathagatas radiate the 
Truth of Noble Wisdom with no recourse to words and to all 
alike. For these reasons is it stated by me that from the night 
of the Enlightenment to the night of the Tathagata’s Parinir- 
vana, he has not uttered, nor ever will he utter, one word. 
And the same is true of all the Buddhas. 

# # * 

Then said Mahamati: Blessed One, you speak of the same- 
ness of all the Buddhas, but in other places you have spoken of 
Dharmata-Buddha, Nishyanda-Buddha and Nirmana-Buddha 



the lankavatara scripture 


349 

as though they were different from each other; how can they 
be the same and yet different? 

The Blessed One replied: I speak of the different Buddhas 
as opposed to the views of the philosophers who base their 
teachings on the reality of an external world of form and who 
cherish discriminations and attachments arising therefrom; 
against the teachings of these philosophers I disclose the N ir- 
mana-Buddha, the Buddha of Transformations. In the many 
transformations of the Tathagata stage, the N irmana-Buddha 
establishes such matters as charity, morality, patience, thought- 
fulness, and tranquillisation; by right-knowledge he teaches the 
true understanding of the maya-like nature of the elements 
that make up personality and its external world; he teaches 
the true nature of the mind-system as a whole and in the dis- 
tinctions of its forms, functions and ways of performance. In 
a deeper sense, The N irmana-Buddha symbolises the principles 
of differentiation and integration by reason of which all com- 
ponent things are distributed, all complexities simplified, all 
thoughts analysed; at the same time it symbolises the harmon- 
ising, unifying power of sympathy and compassion; it removes 
all obstacles, it harmonises all differences, it brings into perfect 
Oneness the discordant many. For the emancipation of all be- 
ings the Bodhisattvas and Tathagatas assume bodies of trans- 
formation and employ many skillful devices, — this is the work 
of the N irmana-Buddha. 

For the enlightenment of the Bodhisattvas and their sus- 
taining along the stages, the Inconceivable is made realisable. 
The N ishyanda-Buddha, the “Out-flowing-Buddha,” through 
Transcendental Intelligence, reveals the true meaning and sig- 
nificance of appearances, discrimination, attachment; and of the 
power of habit-energy which is accumulated by them and condi- 
tions them; and of the un-bornness, the emptiness, the egoless- 
ness of all things. Because of Transcendental Intelligence and 
the purification of the evil out-flowings of life, all dualistic 
views of existence and non-existence are transcended and by 
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom the true imagelessness of Real- 
ity is made manifest. The inconceivable glory of Buddhahood 
is made manifest in rays of Noble Wisdom; Noble Wisdom is 
the self-nature of the Tathagatas. This is the work of the 
N ishyanda-Buddha. In a deeper sense, the N ishyanda-Buddha 
symbolises the emergence of the principles of intellection and 



350 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

compassion but as yet undifferentiated and in perfect balance, 
potential but unmanifest. Looked at from the in-going side of 
the Bodhisattvas, N ishyanda-Buddha is seen in the glorified 
bodies of the Tathagatas; looked at from the forth-going side 
of Buddhahood, N ishyanda-Buddha is seen in the radiant per- 
sonalities of the Tathagatas ready and eager to manifest the in- 
herent Love and Wisdom of the Dharmakaya. 

Dharmata-Buddha is Buddhahood in its self-nature of Per- 
fect Oneness in whom absolute Tranquillity prevails. As Noble 
Wisdom, Dharmata-Buddha transcends all differentiated knowl- 
edge, is the goal of intuitive self-realisation, and is the self- 
nature of the Tathagatas. As Noble Wisdom, Dharmata-Bud- 
dha is inscrutable, ineffable, unconditioned. Dharmata-Buddha 
is the Ultimate Principle of Reality from which all things derive 
their being and truthfulness, but which in itself transcends all 
predicates. Dharmata-Buddha is the central sun which holds 
all, illumines all. Its inconceivable Essence is made manifest 
in the “out-flowing” glory of N ishyanda-Buddha and in the 
transformations of Nirmana-Buddha. 

* * # 

Then said Mahamati: Pray tell us. Blessed One, more about 
the Dharmakaya? 

The Blessed One replied: We have been speaking of it in 
terms of Buddhahood, but as it is inscrutable and beyond pred- 
icate we may just as well speak of it as the Truth-body, or the 
T ruth-principle of Ultimate Reality (Paramartha). This Ul- 
timate Principle of Reality may be considered as it is mani- 
fested under seven aspects: First, as Citta-gocara , it is the world 
of spiritual experience and the abode of the Tathagatas on 
their outgoing mission of emancipation. It is Noble Wisdom 
manifested as the principle of irradiahcy and individuation. 
Second, as Jnana, it is the mind-world and its principle of in- 
tellection and consciousness. Third, as Dristi, it is the realm of 
dualistn which is the physical world of birth and death wherein 
are manifested all the differentiations of thinker, thinking and 
thought-about and wherein are manifested the principles of 
sensation, perception, discrimination, desire, attachment and 
suffering. 

Fourth, because of the greed, anger, infatuation, suffering 
and need of the physical world incident to discrimination and 



THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


35 1 

attachment, it reveals a world beyond the realm of dualism 
wherein it appears as the integrating principle of charity and 
sympathy. Fifth, in a realm still higher, which is the abode of 
the Bodhisattva stages, and is analogous to the mind-world, 
where the interests of heart transcend those of the mind, it 
appears as the principle of compassion and self-giving. Sixth, 
in the spiritual realm where the Bodhisattvas attain Buddha- 
hood, it appears as the principle of perfect Love (Karuna). 
Here the last clinging to an ego-self is abandoned and the Bod- 
hisattva enters into his self-realisation of Noble Wisdom which 
is the bliss of the Tathagata’s perfect enjoyment of his inmost 
nature. Seventh as Prajna it is the active aspect of the Ul- 
timate Principle wherein both the forth-going and the in-com- 
ing principles are alike implicit and potential, and wherein both 
Wisdom and Love are in perfect balance, harmony and One- 
ness. 

These are the seven aspects of the Ultimate Principle of 
Dharmakaya, by reason of which all things are made manifest 
and perfected and then reintegrated, and all remaining within 
its inscrutable Oneness, with no signs of individuation, nor 
beginning, nor succession, nor ending. We speak of it as 
Dharmakaya, as Ultimate Principle, as Buddhahood, as Nir- 
vana; what matters it? They are only other names for Noble 
Wisdom. 

Mahamati, you and all the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should 
avoid the erroneous reasonings of the philosophers and seek 
. for a self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. 


Chapter XIII 
Nirvana 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: Pray tell us about 
Nirvana? 

The Blessed One replied: The term. Nirvana, is used with 
many different meanings, by different people, but these people 
may be divided into four groups: There are people who are 
suffering, or who are afraid of suffering, and who think of Nir- 
vana; there are the philosophers who try to discriminate Nir- 



352 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


vana; there are the class of disciples who think of Nirvana in 
relation to themselves; and, finally there is the Nirvana of the 
Buddhas. 

Those who are suffering or who fear suffering, think of Nir- 
vana as an escape and a recompense. They imagine that Nir- 
vana consists in the future annihilation of the senses and the 
sense-minds; they are not aware that Universal Mind and Nir- 
vana are One, and that this life-and-death world and Nirvana 
are not to be separated. These ignorant ones, instead of medi- 
tating on the imagelessness of Nirvana, talk of different ways 
of emancipation. Being ignorant of, or not understanding, the 
teachings of the Tathagatas, they cling to the notion of Nir- 
vana that is outside what is seen of the mind and, thus, go on 
rolling themselves along with the wheel of life and death. 

As to the Nirvanas discriminated by the philosophers: there 
really are none. Some philosophers conceive Nirvana to be 
found where the mind-system no more operates owing to the 
cessation of the elements that make up personality and its 
world; or is found where there is utter indifference to the ob- 
jective world and its impermanency. Some conceive Nirvana 
to be a state where there is no recollection of the past or pres- 
ent, just as when a lamp is extinguished, or when a seed is 
burnt, or when a fire goes out; because then there is the ces- 
sation of all the substrata, which is explained by the philoso- 
phers as the non-rising of discrimination. But this is not Nir- 
vana, because Nirvana does not consist in simple annihilation 
and vacuity. 

Again, some philosophers explain deliverance as though it 
was the mere stopping of discrimination, as when the wind 
stops blowing, or as when one by self-effort gets rid of the 
dualistic view of knower and known, or gets rid of the notions 
of permanency and impermanency; or gets rid of the notions 
of good and evil; or overcomes passion by means of knowl- 
edge — to them Nirvana is deliverance. Some, seeing in “form” 
the bearer of pain are alarmed by the notion of “form” and 
look for happiness in a world of “no-form.” Some conceive that 
in Consideration of individuality and generality recognisable in 
all things inner and outer, that there is no destruction and that 
all beings maintain their being for ever and, in this etemality, 
see Nirvana. Others see the etemality of things in the con- 
ception of Nirvana as the absorption of the finite-soul in Su- 


THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE 


353 


preme Atman; or who see all things as a manifestation of the 
vital-force of some Supreme Spirit to which all return; and 
some, who are especially silly, declare that there are two pri- 
mary things, a primary substance and a primary soul, that react 
differently upon each other and thus produce all things from 
the transformations of qualities; some think that the world 
is bom of action and interaction and that no other cause is 
necessary; others think that Ishvara is the free creator of all 
things; clinging to these foolish notions, there is no awakening, 
and they consider Nirvana to consist in the fact that there is 
no awakening. 

Some imagine that Nirvana is where self-nature exists in its 
own right, unhampered by other self-natures, as the variegated 
feathers of a peacock, or various precious crystals, or the point- 
edness of a thorn. Some conceive being to be Nirvana, some 
non-being, while others conceive that all things and Nirvana 
are not to be distinguished from one another. Some, thinking 
that time is the creator and that as the rise of the world de- 
pends on time, they conceive that Nirvana consists in the recog- 
nition of time as Nirvana. Some think that there will be Nir- 
vana when the “twenty-five” truths are generally accepted, or 
when the king observes the six virtues, and some religionists 
think that Nirvana is the attainment of paradise. 

These views severally advanced by the philosophers with 
their various reasonings are not in accord with logic nor are 
they acceptable to the wise. They all conceive Nirvana dualist- 
ically and in some causal connection; by these discriminations 
philosophers imagine Nirvana, but where there is no rising and 
no disappearing, how can there be discrimination? Each philoso- 
pher relying on his own textbook from which he draws his un- 
derstanding, sins against the truth, because truth is not where 
he imagines it to be. The only result is that it sets his mind 
to wandering about and becoming more confused as Nirvana is 
not to be found by mental searching, and the more his mind 
becomes confused the more he confuses other people. 

As to the notion of Nirvana as held by disciples and mas- 
ters who still cling to the notion of an ego-self, and who try 
to find it by going off by themselves into solitude: their notion 
of Nirvana is an eternity of bliss like the bliss of the Sama- 
dhis — for themselves. They recognise that the world is only a 
manifestation of mind and that all discriminations are of the 



354 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

mind, and so they forsake social relations and practise various 
spiritual disciplines and in solitude seek self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom by self-effort. They follow the stages to the sixth and 
attain the bliss of the Samadhis, but as they are still clinging 
to egoism they do not attain the “turning-about” at the deep- 
est seat of consciousness and, therefore, they are not free from 
the thinking-mind and the accumulation of its habit-energy. 
Clinging to the bliss of the Samadhis, they pass to their Nir- 
vana, but it is not the Nirvana of the Tathagatas. They are 
of those who have “entered the stream”; they must return to 
this world of life and death. 

* * * 

Then said Mahamati to the Blessed One: When the Bodhi- 
sattvas yield up their stock of merit for the emancipation of 
all beings, they become spiritually one with all animate life; 
they themselves may be purified, but in others there yet re- 
main unexhausted evil and unmatured karma. Pray tell us, 
Blessed One, how the Bodhisattvas are given assurance of Nir- 
vana? and what is the Nirvana of the Bodhisattvas? 

The Blessed One replied: Mahamati, this assurance is not an 
assurance of numbers nor logic; it is not the mind that is to be 
assured but the heart. The Bodhisattva’s assurance comes with 
the unfolding insight that follows passion hindrances cleared 
away, knowledge hindrance purified, and egolessness clearly per- 
ceived and patiently accepted. As the mortal-mind ceases to 
discriminate, there is no more thirst for life, no more sex-lust, 
no more thirst for learning, no more thirst for eternal life; 
with the disappearance of these fourfold thirsts, there is no 
more accumulation of habit-energy; with no more accumulation 
of habit-energy the defilements on the face of Universal Mind 
clear away, and the Bodhisattva attains self-realisation of Noble 
Wisdom that is the heart’s assurance of Nirvana. 

There are Bodhisattvas here and in other Buddha-lands, 
who are sincerely devoted to the Bodhisattva’s mission and yet 
who cannot wholly forget the bliss of the Samadhis and the 
peace of Nirvana — for themselves. The teaching of Nirvana in 
which there is no substrate left behind, is revealed according 
to a hidden meaning for the sake of these disciples who still 
cling to thoughts of Nirvana for themselves, that they may be 
inspired to exert themselves in the Bodhisattva’s mission of 



the lankavatara scripture 


355 


emancipation for all beings. The Transformation- Buddhas/eacb 
a doctrine of Nirvana to meet conditions as they find them, 
and to give encouragement to the timid and selfish. In order 
to turn their thoughts away from themselves and to encourage 
them to a deeper compassion and more earnest zeal for others, 
they are given assurance as to the future by the sustaining 
power of the Buddhas of T ransformation, but not by the 
Dharmata-Buddha. 

The Dharma which establishes the Truth of Noble Wisdom 
belongs to the realm of the Dharmata-Buddha. To the Bodhi- 
sattvas of the seventh and eighth stages, T ranscendental Intel- 
ligence is revealed by the Dharmata-Buddha and the Path is 
pointed out to them which they are to follow. In the perfect 
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom that follows the inconceivable 
transformation death of the Bodhisattva’s individualised will- 
control, he no longer lives unto himself, but the life that he 
lives thereafter is the Tathagata’s universalised life as mani- 
fested in its transformations. In this perfect self-realisation of 
Noble Wisdom the Bodhisattva realises that for Buddhas 
there is no Nirvana. 

The death of a Buddha, the great Parinirvana, is neither 
destruction nor death, else would it be birth and continuation. 
If it were destruction, it would be an effect-producing deed, 
which it is not. Neither is it a vanishing nor an abandonment, 
neither is it attainment, nor is it of no attainment; neither is 
it of one significance nor of no significance, for there is no 
Nirvana for the Buddhas. 

The Tathagata’s Nirvana is where it is recognised that there 
is nothing but what is seen of the mind itself; is where, recog- 
nising the nature of the self-mind, one no longer cherishes the 
dualisms of discrimination; is where there is no more thirst nor 
grasping; is where there is no more attachment to external 
things. Nirvana is where the thinking-mind with all its dis- 
criminations, attachments, aversions and egoism is forever put 
away; is where logical measures, as they are seen to be inert, 
are no longer seized upon; is where even the notion of truth is 
treated with indifference because of its causing bewilderment; 
is where, getting rid of the four propositions, there is insight 
into the abode of Reality. Nirvana is where the twofold pas- 
sions have subsided and the twofold hindrances are cleared away 
and the twofold egolessness is patiently accepted; is where, by 



356 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

the attainment of the “turning-about” in the deepest seat of 
consciousness, self-realisation of Noble Wisdom is fully entered 
into, — that is the Nirvana of the Tathagatas. 

Nirvana is where the Bodhisattva stages are passed one 
after another; is where the sustaining power of the Buddhas 
upholds the Bodhisattvas in the bliss of the Samadhis; is where 
compassion for others transcends all thoughts of self; is where 
the Tathagata stage is finally realised. 

Nirvana is the realm of Dharmata-Buddha; it is where the 
manifestation of Noble Wisdom that is Buddhahood expresses 
itself in Perfect Love for all; it is where the manifestation of 
Perfect Love that is Tathagatahood expresses itself in Noble 
Wisdom for the enlightenment of all — there, indeed, is 
Nirvana! 

There are two classes of those who may not enter the Nir- 
vana of the Tathagatas: there are those who have abandoned 
the Bodhisattva ideals, saying, they are not in conformity with 
the sutras, the codes of morality, nor with emancipation. Then 
there are the true Bodhisattvas who, on account of their orig- 
inal vows made for the sake of all beings, saying, “So long as 
they do not attain Nirvana, I will not attain it myself,” vol- 
untarily keep themselves out of Nirvana. But no beings are 
left outside by the will of the Tathagatas; some day each and 
every one will be influenced by the wisdom and love of the 
Tathagatas of Transformation to lay up a stock of merit and 
ascend the stages. But, if they only realised it, they are al- 
ready in the Tathagata’s Nirvana for, in Noble Wisdom, all 
things are in Nirvana from the beginning. 



AWAKENING OF FAITH 

MAHAYANA SHRADDHOTPADA SHASTRA 
Preface 

T HIS Commentary upon the Mahayana Shradhotpadda 
Shastra is one of the most profound and wonderful books 
that has ever been written. It elucidates the significance of the 
Mahayana which is the Noble Path to Enlightenment and Nir- 
vana, and by so doing it unveils the development of the 
Truth of Mind-Essence under the conditions of this Saha 
world. Its meaning is wide and profound, being as tranquil 
and peaceful as open space, and its potentialities as limitless 
and varied and vast as the boundless ocean. In its scope it in- 
cludes divinities as well as humans, indeed, it reveals the origin 
of all individualized concepts. Because of its succinctness and 
profundity only a few are able to understand it. 

In India, at the time of its writing some six hundred years 
after the Nirvana of our Lord Tathagata, the philosophic and 
religious culture of the times had developed and become segre- 
gated into many different schools and cults, so that all kinds 
of heresies and fallacies were flourishing everywhere. In only 
one thing did they agree and that was in a common attack 
and slanders about the True Teaching of Buddhism. At this 
crisis there came into prominence in India a scholar of out- 
standing virtue by the name of Ashvaghosha who rose to be 
the greatest controversalist of his time and who was able to 
subdue all opponents of Buddhism. As a Brahmin scholar he 
had studied all philosophies, but had become convinced that in 
the Truth of Mahayana he had found the ultimate ground of 
Truth and Faith and he cherished a deep and abiding faith in 
it. Although in the beginning a proud and egoistic Brahmin 
pedant, under the influence of his new faith he awakened a 
great heart of compassion and resolved that whenever oppor- 
tunity came he would willingly interpret it to others. It was 
in this spirit of compassion for all the world, seeing them suf- 

357 



358 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


fering under delusion, that he wrote this Commentary that by 
so doing he might broadcast the Three Treasures of Buddhism 
(Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, that is, Buddha, His Teaching, His 
Brotherhood) and revive their appeal. Any one who by read- 
ing it awakened a pure faith would be quickly turned away 
from his heretical preconceptions and enter upon the true Path. 
Since the time of the Lord Tathagata this Mahayana Teaching 
had only imperfectly been understood because its time of ma- 
turity had not yet fully come. In China it had not even been 
heard of. It was not until the times of the Later Liang Dyn- 
asty (505-552) that the Emperor Liang Wu-ti becoming inter- 
ested in this Indian Teaching sent envoys to the Magadha 
country of India to -secure copies of its Sanskrit Scriptures and 
to invite learned Masters to return with them to China. There 
these envoys met a great Sanskrit Master by the name of Kul- 
ananda, who afterward became better known as Paramartha. 
He had been a great student of Indian philosophies and relig- 
ions during his academic life, but had later become wholly in- 
terested in the Teachings of the Mahayana and had become a 
Master of great insight into its Truths. He was eminently the 
Master the envoys were looking for and they invited him to 
return with them to be under the patronage of the Emperor. 
At first he refused to go, but under the urgent appeal of his 
own King, he at last consented and sailed for China with suit- 
able attendants and a store of images and books. 

He was received with great respect by the Emperor, but 
unfortunately within ten days a rebellion broke out, surrounded 
the palace and in less than eighty days the Emperor had died 
of starvation, leaving the Indian Master unprotected, but not 
without friends. At first he prepared to return to his native 
country, but certain of us including Lord Shaube of the Privy 
Council and the Generalissimo’s office advised him to remain 
and provided him with a safe retreat in the Kien-shing Temple 
in Hengchow, Hunan Province. 

In the Third Year of Shen-Seng (557) The Master began 
the translation of this Shastra and completed it in two years in 
one volume elucidating the Mahayana very vividly and 
clearly. Besides this he translated many other Scriptures, not- 
ably, Metaphysical Buddhism in twenty volumes, the Metaphys- 
ics of the Mahavagga in four volumes, and An Interpretation 
of the Nine Kinds of Consciousness in two volumes. Besides 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


359 


the Grand Master Paramartha, he was assisted by the Indo- 
Scythian Master Surnam and others, and I was one of the 
Chinese writers to put their interpretations into classical Chinese 
characters. From the commencement of the work to its ending, 
the task lasted two years. Since then this elucidation of the 
principle and practice of the Mahayana written by the Vener- 
able Patriarch Ashvaghosha has prevailed in the scholarly world 
and most of the heretical scholars have submitted to the 
orthodox. 

It was a cause of great regret to me that I was never able 
to meet the Venerable Patriarch personally, but I count it a 
good fortune to have had the chance to study his wonderful 
teaching and witness and praise its profound wisdom. I rever- 
enced this Principle so much that I could hardly give up its 
study. In spite of my unlearnedness, I presumptuously ac- 
cepted the honor of writing down the oral interpretations of 
my colleagues. If there ever should be greater scholars who by 
chance should read it, I Would count it a great indebtedness if 
they would correct any errors. 

Written by Bhikshu Chih-chi of the Liang Dynasty. 
Introduction 

ADORATION to our Great Compassionate Savior, Omnipres- 
ent, Omniscient, Omnipotent! 

ADORATION to his Potentiality and unmanifested Univer- 
sality! 

ADORATION to his Activity, perfectly balanced and accom- 
modating! 

ADORATION to the pure Essence of Mind, wide and deep as 
the sea! 

ADORATION to its Store of infinite Virtues and Merit, that 
may be fully developed by earnest and true practising! 

IN THY NAME I interpret the Mahayana for the sake of 
dispelling the suspicions and heretical prejudices of all sen- 
tient beings! 

By the Awakening of their Faith in the Mahayana may I 
scatter Buddha seeds for an unending harvest! 

* * * 

This commentary is written wholly on the ground that there 



a6o SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


is a way in which faith in the Mahayana can be developed. 
It was for this reason and no other that I was impelled to the 
writing of this interpretation of the Mahayana Principle. The 
interpretation is divided into five parts: i) The introduction. 
2) Terms used in the Mahayana. 3) The interpretation of the 
Mahayana. 4) The practising of the Mahayana. 5) The ad- 
vantages of practising the Mahayana. 

Part One 
Introduction 

Some one may enquire why I was led to write this Com- 
mentary. The reply is that there are eight kinds of causes and 
affinities that led me to undertake this task. My first and main 
purpose was to save all sentient beings from suffering and to 
bring them to eternal happiness. I had no desire to gain by 
it worldly fame, riches or honor. The second reason was a de- 
sire to present the true meaning of the Lord Tathagata’s teach- 
ings so that all ‘sentient beings might have the advantage of a 
true understanding of it at the very beginning. The third 
reason was to enable those who have made some advance on 
the Path to enlightenment to conserve their gain and not to 
later lose it. The fourth reason was to awaken and strengthen 
the faith of beginners on the path and to encourage them to a 
more earnest practice. The fifth reason was to show all those 
who are following the path expedient means for getting rid of 
the hindrances of bad karma, for keeping their minds free 
from the cravings and infatuations of egoism, and to keep free 
from the net of evil influences. The sixth reason was the wish 
to help all seekers to practice right methods for practising 
"stopping and reflecting” so as to guard them against the false 
view-points of both worldly minded people and Hinayana dis- 
ciples. The seventh reason was to explain the expedient means 
of reciting the Divine Name of Amitabha Buddha and to prove 
to them that if they should recite the name of Amitabha with 
one-pointed mind that they would be sure to be reborn in Bud- 
dha’s pure land, and once reborn there that they would never 
suffer retrogression. The eighth reason was to show to those 
whose faith was awakened by the reading of this treatise the 
inestimable advantages of the practice of Dhyana and to per- 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 361 

suade them to an earnest perseverance in it. These are the 
reasons that led me to the writing of this commentary. 

Again, some one may enquire why, so long as the Dharma 
was presented in the Sutras, a commentary was called for. My 
reply is this. It is true that the Buddha teachings are fully 
presented in the Sutras, but as the karmas and inherited ten- 
dencies of sentient beings vary widely, and their experiences 
and practises are different from one another, so the conditions 
of their awakening faith and their realization of its fruits will 
be different. During the presence of the Lord Tathagata in this 
world those sentient beings who were endowed with competent 
and intelligent minds as they listened to the Lord Buddha, 
whose words were transcendental both in their form and mean- 
ing, and which were interpreted with perfect accommodation, 
understood them, and there was no need at that time for such 
a treatise as this. But after the Nirvana of the Lord Tathagata 
conditions were different. The teachings had been reduced to 
written words and men’s minds were less acute and more varied. 
Some were able to acquire an understanding of the teaching 
by their own study of them after a long time, and some after 
a short time. Some who lacked intellectual power would acquire 
an understanding after the study of long and erudite com- 
mentaries and some becoming confused by long and tiresome 
commentaries were helped by brief and concise ones. Because 
of these conditions I felt that a new and different commentary 
was called for and I felt impelled to present the Lord’s Teach- 
ings in all their profound wisdom but to explain them briefly, 
succinctly, but clearly and adequately. 

Part Two 

Terms used in the Mahayana 

Generally speaking the Mahayana employs two sets of 
terms. One set is used when speaking of the Dharma as Es- 
sence, the other when speaking of the Dharma as Principle. 
The Dharma is the mind of all sentient beings. This mind 
embraces all conceptions both relating to the phenomenal world 
and those relating to the mind world and leading to the purity 
and freedom of eternity. It is by means of the concepts of this 
mind that the principle of the Mahayana is being unfolded and 
comprehended. In one aspect it manifests the true essence of 



362 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

the Mahayana; in the other aspect it reflects the appearing 
and disappearing, because of causes and conditions, and unfolds 
the potentialities and activities of the principle of the 
Mahayana. 

The concept of the principle of the Mahayana is capable of 
three kinds of interpretation. The first is its immensity, its all- 
embracing wholeness, in which all concepts are intrinsic but 
undifferentiated and of the same suchness neither decreasing nor 
increasing in quantity, but abiding in perfect purity and unity. 
The second is its immensity of potentiality; as the womb of 
Tathagata it is the fountain of all dharmas, of all natures and 
merits, even to infinities of infinity. The third is the immensity 
of its manifesting activities, giving rise to all manner of good 
causes and effects belonging both to this terrestrial world and 
to the mind world leading to the perfect purity and freedom of 
eternity. It is the path by which all the Buddhas have attained 
Nirvana, and by it the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas will attain 
the sure ground of Tathagatahood. 

Part Three 

The interpretation of the Mahayana 

The interpretation of the Mahayana is divided into three 
sections. The first section treats of the unfolding of the true 
principle. The second is a refutation of false doctrines and 
prejudices. The third, relates to right practices leading to en- 
lightenment. 

Section One 

First as to the unfolding of the true principle. The mind 
has two doors from which issue its activities. One leads to a 
realization of the mind’s Pure Essence, the other leads to the 
differentiations of appearing and disappearing, of life and death. 
Through each door passes all the mind’s conceptions so inter- 
related that they never have been separated and never will be. 

What is meant by the Pure Essence of Mind? It is the ul- 
timate purity and unity, the all-embracing wholeness, the quin- 
tessence of Truth. Essence of Mind belongs to neither death 
nor rebirth, it is uncreated and eternal. The concepts of the 
conscious mind are being individualized and discriminated by 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


363 


false imaginations. If the mind could be kept free from dis- 
criminative thinking there would be no more arbitrary thoughts 
to give rise to appearances of form, exigencies and conditions. 
Therefore from the beginning, all concepts have been independ- 
ent of individuation, of names and mental moods and condi- 
tions. They are in their essential nature of an equal sameness, 
neither variable nor breakable nor destructible. As they are of 
one suchness, of one purity, it is spoken of as Mind-essence. 

For the differentiations of words are but false notions with 
no basis in reality. They have in their falsity only a relative 
existence as false imaginations and thoughts arise and pass 
away. Even as applying to Mind-essence words have no value, 
for in Mind-essence there is nothing to be grasped nor named. 
But we use words to get free from words until we reach the 
pure wordless Essence. In Essence of Mind there is nothing 
that can be taken away and nothing that can be added. All 
concepts are an undivided part of Reality; they are not arti- 
ficial but are unchangeable and ineffable and unthinkable. They 
are the Essence of Mind itself. Some one may ask that if all 
concepts are to be thus regarded, how are sentient beings to 
make use of them to abstract their minds into the Mind’s pure 
Essence? The reply is that whenever any sentient being uses 
words in relation to the mind’s pure Essence he should remem- 
ber their falsity and cherish no arbitrary conceptions, nor dis- 
tinctions between themselves and the spoken words and the 
thing spoken about. As they use words to express their 
thoughts they should remember that words are wholly inde- 
pendent of the speaker and are not to be grasped as their own. 
If any sentient being should be able to thus keep free from all 
arbitrary conceptions, it would mean that they had attained 
oneness with the pure Essence of all concepts. 

Again, if we are to distinguish different aspects of Mind- 
Essence, there is an emptiness aspect of its invariable Essence 
for it can unfold its primal reality. And there is a non-empti- 
ness aspect, for it has its own substantiality possessing all sorts 
of merits of a non-intoxicant nature, that is, that it exists in its 
own right. The first is an aspect of negation, the second an 
aspect of affirmation. From the very beginning Mind-Essence 
has never given any mutual response to any contaminated con- 
ceptions of differentiations, it has ever been free from discrim- 
inations among thoughts or phenomena, for it is perfect unity. 



364 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


perfect purity. It should be clearly understood that the true 
nature of Mind-Essence does not belong to any individualized 
conception of phenomena or of non-phenomena; nor of the 
absence of phenomena, or of the absence of non-phenomena; 
nor of unity or of disunity; nor of the absence of unity or of 
disunity; in other words, it has no particularizing consciousness, 
it does not belong to any kind of describable nature. Individ- 
uations and the consciousness of them come into being only as 
sentient beings cherish false imaginations of differences and the 
mind makes discriminations among them, thought after thought 
rising with no mutual response among them, resulting in con- 
fusion and conflict and suffering. This is what is meant when 
speaking of Mind-Essence as being empty. But if the Truth is 
fully understood it will be seen that the conception of empti- 
ness as it relates to Mind-Essence is itself, “empty.” If the 
mind can be kept free from false imaginations there can be no 
conceivable meaning to the term, “emptiness.” 

On the other hand, Mind-Essence is by no means to be 
thought of as being empty of its own perfectly universalized 
nature; it is only empty in the sense that it includes in its 
true nature no elements of falsity, namely, it is the pure Dhar- 
makaya, the very suchness of Truth. Since it has ever been 
permanent and invariable in its nature, and possessing the 
whole body of conceptions in perfectly undifferentiated purity 
it is the very acme of non-emptiness. At the same time, it 
must by no means be considered that Mind-Essence has its 
own transcendental phenomena; not at all, it has no conceiv- 
able or inconceivable phenomena of its own, it is perfect Empti- 
ness, and can only be apprehended as the mind transcending its 
discriminating processes of thought and all imagery of selfness, 
becomes itself unified with the pure Suchness of Mind-Essence. 

Then there is the appearing and dis-appearing aspect of 
Mind-Essence, that we think of as birth and death. In this 
connection we think of Mind-Essence as the Womb of Tatha- 
gata, but in fact nothing comes forth and nothing returns and 
there is no Womb of Tathagata, for the nature of appearing 
and disappearing coincides with the nature of non-appearing 
and non-disappearing. The pure Essence of Mind is neither 
unity nor plurality and yet we conceive it as the inconceivable 
Alaya-vijnana, the “storage” or Universal Mind. This Alaya 
consciousness embraces two significant aspects which can both 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 365 

receive and give forth all definitive concepts. The one aspect is 
that of Enlightenment, the other that of Ignorance. 

In its aspect of Enlightenment, Mind-Essence is free from 
all manner of individuation and discriminative thinking; it is 
all-embracing, extending to all immensities as vast as open 
space, as pure, as unchanging, as indefinable. It is the Dhar- 
makaya of T athagatahood. It is innate Enlightenment, but be- 
cause it is Enlightenment, it foreshadows the appearing of En- 
lightenment, but innate Enlightenment and the appearing of 
Enlightenment are of one sameness; because there is the con- 
ception of Enlightenment, there is the conception of non-En- 
lightenment, and because of the conception of non-Enlighten- 
ment there is the conception of Enlightenment. Because of 
the conception of Enlightenment, and of non-Enlightenment, 
there is the conception of attaining Enlightenment, but En- 
lightenment, non-Enlightenment, attaining of Enlightenment 
are all of one sameness and unity. When the mind becomes 
conscious of its ultimate nature of Enlightenment, it speaks of 
it as Enlightenment; when it is not enlightened as to its ul- 
timate nature, we think of it as Ignorance, but truly in the 
Alaya-vijnana there is no difference between them, there is 
only the perfect purity of the Dharmakaya. 

Among human beings. Enlightenment appears in varying 
degrees of purity. Just as soon as a common person is con- 
scious of a difference between right thoughts and false thoughts, 
between good thoughts and evil thoughts, it can be said that he 
has become enlightened, but it is a very rudimentary form of 
Enlightenment. Hinayana disciples as they begin their practice 
of Dhyana are conscious of their discriminating thoughts and 
at the same time are conscious that they have no validity; 
they are said to have attained Enlightenment, but it is a very 
crude form of Enlightenment. As they restrain their discrim- 
inative concepts, being conscious of their falsity their enlighten- 
ment becomes more refined. As they become Bodhisattvas, be- 
coming more conscious of the grasping nature of discriminative 
thoughts and yet reminding themselves that even discriminative 
thoughts have no grasping quality in their self-nature, their 
Enlightenment has become partly accommodating. As Bodhi- 
sattvas advance along the stages, they more and more become 
sensitive to the arising of these false discriminations and more 
and more quickly react against them, and become more and 



366 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


more skillful in employing expedient means for checking their 
arising and ignoring them if they arise. Until at last they 
come to a state of awareness in which they are able to keep 
far away from even the most refined conceptions, knowing that 
Essential Mind is permanent and abiding in its purity. This is 
a state of perfect accommodation; it can be truly called En- 
lightenment. Therefore it is said in the Sutras, if any sentient 
being is able to keep free from all discriminative thinking, he 
has attained to the wisdom of a Buddha. 

In the foregoing we have referred to the rising of conscious 
and discriminative thoughts, but speaking truly, there is no ris- 
ing of thoughts of any kind, for conscious thinking is wholly 
subjective and imaginary. Most people are said to be lacking 
in Enlightenment. This is not because they have no thoughts, 
but because from the very beginning they have had a contin- 
uous stream of discriminations with no break in their succession. 
They are still abiding in a beginningless Ignorance. But when 
a Bodhisattva has completed the stages and has attained a 
state of no thinking, he is able to realize that all the phe- 
nomena of conscious mentation — its rising, growing, passing, 
disappearing — is the same as no thinking, that all the apparent 
changes are inherent but unmanifest in the Primal Enlighten- 
ing Nature of Mind-Essence, and that the Primal state of En- 
lightenment is" the Ultimate Enlightenment. 

* # * 

The question arises, how can these apparent differences arise 
out of the purity of Mind-Essence? The answer is, that it is" 
because of the perfect accommodation of the Alaya-vijnana to 
its store of defilements that have been accumulated since begin- 
ningless time. These give rise to two classes of phenomena 
which are inseparable from its intrinsic nature of Enlighten- 
ment and yet are in mutual relationship with each other. In 
one class are phenomena relating to intellectual purity and 
moving toward Enlightenment, and in the other class are phe- 
nomena relating to karma and moving toward Ignorance. 

By means of intellectual purity the Bodhisattva has been 
able to practice right methods and employ expedient means to 
transcend the influence of these defilements, to break away from 
their entanglements, destroy the enslaving power of conscious 
discriminations, and by intuition come into a realization of his 



AWAKENING OF FAITH 


367 


pure Dharmakaya. Though all the phenomena of the mind, its 
perceptions, its discriminations, its consciousness, belong to the 
nature of non-enlightenment, yet because the nature of non- 
enlightenment is the same as the nature of Enlightenment, it is 
neither destructible nor indestructible. It is like the waves on 
the surface of the ocean raised by the passing wind, both are 
involved but water does not of itself possess the nature of 
movement, so when the wind ceases the waves subside and the 
water returns to its natural tranquillity. It is the same with 
sentient beings. Their pure Essential Mind has been disturbed 
by the supposed wind of Ignorance, but neither mind nor Ig- 
norance has any substance or form or phenomena of its own, 
neither are they separated from each other. As disturbance does 
not belong to the nature of Mind, so when its Ignorance is dis- 
carded, the disturbing phenomena of false imaginations and 
discriminating thoughts will disappear also, for its power of in- 
tuition does not disturb its true nature in the least. 

In the outward activities of the discriminating mind, karma 
is the record of its habit-energy urging it on to further differen- 
tiation, but in the inconceivable integrating activities of Intui- 
tional Purity, karma is the record of its unifying attractions 
reducing multiplicities to unities and resulting in all manner of 
transcendental syntheses and mysterious wonders, and effecting 
within the minds of earnest disciples all manner of spiritual 
benefits and powers, all of which because of their vows are 
available to all sentient beings. 

* * * 

Likening Enlightenment to space or a clear mirror, a four- 
fold significance relating to its greatness is revealed. The first 
significance to be revealed is when by reason of removing all 
objects to a distance from a mirror there is no reflection, so 
when all disturbing mental conditions and all mental spheres 
in contact with objects through the sense organs are done 
away with there is no disturbance of the Mind’s tranquillity. 
This first significance, therefore, is a revelation of the greatness 
of the Mind’S - Emptiness. The second significance is one of 
greatness of its affirmation' of trueness. No matter what the 
phenomena or the conditions may be in the Saha world they 
are reflected in the mirror of the Mind’s pure Essence with per- 
fect trueness and impartiality. There is nothing that enters and 



368 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


nothing that departs, there is nothing that Is lost nor destroyed, 
for in the true Essential Mind all conceptions are of one same- 
ness that in its suchness abides unchanged and permanent. For 
true Essential Mind yields to no contaminations that can pos- 
sibly contaminate it, and even its reflected contaminated con- 
ceptions have no effect upon it. Its intuitional nature is never 
disturbing and, on the contrary, is in possession of boundless 
non-intoxicant virtues that influence all sentient beings to draw 
them into the unity and purity of its pure Essence. 

The third significance of Mind-Essence considered as a mir- 
ror, is an affirmation of the greatness of its freedom. Just as a 
mirror reflects freely all objects brought before it, so Essential 
Mind reflects all concepts freely without being contaminated 
by them. They go forth freely just as they are, separated from 
all hindrances and annoyances of knowledge, and all the phe- 
nomena of composition and conformity, for in Essential Mind 
all is pure and bright and free. 

The fourth significance is an affirmation of compassionate 
helpfulness, for being free from all limitations of selfness, it 
draws all alike into its all-embracing purity and unity and 
peacefulness, illumining their minds with equal brightness so 
that all sentient beings have an equal right to Enlightenment, 
an equal chance to practice the ultimate principle of kindness, 
an equal surety that ultimately all sentient beings will attain 
Enlightenment, mature their root of merit and realize their 
inherent Buddha-nature. 

* * « 

Let us now consider further the real nature of non-Enlight- 
enment. In the foregoing pages we have said that non-En- 
lightenment is related to Ignorance. This is true in the sense 
that the thinking mind, being confused by its false imaginations 
and discriminations, does not see clearly its own Mind-Essence, 
and the real sameness of all its conceptions. Just as soon as 
the mind notes differences because of its different sensations 
and sense perceptions, it immediately begins to unite them into 
conceptions, to name them, to discriminate them, to think about 
them, from which arises all manner of false judgments and 
self-consciousness. These discrimihated thoughts have no sub- 
stance of their own; they are not at all different from thought 
in its wholeness that by its Essential Nature is pure and en- 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


5^9 


lightening. An ignorant man, one controlled by his discriminat- 
ing mind, is like a man who has lost his way. When we 
speak of a man losing his way, we mean that he has a prior 
conception of a right way from which he has gone astray. 
Apart from this prior conception of a right way, of a place to 
which he wishes to reach, going astray has no meaning. It is 
just the same with sentient beings said to be un-enlightened. 
They have an innate affinity for Enlightenment, but because of 
their false imaginations and discriminations they go astray. 
Thus Ignorance and Enlightenment have only a relative mean- 
ing. If a man had no conception of Enlightenment, he would 
have no conception of Ignorance; and if he can get rid of his 
ignorance, he will have no conception of Enlightenment. It is 
by means of his discriminating mind that leads a man astray 
that he can also gain Enlightenment, therefore we can truly 
speak of the true and Enlightening Nature of a man’s mind, 
but if he can free himself from all consciousness of his En- 
lightening Nature, then the significance of Enlightenment would 
vanish also. 

# # * 

Because of discriminating Ignorance, the mind gives rise to 
three kinds of conceptions which are in close mutuality and 
are inseparable from discriminations. The first is a conception 
of activity; the second is a conception of an actor; the third 
is a conception of a world of action. The first is called, karma. 
If there was only a state of pure Enlightenment, the mind 
would remain undisturbed and in tranquillity, but because of 
discriminating Ignorance the mind becomes disturbed, and this 
disturbance and its habit-energy we speak of as karma. As soon 
as the mind becomes disturbed by its discriminating differences, 
desire arises to be followed by suffering, all of which is em- 
braced in the conception of Karma. 

The second is called Egoism. As soon as the mind perceives 
differences, it awakens desire, grasping, and following suffering, 
and then the mind notes that some relate to himself and some 
to not-self, from which arises a conception of an actor, an ego- 
self. If the mind could remain undisturbed by differences and 
discriminations the conception of an ego-self would die away. 

The third is a conception of a surrounding world that is not- 
self. Independent of an actor there is no meaning to an ex- 



370 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

ternal world of things produced, acted upon and reacting. As 
one gets rid of the conception of self, the conception of an ex- 
ternal world vanishes with it. 

Again, because of discriminating Ignorance and the intimate 
relations of the conceptions of thinking, thinker and things 
thought about, there rises six kinds of mental phenomena. First, 
there are feelings of liking and disliking. Second, these feelings 
following in quick succession are fixed in memory and become 
intensified by a kind of habit-energy. Third, because of this 
habit-energy, there is a grasping after the agreeable and a 
shrinking from the disagreeable, thus abiding in either happi- 
ness or suffering. Fourth, because of the foregoing, there is a 
continuity or clinging that reacts on the thinker himself to con- 
dition his thoughts and he gives names and false meanings to 
things. Fifth, these false names and discriminating thoughts re- 
act upon his conception of an external world to condition his 
surroundings and build up a conditioning karma. Sixth, this kar- 
ma going on accumulating from beginningless time develops a 
strong and stronger tendency to action that enslaves the thinker 
until he more and more loses his freedom. Thus we see that de- 
filing thoughts and suffering do not exist in their own right but 
arise from the non-enlightenment of discriminating Ignorance. 

Again, these two conceptions of Enlightenment and non- 
Enlightenment have a twofold relation. The first is a relation 
of similarity, the other a relation of dissimilarity. Just as dif- 
ferent pieces of pottery made by a potter are similar in the 
sense that they are all made of clay, so with the different kinds 
of karma and karmaic illusions, the defiling as well as the 
purifying, they all have their only reality in the pure Essence 
of Mind. In this sense they are similar, as the Sutras say: 
All sentient beings are ever abiding in Nirvana. Nevertheless, 
the thing called Enlightenment is nothing that can be attained 
by practising, nor can it be created by human hands; it is in- 
tangible and ungraspable, having no form that can be seen or 
nature that can be described. The reason that Enlightenment 
can take on different manifestations of form and explicability 
is wholly because of the conditioning power of karma in cor- 
respondence with the defilements of the mind. Enlightenment 
and Wisdom in their true Nature have nothing to do with 
material forms or phenomena that it can become an object of 
sensation. 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


31 1 

The relation of dissimilarity is this. Just as different objects 
made by the potter are infinitely diversified, so the manifesta- 
tions of the mind’s discriminating thoughts, both enlightening 
and defiling are infinitely varied. Just as karmas and karmaic 
conditions are varied, so the manifestations of their condition- 
ing power are varied and dissimilar. 

* * # 

Again, what has been said in the foregoing about the ap- 
pearing and disappearing, or what is known as birth and death, 
has its particular causes and conditions. We mean by this that 
sentient beings with their ever active discriminating and think- 
ing minds are forever accumulating a body of false imagina- 
tions and notions which become defilements on the face of the 
Alaya-vijnana and give rise to self-consciousness and its pro- 
pensity for desires and habits of grasping and clinging, all of 
which are dependent on the thinking mind without any self- 
nature of their own. This body of false notions having its de- 
pendence on the thinking mind and providing the causes and 
conditions for the evolution of mind is Ignorance. By it there 
arises the intuitive mind (manas), the intellectual mind ( mano - 
vijnana) and the six sense-minds (the vijnanas). Manas having 
relations with both the Alaya-vijnana and the mano-vijnana 
mediates between them and gives rise to the conceptions- of 
consciousness and the faculties of both intellection and intuition 
which lead respectfully to Ignorance and Enlightenment. As 
soon as the non-enlightening nature begins to rise there de- 
velops perceptibility, the manifesting power of discriminating 
thoughts, grasping upon conditions and causing a continuous 
evolution of changes and transformations, from which arises 
the consciousness of an ego-self and an external world of causes 
and conditions. This false notion of an ego-self is in possession 
of five aspects or names. The first is its activity-consciousness 
(karma-consciousness), which means that owing to the partic- 
ularizing power of Ignorance, the non-enlightening potentialities 
of the mind are awakened and brought into activity. The sec- 
ond is the evolving-consciousness or power of transforming sen- 
sations into perceptions. The third is the reflecting-conscious- 
ness which reflects all kinds of perceptions originating in the 
contact of objects with the sense-organs and unites them into 
unities, spontaneously and without prejudice. The fourth is 



372 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


the discriminating-consciousness that classifies these unified per- 
ceptions as they are in relation to itself, into favorable or un- 
favorable, pure or defiled. The fifth is the memory-conscious- 
ness that retains all conceptions in mind and in mutual rela- 
tions and synthetic response without any cessation. It keeps all 
the elements of karma accumulated from a beginningless past 
in activity and registering their full value. It compels the mind 
to endure the reactions of karma whether they be painful or 
pleasant to their full maturity; it brings past experiences into 
sudden remembrance and projects its false imaginations into the 
future. It is the cause of all the illusions of the triple-world, 
not one of which has any cause apart from the discriminating 
and thinking mind. Separated from the mind there are no ob- 
jects of sense, all conceptions of them arise in the mind and 
are developed and manifested by the false activities of the 
mind. Not one of them has any self-substance of its own, they 
are all alike brought into manifestation and kept in continuity 
of relation by the false imaginations of Ignorance of sentient 
beings. They are, indeed, like reflections in a mirror which if 
grasped lead to hallucinations of a self and an external world, 
but which if allowed to pass, if the discriminating and thinking 
mind stops its thinking, leave the mind in tranquillity. 

This memory consciousness because of the desiring and 
grasping nature of the mind becomes more and more ingrained 
in the mind. It develops and intensifies the false notion of an 
ego-self and exaggerates the supposed importance of its inter- 
ests. This is the reason why the memory-consciousness is also 
thought of as the egoistic-consciousness, the separating-conscious- 
ness, because by reason of its activities the mind becomes more 
and more separated by its egoistic desires, prejudices and imag- 
inary annoyances, from its true oneness in the pure Essence of 
Mind. 

* * # 

The relation of the conceptual, discriminating, thinking and 
conscious mind to Essential Mind, how it arises, develops and 
becomes established, is very difficult to understand. It is quite 
impossible for ordinary human beings, and even Hinayana dis- 
ciples misunderstand it. Bodhisattvas who begin their practice 
of stopping thought and realizing truth in pure faith as they 
gain a degree of insight acquire a small degree of its under- 
standing. Even those Bodhisattvas who have attained to the 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


37B 


stage of immovability and constancy cannot understand it thor- 
oughly, only Buddhas can understand it perfectly. Essential 
Mind is pure and immaculate by nature, it possesses Ignorance 
only as a superficial and transient defilement, but by reason of 
the defiling nature of Ignorance, it gives rise to all varieties 
and degrees of mental illusions and conceptions and discrim- 
inated appearances. But in spite of its relation to defiled minds, 
in its own Essentiality, it ever abides in unchanging and un- 
changeable purity. It is this profound relation of unchanging 
Purity to evolving impurities that is only understood by the 
highest perfect Wisdom of Buddhas. Because the mind does not 
realize the perfect purity of the all-embracing wholeness it falls 
into the habit of imagining differences where there are no dif- 
ferences, and thus the mind, being inharmonious with itself, 
becomes the puppet of Ignorance. 

There are six different kinds of mental contaminations. The 
first is defilement by attachment by consent, from which dis- 
ciples, Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas of the early stages 
can be liberated, and Bodhisattvas as they attain the stage of 
“self-mastery” are kept far away. The second is defilement by 
attachments in spite of disapproval and resistance. This can be 
partially controlled as the Bodhisattva by his earnest practice 
gradually advances along the stages to the stage of “realiza- 
tion,” when although still in touch with the discriminations 
and passions of outer things, realizes their emptiness. And as 
he further advances to the stage of “far-going” and leaves be- 
hind all thoughts and remembrances of discriminations, truly 
abiding in the inner world, can be wholly controlled. The third 
kind is defilement by attachment with consent to discrimina- 
tions of the intellectual mind, the clinging to ideas and defini- 
tions. This can be gradually cleared away, by the Bodhisattva ’s 
perfect and selfless keeping of the Precepts, and can be com- 
pletely discarded after attaining a great heart of compassion 
and command of skillful and efficient means, which come to 
him as he gets rid of all arbitrary conceptions of phenomena, 
and passes from outward morality, to inner Wisdom and finally 
to perfect spirituality. The fourth kind is defilement of the 
intellectual mind in spite of disapproval and resistance. It can 
be purified as the Bodhisattva attains to the intrinsic ground of 
transcendental mental freedom. The fifth kind is defilement by 
the Bodhisattva still clinging to the notion of a perceiving and 



374 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


discriminating mind although no longer in bondage to it. This 
can be gotten rid of as he advances in transcendental mental 
freedom where there is no further thought of self or not-self, 
of self and otherness, as he passes beyond all duality, all incom- 
pleteness, and attains perfect equanimity. The sixth kind 
is the mental contamination that a Bodhisattva must accept of 
the general and universal karma until he passes into the Great 
Truth Cloud of Tathagatahood. 

To review these paragraphs let us add the following observa- 
tions. The common non-realization of the Essential purity and 
unity of the all-embracing Wholeness, can be partially dis- 
carded by the awakening of a pure faith, and then as the Bod- 
hisattva ascends the stages by his earnest practice of Dhyana 
can be progressively discarded, until he attains to the highest 
stage of Tathagatahood when it will be perfectly discarded. The 
reference to the principle of mutuality of response or lack of it, 
means that the mind is always in contact with the various con- 
ceptions arising from the senses and which are being differen- 
tiated by means of contaminated or pure thoughts, and that 
the mind is sensitive to their relations of likeness and affinity. 
In regard to the principle of resistance, it means that the mind 
having the faculty of intuition that transcends all states of con- 
sciousness, all unconscious of their mutual resemblances and 
affinities, never makes any distinctions nor discriminations but 
reflects spontaneously their true nature. In regard to the refer- 
ence to die principle of intellectual contaminations, it refers to 
the hindrances that obscure the forth-shining of the intrinsic 
Wisdom of the Mind’s pure Essence. As regards the principle 
of Ignorance, it means the intellectual hindrance that obscures 
the free illumination of the general karma by the Light of 
Transcendental Intelligence. What is meant by this? It means 
that by means of mental contaminations and false imaginations 
the mind becomes disturbed and moved to different forms of 
manifesting activity which is contrary to its true nature of 
Equanimity. Pure concepts undefiled by the mind’s discriminat- 
ing judgments come and go unnoticed, but when disturbed by 
Ignorance they lose their quietness and enlightening nature and 
add to the world's karma. 

* # * 

Further, mind in its manifestation as birth and death has 
two appearances. First there is a crude state as seen in the 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


375 


minds of common people, and there a refined state as mani- 
fested in the minds of Buddhas. The mental state of a novice 
Bodhisattva may be said to be in a refined state of crudeness, 
and the mental state of an advanced Bodhisattva, in a crude 
state of refinement. But these two states of crudeness and re- 
finement both exist because of the defiling power of Ignorance. 
As the thoughts of the mind appear and disappear the mind 
variously cherishes them and there develop causes and condition 
of affinities. The causes are the unenlightened nature of Ig- 
norance, and because of there being affinities among the causes 
there develop varying conditions. If the cause should disappear, 
the affinities would disappear, and moreover, if the cause 
should disappear those parts of the mental attributes that are 
not in mutual response will disappear also. And because of the 
disappearing of the affinities, those parts of the mental attri- 
butes that are in mutual response will disappear, too. 

It may then be asked, if all mental attributes should disap- 
pear what would become of the unceasing continuity of the 
mind? Or, if there should be some continuity of mind after its 
attributes had disappeared, how could we speak of the disap- 
pearing of the mental attributes? The reply is, as regards the 
disappearing of the mental attributes, it means the disappearing 
of the mind’s arbitrary conceptions, not the disappearing of the 
mind’s substantiality in Essential Mind. It is just the same as 
the relation of the wind and water and waves. Wind has the 
power to disturb water and by it to create waves, but if there 
is no water, the power remains potential and there are no 
waves. But so long as there is water and wind there will be 
waves. Again, if the wind loses its potential power of motion, 
there will be no waves even if the water remains. That is, it 
takes both wind and water to make waves. It is just the same 
with Ignorance and mind and discriminating thoughts. The 
reason that Ignorance is the cause of disturbing thoughts is be- 
cause of the mind’s Essential stability. If the mind should lose 
its stability, all sentient beings would disappear because there 
would be nothing for Ignorance to play upon. However, as the 
substantiality of the mind never disappears so the mind retains 
its continuity. But if Ignorance some day should disappear, 
then all arbitrary conceptions of form and phenomena would 
disappear with it, but it would not be the disappearing of the 
Mind’s pure Wisdom. 



376 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


# # # 

There is a constant succession of thoughts both pure and 
defiled that is taking place because of the interaction of four 
elements. First, there is the Ultimate Principle of the Mind’s 
pure Essence; the second, is the cause of all the mind’s con- 
taminations, namely Ignorance; the third, is the discriminating 
mind, or the karma-consciousness; the fourth, are the false 
conditions of the external world, that is, the six objects of sense. 

We may think of the interaction of these four elements as 
a process of fumigation. Just like clothing that is perfectly 
clean has no odour, but if packed away with fragrant herbs for 
a long time the clothing becomes fumigated with the same fra- 
grance. It is the same with these four elements, each tends to 
fumigate the other as they come into relation with each other. 
Pure Mind-Essence is by nature free of any contamination, but 
by association with Ignorance its pure concepts become defiled. 
Conversely, the impure concepts of Ignorance are in their na- 
ture free of any purity of karma, but having their substantiality 
in the purity of Mind-Essence they come to partake of its 
purity. 

How can impure concepts continually arise by reason of the 
habitual fumigation of Ignorance? It is because the Mind’s 
pure Essence has the potentiality for giving rise to all concep- 
tual ideas and it follows from this that there develops the 
principle of individuation and discrimination that we name Ig- 
norance, and it is because of Ignorance giving rise to impure 
concepts that there is the habitual fumigation of Mind-Essence. 
By means of this habitual fumigation there develops the ap- 
pearance of a false mind and it is by reason of this false mind 
that there is the habitual fumigation of Ignorance. Since Ig- 
norance does not realize the pure Concepts of Mind-Essence, 
by its non-enlightening nature it gives rise continually to mani- 
festations of false conditions. By means of there being these 
false conditions affinities appear between them and the false 
mind, continually reminding the mind of their existence and 
thus fumigating it and giving rise continually to grasping and 
activities and the laying up of all kinds of karma and all kinds 
of suffering both mental and physical. 

There are two ways by which the false conditions of an 
external world fumigate the mind; first by continually increas- 
ing its thinking faculty, and second by continually strengthen- 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


377 


ing its desires and graspings. The false mind has, also, two 
kinds of habitual ways for fumigating false conditions of the 
external world; first, to quicken the fundamental activity-con- 
sciousness by reason of which disciples, Pratyekabuddhas, Ar- 
hats and Bodhisattvas can endure all kinds of suffering and 
deaths and rebirths; second, to continually increase the dis- 
criminating-consciousness by reason of which common human 
beings suffer under their karma all manner of suffering. Again, 
the habitual fumigation of Ignorance has two other kinds of 
manifestation, first, a primary habitual fumigation by reason of 
which one’s karma, or activity-consciousness, is being developed; 
second, an accompanying development of the desiring, or fond- 
ness for the agreeable objects of sense, consciousness. The first, 
by reason of its sufferings, awakens a dislike for the experiences 
of birth and death, the second, by its delights, urges it on to 
the grasping for more. 

How are pure concepts constantly produced by the perfum- 
ing of Ignorance? It is because of there being the potentiality 
for pure concepts which reacts upon Ignorance awakening in 
the false minds a feeling of abhorrence of the sufferings of 
birth and death and prompts it to seek Nirvana with willing- 
ness and earnestness. This abhorrence for the suffering of birth 
and death and the seeking for Nirvana with earnestness, in turn 
reacts upon Mind-Essence. By reason of this, the thinking 
mind attains a conception of its Essential Nature and discrim- 
inates it from the changing and pain-producing nature of the 
experiential mind, to convince him of the latter’s unreality and 
to enable him to practise right means for keeping away from its 
dissatisfying experiences and disturbances. Having become con- 
vinced that all external conditions and all the discriminations 
of the conscious mind have no true existence, it is led to make 
use of skillful means and appropriate activities to treat these 
false conditions and thoughts with indifference, neither fearing 
nor grasping nor desiring nor even thinking about them. Thus 
by means of the long continued fumigation of Ignorance by 
Mind-Essence, the state of Ignorance is gotten rid of altogether. 
As Ignorance is discarded the rising of all thoughts of individ- 
uation and discrimination are brought to an end. Because of 
the ceasing of all such thoughts there are no more conceptions 
of external things and conditions to appeal to one through the 
senses. Accordingly as conditions and discriminations come to 



378 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


an end, all the mental phenomena cease to disturb the mind 
and it becomes empty and tranquil. The dying down of all 
disturbance is the attainment of Nirvana, die state of perfect 
freedom. 

Let us now further consider the reactions of the false mind 
and the pure concepts of the Mind’s Essence. The habitual 
fumigation of the false mind by the Pure Concepts of Mind- 
Essence are of two kinds: first, there is the fumigation of the 
discriminating-consciousness by reason of which, disciples, Prat- 
yekabuddhas and Arhats abhorring the suffering of life and 
death are supported according to their individual needs and 
possibilities in their purpose and effort to attain Perfect En- 
lightenment. Second, there is the habitual fumigation of the 
mind’s states by reason of which the Bodhisattvas advance 
along the stages with zeal and courage and perfect faith until 
their goal of Nirvana is attained. 

The habitual fumigation of Mind-Essence by the false mind 
are also of two kinds: first, there is the habitual fumigation of 
the potentialities of one’s own true nature; the second, is the 
habitual fumigation of the mind’s true activities which are no 
activity but are the spontaneous drawing-togetherness of the 
minds’ disturbances and tensions. Since beginningless time, the 
mind has been fully possessed of its rightful non-intoxicating 
pure concepts which have been defiled and covered up by an 
inconceivable Karma to appear in all manner of forms and con- 
ditions. By means of the interaction of these two kinds of re- 
action, sentient beings are led to abhor the suffering of birth 
and death and to be willing to seek for the attainment of Nir- 
vana, thus, it awakens faith in their true Essence of Mind 
and enables them to begin, and to continue the practice of 
devotion, and to endure the necessary restraints. 

If the foregoing is true, that all sentient beings are possessed 
of their pure Mind-Essence and have been equally exposed to 
the habitual fumigation of its pure concepts, how is it that some 
of them awaken a pure faith and some do not. And how is it 
that there are so many and so great inequalities among sentient 
beings, and why is it that some continue in the dreary round 
of death and rebirth and only a few awaken a pure faith, prac- 
tice expedient means with earnest diligence and attain to Nir- 
vana? The reply is that while Essence of Mind in all alike is 
of one pure sameness, that because of the fumigating power of 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


379 


Ignorance it has become differently defiled and therefore mani- 
fests its defilement in different ways and different degrees, so 
that their number is incalculable. So great is the variety of 
their personalities, their experiences, hindrances and suffering 
that only Buddha can comprehend them and embrace them all 
in perfect compassion. 

As all sentient beings in spite of their common Buddha 
Nature are subject to the fumigation of Ignorance they would, 
except for the like constant fumigation of their pure Mind- 
Essence, fall deep and deeper into the defilements of Ignorance, 
but by reason of Buddha’s compassion, they sooner or later 
meet causes and affinities that enable them to awaken a pure 
faith and attain emancipation from their bondage to Ignorance. 
Possessed of suitable causes and affinities any attainment is 
possible. It is the nature of wood to burn, but wood will not 
bum without suitable conditions are present and there is some 
exciting cause. Wood will not ignite itself or bum itself. There- 
fore, if sentient beings are to become emancipated and enlight- 
ened there must be present suitable causes and affinities. By 
nature sentient beings have affinity for emancipation and en- 
lightenment, but without suitable causes and conditions they 
can not attain them. Even if they have a Buddha Nature but 
do not chance to meet a Buddha, or a good learned Master, or 
a Bodhisattva, they could not of themselves attain Nirvana. 
In like manner, no matter how suitable external conditions may 
be, if they were immune to the fumigation of the Mind’s pure 
Concepts, so that there was no awakening of faith, how could 
they come to abhor the suffering of rebirths and deaths and 
willingly and earnestly seek the attainment of Nirvana? But if 
both causes and affinities are present, their Buddha Nature, the 
fumigating power of Mind Essence, the kind teaching and sym- 
pathy of Bodhisattvas, then there will come an abhorrence of 
the suffering of birth and death, the awakening of faith, the 
purpose to practice kindness and to press on toward Nirvana. 
Then after their karma has become matured, they will, all of 
a sudden, meet a Buddha or a Buddhisattva who will show 
them the benefits and joy of following the Path toward Enlight- 
enment and Buddhahood. 

There is an unceasing fumigation of the external activities 
of sentient beings, by the pure Concepts of the fundamental 
Essence of Mind. By means of this fumigation these external 



380 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

activities take on a power of affinity for similar activities draw- 
ing them together into closer synthesis and harmony. This 
power of affinity is manifested in innumerable ways, but for 
convenience in considering it,, we may think of it as of two 
kinds. The first is affinity drawing dissimilar things together; 
the second is affinity drawing likenesses together. 

The affinity between dissimilar things is seen in the com- 
passion which disciples upheld by the transcendental powers of 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, from the very beginning of their 
devotion to seeking Enlightenment, have had for all sentient 
beings, wishing to develop and strengthen their better nature. 
This compassion reveals itself whenever they meet or think of 
their families, their parents, their relatives or servants or famil- 
iar friends, or even their bitter enemies. This compassion re- 
veals itself in the awakening of aspirations to teach them and 
to influence them by the four ways of charity, kind words, self- 
forgetting kindnesses and sympathy. Such deeds of kindness 
react upon their own natures to strengthen and deepen their 
own faith and their own aspiration to benefit all sentient be- 
ings, and to draw them together in bonds of affectionate fellow- 
ship. This kind of affinity is of two kinds, one kind is imme- 
diate in the sense that its effects are seen in the present time; 
the other kind is more remote in the sense that its effects con- 
tinue and come to fruition long after in later rebirths. These 
affinities may be further divided into two aspects, namely, an 
increasing and developing affinity, and an unchanging affinity as 
Enlightenment is attained and mutually enjoyed. 

The affinity between similarities is seen in the Buddha’s 
recognition of their oneness with all sentient beings in the 
purity of Mind-Essence; it is seen in the self-lessness of the 
Buddha’s compassion and self-yielding; it is seen in the Bud- 
dha's constant spontaneity in responding to human needs; and 
because of it, human beings, by their potentiality for intuitive 
Samadhi may realize Buddhahood even as Buddhas realize 
their sufferings. 

# # * 

These interacting fumigations of Essence of Mind and ac- 
tivities may be considered as being divided into two aspects 
as they are ready or unready for the reactions of habitual fumi- 
gation. The unready are those common disciples, Pratyekabud- 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


381 


dhas and Arhats who having had sufficient faith to begin their 
practice but as they continued to receive the habitual fumiga- 
tion under relations with their discriminated ideas and their 
consciousness dependent upon those ideas, they could neither 
discard those ideas, nor attain a state of mutual responsiveness 
with their Mind-Essence, nor continue their practice with spon- 
taneity, nor be in mutual response with their activities. Such 
disciples and Bodhisattvas are to be classed as unready for 
Enlightenment. 

Those who are ready for Enlightenment are those advanced 
Bodhisattvas who have discarded all discriminated ideas and 
consciousness dependent upon them, and are in mutual response 
with the Buddha’s inconceivable activities which are no activity, 
and prosecute their devotional practices with spontaneity, and 
are relying sincerely and wholly on the fumigating power of 
their Mind’s pure Essence to annihilate their Ignorance and 
bring them to Buddhahood. Such Dharmakaya Bodhisattvas 
are ready for Enlightenment. 

This difference between the ready and the unready is ex- 
plained as we understand that the impure concepts of the hu- 
man mind have become defiled by the habitual fumigation of 
Ignorance since beginningless time which fumigation will con- 
tinue until they attain to Buddhahood, when it will be totally 
discarded. On the contrary, the pure concepts of Mind-Essence 
having the power of fumigation within their own nature, while 
the impure concepts of the false mind are slowly being dis- 
carded, their pure conceptual Dharmakaya is being brought into 
manifestation in unceasing continuity. 

The Threefold Nature of Mind-Essence 

The self-substance of Mind-Essence is inconceivably pure 
and, therefore, all sentient beings, common people, disciples, 
Pratyekabuddhas, Arhats, Bodhisattvas and Buddhas are, in 
their essential nature of the same purity. In not one is it de- 
ficient, in not one is it in excess; nor has it any source of aris- 
ing, nor time of disappearing; it is ever abiding, a permanent, 
unchangeable Reality. From its beginningless beginning it has 
been in full possession of all virtue and merit. It is in full 
possession of radiant Wisdom and luminosity, penetrating every- 
where by the purity of its Concepts; seeing everything ade- 
quately and truly, its mind innately free and unprejudiced, ever 



382 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

abiding in blissful peace, pure, fresh, unchangeable, ever 
abounding, never segregating, never ceasing, never conceivable, 
an illimitable Fountain, a Womb of exuberant fertility, a Mind 
of perfect clarity and universality — the Tathagata’s Truth-body, 
the all-embracing Dharmakaya. 

The question might be raised. If Mind-Essence is free from 
all conceptions of phenomena, how can it be said to possess all 
kinds of merits and virtues? The reply is, that although it really 
possesses all kinds of merits and virtues, it does not possess 
them in the sense of grasping them. Mind-Essence in its nature 
of Purity is free from all individuation and discrimination and 
dualisms of any kind. All objects have but one flavor, the 
flavor of reality, but depending upon the principle of appearing 
and disappearing, by reason of its activity-consciousness, there 
are signs of individuation, discrimination, and opposing dual- 
isms. It is true that the Mind embraces all Pure Concepts, and 
yet in reality it possesses no discriminative thoughts, but by 
means of its false defilements discriminative thoughts are de- 
veloped, causing the mind to lose its Enlightenment, and to be 
given over to false imaginations and thus to become enslaved by 
all kinds of conditions and the puppet of Ignorance. If there 
should be no rising of discriminating thoughts, the mind, be- 
cause of its Essence of Mind, would manifest Wisdom and Bright- 
ness. But if the mind gives rise to discriminations and preju- 
dices, it soon becomes darkened and the prey of imaginary phe- 
nomena. So when one’s Essence of Mind is kept away from all 
discrimination and prejudices, it radiates its inherent Bright- 
ness to all parts of the conceptual world. But if the mind be- 
comes disturbed by its false imaginations, it would lose its true 
intuitional insight and understanding, and would become 
changing, unhappy, lacking self-control, impure, entangled, and 
the victim of innumerable vexations and hindrances. When the 
mind is not disturbed it reflects its potentiality for all pure mer- 
its and virtues. Thus it is seen that the possession of all pure 
merits and virtues is the natural and simple state of Mind-Es- 
sence undefiled by any thoughts of individuation or discrimina- 
tion. It is the true Dharmakaya, the true Tathagata Womb. 

Reference has been made to the Activity-Consciousness of 
Mind-Essence; what is the nature of its activity? The activity 
of the false mind is an outer activity bringing about changes 
and increased complexity and confusion, but the activity of the 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


383 


Mind’s pure Essence is an inner activity that brings about 
harmony, simplicity and unity. All Buddhas and Tathagatas 
from their very beginnings have developed hearts of Compassion 
and have spontaneously manifested the Paramitas of charity, 
unselfish kindness, humility and patience, zeal and perseverence, 
tranquillity and Wisdom, not for any gain to themselves but 
for the sake of all sentient beings. They have made great 
Vows, dedicating themselves to emancipating all sentient beings 
from their bondage in the world of sense. But the deliverance 
is effected not by outer acts but by an inner drawing of spirit 
that is not limited by time or conditions, but is ceaseless even 
to infinite ages of the future. The activity of Buddhas and 
Tathagatas is eternal because it is the oppostie of outer ac- 
tivities of the false mind which are subject to weariness and 
inertia. Its activities release and store up energy restoring the 
original purity and unity and peacefulness. 

Tathagatas and Buddhas look upon sentient beings as being 
their own sameness not cherishing any conceptions of separa- 
tion and individuation, To them all sentient beings together 
with themselves come from one and the same Mind-Essence 
in which there are no differences to be distinguished. As they 
possess such great Wisdom and command of skillful means all 
the defilements of Ignorance have been discarded. They have 
realized their oneness with the pure Dharmakaya in the posses- 
sion of a ever-renewing and inconceivable potentiality for ac- 
tivity and karma that is ceaselessly being irradiated to all parts 
of the universes, and just as ceaselessly returning to its primal 
unity and purity and peacefulness. They do not grasp upon 
any arbitrary conceptions of their harmonizing and integrating 
activities, for why should they grasp after that which they al- 
ready possess, the whole body of the potentialities of the Dhar- 
makaya. Their activities are unconditioned by causes and cir- 
cumstances, they flow out spontaneously as the imaginary needs 
of sentient beings arise. 

These harmonizing activities of the Tathagatas, that are no 
activity in a worldly sense, are of two kinds. The first kind can 
be perceived by the minds of common people, disciples and 
Pratyekabuddhas and is known as Nirmanakaya, the appear- 
ance body of Buddha and his inscrutable activities. But com- 
mon people, disciples and Pratyekabuddhas do not realize that 
the Nirmanakaya are being manifested by reason of their own 



384 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


consciousness and its false imaginations. They imagine that all 
sights arise from prior causes and conditions and they grasp 
them and seek to profit by them, thus they fail to understand 
their true significance. The second kind can only be perceived 
by the purified minds of the highest Bodhisattvas; they have 
no form that can be differentiated and described; it is the Dhar- 
makaya in its aspect of Spirit and Principle. It is the Recom- 
pense Body of all the Buddhas, it is the abiding Bliss-body of 
Buddhahood, the inconceivable and inscrutable Sambhogakaya. 
This Sambhogakaya possesses a vast and boundless Potentiality, 
and the Blissful Peace in which it abides is adorned with in- 
conceivably beautiful adornments, which are shadowed forth as 
its potential wisdom and compassion is manifested in spontane- 
ously meeting the needs of human beings. It has no limita- 
tions of boundaries or quantity, it has no spheres nor points. 
Though it is responsive at any time of need, yet it ever abides 
in its permanent unchanging peacefulness, undiminished and 
unchanged. All its merits and virtues are being verified by 
means of such things as the Paramitas and other non-intoxicat- 
ing perfumes. And, moreover, it is in full possession of bound- 
less potentialities of joy and blissful peace. That is the reason 
it is called the Sambhogakaya. 

That of the Dharmakaya which can be perceived by the 
minds of common people is only a shadow of it, and takes on 
different aspects according as it is considered from the different 
viewpoints of the six. realms of existence. Their crude percep- 
tion of it does not include any conception of its possibilities for 
happiness and enjoyment; they see only its reflection in the 
Nirmanakaya. Again, the conception of it which novice Bodhi- 
sattvas get is also only partial and unsatisfactory, but is true 
as far as it goes because of their sincere faith in their pure 
Mind-Essence. At least, they realize that its potentialities and 
embellishments are neither coming nor going, are free of all 
limitations, and are manifestations of, not parts of, the Pure 
Dharmakaya. But as the Bodhisattvas advance along the stages 
their minds become purified, their conceptions of it more pro- 
found and mysterious, their harmonizing activities more tran- 
scendental, until, when they have attained to the highest stage, 
they will be able to intuitively realize its true Reality. In that 
final realization all traces of their individual selfness’and of the 
selfness of their brother Bodhisattvas will have faded away and 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 385 

only a realization of one undifferentiated Buddhahood will re- 
main. 

It may be asked then, If the Buddha’s Dharmakaya is free 
from any perceptions or conceptions of form, how can they 
manifest themselves as sights and forms? The reply is, that the 
Dharmakaya is the very Essence of all sights and forms, and 
therefore, can manifest itself in sights and form. Both the mind 
and the sights that it perceives are in one and the same unity 
since beginningless time, because the essential nature of sights 
and forms is nothing but Mind-only. As the essence of sights 
possesses no physical form, it is the same as the Dharmakaya, 
formless and yet pervading all parts of the universes. The par- 
ticular sights which Mind-Essence manifests are in their essen- 
tial nature devoid of any limitations or points of definition. If 
conditions are suitable appearances may be manifested in any 
part of the universes, being solely dependent upon the mind 
for their appearing. Thus, there are vast Bodhisattvas, vast 
Sambhogakayas, vast embellishments, all of which are different 
from one another and yet are devoid of any spheres of limita- 
tion or points of definition, for Tathagatas are able to manifest 
themselves in bodily forms any where and at the same moment 
that other Tathagatas are manifesting themselves without any 
conflict or hindrance. This marvelous interpenetration is in- 
conceivable by any consciousness dependent upon sense mind, 
but is a commonplace of the inconceivable, spontaneous activi- 
ties of Mind-Essence. 

Section Two 

Refutation of False Doctrines and Prejudices 

Again, in order to awaken faith in the minds of sentient 
beings that they may turn from the cycle of deaths and re- 
births and enter the path that leads to Enlightenment and 
Nirvana, it is necessary to show the falsity of the common con- 
ception of an ego-self and its aggregates of sensation, percep- 
tion, discrimination and consciousness. If one is to become 
free from the bondage of these grasping aggregates then one 
must understand clearly their unreality. This obsession of an 
ego-personality may be considered in two ways. First, the as- 
pects of it that arise from the physical organism; and second, 
the aspects of it that arise in the intellectual mind. 



$86 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


First let us consider the aspects of it that arise from the 
physical organism. These may be considered, as common minds 
think about them, under five heads. The first is the aspect of 
it as perceived by the sense-mind. According to the Sutras, 
Tathagatas are represented as existing in a state of emptiness 
and tranquillity. Common minds interpret this to mean that 
Tathagatas’ minds are empty and tranquil, a physical analogy. 
They do not understand that it refers to the immaterial per- 
ceptions of the thinking mind, a metaphysical analogy, so 
they mistakenly consider that “emptiness” is a characteristic of 
Tathagatas. To disabuse their minds of this false conception, it 
is necessary to show that “emptiness” is a false conception 
arising in their own minds, existing only in relation to their 
senses and discriminating mind, and having no substantiality of 
its own. Its visible manifestation is to be recognized in the 
tendency of human beings to turn to the cycle of births and 
deaths and to continue therein. All these physical sights and 
mental perceptions and discriminations of them belong to the 
mind and have no existence apart from the mind. As soon as 
the mind understands this, even the conception of pure space 
is seen to be a false and arbitrary conception. And the same 
is true, also, of all sorts of physical conditions and conceptions 
about them, that common minds take for granted are in a state 
of existence, they are all simply the false arisings of the ex- 
periential mind, and when the mind understands the falsity of 
the conceptions, the objects themselves vanish into nothingness. 
Then, nothing would remain but the purity of Essential Mind 
radiantly present in all the ten quarters of the universes. This 
is the true significance of the Tathagata’s intrinsic and all- 
embracing Wisdom. 

The second aspect of egoism as perceived by the sense- 
minds relates to the conception of substantiality. In the Sutras 
it is stated that all conceptions of the world are* in a state of 
emptiness. This is interpreted by common minds as meaning 
that it is in a state of physical emptiness but, in truth, it 
refers to a state of mental emptiness, a mental analogy. Com- 
mon minds apply it to all their, conceptions — their conceptions 
of Mind-Essence and Nirvana — and therefore think of them as 
empty of all “substantiality.” To disabuse their minds of this 
false conception it is necessary to show that the Dharmakaya 
of Mind-Essence is not empty of its own true substantiality. 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


387 


Mind-Essence is replete with its own merits and virtues, all- 
embracing, boundlessly potential, inconceivably vast and 
beautiful. 

The third aspect, arises from the saying in the Sutras that 
the Tathagata’s Womb is neither in a state of increasing nor in 
a state of decreasing, that its substantiality is embodied in an 
exhaustless store of Pure Concepts of merits and virtues. Com- 
mon minds fail to understand the true significance of this and 
understand that it refers to some definite possession that is sep- 
arate from the merits and virtues possessed by human beings. 
To disabuse their minds of this false conception, it is necessary 
to show that the true significance of Mind-Essence is its un- 
differentiated purity from all the differentiated conceptual de- 
filements such.as the false concept of birth and death. 

The fourth aspect, arises from the sayings in the Sutras that 
all the impure, contaminated concepts of deaths and rebirths 
belonging to the world exist because they come from Tatha- 
gata’s Womb, a physical analogy, and that all concepts are not 
independent of Mind-Essence. However, as common people 
they do not understand the true significance of the sayings in 
the Sutras, and imagine that the self-nature of Tathagata's 
Womb is fully embodied in such concepts as deaths and rebirths 
belonging to the world. To disabuse their minds of this false 
understanding, it is necessary to show that Tathagata’s Womb 
from beginningless time has only embraced the pure concepts 
of undifferentiated merit and virtue, all of which are neither 
independent of nor differentiated from the true significance of 
Mind-Essence. For all the contaminated concepts and vexatious 
differences and annoying discriminations, which are beyond all 
estimation, only exist as the false illusions of the thinking mind, 
not in its true essential Nature. More than this, they have 
never been in any kind of mutual response with Tathagata’s 
Womb. Or, if it should be granted that the substantiality of 
Mind-Essence is embodied in the false concepts of birth and 
death, but that it could be discarded by intuitive realization, 
this would be, indeed, an absurdity. 

The fifth aspect of egoism, arises from statements in the 
Sutras that births and deaths arise from Tathagata’s Womb and 
that the attainment of Nirvana, also, arises from the same 
source. However, as common people they do not understand the 
true significance of these sayings in the Sutras, and they imag- 



388 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

ine that sentient beings have their beginnings and endings, and 
that the Nirvana attained by Tathagatas, also, has its begin- 
nings and endings, and renewed births in this Saha world. To 
disabuse their minds of this false assumption, we have only to 
call attention to the fact that Tathagata’s Womb is devoid of 
any beginnings or endings or relations of succession. And the 
same is true of Ignorance, also. Or, if it should be asserted that 
there are beings independent of this Saha world that have tran- 
scendental qualities, our reply would be, that the only basis 
for such assertions are the unprovable teachings of heretical 
books. Moreover, there are no endings to be conceived of as 
having relation to Tathagata’s Womb, for the Nirvana attained 
by the Buddhas being in mutual sameness with Tathagata’s 
Womb, has likewise no beginning and no ending. 

Second let us consider the aspects of it arising from the 
immaterial, mental faculties. This refers to the clinging to the 
notions of personalities such as the immature disciples of the 
Hinayana reveal when they think the Tathagata has simply 
taught the non-existence of and ego-self as it relates to per- 
sonalities, but who still cherish the notion of selfness as it re- 
lates to their attainment of Enlightenment and Nirvana. Just 
as common people are fearful of the physical suffering of life, 
so these disciples fear the notions of failure in their effort to 
attain Enlightenment and Nirvana, and they cling to the con- 
ception of a Nirvana for themselves. To disabuse their minds 
of these erroneous conceptions, be it known that just as the 
nature of physical cencepts arising from the sense reactions are 
devoid of any rebirths, so these metaphysical concepts derived 
from the intellectual mind are also devoid of any deaths for in 
their essence they are from the beginning in Nirvana. 

If one is to become free from the grasping nature of these 
aspects of ego-selfness, he must clearly understand that all 
mental concepts, both the pure and the impure, exist only in 
a state of relativity, they have no self-hood in their own right. 
From their very beginnings they are neither matter nor mind, 
neither intelligence nor consciousness, neither existence nor 
nonexistence, they are wholly imaginary. But still having a kind 
of relative existence they are used by the Lord Tathagata as ex- 
pedient means to guide sentient beings by means of words, into 
the path that leads to Enlightenment. The purpose of the Lord 
Tathagata is to emancipate sentient beings from the bondage 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


389 


of their thinking by means of their thinking, and to bring them 
back to their origin in Mind-Essence. But to let the mind 
dwell upon and grasp words and concepts only entangles the 
mind the more in the cycle of deaths and rebirths, and hinders 
it from merging into its true nature of Wisdom. 

Section Three 

Right Practices Leading to Enlightenment 

At the beginning, we must define what is meant by right 
practices leading to Enlightenment and to distinguish between 
the spontaneous activities attained by Buddhas and the crude 
practices laboriously undertaken by the Bodhisattvas at the 
beginning of their devotions. There are three motives that lead 
a novice to the beginning of his practices. The first is the 
awakening of faith in the Dharma. The second is some under- 
standing as to what will be required of him if he is to attain a 
realization of the Dharma. The third is the unfolding insight 
that comes to him as he progressively attains a realization of 
Dharma. 

First, let us consider the awakening and maturing of a pure 
faith in the Dharma. Every sentient being, no matter how 
unconcentrated his mind may be, has certain instinctive reac- 
tions of mind that make him sensitive to kindness, shrink from 
suffering, fear evil, dread retribution, confident in self-effort 
and attainment, and hopeful of something better. If by chance 
they should come in contact with a Buddha, give offerings to 
him, worship him or his image, they would develop their germ 
of faith and after ten thousand kalpas would have so far ma- 
tured their faith that all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas would 
teach them how to start their devotions. 

Or, because of a natural compassionate disposition, they may 
awaken faith in a conception of a Supernatural Compassionate 
One and start their devotional practices. Or, because of the 
absence of the Dharma, or fear that it might become lost, 
their faith may awaken and they begin devotional practices for 
the sake of preserving the true Dharma. All of these whys of 
beginning devotional practices are a manifestation of true faith. 
It will not be in vain nor will it suffer retrogression, but will 
develop under proper conditions, into right aspiration and right 


390 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

ways of practice until it merges into the true Samadhi of 
Buddhahood. 

There may be others who, having a less developed kindness 
of disposition, but who have suffered extremes of vexations and 
sufferings for many kalpas, who by chance meet Buddhas and 
make offerings to them and worship them, they awaken faith, 
also, and start their devotions for the purposes of attaining a 
happy rebirth in this world, or among devas in some super- 
realm of heaven, or as an Arhat, or as a Pratyekabuddha in 
some Nirvana of their own. 

There may be some even who wish to seek the true Maha- 
yana attainment of Buddhahood but whose root of merit is de- 
ficient of stability, now earnest now heedless, now advancing 
now receding. These start devotional practices more or less on 
impulse, and lacking stability, when they meet difficulties or 
hindrances within their own minds, they turn aside from the 
true Mahayana path into the path of Hinayana disciples and 
Pratyekabuddhas. 

From the foregoing we see that there are many reasons that 
move disciples to begin their practices of devotion, but they all 
are based on the awakening of faith. Let us now consider right 
reasons for beginning devotional practices. These are of three 
kinds; first, reasons based upon an intellectual understanding of 
the truth of Mind-Essence. This is the most straightforward 
reason. Second, reasons based upon an earnest purpose to keep 
the precepts and develop a good life. Third, reasons based upon 
a heart of compassion, that seeing the suffering among all sen- 
tient beings wishes out of the kindness of his heart to deliver 
them. 

It may be inferred from what has been said that if a dis- 
ciple has the true understanding of Mind-Essence and con- 
centrates his mind on that, that he needs to do nothing further 
but to quietly wait for the unfolding of Enlightenment and 
Nirvana. The answer to this is, that a disciple is like a precious 
gem whose brilliance is hidden by a coating of impurities. If 
we are to enjoy the pure brilliance of the gem we must first 
resorf to polishing. The true nature of Mind-Essence is im- 
maculately pure but in the disciple it is hidden by accumula- 
tions of defilement that must be removed by expedient means 
if he is to attain Enlightenment. Therefore, besides having a 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


39i 


true understanding of the Dharma, he must also keep the pre- 
cepts and cherish a great heart of compassion. 

There are four kinds of expedient means for beginning and 
continuing devotional practices if one is to be confident of at- 
taining Enlightenment. The first, is to understand and cherish 
certain fundamental intellectual convictions. He should practice 
recollective mindfulness of the true nature of all concepts, that 
they are empty of any self-nature of their own, that they are 
devoid of any rebirth and free from all false prejudices and do 
not abide in the cycle of deaths and rebirths. He should prac- 
tise recollective mindfulness upon the fact that concepts are 
purely relative being altered, united or destroyed by causes and 
affinities. He should practice recollective mindfulness as to the 
fact of karma and its inevitable maturing, and purpose to lay 
up a good karma by keeping with sincerity and faithfulness all 
the precepts and practising all the Paramitas, and to have all 
their practicing of recollective mindfulness and outward keeping 
of the precepts and inward keeping of the Paramitas motivated 
by a great heart of compassion. He should try to develop all 
merits and virtues; he should sympathise with all sentient be- 
ings and seek to awaken faith and aspiration in their minds. 
He must not think over much of Nirvana nor seek to grasp it 
for himself for in the Pure Concepts of Mind-Essence there are 
no desires, no graspings, no clingings. 

The second kind of expedient means for practising is to de- 
velop feelings of shame and repentence after giving place to 
evil thoughts or doing evil acts, as a means for restraining one 
from yielding to them again, for Mind-Essence must be kept 
free from all evil defilements. The third kind is to develop 
one’s root of kindness by the spontaneous and willing doing of 
all kinds of charity in cases of need, by making willing offerings 
to Buddha, Dharma and the Brotherhood. It is to praise Bud- 
dha and to beseech him to emancipate and enlighten all sentient 
beings. It is to practise expressing adoration and affection and 
dependence upon Buddha, Dharma and the Brotherhood, with 
perfect sincerity so as to increase one’s faith and earnestness of 
practice in seeking for highest perfect Enlightenment, for it is 
only by the protecting and supporting power of Buddha, 
Dharma, Sangha, that he will be able to attain it. For to in- 
tegrate oneself with the Pure Concepts of Mind-Essence one 



392 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


must be free from all hindrances both from without and within. 

The fourth expedient means is the practising of compassion, 
the uttering of earnest wishes that all sentient beings may be 
taught and delivered, not a single one omitted even to infinite 
future, all to be brought to Nirvana, and that his merits may 
be devoted to that end. And to be in harmony with the pure 
concepts of Mind-Essence there must be no cessation or inter- 
missions of his compassionate wishes and vows. 

The essential nature of the Pure Concepts of Mind-Essence 
are its all-embracing inclusiveness, embracing all sentient beings 
in its perfect purity and unity with no shadow of individuation 
in either mind or the substance of compassion. Any Bodhi- 
sattva having made this solemn pranadana will attain to some 
measure of intuitive insight into the pure Dharmakaya of his 
Mind-Essence. As they by their intuition enter into pure Dhar- 
makaya, they are enabled to make transcendental manifestations 
of eight kinds that will benefit all sentient beings. First, accord- 
ing to the purity and earnestness of their pranadana, after the 
example of Buddhas, they can descend from the heavenly pal- 
aces of the Tusita Realm, they can enter into a human womb, 
undergo a period of gestation, be bom as a human, become a 
Bhikshu, attain Enlightenment, turn the wheel of the Dharma, 
pass into Nirvana. However, such Bodhisattvas can not be said 
to have attained to Dharmakaya, because they have not yet 
fully matured their karmas that had been inherited from in- 
finite periods of past ages, so they still remain in mutual re- 
sponse with light sufferings in following rebirths, but enduring 
these light sufferings they are not in bondage to them because 
of their transcendental freedom and power belonging to their 
great pranadana. Some of these Bodhisattvas, it is said in the 
Sutras, must descend into the evil realms for a period, but this 
does not mean that they have retrograded, it only means that 
for the maturing of their remaining karma they must experience 
the suffering of those lower realms to cure them of any remain- 
ing shadow of indolence less they fall short of attaining true 
Bodhisattvahood, so that their courage and boldness may be 
adequate. Such Bodhisattvas by reason of this experience in 
the lower realms will start their devotional practices with re- 
newed earnestness and will never again become timid or indo- 
lent, or have any fear of retrograding. Or if they should learn 
that in order to attain Nirvana they must endure hardship for 



AWAKENING OF FAITH 


393 


immense kalpas, they would never slacken their zeal in practice 
or become cowardly and timid, for they have attained a pure 
faith in the teaching that all pure concepts, since beginningless 
time, are in their self-nature Nirvana itself. 

Understanding and Practice. 

As Bodhisattvas advance along the stages they attain a 
clearer understanding of the Dharma and of how to more per- 
fectly practice it. As the first Asamkya Kalpa of their practice 
draws to a close, these advanced Bodhisattvas attain a tran- 
scendental understanding of the self-nature of the Pure Con- 
cepts of Mind-Essence and conform their practices to it. As 
they see that the essential nature of the Pure Concepts is free 
from all acquisitiveness, all stinginess and greediness, all cov- 
etousness, they bring their practising into conformity with it 
by practising the paramita of charity. As they see that the 
essential nature of the Pure Concepts of Mind-Essence are free 
from the defilement of all sensual desires, they bring their 
practising into conformity with it by practising the paramita 
of keeping the Precepts. As they see that the essential nature 
of the Pure Concepts is free frpm all resentment, all malice, 
all anger, they try to conform to it by practising the paramita 
of patience and humility. As they see that the essential nature 
of the Pure Concepts is free from all slothfulness and idleness 
and indifference, they try to conform to it by practising the 
paramita of zeal and perseverence. As they see that the essen- 
tial nature of the Pure Concepts is free from all disturbance 
and confusion, the very perfection of permanence an d peace- 
fulness, they try to conform to it by practising the paramita 
of tranquillity. As they see that the essential nature of the 
Pure Concepts is free from all obscurity caused by segregation 
and individuation, and the darkness caused by Ignorance, and 
is luminous with the Brightness of Truth, they try to conform 
to it by practising the paramita of Wisdom. 

Realization and Attainment 

Let us now consider the unfolding insight that comes to a 
Bodhisattva as he attains the object of his faith and earnest 
practices. From the first awakening of his faith and beginning 
of his practice to his full realization and attainment there has 
been but one object in mind, enlightenment and Buddhahood 



394 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

for the sake of all sentient beings. But can this truly be called 
“an object”? If we think of it as a state or condition, that he 
as an ego-personality is to attain, it might be, but we have al- 
ready found that the conception of an ego-personality is a 
false conception that the highest Bodhisattvas have already 
discarded. In the Pure Concepts of Mind-Essence there is ho 
object and no subject, there is only the nature of Wisdom, the 
Pure Dharmakaya. It is this that highest Bodhisattvas realize 
and attain. In an instant of true realization they are offering 
gifts and worship to all the Buddhas in all the Buddha-lands 
of all the universes, they are beseeching the Buddhas to turn 
the wheel of the Dharma for the sake of all sentient beings, 
they are awakening faith in the minds of all beginners, they 
are supporting them and bestowing upon them all pure merits 
and virtue,' and at the long last they are present when the 
realization comes to welcome them into the pure suchness of 
Enlightment, the pure Dharmakaya. And all this not as a 
glorified personality but as Buddhahood itself. However, on ac- 
count of the timid and cowardly disciples, sometimes they will 
encourage them by such words as, “You will attain Enlighten- 
ment and Buddhahood after infinite ages,” or on account of 
the indolent and sluggish disciples, they may urge them for- 
ward by many skillful devices, but in all cases the awakening 
of faith and the beginning of practice is equal in all cases, so 
their realization and attainment of Enlightenment is always on 
an equality. There are no Dharmas to bring one disciple 
quickly and another slowly to enlightenment, all Dharmas are 
of an equal potency, and all disciples must practice through 
many asamkyas of kalpas, and no Bodhisattva-Mahasattva has 
ever attained it in any less. It is only because of differences in 
the dispositions and environments of sentient beings that dif- 
ferent skillful means are used and different advancements seem 
to be made, but in truth, in the pure Dharmakaya everything 
is in perfect balance and purity. 

The Potential Merit and Virtue of Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas. 

Again, when Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas awaken faith and 
make up their minds to begin spiritual devotions and discipline 
for the sake of all sentient beings, there come into potentiality 
great merits and virtues, which we will now consider under 
three heads. The first, is the True Mind for it embraces and 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


395 


cherishes no individuation nor discriminations nor partialities 
nor prejudices. The second, is the Mind of Perfect Wisdom for 
it unfolds all manner of skillful and expedient principles and 
means. The third, is the Mind of Perfect Compassion for it un- 
folds an activity or karma consciousness that is sympathetic 
toward all sentient beings, cherishing good-will toward them 
and spontaneously willing to satisfy their needs and benefit 
them in innumerable and inconceivable ways, appearing and dis- 
appearing with no thought of self. Furthermore, this kind of 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, having matured their merits and vir- 
tues, attain the ultimate perfection of Purity and Unity and 
Peacefulness, unimaginably supernal and harmonious and bliss- 
ful, the Pure Dharmakaya. By the inscrutable integrancy of 
this Ultimate Purity, spontaneous and constant and ceaseless. 
Ignorance disappears. This is Ultimate, All-embracing Wisdom, 
the immaculate Womb of all Pure Dharmas and the awakening 
faith and beginning spiritual devotions and practices of all sen- 
tient beings. It is the Ultimate and Universal Breathing going 
forth in radiantly creative activity, drawing inward by intuitive 
sympathy and boundless good-will to the perfect purity and 
unity and peacefulness of the Pure Dharmakaya, and all for 
the benefit of all sentient beings that they may be One and 
fully realize their perfect Oneness. 

It may be asked at this point. If the principle of individua- 
tion and discrimination is transcended by the vanishing of Ig- 
norance, how can omniscience of Perfect Wisdom be attained by 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas? If an infinity of universes arises be- 
cause of infinite space, and if because of an infinity of universes 
there are an infinity of sentient beings, and if because of infi- 
nite beings there are an infinitude of mentalities and predis- 
positions and conditions and circumstances and differentiated 
activities, how can even a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva attain per- 
fect understanding, or command of adequate skillful means, or 
highest perfect Wisdom? The explanation is, that all these in- 
finity of infinities are fully embraced in the perfect self-aware- 
ness of the Bliss-body of Buddhahood which is the ineffable 
Dharmakaya, which is free of all differentiation or premonition 
of differentiation. But as sentient beings have falsely imagined 
illusions of objects and conditions and self-ness, and because of 
it discriminative thinking has arisen and egoism and grasping 
and clinging and karma. But all these false imaginations are 



396 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


not to be regarded as of the intrinsic self-nature of the Pure 
Dharmakaya, and provide no ground for infallibly understand- 
ing or perfectly realizing Truth itself. But by intuitively be- 
coming identified with Truth, Highest Bodhisattva-Mahasat- 
tvas become free of all such differentiated thinking and preju- 
dices and are free to react to the undifferentiated purity of their 
Mind-Essence. Their minds can reflect all false concepts but 
without stain or desire, by reason of which they attain perfect 
wisdom and command of expedient means and harmonizing 
activities. By entering intuitively and with sympathy and good- 
will into the minds and desires and limitations of all sentient 
beings, they can elucidate the Dharmas and deliver all sentient 
beings. This is the reply to the question, How can purified 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas attain highest perfect Wisdom: It is 
because they understand and sympathize with the false imagina- 
tions of sentient beings and at the same time enter intuitively 
into the purity and unity of their Mind-Essence, not as stand- 
ing apart and judging, but one with all sentient beings, them- 
selves, the Buddhas, Mind-Essence, Dharmakaya itself, one and 
inseparable. 

Still another question may arise. If all the Buddhas from 
remotest beginnings have had these transcendental powers of 
Wisdom, Compassion and command of unlimited expedient 
means for benefiting all sentient beings, how is it that sentient 
beings do not recognize and appreciate their good-will and 
beneficent activities and respond to them by awakening faith 
and beginning devotional practices and, in due course, attain 
enlightenment and Buddhahood? Instead, most sentient beings 
are indifferent and seem to prefer their own illusions to em- 
brace the sufferings that follow Ignorance? The reply is that 
all Buddhas and Tathagatas and Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas hav- 
ing become identified with the pure Dharmakaya pervade all 
the universes equally and potently and spontaneously, but em- 
bracing in their pure Essence all sentient beings, also, and be- 
ing in eternal relations with them and being of the same self- 
nature, they wait the willing and inevitable response that is a 
necessary part of the perfect purity and unity of the Dharma- 
kaya. The minds of sentient beings are truly like a mirror, re- 
flecting all Dharmas, but if the mirror is stained or defiled 
there will be no clear reflection. Not until the mirror of human 
minds and hearts is purified by the awakening of faith and the 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


397 


beginnings of spiritual practices, can they hope to see Buddhas, 
attain Enlightenment, and realize their own identity with 
Dharmakaya. 

Part Four 

Practice of the Mahayana 

Thus far we have been elucidating the principles of the 
Mahayana. Now we will explain the practice of the Mahayana 
and to do so effectively we must begin by showing the part 
that faith plays in the Practice, especially in the beginning 
when the minds of the novice Bodhisattvas have not yet at- 
tained to right Samadhi. We will then proceed to explain what 
kind of faith a disciple should have and how to apply his faith 
in practice. There are four kinds of faith: First, the novice 
disciple must have faith in the fundamental, ultimate Principle 
of things, that it is perfect Wisdom and perfect Compassion, 
and perfect Oneness. He should think joyfully of his own 
identity with its pure Mind-Essence. Second, the disciple should 
have abounding faith in Buddhahood. This means that he 
should cherish a sincere faith in the merits and virtues of the 
Buddhas, that he should constantly remember them to feel his 
fellowship with them, to make offerings to them of adoration 
and gifts, to seek instruction and guidance from them. Third, 
the disciple should have an unshakable faith in the wisdom, 
the compassion, the power of the Dharma. This means that 
he should look to it and rely upon it as an infallible guide in 
his practice of its Paramita ideals. Fourth, the disciple should 
have an unfeigned, affectionate and abounding faith in the 
Brotherhood of Homeless-Bhikshus, caring for them, supplying 
their few needs, looking to them for instruction and sympathy 
in their own practice, that they may perfect their faith and 
move toward Buddhahood together. 

There are six ways of practising faith. First, there is the 
way of Charity. Second, the way of unselfish kindness in Keep- 
ing the Precepts. Third, the way of Patience and Humility. 
Fourth, the way of Zeal and Perseverance. Fifth, the way of 
Tranquillity, stopping all discriminating thoughts and quietly 
realizing Truth itself. Sixth, the way of Wisdom. 

First, the Way of Charity. The purpose of this practice is 
to eradicate one’s own stinginess and cupidity. To effect this 



398 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

one should train himself to be generous. If any one comes to 
him begging, he should give him money or things as he has 
particular need, with discretion and kindness, as much as he 
can up to his ability and the other’s need, so that the begging 
ones may be relieved and go away cheerful. Or, if the disciple 
come upon one in danger or hardship or an extremity of any 
kind, he should encourage him and help him as much as he 
can. Or, if one should come seeking instruction in the Dharma, 
he should humbly and patiently interpret it to him using ex- 
pedient means, as much as he can interpret with clearness ac- 
cording to his ability. The disciple should practice Charity 
simply and unostentatiously, with no ulterior motive in mind 
of ambition, self-interest, reward, or praise, keeping in mind 
only this that the giving and receiving shall both tend in 
the direction of Enlightenment from them both alike and 
equally. 

Second, the way of Keeping the Precepts. The purpose of 
this practice is to get rid of all selfish grasping after comforts, 
delights, and self-interests. It means not to kill any sentient 
being, not to steal, not to commit adultery, not to deceive nor 
slander nor to utter malicious words nor to flatter. If he is a 
layman, it means keeping away from all greedy actions, envy, 
cheating, mischief, injustice, hatred, anger, and all heretical 
views. If he is a Bhikshu, it means he should avoid all vexa- 
tious and annoying acts, he should keep away from the turmoil 
and activities of the worldly life and live in solitude and quiet- 
ness, practising begging and disciplining himself to be content 
with least desires. He should feel regret over any slight fault 
and should always act with prudence and attentiveness. He 
should not neglect any of the Lord Tathagata’s instructions, 
and should be always ready to defend any one suffering under 
suspicion or slander so as to restrain them from falling into 
further evil. 

Third, the Way of Patience. This means to practice patience 
when vexed or annoyed by others and to restrain any rising 
thoughts of ill-will or vengeance. It means being patient when 
overtaken by any affront to one’s pride, personal losses, criti- 
cisms, or praise, or flattery; it means being patient and undis- 
turbed by either happiness or suffering, comfort or discomfort. 

Fourth, the Way of Zeal. The purpose of this discipline is 
to restrain oneself from yielding to temptations to laziness and 



AWAKENING OF FAITH 


399 


weariness. It disciplines one not to relax one’s effort when he 
meets success and praise, but to ever renew one’s resolution to 
seek enlightenment. It should strengthen one to keep far away 
from temptations to timidity or false modesty. One should ever 
remember past sufferings borne because of evil committed care- 
lessly and to no benefit to himself, and by these recollections to 
renew his zeal and perseverence to make diligent practising of 
all kinds of meritorious and virtuous deeds that will benefit 
both others and himself and keep himself free from suffering in 
the future. In spite of his being a Bhikshu he may be suffer- 
ing from unmatured karma of previous lives and thus still be 
open to the attacks of evil influences, or still be entangled in 
worldly affairs, or the responsibilities of a family life, or under 
some chronic illness or disability. In the face of all such bur- 
densome hindrances, he should be courageous and zealous and 
unceaselessly diligent in his practisings during the day, and in 
the six watches of the night should be on his guard against 
idle thoughts by constantly repeating adorations to all the Bud- 
dhas with zeal and sincerity, beseeching the Buddhas to abide 
in the world to turn the Dharma wheel, to support all right 
efforts to practice, to encourage all kind acts, to awaken faith 
in the faithless, to encourage right vows and to return all merit 
for the Enlightenment of all sentient beings. Unless one is 
zealous and persevering in his practice, he will not be able to 
keep himself from increasing hindrances to cultivating his root 
of devotion. 

Fifth, The Way of Tranquillity. The purpose of this disci- 
pline is twofold, to bring to a standstill all disturbing thoughts, 
and all discriminating thoughts are disturbing, to quiet 
all engrossing moods and emotions so that it will be possible to 
concentrate the mind for the practice of meditation and realiza- 
tion, and thus to be able to follow the practice willingly and 
gladly. Secondly, when the mind is tranquillized by stopping 
all thought, to practice “reflection” or meditation not in a dis- 
criminating way but in a more intellectual way of realizing the 
meaning and significance of one’s thoughts and experiences, and 
also to follow this part of the practice willingly and gladly. By 
this twofold practice of “stopping and realizing”, one’s faith, 
that is already awakened, will become developed and gradually 
the two aspects of this practice will merge into one another — 
the mind perfectly tranquil but most active in realization. In 



4 oo SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

the past, one naturally has had confidence in his faculty of dis- 
crimination, but this is now to be eradicated and ended. 

For those who are practising “stopping”, they should retire 
to some quiet place, or better live in some quiet place, sitting 
erect and with earnest and zestful purpose seek to quiet and 
concentrate the mind. While one may at first think of his 
breathing, it is not wise to continue it very long, nor to let the 
mind rest on any particular appearances or sights, or concep- 
tions arising from the senses, such as the primal elements of 
earth, water, fire and ether, nor to let it rest on any of the 
lower mind’s perceptions, particularizations, discriminations, 
moods or emotions. All kinds of ideation are to be discarded 
as fast as they arise, even the notions of controlling and dis- 
carding are to be gotten rid of. One’s mind should become like 
a mirror, reflecting things but not judging them nor retaining 
them. Conceptions of themselves have no substance, let them 
rise and pass away unheeded. Conceptions arising from the 
senses and lower mind, will not take form of themselves, unless 
they are grasped by the attention, but if they are ignored there 
will be no appearing and no disappearing. The same is true of 
conditions outside the mind: they should not be permitted to 
engross one’s attention nor hinder one’s practice. As the mind 
can not be absolutely vacant, as thoughts rising from the senses 
and discriminating mind are discarded and ignored, one must 
supply their place by right mentation. The question then arises, 
what is right mentation? The reply is: right mentation is the 
realization of the mind itself, of its pure undifferentiated Es- 
sence. Even when we sit quietly with the mind fixed on its 
pure Essence, there should be no lingering notions of self, of 
self realizing, or any phenomena of realization. Pure Mind-Es- 
sence is ungraspable of any rising or appearing of individuation. 

Sixth, the Way of Wisdom. The purpose of this discipline 
is to bring one into the habit of applying the insight that has 
come to him by the preceding ways of discipline. Even when 
one is rising, standing, walking, doing something, stopping, one 
should constantly concentrate his mind on the act and the do- 
ing of it, not on his relation to it or its character or its value. 
One should think: there is walking, there is doing, there is stop- 
ping, there is realizing; not, I am walking, I am doing this, it 
is a good thing, it is disagreeable, it is I who am gaining merit, 
it is I who am realizing how wonderful it is. Then come va- 


AWAKENING OF FAITH 


401 


grant thoughts, feelings of elation or defeat and failure and un- 
happiness. Instead of all this, one should simply practice con- 
centration of the mind on the act itself, understanding it to be 
an expedient means for attaining tranquillity of mind, realiza- 
tion, insight and Wisdom, and to follow the practice in faith, 
willingness and gladness. After long practice the bondage of 
old habits becomes weakened and disappears, and in its place 
appears confidence, satisfaction, awareness and tranquillity. 

What is this practice of Wisdom designed to accomplish? 
There are three classes of conditions that hinder one from ad- 
vancing along the path to Enlightenment: first, the allurements 
arising from the senses and external conditions and the dis- 
criminating mind; second, the inner conditions of the mind, its 
thoughts, desires and moods; these the earlier practices are de- 
signed to eliminate. The third class are the instinctive and 
fundamental, insidious and persistent, urgings, the will-to-live 
and enjoy, the will-to-protect one’s life and personality, the 
will-to-propagate, which give rise to greed and lust, fear and 
anger, infatuation and pride of egoism. The practice of the Wis- 
dom Paramita is designed to control and eliminate these funda- 
mental and instinctive hindrances. By means of it the mind 
gradually becomes clearer, more luminous, more peaceful. In- 
sight clears, faith deepens and broadens, until they merge into 
the inconceivable Samadhi of the Mind’s Pure Essence. As one 
continues the practice of Wisdom, one less and less yields to 
thoughts of comfort or discomfort, faith becomes surer, more 
pervasive, beneficent, joyous, and fear of retrogression vanishes. 

But do not think that these consummations are to be at- 
tained easily or quickly; many rebirths may be necessary, many 
asamkyas of kalpas may have to elapse. So long as doubt, un- 
belief, slanders, evil conduct, hindrances of karma, weakness of 
faith, pride, laziness, a disturbed mind, persist, or their shadows 
linger, there can be no attainment of the Samadhi of the Bud- 
dhas. But once attained, in the luminous brightness of highest 
Samadhi, one will be able to realize with all the Buddhas, the 
perfect unity of all sentient beings with Buddhahood’s Dharma- 
kaya. In the pure Dharmakaya, there is no dualism, neither 
shadow of differences. All sentient beings, if they are able to 
realize it, are already in Nirvana. The Mind’s pure Essence 
is Highest Samadhi. The Mind’s Pure Essence is anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi, is Prajna Paramita, Highest Perfect Wisdom. 



402 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 

Part Five 

The Advantages of Practising the Mahayana 

There may be some disciples whose root of merit is not yet 
matured, whose control of mind is weak and whose power of 
application is limited, and yet who are sincere in their purpose 
to seek Enlightenment, these, for a time, may be beset and be- 
wildered by maras and evil influences who are seeking to break 
down their good purpose. Such disciples, seeing seductive sights, 
attractive girls, strong young men, must constantly remind them- 
selves that all such tempting and alluring things are mind- 
made, and if they do this, their tempting power will disappear 
and they will no longer be annoyed. Or, if they have visions of 
heavenly gods and Bodhisattvas and Tathagatas surrounded by 
celestial glories, they should remind themselves that they, too, 
are mind-made and unreal. Or if they should be up-lifted and 
excited by listening to mysterious Dharanis, to lectures upon 
the Paramitas, to elucidations of the great principles of the 
Mahayana, they must remind themselves that these also are 
emptiness and mind-made, that in their Essence they are Nir- 
vana itself. Or, if they should have intimations within that 
they have attained transcendental powers, recalling past lives, 
or fore-seeing future lives, or reading other’s thoughts, or free- 
dom to visit other Buddha-lands, or great powers of eloquence, 
all of which may tempt them to become covetous for worldly 
power and riches and fame. Or, they may be tempted by ex- 
tremes of emotion, at times angry at other times joyous, or, at 
times very kind-hearted and compassionate at other times the 
very opposite, or, at times alert and purposeful at other times 
indolent and stupid, at times full of faith and zealous in their 
practice at other times engrossed in other affairs and negligent. 
All of which will keep them vacillating, at times experiencing 
a kind of fictitious samadhi, such as the heretics boast of, but 
not the True Samadhi. Or later, when they are quite advanced 
and become absorbed in trance for a day, or two, or even seven, 
not partaking of any food but up-held by inward food of their 
spirit, being admired by their friends and feeling very comfort- 
able and proud and complacent, and then later becoming very 
erratic, sometimes eating little, sometimes greedily, and the ex- 
pression of their face constantly changing. 

Because of all such queer manifestations and developments 



AWAKENING OF FAITH ' 403 

in the course of their practisings, disciples should be on their 
guard to keep the mind under constant control. They should 
neither grasp after nor become attached to the passing and un- 
substantial things of the senses or concepts and moods of the 
mind. If they do this they will be able to keep far away from 
the hindrances of karma. They should constantly remind them- 
selves that the false samadhis and raptures of the heretics al- 
ways have some imperfections about them and affinities with 
the triple world which lead the heretics to grasp after worldly 
fame, self-interest and self-pride, and becoming defiled by these 
graspings and prejudices and defilements, and becoming sepa- 
rated from their good Buddhist friends and learned masters, 
they miss the path of the Buddhas and quickly fall away into 
the path of the heretics. 

The true Samadhi of Mind-Essence is free from all arbitrary 
conceptions, all prejudices, all attainments. There is only purity 
and blissful tranquillity. As the advanced Bodhisattva passes 
into true Samadhi all individualized concepts of body or mind 
vanish and only the pure awareness of truth in its undifferen- 
tiated wholeness remains, and the mind realizes its true free- 
dom and peace, with no notions of egoism or individuality be- 
clouding it. 

As advanced Bodhisattvas practice this true Samadhi of 
Mind-Essence they will acquire in this present life ten great 
advantages: First, they will at all times be under the protection 
and support of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas who consti- 
tute the Eternal Sanga. Second, they will never fear evil. 
Third, they will attain clearing insight and intuitive under- 
standing, and will cease to be confused or disturbed by false 
teachings. Fourth, they will no longer doubt the profound 
Dharma teaching, their predispositions and karma hindrances 
will gradually disappear. Fifth, the rising of instinctive desires, 
suspicious and malicious feelings will cease. Sixth, their faith in 
the purposive good-will of the Tathagatas and of the wisdom 
and compassion of Buddhahood will increase. Seventh, they 
will become courageous and serene in the face of the issues of 
life and death, escaping grief, and all feelings of contrition and 
despondency. Eighth, they will unfold a great heart of com- 
passion themselves, their spirit will become gentle and mild, 
discarding all pride of egoism and untroubled by the acts of 
others. Ninth, they will cease to find pleasure in worldly 


404 SELECTIONS FROM SANSKRIT SOURCES 


things, and though they may not have attained samadhi, they 
will remain tranquil under ordinary conditions. Tenth, after 
they have attained Samadhi, they never again will be in bond- 
age to sense-originating concepts. 

# # # 

Here ends this treatise interpreting the principles and prac- 
tice of Mahayana Buddhism and designed to awaken faith in it. 
It is by means of these principles and practices that the Bodhi- 
sattvas are able to advance along the stages to the perfect at- 
tainment of Enlightenment and Buddhahood. All Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas of the past have by means of this Dharma awak- 
ened faith, undertaken devotional practices, continued them 
earnestly and perseveringly, and attained the goal of faith in 
Buddhahood. The same is true of all the Bodhisattvas of the 
present and the future, they are awakening faith and continu- 
ing the practices and will surely attain the consummation of 
their faith. Therefore, all sentient beings ought to awaken a 
like faith, and be diligent and faithful in studying and prac- 
tising it. 

I have now finished this interpretation of the Dharma, may 
any merit that arises from it, benefit all sentient beings and 
bring them to Buddhahood. 



SELECTIONS 

FROM CHINESE SOURCES 



0 h for this one rare occurrence 

Gladly would I give ten thousand pieces of gold! 

A hat is on my head , a bundle on my back, 

... And my staff, the refreshing breeze and the full moon . 


TAO-TEH-KING 

One 

T HE TAO that can be “tao-ed” can not be the infinite TAO 
(that is, the way that can be followed can not be the ul- 
timate, pathless Way). It is the same with the name of things: 
if things are explicable, the names we give them can not be 
the original Name. (That is) The source of the universe is hid- 
den in non-existence; existence is only the mother of its 
evolution. 

Since human beings are a small likeness of the great Uni- 
verse, they can only realize their Taohood by making close imi- 
tations of it. Before one can attain the supreme perfection of 
Taohood, he must first realize its inmost mystery, that is, he 
must enter the door of this mystery of mysteries. 

There are two ways for effecting this realization, both of 
which can be followed by the human organism. One way to 
realize the wonderful mystery of TAO is to put away all 
thoughts and desires. The other way is to concentrate both true 
intention and sincere devotion. These two ways of realization 
have different names but they both lead to a realization of the 
mystery that we call TAO. 

Two 

Our minds naturally perceive the beauty of things on ac- 
count of their beautifulness; so they also have a feeling of dis- 
gust for their ugliness on account of their ugliness. It is the 
same with goodness and badness. Everything in the world is 
mutually opposing and revealing itself. 

So existence and non-existence are mutually related; the dif- 
ficult and the easy are always in combination; the long and 
the short always qualify each other; the high and the low are 
always in opposition; the loud and the soft are loud and soft 
only in contrast with each other; the before and the behind 
are contrasted but always keep company. 

_ Therefore the perfect Sage in avoiding the limitations of rel- 
ativity resorts to no compulsion, nor does he make invidious 

407 



408 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


comparisons in teaching his people. Whatever he does is done 
in harmony with the principle of TAO. Whatever he produces 
is not kept in his own possession; whatever he does is not ex- 
hibited with pride; whatever he accomplishes is not dwelt upon 
with self-conceit. Because he avoids possession, and pride and 
self-conceit, his accomplishments are kept in lasting memory. 

Three 

If the perfect Sage would have his people give up their 
rivalries, he should not praise the competent ones. If he would 
have his people keep away from robbery and theft, he should 
not value precious things himself. If he would keep his mind 
undisturbed he should not covet desirable things. Thus the ad- 
ministration of the perfect Sage is designed to remove the de- 
sires of his people. He supplies them only with suitable nour- 
ishment and lessens their individual ideas by strengthening 
the common physical health. He ever tries to keep his people 
in ignorance and desirelessness so as to prevent the brainy ones 
from undertaking trouble-making activities. So long as he gov- 
erns his people by the principle of wu-wei (non-assertion, or 
non-compulsion), things naturally arrange themselves into 
social order. 

Four 

TAO is invisible but permeates everywhere; no matter how 
one uses it or how much, it is never exhausted. It is wise for 
us to imitate its profoundness; that is, to keep ourselves in 
quiet confidence as being the unfailing source of all things. We 
should hide our wits and competencies; we should free ourselves 
from worldly entanglements; keep ourselves always in humility 
and courtesy; becoming ever more socialized and personally 
disinterested. 

Should we attain all of these conditions, we would become 
as still and as transparent as the pure water of a spring. Then 
we would not recognize any spiritual forefather because no one 
would be worthy to be our ancestor except the perfect Father, 
the Great TAO. 

Five 

Heaven and earth are not fallible and unjust like humans: 
they are always impartial. They have no favorites in giving 


TAO-TEH-KING 


4<>9 


kindness to the world: they give life to humans with the same 
impartiality they give life to dogs and plants. The perfect sage 
is also impartial: he has no prejudices that would lead him to 
like this one and dislike that one; he treats all men as being 
of equal value. Moreover, there is nothing between heaven and 
earth but vast space. Heaven and earth resemble a bellows and 
a musical pipe: they are empty but inexhaustible; the more 
one plays on them the more they give out. The babbler is con- 
stantly being confounded but the dumb sage, constantly exercis- 
ing concentration of mind, is competent to meet every chance 
and circumstance. 

Six 

As rivers have their source in some far off fountain, so the 
human spirit has its source. To find his fountain of spirit is to 
learn the secret of heaven and earth. In this fountain of mys- 
tery, spirit is eternally present in endless supply. Anyone can 
avail himself of it for the refreshment and the unfolding great- 
ness of his own spirit by the earnest practice of concentration, 
but to do so he must devote himself to the effort with wu-wei 
of mind and sensitive expectancy. 

Seven 

Heaven is eternal and earth is everlasting. The reason why 
heaven and earth are eternal is because they do not live for 
or by themselves: that is the reason they ever endure. 

The perfect Sage, who puts his own interests behind him, 
is always the leader of his people. All the time he is looking 
after the welfare of his people and in doing so he preserves his 
own life. Is it not because he is disinterested that his own 
interests are conserved? 

Eight 

The highest virtue is like water: it benefits everything with- 
out exciting rivalries. We should be like water, choosing the 
lowest place which others avoid. We are then closely akin to 
TAO. 

For our dwelling we should choose the place where we can 
be of most benefit to our neighbors; we should be kind and 
courteous, always choosing to be with good people; in speech 
we should only speak words of truth and kindness; in adminis- 



4X0 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

tration we should seek to keep things in peace and order; in 
affairs we should exercise our best abilities; in activities we 
should adjust ourselves as circumstances arise and change. 

Inasmuch as we are never seeking pre-eminence, no one will 
hate us. 

Nine 

To stop one’s desires is far better than to be continually 
satisfying them. Desire is like a knife: if it is continually be- 
ing sharpened, it will soon wear away. 

There are wealthy men with mansions filled with gold and 
jewels, but they must be on the watch all the time to protect 
them. The pride of wealth and position brings about its own 
destruction. As soon as one has gained merit and fame, he 
should withdraw into retirement. This is the TAO of Heaven. 

Ten 

During the daytime, our senses are kept busy in activities, 
but if we keep our minds concentrated, we will better preserve 
their potentialities. If, in our practice of concentration, we pre- 
serve humility and tenderness and retain our natural breathing, 
we will become like a little child. If, in our practice of con- 
centration, our minds retain their purity, we will be kept free 
from faults. 

If the perfect Sage truly loves his people and wishes to 
bring his state in to peace and order, he must practice wu-wei. 
If in our practice of concentration our heavenly eye is sud- 
denly opened and we gain enlightenment thenceforth we shall 
be free from lust and greed. If we attain transcendental intelli- 
gence, our minds penetrating into every comer and into every- 
thing, then our minds will lose their self-consciousness. 

A father begets children and sustains them while they are 
growing, nevertheless his children are not to be considered as bis 
personal property, nor is his care of them to be done for any 
hope of reward, nor should his parental authority continue 
after they have reached manhood. This is the profoundest 
virtue of TAO. 

Eleven 

There are thirty spokes in a wheel, but its utility lies in the 
hole of the hub. The potter forms the clay into jars, but their 


TAO-TEH-KING 


4ii 


usefulness depends upon the enclosed space. A carpenter builds 
the walls of a house and cuts out windows and doors, but the 
value of the house is measured by the space within the walls. 
Thus it may be said that existence is for accommodation but 
non-existence is for utility. 

Twelve 

If a man indulges his desire for looking at the five beautiful 
colors, his perception of their beauty will become dull; if a man 
indulges a desire for listening to the five musical tones, his per- 
ception of their music will become dulled; if he indulges a de- 
sire for the five pleasant tastes, his perception of their delicious- 
ness will become dull. If a man indulges a desire for racing 
and hunting, he will lose his appreciation of tranquillity and 
may become mad. So it is with the lure of hidden treasure 
that tempts a man to do evil. 

Therefore the perfect Sage aims at usefulness and is not de- 
ceived by the illusions of sense. A man in hunger desires food 
to satisfy his hunger and is little concerned by its beauty and 
delicacy. 

Thirteen 

Favor and disgrace are both to be feared; too great care of 
the body and too great neglect of the body are both to be 
feared. To be favored is humiliating, so to attain it is as much 
to be dreaded as to lose it. That is what is meant by favor 
and disgrace are alike to be feared. 

Why do our greatest troubles lie in too great care of our 
body? It is because one by so doing is all the time remember- 
ing that he has a body. As soon as I forget that I have a body 
then the troubles of the body vanish. 

Therefore, if a man is willing to give up his body for the 
benefit of the state, he is worthy to be entrusted with the state. 
It is the same with the perfect Sage who forgets his body in 
the service of the people; he is best qualified to govern the 
empire. 

Fourteen 

There is one thing in the universe that we can not see with 
our eyes, nor hear with our ears, nor grasp by our perceiving 
mind, which our senses fail to perceive or our mind fails to 



412 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


grasp yet may be realized in meditation. When we look up- 
ward we can not see its brightness, when we look downward 
we can not perceive its existence. Although this mystery is al- 
ways present there is no adequate name for it. 

If we concentrate our mind upon it, our mind becomes uni- 
fied with it and becomes as empty as open space. This is what 
may be called the form of the formless, the image of the image- 
less. It is as if we were in a trance. When we meet it we can 
not see its face and when we follow it we can not see its back. 
If, in dhyana, we tranquilize our minds by the wu-xvei principle 
of TAO, some day we will realize our identity with its mys- 
tery. Then we are true apostles of TAO. 

Fifteen 

In olden times those who were competent to be Masters 
were intelligent, subtle, profound and spiritual. Their thoughts 
could not be easily fathomed. Since their thoughts were hard to 
comprehend, I will try to reveal their virtue by some explana- 
tion. They were as cautious as a man crossing a river in winter; 
they were as suspicious as a man who fears his neighbors; they 
were as circumspect as a guest in the presence of his host; they 
were as ready to adapt themselves as ice at the point of melt- 
ing; they were as true and sound as the trunk of a perfect 
tree; they were as open and broadminded as a spacious valley; 
their thoughts were obscure like troubled waters. 

Who can enlighten himself by slowly quieting the troubled 
waters of his mind? After gaining calmness of mind by con- 
centration, who can gradually pass from its calmness into the 
activities of life and always retain the same calmness of mind? 
Only those who keep themselves from self-sufficiency and who 
control their lives by the principle of TAO. Being free from 
self-sufficiency, their spirit and energy will never fail, but will 
ever be refreshed and renewed. 

Sixteen 

At the moment when one is able to concentrate his mind 
to the extreme of emptiness and is able to hold it there in 
serene tranquillity, then his spirit is unified with the spirit of 
the universe and it has returned to its original state from which 
his mind and all things in the universe have emerged as ap- 
pearance. 



TAO-TEH-KING 


4i3 

All things are in a recurring process of appearing and dis- 
appearing only to return to their original state. This may be 
called a kind of inertia, a drag on activity and manifestation, 
that brings all things back to their original state of composure. 
The original state is eternal. To understand this etemality of 
emptiness is enlightenment; without this enlightenment one’s 
mind is engrossed in confusion and evil activity. 

Understanding this truth of eternality makes one merciful; 
mercy leads one to be impartial; impartiality results in nobility 
of character; nobility is like heaven. To be heavenly means to 
have attained Taohood. To have attained Taohood is to be- 
come unified with eternity. One can never die even with the 
decay of his body. 

Seventeen 

A great ruler, first of all, ought to know the necessities and 
habits of his people. Secondly, he should keep in close touch 
with them and praise the meritorious ones. Thirdly, he should 
give reason for them to respect his moral earnestness. Lastly, 
he should resort to punishment only to bring home to them 
the disgracefulness of evil. 

When a ruler lacks faith in his people, his people will lack 
faith in him. A wise ruler is always careful in his choice of 
words and because of it his people respect him and give him 
credit for the natural success of his administration. 

Eighteen 

When people no longer follow the great TAO, they originate 
the ideas of benevolence and righteousness. When knowledge 
and learning are cultivated there is hypocrisy. When relatives 
are unfriendly to one another, they adopt the teaching of filial 
piety and paternal affection. When a country is in confusion 
and discord, ideals of loyalty and patriotism arise. 

Nineteen 

When people abandon the idea of becoming a sage and give 
up ambition for worldly knowledge and learning, then their in- 
nate goodness will have a chance to manifest itself and will de- 
velop a hundredfold. When there is no activity of thinking to 
interfere, there is nothing that the mind can not accomplish in 
the way of good self-development. If ideas of benevolence and 



414 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


righteousness are abandoned, then people will return naturally 
to the primal virtues of filial piety and parental affection. If 
craftiness and acquisitiveness are abandoned, then theft and 
robbery will naturally disappear. 

The reason why I refer to this is because of the deficiency 
of these primal virtues in our present culture. Let us restrain 
our sensual desires and egoism and return to simplicity and 
naturalness. 

Twenty 

Abandon your acquired learning and do not regret the 
loss. There is very little difference between ‘yes’ and ‘no’, but 
what a vast difference between a good man and a wicked man. 
There are some things (like suffering and death) which are 
universally feared and which it is natural to fear, but woe to 
those ignorant people who desire and grasp after amusements 
and defilements (the very things that cause suffering and 
death). People are busy with enjoyments as if they were cele- 
brating a feast day, or as if they were flocking to the games. 
I, alone, am as fresh as the morning air, as pure as a babe in 
its mother’s arms, as free as a homeless wanderer. Other people 
are admired and envied because of their cleverness; I, alone, 
am neglected. Am I (because of this) foolish at heart? No! 
Let them be as smart and aggressive as ever; I am content to 
remain retiring and obscure. Let them continue to be as sen- 
sible and prudent as ever; let me remain as neglected as a 
deaf-mute. 

Nevertheless, I am as pure as the water in the ocean and 
as free as the driftwood upon its bosom. Let others have their 
means for acquiring wealth, I am content to be counted foolish 
and inefficient. I seem to stand in contrast to common people, 
empty and foolish, but I am nourished by food from Mother 
TAO. 

Twenty-one 

All the innumerable forms of teh (power or virtue) corres- 
pond to the principle of TAO, but the nature of TAO is to be 
realized only in a state of mental concentration when the think- 
ing mind is empty and quiescent and the intuitive mind is alert 
and receptive. Then the spirit reflects reality and realizes its 
true nature. When the spirit is in an advanced state of tran- 



TAO-TEH-KING 


4i5 


quillity, there will be opened a fountain of purest semen avail- 
able for service which by its special signs can be recognized in- 
tuitively. Since the beginning, this generative vitality has ever 
been available for the creation and nourishment of all things. 
Moreover, the reason one can manifest the mystery of Origi- 
nality is simply because of the fertilization of this same vitality 
called TAO. 

Twenty-two 

Time will show that the humblest will attain supremacy, 
the dishonored will be justified, the empty will be filled, the old 
will be rejuvenated, those content with little will be rewarded 
with much, and those grasping much will fall into confusion. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage who keeps his mind unified and 
humble will become the master of the world. As he has no 
prejudices, he becomes enlightened; as he does not assert him- 
self, he will become exalted; as he does not praise himself, his 
merit will be recognized; as he is not proud of himself, his 
fame will endure; inasmuch as he does not seek supremacy, 
he will have no rivals. 

True, indeed, is the old saying: “The humble will be ex- 
alted.” Every one, with sincerity, should take refuge in 
humility. 

Twenty-three 

To have an empty and transparent mind and to be unas- 
sertive is according to nature. A whirlwind never outlasts the 
morning, nor a violent rain the day. What causes the whirlwind 
and a violent rain? Is it not because of special condition of 
heaven and earth? If even nature can not keep up its dis- 
turbances for very long, how can a man expect to long assert 
himself? 

Therefore, he who is devoting his life to the attainment of 
TAO, should be sincerely humble in mind and unassertive in 
his activities. If he is with those who are following TAO, he 
should show sympathy by following TAO himself. If he is with 
those who are practising teh, he should practise teh, also. If he 
is with those who have suffered loss, he should show sympathy 
with them in their loss. 

For he who shows sympathy with those who are following 
TAO will thereby attain his own Taohood; he who shows sym- 



416 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

pathy with those who are practising teh, will rejoice in the ac- 
quirement of more teh himself, he who shows sympathy with 
those in loss will know better how to bear his own loss. 

If one lacks faith in himself, it is because he lacks faith in 
TAO. 

Twenty-four 

He that stands on tiptoe can not long stand steady; he that 
is sitting astride can not walk; he that is prejudiced can not 
become enlightened; he that is self-assertive can not become 
distinguished; he that praises himself will not be given credit 
by others; he that takes pride in himself will not long be able 
to retain his safety and fame. 

The comparison of these illustrations to TAO is like com- 
paring offal to food, or like comparing superficial manners with 
true sympathy of heart. Even animals recognize the difference 
and show hatred. Therefore, one who has attained Taohood 
will never manifest these egoistic qualities. He will avoid think- 
ing of himself and will remain humble at heart. 

Twenty-five 

There is a primal essence that is all-inclusive and undifferen- 
tiated and which existed before there was any appearance of 
heaven and earth. How tranquil and empty it is! How self- 
sufficing and changeless! How omnipresent and infinite! Yet 
this tranquil emptiness becomes the Mother of all. Who knows 
its name? I can only characterize it and call it TAO. Though 
it is quite inadequate, I will even call it the Great. But how 
boundless is its Greatness! It stretches away into the far dis- 
tances (like a circle) only to return again. 

How Great is TAO! But so is Heaven Great; and so is 
earth Great; and so is the perfect Sage Great. On the earth 
there are these four Greatnesses and among them is the perfect 
Sage. Men act in conformity with the laws of earth; earth acts 
in conformity with the laws of Heaven; Heaven acts in con- 
formity with the laws of TAO; TAO acts in accordance with its 
own self-nature. 

Twenty-six 

As the heavy is the foundation of the light, so the quiet is 
master of the passionate. Therefore, the perfect Sage in all the 



TAO-TEH-KING 


417 


experiences of the day does not lose his serenity. Though he 
be surrounded by grandeur, he will keep himself unconcerned 
and simple. 

But, alas, for those emperors, masters of ten thousand char- 
iots, who recklessly ambitious for power, have grasped after 
riches and thereby have lost control of their empires. If a king 
be reckless and flippant, he will lose the respect of his subjects; 
if he give way to passion, he will lose control of his kingdom. 

Twenty-seven 

Good walkers need no guides; good speakers do not blame 
or reproach others; good managers need no rules nor diagrams; 
good locksmiths are competent to open any lock; good binders 
can unloose any kind of knot. 

It is the same with the perfect Sage: he is always competent 
in giving advice to his people, so that not one becomes an out- 
cast. He is competent in using things, so that nothing is useless 
to him. His insight detects hidden values. Therefore the com- 
petent man is the master of the incompetent, and the incom- 
petent are as hands and feet to the competent. The incom- 
petent who does not esteem his master and the competent who 
does not protect his hands and feet, though he otherwise be 
intelligent, is acting foolishly. Herein lies the value of 
intelligence. 

Twenty-eight 

He who realizes the foolishness of passionate action always 
keeps his mind concentrated and tranquil. Just as the valleys, 
because of their lowness, become the source of rivers, so the 
perfect Sage because of his characteristic humility returns to the 
simplicity of a little child. 

He who realizes the true way of conserving his spirit will 
take good care of his body. Thereby he becomes an example to 
the world. His original vitality will never fail, and more, will 
return to its origin. 

He who realizes the dignity of his personality, but retains 
his humility, is like the lowly valley. Being like a valley, he 
becomes filled with the original vitality and reverts to his orig- 
inal nature. But when he forsakes humility, he merely be- 
comes cultivated and useful. The perfect Sage employs these 
cultivated and useful men to become his officials and chiefs. 



418 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


Therefore a good administrator makes no reforms that will de- 
stroy the natural simplicity of his people. 

Twenty-nine 

If anyone desires to take and remake the empire under his 
own reforming plans, he will never be successful. The empire is 
a spiritual thing that cannot be remade after one’s own ideas 
and he who attempts it will only make a failure. Even he 
who tries to hold it will lose it. 

Under any system of holding or remaking the empire, the 
king must make use of different people and things; some of 
whom are honorable and precious and others are of less degree; 
some will be leaders and some will be only ornamental; some 
will be followers and some servants. Some people or things are 
strong and can be depended upon, others are fragile and will 
break or must be thrown away. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage does not seek to take and re- 
make the empire. He does not seek to enforce his own ideas 
upon it, but is content to give up extravagant comforts and 
indulgent egoism himself and thus to set the nation an ex- 
ample of returning to simplicity: 

Thirty 

When a minister serves a ruler after the principle of TAO, 
he will not advise a resort to force of arms to become a great 
nation. Like returns to like. So briars and thorns grow rank 
where an army camps. Bad years of want and disorder follow 
a great war. 

Therefore, the competent ruler, resolutely restraining his 
desires and ambition, dares not resort to force. Because he is 
resolute, he will not be boastful, nor haughty, nor arrogant; 
because he is resolute he will act only under necessity; because 
he is resolute, he will have no ambition to be powerful. 

By the nature of things, when the strength of anything is 
fully developed, it immediately begins to decay. This means 
that strength is not in accordance with the principle of TAO. 
Being not in accordance with TAO, it will soon pass away. 

Thirty-one 

Both arms and armor are unblessed things. Not only men 
come to detest them, but a curse seems to follow them. There- 



TAO-TEH-KING 


419 


fore, the one who follows the principle of TAO does not resort 
to arms. It is significant that in peaceful times, the place of 
honor is on the left and in war times it is on the right. For as 
arms are unblessed things, they are not the things that men of 
good character resort to. 

It is of first importance for a gentleman to preserve his 
serenity and dignity; even when victorious, a good soldier does 
not rejoice, because rejoicing over a victorious battle is the 
same as rejoicing over the killing of men. If he rejoices over 
the killing of men, he will never be victorious. 

Thus, in propitious affairs, the place of honor is on the 
left, but in unpropitious affairs, the right is the place of honor. 
In times of war, lesser officers are on the left of the ranks, a 
place of honor, while the commanding general is on the right, 
a place of less honor. This means that war is considered as a 
funeral ceremony. 

Therefore, after a battle the killing of many men should 
be honored by weeping and mourning, and the victor should 
be received as if he were attending a funeral ceremony. 

Thirty-two 

TAO is eternal but is unnamable. Its simplicity, though con- 
sidered as of the humblest, is most independent. Nothing in 
the world is ahle to bring it into subjection. If princes and 
kings retain simplicity heaven and earth are harmoniously uni- 
fied and everywhere drop the sweet dew of their favor naturally 
and evenly. 

As soon as things are given names, greed and grasping arise 
and, unless one understands when to stop, there will be no 
satisfying the desires. To know when to be satisfied and to 
restrain desire, is to know the secret of longevity. This is the 
principle of TAO. It resembles the great rivers that flow into 
the seas, but which have their origin in the little streams of 
the valleys. 

Thirty-three 

He who understands others is intelligent; he who under- 
stands himself is enlightened. He who is able to conquer others 
is powerful; he who can control himself is more powerful. 

He who is contented is richer than the richest. Those who 
have purpose are resolute, and those who keep tranquillity of 



420 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


mind have endurance. Those whose fame endures beyond death 
are immortal. 

Thirty-four 

Great TAO is all pervading! It is available everywhere, on 
the right hand and on the left. Everything is dependent upon 
it for existence and it never fails them. It does all this but 
claims no ownership. As TAO has no selfish desires and is per- 
fectly humble, everything takes refuge in it. Because it does 
not care for ownership, it is regarded as the greatest. Because 
the perfect Sage never thinks of his greatness, he can attain 
true Greatness. 

Thirty-five 

The whole world is naturally drawn to him, who keeps this 
principle of TAO’S true Greatness. It goes to TAO and receives 
no harm; on the contrary it finds contentment, tranquillity and 
peace. To common people TAO’S principle of simplicity and 
humility seems weak and insipid; they desire and seek music 
and dainties. Indeed, TAO has no taste! When looked at, 
there is nothing to be prized; when listened for, it can scarcely 
be heard; but its satisfactions are inexhaustible. 

Thirty-six 

Before one can contract a thing, it must first be extended; 
before anything can be weakened, it must first be made strong; 
before anything can be wasted, it must be present; before one 
can take a thing by force, someone else must give it up. This 
is the profound principle which explains why the humble and 
yielding conquer the selfish and strong. 

A fish should not be removed from its natural home in the 
deep pond, neither should the authority of the nation be en- 
trusted to anyone, not even to the king’s favorite. 

Thirty-seven 

TAO acts without assertion, yet all things proceed in con- 
formity with it. If princes and kings would follow the principle 
of TAO, then all things would unfold according to their own 
nature. If there are troublesome desires arising from the habits 
of the people, they should be taught the principle of simplicity 
that characterizes the ineffable TAO. 



TAO-TEH-KING 


421 


Even the conception of the ineffable TAO’s simplicity ought 
not to remain in one’s mind. When quietness is attained, not 
by ideas and the satisfaction of desires but by the practice of 
wu-wei, the troubles of the world will right themselves. 

Thirty-eight 

The teh (power, or virtue) of the perfect Sage is not re- 
vealed intentionally. It naturally and spontaneously meets the 
needs of the world and, therefore, it is the true teh of TAO. 
The teh of inferiors simply makes an outside show of power 
which is assumed to be virtue, therefore, it falls short of the 
true teh. 

The Teh of the perfect Sage does not interfere, it cooperates 
with open and sympathetic mind, while the teh of inferiors acts 
with intention and under conditions and is influenced by desires. 
The benevolence of the perfect Sage flows out naturally in acts 
of kindness and is unconditioned by desires, or ideas, or con- 
ditions; while righteousness, even of superior men, is done un- 
der conditioning desires and ideas. This evil is aggravated when 
these righteous ideas of superior men are made up into social 
codes, which if not obeyed willingly are enforced by law. 

Therefore, when one loses TAO, he makes use of teh as a 
standard of living; when he loses Teh, he makes use of benevo- 
lence as a standard; when one loses benevolence, he makes use 
of righteousness; when he loses righteousness he makes use of 
social codes as his standard of conduct. Thus social codes take 
the place of loyalty and faith and there is the beginning of 
disorder. Cultural civilizations are a mere shadow of TAO and 
are the source of allurements and foolishness. 

Therefore, the superior man of affairs conforms to the spirit 
of Teh and not to its reduction into codes of loyality and right- 
eousness. He abides in the reality of TAO and not in its 
shadow. 

Thirty-nine 

From the beginning there has been a law of unity. Heaven 
attained unity and thereby its perfect clearness; earth attained 
unity and thereby its solidity; spirit attained unity and thereby 
its subtilty; valleys attained unity and thereby became the 
source of rivers; everything in the world attained unity and 
thereby their power of growth; princes and kings attained unity 



422 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


and thereby attained to moral conduct. Everything unfolds by 
the same law into some form of unity. 

For if heaven were not purity it would differentiate; if earth 
were not solidity it would crumble and fall apart; if spirit were 
not subtilty it would lose its vitality; if valleys were not ever 
flowing out, they would soon fill up; if things were not grow- 
ing, they would soon come to destruction; when princes and 
kings decline in moral conduct, they soon lose the respect of 
their subjects and forfeit their kingdoms. 

Unless nobles serve the interests of the common people, they 
are no longer noble; the high need the low for a foundation. 
The reason why princes and kings refer to themselves as “the 
forlorn,” “the inferior,” and “the unworthy,” is because they 
understand the principle that nobles require common people as 
a basis for their nobility. 

When a carriage is separated into its parts it is no longer 
a carriage, its unity is lost. The superior man should not de- 
sire to become cultivated and shine as a gem, neither should 
he become gross and dull as stones. There should be a unity of 
ideals and usefulness. 

Forty 

To withdraw the mind from attention to outward things, to 
be thoughtful, to practice meditation, is to be in conformity 
with TAO. To be humble and of service to others is, also, be- 
ing in conformity with TAO. Heaven and earth, and all things 
are manifestations of existence, but existence, itself, comes from 
non-existence. (It is to this potential non-existence that the 
mind should be directed). 

Forty-one 

The superior man, as soon as he listens to TAO, earnestly 
practices TAO; an average man, hearing of TAO, sometimes 
remembers it and sometimes forgets it; an inferior man, hearing 
of Tao, ridicules it. If it were not thus ridiculed it would not 
be worth following as TAO. 

There is an old saying: — “Those who are illuminated by 
TAO, are the most obscure; those who are advanced in TAO 
are the most timid; those who are indifferent to TAO are the 
most distinguished.” The Teh of TAO resembles a deep valley; 
the most innocent appears to be most ashamed; the highest in 



TAO-TEH-KING 


423 


teh appears the humblest; the most firmly established in teh 
appears the most remiss; the most straightforward seems to be 
the most fickle; the greatest polygon has no comers; the finest 
instrument is the latest to be perfected; the largest bell sounds 
rarely; the grandest phenomena are the inconceivable phenom- 
ena of spirit. 

TAO is unseen and inscrutable. Nevertheless, it is precisely 
this TAO that alone can give and accomplish. 

Forty-two 

TAO is inscrutable. From TAO proceeds the one (poten- 
tiality); one produces two (the positive and negative prin- 
ciples); this makes three. From these three proceed all things. 
All things, thus bear the imprint of the negative yin behind 
and embrace the positive yang in front. The primal principle 
of potentiality, as it becomes active, brings the negative and 
positive together and there is manifestation. 

The things that are detested by common people, namely, 
to be called the forlorn, the inferior, the unworthy, are the very 
things that kings and princes take for titles. These are the very 
things that it is a gain to lose and a loss to gain. 

I am teaching the same thing which is taught by others; 
others have said that the strong and aggressive do not come to 
natural deaths, but I make this saying the basis of my teaching. 

Forty-three 

The tenderest things of creation prevail over the hardest. 
Something immaterial enters into the most impenetrable to 
preserve its unity. I, therefore, recognise the advantages of the 
principle of wu-wei and teach non-interference. There is no 
other doctrine that is grander than the doctrine of TAO, and 
no other teaching that is more universally potent than the 
teaching of wu-wei. 

Forty-four 

Which is more intimately precious: fame or life? Which is 
more valuable: life or treasure? Which gives the most trouble: 
gain or loss? One naturally seeks the things he most prizes; 
for that reason we should be careful to prize the right things, 
because grasping and hoarding invite waste and loss both to 
property and life. 



424 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


A contented person is never dishonored. One who knows 
how to stop with enough is free from danger; he will therefore 
endure. 

Forty-five 

The enlightenment of the perfect Sage, because of its sim- 
plicity, appears as lacking, but his wisdom never fails. Perfect 
homogeneity appears as emptiness, but its potentiality is never 
exhausted. Extreme frankness appears as evasive, great skill as 
clumsiness, great eloquence as stammering. Motion conquers 
cold, while quietness conquers heat. Purity and tranquillity are 
the true characteristics of creation. 

Forty-six 

When the world yields to the principle of TAO, its race 
horses will be used to haul manure; when the world ignores 
TAO, war horses are pastured on the public common. 

There is no sin greater than yielding to desire. There is no 
misfortune greater than yielding to discontent. There is no 
greater folly than to yield to acquisitiveness. Thus, everyone 
should be contented for he that is contented is already rich. 

Forty-seven 

Not going out of the door, the sage has knowledge of the 
world. Not looking through the window, he perceives the TAO 
of heaven. The more one wanders about among objective 
things, the less he understands. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage does not think about worldly 
affairs, but he understands the significance of all things. He 
does not boast of his ability, but his name is world famous. 
He works but without grasping and, therefore succeeds in what- 
ever he undertakes. 

Forty-eight 

In regard to knowledge: the more one studies, the more he 
accumulates learning; while in regard to wisdom the more one 
practices TAO, the more his desires and thoughts are lessened, 
even to perfect emptiness of mind, all his innate excellencies 
will be developed and manifested. It is therefore necssary, if 
one is to keep control of his mind, to preserve its emptiness. 
But as soon as one desires to control his mind, he becomes in- 



TAO-TEH-KING 


425 

capable of doing so. It is by this perfect control of mind that 
the Sage gains the world’s favor. 

Forty-nine 

The perfect Sage has no preconceived opinions; he accepts 
the opinions of his people as his own. The good he treats with 
fairness, the not-good he also treats with fairness and by so 
doing attains the teh of justice. The faithful he treats with 
good-faith, and the unfaithful he also treats with good-faith and 
so he attains the teh of faithfulness. 

The perfect Sage is always concerned about the welfare of 
people and, indeed, it is for their sakes that his mind is bur- 
dened. All people show him respect and are obedient to him 
and, in return, he regards them as his children. 

Fifty 

The moon from its first appearance to full moon, is in a 
state of appearing; from its fullness to its disappearance, it is 
in a state of disappearing. It is just the same with the life of 
a man: from babyhood to manhood he is growing up; from 
manhood to old age, he is failing. What does this signify? It 
means that it is only the spirit of man that shares the longevity 
of heaven and earth. Of all things, heaven and earth are en- 
dowed with perennial vitality. 

Thus it may be said that those who have attained mastery 
over their spirit have set free this perennial vitality; when 
traveling will never suffer harm from rhinoceros or tiger, be- 
cause the rhinoceros will find no place to horn him, nor the 
tiger for his claws; or in battle without weapons or armor, will 
soldiers be able to wound him. Why is this so? Because spirit 
transcends mortality. 

Fifty-one 

Life comes from TAO; its nourishment comes from teh; its 
shape is formed by materiality; its accomplishments are owing 
to energy. Therefore among all men there are none who do not 
honor TAO and esteem teh. Honor for TAO and esteem for 
Teh is never by compulsion, it is always spontaneous. Men 
understand naturally that life comes from TAO and that teh 
nourishes them, raises them, nurtures them, completes, matures, 
rears, and protects them. 



426 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


TAO gives life to them but does not exercise authority over 
them; teh forms them but makes no use of them, raises them 
but never interferes with them. This is the profound teh of 
the mysterious TAO. 

Fifty-two 

When the potentiality of TAO manifests itself, it becomes 
the mother of all things. When one realizes that his life comes 
from this universal Mother, he will also realize his brotherhood 
to all her descendents. When one realizes his descent from the 
universal Mother and his brotherhood with all humanity, he 
will cherish his life and thus, to its end, will be kept in perfect 
health. 

He who talks little and closes his sense gates will never be- 
come wearied to the end of life; he who talks much, and yields 
to the desires of his senses, and interferes with affairs, will be 
risking his life continually. 

To be thoughtful and mindful is to be enlightened. To be 
humble and yielding is better than great strength. To use one’s 
intelligence to seek enlightenment and to control one’s body is 
to return to the nature of one’s origin. 

Fifty-three 

Should only one day be given me to carry out my wishes 
in explaining the principle of the Great TAO, I would condemn 
almsgiving as being a poisonous medicine, making people" de- 
pendent. The Way of the Great TAO is wide and straight for 
men to follow, but most people prefer the bypaths. 

When the royal palace is magnificent, fields become devas- 
tated and granaries empty. To wear ornaments and gay colors, 
to carry sharp swords, to indulge in dainties and excessive 
drinking, to hoard wealth and treasure, is simply to invite rob- 
bery. It is not the Way of the Great TAO. 

Fifty-four 

As a thing that is well planted is not easily uprooted and 
as a thing that is well guarded is not easily stolen, so if a 
family observes the principle of TAO, its descendents will ever 
hold their ancestors in honor. 

He who practices TAO for himself will only gain teh for 
himself. He who practices TAO for the benefit of his family, 



TAO-TEH-KING 


427 


his teh will pass to his descendents. If he practices TAO for 
the welfare of his community, his teh will be multiplied. If he 
practices TAO for the benefit of his country, his teh will be- 
come abundantly multiplied. If he practices the principle of 
TAO for the sake of the whole world, teh will become 
universal. 

Therefore, he who practices TAO for himself will only him- 
self be benefited. He who practices it for the sake of his fam- 
ily, will have his family benefited. He who practices it for his 
community will have his community benefited. He who prac- 
tices TAO for the whole world will benefit .the whole world. 

How do I know all this? It comes from the practice of 
TAO. 

Fifty-five 

He who attains to the highest teh of simplicity and sincerity, 
may be compared to the ingenuousness of an infant. Poisonous 
insects do not sting their own young, wild beasts do not attack 
their own cubs, nor do birds of prey. A baby’s bones may be 
weak and its muscles soft, but its spiritual vitality is perfect. 
An infant does not know about the relation of the sexes, but 
gradually its generative vigor will develop. Its spirit is virile, 
indeed! It may sob and cry all day but will not become hoarse. 
His unity as a child is perfect. 

To understand how to preserve this unity and soundness, 
one must return to his original state of simplicity. To know 
how to return to one’s original state is to be enlightened. To 
increase one’s natural vigor means blessedness. To control one’s 
breathing means strength. Things that are fully grown begin to 
decay, for growth is contrary to the principle of TAO. Things 
that are contrary to TAO soon pass away. 

Fifty-six 

The wise keep silent; a babbler is not wise. Keep your 
mouth closed and guard the gates of sense. Hide your sharp- 
ness, free yourself from entanglements, conceal your personality, 
be socially minded and natural. Thus to harmonize one’s life 
with the life of others is the teh of the profound TAO. 

No one can befriend such a man, nor can they estrange 
him, nor endanger him, nor honor him, nor despise him. Such 
a man is naturally honored by all the world. 



428 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


Fifty-seven 

An empire is best administered by justice, an army by craft, 
and influence over people is gained by non-interference. The 
more people become selfish, the more the state is in disorder. 
The more people become artful and cunning, the more abnor- 
mal things become. The more laws and orders are multiplied, 
the more theft and violence increase. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage reasons: If I practice wu-wei, 
that is, non-interference, the people will restrain themselves 
naturally. If I set an example of good behavior, people of 
themselves will become tranquil and prosperous naturally. 

If I have no selfish desires myself, other people will become 
unselfish and simple. 

Fifty-eight 

If administrative restrictions be kept out of sight as much 
as possible, the people will become quiet, honest and sympa- 
thetic. If an administration becomes complex and officious, the 
people will become needy and turbulent. 

Misery may be followed by happiness and happiness may 
lead to misery. Who can foretell the outcome of either misery 
or happiness? Is there no safe guide to normality? Indeed, 
normality itself soon becomes abnormal, and good conditions 
soon become unsatisfactory. 

(Why is it necessary for justice to always become injustice, 
and for good conditions to always pass into evil?) It is because 
men have been under illusion for a long, long time. Therefore, 
the perfect Sage, though just himself, does not reprove an- 
other’s injustice; though unselfish himself, he does not repri- 
mand the covetousness of others; though he is straight for- 
ward, he does not offend others by disagreeable assertiveness, 
though wise, he does not make a show of his wisdom. 

Fifty-nine 

In governing people and in worshipping heaven, nothing sur- 
passes the teh of self-restraint. The restraint of desire is like 
returning to the original TAO. Returning to one’s origin means 
the recovery of one’s vitality. When one has recovered his orig- 
inal vitality, nothing is unmanageable. If nothing is unman- 
ageable then he retains his original tranquillity because he is 



TAO-TEH-KING 


429 

unconscious of any limits. When he retains this state of tran- 
quillity he may govern the country wisely. Moreover, when he 
is in a state of tranquillity, he will govern the country as a 
mother takes care of her children and by so doing long retain 
his usefulness. He will be like a plant having a strong stem 
and deep roots. He will manifest the longevity of TAO. 

Sixty 

To govern a great state one should do it as a cook fries 
small fish, that is, without scaling or cleaning them. 

If one rules an empire by the principle of TAO, evil spirits 
will lose their power. It is not because their power is any less, 
but because the people can no longer be harmed by them. It 
is not because of the harmlessness of the gods, but because of 
the harmlessness of the wise ruler. Since neither ghosts nor 
gods can harm people, if they have a wise ruler, they will re- 
turn to that ruler good-will and they will abide in tranquillity. 

Sixty-one 

A great state is like the current of a river; it is always flow- 
ing down the lower valleys. There is a bond of unity, also, in 
a great state that draws its people together, like the attraction 
of male to female. 

The female wins the favor of a male by her quietude and 
quietude is always submissive. Thus a great state by its service 
to smaller states wins their allegiance. A smaller state by its 
submission to a great state wins an influence over it. Thus one 
wins by condescension, and the other by submission, and their 
interests are mutually conserved. 

The great state likes to federate more states and have more 
people; the small state to guard its safety is willing to submit 
to the greater and enter its federation. Each by the same pro- 
cedure gains its particular end. So it is a good policy for a 
great state to lead the way by itself first practicing humility. 

Sixty-two 

TAO is an all-embracing mystery. It is treasure to good 
men and a refuge to bad men. Fine words are used in selling 
goods, but it is a noble life that wins the respect of others. 
Even though TAO is despised by common people, why should 
I be foolish as are they and ignore it? 



430 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


In the establishment of a monarchy, (there are many things 
that are to be considered): the emperor is to be enthroned, the 
three ministers are to be appointed, the precious gems that have 
been presented to the emperor are to be distributed, and the 
tribute war-horses are to be properly exhibited. But nothing 
is more important than the dedication of the throne to TAO. 
For what reason did the ancients so highly esteem TAO? Was 
it not because it was only by devotion to TAO that the hopes 
of the nation could be realized and the miseries of the people 
relieved? 

That is why TAO is honored by all the world. 

Sixty-three 

A man’s first duty is to practice wu-wei and make use of his 
quiet hours to gain enlightenment. One should early learn to 
find sweetness in tasteless things; to discover greatness in small 
things; to be satisfied with few things. 

One should respond to hatred with kindness; he should treat 
little affairs as though they were important. All the world’s 
difficulties arise from slight causes, and all the world’s great 
affairs have risen from small beginnings. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage never asserts his greatness and 
by so doing attains to true greatness. Rash promises are easily 
made, but the simpler a thing looks, the harder it is to accom- 
plish. This is a common experience, therefore the perfect Sage 
considers everything difficult and so to the end has no 
difficulties. 

Sixty-four 

That which is at rest can easily be taken hold of. That 
which has not yet become important, can be easily prevented. 
The fragile is easily broken, light things are easily scattered. 
It is wise to be prepared for difficulties and to establish order 
before there is disorder. A tree that it takes both arms to en- 
circle grew from a tiny rootlet. A many storied pagoda is 
built by placing one brick upon another brick. A journey of 
three thousand miles is begun by a single step. If one attempts 
to govern either himself or another, he is bound to make a 
failure of it. If he tries to grasp anything, it slips away from 
him. 

The perfect Sage, therefore, by practicing wu-wei and mak- 



TAO-TEH-KING 


43 * 


ing no attempts, makes no failures, and because he does not 
grasp anything, he has nothing to lose. People in their eager- 
ness are ever approaching success only to continually fail. If 
one is to succeed, he must be as careful to the end as at the 
beginning. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage has no desire for things that are 
difficult to obtain, nor does he value them. He learns to be un- 
learned; he turns away from that which others greedily seek. 
In that spirit he helps all things toward their natural develop- 
ment but dares not attempt to force their development. 

Sixty-five 

In the olden days, those who were well versed in the prin- 
ciple of TAO, avoided teaching the people anything; instead 
they kept them in ignorance. The reason why people are dif- 
ficult to govern is because they are educated. To govern a 
people by craftiness is a curse; to govern them by the principle 
of wu-wei is a blessing. He who understands the difference 
between these two ways of governing is a model ruler. If he 
knows how to become a model ruler, he has gained profound- 
ness of teh. 

The profoundness of Teh is deep, indeed, and far reachingl 
Because it is in harmony with the original nature of things, 
everything will be acting according to the law of its nature. 

Sixty-six 

The rivers and seas become the kings of the myriad valleys 
because they are content with the low places. The perfect Sage 
rises above his people because of his humility; because he is 
first willing to follow them, he comes to leadership. 

Although the perfect Sage is above his people, yet they feel 
no burden; he dominates them, but they cherish no resentment. 
Therefore the world rejoices to exalt the perfect Sage and never 
wearies of him. Because he does not seek to rival others, others 
have no desire to rival him. 

Sixty-seven 

The world calls it the Great TAO, but there is nothing with 
which to compare it. Why? Simply because of its greatness. If 
there were anything with which to compare it, TAO would im- 



432 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


mediately become, and remain so for a long time, the most in- 
significant thing in all the world. 

TAO has three treasures that are inherent in its very nature. 
The first is compassion; the second is economy; the third is 
humility. Because of his compassion, a man becomes coura- 
geous. Because of his economy, a man becomes generous. Be- 
cause of his humility, a man becomes a leader. Nowadays a 
man, because of disregarding compassion, merely becomes bold; 
because of discarding economy, he only becomes extravagant; 
because of discarding humility, he becomes arrogant. Such men 
are already in the process of dying. 

If a soldier is compassionate, in battle he will be a conquerer 
and in defense secure. If a man is compassionate. Heaven will 
protect him because of its compassion. 

Sixty-eight 

He who excels as a soldier is the man who is not warlike. 
He who fights the best fight is the man who does not lose his 
temper. He who truly conquers an enemy does not lord it over 
him but treats him with respect. He who best employs people 
keeps himself humble. 

This is what is meant by the teh of wu-wei. It is the way 
to bring out the good in others. It is the oldest principle that 
has ever been taught. It is in compliance with the nature of 
TAO. 

Sixty-nine 

It is taught in books of strategy: “Never be so rash as to 
start a war; at first, always be on the defense.” “One should 
hesitate to advance an inch but be always ready to withdraw 
a foot.” This means that it is better for an army to advance 
by craft rather than by aggressive operations. (It means for 
everybody) that there is a better way of attack than by hands, 
a better -way of winning than by hostility, a better way of 
gaining than by resort to force. There is no greater mistake 
than to make light of an enemy. By making light of an enemy 
many a kingdom has been lost. When well matched armies 
come to conflict, the army that regrets the hostility between 
them, always conquers. 



TAO-TEH-KING 


433 


Seventy 

The principle of TAO ( wu-wei ) is easy to understand and 
easy to put into practice, yet in all the world how few there 
are who understand it and put it into practice. Every word of 
common people has its object; every deed has its actor, but be- 
cause these talkers and actors are ignorant, TAO is ignorant 
with them and does not interfere. 

Since very few people know TAO, TAO is the more worthy 
of esteem. Therefore, the perfect Sage clothes himself in the 
cheap garments of poor people but keeps TAO, like a gem, 
hidden in his bosom. 

Seventy-one 

To recognize one’s ignorance of unknowable things is mental 
health and to be ignorant of knowable things is sickness. It is 
only by grieving over knowable things that we are kept in 
mental health. The perfect Sage is free from the mental sick- 
ness of common people, because he understands his ignorance 
and grieves over it. 

Seventy-two 

When people are too ignorant to fear the things that are 
really fearful (greed, illusion and self-assertion), the greatest 
fear (of death) will soon over-power them. Do not be troubled 
because of the narrowness of your dwelling, do not become de- 
pressed because of the life you are compelled to live. If people 
cease to worry about their surroundings and their lives, their 
minds will become tranquil. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage understands himself but never 
exhibits himself; he cherishes but never overvalues himself. 
He discards ostentation and pride, but keeps understanding 
and mindfulness. 

Seventy-three 

Courage carried to recklessness leads to death, while courage 
restrained and cautious leads to life. Of these two kinds of 
courage, one is harmful and one is beneficial. Why this is so, 
why some things are rejected by Heaven and some not, who 
can tell the reason? Therefore the perfect Sage looks upon all 
things as puzzling (and does not interfere with any). 



434 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


The TAO of Heaven never seeks supremacy, yet it is always 
supreme. It speaks not but it is perfectly responsive. It issues 
no summons yet things come to it naturally. It appears to be 
open and simple, but hidden from view is a profound design. 
Indeed, the meshes of Heaven’s net are wide, but no matter 
how wide or loose they may appear nothing escapes. 

Seventy-four 

If people do not fear death, how can they be frightened by 
the death penalty? If people are afraid of death, I would 
seize the one who is not afraid of death and execute him. 
After that who would dare to disobey? 

There is always an experienced officer to execute murderers. 
If an inexperienced person takes his place, it would be like an 
unskilled man taking the place of a skilled carpenter at his 
hewing: he is very likely to cut himself. 

Seventy-five 

When a ruler appropriates too much of the taxes, starvation 
comes to the people. The reason why people are difficult to 
govern is because the ruler is thinking too much of his own 
interests. People make light of death because they are ab- 
sorbed in the interests of life. The one who is not absorbed in 
life is wiser than he who esteems life. 

Seventy-six 

When a baby is bom it is tender and fragile; when it grows 
to be a man and dies, it becomes hard and stiff. It is the same 
with everything. Herbs and trees when young and growing 
are tender and delicate, but when they become old and die, 
they become rigid and hard. 

Therefore, those who are stiff and unyielding belong to the 
domain of death, while the tender and sympathetic belong 
to the realm of life. Those who are ruthless in battle do not 
gain the victory. When a tree becomes hard and rigid, it will 
soon decay. The large and hard are put at the bottom, the 
tender and delicate are placed on top. 

Seventy-seven 

The TAO of Heaven resembles the stretching of a bow. 
The mighty it humbles, the lowly it exalts; the overflowing it 
diminishes, the insufficient it supplies. 



TAO-TEH-KING 


435 


The way of humans is not so. Humans take from the needy 
to further enrich the rich. The one who can take from his over- 
abundance and give to a needy world has attained Taohood. 
Therefore, the perfect Sage is not sparing of his services, nor 
does he look upon them as meritorious, nor does he make a 
display of them. Is this not so? 

Seventy-eight 

Nothing is more fragile than water, yet of all the agencies 
that attack hard substances nothing can surpass water, nor take 
its place. Therefore the weak are conquerors of the strong, and 
the yielding are conquerors of the mighty. Everyone knows 
this but few practice it. 

Therefore, the perfect Sage accepts the disgrace of his 
country and by so doing becomes a true patriot; he is a patient 
under the misfortunes of his country and because of it worthy 
to be its sovereign. 

True words always seem paradoxical, but no other form of 
teaching can take its place. 

Seventy-nine 

If nations hate each other but are making a treaty of peace, 
there will always remain some seeds of hatred. How can it be 
considered as a settlement? 

The perfect Sage is always willing to accept the debit side 
of an account, for then he does not have to enforce payment 
from another. Those who have teh make unwritten contracts 
of faith; those who have no teh, make written contracts and 
hold them as evidence. 

The TAO of Heaven makes no written contracts, but always 
helps the good man. 

Eighty 

In a small country with few people there will be in propor- 
tion many of exceptional merit and of competency but few 
vacancies for their services. 

If people consider their death to be important, they will 
hesitate to go to distant countries. Though there be boats and 
carts they will have no occasion to use them. Though there be 
armor and weapons, there will be no occasion to don them. 
Let people return to the spirit of the olden days when they 



436 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


used knotted cords for their records; then they will take delight 
in simple food, be proud of their cheap clothes, content with 
their dwellings, and rejoice in their customs. 

Neighboring states may be so close to each other that one 
can see them with their eyes, and their cocks and dogs can be 
mutually heard, but people will have no desire to go and come 
even to the end of their lives. 

Eighty-one 

Faithful words are often not pleasant; pleasant words are 
often not faithful. Well informed men do not dispute; men 
who dispute are not well informed. The wise man is not al- 
ways learned; the learned man is not always wise. 

The perfect Sage does not keep things in possession or in 
memory, but since he ever serves others he acquires the most 
after, all. Since he continually gives to others, he will possess 
the most in the end. 

The TAO of Heaven always benefits and harms no one. 
The perfect Sage by following TAO, that is, by practising wu- 
wei and serving others, will never be the cause of strife. 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 
Preface 

• 

T HE Tien-tai Sect hold four treatises on Dhyana in high re- 
gard. The first is entitled, Dhyana for Immediate Enlight- 
enment. It was written for those who are seeking instantaneous 
enlightenment by means of one phrase or even one word. It 
is the record of lectures given at the Nuo-chien Monastery in 
King-chow, Hupeh Province, by Grand Master Chih-chi. It 
was written down by Chang-an, one of his disciples, and was 
compiled in ten volumes. The second treatise is entitled, 
Dhyana by Regular Steps. It is also based upon lectures by 
the Grand Master, but this time they were delivered at the 
N’rkwei Monastery and recorded by the disciple, Fah-chen. It 
was at first compiled in thirty volumes, but was, afterward re- 
compiled in ten volumes under the title, Dhyana Paramita, or 
the Ideal Dhyana. The third treatise was at first entitled, 
Dhyana by Irregular Steps. It was written down by the Grand 
Master at the request of Mao-shee, a Minister of the Grand 
Council (Chen Dynasty 548-581.) It was compiled in one vol- 
ume and now goes under the title, the Six Wonderful Ways of 
Dhyana. The fourth treatise, the one that we are now to study, 
was written down by the Grand Master for the benefit and in- 
struction of his own brother (Lieut. Col.) Chen-chin. It is 
undoubtedly a compendium of the Master's mature under- 
standing of the Mahayana and is a sure key to enlightenment. 

The different headings employed in this book, such as, “Stop 
and Realize,” “Samapatti and Prajna” (Transcendental-powers 
and Wisdom), “Tranquillization and Reflection,” “Serenity and 
Quietness,” are all derived from the same source. If you trace 
out this source and terminus, or should trace out the practices 
and attainments of the Buddhas, they would all alike be found 
in this practice of Dhyana, — stopping thought about Truth 
and realizing Truth itself. It was just what the Grand Master 
of the Tien-tai Mountains had himself experienced in a vision 
of the Vulture Peak that had come to him when he was stay- 
ing at the great Su Mountains, and was always after his chief 
inspiration. Briefly speaking, the Dhyana which our Master 

437 



438 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

Chih-chi had practiced, and the Samadhi which he had ex- 
perienced, and the lectures which he had delivered with such 
eloquence, were nothing but the manifestation of this “Stop 
and Realize.” Or, in other words, what the Master had been 
teaching us was simply the narrative of the operation of our 
own minds; and the profound teaching of the Tien-tai School, 
and the voluminous literature to be studied, are no more than 
an elaboration of this single subject. If we should disregard 
the conception of Dhyana, it would be impossible for us either 
to understand or to discuss the teachings of the Tien-tai School. 
Consequently, it is not only necessary for everyone who is fol- 
lowing (Buddha) to study it, it is also necessary for him to 
practice it. 

As we look outward upon the world, we see corruption 
everywhere — people hankering after amusements, seeking to 
gratify their own selfish comfort, trying to rationalize their 
prejudices, deliberately blinding their eyes to their own enlight- 
enment. How few there are who comprehend the way to prac- 
tice Dhyana! Instead of studying this book, they keep it hid- 
den away in a bookcase and their labor is in vain. But again 
I bring the teaching to the “engraver of wooden blocks” for 
another republishing and I hope that everyone who reads it 
will profit by its teachings. Moreover, I hope that everyone 
who reads it will practise its teachings and gain thereby a per- 
sonal realization of its immeasurable treasure. As my labor 
is now ended, I write these few lines as an introduction. 

Bhikkshu Yuen-tso 

Yu-hang (near Han-chow). 

The first day of Mid-autumn, 

the 2nd Year of Shao-sang (Tsung Dynasty, 956-1273). 


DHYANA 

Lectures Delivered by Grand Master Chih-chi of Tien-tai 
Mountains, at the Shiu-ch’an Temple. 

(Sui Dynasty, 581-618) 

“Avoid all evil, cherish all goodness, keep the mind pure. 
This is the teaching of Buddha 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


439 


There are many different paths to Nirvana, but the most 
important one for us is the path of Dhyana. Dhyana is the 
practice of mind-control by which we stop all thinking and 
seek to realize Truth in its essence. That is, it is the practice 
of “stopping and realizing.” If we cease all discriminative 
thought it will keep us from the further accumulation of error, 
while the practice of realizing will clear away delusions. Stop- 
ping is a refreshment of the lower consciousness, while realiz- 
ing may be compared to a golden spade that opens up a treas- 
ure of transcendental wealth. Stopping is an entrance into the 
wonderful silence and peacefulness of potentiality (dhyana- 
samapatti); while realizing is an entrance into the riches of 
intuition and transcendental intelligence (matti-prajna). As 
one advances along this path, he comes into full possession of 
all means for enriching himself and for benefiting others. In 
the Lotus of the Wonderful Law Sutra , it says: — 

" Our Lord Buddha forever abides in the permanence of the 
Mahayana both as to his attainment of the realization of Truth 
and as to his enrichment with supernatural powers of intuition 
and transcendental intelligence. With these qualifications he 
brings deliverence to all penitent beings." 

We may liken these two powers ( samapatti and prajna) to 
the wheels of a chariot and the wings of an eagle. If a fol- 
lower has only one, he is led into an unbalanced life. As the 
Sutra says: — 

"Those who only practice the goodness and blessings of 
samapatti and do not learn wisdom are to be counted ignorant, 
while those who only practice wisdom and do not learn good- 
ness and sympathy are to be counted as unbalanced." Though 
the errors eventuating from unbalance may differ from the 
errors of ignorance, they alike lead a person to the same false 
views. This explains clearly that if one is to attain Supreme 
Perfect Wisdom in an immediate way, he must hold the two 
powers in equal balance: he must be both prepared and ready. 
The Sutra says: — 

"As intelligence is more especially developed by Arahats, 
the true nature of Buddhas is . not perceived by them. The 
Mahasat tva-Bodh isat tvas, by possessing the ten enlightening 
factors of permanence, perceived the true nature of Buddhas, 
but if they do not perceive it truly it is because of their laying 
too much stress on intelligence. It is only the Buddhas and 



440 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

Tathagatas that perceive it perfectly because their powers of 
samapatti and prajna have been equally developed . 

Hence, in conclusion, are we not right in drawing the in- 
ference that the practice of Dhyana is the true gateway to 
Supreme Perfect Enlightenment? Is it not the Noble Path that 
all followers of Buddha must follow? Is not Dhyana the pole 
star of all goodness and the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment? 

If anyone thoroughly understands what has been said here 
about Dhyana, he will appreciate that its practice is not an easy 
task. However, for the sake of aiding beginners to clear away 
their ignorance and hindrances and to guide them toward en- 
lightenment, we will aid them all we can by explaining the 
practice of Dhyana in as simple words as possible, but at best, 
its practice will be difficult. It would be absurd to present its 
profoundness otherwise. It will be explained under ten heads 
which will be like the steps of a stairway that leads upward 
to Enlightenment and Nirvana. 

Those who are really seeking Truth, but are more advanced, 
should not look upon this book with contempt because it is 
written simply and for beginners. They should be humble and 
prudent because of the difficulties they will encounter when 
they come to its practice. It is possible that some will be able 
to digest its teachings with great ease and, in the twinkle of 
an eye, their hindrances will be abolished and their intelligence 
will be boundlessly developed and so will be their supernormal 
understanding, also. But if you just read over the literal mean- 
ing and do not enter into its significance, you will not be able 
to find your way to enlightenment — the reading will be just 
a waste of time. Such a reader will be likened to a poor man 
who spends his time in counting another man’s treasures and 
being no richer for it himself. 

The Ten Heads 

1. External conditions. 2. Control of sense desires. 3. Abol- 
ishment of inner hindrances. 4. Regulation and adjustment. 
'5. Expedient activities of mind. 6. Right practice. 7. The de- 
velopment and manifestation of good qualities. 8. Evil influ- 
ences. 9. Cure of disease. 10. Realization of Supreme Perfect 
Enlightenment. 

These ten headings indicate the stages of correct Dhyana 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 441 

practice. It is imperative, if a follower of Buddha desires to be 
successful in the practice, that the stages be closely followed 
and their meaning be put faithfully into practice. If these ten 
stages are faithfully followed the mind will become tranquil, 
difficulties will be overcome, powers for concentrating the mind 
and for gaining insight and understanding will be developed, 
and in the future Supreme Perfect Enlightenment (anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi) will be attained. 

I 

External Conditions 

If a disciple undertakes the practice of Dhyana, and to put 
the lessons of this book into action, he must be in possession 
of five external conditions. (1) He must resolve to keep the 
Precepts (as to killing, stealing, sexual impurity, deceit, and use 
of intoxicants), as it is said in the Sutra that it is in obedience 
to the Precepts that all intelligence is developed and all suf- 
fering is brought to an end. So it is the duty of every disciple 
to keep the Precepts pure. However, there are three kinds of 
disciples who observe the Precepts under different conditions. 
The first kind are those who, before becoming converts, have 
not committed any of the “five highest offenses.” Afterwards, 
happening to be in personal contact with some learned Master, 
they are taught the Three Holy Refuges and the Five Funda- 
mental Precepts which are to be observed by every faithful fol- 
lower of the Lord Buddha. If there is no hindrance developed 
after conversion they are next taught to keep the ten Additional 
Precepts of disciples. Afterwards, as they become Bhikshus and 
Bhikshuni, they are taught to observe the whole spirit of the 
Precepts. If after conversion they are able to keep the Precepts 
pure, both in letter and in spirit, they are counted worthy fol- 
lowers of Lord Buddha and will assuredly realise the Buddha- 
Dharma through their faithful practice of Dhyana. It is as if 
their robe was perfectly white and ready for dyeing. 

The second kind of followers are those who keep the main 
Precepts but neglect many of the less important ones, but, be- 
cause of their practice of Dhyana, are repentant. These are rec- 
ognized as pure keepers of the Precepts, also, and they can 
progress in the practice of Dhyana and in the attainment of 



442 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

intelligence. It is as if their robe which had been stained and 
soiled could be worn again after washing and cleansing. 

The third kind of followers are those who have been taught 
to keep the Precepts but who fail to keep even the important 
ones and who, on the contrary, are breaking both important as 
well as the less important. According to the rites of the Hin- 
ayana there is no way provided for removing the stain caused 
by the Four Main Violations (any kind of killing, theft, lust, 
and deceit). But in the Mahayana religious services are pro- 
vided for the purification of such offences provided there is 
evidence of sincere penitence and remorse. The Sutra teaches 
that there are two kinds of “healthy” converts, namely, those 
who do nof commit offences and those who having committed 
offences are sincerely repentant. The penitent should be in 
possession of ten indications of his sincerity: — (a) A clear un- 
derstanding and acceptance of the cause and effect of his of- 
fense. (b) To be in a state of fear because of it. (c) To feel 
humiliation, (d) To search for means of purification, and when 
he finds them in the Mahayana Sutras to be willing to take 
advantage of them, (e) A frank confession of his guiltiness, 
(f) To break off the current of his thoughts relating to the 
offense, (g) To take advantage of the protective courage which 
the Dharma offers him. (h) To wish for the emancipation of 
all sentient beings and to renew his vow to help them all. (i) 
To keep continually in mind the non-existence of both offense 
and repentance. 

If a penitent has these evidences of sincerity, he should pre- 
pare an altar with solemn adornments and purity. Then wear- 
ing clean, neat clothes, he should offer on this altar before 
Buddha's image an offering of flowers and incense. Then he 
should continue this practice as an evidence of his repentance 
for a period of one week, or three weeks, or a month, or three 
months, or even a year, or as long as the conception of guilti- 
ness abides in the mind. 

But, you may ask, how will we know that our offense has 
been cleared away? When we are making whole hearted re- 
pentance in agreement with the rites as indicated above, we will 
experience many different emotions that will bring testimony to 
our understanding. In the course of our practice of repentance 
we may feel both our body and mind to be in a state of brisk- 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


443 


ness and lightness, and in our dreams we will see good visions. 
Or we shall happen to see wonderful signs of good omen, or 
feel our thoughts unfolding auspiciously. Or we shall feel our 
body as if It were a cloud drifting about in the free air, or as 
If, when we are practicing Dhyana, we were sitting in a shadow 
cast by our body. Under all these conditions we will gradually 
come to realize many aspects of Dhyana, or, all of a sudden, 
may realize enlightenment. We shall then understand the sig- 
nificance of all phenomena and, moreover, will gain a deeper 
conception of the meaning and import of the teachings we 
have heard from the Sutras. There will be no more griefs nor 
worries in our minds as we enter into a deeper enjoyment of 
the Dharma. We will recognize in all these experiences a mani- 
festation and testimonial of our purification from the violation 
of the Precepts that has been a hindrance in our practice of 
Dhyana. Henceforth, keeping close to the Precepts, we can 
rightly practice Dhyana and it will be noticed by others that 
we have been purified. It Is as if the robe that had been rag- 
ged and foul had been cleansed and mended and newly dyed. 

If any one, having violated the main Precepts, feels that 
it will hinder his successful practice of Dhyana, let him go be- 
fore Buddha's image and in earnest humility make a frank con- 
fession of his violation. This method of practicing repentance is 
not in accordance with the way shown in the Sutra, neverthe- 
less, let him discontinue his recollections of guiltiness and re- 
sume his practice of Dhyana, sitting up straight with deter- 
mination, recollecting that his wrong acts have no independent 
self-nature and keeping in mind the reality of the Buddhas in 
all the six regions. If his thoughts slip away from his practice, 
let him get up and go before Buddha’s image and with humble 
and earnest heart, offer incense, repeat his confession, recite the 
Precepts and a Mahayana Sutra. The hindrances to the prac- 
tice of Dhyana will be gradually cleared away, the temptation 
to violate the Precepts will be overcome, and he will progress 
In the practice of Dhyana. In the Wonderful Expedient Scrip- 
ture it is written: — 

“Should anyone having committed crimes, come into great 
agony of spirit, and earnestly desire purification, there is no 
better way than the practice of Dhyana” 

He should seek an open and quiet place, sitting up with 



444 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


determined and concentrated mind, reciting Mahayana Sutras. 
In this way he will gradually get rid of thought of his guilti- 
ness and in time will realize the usual Dhyana and Samadhis. 

(2) The second external condition that one must possess if 
one is to hope for success in the practice of Dhyana, relates to 
clothing and food. We should consider clothing from three view- 
points. (a) If we have the fortitude to endure exposure we 
should follow the example of the great Masters of the Himalaya 
mountains and have but a single garment, just sufficient to 
cover one’s nakedness, (b) If we move about in the world as 
itinerant monks, we should follow the example of Mahakasyapa 
and limit our garments to three and these old and castoff 
garments, (c) If we live in cold countries, we are permitted by 
Buddha to have an extra garment. As for a hundred other 
things that seem to be necessary, we are permitted to retain 
only one and be satisfied with that. If we permit our minds 
to become avaricious for many things, our thoughts will become 
disturbed and the many things will become a hindrance to gain- 
ing enlightenment. 

Next, in regard to eating. There are four ways of living, 
(a) The first way is the way followed by the great Masters of 
the high mountains, who live on the herbs and seasonable 
fruits, (b) The second way is the way followed by the itinerant 
monks who live by begging their food and who are able to re- 
sist the temptation to live by the four wrong ways, namely, 
working for others for pay, living by astrology foretelling the 
changes and effects of the heavenly bodies in human affairs, by 
geomancy and fortune telling, and finally by flattery and de- 
pendence upon the rich and mighty. The danger of these ways 
of wrong living has been described by Sariputra. (c) The third 
right way of living is to take up one’s abode in some secluded 
place and to depend in faith upon the gifts of generous lay- 
men. (d) The fourth way of right living is to join some 
Brotherhood and participate in their communal life. If we are 
living in any one of these four ways of living, we are sure of 
all the food and clothing that is necessary. What does this 
mean? It means that if we lack any of these good conditions, 
our minds will not abide in peaceful quietude and that would 
be an impediment to enlightenment. 

(3) The third external condition that one must possess if 
one is to hope for success in the practice of Dhyana, relates to 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


445 


shelter. A retreat for a follower to be satisfactory must be quiet 
and free from annoyances and troubles of any kind. There are 
three kinds of places that are suitable for Dhyana practice: (a) 
A hermitage in the high and inaccessible mountains, (b) A 
shack such as would serve a begger or a homeless monk. These 
should be at least a mile and a half from a village where even 
the voice of a cowboy would not reach and where trouble and 
turmoil would not find it. (c) A bed in a monastery apart from 
a layman’s house. 

(4) The fourth external condition that one must possess if 
one is to hope for success in the practice of Dhyana, relates to 
freedom from entanglement in all worldly affairs, (a) It means 
to withdraw from all conditional engagements and social re- 
sponsibilities. (b) It means to give up all worldly friends, 
relatives, and worldly interests. This means to cut off all social 
intercourse, (c) It means to give up all worldly business such 
as busies craftsmen, doctors, clerks, traders, fortune tellers, etc. 
(d) It means to give up all general study even of a seemingly 
good kind, such as reading, writing lectures or books, attending 
lectures, etc. For what reason should these things be given up? 
It is because if we are interested in these things our minds are 
not quiet and free for the practice of Dhyana and the attain- 
ment of enlightenment. Moreover, if our minds are disturbed 
or weary or not at peace, one can hardly practice Dhyana. 

(5) The fifth external condition that one must possess if 
one is to hope for success in the practice of Dhyana, relates to 
association with people. We should keep in close relations with 
three kinds of noble minded people: The first kind are those 
outside the Brotherhood who supply us with our food and 
clothing, and who are competent in taking good care of us and 
in protecting us from annoyances and troubles. The second 
kind of noble minded people are the members of our Brother- 
hood with whom we live in intimacy and mutual forbearance 
and kindness. The third kind are our teachers and Masters 
who instruct us and guide us in the use of expedient means to 
meet both external and internal conditions, and to show us how 
to become interested and to enjoy ourselves in the practice of 
Dhyana. 

This finishes the discussion of the control of external condi- 
tions. We will now turn to a discussion of internal conditions 
and how to control them. 



446 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


II 

Censorship Over Desires Arising 
From the Senses 

By the desires that should be placed under censorship are 
meant the kinds of desires that arise from the senses possessed 
by every living person, namely, the senses of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting and touching. If we wish to be successful in 
the practice of Dhyana we must keep the desires arising from 
these senses under strict censorship. These five kinds of phys- 
ical desires may easily lead one into foolishness and illusion and 
lustful cravings. If we clearly understand that our faults and 
feelings of guiltiness are but the outcome of these desires, we 
will no longer cherish them. In order to control these physical 
desires we must keep close watch over them. 

(1) First is the censorship over the desires arising from the 
use of the eyes, among which we mention as of first importance, 
sexual desires that arise from seeing crystal eyes, slender brows, 
crimson lips, snow-white teeth, worldly adornments, garments of 
beautiful colors — green, yellow, red, white, purple, violet, and so 
on, — all of which will attract a fool’s attention and awaken 
desires that are evil. It was the mere sight of his paramour’s 
beauty that led King Bimbisara to risk his life in the enemy’s 
country and to stay in the house of Lady Abrahmapara. So it 
was in the case of the King of Khotan who because of re- 
sentment arising from jealousy put many people to death. All 
such wickednesses have their rise from desires awakened by 
sight. 

(2) Second is the censorship over the desires arising from 
the use of the ears, among which we mention, musical sounds 
from harp, twelve-stringed lute, and instruments using silk, 
bamboo, metal, stone, etc., and from the voices of dancing and 
singing girls, reciting, praising, etc. No sooner do we, disciples 
of Buddha, hear these sweet sounds than our hearts are stained 
and our minds entangled and we are led into evil acts. Such 
was the fact in the case of the five hundred disciples who lived 
in a monastery in the Himalayas when they heard the songs 
sung by a girl hamed Chindra. They lost their devotion to the 
practice of Dhyana and became delirious with exciting desires. 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


447 

By all such causes and conditions we may know that sounds 
are the source of wickedness and guilt. 

(3) Third is the censorship over the desires arising from the 
use of sense of smell. By this is meant the scent from sexually 
excited bodies, from beverages, from delicious foods, and from 
the fragrance from all kinds of smouldering perfumes. In our 
foolishness we do not recognize the true nature of smelling so 
no sooner do we smell a fragrance than we desire it and are 
captivated by it. This unlocks the prison door of moral de- 
filement. Such was the fact in the case of a certain bhikshu. 
He was so captivated by the fragrance of lotus blossoms in a 
pond near his monastery that he neglected his practice of 
Dhyana to indulge his passion for it. The god of the pond re- 
buked him severely and said: — “Why do you steal my sweet 
perfume?” Because of our fondness for sweet fragrances we 
awaken sleeping desires and fall into moral defilement. By 
recognizing these causes and conditions we know that scents 
are the cause of evil acts. 

(4) The fourth is the censorship over the desires arising 
from the use of the sense of taste, which means all kinds of 
sweet tastes in eating and drinking, such as, bitterness, sour- 
ness, sweetness, spiciness, saltness and freshness. All such pleas- 
ing tastes and flowers besides gratifying the tongue lure the 
heart into excesses and evil. Such was the fact in the case of a 
Lamaist monk in Tibet who was so fond of cheese, it is said, 
that at his death he was changed into a cheese-maggot. By all 
such instances we know that the sense of taste is the source 
of much guiltiness. 

(5) Fifth is the censorship over the desires arising from the 
use of the sense of touch. Our body is very sensitive to soft- 
ness, smoothness, warmth in winter, coolness in summer, etc. 
We are so ignorant as to the true nature of these sensations 
that our minds become upset and foolish by the touch of pleas- 
ing things, and our effort to attain enlightenment is obstructed 
and hindered. Such was the fact in the case of a “one-homed 
evil spirit" who lost his supernormal powers because of his 
craving after pleasing tangibles. By all such causes and condi- 
tions we see the folly and guiltiness of desiring pleasing tan- 
gibles and yielding to their seduction. 

The several ways for censoring our desires that have been 



448 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


given above are taken from the Mahavibhasa Sutra which, also, 
makes the following observation. — “Notwithstanding the annoy- 
ances which the gratification of sensual desires brings to us, we 
go on craving for these desires.” As these five sensual desires 
are gratified by anyone, he only becomes more intensely ex- 
cited. It is like a burning house, the more fuel is added the 
hotter the flames become. Or, if these sensual desires are not 
gratified, by anyone and he still clings to them, he is like a dog 
gnawing at rotten bones. Or, if these intensified desires become 
competitive, they are like birds fighting over their prey. Or, 
they bum us as though we were holding a blazing torch in the 
face of the wind. Or, they harm us as though we were tread- 
ing on serpents. Or, they are like dreams from which we awake 
in a fright. Or, they have a life no longer than the sparks 
from a flint. They are looked upon as enemies, by wise men. 
Notwithstanding all this, we, like deluded fools, go on craving 
them as long as we live, not realizing that these annoyances 
and suffering will continue to trouble, after the death of the 
body, in a following rebirth. 

These five kinds of sensual desire were grasped by animals 
before us and their baneful effects have come down to us. We 
are their slaves and by reason of their power we may be 
dragged down into the three lower realms. Even in the sacred 
moments of Dhyana and Samadhi they close in about us. What 
unbelievable enemies they are to us! We should flee from them 
instantly. The Dhyana Sutra speaks of them as follows: — 

“The continual sufferings of birth and death are due to thy 
sensual desires and lusts. When these thy children are grown 
they become thy enemies and all thy laborious work has been 
in vain and after the last breath thou art buried in the grave. 

“ How foul is thy dead body; how putrid is a dead corpse! 
Its nine cavities yield stinking fluids , but, thou, O fool, clingest 
to it as does a maggot to excrement. 

However ; thou who art wisest, realizing the body’s empti- 
ness and transiency, will not be enslaved by the allurements of 
its desires but rising free from their fascinations will find thy 
true Nirvana. 

“Thou shouldest follow the teaching of Buddha and, as thou 
sittest in Dhyana shouldest count thy breathing moment by 
moment with all thy mind and heart. This is the practice of 
the earnest bhikshu.” 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


449 


III 

Inner Hindrances to be Abolished 

There are five kinds of inner hindrances' that must ' be 
abolished. 

(i) The first kind are the hindrances of sensual desires that 
have their origin within the mind itself, because of memory or 
imagination. In the preceding chapter in discussing the external 
conditions, we referred to the sensual desires, also, but then we 
had in mind the bodily desires that had their origin in the 
physical contact of the senses with their objects. Now we are 
to consider the mental notions of these desires as they arise 
or linger within the mind itself. A follower of Buddha may 
be practicing Dhyana in a very solemn manner, but his mind- 
may be filled with seductive notions of these craving sensual 
desires and their continual activity will effectually prevent good 
qualities from germinating. So when we become conscious of 
the presence of these sense-desire notions, we must get rid of 
them at once. For, as in the case of Jubhaga whose body was 
consumed by the inner fires of his concupiscence, so we must 
not be surprised if the flames of these inner desires consume 
all our good qualities. Those who cherish these inner desires 
will make little progress on the path that leads to enlighten- 
ment. Why is this so? It is because these inner desires are a 
stronghold of vexations that so engross the mind that they 
crowd out the very purpose to attain enlightenment. In the 
Sutra it is written: — 

“Thou that seekest enlightenment must be a man of humil- 
ity and modesty. Thou who boldest out the begging bowl that 
thou mayest give blessings to all sentient beings , how canst 
thou indulge in cheap desires for thyself and plunge into the 
sea of the five hindrances? 

“How is it that thou, who has gotten rid of the external 
desires, hast forsaken all their pleasures and thrown them away 
without regret, shouldest now seek their shadow? Art thou a 
fool who returns to his own spittle? 

“These notions of sensual desires which thou art hankering 
for inevitably lead to suffering. If they are gratified there is 
no satisfaction, and if they are not satisfied there is annoyance. 
In either case there is no happiness at all. 

“What power hast thou to get rid of these pain-producing 



450 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


desire-notionsf When thou hast deeply enjoyed the happiness 
that arises from the successful practice of Dhyana, then thou 
wilt no longer be defrauded by these deluding notions.” 

(2) The second inner hindrance is the hindrance of hatred. 
This is a most fundamental factor in preventing one from at- 
taining enlightenment. It is both the cause and condition for 
our fall into the evil existences. It is the enemy that keeps us 
from enjoying the Buddha’s Dharma. It is the thief that steals 
away our thoughts of good-will toward all sentient beings. It 
is the fountain of evil words that burst out unchecked. There- 
fore, in the practice of Dhyana we should treat the mood of 
hatred as though it was a personality that was annoying not 
only yourself, but your relatives and enemies; and not only in 
the present but because of memory in both the past and the 
future. This makes nine annoyances which will keep alive this 
mood of hatred. Hatred gives rise to grievances and each added 
grievance gives rise to more annoyances. Thus hatred goes on 
disturbing the mind, and that is why we speak of it as funda- 
mental hindrance. We should cut it away at the root and thus 
prevent it from spreading. 

Suprapunna asked the Lord Buddha as follows: — 

“What shall we get rid of if we want peace and happiness ? 
What shall we do to get rid of sorrow? What is the poison 
that devours all our good thoughts?” 

“Kill hatred and thou shalt have peace and happiness. Kill 
hatred and thou shalt have no more sorrow. It is hatred that 
devours all thy goodness.” 

Having become fully convinced of the evil of hatred, if one 
wishes to get rid of it, he must practice both compassion and 
patience. 

(3) The third hindrance is the hindrance of laziness and 
sleepiness. Laziness means that our mind gets dull and inert; 
while sleepiness means that our five senses become relaxed, our 
body becomes immobile, and then we fall asleep. To attain en- 
lightenment we need an alert mind and all such causes and 
conditions are hindrances that prevent us from experiencing 
the highest happiness both in our present life and in future 
lives, and the joy of the Pure Land, and the inconceivable 
peace of Nirvana. This hindrance is perhaps the most serious 
of all. Why? Because other hindrances come when we are 
awake mentally and we can at least make an effort to over- 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


45i 


come them, but the hindrance of laziness and sleepiness makes 
effort impossible. In sleepiness we are like a dead corpse with 
no perception and no consciousness. 

Even our Lord Buddha and the Mahasattva-Bodhisattvas 
have had to combat sleepiness, as it is written in the following 
verses: — 

" Get up! Do not lie there clasping a decaying corpse to 
thy bosom. Even though it passes under the name of man, it 
is only an aggregation of rubbish. It is as if thou hadst been 
poisoned by an arrow; in thy pain wouldst thou lazily lie down 
to sleep? It is as if thou wert tightly bound because thou 
hadst murdered some one; in thy calamity and fear wouldst 
thou lie down to sleep? 

“This thief and kidnapper might well be our death if you 
do not repel him forcefully. It is like lying down with a poi- 
sonous snake, or it is like lying down in the midst of battle; 
under such desperate conditions how couldest thou think of 
indulging in a siesta? 

“Thou shouldest realize that laziness and sleepiness leaves 
you in perfect darkness; it robs you of your intelligence, it 
dulls wits, it is a drag on your will, it obscures your heart's 
true purpose. How canst thou lie down to sleep when suffering 
such losses?” 

It is because of these very serious causes and conditions that 
the mind is given its faculty for noticing and appreciating their 
danger, and for guarding against and warding off laziness and 
sleepiness. If laziness and sleepiness are the great foe of the 
practice of Dhyana, strange to say, the earnest practice of 
Dhyana is our best weapon against laziness and sleepiness. 

(4) The fourth inner hindrance is recklessness and remorse. 
Recklessness is of three kinds. There is body haste, walking or 
rambling about with no especial purpose in mind, sports and 
make-believe and dancing about. Then there is haste and reck- 
lessness of lips. The lips seem to find enjoyment in just recit- 
ing and singing and disputing and boasting and discussing 
world affairs, all to no purpose, just for the thrill one gets out 
of it. The third is mind recklessness. This means careless think- 
ing, idle day-dreams, the perversion of the mind’s powers to 
selfish and acquisitive ends when they should be used for the 
attainment of enlightenment. Then there is the waste of the 
mind upon the Unnecessary discrimination of external differ- 


452 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

ences and the diversion of it into the enjoyment of worldly writ- 
ings and artistic pursuits, or the frittering away of it in concen- 
tration upon sentimentality and emotionalism, and the absorp- 
tion of it in contemplation of beautiful sights, music, delicacies, 
fragrance, softness, and the seductive rhythm and cadence of 
beautiful thoughts. 

It is as if a person, who had made up his mind to strictly 
control his mind, deliberately forgets his purpose and lets his 
mind run along the easiest channel. What does it mean to be a 
reckless person? He is no better than an intoxicated elephant 
free of its chains, or a wild camel held by the nose. Concerning 
this hindrance, it is written in the Sutra:— 

“O thou, who hast become a monk, hast shaved the head, 
hast gone begging from door to door, why dost thou indulge in 
light and reckless manners, when thou knowest that by such 
careless conduct and indulgence thou wilt imperil all the ben- 
efits of the Dharma that might be thine?” 

As soon as we become aware of what we are risking by 
such reckless acts and habits we should give them up once for 
all. Because as soon as we become aware of our guiltiness and 
do not give them up then remorse will spring up and that will 
intensify the hindrance, where recklessness without remorse 
would not be so serious. Why is this? The reason is this: 
We may have reckless habits without thinking much about it 
and then remorse will not spring up to disturb the mind. It is 
in the quiet of Dhyana practice that remorse with its burden 
of sadness and regret and vexation rises to disturb the mind 
and prevent its concentration. That is why recklessness and 
remorse are so great a hindrance to the practice of Dhyana. 
There are two kinds of remorse, namely, one kind comes after 
recklessness as stated above, the other kind preceeds further 
recklessness. It is the fear that always shadows the life of a 
criminal. It is like an arrow that has penetrated so deep that it 
cannot be removed. As the Sutra says: — 

“Because thou doest what thou oughtest not to do, and 
doest not what thou oughtest to do, thy life is replete with re- 
morse and vexation, whereby thou shall fall at thy death into 
an evil existence. 

“If thou hast committed an offence and felt remorse for it 
and afterward art able to keep thy mind from its grievance, 
thy heart will be happy and peaceful, but be thou careful not 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


453 


to reawaken the mind either to the offence or to the remorse . 

“There are two kinds of remorse in which the foolish man 
is accustomed to indulge . The first is for things done which 
ought not to have done; the second is for things which he 
ought to have done but which he did not do. 

“The reason why both these kinds of remorse are foolish is 
because they do not express the true state of the mind, and 
because the offence having occurred it is too late for thee to 
undo it” 

(5) The fifth inner hindrance is the hindrance of doubt. 
If the mind is clouded with doubt, how can it have any faith 
in the teaching? And if it *has no faith in the teaching, how 
can it profit by it? It is as if one was going up a mountain 
for treasure but had no hands with which to bring back any 
of the treasure. There are some “honest doubts” which do not 
entirely hinder the practice of Dhyana, but there are three 
kinds of doubt that most effectually hinder the attainment of 
Samadhi. The first kind of doubt that hinders successful 
Dhyana is doubt of oneself. We may question whether we are 
the right one to attempt the Noble Path inasmuch as we are 
temperamentally gloomy and dull and our faults and offenses 
are many and serious. If in the very beginning we cherish 
such doubt as that, we will never attain any development of 
Samadhi. So, if we are to practice Dhyana, we should not be 
contemptuous of ourself. We should remind ourselves that it is 
impossible for anyone to fathom the depth that some root of 
goodness lies buried in our past lives. 

The second kind of doubt is doubt of our blaster. We may 
have been displeased with his manner or appearance and 
doubted whether he had attained any degree of enlightenment 
and would be able to guide us along the path. If we cherish 
such doubt or contempt for our Master it will certainly hinder 
our attainment of Samadhi. If we wish to get rid of this hin- 
drance we should recall the words of the Mahavibhasa Sutra in 
its parable of the miser who kept his gold in a bag of rubbish. 
If we love the gold of enlightenment we, too, must keep it in 
our rubbish bag. Although our Master is not perfect as we 
think he ought to be, we should honor and trust him just the 
same, because he stands for us in Buddha’s place. 

The third kind of doubt is doubt of the Dharma. Nearly 
every one of us, no doubt, retains some measure of confidence 



454 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


In his own mental judgment, and, therefore, it will be hard for 
us at first to have faith in the teachings of the Master when 
they differ from what we think they ought to be, and it will 
be hard at first to put his teachings into practice humbly and 
faithfully. So long as we cherish doubts of our Master, we can 
not be much influenced by his teachings. This is clearly ex- 
plained in the following stanzas; — 

“Just as a man standing where roads cross and questioning 
which way he ought to go, so we are facing the true nature of 
things. If we cherish doubts as to our ability to know and to 
choose the right way, it is not likely that we will put much 
earnestness or zeal in our search. 

“If, in our ignorance as we face the true nature of things, 
seeing bad and good, mortality and Nirvana, we doubt our 
Master, we resign ourselves to the bondage of life and death. 
We will be like a deer chased by a lion with no hope of escape. 

“In thy ignorance, facing the true nature of things obscured 
by the world's appearances and changes, thou hadst better have 
faith in the good Dharma and follow its teachings with zeal 
and confidence. Standing where the ways of life cross, have 
faith and courage to choose the right ” 

Faith is the only entrance to Buddhism. Without faith all 
earnest study and constant effort will be of no avail. Just as 
soon as you are convinced that error always follows doubt, give 
up all doubt and enter the gateway of faith. 

Some one may ask: — “There are as many different kinds of 
error as there are grains of dust, why do you speak of giving 
up only five dotibts?” That is true, but these five doubts cover 
the whole field of greed, hatred and foolishness. Doubt, greed, 
hatred and foolishness, are the four bad ways that are funda- 
mental. Beyond the gateway of doubt open all the paths, said 
to be eighty-four thousand in number, that lead to worldly 
suffering. If we close the gate of doubt we block the way to 
all evil. 

For these reasons, the followers of Buddha should get rid 
of the five inner hindrances of greed, anger and hatred, lazi- 
ness and sleepiness, recklessness and remorse, and doubt. Get- 
ting rid of these five hindrances is like having a debt remitted, 
it is like recovering from a painful sickness, it is passing from 
a famine-stricken country into a land of prosperity, it is like 
living in peace and safety in the midst of violence and enmity 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


455 


with no apparent reason for it. If we have given up ail these 
hindrances our minds will be fresh and happy and our spirits 
will be tranquil and peaceful. 

Just as the brightness of the sun may be obscured by 
smoke, or dust, or clouds, or mist, or Rahula or the Asuras 
may hide its brightness behind their palms, so the pure bright- 
ness of our minds may be obscured by these five hindrances. 

IV 

Regulating and Readjusting 

When we, the followers of Buddha, begin to learn the prac- 
tice of Dhyana, we do so because we wish to put into practice 
all the teachings of all the Buddhas of the Ten Quarters, past, 
present and future. We should, at the very beginning, besides 
desiring to attain supreme Enlightenment, make an earnest vow 
to emancipate all sentient beings. Our purpose to do this should 
be as firm and unchangeable as is gold or steel; we should be 
energetic and courageous even to the sacrifice of our lives; we 
should never be turned aside or backward even after we have 
attained all the Buddha-Dharmas. Having made this vow in 
all sincerity, we may sit up with right thoughts contemplating 
the true nature of all things, for all things, merit and demerit, 
memory and forgetfulness, the false consciousness that arises 
from the sense perception of objects and from the process of 
the mind, all kinds of impure outflowings of the mind and evil 
passions, all the laws in the triple world of cause and effect, of 
birth and death, and doing and not-doing, all are now within 
the grasp of the mind. This is written in the Dasa-bhumika 
Sutra which says: 

"There is nothing in the triple world but the operation of 
our own minds. When thou dost realize that there is no per- 
sonality in thy mind then thou wilt recognize that there is no 
reality in things as well.” 

If our thoughts do not become attached or influenced by 
things then action, deeds, birth and death, all cease and never 
have been. After recalling all these things, then begin the real 
practice of Dhyana in accordance with the orderly stages given 
here. 

Now let us consider the fourth heading — What is meant by 
regulating and readjusting? It may be likened to the work of 



456 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


a potter. Before he can begin to form a bowl or anything else, 
he must first prepare the clay — it must neither be too soft nor 
too hard. Just as a violinist must first regulate the tension of 
the different strings — they must be in perfect tune — before he 
can produce harmonious music. So it is just the same in our 
case. Before we can control our mind for the attainment of 
enlightenment, we must first regulate and adjust the inner 
conditions. 

To be able to secure the right regulation and readjustment 
of conditions for our practice of Dhyana there are five lessons 
to be learned. If these lessons are learned and applied, then 
Samadhi can be easily attained, otherwise a great deal of dif- 
ficulty will be experienced and our tender root of goodness can 
hardly sprout. 

(1) The first lesson relates to our habits of eating. Eating 
is necessary for the support of the body and mind in its search 
for enlightenment, but too much eating would clog the system 
and cause sickness that would be a distress and hindrance to 
our practice. On the other hand if we take too little food there 
will be an emaciated body, the distress of hunger, a feeble and 
unstable mind, a weak and uncertain purpose. Neither of these 
two extremes is the right way to attain the fruits of Dhyana. 
If we eat repulsive food our minds will be disturbed and our 
understanding confused and bewildered. If we take improper 
food we invite sickness and our strength of purpose fails. For 
these reasons we should be very careful of our eating. The 
Sutra says: — 

“The strength of purpose to attain enlightenment will vary 
with the strength of thy body. Eating and drinking should be 
under restraint; thou shouldest keep thy mind tranquil by 
avoiding disturbing thoughts. When the mind is calm, thou 
will find, satisfaction in zealous practice of Dhyana. These are 
the teachings of all the Buddhas.’’ 

(2) The second lesson relates to the regulation of laziness 
and sleep. Sloth is one of the besetting hindrances and no in- 
dulgence should be allowed it. If we give too much time to 
sleep we shall be wasting time that might be given to our prac- 
tice, or that might better be employed in industry. Too much 
sleep brings dullness of mind and drowns our good qualities in 
deep seas of gloominess. We should recollect our impermanence 
and make good use of the time by restraining our laziness 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


457 


and sleepiness. By so doing the brain is refreshed and the 
thoughts purified, and, as we realize Samadhi, the heart will be 
at rest as in a holy sepulchre. In the Sutra it is written: — 

“In the evening and after midnight, thou shalt not forget 
thy practice of Dhyana.’’ 

Just because it is natural to be slothful and sleepy, we 
ought not to spend our lives in idle comfort — such a life is 
vain and fruitless. We should remember that the conflagration 
of impermanence is sweeping over the world and we should 
not yield to sloth and sleepiness in seeking deliverance. 

(3) The third, fourth and fifth lessons relate to the right 
control of the body, — its physical state, its breathing, and its 
mental state. They are to be considered as the beginning, the 
middle and the ending of one regulation. In order to concen- 
trate the mind in Dhyana, we must first regulate the condition 
and position of the body, then of its breathing, and finally of 
its mental states. This means that before we begin Dhyana we 
must keep close watch over our physical activities and states, 
such as walking, working, standing, sitting, etc., lest we be- 
come over-tired or excited and our breathing become rapid and 
forced. The mind then will be in no good condition to begin 
practice. It will be disturbed, vexed, clouded, and far from 
tranquil. We ought to take precautions against such a state at 
all times, whether we are expecting to practice Dhyana soon or 
not, so that our mind will always be fresh and transparent and 
in good condition. But, especially, before beginning Dhyana 
we should take careful thought as to the condition of the body. 
We should also take careful thought as to the place where we 
are to carry on the practice. We should find a place that will 
be free from disturbance and that will not offer any unneces- 
sary difficulties to the practice. 

Next we should consider the position of the body. We 
should cross the feet with the left foot on the* right, draw the 
legs close to the body so that the toes are in line with the out- 
side of the thighs. This is the half position. If you wish to 
take the full position, simply place the left foot on the right 
thigh and the right foot on „ the left thigh and at right angles 
to each other. 1 Next we should loosen the girdle and arrange 
the garments so that they will not become disarranged during 

1 The full position is impossible to most Europeans and can only be taken 
after long practice begun in youth. 



458 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


practice. Next we place our left palm upon the right hand and 
place the hands on the left foot which we draw close to the 
body. Next we straighten up the body, swaying it several times 
to find its center, the backbone neither too bent nor too 
straight. Next we straighten our neck so that the nose is in 
a perpendicular line with the navel. Next open the mouth and 
breathe out all bad air from the lungs slowly and carefully so 
as not to quicken the circulation. Then close the mouth and 
breathe in fresh air through the nose. If the body is well reg- 
ulated, once is enough, otherwise do it two or three times. 

Next close the lips with tongue resting against the upper 
palate. Close the eyes easily simply to shut out unnecessary 
light. In this position sit firmly as if you were a foundation 
stone. Do not let your body, head, hands or feet move about. 
This is the best way for regulating the body for the practice 
of Dhyana. Do not be hurried about it nor unduly sluggish. 

(4) The fourth lesson relates to the regulation of breathing. 
Breathing may be divided into four kinds, — blowing, panting, 
audible and silent, only the last of which can be said to be in 
a regulated adjusted state. By blowing is meant that we feel 
our breath being forcibly sent through the nose. By panting 
is meant that our breathing is too hurried and hard. By au- 
dible is meant that when sitting we can hear a faint sound of 
the breath as it passes through the nose. If we were standing 
or working we would not notice it, but in our practice it is 
enough to distract the mind. By silent breathing is meant that 
there is no sound, no compression, no force, simply the slightest 
feeling of the tranquillity of our breathing, which does not 
disturb the mind but rather gives to the mind a pleasant feel- 
ing of security and peace. Blowing disturbs concentration, pant- 
ing gives it heaviness, audible breathing wearies it. We can at- 
tain Samadhi only with silent breathing. 

This then is the lesson concerning breathing that we are to 
learn at the beginning of our practice of Dhyana. Wear loose 
clothes, let the wind blow over and refresh the body; imagine 
that every pore of the body is participating in the breathing. 
Let the breathing be neither forceful nor hasty, let it be gentle 
and natural and deliberate. By so doing the mind will be clear, 
sickness will be avoided, and there will be enjoyment in the 
practice and a successful issue from it. 

(5) The fifth lesson relates to the regulation and adjust- 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


459 


merit of the mind. There are three stages of this regulation, in 
entering Dhyana, in practicing it, and in retiring from it. In 
entering Dhyana the mind is to be brought into an empty and 
tranquil state. The uncontrolled and half-unconscious current 
of confused and vagrant thinking must be brought to a stop. 
Second, these vagrant thoughts must be prevented from again 
arising and all bad states of mind, such as discouragement or 
aimlessness, or lack of control, or too great tension, are to be 
avoided. Let us speak more at length about these bad mental 
states that are to be regulated and adjusted. When we are sit- 
ting erect and perfectly still the mind very easily falls into 
drowsiness and becomes inattentive and the head nods. At such 
moments it is advisable to focus the mind’s attention on the 
tip of the nose but still keeping the mind empty and tranquil. 
This will prevent the mind from sinking into discouragement 
or aimlessness. Again, when we are sitting erect and perfectly 
still the mind very easily passes out of control and drifts 
about. The body becomes lax and all sorts of vagrant thoughts 
arise and pass away. At such times it is advisable to focus 
attention on the navel which tends to unify the mind and 
prevent confusion. So long as the restless activities of the mind 
are brought to a standstill there will naturally be tranquil- 
lity. That is, if our minds are regulated and adjusted there 
will be neither sinking nor drifting about. 

As to the aspect of over strain, by this is meant that, be- 
cause of our earnest effort to practice concentration we overdo 
the matter and use wrong means and the brain becomes tired 
and possibly there are fatigue pains in the head and chest. At 
such times we should relax our effort slightly and give up try- 
ing to forcibly eject the vagrant thoughts, letting them pass 
away more naturally, which they will do if for a moment we 
focus the mind on the navel. 

As to the aspect of too great looseness of mind-control there 
is likely to be dullness and dispersion of attention, the body 
will lose its erectness, the mouth will open and the saliva 
drivel, and sleepiness will overcome it. On such occasions we 
should renew attention and effort toward mind-control by 
which the mind and body will be mutually helpful in attain- 
ing success. To attain this success there must be a progressive 
advance from a state of physical activity to a state of mental 
tranquillity. Just as the breathing is to become gentle and in- 



460 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


audible, so the current of the mind’s activity is to become 
gentle and unnoticed. Just as we regulate the activities of the 
body, so we are to regulate and adjust the activities of the 
mind until there is tranquillity and peacefulness. 

In the second teaching of the fifth lesson — regulating the 
mind as it abides in Dhyana — we are to employ three kinds 
of regulation. We are to use our brain to concentrate our mind 
at every moment of our sitting, and we are to use skillful 
means for extending the sittings from one hour, to two hours, 
to four hours, to even six hours out of the twenty-four. To 
be able to do this we must have perfect control over the con- 
dition of our bodies, our breathing and our minds, and must 
be able to regulate and adjust these conditions so that they will 
be in the best condition during the whole progress of the sit- 
ting. If, during the progress of the sitting, we become con- 
scious that the body has relaxed into a loose or strained state, 
or a slouching attitude, we should immediately regulate and 
restore it to its former erect and attentive state. We have to 
do this again and again. Then, our body may be erect but our 
breathing may be wrong, constrained, panting, or audible. We 
must correct this at once, until it is gentle, continuous and 
silent. 

Next, though both body and breathing may be regulated, 
the mind may be drifting, or sinking, or it may be too lax, or, 
too constrained. As soon as we become conscious of it, we 
should again bring it into adjustment as before. For the reg- 
ulating of these three, body, breathing and mind, there is no 
fixed order, we should simply regulate and adjust whichever 
and whenever we notice any one of them to be in an improper 
state. As long as we sit in practice we should keep body, 
breathing and mind in perfect control and harmonious adjust- 
ment. If this is done there will be no relapses and no hin- 
drance to the certain attainment of enlightenment. 

In the third teaching of the fifth lesson — how to withdraw 
from Dhyana — there are three things to be attended to. First, 
we should gently relax the mind, open the mouth and exhale 
the air as though to empty it from every part of the body 
and arteries and veins. Then we should move our body little 
by little; next our shoulders, hands and neck; next our feet 
until they become flexible; then gently rub the body; next 
rub the hands until the blood circulates warmly; and not until 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


461 


then should we open our eyes and rub them with our warm 
hands. Finally sit quietly for a moment or two and then get 
up quietly and go away. If we proceed otherwise, if we break 
in suddenly upon our meditation and hurry away, the condi- 
tions of the body in Dhyana being different from the condi- 
tions of active life, there will be disharmony, perhaps a feeling 
of headache or of paralysis in the joints, which will linger in 
the mind as a feeling of annoyance and uneasiness that will 
prejudice the mind against a following sitting. Therefore, we 
should be attentive and careful in retiring from the practice. 
As we retire from a state of minimum activity of mind back to 
maximum activity of the body we should do it gradually and 
thoughtfully, carrying over into our ordinary life the practice 
of concentration of mind. There is a stanza that refers to 
this: — 

“Thou shall not only make rules for thy sitting y but thou 
shall make rules for thy retirement from sitting so that there 
will be no jolt between the minimum activity of the mind and 
the maximum activity of the body . You should be like a good 
horseman who has perfect control of his horse / 9 

It is also written in the Lotus of the Wonderful Law 
Sutra: — 

“For the sake of the Enlightenment of all the Buddhas, the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas assembled here have devoted their 
lives with zeal and perseverance . They have experienced the 
hundreds of thousands of myriads of kotis of Samadhis as they 
have entered Dhyana, abided in Dhyana and retired from 
Dhyana . They have attained transcendental powers, have prac- 
ticed the practice of Brahma for long periods, have studied all 
the scriptures, for innumerable numbers of thousands of myr- 
iads of kotis of aeons / 9 

V 

Expedient Activities of Mind 

In practicing Dhyana the mind should be possessed by five 
expedient activities or states. The first of these is an activity 
of wishfulness or purpose. It is willfulness in the sense of para- 
mount desire, or preference of directive control. If we are to 
attain the object of Dhyana, we should wish and purpose to 
avoid all false and worldly thoughts and hindering states of 



4 6s SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


mind and all confused and shifting attention, and should 
make the attainment of the object of Dhyana, namely the at- 
tainment of tranquillity, of transcendental knowledge and wis- 
dom, the mind’s paramount desire and purpose. The Lord 
Buddha said: — 

“Of all thy good qualities, a wishful purpose is the principle 
cause.” 

The second expedient activity of the mind is characterized 
by an earnest and zestful spirit. It means to keep the precepts 
with a persevering earnestness of spirit; it means to give up 
the five hindrances, and to persevere in our practice with whole- 
hearted zeal both in the evening and in the early morning. If 
you were trying to get fire from a twirling stick you would not 
expect to be successful if you did it intermittently; you must 
persist with increasing effort until the fire comes. So you must 
seek enlightenment with the same earnest zeal. 

The third expedient activity of the mind is mindfulness 
and recollection. It means that we should always keep in mind 
the emptiness and deceptive aspect of the world with all its 
fraud and suffering, and should always cherish thoughts of the 
nobility and value of the enlightenment that comes from the 
practice of Dhyana. It is noble because it leads to the highest 
attainment of realization and wisdom and compassion. It opens 
up the capacity of the mind for the enjoyment of the highest 
powers of cognition, it gives one an intuition of the blessedness 
that follows the extinction of the intoxicants, it enables one to 
realize the highest joy when perfect wisdom is devoted to the 
deliverance of all sentient beings. This is what is meant by 
recollective mindfulness. 

The fourth expedient activity of the mind is keenness of 
insight. We should ponder over a comparison of the enjoyments 
of the world with those that come with the practice of Dhyana. 
We should think with penetrating insight as to whether there 
is loss or gain, as to whether the gain from the practice of 
Dhyana is inconsiderable or of highest importance. The delights 
of the world are illusive and delusive, one needs keenness of in- 
sight to judge them rightly. The world’s fascinations often ob- 
scures its suffering and unreality. If we consider it carefully 
and truly we are bound to see that desire for the world and 
its illusions is a loss and not a gain. 

On the contrary, the same keenness of insight will convince 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


463 


one that the practice of Bhyana brings one inestimable gain of 
intuitive realization and transcendental intelligence that are free 
from all intoxicants and are unconditioned. To live in a quiet 
and secluded place, to feel free from the bondage of life and 
death, its unhappiness and its suffering, to sit quietly in Dhy- 
ana, is of highest importance and value. Keenness of insight 
will keep these differences clear before the mind and will aid 
one in the earnest practice of Bhyana. 

The fifth expedient activity of the mind is clearness and 
singleness. It means that we should understand clearly the true 
nature of the world as being pain-producing and abominable, 
and, at the same time, we should know well that the tranquil- 
lity and intelligence of the mind brought about by the practice 
of Bhyana is very precious and honorable. With this clearness 
and singleness of mind we should determine unreservedly to 
practice Bhyana with our mind as resistant as gold or 
diamond, so that we will be able to resist and cast off all evil 
influences of devas, maras and thirthakas, that might tend to 
discourage us. Even though we are unconscious of any marked 
success in our practice, clearness and singleness of mind will 
keep us from neglecting the practice or from turning back. A 
man before he begins a journey will have a clear idea as to 
where and why he is going and then after that will not be 
easily turned aside, so a man in his practice of Bhyana should 
have a clear and single mind, if he is to hope for success. 

Right Practices 

In the practice of Bhyana there are two aspects to be con- 
sidered. The first relates to the sitting, and the other relates to 
the circumstances and conditions. 

1. First as the right practice of sitting. Bhyana can be 
practiced when one is walking, standing, sitting or reclining, but 
the position of sitting being the best for its practice, that is 
considered first. It 'may be considered under five different 
heads. (1) First, in its relation to the many and confused 
thoughts that fill the mind at the beginning of the practice. 
First we should practice stopping of thoughts in order to bring 
these many thoughts to a standstill and break off thinking al- 
together. If we have difficulty in doing this we should next 



464 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


practice examination of thoughts. That is, to get rid of the 
many and confused thoughts that ordinarily crowd the mind 
at the beginning of Dhyana, we must practice “stopping and 
examining.” We will explain this practice of “stopping and ex- 
amining” in two ways, (a) As to “stopping.” There are three 
ways of doing this. It can be done by recalling the wandering 
attention to some part of the body as the tip of the nose or 
the navel, by so doing the many and wandering thoughts drop 
out of attention and disappear. It says in one of the Sutras: 
“Thou must keep thy mind under control without any relaxa- 
tion; thou shouldest keep it under control as thou wouldest a 
monkey’’ It can be done by bringing attention to only one 
thought when the other will pass away, after which the one 
thought can more easily be excluded. The Sutra says that of 
the six senses, the mental process is of highest importance; if 
we control the mind we control the other five senses and the 
perceptions that spring from them. Again it can be done by 
recalling the true nature of all objects of thought. We should 
recall that every object of thought arises from causes and con- 
ditions and therefore has no self-nature of its own. Recollecting 
this the mind will have no reason for grasping it and it will 
fall away. Referring to this the Sutra says: — 

“There is no substance in phenomena for phenomena are 
made up of causes and conditions. Thou art called a disciple 
because thou dost recognize the true nature of all things and 
art able to stop thy mind from dwelling upon them.” 

When we begin to practice meditation, at first our thoughts 
continue and ramble about without any cessation. We try to 
realize their true nature and to employ different means for stop- 
ping them but the delusive thoughts continue to flow on. In 
this case we should reflect upon the history of the thought 
that has arisen: — in the past it must have taken some form 
that has now been exterminated; and we know that in its pres- 
ent form it has no actual existence; and in the future it will 
have no more reality. By this consideration we realize that the 
phenomena of thought has no reality by which it can be 
grasped, either in the past, present nor future, and so we ex- 
clude it from attention. 

Although we may be convinced by our insight that this con- 
tinuing stream of thoughts has no substantial existence and we 
are able in the main to exclude it from attention, but there 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


465 


still may remain a consciousness of Bickerings of thought spring- 
ing up occasionally from moment to moment. In this case we 
should try to realize the true nature of consciousness by which 
we notice these momentary Bickerings of thought. Conscious- 
ness arises when the six external objects of thought are brought 
into contact with the six senses and the six internal sense-minds 
react to them. So long as the six internal sense-minds are not 
in contact with the six external objects of sense, no conscious- 
ness of them will arise. Applying this to the consciousness of 
thoughts that we are convinced have no existence in the past, 
present nor future, we are forced to recognize that all such 
phenomena are mere assumptions of the mind. Being thus con- 
vinced as to the rising, extermination, and future unreality of 
thoughts, we exclude them from further attention and the mind 
becomes tranquil. As the mind becomes tranquil, we more and 
more become convinced as to the unreality of all thought, even 
the notion of our own existence. This is the ultimate principle 
of tranquillity and peacefulness that is embodied in the concep- 
tion of Nirvana where all thought comes to a natural and final 
end. In the Lotus of the Wonderful Law Sutra it is said that 
as soon as the mind becomes diffused we should bring it back 
into right mindfulness, and keep it under control of right 
mindfulness. This means that it is not by diffusion and scat- 
tering of thought that thought can be brought to a standstill 
but it is by concentration and mindfulness. The human mind 
is not an entity with its own phenomena that can be grasped 
and held by continued and forced effort, even right mindfulness 
is only an efficient means for controlling its activities. By this 
is meant that at the beginning of our practice of Dhyana we 
will find difficulty in controlling and excluding thought which 
if effected by too much violence may result in insanity. It is 
like becoming proficient in archery — we must take a long time 
for practice if we are to become proficient. 

(b) Second, as to “stopping and examining,” we will now 
consider the control of vagrant thoughts by examining, or ob- 
serving, or making insight. One way is by opposing bad state 
of mind with its corresponding good state, as for instance, 
thoughts of purity as opposing licentious thoughts and desires, 
thoughts of kindness as opposing hatred, thoughts of the five 
grasping aggregates that make up personality as opposing 
egoism, and thinking about the breath in controlling too much 



466 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

effort at the beginning, or controlling rising thoughts during 
the practice. Another way is to oppose definite things or 
thoughts with consideration of the causes and conditions that 
make them what they are, namely, empty, transitory and ego- 
less. By doing this, the hold of these passing thoughts upon 
the attention will be broken and they will pass away as we 
note their vanity, and new thoughts will be less likely to arise. 
The discussion of this means of examining is referred to all 
through this treatise so we will say no more about it at this 
time. It is also stated in a Sutra: — 

“All phenomena are impermanent, existing simply in our 
own minds, and so, as we see the unsubstantial character of 
all things, knowing them simply as objects of sense, thou 
shouldest devote no more thought to them.” 

(2) Second in the relation of the practice of Dhyana to 
such “sicknesses” of the mind as sinking and drifting. Often 
during the progress of the sitting the mind will become dark- 
ened or obscured or inattentive or unconscious or sleepy. On 
such occasions we should practice a reflecting insight; we should 
practice “stopping to stop them.” This is a very brief sugges- 
tion for the treatment of these sicknesses of the mind’s sinking 
and drifting, but in adopting it you should be careful to have 
the remedy fit the disease for there should be no inappro- 
priateness. 

(3) In the relation of the sitting practice of Dhyana we 
should take advantage of every means available to secure tran- 
quillity of mind. As has been said, if the mind is disturbed or 
over active or sinking, we should practice stopping and examin- 
ing. If the mind does not become tranquil, then we should 
practice “stopping to stop” our thoughts. If the body and mind 
then become calm and peaceful we have reason to believe that 
the remedy was suitable for the disease and we should use it as 
occasion demands. If in practicing Dhyana we feel the mind to 
be unsteady and not advancing toward tranquillity notwith- 
standing our practice of “stopping to stop,” then we should try 
some form of insight. If, as soon as we employ insight, we 
notice that the mind is more serene and pure as well as tran- 
quil and peaceful, then we know that insight was adapted to 
our need and we should employ it at once, in order to com- 
plete the pacification. This is a brief statement of the way to 
use adjustment means in the practice of stopping and reflecting. 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


467 


But all these suggestions should be followed with care and 
discrimination if we are to expect the good results of a tranquil 
and peaceful mind and the following rewards of successful 
practice of Dhyana. 

(4) The fourth relation of the practice of stopping and ex- 
amining to our practice of Dhyana is the treatment of mini- 
mum thought in the concentration of mind. This means that 
after using stopping and insight for the suppression of confused 
and maximum thinking, we should now use it for the control of 
minimum thinking. As soon as our confused maximum thinking 
is tranquilized we attain a measure of concentration and be- 
cause of that the mind enters into a more subtle state. Because 
the body and mind are comparatively tranquil and peaceful 
there is a feeling of exhilaration in which state it is easy for min- 
imum thoughts of heretical prejudice to seep in. If we do not 
recognize this and do not adopt ways to prevent these false 
and deluding thoughts from arising they will easily increase and 
run into thoughts of egoism and craving desire. As soon as the 
mind begins to crave things it has already forsaken the idea of 
emptiness and has reinstated the idea that some things have a 
real existence. If we recall to mind the universal emptiness then 
these two vexations of sense-perception and desire will be elim- 
inated and the mind will continue tranquil. This is the prac- 
tice of stopping. But if these thoughts of sensation and crav- 
ing continue to arise it proves that the mind is still in bondage, 
and we must try the other remedy of insight into the nature 
of these minimum thoughts. As soon as we recall their unsub- 
stantial character we will cease to be attached to them; as soon 
as we cease desiring them they will quickly pass away being 
only the vexations of a moment. This is a brief account of the 
remedy of stopping and insight as applied to the minimum 
thoughts that arise in the course of our practice of Dhyana. 
There is a slight difference between stopping and insight which 
must be kept in mind when we come to passing out of con- 
centration because a mistaken use of them at that time would 
be serious. 

(5) The fifth relation of the practice of stopping and ex- 
amining pertains to the need of establishing an equilibrium be- 
tween Dhyana and intelligence. If, in the practice of Dhyana, 
we come into concentration of mind, either by the method of 
stopping or by the method of insight, and have no attainment 



468 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


of intelligence, it is an ignorant form of concentration and can 
not cut away our bonds of mental habits. Again, we may have 
attained a little intelligence but not enough to develop Into 
full intelligence or to wholly remove the bonds of defilement. 
In such a case we should apply the insight of analysis to our 
bonds and defilements, and by so doing would be able to get 
rid of them and thereafter would be able to realize concentra- 
tion with intelligence and thus be able to employ the right 
ways for the attainment of enlightenment. 

As we are sitting up and practicing Dhyana, especially by 
thl? means of insight, it is possible that all of a sudden we will 
be enveloped in a wave of intuition and intelligence, but as 
our power of concentration is still weak, our mind will be weak 
and fluctuating like a candle flame in the wind, so this meas- 
ure of transcendental intelligence will not be lasting. Under this 
condition we must again go back to the -method of stopping all 
thought. Then by the patient practice of stopping all thought, 
the mind will come to be like a candle in a closed room that 
bums steadily and brightly. This is a brief account of the 
methods of stopping and examining applied to securing equilib- 
rium between concentration and intelligence, or concentration 
and realization. If we practice Dhyana with the body in right 
position and make good use of these five means for securing 
right conditions of the mind, choosing the one that is most 
appropriate at the time, we will soon become competent and 
will be able to make good use of our whole life. 

2. We now come to a consideration of the second division 
of right practice of Dhyana. The first division had to do with 
right sitting and right conditions of mind control. This divi- 
sion has to do with the employment of stopping and examin- 
ing in the circumstances to be encountered and to the condi- 
tions to be experienced. It is of first importance that we sit up 
in proper position but as the body is under bondage its condi- 
tion is not always the same and the circumstances vary. We 
should learn to practice stopping and examining under whatever 
circumstances we are placed and in whatever condition we find 
ourselves. Otherwise the practice would be intermittent, the 
practicing mind would be checked by reverses, the bonds of 
desire and grasping would be renewed, and the defilement of 
habits would be intensified. Under these circumstances how can 
we expect to advance in our understanding of the Dharma or 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


469 


in our powers of cognition? But if we keep our minds steadily 
under control and constantly employ the best means for prac- 
ticing then we will steadily advance in our power of under- 
standing and realizing. 

Now, let us ask, what is meant by practicing stopping and 
examining in relation to conditions and experience? Under the 
heading of conditions and experience there are six conditions 
and six aspects of experience, making twelve items to be consid- 
ered. (1) First as to the condition of acting, (2) while standing, 
(3) while sitting, (4) while reclining, (5) while doing things, 
(6) while speaking. In these conditions there are six aspects of 
behavior, namely, (7) as regards eyes toward sights, (8) of ears 
toward sounds, (9) of nose toward smells, (10) of tongue to- 
ward tastes, (1 1) of the body toward tangibles, (12) and of 
the mind toward ideas. We will now explain the relation of 
stopping and examining toward these six conditions and six 
aspects. 

(1) Acting. When engaged in any activity we should ask 
this question: — For what reason am I engaged in this activity? 
If we are conscious that we are acting from some unworthy 
motive — because of discouragement, vexation, or some other evil 
instinct — we should cease the action. But if we are conscious 
that we are acting from some good motive, such as charity or 
some spiritual service, then we should go on with the activity. 
If we go on with the activity we should concentrate the mind 
on the pure activity with no ulterior purpose in mind. If we 
cease the activity, or the mind is disturbed by desires or angry 
or egoistic thoughts, then we should practice stopping. What is 
meant by this? It means that the mind should be tranquillized 
by getting rid of the thoughts which prompt the action. Action 
in itself is unwise as it leads to further multiplicity and in- 
creased confusion and dissatisfaction and suffering. Action is 
warranted by some good purpose and when the mind is con- 
vinced of this it will be quieted and if there is no good purpose 
in mind the activity will cease. The acting mind and all that 
eventuates from its activity have no reality that can be taken 
hold of. When this is fully understood, the disturbing activity 
of the mind will cease and with it the activity of the body. 
This is what is meant by practicing stopping under the condi- 
tions of action. 

What is meant by practicing examining or insight under 



470 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


these same conditions? This means that we should recall that 
the mind is crowded with impulses to activity which have no 
substance in themselves and which lead to vexation and dis- 
turbances good and bad. We should reflect upon this and realize 
that neither the acting mind or the following action has any 
true existence but are alike empty and vain. This is what is 
meant by the practice of examining under the condition of 
acting. 

(2) Standing. If we are standing because we are vexed or 
disturbed or are seeking some selfish thing, then we should cease 
standing. But if we are standing for some good purpose we 
should remain standing but with tranquil mind. What is meant 
by standing? When a man is standing he is neither active nor 
at rest; he is simply “standing by,” that is, in a position to 
begin activity or to sit down and relax. What is meant by prac- 
ticing stopping and examining under these conditions of “stand- 
ing by?” If in this condition we recall that by remaining in it 
we shall experience all manner of vexation and disturbance 
good and evil, and also recall that our standing-by-mind and all 
that arises from it by its manifestation in activity have no 
substance that can be grasped, then the deluding thoughts are 
quieted and activity ceases. 

Now what is meant by practicing examining or insight 
under the condition of standing-by? It means that the mind 
being located in the brain is the cause of all the following vexa- 
tions and disturbances both good and bad, which should lead us 
to reflect that not only are the vexatious and disturbing activi- 
ties empty of any substance, but so, also, is the "personality” 
that seems to initiate the thoughts of standing-by and the 
thoughts of activity, and that all alike are emptiness and vanity. 
This explains the practice of examining. 

(3) Sitting. We have already discussed the problem of the 
application of stopping and examining to the condition of sit- 
ting in the practice of Dhyana; we will now only refer to it 
briefly. First we should ask ourselves the question: — Why am 
I sitting here? If we are sitting because of vexation and a 
disturbed mind, we should not do it. But if it is for some good, 
unselfish purpose then we should take our seat with a concen- 
trated but tranquil mind. What is meant by practicing stopping 
under the condition of sitting? When we are sitting, we should 
comprehend that by our sitting there will be all kinds of dis- 



1 

j DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 471 

1 ' 

j turbances and vexations, good and bad, and by so comprehend- 

\ ing we will prevent the arising of delusive thoughts. This is 

| the practice of stopping. By the practice of examining at the 

time of sitting, we mean, that at the time of encountering the 
vexations and disturbing experiences while we are sitting in 
| practice, we should recall that it is by our sitting with legs 

crossed and body in right attitude, that we are encountering 
these vexations and disturbances, but that they have no sub- 
stance and will pass away. And just as we reflect that the sit- 
ting-mind has no substance of its own, so the sitting “person- 
ality” has no existence and is nothing but vanity and 
emptiness. This is the practice of examining as applied to the 
condition of sitting. 

(4) Reclining. We should keep in mind the question as to 
why we are lying down. If it is because we are lazy and sleepy 
j we aught not to do it, but if it is the regular time for sleep, 

or because we truly need rest, then we should do so With tran- 
j quil mind. When we lie down we should take the position the 

j lion takes — on his right side with his feet crossed. What is 

j meant by stopping at this time? When we are about to rest 

or sleep, we should recall that various disturbances and vexa- 
j tions of mind will follow but that all of them are unsubstantial 

and unreal and with that recollection the mind will become 
tranquil. By this is meant the practice of stopping at the time 
of reclining. 

What is meant by examining at the time of reclining? We 
j should recall that it is by our hard labor and following weari- 

j ness that we have become fatigued and our senses dulled. From 

this will follow many disturbances and vexations but that all of 
i them, good and bad alike, are empty of any self-substance and 

| are empty and vain. We should recall also that the reclining 

“personality” and all that arises from the condition of reclining 
are nothing but emptiness and vanity. This is the practice of 
| examination under conditions of lying down, 

j (5) Doing things. When we are prompted to do things we 

| should ask ourselves, why should we do them? If it is an in- 

stinctive act, or an evil, selfish act we should not do it. If it 
is a good act for the welfare of others then we should do it. 
During the act various vexatious and disturbing thoughts will 
arise both good and bad. To get rid of these thoughts we 
should practice stopping by means of realizing the emptiness 



472 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

and vanity of all thoughts, by reason of which practice the 
deluding thoughts will disappear. This is the practice of stopping 
at the time of doing things. 

The practice of examining at the time of doing things 
means that we should be mindful that we are doing things 
with our hands and body wholly under command of the mind 
and that as a result we are experiencing all manner of vexa- 
tious and disturbing thoughts. We should reflect upon this, and 
because these thoughts and acts have no substance of their own 
we should lose confidence in them. We should also recall that 
the doing — “personality” and all that arises from its doings are 
nothing after all but emptiness and vanity. This is what is 
meant by the practice of examining and insight under the con- 
dition of doing things. 

(6) Speaking. While we are speaking we should keep in 
mind the reason for our speaking. If it is mere arguing, or 
vexatious discussion, or wild words prompted by instinctive 
moods, then we should keep silent, but if it is for some good, 
unselfish purpose, then we may speak. What is meant by the 
practicing of stopping at the time of speaking? If we recall 
that much vexatious disturbances arises from speaking, be it 
from good motive or bad motive, and comprehend that the 
speaking mind and all the vexations arising from its activitities 
have no substance that can be grasped, then our delusive 
thoughts will come to a natural end. This is what is called the 
practice of stopping at the time of speaking. 

What is meant by the practice of examining at the time of 
speaking? In the practice of examining at the time of speaking 
we are to keep in mind that we are consciously and willfully 
giving our thoughts expression by forcing our breath through 
our throat, tongue, palate, teeth and lips, and that we have 
different sounding voices and different use of words, and that 
by our speaking we are giving rise to vexatious and disturbing 
feelings, both good and bad. We should reflect that the speak- 
ing-mind has no visible appearance, and that the speaking- 
personality and all the disturbances that arise from speak- 
ing, are nothing after all but emptiness and vanity. This is 
what is meant by the practice of examining at the time of 
speaking. 

These six different occasions for employing the practice of 
stopping and examining may arise at any time and we are to 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


473 

use the practice whenever it is called for and in the manner as 
shown in the preceding five ways. 

(7) We are to practice stopping whenever our eyes notice 
sights. This means that whenever our eyes catch sight of any 
object we are to recall that the apparent object has no more 
reality than the moonlight in the pond. So if it is a pleasing 
sight we are not to let desire for it arise in the mind, and if 
it is a repulsive sight we are not to let a feeling of aversion 
arise, and if it is an indifferent sight we are not to let ignorance 
of its meaning disturb the mind. This is what is meant by the 
practice of stopping at the time of catching sights by the eyes. 

Now, what is meant by practicing examining in the act of 
seeing? We should keep in mind that whatever we see with 
our eyes is no more than vanity and emptiness. What do we 
mean by this? It means that if we are to seek for it, we could 
find no differentiated substance either in the internal organs or 
in the object, or in space, or in the light. Our consciousness of 
the supposed object is a phenomena that is dependent upon the 
reaction of the light upon the eye, a variety of other causes 
and conditions among which is the mental process that springs 
up in the mind because of the reaction by which we make 
distinctions between the various sights we see. Thus from the 
sights we see we experience all manner of vexations and dis- 
turbances, good and bad. We should immediately reflect that 
our sight-mindful thought has no visible appearance, and we 
should understand, also, that the sight-seeing personality and 
all that arises from sight-seeing are nothing after all but vanity 
and emptiness. This is what is meant by the practice of exa- 
mining at the time of catching sights by our eyes. 

(8) We are to practice stopping and examining at the time 
of hearing sounds by our ears. That is, just as soon as we are 
conscious of a sound we are to think of it as of no more value 
than an echo. If it is pleasing sound we are not to let it 
awaken any craving desire, and if it- is discordant sound we are 
not to let it give rise to any fear or hatred, or if it is an indiffer- 
ent sound we are not to be curious or disturbed. This is what 
is meant by the practice of stopping under hearing conditions. 

What is meant by the practice of examining the conditions 
of hearing? We should immediately recall that every sound is 
an unreality. A sound is only the reaction of the hearing ap- 
paratus as it comes into contact with its appropriate field of 



474 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

vibration and the ear-mind is stimulated and the mental process 
distinguishes differences. By reason of this we have all kinds of 
vexatious and disturbing thoughts, both good and bad. This is 
what is involved in hearing. As we reflect that the hearing 
mind has no visible appearance, we should understand that the 
hearing personality and all that arises from hearing are nothing 
after all but emptiness and vanity. This is what is meant by 
the practice of examining under the conditions of hearing. 

(9) We are to practice stopping and examining At the time 
of smelling. This is meant that whenever a scent is noticed, we 
are to think of it immediately as a make-believe bonfire. It it 
is a pleasant fragrance we are not to give away to a craving 
desire for it, if it is a disagreeable smell, we are not to let a 
feeling of aversion or dislike spring up, and, if it is an indif- 
ferent odor, any feeling of disturbance. This is what is meant 
by the practice of stopping at the time of smelling. 

What is meant by the practice of examining at the time of 
smelling? We should immediately recollect that what we are 
smelling is unreal and deluding. Why? Because it is only a 
phenomena that is involved in the concurrence of the nose, its 
field of stimulation and the processes of the smelling-mind, by 
reason of which we perceive a consciousness of smell and the 
mind proceeds to differentiate it from other smells. From this 
there arises all manner of thoughts, vexatious and disturbing, 
both good and bad. As we reflect that our smelling has no sub- 
stantial appearance, we should decide that our smelling-per- 
sonality and all that arises from smelling are nothing after all 
but emptiness and vanity. This is what is meant by the prac- 
tice of examining at the time of smelling. 

(to) We are to practice stopping at the time of tasting. 
This means that whenever we taste anything we should im- 
mediately think of it as having no more substantiality than a 
dream experience. If it is a pleasing taste we should not crave 
it; if it is a repulsive taste, we should not be troubled by it; 
if it is an indifferent taste, we should ignore it. This is the 
practice of stopping under the condition of tasting. What is 
meant by the practice of examining at the time of tasting? It 
means that whenever we experience the sensation of taste we 
are immediately to remember that taste is nothing that has any 
reality about it. Why has it no reality? Because, although we 
distinguish six kinds of taste, there is no substantial difference 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


475 


between 'them, they are all alike sensations that involve the 
tongue and its internal apparatus from which a sense-conscious- 
ness arises followed by a consciousness that is dependent upon 
the mental processes that notices differences, from which arise 
all manner of vexatious and disturbing thoughts both good and 
bad. As we reflect that our tasting-mind has no substantial ap- 
pearance, we are forced to conclude that our tasting-personality 
and all that arises from tasting are nothing but emptiness and 
vanity. This is what is meant by the practice of examining at 
the time of tasting. 

(11) We are to practice stopping and examining at the 
time of touching things. No matter what the hands or body 
touches we should think right away that it is unreal and vi- 
sionary. If we receive pleasing sensations from what we touch 
we are not to become fond of it, and if the sensations are dis- 
agreeable and painful we are not to cherish dislike nor hatred 
for it, and if the sensations are indifferent we are not to try 
to make distinctions nor to carry them in memory. This is what 
is meant by stopping when in contact with tangibles. 

What is meant by the practice of examining at the time of 
touching things? We should remember at once that all such 
feelings as heaviness and lightness, warmth and coldness, 
smoothness and roughness, have no reality except in connection 
with our thoughts, and that the six parts of our skeleton are 
only names. As these sensations are known to be only shame 
and visions, so we must recognize that the things and our 
body that gives rise to the sensations are unreal also. No sooner 
are causes and conditions blended than there arise sensations, 
perceptions and consciousness, and from these arise memory and 
distinctions and discriminations of happiness and suffering. 

This is what is meant as the sensation of touch. At such 
times we are to reflect that the feeling-mind has no visible ap- 
pearance and from that we should know that the feeling-per- 
sonality and all that arises from tangibles are also empty and 
vain. This is what is meant by the practice of examining under 
the conditions of contact and the sensation of touch. 

(12) We are to practice stopping and examining at all 
times when the mind is engaged in thinking, but as this sub- 
ject has already been fully discussed at the beginning of this 
treatise, we will not dwell upon it further. At the time when 
we are sitting in the practice of Dhyana we may find ourselves 



476 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


hindered by any one of these sense hindrances and should em- 
ploy the corresponding means of relief, but as these have been 
now fully explained in the foregoing paragraphs we will not 
repeat them here. As any one of us becomes capable of apply- 
ing these teachings to his practice of Dhyana, whether he be 
acting, standing, sitting, reclining, looking, listening, feeling, or 
consciousness, he may know that he is practicing Mahayana 
Dhyana truly. It is said in the Maha-vagga Sutra : — 

“The Lord Buddha said to his disciple Sona, If Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas know how to act at the time of their acting, know 
how to sit at the time of their sitting, or even know how to 
wear the robe of a disciple at the time of wearing the robe, 
and how to enter the practice of Dhyana, at the time of en- 
tering, and how to retire at the time of retiring, then they 
may be rightfully called , Maha-Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas ? 

If we are able to practice the Mahayana at any time and 
place, as stated above, we are worthy to be known as the high- 
est and supreme one in all the world and that none other is to 
be compared with us. It is said in the Mahayana Shastra : — 

“To desire the happiness of the gods, thou must retire to 
the quiet forest, give up all they evil ways, free thyself from 
all lustful desires , and with tranquil mind practice Dhyana. 

“Now, thou are craving for worldly things , lust, and riches 
and ambition , but such things can not give thee peace for there 
would be no satisfying of thy desires . 

“But we, the wearers of the mended robes , live in quiet 
retirement with minds tranquil and concentrated at all times 
whether acting or standing or sitting and, by so doing, we are 
enlightening ourselves with wisdom, observing all things in 
their true nature. 

“As we continue under these conditions, observing all phe- 
nomena with equitable and tranquil minds, our minds will 
gain serenity and understanding and insight that will tran- 
scend the possibilities of this triple world ” 

VII 

The Development and Manifestation 
of Good Qualities 

As we become competent in the practice of stopping and 
insight, we will first come to an understanding of the empti- 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


477 


ness and unreality of phenomena and then we will become able 
to avoid them as hindrances to our practice; then both our 
body and mind will become pure and serene. In this condition 
many kinds of good qualities will develop and manifest them- 
selves. We will now briefly describe two different kinds of de- 
velopment of such good qualities. 

The first kind is the development of external good qualities, 
such as the giving of alms, keeping the precepts, being filial to 
parents, respectful to elders, making offerings to images, observ- 
ing the scriptural teachings, and many other good qualities. 
But as these good outward developments may be confused with 
similar outward developments of evil qualities, we must be on 
our guard. The distinction between good external developments 
and bad developments will not be considered at this time, but 
should be kept in mind. The second kind is the development 
of internal good qualities by which we mean the good qualities 
that develop and manifest themselves in the course of our 
Dhyana Practice. There are three groups of these good 
qualities: — 

1. In the first group there are five of these good qualities: — 

(1) The development of good qualities by right breathing. 
As we become competent in the practice of stopping and ex- 
amining, both our body and mind will become regulated and 
adjusted and the delusions of our minds will cease. As our 
thinking gradually dies down, our minds will become tranquil 
and concentrated and the development and manifestation of 
good qualities will go on as far as they can go on under the 
conditions of this Karma-world of action. But it is not until 
we begin to advance along the ten stages of Bodhisattvahood 
that our bodies and minds come into a state of perfect tranquil- 
lity and our Dhyana-mind attains a state of safety and abid- 
ing peace. At this earlier stage of Dhyana, we do not at first 
notice any tangible result either of body or mind, but after one 
sitting or two sittings, or it may not be until after one day or 
two days, or after one month or two months, we will gradually 
become conscious that we are being forced to keep on with our 
practice, being convinced that as long as there is no interrup- 
tion to our practice there will be a gradual gain even if there 
are no visible signs of gain. Then suddenly, we will become 
conscious that certain developments are taking place within our 
bodies and minds by which we are becoming more sensitive in 



478 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


their reactions to conditions. We will notice slight differences of 
pain and pleasure, heat and cold, heaviness and lightness, 
smoothness and roughness. At the time of feeling these differ- 
ences, our bodies as well as our minds will become very peace- 
ful and tranquil, very quiet and happy, very joyous and pure. 
It may be a very faint feeling at first and wholly indescribable 
but it will be real nevertheless. This is what is meant by the 
development of good qualities going on with out right breathing 
at the time of our practice. It is what makes right breathing 
of such fundamental importance in our practice of Dhyana. 

Or, under the same conditions of the Karma-world before 
we have begun to advance along the ten Bodhisattva stages, 
all of a sudden we become conscious of our breathing and 
notice its peaceful respiration, its extent and its transmission to 
all the pores of the body. We will suddenly see with our 
mental eyes that within the body are thirty-six good things. 
It is as if the doors of a granary were opened and we saw 
within the riches of sesame seeds and beans. It fills our minds 
with awe and wonder and gladness, as well as peace and tran- 
quillity, and calmness and bliss. Such is the wonderful develop- 
ment and manifestation of good qualities that goes on in our 
practice of Dhyana coincident with right breathing. 

(2) The development and manifestation of good qualities by 
an examination of the essential impurity of that which we most 
have loved — our bodies. If, in the state of Dhyana, under the 
conditions of the Karma-world preceding an entrance along the 
Bodhisattva stages, we reflect upon the emptiness and transiency 
of both body and mind, suddenly we will have a vision of 
bodies lying dead and becoming swollen and decaying, with pus 
oozing out and maggots fattening on them, and scattered all 
about the bones of other dead bodies. With this horrible vision 
of the constitution of the bodies we have loved will come a 
feeling of sadness and compassion. This is what is meant by 
the development and manifestation of good qualities from in- 
sight into the impurity of all transient and component things. 

Or, in the midst of our quiet practice, there will come a 
recollection of the impurity of our own body: we will seem to 
see our skeleton suspended before us. As we realize the signifi- 
cance of the five sensualities, we are filled with disgust at the 
thought that we must submit to the death of the body. With 
this thought we will lose all pride and confidence in our ego- 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


479 


self and in the selfhood of others, and will gain a peaceful and 
quiet mind. This is the way good qualities develop and are 
manifested by the dissolving of attachments to things that were 
beloved, as we come to realize their impurity. The same thing 
is true of attachments to things outside of the body as we come 
to note their impurity, also. As attachments are dissolved, 
good qualities are developed. 

(3) The development and manifestation of the good quality 
of compassion. If, in the state of Dhyana under the conditions 
of the Karma-world preceding an entrance upon the Bodhisat- 
tva stages, we practice realizing the good qualities of other 
people, there will come a feeling of great compassion for all 
sentient life. In this connection we will have vision and recol- 
lections of our parents, our close kinsmen, our intimate friends, 
and our hearts will be filled with inexpressible joy and grati- 
tude. Then there will develop similar visions of compassion for 
our common acquaintances, even for our enemies, and for all 
sentient beings in the five realms of existence. When we rise 
from the practice of Dhyana after these experiences, our hearts 
will be full of joy and happiness and we will greet whoever 
we meet with kind and peaceful faces. This is the development 
and manifestation of the good quality of compassion. In like 
manner we will come to realize developments and manifesta- 
tions of other good qualities such as kindness, sympathetic joy 
and equanimity. 

(4) The development of the good quality of insight into 
causes and conditions. Owing to our practice of stopping and 
realizing in the state of Dhyana under the conditions of the 
Karma-world preceding an entrance upon the Bodhisattva 
stages, with both the body and mind tranquil, there will sud- 
denly come to us a clear insight into the causes and conditions 
of our life in the triple aspects of past, present and future. At 
such times we will see clearly that there is no such thing as 
an ego-personality or an ego-nature of things, but that every- 
thing has arisen from the concatenation of causes and conditions 
of our own ignorance and activities. Under the conviction of 
this clear insight we will give up all of our conceptions of phe- 
nomena as having some attributes of reality, we will break 
away from our old prejudices, and we will attain to a more 
perfect concentration of mind with a correspondingly deeper 
peace and sense of mental security. 



480 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


Then there will arise within our deepest consciousness a 
more comprehensive intelligence, our minds will find a purer 
joy in the Dharma, we will cease to be worried about our 
worldly conditions, we will accept with patience the fact that 
our personality is only the five grasping aggregates of form, 
sensation, perception, discrimination and consciousness, we will 
accept with patience the fact that our external world is wholly 
made up of the mental reactions between our six senses and 
their corresponding fields of contact, we will accept with pa- 
tience the fact that all our physical experience is within the 
compass of our physical senses, the objects of sense and our 
sense-minds. This is what is meant by the development and 
manifestation of the good quality of insight into causes and 
conditions. 

(5) The development and manifestation of the good quality 
of remembrance of all the Buddhas. In the state of Dhyana, 
under the conditions of the Karma-world preceding an entrance 
upon the Bodhisattva stages, and owing to our practice of 
stopping and realizing, when our minds and bodies are quiet 
and tranquil, then all of a sudden there comes into the memory 
a recollection of the inconceivable merits and purity of all the 
Buddhas. We recall their possession of the ten transcendental 
powers, of the four fearlessnesses of the eighteen characteristic 
marks of a Buddha; their attainment of the Samadhis and 
emancipations, and their command over all manner of skillful 
means and powers of transformations, which they use freely for 
the benefit of all sentient beings. All such kinds of transcenden- 
tal powers and merits are beyond our human comprehension. 
As soon as we are dwelling in such remembrances of the Bud- 
dha’s transcending attainments and merits, we feel springing up 
within our Dhyana-minds the development of a spirit of respect 
for all sentient life and a feeling of fraternity with them; we 
feel unfolding powers of samadhi, and a sense of joy and 
bliss pervades both body and mind that wraps us in a feeling 
of righteousness and safety. At such times we are never dis- 
turbed by the appearance of any bad developments nor evil 
manifestations. When we retire from our Dhyana practice, our 
body seems light and active and we feel so confident in the 
possession of good qualities, that we expect everyone whom we 
meet will respect us and respond to our good will. This is what 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


481 

is meant by the development and manifestation of good qual- 
ities and powers of samadhi by our remembrance of all the 
Buddhas. 

Or, if, on account of our practicing stopping and observing 
at the time of our Dhyana practice, we attain this purity and 
serenity of mind and body, then we will become conscious of 
the development within our minds of all kinds of ways of mani- 
festing good qualities in the face of suffering, foolishness, pride, 
impurity, the disgusting things of the world, the impurity of 
food, death and the desire for survival after the death of the 
body. We will become conscious of and increasing love for 
Buddha, Dharma and the Brotherhood, of respect for the Pre- 
cepts, of equanimity of mind, of a sense of awe for the celestial 
worlds, of the attainment of the four right viewpoints for our 
thinking, of the four right diligencies, of the four right powers 
of self-mastery, of the five factors and the five faculties, of the 
Noble Path, of the six Paramitas that lead to enlightenment, 
of all Wisdoms, and all transcendental powers of transformation, 
and we shall have powers of mind to distinguish every one of 
these things rightly and use them properly. The Sutra says 
that if we know our own mind on any one subject rightly, 
then we can attain anything we will. 

2. The second conception of the internal developments re- 
lates to the faculty of distinguishing between trueness and fal- 
sity. It manifests itself in two ways. (1) The first relates to 
the development and manifestation of false forms of concentra- 
tion. There is only one right way of practicing Dhyana but 
there are many false ways. According to our wrong ways of 
practicing there will be different corresponding signs. We may 
feel a tickling sensation over our bodies, or sometimes a feeling 
of heaviness as though our body were under pressure, or some- 
times the very contrary, a feeling of lightness as if our body 
would float away, or sometimes a feeling as though the body 
was held down by bonds. Sometimes there will be a feeling of 
unbearable sleepiness, sometimes of coldness, sometimes of heat; 
sometimes there will be strange changing conditions, now and 
then the mind will become obscure and again it will be alive 
with many bad perceptions; or concerned with all kinds of 
troubles and the complicated affairs of others; or at times we 
may become lightheaded and optimistic, and at other times very 



482 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


pessimistic; or sometimes we will be so filled with fright that 
our hair will stand on end, and then again, there will be times 
of exciting happiness as though we were intoxicated. 

All such kinds of false developments may arise during the 
course of our practice, but we should pay no attention to them. 
If we become attached to any of these false developments, we 
will soon pass under the influence of ninety-five devils who 
will delude us into madness. When the gods or devils or evil 
spirits notice our susceptibility to these evil developments, they 
will sometimes give us increased meditating power so as to lead 
us on into deeper development of these evil manifestations. 
Sometimes they give one powers of knowledge and eloquence, 
sometimes magical gifts so that we will be able to stir up 
people all the more. Under these conditions foolish people 
think he has attained enlightenment and they give him their 
faith and obedience, but his deluded mind is in a disturbed 
condition and is really in the service of evil spirits in their ef- 
forts to lead the world into turmoil. Alas to him who yields 
himself to such evil developments and manifestations! He will 
decline in his practice of Dhyana and after his death will fall 
into evil existences. 

But if we, true hearted followers of Buddha, notice that we 
are having these wrong developments and sham manifestations, 
then we should reject them forthwith. How may we reject 
them? Well, if we recognize them to be false and visionary, 
and take care not to think of them or grasp them or become 
attached to them, then they will soon vanish away. If we 
observe them with right insight, they will quickly pass away. 

(2) The other way of drawing distinctions between false- 
hood and trueness is the discernment by the practice of de- 
velopment and manifestation of right Dhyana. If we are prac- 
ticing right Dhyana there will come into development and 
manifestation all kinds of meritorious qualities that will ap- 
prove themselves to our enlightened consciousness by their 
benefit to our Dhyana practice. The body will become bright 
and transparent, fresh and pure; our minds will become happy 
and joyous, tranquil and serene; hindrances to our practice will 
disappear and good thoughts will spring up to help us; our 
respect for the practice will increase and our faith in it will 
deepen; our powers of understanding and wisdom will become 
clear and trustworthy; both our body and mind will become 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


483 


sensitive and flexible; our thought will be less superficial and 
more profound; our body will become tranquil; we will feel an 
instinctive disgust for the world’s lusts. Under these conditions, 
our minds will become unconditioned and desireless, and both 
frankness and charm will characterize our daily life. 

This is the true and right development and manifestation 
that should follow our practice of Dhyana. These reactions are 
similar to the reactions we feel when we are with people — if 
we are with bad people, we feel irritated and annoyed, but if 
we are with good people, we are mutually benefited and feel 
at ease. Stopping and observing at the time of our practice 
helps us to discern between the wrongness and the rightness of 
the developments that take place during the practice. 

3. The third conception of the internal developments relates 
to making more use, in our practice of Dhyana, of stopping 
and observing as a continuing nourishment for these unfolding 
good qualities. If we wish to conserve and develop the good 
qualities, we must continually resort to the practice of stopping 
and observing. Sometimes it will be the practice of stopping 
that the situation needs, and at other times it will be observing 
that is needed. We should consider each situation separately by 
our enlightened insight and then apply the right remedy. 

VIII 

Beware of Evil Influences 

(The word used in the title of this chapter in the Sanskrit 
is Mara which corresponds with the English, Satan or Devil. In 
the Chinese the word has the meaning of “killer” because it 
robs us of our treasure of merit and kills our life of wisdom. 
In the old days evil was usually personified as the doings of 
Mara the King of Evil and his hosts of demons, but in our 
day we think of it in impersonal terms of evil influences.) Our 
Lord Buddha accumulates all his store of merit and wisdom by 
delivering all sentient beings into Nirvana, while evil influences 
are always destroying the good qualities of sentient beings and 
keeping them in the dreary round of life and death. If we 
have patience to follow the Buddha’s Noble Path we will 
clearly perceive the influence and danger of all evil things. 
These evil influences may be classified into four groups: (1) 
Vexation; (2) sensuality; (3) cruelty; and (4) “personal” 



484 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


evils. The first three are so common in our daily life and 
correspond so closely with the thoughts of our own minds that 
we will not make any further reference to them at present. 
They are to be driven off and kept off by our right thinking. 
But the evil influences that originate outside of our own minds, 
that we commonly think of as the doings of devils and goblins, 
require more attention. 

There are three classes of these “personal” devils: (1) The 
first class are the evil influences that awaken fear. There are 
twelve of these and they seem to come during the different 
periods of the day and night. They make all sorts of trans- 
formations so that simple and innocent things take on the ap- 
pearance of frightful things, or harmless women or girls appear 
as witches, or they are wholly imaginary. In the early morning 
from 3 to 5 things look like tigers; from 5 to 7 they take on 
harmless forms as deer or rabbits but they frighten us just the 
same. From 7 to 9 they are horrible things like dragons and 
turtles; from 9 to 1 1 they look like snakes; from 1 1 to 1 they 
take on the appearance of horses and mules and camels; from 
1 to 3 they are sheep; from 3 to 5 ’they are monkeys; 5 to 7 
in the twilight they are vultures and crows; from 7 to 9 in the 
shadows of night they look like dogs and wolves; from 9 to n 
they take on the appearance of pigs and disgusting things; 
from 11 to 1 they are scurrying rats and mice; from 1 to 3 
they are big cows that frighten us. When we are tempted by 
these goblins or frightful things we must recall the hour of the 
night and the day and dismiss them from our thoughts. Just 
as soon as we see them as they truly are and call them by 
their right name, they will vanish away. 

(2) The second class are the evil influences that awaken 
anger. They also employ transformations to gain their evil 
ends. They take on the form of worms and bugs creeping over 
our face or back and making sharp stings, or they tickle us, 
or suddenly they grab us, or make disturbing sounds, or jump 
out at us. At such times we should keep control of our minds 
and refuse to be annoyed, saying to ourselves, “I know who 
you are; you are only the little discomforts of life; you are 
only the annoying differences of opinion that try our patience 
and irritate us. But we are followers of Buddha, we keep the 
Precepts, you can not make us angry, you can not disturb us. 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


485 


Sometimes it will be necessary, in order to keep control of our 
minds, to repeat a Sutra if we are monks, or repeat the Pre- 
cepts if we are laymen. But these evil influences have no real 
power, they can only influence us as we let them. Careful 
reading of the scriptures will make this plain to us. 

(3) The third class are the evil influences of illusion that 
bolster up our imaginary egoistic pride and self-complacency. 
They generally work through the conditions of our five sense 
objects, for the purpose of disturbing and breaking off our good 
and right thoughts. Their transformations may be divided into 
three groups. The first group are transformations of repulsive 
things, making them to appear to be desirable. The second 
group are transformations of pleasing things, making them to 
appear as undesirable. The third group are transformations of 
indifferent things, making them to appear different from what 
they are and by so doing serving to confuse and bewilder the 
mind. 

All these transformations that serve to confuse and bewilder 
and deceive the mind are the work of demons and devils if 
anything is, because their arrows are sent against our highest 
thoughts and sentiments. They do not make a frontal attack, 
they attack from behind and underneath; they transform pleas- 
ing conditions, such as, forms of our parents and brothers and 
friends; the conditions of simple and quiet living, the beautiful 
thoughts of Buddha, alluring us into imaginary conditions that 
have no substantial basis and which lead to suffering. They 
transform harmless things into an appearance of frightful 
beasts in order to deceive us and frighten us; or they trans- 
form indifferent conditions such as are usual and commonplace, 
in order to forestall and disturb our practice of Dhyana. They 
transform all kinds of pleasing and repulsive sights, all kinds 
of agreeable and distressing sounds, all kinds of fragrant and 
horrid odors, all kinds of delicious and distasteful flavors, all 
kinds of good and evil thoughts and conditions that make up 
tfie routine life of everyone, and thereby delude us and hinder 
us from following the Noble Path. 

These transformations are too numerous to take up in detail, 
but we will group them under five heads. Anything which 
serves to transform the five objects of sense and the thoughts 
of the miiid is the work of Mara's army of demons and gob- 



486 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


lins. The purpose of their activities is to annoy us, to delude 
us, to, destroy our good qualities, to disturb our equanimity, to 
raise up hindrances against our practice of Dhyana. This is 
explained in the Sutra: 

“Be advised that sensual desires are the ist Army of thine 
enemy; that discouragement and sadness are the 2nd Army; that 
hunger and thirst is the 3rd Army; that attachments are the 4th 
Army; that laziness and sleepiness are the yth Army; that fear 
and fright are the 6th Army; that doubt and remorse are the yth 
Army; that hatred is the 8th Army; that selfish love of comfort 
and praise are the pth Army; that egoistic pride and complacency 
are the 10th Army . All of these armies of evil beset the follower 
of Buddha . 

“But thou shalt say: “I will defeat all of these armies by 
the power of my Dhyana practice, and when 1 have attained 
Enlightenment I will deliver all mankind” 

Now that we, the followers of Buddha, have become aware 
of all these evil influences, we must resist them with all de- 
termination, There are two ways of resisting them: The first 
way is by the practice of stopping. Just as soon as we become 
aware of any of these evil influences besetting us, we are to 
recall that each and every one of them is falsehood and delu- 
sion. If we do this, there will be no fear nor sadness, no aver- 
sion nor fondness, no discrimination nor rationalizing. If we 
practice stopping of thoughts the mind will become tranquil 
and the hosts of Mara will vanish away. 

The second way of resisting evil influences is by the prac- 
tice of insight and examination. If we instantly reflect that 
our perceiving and discriminating mind has no objective exist- 
ence and that there is nothing for these evil influences to an- 
noy and delude. If the evil thoughts still linger about, if we 
practice insight and right mindfulness we will, at least, not be 
vexed of them nor afraid of them. We should determine to 
keep the mind tranquil and steady even if we have to sacrifice 
our life to do so. 

In our practice of right mindfulness we realize that the con- 
ception of Mara as the embodiment of evil and the conception 
of Buddha as the embodiment of goodness and truth is really 
one conception — the conception of manifestation — but that in 
ultimate reality they balance each other and there remains only 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


487 


the conception of Dharmakaya, the ultimate Essence that 
abides in emptiness and silence. In this sense there is no Mara 
to resist and no Buddha to take refuge in. But inasmuch as 
Mara is only the transformation of unreal appearances, and 
Buddha is the manifestation of the true nature of Dharmakaya, 
the transformations of Mara disappear, and the manifestations 
of the Buddha-Dharma are realized by us, all in the same 
moment. 

Moreover, we need not be troubled if the transformed con- 
ditions of Mara do not vanish away, nor should we be- pleased 
if they do vanish. Why? Because these evil influences that 
come to trouble us during our practice of Dhyana are not real 
wolves and tigers, neither is Mara a reality. As to our ignor- 
ance and foolishness and delusion by reason of which we be- 
come frightened or fond of unseen things, it is only our mind 
in state of illusion, diffusion, non-concentration and dementa- 
tion. Thus our troubles, which we ascribe to evil influences, 
are only due to wrong states of our own minds. Our slowness 
in attaining enlightenment is not because of Mara's doings, 
but because of our own slackness in the practice of Dhyana. 

Should these disturbing conditions persist through many 
months, and even years, we must patiently continue to seek to 
control the states of our own minds; we must do so with de- 
termination that knows neither fear nor pain. Falsehood must 
sooner or later yield to truth; the transformations that arise 
from evil influences must just as surely yield to an earnest 
purpose and steadfast effort. 

But we are not to look lightly upon these disturbing in- 
fluences, because the deeper they are and the stronger effort 
we make to uproot them, the greater will be the danger from 
them. We must learn to distinguish them clearly and fight 
them separately, or they will drive us mad. These morbid states 
of alternate happiness and gloomy discouragement are the cause 
of sickness and even death. Every follower of Buddha should 
have a competent Master or a wise and noble-hearted friend, 
for sooner or later he will encounter these evil influences. 

Worse than sickness and madness, these besetting influences 
and transformed conditions, if not overcome, may change a 
follower of Buddha into a heretic and enemy of Buddha. It 
sometimes seems as though Mara was training a follower of 



488 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


Buddha to become his own servant, by leading him into false 
kinds of concentration, false intelligence, false intuition, false 
supernatural powers, and magical spells, so that he may preach 
the Dharma with power and win many converts. And then 
later Mara seems to take delight in exposing his falsity and 
ruining his pseudo converts. The wiles of Mara and his hosts 
are innumerable and inexplicable. We have referred only to a 
few of them in order to warn the followers of Buddha to be 
on their guard against them constantly, and especially against 
this danger of heresy. The fundamental heresy of the reality of 
all phenomena is not of Mara’s doing, that is basic, but all the 
rest belong to Mara. The Sutra says: — 

“As soon as thou dost speculate discursively , thou art al- 
ready caught in Mara’s net. A follower of Buddha should 
neither yield to evil influences nor to the temptation of dis- 
cursive discussion. This is the true Mudra that will protect 
him from all evil.” 

IX 

Treatment of Sickness 

As sickness rises from wrong conditions or maladjustments 
of good conditions, the followers of Buddha, by observing the 
Precepts, following the Noble Path and practicing Dhyana, 
should be largely if not wholly free from sickness. Wise control 
of the mind is the best preventative of sickness and is the best 
method of cure. If our body, mind and breathing are well 
regulated and our circumstances are in harmony with the teach- 
ings of Buddha, we should be able to throw off most sicknesses 
and heal most wounds. We should do everything we can to 
keep well because sickness is a discredit to our enlightenment 
besides being a hindrance to our practice of Dhyana. 

There are two divisions of this subject that should be kept 
in mind. First, the nature of the sickness, its development 
and its symptoms. Second, methods of treatment. Under the 
first head we should distinguish between sickness caused by 
external conditions and sickness caused by irregularities within 
our own minds. In either case we should notice the .beginning 
of sickness and try to prevent its becoming serious by remedy- 
ing the conditions both external and internal as early as pos- 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


489 


sible. What are the best remedies? The best remedy is the 
practice of stopping and insight. Stopping means removing 
dangerous conditions and ending bad habits. Insight means an 
examination of and reflection on the emptiness aspect of all 
phenomena. If we cease to let the mind dwell upon symptoms 
and hold it to a reflection upon the unreality of both body and 
ideas concerning its state, then the mind will speedily become 
tranquil and the symptoms will disappear. The reason for this 
is that most of our sicknesses come from irritations within the 
mind and if these can be controlled by right mindfulness, then 
the mind will become kind and tranquil and the sickness will 
disappear. Medicines made up of either minerals or herbs or 
both may be used if they have some correspondence with the 
sickness. The same thing is true, also, in the application of 
ways and means for practicing insight, — each practice must 
have correspondence with its mental sickness. 

"In the treatment of sickness by some process of insight, it 
is necessary for us to do so in ten ways, if we are to expect 
.good results. The ten ways are: (1) Faith. We must believe 
that the remedy is going to help us. (2) Application. We 
must make use of the remedy in the right way and the right 
time. (3) Diligence. It means to apply the remedy whole- 
heartedly, without relaxation until the sickness is cured. (4) 
Permanent conditions. This means that we are to keep the 
mind concentrated upon the Dharma. (5) Discernment of 
causes. (6) Expedient means. This means that we are to keep 
our right breathing, right practice, and right use of our 
thoughts in good adjustment and balance. (7) Long practice. 
This means that if we are benefited by the means or practice, 
we are to continue it faithfully without regard to the passing 
of time. (8) Choice of means. This means that we are to use 
observation to note whether a remedy is useful or harmful and 
be governed as to its continued use accordingly. (9) Mainte- 
nance and protection. This means that we are to protect the 
body by the best use of our mind. (10) Hindrances. This 
means that if we are benefited by our practice of Dhyana we 
shall not boast of it to others, and if we are unsuccessful in 
getting rid of hindrances we must not give rise to doubts and 
slanders. If we treat our sicknesses in these ways, no doubt 
we will have good results.” 



49« SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


X 

Realization of Supreme 
Attainment 

(A nuttara-samyak-sambodhi) 

If we, followers of Buddha, in practicing stopping and in- 
sight as given in the preceding chapters, could see that all phe- 
nomena arise from our own minds, and that causes and condi- 
tions are merely pseudo-visions, then we would know, also, 
that all phenomena are nothing but emptiness. As we see 
that they are nothing but emptiness, then it will be impossible 
for us to retain the common conception of phenomena. By 
this new conception of phenomena as emptiness, it can be said, 
we have realized “the true viewpoint of reality.” But from 
this viewpoint we are unable to see either the Supreme Perfect 
Attainment of the Buddha to whom we are devoted, nor are 
we able to see any sentient being that we can emancipate. 
This means the insight of emptiness attained by practicing 
the unreality of all phenomena and it also means “the insight 
of Ultimate Truth” both by the eyes of intelligence and the 
heart of realization. But if we come to a standstill in the prac- 
tice of insight we soon descend into the state of a Pratyeka- 
buddha, who is content with his own attainment. As it is said 
in the Sutra:— 

“ All the Arhats sighed and said: ‘When we listen to the 
preaching of our Lord Buddha, whether it be about the Pure 
Land or about our duty toward all sentient beings, why is it 
we are not interested and fail to enjoy it’?” 

What does this verse signify? It signifies that to the Arhats 
all phenomena are nothing but emptiness and silence, neither 
birth nor death, neither greatness nor littleness, neither purity 
nor unconditionality. As they fix their minds on these negative 
conceptions, how can interest and enjoyment arise? You should 
clearly understand that if you attain concentration solely by 
fixing the mind on the unconditionality of emptiness, you will 
never be able to develop highest wisdom. It means that your 
attainment is one-sided, inasmuch as it is leaving out of focus 
the conception of Buddha. If the Mahasattva-Bodhisattvas 
keep all the Buddha Dharmas in mind and keep them in mind 
for the sake of all sentient beings, they will not fall into over- 


DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


49 * 


fondness for the unconditionality of emptiness and thus be- 
come satisfied with Nirvana for themselves. 

From the very beginning the Mahasattva-Bodhisattva, beside 
his practice of insight into the emptiness of all phenomena, 
should also practice insight into the potentiality that abides in 
emptiness. If he does this he will realize with clearness that 
although the nature of mind is emptiness, as it comes into 
relations with suitable causes and conditions, it is potential of 
all phenomena though they are not real nor permanent, and 
though they manifest through different organs of seeing, hear- 
ing, perceiving, thinking, etc. 

Notwithstanding his knowledge of the essential emptiness 
and silence of all phenomena, the Mahasattva-Bodhisattva, by 
the practice of rightly balanced insight, may practice all man- 
ner of activities in his conception of emptiness as though he 
were planting trees in the clouds, and also, he may distinguish 
in sentient beings all manner of relative qualities. As the de- 
sires of our nature are innumerable, so the ways of our preach- 
ing are innumerable, also. As we adapt our various arts of 
preaching to their various needs, we will be able to benefit all 
sentient beings in the six realms. This is what is meant by 
“the viewpoint of expedient adjustment to conditions,” which is 
our insight from emptiness into potentiality. It is also called, 
“insight of equality,” “the eyes of the Dharma,” and “the gar- 
den of intuitive enlightenment,” If we make this balanced in- 
sight our viewpoint we shall perceive, but with difficulty and 
dimly because our powers of intelligence are comparatively un- 
developed, the true nature of Buddha potential in everything. 

Although the Mahasattva-Bodhisattva has attained these 
two ways of insight, from the viewpoints of emptiness and 
potentiality, he has still not yet attained to perfect insight. 
Therefore, the Sutra says that these two ways of insight are to 
be used as expedient means for by them we may enter by a 
Middle Way into Supreme Attainment and therein abide in 
both conceptions of ultimate Truth,— Perfect Intelligence and 
Perfect Realization, Perfect Wisdom and Perfect Love — with 
our mind in tranquillity and peacefulness. Then our minds 
will no longer run in two channels but will cease their flow 
in Prajna’s Ocean of Truth. 

If the Mahasattva-Bodhisattva wishes to have all Buddha- 
Dharmas embraced in a single thought, he should practice in- 



492 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

sight from the viewpoint of “cessation of the heretical separa- 
tion of the two extremes”; this will enable him to walk by 
right insight along a Middle Way. What does it mean to prac- 
tice insight by the Middle Way? It means to look at the na- 
ture of our minds in a more comprehensive way. If we do 
that we will see that the mind is neither true nor false, and 
from that viewpoint we restrain our dependent thoughts. This 
is what we mean by the right practice of insight. 

If we are able to reflect upon so profound a conception as 
the nature of our mind being neither emptiness nor potential- 
ity, without cutting asunder our conceptions of emptiness and 
potentiality, then the true nature of our mind will be wholly 
and clearly comprehended as a manifestation of the Truth of 
the Middle Way, and we can reflect upon both of these paths 
of Reality (intelligence and intuitive realization), with readi- 
ness and assurance. If we can see these two aspects of Reality 
as the Middle Way in our own mind, then we can see them in 
all phenomena. But we do not take these two aspects of Real- 
ity into our reflection upon the Middle Way, for we are unable 
to find any trace of them in its nature. This is what is meant 
by the practice of right insight into the Middle Way. It is 
said in the Madhyamika Sutra: — 

“All phenomena which arise from causes and conditions are 
nothing but emptiness, but we give them pseudo-names and 
then think of a Middle Way ” 

If we carefully examine the meaning of this stanza, we will 
see that it not only embraces all conceptions of the differentia- 
tions of the Middle Way but it also shows the purpose of the 
two preceding ways of expedient insight. We will also realize 
that the right insight of the Middle Way reveals it to be both 
the all-comprehending wisdom of Buddha's eyes and the all- 
embracing love of his intuitive heart. If we keep our stand on 
this right insight, then our powers of Dhyana and intelligence 
will be in equality; we will clearly perceive the true nature of 
Buddha, we will rest peacefully in the Mahayana; we will 
advance with the steadiness and the speed of the wind; and 
we will inevitably run into Prajna’s Ocean of Truth. 

If we do the deeds of Tathagata (the Ultimate Principle 
that is what it is), abide in the palace of Tathagata, dress in 
the robe of Tathagata, sit on the throne of Tathagata, then we 
will be entering into all the imperial resources of Tathagata. 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


493 


Then we will regain the purity of our six sense faculties and 
will no longer be defiled or become fond of the changing and 
passing phenomena of life. We will enter into the conditions 
of a Buddha, we will become able to understand all the Bud- 
dha-Dharmas, will attain the Samadhi of reciting the Sacred 
Name, will enter into the peaceful continuance of the Supreme 
Perfect Enlightenment, and will attain the highest Samadhi of 
the Transcendental Body. Then we may visit all Buddha 
Worlds, preach the Buddha-Dharmas to all sentient beings 
everywhere, purify and adorn all Buddha’s Kshatra, make am- 
brosial offerings to all Buddhas everywhere, receiving and ob- 
serving all the Dharma-scriptures, of all the Buddhas, possess- 
ing perfect ideals for all activities, and advancing along the 
Bodhisattva stages to Mahasattva-Bodhisattvahood. Then we 
will be of equal rank and in intimate friendship with Saman- 
tabhadra and Manjusri and will be in permanent possession of 
Dharma nature. Then all the Buddhas will praise us and 
prophesy our attainment of Buddhahood. 

This was the progress of our Lord Buddha from his ascent 
into the glories of the Tusita Heaven, down to the entrance of 
his spirit into the womb of his mother Queen Maya, to his con- 
version to Buddhism, to his sitting under the Bodhi tree, to his 
rejection of Mara and his hosts, to his full attainment of en- 
lightenment, to his preaching the Dharma, and to his Parinir- 
vana. This means that we are in possession of two bodies, 
namely, a True Body and an Appearance Body, which are like 
a sound and its echo, a form and its shadow. The True Body 
abides in all directions and all times and in all worlds; the 
Appearance Body accomplishes all the deeds of a Buddha. 
This is our mission as Mahasattva-Bodhisattvas that was begun 
in our practice of Dhyana. 

It is said in the Avatamsaka Sutra that as soon as novice 
Bodhisattvas begin their practice of Dhyana that they have 
already accomplished their full Enlightenment, and have com- 
prehended that the intelligence embodied in the true nature of 
all phenomena is to be accomplished in no other way than by full 
Enlightenment. In another place the same Sutra says that new 
Mahasattva-Bodhisattvas in attaining oneness with Tathagata 
really attain innumerable bodies and that each body is 
Buddha. 

In the Parinibanna Sutra it is said : — "The beginnings as 



494 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


new Mahasattva-Bodhisattvas and the ultimate Buddha are in- 
distinguishable , but in regard to responsibilities the new Maha- 
sattva-Bodhisattva has the heavier burden ” 

In the Maha-vagga The Lord speaking to Sona Kutakanna 
said: — Sana Kutakanna , there are some Mahasattva-Bodhisat- 
1 tvas whOj no sooner have they made their first practice of 
Dhyana than they are fitted to sit under the Bodhi-tree ” 

We should realize that these novice Mahasattva-Bodhisat- 
tvas are really Buddhas in manifestation. This is signified in 
the Wonderful Lotus Sutra, also, in the case of the Naga Prin- 
cess, who was a disciple of Manjusri and only eight years old, 
but who presented her priceless jewel to Lord Buddha as to an 
equal. 

In all these Sutras the new Mahasattva-Bodhisattvas are 
represented as being already in possession of all Buddha- 
Dharmas. The same meaning is embodied in the Maha-vagga 
where it uses the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet — Aum — to 
represent wholeness. It is so stated in the Lotus Sutra, where 
the purpose of our Lord Buddha’s appearing in this world is 
presented as manifesting and emancipating the Buddha percep- 
tion and understanding that is inherent in every sentient being. 
It is so stated in the Nirvana Sutra , that as we have received 
the nature of Buddha, so we ever abide in Maha-Nirvana. 

This is a brief elucidation of the attainment of Supreme 
Perfect Wisdom through the practice of Dhyana by novice Ma- 
hasattva-Bodhisattvas. We will now refer to the attainment of 
Supreme Perfect Wisdom by the Buddhas. 

As we cannot see the conditions that surround the perfect 
minds of Buddhas, we are limited in our understanding as to 
how they attain Supreme Perfect Wisdom to the teachings of 
the Sutras. In the Sutras we find only two ways in which 
Buddhas practice Dhyana. In the Lotus of { he Wonderful Law 
Sutra we read these words:—" (All the highest Mahasattva- 
Bodhisattvas) sincerely and earnestly and perseveringly praise 
the Wisdom of all the Buddhas/' This is their practice of reali- 
zation in DJiyana. In their practice of Dhyana they abide in 
Samadhi. We get our understanding of their attainment of 
Supreme Perfect Wisdom through our own practice of realiza- 
tion. 

Iii its interpretation of the meaning of Maha-Nirvana, the 



DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS 


495 


Nirvana Sutra considers over a hundred phrases referring to 
the subject of emancipation. It interprets Nirvana as having 
the meaning of “stopping/’ That is, Buddhas attain Supreme 
Perfect Wisdom through the practice of “stopping.” In this 
Sutra, Maha-Nirvana is spoken of as the “Permanent Tranquil 
Samadhi.” Here Samadhi means “stopping.” 

In the Lotus of the Wonderful Law Sutra, though the Su- 
preme Perfect Attainment is explained by deductions from the 
practice of realization, it is summarized in terms of “stopping.” 
It is stated that even the conception of ultimate Nirvana as 
“Permanent Tranquil Samadhi” amounts to the same thing as 
“the full” realization of emptiness. 

In the Nirvana Sutra, although Supreme Perfect Attainment 
is interpreted by deductions from “stopping,” it is summarized 
in terms of realization, and therefore, takes the three ultimate 
qualities, Truth-Essence, Prajna-Potentiality, Blissful-Peace, as 
its Maha-Nirvana. 

Although these two Sutras treat the subject of ultimate 
Nirvana differently, they both follow the two ways of “stopping 
and realizing,” and they both explain Supreme Perfect Attain- 
ment in terms of “Stopping and realizing,” which is the same 
thing as saying that they unite in looking upon Supreme Per- 
fect Attainment as the common goal of both Intuition and In- 
telligence, of both Love and Wisdom. 

We, the followers of Buddha, should humbly recognize and 
patiently accept the fact that the attainment of Bodhisattva- 
ship, in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, are alike 
inconceivable. The newly translated Suvana-Prabhasa Sutra 
says that the Buddhas of the past are inconceivable, the Bud- 
dhas of the Present possess inconceivable potentialities, the 
Buddhas of the future will never be destroyed. This is true 
because all Buddhas arrive at the Supreme Perfect Wisdom by 
the two ways of “stopping and realizing,” and these are not 
two divergent ways but are one Middle Way whose goal is 
Highest Perfect Enlightenment. 

In conclusion, I sincerely wish that all of you who are de- 
voted to the practice of Dhytoa will quickly get rid of the 
three poisons, — lust, anger, and foolishness; and the five hin- 
drances, — coveteousness, fear, ignorance, conceit, and doubt. As 
long as the mind is burdened with these poisons and hin- 



496 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

drances, no matter how hard you may try, you will never be 
benefited. As it is said in the Prajna Sutra : — 

“All the Buddhas attain their emancipation by means of 
their own minds , which are kept pure and transparent and un- 
defiled , which are always fresh and clean , without stain of 
color , in all their six sense-fields . Thou , too, shouldest learn to 
keep thy mind in the same state , then thou, too, mayest attain 
the great Enlightenment.” 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH 
PATRIARCH 


Chapter I 

Autobiography of Hui-Neng 

O NCE when the patriarch had come to Paolam Monastery 
Prefect Wai of Shiu-chow and other officials came there to 
invite him to deliver public lectures on Buddhism in the hall 
of Tai-fan Temple in the city (Canton). 

When the time came, there were assembled Prefect Wai, 
government officials and Confucian scholars about thirty each, 
bhikshu, bhikshuni, Taoists and laymen, nearly a thousand in 
all. After the Patriarch had taken his seat, the congregation 
in a body paid him homage and asked him to speak on the 
fundamental truths of Buddhism. Whereupon, His Eminence 
delivered the following address: — 

Learned Audience, our self-nature which is the seed or 
kernel of Bodhi (the Wisdom that comes with enlightenment) 
is pure by nature and by making right use of it we can reach 
Buddhahood directly. Let me tell you something about my own 
life and how I came into possession of this inner teaching of 
our Ch’an School. 

My father, a native of Fan-yang, was dismissed from his 
official post and banished to become a commoner in Sun-chow 
in Kwang-tung. My father died when I was quite young leav- 
ing my mother poor and miserable, to my great misfortune. We 
moved to Kwang-chow (now Canton) and lived in very bad 
circumstances. I was selling firewood in the market one day 
when one of my customers ordered some to be sent to his shop. 
Upon delivery and payment for the same as I went outside I 
found a man reciting a Sutra. No sooner had I heard the text 
of this Sutra than my mind became at once enlightened. I 
asked the man the name of the book he was reciting and was 
told that it was the “Diamond Sutra” ( Vajracchedika ). I asked 



498 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


him where he came from and why he recited this particular 
Sutra. He replied that he came from the Tung-tsan Monastery 
in the Wong-mui District of Kee-chow; that the Abbot in 
charge of this temple was Hwang-yan who was the Fifth Pa- 
triarch and had about a thousand disciples under him; and 
that when he went there to pay homage to the Patriarch, he 
found him lecturing on this Diamond Sutra. He further told 
me that his Eminence was in the habit of encouraging the laity 
as well as his monks to recite this scripture, as by so doing 
they might realise their own essence-of-mind and thereby reach 
Buddhahood directly. 

It must be due to my good karma accumulated from past 
lives that I heard about this and that later on I was given ten 
taels for the maintenance of my mother by a man who ad- 
vised me to go to Wong-mui to interview the Fifth Patriarch. 
After arrangements had been made for my mother’s support, 
I left for Wong-mui which took me about thirty days to 
reach. 

I paid homage to the Patriarch and was asked where I 
came from and what I expected to get from him. I replied that 
I was a commoner from Sun-chow in Kwang-tung and had 
travelled far to pay my respects to him, and then said, “I ask 
for nothing but Buddhahood.” 

The Patriarch replied: “So you are a native of Kwang- 
tung, are you? You evidently belong to the aborigines; how 
can you expect to become a Buddha?” 

I replied: “Although there are Northern men and Southern 
men, but North or South make no difference in their Buddha- 
nature. An aborigine is different from your Eminence phys- 
ically, but there is no difference in our Buddha-nature.” 

He was going to speak further to me but the presence of 
other disciples made him hesitate and he told me to join the 
other laborers at their tasks. “May I tell Your Eminence,” I 
urged, “that Prajna (transcendental Wisdom) constantly rises in 
my mind. As one cannot go astray from his own nature one 
may be rightly called, ‘a field of merit’ (this is a title of honor 
given to monks as a monk affords the best of opportunities to 
others, ‘to sow the seed of merit’). I do not know what work 
Your Eminence would ask me to do.” 

“This aborigine is very witty,” he remarked. “Go to the 
work-rooms and say no more.” I then withdrew to the rear 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 499 

where the work of the monastery was carried on and was told 
by a lay brother to split firewood and hull rice. 

More than eight months after, the Patriarch met me one 
day and said, “I know that your knowledge of Buddhism is 
very sound, but I have to refrain from speaking with you lest 
evil men should harm you. Do you understand?” “Yes, Sir, I 
understand,” I replied. “And I will not go near your hall, lest 
people take notice of me.” 

One day the Patriarch assembled all his disciples and said to 
them: “The question of incessant rebirth is a very momentous 
one, but instead of trying to free yourselves from that bitter 
sea of life and death, you men, day after day, seem to be going 
after tainted merits only. Merit will be of no help to you if 
your essence of mind is polluted and clouded. Go now and seek 
for the transcendental wisdom that is within your own minds 
and then write me a stanza about it. He who gets the clearest 
idea of what Mind-essence is will be given the insignia of the 
Patriarch; I will give him the secret teaching of the Dharma, 
and will appoint him to be the Sixth Patriarch. Go away 
quickly, now, and do not delay in writing the stanza; delibera- 
tion is quite unnecessary and will be of no use. The one who 
has realised Essence of Mind can testify to it at once as soon 
as he is spoken to about it. He cannot lose sight of it, even if 
he were engaged in a battle.” 

Having received this instruction, the disciples withdrew and 
said to one another, “There is no use of our making an effort 
to write a stanza and submit it to His Eminence; the Pa- 
triarchship is bound to go to Elder Shin-shau, our Master, any- 
way. Why go through the form of writing, it will only be a 
waste of energy.” Hearing this they decided to write nothing, 
saying, “Why should we take the trouble to do it? Hereafter 
we will simply follow our Master Shin-shau wherever he goes 
and will look to him for guidance.” 

Shin-shau reasoned within himself, “Considering that I am 
their Master, none of them will take part in competition. I 
wonder whether I should write a stanza and submit it to His 
Eminence, or not. If I do not, how can the Patriarch know 
how deep or how superficial my knowledge is? If my object is 
to get the Dharma, my motive is pure. If it is to get the 
Patriarchship, then it is bad; my mind would be that of a 
worldling and my action would amount to a theft of the Pa- 



500 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


triarch’s holy seat. But if I do not submit the stanza, I will 
lose my chance of getting the Dharma. It is very difficult to 
know what to do.” 

In front of the Patriarch’s hall there were three corridors 
the walls of which were to be painted by a court artist named 
Lo-chun, with pictures suggested by the Lankavatara Sutra de- 
picting the transfiguration of the assembly, and with scenes 
showing the genealogy of the five Patriarchs, for the informa- 
tion and veneration of the public. When Shin-shau had com- 
posed his stanza he made several attempts to submit it, but 
his mind was so perturbed that he was prevented from doing 
it. Then he suggested to himself, “It would be better for me 
to write it on the wall of the corridor and let the Patriarch 
find it himself. If he approves it, then I will go to pay him 
homage and tell him that it was done by me; but if he disap- 
proves it, — well, then I have wasted several years’ time in this 
mountain receiving homage which I did not deserve. If I fail, 
what progress have I made in learning Buddhism?” 

At midnight of that night, he went secretly to write his 
stanza on the wall of the south corridor, so that the Patriarch 
might know to what spiritual insight he had attained. The 
stanza read: — 

"Our body may be compared to the Bodhi-tree ; 

While our mind is a mirror bright. 

Carefully we cleanse and watch them hour by hour, 

And let no dust collect upon them.” 

As soon as he had; written it he returned at once to his 
room, so no one knew what he had done. In the quiet of his 
room he pondered: “When the Patriarch sees my stanza tomor- 
row, if he is pleased with it, it will show that I am (spirit- 
ually) ready for the Dharma; but if he disapproves of it, then 
it will mean that I am unfit for the Dharma owing to mis- 
deeds in previous lives and karmic accumulations that so thickly 
becloud my mind. What will the Patriarch say about it? How 
difficult it is to speculate.” He could neither sleep nor sit at 
ease; and so in this vein he kept on thinking until dawn. 

In the morning the Patriarch sent for Lo, the court artist, 
to have the walls painted with pictures and went with him to 
the south corridor. The Patriarch noticed the stanza and said 
to the artist, “I am sorry to have troubled you to come so far, 
but the walls do not need to be painted now. The Sutra says. 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 501 


‘All forms and phenomena are transient and illusive’; we will 
leave the stanza here so that people may study the stanza and 
recite it. If they put its teachings into actual practice, they will 
be saved from the misery of being born in evil realms of exist- 
ence. Any one who practices it will gain great merit.” The Pa- 
triarch ordered incense to be burnt before it, and instructed all 
his disciples to pay homage to it and recite it, so that they 
might realise Essence of Mind. After his disciples had recited 
it, they all exclaimed, “Well done!” 

That midnight the Patriarch sent for Shin-shau and asked 
if he had written the stanza. Shin-shau admitted that he had 
written it and then added: “I am not so vain as to expect to 
get the Patriarchship, but I wish Your Eminence would kindly 
tell me whether my stanza shows the least grain of wisdom.” 

“To attain supreme enlightenment,” replied the Patriarch, 
"one must be able to know spontaneously one’s own self-nature 
which is neither created nor can it be annihilated. From one 
momentary sensation to another, one should always be able to 
realise Essence of Mind; then all conceptions of the mind will 
be free of any graspings by the mind. As one thing is being 
realized as to its reality, so the mind will reflect all circum- 
stances and conditions as being a state of naturalness. This 
means that the mind in its pure state is truthful. For if the 
mind is able to see things truthfully in their pure state it sees 
them to be the same as its own essential nature of Supreme 
Enlightenment. You had better return now and think it over 
for a couple of days and then submit another stanza. In case 
the new stanza shows that you have entered ‘the door of en- 
lightenment,’ I will transmit to you the robe and the Dharma.” 

Shin-shau made obeisance to the Patriarch and went away. 
For several days he tried in vain to write another stanza, which 
upset his mind so much that he was as ill at ease as though he 
was in a nightmare; he could find comfort neither in sitting nor 
walking. 

Two days after, it happened that a boy who was passing by 
the room where I was hulling rice, was loudly reciting the 
stanza written by Shin-shau. As soon as I heard it I knew at 
once that its composer had not yet realised Essence of Mind. 
Although at that time I never had had instruction about it, 
I already had a general idea of it. “What stanza is this,” I 
asked the boy. “You aborigine,” he said, “don’t you know 



502 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

about it? The Patriarch told his disciples that the question of 
rebirth was a momentous one, and those who wished to inherit 
his robe and the Dharma should write him a stanza and the 
one who had the true idea of Mind-essence would get them 
and become the Sixth Patriarch. Elder Shin-shau wrote this 
‘formless’ stanza on the wall of the south corridor and the Pa- 
triarch told us to recite it. He also said that those who put its 
teachings into actual practice would attain great merit and be 
saved from being bom in the evil realms of existence.” 

I told the boy that I wished to leam the stanza also, so that 
I might have the benefit of it in future life. Although I had 
been hulling rice for eight months, I had never been to the 
hall, so I asked the boy to show me where the stanza was writ- 
ten, so that I might make obeisance to it. The boy took me 
there and as I was illiterate, I asked him to read it to me. A 
petty officer of the Kong-chow District, named Chang Fat- 
yung, who happened to be there, then read it clearly. When he 
had finished reading, I told him that I also, had composed a 
stanza and asked him to write it for me. “Extraordinary,” he 
exclaimed, “that you, also, can compose a stanza.” 

“If you are a seeker of supreme enlightenment, you will not 
despise a beginner,” I said. 

“Please recite your stanza,” said he, “I will write it down 
for you, but if you should succeed in getting the Dharma, do 
not forget to deliver me.” 

My stanza read as follows: 

By no means is Bodhi a kind of tree. 

Nor is the bright reflecting mind, a case of mirrors. 

Since mind is emptiness, 

Where can dust collect? 

Later on seeing that a crowd was collecting, the Patriarch 
came out and erased the stanza with his shoe lest jealous ones 
should do me injury. Judging by this, the crowd took it for 
granted that the author of it had also not yet realised Mind- 
essence. 

Next day the Patriarch came secretly to the room where the 
rice was being hulled and seeing me at work with the stone 
pestle, said, “A seeker of the Path risks his life for the Dharma. 
Should he do so?” Then he asked, “Is the rice ready?” 
“Ready long ago,” I replied, “only waiting for the sieve.” He 
knocked the mortar thrice with his stick and went away. 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 503 


Knowing what his signal meant, in the third watch of the 
night, I went to his room. Using his robe as a screen so that 
no one would see us, he expounded the Diamond Sutra to me. 
When he came to the sentence, “One should use one’s mind in 
such a way that it will be free from any attachment,” I sud- 
denly became thoroughly enlightened and realised that all 
things in the universe are Mind-essence itself. 

I said to the Patriarch, “Who could have conceived that 
Mind-essence is intrinsically pure! Who could have conceived 
that Mind-essence is intrinsically free from becoming and anni- 
hilation! That Mind-essence is intrinsically self-sufficient, and 
free from change! Who could have conceived that all things 
are manifestations of Mind-essence!” 

Thus at midnight, to the knowledge of no one, was the 
Dharma transmitted to me, and I consequently became the in- 
heritor of the teachings of the “Sudden” School, and the pos- 
sessor of the robe and the begging-bowl. 

“You are now the Sixth Patriarch,” said His Eminence. 
“Take good care of yourself and deliver as many sentient beings 
as possible. Spread the teaching; keep the teaching alive; do 
not let it come to an end. Listen to my stanza: 

‘Sentient beings who sow seed of Enlightenment 
In the field of causation, will reap the fruit of 
Buddhahood. 

Inanimate objects which are void of Buddha-nature 
Sow not and reap not.’ ” 

His Eminence further said: “When Patriarch Bodhidharma 
first came to China, few Chinese had confidence in him and so 
this robe has been handed down as a testimony from one Patri- 
arch to another. As to the Dharma, as a rule it is transmitted 
from heart to heart and the recipient is expected to understand 
it and to realise it by his own efforts. From time immemorial, 
it has been the practice for one Buddha to pass on to his suc- 
cessor the quintessence of the Dharma, and for one Patriarch 
to transmit to another, from mind to mind, the esoteric teach- 
ing. As the robe may give cause for dispute, you will be the 
last one to inherit it. If you should again hand it down to a 
successor, your life would be in imminent danger. You must 
now leave this place as quickly as you can, lest some one 
should harm you.” 



50 4 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


I asked him, “Where shall I go?” and he replied, “Stop at 
Wei and seclude yourself at Wui.” 

As it was the middle of the night when I thus received the 
begging-bowl and the robe, I told the Patriarch that as I was 
a Southerner I did not know the mountain trails and it would 
be impossible for me to get down to the river. “You need not 
worry,” he replied, “I will go with you.” He then accompanied 
me to the Kiu-kiang landing where we got a boat. As he 
started to do the rowing himself, I asked him to be seated and 
let me handle the oar. He replied, “It is only right for me to 
get you across.” (This is an illusion to the sea of birth and 
death which one has to cross before the shore of Nirvana can 
be reached.) To this I replied, “ (So long as I was) under illu- 
sion, I was dependent on you to get me across, but now it is 
different. It was my fortune to be born on the frontier and 
my education is very deficient, but I have had the honor to 
inherit the Dharma from you; since I am now enlightened, it 
is only right for me to cross the sea of birth and death by my 
own effort to realise my own Essence of Mind.” 

“Quite so, quite so,” he agreed. “Beginning with you 
(Ch’an) Buddhism will become very widespread. Three years 
from your leaving me I shall pass from this world. You may 
start on your journey now; go as fast as you can toward the 
South. Do not begin preaching too soon; (Ch’an) Buddhism 
is not to be easily spread.” 

After saying good-bye, I left him and walked toward the 
South. In about two months I reached the Tai-yu Mountain 
where I noticed several hundred men were in pursuit of me 
with the intention of recovering the robe and begging-bowl. 
Among them, the most vigilant was a monk of the name of 
Wei-ming whose surname was Chen. In lay-life he had been a 
general of the fourth rank. His manner was rough and his 
temper hot. When he overtook me, I threw the robe and the 
begging-bowl on a rock, saying, “This robe is nothing but a 
testimonial; what is the use of taking it away by force?” 
When he reached the rock, he tried to pick them up but could 
not. Then in astonishment he shouted, “Lay Brother, Lay 
Brother, (Hui-neng, although appointed the Sixth Patriarch, 
had not yet formally been admitted to the Order), I have come 
for the Dharma; I do not care for the robe.” Whereupon I 
came from my hiding place and took the position on the rock 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 505 

of a Patriarch. He made obeisance and said, “Lay Brother, I 
beg you to teach me.” 

“Since the object of your coming is for the Dharma,” said 
I, “please refrain from thinking about anything and try to keep 
your mind perfectly empty and receptive. I will then teach 
you.” When he had done this for a considerable time, I said, 
“Venerable Sir, at the particular moment when you are thinking 
of neither good nor evil, what is your real self-nature (the 
word is, physiognomy)?” 

As soon as he heard this he at once became enlightened, 
but he asked, “Apart from these sayings and ideas handed down 
by the Patriarchs from generation to generation, are there still 
any esoteric teachings?” 

“What I can tell you is not esoteric,” I replied, “If you 
turn your light inward, you will find what is esoteric within 
your own mind.” 

“In spite of my stay in Wong-mui,” said he, “I did not 
realise my own self-nature. Now, thanks to your guidance, I 
realise it in the same way a water-drinker knows how hot and 
how cold the water is. Lay Brother, I am now your disciple.” 
I replied, “If this is the case, then you and I are fellow dis- 
ciples of the Fifth Patriarch. Please take good care of yourself.” 
He paid homage and departed. 

Some time after I reached Tso-kai, but as evil-doers were 
again persecuting me, I took refuge in Sze-wui where I staid 
with a party of hunters for fifteen years. They used to put 
me to watch their nets, but when I found living creatures en- 
tangled in them I would set them free. At meal time I would 
put vegetables in the same pan in which they cooked their 
meat. Some of them questioned me and I explained to them 
that I could only eat vegetables. Occasionally I talked to them 
in a way that befitted their understanding. One day I be- 
thought myself that I ought not to pass so secluded a life all 
the time; I felt that the time had come for me to propagate 
the Dharma. Accordingly I left there and went to the Fat- 
shin Temple in Canton. 

At the time I reached that temple, the monk Yen-chung, 
Master of Dharma, was lecturing on the Maha Parinirvana 
Sutra. It happened one day when a pennant was being blown 
about by the wind, that two monks entered into a dispute as 
to what was in motion, the wind or the pennant. As they 



506 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


failed to settle their difference, I suggested that it was neither; 
that what actually moved was their own mind. The whole 
group was surprised by what I said and the Master Yen-chung 
invited me to a seat of honor and questioned me about various 
knotty points in the Sutra. Seeing that my answers were precise 
and accurate, that they inferred more than book knowledge, he 
said to me, “Lay Brother, you must be an extraordinary man. 
I was told long ago that the inheritor of the Fifth Patriarch’s 
robe and Dharma had come to the South; very likely you are 
the man?” 

To this I politely assented. He made obeisence and cour- 
teously asked me to show to the assembly the robe and begging- 
bowl which I had inherited. He further asked what instructions 
I had received at the time the Fifth Patriarch had transmitted 
the Dharma to me. 

I replied, “Apart from a discussion on the realisation of 
Mind-essence, he gave me no other instruction. He did not 
refer to Dhyana nor to Emancipation.” The Master asked, 
“Why not?” I replied, “Because that would mean two kinds of 
Dharmas. That is not the Buddha Dharma, for the Buddha 
Dharma is not dual in its nature. He then asked, “What is the 
Buddha Dharma that is not dual in its nature?” 

I replied, “The Maha Parinirvana Sutra which you are ex- 
pounding teaches that Buddha-nature is the only way. For 
example: in that Sutra King-ko-kwai-tak, a Bodhisattva, asked 
the Buddha whether those who commit the four serious sins, 
or the five deadly sins, or ate heretics, etc., would thereby root 
out their ‘element of goodness’ and their Buddha-nature. Bud- 
dha replied, ‘There are two kinds of ‘goodness-elements’ : an 
eternal element, and a non-etemal. Since Buddha-nature is 
neither eternal nor non-eternal, therefore, the Buddha’s essen- 
tial nature is not to be regarded as ‘eradicated,’ it is to be 
regarded as already, ‘non-duality’. There are good natures and 
evil natures but Buddha’s essential nature belongs to neither; 
it is non-dual. From the point of view and prejudices of or- 
dinary people, there is a difference between the physical sense- 
ingredients and the mental and conscious ingredients, but en- 
lightened men know that they are not dual in nature. It is 
that nature of non-duality that is Buddha-nature.” 

Master Yen-chung was pleased with my answer. Putting his 
hands together in token of respect, he said, “My interpretation 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 507 


of the Sutra is as worthless as a heap of debris, while your 
discourse is as valuable as pure gold.” Subsequently he con- 
ducted a ceremony of initiation, receiving me into the order, 
and then asked me to accept him as a pupil. 

Thenceforth under the Bodhi-tree I have discoursed about 
the teachings of the Fourth and Fifth Patriarchs. Since the 
Dharma was transmitted to me in Tung Mountain, I have gone 
through many hardships and often my life seemed to be hang- 
ing by a thread. Today I have had the honor of meeting Your 
Highness, and you, officials, monks and nuns, Taoists and lay- 
men, in this great assembly. I must ascribe this good fortune 
to our happy connection in previous kalpas, as well as to our 
common accumulated merits in making offerings to various Bud- 
dhas in our past incarnations. Otherwise we would have had 
no chance of hearing the teachings of the “Sudden” School of 
Ch’an and thereby laying the foundation of our present success 
in understanding the Dharma. 

This teaching is not a system of my own invention, but 
has been handed down by the Patriarchs. Those who wish to 
hear the teaching should first purify their own minds; and after 
hearing it, each must clear up his own doubts, even as the 
Sages have done in the past. 

At the end of the address, the assembly felt rejoiced, made 
obeisance and departed. 


Chapter II 

Discourse on Repentance 

At one time there was a large gathering of literary men 
and commoners gathered from Kwong-chow, Shiu-chow and 
other places, to listen to the Patriarch’s words at his monastery 
of Tso-kai. The Patriarch ascended his platform and delivered 
the following address: — 

Come, good people. In Buddhism we should start from our 
Essence of Mind. Let us purify our minds always and from 
one momentary sensation to another. Let us follow the Path 
by our own effort, recognise our own Essence-body, realise that 
our own mind is Buddha, and free ourselves by a voluntary 
observance of the disciplinary rules, — then this gathering will 



508 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

not be in vain. You have all come from distant places and 
your gathering here shows the affinity that exists among us. 
Let us now sit down together in the Indian fashion. First I 
will light the five kinds of incense that belong to your essential 
nature, then I will show you what is meant by “Formless 
Repentence.” 

When they were seated the Patriarch continued: — The first 
is the Sila Incense (Behavior), which symbolises that our minds 
are free from all taint of misdeeds, evil, jealousy, avarice, anger, 
spoilation and hatred. The second is Samadhi Incense, which 
symbolises that our mind is serene under all circumstances — 
favorable or unfavorable. The third is Prajna Incense, which 
means that our minds are free from all impediments; that we 
constantly seek to realise our Mind-essence with wisdom; that 
we refrain from all evil; that we do all kinds of good acts with 
no attachment to the fruit of such action; and that we are re- 
spectful toward our superiors, considerate of our inferiors, and 
sympathetic for the destitute and those in trouble. The fourth 
is the Incense of Liberation, which means that our minds are 
in such a perfectly free state that they cling to nothing and 
bother themselves neither with good nor evil. The fifth is the 
Incense of “Knowledge gained because of the attainment of 
Liberation.” When our minds cling to neither good nor evil, 
we should take care not to let them go to the other extreme 
of vacuity and remain in a state of inertia. At this point we 
should study and seek to broaden our knowledge so that we 
can understand our own minds, thoroughly understand the prin- 
ciples of Buddhism, be considerate of others in our dealings 
with them, get rid of the idea of “self” and “existence,” and 
realise that up' to the time when we obtain enlightenment 
(Bodhi) our true nature (Tathata) is immutable. 

Learned Audience: — This five-fold Incense perfumes us from 
within; we should not seek it without. Now I want to explain 
to you this Ritual of Repentance which is designed to expiate 
our sins whether committed in the present, the past or future 
lives; and whether physical, or by word, or by thought. (In 
Buddhist thought, sin is considered not in a legal sense as some- 
thing to be punished, or forgiven, or atoned for by sacrifice, 
but in its cause-and effect aspect of Karma and its maturing.) 

Please follow me carefully and repeat together what I am 
going -to say. May we, disciples (from such and such a village). 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 509 

be always free from the taint of ignorance and delusion. We 
repent of all our past, present and future sins and evil deeds 
committed under delusion or in ignorance. May their karma be 
expiated at once and may they never rise again. 

May we, disciples (from such and such a village), be always 
free from taint of arrogance and dishonesty. We repent of all 
our past, present and future evil deeds done in an arrogant or 
dishonest spirit. May their karma be expiated at once and may 
they never rise again. 

May we, disciples (from such and such a village), be al- 
ways free from taint of envy and jealousy. We repent of all 
our past, present and future evil deeds done in an envious or 
jealous spirit. May their karma be expiated at once and may 
they never rise again. 

As you will notice, there are two aspects to this repentance 
ritual: One refers to repentance for past sin; we ought to re- 
pent for all our past sins and evil deeds committed under de- 
lusion or ignorance, arrogance or dishonesty, jealousy or envy, 
so as to put an end to all of them. This is one aspect of re- 
pentance. The other aspect refers to future conduct. Having 
realized the evil nature of our transgression we make a vow 
that hereafter we will put an end to all evil deeds committed 
under delusion or ignorance, arrogance or dishonesty, envy or 
jealousy, and that we will never sin again. This is the second 
aspect of repentance. On account of ignorance and delusion, 
common people do not always appreciate that in repentance 
they must not only feel sorry for their past sins, but must also 
refrain from sinning in the future. Since they often take no 
heed as to their future conduct, they commit the same sins 
over again almost before the past ones are expiated. How can 
we call that repentance? 

Learned Audience: Having repented of our sins, we should 
take the following all-embracing vows: Listen very carefully: — 

Our Mind-essence is potentially an infinite number of sen- 
tient beings. We vow to bring them all unto deliverance. 

We vow to get rid of the evil passions of our minds, inex- 
haustible though they seem. 

We vow to learn the countless systems of Dharma in our 
Mind-essence. 

We vow to attain the Supreme Buddhahood of our Mind- 
essence. 



5 io SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

We have now vowed to deliver an infinite number of sen- 
tient beings; but what does that mean? It does not mean 
that I, Hui-neng is going to deliver them. And who are these 
sentient beings, potential within our minds? They are the de- 
lusive mind, the deceitful mind, the evil mind, and such like — 
all these are sentient beings. Each of them has to be delivered 
by one-self by means of his own Essence of Mind; only by his 
own deliverance, is it genuine. 

Now, what does it mean, “delivering oneself by one’s own 
Essence of Mind?” It means the deliverance of the ignorant, 
delusive, and the vexatious beings that spring up within our 
own mind, by means of Right Views. With the aid of Right 
Views and Prajna, the barriers thrown up by these delusive 
and ignorant beings may be broken down; so that each of us 
will be in a position to deliver himself by his own efforts. The 
false will be delivered by truthfulness; the delusive by enlight- 
enment; the ignorant by wisdom; and the malevolent by benev- 
olence; such is genuine deliverance. 

As to the vow; “to get rid of the inexhaustible evil pas- 
sions,” that refers to the transcendence of our unreliable and 
illusive thinking faculty by the transcendental Wisdom (Prajna) 
of our Mind-essence. As to the vow: “to learn the countless 
systems of Dharma”; there will be no true knowledge until we 
have been brought face to face with our Essence of Mind, by 
our conforming to the orthodox Dharma on all occasions. As 
to the vow, “to attain Supreme Buddahood”; I wish to point 
out that when we are able to control our minds to follow the 
true and orthodox Dharma on all occasions, and when Prajna 
always rises in our minds, so that we can hold aloof from both 
ignorance and enlightenment, and can do away with falsehood 
as well as truth, then we may consider ourselves as having real- 
ised our Buddha-nature, or, in other words, having attained 
Buddhahood. 

Learned Audience: we should always bear in mind that we 
are following the Path for thereby strength is added to our 
vows. Now, since we have all taken the four-fold vows, I will 
teach you the Ritual of the three-fold Guidance. 

We take “Enlightenment” as our Guide, because it is the 
fruit of both merit (Punya) and Wisdom (Prajna). 

We take “Orthodoxy” as our Guide, because it is the best 
way to get rid of desire. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 511 

We take “Purity” as our Guide, because it is the noblest 
quality of mankind. 

Hereafter let Shakyamuni, the Enlightened One, be our 
guide and on no account should we listen to the suggestions of 
Mara, the evil one, or any heretic. We should testify to our- 
selves by constantly appealing to the “Three Gems” of our 
Essence of Mind, in which I advise you to take refuge. They 
are: 

Buddha, which stands for Enlightenment; 

Dharma, which stands for Orthodoxy; 

Sangha, which stands for Purity. 

To take refuge in Enlightenment so that evil and delusive 
notions do not arise, so that desire decreases, discontent be- 
comes unknown, and lust and greed no longer bind us — this is 
the fruitage of Punya and Prajna. To take refuge in Ortho- 
doxy so that from momentary sensation to another we will be 
free from wrong views — this is the best means of getting rid 
of desires. To take refuge in Purity so that no matter under 
what circumstance we may be, we will not become contami- 
nated by wearisome sense objects, by craving nor by desire — 
this is the noblest quality of mankind. To practise the “Three- 
fold Guidance” as thus outlined means to take refuge in one’s 
Mind-essence. Ignorant people often take the “Three-fold 
Guidance” without understanding it. They say that they take 
refuge in Buddha: do they know where he is? If they cannot 
conceive Buddha, how can they take refuge in him? Would 
not such an assertion amount to self-deception? Each of you 
should examine this point for himself, so that his energy may 
not be misapplied through ignorance. The Sutra distinctly says 
that each should take refuge in the Buddha within himself. It 
does not refer to any other Buddhas, hence if we do not take 
refuge in the Buddha of our own Mind-essence, there is no- 
where else for us to go. Having cleared this point, let each of 
us take refuge in the “Three Jewels” of his own mind/ With- 
in, each should control his own mind; without, each should be 
respectful toward others — this is the way to take refuge within 
ourselves. 

I have a stanza, the reciting and practising of which will at 
once dispel the delusions and expiate the sins accumulated dur- 
ing many kalpas. This is the stanza: — 



512 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


People under delusion accumulate tainted merit but tread 
not the Path. 

They are under the illusion that to accumulate merit 
and to tread the Path are one and the same thing. 

Their merit for alms-giving and offerings may be infi- 
nite. 

But they fail to realise that the ultimate source of sin 
lies in the greed, hatred and infatuation within their 
own mind. 

They expect to expiate their sin by the accumulation of 
merit, 

Without knowing that the felicities to be gained thereby 
in future lives. 

Have nothing to do with expiation of sin. 

If we get rid of the sin within our own mind 

Then it is a case of true repentance. 

One who realises suddenly what constitutes true repent- 
ance in the Mahayana sense. 

And who ceases to do evil and practises righteousness, is 
free from sin. 

• • • 

Essence of Mind (Tathata) is the real Buddha, 

While heretical views and the three poisonous elements 
are Mara. 

Enlightened by Right Views, we call forth the Buddha 
within us. 

When our nature is dominated by the three poisonous 
elements, as the result of heretical views. 

We are said to be possessed by Mara; 

But when Right Views free our minds of these poison 
elements, 

Mara will be transformed into a real Buddha. 

A follower of the Path who keeps constant watch on 
his Mind-essence 

Is in the same class with the many Buddhas. 

Our Patriarchs transmitted no other system but this of 
“Sudden Enlightenment.” 

If you are seeking Dharmakaya, 

Search for it apart from the world of things and phe- 
nomena. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 513 


Then your mind will be pure and free. 

Exert yourself in order to come face to face with Mind- 
essence and relax not; 

For death may come suddenly and put an end to your 
earthly existence. 

Learned Audience: — All of you should recite this stanza and 
put it into practice. If you succeed in realising Essence of 
Mind, then you may think of yourselves as being in my pres- 
ence though you may be a thousand miles away. But should 
you be unable to do so, though we were face to face with each 
other, we would really be thousands of miles apart. In that 
case what is the use of your taking the trouble to come here 
from such a long distance? Take good care of yourselves. I 
bid you good-bye. 


Chapter III 
Discourse on Prajna 

On the following day Prefect Wai asked the Patriarch to give 
another address. Having taken his seat, the Patriarch asked the 
assembly to first purify their minds (by a period of dhyana- 
silence) and then to join in reciting the Maha Prajna-paramita 
Sutra, after which he gave the following address: — 

Learned Audience: Prajna, the principle of wisdom, is in- 
herent in every one of us. It is because of the delusions under 
which our minds labor that we fail to realise its presence, and 
that we have to seek the advice and the guidance of the more 
highly enlightened before we can realise it In our mind’s Es- 
sence. You should know that as far as Buddha-nature is 
concerned, there is no difference between an enlightened man 
and an ignorant one. What makes the difference is that one 
realises it and the other is ignorant of it. Let me speak to 
you now about the Maha Prajna-paramita Sutra, so that each 
of you may attain wisdom. Listen carefully while I speak. 

Learned Audience: There are many people who recite the 
word, Prajna, the whole day long, who do not seem to know 



5 i4 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


that Prajna is inherent in their own nature. The mere talking 
about food will not appease hunger, but that is the very thing 
these people are doing. We may talk about the “Doctrine of 
Voidness” for myriads of kalpas, but merely talking about it 
will not enable one to realise it in his Mind-essence, and the 
talking will serve no good purpose in the end. 

The name, Maha Prajna-paramita, is Sanskrit and means, 
"great Wisdom to reach the opposite shore.” Now, what we 
ought to do with it is to carry it into practice with our mind; 
whether w.e recite it or do not recite it matters little. Mere re- 
citing without mental practice, may be likened to a phantasm, 
a magical delusion, a flash of lighting, or a dew-drop. On the 
other hand, if we do both, then our mind will be in accord 
with what we repeat orally. Our very self-nature is Buddha, 
and apart from this nature there is no other Buddha. 

What is Maha? Maha means, “great.” The capacity of the 
mind is as great as that of space. It is infinite, it is neither 
round nor square, neither great nor small, neither green nor 
yellow, neither red nor white, neither above nor below, neither 
long nor short, neither angry nor happy, neither right nor 
wrong, neither good nor evil, neither first nor last. All Buddha- 
lands are as void as space. Intrinsically our transcendental 
nature is void and not a single dharma can be attained. It is 
the same with Mind-essence which is a state of the “voidness 
of non-voidity.” 

Learned Audience: when you hear me speak about the void, 
do not fall into the idea that I mean vacuity. It is of the ut- 
most importance that we should not fall into that idea, because 
then when a man sits quietly and keeps his mind blank he 
would be abiding in a state of the “voidness of indifference.” 
The illimitable void of the Universe is capable of holding 
myriads of things of various shapes and form, such as the sun 
and the moon, and the stars, worlds, mountains, rivers, rivulets, 
springs, woods, bushes, good men, bad men, laws pertaining to 
goodness and to badness, heavenly planes and hells, great 
oceans and all the mountains of Mahameru. Space takes in all 
these, and so does the voidness of our nature. We say that Es- 
sence of Mind is great because it embraces all things since all 
things are within our nature. When we see the goodness or the 
badness of other people, and are not attracted by it, nor re- 
pulsed by it, nor attached to it, then the attitude of our mind 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 515 

is as void as space. In that we see the greatness of our minds, 
therefore we call Mind-essence, Maha. 

Learned Audience: When ignorant people have ideas they 
merely talk about them, but wise men keep them within their 
own minds and put them into practice. There is also a class 
of foolish people who sit quietly and try to keep their minds 
blank; they refrain from thinking of anything and then call 
themselves “great.” Concerning this heretical view, I have no 
patience to speak. You should know that the capacity of the 
mind is very great since it pervades the whole Universe wher- 
ever the domain of Law extends. When we use the mind we 
can consider everything; when we use Mind to its full capac- 
ity, we shall know all. 

Prajna comes from Mind-essence and not from any exterior 
source. Do not have any mistaken notion about that. To cher- 
ish mistaken notions about that is to make a “selfish use of 
True Nature.” Once the “True Nature” of Mind-essence is 
realised, one will be forever free from delusion. Since the 
capacity of Mind is for great things, we should not busy it 
with trivial acts. (That is, the mind that can realise Mind- 
essence through the right practice of dhyana, ought not to be 
sitting quietly with a blank mind nor wasting its resources on 
idle talk.) Do not talk all day about “the void,” without 
practising it in the mind. One who does this may be likened 
to a self-styled king who is really a commoner. Prajna can 
never be attained in that way and those who act like that are 
not my disciples. 

What is Prajna? It means. Transcendental Wisdom. If we 
steadily, at all times and in all places, keep our thoughts free 
from foolish desire and act wisely on all occasions, then we are 
practising the Paramita of Prajna. One foolish notion is enough 
to shut-off Prajna; one wise thought will bring it forth again. 
People in ignorance or under delusion do not see this; they 
talk about it with their tongue but in their mind they are ig- 
norant of it. They are always saying that they practice Prajna, 
and they talk incessantly about “vacuity,” but they have not 
realised the True Void. Prajna is Wisdom’s Heart; it has 
neither form nor characteristic. If we interpret it in this way, 
then it is, indeed, the Wisdom of Prajna. 

What is Paramita? It is a Sanskrit word (commonly trans- 
lated, “ideal”) that means, “to the opposite shore.” Figura- 



516 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

tively it means, “beyond existence and non-existence.” By cling- 
ing to sense things, existence and non-existence are like the 
ups and downs of the billowy sea. Such a state, metaphorically 
is called, “this shore”; while beyond existence and non-existence 
there is a state characterised by non-attachment that has the 
undisturbed calmness of running water, that is called, “the op- 
posite shore.” This is why Prajna is called, Paramita. 

Learned Audience: People under illusion recite the Maha 
Prajna-paramita with their tongue and, while they are reciting 
it, erroneous and evil thoughts arise; but if they put it into 
practice unremittingly they will come to realise its True Na- 
ture. To know this Dharma is to know the Law of Prajna; 
and to practice it is to practice Ideal Wisdom. He who does 
not practice it is an ordinary man; he who concentrates his 
mind on its practice, even if it be but for a moment only, he 
is the equal of Buddha. An ordinary man is Buddha! and de- 
filement is Enlightenment (Bodhi). A passing foolish thought 
makes one an ordinary man, while an enlightened thought 
makes one a Buddha. A passing thought that clings to sense- 
objects is defilement; a second thought that frees one from 
attachment is Enlightenment. 

Maha Prajna-paramita! The Great Transcendental-Wisdom 
Ideal, supreme, most exalted, foremost. It neither stays, nor 
goes, nor comes. By it Buddhas of the present, the past and 
future generations attain Buddhahood. We should use this Per- 
fect Wisdom to break up the five bundles of aggregates that 
make up our personality, and thus get rid of the pollutions 
and contaminations. To follow such a practice ensures the 
attainment of Buddhahood. The three poisonous elements 
(greed, anger and infatuation) will then be turned into good 
conduct (sila) and self-realisation (samadhi) and wisdom 
{Prajna). When one is free from defilement, Wisdom reveals 
itself steadily and cannot be distinguished from Mind-essence. 
Those- who understand this Dharma will be free from idle 
thoughts. To be free from discriminations, from clinging to 
desires, from illusions; to set free one’s true nature; to use 
Prajna for contemplation; to take an attitude of neither indif- 
ference nor attachment towards all things — that is what is 
meant by realising one’s true Essence of Mind and (in its per- 
fection) is the attainment of Buddhahood. 

Learned Audience: If you wish to penetrate the deepest 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 517 

mystery of the Dharma-world and experience the deepest reali- 
zation (samadhi) of Prajna, you should practice Prajna by 
reciting and studying the Diamond Sutra (the Vajracchedika) 
which will enable you to realize Essence of Mind. You should 
know that the merit for studying this Sutra is distinctly set 
forth in the text in laudatory terms; it is immeasurable and 
illimitable and cannot be enumerated in detail. This Sutra ex- 
pounds the highest thought of Buddhism and our Lord Buddha 
delivered it specially for the very wise and quick-witted. The 
less wise and the slow-witted doubt its credibility. Why? For 
example: When it rains through the power of the celestial Naga 
on the plains of India, cities, towns and villages are drifted 
about as if they were only leaves of the date tree; but should 
it rain on the great ocean, the level of the seas of the whole 
world would not be affected by it. When the followers of the 
highest school of Mahayana 'study the Diamond Sutra, their 
minds become enlightened as they realize that Prajna is imma- 
nent in their own Mind-essence. Since they have their own 
access to highest wisdom through the constant practice of con- 
centration and contemplation (dhyana and samadhi) they 
realize that they no longer need to rely on scriptural authority. 

The Prajna immanent in the minds of every one may be 
likened to the rain, the moisture of which refreshes every living 
thing, trees and plants as well as sentient creatures. When 
rivers and streams reach the sea, the water carried by them 
merges into the one body, which is a good analogy. When rain 
falls in a deluge, plants which are not deep-rooted are washed 
away and eventually they perish. It is the same with the slow- 
witted when they hear about the teachings of the “Sudden 
School.” The Prajna immanent in them is exactly the same as 
that in very wise men, but when the Dharma is made known 
to them they fail to enlighten themselves. Why is it? It is 
because their minds are thickly veiled by erroneous views and 
deeply rooted infections, just as the sun is often thickly veiled 
by clouds and unable to show its splendor until the wind blows 
the clouds away. Prajna does not vary with different persons; 
what makes the seeming difference is the question whether 
one’s mind is enlightened or is beclouded. He who does not 
realize his own Mind-essence, and rests under the delusion that 
Buddhahood can be attained by outward religious rites, is 
rightly called the slow-witted. He who knows the teachings of 



518 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


the “Sudden School,” and who attaches no importance to ritual, 
and whose mind always functions under right views so that he 
is absolutely free of defilement and contamination, such an one 
may be said to have realized his Mind-essence. 

Learned Audience: The mind should be framed in such a 
way that it will be independent of external and internal things, 
at liberty to come and go, free from attachment, thoroughly 
enlightened, without the least obscuration. He whose mind is 
thus framed is able to measure up to the standard of the 
Prajna Sutras. The sutras and the scriptures of both the Ma- 
hayana and the Hinayana, as well as the twelve sections of the 
canonical writings, were provided to suit the different needs and 
temperaments of various people. It is upon the principle that 
Prajna is latent in every man that the doctrines expounded in 
these scriptures are established. If there were no human be- 
ings, there would be no teachings; hence we know that all 
teachings are made for man and that all the Sutras owe their 
existence to preachers. Some men are wise, the so called supe- 
rior men, and some are ignorant, the so called inferior men; 
the wise preach to the ignorant when they are asked to do so. 
Through this the ignorant may attain sudden enlightenment 
and their minds will become illuminated thereby; then they are 
no longer different from wise men. This does not mean that 
without enlightenment a man is in a class with human beings 
different from Buddhahood. The opposite is the truth, he has 
always been in the same class with Buddhas from the begin- 
ning. Ignorance does not separate him from Buddhahood, it 
only obscures his realization of his true Buddha nature. 

A gleam of enlightenment is enough to make a living being 
the equal of a Buddha. Since all truth (Dharmas) is immanent 
in our minds, there is no reason why we should not realize in- 
tuitively the real nature of Mind-essence ( tathata ). The Bodhi- 
sattva Sila Sutra says, “Our Essence of Mind is intrinsically 
pure; if we knew our mind perfectly and realized what our self- 
nature truly is, all of us would attain Buddhahood.” The 
Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra says, “At once they become enlight- 
ened and regain their true mind.” 

When the Fifth Patriarch preached to me I became enlight- 
ened immediately after he had spoken and spontaneously I 
realized the real nature of Mind-essence (tathata). For this 
reason it is my particular object to propagate the teaching of 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 5x9 

the “Sudden” School so that learners may know enlightenment 
at once and realize their true nature by introspection of mind. 
Should they fail to enlighten themselves they ought to ask 
some very pious and learned Buddhist who understands the 
teachings of this highest school to show them the right way. 
The office of a pious and learned Buddhist who guides others 
to realize Essence of Mind, is an exalted position. Through his 
assistance one may be initiated into all meritorious Dharmas. 
The wisdom of Buddhas, past, present and future, as well as 
the teachings of the twelve sections of the canon are immanent 
in the mind, but in case we fail to enlighten ourselves, we have 
to seek the guidance of the pious and learned. On the other 
hand those who enlighten themselves need no extraneous help. 
It is wrong to insist upon the idea that we cannot obtain liber- 
ation without the assistance of the pious and learned. It is by 
our innate wisdom that we enlighten ourselves, and even the 
extraneous help and instruction of a pious and learned friend 
would be of no use so long as one is deluded by false doctrines 
and erroneous views. As we introspect our minds with Prajna, 
all erroneous views will disappear of themselves, and just as 
soon as we realize Essence of Mind we will immediately arrive 
at the Buddha stage. 

When we use Prajna for introspection we are illuminated 
within and without and are in position to know our own na- 
ture. To realize our own nature is to obtain fundamental lib- 
eration. To obtain liberation is to attain the Samadhi of Prajna, 
which is intuitive insight. What is intuitive insight? Intuitive 
insight to see and to realize all dharmas (things as well as 
truths) with a mind free from attachment. In action Prajna is 
everywhere present yet it “sticks” nowhere. What we have to 
do is to so purify the mind that the six aspects of consciousness 
(sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, mentation) in passing through 
their six sense-gates will neither be defiled by nor attached to 
their six sense-objects. When our mind works freely without 
.any hindrance and is at liberty “to come” or “to go,” then we 
have attained the intuitive insight pf Prajna, which is emanci- 
pation. To enable one to attain such a mental state of freedom 
is the function of intuitive insight. To refrain from thinking 
of anything, in the sense that all mental activity is suppressed, 
is to be Dharma-ridden; this is an extremely erroneous view. 
(Discriminative thought which leads to desire and attachment. 



520 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

or to aversion and defilement, is to be controlled in the interests 
of intuitive thought which leads to self-realization and freedom.) 

Those who understand the way of intuitive insight will 
know everything; they will have the experience that all the 
Buddhas have had, and they will attain Buddhahood. In the 
future, if an initiate of my school should make a vow in com- 
pany with his fellow-disciples to devote his whole life without 
retrogression to the practice and commemoration of the teach- 
ings of this “Sudden” School, in the same spirit as if he were 
serving the Buddha, he would attain without failure the Path 
that leads to Bodhisattvahood and Buddhahood. He should 
transmit from heart the instructions handed down from one 
Patriarch to another, and no attempt should be made to conceal 
the orthodox teaching. 

Learned Audience: I have a Stanza for all of you to recite. 
Both laity and monks should put its teachings into practice, 
without which it would be useless to remember the words alone. 
Listen to this stanza: — 

A master of the Buddhist canon 
As well as the teachings of the Dhyana school 
Should teach nothing but the Dharma for realizing Es- 
sence of Mind. 

We can hardly classify dharmas into “sudden” and 
“gradual,” 

But some men will attain enlightenment quicker than 
others. 

For example: this system for realizing Essence of Mind 
Is beyond the comprehension of the ignorant. 

We may explain it in ten thousand ways. 

But all these explanations may be traced back to one 
principle. 

To illumine our gloomy mind, stained by defilement, 

We should constantly set up the Sun of Wisdom. 
Erroneous views keep us in defilement. 

But right views remove us far from it. 

But when we are in a position to discard both defile- 
ment and purity 
Then are we absolutely free. 

Bodhi is immanent in our Mind-essence; 

Any attempt to look for it elsewhere is foolish. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 521 

Within our defiled minds, purity is to be found, 

And once our mind is set right, we are free from the 
bonds 

Of defilement, of evil karma, of expiation. 

If we are treading the Path of Enlightenment, 

We need not be worried by stumbling-blocks. 

If we keep an eye constantly on our own faults. 

We cannot go far astray from the right path. 

Every species of life has its own way of salvation; 

They will not be antagonistic one to another. 

If we leave our own path and seek for another way 
Of salvation, we shall never find it. 

Though we plod on till death overtake us 
We shall find only penitence at the end. 

If one wishes to find the true way, 

Right action will lead him to it directly. 

If one has not a mind to aim at Buddhahood, 

One will grope in the dark and never find it. 

He who treads the Path in earnest 
Sees not the mistakes of the world. 

If we find fault with others, 

We ourselves are also in the wrong; 

When other people are in the wrong we should ignore it; 
It is wrong for one to find fault with others. 

By getting rid of the habit of fault-finding. 

We get rid of one source of defilement. 

When neither hatred nor love disturb the mind. 

Serene and restful is our sleep. 

Those who intend to be teachers of others 
Should themselves be skillful in the various expedients 
that lead to enlightenment. 

When the disciple is free from all doubts 

Then it indicates that his Mind-essence is unclouded. 

This world is the Buddha-world 

Within which enlightenment may be sought. 

To seek enlightenment by separating from this world 
Is as foolish as to search for a rabbit’s horn. 

Right views are called “transcendental,” 

Erroneous views are called “worldly,” 

But when all views, both right and erroneous, are dis- 
carded. 



528 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


Then the essence of Wisdom manifests itself. 

Kalpa after kalpa a man may be under illusion. 

But once enlightened, it takes him but a moment to 
attain Buddhahood. 

* * * 

After hearing what the Patriarch had to say. Prefect Wai, 
the government officials, Taoists, monks, and laymen, were all 
enlightened. They made obeisance in a body and exclaimed 
unanimously, “Well donel Well done! Who would have ex- 
pected that a Buddha would be born in Kwongtung?” 


Chapter IV 

Discourse on Dhyana and Samadhi 

The Patriarch, on another occasion, addressed the assembly 
as follows: — 

Learned Audience: Samadhi and Prajna are fundamental. 
But you must not be under the wrong impression that they are 
independent of each other, for they are not two entities, they 
are inseparably united. Samadhi is the quintessence of Prajna, 
while Prajna is the activity of Samadhi. 

At the very moment Prajna is realized, Samadhi is simul- 
taneously attained. At the very moment that Samadhi is 
realized, Prajna is attained. A disciple should not think that 
there is a distinction between first comes Samadhi, then comes 
Prajna, and first comes Prajna, then comes Samadhi. To think 
that way would imply succession and cause and effect, whereas, 
they are simultaneous. For one whose tongue is ready with 
good words but whose heart is impure, Samadhi and Prajna 
are useless because they are not in balance. On the other hand, 
when one is good in mind as well as in word, and when the 
outward appearance and inner feelings are in harmony with 
each other, then Samadhi and Prajna are in balance. 

To an enlightened disciple (who has realized Prajna in 
Samadhi) discussion about it is unnecessary. To argue about 
Prajna or Samadhi as to which comes first, places one in the 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 523 

pme position with those who are under delusion. Argument 
implies a desire to win, it strengthens egoism, it binds one to 
belief in the idea of “a self, a being, a living being and a 
person. But we may liken Samadhi and Prajna to a glowing 
lamp and its light: with the glowing lamp there is light; with- 
out it there is darkness. Light is the quintessence of the glow- 
ing lamp, the glowing lamp is the expression of light. In name 
they are two things, but in reality they are one and the same. 
It is the same with Samadhi and Prajna. 

The Patriarch continued: To practice samadhi is to make it 
a rule to have the mind in concentrated attention on all occa- 
sions (that is, not to let the mind wander from the thing in 
hand),— no matter what we are doing, walking, standing, sitting 
or reclining. The Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra says: “Straight- 
forwardnesses the holy place, the Pure Land.” Do not let your 
mind be “crooked” and try to be straightforward with your lips 
only. People should practice straightforwardness but should not 
attach themselves to anything. People under delusion believe 
obstinately that there is a substance behind appearances and so 
they are stubborn in holding to their own way of interpreting 
the samadhi of specific mode, which they define as, “sitting 
quietly and continuously without letting any idea arise in the 
mind/ Such an interpretation would class us with inanimate 
objects; it is a stumbling-block to the right Path and the Path 
should be kept open. How can we block the Path? By attach- 
ment to any definite thought; if we free our minds from attach- 
ments, the Path will be clear, otherwise we are in bondage. If 
that practice of “sitting quietly without letting any idea arise 
in the mind,” is correct, why on one occasion was Saraputra 
reprimanded by Vimalakirti for sitting quietly in the forest? 
(That is, it is not thinking that blocks the Path, but attach- 
ment to definite thoughts.) 

Some teachers of concentration instructed their disciples to 
keep a watch on their minds and secure tranquillity by the 
cessation of all thought, and henceforth their disciples gave up 
all effort to concentrate the mind and ignorant persons who did 
not understand the distinction became insane from trying to 
carry out the instruction literally. Such cases are not rare and 
it is a great mistake to teach the practice. 

It ^ has been the tradition of our school to make “non-ob- 
jectivity” as our basis, “idea-lessness” as our object, and “non- 



524 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

attachment” as our fundamental principle. “Non-objectivity” 
means, not to be absorbed in objects when in contact with ob- 
jects; “idea-lessness” means, not to be carried away by any 
particular idea in our exercise of the mental faculty; (“non- 
attachment” means, not to cherish any desire for or aversion 
to any particular thing or idea). “Non-attachment” is the char- 
acteristic of Mind-essence. 

We should treat all things — good or bad, beautiful or ugly — 
as void (of any self-substance). Even in time of dispute and 
quarrel, we should treat intimates and enemies alike and never 
think of retaliation. In the thinking faculty, let the past be 
dead. If we allow our thoughts, past, present and future, to 
become linked up into a series, we put ourselves under restraint. 
On the other hand, if we never let our mind become attached 
at any time to any thing, we gain emancipation. For this rea- 
son we make “non-attachment” our fundamental principle. 

To free ourselves from dependence upon externals is called, 
“non-objectivity.” In as far as we are in position to do this, 
the path of the Dharma is free. That is why we make “non- 
objectivity” our basis. 

To keep our mind free from defilement under all circum- 
stances is called “idea-lessness.” Our mind should always stand 
aloof and on no account should we allow circumstances to in- 
fluence the functioning of the mind. It is a great mistake to 
suppress all thinking. Even if we succeed, and die immediately 
thereafter, still, there is rebirth. Mark this, pilgrims of the 
Path! It is bad enough for a man to commit blunders by 
cherishing false ideas of the Dharma, how much worse to teach 
others. Being deluded, he is blind himself, and in addition he 
misrepresents and puts to shame the Buddhist scriptures. There- 
fore we make “idea-lessness” our object. 

There is a type of man who is under delusion who boasts of 
his realization of Mind-essence; but being influenced by circum- 
stances ideas rise in his mind, followed by erroneous views, 
which in turn become the source of attachment and defilement. 
In Essence of Mind, intrinsically, there is nothing to be 
attained. To boast of attainment and to talk foolishly of merits 
and demerits is erroneous and defiling. For this reason we make 
“idea-lessness” the object of our school. 

(If “idea-lessness” is not the cessation of all thought) what 
ideas should we get rid of, and on what ideas should we focus 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 525 

our mind? We should get rid of all “pairs of opposites” of all 
conceptions of goodness and badness (that is, of all discrimi- 
native thinking). We should focus our mind on the true na- 
ture of reality. (The word used is “Tathata,” which means, 
“True Nature,” or Mind-essence, or Prajna, or “Oneness,” or 
“Suchness,” or anything else that is ultimate.) Tathata (con- 
sidered as the ultimate “suchness” of Mind-essence) is the 
quintessence of “idea”; “idea” is the manifestation of Tathata. 
It is the function of Tathata to give rise to “ideas.” It is not 
the sense-organs that do so. Tathata (considered as the Intel- 
lective Principle) reproduces its own attribute, therefore, it can 
give rise to “idea.” Without Tathata, sense-organs and sense- 
objects would disappear immediately. Because it is an attribute 
to Tathata to give rise to ideas, our sense-organs, in spite of 
their functioning in seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, and 
knowing, are not tainted and defiled under all circumstances. 
(It is the cherishing of “attachments” that defiles.) Our true- 
nature is “self-manifesting” all the time. (The Path to self- 
realization of Mind-essence through Samadhi and Prajna is 
present to all, even though for some it may be blocked for a 
time by “attachments.”) Therefore, the Sutra says: “He who 
is an adept in appreciation of that which lies behind things 
and phenomena, is established upon the Ultimate Principle 
(Prajna). 

• • * 

The Patriarch one day preached to an assembly as follows: 

In our system of Dhyana, we neither dwell upon our mind 
nor upon its purity; neither do we seek to suppress its activ- 
ity. As to dwelling on the mind: the (functional) mind is 
primarily delusive and as we come to realize that it is only a 
phantasm we see that there is no reason for dwelling upon it. 
As to dwelling upon its purity: our nature is intrinsically pure, 
and just as far as we get rid of discriminative thinking, there 
will remain nothing but purity in our nature; it is these delu- 
sive ideas that obscure our realization of True reality (Tathata). 
If we direct our mind to dwell upon purity, we are only creat- 
ing another delusion: the delusion of purity. Since delusion has 
no abiding place, it is deluding to dwell upon it. Purity has 
neither shape nor form, but some people go so far as to invent 
the “Form of Purity” and then treat it as a problem for solu- 



526 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


tion. Holding such an opinion, these people become purity- 
ridden and their Essence of Mind is thereby obscured. Those 
who are training themselves for serenity of mind, in their con- 
tact with the many types of men, should not notice the faults 
of others. They should be indifferent as to whether others are 
good or bad, or whether they deserve merit or demerit. To as- 
sume a discriminatory attitude toward others is to invite per- 
turbation of mind. An unenlightened man may seem outwardly 
unperturbed, but as soon as he opens his mouth and criticises 
others and talks about their merit or demerit, their ability or 
weakness, their goodness or badness, he shows that he has de- 
viated from the right course. On the other hand, to dwell upon 
our own mind and its purity is also a stumbling-block in the 
true Path. 

* * * 

At another assembly the Patriarch spoke as follows: What 
is dhyana? It means, first, to gain full freedom of mind and 
to be entirely unperturbed under all outward circumstances, be 
they good or otherwise. What is the difference between Dhy- 
ana and Samadhi? Dhyana is the effort to be mentally free 
from any attachment to outer objects. Samadhi is the reali- 
zation of that freedom in inward peace. If we are attached 
to outer objects the inner mind will be perturbed. When we 
are free from attachment to all outer objects, the mind will be 
at peace. Our Essence of Mind is intrinsically pure; the reason 
we become perturbed is simply because we allow ourselves to 
be carried away by the circumstances we are under. He who 
is able to keep his mind serene, irrespective of circumstances, 
has attained true Samadhi. 

To be free from attachment is Dhyana; to realize inner 
peace is Samadhi. When we are able to hold the mind con- 
centrated, and to rest in inner peace, then we have attained 
both Dhyana and Samadhi. The Bodhisattva Sila Sutra says: 
“Our Essence of Mind is intrinsically pure.” Learned Audience: 
let us each realize this for himself from one momentary sensa- 
tion to another. Let us practice it by ourselves, let us train our- 
selves, and thus by our own effort attain Buddhahood. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 527 

Chapter V 

Discourse on the Three-Bodies of Buddha 

Some time after the foregoing Discourse on Repentance had 
been delivered to “commoners,” when the Patriarch had gath- 
ered his disciples together for instruction, a senior disciple. Fat- 
hoi, said to the Patriarch, “Sir, will you please leave to poster- 
ity certain instruction whereby people under delusion may 
realize their Buddha-nature?” 

“Listen to me,” replied the Patriarch. It is possible for 
those who are under delusion to realize their Buddha-nature, 
provided they acquaint themselves with the nature of ordinary 
sentient beings. Without such knowledge, to seek Buddhahood 
would be in vain, even if one spent aeons of time in doing so. 

First, let me show you how to get acquainted with the na- 
ture of the sentient beings within your mind, whereby one can 
realize the Buddha-nature latent in everyone. Knowing Bud- 
dha means nothing else than knowing sentient beings. It is 
sentient beings who are blind to the fact that they are poten- 
tially Buddhas, whereas a Buddha sees no difference between 
himself and other beings. When sentient beings realize their 
Essence of Mind, they are Buddhas. If a Buddha is under de- 
lusion as to his Essence of Mind, he is then only an ordinary 
being. Seeing everything as equal in Essence of Mind makes 
ordinary beings Buddhas. Seeing inequalities in Essence of 
Mind transforms a Buddha into an ordinary being. When one’s 
mind is crooked or depraved, then he is only an ordinary being 
with Buddha-nature latent within him. On the other hand, 
if one concentrates his mind on equality and straightforward- 
ness, even for one moment only, then he is a Buddha. 

Within our mind there is Buddha, and that Buddha within 
is the real Buddha. If Buddha is not to be found within our 
mind, then where shall we seek for the real Buddha? Doubt 
not that Buddha is within your own mind, apart from which 
nothing can exist. Since all things and phenomena are the 
product of mind, the Sutra says: “When mental activity rises, 
various things exist; when mental activity ceases, various things 
exist not.” 

Our physical body may be likened to an inn where we can 



528 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

remain only temporarily, we cannot make it a refuge. The 
Trikaya of Buddha is to be found within our Mind-essence 
which is the common possession of everybody. It is because the 
mind of an ordinary man labors under delusion that he does 
not know his own inner nature, the result is that he ignores the 
Trikaya that is within himself and seeks for it without. Please 
listen; I am going to show you that you can realize the Tri- 
kaya within yourself, which being a manifestation of Mind-es- 
sence cannot be found anywhere else. 

Within our physical body we take refuge in the Pure 
Dharmakaya (Essence-body) of Buddha; 

Within our physical body we take refuge in the Perfect 
Sambhoga-kaya (the Bliss-body) of Buddha; 

Within our physical body we take refuge in the Myriad 
Nirmanakaya (Bodies of transformation,) of Buddha. 

What is the Pure Dharmakaya? Our Mind-essence is in- 
trinsically pure, that is, all things are manifestations of mind. 
Good deeds and evil deeds are but the manifestation of good 
thoughts and evil thoughts respectively. Thus within Essence 
of Mind all things, like the azure of the sky and the radiance 
of the sun and moon which, when obscured by passing clouds, 
may appear as if their brightness had been dimmed, but as 
soon as the clouds are blown away, their brightness reappears 
and all objects are again fully illuminated. Foolish thoughts 
may be likened to the clouds while sagacity and Wisdom are 
the moon and the Sun. When we become attached to discrimi- 
nated objects, our Mind-essence becomes clouded by drifting 
thoughts which prevent sagacity and Wisdom from sending 
forth their light. We were fortunate that we found learned 
and pious teachers to make known the orthodox Dharma to us 
so that we may, by our own effort do away with ignorance and 
delusion, and by so doing we will become enlightened both 
within and without, and our true nature within our Essence of 
Mind will manifest itself. This is precisely what happens with 
those who come face to face with their Essence of Mind. This 
is what is called the Pure Dharmakaya of Buddha. 

To take refuge in the true Buddha is to take refuge in our 
own Essence of Mind. He who takes refuge within himself 
must first get rid of the evil-mind and the jealous-mind, the 
flattering and crooked-mind, deceit, and falsehood, and fallacious 
views, egotism, snobbishness, contemptuousness, arrogance, and 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 529 

all other evils that may arise at any time. To take refuge 
within ourselves is to be always on the alert to prevent our 
own mistakes and to refrain from criticism of other’s faults. He 
who is humble and patient on all occasions and is courteous to 
every one, has truly realized his Mind-essence, so truly in fact 
that his Path is free from further obstacles. This is the way 
to take refuge in (the Buddha of) oneself. 

What is the Perfect Sambhogakaya? Let us take the illus- 
tration of a lamp. Since the light of a lamp can dissipate dark- 
ness that has been there for a thousand years, so a ray of Wis- 
dom can do away with ignorance that has lasted for ages. We 
need not bother about the past, for the past is gone and is irre- 
coverable. What demands our attention is the present and fu- 
ture, so let our thoughts, from one momentary sensation to an- 
other, be dear and pure and let us see face to face our Mind- 
essence. Goodness and evil are opposite to each other, but in 
essence they cannot be dualistic. This non-dualistic nature is 
called “true nature,” it can neither be contaminated by evil, 
nor affected by goodness. This is what is called the Sambhog- 
akaya of Buddha. One single evil thought clouding our Essence 
of Mind will undo the good merit accumulated in aeons of 
time; while a good thought can expiate all our sins though 
they be as many as the sands of the river Ganges. To realize 
our Essence of Mind from one momentary sensation to another 
and without intermission until we attain Supreme Enlighten- 
ment (Bodhi) so that we are in a perpetual state of Right 
Mindfulness, is the Sambhogakaya. 

Now, what is the Myriad Nirmanakaya? When we subject 
ourselves to the least differentiation or particularisation, trans- 
formation takes place: otherwise all things would be as void as 
space, as they inherently are. By letting our minds dwell on 
evil things, hell arises. By letting our minds dwell upon good 
acts, paradise is manifested. Dragons and snakes are the trans- 
formations of venomous hatred; while Bodhisattvas are com- 
passionate thoughts made manifest. The various heavens are 
the projection of Prajna; while underworlds are the transforma- 
tions of ignorance and infatuation. Un-numbered, indeed, are 
the transformations of Mind-essence. People under delusion 
are as if asleep; they do not understand; their minds naturally 
turn toward evil and, as a rule, they practice evil. But should 
they turn their minds from evil to righteousness, even for one 



530 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

moment, Prajna shines forth. This is what is called the Nir- 
manakaya of the Buddha of Mind-essence. 

The Dharmakaya is intrinsically self-sufficient. To see our 
own Essence of Mind clearly and without interruption, is the 
Sambhogakaya of Buddha. To let our mind dwell on the Sam- 
bhogakaya, so that Prajna radiates forth in manifestation is 
Nirmanakaya. To attain enlightenment by one’s own effort and 
to practice by one’s self the goodness that is inherent in our 
Essence of Mind, is a genuine case of “taking refuge.” Our 
physical body consisting of flesh and skin, etc., is nothing more 
than a tenement or an inn; it is no place of refuge. Let us 
realize the Trikaya of our own Mind-essence, then we shall 
know the Buddha of our own nature. 

In closing let me leave with you a stanza, entitled: “The 
Real Buddha of Mind-essence.” Accordingly as they heed it 
people of future generations who can understand its meaning 
will realize their Mind-essence and attain Buddhahood. This is 
the stanza: — 

Those who understand the Mahayana teaching 

And are thus able to realize Mind-essence 

Should reverently and fervently seek for a realization of 
Dharmakaya. 

The Dharmakaya, the Sambhogakaya, the Nirmana- 
kaya — 

These three Bodies emanate from Oneness. 

He who is able to realize this fact intuitively 

Has sown the seed and will reap the fruit of Enlight- 
enment. 

It is from Nirmanakaya that our “pure nature” emerges; 

Within the former the latter is always to be found. 

Guided by its “pure nature” Nirmanakaya follows the 
right path, 

And will some day culminate in a Body of Bliss, perfect 
and infinite. 

Pure Nature is hidden by our sensual instincts; 

By getting rid of sensuality, we realize Pure Dhar- 
makaya. 

When our temperament is such that we are no longer 
the slave of the five sense-objects. 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 531 

And when we have realized Mind-essence, even for one 
moment, then Tathata is known to us. 

Those who are so fortunate as to be followers of the 
Sudden School 

Shall suddenly, in this life, see the Blessed One in their 
own Mind-essence. 

He who has not realized Essence of Mind and seeks for 
Buddha without. 

Is on a wrong path and is acting foolishly. 

He who seeks Buddha by practising certain doctrines 

Knows not the place where the real Buddha is to be 
found. 

He who is seeking to realize Buddha within his own 
mind. 

He only is sowing the seed of Buddhahood. 


Chapter VI 

Dialogues Suggested by Various 
Temperaments and Circumstances 

Upon the Patriarch’s return to the village of Tso-hau in 
Shiu-chow from Wong-mui, where the Dharma had been trans- 
mitted to him, he was an unknown man. At that time, it was 
a Confucian scholar, named Liu Chi-luk, who first gave him a 
warm welcome and appreciation. It came about in this manner. 
Chi-luk had an aunt, named Wu Chun-chong who was a Bud- 
dhist nun, who was in the habit of reciting the Maha Pari- 
nirvana Sutra. One day the Patriarch heard her reciting it, and 
after listening for only a short time, grasped the profound 
meaning of the Sutra, and began to explain it to her, where- 
upon she brought the book and asked him the meaning of cer- 
tain passages. 

“I am not very well educated,” he replied, “but if you wish 
to understand the purport of the book, I will do the best I 
can.” "How can you understand the meaning of the text,” 
she rejoined, “if you do not know the words?” To this he re- 


532 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


plied: “The profound teaching of the various Buddhas, has 
nothing to do with the written language.” 

This answer surprised her very much, and recognising that 
he was no ordinary man, she spoke of him freely to the pious 
elders of the village, saying: “He is a sage. We should get his 
permission to supply him with food and lodgings, and urge 
him to remain with us.” 

Whereupon a descendant of Marquis Wu of the Ai Dynasty, 
named, Tso Shuk-leung, came one afternoon with other villagers 
to offer homage to the Patriarch. At that time the historic Po- 
lam Monastery, which had been devastated by war at the end 
of the Chu Dynasty, was reduced to a heap of ruins. The vil- 
lagers rebuilt it on the old site, arid asked the Patriarch to 
make it his home. Afterwards it became a very famous temple. 

« * * 

The monk, Fat-Hoi, a native of Hook-kong in Shu-chow, 
in his first interview with the Patriarch, asked the meaning of 
the well-known saying, “The spontaneous realization of Mind- 
Essence is the state of attaining Buddhahood.” The Patriarch 
replied: — When one has attained to the state of mind in which 
there are no rising thoughts, simultaneously he has realized his 
Essence of Mind and attained Buddhahood. To realize that all 
phenomena are a manifestation of mind is just the same as 
realizing Mind-Essence. When one realizes that no rising 
thought should be annihilated, he is on his way to attaining 
Buddhahood, and to know how to be free from all discrimina- 
tions of thought and conceptions of phenomena is the same as 
attaining Buddhahood. If I were to give you a full explana- 
tion, it would take the full time of a kalpa. Listen to this 
stanza: 

“Prajna is what mind is; Samadhi is what Buddha is. 

The spontaneous realization of Mind is Prajna; 

Attaining the state of Buddhahood 

Is what Samadhi is. 

In practising Prajna and Samadhi, let each keep pace 
with the other. 

Then our thoughts will be pure. 

This teaching can be understood 

Only through the ‘habit of practice.’ 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 533 


Samadhi functions, but inherently it is not. 

The orthodox teaching is, to practice Prajna as well as 
Samadhi.” 

After considering what the Patriarch had said, Fat-hoi was 
enlightened and he praised the Patriarch in the following 
stanza: 

“That which mind is, Buddha is; how true it is, indeed! 

I put myself to shame by not understanding it. 

Now I understand the principle of Prajna and Samadhi, 

Both of which I shall practice to set myself free from 
all confining forms.” 

* # # 

The monk Fat-tat, a native of Hung-chow, who joined the 
order at the early age of seven, used to recite the Lotus of the 
Good Law Sutra. When he came to offer homage to the Pa- 
triarch, he failed in offering due respect to him, for which the 
Patriach reproved him, saying, “If you object to offer due re- 
spect, would it not be better to omit the salutation entirely? 
There must be something in your mind that makes you feel 
that way. Please tell me what you do in your daily religious 
exercise?” 

“I recite the Lotus of the Good Law (Saddharma Pun - 
darika) Sutra,” replied Fat-tat; “I have read the whole text 
three thousand times.” 

“If you had fully understood the meaning of the Sutra,” 
remarked the Patriarch, “You would not have assumed such a 
lofty bearing, even if you had read it ten thousand times. 
When you understand it, you will be following the same Path 
with me. But now, all that you have accomplished is to make 
yourself conceited. Moreover, you do not seem to realize that 
you are in the wrong. Listen to this stanza: 

“Since the object of ceremony is to curb arrogance. 

Why did you fail to offer due respect? 

To take pride in oneself, is a source of sin. 

But to learn to treat any attainment as Void/ is to at- 
tain incomparable merit.” 

The Patriarch then asked him for his name, and upon being 
told that his name was Fat-tat (which means “law-understand- 



534 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

ing”), he remarked, “Your name is Fat-tat, but you have not 
yet understood the Law.” Then the Patriarch intending to con- 
clude the interview, recited the following stanza: 

“Your name is Fat-tat. 

Diligently and faithfully you recite the Sutra. 

Lip-repetition of the text ends with its pronunciation, 

But he whose mind is enlightened, by grasping its mean- 
ing, becomes a Bodhisattva. 

On account of conditions of affinity which may be 
traced to our past lives, 

Let me explain this to you. 

If you can only understand that Buddha speaks no 
words. 

Then the Lotus will blossom from your mouth. 

(Truth is inscrutable and ineffable; words fail, 

But the Lotus blossoms and radiates its perfume.) 

Having heard this stanza, Fat-tat became ashamed and apol- 
ogised to the Patriarch. He added, “Hereafter I will be humble 
and polite on all occasions. It is true: I do not quite under- 
stand the meaning of the Sutra as I recite it, so I am often 
doubtful as to its proper interpretation. From your profound 
knowledge and high Wisdom, will you kindly give me a short 
explanation?” 

The Patriarch replied: “Fat-tat, the Good Law is quite 
clear; it is your mind that is not clear. The Sutra is free from 
doubtful passages; it is only your mind that makes them seem 
doubtful. Do you know the principal object of the Sutra?!’ 

“How can I know. Sir,” replied Fat-tat, “since I am so dull 
and stupid? All I know is to recite it word by word.” 

The Patriarch then said, “Will you please recite the Sutra? 
I am unable to read it myself. Then I will explain its mean- 
ing to you.” 

Fat-tat recited the Sutra loudly. When he came to the 
section entitled, “parables,” the Patriarch stopped him, saying, 
“The theme of this Sutra is to set forth the aim and object of 
a Buddha’s incarnation into this world. Though parables and 
illustrations are numerous in it, none of them go beyond this 
pivotal point. Now, what is that aim? and what is that object? 
The Sutra says, ‘It is for a sole object, it is for a sole aim, but 
truly a lofty object and a lofty aim, that a Buddha appears in 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 535 

this world.’ Now that sole object, that sole aim, that is so 
exalted, is the realization of Buddha-knowledge. 

“Common people attach themselves to external objects, 
thinking them to be real, and within, they fall into the wrong 
idea that external things come to an end. When they are able 
to free themselves from attachment to objects when in contact 
with objects, and to free themselves from the fallacious view 
that ‘Emptiness’ means annihilation, then they are free from il- 
lusions without and delusions within. He who understands this 
and whose mind is thus suddenly enlightened, is said to have 
opened his eyes to the sight of Buddha-Knowledge. 

“The word, ‘Buddha’ is equivalent to ‘Enlightenment’ and is 
dealt with under four heads: — Opening the eyes for the sight of 
Enlightenment-knowledge; seeing the sight of Enlightenment- 
knowledge; understanding Enlightenment-knowledge; becoming 
firmly established in Enlightenment-knowledge. If we are able, 
upon being taught, to grasp and thoroughly understand the 
teaching of Enlightenment-knowledge, then our inherent quality 
of ‘true-nature’ will have an opportunity to manifest itself. 
You should not misinterpret the text and come to the conclu- 
sion that Buddha-knowledge is something special to Buddha 
and not common to us, just because you happen to find in the 
Sutra these passages: ‘To open the eyes for the sight of Bud- 
dha-knowledge,’ ‘To see the sight of Buddha-knowledge, etc.’ 
Such a misinterpretation would be slandering Buddha and blas- 
pheming the Sutra. Since one is (potentially) a Buddha, he is 
already in possession of this Enlightenment-knowledge, and 
there is no occasion for him to open his eyes for it. You should 
therefore accept the interpretation that Buddha-knowledge is 
the Buddha-knowledge of your own mind and not that of any 
other Buddha. 

“Being infatuated with sense-objects and thereby shutting 
themselves from their own light, all sentient beings, tormented 
by outer circumstances and inner vexations, act voluntarily as 
slaves to their own desires. Seeing this, our Lord Buddha took 
the trouble of rising from his Samadhi in order to exhort them 
by earnest preaching of various kinds to suppress their desires 
and to refrain from seeking happiness from without, so that 
they may enter into their rights of Buddhahood. For this 
reason the Sutra says, ‘To open the eyes for Buddha-knowledge 
etc.’ I advise people to thus constantly open their eyes for 



536 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

the Buddha-knowledge within their own minds. But in their 
perversity they commit sins under delusion and ignorance; they 
are kind in words but wicked in mind; they are greedy, malig- 
nant, jealous, crooked, flattering, egoistic, offensive to men and 
destructive to inanimate objects. Thus they open their eyes to 
‘common-people-knowledge’ instead. Should they rectify their 
heart so that wisdom rises spontaneously, the mind is under 
introspection and the practice of doing good takes the place of 
evil. Thus they would initiate themselves into Buddha-knowl- 
edge. 

“You should, therefore, from one momentary sensation to 
another, open your eyes, not for ‘common-people-knowledge,’ 
which is worldly, but for the Buddha-knowledge that is supra- 
mundane. On the other hand, if you stick to the arbitrary con- 
cept that mere recitation as a daily exercise is good enough, 
then you are infatuated, like the yak by its own tail.” 

Fat-tat then said: “If that is so, then we only have to 
know the meaning of the Sutra and there will be no further 
necessity for reciting it. Is that right, Sir?” The Patriarch re- 
plied, “There is nothing wrong with the Sutra that you need to 
refrain from reciting it. Whether sutra-reciting will enlighten 
you or not, or benefit you or not, all depends upon yourself. 
He who recites the Sutra with his tongue and puts its teach- 
ings into actual practice with his mind, masters the Sutra. 
Listen to this stanza: 

“When we are ignorant of the true meaning of the Sad- 
dharma-pundarika Sutra, our mind is being turned by 
the Sutra. 

When we realize the true meaning of the Sutra, our 
mind turns the Sutra. 

To recite the Sutra for a long time without understand- 
ing its meaning is the wrong way; 

To recite the Sutra without holding any arbitrary con- 
ception of it is the right way. 

To recite the Sutra with a pure mind is the true recit- 
ing, to do otherwise is wrong. 

He whose mind is above affirmation and negation 

Rides permanently in the Buddha vehicle.” 

Having heard this stanza, Fat-tat was enlightened and was 
unconsciously moved to tears. “It is quite true,” he exclaimed, 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 537 

“heretofore I have been unable to master the Sutra, rather it 
has been my master.” 

Fat-tat then raised another difficulty. “The Sutra says, 
‘From various disciples up to Bodhisattva, though they were to 
speculate with their combined effort, they would be unable to 
comprehend Buddha-knowledge.’ But you, sir, give me to un- 
derstand that if an ordinary man realizes his own mind, he is 
said to have attained Buddha-knowledge. I am afraid, Sir, that 
with the exception of those gifted with superior mental disposi- 
tions, others may doubt your remark. Further, the Sutra men- 
tions three kinds of carts: goat carts (the vehicle of disciples); 
deer carts (for Arahats); and bullock carts (for Bodhisattvas). 
How are these to be distinguished from the White Bullock 
carts of the Buddhas? Will you please tell me?” 

The Patriarch replied: “The Sutra is quite plain on this 
point; it is you who fail to understand it. The reason why 
disciples, Arahats and Bodhisattvas fail to comprehend Buddha- 
knowledge is because they speculate about it (with their think- 
ing mind which is limited and polluted); they may combine 
their efforts, but the more they speculate the farther they are 
from Truth. (Buddha-knowledge is to be realized within, not 
thought about as though it was something external.) It was 
not to Buddhas but to ordinary men that Buddha Gautama 
preached this Sutra. You do not seem to appreciate that since 
we are already riding in the White Bullock cart of the Bud- 
dhas, that there is no necessity for us to look for other vehicles. 
Moreover, the Sutra plainly teaches that there is only the one 
Buddha vehicle; that there are no others, no second, no third. 
It is because there is only one vehicle that Buddha had to 
preach to us with innumerable skillful means such as various 
reasons and arguments, various parables and illustrations, etc. 
Do you not understand that the other three vehicles are make- 
shifts, useful for the past only; while the sole vehicle, the 
Buddha vehicle, is for the present because it is ultimate? 

“The Sutra teaches to dispense with the makeshifts and 
depend on the ultimate. Having resorted to the ultimate, you 
will find that even the very name ‘ultimate’ disappears. You 
should appreciate that you are the sole owner of these treasures 
and that they are entirely subject to your disposal. (This is in 
allusion to another Parable, the Buddhist Prodigal Son, in the 
Sutra.) But moreover, it is not until you are able to free your- 



5$8 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

self from the arbitrary conceptions that there are any treasures 
belonging to the Father or to the son, or subject to so and so’s 
disposal, that you really know the right way to recite the Sutra. 
When you so understand it, the Sutra will be in your hand 
from eternity to eternity, and from morning to midnight you 
will be reciting the Sutra all the time.” 

Being thus awakened, Fat-tat praised the Patriarch in a 
transport of joy with the following stanza: — 

‘‘The delusion that I had attained great merit by recit- 
ing the Sutra three thousand times 

Is all dispelled by a single utterance of the Master of 
Tso-kai. 

He who has not yet understood the object of the Bud- 
dha’s incarnation 

Is unable to suppress the wild passions accumulated in 
many lives. 

The three vehicles are makeshifts only; 

And the three stages in which the scholars expound the 
Dharma are ingeniously spoken, indeed; 

But how few appreciate that it is within the burning 
house itself 

That the Truth of Dharma is to be found.” 

The Patriarch then told him that before he had rebuked 
him for being a “sutra-reciting monk,” but that hereafter he 
would praise him for the same reason. After that interview, 
Fat-tat was able to grasp the profound meaning of Buddhism, 
and yet he continued to recite the Sutra as before. 

* * * 

The monk, Chi-tong, a native of Shau-chow of An-fung, 
had read over the Lankavatara Sutra nearly a thousand times, 
but could not understand the meaning of the Trikaya nor the 
four Prajnas. One day he called upon the Patriarch for an ex- 
planation of them. 

“As to the ‘Three Bodies/ ” explained the Patriarch, “The 
Pure Dharmakaya is your nature; The Perfect Sambhogakaya 
is your wisdom; and the Myriad Nirmanakayas are your ac- 
tions. If you deal with these three bodies apart from your 
Mind-essence, they would be bodies without wisdom. If you 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 539 

realize that these three: self-nature, self-wisdom and self-action, 
have no substance of their own (being only manifestations of 
Mind-essence) then you have attained the enlightenment of 
the four Prajnas. Listen to this stanza: — 

“The Three-bodies are inherent in our Essence of Mind, 

By the radiation of which the four Prajnas are mani- 
fested. 

Thus, without closing your eyes and your ears to shut 
out the external world. 

You may reach Buddhahood directly. 

Now that I have made this plain to you. 

If you believe it implicitly, you will be forever free 
from delusion. 

Follow not those who seek for ‘enlightenment' from 
without: 

Such people talk about Bodhi all the time, but do it 
vainly.” 

For the second time, Chi-tong asked, “May I know some- 
thing about the four Prajnas?” “If you understand the Three- 
Bodies,” replied the Patriarch, “you should know the four 
Prajnas as well; your question is quite unnecessary.* If you 
deal with the four Prajnas apart from the Three-Bodies, there 
would be Prajnas without bodies; in such a case, they would 
not be Prajnas. (Prajna is the Ultimate Principle of the Three- 
Bodies, which is Ultimate Reality.) The Patriarch then uttered 
this stanza: — 

“Mirror-like Wisdom is pure by nature; 

Wisdom that comprehends all things equally, frees the 
mind from all impediments; 

All-discerning Wisdom sees things intuitively; 

All-performing Wisdom, like Mirror-Wisdom, is free 
from prejudice. 

Perception-consciousness of the five-sense-vijnanas. 

And the Universal Consciousness of the Alaya-vijnana, 

Are not ‘transmuted’ to Prajna, until the Buddha-stage; 

While the intellective-consciousness of the Manas, 

And the discriminative-consciousness of the Manovij- 
nana, 

Are ‘transmuted’ in the Bodhisattva-stage. 



540 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


When you are able to free yourself entirely from at- 
tachments to sense-objects as these ‘transmutations’ 
take place, 

Then you will forever abide in the never-ceasing Naga 
Samadhi.” 

Suddenly Chi-tong realized the Prajna of his Mind-essence 
and submitted the following stanza to the Patriarch: — 

“Intrinsically, the Three-Bodies are within our Essence of 
Mind. 

When our mind is enlightened, the four Prajnas will 
appear. 

When ‘Bodies’ and Prajna appear as one identity. 

Then are we able to respond to the appeal of all beings, 
no matter what form they take. 

To make an effort to find the Trikaya and the four Praj- 
nas is to take an entirely wrong course; 

To try to ‘discriminate’ and ‘grasp’ them is to misun- 
derstand their intrinsic nature. 

Through you. Sir, I am now able to realize the pro- 
fundity of their meaning; 

Henceforth, I may discard for ever their false and arbi- 
trary names.” 

The monk, Chi-sheung, a native of Kwai-kai of Shun-chow, 
joined the order in his childhood and was very zealous in his 
efforts to realize Mind-essence. One day he came to pay hom- 
age to the Patriarch and was asked by the latter whence and 
for what he came. Chi-sheung replied: — 

“I have recently been at the White Cliff Monastery in 
Hung-chow, to study with the Master Ta-tung who was good 
enough to teach me how to realize Mind-essence and thereby 
to gain Buddhahood, but as I still have some doubts, I have 
travelled far to come here to pay my respects to you. Will 
you kindly clear away my doubts. Sir?” 

The Patriarch asked, “What instruction did he give you? 
Will you please repeat it? 

Chi-sheung replied: “After staying there three months with- 
out receiving any instruction, and being zealous for the 
Dharma, I went alone one night to his chamber and asked 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 541 

him, what my essence of mind was. He asked me, ‘Do you 
see the illimitable void?’ ‘Yes, I do,’ I replied. Then he asked 
me whether the void had any particular form, and on replying 
that the void must be formless and therefore can not have any 
particular form, he said: ‘Your Essence of Mind is exactly like 
the void. To realize that there is nothing to be seen, is Right 
View. To realize that nothing is knowable, is True Knowl- 
edge. To realize that it is neither green nor yellow, neither 
long nor short; that it is pure by nature; that its quintessence 
is perfect and clear; is to realize Essence of Mind and thereby 
to attain Buddhahood. This is also called, Buddha-knowledge.’ 
As I do not quite understand this teaching, will you please en- 
lighten me. Sir?” 

“His teaching indicates,” said the Patriarch, “that he still 
retains the arbitrary concepts of ‘Views’ and ‘Knowledge’; that 
explains why he failed to make it clear to you. Listen to this 
stanza: — 

“To realize that nothing can be seen, but to retain the 
concept of ‘invisibility’ 

Is somewhat like passing clouds obscuring the face of 
the sun. 

To realize that nothing is knowable, but to retain the 
concept of ‘unknowability’ 

May be likened to the clear sky disfigured by a flash of 
lightning. 

To let these arbitrary concepts arise spontaneously in 
the mind 

Indicates that you have not yet realized Essence of 
Mind, 

And that you have not yet found the skillful means to 
realize it. 

If you realize for one moment that these arbitrary con- 
cepts are wrong, 

Then your own spiritual light will shine forth unhin- 
dered.” 

Having heard this, Chi-sheung at once felt that his mind 
was enlightened. Thereupon, he submitted to the Patriarch, 
the following stanza: — 

“To allow the concepts of ‘invisibility’ and ‘unknow- 
ability’ to rise spontaneously in the mind 



542 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

Is to seek Bodhi without freeing oneself from the arbi- 
trary concepts of phenomena. 

He who is puffed-up by the slightest impression, ‘I am 
now enlightened’ 

Is no farther advanced than one under delusion. 

Had I not put myself at the feet of Your Eminence, 

I would have remained bewildered, ignorant of the right 
way to go.” 

One day Chi-sheung asked the Patriarch, “Buddha preached 
the doctrine of ‘Three Vehicles’ and also that of the ‘Supreme 
Vehicle.’ I do not understand them; will you please explain 
them to me?” 

The Patriarch replied, “ (In trying to understand these) you 
should introspect your own mind and ignore outward things 
and phenomena. The distinction of these four vehicles does 
not exist in the Dharma itself, but in the differentiations of 
people’s minds. To see and to hear and to recite the Sutras, 
is the Small Vehicle. To know the Dharma and to understand 
its meaning is the Middle Vehicle. To put the Dharma into 
actual practice, is the Great Vehicle. To understand all 
Dharmas (intuitively), to become part of them, to be free from 
all attachments, to be independent of things and phenomena; 
to be in possession of nothing, that is the Supreme Vehicle. 

“Essence of Mind is always a state of tranquillity. Since 
the word ‘vehicle,’ means, ‘motion,’ discussion is out of place. 
All depends on intuitive self-practice. Do not ask any more 
questions.” 

Chi-sheung made obeisance and thanked the Patriarch and, 
thereafter served as one of the Patriarch’s personal attendants 
until his death. 

* * • 

The monk, Chi-wang, a follower of the Dhyana school, had 
a consultation with the Fifth Patriarch and afterward considered 
himself to have attained Samadhi. For twenty years he con- 
fined himself to a small temple and all the time kept the 
Dhyana posture. Un-chak, a disciple of the Sixth Patriarch, on 
a pilgrimage to the northern bank of the Hoang-ho, heard 
about him and called at his temple. 

“What are you doing here?” enquired Un-chak. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 543 

“I am abiding in Samadhi,” replied Chi-wang. 

“Abiding in Samadhi, did you say?” Observed Un-chak. “I 
wish to enquire whether you are doing it consciously or un- 
consciously? If you are doing it unconsciously, it would mean 
that it is possible for all inanimate objects, suqh as earthen 
ware, stones, trees and weeds, to attain Samadhi. On the other 
hand, if you do it consciously, then any animate object or sen- 
tient being might abide in Samadhi, also.” 

Chi-wang then said, “When I am in Samadhi, I know 
neither consciousness nor unconsciousness.’ ’ 

“In that case,” observed Un-chak, “it is a perpetual quie- 
tude, in which there is neither abiding nor leaving. A state of 
samadhi in which you can abide or come out of at will, can 
not be a perfect Samadhi.” 

Chi-wang was nonplussed. After a long time, he asked, “May 
I know who is your teacher?” 

“My teacher is the Sixth Patriarch, of Tso-kai,” replied Un- 
chak. 

“How does he define Dhyana and Samadhi?” enquired Chi- 
wang. 

“According to his teaching,” replied Un-chak, “the Dharma- 
kaya is perfect and serene and unchanging; its quintessence 
and its function are in a state of ‘Suchness.’ The five aggre- 
gates are intrinsically void and the six sense-objects are non- 
existent. There is neither abiding nor leaving in Samadhi; there 
is neither quietude nor perturbation. The nature of Dhyana is 
non-abiding, so we should seek to transcend the state of ‘abid- 
ing in the calmness of Dhyana.’ The nature of Dhyana is un- 
creative, so we should transcend the notion of ‘creating a state 
of Dhyana.’ Essence of Mind is like space without the limita- 
tions of space.” 

After this interview, Chi-wang went to Tso-kai to interview 
the Sixth Patriarch. Upon being asked whence he came, Chi- 
wang told the Patriarch the details of his conversation with 
Ufi-chak. 

The Patriarch said, “What Un-chak said is quite right. 
Let your mind be in a state like the illimitable void, but do 
not think of it as ‘vacuity.’ Let the mind function freely, but 
whether it is in activity or at rest, let it abide nowhere. For- 
get all discriminations : see no distinction between a sage and 



544 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


an ordinary man; ignore the distinction between subject and 
object; let Essence of Mind and all phenomena and objects be 
alike in a state of ‘Suchness.’ Then you will truly be in 
Samadhi all the time.” 

Chi-wang was thereby fully enlightened. What he had con- 
sidered for the past twenty years as an attainment, now all 
va n ished. He remained with the Patriarch for a time and then 
returned to Ho-Pei where he taught many people, monks as 
well as laymen. 

# * # 

The monk, Chi-tao, a native of Nam-hoi of Kwong-tung, 
came to the Patriarch for instruction, saying, “Since I joined 
the order, I have read the Maha Parinirvana Sutra for more 
than ten years, but I have not yet grasped its teaching. Will 
you please teach me.” 

“What part of it do you not understand?” enquired the 
Patriarch. 

“It is this part, Sir: ‘All things are impermanent and so 
they belong to the Dharma of Becoming and Cessation. When 
both Becoming and Cessation cease to operate. Cessation of 
Change with its bliss of Perfect Rest (Nirvana) arises.’ ” 

“Whiat obscurity is there in that?” enquired the Patriarch. 

Chi-tao replied, “All beings have two bodies: the physical 
body and an essence body. The former is impermanent — it 
exists and it deceases. The latter is permanent, but it knows 
not and feels not. Now the Sutra says, ‘When both Becoming 
and Cessation cease to operate, the bliss of Perfect Rest and 
Cessation of Change arises.’ I can not understand which body 
ceases to exist, and which body enjoys the bliss. It cannot be 
the physical body that enjoys, because when it dies, the mate- 
rial elements disintegrate and disintegration is suffering, the 
very opposite of bliss. If it is the essence body that ceases to 
exist, it would be in the same ‘unfeeling’ state as inanimate 
objects, such as the grass, trees and stones. Who, then, will be 
the enjoyer? 

“Moreover, essence-nature is the quintessence of ‘Becoming 
and Cessation’ whose manifestation is the union of the five 
‘aggregates’ (body, sensation, perception, consciousness and intel- 
lection). That is to say, from one essence, five functions arise. 
This process of Becoming and Cessation is everlasting. When 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 545 

function and operation ‘arise’ from the quintessence, it be- 
comes; when operation and function are ‘absorbed’ back into the 
quintessence, it ceases to exist. If reincarnation is admitted, 
there will be no Cessation of Changes, as in the case of sentient 
beings. If reincarnation is out of the question, then things will 
remain forever in a state of lifeless quintessence, like the case 
of inanimate objects. When this is the case, under the limita- 
tions and restrictions of Nirvana, even existence would be im- 
possible to all things, much less enjoyment.” 

“You are a Bhikkhu,” said the Patriarch, “how can you 
adopt the fallacious views of Etemalism and Annihilationism 
that are held by heretics, and venture to criticise the teaching 
of the Supreme Vehicle? Your argument implies that apart 
from the physical body, there is an essence body; and that 
Perfect Rest and Cessation of Change may be sought apart 
from ‘Becoming and Cessation.’ Further, from the statement, 
‘Nirvana is everlasting rest,’ you infer that there must be some- 
body to play the part of enjoyer. 

“It is exactly these fallacious views that makes people crave 
for sentiate existence and worldly pleasure. These people are 
the victims of ignorance; they identify the union of the five 
aggregates as the ‘self’ and regard all other things as ‘not-self ; 
they crave for individual existence and have an aversion to 
death; they are drifting about from one momentary sensation 
to another in the whirlpool of life and death without realising 
the emptiness of mundane existence which is only a dream and 
an illusion; they commit themselves to unnecessary suffering by 
binding themselves to rebirth; they mistake the state of ever- 
lasting joy of Nirvana to be a mode of suffering; they are al- 
ways seeking after sensual pleasures. It was for these people, 
victims of ignorance, that the compassionate Buddha preached 
the real bliss of Nirvana. 

“Never for a moment was Nirvana either the phenomena of 
Becoming and. Cessation, or the ceasing of Becoming and Cessa- 
tion. It is the perfect manifestation of Rest and Cessation of 
Change, and at the ‘time’ of manifestation, there is no such 
thing as manifestation. It is called ‘everlasting’ Joy because it 
has neither enjoyer nor non-enjoyer. 

“There is no such thing as ‘one quintessence and five mani- 
festations.’ You are slandering Buddha and blaspheming the 
Dharma, when you go so far as to state that under the limita- 



546 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

tion and restriction of Nirvana, living is impossible to all beings. 
Listen to this stanza: — 

“The Supreme Maha Parinirvana 

Is perfect, permanent, calm, radiantly illuminative. 

Common and ignorant people miscall it death, 

While heretics arbitrarily declare it to be annihilation. 
Those who belong to the Small Vehicle and to the 
Middle Vehicle 

Regard Nirvana as ‘non-action.’ 

All these are merely intellectual speculations. 

And they form the basis of the sixty-two fallacious views. 
Since they are merely names, invented for the occasion, 
They have nothing to do with Absolute Truth. 

Only those of super-eminent mind 

Can understand thoroughly what Nirvana is, 

And take an attitude toward it of neither attachment 
nor indifference. 

They know that the five aggregates. 

And the so-called ‘self arising from the aggregates. 
Together with all external forms and objects. 

And the various phenomena of words and voice. 

Are all equally unreal, like a dream or an illusion. 

They make no discrimination between a sage and an 
ordinary man. 

Nor do they have any arbitrary concept of Nirvana. 
They are above ‘affirmation’ and ‘negation’; 

They break the barriers between the past, the present 
and the future. 

They use their sense organs when occasion requires. 

But the concept of ‘using’ does not arise. 

They may particularise on all sorts of things. 

But the concept of ‘particularisation’ arises not. 

Even during the cataclysmic fire at tire end of a kalpa. 
When ocean beds are burnt dry; 

Or during the blowing of catastrophic winds, when 
mountains topple; 

The everlasting bliss of Perfect Rest and Cessation of 
Change that is Nirvana 
Remains the same and changes not.” 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 547 


The Patriarch then said to Chi-tao, “I am trying to describe 
to you something that intrinsically is ineffable, in order to help 
you to get rid of fallacious views. If you do not interpret my 
words too literally you may perhaps know a wee bit of 
Nirvana.” 

Chi-tao became highly enlightened and, in a rapturous mood 
he made obeisance and departed. 


Chapter VII 

Sudden Enlightenment and Gradual 
Attainment 1 

Contemporaneous with the Patriarch when he was living at 
Po-lam Monastery was Grand Master Shin-shau who was 
preaching in Yuk-chuen Monastery of King-nam. At that time 
the two schools of Hui-neng in the South and of Shin-shau in 
the North were both flourishing. As the tvyo schools were dis- 

1 Note by Editor. When Hui-neng, who afterward became the Sixth Patri- 
arch, came to Wong-mui to interview the Fifth Patriarch, he was a compara- 
tively uneducated country boy and not yet a member of the order of monks. 
He did not remain there very long but before he left his insight into the Dhar- 
ma had been recognised by the Patriarch and he was initiated into the Pa- 
triarchate and given the insignia of the robe and begging bowl. While he re- 
mained at Monastery he served as a lay-helper in the granary, hulling nee. At 
the same time he was- there, the Master (or Dean as we would call him) of the 
Monastery was Shin-shau, a notably learned monk of the Dhyana School. After 
Hui-neng left Ung-mui he lived in retirement for a number of years, Shin-shau, 
in disappointment at not receiving the appointment of Sixth Patriarch, re- 
turned to his home in the North and founded his own School which later, 
under Imperial patronage, came into great prominence. But after the death of 
Shin-shau, the School steadily lost prestige and later dropped out of importance. 
But the different principles of the two schools, “Sudden Enlightenment” of the 
Sixth Patriarch's Southern School and “Gradual Attainment” of Shin-shau ’s 
Northern School, have continued to divide Buddhism and do so to-day. The 
principle in dispute is as to whether enlightenment comes as a “gradual attain- 
ment” through study of the scriptures and the practice of dhyana, or whether 
it comes suddenly in some ecstatic samadhi, or, as the Japanese say, in some 
sudden and convincing and life-enhancing “satori.” It is not a question of 
quickness or slowness in arriving at it: “gradual attainment” may arrive sooner 
man “sudden enlightenment,” It is the question whether enlightenment comes 
as the culmination of a gradual process of mental growth, or whether it is a 
sudden “turning” at the seat of consciousness from an habitual reliance on the 
thinking faculty (a looking outward), to a new use of a higher intuitive faculty 
(a looking inward). 



548 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


tinguished from each other by the names, Sudden, and Gradual, 
some Buddhist scholars were troubled as to which school to 
follow. 

One day the Patriarch addressed his assembly as follows: — 

“So far as the Dharma is concerned, there can be only one 
school. If a distinction is made, it exists in the fact that the 
founder of one school was a Northern man, and the founder of 
the other was a Southern man. While there is only one system 
of Dharma, some disciples realise it quicker than others but the 
reason why the names, ‘Sudden’ and 'Gradual,’ are given is be- 
cause some disciples are superior to others in their mental dis- 
positions. So far as the Dharma is concerned, the distinction of 
Sudden and Gradual does not exist.” 

(Between the two leaders there was mutual respect but) the 
followers of Shin-shau often criticised the Patriarch. They dis- 
credited him by saying that he was illiterate and could not dis- 
tinguish himself in any respect. Shin-shau, on the other hand, 
admitted that he was inferior to the Patriarch in one respect, 
namely, that Hui-neng thoroughly understood the teachings of 
the Mahayana, even if he had attained that wisdom without 
the aid of a teacher. “Moreover,” he added, “my Master, the 
Fifth Patriarch, would not have personally transmitted the robe 
and bowl to him without good cause. I regret that, owing to 
the patronage of the Court, which I by no means deserve, I am 
unable to travel far to receive instruction from him personally. 
You should go to Tso-kai to consult him. Do not tarry.” 

One day, Shin-shau said to his disciple, Chi-shing, “You 
are clever and witty; I wish you would go to Tso-kai and at- 
tend the lectures there. Try your best to keep in mind what 
you hear, so that on your return you may repeat it to me.” 

Acting on his teacher’s instruction, Chi-shing arrived at Tso- 
kai. Without saying anything about where he came from, he 
joined the company attending the Patriarch’s lectures. When 
the Patriarch came to address the assembly, he said, “Some one 
has come here secretly to learn my teaching and later to plagi- 
arise it.” Chi-shing at once came forward, made obeisance, and 
told the Patriarch what his mission was. 

“You come from Yuk-chuen Monastery, do you?” said the 
Patriarch. “Then you must be a spy.” 

“No, I am not,” replied Chi-shing. “Why not?” asked the 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 549 


Patriarch. “If I had not told you, I would have been a spy,” 
said Chi-shing. “Since I have told you who I am, I am no 
spy.” 

“Tell me, how does your teacher instruct his disciples?” 
asked the Patriarch. 

“He often tells them to concentrate their minds in a medita- 
tion on ‘purity’; to keep up the dhyana position constantly, 
and not to lie down.” 

Said the Patriarch, “To concentrate the mind on a medita- 
tion on ‘purity’ is an infirmity and is not Dhyana. To restrict 
oneself to the crosslegged position all the time is logically un- 
profitable. Listen to this stanza: — 

“A living man sits and does not lie down; 

But a dead man lies down and does not sit. 

On this physical body of ours, why should we impose 
the task of sitting crosslegged?” 

Making obeisance a second time, Chi-shing remarked, 
“Though I have studied Buddhism for nine years under Grand 
Master Shin-shau, my mind was not awakened for enlighten- 
ment, but as soon as you speak to me, my mind is enlightened. 
As the question of continuous re-birth is an important one, I 
wish you would take pity on me and give me instruction as 
to that question.” 

The Patriarch said, “I understand that your Master gives his 
disciples instruction as to ‘disciplinary rules’ (sila), meditation 
(dhyana), and Wisdom (Prajna). Will you please tell me how 
he defines these terms?” 

“According to his teaching,” replied Chi-shing, “to refrain 
from all evil action, is Sila; to practise whatever is good, is 
Prajna; and to purify one’s mind, is Dhyana. This is the way 
he teaches us. May I ask what your system is?” 

The Patriarch replied, “If I should tell you that I had a 
system of Dhyana to transmit to others, I would be deceiving 
you. What I try to do to my disciples, is to liberate them from 
their own bondage, by such device as each case requires. To 
use a name, which after all is nothing but a makeshift, it may 
be called ‘Samadhi.’ The way your Master teaches Sila, Dhy- 
ana, Prajna, is wonderful; but my way is different.” 

“How can it be different, Sir, when there is only one form 
of Sila, Dhyana and Prajna?” 


550 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


“The teaching of your Master,” replied the Patriarch, “is 
for the guidance of the general followers of the Mahayana; my 
teaching is for the more advanced followers. It is because some 
realise the Dharma quicker and deeper than others, that there 
is a difference of interpretation. Listen while I explain and see 
if you think my instruction is the same as his. In expounding 
the Dharma, I do not deviate from the authority of my intui- 
tive mind. To do otherwise would indicate that the expositor’s 
Mind-essence was obscured, and that he was competent to 
teach only the phenomenal side of the Dharma (but not its 
essence). The true teaching of Sila, Dhyana and Prajna, should 
be based on the principle that the function of all things derives 
its virtue from its essence. Listen to this stanza: — 

“To free the mind from all improprieties is the Sila- of 
Mind-essence; 

To free the mind from all perturbations is the Dhyana 
of Mind-essence. 

That which neither increases nor decreases is the 
‘diamond’ of Mind-essence. 

‘Going’ and ‘coming’ are only phases of Samadhi.” 

Having heard this instruction, Chi-shing felt humiliated and 
thanked the Patriarch for the instruction. 

The Patriarch continued: “The teaching of your Master on 
Sila, Dhyana and Prajna, is fitted for minds of wise men, it is 
true, but my teaching is intended for minds of a more ad- 
vanced type. He who has realised Mind-essence, himself, may 
dispense with such doctrines as Bodhi, Nirvana, and Knowledge 
of Emancipation. It is only those who do not possess a single 
system of Dhyana, who can formulate all systems of Dhyana; 
these who understand what this means, may rightly use such 
terms as Buddhakaya, Bodhi, Nirvana, Knowledge of Emanci- 
pation. To those who have realised Mind-essence, it makes no 
difference whether they formulate all systems of Dhyana, or 
dispense with all of them. (Because of this non-attachment) 
they are at liberty to come or to go; they are free from all 
obstacles and impediments. As circumstances arise, they take 
appropriate action; they give suitable answers according to the 
varying temperament of their questioner. They see with a com- 
prehensive glance that all ‘Bodies of T ransformation’ are insep- 
arable from Essence of Mind. They attain liberation, psychic 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 551 

powers, and Samadhi, which enables them to perform the ardu- 
ous task of universal salvation as easily as if they were only 
playing. Such are the men who have realised Mind-essence.” 

“By what principle are we guided in dispensing with all 
systems of Dhyana?” was Chi-shing’s next question. 

The Patriarch replied: — “When our Mind-essence is free 
from improprieties, infatuations and perturbations; when we 
look inward from each momentary sensation to another, with 
Prajna; and when we no longer cherish attachment to objects, 
or to words, or to ideas; then are we forever emancipated. Why 
should we formulate any system of Dhyana when our goal may 
be reached no matter whether we turn to the right or to the 
left? Since it is by our own effort that we realise Mind-essence, 
and since the realisation and practise of Dhyana are both spon- 
taneous and instantaneous, the formulation of any system of 
Dhyana is unnecessary. All Dharmas are intrinsically Nirvanic, 
how can there be gradation in them?” 

Chi-shing made obeisance and volunteered to be an atten- 
dent of the Patriarch, in which capacity he served faithfully. 

* * * 

Since the two Dhyana Schools, that of Hui-neng in the 
South and Shin-shau in the North, were flourishing at the same 
time, in spite of the tolerant spirit shown by both Masters who 
hardly knew what egotism was, there naturally developed a 
strong sectarian feeling among the disciples. Calling their own 
Master, Shin-shau, the Sixth Patriarch on no better authority 
than their own wishes, the followers of the Northern School 
were jealous of the rightful owner of that title whose claim 
was supported by the possession of the insignia, the robe etc., 
and was generally acknowledged. (In order to get rid of the 
rightful Patriarch) they sent a lay member of the order whose 
secular name was Chang Hang-chong, a native of Kiang-si, and 
who as a young man had been fond of adventure, to get rid 
of him. 

With his psychic power of mind-reading, the Patriarch was 
able to know of the plot. One evening Chang entered the Pa- 
triarch’s room intending to carry out his instructions. The Pa- 
triarch, after placing ten taels near his side, bent his neck for- 
ward and waited the blow. Chang made three attempts, but 



552 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

strange to say no wound was made. Then the Patriarch spoke 
to him, saying, 

“A straight sword is not crooked; 

A crooked sword is not straight. 

I owe you money only, but life I do not owe you.” 

Chang was taken by surprise and, remorseful and penitent, 
he asked for mercy and volunteered to join the order at once, 
but the Patriarch handed him the money and said: “If my fol- 
lowers should learn of it, they would harm you; you must not 
remain here. Some other time come to see me in disguise and 
I will take good care of you.” As directed, Chang ran away 
that .night and subsequently joined the order under another 
Master. Upon being fully ordained, he proved himself to be a 
very diligent monk. 

One day recollecting what the Patriarch had said, he made 
the long journey to see him and to pay him homage. “Why 
have you waited so long?” said the Patriarch, “I have been ex- 
pecting you all the time.” 

Said Chang, “Since that night you so graciously pardoned 
my crime, I have become a monk and have studied Buddhism 
diligently. I can only show my gratitude adequately by spread- 
ing the Dharma for the deliverance of all sentient beings.” 
Then he asked a question as to the meaning of “eternal and 
non-eternal,” which the Patriarch answered and then said, 
“You have now thoroughly realised Mind-essence; hereafter you 
may call yourself, Chi-chai.” 

Chi-chai made obeisance and departed. 


Chapter VIII 
Royal Patronage 

An edict dated the 15th day of the First Moon of the 1st 
year of Shin Lung, issued by the Empress Dowager Chek Tin 
and the Emperor Chung Chung, read as follows: — 

“Since we have invited Grand Masters Wei-on and Shin- 
shau to stay in the Palace and receive our offerings, we have 
continued to study under them as far as we could find time 
after attending to our imperial duties. Out of sheer modesty. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 553 

these two Masters recommended that we should seek the advice 
of Dhyana Master Hui-neng of the South, who had inherited 
the secret Dharma and the robe of the Fifth Patriarch as well 
as the ‘Heart Seal’ of the Lord Buddha. 

“We hereby send Eunuch, Sit Kan, as the courier of this 
Edict to invite His Eminence to come, and we trust His Emi- 
nence will graciously favor us with an early visit, etc., etc.” 

On the ground of illness, the Patriarch sent a reply declin- 
ing the royal invitation and craved permission to be allowed to 
spend his remaining years in the “forest.” 

(In due time Sit Kan, the imperial envoy, arrived at Tso- 
kai and interviewed the Patriarch as follows): 

“In the capitol, Dhyana experts unanimously advise people 
to meditate in the ‘crosslegged’ position to attain Samadhi; 
they say that this is the only way to realise the ‘Norm’ and 
that it is impossible for any one to obtain liberation without 
going through this meditation exercise. May I know your way 
of teaching. Sir?” 

“The Norm is to be realized by the mind,” replied the Pa- 
triarch, “it does not depend upon the crosslegged position. The 
Vajracchedika Sutra says that it is wrong ‘for any one to as- 
sert that Tathagata comes or goes, sits or reclines.’ Why? Be- 
cause Tathagata’s Dhyana of Purity implies neither coming 
from anywhere nor going to anywhere, neither becoming nor 
annihilation. All Dharmas are calm and void, such is Tatha- 
gata’s Seat of Purity. Strictly speaking, there is no such thing 
as ‘attainment’; why should we bother ourselves about the 
crosslegged position?” 

“Upon my return,” said Sit Kan, “Their Majesties will ask 
me to make a report. Sir, will you kindly give me some hints 
as to your essential teachings, so that I may make them known, 
not only to Their Majesties, but also to all Buddhist scholars 
at the Capital. As the flame of one lamp may kindle hundreds 
of thousands of others, the ignorant will be enlightened and 
light will produce light without end.” 

“The Norm implies neither light nor darkness,” replied the 
Patriarch. “Light and darkness signify the idea of alternation. 

(It is not correct to say) ‘light will produce light without end’; 
since light and darkness are a pair of opposites, there must be 
an end as well as a beginning. The Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra 
says, ‘The Norm has no analogy; it is not a relative term.’ ” 



554 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 

“Light signifies wisdom, and darkness signifies defilement. 
If a pilgrim of the Path does not get rid of defilement by wis- 
dom, how is he going to free himself from the ‘wheel of birth 
and death,’ which is beginningless?” 

The Patriarch continued, “Defilement (klesa) is wisdom 
( bodhi ); The two are the same and are not different from each 
other. To break up klasa by Bodhi is only a teaching of the 
followers of the ‘Small’ and ‘Middle’ vehicles. To those of 
keen intellect and superior mental attainment, such teaching is 
disapproved.” 

“What, then, is the teaching of the Mahayana?” 

“From the point of ordinary men,” replied the Patriarch, 
“enlightenment and ignorance are two separate things. Wise 
men who thoroughly realise Mind-essence, know that they are 
of the same nature. This sameness of nature, that is, this non- 
duality of nature, is what is called ‘true nature’; it neither de- 
creases in the case of an ordinary man and ignorant person, 
nor increases in the case of an enlightened sage; it is undis- 
turbed in an annoying situation, and is calm in Samadhi. It is 
neither eternal, nor not-eternal; it neither goes, nor comes; it is 
to be found neither in the interior, nor in exterior, nor in the 
space intervening between. It is beyond existence and non- 
existence; its nature and its phenomena are always in a state 
of ‘tathata;’ it is both permanent and immutable, Such is the 
Norm.” 

Sit Ran asked, “You speak of it as beyond existence and 
non-existence. How do you differentiate it from the teaching of 
the heretics, who teach the same thing?” 

The Patriarch replied: “In the teaching of the heretics, non- 
existence means the ‘end’ of existence, while existence is used 
in contrast with non-existence. What they mean by ‘non-exist- 
ence’ is not actual annihilation, and what they mean by ‘ex- 
istence’ really does not exist. What I mean by ‘beyond exist- 
ence and non-existence’ is this: intrinsically it exists not, and 
at the present moment it is not annihilated. Such is the differ- 
ence between my teaching and the teaching of the heretics. If 
you wish to know the essentials of my teaching, you should free 
yourself from all thought — good ones as well as bad ones — then 
your mind will be in a state of purity, ever calm and serene, 
the usefulness of which will be as apparent as the sands of the 
Ganges.” 


SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 555 

This preaching of the Patriarch, awoke Sit Kan to full en- 
lightenment. He made obeisance to the Patriarch and bade 
him, adieu. Upon his return to the Palace, he reported to 
Their Majesties, what the Patriarch had said. 

In that same year on the 3d day of the 9th Moon, an Edict 
was issued commending the Patriarch in the following terms:— 

“On the ground of old age and poor health, the Patriarch 
declined our invitation to the Capital. Devoting his life, as he 
does, to the practice of Buddhism for the benefit of us all, he 
is, indeed, ‘a field of merit’ for the nation. Following the ex- 
ample of Vimalakirti who recuperated in Vaisali, he widely 
spreads ,the Mahayana-teaching, transmitting the doctrines of 
the Dhyana School, expounding especially the ‘non-dual’ 
Dharma. Through the medium of Sit Kan to whom the Pa- 
triarch imparted the ‘Buddha-knowledge,’ we are fortunate 
enough to have an opportunity to understand clearly his teach- 
ings of Higher Buddhism. This must be due to the accumulated 
merit and our ‘root of goodness’ planted in past lives, otherwise 
we would not be contemporaries of His Eminence. 

“In appreciation of the graciousness of the Patriarch, we 
find ourselves hardly able to express our gratitude. (As a 
token of our great regard for him) we present him herewith a 
Korean Mo-la robe and a crystal bowl. The Prefect of Shiu- 
chow is hereby ordered to renovate his monastery, and to con- 
vert his old residence into a temple which is to be named, 
Kwok-yen. By royal favor, etc., etc.” 


Chapter IX 

Final Words and Death of the Patriarch 

On the 1st day of the 7th Moon, the Patriarch assembled 
his disciples and addressed them as follows: — 

“I am going to leave this world by the 8th Moon. Should 
any of you have doubts about the teaching, please ask me soon, 
so that I may clear them away before I go. You may not find 
any one to teach you after I am gone.” (The sad news moved 
many of them to tears. The Patriarch spoke to them at some 
length) and then added: — 

“Under all circumstances you should free yourselves from 



556 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


attachment to objects; toward them your attitude should be 
neutral and indifferent. Let neither success nor failure, neither 
profit nor loss, worry you. Be ever calm and serene, modest 
and helpful, simple and dispassionate. The Dharma is non- 
dual as is the mind also. The Path is pure and above all 
‘form.’ You are especially warned not to let the exercise for 
concentration of mind, fall into mere quiet thinking or into an 
effort to keep the mind in a blank state. The mind is by na- 
ture pure, there is nothing for us to crave or give up.” 

Realising that the Patriarch would pass away in the near 
future. Elder Fat-hoi after prostrating himself twice asked, “Sir, 
upon your entering into Parinirvana, who will be the inheritor 
of the robe and the (secret) Dharma?” 

“ (As for the Dharma) all my sermons from the time I 
preached in the Tai-fan Monastery up to now, may be copied 
out for circulation. You should take good care of it and hand 
it down from generation to generation for the salvation of all 
sentient beings. He who preaches in accordance with its teach- 
ing preaches the Orthodox Dharma. I have already made 
known to you, all the Dharma I know. 

“As to the transmission of the robe, this practice is to be 
discontinued. Why? Because you all have implicit faith in my 
teaching, you are all free from doubts, therefore, you are all 
able to carry out the lofty object of our school. It is in accord- 
ance with the meaning of the stanza, handed down by Bodhi- 
dharma, the First Patriarch, that the robe be no longer handed 
down to posterity. The verse says: — 

“ ‘The object of my coming to China, 

Was to transmit the Dharma of deliverance to all under 
delusion. 

In five petals, the flower will be complete; 

Thereafter, fruit will come to maturity naturally.’ 

“Do your best each of you; go wherever circumstances lead 
you. Listen to this stanza: — 

“With those who are sympathetic 

You may have discussion about Buddhism. 

As to those whose point of view differs from ours. 

Treat them politely and try to make them happy. 
Disputes are alien to our school. 

They are incompatible with its spirit. 



SUTRA SPOKEN BY THE SIXTH PATRIARCH 557 

To be bigoted and to argue with others in disregard of 
this rule 

Is to subject one’s Mind-essence to the bitterness of this 
mundane existence.” 

* * « 

On the 8th day of the 7th Moon, the Patriarch suddenly 
gave an order to his disciples to get a boat ready for his return 
to Sun-chow, (his native place). They entreated him earnestly 
to remain where he was, but in vain. 

“It is only natural,” said the Patriarch, “death is the inevi- 
table outcome of birth. Even the Buddhas as they appear in 
this world must manifest an earthly death before they enter 
Parinirvana. There will be no exception with me; my physical 
body must be laid down somewhere. Fallen leaves go back to 
the place where the root is.” 

# # # 

On the 3rd day of the 8th Moon of the Year Kwai Tsau, 
the 2nd year of the Sin Tan Era, after eating with his disciples 
at the Kwok-yen Monastery (Sun-chow), the Patriarch spoke 
as follows: — 

“Please sit down in order of seniority; I am going to say 
good bye to you. After my passing away, do not follow the 
worldly custom of crying and lamenting. Neither should mes- 
sages of condolence be accepted, nor should mourning be worn. 
These things are contrary to orthodox teaching; he who does 
them is not my disciple. What you should do is to know your 
own mind and realise your own Buddha-nature, which neither 
rests nor moves, neither becomes nor ceases to be, neither comes 
nor goes, neither affirms nor denies, neither remains nor departs. 
I repeat this to you that you may surely realise your Mind- 
essence. If you carry out my instructions after my death and 
practise them, then my going away will make no difference 
with you. On the other hand, if you go against my teachings, 
even if I remained with you, no benefit would be yours.” Then 
he uttered this stanza: — 

“Undisturbed and serene, the wise man practises no 
virtue; 

Self possessed and dispassionate, he commits no sin; 

Calm and silent, he gives up seeing and hearing; 

Even and upright his mind abides nowhere.” 



558 SELECTIONS FROM CHINESE SOURCES 


Having uttered the stanza, he sat reverently until the third 
watch of the night, then he said abruptly, “I am going now,” 
and in a moment passed away. At that time, a peculiar fra- 
grance pervaded the room and a lunar rainbow appeared to 
link the earth and heaven; the trees in the grove turned pale 
and the birds and animals cried mournfully. 

« * « 

In the nth Moon of that year, the question of the Patri- 
arch’s resting place gave rise to a dispute among the govern- 
ment officials of Kwong-chow, Shiu-chow and Sun-chow, each 
party being anxious to have the remains of the Patriarch re- 
moved to his own district. The Patriarch’s disciples together 
with other Bhikkhus and laymen, took part in the controversy. 
Being unable to come to any agreement, they burnt incense 
and prayed to the Patriarch to indicate by the drift of the 
smoke the place he himself would like to rest. As the smoke 
turned directly to Tso-kai, the sacred shrine together with the 
inherited robe and bowl were accordingly removed back there 
on the 13th day of the 11th Moon. 

Next year on the 25th day of the 7th Moon, the body was 
taken from the shrine and re-embalmed and placed in the 
stupa, and by imperial order, tablets were erected to record the 
life of the Patriarch. 

The Patriarch inherited the robe when he was 24; he was 
ordained at 39; and died at the age of 76. For thirty-seven 
years he preached to the benefit of all sentient beings. Forty- 
three of his disciples inherited the Dharma; while those who 
attained (a measure of) enlightenment and thereby got out of 
the rut of the ordinary life were too many to be numbered. 
The robe transmitted by the First Patriarch, Bodhidharma, as 
the insignia of the Patriarchship, the Mo La robe and the 
crystal bowl presented by the Emperor Chung Chung, the Pa- 
triarch’s image carved by Fong-pin, and other sacred things, 
were given into the care oF the keeper of the stupa. They were 
to be kept permanently at Po-lam Monastery to guard the wel- 
fare of the temple. The Sutra spoken by the Patriarch was pub- 
lished and circulated to make known the principles of the Dhy- 
ana School. All these steps were taken for the prosperity of 
the “Three Jewels,” Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, as well as 
for the general welfare of all sentient beings. 


SELECTIONS 

FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 



Metier is it to live the solitary life of a monk 
Than to return again and again to the dreary round 
of life's distractions . 

The true disciple of the Buddha, having freed himself 
from the fetters of sense , 

Seeks in solitude that serenity of mind 

Which is necessary to the attainment of Wisdom. 

; # # # 

I pray Thee, O gracious Lord , 

Grant that this mendicant may cling successfully to 
solitude, 

Making solitude his paradise . 




THE LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 
Milarepa’s Belief 

M Y Guru said, My son, what beliefs or convictions hast 
thou arrived at regarding these Truths; what experiences, 
what insight, what understanding hast thou obtained? And 
he added. Take thy time and recount them to me. 

Upon this, with deep and sincere humility, I knelt, and 
joining the palms of my hands, with tears in mine eyes, ex- 
temporaneously sang to my Guru a hymn of praise, offering 
him the sevenfold worship — as a prelude to submitting the nar- 
rative of mine experiences and convictions: 

i 

To the impure eyes of them Thou seekest to liberate. 
Thou manifestest Thyself in a variety of shapes; 

But to those of Thy followers who have been purified. 
Thou, Lord, appearest as a Perfected Being; obeisance to 
Thee. 

2 

With Thy Brahma-like voice, endowed with the sixty 
vocal perfections, 

Thou preachest the Holy Truths to each in his own 
speech. 

Complete in their eighty-four thousand subjects; 
Obeisance to Thy Word, audible yet inseparable from 
the Voidness. 

3 

In the Heavenly Radiance of Dharma-Kaya Mind, 
There existeth not shadow of thing or concept. 

Yet It pervadeth all objects of knowledge; 

Obeisance to the Immutable, Eternal Mind. 



562 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


In the Holy Palace of the Pure and Spiritual Realms, 
Thou Person illusory, yet changeless and selfless. 

Thou Mother Divine of Buddhas, past, present, and 
future, 

0 Great Mother Damema, to Thy Feet I bow. 

5 

(O Guru), to Thy children spiritual. 

To Thy disciples who Thy word obey. 

To each, with all his followers. 

Obeisance humble and sincere I make. 

6 

Whate’er there be, in all the systems of the many worlds. 
To serve as offerings for the rites divine, 

1 offer unto Thee, along with mine own fleshly form; 

Of all my sins, may I be freed and purified. 

7 

In merits earned by others, I rejoice; 

So set the Wheel of Truth in motion full, I pray; 

Until the Whirling Pool of Being emptied be. 

Do not, O Noble Guru, from the world depart. 

I dedicate all merit from this Hymn, 

Unto the Cause of Universal Good. 

Having, as a prelude, sung this hymn of seven stanzas, I 
then continued: Inseparable from Dorje-Chang Himself art 
thou, my Guru, with thy consort, and thine offspring. In virtue 
of thy fair and meritorious deeds, and of the power of the 
waves of grace proceeding from thy boundless generosity, and 
of thy kindness beyond repayment, I, thy vassal, have imbibed 
a little knowledge, in the sphere of understanding, which I 
now beg to lay before thee. Out of the unchanging State of 
Quiescence of Eternal Truth, be pleased to listen unto me for a 
little while. 

I have understood this body of mine to be the product of 
Ignorance, as set forth in the Twelve Nidanas, composed of 
flesh and blood, lit up by the perceptive power of conscious- 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


563 


ness. To those fortunate ones who long for Emancipation, it 
may be the great vessel by means of which they may procure 
Freedom and Endowments; but to those unfortunate ones, 
who only sin, it may be the guide to the lower and miserable 
states of existence. This, our life, is the boundary-mark whence 
one may take an upward or downward path. Our present time 
is a most precious time, wherein each of us must decide, in one 
way or the other, for lasting good or lasting ill. I have under- 
stood this to be the chief end of our present term of life. 
Here, again, by holding on to Thee, O powerful Lord and 
Saviour of sentient beings like myself, I hope to cross over this 
Ocean of Worldly Existence, the source of all pains and griefs, 
so difficult to escape from. But to be able to do so, it is first 
of all necessary for me to take refuge in the Precious Trinity, 
and to observe and adopt in a sincere spirit the rules prescribed. 
In this, too, I see the Guru to be the main source and embodi- 
ment of all good and happiness that can accrue to me. 

Therefore do I realize the supreme necessity of obeying the 
Guru’s commands and behests, and keeping my faith in him 
unsullied and staunch. After such realization, then deep medi- 
tation on the difficulty of obtaining the precious boon of a 
free and well-endowed human birth, on the uncertainty of the 
exact moment of death, on the certain effect of one’s actions, 
and on the miseries of sangsaric being, cannot fail to compel 
one to desire freedom and emancipation from all sangsaric ex- 
istence; and to obtain this, one must cleave to the staff of the 
Noble Eightfold Path, by which only may a sentient being ob- 
tain that emancipation. Then, from the level of this Path, one 
must pass on, by degrees, to the Higher Paths, all the while 
observing one’s vows as carefully as if they were one’s own 
eyes, rebuilding or mending them should they become in the 
least impaired. I have understood that one who aimeth at his 
individual peace and happiness adopteth the Lower Path (the 
Hinayana). But he, who from the very start, devoteth the 
merit of his love and compassion to the cause of others, I un- 
derstand belongeth to the Higher Path (the Mahayana). To 
leave the Lower Path and to enter upon the Higher Path, it 
is necessary to gain a clear view of the goal of one’s aspira- 
tions, as set forth by the unexcelled Immutable Path (the 
Vajra-Yana). 

Again, to gain a clear view of the Final Goal, it is essential 


564 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


to have a perfectly well-accomplished Guru , who knoweth every 
branch of the four kinds of initiatory rites without the slightest 
misunderstanding or doubt regarding them; he alone can make 
the Final Goal thoroughly explicit to a shishya. The ceremony 
of initiation conferreth the power of mastering abstruse and 
deep thoughts regarding the Final Goal. In meditating on the 
Final Goal, step by step, one hath to put forth all one’s en- 
ergies, both of grammatical and logical acumen; as well as, 
through moral and mental reasoning and internal search, to 
discover the nonexistence of the personal Ego and, therefore, 
the fallacy of the popular idea that it existeth. In realizing the 
non-existence of the personal Ego, the mind must be kept in 
quiescence. On being enabled, by various methods, to put the 
mind in that state as a result of a variety of causes, all 
(thoughts, ideas, and cognitions) cease, and the mind passeth 
from consciousness (of objects) into a state of perfect tranquil- 
lity, so that days, months, and years may pass without the per- 
son himself perceiving it; thus the passing of time hath to be 
marked for him by others. This state is called Shi-nay (Tran- 
quil Rest). By not submitting oneself to the state of total 
oblivion and unconsciousness (of objects), but by exerting one’s 
intellect or faculty of consciousness in this state, one gaineth 
the clear ecstatic state of quiescent consciousness. 

Although there be this state, which may be called a state of 
superconsciousness (Lhag-tong), nevertheless, individuals, or 
ego-entities, so long as they are such, are incapable of experi- 
encing it. I believe that it is only experienced when one hath 
gained the first (superhuman) state on the Path to Buddha- 
hood. Thus, by thought-process and visualization, one treadeth 
the Path. The visions of the forms of the Deities upon which 
one meditateth are merely the signs attending perseverance in 
meditation. They have no intrinsic worth or value in them- 
selves. 

To sum up, a vivid state of mental quiescence, accompanied 
by energy, and a keen power of analysis, by a clear and in- 
quisitive intellect, are indispensable requirements; like the low- 
est rungs of a ladder, they are absolutely necessary to enable 
one to ascend. But in the process of meditating on this state 
of mental quiescence (Shi-nay), by mental concentration, either 
on forms and shapes, or on shapeless and formless things, the 
very first effort must be made in a compassionate mood, with 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


565 


the aim of dedicating the merit of one’s efforts to the Uni- 
versal Good. Secondly, the goal of one’s aspirations must be 
well defined and clear, soaring into the regions transcending 
thought. Finally, there is need of mentally praying and wish- 
ing for blessings on others so earnestly that one’s mind-processes 
also transcend thought. These, I understand, to be the highest 
of all Paths. 

Then, again, as the mere name of food doth not satisfy the 
appetite of a hungry person, but he must eat food, so, also, 
a man who would learn about the Voidness (of Thought) must 
meditate so as to realize it, and not merely learn its definition. 
Moreover, to obtain the knowledge of the state of supercon- 
sciousness (Lhag-tong), one must practice and accustom one- 
self to the mechanical attainment of the recurrence of the 
above practices without intermission. In short, habituation to 
the contemplation of Voidness, of Equilibrium, of the Inde- 
scribable, and of the Incognizable, forms the four different 
stages of the Four Degrees of Initiation, — graduated steps in the 
ultimate goal of the mystic Vajra-Yana (or Immutable Path). 
To understand these thoroughly, one must sacrifice bodily ease 
and all luxuriousness, and, with this in mind, face and sur- 
mount every obstacle, being ever willing to sacrifice life itself, 
and prepared for every possible contingency. 

As for myself, I have not the means to a recompense thee, 
my Guru and the Reverend Mother, — my benefactors; your 
loving kindness is beyond my power to repay by any offer of 
worldly wealth or riches. So I will repay you by a lifelong de- 
votion to meditation,and I will complete my final study of your 
Teachings in the ’Og-min Heaven. 

To my Guru , the Great Dor j e-Chang, 

To Damema, the Mother of all Buddhas, 

And to all Princes Royal, the Avataras, 

I make as offering, to Their ears, this essence of my 
learning gleaned. 

If there be heresy or error in my speech, 

I pray that They will kindly pardon it. 

And set me then upon the Righteous Path. 

Lord, from the sun-orb of Thy Grace, 

The radiant Rays of Light have shone, 



566 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

And opened wide the petals of the Lotus of my Heart, 
So that it breatheth forth the fragrance bom of Knowl- 
edge, 

For which I am for ever bounden unto Thee; 

So will I worship Thee by constant meditation. 

Vouchsafe to bless me in mine efforts. 

That good may come to every sentient being. 

Lastly, I ask forgiveness, too, for any lavishness of words. 

Then my Guru replied, I have conferred upon thee the Su- 
preme, Mystic, Ear-Whispered Truths, as revealed by the 
Deities and transmitted to me by my Lord Naropa. To no 
other of my disciples have I imparted them; nay, not even to 
the foremost. To thee I have handed them on in an entire and 
perfect manner, like unto a vessel filled to the very brim. 

Then he invoked the Tutelary Deities to bear witness to the 
truth of these statements. 

The Guru having delivered this deeply impressive discourse 
sang the following song extempore: 

To desire much, bringeth a troubled mind; 

(So) store within thy heart (these) precepts wise: 
Many seeming Thats are not the That; 

Many trees bear nought of fruit; 

All Sciences are not the Wisdom True; 

Acquiring these is not acquiring Truth. 

Much talking is of little profit. 

That which enricheth the heart is the Sacred Wealth; 
Desirest thou wealth? then store thou this. 

The Doctrine which subdueth passions vile is the Noble 
Path; 

Desirest thou a safe path? then tread thou this. 

A contented heart is the noblest king; 

Desirest thou a noble master? Then seek thou this. 

Forsake the weeping, sorrow-burdened world; 

Make lonely caves thy home paternal. 

And solitude thy paradise. 

Let Thought riding Thought be thy tireless steed. 

And thy body thy temple filled with gods. 

And ceaseless devotion thy best of drugs. 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 567 

To thee, thou energetic one, 

The Teaching that containeth all of Wisdom I have 
given; 

Thy faith, the Teaching, and myself are one. 

And may this Perfect Seed of Truth, thus to my son 
entrusted. 

Bring forth its foliage and its fruit. 

Without corruption, without being scattered, without 
withering. 

Having sung this, the Guru placed his hand upon my head, 
and said, My son, thy going away breaketh my heart; but 
since all composite things are alike liable to dissolution it can- 
not be helped. Yet remain with me a few days more; examine 
thy texts, and if thou find in them uncertainties, have these 
cleared. I obeyed, and on my remaining for some days my un- 
certainties touching the texts were cleared up. 

Then my Guru asked me, Son, hast thou seen, and dost 
thou believe? I replied, Yes, Lord and Guru , impossible is it 
not to believe; I myself will emulate Thee in devotion, till I, 
too, obtain these powers. 

He answered, That is well, my son. And now thou art fit- 
ted to take thy departure, for I have shown to thee the mir- 
age-like nature of all existing things. Realize this fact for thy- 
self, going into retreat in mountain recessess, lonely caves, 
and the solitudes of wildernesses. 

Having done this, I paid him due worship, and expressing 
a wish for a future meeting started home. I reached there 
after three days, feeling somewhat elated at the development 
in the art of controlling the breath which this betokened. 

Thus did all come about — mine obtaining the Truth in 
its entirety, my thorough study of it, and, while thus engaged, 
my being impelled by a significant dream to take leave of my 
Guru and return home. 


Milarepa’s Visit to Old Home 

The news of the death of my mother and the disappearance 
of my sister filled my heart with despair and sorrow. I hid 



568 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


myself in a nook till past sunset, where I wept bitterly. After 
sunset I went to the village, and lo! I beheld my house exactly 
in the condition I had seen in my dream. The fine house, 
which used to be like a temple, was in a most dilapidated and 
ruinous condition. The set of sacred volumes had been damaged 
by the rain leaking in, and thick layers of dust and earth fal- 
len from the (ruined) roof covered them; they were serving 
as nests and sleeping-places for birds and mice. Wherever I 
looked, desolation and ruin met me, so that I was overwhelmed 
with despondency. Then groping my way towards the outer 
rooms I found a heap of earth and rags, over which a large 
quantity of weeds and grass had grown. On shaking it up I 
found it to be a heap of human bones, which instinctively I 
knew to be my mother’s. A deep and unutterable yearning 
seized me. So unbearable was the thought that I should never 
more see my mother that I was about to lose consciousness, 
when I remembered my Guru’s Teachings; and, communing 
spiritually with my mother’s spirit and the divine spirits of 
the saints of the Kargyutpa Sect, I made a pillow of my moth- 
er’s bones and remained in an undistracted state of tranquil- 
ity, in clear and deep meditation, whereby I realized that it 
was indeed possible to save both my father and mother from 
the pain and miseries of sangsaric existence. After passing seven 
days and nights thus, I rose from the samadhi. 

Thence, upon reflection, I came to the conclusion that there 
was no permanent benefit to be obtained in any state of sang- 
saric existence. So I made up my mind to dispose of my moth- 
er’s bones in the approved way, namely, to have them pulver- 
ized and mixed with clay and then moulded into miniature 
reliquaries, called tsha-tshas. I would offer the volumes of Scrip- 
ture in payment for having this done; and, as for myself, I 
would go away to the Dragkar-Taso Cave and there pass my 
whole time in constant meditation. I determined to sit there 
night and day, till death should put an end to my life. I 
vowed that if any thought of worldly ambition should allure 
me, I would commit suicide rather than allow myself to be 
overcome by it. I prayed to the Tutelary Deities and Dakinis 
to cut short my life if ever I should come to think of an easy 
sort of devotion. 

Making these mental resolves over and over again, I gath- 
ered up my mother’s bones; and then, upon removing the heap 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


569 


of dust and dirt that had accumulated upon the volumes of 
Scripture, I saw that their letters were still clear. Carrying the 
volumes on my back and my mother’s bones in my lap, I 
started forth. An unutterable anguish wrung my heart to its 
very core. Henceforth, the world had nothing to tempt me or 
to bind me to it. I repeated my vows to devote my life to a 
rigid course of asceticism in the realization of the Truth, and 
resolved to adhere to them firmly. In an almost frenzied mood 
I sang the following verses of firm resolution to myself: 

O Gracious Lord, Thou the Immutable, 

O Marpa the Translator, according to Thy Words 
Prophetic, 

A teacher of the transitoriness of things I’ve found 
Within my native land — prison of temptation; 

And by Thy Blessing and Thy Grace, may I 

From this noble teacher, experience and faith obtain. 

All phenomena, existing and apparent. 

Are ever transient, changing, and unstable; 

But more especially the worldly life 
Hath no reality, no permanent gain (in it). 

And so, instead of doing work that’s profitless. 

The Truth Divine I’ll seek. 

First, when my father lived, the (grown-up) son lived 
not; * 

Next, when I was born (and grown), my father did not 
live. 

Had both together met, little would have been the profit, 
even then; 

So T will go to gain the Truth Divine, 

To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation. 

When my mother lived, myself, the son, was long away; 
When I come home, I find my mother dead. 

Had both together met, little would have been the profit, 
even then; 

So I will go to gain the Truth Divine, 

To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation. 



570 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

When my sister was at home, myself, her brother, was 
away; 

When I, her brother, come back home, I find my sister 
gone astray. 

Had both together met, little would have been the profit, 
even then; 

So I will go to gain the Truth Divine, 

To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation. 

When the Scriptural Texts were there, no veneration had 
they; 

When the veneration came, they lay damaged by the 
rain. 

Had both together (earlier) met, little would have been 
the profit, even then; 

So I will go to gain the Truth Divine, 

To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation. 

When the house stood firm, the master was away; 

When the master came, the house was fallen in ruin. 

Had both remained together, little would have been the 
profit, even then; 

So I will go to gain the Truth Divine, 

To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation. 

When the field was fertile, the farmer was away; 

When the farmer came, the field was choked with weeds. 

Had both remained together, little would have been the 
profit, even then; 

So I will go to gain the Truth Divine, 

To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practice meditation. 

Native land, and home, and all possessions, 

I know you all to be but empty things; 

Any thoughtless one may have you. 

As for me, the devotee, I go to win the Truth Eternal 

O Gracious Father, Marpa the Translator, 

May I succeed in meditation in the solitude. 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


57 1 


Milarepa’s Temptations in Solitude 

Zesay (to whom I had been betrothed in my childhood), 
hearing about my being there, came with some nice food and 
drink to meet me. She wept copiously and embraced me. 
When she had told me of the manner of my mother’s death 
and about my sister’s straying, I was greatly saddened, and 
wept bitterly. I said to her, How constant thou art, that thou 
shouldst not have married yet. She said. People were so afraid 
of thy Deities that no one dared to ask my hand in marriage, 
nor would I have married even had any one proposed to me. 
That thou hast taken to this religious life is admirable; but 
what dost thou intend doing with thy house and field? I 
understood her desire, and thinking that since, by the grace of 
my Guru (Marpa the Translator), I had given up worldly life 
altogether, praying for her might suffice from a religious point 
of view, but that I should say something to her which might 
settle her doubts from a worldly standpoint. So I said to her. 
If thou meet my sister, give them to her; until she cometh, 
thou mayst enjoy the field thyself; and, if my sister be dead, 
then thou canst have both the house and the field for thine 
own. She asked me, Dost thou not want them thyself? And I 
replied, I shall find my food as the mice and birds do theirs, 
or I shall fast and starve, therefore I need not the field; and, 
as I shall dwell only in caves and lonely solitudes, I have no 
need of a house. I realize that even though I should possess 
the whole world, at my death 1 should have to give up every- 
thing; and so it will confer happiness in this and the next life 
if I give up everything now. I am thus pursuing a life which 
is quite opposite to that followed by the people of the world. 
Give up thinking of me as a living person. 

She then asked me. Is thy practice also opposed to that of 
all other religious persons? And I replied, I am of course op- 
posed to those hypocrites who have assumed a religious garb 
only for the sake of the honour attending it, and — their aim 
being merely the acquisition of wealth, fame, and greatness — 
have succeeded in getting by heart the contents of a volume or 
two; and who, having strong party feelings, strive for victory 
for their own party and defeat for the opposite party. But as 



572 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


for those who are sincere devotees, although they be of differ- 
ent sects and creeds, if their principle be not like the one men- 
tioned above, then there cannot be much disagreement between 
the aim of the one or the other, so I cannot be opposed to any 
of them. On the whole, if they are not as sincere as myself, 
then they must, of course, be opposed to my creed. 

On this, she said. Then how is it that thy practice is so poor 
and miserable — much worse than that of the meanest beggar? 
I have never seen anyone like this before. To what particular 
doctrine of the Mahayana Sect dost thou belong? I told her 
that it was the highest creed of the Mahayana; that it was 
called the Path of Total Self-Abnegation, for the purpose of 
attaining Buddhahood in one lifetime; and that to attain Bud- 
dhahood thus we must scatter this life’s aims and objects to 
the wind. 

She said. Indeed, I see that the practice of thy doctrine and 
theirs is quite opposite; and from what I hear and see of thee 
it appeareth that the practice of the Dharma is not altogether 
a very easy matter; theirs would have been an easier path to 
tread. I replied. The yogi who still retaineth a love of the 
world would not attain to mine ideal of a sincere devotee. I 
am of opinion that even those sincere Truth-seekers who still 
cling to the yellow robe retain a little love of worldly fame and 
honour; and even though they do not retain it, yet I am con- 
vinced that there is (between me and them) a vast difference 
in regard to the speed and efficacy of attaining Buddhahood. 
This, however, thou wilt not comprehend just now. So, if thou 
think thou canst, thou shouldst devote thyself to a religious 
life; but if thou feel unequal to the task, then thou canst en- 
joy the house and field as I have already said, and hadst bet- 
ter go home. She replied, I cannot accept thy house and field 
which thou shouldst give to thy sister. I should like to be a 
devotee, but such a devotee as thou art I cannot be. Having 
said this she went away. 

Mine aunt, coming to learn that I did not care about my 
house and field, after a while began to think that since I pro- 
fessed a determination to adhere to my Guru’s command, she 
might perhaps be able to obtain them for herself. So she 
visited me, bringing with her a quantity of barley-flour, butter, 
chhang, and other food, and said, Some time ago I treated thee 
unkindly, being steeped in ignorance; but as thou, my nephew. 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


573 


art a religious person, thou must pardon me. If thou wilt al- 
low me, I will cultivate thy field, and supply thee with food. 
To this I agreed, saying. So be it; please supply me with the 
flour of twenty measures of barley per month; the rest thou 
canst enjoy; thou mayst cultivate the field. She went away 
delighted with the bargain. For two months she supplied the 
flour as agreed; then she came again and said. People say that 
if I cultivate thy field perhaps thy Tutelary Deities may injure 
me because of thy magical power. When I satisfied her, saying, 
Why should I practice sorcery now? Rather wilt thou be ac- 
quiring merit if thou continue to cultivate the field and supply 
me as thou art doing, she at once said. In that case, wilt thou 
kindly reassure me by taking an oath that thou wilt not prac- 
tice sorcery any more. Thou canst have no objection to doing 
so. I was not sure what she intended doing; But, as I con- 
sidered it consistent with my calling to please others, I reas- 
sured her by taking the oath in accordance with her wish, at 
which she went away quite pleased. 

All this while, in spite of mine unremitting perseverance in 
meditation, I was unable to obtain signs of any improvement or 
growth in my knowledge or experience of Ecstatic Warmth; and 
I was becoming anxious as to what I should do next. One 
night I dreamt that I was engaged in ploughing a very stiff 
and hardened plot of land, which defied all mine efforts; and, 
despairing of being able to plough it, was thinking of giving 
up the task. Thereupon, my beloved Guru Marpa appeared in 
the heavens and exhorted me, saying, Son, put forth thine 
energy and persevere in the ploughing; thou art sure to suc- 
ceed, despite the hardness of the soil. Then Marpa himself 
guided the team; the soil was ploughed quite easily; and the 
field produced a rich harvest. The dream gave me great pleas- 
ure on my waking up. 

Thereby the thought arose in me that dreams, being illusory 
reproductions of one’s own thoughts, are not regarded as real 
even by stupid and ignorant boors, and that when I thus al- 
lowed a dream to affect -my temper I must be more silly than 
the greatest fool. But as it seemed to be a sign that if I con- 
tinued to meditate with zeal and perseverance mine efforts 
would be crowned with success, I was filled with pleasure and 
in that mood I sang this song to impress the true interpretation 
of the dream clearly on mine own memory: 



574 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


I pray to Thee, O Gracious Lord! 

Grant that this mendicant may cling successfully to 
solitude. 

I put upon the field of Tranquil Mind 
The water and manure of a constant faith. 

Then sow it with unblemished seed of a heart immacul- 
ate. 

And over it, like pealing thunder, reverberateth sincere 
prayer; 

Grace of itself upon it falleth, like a shower of rain. 

Unto the oxen and the plough of Undistracted Thought 
I add the ploughshare of (Right) Method and of 
Reason. 

The oxen, guided by the undeluded person. 

And with firm grasp of undivided purpose. 

And by the whip of zeal and perseverance goaded on, 
Break up the hardened soil of Ignorance, bom of the 
Evil Passions Five, 

And clear away the stones of the hardened, sin-filled 
nature, 

And weed out all hypocrisies. 

Then, with the sickle of the Truth of Karmic Laws, 
The reaping of the Noble Life is practised. 

The fruits, which are of Truths Sublime, 

Are stored within the Granary to which no concepts can 
apply. 

The gods engage in roasting and in grinding this most 
precious food. 

Which then sustaineth my poor humble self 
Whilst I for Truth am seeking. 

The dream I thus interpret: 

Words bring not forth True Fruit, 

Mere expositions do not yield True Knowledge. 

Yet those who would devote themselves unto the life 
religious. 

In meditation must exert their utmost zeal and persever- 
ance; 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


575 

And if they will endure hardships and strive most zeal- 
ously. 

And seek with care, the Most Precious can be found. 

May all who are sincerely seeking Truth 

Untroubled be by obstacles and interruptions on the 
Path. 

Having sung this, I made up my mind to go and carry on 
my meditation in the Dragkar-Taso Cave. As I was about to 
start, mine aunt came up with sixty measures of barley-flour, 
a ragged dress of skins, one piece of good cloth, and some but- 
ter and grease mixed up into a ball, and said. My nephew, 
these are in payment of thy field, which thus is disposed of. 
Take them and go away to a place far beyond my sight and 
hearing, for the neighbours are saying to me, Thopaga hath 
wrought much mischief upon us before this; and if thou must 
still have dealings with him and serve him, we are certain that 
he will do us more harm and perhaps kill the remaining people 
of the place. Rather than this, we will kill both of you. So it 
is safer for thee to flee away into some other country. If 
thou do not go, why should they sacrifice me? But there is 
not the least doubt that they will kill thee. 

I knew that the people would not speak in that fashion, 
and so I said to her. If I were not faithful to my religious 
vows, I would not refrain from practising sorcery to regain pos- 
session of my field, especially as I have not sworn to refrain 
from doing so under these circumstances. Being possessed of 
such magical powers, I could with the greatest ease stretch thee 
out a pale corpse in an instant; yet I will not do so, for on 
whom should I practise my patience if not on those who have 
wronged me? If I should die to-night, what could I do with 
the field, or with these few articles themselves? Patience is 
said to be the shortest path to obtain Buddhahood, and thou 
mine aunt art the very person on whom I must practise my 
patience. Moreover, ye, mine aunt and mine uncle, have been 
the means of bringing me to this life (of renunciation). I am 
sincerely grateful to both of you, and in return for these deeds 
of yours I will ever pray for you, that ye may obtain Buddha- 
hood in your future lifetime. Not only can I give to thee the 
field, but the house, too. Then I explained to her everything 



576 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


explicitly, and ended by saying. As for me — whose life is de- 
voted to the search for Truth — I require only my Guru’s in- 
structions and nothing more; so thou art welcome to both the 
field and the house. And I sang to her the following song: 

O Lord, my Guru, by Thy Grace do I the life ascetic 
live; 

My weal and woe are known to Thee! 

The whole Sangsara, being e’er entangled in the Web of 

Whoever holdeth fast to it severeth Salvation’s Vital 
Cord. 

In harvesting of evil deeds the human race is busy; 

And the doing so is to taste the pangs of Hell. 

The affectionate expressions of one’s kith and kin are 
the Devil’s Castle; 

To build it is to fall into the Flames (of Anguish). 

The piling up of wealth is the piling up of others’ 
property; 

What one thus storeth formeth but provisions for one’s 
enemies. 

Enjoying wine and tea in merriment is drinking juice of 
aconite; 

To drink it is to drown Salvation’s Vital Cord. 

The price mine aunt brought for my field are things 
wrung out of avarice; 

To eat them would entail a birth amongst the famished 
ghosts. 

The counsel of mine aunt is born of wrath and venge- 
ance; 

To utter it entaileth general disturbance and destruction. 

Whatever I possess, both field and house, 

Take all, O aunt, and therewith, happy be. 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


577 


I wash off human scandal by devotion true; 

And by my zeal I satisfy the Deities. 

By compassion I subdue the demons; 

All blame I scatter to the wind. 

And upward turn my face. 

O Gracious One, Thou the Immutable, 

Vouchsafe Thy Grace, that I may pass my life in soli- 
tude successfully. 

Until I have attained to Siddhi, unto this solitude will 
I hold fast; 

Of starvation though I die, I’ll not go to seek alms given 
in faith or dedicated to the dead. 

For that would be to choke myself with dust. 

E’en though of cold I die, I’ll not descend to beg for 
garments. 

E’en though of misery and sorrow I should die. I’ll not 
descend to join in pleasures of the worldly life. 

Though I fall ill, e’en unto death. I’ll not descend to 
seek one dose of medicine. 

And not one movement of my body will I give to any 
worldly purpose; 

But body, speech, and heart I dedicate to winning Bud- 
dhahood. 

May the Guru, Gods, and Dakinis enable me to keep my 
vows. 

And may they bless mine efforts; 

May the Dakinis and Faith Protecting Deities fulfill my 
wishes. 

And render me all needed aid. 

(I added): Should I break these vows — seeing that it is 
better to die than to live a life without seeking to acquire 
Truth — may the Divine Beings, who protect the Faith, cut my 
life short immediately, and may my Guru’s and Deva’s grace 
combine in directing my next life to religious pursuits and en- 
dow it with the firmness and intellect necessary to enable it 
to surmount all obstacles (on the Path) and triumph over 
them. 



578 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


Having thus vowed, I sang this song, consecrating my vows: 

Offspring of Naropa and of the Saving Path, 

May (I), the hermit, cling successfully to solitude. 

May pleasures of the world illusory not tempt me; 

But may Tranquillity of Meditation be increased; 

May I not lie steeped in Unconsciousness of Quietude; 

But may the Blossom of the Superconsciousness bloom 
forth in me. 

May various mind-created worldly thoughts not vex me; 

But may the foliage luxuriant, of Uncreatedness, burst 
forth in me. 

May I, in hermitage, be troubled not with mental 
conflicts; 

But may I ripen fruit of Knowledge and Experience. 

May Mara and his hosts disturb me not; 

But may I find self-satisfaction in the Knowledge of 
mine own (True) Mind. 

May I doubt not the Path and Method I pursue; 

But may I follow in the footsteps of my Father 
(Spiritual). 

O Gracious Lord, Embodiment of the Immutable, 

Thy Blessings grant, that I (the mendicant), may firmly 
hold to solitude. 

# # * 

About a year after that, some hunters of Tsa, having failed 
to secure any game, happened to come strolling by the 

cave They said, Living upon such food, and wearing 

such garments as thou hast on now, it is no wonder that thy 
body hath been reduced to this miserable plight. Thine appear- 
ance becometh not a man. Why, even if thou should serve as 
a servant, thou wouldst have a bellyful of food and warm cloth- 
ing. Thou art the most pitiable and miserable person in the 
whole world. I said, O my friends, do not say that. I am one 
of the most fortunate and best amongst all who have obtained 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


579 


the human life. I have met with Marpa the Translator, of 
Lhobrak, and obtained from him the Truth which conferreth 
Buddhahood in one lifetime; and now, having entirely given up 
all worldly thoughts, I am passing my life in strict asceticism 
and devotion in these solitudes, far away from human habita- 
tions. I am obtaining that which will avail me in Eternity. By 
denying myself the trivial pleasures to be derived from food, 
clothing, and fame, I am subduing the Enemy (Ignorance) in 
this very lifetime. Amongst the World’s entire human popula- 
tion I am one of the most courageous, with the highest aspira- 
tions. But ye! — bom in a country where the Noble Doctrine of 
the Buddha prevaileth, yet have not so much as listened to one 
religious discourse, let alone devoting your lives to it; but, on 
the other hand, ye are striving your utmost to gain the lowest 
depths and the longest terms of an existence in the Infernal 
Regions! Ye are accumulating sins by the pound and stone, 
and vying with each other in that! How foolish and perverted 
are your aims in life! I not only rejoice in the prospect of 
Eternal Bliss, but enjoy these things which give me content- 
ment and self-approbation. 

I then sang to them a song about my Five Comforts: 

Lord! Gracious Marpa! I bow down at Thy Feet! 

Enable me to give up worldly aims. 

Here is the Dragkar-Taso’s Middle Cave, 

On this the topmost summit of the Middle Cave, 

I, the Yogi Tibetan called Repa, 

Relinquishing all thoughts of what to eat or wear, and 
this life’s aims. 

Have settled down to win the perfect Buddhahood. 

Comfortable is the hard mattress underneath me. 

Comfortable is the Nepalese cotton-padded quilt above 
me. 

Comfortable is the single meditation-band which holdeth 
up my knee. 

Comfortable is the body, to a diet temperate inured. 

Comfortable is the Lucid Mind which discemeth present 
clingings and the Final Goal; 

Nought is there uncomfortable; everything is com- 
fortable. 



580 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

If all of ye can do so, try to imitate me; 

But if inspired ye be not with the aim of the ascetic hte. 

And to the error of the Ego Doctrine will hold fast, 

I pray that ye spare me your misplaced pity; 

For I a Yogi am, upon the Path of the Acquirement of 
Eternal Bliss. 

The sun’s last rays are passing o’er the mountain tops; 

Return ye to your own abodes. 

And as for me, who soon must die, uncertain of the 
hour of death. 

With self-set task of winning perfect Buddhahood, 

No time have I to waste on useless talk; 

Therefore shall I into the State Quiescent of Samadhi 
enter now. 

On hearing the song, they said. Thou art singing of various 
comforts, yet, in fact, thou dost really possess a very nice voice. 
As for us, we cannot rough it as thou art doing. Then they 
went off home. 

On* the occasion of an annual feast-day in Kyanga-Tsa, 
they chanced to sing this song together. It happened that my 
sister Peta was also there, having gone to obtain some food and 
drink. She, upon hearing the song, said to them. Sirs, the man 
who sang that must be a very Buddha himself. One among the 
hunters said, Ha! Ha! see how she praiseth her own brother; 
and another said. Whether he be Buddha or animal, it is thy 
half-starved brother’s song; he is on the point of death from 
hunger. On this, Peta said, Oh! my parents are dead long ago; 
my relatives have become mine enemies; my brother hath 
roamed away, and I myself am reduced to a beggar’s life: what 
is the need of gloating over my miseries? And she burst out 
weeping. Zesay came up just then, and comforted her by say- 
ing, Do not weep. It is quite possible that it is thy brother; 

I also met him some time ago. Go thou to the Dragkar-Taso 
Cave, and find out if he be there still. If he be, then both of 
us will go to see him. 

Thus being led to believe the statement, she came to me at 
the Dragkar-Taso Cave with a jugful of chhang and a small 
vessel full of flour. On first seeing me from the entrance of the 
cave, she was frightened. My body was emaciated by the priv- 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 581 

ations and hardships; mine eyes were deeply sunken into the 
sockets; my bones showed prominently; my color was of a 
bluish green; my muscles were all shrunken and shrivelled; a 
growth of bluish-green hair covered my skeleton-like form; the 
hairs of my head were stiff, and formed a formidable wig; and 
my limbs appeared as if they were about to break. Altogether, 
I was a sight which inspired her with such a dreadful fright 
that she took me to be a bhuta. But recollecting that she had 
heard that her brother was on the point of death from starva- 
tion, she half doubted whether it was really myself. At last 
she mustered up courage, and asked me. Art thou a human be- 
ing or a bhuta? I answered, and said, I am Mila Thopaga. 
She, recognizing my voice, came in and embraced me, crying. 
Brother, brother! and then fainted away for a while. I, too, 
knowing her to be Peta, felt both glad and sorry at the same 
time. Applying the best means of restoring her, I at last suc- 
ceeded in doing so. But she put her head between my knees, 
and, covering her face with both her hands, gave way to an- 
other flood of tears, sobbing forth the following: Our mother 
died in great trouble with a keen yearning to see thee. No one 
came near us; and I, being unable to bear the great privations 
and loneliness in our own house, left it to go a-begging in dis- 
tant lands. I thought that thou wert also dead. I should, how- 
ever, have expected that if thou were alive to have found thee 
in better circumstances than these. But, alas! thy circumstances 
are such. Thou seest what mine own destiny is! Could there 
be any one on the earth more wretched than ourselves! Then 
she repeatedly called upon the names of our parents, and con- 
tinued wailing bitterly. I tried my best to console her. At last, 
I, too, felt very sad, and sang this song to my sister: 

Obeisance to my Lords, the Gurus! 

Grant that this Yogi may hold fast to solitude. 

O sister, thou art filled with worldly sentiments and 
feelings; 

(Know thou that worldly) joys and griefs are all imper- 
manent. 

But I, alone by taking on myself these hardships. 

Am sure to win Eternal Happiness; 

So harken thou unto thy brother’s song: 


5 8s SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

To repay the kindness of all sentient beings, 

They having been our parents, to the life religious I did 
give myself. 

Behold my lodgings; like those of jungle beasts are they; 

Any other person would be timid in them. 

Behold my food; ’tis like the food of dogs and pigs; 

It would excite in others nausea. 

Behold my body; ’tis like a skeleton; 

Even an enemy would weep on seeing it. 

In my behaviour, I am like a madman; 

0 sister, thou art moved thereby to disappointment and 
to sorrow; 

Yet if thou could observe my mind, ’tis the Bodhi Mind 
itself; 

The Conquerors rejoice at seeing it. 

Sitting upon this cold rock underneath me, I meditate 
with zeal. 

Enough to bear the tearing of my skin off or my flesh 
from off its bones; 

My body, both inside and out, like nettles hath become; 

A greenish hue, which changeth not, it hath assumed. 

Here in this solitary rocky cave, 

Though with no chance of driving melancholy from my 
mind, 

Unchangedly I ever hold adoration and affection 

For the Guru, True-Embodiment of the Eternal Buddhas. 

Thus persevering in my meditation, 

1 doubtlessly shall gain Transcendent Knowledge and 
Experience; 

And if, in this, I can succeed, 

Prosperity and happiness is won within this lifetime, as 
I go along; 

And, in my next birth, Buddhahood I’ll win. 


LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


58s 


f Therefore, my sister, Peta dear, 

! To woeful sorrows give not way, 

I But also give thyself to penances, for religion’s sake. 

When Peta had heard this, she said. It would be admirable 
1 were it as thou sayest, but it is difficult to believe it true. For 

were it as thou representest it to be, other devotees would prac- 
tise at least part of such hardships, even if they could not bear 
all that thou hast borne. But I have not seen even one who is 
undergoing such privations and penances. Saying this, she gave 
me the chhang and the food she had brought. I felt very much 
strengthened and refreshed by partaking of it, and my devo- 
tions during the night were more earnest and spiritual. 

The next morning, after Peta’s departure, I experienced a 
sharp feeling of excitement and physical pain; and a variety of 
pious and impious ideas and thoughts sprang up in my mind. 
I tried mine utmost to concentrate my mind upon meditation, 
but it was of no avail. Some days after this, Zesay paid me a 
| visit, bringing some well-cured and seasoned meat and butter, 

i and a goodly supply of chhang and flour. She'was accompanied 

by Peta. They met me while I was going to fetch water. I 
being stark naked (for I had no clothes), they were both 
ashamed; and yet, despite their bashfulness, they could not 
help weeping at mine utter poverty. They offered me the meat, 
butter, flour, and chhang. While I was drinking the chhang, 
Peta said, O my brother, whichever way I observe thee, thou 
I dost not look at all like a sane human being. Pray have re- 

( course to soliciting of alms, and do partake of the food of men. 

| I will try to find some cloth and bring it over to thee. Zesay 

I added. Do have recourse to alms, begging for your food, and 

I, also, will come to offer thee a cloth. But I said, With the 
uncertainty of the time of death looming over me, I see not 
the use of going a-begging for food, nor could I afford to lose 
the time in doing so. Even if I were to die of the cold, it 
:j would for the sake of Truth and Religion; and, therefore, 

I I should have very little cause for regret. I could not be satis- 

| fled with that show of devotion which is practised amid a circle 

I of merry relatives and friends, revelling in unlimited quantities 

j of food and drink, and clothed in fine raiment — all obtained at 

I the cost of real and sincere devotion. Nor do I need thy clothes 

f and visits. I will not pay heed to thine advice of going a-beg- 



584 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

ging for food. Peta said, How then, my brother, can thy heart 
be satisfied? It seemeth to me that something more wretched 
than this would satisfy thee, but even thine ingenuity seemeth 
to fail in devising anything more painful and abstemious. I 
replied that the three Lower Lokas are much more miserable 
than this; yet most sentient beings are doing their best to 
obtain the miseries of these three states of existence. As for me, 
I am satisfied with these present afflictions. So saying, I sang 
the song of what would constitute my Satisfactions: 

Obeisance to the Body of my Lord, the Guru! 

O grant that I may cling successfully to solitude. 

My happiness unknown unto my relatives. 

My sorrowing unknown unto mine enemies — 

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude, 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 

My growing old unknown unto my betrothed, 

My falling ill unknown unto my sister — 

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude, 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 

My death unknown to any human being. 

My rotting corpse unseen by birds — 

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude, 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 

My putrid flesh sucked by the flies, 

My dissolving muscles eaten by the worms — 

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude; 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 

With no human foot-print by my door. 

With no mark of blood within (the Cave) — 

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude, 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 

With none to crowd about my corpse (or bier). 

With none to lament o’er my death — 

Could thus I die, aihid this Solitude, 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 


LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


585 


With none to ask where I had gone, 

And with no place which one might point to as my 
goal— 

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude, 

Contented would I be, I the devotee. 

Thus, may this prayer about the manner of my death 

Amid this uninhabited Solitude 

Bear fruit, and, for all beings good, be granted as I wish; 

Then Satisfied I’ll die, I the devotee. 

On hearing this Zesay said, Thy first sayings and thy pres- 
ent actions agree. Therefore this song is worthy of admiration. 
Then Peta said. Whatever thou mayst say, my brother, as for 
me, I cannot bear to see thee in such utter want of clothes and 
food. I will do my best to find a cloth for thee, and will come 
over with it. Thy devotion would not run away if thou 
shouldst have a sufficiency of good food and clothing, but see- 
ing that thou wilt not go to beg for alms, it is probable that 
thou wilt die without any one near thee, in this solitude, of 
starvation and cold, just as thou desirest. Should I, however, 
find that thou art not dead, I will come to bring thee some 
sort of a cloth, which I will try to get. Having said this, they 
both went away. 

On my partaking of the good food, my physical pains and 
my mental disturbances increased so much that I was unable to 
go on with my meditation. In this predicament, thinking that 
there could not be a greater danger than the inability to con- 
tinue my meditation, I opened the scroll giveri me by my Guru. 
I found it to contain the manner of treating the present ail- 
ment, thus clearing the obstacles and dangers on the Path, and 
turning the Vice to Virtue, and increasing the Spiritual Earn- 
estness and Energy. It was mentioned in the scroll that I should 
use good wholesome food at this time. The perseverance with 
which I had meditated had prepared my nerves for an internal 
change in the whole nervous system, but this had been re- 
tarded by the poor quality of my food. Peta’s chhang had 
somewhat excited the nerves, and Zesay’ s offerings had fully 
affected them. I now understood what was happening; and, on 
studying the contents of the scroll, I found it contained the 
accessory means and exercises (both physical and mental), 
which I at once began to practise. Thereupon, I saw that the 



586 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


minuter nerves of my system were being straightened out; even 
the knot of the Sushumna-Nadi (median nerve) was loosening 
below the navel; and I experienced a state of supersensual 
calmness and clearness resembling the former states which I 
had experienced, but exceeding them in its depth and ecstatic 
intensity, and therein differing from them. Thus was a hith- 
erto unknown and transcendent knowledge bom in me. Soaring 
free above the obstacles, I knew that the very evil (or danger) 
had been turned to good. What till now had been regarded as 
objective discrimination shone forth as the Dharma-kaya. I 
understood the Sangsara and Nirvana to be dependent and 
relative states; and that the Universal Cause is Mind, which 
is distinct from the ideas of Interestedness or Partiality. This 
Universal Cause, when directed along the Path of Dis- 
belief (or Selfishness), resulteth in the Sangsara; while if it be 
directed along the path of Altruism, it resulteth in Nirvana. 
I was perfectly convinced that the real source of both Sangsara 
and Nirvana lay in the Voidness (of the Supra-mundane 
Mind). The knowledge I now had obtained was bom of my 
previous energetic devotions, which had served as its main 
cause; and it only awaited the accident, at the crisis, of the 
wholesome and nourishing food, and the timely prescription 
contained in the scroll, to bring it forth. My belief in the 
methods of the Mantrayanic doctrines, which teach that a real 
transcendent knowledge can be obtained by proper care of the 
body and without giving up nourishing food and comfortable 
clothing, was thus firmly established. I also saw that Peta and 
Zesay had greatly contributed to the final development of the 
hitherto latent qualities, and therefore mine obligation to them 
was great. So by way of proving my gratitude, and to con- 
secrate their pious deeds to an Eternal and Inexhaustible Pur- 
pose, I sang this hymn (of prayer), which embodieth the Es- 
sence of the Dependence and Relativity of Facts: 

Obeisance to the Feet of Marpa of Lhobrak! 

Grant that this hermit may hold fast to Solitude success- 
fully. 

Upon the charity of righteous laymen. 

Success for them and me dependeth; 

This body, delicate and brittle, and difficult to gain. 

By meeting food, is nourished and sustained. 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


587 


The life-sustaining principle, upsprouting from the earth, 
And ambrosial showers from the heavenly dome of blue. 
Join together and confer a blessing on all sentient beings; 
And in a life religious this is employed the best. 

The transient body, nourished by one’s parents. 

And the Sacred Teaching of the Sacred Guru , 

Join together and then favour the religious life; 
Wherein, in Perseverance, lieth true success. 

The rocky cave, amid the uninhabited solitude. 

And devotion zealous and sincere. 

Join together and bring forth the Issue of Success; 

Of Knowledge Spiritual doth this consist. 

In the stoical and patient fortitude of Milarepa’s medi- 
tation. 

And the faith of beings of the Lokas Three, 

Lieth opportunity of Universal Usefulness; 

Of this, the essence is Compassion. 

The yogi who, in rocky caves, doth meditate. 

And laymen who provide his sustenance. 

Do each thus win the chance of gaining Buddhahood; 

Of this, the essence is the Consecration. 

In the Sacred Guru’s grace. 

And the active meditation of the zealous shishya, 

Lieth opportunity to uphold the Truth (the Hierarchy); 
Of this, the essence is the Purity of Faith. 

In the Rites Initiatory, which confer and bless with Oc- 
cult Power, 

And in the prayer, earnest and sincere (of the devotee), 
Lieth opportunity of meeting speedily (Spiritual Com- 
munion); 

Of this, the essence is the Benediction. 

Lord Dorje-Chang, O Thou the Immutable, 

The weal and woe of this mendicant Thou knowest. 



588 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


This hymn having been sung, I zealously persevered in my 
meditations. 

Now I thought that I could efficiently help all sentient 
beings if I liked, so I resolved to devote myself to helping 
others; but I had a direct command from my Tutelary Deity 
to go on devoting my whole life to meditation, as my Guru 
had commanded. By that alone I should serve the Cause of 
the Buddhistic Faith; and, also, in serving all sentient beings 
thereby, I could do no better; such was the command I re- 
ceived. Thereupon, I thought that by dedicating my whole life 
to meditation, I should be setting an example to future devo- 
tees, who would thus be led to spend their life in devotion, 
after giving up all worldy aims and prospects; and that would 
conduce to the Cause of the Buddhistic Faith and to the ben- 
efit of all sentient beings. So I resolved go spend my whole 
life in meditation. 

• * # 

I also went on towards Brin (Drin), where I heard about 
both Lapchi-Chubar (Mt. Everest?) and Kyit-Phug (Pleasant 
Cave), also known as Nyima-Dzong (Sunny Castle), of which 
I chose the latter. . . . Now I must go to a most solitary 
region and seek a cave there. So, according to my Guru's com- 
mand, I resolved to go to Lapchi-Chubar. While I was about 
to start on my way thither, my sister Peta came to offer me a 
piece of blanket-cloth, woven of wool which she had collected 
from the leavings of others. She had taken it to Dragkar-Taso, 
and not finding me there, had come searching for me, inquiring 
from every one; and hearing, at Gungthang-Tot, that a hermit 
resembling a caterpillar which feedeth upon nettles had passed 
from Palkhung towards La-Tot-Lho (Upper Hills Facing South), 
she had come tracking my very footprints. At Tingri, she had 
seen Lama Bari-Lotsawa (Th Great Bari Translator) seated 
upon a high seat, with an umbrella over him, dressed in silks 
of five different colours, and surrounded by his disciples, some 
of whom blew conchs, cymbals, clarionets, and flutes, with an 
great crowd round about, all offering him tea and chhang. 
Upon seeing this, Peta thought, Other devotees and religious 
folk enjoy these things, but my brother’s religion is a source of 
misery and trouble to himself and shame to his relatives. If I 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


589 


now meet my brother, I shall try mine utmost to persuade him 
to become a disciple of this Lama. Thinking thus, she asked 
some among the assembly there whether they had heard or 
seen aught of me, and, being told that I was at Brin, she had 
come inquiring after me right up to Kyit-Phug, where I then 
was. Upon seeing me, she at once said, O brother, it will never 
do to go on in this starving, naked condition, which thou sayest 
is thy mode of living a religious life. Thou art past shame 
and common decency! Make a lower garment of this blanket, 
and go to the Lama Bari-Lotsawa, who is a Lama indeed, but 
quite different in style and practice from thyself. He hath a 
throne under him, and an umbrella over him; he is clad in 
silken garments, and his lips are always dipped in tea and 
chhang. He is surrounded by his disciples and followers, who 
walk in front of him, blowing trumpets by pairs. He assem- 
bled! a crowd wherever he goeth, and collecteth their offerings 
in large quantities, thus benefiting his relatives; and is one who 
can be boasted of as a most eminent Lama. I would have thee 
try to enter his service and follow him as his disciple. Even 
if thou be accepted as his meanest disciple, that would be bet- 
ter than this sort of life. Thy penurious devotion and my luck- 
less life will scarcely do in this world. We cannot sustain life. 
And then she began to weep bitterly, deploring our lot. 

I tried to console her by saying, Peta, do not speak in that 
fashion. Thou regardest my naked condition with shame, be- 
cause I have cast aside clothing and coverings. I am proud 
that I have obtained the Truth through my being a man; and 
there is no shame in that. I was bom thus; therefore there is 
no shame in it. But those who knowing certain acts to be sin- 
ful commit them, thereby breaking their parents’ hearts, and 
those coveting property dedicated to Gurus and the Trinity, 
committing various acts of deception and meanness to attain 
their selfish aims, cause pain and suffering to other beings, and 
hurt themselves in the end. They are objects of loathing and 
abhorrence to every righteous being among gods and men; and 
they alone should feel shame. . . . Moreover, if thou think that 
I am meditating in this penurious condition just because I can- 
not earn or obtain food and clothing, thou art quite mistaken. 
I am frightened at the pains and tribulations of this Sangsara. 
I feel them as keenly as though I had been cast alive into 
flames. Worldly acquisitions of wealth and the need of clinging 



590 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


to them, as well as the pursuit of the Eight Worldly Aims, I 
regard with as much loathing and disgust as a man who is suf- 
fering from biliousness regardeth the sight of rich food. Nay, 
I regard them as if they were the murderers of my father; 
therefore is it that I am assuming this beggarly and penurious 
mode of life. Moreover, my Guru, Marpa the Translator, bade 
me to give up all worldly concerns, aims, and objects; to bear 
the loss of food, clothing, and name; to live in various solitary 
places (not fixing myself to one place permanently); and to 
carry on my devotions most energetically, giving up all pros- 
pects in this life. Such being my Guru’s commandments, I am 
fulfilling them. By thus obeying my Guru’s commandments, I 
shall not only be able to confer temporal ease and comfort on 
those who are my followers, but I shall earn eternal happiness 
for every sentient being, including myself. I gave up all 
thoughts of this life, because I saw that there is no certainty 
as to when death may come upon me. If I were to think of 
acquiring wealth and ease, I should be able to acquire as much 
as Lama Bari-Lotsawa himself is acquiring; so what need is 
there to speak of his meanest follower! But I desire Buddha- 
hood in this very life-time; therefore am I devoting myself to 
devotion and meditation in such an energetic way. Peta, do 
thou also give up all worldly aims, and come with thy brother, 
who is older, to pass thy life in meditation at Lapchi-Kang. 
If thou can give up worldly thoughts and come to pass thy 
life in meditative devotions, the sun of thy temporal and 
eternal happiness will thus shine in full splendour. Give ear to 
thy brother's song. Then I sang this song: 

0 Lord, Protector of all Sentient Beings, Thou the 
Eternal Buddha! 

Since Thou, by worldliness unsullied hath remained, 

And blessed Thy Shishyas with Thy Grace, 

1 bow down at Thy Feet, O Marpa the Translator! 

My sister Peta, listen unto me, 

Immersed in worldly wishes as thou art. 

The pinnacle of gold, placed on an umbrella, at the top, 
for one; 

The fringe of Chinese silk, arranged in tasteful folds, 
below, for two; 



life and hymns of milarepa 


591 

The ribs outspread, like a peacock’s gorgeous feathers, in 
between, for three; 

The polished handle of red teak-wood, at the bottom, 
for four: 

These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure. 

But these are worldly things, and I’ve eschewed them, 

And, by my thus eschewing worldliness, my Sun of Hap- 
piness shineth gloriously. 

Likewise, do thou, O Peta, all worldliness eschew. 

And come to meditate in Lapchi-Kang: 

Let us together go to Lapchi-Kang; to meditate. 

The white conch-shell’s far-sounding note, for one; 

The practised blower’s full and potent breath, for two; 

The silken ribbons (on the conch), plaited in fine plaits, 
for three; 

The vast assembly of celibate priests (summoned thus), 
for four: 

These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure. 

(Chorus) 

The charming, pretty little temple, just above a village 
placed, for one; 

The fluent speech, of youthful novices, for two; 

The splendid kitchen, well arranged, with goodly stock 
of Chinese tea, for three; 

The busy hands, of many youthful novices, for four: 

These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure. 

(Chorus) 

The well-liked trade, in necromantic seership, and in 
astrology, for one; 

The correctness and the modesty of a pastor’s acts, for 
two; 

The performance of the pujas , for enjoying them, for 
three; 

The psalms melodious, sung with a view to turn the 
heads of the laity, for four: 

These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure. 



592 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

(Chorus) 

A building, massive, beautiful, and tall, of brick, for one; 
A field, extensive and fertile, for two; 

A well-stocked store, of food and wealth, for three; 

A numerous retinue, and crowd of servitors, for four: 
These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure. 

(Chorus) 

But if thou can not give up worldliness. 

And can not come to Lapchi-Kang, 

No liking have I for thy sentimental, sisterly affections. 
These talks of worldly things disturb my meditation. 

I being born, know I must die; uncertain of the hour of 
death, 

No time have I to postpone my devotion; 
Uninterruptedly will I devote myself to meditation. 

The teachings of my Guru-Father are beneficial to the 
mind; 

Thus, contemplating that which bringeth benefit, 

I’ll earn the Great Happiness of Deliverance; 

Therefore to Lapchi-Kang I’m going. 

Do thou, my sister, cling -to worldliness. 

Acquire sins by the pound and stone. 

Strive to remain, for all the time thou canst, in the 
Sang sara, 

And strive to win thyself a birth in the Three Lower 
Worlds. 

Yet if thou fear the Sangsara in the least. 

Renounce, in this life now, the Eight Sangsaric Aims, 
And let us go together, unto Lapchi-Kang, 

Let us, the twain, brother and sister, be high-destined 
ones. 

And go together to the Ranges of the Lapchi-Kang. 

On my singing thus, Peta said, I see that thou meanest 
ease and comfort by worldliness, my brother. As for that, both 
of us have so little to give up. All these fine-sounding truths 
and sermons are merely excuses to cloak thine inability to be 
as well off as Lama Bari-Lotsawa; but, as for me, I will not 


LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


593 


go to Lapchi-Kang, where I shall have nothing to eat, nor any- 
thing to wear: it would be unendurable misery, which I need 
not go to seek at Lapchi. I do not even know where it is; 
and I would entreat thee, my brother, to remain permanently 
in one place, instead of rushing about and clinging to uninhab- 
ited cliffs and rocks, like an animal pursued by dogs. I could 
find thee more easily then. The people of this place seem dis- 
posed to regard thee with veneration, so it would be best if thou 
remain here permanently. . . . 

It is quite clear that thou wilt not do anything such as I 
wish thee to do, yet I cannot give thee up. So please use these; 
and I will do what I can to obtain more. Having said this, she 
was about to go away. I, however, wishing to turn her heart 
towards religion, induced her to remain as long as the provisions 
might last, so that even though she did not earn merit by prac- 
tising devotion, she would for that much time, at least, be 
free from committing sin. As long as she thus lived with me, 
I talked to her about religious subjects and about the Law of 
Karma. At last, I succeeded in turning her heart towards the 
Faith, to some extent. . . . 

I have obtained spiritual knowledge through giving up all 
thought of food, clothing, and name. Inspired with zeal in my 
heart, I bore every hardship and inured myself to all sorts of 
privations of the body; I devoted myself to meditation in the 
most unfrequented and solitary places. Thus did I obtain 
knowledge and experience; do ye also follow in the path trod- 
den by me, and practise devotion as I have done. . . . 

At the time when Jetsun had fulfilled the various duties 
mentioned above, there lived, in the interior of Brin (Drin), a 
learned Lama named Tsaphuwa, very rich and influential, who 
was accustomed to take the highest seat in the assemblies of 
the people of Brin. This man feigned great reverence for Jet- 
sun, while at heart he was bursting with envy of him, and de- 
sirous of exposing what he took to be Jetsun’s ignorance, by 
putting difficult questions to Jetsun in a public gathering of 
his own supporters. In this wise he asked Jetsun many and 
various questions, all the while pretending that it was for the 
clearing of his own doubts. 

Then, in the first month of the autumn of the Wood-Tiger 



594 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


year, there happened to be a grand marriage feast to which 
Jetsun was invited, and he was placed on the highest seat at 
the head of the first row of guests, and the Geshe Tsaphuwa 
was seated next to him. The Geshe bowed down to Jetsun, 
expecting that Jetsun would bow down to him in return. Jet- 
sun, however, did not do so; for never having bowed down to, 
nor returned the obeisance of any person save his own Guru, 
he did not depart from his usual custom on this occasion. 

Much chagrined, the Geshe thought to himself. What! shall 
so learned a pandit as I am bow down to an ignoramus like 
h im , and he not condescend to return the salutation! I shall 
certainly do my best to lower him in the esteem of the public. 
And, producing a book on philosophy, he addressed Jetsun 
thus: O Jetsun, please be so good as to dissipate my perplexi- 
ties by going through this book and explaining it to me word 
by word. 

Upon this, Jetsun answered, As for the mere word-by-word 
explication of these dialectics, thou thyself are sufficiently ex- 
pert; but to realize their true import it is necessary to renounce 
the Eight Worldly Ambitions, lopping off their heads, to sub- 
due the illusion of belief in the personal ego, and, regarding 
Nirvana and Sangsara as inseparable, to conquer the spiritual 
ego by meditation in mountain solitudes. I have never valued 
or studied the mere sophistry of word-knowledge, set down in 
books in conventionalized form of questions and answers to fae 
committed to memory (and fired off at one’s opponent); these 
lead but to mental confusion and not to such practice as bring- 
eth actual realization of Truth. Of such word-knowledge I 
am ignorant; and if ever I did know it, I have forgotten it 
long ago. I pray that thou wilt give ear to the song which I 
am about to sing, to show my reasons for forgetting book-learn- 
ing. And then Jetsun sang this song: 

Obeisance to the honored Feet of Marpa the Translator! 

May I be far removed from arguing creeds and dogmas. 

E’er since my Lord’s Grace entered in my mind. 

My mind hath never strayed seeking various distractions. 

Accustomed long to contemplating Love and Pity, 

I have forgot all difference between my self and others. 


LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 


595 

Accustomed long to meditating on my Guru as enhaloed 
o’er my head, 

I have forgot all those who rule by power and by 
prestige. 

Accustomed long to meditating on my Guardian Gods 
as from myself inseparable, 

I have forgot the lowly fleshly form. 

Accustomed long to meditating on the Whispered Chosen 
Truths, 

I have forgot all that is said in written and in printed 
books. 

Accustomed, as I’ve been, to the study of the Common 
Science, 

Knowledge of erring Ignorance I’ve lost. 

Accustomed, as I’ve been, to contemplating the Three 
Bodies as inherent in myself, 

I have forgot to think of hope and fear. 

Accustomed, as I’ve been, to meditating on this life and 
the future life as one, 

I have forgot the dread of birth and death. 

Accustomed long to studying, all by myself, mine own 
experiences, 

I have forgot the need of seeking the opinions of friends 
and brethren. 

Accustomed long to application of each new experience to 
mine own growth spiritual, 

I have forgot all creeds and dogmas. 

Accustomed long to meditating on the Unborn, the In- 
destructible, and the Unabiding, 

I have forgot all definitions of this or that particular 
Goal. 



596 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

Accustomed long to meditating on all visible phenomena 
as the Dharma-Kaya, 

I have forgot all mind-made meditations. 

Accustomed long to keep my mind in the Uncreated 
State of Freedom, 

I have forgot conventional and artificial usages. 

Accustomed long to humbleness, of body and of mind, 

I have forgot the pride and haughty manner of the 
mighty. 

Accustomed long to regard my fleshy body as my hermit- 
age, 

I have forgot the ease and comfort of retreats in monas- 
teries. 

Accustomed long to know the meaning of the Wordless, 

I have forgot the way to trace the roots of verbs and 
source of words and phrases; 

May thou, Q learned one, trace out these things in stand- 
ard books. 


Milarepa’s Final Words 

Now hear my principal testament, of which none save my 
chief disciples and lay followers, male and female, should be 
informed. . . . 

As to how ye are to carry the religious teachings into prac- 
tice in your everyday life, bear in mind the following: Some 
there may be among you who are proud of their apparent 
sanctity, but who, at heart, are really devoted to acquiring 
name and fame in this world; they dispense a hundred neces- 
sary and unnecessary things in charity, hoping thereby to reap 
a liberal return. This, though displeasing to the Divinities 
gifted with divine vision, is persevered in by selfish beings of 
obscured vision. The hypocrisy of thus hankering after the 
rich juices of this world, while outwardly appearing pious and 
devout, because unable to face the ridicule of the world (which 



LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 597 

might otherwise come to know of the hankering), is like partak- 
ing of delicacies and rich food mixed with deadly aconite. 
Therefore, drink not the venom of desire for worldly fame and 
name; but casting aside all the fetters of worldly duties, which 
but lead to this desire, devote yourselves to sincere and earnest 
devotion. 

The disciples then inquired if they could engage in worldly 
duties, in a small way, for the benefit of others, and Jetsun 
said, If there be not the least self-interest attached to such 
duties, it is permissible. But such (detachment) is indeed rare; 
and works performed for the good of others seldom succeed if 
not wholly freed from self-interest. Even without seeking to 
benefit others, it is with difficulty that works done even in 
one’s own interest (or selfishly) are successful. It is as if a 
man helplessly drowning were to try to save another man in 
the same predicament. One should not be over-anxious and 
hasty in setting out to serve others before one hath oneself 
realized Truth in its fullness; to do so, would be like the blind 
leading the blind. As long as the sky endureth, so long will 
there be no end of sentient beings for one to serve; and to 
every one cometh the opportunity for such service. Till the op- 
portunity comes, I exhort each of you to have but the one re- 
solve, namely, to attain Buddhahood for the good of all living 
things. 

Be lowly and meek. Clothe yourselves in rags. Be resigned 
to hardships with respect to food and dress. Renounce all 
thought of acquiring worldly renown. Endure bodily penance 
and mental burdens. Thus gain knowledge from experience. 
That your study and penance be directed towards the right 
path, it is necessary to hold these injunctions in your hearts. 

Having so spoken, Jetsun sang this hymn: 

Obeisance at the Feet of Lordly Marpa the Translator! 

If ye who would be devotees, and Wisdom win, 

Do not procure and serve a Guru wise. 

Though ye have faith and meekness, small will be the 
Grace. 

If ye do not obtain the Initiation deep and mystic. 

The words alone, the Tantras hold, will merely serve as 
fetters. 



598 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

If ye keep not the Tan trie Scriptures as your witness. 
All practice of the rites will be but many snares. 

If ye do not the Chosen Teachings meditate. 

Mere renunciation of the worldly life will be but vain 
self-torture. 

If ye subdue not evil passions by their antidote. 

Mere verbal preachings will be but empty sounds. 

If ye know not the Subtle Methods and the Path, 

Mere perseverance will bear but little fruit. 

If ye know not the Secret and the Subtle Methods, 

Mere exercise of zeal will make the Pathway long. 

If ye do not acquire great merit. 

And work for self alone, sangsaric being will continue. 

If ye do not devote unto Religion all your worldly goods 
amassed. 

Much meditation will not gain much Knowledge. 

If ye do not acquire contentment in yourselves, 
Heaped-up accumulations will only enrich others. 

If ye do not obtain the Light of Inner Peace, 

Mere external ease and pleasure will become a source of 
pain. 

If ye do not suppress the Demon of Ambition, 

Desire of fame will lead to ruin and to lawsuits. 

The desire to please exciteth the Five Poisonous Passions; 
The greed of gain separateth one from dearest friends; 
The exaltation of the one is the humiliation of the 
others. 

Hold your peace and no litigation will arise; 

Maintain the State of U ndistractedness and distraction 
will fly off; 


LIFE AND HYMNS OF MILAREPA 599 

Dwell alone and ye shall find a Mend; 

Take the lowest place and ye shall reach the highest; 

Hasten slowly and ye shall soon arrive; 

Renounce all worldly goals and ye shall reach the highest 
goal. 

If ye tread the Secret Path, ye shall find the shortest 
way; 

If ye realize the Voidness, Compassion will arise within 
your hearts; 

If ye lose all differentiation between yourselves and 
others, fit to serve others ye will be; 

And when in serving others ye shall win success, then 
shall ye meet with me; 

And finding me, ye shall attain to Buddhahood. 

To me, and to the Buddha, and the Brotherhood of my 
disciples 

Pray ye earnestly, without distinguishing one from the 
other. 

Thus did Jetsun sing. And then he said', Seeing that I may 
not have much longer now to live, observe my teachings and 
follow me. 

After saying this, Jetsun sank in to the quiescent state of 
Samadhi. Thus did Jetsun pass away at the age of eighty- 
four years, on the fourteenth day of the last of the three winter 
months of the Wood-Hare Year (A.D. 1135), at dawn. 


THE SUPREME PATH, 

THE ROSARY OF PRECIOUS GEMS 


Obeisance to the Honored Guru! 

The Foreword 

L ET him who desireth deliverance from the fearful and dif- 
ficult-to-traverse Sea of Successive Existences, by means of 
the precepts taught by the inspired Kargyutpa Sages, render 
due homage to these Teachers, whose glory is immaculate, 
whose virtues are as inexhaustible as the ocean, and whose in- 
finite benevolence embraceth all beings, past, present, and fu- 
ture, throughout the Universe. 

For the use of those who share in the quest for Divine Wis- 
dom there follow, recorded in writing, the most highly esteemed 
precepts, called The Supreme Path, the Rosary of Precious 
Gems, transmitted to Gampopa, either directly or indirectly, 
through that Inspired Dynasty of Gurus, out of their love for 
him. 

The Twenty-Eight Categories of Yogic Precepts 
I. The Ten Causes of Regret 

The devotee seeking Liberation and the Omniscience of 
Buddhahood should first meditate upon these ten things which 
are causes of regret: 

(1) Having obtained the difficult-to-obtain, free, and en- 
dowed human body, it would be a cause of regret to fritter 
life away. 

(2) Having obtained this pure and difficult-to-obtain, free, 
and endowed human body, it would be a cause of regret to die 
an irreligious and worldly man. 

(3) This human life in the Kale-Yuga (or Age of Dark- 
ness) being so, brief and uncertain, it would be a cause of re- 
gret to spend it in worldly aims and pursuits. 

(4) One’s own mind being of the nature of the Dharma- 

600 



THE SUPREME PATH , 


601 


Kaya, uncreated, it would be a cause of regret to let it be 
swallowed up in the morass of the world’s illusions. 

(5) The holy guru being the guide on the Path, it would be 
a cause of regret to be separated from him before attaining 
Enlightenment. 

(6) Religious faith and vows being the vessel which convey- 
eth one to Emancipation, it would be a cause of regret were 
they to be shattered by the force of uncontrolled passions. 

(7) The Perfect Wisdom having been found within oneself 
in virtue of the guru’s grace, it would be a cause of regret to 
dissipate it amidst the jungle of worldliness. 

(8) To sell like so much merchandise the Sublime Doctrine 
of the Sages would be a cause of regret. 

(9) Inasmuch as all beings are our kindly parents, it would 
be a cause of regret to have aversion for and thus disown or 
abandon any of them. 

(10) The prime of youth being the period of development 
of the body, speech, and mind, it would be a cause of regret 
to waste it in vulgar indifference. 

These are The Ten Causes of Regret. 

II. The Ten Requirements Come Next 

(1) Having estimated one’s own capabilities, one requireth 
a sure line of action. 

(2) To carry out the commands of a religious preceptor, one 
requireth confidence and diligence. 

(3) To avoid error in choosing a guru, the disciple requireth 
knowledge of his own faults and virtues. 

(4) Keenness of intellect and unwavering faith are required 
to tune in with the mind of the spiritual preceptor. 

(5) Unceasing watchfulness and mental alertness, graced 
with humility, are required to keep the body, speech, and mind 
unsullied by evil. 

(6) Spiritual armour and strength of intellect are required 
for the fulfilment of one’s heart’s vows. 

(7) Habitual freedom from desire and attachment is neces- 
sary if one would be free from bondage. 

(8) To acquire the Twofold Merit, bom of right motives, 
right actions, and the altruistic dedication of their results, there 
is need of unceasing effort. 

(9) The mind, imbued with love and compassion in thought 



60s SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


and deed, ought ever to be directed to the service t>f all sentient 
beings. 

(10) Through hearing, understanding, and wisdom, one 
should so comprehend the nature of all things as not to fall 
into the error of regarding matter and phenomena as real. 

These are The Ten Requirements. 

III. The Ten Things to be Done 

(1) Attach thyself to a religious preceptor endowed with 
spiritual power and complete knowledge. 

(2) Seek a delightful solitude endowed with psychic influ- 
ences as a hermitage. 

(3) Seek friends who have beliefs and habits like thine own 
and in whom thou canst place thy trust. 

(4) Keeping in mind the evils of gluttony, use just enough 
food to keep thee fit during the period of thy retreat. 

(5) Study the teachings of the Great Sages of all sects im- 
partially. 

(6) Study the beneficent sciences of medicine and astrology, 
and the profound art of omens. 

{7) Adopt such regimen and manner of living as will keep 
thee in good health. 

(8) Adopt such devotional practices as will conduce to thy 
spiritual development. 

(9) Retain such disciples as are firm in faith, meek in spirit, 
and who appear to be favoured by karma in their quest for 
Divine Wisdom. 

(10) Constantly maintain alertness of consciousness in walk- 
ing, in sitting, in eating, and in sleeping. 

These are The Ten Things to be Done. 

IV. The Ten Things to be Avoided 

(1) Avoid a guru whose heart is set on acquiring worldly 
fame and possessions. 

(2) Avoid friends and followers who are detrimental to thy 
peace of mind and spiritual growth. 

(3) Avoid hermitages and places of abode where there hap 
pen to be many persons who annoy and distract thee. 

(4) Avoid gaining thy livelihood by means of deceit and 
theft. 



THE SUPREME PATH 603 

(5) Avoid such actions as harm thy mind and impede thy 
spiritual development. 

(6) Avoid such acts of levity and thoughtlessness as lower 
thee in another’s esteem. 

(7) Avoid useless conduct and actions. 

(8) Avoid concealing thine own faults and speaking loudly 
of those of others. 

(9) Avoid such food and habits as disagree with thy health. 

(10) Avoid such attachments as are inspired by avarice. 

These are The Ten Things to be Avoided. 

V. The Ten Things Not to be Avoided 

(1) Ideas, being the radiance of the mind, are not to be 
avoided. 

(2) Thought-forms, being the revelry of Reality, are not to 
be avoided. 

(3) Obscuring passions, being the means of reminding one 
of Divine Wisdom (which giveth deliverance from them), are 
not to be avoided (if rightly used to enable one to taste life to 
the full and thereby reach disillusionment). 

(5) Illness and tribulations, being teachers of piety, are not 
to be avoided. 

(6) Enemies and misfortune, being the means of inclining 
one to a religious career, are not to be avoided. 

(7) That which cometh of itself, being a divine gift, is not 
to be avoided. 

(8) Reason, being in every action the best friend, is not to 
be avoided. 

(9) Such devotional exercises of body and mind as one is 
capable of performing are not to be avoided. 

(10) The thought of helping others, howsoever limited one’s 
ability to help others may be, is not to be avoided. 

These are The Ten Things Not To Be Avoided. 

VI. The Ten Things One Must Know 

(1) One must know that all visible phenomena, being il- 
lusory, are unreal. 

(2) One must know that the mind, being without inde- 
pendent existence (apart from the One Mind), is impermanent. 

(3) One must know that ideas arise from a concatenation of 
causes. 



604 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

(4) One must know that the body and speech, being com- 
pounded of the four elements, are transitory. 

(5) One must know that the effects of past actions, whence 
cometh all sorrow, are inevitable. 

(6) One must know that sorrow, being the means of con- 
vincing one of the need of the religious life, is a guru. 

(7) One must know that attachment to worldly things mak- 
eth material prosperity inimical to spiritual progress. 

(8) One must know that misfortune, being the means of 
leading one to the Doctrine, is also a guru. 

(9) One must know that no existing thing has an inde- 
pendent existence. 

(10) One must know that all things are interdependent. 

These are The Ten Things One Must Know. 

VII. The Ten Things to be Practised 

(1) One should acquire practical knowledge of the Path by 
'' treading it, and not be as are the multitude (who profess, but 

do npt practice, religion). 

(2) By quitting one’s own country and dwelling in foreign 
lands one should acquire practical knowledge of non-attach- 
ment. 

(3) Having chosen a religious preceptor, separate thyself 
from egotism and follow his teachings implicitly. 

(4) Having acquired mental discipline by hearing and medi- 
tating upon religious teachings, boast not of thine attainment, 
but apply it to the realization of Truth. 

(5) Spiritual knowledge having dawned in oneself, neglect 
it not through slothfulness, but cultivate it with ceaseless 
vigilance. 

(6) Once having experienced spiritual illumination, com- 
mune with it in solitude, relinquishing the worldly activities of 
the multitude. 

(7) Having acquired practical knowledge of spiritual things 
and made the Great Renunciation, permit not the body, speech, 
or mind to become unruly, but observe the three vows, of 
poverty, chastity, and obedience. 

(8) Having resolved to attain the Highest Goal, abandon 
selfishness and devote thyself to the service of others. 

(9) Having entered upon the mystic Mantrayanic Pathway, 


THE SUPREME PATH . 605 

permit not the body, the speech, or the mind to remain un- 
sanctified, but practise the threefold mandala. 

(10) During the period of youth, frequent not those who 
cannot direct thee spiritually, but acquire practical knowledge 
painstakingly at the feet of a learned and pious guru. 

These are The Ten Things to be Practised. 

VIII. The Ten Things to be Persevered in 

(1) Novices should persevere in listening to, and meditating 
upon, religious teachings. 

(2) Having had spiritual experience, persevere in meditation 
and mental concentration. 

(3) Persevere in solitude until the mind hath been, yogically 
disciplined. 

(4) Should thought-processes be difficult to control, per- 
severe in thine efforts to dominate them. 

(5) Should there be great drowsiness, persevere in thine ef- 
forts to invigorate the intellect (or to control the mind). 

(6) Persevere in meditation until thou attainest the imper- 
turbable mental tranquillity of samadhi. 

(7) Having attained this state of samadhi, persevere in 
prolonging its duration and in causing its recurrence at will. 

(8) Should various misfortunes assail thee, persevere in pa- 
tience of body, speech, and mind. 

(9) Should there be great attachment, hankering, or mental 
weakness, persevere in an effort to eradicate it as soon as it 
manifesteth itself. 

(10) Should benevolence and pity be weak within thee, 
persevere in directing the mind towards Perfection. 

These are The Ten Things to be Persevered in. 

IX. The Ten Incentives 

(1) By reflecting upon the difficulty of obtaining an en- 
dowed and free human body, mayest thou be incited to adopt 
the religious career. 

(2) By reflecting upon death and the impermanence of life, 
mayest thou be incited to live piously. 

(3) By reflecting upon the irrevocable nature of the results 
which inevitably arise from actions, mayest thou be incited to 
avoid impiety and evil. 



606 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


(4) By reflecting upon the evils of life in the round of 
successive existences, mayest thou be incited to seek Emancipa- 
tion. 

(5) By reflecting upon the miseries which all sentient be- 
ings suffer, mayest thou be incited to attain deliverance there- 
from by enlightenment of mind. 

(6) By reflecting upon the perversity and illusory nature 
of the mind of all sentient beings, mayest thou be incited to 
listen to, and meditate upon, the Doctrine. 

(7) By reflecting upon the difficulty of eradicating erroneous 
concepts, mayest thou be incited to constant meditatibn (which 
overcometh them). 

(8) By reflecting upon the predominance of evil propensities 
in this Kali-Yuga (or Age of Darkness), mayest thou be in- 
cited to seek their antidote (in the Doctrine). 

(9) By reflecting upon the multiplicity of misfortunes in 
this Age of Darkness, mayest thou be incited to perseverance 
(in the quest for Emancipation). 

(10) By reflecting upon the uselessness of aimlessly fritter- 
ing away thy life, mayest thou be incited to diligence (in the 
treading of the Path). 

These are The Ten Incentives. 

X. The Ten Errors 

(1) Weakness of faith combined with strength of intellect 
are apt to lead to the error of talkativeness. 

(2) Strength of faith combined with weakness of intellect 
are apt to lead to the error of narrow-minded dogmatism. 

(3) Great zeal without adequate religious instruction is apt 
to lead to the error of going to erroneous extremes (or follow- 
ing misleading paths). 

(4) Meditation without sufficient preparation through hav- 
ing heard and pondered the Doctrine is apt to lead to the error 
of losing oneself in the darkness of unconsciousness. 

(5) Without practical and adequate understanding of the 
Doctrine, one is apt to fall into the error of religious self- 
conceit. 

(6) Unless the mind be trained to selflessness and infinite 
compassion, one is apt to fall into the error of seeking libera- 
tion for self alone. 



THE SUPREME PATH • 


607 


(7) Unless the mind be disciplined by knowledge of its own 
immaterial nature, one is apt to fall into the error of diverting 
all activities along the path of worldliness. 

(8) Unless all worldly ambitions be eradicated, one is apt 
to fall into the error of allowing oneself to be dominated by 
worldly motives. 

(9) By permitting credulous and vulgar admirers to con- 
gregate about thee, there is liability of falling into the error of 
becoming puffed up with worldly pride. 

(10) By boasting of one’s occult learning and powers, one 
is liable to fall into the error of proudly exhibiting proficiency 
in worldly rites. 

These are The Ten Errors. 

XI. The Ten Resemblances Wherein One May Err 

(1) Desire may be mistaken for faith. 

(2) Attachment may be mistaken for benevolence and com- 
passion. 

(3) Cessation of thought-processes may be mistaken for 
the quiescence of infinite mind, which is the true goal. 

(4) Sense perceptions (or phenomena) may be mistaken for 
revelations (or glimpses) of Reality. 

(5) A mere glimpse of Reality may be mistaken for com- 
plete realization. 

(6) Those who outwardly profess, but do not practise, 
religion may be mistaken for true devotees. 

(7) Slaves of passion may be mistaken for masters of yoga 
who have liberated themselves from all conventional laws. 

(8) Actions performed in the interest of self may be mis- 
takenly regarded as being altruistic. 

(9) Deceptive methods may be mistakenly regarded as being 
prudent. 

(10) Charlatans may be mistaken for Sages. 

These are The Ten Resemblances Wherein One May Err. 

XII. The Ten Things Wherein One Erreth Not 

(1) In being free from attachment to all objects, and being 
ordained, a bhikshu into the Holy Order, forsaking home and 
entering upon the homeless state, one doth not err. 

(2) In revering one’s spiritual preceptor one doth not err. 

(3) In thoroughly studying the Doctrine, hearing discourses 


6o8 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


thereon, and reflecting and meditating upon it, one doth not 
err. 

(4) In nourishing lofty aspirations and a lowly demeanour 
one doth not err. 

(5) In entertaining liberal views (as to religion) and yet 
being firm in observing (formal religious) vows one doth not 
err. 

(6) In having greatness of intellect and smallness of pride 
one doth not err. 

(7) In being wealthy in religious doctrines and diligent in 
meditating upon them one doth not err. 

(8) In having profound religious learning, combined with 
knowledge of things spiritual and absence of pride, one doth 
not err. 

(9) In being able to pass one’s whole life in solitude one 
doth not err. 

(10) In being unselfishly devoted to doing good to others, 
by means of wise methods, one doth not err. 

These are The Ten Things Wherein One Erreth Not. 

XIII. The Thirteen Grievous Failures 

(1) If, having been born a human being, one give no heed 
to the Holy Doctrine, one resembleth a man who retumeth 
empty-handed from a land rich in precious gems; and this is 
a grievous failure. 

(2.) If, after having entered the door of the Holy Order, 
one return to the life of the householder, one resembleth a 
moth plunging into the flame of a lamp; and this is a grievous 
failure. 

(3) To dwell with a sage and remain in ignorance is to be 
like a man dying of thirst on the shore of a lake; and this is 
a grievous failure. 

(4) To know the moral precepts and not apply them to the 
cure of obscuring passions is to be like a diseased man carrying 
a bag of medicine which he never useth; and this is a grievous 
failure. 

(5) To preach religion and not practise it is to be like a 
parrot saying a prayer; and this is a grievous failure. 

(6) The giving in alms and charity of things obtained by 
theft, robbery, or deceit, is like lightning striking the surface of 
water; and this is a grievous failure. 



THE SUPREME PATH 


609 


(7) The offering to the deities of meat obtained by killing 
animate beings is like offering a mother the flesh of her own 
child; and this is a grievous failure. 

(8) To exercise patience for merely selfish ends rather than 
for doing good to others is to be like a cat exercising patience 
in order to kill a rat; and this is a grievous failure. 

(9) Performing meritorious actions in order merely to attain 
fame and praise in this world is like bartering the mystic wish- 
granting gem for a pellet of goat’s dung; and this is a grievous 
failure. 

(10) If, after having heard much of the Doctrine, one’s 
nature still be unattuned, one is like a physician with a chronic 
disease; and this is a grievous failure. 

(11) To be clever concerning precepts yet ignorant of the 
spiritual experiences which come from applying them is to be 
like a rich man who hath lost the key of his treasury; and 
this is a grievous failure. 

(12) To attempt to explain to others doctrines which one 
hath not completely mastered oneself is to be like a blind man 
leading the blind; and this is a grievous failure. 

(13) To hold the experiences resulting from the first stage 
of meditation to be those of the final stage is to be like a man 
who mistaketh brass for gold; and this is a grievous failure. 

These are The Thirteen Grievous Failures. 

XIV. The Fifteen Weaknesses 

(1) A religious devotee showeth weakness if he allow his 
mind to be obsessed with worldly thoughts while dwelling in 
solitude. 

(2) A religious devotee who is the head of a monastery 
showeth weakness if he seek his own interests (rather than 
those of the brotherhood). 

(3) A religious devotee showeth weakness if he be careful 
in the observance of moral discipline and lacking in moral 
restraint. 

(4) It showeth weakness in one who hath entered upon the 
Righteous Path to cling to worldly feelings of attraction and 
repulsion. 

(5) It showeth weakness in one who hath renounced world- 
liness and entered the Holy Order to hanker after acquiring 
merit. 



610 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


(6) It showeth weakness in one who hath caught a glimpse 
of Reality to fail to persevere in sadhama (or yogic meditation) 
till the dawning of Full Enlightenment. 

(7) It showeth weakness in one who is a religious devotee 
to enter upon the Path and then be unable to tread it. 

(8) It showeth weakness in one who hath no other occupa- 
tion than religious devotion to be unable to eradicate from him- 
self unworthy actions. 

(9) It showeth weakness in one who hath chosen' the re- 
ligious career to have hesitancy in entering into close retreat 
while knowing full well that the food and everything needed 
would be provided unasked. 

(xo) A religious devotee who exhibiteth occult powers when 
practising exorcism or in driving away diseases showeth 
weakness. 

(11) A religious devotee showeth weakness if he barter 
sacred truths for food and money. 

(12) One who is vowed to the religious life showeth weak- 
ness if he cunningly praise himself while disparaging others. 

(13) A man of religion who preacheth loftily to others and 
doth not live loftily himself showeth weakness. 

(14) One who professeth religion and is unable to live in 
solitude in his own company and yet knoweth not how to 
make himself agreeable in the company of others showeth 
weakness. 

(15) The religious devotee showeth weakness if he be not 
indifferent to comfort and to hardship. 

These are The Fifteen Weaknesses. 

XV. The Twelve Indispensable Things 

/ (1) It is indispensable to have an intellect endowed with 

the power of comprehending and applying the Doctrine to one’s 
own needs. 

(2) At the very beginning (of one’s religious career) it is 
indispensably necessary to have the most profound aversion for 
the interminable sequence of repeated deaths and births. 

(3) A guru capable o’f guiding thee on the Path of Emanci- 
pation is also indispensable. 

(4) Diligence combined with fortitude and invulnerability 
to temptation are indispensable. 



THE SUPREME PATH . 


611 


(5) Unceasing perseverance in neutralizing the results of 
evil deeds, by the performance of good deeds, and the fulfilling 
of the threefold vow, to maintain chastity of body, purity of 
mind, and control of speech, are indispensable. 

(6) A philosophy comprehensive enough to embrace the 
whole of knowledge is indispensable. 

(7) A system of meditation which will produce the power 
of concentrating the mind upon anything whatsoever is indis- 
pensable. 

(8) An art of living which will enable one to utilize each 
activity (of body, speech, and mind) as an aid on the Path 
is indispensable. 

(9) A method of practising the select teachings which will 
make them more than mere words is indispensable. 

(10) Special instructions (by a wise guru) which will en- 
able one to avoid misleading paths, temptations, pitfalls, and 
dangers are indispensable. 

(1 1) Indomitable faith combined with supreme serenity of 
mind are indispensable at the moment of death. 

(12) As a result of having practically applied the select 
teachings, the attainment of spiritual powers capable of trans- 
muting the body, the speech, and the mind into their divine 
essences is indispensable. 

These are The Twelve Indispensable Things. 

XVI. The Ten Signs of a Superior Man 

, (1) To have but little pride and envy is the sign of a su- 

perior man. 

(2) To have but few desires and satisfaction with simple 
things is the sign of a superior man. 

(3) To be lacking in hypocrisy and deceit is the sign of a 
superior man. 

(4) To regulate one’s conduct in accordance with the law 
of cause and effect as carefully as one guardeth the pupils of 
one’s eyes is the sign of a superior man. 

/ (5) To be faithful to one’s engagements and obligations is 

the sign of a superior man. 

(6) To be able to keep alive friendships while one (at the 
same time) regardeth all beings with impartiality is the sign of 
a superior man. 



6 18 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


(7) To look with pity and without anger upon those who 
live evilly is the sign of a superior man. 

(8) To allow unto others the victory, taking unto oneself 
the defeat, is the sign of a superior man. 

(9) To differ from the multitude in every thought and ac- 
tion is the sign of a superior man. 

(10) To observe faithfully and without pride one’s vows of 
chastity and piety is the sign of a superior man. 

These are The Ten Signs of a Superior Man. Their op- 
posites are The Ten Signs of an Inferior Man. 

XVII. The Ten Useless Things 

(1) Our body being illusory and transitory, it is useless to 
give over-much attention to it. 

(2) Seeing that when we die we must depart empty-handed 
and on the morrow after our death our corpse is expelled from 
our own house, it is useless to labour and to suffer privations in 
order to make for oneself a home in this world. 

(3) Seeing that when we die our descendants (if spiritually 
unenlightened) are unable to render us the least assistance, it 
is useless for us to bequeath to them worldly (rather than 
spiritual) riches, even out of love. 

(4) Seeing that when we die we must go on our way alone 
and without kinsfolk or friends, it is useless to have devoted 
time (which ought to have been dedicated to the winning of 
Enlightenment) to their humouring and obliging, or in shower- 
ing loving affection upon them. 

(5) Seeing that our descendants themselves are subject to 
death and that whatever worldly goods we may bequeath to 
them are certain to be lost eventually, it is useless to make 
bequests of the things of this world. 

(6) Seeing that when death cometh one must relinquish 
even one’s own home, it is useless to devote life to the acquisi- 
tion of worldly things. 

(7) Seeing that unfaithfulness to the religious vows will 
result in one’s going to the miserable states of existence, it is 
useless to have entered the Order if one live not a holy life. 

(8) To have heard and thought about the Doctrine and not 
practised it and acquired spiritual powers to assist thee at the 
moment of death is useless. 



THE SUPREME PATH • 


613 

(9) It is useless to have lived, even for a very long time, 
with a spiritual preceptor if one be lacking in humility and 
devotion and thus be unable to develop spiritually. 

(10) Seeing that all existing and apparent phenomena are 
ever transient, changing, and unstable, and more especially that 
the worldly life affordeth neither reality nor permanent gain, 
it is useless to have devoted oneself to the profitless doings of 
this world rather than to the seeking of Divine Wisdom. 

These are The Ten Useless Things. 

XVIII. The Ten Self-Imposed Troubles 

(1) To enter the state of the householder without means of 
sustenance produceth self-imposed trouble as doth an idiot 
eating aconite. 

(2) To live a thoroughly evil life and disregard the Doctrine 
produceth self-imposed trouble as doth an insane person jump- 
ing over a precipice. 

(3) To live hypocritically produceth self-imposed trouble as 
doth a person who putteth poison in his. own food. 

(4) To be lacking in firmness of mind and yet attempt to 
act as the head of a monastery produceth self-imposed trouble 
as doth a feeble old woman who attempteth to herd cattle. 

(5) To devote oneself wholly to selfish ambitions and not to 
strive for the good of others produceth self-imposed trouble as 
doth a blind man who alloweth himself to become lost in a 
desert. 

(6) To undertake difficult tasks and not have the ability 
to perform them produceth self-imposed trouble as doth a man 
without strength who trieth to carry a heavy load. 

(7) To transgress the commandments of the Buddha or of 
the holy guru through pride and self-conceit produceth self- 
imposed trouble as doth a king who followeth a perverted 
policy. 

(8) To waste one’s time loitering about towns and villages 
instead of devoting it to meditation produceth self-imposed 
trouble as doth a deer that descendeth to the valley instead of 
keeping to the fastnesses of the mountains. 

(9) To be absorbed in the pursuit of worldly things rather 
than in nourishing the growth of Divine Wisdom produceth 
self-imposed trouble as an eagle when it breaketh its wing. 



6 14 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


(10) Shamelessly to misappropriate offerings which have 
been dedicated to the guru or to the Trinity produceth self- 
imposed trouble as doth a child swallowing live coals. 

These are The Ten Self-Imposed Troubles. 

XIX. The Ten Things Wherein one Doeth Good to Oneself 

(1) One doeth good to oneself by abandoning worldly con- 
ventions and devoting oneself to the Holy Dharma. 

(2) One doeth good to oneself by departing from home and 
kindred and attaching oneself to a guru of saintly character. 

(3) One doeth good to oneself by relinquishing worldly ac- 
tivities and devoting oneself to the three religious activities, — 
hearing, reflecting, and meditating (upon the chosen teachings). 

(4) One doeth good to oneself by giving up social inter- 
course and dwelling alone in solitude. 

(5) One doeth good to oneself by renouncing desire for 
luxury and ease and enduring hardship. 

(6) One doeth good to oneself by being contented with 
simple things and free from craving for worldly possessions. 

(7) One doeth good to oneself by making and firmly adher- 
ing to the resolution not to take advantage of others. 

(8) One doeth good to oneself by attaining freedom from 
hankering after the transitory pleasures of this life and devoting 
oneself to the realization of the eternal bliss of Nirvana. 

(9) One doeth good to oneself by abandoning attachment to 
visible material things (which are transitory and unreal) and 
attaining knowledge of Reality. 

(10) One doeth good to oneself by preventing the three 
doors to knowledge (the body, the speech, and the mind) from 
remaining spiritually undisciplined and by acquiring, through 
right use of them, the Twofold Merit. 

These are The Ten Things Wherein one Doeth Good to 
Oneself. 

XX. The Ten Best Things 

(x) For one of little intellect, the best thing is to have 
faith in the law of cause and effect. 

(2) For one of ordinary intellect, the best thing is to 
recognize, both within and without oneself, the workings of the 
law of opposites. 



THE SUPREME PATH 


615 


(3) For one o£ superior intellect, the best thing is to have 
thorough comprehension of the inseparableness of the knower, 
the object of knowledge, and the act of knowing. 

(4) For one of little intellect, the best meditation is com- 
plete concentration of mind upon a single object. 

(5) For one of ordinary intellect, the best meditation is un- 
broken concentration of mind upon the two dualistic concepts 
(of phenomena and noumena, and consciousness and mind). 

(6) For one of superior intellect, the best meditation is to 
remain in mental quiescence, the mind devoid of all thought- 
processes, knowing that the meditator, the object of meditation, 
and the act of meditating constitute an inseparable unity. 

(7) For one of little intellect, the best religious practice is 
to live in strict conformity with the law of cause and effect. 

(8) For one of ordinary intellect, the best religious practice 
is to regard all objective things as though they were images 
seen in a dream or produced by magic. 

(9) For one of superior intellect, the best religious practice 
is to abstain from all worldly desires and actions, (regarding 
all sattgsaric things as though they were non-existent). 

(10) For those of all three grades of intellect, the best in- 
dication of spiritual progress is the gradual diminution of ob- 
scuring passions and selfishness. 

These are The Ten Best Things. 

XXI. The Ten Grievous Mistakes 

(1) For a religious devotee to follow a hypocritical charla- 
tan instead of a guru who sincerely practiseth the Doctrine is a 
grievous mistake. 

(2) For a religious devotee to apply himself to vain worldly 
sciences rather than to seeking the chosen secret teachings of 
the Great Sages is a grievous mistake. 

(3) For a religious devotee to make far-reaching plans as 
though he were going to establish permanent residence (in this 
world) instead of living as though each day were the last he 
had to live is a grievous mistake. 

(4) For a religious devotee to preach the Doctrine to the 
multitude (ere having realized it to be true) instead of meditat- 
ing upon it (and testing its truth) in solitude is a grievous 
mistake. 



6x6 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


(5) For a religious devotee to be like a miser and hoard up 
riches instead of dedicating them to religion and charity is a 
grievous mistake. 

(6) For a religious devotee to give way in body, speech, and 
mind to the shamelessness of debauchery instead of observing 
carefully the vows (of purity and chastity) is a grievous 
mistake. 

(7) For a religious devotee to spend his life between worldly 
hopes and fears instead of gaining understanding of Reality is 
a grievous mistake. 

(8) For a religious devotee to try to reform others instead 
of reforming himself is a grievous mistake. 

(9) For a religious devotee to strive after worldly, powers 
instead of cultivating his own innate spiritual powers is a 
grievous mistake. 

(10) For a religious devotee to be idle and indifferent in- 
stead of persevering when all the circumstances favourable for 
spiritual advancement are present is a grievous mistake. 

These are The Ten Grievous Mistakes. 

XXII. The Ten Necessary Things 

(1) At the very outset (of one’s religious career) one should 
have so profound an aversion for the continuous succession of 
deaths and births (to which all who have not attained Enlight- 
enment are subject) that one will wish to flee from it even as 
a stag fleeth from captivity. 

(2) The next necessary thing is perseverance so great that 
one regretteth not the losing of one’s life (in the quest for En- 
lightenment), like that of the husbandman who tilleth his 
fields and regretteth not the tilling even though he die on 
the morrow. 

(3) The third necessary thing is joyfulness of mind like 
that of a man who hath accomplished a great deed of far- 
reaching influence. 

(4) Again, one should comprehend that, as with a man 
dangerously wounded by an arrow, there is not a moment of 
time to be wasted. 

(5) One needeth ability to fix the mind on a single thought 
even as doth a mother who hath lost her only son. 

(6) Another necessary thing is to understand that there is 
no need of doing anything, even as a cowherd whose cattle 


THE SUPREME PATH, 617 

have been driven off by enemies understandeth that he can do 
nothing to recover them. 

(7) It is primarily requisite for one to hunger after the 
Doctrine even as a hungry man hungereth after good food. 

(8) One needeth to be as confident of one’s mental ability 
as doth a strong man of his physical ability to hold fast to a 
precious gem which he hath found. 

(9) One must expose the fallacy of dualism as one doth 
the falsity of a liar. 

(10) One must have confidence in the Thatness (as being 
the Sole Refuge) even as an exhausted crow far from land 
hath confidence in the mast of the ship upon which it resteth. 

These are The Ten Necessary Things. 

XXIII. The Ten Unnecessary Things 

(1) If the empty nature of the mind be realized, no longer 
is it necessary to listen to or to meditate upon religious teach- 
ings. 

(2) If the unsulliable nature of the intellect be realized, no 
longer is it necessary to seek absolution of one s sins. 

(3) Nor is absolution necessary for one who abideth in the 
State of Mental Quiescence. 

(4) For him who hath attained the State of Unalloyed 
Purity there is no need to meditate upon the Path or upon the 
methods of treading it, (for he hath arrived at the Goal). 

(5) If the unreal (or illusory) nature of cognitions be real- 
ized, no need is there to meditate upon the state of non-cogni- 
tion. 

(6) If the non-reality (or illusory nature) of obscuring pas- 
sions be realized, no need is there to seek their antidote. 

(7) If all phenomena be known to be illusory, no need is 
there to seek or to reject anything. 

(8) If sorrow and misfortune be recognized to be blessings, 
no need is there to seek happiness. 

(9) If the unborn (or uncreated) nature of one’s own con- 
sciousness be realized, no need is there to practise transference 
of consciousness. 

(10) If only the good of others be sought in all that one 
doeth, no need is there to seek benefit for oneself. 

These are The Ten Unnecessary Things. 


618 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


XXIV. The Ten More Precious Things 

(1) One free and well-endowed human life is more precious 
than myriads of non-human lives in any of the six states of 
existence. 

(2) One Sage is more precious than multitudes of irreligious 
and worldly-minded persons. 

(3) One esoteric truth is more precious than innumerable 
exoteric doctrines. 

(4) One momentary glimpse of Divine Wisdom, born of 
meditation, is more precious than any amount of knowledge de- 
rived from merely listening to and thinking about religious 
teachings. 

(5) The smallest amount of merit dedicated to the good of 
/ others is more precious than any amount of merit devoted to 

one’s own good. 

(6) To experience but momentarily the samadhi wherein 
all thought-processes are quiescent is more precious than to 
experience uninterruptedly the samadhi wherein thought-proc- 
esses are still present. 

(7) To enjoy a single moment of Nirvanic bliss is more 
precious than to enjoy any amount of sensual bliss. 

(8) The smallest good deed done unselfishly is more precious 
/ than innumerable good deeds done selfishly. 

(9) The renunciation of every worldly thing (home, family, 
friends, property, fame, duration of life, and even health) is 
more precious than the giving of inconceivably vast worldly 
wealth in charity. 

(10) One lifetime spent in the quest for Enlightenment is 
more precious than all the lifetimes during an aeon spent in 
worldly pursuits. 

These are The Ten More Precious Things. 

XXV. The Ten Equal Things 

* 

(1) For him who is sincerely devoted to the religious life, 
it is the same whether he refrain from worldly activities or not. 

{2) For him who hath realized the transcendental nature 
of mind, it is the same whether he meditate or not. 

(3) For him who is freed fropi attachment to worldly lux- 
uries, it is the same whether he practise asceticism or not. 

(4) For him who hath realized Reality, it is the same 



THE SUPREME PATH ' 619 

whether he dwell on an isolated hill-top in solitude or wander 
hither and thither (as a bhikshu ). 

(5) For him who hath attained the mastery of his mind, 
f it is the same whether he partake of the pleasures of the world 

or not. 

(6) For him who is endowed with the fullness of compas- 
sion, it is the same whether he practise meditation in solitude 
or work for the good of others in the midst of society. 

(7) For him whose humility and faith (with respect to his 
guru ) are unshakable, it is the same whether he dwell with 
his guru or not. 

(8) For him who understandeth thoroughly the teachings 
which he hath received, it is the same whether he meet with 
good fortune or with bad fortune. 

(9) For him who hath given up the worldly life and taken 
to the practice of the Spiritual Truths, it is the same whether 
he observe conventional codes of conduct or not. 

(10) For him who hath attained the Sublime Wisdom, it is 
the same whether he be able to exercise miraculous powers or 
not. 

These are The Ten Equal Things. 

XXVI. The Ten Virtues of the Holy Dharma (or Doctrine) 

(1) The fact that there have been made known amongst 
men the Ten Pious Acts,' the Six Paramita, the various teach- 
ings concerning Reality and Perfection, the Four Noble Truths, 
the Four States of Dhyana, the Four States of Formless Exist- 
ence, and the Two Mystic Paths of spiritual unfoldment and 
emancipation, showeth the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(2) The fact that there have been evolved in the Sangsara 
spiritually enlightened princes and Brahmins amongst men, 
and the Four Great Guardians, the six orders of devas of the 
sensuous paradises, the seventeen orders of gods of the worlds 
of form, and the four orders of gods of the worlds without 
form showeth the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(3) The fact that there have arisen in the world those who 
have entered the Stream, those who will return to birth but 
once more, those who have passed beyond the need of further 
birth, and Arhants, and Self-Enlightened Buddhas and Om- 
niscient Buddhas, showeth the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(4) The fact that there are Those who have attained Bodhic 


620 SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 

Enlightenment and are able to return to the wdrld as Divine 
Incarnations and work for the deliverance of mankind and of 
all living things till the time of the dissolution of the physical 
universe showeth the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(5) The fact that there existeth, as an outcome of the all- 
embracing benevolence of the Bodhisattvas, protective spiritual 
influences which make possible the deliverance of men and of 
all beings showeth the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(6) The fact that one experienceth even in the unhappy 
worlds of existence moments of happiness as a direct outcome 
of having performed little deeds of mercy while in the human 
world showeth the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(7) The fact that men after having lived evilly should have 
renounced the worldly life and become saints worthy of the 
veneration of the world showeth the virtue of the Holy 

Dharma. 

(8) The fact that men whose heavy evil karma would have 
condemned them to almost endless suffering after death should 
have turned to the religious life and attained Nirvana showeth 
the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(9) The fact that by merely having faith in or meditating 
upon the Doctrine, or by merely donning the robe of the bhik- 
shu, one becometh worthy of respect and veneration showeth 
the virtue of the Holy Dharma. 

(10) The fact that one, even after having abandoned all 
worldly possessions and embraced the religious life and given 
up the state of the householder and hidden himself in a most 
secluded hermitage, should still be sought for and supplied with 
all the necessities of life showeth the virtue of the Holy 

Dharma. 

These are The Ten Virtues of the Holy Dharma. 

XXVII. The Ten Figurative Expressions 

(1) As the Foundation Truth cannot be described (but 
must be realized in samadhi), the expression Foundation Truth 
is merely figurative. 

(2) As there is neither any traversing nor any traverser of 
the Path, the expression Path is merely figurative. 

(3) As there is neither any seeing nor any seer of the True 
State, the expression True State is merely figurative. 



THE SUPREME PATH ’ 


621 


(4) As there is neither any meditation nor any meditator 
of the Pure State, the expression Pure State is merely 
figurative. 

(5) As there is neither any enjoying nor any enjoyer of 
the Natural Mood, the expression Natural Mood is merely 
figurative. 

(6) As there is neither any vow-keeping nor any vow- 
keeper, these expressions are merely figurative. 

{7) As there is neither any accumulating nor any accu- 
mulator of merits, the expression Twofold Merit is merely 
figurative. 

(8) As there is neither any performing nor any performer 
of actions, the expression Twofold Obscuration is merely 
figurative. 

(9) As there is neither any renunciation nor any renouncer 
(of worldly existence), the expression worldly existence is 
merely figurative. 

(10) As there is neither any obtaining nor any obtainer (of 
results of actions), the expression results of actions is merely 
figurative. 

These are The Ten Figurative Expressions. 

XXVIII. The Ten Great Joyful Realizations 

(1) It is great joy to realize that the mind of all sentient be- 
ings is inseparable from the All-Mind. 

(2) It is great joy to realize that the Fundamental Reality 
is qualityless. 

(3) It is great joy to realize that in the infinite, thought- 
transcending Knowledge of Reality all sangsaric differentiations 
are non-existent. 

(4) It is great joy to realize that in the state of primordial 
(or uncreated) mind there existeth no disturbing thought- 
process. 

(5) It is great joy to realize that in the Dharma-Kaya, 
wherein mind and matter are inseparable, there existeth neither 
any holder of theories nor any support of theories. 

(6) It is great joy to realize that in the self-emanated, com- 
passionate Sambhoga-Kaya there existeth no birth, death, 
transition, or any change. 

(7) It is great joy to realize that in the self-emanated, 
divine Nirmana-Kaya there existeth no feeling of duality. 



62s SELECTIONS FROM TIBETAN SOURCES 


(8) It is great joy to realize that in the Dharma-Ghakra 
there existeth no support for the soul doctrine. 

(9) It is great joy to realize that in the Divine, Boundless 
Compassion (of the Bodhisattvas) there existeth neither any 
shortcoming nor any showing of partiality. 

(10) It is great joy to realize that the Path to Freedom, 
which all the Buddhas have trodden is ever-existent, ever un- 
changed, and ever open to those who are ready to enter upon 
it. 

These are The Ten Great Joyful Realizations. 

(The Conclusion) 

Herein, above, is contained the essence of the immaculate 
words of the Great Gurus, who were endowed with Divine Wis- 
dom; and of the Goddess Tara and other divinites. Among 
these Great Teachers were the glorious Dipankara, the spiritual 
father and his successors, who were divinely appointed for the 
spreading of the Doctrine in this Northern Land of Snow; and 
the Gracious Gurus of the Kahdampa School. There were also 
that King of Yogins, Miiarepa, to whom was bequeathed the 
learning of the Sage Marpa of Lhobrak and of others; and the 
illustrious Saints, Naropa and Maitripa, of the noble land of 
India, whose splendour equalled that of the Sun and Moon; 
and the disciples of all these. 

Here endeth The Supreme Path, the Rosary of Precious 
Gems . 

May this Book radiate divine virtue; and may it prove to 
be auspicious. 

Mangalam. 



SELECTIONS 

FROM MODERN SOURCES 


1 he scripture of the saviour of the world 
Lord Buddha — Prince Siddartha styled on earth — 

In Earth and Heavens and Hells Incomparable, 
All-honoured, Wisest, Best, most Pitiful ; 

The Teacher of Nirvana and the Law . 

# # # 

Om mani padme hum, the Sunrise comes ! 

The Dewdrop slips into the shining Sea! 

Sir Edwin Arnold 
The Light of Asia. 


HOMELESS BROTHERS 


A MAN who wishes to become my disciple must be willing 
to give up all direct relations with his family, with the 
social life of the world and all dependence upon wealth. A 
man who has given up all such relations for the sake of the 
Dharma and has no abiding place for either his body or his 
mind has become my disciple and is to be called a homeless 
brother. 

Though his feet leave their imprints in my footsteps and his 
hands carry my garment, if his mind is disturbed by greed, he 
is far from me. Though he dresses like a monk, but does not 
accept the teaching, he does not see me. But if he has removed 
all greed and his mind is pure and peaceful, he is very close to 
me though he be thousands of miles away. If he receives the 
Dharma he sees me in the Dharma. 

2. My disciples, the homeless brothers, observe four rules and 
about them build their lives. First, they wear old and cast-off 
garments; second, they get their food by faith; third, their 
home is where night finds them; fourth, they use the special 
medicine laid down by the brotherhood. 

To carry a bowl in hand and go from house to house is a 
beggar’s life, but he is not compelled to do it by others, he is 
not forced into it by circumstances or by temptation, he does 
it of his own free will because he thinks that a life of faith 
will keep him away from the delusions of life, will help him to 
avoid suffering, and will lead him toward enlightenment. 

The life of a homeless brother is not an easy life; one ought 
not to undertake it if he can not keep his mind free from greed 
and anger, and if he can not control his mind and his five 
senses. 

3. To believe oneself to be a homeless brother and to be able 
to answer when he is asked about it, one must be able to 
say:— 1 am willing to undertake whatever is necessary to be a 
homeless brother. I will be sincere about it and will try to 
accomplish the purpose for becoming one. I will be grateful 

62s 



626 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


to those who help me by donations and will try to make them 
happy by my earnestness and good life." 

To be a homeless brother one must train himself in many 
ways: — He must be sensitive to shame and dishonor when he 
fails; he must keep his body, lips and mind pure if his life is 
to be pure; he must guard the gates of the five senses; he 
must not lose control of his mind for the sake of some passing 
pleasure; he must not praise himself nor rebuke others; and he 
must not be idle nor given to much sleep. 

In the evening he should have a time for quiet sitting and 
meditation and a little walk before retiring. For peaceful sleep 
he should rest on the right side with his feet together and his 
last thought should be of the time when he wishes to rise in 
the early morning. In the early morning he should have an- 
other time for quiet sitting and meditation and a little walk 
after it. During the day he should always maintain an alert 
mind, keeping both body and mind under control, resisting all 
tendency to greed, anger, laziness, sleepiness, inattention, regret 
and suspicion, and all worldly desires. Thus, with concentrated 
mind, he should radiate excellent wisdom and aim at perfect 
enlightenment only. 

4. If a homeless brother, forgetting himself, lapses into greed, 
gives way to anger, cherishes resentment, jealousy, conceit, self- 
praise, or insincerity, he is carrying a keen two-edged sword 
only covered by a thin cloth. One is not a homeless brother 
simply because he wears a monk’s rags and carries a begging 
bowl; he is not a homeless brother just because he recites scrip- 
tures glibly; he is only a man of straw. 

Even if his intention is honest, if he can not control his 
worldly desires, he is not a homeless brother, no more than an 
infant is. Only those who are able to concentrate and control 
the mind, who manifest wisdom, who have removed all worldly 
desires, and whose only purpose is to attain enlightenment, 
only these can be called a true homeless brother. 

A true homeless brother determines to reach his goal of 
enlightenment even though he loses his last drop of blood and 
his bones crumble into powder. Such an one, trying his best, 
will finally attain the goal of a homeless brother and give evi- 
dence of it by his ability to do the meritorious deeds of a 
homeless brother. 

5. The mission of the homeless brother is to carry forward the 



HOMELESS BROTHERS, 


627 


light of the Dharma. He must preach to everybody, he must 
wake up sleeping people, he must correct false ideas, he must 
give people a right viewpoint; he must not wait for people 
to come to him, he must go everywhere, risking his own life 
even to do so. 

The mission of a homeless brother is not an easy one, so he 
who aspires to it should wear Buddha’s clothes, sit on Buddha’s 
seat and enter into Buddha’s room. To wear Buddha’s clothes 
means to be humble and to practice endurance. To sit on Bud- 
dha’s seat means, to see everything as emptiness, to have no 
abiding place, no attachments; to enter into Buddha’s room 
means, to share his all-embracing compassion, to have sympathy 
with everybody. To be able to enter into Buddha’s all-embrac- 
ing compassion, one must sit on Buddha’s seat of emptiness, 
must wear his garment of humility, and must patiently teach 
all people. 

6. Those who wish to teach the Buddha’s Dharma acceptably 
must be concerned about four things: — First, he must be con- 
cerned about his own behavior; second, he must be concerned 
about the people he will approach and teach and what words 
he will use; third, he must be concerned about his motive for 
teaching and the end he wishes to accomplish; fourth, he must 
be concerned about the great compassion for Buddha. 

To be a good teacher of the Dharma, first of all, a homeless 
brother must have his feet well set on the ground of endurance, 
he must be modest, he must not be eccentric or desire publicity, 
he must constantly think of the emptiness aspect of things, he 
must avoid thinking of things as this good and that bad, 
as this easy and that hard, he must not become attached to 
anything. If he is thus concerned, he will be able to behave 
well. 

Secondly, he must exercise caution in approaching people 
and situations. He must avoid people who are living evil lives 
or people of authority; he must avoid women. Then he must 
approach people in a friendly way; he must always remember 
that things rise from a combination of causes and conditions, 
and standing at that point, he must not blame people, or abuse 
them, or speak of their mistakes, or hold them in light esteem. 

Thirdly, he must keep his mind peaceful, considering Bud- 
dha as his spiritual father, considering other homeless brothers 
who are training for enlightenment as his teachers, look upon 


628 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


everybody with great compassion and then teach anybody with 
friendly patience. 

Fourthly, he must let his spirit of compassion have free 
course, even as Buddha did, unto the uttermost. Especially he 
should let his spirit of compassion flow out to those who do not 
know enough to want to be enlightened. He should wish that 
they might want to be enlightened, and then he should follow 
his wishes with an unselfish effort to awaken their interest. 

Lay Members 

1. It has already been explained that to become a disciple of 
Buddha one must believe in the three treasures: — Buddha, 
Dharma; and the Brotherhood. To become a lay member one 
must have an unshaken faith in Buddha, must believe in his 
teachings and study them and put them into practice, and must 
cherish the Brotherhood. To cherish the Brotherhood means, 
to feel themselves a part of its fellowship, honoring and sustain- 
ing the homeless brothers, making regular donations for their 
support, and seeking their instruction. 

Lay members should follow the five precepts for good be- 
havior: — not to harm any sentient life, not to steal, to live a 
pure and restrained life, not to lie or deceive, and not to use 
intoxicants. 

Lay members should not only believe in the teachings and 
study themselves, but they should, as far as they are able, ex- 
plain them to others, especially to their relatives and friends, 
trying to awaken in them a similar faith in Buddha, Dharma 
and the Brotherhood, so that they too may share in Buddha’s 
mercy. 

Lay members should always keep in mind that the reason 
why they believe in the three treasures and why they keep the 
precepts is to enable them ultimately to attain enlightenment 
and for that reason they should avoid becoming attached to 
worldly desires yhile still living in the world of desire. 

Lay members should always keep in mind that sooner or 
later they will be obliged to leave their parents and families 
and pass away from this life of birth and death; therefore, 
they should set their minds on the world of enlightenment 
wherein nothing passes away. 

2. Lay members should awaken an earnest undisturbed faith in 



HOMELESS BROTHERS 


629 


Buddha’s teachings and as far as they do this they will realize 
within their minds a quiet and undisturbed happiness that will 
shine out on all their surroundings and be reflected back to 
them. This mind of faith is pure and gentle, always patient 
and enduring, never argues, never causes suffering to others, 
always' keeps in mind the three treasures, — Buddha, Dharma 
and the Brotherhood. 

Since by faith you are resting in the bosom of Buddha, you 
are kept far away from a selfish mind and from attachment to 
your possessions. You will have no fear about your future sup- 
port and no fear that anyone will harm you. Since you have 
faith in the truth and the holiness of the Dharma, you can 
express your thoughts freely and without fear. Since you have 
faith in Buddha’s Pure Land, you need have no fear of death. 

Since your mind is filled with compassion for all people, you 
will make no distinctions among them but will treat all alike, 
and since your mind is free from likes and dislikes it will be 
pure and equitable, happy to do any good deed. 

Whether you live in adversity or in prosperity will make 
no difference to the increase of your faith. If you cherish 
humility, if you respect Buddha’s teachings, if you are con- 
sistent in speech and action, if you are guided by wisdom, if 
your mind is as resistant as a mountain, then you will make 
steady progress on the path to enlightenment. And though you 
are forced to live in a difficult situation and among people of 
impure minds, if you cherish faith in Buddha you can lead 
them toward better deeds. 

3. Therefore, everyone should make the wish to hear Buddha’s 
teaching the paramount wish of his heart. If anyone should 
tell him that it would be necessary to go through fire to gain 
enlightenment then he should be willing to pass through fire. 
There is a satisfaction in hearing the Buddha’s name that is 
worth passing through a world filled with fire to gain. 

If one wishes to follow the Buddha’s teaching he must not 
be egoistic nor self-willed, but should cherish feelings of good- 
will toward all alike, he should respect those who are worthy 
of respect, he should serve those who are worthy of service and 
treat all others with uniform kindness. After this manner lay 
members are to train their own minds first and not be disturbed 
as to how other people act. In this manner they are to receive 
the Buddha’s teaching and put it into practice, not envying 


630 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


other people, nor being influenced by other teachings, not con- 
sidering other ways. 

Those who do not believe in Buddha’s teaching have a nar- 
row vision and consequently a disturbed mind. But those who 
believe in Buddha’s teaching believe that there is a great wis- 
dom and a great compassion encompassing everything and in 
that faith they are undisturbed by trifles. 

4. Those who hear and receive the Dharma know that their 
lives are transient and that their bodies are merely aggregations 
of sufferings and the source of all evil, so they do not become 
attached to them. At the same time they do not neglect to take 
good care of their bodies, not because they wish to enjoy the 
physical life of the body, but because the body is necessary for 
the attainment of wisdom and for their mission of explaining 
the Dharma. If they do not take good care of their bodies 
they can not live long. If they do not keep well and live long, 
they can not practice the Dharma personally nor explain it to 
others. 

If a man wishes to cross a river he is very careful of his 
raft. If he has a long journey to make he takes good care of 
his horse. So if a man wishes to attain enlightenment he takes 
good care of his body. 

Those who are disciples of Buddha must wear suitable 
clothing to protect the body from the extremes of heat and 
cold and to hide its shame, but they should not wear them for 
decoration. They must eat suitable food to nourish the body 
so that they may hear and receive and explain the Dharma, 
but they should not eat for mere enjoyment. They must live 
in houses of enlightenment to be protected from the thieves 
of worldly passion and from the storms of evil teaching, but 
they should use the house for its real purpose and not for dis- 
play or the concealment of selfish practices. 

Thus you should value things and use them solely in their 
relation to enlightenment and the Dharma. You should not 
become attached to them for selfish reasons but only as they 
serve a useful purpose in carrying the Dharma to others. There- 
fore your mind should dwell on the Dharma even when you 
are living with your family. You should care for them with 
a wise and sympathetic mind, seeking to awaken faith in their 
minds by many methods. 

5. Lay members of Buddha’s Brotherhood should study the fol- 


HOMELESS BROTHERS 


63 1 

lowing lessons every day: — How to serve their parents, how tc 
live with wife and children, how to control oneself, how tc 
manifest Buddha. 

To best serve parents they must learn to practice kindness 
toward all animate life. To live with wife and children happily 
they must keep away from lust and thoughts of selfish com 
fort. While hearing the music of the family life they must not 
forget the sweeter music of the Dharma, and while living ir 
the shelter of the home, they should often seek the safer sheltei 
of Dhyana practice where wise men find refuge from all im 
purity and all disturbance. 

When laymen are bestowing charity they should remove 
all greed from their own hearts; when they are in the midst 
of a crowd, their minds should be in the company of wise men; 
when they face misfortune, they should keep the mind tran 
quil and free from hindrances. When they take refuge in Bud 
dha, their desire should be for his wisdom; when they take ref 
uge in the Dharma, their desire should be to realize its truth 
which is like a great ocean of wisdom; when they take refuge 
in the Brotherhood, their desire should be to share its peaceful 
fellowship unobstructed by any selfish interests. 

When they wear clothes they must not forget to put on 
also the garment of goodness and humility. When they take 
an injection, they must wish to discharge all greed, anger and 
foolishness of mind. When they are toiling on an up-hill road, 
they should think of it as the road to enlightenment that will 
carry them beyond the world of delusion. When they are 
following an easy road, they should guard the mind against 
sloth and pride and should take advantage of its easier condi 
tions to make a greater progress toward Buddhahood. 

When they see a bridge, they must wish to tell people of 
the bridge of the Dharma; when they meet a sorrowful man, 
they should have feelings of hatred for the bitterness of this 
ever changing world; when they see a greedy man, they should 
have a great longing to keep free from the illusions of this life 
and to share in the true riches of enlightenment; when they 
see savory food, they must be on guard; when they see distaste- 
ful food, they should wish that greed might never return. 

During the intense heat of summer, they must wish to be 
away from the heat of worldly desires and gain the fresh cool- 
ness of enlightenment. During the eold of winter, they must 



632 selections from modern sources 

think of the warmth of Buddha’s great compassion. When they 
recite the sacred scriptures, they must try not to forget them 
and must be very earnest to put their teaching into practice. 
When they think of Buddha, they must cherish a deep wish to 
have eyes like Buddha. As they fall asleep at night they should 
wish that their body, lips and mind might be purified and re- 
freshed; when they awake in the morning, their first wish 
should be that during that day their minds might be clear to 
understand everything. 

6. Laymen, although understanding that everything is char- 
acterized by “emptiness,” do not treat the things that enter 
into a man’s life lightly, but they receive them for what they 
are and then try to make them fit for enlightenment. Laymen 
must not think that the world of man’s life is meaningless and 
filled with confusion, while the world of enlightenment is full 
of meaning and peaceful. Rather, they should taste the way 
of enlightenment in all the affairs of the world. If one looks 
upon the world with eyes dimmed in ignorance, he will see it 
filled with error, but if he looks upon it with clear wisdom, he 
will see it as the world of enlightenment itself. 

The fact is, there is only one world, — there are not two 
worlds, one meaningless and the other full of meaning, one 
good, the other bad — People think there are two worlds by the 
activities of their own minds. If they could get rid of these 
false judgments and keep their minds pure with the light of 
wisdom, then they would see only one world and that world 
bathed in the light of wisdom. 

7. Laymen who believe in Buddha taste this universal purity 
of oneness in everything, and in that mind they feel compas- 
sion for everyone and humbly desire to serve them. Therefore, 
laymen should cleanse their minds from all proudness and cher- 
ish minds of humility and courtesy and service. Their minds 
should be like the fruitful earth that nourishes everything with- 
out partiality, that serves without complaint, that endures pa- 
tiently, that is always zealous, that finds its highest joy in serv- 
ing all poor people by planting in their minds the seeds of 
Buddha’s Dharma. 

Thus the mind that has compassion on poor people, be- 
comes a mother to all people, honors all people, looks upon 
all people as his personal friends, respects them as though they 
were his parents. Therefore, though thousands of people have 


HOMELESS BROTHERS , 


633 


hard feelings and cherish ill-will toward lay believers, they 
can do them no harm, for what harm is a drop of poison in 
the waters of an ocean. 

8. A lay member will add to his happiness by habits of recol- 
lection and reflection and thanksgiving. He will come to realize 
that his faith is Buddha’s compassion itself, that it is one thing, 
and that it has been given to him as a present by Buddha. 

There are no seeds of faith in the mud of worldly passion, 
but seeds of faith may be sown there because of Buddha’s com- 
passion and they will purify the mind until it has faith to be- 
lieve in Buddha. 

As has been said, the fragrant Candana can not grow in the 
forest of Eranda. In like manner the seeds of faith in Buddha 
can not grow in the bosom of delusion. But actually the 
flower of joy is blooming there, so we must conclude that while 
its blossoms are in the bosom of delusion, its roots are else- 
where, namely, its roots are in the bosom of Buddha, or in 
other words, faith in Buddha is the gift of Buddha, and grows 
independent of conditions. 

If a lay believer is later carried away by self-pride, he will 
become jealous, envious, hateful and harmful, because his mind 
has again become defiled with greed, anger and foolish infatua- 
tion, but if he return to Buddha, he will accomplish an even 
greater service for Buddha. It is, indeed, a marvel. 


PRACTISING THE SEVENTH STAGE 
OF BUDDHA’S NOBLE PATH 


S ITTING quietly with empty and tranquil mind, breathing 
gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; realizing that however 
necessary the process of breathing is to the life of the organism, 
it is not the self, neither is it anything that a self can accomplish 
by volition or effort. It is a spontaneous activity that goes on 
best as we rest quietly, restraining all rising thoughts, keeping 
the mind fixed on its pure essence, realizing that the organism 
and all its activities is only a skillful device, an efficient means, 
which Buddhahood employs in fulfillment of its nature to 
emancipate and enlighten all sentient beings. As such it Is a 
manifestation of Buddhahood’s love and wisdom; it is Buddha- 
hood taking form within one’s own mind as a coming Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of the mind to clear away so that the clear bright- 
ness within may shine forth, illumining the mind, revealing 
that self is nothing, that mind-essence is everything. Sitting 
quietly realizing the mind’s pure essence. Realizing its all- 
embracing wholeness, its inconceivable purity and unity, its 
boundless potentiality for radiation and integration; radiation 
going forth in rays and vibrations of cosmic energy; manifesting 
itself in particles, electrons and atoms; and by the phenomena 
of light, heat and electricity. Integration drawing everything 
inward to purity and unity; the going forth and the drawing 
inward being so perfectly balanced that all abides in the orig- 
inal emptiness and silence. Sitting quietly with empty and tran- 
quil mind, realizing the universal emptiness and eternal silence; 
realizing it, but yielding to its radiating potency, continually 
being reborn in this Saha-world of suffering. 

* * • 

Sitting quietly, breathing gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; 
realizing that the organism if it is to become enlightened and 



PRACTISING THE SEVENTH SJAGE 635 

brought to Buddhahood requires something more than breath- 
ing, namely, it requires nutrition. This need is supplied by the 
organism going forth in search of food which the mouth pro- 
ceeds to masticate and salivate, the stomach to digest, the intes- 
tines to assimilate the wholesome into the blood and to reject 
the waste. But this process of transmuting food into nutritious 
blood is not the self, neither is it anything that a self can ac- 
complish by volition or effort. It is a spontaneous activity 
that goes on best as we rest quietly, restraining all rising 
thoughts, keeping the mind fixed on its pure essence, realizing 
that the organism and all its activities is only a skillful device, 
and efficient means, which Buddhahood employs in fulfillment 
of its nature to emancipate and enlighten all sentient beings 
and bring them to Buddhahood. As such it is a manifestation 
of Buddhahood’s love and wisdom; it is Buddhahood taking 
form within one’s own mind as a coming Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of the mind to clear away so that the brightness 
within may shine forth, illumining the mind, revealing that 
self is nothing, that mind essence is everything. Sitting quietly 
realizing the mind’s pure essence. Realizing its all-embracing 
wholeness, its inconceivable purity and unity, its boundless po- 
tentiality for radiation and integration; radiation going forth 
in chemical reactions among the atoms, manifesting themselves 
as molecules and physical substances, and by the phenomena of 
dynamics, gravitation and inertia; integration drawing every- 
thing inward to unity and purity; the going forth and the 
drawing in being so perfectly balanced that all abides in the 
original emptiness and silence. Sitting quietly with empty and 
tranquil mind realizing the universal emptiness and eternal 
silence; realizing its unbomness, its imagelessness, its egoless- 
ness; realizing it, but yielding to its radiating potency, con- 
tinually being reborn in this Saha-world of suffering. 

* * * 

Sitting quietly, breathing gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; 
realizing that the organism, if it is to become enlightened and 
brought to Buddhahood, requires something more than nutri- 
tion, namely, it requires vital energy. To satisfy this need the 
muscles and glands and ganglia of the lower abdomen receive 


636 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


the nutritious blood and transmutes it into vital energy by rea- 
son of which the material blood becomes living tissue. But 
this process is not a self neither is it anything that a self can 
accomplish by volition or effort; it is a spontaneous activity 
that goes on best as we rest quietly restraining all rising 
thoughts, keeping the mind fixed on its pure essence, realizing 
that the organism and all its activities is only a skillful de- 
vicej an efficient means, which Buddhahood employs in the 
fulfillment of its nature to emancipate and enlighten all sen- 
tient beings and bring them to Buddhahood. As such it is a 
manifestation of Buddhahood’s love and wisdom; it is Bud- 
dhahood taking form within one’s own mind as a coming 
Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of the mind to clear away so that the pure bright- 
ness within may shine forth, illumining the mind, revealing 
that self is nothing, that mind essence is everything. Sitting 
quietly realizing the mind’s pure essence; realizing its all-em- 
bracing wholeness, its inconceivable purity and unity, its bound- 
less potentiality for radiation and integration; radiation going 
forth into more and more complex forms of life — protoplasm, 
bacteria, cellular life and organic — manifesting itself in the phe- 
nomena of birth, growth, reproduction, decay and death. Inte- 
gration drawing everything into unity and purity; the going 
forth and the drawing in being so perfectly balanced that all 
abides in the original emptiness and silence. Sitting quietly 
with empty and tranquil mind, realizing the universal empti- 
ness and eternal silence; realizing its unbomness, its imageless- 
ness, its egolessness; realizing it, but yielding to its radiating 
potency, continually being reborn in this Saha-world of 
suffering. 

* # * 

Sitting quietly, breathing gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; 
realizing that the organism, if it is to become enlightened and 
brought to Buddhahood requires something more than vital 
energy, namely, it requires awareness. This need is supplied by 
the dual system of nerves and their ganglia which receive the 
current of vital energy and transmute it into instinctive aware- 
ness. By this process the organism becomes aware of its needs 


PRACTISING THE SEVENTH STAGE 


637 


and how to supply them, and of its dangers and how to pro- 
tect itself. But this process transmuting energy into awareness 
is not the self, neither is it anything that a self can accomplish 
by volition and effort; it is a spontaneous activity that goes 
on best as we rest quietly, restraining all rising thoughts, keep 
ing the mind fixed on its pure essence, realizing that the or- 
ganism and all its activities is only a skillful device, an efficient 
means, that Buddhahood employs in fulfillment of its nature 
to emancipate and enlighten all sentient beings and bring them 
to Buddhahood. As such it is a manifestation of Buddhahood’s 
love and wisdom; it is Buddhahood taking form within one’s 
own mind as a coming Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of the mind to clear away, so that the pure bright- 
ness within may shine forth illumining the mind, revealing 
that self is nothing, that essence of mind is everything. Sitting 
quietly realizing the mind’s pure essence. Realizing its all- 
embracing wholeness, its inconceivable purity and unity, its 
boundless potentiality for radiation and integration; radiation 
going forth in instinctive will-to-live, to-enjoy, to-propagate; 
becoming manifest in instinctive acts of greed, lust and self- 
assertion; and in the phenomena of natural selection, varia- 
tion, conflict, suffering and survival. Integration drawing every- 
thing inward to unity and purity; the going forth and the 
drawing in being so perfectly balanced that all abides in the 
original emptiness and silence. Sitting quietly realizing the uni- 
versal emptiness and eternal silence. Realizing its unbomness, 
its imagelessness, its egolessness; realizing it, but yielding to 
its radiating potency continually being reborn in this Saha- 
world of suffering. 

# # * 

Sitting quietly, breathing gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; 
realizing that the organism, if it is to become enlightened 
and brought to Buddhahood requires something more than in- 
stinctive awareness, namely, it requires consciousness and dis- 
crimination. This need is supplied by the system of sense or- 
gans and the lower mind, which in contact with their appro- 
priate fields receive the current of nervous energy and awareness 
and transmute it into sensations and perceptions, which the 


638 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


lower mind proceeds to unite, to name and to discriminate, from 
which arises consciousness and the ideas of self and not-self. 
But this process of transmuting nervous energy into conscious- 
ness and the idea of self is not the self, neither is it any- 
thing which a self can accomplish by volition or effort. It is 
a spontaneous activity which goes on best as we rest quietly, 
restraining every rising thought, ignoring every risen thought, 
keeping the mind fixed on its pure essence, realizing that the 
organism and all its activities is only a skillful device, an ef- 
ficient means, which Buddhahood employs in fulfillment of its 
nature to emancipate and enlighten all sentient beings and 
bring them to Buddhahood. As such it is a manifestation of 
Buddhahood’s love and wisdom; it is Buddhahood taking form 
within one’s own mind, as a coming Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of the mind to clear away so that the pure bright- 
ness within may shine forth, illumining the mind, revealing 
that self is nothing, that mind-essence is everything. Realizing 
the mind’s pure essence. Realizing its all-embracing wholeness, 
its inconceivable purity and unity, its boundless potentiality for 
radiation and integration; radiation going forth in discrimina- 
tion of thoughts relating to self and not self, that awaken likes 
and dislikes; and the phenomena of desire, grasping, acts of 
greed, lust, hatred, to be accumulated in memory, habits and 
karma. Integration drawing everything inward to unity and 
purity; the going forth and the drawing in being so perfectly 
balanced that all abides in the original emptiness and silence. 
Sitting quietly realizing the universal emptiness, the eternal 
silence; realizing its unbornness, its imagel'essness, its egoless- 
ness; realizing it, but yielding to its radiating potency being 
continually reborn in this Saha-world of Suffering. 

Sitting quietly, breathing gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; 
realizing that the organism, if it is to become enlightened and 
brought to Buddhahood, requires something more than con- 
scious discriminations, namely, it requires intellection and 
knowledge. This need is supplied by the upper mind, the cere- 
brum, which receives the stream of conscious discriminations 
and transmutes them into intellectual knowledge. By this the 



PRACTISING THE SEVENTH STAGE 639 


mind becomes aware that the myriad, myriad things which the 
senses perceive and the conscious mind discriminates and thinks 
about are empty and transient — dreams that have been caused by 
its own greed, anger and infatuation, as conditioned by karma 
and the mind’s defilements, and as expressed by body, lips and 
mind; it becomes aware that the only reality is the mind’s pure 
essence, the dharma of whose self-nature is the ultimate prin- 
ciple. It becomes aware that as ultimate principle, mind is 
irradiant, going forth in discriminations of thought that mani- 
fest themselves in activities and appearances of form and 
phenomena. It becomes aware that mind as ultimate principle 
is also integrant drawing all these differentiations into more 
and more harmonious relations and into final identity with 
itself. It becomes aware that mind, whether as essence, as 
principle, as activity and manifestation, is of one undivided 
sameness. 

But this process of transmuting discriminated thoughts into 
intellection and knowledge is not the self, neither is it any- 
thing that a self can accomplish by volition or effort; it is a 
spontaneous activity that goes on best as we rest quietly, re- 
straining all rising thoughts, ignoring all risen thoughts, keep- 
ing the mind fixed on its pure essence, realizing that the or- 
ganism and all its activities is only a skillful device, an efficient 
means, that Buddhahood employs in fulfillment of its nature 
to enlighten all sentient beings and bring them to Buddha- 
hood. As such it is Buddhahood’s love and wisdom becoming 
manifest; it is Buddhahood taking form within one’s own 
mind, as a coming Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of the mind to clear away so that the pure bright- 
ness within may shine forth illumining the mind, revealing 
that self is nothing, that mind-essence is everything. Sitting 
quietly realizing the mind’s pure essence. Realizing its all- 
embracing wholeness, its inconceivable purity and unity, its 
boundless potentiality for radiation and integration; radiation 
going forth as pragmatic thoughts concerning social relations, 
ethics, industry, economics, politics; going forth as scientific 
research as to the origin, the nature and the laws of physical 
things; going forth in philosophical speculations as to the na- 
ture of the soul, life after death, eternal life, a personal God, 



640 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


Universal Self; all of which tend toward multiplicity, complex- 
ity, confusion, unrest of mind and pride of egoism; to karma 
and rebirth in the Saha world. Integration drawing everything 
toward unity and purity and peacefulness; the going forth 
and the drawing in being so perfectly balanced that all abides 
in the original emptiness and silence. Sitting quietly realizing 
this universal emptiness and eternal silence. Realizing its un~ 
bornness, its imagelessness, its egolessness; realizing it, but 
yielding to its radiating potency, continually being reborn in 
this Saha-world of suffering. 

# * # 

Sitting quietly, breathing gently, deliberately, evenly, slowly; 
realizing that the organism, if it is to become enlightened and 
brought to Buddhahood, requires something more than intellec- 
tual knowledge, namely, it requires wisdom. Knowledge about 
Truth is not Truth itself; if one is to attain wisdom, he must 
realize Truth itself, and that requires another process than 
intellection, namely, it requires intuition. By intuition the 
mind becomes identified with Truth and attains wisdom by it- 
self becoming Truth. But this process transmuting intellection 
into intuition, and knowledge into wisdom, is not the self, 
neither are all the processes of the body and mind working to- 
gether harmoniously a self; they are after all only an aggrega- 
tion and concatenation of fortuitous causes and conditions and 
are not a self, nor are they anything that a self can accomplish 
by volition or effort. It is only a spontaneous activity that 
goes on best as we rest quietly, restraining all rising thoughts, 
ignoring all risen thoughts, keeping the mind fixed on its pure 
essence, realizing that the organism with all its activities, is 
only a skillful device, an efficient means, which Buddhahood 
employs in fulfillment of its nature to emancipate and en- 
lighten all sentient beings and bring them to Buddhahood. 
As such it is a manifestation of Buddhahood’s love and wis- 
dom; , it is Buddhahood taking form within one’s own mind 
as a coming Buddha. 

Sitting quietly with humble and patient mind, with earnest 
and disciplined mind, waiting for the clouds of karma and the 
defilements of mind to clear away so that the pure brightness 
within may shine forth, illumining the mind, revealing that self 
is nothing, mind-essence is everything. Sitting quietly realizing 



PRACTISING THE SEVENTH S,TAGE 641 

the mind’s pure essence! Realizing that the mind’s pure essence 
is the Universal Essence that is prior to everything, that em- 
braces everything, that is everything; and realizing that what is 
mind is Buddhahood. Sitting quietly realizing that this life of 
birth and death with all its greed, anger and infatuation is the 
pure essence of mind and the Bliss-body of Buddhahood; that 
all the outer things of manifestation and form and phenomena 
are unreal and imaginary; that all the inner things of desire and 
aversion, of fear and anger, of infatuation and pride of egoism 
are unreal and imaginary; that all the activities of the mind dis- 
criminating this and that, big and little, good and bad, self and 
not-self, are unreal and imaginary; that all the states of the 
mind, its judgments and feelings and emotions, are unreal and 
imaginary; that only the mind’s pure essence is real and abid- 
ing, and that is Buddhahood abiding in blissful Peace. 

Sitting quietly realizing that all the changes and processes of 
the body and mind that are going on with no volition or effort 
on our part are bringing the organism into perfect Oneness with 
Buddhahood. Sitting quietly realizing this perfect Oneness: — 
realizing its all-embracing wholeness, its inconceivable unity and 
purity, its boundless potentiality for Wisdom and Compassion; 
Wisdom going forth in individuations of Ignorance and discrim- 
inations of knowledge that eventuate in multiplicities of 
thought, desires, activities, karma, rebirth in the Saha World 
of suffering. Compassion drawing everything together eventu- 
ating in the patient endurance of suffering, the awakening of 
faith, mind-control, clearing insight, maturing of karma, birth 
in the Pure Land, attainment of Buddhahood. The going forth 
and the drawing in being so perfectly balanced that all abides 
in the original emptiness and silence. 

Sitting quietly, realizing the basic emptiness and eternal 
silence; realizing its unbomness, its imagelessness, its egoless- 
ness. Realizing that in its perfect purity and unity there is 
neither self nor not-self, neither Ignorance nor Enlightenment, 
neither a Saha World of Suffering nor a Pure Land of Bliss, 
but, potentially, all are present in fullness. Realizing that in 
its perfect unity this Saha World of Suffering is the Pure Land 
of Bliss; realizing that what is radiation is integration, that 
what is Wisdom is Compassion. Wisdom-Compassion urging 
one to yield to its radiating potency that it may go forth for the 


642 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 

enlightenment of all sentient beings; Compassion-Wisdom sup- 
porting one as he advances along the Bodhisattva Stages, sub- 
mitting to its integrating potency, for the sake of Buddhahood. 
In the long last, having yielded to Compassion and submitted to 
Wisdom, attaining Buddhahood — its highest perfect Wisdom, 
its unceasing Compassion, its blissful Peace; becoming Pure 
Essence — its emptiness, its silence. 

ALL HAIL! THE BLISS-BODY OF BUDDHAHOOD! 

Namo Sambhogakaya Buddhaya. 

(To be memorized and repeated daily ) 


SUMMARY 

OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 



SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 
Introduction 

T HE Buddha’s Dharma ought not to be considered as a 
system of philosophic or intellectual thought, much less as 
a system of ethical idealism. Strictly speaking, even less is it a 
religion based upon authority. It is simply a way of life which 
Buddha called the Eightfold Noble Path and the Middle Way, 
and which he said would lead him who followed it to emanci- 
pation of body, to enlightenment of mind, to tranquillity of 
spirit, to highest Samadhi. That is, it is a system of mind- 
control leading to highest perfect cognition. He did not make 
it up — it is the record of his own experience under the Bodhi- 
tree, when he himself attained Enlightenment. 

The summary is introduced by what is known as the Twelve 
Nirdanas, or the Chain of Simultaneous Dependent Origina- 
tions (paticca-samutpada). Then he taught the Four Noble 
Truths upon which he based the Eightfold Noble Path. These 
are all briefly summarized. 

The Twelve Nirdanas 

i. Because of Ignorance (avidya) the principle of individ- 
uation as discriminated from Enlightenment which is the prin- 
ciple of unity and sameness the primal unity becomes divided 
into thinking, thinker and discriminated thoughts by reason of 
which there appear the “formations” of karma. 

2. Because of these “forms” (samsara), the principle of con- 
sciousness emerges. 

3. Because of the principle of consciousness ( vijnana ), men- 
tality and body emerge. 

4. Because of mentality and body (nama-rupa), the six, 
sense minds and organs appear. 

5. Because of the six sense minds and organs (shadayat- 
ana), sensations and perceptions arise. 

6. Because of sensations and perceptions ( spasha ), feelings 
and discriminations arise. 


fit ■>:!?: 



646 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


7. Because of feelings and sensations ( vedana ), thirst and 
craving arise. 

8. Because of thirst and craving (trishna), grasping and 
clinging appear. 

9. Because of grasping and clinging ( upadana ), conception 
takes place. 

10. Because of conception ( bhava ), the continuing process 
of existence goes on. 

xi. Because of the continuing process of existence (jeti), 
growth, sickness, old age, decay and death take place. 

12. Because of sickness, old age and death (jana-marana ), 
“sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair arise. Thus arises 
the whole mass of suffering.” In all this 

“No doer of the deeds is found. 

No one who ever reaps their fruit. 

Empty phenomena are there. 

Thus does the world roll on. 

No god, no Brahma, can be found. 

No maker of this wheel of life. 

Empty phenomena are there, 

Dependent upon conditions all.” 

The Four Noble Truths 

1. The universality of suffering. 

2. The cause of suffering rooted in desire. 

3. By ending desire, suffering comes to an end. 

4. The way to end desire and hence to end suffering, is to 
follow the Eightfold Noble Path. 

The Eightfold Noble Path 

1. RIGHT IDEAS: the Twelve Nirdanas and the Four Noble 
Truths. Not only should one understand them but he should 
make them the basis of all his thinking and understanding of 
life, he should make them the basis for a life of patient and 
humble acceptance and submission. 

2. RIGHT RESOLUTION: He should make it the purpose 
of his life to follow the Noble Path. In loyalty to this pur- 
pose he should be willing to give up anything that is contrary 
to it, or which hinders his progress. He should be willing to 
pay any cost of comfort, or self denial, or effort, in order to 


SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 


647 


attain its goal. He should not do this for any selfish motive 
but that he might devote the merit of its attainment to all 
animate life. And finally he should make his great Vow 
(Pranadana) not to enter Nirvana until all others may enter 
with him. 

3. RIGHT SPEECH: Speech is the connecting link between 
thought and action; words often obscure the Truth within 
one’s own mind, and often give a false impression to those that 
hear them. It is important therefore, that one should restrain 
his speech. It should always be characterized by wisdom and 
kindness. Undue loudness, over emphasis, and excitement 
should be avoided. Speech should not be prompted by prej- 
udice, fear, anger, nor infatuation, nor self interest. Careless, 
idle and flippant words should be avoided. All invidious dis- 
tinctions, and discriminations, and dogmatic assertions and neg- 
ations, should be avoided. Words that are liable to cause hard 
feelings, such as repeating scandal, mean or angry words, words 
that deceive or cause misunderstandings, or that tend to arouse 
passion and lust, should never be uttered. In general speech 
should be limited to asking and answering necessary questions, 
and because speech is so easily conditioned by crowd psychol- 
ogy, all formal speech before groups, audiences and crowds 
should be avoided. 

4. RIGHT BEHAVIOR. Besides behaving according to the 
general rules of propriety, one should be especially careful to 
keep the Five Precepts: — Not to kill but to practice kindness 
and harmlessness toward all animate life. Not to steal or covet 
what does not belong to one, but to practice charity and going 
without things oneself. Not to commit adultery but to prac- 
tice purity of mind and sexual self-control. Not to lie but to 
practice honesty and sincerity in thought, word and deed. Not 
to partake of alcoholic drinks or drugs, or anything that weak- 
ens one’s mind-control, but to practice abstinence and self- 
control. 

The reason that Buddha made keeping the Precepts so im- 
portant was not so much for ethical reasons as for its bear- 
ing on mind development and its goal of the attainment of 
highest cognition and enlightenment. One can not progress 
toward this high goal if he is living a wicked or self-indulgent 
life. Even the keeping of the Precepts is only a beginning, for 
as disciples advance on the Path and undertake the homeless 


648 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


life, there are other five Precepts that must also be observed, 
namely, Not to use ointments or condiments and not to eat 
between meals. Not to wear jewelry or expensive clothes, but 
to practice humility. Not to sleep on soft beds but to resist 
all tendency to sloth and sleepiness. Not to attend entertain- 
ments, dances, concerts or to take part in games of chance; 
keeping the mind at all times under strict control. Not to have 
anything to do with money or precious things, but to practice 
poverty. 

5. RIGHT VOCATION. One must not engage in any busi- 
ness or profession that involves cruelty or injustice to either 
men or animals. His life must be free from acquisitiveness, 
deceit or dishonesty. He must have nothing to do with war, 
gambling, prostitution. It must be a life of service rather than 
a life of profit and indulgence. For those who wish to devote 
their entire attention to attaining enlightenment it must be a 
Homeless Life, free from all dependence or responsibility for 
property, family life or society. 

The ideal life, therefore, for one who has resolved to follow 
the Noble Path is the Homeless Life. But before one is will- 
ing and able to do this, he should come as near to It as pos- 
sible while living the ordinary life of a householder. Being 
engaged in the family, social and economical life of the world, 
he will often find it difficult to do much more than keep the 
Precepts, but as he advances on the Path he can at least in 
part observe the other precepts, and as fast as it becomes pos- 
sible, he can separate from his family and business, and under- 
take to live more simply and abstemiously and devote more 
time to his devotional practices. If there is any personal or 
family property it should gradually be disposed of, so that be- 
ing free from family and property responsibilities, he may more 
exclusively undertake the Homeless Life. 

In cutting himself off from all relations and responsibilities 
with the household and worldly life, the Homeless Brother 
does so with the single purpose of devoting himself to the at- 
tainment of enlightenment and Buddhahood, not for selfish 
reasons but that he may share his attainment and merit with 
whoever may need his instruction or help. In making his de- 
cision to follow the Homeless Life he does so in perfect faith 
that the Lay Brothers and other Homeless Brothers will take 
good care of him. 


SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 649 

Some may think that this homeless, mendicant life might 
have been possible and rewarding under the primitive and sim- 
ple conditions of patriarchal life, but that it would be impos- 
sible and foolish and futile under the more complex conditions 
of our modem, acquisitive, comfort seeking, excitement-loving 
conditions, founded as they are upon scientific materialism and 
enforced by conventions, laws, courts and police. If we count 
one’s comfort and convenience important, it probably is. But 
are they of first importance? Is not enlightenment, the end- 
ing of suffering, the attainment of peace, of far more impor- 
tance? If they are then any discipline, any deprivation, any 
inconvenience, any suffering even, is fully warranted. It would 
be different if there was any easier method known, but Bud- 
dha, who was perfectly enlightened, presented it as the only 
possible Path. Is it not for us who are seeking enlightenment 
and peace of mind, and who are following Buddha, to have 
faith in his Noble Path and give it a fair trial? It is notice- 
able, however, that doubt as to its reasonableness and possi- 
bility is not voiced by those who have tried it but by those 
whose habits and comforts would be curtailed and interfered 
with. 

The Buddha’s Dharma is too deep and inclusive to be trans- 
lated into writing and even less to be completely understood 
and fully realized by the study of the Scriptures alone. It must 
be carried out into practice, systematically, earnestly, persist- 
ently. The source of all truth is within one’s own mind and 
heart, by the practice of Dhyana, it issues forth in unutter- 
able treasures of compassion and wisdom. 

But more significant than that, it is by means of dhyana 
practised by free minds in undisturbed solitude that the deeper 
realizations of Truth issue forth spontaneously in unseen spir- 
itual ways to implant intimations and seeds of faith and hope 
in the minds of others. Thus one, who in the midst of the 
world’s unrest, craving and suffering, has found wisdom and 
peace, radiates from his being a serenity and compassion and 
wisdom that emancipates and enlightens others. He is already 
a Buddha. Being one ,with Buddha in the blissful peace of 
Samadhi, he will be radiating compassion and wisdom toward 
this Saha world of suffering and drawing in to his peace the 
world’s woe. He has learned the secret of the Dharma breath- 
ing — going forth, drawing in — in eternal rhythm. 


650 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 

' . ■ ■ » ■ 

6. RIGHT EFFORT. As one advances along the Path, he 
needs something more than ethical Precepts to guide and ac- 
tivate his progress, namely, he needs spiritual ideals. To meet 
this need, the Dharma presents Six Paramitas: (1) Dana Par- 
amita. One should cherish a spirit of unselfish charity and good 
will that will prompt him to the giving of material gifts for 
the relief of need and suffering, being especially thoughtful of 
the needs of the Homeless Brothers, and always remembering 
that the greatest gift is the gift of the Dharma. (2) Sila Par- 
amita. This same spirit of good-will towards others, the clear- 
ing sense of his oneness with all sentient beings, will first 
prompt him to greater sincerity and fidelity in keeping the 
Precepts himself for their sakes. Next it will lead him to ig- 
nore and forget his own comfort and convenience in offering 
wherever needed the more intangible gifts of compassion and 
sympathy and personal service. (3) Kshanti Paramita. This 
Paramita of humility and patience will help him to bear with- 
out complaint, the acts of others without fear or malice 
or anger. It will help him to bear the common ills of life, the 
difficulties of the Path and the burden of his karma. It will 
keep him free from both elation or discouragement as he meets 
the extremes of success or failure, and will help him to always 
maintain an equitable spirit of serenity and peacefulness. (4) 
Virya Paramita. This Paramita of zeal and perseverance will 
keep one from becoming indolent, careless and changeable. 
This Paramita is not intended so much to prompt one to out- 
ward acts of charity and propaganda as it is wholly concerned 
with these inner states of mind that affect one’s control 
of mind and attainment of highest cognition and unceasing 
compassion. The results of behavior are not all outward and 
apparent; they also affect one’s inner habits and dispositions 
and are surely registered in one’s karma. One does not truly 
attain until he becomes earnest and faithful in both outward 
behavior and inner states of mind. Therefore, one should be 
earnest and persevering and faithful in cherishing right ideas, 
right purposes, right effort, right devotional practices, right 
vows. (5) Dhyana Paramita. This Paramita of tranquillity 
prompts one to practice one-pointedness of mind. One should 
always keep his mind concentrated on the task in hand, un- 
distracted by thoughts of policy, or its relation to one’s selfish 
advantage or comfort. It will often prompt one to a course 


SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 


651 


far different from the old competitive, acquisitive, exciting 
habits of the worldly life. One must often disregard personal 
comfort and advantage in an effort to be truly sympathetic 
and charitable. But so long as one acts from motives of sym- 
pathy and kindness the mind will be undisturbed by conse- 
quences, and so long as one has no desires, he will be undis- 
turbed by conditions. So long as the mind is free from greed, 
anger, fear and egoism, it rests in peace. The mind should be 
trained, therefore, to be concentrated on spiritual ends. (6) 
Prajna Paramita. This Paramita prompts one to be yielding 
to the suggestions of wisdom. Thus far we have been consid- 
ering aspects of spiritual behavior that are more or less under 
the control of one’s own mind, but now in this Wisdom Par- 
amita, we should cease from all self-direction of will and effort 
and, remaining tranquil in spirit, should yield ourselves in 
effortless ways, a free channel for the flow of mingled wisdom 
and compassion. 

7. RIGHT MINDFULNESS. This stage of the Noble Path 
is the culmination of the intellective process and the connect- 
ing link with the intuitive process. The goal to be reached is 
the establishment of a habit of looking at things truthfully, 
at their meaning and significance rather than at their discrim- 
inated appearances, and relations. This is quite different and an 
advance from the instinctive reactions of the will-to-live, to 
enjoy, to propagate. It is also quite different and a further 
advance beyond the habit of considering things by their differ- 
ences and relations. The senses can give one sensations and 
perceptions which the lower mind unites and names and dis- 
criminates, but they have little value in truth. Things seem 
real but they are not, they seem good and bad, big and little, 
right and wrong, but they are not. They often seem necessary 
but they are not. This consciously discriminated stream of ap- 
pearances is only food for the higher intellectual mind to di- 
gest and assimilate, which by doing enables one to cognize 
more truthfully the realness or falsity of these first impressions. 
But the conclusions of the intellectual mind are not final for 
it can only arrive at a knowledge of relations among things 
which we think are true. If one is to gain an immediate 
awareness of Truth, he must transcend the intellectual mind, 
also. To make the highest and best use of the intellectual 
mind, however, it is necessary to first practice “recollective 


6g2 SELECTIPNS FROM MODERN SOURCES 

mindfulness,” which is the Seventh Stage of the Noble Path. 

The Seventh Stage is usually translated, Mindfulness. It 
consists in recollecting and meditating upon the conclusions of 
the intellectual mind, seeking to understand their true mean- 
ing and significance. 

8. RIGHT DHYANA. The Eighth Stage of the Noble Path 
is called in Sanskrit, Dhyana. It is a difficult word to trans- 
late into English because of its unfamiliar content of mean- 
ing. The nearest term is “concentration of mind” although in 
Pali this stage is named, “rapture.” There are, thus, two as- 
pects to it: the first is its active aspect of concentration, the 
second is a passive aspect of realization, or rapture. Having 
tranquillized the mind by the practice of the Seventh Stage 
of Mindfulness, to practice the Eighth Stage of Dhyana, one 
should sit quietly with empty and tranquil mind, but with at- 
tentive and concentrated mind, keeping the mind fixed on its 
pure essence. If attention wavers and vagrant thoughts arise, 
one should humbly and patiently regulate the mind anew, 
again and again, stopping all thinking, realizing Truth itself. 

In doing this breathing plays an important part. Right 
breathing consists in breathing gently, deliberately, evenly. 
Think of it as filling the whole body to the top of the head, 
then gently pressing it downward to the abdomen, let it quietly 
pass away. Ordinarily we think of its course as being in 
a straight line, up and down, but it is better to think of it 
as a circle or loop always moving in one direction — upward 
to the head, downward to the abdomen, upward to the head 
and so on. Then forgetting the breathing, think of this circle 
moving more and more slowly and growing smaller and smaller 
until it comes to rest at a point between the eyes, the “wisdom 
eye” of the ancients, between the pineal and pituitary glands 
of the modems. Hold the attention there, realizing its perfect 
balance and emptiness and silence. 

At first it may be advisable to hold some simple thought 
conception in mind, such as counting the out-going breaths, 
or repeating Buddha’s name, or some “koan” puzzle that can 
only be solved intuitively. But avoid thinking about them, 
keeping the mind fixed on its pure essence. In the primitive 
days of Buddhism, masters encouraged their disciples to keep 
in mind the abhorrent and painful aspects of the body, and 
the empty and transitory nature of all component things; but 



SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 653 

in later times and Western lands, not liking to think of dis- 
gusting and negative things, we more often go to the other 
extreme and think of the beautiful, noble and rewarding things 
of life, of wisdom and compassion and purity and solitude and 
joy and peace. But the right way is to avoid both extremes, 
keeping the mind fixed on its pure essence, unperturbed by 
any differentiations whatever. 

In the course of this discipline, various psychic effects ap- 
pear — colors, sounds, visions, raptures, etc., and beginners are 
apt to become elated or discouraged by them, and to measure 
their success or failure by their appearing or not appearing. 
But this is all wrong. All these transitory psychic experiences 
should be ignored and forgotten; they are only mile-stones on 
the path and will be left behind as we move upward toward 
emancipation and enlightenment and perfect equanimity. The 
goal is not some entrancing rapture, or indescribable vision; 
it is highest perfect Wisdom and a great heart of Compassion 
and blissful Peace. Then ceasing all thought, realize its un- 
ceasing calm and silence. 

The Four Jnanas, or Holy States 

1. COMPASSION. As the mind progresses towards Enlighten- 
ment, it becomes aware of clearing insight and sensitiveness 
as to the .essential unity of all animate life, and there awakens 
within him a great heart of compassion and sympathy draw- 
ing all animate life together, harmonizing differences, unifying 
all dualisms. 

2. JOY.* With the disappearing of all sense of difference be- 
tween self and others and all dualisms, the heart becomes filled 
with a great rapture of gladness and joy. 

3. PEACE. Gradually as the difference between suffering and 
happiness fades away, this feeling of gladness and joy is trans- 
muted into perfect tranquillity and peacefulness. 

4. EQUANIMITY. Gradually even the conception of difference 
and likeness vanishes and all notions of even joy and peace 
drop out of sight, and the mind abides in the blissful peace 
of perfect Equanimity. 

The Ten Bodhisattva Stages 

For a long time the above Four Holy States engrossed the 
attention of the Pali Scriptures and Southern Buddhists, but 



654 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 

gradually there appeared among Northern Buddhists and in 
the Sanskrit Scriptures a new vision of the goal of the Bud- 
dha’s Noble Path. The enjoyment of the Four Raptures for 
one’s self to their culmination in Nirvana, seemed less worthy 
and satisfying, and meditation on the deeper implications of 
the Buddha’s Dharma, led the great Mahayana Masters to the 
vision of the Ten Stages of Bodhisattvahood. 

1 . Pramudita. Based upon the perfect practice of the Dana Par- 
amita, the Bodhisattva enters the stage of gladness and Joy. 

2 . Vimala. Based upon the Sila Paramita, the Bodhisattva 
enters upon the perfect practice of purity wherein there is 
neither joy nor the absence of joy but the mind abides in per- 
fect Peace. 

3. Prabhakari. Based upon the perfect practice of the Kshanti 
Paramita, the Bodhisattva enters upon the stage of self-lu- 
minous humility in which there is absent even the conception 
of joy or peace, — the stage of perfect Equanimity, of effortless, 
self-shining patience. 

4. Archismati. Based upon the perfect practice of the Virya 
Paramita, the Bodhisattva enters upon the stage wherein there 
is conviction arid purpose and zeal and determination and per- 
severance. It is the stage of unceasing, in-drawing, effortless 
"Energy.” 

5. Sudurjaya. Based upon the perfect practice of the Dhyana 
Paramita, the Bodhisattva enters upon the overcoming stage 
of self-mastery and the attainment of tranquillity that is based 
upon unshakable confidence. 

6 . Abhimukhi. Based upon the perfect practice of the Prajna 
Paramita, *the Bodhisattva enters upon the realization stage of 
Samadhi. While still being in touch with the passions and dis- 
criminations of the Saha world, he turns his mind inward by 
his faculty of intuitive insight to the realization of the intrin- 
sic emptiness and silence of the mind’s pure essence. 

7. Durangama. The Bodhisattva, having attained highest Sa- 
madhi, leaves behind all remembrance of discriminations and 
wholly abiding in the Mind’s Pure Essence, he attains within 
his mind a “turning about” from which he never again recedes. 
It is the stage of “far-going.” 

8 . Acala. This is the "immovable stage,” in which the Bod- 
hisattva attains the Samapatti graces and transcendental pow- 
ers. Having attained a clear understanding of all inner and 



SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA 


655 


outer conditions, his mind accepting things as they are, he nei- 
ther desires to return to the world or to enter Nirvana. He 
has no desire or purpose except to live a pure life of anutpat- 
ika-dharma-kshanti-gocaya — a life of patient submissive accept- 
ance. 

9. Sadhumati. This is the state of perfect identity with anut- 
tara-samyak-sambodhi - — highest perfect Wisdom. In this state 
the Bodhisattva has passed beyond all thought of individua- 
tion, or discrimination, or integration; he has passed beyond 
all dualisms, all incompleteness, and is abiding in perfect bal- 
ance and equanimity realizing the blissful peace of unceasing 
Samadhi. But still he retains in mind a memory of the world’s 
ignorance and suffering, unreal as it is in fact, but untainted 
and undisturbed by it, his mind overflowing with compassion, 
he goes forth in wisdom and love for its emancipation and en- 
lightenment. 

10. Dharmamegha. In this highest state, the Bodhisattva be- 
comes wholly identified with the Great Truth Cloud and, like 
a cloud saturated with Truth and Compassion, he becomes 
Tathagata, his life perfectly integrated with the lives of all, 
and goes forth to sprinkle the rain of the Good <Law by which 
the seed of enlightenment takes root in the minds of all sen- 
tient beings and in the long last brings them to Buddhahood. 

Nirvana 

In the more primitive type of Buddhism as still held in 
Ceylon and Burma, the end of the Path is the attainment of 
Arhatship and, when life passes, to Nirvana. What then is 
Nirvana? The root meaning of the word is the extinguishment 
of a fire when the fuel is all consumed. That is, in Southern 
Buddhism, when the fires of earthly passion die down, and the 
disciple becomes an Arhat, free from all desire, and life passes, 
he is said to have attained Nirvana, or Parinirvana. In North- 
ern Buddhism, Nirvana has a more philosophic meaning: it 
means the state where not only the fires of earthly passion 
have died down and earthly life has passed, but all karmaic 
desire for individual life is extinguished and the disciple has 
passed into the unitive life of Buddhahood. 

The term, pratyekabuddha as used by both schools, means 
a disciple or an arhat who is selfishly desiring Nirvana for his 
own satisfaction. Such a disciple, according to the Mahayana 



656 SELECTIONS FROM MODERN SOURCES 


school has ceased to follow the Path at the seventh stage of 
Bodhisattvahood and “passes to his nirvana.” But after a Bod- 
hisattva attains the eighth stage there is, thereafter, “no more 
recension,” and he goes on to the attainment of highest per- 
fect Wisdom which constrains him, instead of passing to Nir- 
vana, to return to the Saha world of Ignorance and suffering 
for its liberation and enlightenment. Hence the saying in the 
Lankavatara Sutra: “For Buddhas there is no Nirvana.” 

The question may be asked, how, in this world of ignorance, 
suffering and death, we are to recognize these “returning” Bud- 
dhas and Tathagatas? Please recall that Bodhisattvas as they 
attain the ninth and tenth stages of Bodhisattvahood lose all 
individuation as human personalities to become identified with 
Buddhahood in the Great Truth Cloud, and as “formless” 
Tathagatas attain boundless potentiality and command of skill- 
ful means and transcendental powers of self-mastery and ef- 
ficiency, and as the integrating principle of Buddhahood, are 
able to take any form they think best, or to be present 
wherever there is need to support and to draw all sentient be- 
ings to enlightenment and Buddhahood. By our practice of 
Dhyana, as we attain moments of intuitive Samadhi, we in- 
tegrate our lives with this ever present Buddha-nature, and 
when we attain highest perfect Samadhi, we become one with 
all the Buddhas, enjoying their blissful peace, and becoming 
able ourselves to return to this Saha-world of suffering for its 
emancipation and enlightenment. 

American and European Buddhists, before they can com- 
monly attain Enlightenment and Buddhahood, will need their 
own method for practicing the Eighth Stage of the Noble Path, 
but such a Right Method can not be formulated until 
the Buddha that is taking form within our own minds, comes. 
Some among us must first attain the Seventh and Eighth of 
the Bodhisattva Stages and himself have experienced the Dur- 
angama Samadhi of “Far-going” and the Acala Samadhi of 
“No-recension” before he will be worthy of being employed 
as a skillful device and convenient means for formulating such 
a Right Method for practicing the Eighth Stage of the Noble 
Path. “When He comes, we shall be like Him, for we shall 
see Him as He is.” “Even so come, Lord Maitreya!” 



APPENDIX 




APPENDIX 

Scriptures Selected from Pali Sources 

LIFE OF THE HISTORIC BUDDHA. Page 3 

This selection is the first chapter of the book entitled, THE 
ESSENCE OF BUDDHISM, written by the late P. Lakshmi 
Narasu and published by Srinivasa Varadachari & CO., Mad- 
ras, India, Second Edition, 1912. The earliest accounts of the 
life of Buddha are crowded with legendary and mythical 
material and all modern accounts consist of selections from 
these sources the value of which consists in the judgment with 
which the selection has been made. Mr. Narasu’s account is 
usually credited to have been written with great sympathy and 
good judgment. 

THE WORD OF BUDDHA. Page 22 

This selection is an epitome of the Buddha’s teachings as 
recorded at length in the voluminous Pali Scriptures, which 
was made by the Venerable Bhikkhu Nyanatiloka, the German 
Abbot of a large and important colony and monastery located 
at Dodanduwa, Ceylon. The epitome is published in a pam- 
phlet with many valuable notes and elucidations which are 
omitted in this version. It was published in 1935. We are 
very grateful to the Venerable Nyanatiloka for his permission 
to use it in this connection. 

TEVIGGA SUTTA. Page 61 

The Tevigga Sutta is the last Sutta of the first division of 
the Digha Nikaya which is called the Silakkhandha Vaggo be-, 
cause the whole of the twelve dialogs deal from one point of 
view or another with “sila” or Right Conduct. It was trans- 
lated by T. W. Rhys-Davids and was published in Volume 
XI of the Sacred Books of the East in 1900. 

This version is somewhat changed in choice of words and 
a few unimportant omissions to make it easier reading for 
Americans. The reader is referred to Volume XI for valuable 
Introduction and foot notes. Acknowledgement is gratefully 

659 



66o 


APPENDIX 


made to the Clarendon Press of Oxford, for the use of this 
Scripture. 

“In this Scripture we have Right Conduct used as a sort 
of argumentum ad hominem for the conversion of two earnest 
young Brahmans. They ask, which is the true path to a state 
of union (in the next birth) with God (Brahma) after argu- 
ing, in a kind of Socratic dialog, that on their own showing 
the basis of facts they themselves admitted, the Brahmans 
could have no real knowledge of Brahma, Gotama maintains 
that union; with God, whom they admitted to be pure 
and holy, must be unattainable by men impure and sinful and 
self-righteous however great their knowledge of the Vedas may 
be. And he then lays down, not without occasional beauty 
of language, that system of Right Conduct that must be the 
only direct way to a real union with God.” 

n 8th DISCOURSE FROM THE COLLECTION OF THE 
MIDDLE DISCOURSES. Page 73 

This Discourse is translated by the Venerable Chao Kung 
(Trebitch Lincoln) whose temple-hermitage is just outside of 
Tientsin, China. The number of his disciples varies of course 
but he has had as many as fifteen made up of both men and 
women, largely European but including some Chinese. We are 
indebted to Venerable Chao Kung for his kind permission to 
use this translation which was made for his personal instruc- 
tion, the printing being made from his manuscript copy. 

The Discourse opens with certain introspective breathing 
Exercises, and then is founded upon four psychological Cat- 
egories, — Observing and examining body; Observing and ex- 
amining sensations and feelings; Observing and examining 
thoughts; Observing and examining phenomena. These are 
next examined by Seven Stages, or Factors, leading to Enlight- 
enment: — Introspection, Penetration, Energy, Serenity, Gentle- 
ness (or non-assertion), Concentration, and Even-mindedess 
(or Equanimity). 

THE MAHA PRAJNA PARAMITA HRIDVA. Page 85 

This Sutra forms part of the Great Pragna Paramita Sutra 
and is the shortest of all its sections. It is memorized and daily 
repeated by practically all Buddhist Bhikshus of the Mahayana 
School of Buddhism. It has been translated from the Sanskrit 



APPENDIX 


66 1 

into Chinese at various times by Kumarajiva (400 A.D.), 
Hiouen-tsang (649 A.D.), Sh-hu (980 A.D.), Pragna (785-810). 
It has been translated into English either from the Sanskrit 
or Chinese a number of times, notably by Max Muller in the 
Sacred Books of the East, Volume XLIX, and by Dr. Daisetz 
Teitaro Suzuki, in his Manual of Zen Buddhism, Eastern Bud- 
dhist Society, 1935. -This English Version was made by Dwight 
Goddard from various English translations. 

THE DIAMOND SUTRA. Page 87 

The Sanskrit title of this Sutra is Vajracchedika Sutra. It 
is Number 9 of the Great Prajna Paramita Sutra, the author 
of which is unknown. It was written in the First Century and 
has been translated into the Tibetan and Chinese a number 
of times. This translation was made from Kumarajiva’ s trans- 
lation from the Sanskrit into Chinese (384-417 A.D.) by Bhik- 
shu Wai-tao and Dwight Goddard in 1935. 

Its theme is that all definitive things, phenomena and ideas 
are subjective and unreal, being merely manifestations of one’s 
own mind; that even the highest conceptions of the Dharma 
and of Tathagata are mind-made and “empty.” Max Muller 
writes of it, “In contradistinction to fallacious phenomena, there 
is the true essence of mind; underlying the phenomena of mind 
there is unchanging principle.” Based upon this theme, the 
Sutra teaches how to practice the Six Paramitas. 

At some time in its literary history the “leaves” of the text 
must have become displaced for it is at present in a confused 
development. The editor has numbered the sections according 
to the original order, and then has re-arranged them to pre- 
sent the Scripture in as readable and logical an order as pos- 
sible. 

Scriptures Selected from Sanskrit Sources 
THE SURANGAMA SUTRA. Page 108 

The name of this Sutra is usually translated. The Buddha’s 
Great Crown Sutra, being an Elucidation of The Secret of the 
Lord Buddha’s Supreme Attainment, and the Practice of all 
the Bodhisattvas. It was originally written in Sanskrit by an 
unknown writer during the First Century A.D. It was trans- 
lated from the Sanskrit into Chinese by the Great Indian 



662 


APPENDIX 


Master Paramartha about 717 A.D. The English translation 
was made by Bhikshu Wai-tao and Dwight Goddard, during 
the years 1935-1937. The part presented here is only about 
one-third of the original text, the balance being omitted for 
various reasons. For instance, Chapter Three is omitted be- 
cause it is obviously an “extension” by some lesser scribe. 
Chapters Five and Six are omitted because, while evidently 
being by the same author, the theme and treatment are quite 
different and independent. 

The most important of these omissions, however, is that 
of the Great Dharani itself. At the time at which the Sutra 
was written and for many years afterwards it was probably 
its most important feature, and it is still chanted with great 
emotion in. all Tibetan, Chinese and Japanese Monasteries. In 
omitting it from this English version the reader is entitled to 
a few words ojE explanation. 

In the first place let us have a clear idea of what a dhar- 
ani is. It is a more or less meaningless chain of words 
or names that is supposed to have a magical power in helping 
the one who is repeating it at some time of extremity. It may 
be very short, like the Sanskrit word “aum,” which the Tib- 
etans repeat ad infinitum, or it may be very long, like this 
one we are now considering, or the one in the Lankavatara 
Sutra. Generally, however, they are quite short like the one 
in the Prajna-Paramita-Hridaya Sutra: — "Gate, gate, paragate, 
parasamgate, bodhi svaha." A Dharani is supposed to embody 
the quintessence of the spiritual power emanating from some 
great teacher or spiritual benefactor. It is a kind of carrier 
for spiritual “radio-activity,” an appeal for “absent treatment.” 
A great Master or Bodhisattva gives his instruction under quiet 
conditions with a sincere purpose of enlightening and benefit- 
ing his disciples, but in times of extremity when his Master 
is absent and the disciple feels his strength failing, he is en- 
couraged by repeating the name and words of his Master. 
Doubtless there is a measure of superstition in its practice, but 
there is also a great deal of practical usefulness and provable 
value in it. 

All religions have had their Dharani. The Pure Land Bud- 
dhists repeat: — “Namo Omito Fu” more or less constantly. The 
Nichiren Buddhists repeat: — " Nemo myoho renge kyo,” in 
which case its repetition holds the mind to the superlative spir- 


APPENDIX 


663 


itual power inherent in The Lotus of the Wonderful Dharma 
Scripture. The Mohammedans repeat in the same fashion the 
words: — “Allah is one God and Mohammed is his Prophet.” 
Christians, whether they are conscious of it or not, in repeat- 
ing the Lord’s Prayer, are repeating a Dharani in which they 
have implicit faith. They are not thinking so much of the 
meaning of the words as they are voicing their faith in the 
supernal power of the Heavenly Father. Catholics have a num- 
ber of these Dharani, “the Pater Noster,” “Ora Pro Nobis/’ 
and “Ave Maria,” for instance. Even the benediction, “In the 
Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Amen,” 
and the various creeds, the Nicean, and the Alexandrian, are 
used as Dharani, as is seen by the fact of the general dislike 
of altering or amending them. 

In omitting this long Dharani, therefore, we are not dep- 
recating the great reality of the Spiritual Power that it sym- 
bolizes, nor are we denying its practical usefulness in serving 
to concentrate the mind’s attention; in fact, in thus explaining 
at length why we omit it, we are emphasizing its basic value 
in holding a disciple’s attention to the true source of Power 
in which by this practice of repeating Dharani he is identify- 
ing his spirit. Our Sutra is wholly given up to establishing the 
fact that this boundless Potentiality of Spiritual Power is res- 
ident in the Mind’s Pure Essence, to which all appeal, whether 
in calm or tempest should be made. 

The following Preface and Introduction was prepared for 
the English Version by Bhikshu Wai-tao and Dwight Goddard. 
It is here given in full. 

The author and date of this profound Scripture, that is com- 
monly known by its Sanskrit name, THE SURANGAMA Sutra, 
and by its Chinese name Ta Fo Ting-shou Leng Yen Ching 
(Buddha’s Great Crown Sutra), is unknown, but it was un- 
doubtedly written in Sanskrit about the First Century of the 
Christian Era. It was highly regarded by the kings of South- 
ern India as being of supreme value for the protection of their 
country and they issued orders forbidding it to be carried out 
of their domains with the death penalty for anyone who 
should attempt it. 

When the great Hindu Master Paramartha felt that the 
time had arrived for the propagation of this profound teach- 
ing in the great and powerful Empire of China, it is said that 



664 


APPENDIX 


he made a gash in his arm and secreted the Sutra in 
the wound, which probably meant that he concealed it in the 
lining of his sleeve, and thus carried it safely by sea to South- 
ern China. There he met an exiled Minister of State of the 
Tang Dynasty, by the name of Wang Yung, who aided him 
in translating it into Chinese. This was in the First Year of 
the Emperor Chien-Lung, about 717 A.D., it taking two years 
to do the work. The fact becoming known to the Chinese Em- 
peror, he sent Censors to enquire into the matter who reported 
that the writing was of such importance that the translation 
ought not to have been undertaken without first getting the 
approval of the Government. The exiled Minister was pun- 
ished and Paramartha was obliged to return to his native 
Country taking the Sanskrit text with him. How the transla- 
tion was preserved is unknown. 

Since the transmission of this wonderful Scripture to China, 
it has always been venerated by Buddhists of all Sects, and 
even the great among Taoist scholars have treated it with re- 
spect and studied it with care. Would that this English Ver- 
sion might receive the same respect in the English-reading 
world which it has received for two thousand years in the 
Orient. 

The theme of the Sutra unfolds the necessary steps for at- 
taining Supreme Enlightenment and Highest Samadhi. It is 
presented in the form of instruction given by the Blessed One 
to a great assembly of Bhikshus and highest Bodhisattva-Ma- 
hasattvas and especially to his favorite Bhikshu, Ananda, who 
had recently been unable to resist the lure of a prostitute, and 
by asking him questions, leads up to an elucidation of his own 
crowning experience of Highest Samadhi. In the course of the 
instruction there are seen many miraculous visions of glory 
radiating outward from the personality of the Lord Buddha 
and just as marvelously returning inward to rest upon his brow 
in a crown of glory. 

The Sutra gives in great detail and precision the necessary 
mental preparation and steps that must be followed in the 
practice of Dhyana (concentration of mind and intuitive in- 
sight) for the attainment of Supreme Enlightenment. The suc- 
cessive steps are given in such detail and are so intelligently 
interpreted that if faithfully followed from their beginning in 



APPENDIX 665 

■i 

counting the breaths to their goal, one will surely attain En- 
lightenment and Samadhi. 

The Sutra is divided into three main divisions correspond- 
ing to the three aspects of Dhyana, namely, (1) Steps relating 
to the aspect of tranquillizing the mind by the exclusion of 
all concepts originating in the senses and all discriminating 
thoughts based upon them. (2) The subjective aspect of in- 
tuitive realization of Truth itself, which is known as Samadhi. 
(3) The aspect known as Samapatti which is concerned with 
the transcendental graces and powers that are revealed in Su- 
preme Enlightenment and made available by Samadhi. 

In the first division the author brings out clearly the differ- 
ent components that make up the different activities of the 
mind and condition its manifestations, namely, the sense or- 
gans, the discriminating mind, the intellectual mind, their sen- 
sations, interactions and reactions, the six kinds of perceptions 
and conceptions, the twelve locations of contact between con- 
sciousness and its objects, the eighteen spheres of mentation 
down through the various sense-minds, sense-objects, the ob- 
jects themselves, and finally the relation of the objects to the 
four great elements. He brings out the difference between false 
imaginations of the discriminating mind and the true knowl- 
edge of Essential Mind. By so doing he indicates and proves 
incontrovertibly the emptiness, transiency and unreality of all 
sense-originated concepts and all their combinations and per- 
mutations. 

He then shows that because of and by means of these nu- 
merous divisions of manifestations and all dualistic thinking 
about them, the natural mind falls into a labyrinth of illusions 
which makes up the continuum of consciousness and its world 
of sentient beings and their accumulation of conditioning kar- 
mas. However, as all these causes and conditions are simply 
visions in the air, by one right attainment of intuitive realiza- 
tion the mind breaks through the entanglement of illusions 
and unveils its true nature of Enlightenment. This is the First 
Great Lesson for the Practice of intuitive meditation known 
as Dhyana. 

After the mind has discarded all its dependence upon these 
entangling illusions and has gained confidence in its true and 
essential Mind, the Sutra teaches its Second Great Lesson:— 



666 


APPENDIX 


the attainment of Samadhi, which is the subjective aspect, or 
the intuitive realization of the intrinsic and eternal and per- 
fectly unified nature of Essential and True Mind. The Sutra 
shows the source of vexations and how to untangle the knots 
that are made up by the six kinds of conceptions and rein- 
forces the lesson by asking the great Disciples to relate their 
different experiences in untangling the knots in their own 
minds during their individual progress in realization and the 
attainment of Samadhi. It shows the extreme individuation 
among sentient beings and their worlds of experience and then 
sets forth the sixty transcendental powers available for the ar- 
duous practice of attainment. It points out advantageous ways 
for attaining the requisite control of mind and finally reveals 
the Great Dharani, or mystic combination of names and words, 
that symbolizes the power of his own supreme experience. It 
shows the six great realms of existence from the highest realm 
of spontaneity and freedom to the lowest of inconceivable bond- 
age and sufferings. And then he shows the unreality of all 
these conceptions ( naiva-samjnana-samjna-yatana ) and the in- 
conceivable unity and purity of Truth itself. 

The Third Great Lesson has to do with the attainment of 
Highest Perfect Wisdom ( anuttara-samyak-sambodhi ) and the 
dangers originating in the evil Maras that beset its attainment 
even in heavenly places. As his parting gift of advice to his 
disciples and to all future disciples, he gives them ways by 
which these evil influences lurking in the conceptions arising 
from the five senses and the six sense-minds may be avoided 
and the supreme attainment realized by one’s own efforts, but 
when that fails, by faith in the transcendental power of the 
Great Dharani. 

It is Buddha’s great gift to us that the teaching of this 
great Sutra has been preserved to our time. We may no longer 
listen to the charm of the Buddha’s voice, but we may still 
study and meditate upon his teaching as elucidated in this 
wonderful Scripture. We must preserve it and pass it on even 
to the last kalpa for the benefit of all future beings. For the 
more scientifically trained minds of our Western World, its cul- 
minating resort to faith in a Great Dharani seems irrational 
and superstitious and negating the more important lesson of 
self-responsibility and selLeffort. For that reason it is omitted 
in this Version. But in a deeper sense of embodying within 


APPENDIX 


667 

its symbolic structure the intrinsic power of the inner working 
of the Ultimate Spiritual Principle that is drawing all sentient 
beings into some perfect Unity that is both Highest Perfect 
Wisdom and All-embracing Compassion, it is most profoundly 
true and our feeble efforts of self-help must always at last re- 
sort be supplemented by an appeal in faith to the Transcend- 
ental Power of the Self-nature of Truth itself as embodied and 
made available in the supreme experience of Shakyamuni Bud- 
dha. 

If any good and earnest disciple, be he man or woman, with 
pure faith observes, studies and puts in practice this great 
Teaching, should he later become entangled in the five defile- 
ments of this evil world, but still keep up his practice of con- 
centration of mind, he will surely be delivered and will move 
forward in the enjoyment of a life of purity, joy and tranquil- 
lity, to its goal in Samadhi. 

THE LANKAVATARA SCRIPTURE. Page 277 

This Sutra was written in Sanskrit, but nothing is known 
as to the author or time of its writing. Its original Sanskrit 
form has been lost, but references to it indicate that it must 
have been tremendously long. It is generally felt that the pres- 
ent text jnust have been compiled early in the First Century, 
probably a little earlier than the Awakening of Faith Shastra, 
which doctrinally it greatly resembles. The earliest date we 
have of it, is the date of its first translation into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksha about A.D. 420 and which was lost before 700. 
Three other Chinese translations have been made of it: one by 
Gunabhadra in 443; one by Bodhiruchi in 513; and one by 
Shikshananda in 700. 

The only English translation of it is Dr. Suzuki’s made in 
1929 and published by the Eastern Buddhist Society, Tokyo, 
and by Routledge, London, 1932. Dr. Suzuki’s translation is 
very scholarly and exact, but owing to the nature of the text 
is considerably confused and “extended.” With the encourage- 
ment of Dr. Suzuki, the present Editor undertook a rearrange- 
ment of it, omitting the extensions/ verse portions, and other 
parts, in the interests of easier reading. The result of his effort 
is the present version. It is only about one-third the length 
of Dr. Suzuki’s translation. 



668 


APPENDIX 


In the early days of Dhyana Buddhism in China, this Sutra 
was highly honored and together with the Diamond Sutra and 
the Awakening of Faith Shastra had largely to do with giving 
form to Chinese Mahayana. The theme of it is to elucidate 
the profoundest experience that comes to the human spirit. 
It everywhere deprecates dependence upon words and doctrines 
and urges upon all the wisdom of making a determined effort 
to attain this highest experience. It begins with a study of the 
origin and development of cognition and advances from Ignor- 
ance, to false imagination, knowledge of relations, knowledge 
about reality, a study of the mind system, transcendental in- 
telligence, intuition and realization of Noble Wisdom. Then 
it proceeds to show the development of the mind along the 
stages of Bodhisattvaship in correspondence with the clearing 
cognition, until full realization and Buddhahood is attained. 

AWAKENING OF FAITH SHASTRA. Page 357 

The Sanskrit title of this Scripture is Shraddhotpada Shas- 
tra . The writing of this wonderful Scripture is generally cred- 
ited to the great Indian poet and controversalist, Ashvaghosha, 
who lived at the close of the First Century. The Sanskrit orig- 
inal disappeared long ago, and the English translations have 
all been made from Chinese versions. The Chinese translation 
having been made by Imperial authority was of exceptional 
accuracy and beauty; it ranking among the very highest of 
Chinese Scriptures. The translation was made by Paramartha, 
a Great Hindu Master, with the assistance of interpreters and 
writers, among whom was the Great Chinese philosopher Chih- 
chi, who was responsible for its exceptional classical elegance. 
It was translated into Chinese in 557. 

There have been two English translations of note; Dr. Su- 
zukfs made in 1900 and now long out of print. This was marred 
by too great an interpretation of it as a metaphysical trea- 
tise. Another was made by several Sanskrit scholars from a 
Sanskrit text remade from the Chinese, and misses the pro- 
found esoteric significance of the original. This was published 
in the magazine. The Shrine of Wisdom, in 1929 and 1930. 

The present translation was made by Bhikshu Wai-tao and 
Dwight Goddard in 1936 and 1937. The teaching of Ashvag- 
hosha is seen now for the first time in its true colors as a pro- 
foundly inspiring psychological appeal designed to awaken faith 



APPENDIX 


669 


in the minds of all seekers for Truth. The theme of the trea- 
tise is the first awakening of confidence in the mind, then its 
passing into aspiration and realization. It is the unfolding 
within the mind of an ever clearing conviction as to the truth 
of the principle of the Mahayana Buddhism, faith in an actual 
becoming as the goal of a process that is inherent in the na- 
ture of Ultimate Reality itself. This becoming through one’s 
own effort at following the Noble Path, its unfolding knowl- 
edge and enlightenment, and its final self-giving in love for 
all sentient life, is the whole aim and reward of the Maha- 
yana. That is, Buddhist faith is a cosmic process that goes 
on unfolding from faith to aspiration, to right knowledge, to 
realization of Wisdom, to the self-giving of Bodhisattvas, to 
Buddhahood. Ashvaghosha makes no dogmatic assertions that 
are to be accepted on authority; he merely offers explanations 
based on things of this life of birth and death that awakens 
faith, then advances to a consideration of the relation of these 
appearances by the higher mental processes, and then he urges 
self realization of this right knowledge as to the true nature 
of things by an appeal to the highest intuitive faculties. The 
teaching of Ashvaghosha is, that one becomes identified with 
Truth, not by doctrinal belief nor by behavior, but by follow- 
ing the true Path in the right way, and thus ultimately to be- 
come identified with the true principle of Mahayana Buddhism, 
which is self-less compassion for all animate life. 

Scriptures Selected from Chinese Sources 
THE TAO-TEH-KING. Page 407 

This Scripture is not strictly a Buddhist text, but it had 
so much influence in the formation of Chinese Buddhism, and 
always a good influence, keeping it humble and practical and 
simple, restraining it from running off into institutionalism and 
ecclesiasticism and ceremony and formalism, that the Editor 
makes no apology for including it. Nearly all the early Chi- 
nese Masters were originally Taoist scholars, and carried over 
their Taoist ideas into Buddhism, and even today it is often 
hard to tell some Taoist temples from Buddhist temples. 

The date of this Scripture and the author or source of it 
is difficult to determine. Lao-tsu is usually credited with it, 
and he is supposed to have lived in 544-463 B.C., but the book 



670 


APPENDIX 


was apparently unknown before 240 B.C. Moreover, the book 
is credited to three different persons, Lao-tzu, Lao-lai-tzu and 
Lao-tan, who lived two hundred years apart. Moreover, the 
teachings are so similar to Buddhist teachings, that it is more 
than probable that they are Buddhist ideas which had perco- 
lated into China during the two hundred years before 240 B.C., 
and the Lao-tzu (The Old Philosopher) to whom the book is 
credited really refers not to a Chinese author but to Buddha 
himself. 

The book has been translated into English over twenty-five 
times. The present translation was made by Bhikshu Wai-tao 
and Dwight Goddard. Strictly speaking it is an interpretive 
translation, for the Chinese text is exceedingly condensed and 
cryptic. Bhikshu Wai-tao is a member of a Taoist-Buddhist 
Brotherhood and had the advantage of many Taoist commen- 
taries and acquaintance with present day Taoist Masters, so 
his translation should be more accu'rate and sympathetic than 
any made by a hostile Confucianist, or Christian. 

The title of the book, Tao-teh-king, means, “the virtue or 
nature of Tao.” The word Tao, is the name given to perhaps 
the grandest conception the human mind has ever conceived. 
The word means, The Way or Path, but the conception far 
transcends the word. It is w'hat it is, just so and not other- 
wise. Other grand conceptions require some limiting or defin- 
ing or explaining, for instance, the word God needs to be de- 
fined as “infinite, just, holy,” as Creator, Law-giver, Judge, 
Savior. Not so, Tao! Taoism may be defined as the philosophy 
or religion of Naturalism, and the principle of its self-nature 
(wu-wei) as non-assertion, “that being so, this follows.” 

THE PRACTISE OF DHYANA FOR BEGINNERS. Page 437 

This Scripture was written by the great Chinese Philoso- 
pher, Ch’iang Chih-chi (522-597), the founder of Tien-tai 
School of philosophic Buddhism. It was translated into English 
by Bhikshu Wai-tao and Dwight Goddard, in 1934. The Prac- 
tice is discussed under ten heads, namely: — External condi- 
tions: Control of sense desires; Abolishment of inner hin- 
drances; Regulation and adjustment; Expedient activities of 
mind; Right practice; The development and manifestation of 
good qualities; Evil influences; Cure of disease; Realization of 
Supreme Perfect Enlightenment. 


APPENDIX 671 

THE SUTRA OF THE SIXTH PATRIARCH Page 497 

Knowledge of Buddhism began to percolate into China as 
early as the Second Century B.C., and after the First Century 
A.D. there was a steady stream of Buddhist treatises and Scrip- 
tures being translated into Chinese, but until the Fifth Century 
A.D. there were no Chinese Masters and few Bhikshus, but 
with the coming of Bodhidharma, a native of South India and 
reputed to be a Prince, the introduction of Buddhism into 
China took on a different character. Before his day, it had 
been almost exclusively a literary invasion by Indian Masters, 
but after his day there began to be Chinese Bhikshus and 
Masters, and Buddhist temples and monasteries. Bodhidharma 
is commonly acclaimed as the 28th Patriarch from Shakyamuni 
Buddha, and the First Chinese Patriarch. It is reported that 
Bodhidharma waited nine years before he gained his first dis- 
ciple. After Bodhidharma there were five Patriarchs the last 
of whom was Hui-neng, (or Wei-lang), the Sixth Patriarch, 
whose life and teachings are recorded in this Sutra. 

In closing it is well to sum up the characteristics of Ch’an 
Buddhism as they differed from the orthodox Buddhism of that 
early period. Negatively, it was more atheistic. Shakyamuni 
had been more agnostic concerning the nature of Reality, Nes- 
tor i an Christianity was emphatically theistic, while Taoism 
was decidedly atheistic, looking upon Tao as being Ultimate 
Principle rather than personality. Mahayanistic Buddhism in 
contact with the great theistic religions of Central Asia had 
grown to be more philosophic, looking upon Reality in its three 
phases of essence, principle, and transitory appearances as exist- 
ing in a state of undifferentiated Oneness. In contact with the 
polytheism of India and the animistic spiritism of Tibet it had 
absorbed much of their love for differentiated images and ranks 
of divinities; but that was for the accommodation of its more 
ignorant believers than for its elite. Under the influence of 
Taoism, Ch’anism became at first quite decidedly atheistic and 
iconoclastic, shading off later on into a more tolerant attitude, 
but even down to today, Ch’an in China and Zen in Japan 
make very little of their images which are used more for decora- 
tion than for worship. The deification of Shakyamuni Bud- 
dha that marked the Hinayana of Ceylon and Burma is almost 
entirely absent in Ch’an; in fact, the adoration shown Ami- 



672 


APPENDIX 


tabha is much more apparent, and images of Kwan-yin, Man- 
jushri and Kasyapa are just as frequently seen, while adoration 
to the image of the Founder of each particular temple and 
even for the Master of the Founder, seems to be more senti- 
mentally sincere and earnest. 

Further, under the influence of Taoism, Ch’an Buddhism 
had very little use for the Sutras that the Buddhism of those 
early days made so much of, the Lankavatara being the only 
exception. Ch’anists, intent in their strenuous practice of Dhy- 
ana, had found a more direct and immediate realisation of 
Reality and therein were satisfied. The same can be said of 
all the rest of the common paraphernalia of worship; they had 
no use for ritual, or public services, or prayer, or priests, or 
ranks of Dignity, or sentimentalism or emotionalism of any 
kind whatever. Every thing had to give way to the one thing 
of self-realisation of Oneness. 

The result of this contact of Indian Buddhism with Taoism, 
therefore, was to develop in Ch’an a type of Buddhism that 
was coldly rational, experiential, positive and iconoclastic, and 
that led to a life of extreme simplicity, strict discipline, humil- 
ity, industry, sympathy with all animate life, and to an equi- 
table and cheerful peace of mind. At first Ch’an Buddhists 
had no temples of their own, nor organisations of any kind; 
they were either isolated individuals living a solitary life, or 
were groups of disciples gathered about a Master. This later 
developed into the calling of Ch’an Masters to be the heads of 
monasteries belonging to other sects, and still later to the ac- 
quiring of their own monasteries and temples, with all their 
vested abbots of high degree, and ceremonial ritual and worldly 
pride. Nevertheless, as of old, the true Ch’an monk is more 
often to be found in some solitary hermitage, busy and cheer- 
ful at his manual work, humble and zealous at his practice of 
Dhyana, intent on the one goal of self-realisation of enlighten- 
ment, Buddhahood and Nirvana. 

While Bodhidharma is usually credited with being the 
founder of Ch’an Buddhism and rightly so, it was Hui-neng 
the Sixth Patriarch* who gave it more definite character and 
permanent form that time has tested and approved. Ch’an 
Buddhism seems to have discerned the essentials of Shakya- 
muni’s teachings and spirit better than any other sect, and to 
have developed their deeper implications more faithfully. This 



APPENDIX 


673 


development came through its contact with Chinese Taoism 
under the lead of Bodhidharma and Hui-neng, making it a 
virile and wholesome influence for all nations thereafter. Hui- 
yuan yielded to the seduction of the Divine Name and thereby 
gained .the credit of being the founder of the Pure Land sects 
with all their glamour of “salyation by faith.” Chih-chi (597), 
one of China’s greatest philosophic minds, grew up as an earn- 
est Ch’an Buddhist but yielding to the lure of his profound 
study of the Scriptures became known as the founder of the 
Tien-T’ai school of philosophic Buddhism, Shen-shui, the 
learned Master of the very temple where Hui-neng worked as 
a laborer in the granary, yielded to the lure of egoism and 
popularity to become the founder of the passing school of 
“Gradual Attainment.” 

But Hui-neng more or less illiterate as he was said to be, 
had the force of personality, and insight and common-sense, to 
determine the essentials of the Dharma and the humble and 
patient zeal to work out and to apply them in the wisest way. 
The outstanding features of Hui-neng’s Ch’an were as follows: 

1 . Distrust of all Scriptures and dogmatic teachings. 

2. An enquiring mind and earnest search into the depths of 
one’s own nature. 

3. Humble but positive faith in the possibilities of such an 
enquiring search, in a sudden self-realisation of enlightenment, 
Buddahood and Nirvana. 

4. Loyal and patient acceptance of such self-realisation in a 
following life of simplicity, self-restraint, industry, and sym- 
pathy with all animate life. 

In arriving at these convictions Hui-neng’s inherited and 
experiential acquaintance with Taoism was very influential. He 
was said to be illiterate but this could have been only relatively 
true of one who had mastered the Diamond Sutra and fre- 
quently discoursed to his disciples about the other great Sutras 
of the Mahayana. His study of the Diamond Sutra had con- 
vinced him of the truth of “Emptiness” and prepared his 
mind for the later truth of “Self-realisation of Mind-essence” 
which the Lankavatara taught him. But it was the conception 
of the Tao, active, limitless, inscrutably wise and benevolent, 
universal, eternal, ineffable, that gave depth and substance to 
his convictions and brought sympathy and patience with him- 


674 


APPENDIX 


self and with all animate life. It was the blending of all these 
elements in the mind and spirit of Hui-neng, the Sixth Patri- 
arch, that through him gave Chinese Ch’an, and Japanese Zen, 
Buddhism their characteristic form and spirit. 

Hui-neng was deeply influenced by his inherited and per- 
sonal acquaintance with Taoism. In his leadership and teach- 
ings he made little of the personal Buddha and very much of 
Prajna in which he saw the Ultimate Principle of Tao in both 
its irradiant and integrating forms, as both intellection and 
compassion. The term he used for Ultimate Reality, and made 
so much of, was Mind-essence. A self-realisation of this was 
all the Buddha he cared about. It was Dharmakaya and Bud- 
dhahood and Nirvana and Tathata and Prajna. It was uni- 
versal, undifferentiated and inscrutable, but was clouded over 
and hidden by karma and discriminative thought and desire 
and grasping. If these clouds could be driven away, and they 
all might be, then it would shine forth in all its pristine purity 
and potency. To Hui-neng, perfect enlightenment and self- 
realisation of Mind-essence and Buddhahood were the same 
thing. , This perfect culmination of life would come suddenly 
as the result of an earnest and sincere concentration of mind 
on the search for it within one’s own mind, and this was the 
only way it could come. In his mind all scripture and all 
teachings were subordinate to the self-realisation attained sud- 
denly by earnest Dhyana and Samadhi. 

Scriptures from Tibetan Sources 
THE LIFE OF MILAREPA. Page 56 1 

This Scripture is made up from selections from the Bio- 
graphical History of Jetsun Milarepa according to the late Lama 
Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s English Rendering, edited with introduc- 
tion and annotations by W. Y. Evans-Wentz, M.A., D.Litt., 
B.Sc. and published by the Oxford University Press, London, 
Humphrey Milford, 1928. It is here included by the kind per- 
mission of Mr. Evans-Wentz to whom our grateful thanks 
are extended. Appreciation and thanks are also given to Hum- 
phrey Milford for his part of the permission. In this selection, 
all of Mr. Evans-Wentz’s invaluable notes are omitted; readers 
who may become interested in it are urged to refer to the book 
itself for further study. 



APPENDIX 


675 


Jetsun Milarepa is the greatest of Tibetan saints. He be- 
longed to the Kargyutpa Apostolic Succession which included 
Tilopa its founder (950), Naropa, Marpa (Jetsun’s own guru), 
Milarepa being the fourth (1052-1 135). Milarepa’s first disciple 
was Je-Gampo-pa w r ho became his successor and through him 
the Kargyutpa Sect continues to this day. His second disciple, 
Rechung, was the writer of this Biography. 

Jetsun was bom of a wealthy father but upon his early 
death the property was stolen from the widow and children by 
relatives, so that during his childhood and youth Jetsun suffered 
terribly from poverty and feelings of hatred toward his relatives. 
During this period he studied “black magic” and becoming pro- 
ficient in it, used the power it gave him to destroy his enemies. 
Coming to see the futility of such a course he decided to study 
Buddhism. “Milarepa lived to a great old age amid the snowy 
heights of the Himalayas, constantly practising Dhyana, living 
so abstemiously that he earned the name of “the Energetic 
One,” and developing those graces of character, faith full and 
firm, keenness of intellect, poetic insight, and a heart over- 
flowing with an all embracing love and sympathy. Having had 
the advantage of holy and sacred teachers, he stored up the 
life-giving elixir that fell from their lips and tasted it for him- 
self in the solitude of his mountain retreat. Having thrown 
aside all concern for worldly prospects, ease, name and fame, 
resolutely devoting himself to the single object, he resolutely 
pressed on toward the highest spiritual development possible, 
not for himself but that he might encourage others to follow 
after. 

“At this very moment there are hundreds of the Kargyutpa 
ascetics living in the bleak solitudes of the Tibetan Himalayas, 
some of them in the caves at the base and on the sides of 
Mount Everest, wherein are still to be found, as places of spe- 
cial sanctity and pilgrimage, the hermitages of Jetsun. Their 
nature remains as it has been since earth’s early ages, and the 
Kargyutpa hermits dwell undisturbed by the restlessness of the 
world beyond, wherein the ancient ideals which they uphold no 
longer govern men, but where there rules, instead, the opinion 
that success means the acquisition of worldly riches, fame and 
power. 

“To the ordinary European and American, accustomed, per- 
haps too much, to modern comforts and luxuries, the life lived 



676 


APPENDIX 


by these Kargyutpa hermits, and by others like them, amid the 
climatic rigours of the snowy Himalayas, clad only in a thin 
cotton garment, subsisting on a daily handful of parched barley, 
supplemented by roots and herbs, and now and then a little 
yak’s milk brought by pious laymen, and freed from all worldly 
possessions and untroubled by worldly quests, may, possibly, 
seem an outcome of unreasoning religious zeal. 

“It should not be forgotten, however, that the hermit, in 
his turn, views with deep compassion his brethren immersed in 
the world; and, while they struggle for the world’s baubles, he 
is offering up prayer for them, that their ignorance may be 
dissipated and their feet set upon the Path of the Great De- 
liverance. Full of pity, he looks out over the human race with 
eyes of spiritual insight, as the Buddha Gotama did, and be- 
holds mankind fettered like chained slaves by their own con- 
ventionalities — many of which are, in fact, indefensible. He 
sees his fellow men held up by their karma, the results of their 
previous actions, to the treadmill of the Twelve Nirdanas, the 
mutually dependent causes of sansaric existence, and being re- 
born interminably, but to fall each time, victims to sorrow, 
old age, illness and death. And he contemplates the time when 
he shall be empowered to go forth and lead them to Freedom.” 

THE SUPREME PATH. Page 600 

This Scripture is selected from the book entitled, Tibetan 
Yoga and Secret Doctrines, which comprises seven different but 
related treatises of which this is the first. It was written by 
Gampopa a disciple of Milarepa, and contains twenty-eight 
sets of yogic precepts. The translation was made by the late 
Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup as edited by W. Y. Evans-Wentz, 
and published by the Oxford University Press, London: Hum- 
phrey Mumford, 1935. This Scripture is here included by the 
kind permission of Mr. Evans-Wentz and Mr. Mumford, to 
whom our grateful thanks are extended. 

Selections from Modern Sources 
HOMELESS BROTHERS. Page 625 

This selection is taken from the book entitled, Buddha, 
Truth and Brotherhood as translated from the Japanese of an 
epitomized compilation of many Buddhist Scriptures prepared 


APPENDIX 


6 77 

by Professor S. Yamabe of Kyoto. The translation was made 
under the supervision of Professor Yamabe in 1934 for the 
(General Conference of Pan-Pacific Young Buddhists Federa- 
tion. The selection is the first chapter of the third division, 
and is here included by the kind permission of Professor 
Yamabe. 

PRACTICE OF THE SEVENTH STAGE OF THE NOBLE 
PATH. Page 634 

As Europeans and Americans are not much accustomed to 
practising recollective mindfulness of the Seventh Stage and 
generally ignore it and try to pass directly from the mental 
confusion and illusions of the world’s life into the silence of 
Dhyana of the Eighth Stage with consequent difficulty and 
general failure, it seems best to offer a simple method for its 
practice. To tranquilize the mind for the Eighth Stage one 
should always enter it through the door of the Seventh. The 
theme of the method here presented is designed to impress 
upon the mind the false imagination of all thoughts of ego- 
selfness, and the value of keeping the mind fixed on its pure \ 
essence. By sitting quietly restraining all rising thoughts, ig- 
noring all risen thoughts, it is possible to do this with the re- 
sult that the mind is tranquilized and in condition to make 
use of the Eighth Stage of Dhyana. The method here given 
was composed by the editor during a number of years of prac- | 
tice, and is placed at the end of the selections as a fitting ■ 
close. [ 

SUMMARY OF BUDDHA’S DHARMA. Page 645 

As the teachings of the Buddha Dharma are distributed ' 
throughout the foregoing Scriptures, mingled with interpreta- 
tions and elucidations, it seems wise to add a brief summary 
of them. 


