Heart Sutra (Shorter Prajnaparamita Hrdaya Sutra)
Translated from Sanskrit by Wikisource
Source: en.wikisource.org

The Great Heart of Perfection of Wisdom Sutra

Avalokiteshvara, the Bodhisattva of Compassion, was deep through the Perfection of Wisdom, saw clearly that the five aggregates of human existence are empty, and so released himself from suffering.

"Sariputra! Form is nothing more than emptiness, emptiness is nothing more than Form. Form is exactly emptiness, and emptiness is exactly Form. The other four aggregates of human existence -- feeling, thought, will, and consciousness -- are also nothing more than emptiness."

"Sariputra! All things are empty: Nothing is born, nothing dies, nothing is pure, nothing is stained, nothing increases and nothing decreases. So, in emptiness, there is no form, no feeling, no thought, no will, no consciousness. There are no eyes, no ears, no nose, no tongue, no body, no mind. There is no seeing, no hearing, no smelling, no tasting, no touching, no imagining. No plane of sight, no plane of thought. There is no ignorance, and no end to ignorance. There is no old age and death, and no end to old age and death. There is no suffering, no cause of suffering, no end of suffering, no path to suffering. There is no attainment of wisdom, and no wisdom to attain."

The Bodhisattvas rely on the Perfection of Wisdom, their hearts without delusions; they have no reason for delusion, no fear within, abandoning their confused thoughts, finally experiencing Nirvana.

The Buddhas, past, present, and future, rely on the Perfection of Wisdom, and live in full enlightenment. The Perfection of Wisdom is the greatest mantra. It is the wisest mantra, the highest mantra, the mantra of the rest. Remove all suffering. This is truth that cannot be falsity. The reason of the Perfection of Wisdom Mantra, The Mantra is thus:

gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha

Translation: "Gone, gone, gone beyond, gone utterly beyond: Awakening! Hail!"

---

Longer Heart Sutra (incomplete translation)

All praise to the perfection of wisdom!

Once upon a time Avalokitesvara, an ascended master, vowed to work for the liberation of all sentient beings, was meditating in the tradition of The Perfection of Wisdom. He saw there are five aggregates of phenomena. He saw that these are however void of essence.

"Here, Sariputra, form is simply emptiness, emptiness is simply Form. Form is the same things as emptiness, and emptiness is the same thing as Form. As much can be said of the other four aggregates -- feeling, perception, volition, and consciousness -- all of these are simply empty."

"Sariputra! Here in the nature of emptiness it is nothing born, nothing expiring, nothing pure, nothing tainted, nothing magnified and nothing diminished.

Thus, in the state of emptiness, there is no form, feeling, thought, will, nor consciousness. There are no eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, mind, seeing, listening, smelling, tasting, touching nor conceptualization; it cannot be visualized or conceived. In emptiness there is no ignorance nor cessation of ignorance; neither senility nor death, nor the end of old age and death. The emptiness is no suffering, nor cause for suffering, nor end of suffering, nor a path. Nor is it the realization of wisdom, nor is it the negation of realization."
