« 


b^ 


Zj 


Division 

Sect  ion 


P\A<c4S0 

A 2 vy  57 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/masnaviimanavisp00jala_0 


TRUBNER’S 


ORIENTAL  SERIES 


MASNAYI  I MA’NAVI 


i 


THE  SPIRITUAL  COUPLETS 


Jalal  txl  - D\r> 

MAULANA  JALALU-’D-DIN  MUHAMMAD  RUMI 


TRANSLATED  AND  ABRIDGED 

BT 

E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A. 

LATE  OF  H.M.  BENGAL  CIVIL  SERVICE 


SECOND  EDITION 


LONDON 

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  & CO.  LTJ> 

PATERNOSTER  HOUSE,  CHARING  CROSS  ROAD 
1898 


The  lights:  of  translation  and  of  reproduction  are  reserved 


Printed  by  Ballantynk,  Hanson  & Co. 
At  tlie  BuUantync  Press 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Introduction xiii 

BOOK  I. 

Prologue  i 

Story  I.— The  Prince  and  the  Handmaid  . . 4 

Description  of  love 

Importunity  of  Shamsu-’d-Din  of  Tabriz  .... 

Story  II. — The  Oilman  and  his  Parrot 

Confusion  of  saints  with  hypocrites  ..... 

Story  III. — The  Jewish  King  and  the  Vazir  .... 

The  VaziFs  teaching 1 

Sleep  of  the  body  the  soul’s  awaking  . . .11 

Laila  and  the  Khalifa 12 

The  twelve  volumes  of  theology 13 

Story  IV. — Another  Tyrannical  Jewish  King  . . .15 

Second  causes  subordinate  to  the  First  Cause  . • 1 5 

Praises  compared  to  vapour  . . . . . .16 

Story  V. — The  Lion  and  the  Beasts  . .17 

Trust  in  God  opposed  to  human  exertions  18 

Wisdom  granted  to  the  weak  ......  20 

Human  wisdom  the  manifestation  of  Divine  . . .21 

Story  VI. — ’Omar  and  the  Ambassador 24 

God’s  agency  reconciled  with  man’s  free  will  . . .25 

Story  VII. — The  Merchant  and  his  Parrot  ....  28 

Saints  preserved  from  all  harm 28 

The  jealousy  of  God 29 

Complaints  of  God’s  harsh  dealings 30 


VO  OO  ON  O 


VI 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Story  VIII. — The  Harper 33 

Apology  for  applying  the  term  “ Bride  ” to  God  . . 33 

’Omar’s  rebuke  to  the  harper 34 

Story  IX. — The  Arab  and  his  Wife 35 

Men  subdued  by  women’s  wiles 36 

Moses  and  Pharaoh  both  doers  of  God’s  will  ...  37 

Man  and  wife  types  of  the  spirit  and  the  flesh  ...  38 

Adam  made  superior  to  the  angels 40 

Partial  evil  universal  good  ......  42 

Story  X. — The  Man  who  was  Tattooed 44 

Submission  to  the  Spiritual  Director  . . -45 

Story  XI. — The  Lion  who  hunted  in  Company  ...  47 

Man  must  destroy  “ self  ” 47 

Story  XII. — Joseph  and  the  Mirror 48 

“Not-being”  the  mirror  of  Being 48 

Story  XIII. — The  Prophet’s  Scribe 50 

How  philosophers  deceive  themselves  ....  50 

Story  XIV. — The  Chinese  and  the  Greek  Artists  . . 51 

Knowledge  of  the  heart  and  of  the  schools  ...  52 

Story  XV. — The  Prophet  and  Zaid 53 

Counsels  of  “ reserve  ” 54 

Story  XVI. — ’Ali’s  Forbearance 56 

The  Prophet’s  whisper  to  ’Ali’s  stirrup-bearer  ...  57 

Adam  rebuked  for  scorning  Iblis 58 

Epilogue  to  Book  I. 60 

BOOK  II. 

Prologue 61 

Story  I. — The  Sufi’s  Beast 62 

The  poet’s  doctrines  veiled  in  fables  ....  63 

Why  the  prophets  were  sent 63 

Mystical  meaning  of  “ Daylight  ” 64 

Expressions  of  religious  feeling 65 

On  blind  imitation 66 

Evil  influence  of  covetousness 67 

Story  II. — The  Pauper  and  the  Prisoners  ....  68 

Satan’s  office  in  the  world 68 

The  “ Beloved  ” the  cause  of  all  earthly  beauty  . . 70 


CONTENTS. 


Vll 
PAGE 

Story  III. — The  King  and  his  two  Slaves  72 

The  apostolical  succession 73 

Story  IV. — The  Falcon  and  the  Owls 76 

The  right  use  of  forms 76 

Story  V. — The  Thirsty  Man 77 

“It  was  not  ye  who  shot ” 78 

Story  VI. — Luqnmn  and  his  Master 79 

Love  endures  hardships  from  the  Beloved  . . 80 

Story  VII. — Moses  and  the  Shepherd  ...  .81 

Religions  forms  indifferent 82 

Why  the  wicked  flourish 84 

Story  VIII. — The  Man  and  his  Pet  Bear  ....  85 

He  who  needs  mercy  finds  it 86 

The  worshippers  of  the  golden  calf 87 

Story  IX. — The  Gardener  and  the  Three  Friends  . 88 

Story  X. — Bdyazid  and  the  Saint 88 

The  sweet  uses  of  adversity  ....  9° 

God  the  Author  of  good  and  evil 91 

Evil  turned  into  good  for  the  good 92 

Story  XI.—  Mo’dvia  and  Iblis  ......  94 

The  value  of  sighs 96 

Wisdom  the  “ believer’s  lost  camel  ” . . 97 

False  doctrines  contain  some  truth  ...  98 

Story  XII. — The  Four  Hindustanis 99 

Story  XIII. — The  Old  Man  and  the  Physician  100 

Bad  principles  produce  bad  actions  . ...  100 

Story  XIV. — The  Carrier  and  the  Scholar  . . .101 

Story  XV. — The  Man  who  Boasted 102 

Story  XVI. — The  Gluttonous  Sufi 104 

The  “mean”  is  relative 105 

The  ecstatic  state  above  law 105 

The  “ inner  voice  ” its  own  evidence  . . . .106 

Story  XVII. — The  Tree  of  Life 107 

Story  XVIII. — The  Young  Ducks 109 


CONTENTS. 


viii 

BOOK  III. 

PAGE 

Story  I. — Tlie  Travellers  who  ate  the  Elephant  . . 1 1 1 

God’s  care  for  His  children 1 1 1 

Evil  deeds  make  prayers  stink 1 1 2 

The  man  who  cried  “ 0 Allah  ! ’’  . . 114 

Story  II. — The  Villager  and  the  Townsman  . . . 1 1 5 

Jesus  healing  the  sick  . . . . . .116 

God’s  claims  to  our  gratitude 117 

Tests  of  hypocrisy  . . . . . . .118 

Story  III. — The  Jackal  who  aped  a Peacock  . . . .120 

Story  IV. — Moses  and  Pharaoh .120 

Lust  compared  to  the  snake  . . .121 

Story  V. — The  Elephant  in  a dark  Room  . 122 

Outward  sense  compared  to  the  palm  of  a hand  .122 

Noah  and  his  son  Canaan .124 

Reconciliation  of  two  traditions  . . ..124 

The  bewilderment  of  love  annuls  thought  . . 125 

Story  VI. — rl  he  Lover  and  his  Mistress  . .126 

True  lovers  seek  “ union  ” . . .127 

Story  VII. — The  Man  in  the  Time  of  David  . .128 

Knowledge  opposed  to  opinion 128 

Story  VIII. — The  Boys  and  their  Teacher  ...  129 

Story  IX. — The  Darvesh  who  broke  his  Vow  . . . 130 

All  things  dependent  on  God’s  will 1 3 1 

Divine  decrees  apparent  in  their  effects  . . 131 

Story  X. — The  Old  Man  and  his  Sons  . 1 33 

Story  XI. — Bahlol  and  the  Darvesh 134 

Story  XII. — The  Visions  of  Daqiiqi 136 

Identification  of  the  will  with  God’s  will  . >37 

All  religions  in  substance  one >39 

Story  VII.  (continued) — The  Man  in  the  Time  of  David  139 

Criminals  betray  themselves >40 

Lust  compared  to  the  murderer  . . . 1 4 1 

Story  XIII. — The  Men  of  Saba 142 

Not  all  can  use  parables  rightly  . . . . >43 

The  arguments  of  the  Fatalists . . . . . • >44 

Mercy  inclines  the  good  to  devotion >46 

The  despair  of  the  prophets >48 

Probability  the  guide  of  life  . . . . . • >49 


CONTENTS. 


IX 


PAGE 

Story  XIV. — The  Miracles  of  the  Prophet  . . .150 

The  way  of  escape  in  difficulties 150 

Story  XV. — The  Language  of  Animals 151 

Why  free  will  is  good  for  man 152 

Story  XVI. — The  Woman  who  lost  her  Infants  . . >53 

Knowing  through  similitudes  and  at  first  hand  >54 

Story  XVII. — The  Vakil  of  the  Prince  of  Bokhara  155 

The  lover’s  reply 1 57 

The  Vakil’s  answer  . 158 

Love  generates  love . .160 

The  Vakil’s  praises  of  the  Prince  . .163 

Story  XVIII. — The  Deadly  Mosque 165 

The  “ eye  of  certainty  ” >66 

Affliction  compared  to  the  boiling  of  herbs  .167 

Objections  of  fools  to  the  Masnavi 168 

Solomon  and  the  gnat  ...  ..170 

BOOK  IV. 

Story  I. — The  Lover  and  his  Mistress 172 

Evil  only  relative 174 

Why  God  is  named  “Seeing” 175 

The  world  compared  to  a bath  stove  . . . .176 

Story  II. — The  “Most  Remote”  Temple  . . 177 

The  microcosm  and  the  macrocosm  . . >79 

Solomon’s  message  to  Bilqis .180 

Ibrahim  bin  Adham’s  love  for  music  . . .181 

Ibrahim  bin  Adham  abdicates  his  throne  .182 

The  art  of  preaching  . . . . . 1 83 

Solomon’s  admonitions  to  Bilqis 184 

How  men  and  demons  helped  to  build  the  temple  . . 186 

All  creatures  cry  to  God  for  sustenance  . . . .188 

On  cleansing  the  heart  from  self-conceit  . . . .189 

Story  III. — The  Youth  who  complained  of  his  Food  . . 192 

Moses  and  the  magicians 193 

Story  IV. — The  Ecstatic  States  of  Bayazid  . . . 194 

Bayazid’s  impious  sayings 195 

Why  the  Hudhaili  youth  was  promoted  . . . . 1 97 


X 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Story  V. — The  Three  Fishes 198 

The  wise,  the  half  wise,  and  the  fool  . 199 

The  bird’s  counsels 200 

Story  VI. — Moses  and  Pharaoh 201 

The  tradition,  “ I was  a hidden  treasure  ”...  204 

Pious  men  ask  not  where  heaven  and  hell  are  . . 205 

Arguments  of  a Sunni  and  a Dahri 207 

Story  VII. — The  ungrateful  Courtier 209 

Why  some  are  made  for  destruction  . . . . .211 

Story  VIII. — The  Prince  beguiled  by  a Courtesan  . 212 

He  who  grieves  the  Logos  must  expect  tribulation  . .214 

Story  IX. — The  Mule  and  the  Camel 215 

The  evolution  of  man 216 

Zu’l  Qarnain  visits  Mount  Qaf 218 

Gabriel  appears  to  Muhammad 219 

Address  to  Husamu’-d-Din  ....  . 220 

BOOK  V. 

Story  I. — The  Prophet  and  his  Guest  . . 221 

Outward  acts  bear  witness  of  the  thoughts  . . 223 

Prayers  for  spiritual  enlightenment 225 

Story  II. — The  Arab  and  his  Dog 227 

Story  III. — The  Sage  and  the  Peacock  . 228 

“ There  is  no  monkery  in  Islam  ” 228 

Prayers  for  higher  aspirations  . . ...  230 

Story  IV. — The  RAfizis  of  Sabzawar  ....  232 

Satan’s  snares  for  men 233 

Story  V. — The  Man  who  claimed  to  be  a Prophet  . . 234 

The  Prophet’s  prayer  . . . . . 235 

Story  VI. — The  Youth  who  imitated  a Shaikh  . 236 

Worthlessness  of  blind  imitation 237 

Theologians  blind  to  things  of  the  Spirit ....  239 

Story  VII. — The  Creation  of  Adam 241 

God  the  “ Only  Real  Agent  ” ....  242 

Death  is  gain 243 

Story  VIII. — Mahmiid  and  Ayaz 245 

Description  of  him  who  is  made  one  with  God  . . . 247 


CONTENTS. 


xi 


PAGE 

Story  IX. — The  Repentance  of  Nasfih 248 

Men’s  members  will  bear  witness  against  him  . .250 

Story  X. — The  Lion,  the  Fox,  and  the  Ass  . .250 

Blind  imitators  exposed  by  their  actions  ....  253 

Worldly  illusions  to  be  shaken  oft’  . . . . .255 

The  monk’s  search  for  a man 257 

Story  XL — The  Musulman  and  the  Magian  ....  258 
Love  puts  reason  to  silence  ......  260 

Story  VIII.  ( continued ) — Mahmud  and  Ayaz  . . . 261 

Love  and  faith  a mighty  spell 262 

God’s  dealings  manifest  to  the  spiritual  ....  262 

Story  XII. — The  Devotee  who  broke  the  Wine-Jar  . . 265 

Description  of  one  who  trusts  to  the  light  of  nature  . . 267 

Story-  VIII.  ( continued ) — Mahmud  and  Ayaz  ....  267 

Iyazi’s  rebuke  to  his  passions  ......  268 

Hearing  leads  on  to  seeing  . . . . .270 

Those  who  deny  the  life  to  come 271 

“ We  allot  to  some  lusts,  to  others  virtues  ” . 272 

BOOK  VI. 

Prologue 275 

Man’s  worth  depends  on  the  objects  of  his  aspiration  276 

Fear  of  men  hinders  acceptance  of  truth  ...  278 

Prayers  for  guidance 279 

Story  I. — The  Slave  who  loved  his  Master’s  Daughter  . 280 

Story  II.- — The  Fowler  and  the  Bird 282 

The  bird’s  cries  for  succour 283 

Story  III. — The  Turkish  Amir  and  the  Minstrel  284 

Intoxication  a figure  of  spiritual  ecstasy  . .286 

Reasons  for  knocking  at  the  empty  house  . 288 

Story  IV. — The  purchase  of  Bilal 289 

Growth  in  grace  gradual 291 

Story  V. — The  Sufi  and  the  Qazi 292 

The  dead  regret  not  dying,  but  lost  opportunities  . 294 

Virtue  implies  trials  overcome 295 

Men’s  members  bear  witness  of  God’s  bounty  . . 297 

Story  VI. — The  Faqir  and  the  Hidden  Treasure  . . 298 

God  rules  men  by  hope  and  fear 300 

“ I am  about  to  place  on  earth  a Khalifa  ”...  300 

God  is  “ nearer  to  us  than  our  neck- vein  ” ...  302 


CONTENTS. 


Story  VII. — The  Three  Travellers 304 

Lofty  speculation  diverts  us  from  God  ....  305 

The  uses  of  chastisement 307 

The  mouse  and  the  frog 309 

He  who  discerns  God  in  the  world  is  safe  . . .310 

Story  VIII. — The  Pensioner  of  the  Prefect  of  Tabriz  . 31 1 

Folly  of  trusting  to  man 312 

Joseph  in  the  prison  . . . 314 

Story  IX. — The  King  and  his  Three  Sons  . . 314 

The  significance  of  “ forms  ” 315 

•‘The  Truth ” hidden  in  our  phenomenal  being  . 317 

The  figurative  language  of  the  Princes  . . . -319 

Why  the  answer  to  prayer  is  delayed  ....  323 

The  joys  of  “ Fruitio  Dei"  inexpressible  ....  325 

The  death  of  the  Second  Prince 328 


Note  on  Apocryphal  Supplements  to  the  Masnavi 


• 329 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  AUTHOR’S  PREFACE. 

The  Masnavi  is  thus  described  by  its  author  in  his 
Arabic  preface : — 

“ This  is  the  book  of  the  Masnavi.  It  contains 
the  roots  of  the  roots  of  the  roots  of  the  Paith,  and 
treats  of  the  mysteries  of  ‘Union’  and  ‘Certitude.’ 
Thus  saith  the  feeble  slave,  in  need  of  the  mercy  of 
God,  whose  name  be  praised,  Muhammad,  son  of 
Muhammad,  son  of  Husain,  of  Balkh,  of  whom  may 
God  accept  it, — ‘ I have  exerted  myself  to  enlarge  this 
book  of  poetry  in  rhymed  couplets,  which  contains 
strange  and  rare  narratives,  beautiful  sayings  and 
recondite  indications ; a path  for  the  devout,  and  a 
garden  for  the  pious ; short  in  its  expressions,  but  having 
numerous  applications.’  ” The  author  goes  on  to  state 
that  he  wrote  his  book  at  the  instance  of  Shaikh  Hasan, 
son  of  Muhammad,  “ a chief  of  the  Gnostics  (Arif  in) 
and  a leader  of  right  direction  and  of  sure  knowledge ; ” 
and  concludes  with  a prayer  that  it  may  prove  “ a 
blessing  to  those  who  are  possessed  of  insight,  the 
godly,  the  spiritual,  the  heavenly-minded,  the  men  of 
light  who  keep  silence  and  observe,  who  are  absent  in 
spirit  though  present  in  the  body,  very  kings  though 
clothed  in  rags,  true  nobles  among  the  people,  endued 
with  virtues,  the  lights  of  guidance.” 

xiii 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


II. 

SUFISM. 

The  Masnavi  is  a summary  of  the  religious  senti- 
ments and  doctrine  of  Islam  as  interpreted  and  modi- 
fied by  the  Muhammadan  Mystics  or  Sufis.  And,  as  the 
preface  declares,  it  is  specially  addressed  to  Sufis,  men 
who  aimed  at  following  the  more  perfect  way  as  opposed 
to  the.  moderate  practice  of  average  Muhammadans,  men 
who  professed  to  renounce  the  world  and  seek  know- 
ledge of  God  and  union  with  Him  in  a life  of  self- 
mortification and  spiritual  meditation.  Although  some 
Sufi  tenets  seem  repugnant  to  the  teaching  of  the 
Koran,  nevertheless  there  is  ample  evidence  to  prove 
that  the  Sufis  were  the  lineal  spiritual  descendants  of  the 
earliest  saints  of  Islam,  and  were,  in  fact,  what  Catholics 
call  the  “ Religious  ” of  the  Muhammadan  communion. 
Haji  Ivhalfa  in  his  article  on  Sufism  ( Tasawwvf ),  quotes 
Qushairi  to  the  effect  that,  after  the  death  of  Muhammad, 
the  most  earnest  adherents  of  the  Faith  were  called 
“ Companions  of  the  Prophet  ” (Ashdb),  their  successors 
bore  the  title  of  “Followers”  ( Tabd’iyun ),  and  in  the 
third  generation  this  title  was  altered  to  that  of 
“ Ascetics  ” ( Zdliici ),  or  “ Devotees  ” (’ Abid ).  The  first 

to  bear  the  name  “ Sufi  ” (“  clad  in  wool  ”),  was  one 
Abu  Hashim,  a Syrian  ascetic,  who  died  in  150  a.h. 
(767  A.D.).  Jami,  in  his  life  of  Abu  Hashim,  says  that 
the  first  convent  ( Khanqdh ) was  built  for  the  Sufis  by 
a Christian  nobleman  who  had  remarked  their  love  for 
one  another.  This  adoption  of  quasi-monastic  institu- 
tions seems  to  have  been  the  first  step  taken  by  the 
Sufis  beyond  the  pale  of  strict  Muhammadan  ordinances. 
The  prophet  had  said,  “There  is  no  monkery  in  Islam,” 
but  this  dictum  had  to  be  ignored  or  explained  away 
by  the  growing  sect.  Their  increasing  spiritual  exalta- 
tion soon  led  them  to  adopt  other  modifications  of 


INTRODUCTION. 


xv 


ordinary  Muhammadan  doctrines.  Thus  the  ordinary 
doctrine  of  resignation  to  the  will  of  Allah  ( Tasllm ), 
was  soon  developed  into  an  exaggerated  “ Quietism  ” 
like  that  of  Mme.  Guyon  in  France.  In  his  Tazkiratu-l- 
Auliyd,  ’Attar  gives  the  life  of  Rabi’a  of  Basra,  a female 
saint  of  the  second  century  of  the  Hijira.  A conversa- 
tion took  place  between  her  and  three  holy  men  on  the 
subject  of  sincerity  (Sidy).  One  of  them  said,  “ He  is 
not  sincere  who  does  not  patiently  endure  the  blows  of 
his  Lord.”  Eabi’a  answered,  “ That  saying  smells  of 
egotism.”  Another  said,  “ He  is  not  sincere  in  his  pro- 
fessions who  does  not  enjoy  the  blow's  of  his  Lord.” 
Rabi’a  rejoined,  “ I know  a better  saying  than  that : 
He  is  not  sincere  who  does  not  forget  the  pain  of  the 
blows  in  his  joy  at  beholding  the  face  of  his  Lord.” 
Once  she  fell  sick,  and  they  asked  her  the  cause  of 
her  sickness.  She  said,  “ I dwelt  upon  the  joys  of 
Paradise,  and  therefore  my  Beloved  has  chastened  me.” 
She  added,  “ Consume  with  fire,  0 Lord,  the  heart  that 
loveth  thee.”  This  is  exactly  Mme.  Guyon’s  senti- 
ment : — 

“ Love,  if  thy  destined  sacrifice  am  I, 

Come,  slay  thy  victim  and  prepare  thy  fires, 

Plunged  in  thy  depths  of  mercy  let  me  die 
The  death  which  every  soul  that  lives  desires.” 

Rabi’a  was  asked  if  she  wished  to  marry ; she  said, 
“ The  bonds  of  wedlock  have  descended  upon  me,  I 
am  not  my  own  but  my  Lord's,  and  must  not  be  un- 
faithful to  Him.”  Hasan  of  Basra  said  to  her,  “ How 
dost  thou  know  Him  ? ” She  answered,  “ Thou  knowest 
Him  as  such  and  such,  I as  Nonsuch.”  When  she 
made  the  pilgrimage  and  saw  the  Ka’la,  she  said,  “ I 
see  only  bricks  and  a house  of  stone,  what  do  they 
profit  me  ? ’Tis  Thou  that  I want.”  This  saying  is, 
perhaps,  the  earliest  expression  of  that  indifference  to 
outward  forms  and  rites  which  distinguished  Sufis  as  a 
class. 


b 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


Another  famous  saint  of  the  second  century  a.h.  was 
Ibrahim  bin  Adham  of  Balkh.  He  is  a typical  example 
of  the  Sufi  ascetic.  Born  in  the  purple,  he  renounced 
all  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  the  world  and  became  a 
Darvesh.  One  story  told  of  his  ascetic  practices  is  that 
he  was  not  content  to  make  the  pilgrimage  in  the 
ordinary  way,  but  stopped  at  the  end  of  every  mile  of 
the  road  to  prostrate  himself  a thousand  times.  By  this 
and  similar  works  of  supererogation  he  of  course  acquired 
supernatural  powers.  Just  as  St.  Anthony  of  Padua 
constrained  the  fishes  at  Ravenna  to  listen  to  his  preach- 
ing, Ibrahim  made  the  fishes  in  the  Tigris  bring  back 
a needle  which  he  had  dropped  into  that  river.  The 
miracles  ascribed  to  all  the  chief  Sufi  saints,  are  almost 
exact  counterparts  of  those  of  St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  and 
other  noted  Christian  saints.  As  Rumi  says,  “ Love 
and  faith  are  a mighty  spell.”  The  “ Golden  Legend  ” 
is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  love  and  reverence  in- 
spired by  the  memories  of  saintly  lives. 

By  the  end  of  the  second  century  of  the  Hijira,  it  is 
clear  that  Sufi  doctrine  had  come  to  differ  in  some 
respects  from  ordinary  Muhammadan  views,  but  there 
is  good  evidence  to  prove  that  the  Sufis  of  that  time 
were  highly  esteemed.  According  to  the  Tazkiratu-l- 
Auliya , the  great  Canonist,  Imam  Ash-Shafi’i  once  visited 
a Sufi  convent  and  listened  to  the  discourse  of  the 
brethren,  and  then  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  “ The 
knowledge  (of  God)  possessed  by  the  whole  world  did 
not  equal  his  own  knowledge,  but  that  his  own  know- 
ledge fell  short  of  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  Sufis.” 
The  Imam  Ahmad  Hanbal,  another  of  the  great  Canonists, 
gave  similar  testimony.  One  day  his  disciples  said  to 
him,  “ These  Sufis  rest  on  Mind  faith  or  trust  ( tawakkal ), 
but  are  devoid  of  knowledge.”  Hanbal  answered,  “ Ye 
are  mistaken,  knowledge  is  implanted  in  them.”  They 
said,  “ They  aspire  to  nothing  more  than  a broken  crust.” 
He  replied,  “ I know  no  sect  on  the  face  of  the  earth 


INTRODUCTION. 


XVII 


whose  aspirations  are  nobler  than  theirs,  since  they 
desire  nothing  of  the  world  beyond  a broken  crust.” 

In  the  third  century  of  the  Hijira,  Sufi  doctrines 
were  developed,  which  at  last  brought  some  of  the  more 
advanced  members  of  the  sect  into  conflict  with  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities.  The  earliest  and  most  cele- 
brated of  these  more  advanced  doctrinaires  was  Bayazld 
of  Bistarn  in  Ivhorasan,  who  was  descended  from  a Parsi 
(or  Magian)  family.  He  used  to  say  that  he  had  gained 
his  spiritual  knowledge  by  au  empty  belly  and  a naked 
body.  Ibn  Khalliqan  records  one  of  his  sayings  to  the 
effect  that  it  is  not  the  performance  of  miracles  which 
proves  saintship,  but  rather  a godly  and  righteous  life. 
On  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  sayings  ascribed  to  him 
in  the  “ Lives  of  the  Saints  ” are  of  the  most  extravagant 
character.  He  would  say,  “ Glory  be  to  me  ! ” ( Subhdni ), 
implying  that  he  was  one  with  the  Deity.  In  the 
Masnavi,  Puuni  gives  some  specimens  of  these  extravagant 
sayings,  and  excuses  him  on  the  ground  that  he  was 
possessed  by  a spirit,  and  therefore  not  answerable. 

It  seems  worth  while  to  give  some  more  of  these 
hard  sayings  of  Bayazld,  because,  so  far  as  we  can  judge, 
he  was  the  man  who  above  all  others  gave  to  Sufi 
doctrine  its  permanent  shape.  The  Tazkirat  ul  Auliyd 
records  this  saying  of  his,  “ God,  most  high,  has  laid  down 
commands  and  prohibitions,  and  to  those  who  obey  Him 
He  gives  a robe  of  honour.  Other  men  earnestly  strive 
to  gain  that  robe,  but  I desire  of  Him  naught  but 
Himself.”  Again,  “ Every  one  is  drowned  in  the  sea  of 
works,  but  I am  drowned  in  the  sea  of  Tonification 
( Tauliid ).  They  rely  on  their  own  righteousness,  but 
I rely  on  His  free  bounty.”  Here  we  find  the  first 
hint  of  an  esoteric  religion  for  “ interior  men  ” 1 {Ahl 

1 ‘‘While  men  of  externals  believe  be  seen  through  a near  approach  to 
that  there  is  nothing  in  existence  God,  and  a close  communion  with 
but  what  is  visible  to  sight,  in-  His  omnipresent  Spirit.” — Fasusu’l 
terior  men  hold  that  much  is  veiled  Hikam. 
from  outward  sight,  which  can  only 


INTRODUCTION. 


xviii 

i biitin),  as  the  Sufis  called  themselves,  opposed  to  the 
exoteric  religion  of  ordinary  Mussulmans.  The  latter 
sought  salvation  through  the  works  of  the  law  {Shari’ at), 
while  the  Sufis  followed  the  higher  road  of  the  truth 

(ffaqiqat). 

There  was  nothing  singular  or  exceptional  in  the  rise 
of  an  esoteric  religion  in  Islam.  The  same  phenomenon 
had  been  seen  in  Hinduism,  when  the  theosophy  of  the 
Upanishads  and  the  Vedanta  was  engrafted  upon  the 
older  Hindu  scriptures.  And  the  same  thing  happened 
when  the  more  cultivated  Athenians  established  the 
Eleusinian  mysteries,  which  aimed  at  presenting  to  the 
initiated  or  “ mystics,”  as  they  were  called,  more  ade- 
quate conceptions  of  Deity  than  those  of  the  current 
popular  religion. 

Bayazld  is  reported  to  have  said,  “ I saw  ‘ The  Truth,’ 
most  high  {Al  Haqq),  in  a dream.  He  said  to  me,  ‘ What 
dost  thou  desire  ? ’ I answered,  ‘ I desire  what  Thou 
desirest.’  He  said,  ‘ I am  to  thee  as  thou  to  Me.’  ” 
Another  of  his  sayings  was  this,  “ I beheld  in  a dream 
‘ The  Truth,’  most  high,  and  I asked,  ‘ What  is  the  way 
to  Thee  ? ’ And  He  said,  ' Quit  thyself,  and  thou  wilt 
attain  to  Me.’  ” 

Al  Haqq,  or  “ The  Truth,”  the  name  here  used  by 
Bayazld,  is  one  of  the  ninety-nine  names  of  Allah,  com- 
monly recited  as  ejaculations  (Zilcr).  But  in  most  Sufi 
writings  it  is  used  in  preference  to  all  the  rest,  presum- 
ably because  it  indicates  a somewhat  wider  conception 
of  Deity  than  the  “ Allah  ” of  the  Koran.  It  has  been 
compared  to  the  “ Sat  ” of  the  Upanishads  ( Das  s&iende ), 
but  it  may  well  be  doubted  if  the  Sufi  conception  of 
deity  ever  became  quite  so  abstract  and  devoid  of  per- 
sonal attributes  as  the  Brahma  of  the  Upanishads 
and  the  Vedanta.1  With  the  Sufis  “ The  Truth  ” is  a 


1 Thus  “The  Truth’’  seems  to  jaldl),  which  are,  in  fact,  the  good- 
have  always  retained  the  attributes  ness  and  severity,  the  mercv  and 
of  beauty  and  terror  (jamal  and  vengeance  of  the  Allah  of  the  Koran. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xix 


personality  so  wide  as  to  include  in  itself  all  existence  and 
all  action,  all  matter  and  all  force,  but  it  seems  to  be 
regarded  as  a personality  for  all  that.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  understand  how  this  idea  of  the  all-absorbing  and 
all-embracing  nature  of  the  Deity  grew  up. 

As  Deutsch  and  Renan  point  out,  the  Koran  does  not 
clearly  determine  the  question  as  to  how  far  men  are 
free  agents,  acting  on  their  own  initiative,  and  how  far 
their  action  is  constrained  by  Allah.  In  fact,  it  speaks 
in  merely  popular  language,  sometimes  ascribing  all 
action  to  Allah,  and  sometimes  to  men's  own  agency.1 
But  the  Scholastic  theologians,  or  Mutakallamln,  were 
not  content  to  leave  the  question  in  this  prudent 
obscurity.  By  reasonings  similar  to  those  of  St.  Augus- 
tine and  Calvin,  they  demonstrated  that  Allah  was  the 
only  real  agent  (Fail  i haqiql),  and  that  men  only  acted 
under  the  “ compulsion  ” ( jabr ) of  the  divine  will.  This 
extreme  view  seemed  to  glorify  Allah,  and  exalt  the  idea 
of  the  divine  nature,  and  was  warmly  adopted  by  thorough- 
going Sufis  like  Bayazid.  Thus  we  find  him  saying,  “ If 
to-morrow  in  His  court  He  should  ask  me,  ' Why  hast 
thou  not  done  so  and  so  ? ’ I should  prefer  that  to  His 
asking,  ‘ "Why  hast  thou  done  so  and  so  ? ’ for  whatever 
I do  of  myself  is  egotism,  and  egotism  and  ‘ I ’ are 
‘ Shurk,’  or  ascribing  partners  to  God,  which  is  the 
deadliest  of  sins.”  A story  is  told  of  a zealous  Sufi, 
called  “ Muhasibi,”  from  his  habit  of  rigorous  self-exami- 
nation, who  refused  to  inherit  from  his  father  because 
the  father  had  held  the  doctrine  of  man’s  free  will,  and 
was  therefore  a blasphemer  of  the  divine  omnipotence. 
Shabistarl,  in  the  Gulshan  i Rciz,  lays  down  in  like 
manner  that  all  who  hold  any  doctrine  other  than 
“ compulsion  ” (jabr),  are  no  better  than  Magian  dualists. 
It  may  be  remarked  by  the  way  that  St.  Augustine, 
like  Bayazid,  had  once  held  the  dualistic  view.  Was 

1 Canon  Mozley,  in  his  “Angus-  makes  a similar  remark  about  the 
tinian  Doctrine  of  Predestination,”  Bible  (p.  36). 


XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


it  a similar  revulsion  from  this  view  which  im- 
pelled both  to  such  strong  advocacy  of  the  opposite 
principle  ? 

When  Bayazid  had  become  convinced  that  all  the 
action  in  the  universe  is  the  direct  action  of  “ The 
Truth,”  he  soon  came  to  the  further  conclusion  that 
there  is  no  real  existence  in  the  universe  save  the  exist- 
ence of  the  same  “ Truth.”  By  the  aid  of  allegorical 
interpretation,  that  wonderful  instrument  for  putting 
new  wine  into  old  bottles,  it  was  easy  to  deduce  this 
doctrine  from  various  texts  of  the  Koran,  e.g.  “ To  Him 
we  shall  return,”  “ All  creatures  shall  pass  away  except 
the  face  of  thy  Lord,”  &c.  Consequently  we  find 
Bayazid  claiming  actual  identity  with  the  Deity.  He 
said,  “ My  similitude  is  as  the  ocean,  for  its  depth  is  not 
seen,  neither  its  beginning  or  ending.”  One  asked  him, 
“ What  is  the  empyrean  (’ arsh ) ? ” He  answered,  “ It 
is  I.”  “ What  is  the  throne  of  Allah  ? ” “ It  is  I.” 

“ What  are  the  pen  and  the  tablet  ? ” He  said,  “ I am 
the  pen  and  the  tablet.”  They  said,  “ Before  God,  most 
high,  Abraham,  Moses,  and  Muhammad  (on  whom  be 
peace  and  blessing),  are  very  slaves.”  He  made  answer, 
“ All  these  am  I.”  They  said,  “ Before  God,  most  high, 
Gabriel,  Michael,  Israfil,  and  ’Azrall  (on  whom  be  peace), 
are  very  slaves.”  He  said,  “ I am  all  these.”  His  ques- 
tioners were  silent.  Bayazid  added,  “ Of  a surety  he 
who  is  annihilated  ( mahv ) in  ‘ The  Truth  ’ attains  to  the 
very  reality  of  all  that  exists.” 1 To  use  the  words  of 
the  German  mystic,  Eckart,  he  “ breaks  through  to  the 
Oneness,”  and  abides  in  “ the  ground  of  his  soul.” 2 This 
is  the  doctrine  expressed  in  the  well-known  Sufi  formula, 
“ Bciqa  ha’ cl  id  fana,”  or  abiding  in  “ The  Truth  ” after  anni- 
hilating self. 

After  Bayazid,  the  greatest  name  amongst  the  early 

1 Vaughan  quotes  similar  rhap-  ii.  pp.  7 and  II. 

Bodies  from  the  poems  of  Mr.  Emer-  - See  Vaughan’s  account  of 
son  and  the  hymns  of  Angelus  Eckart  in  “ Hours  with  the  Mys- 
Silesius.  “ Hours  with  the  Mystics,”  tics,”  i.  p.  146. 


.INTRODUCTION. 


xxi 


Sufis  was  that  of  Junaid  of  Bagdad,  who,  according  to 
Jaini  in  the  Nafahatu-l-Uns , died  in  297  A.H.  It 
is  said  that  the  mantle  of  ’Ali  had  descended  to 
Junaid  through  Hasan  of  Basra,  as  an  outward  and 
visible  sign  of  his  apostolic  succession.  One  of  his 
sayings  was  this,  “ The  hearts  of  religious  men  are 
veiled  by  three  veils ; to  wit,  estimation  of  their  own 
works,  expectation  of  recompense  for  them,  and  pre- 
occupation with  the  hope  of  divine  favours.”  They 
asked  Junaid,  “ When  is  a servant  a true  servant  in 
his  devotion  ? ” He  answered,  “ When  he  sees  all 
things  under  the  absolute  sway  of  God,  most  high, 
and  that  all  come  from  God,  and  subsist  in  God,  and 
return  to  God,  as  God  hath  said,  ‘ Glory  be  to  Him  in 
whose  hand  is  sway  over  all  things,  and  to  Him  shall 
ye  return’”  (Sura,  xxxvi.  83). 

Husain  bin  Mansur  A1  Hallaj  (“  the  wool-carder  ”) 
was  a disciple  of  Junaid.  His  life  is  given  by  Ibn 
Khalliqan,  ’Attar,  Jam!,  and  others.  He  was  put  to 
death  at  Bagdad  in  309  a.h.  for  saying,  “I  am  ‘The 
Truth  ’ :’  ( And  ul  Haqq).  Imam  Ghazall  excuses  him  on 
the  ground  that  he  spoke  in  this  way  out  of  excessive 
love  to  God,  and  that  such  expressions  may  be  likened 
to  the  following:  “ I am  he  whom  I love,  and  he  whom 
I love  is  I.  We  are  as  two  souls  in  one  body.  When 
ye  see  me  ye  see  him,  and  when  ye  see  him  ye  see 
me.”  But  in  another  passage  quoted  in  Pococke’s 
Specimen  Historic  Arabum,  p.  263,  he  condemns  the 
use  of  all  such  expressions.  When  the  sentence  of 
death  was  passed,  Hallaj  said,  “ You  cannot  scourge  me 
or  shed  my  blood ; my  belief  is  Islam  based  on  the 
Sunna ; I acknowledge  the  pre-eminence  of  the  Imams, 
the  well-directed  Khalifs  ( i.e . the  first  four  Khalifs),  and 
of  the  rest  of  the  Companions,  may  the  blessing  of  God 
be  upon  them ; on  God  do  I call  that  He  protect  my 
blood.”  Shortly  before  he  died,  he  cried  out,  “ My 
friend  is  not  guilty  of  injuring  me ; he  gives  me  to 


XXII 


INTRODUCTION. 


drink  what,  as  master  of  the  feast,  he  drinks  himself. 
When  he  passes  me  the  cup  he  invites  me  to  taste 
sword  and  block,  like  one  who  drinks  old  wine  mixed 
with  dragonswort.”  (?)  His  last  words  were,  “ The 
counting  of  Unity  makes  numbers  (or  plurality)  out  of 
Unity.”  His  disci pies  flattered  themselves  with  the 
hope  that  he  would  rise  again  after  forty  days,  and  as 
a great  flood  occurred,  they  said  it  had  been  caused  by 
the  ashes  of  llallaj,  which  had  been  flung  into  the 
Tigris.  Others  averred  that  it  was  not  he  who  had 
been  put  to  death,  but  one  of  his  persecutors  who  had 
been  made  to  resemble  him,  and  had  thus  suffered  in 
his  stead. 

The  following  are  some  of  his  sayings : “ The  way 
to  God  is  two  steps,  one  step  out  of  this  world,  and 
one  step  out  of  the-  next  world,  and  lo ! you  are  there 
with  the  Lord  ( Maula ).”  They  asked  him  of  poverty, 

and  he  said,  “ The  poor  man  ( Faqlr ) is  he  who  dispenses 
with  what  is  beside  God,  and  looks  to  Him  alone.” 
Again  he  said,  “ The  true  ecstatic  Sufi  is  he  who  knows 
One  person,  and  One  person  knows  him.”  Again, 
“ Whoso  worships  God  by  the  light  of  ordinary  religion 
is  as  one  who  seeks  the  sun  by  the  light  of  the  stars.” 
When  he  said,  “ I am  ‘ The  Truth,’  ” they  said  to  him, 
“ Say  Re  is  ‘ The  Truth.’  ” He  replied,  “ Verily,  He  is  all 
in  all,  and  yet  ye  say  He  is  lost  (in  me).  Nay,  Husain 
is  lost  (in  Him).  The  circumfluent  ocean  is  not  lost 
{gum),  and  never  decreases.”  A saying  was  current 
that  Hallaj  was  put  to  death  because  he  revealed 
secrets. 

The  next  leading  Sufi  teacher  was  Abu  Sa’id  bin 
Abu-l-Khair  of  Malina  in  Khorasan,  who  lived  from 
396  to  440  a.h.1  In  early  youth  he  felt  drawn  to  a 
religious  life,  and  became  the  disciple  of  Abu-1-Fazl 

1 Dr.  Ethd  published  ninety-two  Bavarian  Academy  in  1S75.  Some 
of  his  Quatrains  with  a German  English  translations  appeared  in  the 
translation  in  the  Journal  of  the  Calcutta  Review  for  April  1896. 


INTRODUCTION.  xxiii 

Luqman  of  Sarakhs,  by  whom  he  was  admitted  into 
one  of  the  Darvesh  orders.1  At  Sarakhs  he  passed, 
it  is  said,  seven  years,  practising  the  most  rigorous 
asceticism.  He  would  spend  hours  calling  out,  “Allah, 
Allah ! ” just  as  St.  Francis  at  the  outset  of  his  career 
used  to  confine  his  devotions  to  the  ejaculation,  “ My 
God,  my  God ! The  following  sayings  of  his  are  re- 
corded in  the  Haft  Iqlim.  When  asked  what  a Sufi  was, 
he  said,  “ Whatever  is  in  thy  head  forget  it,  whatever 
is  in  thy  hand  give  it  away,  and  whatever  happens  to 
thee  disregard  it.”  Again,  “ The  more  a man  knows 
of  the  world  the  less  he  knows  of  God.”  He  said, 
" Love  is  God’s  snare,”  i.e.  the  feeling  of  attraction  to 
God  is  implanted  in  the  heart  in  order  to  draw  man 
to  God.  After  conversing  with  the  great  philosopher, 
Ibn  Sina  or  Avicena,  he  said,  “ I see  (by  spiritual  in- 
tuition) all  that  he  knows.”  That  is  to  say,  he  claimed 
to  be  illuminated  by  the  “ inner  light,”  which  plays  so 
important  a part  in  all  mystic  systems.  Thus  Mystical 
theology  is  described  by  a very  high  authority 2 as  a 
“ pure  knowledge  of  God  which  the  soul  ordinarily 
receives  in  a luminous  darkness  or  obscure  light  of 
sublime  contemplation,  together  with  an  experimental 
love  so  intimate  that  the  soul  losing  itself  altogether 
is  united  to  God  and  transformed  into  Him.”  How  to 
describe  these  supra  - sensible  sensations  has  always 
been  a difficulty  for  mystics.  Jeremy  Taylor  says, 
“ When  they  suffer  transportation  beyond  the  burden 
and  support  of  reason,  they  feel  they  know  not  what, 
and  call  it  what  they  please.”  Among  the  Sufis  Abu-1- 
Khair  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  use  that  sym- 
bolical language  which  characterises  all  subsequent  Sufi 
writings.  This  language  is  explained  in  the  Gulshan-i- 
Haz,  which  was  written  about  1317  a.d.,  corresponding 

1 For  a full  account  of  these  and  Arnold,  published  at  London 
orders,  see  “The  Dervishes,”  by  in  1893,  with  the  imprimatur  of 
John  P.  Brown.  London,  1868.  Cardinal  Vaughan. 

2 A Catholic  Dictionary  by  Addis 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  71 7 a.h.  Wine  is  the  symbol  of  spiritual  transports, 
the  eye  of  the  divine  severity,  the  lip  of  the  divine 
loving-kindness,  the  mole  of  the  divine  unity,  and  so 
on.  In  fact,  it  was  similar  to  the  symbolism  which 
St.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  extracted  from  the  Canticles, 
only  much  more  elaborate.  Later  Persian  poets  like 
Hafiz  often  played  with  this  Sufi  symbolism,  and  used 
it  in  equivocal  senses,  and  this  has  led  some  writers  to 
represent  Sufi  doctrine  as  mere  lawless  pleasure-wor- 
ship, and  Sufi  poetry  as  a mere  counterpart  of  the 
poems  of  Anacreon  and  Moore.  But  this  view  of  Sufi 
doctrine  is  hardly  borne  out  by  the  evidence. 

As  Abu-l-Ivhair  gave  the  Sufis  their  poetic  symbolism, 
so  Imam  Ghazall  of  Tus  in  Khorasan,  who  also  lived  in 
the  fifth  century  of  the  Hijira,  gave  them  their  meta- 
physical terminology.  He  was  a man  of  great  learning, 
at  once  a theologian  of  the  highest  repute  and  a philo- 
sopher versed  in  Greek  metaphysics,  as  interpreted  by  his 
predecessors  A1  EarabI  and  the  celebrated  Ibn  Slna  or 
Avicena.  He  had  written  a book  on  the  “ Vivification 
of  the  Sciences  ” ( Ihlya  ul  ’ulum),  of  which  it  was  said, 
that  were  all  other  records  of  Islam  to  be  lost,  the  entire 
religion  might  be  recovered  from  this  book.  To  judge 
from  his  treatise,  “ The  Deliverer  from  Error  ” ( Munqiz 
min  az-zalcil),1  he  seems  to  have  been  a thinker  something 
like  Schelling,  who  tried  to  find  a sure  basis  of  know- 
ledge in  an  “ intellectual  intuition  ” transcending  the 
ordinary  understanding.  And,  to  complete  the  parallel, 
just  as  Schelling’s  philosophical  mysticism  was  disposed 
of  by  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  Dean  Mansel,  and  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer,  so  Ghazall  eventually  found  a refuter  in  the 
celebrated  Ibn  Roshd,  better  known  as  Averroes.  How- 
ever, it  is  not  with  Ghazali’s  attempt  to  make  philosophy 
mystical  that  we  are  here  concerned,  but  with  his  attempt 

1 Edited  by  A.  Schmblders,  with  Arabes.”  Paris,  1842.  Haji  Khalfa 
a French  translation,  and  notes  in  (Fluegel’s  ed.),  vi.  199. 
his  “ Ecoles  philosophiques  chez  les 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


to  mnke  mysticism  philosophical  by  furnishing  it  with 
a philosophical  terminology.  And  this  he  did  by  appro- 
priating the  terminology  of  the  Alexandrian  Neoplatonists. 
The  Dabistan  in  its  chapter  on  “ The  religion  of  the  philo- 
sophers,” states  that  there  are  two  classes  of  philosophers, 
the  Orientals  ( Shardqln  or  Mushraqln),  who  included  all 
down  to  Plato,  and  the  Occidentals ; and  elsewhere  it 
states  that  the  belief  of  the  Sufis  is  the  same  as  that 
of  the  Platonists.  Moreover,  Haji  Khalfa  in  his  article 
on  Sufism,  states  that  the  Sufis  borrowed  their  termin- 
ology from  the  Oriental  class  of  philosophers,  as  will  be 
manifest  to  any  one  who  examines  their  books.1  There 
can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  correctness  of  these  statements. 
In  reading  Sufi  books  we  are  constantly  confronted  from 
this  time  forward  with  the  technical  terms  of  Greek, 
and  especially  Neoplatonist  philosophy.” 2 And  the  use 
of  this  new  terminology  undoubtedly  modified  to  some 
extent  the  older  Sufi  theosophy.  To  give  only  two 
instances  of  this  : — First,  “ The  Truth  ” was  assimilated 
to  the  Deity  of  Plotinus.3  “ The  Truth  ” no  longer  acts 
like  Allah  by  willing,  but  by  being.  Creation  is  not 
effected  by  a fiat,  but  by  emanation  from  the  Divine 
Being,  which  rays  itself  out  into  creatures  by  “ proodos” 
as  Plotinus  called  it.  The  Logos  (’ Aql  i kull)  first 
proceeds  from  the  Deity,  then  the  Spirit  (JSrafs  i 
kull)  from  the  Logos,  and  so  on.  And  ultimately  all 
creatures  are  reabsorbed  into  the  Deity  by  a process 
analogous  to  the  “ epistrophe  ” of  Plotinus.  Secondly, 
in  place  of  the  older  vague  statements  about  the  “ inner 
light,”  we  get  almost  the  precise  doctrine  of  Plotinus  as 


1 Fluegel  translates  the  word 
Shardqln  by  “ Illuminati,”  but  the 
passage  in  the  Dabistan  proves  that 
the  right  rendering  is  “ Orientals,” 
as  in  Shea  and  Troyer’s  translation, 
iii.  J39- 

2 See  the  list  given  by  Schmolders 

in  his  “Documenta  philosophise 
Arabum,”  and  compare  the  Sufi 


terms  in  ’Abdu-r-Razaq’s  “ Istlla- 
hdt  i Siifiah,”  and  in  Jorjani’s  “De- 
finitions,” translated  by  De  Sacy  in 
“Notices  et  Extraits  des  MSS.,’* 
vol.  x.  Also  the  notes  to  the  Gul- 
shan-i-Raz. 

3  See  Ueberweg’s  “History  of 
Philosophy,”  i.  250. 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  “ ecstasy  ” and  consequent  intuition  of  the  Deity. 
This  Plotinian  doctrine  is  well  set  out  in  a passage  in 
Barclay’s  “ Apology  for  the  True  Christian  Divinity  as 
the  same  is  held  forth  and  preached  by  the  people  called 
in  scorn  Quakers”  (edition  of  1678,  p.  126).  “Yea, 
there  is  a book  translated  out  of  the  Arabic,  which  gives 
an  account  of  one  Hai  Ebn  Yokdan,  who,  without  con- 
verse of  men,  living  in  an  island  alone,  attained  to  such 
a profound  knowledge  of  God  as  to  have  immediate 
converse  with  Him,  and  to  affirm  that  the  best  and 
most  certain  knowledge  of  God  is  not  that  which  is 
attained  by  premisses  premised,  and  conclusions  deduced, 
but  that  which  is  enjoyed  by  conjunction  of  the  mind 
•of  man  with  the  Supreme  Intellect,  after  the  mind  is 
purified  from  its  corruptions,  and  is  separated  from  all 
bodily  images,  and  is  gathered  into  a perfect  stillness.”  1 

After  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  of  the  Hijira, 
nothing  of  consequence  was  added  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Sufis,  though,  as  Haji  Khalfa  remarks,  very  many  books 
were  written  about  it.  Nearly  all  the  chief  poets  of 
Persia  either  were  or  professed  to  be  Sufis,  and  even 
works  on  ethics  like  the  Akhlaq-i-Jaldll  use  the  Sufi 
phraseology  whenever  it  is  possible. 

The  poems  which  are  regarded  as  the  best  expositions 
of  Sufi  doctrine  are  the  following : — 

1.  The  Iictdiqa  ul  Haqiqat,  or  “Garden  of  Verity,” 
•composed  by  Hakim  Sana!  in  535  a.h. 

2.  The  Ildhlndma,  or  “ Divine  Book,”  and  the  Mantiq 
ut  Tear,  or  “ Discourse  of  the  Birds,”  composed  by  Farldu- 
d-Dln  ’Attar  about  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  of  the 
Hijira.  The  latter  has  been  published  together  with  a 
French  translation  by  M.  Garcin  de  Tassy.  He  lias  also 
published  a full  abstract  in  his  “ Poiisie  philosophique  et 
religieuse  chez  les  Persans.” 

3.  The  Masncivi  of  Jalalu-’d-Dln  Rum!,  which  was 

1 The  parallel  passage  in  Plotinus  the  Mystics,”  i.  288,  and  also 
is  given  in  Vaughan’s  “ Hours  with  GuUhan-i-Rdz,  p.  8,  note  5. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxvn 


written  in  the  seventh  century  a.h.,  corresponding  with 
the  thirteenth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  It  preceded 
the  “ Divina  Commedia  ” by  some  fifty  years,  and  just  as 
Dante's  poem  has  acquired  the  epithet  “ Divina  ” by 
general  consent,  so  the  Masnavi  has  in  India  acquired 
that  of  Ma’navl,”  or  “ Spiritual.”  1 

4.  The  GuUlian-i-Raz,  or  “ Mystic  Rose-garden,”  of 
Mahmud  of  Shabistar  (written  in  717  a.h.,  and  thus 
almost  exactly  contemporaneously  with  the  “ Divina 
Commedia  ”),  cannot  take  rank  with  the  great  poems  just 
mentioned,  but  it  is  a very  useful  compendium  of  Sufi 
doctrine.  The  text  has  been  published  together  with  a 
translation  and  notes  by  Triibner,  1880. 


III. 

GENEltAL  VIEW  OF  THE  MASNAVI. 

The  poem  begins  with  what  the  late  Professor  Palmer 
called  “ The  song  of  the  reed,”  figuring  the  love  of  the 
soul  to  God  and  its  longing  to  be  reunited  with  God. 
This  is  the  keynote  of  the  whole  poem,  which,  if  we 
may  parody  Aristotle’s  definition  of  tragedy,  may  be 
defined  as  an  attempt  to  purify  the  religious  senti- 
ment by  love.  By  “ love  ” the  poet  seems  to  mean,  in 
the  first  place,  such  a longing  for  God  as  that  de- 
scribed in  the  Psalm,  “ Like  as  the  hart  desireth  the 
waterbrooks,  so  longeth  my  soul  after  Thee,  0 God.” 
And,  in  the  second  place,  Ruml's  conception  of  love 
certainly  included  some  part  of  what  St.  John  and 
St.  Paul  meant  by  love  {Agape).  It  certainly  included 
mutual  charity,  at  any  rate  as  far  as  the  brethren  of 
the  order  and  other  “ friends  of  God  ” were  concerned, 
though  of  course  it  did  not  amount  to  that  universal 
charity,  that  “ enthusiasm  of  humanity,”  which  possessed 

1 It  is  styled  the  “ Amulet  of  the  Malcolm  in  his  “ History  of  Persia,” 
Soul”  by  Khaja  'Aini,  one  of  the  ii.  280,  calls  it  one  of  the  “ Scriptures 
Constantinople  ’ llama  ; and  Sir  J.  of  Persia.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxviii 

St.  Francis,  and  impelled  him  to  spend  and  be  spent  in 
the  service  of  the  poor  and  outcast. 

The  claim  of  the  Sufis  to  feel  love  to  God  seems  to 
strike  some  critics  as  absurd.  No  doubt  Moslems  who 
only  regard  Christ  as  a great  prophet  cannot  feel 
the  same  motives  for  love  of  God  as  those  felt  by 
Christians,  hut  there  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  that 
they  may  feel  all  the  motives  which  operated  on  Old 
Testament  writers.  The  Allah  of  the  Koran  is  precisely 
the  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament,  a divine  King  of 
kings  dwelling  in  the  highest  heaven  (’ ctrsJi ),  a God  of 
goodness  and  of  severity,  of  mercy  and  of  vengeance, 
who  rules  the  world  with  almighty  and  irresistible 
power.  Love  is  excited  by  goodness,  not  by  power, 
and  thus  we  find  pious  Moslems  always  dwelling  by 
preference  on  the  merciful  attributes  of  the  Deity ; thus, 
for  instance,  in  the  common  formula  the  “ Bismillah,” 
they  always  address  Allah  as  “ the  Merciful,  the  Com- 
passionate.” And  it  is  precisely  this  aspect  of  the 
divine  nature  which  is  insisted  on  by  Eumi  as  the 
basis  for  his  principle  of  love.  Throughout  the  Masnavi 
his  main  object  is  to  bring  out  the  “ fatherhood  of  God  ” 
and  to  explain  away  His  terrible  attributes,  the  com- 
pulsion or  predestination,  the  origin  of  evil,  and  all  the 
seeming  anomalies  in  the  divine  government  which  per- 
plexed Job,  the  Ecclesiast  and  many  later  theologians. 
He  approaches  all  these  questions  not  on  their  meta- 
physical but  on  their  moral  side,  that  is,  through  his 
principle  of  love.  The  more  a man  loves,  the  deeper 
he  penetrates  the  divine  purposes.  Love  is  the  “ astro- 
labe of  heavenly  mysteries,”  the  “ eye-salve  ” which 
clears  the  spiritual  eye  and  makes  it  clairvoyant.  He 
compares  it  to  the  love  of  an  affectionate  child  which 
divines  the  reasons  for  its  father’s  severity,  and  to  the 
love  of  a lover  who  finds  excuses  for  the  cruelty  of  his 
mistress  ; in  fact,  he  explains  it  by  the  analogy  of  earthly 
love. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXIX 


It  is  this  perilous  analogy  which  leads  him,  as  it 
has  also  led  many  Christian  mystics,  into  some  of  his 
worst  errors.  That  fervid  Copt,  Origen,  was  perhaps 
the  first  to  apply  the  phraseology  of  human  love  to  the 
love  of  God.  Like  his  successor  St.  Bernard,  he  did  this 
by  his  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  Canticles,  a book 
which  it  is  said  the  Eabbis  were  half-inclined  to  exclude 
from  the  Canon.  And  the  line  of  sentiment  thus  started 
has  been  followed  by  later  mystics,  very  much  to  their 
own  detriment  and  discredit.  As  Kingsley  points  out,1 
it  tends  to  produce  a kind  of  hysterical  devotion,  con- 
sisting in  transports  and  raptures,  which  are  certainly 
very  alien  from  sober  and  sensible  piety.  It  may  be 
said  for  Eumi  in  the  first  place,  that  he  is  not  so  great 
a sinner  in  this  respect  as  many  others  of  the  mystic 
fraternity.  Secondly,  he  is  careful  to  point  out  in 
language  which  would  almost  satisfy  Dean  Mansel  and 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  that  man  is  utterly  unable  to  form 
adequate  conceptions  of  the  Absolute,  and  that  all 
symbols  of  it  derived  from  the  world  of  sense  are  more 
or  less  misleading,  though  he  justifies  their  use  by  the 
example  of  the  Koran  and  by  the  necessities  of  human 
thought.  Lastly,  he  was  no  doubt  influenced  by  Platonist 
doctrine.  Plato  held  that  the  soul  in  its  ante-natal 
condition  had  been  conversant  with  the  “ ideas  ” (or 
forms)  of  heavenly  goodness  and  beauty,  and  that  in 
its  sojourn  on  earth  it  is  reminded  of  these  ideas  by  the 
sight  of  beautiful  things.  Beauty,  it  has  been  said, 
“ stands  on  the  threshold  of  the  mystical  world  ” and 
rekindles  the  love  of  the  soul  for  its  heavenly  prototype. 
If  Christian  poets,  like  Wordsworth  in  his  “ Ode  on 
Immortality  ” and  Newman  when  he  talks  of  “ angel 
faces  loved  long  since  and  lost  awhile,”  might  without 
reproach  use  part  of  Plato’s  imagery,  we  must  not  be 
too  hard  on  Eumi  for  travelling  a little  further  in  the 
same  direction.  On  the  whole,  then,  it  does  not  seem 

1 Speaking  of  St.  Francis  de  Sales  in  a note  to  the  “ Saint’s  Tragedy.” 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION. 


fair  to  question  the  sincerity  or  genuineness  of  the  love 
to  God  which  Eumi  professed  to  feel,  though  much  of 
his  phraseology  must  seem  offensive  and  unseemly  to 
modern  readers. 

The  way  in  which  he  applies  his  principle  of  love 
may  be  seen  in  the  following  instances  of  its  application 
to  the  questions  of  the  origin  of  evil,  “ compulsion,”  the 
grounds  of  belief,  and  the  mystical  journey  to  “ Union.” 

First  as  regards  the  mystery  of  evil,  Eumi  says  a skilful 
painter  is  of  necessity  able  to  paint  ugly  pictures  as  well 
as  fair  ones.  Hence  the  “ knower  ” does  not,  like  the 
Magians,  set  up  over  against  the  good  Ormuzd  an  evil 
Ahriman  to  account  for  the  origin  of  evil,  but  recognises 
that  God  created  all  things,  even  including  what  seems 
to  us  evil.  But  what  we  call  evil  has  in  reality  no  real 
existence  of  its  own,  being  merely,  as  St.  Augustine  said, 
a “ negation,”  or  not-being — a departure  from  the  Only 
Self-existent  Being.  Here  the  poet  first  takes  “ not- 
being  ” in  its  literal  sense  of  “ nothing,”  and  then,  misled 
by  the  old  notion  that  all  words  must  have  things  an- 
swering to  them,1  as  something, — as  nothing  in  relation 
to  God,  but  as  a very  pernicious  something  in  relation 
to  man.  In  the  next  place,  the  poet  points  out  that  much 
of  what  we  call  evil  is  only  relative, — what  is  evil  for  one 
being  good  for  another, — nay  more,  that  evil  itself  is  often 
turned  into  good  for  the  good.  Further,  he  insists  on  the 
probationary  design  of  much  so-called  evil.  As  Bishop 
Butler  says,  life  is  a state  of  probation,  and  probation 
involves  the  existence  of  evil  lusts  and  pains  to  prove  us. 
How,  the  poet  asks,  could  there  be  self-control  without 
evil  passions  to  be  controlled,  or  patience  without  the 
pressure  of  afflictions  to  be  borne  ? Much  evil,  again,  is 
medicinal, — the  jail  serves  as  the  mosque  of  the  criminal, 
because  it  makes  him  cry  to  God,  just  as  fasting  and 
discipline  are  the  school  of  the  ill-regulated  passions. 
Lastly,  much  evil  has  a punitive  purpose.  “ He  who 
1 See  p.  52. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXI 


grieves  the  Lotjos  must  look  for  tribulation  in  the 
world.” 

So,  again,  with  the  question  of  “compulsion”  or  pre- 
destination:— God  is  the  "Only  Ileal  Agent,”  and  in 
His  inscrutable  wisdom  He  undoubtedly  fashions  some  to 
be  vessels  of  wrath,  such  as  were  Iblis,  Cain,  Nimrod, 
Pharaoh,1  and  Abu  Jahl ; but,  as  we  can  see  only  a small 
part  of  the  divine  scheme,  we  must  be  wary  of  judging  in 
these  cases.  Adam  was  rebuked  for  scorning  Iblis,  and 
it  may  be  that  Iblis  will  one  day  be  turned  again  into  an 
angel  of  light.  So  it  is  said  that  Pharaoh  was  a doer 
of  God’s  will  equally  with  Moses,  and  was  wont  at  night 
to  bewail  the  “ compulsion  ” which  made  him  oppose 
that  faithful  servant  of  God.  But  the  “ knower,”  while 
refusing  to  judge  others,  will  not  be  backward  in  judging 
himself.  He  will  admit  the  ability  to  choose  good  and 
refuse  evil,  which  his  own  consciousness  testifies  to  as 
existing  in  himself.  He  will  not,  like  Iblis,  throw  the 
responsibility  for  his  sins  upon  the  Creator,  but  rather 
he  will  cry  with  Adam,  “ O Lord,  we  have  blackened  our 
own  faces ! ” Finally,  when  man’s  will  is  altogether 
identified  with  God’s  will,  and  be  finds  his  chief  plea- 
sure in  doing  God’s  will,  the  whole  opposition  and  dis- 
tinction between  “compulsion”  and  free  will  is  annihilated, 
just  as  raindrops  falling  into  oyster-shells  become  pearls. 

Next  as  to  the  grounds  of  belief  and  evidences  of 
religion: — There  are  some  minds,  illuminated  by  the 
“ dry  light  ” of  reason,  which  are  irresistibly  impelled 
to  prove  all  things.  Such  a sober  and  candid  mind, 
for  instance,  as  that  of  Bishop  Butler  cannot  rest  in 
what  seems  to  it  mere  “ enthusiasm.”  Bishop  Butler, 
like  his  master  Locke,  cannot  help  proportioning  his 
beliefs  to  the  evidence  for  them.  Even  for  the  glory  of 
God  he  cannot  exaggerate  the  evidence,  and,  where  he 
finds  only  probable  evidence,  he  will  not  pretend  to 
demonstrable  certitude.  And  it  may  be  noted  by  the 

1 See  “ Dabistan,”  by  Shea  and  Troyer,  iii.  272,  note. 


XXXU 


INTRODUCTION. 


way,  that  our  poet  himself  does  not  disdain  to  use  the 
argument  from  probability  in  addressing  the  worldly, 
though  he  insists  that  his  own  faith  rests  on  far  deeper 
foundations.  In  addressing  the  worldly,  however,  he 
says,  “ Even  in  your  trade  you  act  on  probability.  You 
despatch  goods  by  sea  at  the  risk  of  shipwreck,  for  if 
you  decline  the  risk  you  can  gain  no  livelihood.  And 
so  you  ought  to  act  with  the  great  venture  of  faith.” 
But  for  himself  the  poet  cannot  rest  on  mere  probability. 
He  must  have  “indefectible  certitude,” — a firm  convic- 
tion independent  of  varying  moods  and  shifting  proba- 
bilities,— a very  “ passion  of  belief.”  A true  lover,  he  says, 
is  ashamed  to  demand  proofs  of  his  mistress,  and  prides 
himself  on  trusting  her  in  spite  of  appearances  teding 
against  her.1  He  has  an  evidence  in  his  heart  which 
makes  him  turn  away  from  all  external  evidences  with 
disgust.  This  was  just  the  feeling  with  which  the 
Evangelical  School  regarded  the  “ Probabilities  ” of  Butler 
and  the  “ Evidences  ” of  Paley.  Similarly  we  read  in 
Cardinal  Newman's  “Apologia”"  that  Mr.  Keble  “ascribed 
the  firmness  of  assent  which  we  give  to  religious  doc- 
trine, not  to  the  probabilities  which  introduced  it,  but 
to  the  living  power  of  faith  and  love  which  accepted 
it.”  Just  so  the  Masnavi  teaches  that  it  is  love  which 
generates  intuition  and  belief.  Love  absorbs  a man’s 
whole  being  and  makes  him  indifferent  to  the  cavils  of 
cold  reason ; just  as  Zaid,  smarting  with  the  pain  of  the 
blow,  was  unable  to  attend  to  the  hair-splitting  distinc- 
tions of  his  assailant. 

Not  only  is  faith  generated  by  love,  but,  what  is  more, 
faith  generated  by  any  other  motive  is  worthless.  Faith, 
like  that  of  respectable  conformists,  growing  from  mere 
blind  imitation  and  the  contagion  of  custom,  or  like 
that  of  scholastic  theologians,  consisting  in  mere  intel- 
lectual apprehension  of  orthodox  dogmas  (Jama’at),  and 
all  mere  mechanical  and  routine  professions  of  belief, — 
1 Credo  quia  impossible.  8 “ Apologia,”  p.  19. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxiii 

summed  lip  by  the  poet  under  the  general  name  of  the 
“ yoke  of  custom  ” ( [taqlld ) — profit  nothing.  They  only 
produce  the  spiritual  torpor  called  by  Dante  “ nccidia." 
To  be  of  any  value,  faith  must  be  rooted  and  grounded  in 
love.  The  mere  external  righteousness  generated  by 
“ taqlld,” — the  mere  matter-of-course  adoption  of  the 
virtues  of  the  age,  the  class,  the  sect, — is  compared  to  a 
“ veil  of  light  ” (formal  righteousness)  which  hides  the 
Truth  more  entirely  than  the  “ veil  of  darkness  ” (open 
sin).  For  “ self-deluding  goodness  is  of  necessity  un- 
repentant,” while  the  avowed  sinner  is  already  self- 
condemned,  and  so  advanced  one  step  on  the  road  to 
repentance. 

Since  there  are  so  many  kinds  of  spurious  faith  current 
in  the  world,  the  pious  man  must  walk  warily,  and  before 
copying  the  words  and  actions  of  those  who  seem  to  be 
religious,  he  must  test  and  prove  them.  Sometimes  he 
will  find  their  professions  contradicted  by  their  practice  ; 
sometimes,  especially  in  moments  of  unguarded  anger, 
their  “ speech  will  betray  them,”  and  show’  their  motive 
to  be  odium  tlieologicum  and  not  religious  love.  He  must 
apply  a sort  of  Socratic  clenckus  to  their  shibboleths,  and 
see  if  the  root  of  the  matter  be  in  them.  Even  when  he 
has  found  a genuine  saint,  he  must  not  run  away  with 
the  notion  that  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  copy  his  outward 
conduct,  but  he  must  try  to  divine  his  inward  motives 
and  ruling  principles,  and  strive  earnestly  to  attain  the 
disciplined  affections,  the  concentrated  will,  the  all- 
absorbing  love  of  God,  which  are  the  characteristics  of 
His  true  children. 

God  judges  not  as  men  judge,  from  outward  conduct, 
but  looks  at  the  heart,  the  secret  motives,  and  the  “ aspi- 
ration.”1 Hence  the  poet  holds  outward  forms  and  rites 
to  be  matters  of  very  minor  importance.  Islam  is  the 
“religion  of  Abraham”2  ( minus  the  priesthood) — a religion 

1 See  Book  VI. — Prologue. 

- See  Koran  iii.  89,  and  Deutsch,  “Remains,”  p.  129. 


XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


of  new  moons  and  fasts,  of  circumcision,  of  purifications, 
of  holy  war,1  of  precise  postures  in  prayer,  which,  as  the 
late  Dr.  Liddon  pointed  out,  are  the  very  postures  de- 
scribed in  the  Psalms.2  Naturally  Moslems  get  to  rely  on 
these  forms  too  entirely, — to  lose  the  sense  of  proportion 
in  religious  matters, — to  fancy  that  a painful  and  scrupu- 
lous observance  of  forms  will  atone  for  the  neglect  of 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law, — the  essential  religious 
graces  summed  up  by  St.  Paul  under  the  name  of  Charity. 
Hence  the  poet  was  led  to  regard  forms,  generally  speak- 
ing, as  indifferent.  In  the  parable  of  Moses  and  the 
Shepherd  he  points  out  that  so  long  as  a worshipper  is 
inspired  by  love  of  God  the  words  in  which  he  expresses 
his  devotion  are  quite  immaterial.  He  says,  “ Fools  exalt 
the  Mosque,  and  ignore  the  true  temple  in  the  heart.” 
He  has  even  a good  word  for  idolaters  who  act  up  to 
their  lights.  The  old  satire  of  Xenophanes,  that  if  lions 
had  a god  they  would  represent  him  as  a lion,  would 
affect  him  not  at  all.  He  says  it  is  not  from  any  per- 
verse preference  that  men  buy  counterfeit  gold,  but  only 
because  it  seems  to  them  genuine.  Man  is  not  saved  by 
“ naming  the  divine  names  ” with  orthodox  accuracy,3  or 
by  worshipping  with  “ fair  rites,”  but  by  heartfelt  love 
and  earnest  endeavour  to  please  God.  In  every  nation 
he  who  loves  God  and  does  His  will  according  to  his 
lights  is  accepted  of  Him. 

The  final  consummation  of  love  to  God  is  union  with 
God  ( icasl ).  According  to  the  Sufi  gnosis  (ma'rifat), 
God  is  the  only  Being  who  has  any  real  existence. 
Everything  besides  God  is  “ not-being  ” (’adm),  which  is 
sometimes  described  as  mere  negation  of  existence,  and 
at  other  times  as  having  some  positive  evil  elements. 
Man  is  a compound  of  these  two  ingredients,  namely, 
real  divine  being  and  the  phenomenal  and  illusory 

1 See  Deuteronomy,  chap.  xx.  2 Psalm  xcv.  6. 

3 Jalalu-’d-Din  once  said  that  he  agreed  with  all  the  seventy-three 

sects.  Nafahatu-’l  Uns,  p.  532. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV 


not-being.  The  saints  “ see  things  as  they  really  are." 
They  recognise  the  divinity  within  them.  They  see  that 
“ God  is  nearer  to  them  than  their  neck-vein.”  And, 
kindled  with  love  of  this  divine  element  of  their  nature, 
they  concentrate  all  their  endeavours  on  developing  it 
and  realising  its  perfection.  This  is  effected  by  purging 
away  the  clouds  of  not-being.  To  use  the  mystical 
term,  they  “ascend  inwards”  (introrsum  ascendant).  I’>y 
spiritual  meditation  and  a course  of  rigorous  asceticism 
they  sweep  away  self-consciousness,  self-will,  and  all 
human  passions  and  affections  which  separate  them  from 
the  one  real  being.  And  thus  they  attain  the  annihila- 
tion or  death  of  “self  " (Jana),  which  results  in  the 
spiritual  resurrection  to  eternal  life  in  God  ( baqa ) ; in 
other  words,  they  obtain  union  with  God,  being  entirely 
absorbed  in  Him  and  abiding  for  ever  in  Him. 

To  use  the  language  of  Catholic  theologians,  the 
Masnavi  is  an  exposition  of  “experimental”  mysticism, 
and  not  a treatise  of  “doctrinal”  mysticism.  Hence 
liumi  does  not  set  out  all  this  Sufi  gnosis  wit  h the  logical 
precision  of  a systematic  treatise,  like  the  Gulshan-i-raz, 
but  rather  assumes  it  all  as  known  to  his  readers.  He 
describes  it  all  in  the  language  of  emotion  and  imagina- 
tion, rather  than  in  that  of  the  intellect.  Thus,  for 
instance,  he  nowhere  describes  in  precise  terms  the 
method  in  which  God  is  conceived  to  “ ray  Himself 
out  ” into  the  visible  universe  by  the  emanations  of  the 
Logos  ( aql-i-kull ),  the  Pneuma  ( nafs-i-hnll ),  and  the  rest. 
He  only  introduces  these  terms  as  already  familiar  to 
his  readers.  In  like  manner,  he  does  not  describe  with 
minuteness  the  various  stages  of  the  Sufi  progress  up  to 
union,  which  are  described  at  great  length,  and,  it  may 
be  added,  with  great  discrepancy,  by  other  Sufi  writers. 

European  critics  generally  condemn  this  central  Sufi 
doctrine.  Tholuck  in  his  “ Ssufismus  ” calls  it  “ a pan- 
theistic theosophy,”  but  in  his  later  “ Bliithensammlung  ” 
he  traces  some  analogies  between  it  and  certain  Christian 


XXXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


views.  Garcin  de  Tassy  calls  it  a “ funeste  doctrine,” 
assuming  that  it  implies  the  indifference  of  good  and 
evil,  and  the  negation  of  all  morality.  But  as  regards 
Iiumi  and  the  better  Sufi  writers,  this  criticism  seems 
hardly  fair.  They  may  possibly  be  branded  as  incon- 
sequent logicians,  but  they  cannot  justly  be  condemned 
as  bad  moralists,  and  charged  with  holding  conclusions 
which  they  did  not  draw,  but  distinctly  repudiated.1  In 
one  respect,  however,  their  doctrine  of  the  ultimate 
absorption  of  man  into  God  does  offend  a very  wide- 
spread and  natural  human  sentiment,  namely,  the  in- 
stinctive hope  of  seeing  again  those  whom  we  have  loved 
in  this  life.  The  Muhammadan  paradise,  which  is,  in 
fact,  the  temporal  Messianic  kingdom  of  the  Jewish 
prophets  with  some  embellishments  probably  suggested 
by  the  Talmud,  and  the  Christian  paradise,  the  celestial 
choirs  shadowed  forth  in  the  Apocalypse,  both  afford 
scope  and  grounds  for  indulging  such  hopes.  But  the 
Sufi  future  state  of  absorption  in  God  seems  entirely  to 
exclude  them.  As  Tennyson  puts  it — 

“ That  each,  who  seems  a separate  whole, 

Should  move  his  rounds,  and  fusing  all 
The  skirts  of  self  again,  should  fall 
Remerging  in  the  general  Soul, 

Is  faith  as  vague  as  all  unsweet.” 

But  of  course  the  death  of  self  required  by  the  Sufi 
system  necessarily  involved  the  sacrifice  of  all  human 
affections.  Their  all-absorbing  love  of  God  left  no  room 
for  love  of  aught  else. 

According  to  the  Sufi  view,  some  foretaste  of  the  ulti- 
mate “ union  with  God  ” may  be  obtained  in  the  pre- 
sent life  in  those  states  of  spiritual  exaltation  known  as 
“ ecstasy.”  This  “ ecstasy  ” (Hal),  and  the  raptures  (Zauq 
and  Muwajid)  which  attended  it,  were  condemned  as  heresy 
(Bid’ at)?  but  continued  to  be  held  by  the  Sulis  notwith- 

1 The  Urshar’  Fnqirs,  like  the  Anabaptists  of  Munster,  were  the  mere 
froth  and  foam  of  mysticism. 

2 Haji  Khalfa,  ii.  471 ; Ibn  Khalliqan,  i.  365. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxvu 


standing.  The  poet  says  these  ecstatic  states  must  be 
experienced  to  be  understood.  The  accounts  given  of 
them  naturally  vary.  Some  describe  fand  as  a sort  of 
“ thinking  away  self.”  Thus  Lahijl  says  it  is  to  “ emerge 
from  the  limitations  of  self  which  veil  man’s  real  essence 
(God).”  1 Imam  Ghazali  describes  fand  as  a “ prayer  of 
rapture.”  “ In  that  state  man  is  effaced  from  self,  so 
that  he  is  conscious  neither  of  his  body  nor  of  outward 
things,  nor  of  inward  feelings.  He  is  1 rapt  ’ from  all 
these,  journeying  first  to  his  Lord,  and  then  in  his  Lord ; 
and  if  the  thought  that  he  is  effaced  from  self  occurs 
to  him,  that  is  a defect.  The  highest  state  is  to  be 
effaced  from  effacement.” ' Shabistari  describes  it  as 
an  approximation  to  the  Light  of  lights,  which  blinds 
the  mental  eye  with  excess  of  light.3  Ruml,  pursuing 
his  favourite  metaphor  of  human  love,  describes  the 
state  of  “fand  ” as  one  in  which  “ the  flame  of  ever- 
lasting love  doth  burn  ere  it  transforms,” 4 — utterly 
consuming  “ self  ” ere  it  quickens  the  lover  with  the 
embrace  of  “ union.” 

This  doctrine  of  ecstasy  is  the  really  mischievous  part 
of  the  poet’s  system.  Like  Ghazali,5  he  was  aware  of  its 
liability  to  abuse,6  and  for  ordinary  persons  he  prescribes 
a certain  safeguard  in  the  person  of  the  “ Spiritual 
Director”  (Pir).  When,  however,  he  has  to  deal  with 
what  Cardinal  Newman  calls  the  “ eccentricities  of  the 
saints,” — with  the  excesses  of  the  “ Pits  ” themselves, — 
his  theology  blinds  his  moral  judgment,  and  he  does 
not  dare  to  censure  even  such  outrageous  pretensions  as 
those  he  relates  of  the  saint  Bayazld.  He  goes  so  far  as 

1 Gulshan-i-Raz,  p.  8,  note.  Cp.  6 He  compares  ecstasy  to  posses- 
the  passage  from  Dionysius  the  sion  by  a spirit — possibly  an  evil 
Pseudo- Areopagite,  given  there  from  spirit.  So  Wesley  said  of  the  trans- 
Vaughan,  i.  288.  ports  of  religious  excitement  ex- 

- Tholuck,  “Ssufismus,”pp.4.  105.  perienced  by  his  energumens,  that 
See  Vaughan,  ii.  132,  on  Tauler.  “Satan  sometimes  mimicked  the 

3 Gulshan-i-Raz,  1.  120.  work  of  grace.”  Cp.  Virgil’s  de- 

4 See  “ The  Dream  of  Gerontius.”  scriptionof  the  ecstasy  of  the  Pythian 

5 Sale’s  Koran,  “ Prelim.  Disc.,”  priestess.  HSn.,  vi.  77. 
p.  126. 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

to  say  that  in  the  mouth  of  a saint  even  infidelity  and 
blasphemy  may  be  true  piety.  Such  are  the  pitfalls  that 
lie  in  the  road  of  all  who  regard  religion  as  something 
beyond  human  criticism,  and  ignore  Bishop  Butler’s  dictum, 
that  reason  cannot  abdicate  its  right  of  judging  obvious 
improprieties  in  religious  doctrines  and  persons. 

As  regards  love  to  man,  the  poet  enjoins  the  practice 
of  meekness,  patience,  humility,  kindness,  tolerance, — 
in  fact,  of  all  the  virtues  classed  by  St.  Paul  as 
“ charity  ” and  constituting  the  “ Christian  temper,” 
though,  by  the  way,  it  is  hardly  confined  to  Christians. 
But,  as  before  remarked,  his  love  to  man  does  not 
amount  to  universal  philanthropy  like  that  of  St. 
Francis.  With  him,  as  with  most  ascetics,  his  own 
individual  salvation  is  the  paramount  object,  and  love 
of  man  was  only  regarded  as  a means  to  attain  that 
paramount  object. 

Throughout  the  Masnavi  it  is  very  noticeable  how 
the  poet  never  throws  aside  the  authority  of  the 
Koran  and  the  Sunna,  but,  on  the  contrary,  presses 
it  into  his  service  on  every  possible  occasion.  This 
he  does  by  the  method  of  allegorical  interpretation 
which  has  been  always  followed  by  Christian  mystics. 
This  method  was  first  employed  by  the  Jew  Philo, 
who  by  its  aid  read  much  of  Greek  philosophy  into 
the  Old  Testament.  The  Christian  Platonist  Origen 
copied  his  example,  and  ascribed  three  senses  to  Scrip- 
ture. Mediaeval  mystical  writers  added  a fourth  sense, 
and  laid  down  the  rule — 

“ Littera  gesta  refert,  quod  credas  AllegorTa, 

Moralis  quod  agas,  quod  speres  Anagogia.-’’ 

Itumi  goes  still  further,  and  ascribes  no  less  than 
seven  senses  to  each  passage  of  the  Koran. 

Also  noteworthy  is  his  view  of  the  evolution  of  man 
out  of  inanimate  matter,  through  the  grades  of  the 
vegetative  and  animal  souls,  up  to  humanity,  and  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXIX 


presage  and  augury  thence  derived  that  this  ascending 
process  will  not  cease  at  death,  but  will  be  carried  on, 
and  the  “ great  aspiration  of  humanity  ” realised  in  a 
yet  higher  life  to  come.  His  doctriue  of  the  final  res- 
titution of  all  who  at  the  last  judgment  throw  them- 
selves unreservedly  on  the  mercy  of  the  Great  Judge, 
is  also  remarkable.  This,  as  well  as  his  doctrine  of 
“Reserve,”  he  probably  took  from  the  Christian  Platonists.1 

It  seems  from  the  story  of  the  “Twelve  Volumes  of 
Theology,”  that  Rumi  must  have  had  some  general  know- 
ledge of  the  Epistles.  Possibly  he  might  have  been 
attracted  by  St.  Paul  had  he  studied  him  with  an  open 
mind,  unbiassed  by  the  unfavourable  accounts  given  of 
him  in  Muhammadan  writers.2 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  Rumi  shows  all  an  en- 
thusiast's fear  and  contempt  of  “ carnal  reason.”  The 
emotions  chafe  against  the  control  of  reason  quite  as 
much  as  the  passions  do,  and  according  to  Plato,  “ there 
is  an  ancient  quarrel  between  poetry  and  philosophy. 

IV. 

LIFE  OF  THE  POET. 

The  poet  was  born  at  Balkh  in  604  A.H.  (1207  a.d.), 
of  a noble  family  claiming  descent  from  the  Khalifa  Abu 
Bakr,  and  related  to  the  reigning  Khwarazmiau  dynasty. 
His  father,  Bahau-’d-Dln,  had  to  quit  Balkh  about  1 2 1 1 
a.d.  in  consequence  of  having  given  offence  to  the  king 
by  a sermon  on  politics.  At  Xishapur  the  fugitives  met 
the  great  Sufi  saint  Farldu-’d-Dln  ’Attar,  who  presented 
the  child  Jalalu-’d-Dln  with  a copy  of  his  “ Asrdmama,” 
and  said  to  his  father,  “ The  day  will  come  when  this 
child  will  kindle  the  fire  of  divine  enthusiasm  throughout 
the  world.”3  When  they  reached  Bagdad  they  heard 

1 Bigg.  “Christian  Platonists,”  ising  Christian  authority,  makes  St. 

pp.  143,  292.  Paul  the  first  heresiarch. 

2 Shahrastani  (Cureton’s  ed.,  p.  s Ouseley,  “Persian  Poets,”  p. 
173),  evidently  following  some  Juda-  1 13. 

d 


xl 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  news  of  the  destruction  of  Balkh  by  Chingiz  Khan. 
After  further  wanderings  the  family  finally  settled  at 
Qonla,  the  Iconium  of  St.  Paul,  in  the  old  Homan  pro- 
vince of  “ Galatia,” 1 and  hence  the  poet  acquired  his 
ethnic  name  of  RumI  or  the  “ Roman.”  Qonla  was  then 
the  capital  of  ’Alau-’d-Dln  Kaiqubad,  one  of  the  western 
branch  of  the  Saljuks,  who  bore  the  title  of  Sultan  of 
Rum.  Here  the  poet  passed  his  life,  engaged  in  teaching 
his  disciples,  the  order  of  Darveshes  called  “ Maulavis,”  2 
and  in  writing  the  Masnavi  and  many  odes  and  hymns 
for  their  spiritual  benefit.3  He  prescribed  the  use  of 
music  in  their  religious  services,  because  he  found  that 
the  sluggish  temperament  of  the  “ Romans  ” needed  this 
stimulus.4  He  also  authorised  the  use  of  religious  dances, 
which  had  been  practised  by  other  Sufi  sects  before  him.° 
The  anecdotes  translated  by  Mr.  Redhouse  show  that  he 
gave  way  at  times  to  excesses  of  wild  enthusiasm,  but 
the  “ eccentricities  of  the  saints  ” are  not  very  edifying 
reading.  They  only  serve  to  show  what  tricks  over- 
wrought religious  feeling  will  play  with  well-meaning 
men  when  uncontrolled  by  reason.  The  poet  was 
assisted  in  composing  the  Masnavi  by  Hasan  Hasamu-’d- 
Dln,  and  he  was  also  intimate  with  Burhanu-’d-Dln  of 
Tirmld,  and  with  Shamsu-’d-Dln  of  Tabriz,  whose  name  lie 
uses  as  his  poetic  title  ( taJchallus ).  He  died  at  Qonla  in 
672  a.h.  (1273  A.D.),  leaving  a son,  Bahau-’d-Din  Valad, 
who  succeeded  him  in  the  generalship  of  the  Maulavi 
order.  His  dying  instructions  were  in  these  words : — 

“ My  testament  is  this,  that  ye  be  pious  towards  God, 
in  private  and  in  public ; — that  ye  eat  little,  sleep  little, 
speak  little ; — that  ye  depart  from  wickedness  and  sin  ; 

1 See  Renan,  “ Saint  Paul,”  p.  48.  translated  by  Hammer,  “Redekunste 

2 These  are  commonly  known  Persiens,”  p.  172,  and  by  Rosenz- 

as  the  Dancing  Darveshes.  Their  weig  (Wien,  1838).  They  have  been 
Friday  services  at  Pera  are  open  to  published  at  Lucknow  with  the  title 
the  public.  It  is  a Maulavi  Darvcsh  “ Kulliyat-i  Shnms-i-Tabrizi." 
who  girds  the  Sultan  with  the  sword  4 Redhouse,  “ Mesnevi,”  p.  12. 

of  Othman  at  his  accession.  0 Notices  et  Extraits  des  MSS., 

3 Portions  of  these  have  been  iv.  701. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xli 


— that  ye  continue  instant  in  fasting  and  steadfast  in 
vigilance ; — that  ye  flee  from  carnal  lusts  with  all  your 
might ; — that  ye  endure  patiently  the  contumely  of  the 
world ; — that  ye  shun  the  company  of  the  base  and 
foolish,  and  consort  with  the  noble-hearted  and  the  pious. 
Verily  the  best  man  is  he  who  doeth  good  to  men,  and 
the  best  speech  is  that  which  is  short  and  guideth  men 
aright.  Praise  be  to  God  who  is  the  Only  God.”  1 

V. 

THE  TRANSLATION. 

The  Masnavi  contains  some  26,000  couplets,  and  a 
full  translation  of  the  whole  poem  would  be  found  in- 
tolerably tedious.  Up  to  the  present  time  the  most 
sustained  attempts  in  that  direction  have  been  those  of 
Professor  George  Rosen  (“  Mesnewi,”  Leipzig,  1849)  and 
of  Mr.  Redhouse  (“The  Mesnevi,”  London,  1881).  The 
poem,  consisting  as  it  does  of  stories  serving  as  pegs 
on  which  to  hang  spiritual  morals,  easily  lends  itself  to 
abridgment  in  its  purely  narrative  portions,  and  the 
plan  adopted  in  the  present  translation  has  been  to  give 
abridgments  of  the  principal  stories,  and  full  translations 
of  the  main  doctrinal  morals  deduced  from  them.  Thus 
Book  I.,  which,  in  Mr.  Redhouse’s  translation,  occupies 
290  pages,  has  been  compressed  so  as  to  occupy  only  60 
pages,  and  the  remaining  five  books  have  been  compressed 
in  like  proportions.  Of  course  this  plan  is  open  to  the 
objection  that  it  involves  the  omission  of  many  passages 
worth  full  translation ; but  that  cannot  be  helped. 

The  poem  is  written  in  a simple  and  unaffected  style,2 
and  is  not  disfigured  by  the  laboured  prettiness  and  fine 
writing  ( kalambazl ) which  are  found  in  JamI  and  later 
Persian  poets.  Nevertheless  it  is  not  always  easy  to 
follow  the  meaning.  When  the  poet  is  telling  his  stories 

1 Nafahatu’-l  Uns  (Lees’  ed.),  p.  possesses  for  the  Pahlavi  dialect  the 

534.  authority  of  the  Koran.  Bloch - 

2 According  to  JamI,  the  Masnavi  maun’s  Prosody,  p.  xv. 


aslii 


INTRODUCTION. 


lie  is  constantly  “going  off  upon  a word,” — drawing  a 
fresh  moral  from  every  incident  in  the  course  of  the 
story.  “ II  moralise  tout”  some  French  critic  says  of 
him,  and  this  unfortunate  habit  of  his  is  certainly  some- 
what of  a trial  to  his  readers. 

The  pages  given  at  the  head  of  each  section  are  those 
of  the  Lucknow  edition  of  1282  A.H.,  as  that  is  one  of 
the  editions  commonly  used  in  India ; but  the  transla- 
tion has  been  made  from  the  Bulaq  edition  of  1268  a.h., 
which  gives  correcter  readings,  and  omits  the  interpola- 
tions often  occurring  in  the  Lucknow  edition,  and  likewise 
in  the  Tabriz  edition  of  1264  a.h. 

I have  made  use  of  the  Persian  commentary  of  ’Abdu- 
l-’Ali  Muhammad,  published  at  Lucknow  in  1293  a.h. 
I have  also  occasionally  referred  (so  far  as  my  very 
limited  knowledge  of  Turkish  allowed  me)  to  the  great 
Turkish  commentary  written  by  Ismail  Anquravl,  which 
was  printed  at  Stambfil  in  1872.  Ismail  was  the  old 
Maulavi  Darvesh,  familiarly  known  as  “ Fir  Dadd,”  who, 
according  to  Haji  Khalfa,  invented  the  seventh  book  of 
the  poem  (p.  329  infra).  As  he  was  a Fir,  or  spiritual 
director  of  the  Maulavi  order,  his  interpretations  may  be 
presumed  to  be  those  generally  accepted  by  the  brethren. 

I have  also  to  acknowledge  my  obligations  to  Mr. 
Eedhouse’s  “ Mesnevi,”  (which  contains  Bk.  I.),  and  to 
Dr.  Tholuck’s  “ Ssufismus,”  and  “ Bllithensammlung  aus 
den  Morgenliindischen  Mystik.”  Tholuck  was  an  indif- 
ferent Persian  scholar,  and  many  of  his  translations  are 
wrong,  but  he  grasped  the  meaning  of  Sufism  and  its 
affinity  to  European  mysticism  much  more  thoroughly 
than  many  who  were  far  superior  to  him  in  mere  verbal 
scholarship.  The  value  of  his  work  was  fully  recog- 
nised by  Dr.  Pusey,  a very  competent  judge,  in  his 
“ Preface  to  Nicoll’s  Catalogue  of  Arabic  MSS.”  in  the 
Bodleian  Library. 


THE  MASNAVI. 


Book  i. 

PROLOGUE. 

Hearken  to  the  reed-flute,  how  it  discourses 
When  complaining  of  the  pains  of  separation — 

“ Ever  since  they  tore  me  from  my  osier  bed, 

My  plaintive  notes  have  moved  men  and  women  to  tears. 

I burst  my  breast,  striving  to  give  vent  to  sighs, 

And  to  express  the  pangs  of  my  yearning  for  my  home. 
He  who  abides  far  away  from  his  home 
Is  ever  longing  for  the  day  he  shall  return. 

My  wailing  is  heard  in  every  throng, 

In  concert  with  them  that  rejoice  and  them  that  weep. 
Each  interprets  my  notes  in  harmony  with  his  own  feelings, 
But  not  one  fathoms  the  secrets  of  my  heart. 

My  secrets  are  not  alien  from  my  plaintive  notes, 

Yet  they  are  not  manifest  to  the  sensual  ear. 

Body  is  not  veiled  from  soul,  neither  soul  from  body, 

Yet  no  man  hath  ever  seen  a soul.” 

This  plaint  of  the  flute  is  fire,  not  mere  air. 

Let  him  who  lacks  this  fire  be  accounted  dead ! 

Tis  the  fire  of  love  that  inspires  the  flute,1 
’Tis  the  ferment  of  love  that  possesses  the  wine. 

The  flute  is  the  confidant  of  all  unhappy  lovers ; 

1 Love  signifies  the  strong  attraction  that  draws  all  creatures  back  to 
reunion  with  their  Creator. 

A 


2 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Yea,  its  strains  lay  bare  my  inmost  secrets. 

Who  hath  seen  a poison  and  an  antidote  like  the  flute  ? 
Who  hath  seen  a sympathetic  consoler  like  the  flute  ? 

The  flute  tells  the  tale  of  love’s  bloodstained  path, 

It  recounts  the  story  of  Maj  nun’s  love  toils. 

None  is  privy  to  these  feelings  save  one  distracted, 

As  ear  inclines  to  the  whispers  of  the  tongue. 

Through  grief  my  days  are  as  labour  and  sorrow, 

My  days  move  on,  hand  in  hand  with  anguish. 

Yet,  though  my  days  vanish  thus,  ’tis  no  matter, 

Do  thou  abide,  0 Incomparable  Pure  One  ! 1 

But  all  who  are  not  fishes  are  soon  tired  of  water ; 

And  they  who  lack  daily  bread  find  the  day  very  long  ; 

So  the  “ Raw”  comprehend  not  the  state  of  the  “ Ripe  ; ” 2 
Therefore  it  behoves  me  to  shorten  my  discourse. 

Arise,  0 son  ! burst  thy  bonds  and  be  free  ! 

How  long  wilt  thou  be  captive  to  silver  and  gold  ? 

Though  thou  pour  the  ocean  into  thy  pitcher, 

It  can  hold  no  more  than  one  day’s  store. 

The  pitcher  of  the  desire  of  the  covetous  never  fills, 

The  oyster-shell  fills  not  with  pearls  till  it  is  content ; 
Only  he  whose  garment  is  rent  by  the  violence  of  love 
Is  wholly  pure  from  covetousness  and  sin. 

Hail  to  thee,  then,  0 LOVE,  sweet  madness! 

Thou  who  healest  all  our  infirmities ! 

Who  art  the  physician  of  our  pride  and  self-conceit ! 

Who  art  our  Plato  and  our  Galen  ! 

Love  exalts  our  earthly  bodies  to  heaven, 

And  makes  the  very  bills  to  dance  with  joy ! 

0 lover,  ’twas  love  that  gave  life  to  Mount  Sinai, 

When  “it  quaked,  and  Moses  fell  down  in  a swoon.”3 
Did  my  Beloved  only  touch  me  with  his  lips, 

1 too,  like  the  flute,  would  burst  out  in  melody. 


1 Self-annihilation  leads  to  eter- 

nal life  in  God — the  universal  Nou- 

menon,  by  whom  all  phenomena 
subsist.  See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1. 
400. 


3 “ Raw  ” and  “ Ripe  ” are  terms 
for  “ Men  of  Externals  ” and  “ Men 
of  heart  ” or  Mystics. 

3 Alluding  to  the  giving  of  the  law 
on  Mount  Sinai.  Koran  vii.  1 39. 


BOOK  I.] 


PROLOGUE. 


3 


But  he  who  is  parted  from  them  that  speak  his  tongue, 
Though  he  possess  a hundred  voices,  is  perforce  dumb. 
When  the  rose  has  faded  and  the  garden  is  withered, 

The  song  of  the  nightingale  is  no  longer  to  be  heard. 

The  Beloved  is  all  in  all,  the  lover  only  veils  Him  ; 1 
The  Beloved  is  all  that  lives,  the  lover  a dead  thing. 
When  the  lover  feels  no  longer  Love’s  quickening, 

He  becomes  like  a bird  who  has  lost  its  wings.  Alas ! 
How  can  I retain  my  senses  about  me, 

When  the  Beloved  shows  not  the  light  of  His  countenance? 

Love  desires  that  this  secret  should  be  revealed, 

For  if  a mirror  reflects  not,  of  what  use  is  it  ? 

Knowest  thou  why  thy  mirror  reflects  not  ? 

Because  the  rust  has  not  been  scoured  from  its  face. 

If  it  were  purified  from  all  rust  and  defilement, 

It  would  reflect  the  shining  of  the  SUN  of  God.2 

0 friends,  ye  have  now  heard  this  tale, 

Which  sets  forth  the  very  essence  of  my  case. 


1 All  phenomenal  existences  (man 
included)  are  but  “veils”  obscur- 
ing the  face  of  the  Divine  Noume- 

non,  the  only  real  existence,  and 
the  moment  His  sustaining  presence 


is  withdrawn  they  at  once  relapse 
into  their  original  nothingness.  See 
Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  165. 

2 So  Bernard  of  Clairvaux.  See 
Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  435. 


( 4 ) 


Story  I.  The  Prince  and  the  Handmaid  (p.  5). 

A prince,  while  engaged  on  a hunting  excursion, 
espied  a fair  maiden,  and  by  promises  of  gold  induced 
her  to  accompany  him.  After  a time  she  fell  sick,  and 
the  prince  had  her  tended  by  divers  physicians.  As, 
however,  they  all  omitted  to  say,  “ God  willing,1  we  will 
cure  her,”  their  treatment  was  of  no  avail.  So  the  prince 
offered  prayer,  and  in  answer  thereto  a physician  was 
sent  from  heaven.  He  at  once  condemned  his  pre- 
decessors’ view  of  the  case,  and  by  a very  skilful 
diagnosis,  discovered  that  the  real  cause  of  the  maiden’s 
illness  was  her  love  for  a certain  goldsmith  of  Samarcand. 
In  accordance  with  the  physician’s  advice,  the  prince  sent 
to  Samarcand  and  fetched  the  goldsmith,  and  married 
him  to  the  lovesick  maiden,  and  for  six  months  the  pair 
lived  together  in  the  utmost  harmony  and  happiness. 
At  the  end  of  that  period  the  physician,  by  divine 
command,  gave  the  goldsmith  a poisonous  draught,  which 
caused  his  strength  and  beauty  to  decay,  and  he  then  lost 
favour  with  the  maiden,  and  she  was  reunited  to  the 
king.  This  divine  command  was  precisely  similar  to 
God’s  command  to  Abraham  to  slay  his  son  Ishmael,  .and 
to  the  act  of  the  angel  in  slaying  the  servant  of  Moses.2 
and  is  therefore  beyond  human  criticism. 

1 As  enjoined  in  Koran  xviii.  23.  Ta'alla,"  or  D.  V.  Cp.  St.  Janies 
One  cannot  converse  with  a strict  iv.  15. 

Musulman  for  five  minutes  without  2 Koran  xviii.  73. 
hearing  the  formula,  “ In  sha  Allah 


STORY  i.]  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  HANDMAID. 


Description  of  Love  (p.  7). 

A true  lover  is  proved  such  by  his  pain  of  heart ; 

No  sickness  is  there  like  sickness  of  heart. 

The  lover’s  ailment  is  different  from  all  ailments ; 

Love  is  the  astrolabe  of  God’s  mysteries. 

A lover  may  hanker  after  this  love  or  that  love, 

But  at  the  last  he  is  drawn  to  the  King  of  love. 
However  much  we  describe  and  explain  love, 

When  we  fall  in  love  we  are  ashamed  of  our  words. 
Explanation  by  the  tongue  makes  most  things  clear, 
But  love  unexplained  is  clearer. 

When  pen  hasted  to  write, 

On  reaching  the  subject  of  love  it  split  in  twain. 

When  the  discourse  touched  on  the  matter  of  love, 

Pen  was  broken  and  paper  torn. 

In  explaining  it  Reason  sticks  fast,  as  an  ass  in  mire  ; 
Naught  but  Love  itself  can  explain  love  and  lovers ! 
None  but  the  sun  can  display  the  sun, 

If  you  would  see  it  displayed,  turn  not  away  from  it. 
Shadows,  indeed,  may  indicate  the  sun’s  presence, 

But  only  the  sun  displays  the  light  of  life. 

Shadows  induce  slumber,  like  evening  talks, 

But  when  the  sun  arises  the  “ moon  is  split  asunder.'' 1 
In  the  world  there  is  naught  so  wondrous  as  the  sun, 
But  the  Sun  of  the  soul  sets  not  and  has  no  yesterday. 
Though  the  material  sun  is  unique  and  single, 

We  can  conceive  similar  suns  like  to  it. 

But  the  Sun  of  the  soul,  beyond  this  firmament. — 

No  like  thereof  is  seen  in  concrete  or  abstract.2 
Where  is  there  room  in  conception  for  His  essence, 

So  that  similitudes  of  Him  should  be  conceivable  ? 

1 Koran  liv.  I. 

2 There  is  a tradition,  “ I know  my  Lord  by  my  Lord.” 


6 


THE  MASNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Shamsu-d-Din  importunes  Jalalu-’d-Din 
to  compose  the  Masnavi  (p.  7). 

The  sun  (Shams)  of  Tabriz  is  a perfect  light, 

A sun,  yea,  one  of  the  beams  of  God ! 

When  the  praise  was  heard  of  the  “ Sun  of  Tabriz,” 

The  sun  of  the  fourth  heaven  bowed  its  head. 

Now  that  I have  mentioned  his  name,  it  is  but  right 
To  set  forth  some  indications  of  his  beneficence. 

That  precious  Soul  caught  my  skirt, 

Smelling  the  perfume  of  the  garment  of  Yusuf; 

And  said,  “ For  the  sake  of  our  ancient  friendship, 

Tell  forth  a hint  of  those  sweet  states  of  ecstasy, 

That  earth  and  heaven  may  be  rejoiced, 

And  also  Reason  and  Spirit,  a hundredfold.” 

I said,  “ 0 thou  who  art  far  from  ‘ The  Friend,’ 

Like  a sick  man  who  has  strayed  from  his  physician, 
Importune  me  not,  for  I am  beside  myself ; 

My  understanding  is  gone,  I cannot  sing  praises. 
Whatsoever  one  says,  whose  reason  is  thus  astray, 

Let  him  not  boast ; his  efforts  are  useless. 

Whatever  he  says  is  not  to  the  point, 

And  is  clearly  inapt  and  wide  of  the  mark. 

What  can  I say  when  not  a nerve  of  mine  is  sensible  ? 
Can  I explain  ‘The  Friend’  to  one  to  whom  He  is  no 
Friend  ? 

Verily  my  singing  His  praise  were  dispraise, 

For  ’twould  prove  me  existent,  and  existence  is  error.1 
Can  I describe  my  separation  and  my  bleeding  heart  ? 
Nay,  put  off  this  matter  till  another  season.” 

He  said,  “Feed  me,  for  I am  an  hungred, 

And  at  once,  for  ‘ the  time  is  a sharp  sword.’ 

0 comrade,  the  Sufi  is  ‘the  son  of  time  present.’ - 

1 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  400.  In  2 The  Sufi  is  the  “son  of  the  time 

the  state  of  union  self  remains  not.  present,”  because  he  is  an  Energu* 


7 


STORY  it.]  THE  OILMAN  AND  HIS  PARROT. 

It  is  not  the  rule  of  his  canon  to  say,  ‘To-morrow.’ 

Can  it  be  that  thou  art  not  a true  Sufi  ? 

Heady  money  is  lost  by  giving  credit.” 

I said,  “ ’Tis  best  to  veil  the  secrets  of  ‘ The  Friend.’ 

So  give  good  heed  to  the  morals  of  these  stories. 

That  is  better  than  that  the  secrets  of  ‘ The  Friend  ’ 
Should  be  noised  abroad  in  the  talk  of  strangers.” 

He  said,  “Without  veil  or  covering  or  deception. 

Speak  out,  and  vex  me  not,  0 man  of  many  words ! 

Strip  off  the  veil  and  speak  out,  for  do  not  I 
Enter  under  the  same  coverlet  as  the  Beloved  ? ” 

I said,  “If  the  Beloved  were  exposed  to  outward 
view, 

Neither  wouldst  thou  endure,  nor  embrace,  nor  form. 
Press  thy  suit,  yet  with  moderation ; 

A blade  of  grass  cannot  pierce  a mountain. 

If  the  sun  that  illumines  the  world 

Were  to  draw  nigher,  the  world  would  be  consumed.1 

Close  thy  mouth  and  shut  the  eyes  of  this  matter, 

That  the  world’s  life  be  not  made  a bleeding  heart. 

No  longer  seek  this  peril,  this  bloodshed  ; 

Hereafter  impose  silence  on  the  ‘ Sun  of  Tabriz.’  ” 

He  said,  “ Thy  words  are  endless.  Now  tell  forth 
All  thy  story  from  its  beginning.” 


Story  II.  The  Oilman  and  his  Parrot  (p.  io). 


An  oilman  possessed  a parrot  which  used  to  amuse 
him  with  its  agreeable  prattle,  and  to  watch  his  shop 
when  he  went  out.  One  day,  when  the  parrot  was  alone 
in  the  shop,  a cat  upset  one  of  the  oil-jars.  When  the 


men,  or  passive  instrument  moved 
by  the  divine  impulse  of  the 
moment.  “The  time  present  is  a 
sharp  sword,”  because  the  divine 
impulse  of  the  moment  dominates 
the  Energumen,  and  executes  its 
decrees  sharply.  See  Sohravardi 


quoted  in  Notices  ct  Extraits  des 
MSS. , xii.  371  note. 

1 “ When  its  Lord  appears  in  glory 
to  the  Mount  of  existence, 
Existence  is  laid  low,  like  the 
dust  of  the  road.” 

— Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  195. 


8 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


oilman  returned  home  he  thought  that  the  parrot  had 
done  this  mischief,  and  in  his  anger  he  smote  the  parrot 
such  a blow  on  the  head  as  made  all  its  feathers  drop 
off,  and  so  stunned  it  that  it  lost  the  power  of  speech  for 
several  days.  But  one  day  the  parrot  saw  a bald-headed 
man  passing  the  shop,  and  recovering  its  speech,  it  cried 
out,  “Pray,  whose  oil-jar  did  you  upset?”  The  passers- 
by  smiled  at  the  parrot’s  mistake  in  confounding  baldness 
caused  by  age  with  the  loss  of  its  own  feathers  due  to  a 
blow. 


Confusion  of  saints  with  hypocrites  (p.  1 2). 

Worldly  senses  are  the  ladder  of  earth, 

Spiritual  senses  are  the  ladder  of  heaven. 

The  health  of  the  former  is  sought  of  the  leech, 

The  health  of  the  latter  from  “ The  Friend.” 

The  health  of  the  former  arises  from  tending  the  body, 
That  of  the  latter  fi’om  mortifying  the  flesh. 

The  kingly  soul  lays  waste  the  body, 

And  after  its  destruction  he  builds  it  anew. 

Happy  the  soul  who  for  love  of  God 
Has  lavished  family,  wealth,  and  goods  ! — 

Has  destroyed  its  house  to  find  the  hidden  treasure, 

And  with  that  treasure  has  rebuilt  it  in  fairer  sort ; 

Has  dammed  up  the  stream  and  cleansed  the  channel, 
And  then  turned  a fresh  stream  into  the  channel ; — 

Has  cut  its  flesh  to  extract  a spear-head,1 

Causing  a fresh  skin  to  grow  again  over  the  wound ; — 

Has  razed  the  fort  to  oust  the  infidel  in  possession, 

And  then  rebuilt  it  with  a hundred  towers  and  bulwarks. 

Who  can  describe  the  unique  work  of  Grace  ? 

I have  been  forced  to  illustrate  it  by  these  similes. 
Sometimes  it  presents  one  appearance,  sometimes  another. 
Yea,  the  affair  of  religion  is  only  bewilderment. 

Not  such  as  occurs  when  one  turns  one’s  back  on  God, 

1 These  are  all  figures  and  types  of  self-annihilation  in  order  to  tho 
acquisition  of  eternal  life  in  God. 


STORY  III.]  THE  JEWISH  KING.  9 

But  such  as  when  one  is  drowned  and  absorbed  in  Him. 
The  latter  has  his  face  ever  turned  to  God, 

The  former’s  face  shows  his  undisciplined  self-will. 

Watch  the  face  of  each  one,  regard  it  well, 

It  may  be  by  serving  thou  wilt  recognise  Truth’s  face. 

As  there  are  many  demons  with  men’s  faces, 

It  is  wrong  to  join  hand  with  every  one. 

When  the  fowler  sounds  his  decoy  whistle, 

That  the  birds  may  be  beguiled  by  that  snare, 

The  birds  hear  that  call  simulating  a bird’s  call, 

And,  descending  from  the  air,  find  net  and  knife. 

So  vile  hypocrites  steal  the  language  of  Darveshes, 

In  order  to  beguile  the  simple  with  their  trickery. 

The  works  of  the  righteous  are  light  and  heat, 

The  works  of  the  evil  treachery  and  shamelessness. 

They  make  stuffed  lions  to  scare  the  simple, 

They  give  the  title  of  Muhammad  to  false  Musailima. 

But  Musailima  retained  the  name  of  “Liar,” 

And  Muhammad  that  of  “ Sublimest  of  beings.” 

That  wine  of  God  (the  righteous)  yields  a perfume  of 
musk  ; 

Other  wine  (the  evil)  is  reserved  for  penalties  and  pains. 


Story  III.  The  Jewish  King,  his  Vazir,  and  the 
Christians  (pp.  12-22). 

A certain  Jewish  king  used  to  persecute  the  Christians, 
desiring  to  exterminate  their  faith.  His  Vazir  per- 
suaded him  to  try  a stratagem,  namely,  to  mutilate  the 
Vazir  himself,  and  expel  him  from  his  court,  with  the 
intent  that  he  might  take  refuge  with  the  Christians, 
and  stir  up  mutual  dissensions  amongst  them.  The 
Vazir’s  suggestion  was  adopted.1  He  fled  to  the  Chris- 
tians, and  found  no  difficulty  in  persuading  them  that 
he  had  been  treated  in  that  barbarous  way  on  account  of 
his  attachment  to  the  Christian  faith.  He  soon  gained 

1 Compare  the  story  of  Zopyrus,  Herodotus,  iii.  155. 


IO 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


complete  influence  over  them,  and  was  accepted  as  a 
saintly  martyr  and  a divine  teacher.  Only  a few  dis- 
cerning men  divined  his  treachery;  the  majority  were 
all  deluded  by  him.  The  Christians  were  divided  into 
twelve  legions,  and  at  the  head  of  each  was  a captain. 
To  each  of  these  captains  the  Yazir  gave  secretly  a 
volume  of  religious  directions,  taking  care  to  make  the 
directions  in  each  volume  different  from  and  contradictory 
to  those  in  the  others.  One  volume  enjoined  fasting, 
another  charity,  another  faith,  another  works,  and  so  on. 
Afterwards  the  Yazir  withdrew  into  a cave,  and  refused 
to  come  out  to  instruct  his  disciples,  in  spite  of  all  their 
entreaties.  Calling  the  captains  to  him,  he  gave  secret 
instructions  to  each  to  set  himself  up  as  his  successor, 
and  to  be  guided  by  the  instructions  in  the  volume 
secretly  confided  to  him,  and  to  slay  all  other  claimants 
of  the  apostolic  office.  Having  given  these  directions,  he 
slew  himself.  In  the  event  each  captain  set  himself  up 
as  the  Vazir’s  successor,  and  the  Christians  were  split  up 
into  many  sects  at  enmity  with  one  another,  even  as  the 
Vazir  had  intended.  But  the  malicious  scheme  did  not 
altogether  succeed,  as  one  faithful  band  cleaved  to  the 
name  of  “ Ahmad,”  mentioned  in  the  Gospel,1  and  were 
thus  saved  from  sharing  the  ruin  of  the  rest. 


The  Vazir  s Teaching  (p.  13). 

Myriads  of  Christians  flocked  round  him, 

One  after  another  they  assembled  in  his  street. 

Then  he  would  preach  to  them  of  mysteries, — 

Mysteries  of  the  Gospel,  of  stoles,  of  prayers. 

He  would  preach  to  them  with  eloquent  words 
Concerning  the  words  and  acts  of  the  Messiah. 

Outwardly  he  was  a preacher  of  religious  duties, 

But  within  a decoy  call  and  a fowler’s  snare. 

1 John  xiv.  26:  “But  the  Comforter  ( parahietos ) shall  teach  you  all 
things.”  Musulmans  read  periklytos  “ praised”  = Muhammad. 


STORY  III.] 


THE  JEWISH  KING. 


1 1 


Therefore  the  followers  of  the  Prophet  (’Isa) 

Were  beguiled  by  the  fraud  of  that  demon  soul. 

He  mingled  in  his  discourses  many  secret  doctrines 
Concerning  devotion  and  sincerity  of  soul. 

He  taught  them  to  make  a fair  show  of  devotion, 

But  to  say  of  secret  sins,  “What  do  they  matter?  ’ 

Hair  by  hair  and  jot  by  jot  they  learned  of  him 
Fraud  of  soul,  as  roses  might  learn  of  garlic. 
Hair-splitters  and  all  their  disciples 
Are  darkened  by  similar  preaching  and  discourse. 

The  Christians  gave  their  hearts  to  him  entirely, 

For  the  blind  faith  of  the  vulgar  has  no  discernment. 

In  their  inmost  breasts  they  planted  love  of  him. 

And  fancied  him  to  be  the  Vicar  of  Christ ; — 

Yea,  him,  that  one-eyed  and  cursed  Dajjal ! 1 
Save  us,  0 God ! who  art  our  only  defender  ! 

0 God,  there  are  hundreds  of  snares  and  baits, 

And  we  are  even  as  greedy  and  foolish  birds ; 

Every  moment  our  feet  are  caught  in  a fresh  snare ; 
Yea,  each  one  of  us.  though  he  be  a falcon  or  Simurgh  ! 
Thou  dost  release  us  every  moment,  and  straightway 
We  again  fly  into  the  snare,  0 Almighty  One  ! 


Sleep  of  the  body  the  soul’s  awaking  (p.  14). 

Every  night  Thou  freest  our  spirits  from  the  body 
And  its  snare,  making  them  pure  as  rased  tablets. 

Every  night  spirits  are  released  from  this  cage, 

And  set  free,  neither  lording  it  nor  lorded  over. 

At  night  prisoners  are  unaware  of  their  prison, 

At  night  kings  are  unaware  of  their  majesty. 

Then  there  is  no  thought  or  care  for  loss  or  gain, 

Xo  regard  to  such  an  one  or  such  an  one. 

The  state  of  the  “knower”  is  such  as  this,  even  when 
awake. 

1 Dajjal,  i.e.,  Antichrist.  Sale,  Prelim.  Discourse,  p.  57. 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


12 


[book  I. 


God  says,1  “ Thou  wouldst  deem  him  awake  though 
asleep, 

Sleeping  to  the  affairs  of  the  world,  day  and  night, 

Like  a pen  in  the  directing  hand  of  the  writer. 

He  who  sees  not  the  hand  which  effects  the  writing 
Fancies  the  effect  proceeds  from  the  motion  of  the  pen. 

If  the  “ knower  ” revealed  the  particulars  of  this  state, 
’Twould  rob  the  vulgar  of  their  sensual  sleep. 

His  soul  wanders  in  the  desert  that  has  no  similitude  ; 
Like  his  body,  his  spirit  is  enjoying  perfect  rest ; — 

Freed  from  desire  of  eating  and  drinking, 

Like  a bird  escaped  from  cage  and  snare. 

But  when  he  is  again  beguiled  into  the  snare, 

He  cries  for  help  to  the  Almighty. 


Laila  and  the  Khalifa  (p.  14). 

The  Khalifa  said  to  Laila,  “ Art  thou  really  she 
For  whom  Majnun  lost  his  head  and  went  distracted  ? 
Thou  art  not  fairer  than  many  other  fair  ones.” 

She  replied,  “ Be  silent ; thou  art  not  Majnun  ! ” 

If  thou  hadst  Maj  nun’s  eyes, 

The  two  worlds  would  be  within  thy  view. 

Thou  art  in  thy  senses,  but  Majnun  is  beside  himself. 

In  love  to  be  wide  awake  is  treason. 

The  more  a man  is  awake,  the  more  he  sleeps  (to  love)  ; 
His  (critical)  wakefulness  is  worse  than  slumbering. 

Our  wakefulness  fetters  our  spirits, 

Then  our  souls  are  a prey  to  divers  whims, 

Thoughts  of  loss  and  gain  and  fears  of  misery. 

They  retain  not  purity,  nor  dignity,  nor  lustre, 

Nor  aspiration  to  soar  heavenwards. 

That  one  is  really  sleeping  who  hankers  after  each 
whim 

And  holds  parley  with  each  fancy. 

1 Said  of  the  Seven  Sleepers  in  the  cave.  Koran  xviii.  17.  “Knower” 
= the  Gnostic  who  through  ecstasy  beholds  divine  verities. 


STORY  III.] 


THE  JEWISH  KING. 


>3 


The  twelve  volumes  of  theology  (p.  16). 

He  drew  up  a separate  scroll  to  the  address  of  each. 

The  contents  of  each  scroll  of  a different  tenor ; 

The  rules  of  each  of  a different  purport, 

This  contradictory  of  that,  from  beginning  to  end. 

In  one  the  road  of  fasting  and  asceticism 

Was  made  the  pillar  and  condition  of  right  devotion. 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Abstinence  profits  not ; 

Sincerity  in  this  path  is  naught  but  charity.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  ‘"Thy  fasting  and  thy  charity 
Are  both  a making  thyself  ecjual  with  God ; 

Save  faith  and  utter  resignation  to  God’s  will 
In  weal  and  woe,  all  virtues  are  fraud  and  snares.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “Works  are  the  one  thing  needful ; 

The  doctrine  of  faith  without  works  is  a delusion.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Commands  and  prohibitions  are 
Not  for  observance,  but  to  demonstrate  our  weakness, 
That  we  may  see  our  own  weakness  (to  carry  them  out), 
And  thereby  recognise  and  confess  God’s  power.”  1 
In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Reference  to  thine  own  weakness 
Is  ingratitude  for  God’s  mercies  towards  us. 

Rather  regard  thy  power,  for  thou  hast  power  from  God, 
Know  thy  power  to  be  God’s  grace,  for  ’tis  of  Him.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Leave  power  and  weakness  alone ; 
Whatever  withdraws  thine  eyes  from  God  is  an  idol.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Quench  not  thy  earthy  torch,2 
That  it  may  be  a light  to  lighten  mankind. 

If  thou  neglectest  regard  and  care  for  it, 

Thou  wilt  quench  at  midnight  the  lamp  of  union.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “Quench  that  torch  without  fear, 

That  in  lieu  of  one  thou  may’st  see  a thousand  joys, 

For  by  quenching  the  light  the  soul  is  rejoiced, 

And  thy  Laila  is  then  as  bold  as  her  Majnun. 

1 This  was  the  doctrine  of  the  2 i.e.,  Hide  not  thy  light  (of 
Jabriyan  or  extreme  predestina-  good  works  or  of  self-denial)  under 
rians.  a bushel. 


14  THE  MASNAVI.  [book 

Whoso  to  display  his  devotion  renounces  the  world, 

The  world  is  ever  with  him,  before  and  behind.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Whatsoever  God  has  given  thee 
In  His  creation,  that  He  has  made  sweet  to  thee  ; 

Yea,  pleasant  to  thee  and  allowable.  Take  it,  then, 

And  cast  not  thyself  into  the  pangs  of  abstinence.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Give  up  all  thou  possessest, 

For  to  be  ruled  by  covetousness  is  grievous  sin.” 

(Ah  ! how  many  diverse  roads  are  pointed  out, 

And  each  followed  by  some  sect  for  dear  life  ! 

If  the  right  road  were  easily  attainable, 

Every  Jew  and  Gueber  would  have  hit  on  it!) 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ The  right  road  is  attainable, 

For  the  heart’s  life  is  the  food  of  the  soul. 

Whatever  is  enjoyed  by  the  carnal  man 
Yields  no  fruit,  even  as  salt  and  waste  land. 

Its  result  is  naught  but  remorse, 

Its  traffic  yields  only  loss. 

It  is  not  profitable  in  the  long  run  ; 

Its  name  is  called  ‘ bankrupt  ’ in  the  upshot. 

Discern,  then,  the  bankrupt  from  the  profitable, 
Consider  the  eventual  value  of  this  and  that.” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ Choose  ye  a wise  Director, 

But  foresight  of  results  is  not  found  in  dignities.” 
(Each  sect  looked  to  results  in  a different  way, 

And  so,  perforce,  became  captive  to  errors. 

Real  foresight  of  results  is  not  simple  j ugglery, 
Otherwise  all  these  differences  would  not  have  arisen.) 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “Thyself  art  thy  master, 

Inasmuch  as  thou  art  acquainted  with  the  Master  of  all 
Be  a man,  and  not  another  man’s  beast  of  burden  ! 
Follow  thine  own  way  and  lose  not  thy  head ! ” 

In  one  ’twas  said,  “ All  we  see  is  One. 

Whoever  says  ’tis  two  is  suffering  from  double  vision.” 
In  one  ’twas  said,  “A  hundred  are  even  as  one.”1 
But  whoso  thinks  this  is  a madman. 

1 Alluding  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity. 


STORY  IV.] 


ANOTHER  JEWISH  KING. 


'5 


Each  scroll  had  its  contrary  piece  of  rhetoric, 

In  form  and  substance  utterly  opposed  to  it ; 

This  contrary  to  that,  from  first  to  last, 

As  if  each  was  compounded  of  poison  and  antidotes. 


Story  IV.  Another  Tyrannical  Jewish , King  (p.  22). 

A certain  Jewish  king,  the  same  who  is  referred  to  in 
the  Sura  “ Signs  of  the  Zodiac,”1  made  up  his  mind  to 
utterly  exterminate  the  Christian  faith,  and  with  that 
view  he  set  up  a huge  idol,  and  issued  commands  that 
all  who  refused  to  worship  it  should  be  cast  into  the  fire. 
Thereupon  his  officers  seized  a Christian  woman  with  her 
babe,  and  as  she  refused  to  worship  it,  they  cast  the 
babe  into  the  fire.  But  the  babe  cried  out  to  its  mother, 
“ Be  not  afraid,  the  fire  has  no  power  to  burn  me ; it 
is  as  cool  as  water ! ” Hearing  this,  the  rest  of  the 
Christians  leapt  into  the  fire,  and  found  that  it  did  not 
burn  them.  The  king  reproached  the  fire  for  failing  to 
do  its  office,  but  the  fire  replied  that  it  was  God’s  servant, 
and  that  its  consuming  properties  were  not  to  be  used 
for  evil  purposes.  It  then  blazed  up  and  consumed  the 
king,  and  all  his  Jews  with  him. 


Second  causes  only  operate  in  subordination  to,  and  Jrom 
the  impulsion  of,  the  First  Cause  (p.  25). 

Air,  earth,  water,  and  fire  are  God’s  servants. 

To  us  they  seem  lifeless,  but  to  God  living. 

In  God’s  presence  fire  ever  waits  to  do  its  service, 

Like  a submissive  lover  with  no  will  of  its  own. 

AVhen  you  strike  steel  on  flint  fire  leaps  forth ; 

But  ’tis  by  God’s  command  it  thus  steps  forth. 

Strike  not  together  the  flint  and  steel  of  wrong, 

For  the  pair  will  generate  more,  like  man  and  woman. 

1 Koran  lxxxv. 


i6 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  i. 


The  flint  and  steel  are  themselves  causes,  yet 
Look  higher  for  the  First  Cause,  0 righteous  man  ! 

For  that  Cause  precedes  this  second  cause. 

How  can  a cause  exist  of  itself  without  precedent  cause  ? 
That  Cause  makes  this  cause  operative, 

And  again  helpless  and  inoperative. 

That  Cause,  which  is  a guiding  light  to  the  prophets, 
That,  I say,  is  higher  than  these  second  causes. 

Men’s  minds  recognise  these  second  causes, 

But  only  prophets  perceive  the  action  of  the  First 
Cause. 


Praise  compared  to  vapour  drawn  upwards,  and  then 
descending  in  rain  (p.  25). 

Though  water  be  enclosed  in  a reservoir, 

Yet  air  will  absorb  it,  for  ’tis  its  supporter ; 

It  sets  it  free  and  bears  it  to  its  source, 

Little  by  little,  so  that  you  see  not  the  process. 

In  like  manner  this  breath  of  ours  by  degrees 
Steals  away  our  souls  from  the  prison-house  of  earth. 

“ The  good  word  riseth  up  to  Him,’’ 1 
Rising  from  us  whither  He  knoweth. 

Our  breathings  are  lifted  up  in  fear  of  God, 

Offerings  from  us  to  the  throne  of  Eternity. 

Then  come  down  to  us  rewards  for  our  praises, 

The  double  thereof,  yea,  mei’cies  from  the  King  of  Glory. 
Therefore  are  we  constrained  to  utter  these  praises, 

That  slaves  may  attain  the  height  of  God’s  gifts. 

And  so  this  rising  and  descent  go  on  evermore, 

And  cease  not  for  ever  and  aye. 

To  speak  in  plain  Persian,  this  attraction 
Comes  from  the  same  quarter  whence  comes  this  sweet 
savour.2 

1 Koran  xxxv.  II.  prayer  when  his  prayer  is  accepted 

2 Sweet  savour,  i.e.,  the  joy  of  of  God.  See  Book  II.  Story  XVII. 
heart  experienced  by  the  offerer  of 


STORY  v.]  THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS. 


17 


Story  V.  The  Lion  and  the  Beasts  (p.  26). 

In  the  book  of  Kalila  and  Damna  a story  is  told  of 
a lion  who  held  all  the  beasts  of  the  neighbourhood  in 
subjection,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  making  constant 
raids  upon  them,  to  take  and  kill  such  of  them  as  he 
required  for  his  daily  food.  At  last  the  beasts  took 
counsel  together,  and  agreed  to  deliver  up  one  of  their 
company  every  day,  to  satisfy  the  lion’s  hunger,  if  he,  on 
his  part,  would  cease  to  annoy  them  by  his  continual 
forays.  The  lion  was  at  first  unwilling  to  trust  to  their 
promise,  remarking  that  he  always  preferred  to  rely  on 
his  own  exertions ; but  the  beasts  succeeded  in  persuading 
him  that  he  would  do  well  to  trust  Providence  and  their 
word.  To  illustrate  the  thesis  that  human  exertions  are 
vain,  they  related  a story  of  a man  who  got  Solomon  to 
transport  him  to  Hindustan  to  escape  the  angel  of  death, 
but  was  smitten  by  the  angel  the  moment  he  got  there. 
Having  carried  their  point,  the  beasts  continued  for  some 
time  to  perform  their  engagement.  One  day  it  came  to 
the  turn  of  the  hare  to  be  delivered  up  as  a victim  to 
the  lion ; but  he  requested  the  others  to  let  him  practise 
a stratagem.  They  scoffed  at  him,  asking  how  such  a 
silly  beast  as  he  could  pretend  to  outwit  the  lion.  The 
hare  assured  them  that  wisdom  was  of  God,  and  God 
might  choose  weak  things  to  confound  the  strong.  At 
last  they  consented  to  let  him  try  his  luck.  He  took 
his  way  slowly  to  the  lion,  and  found  him  sorely  enraged. 
In  excuse  for  his  tardy  arrival  he  represented  that  he 
and  another  hare  had  set  out  together  to  appear  before 
the  lion,  but  a strange  lion  had  seized  the  second  hare, 
and  carried  it  off  in  spite  of  his  remonstrances.  On 
hearing  this  the  lion  was  exceeding  wroth,  and  com- 
manded the  hare  to  show  him  the  foe  who  had  trespassed 
on  his  preserves.  Pretending  to  be  afraid,  the  hare  got 
the  lion  to  take  him  upon  his  back,  and  directed  him 
to  a well.  On  looking  down  the  well,  the  lion  saw  in 

B 


i8 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


the  water  the  reflection  of  himself  and  of  the  hare  on  his 
back ; and  thinking  that  he  saw  his  foe  with  the  stolen 
hare,  he  plunged  in  to  attack  him,  and  was  drowned, 
while  the  hare  sprang  off  his  back  and  escaped.  This 
folly  on  the  part  of  the  lion  was  predestined  to  punish 
him  for  denying  God’s  ruling  providence.  So  Adam, 
though  he  knew  the  names  of  all  things,  in  accordance 
with  God’s  predestination,  neglected  to  obey  a single 
prohibition,  and  his  disobedience  cost  him  dearly. 


Trust  in  God,  as  opposed  toJmman  exertions  (p.  26). 

The  beasts  said,  “0  enlightened  sage, 

Lay  aside  caution  ; it  cannot  help  thee  against  destiny  ; 
To  worry  with  precaution  is  toil  and  moil ; 

Go,  trust  in  Providence,  trust  is  the  better  part. 

War  not  with  the  divine  decree,  0 hot-headed  one, 

Lest  that  decree  enter  into  conflict  with  thee. 

Man  should  be  as  dead  before  the  commands  of  God, 

Lest  a blow  befall  him  from  the  Lord  of  all  creatures.” 

He  said,  “ True  ; but  though  trust  be  our  mainstay, 

Yet  the  prophet  teaches  us  to  have  regard  to  means. 

The  Prophet  cried  with  a loud  voice, 

‘ Trust  in  God,  yet  tie  the  camel’s  leg.’ 1 

Hear  the  adage,  ‘ The  worker  is  the  friend  of  God  ; ’ 2 

Through  trust  in  Providence  neglect  not  to  use  means. 

Go,  0 Fatalists,  practise  trust  with  self-exertion, 

Exert  yourself  to  attain  your  objects,  bit  by  bit. 

In  order  to  succeed,  strive  and  exert  yourselves ; 

If  you  strive  not  for  your  objects,  ye  are  fools.” 

They  said,  “ What  is  gained  from  the  poor  by  exertions 
Is  a fraudulent  morsel  that  will  bring  ill  luck. 

Again,  know  that  self-exertion  springs  from  weakness  ; 
Relying  on  other  means  is  a blot  upon  perfect  trust. 
Self-exertion  is  not  more  noble  than  trust  in  God. 

1 “ Trust  in  God  and  keep  your  powder  dry.” 

2 “ Laborare  est  orare.” 


'9 


STORY  v.]  THE  LI  OS  AND  THE  BEASTS. 

What  is  more  lovely  than  committing  oneself  to  God  ? 
Many  there  are  who  flee  from  one  danger  to  a worse  ; 
Many  flee  from  a snake  and  meet  a dragon. 

Man  plans  a stratagem,  and  thereby  snares  himself ; 

What  he  takes  for  life  turns  out  to  be  destruction. 

He  shuts  the  door  after  his  foe  is  in  the  house. 

After  this  sort  were  the  schemes  of  Pharaoh. 

That  jealous  king  slew  a myriad  babes, 

While  Moses,  whom  he  sought,  was  in  his  house. 

Our  eyes  are  subject  to  many  infirmities ; 

Go!  annihilate  your  sight  in  God’s  sight. 

For  our  foresight  His  foresight  is  a fair  exchange  ; 

In  His  sight  is  all  that  ye  can  desire. 

So  long  as  a babe  cannot  grasp  or  run, 

It  takes  its  father’s  back  for  its  carriage. 

But  when  it  becomes  independent  and  uses  its  hands, 

It  falls  into  grievous  troubles  and  disgrace. 

The  souls  of  our  first  parents,  even  before  their  hands, 
Flew  away  from  fidelity  after  vain  pleasure. 

Being  made  captives  by  the  command,  ‘ Get  down  hence.' 1 
They  became  bond-slaves  of  enmity,  lust,  and  vanity. 

We  are  the  family  of  the  Lord  aud  His  sucking  babes. 
The  Prophet  said.  ‘The  people  are  God’s  family  ; ’ 

He  who  sends  forth  the  rain  from  heaven, 

Can  He  not  also  provide  us  our  daily  bread  ? ” 

The  lion  said,  “ True ; yet  the  Lord  of  creatures 
Sets  a ladder  before  our  feet. 

Step  by  step  must  we  mount  up  to  the  roof ! 

The  notion  of  fatalism  is  groundless  in  this  place. 

Ye  have  feet — why  then  pretend  ye  are  lame? 

Ye  have  hands — why  then  conceal  your  claw's  ? 

When  a master  places  a spade  in  the  hand  of  a slave, 

The  slave  knows  his  meaning  without  being  told. 

Like  this  spade,  our  hands  are  our  Master’s  hints  to  us ; 
Yea,  if  ye  consider,  they  are  His  directions  to  us. 

When  ye  have  taken  to  heart  His  hints, 

1 Koran  ii.  341. 


20 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  i 


Ye  will  shape  your  life  in  reliance  on  their  direction  ; 
Wherefore  these  hints  disclose  His  intent, 

Take  the  burden  from  you,  and  appoint  your  work. 

He  that  bears  it  makes  it  bearable  by  you, 

He  that  is  able  makes  it  within  your  ability. 

Accept  His  command,  and  you  will  be  able  to  execute  it ; 
Seek  union  with  Him,  and  you  will  find  yourselves  united 
Exertion  is  giving  thanks  for  God’s  blessings  ; 

Think  ye  that  your  fatalism  gives  such  thanks  ? 

Giving  thanks  for  blessings  increases  blessings, 

But  fatalism  snatches  those  blessings  from  your  hands. 
Your  fatalism  is  to  sleep  on  the  road ; sleep  not 
Till  ye  behold  the  gates  of  the  King’s  palace. 

Ah  ! sleep  not,  0 unreflecting  fatalists, 

Till  ye  have  reached  that  fruit-laden  Tree  of  Life 
Whose  branches  are  ever  shaken  by  the  wind, 

And  whose  fruit  is  showered  on  the  sleepers’  heads. 
Fatalism  means  sleeping  amidst  highwaymen. 

Can  a cock  who  crows  too  soon  expect  peace  ? 

If  ye  cavil  at  and  accept  not  God’s  hints, 

Though  ye  count  yourselves  men,  see,  ye  are  women. 

The  quantum  of  reason  ye  possessed  is  lost, 

And  the  head  whose  reason  has  fled  is  a tail. 

Inasmuch  as  the  unthankful  are  despicable, 

They  are  at  last  cast  into  the  fiery  pit. 

If  ye  really  have  trust  in  God,  exert  yourselves, 

And  strive,  in  constant  reliance  on  the  Almighty.” 


Wisdom  is  granted  oftentimes  to  the  weak  (p.  29). 

He  said,  “ 0 friends,  God  has  given  me  inspiration. 
Oftentimes  strong  counsel  is  suggested  to  the  weak. 
The  wit  taught  by  God  to  the  bee 
Is  withheld  from  the  lion  and  the  wild  ass. 

It  fills  its  cells  with  liquid  sweets, 

For  God  opens  the  door  of  this  knowledge  to  it. 

The  skill  taught  by  God  to  the  silkworm 


21 


story  v.]  THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS. 

Is  a learning  beyond  the  reach  of  the  elephant. 

The  earthly  Adam  was  taught  of  God  names,1 
So  that  his  glory  reached  the  seventh  heaven. 

He  laid  low  the  name  and  fame  of  the  angels,2 
Yet  blind  indeed  are  they  whom  God  dooms  to  doubt ! 
The  devotee  of  seven  hundred  thousand  years  (Satan) 

Was  made  a muzzle  for  that  yearling  calf  (Adam),3 
Lest  he  should  suck  milk  of  the  knowledge  of  faith, 

And  soar  on  high  even  to  the  towers  of  heaven. 

The  knowledge  of  men  of  external  sense  is  a muzzle 
To  stop  them  sucking  milk  of  that  sublime  knowledge. 
But  God  drops  into  the  heart  a single  pearl-drop 
Which  is  not  bestowed  on  oceans  or  skies  ! ” 

“ How  long  regard  ye  mere  form,  0 form-worshippers  ? 
Your  souls,  void  of  substance,  rest  still  in  forms. 

If  the  form  of  man  were  all  that  made  man, 

Ahmad  and  Abu  Jahl  would  be  upon  a par. 

A painting  on  a wall  resembles  a man, 

But  see  what  is  lacking  in  that  empty  form. 

'Tis  life  that  is  lacking  to  that  mere  semblance  of  man. 

Go ! seek  for  that  pearl  it  never  will  find. 

The  heads  of  earth’s  lions  were  bowed  down 
When  God  gave  might  to  the  Seven  Sleepers’  dog.4 
What  mattered  its  despised  form 
When  its  soul  was  drowned  in  the  sea  of  light  ? ” 

Human  wisdom  the  manifestation  of  divine  (p.  3 1 ). 

On  his  way  to  the  lion  the  hare  lingered, 

Devising  a stratagem  with  himself. 

He  proceeded  on  his  way  after  delaying  long, 

In  order  to  have  a secret  or  two  for  the  lion. 

What  worlds  the  principle  of  Reason  embraces ! 

How  broad  is  this  ocean  of  Reason ! 

1 “And  He  taught  Adam  the  knowledge  but  what  thou  hast  given 
names  of  all  things”  (Koran  ii.  us  to  know”  (Koran  ii.  30). 

29).  3 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  543. 

2 The  angels  said,  “We  have  no  4 Koran  xviii.  17. 


22 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  i. 


Yea,  the  Reason  of  man  is  a boundless  ocean. 

0 son,  that  ocean  requires,  as  it  were,  a diver.1 

On  this  fair  ocean  our  human  forms 

Float  about,  like  bowls  on  the  surface  of  water ; 

Yea,  like  cups  on  the  surface,  till  they  are  filled ; 

And  when  filled,  these  cups  sink  into  the  water. 

The  ocean  of  Reason  is  not  seen ; reasoning  men  are 
seen ; 

But  our  forms  (minds)  are  only  as  waves  or  spray 
thereof. 

Whatever  form  that  ocean  uses  as  its  instrument, 
Therewith  it  casts  its  spray  far  and  wide.2 

Till  the  heart  sees  the  Giver  of  the  secret, 

Till  it  espies  that  Bowman  shooting  from  afar, 

It  fancies  its  own  steed  lost,  while  in  bewilderment 
It  is  urging  that  steed  hither  and  thither ; 3 
It  fancies  its  own  steed  lost,  when  all  the  while 
That  swift  steed  is  bearing  it  on  like  the  wind. 

In  deep  distress  that  blunderhead 

Runs  from  door  to  door,  searching  and  inquiring, 

“Who  and  where  is  he  that  hath  stolen  my  steed?" 

They  say,  “ What  is  this  thou  ridest  on,  O master  ? ” 

He  says,  “ True,  ’tis  a steed  ; but  where  is  mine  ? ” 

They  say,  “ Look  to  thyself,  0 rider ; thy  steed  is  there.'’ 
The  real  Soul  is  lost  to  view,  and  seems  far  off  ;4 
Thou  art  like  a pitcher  with  full  belly  but  dry  lip ; 

How  canst  thou  ever  see  red,  green,  and  scarlet 
Unless  thou  see’st  the  light  first  of  all? 

When  thy  sight  is  dazzled  by  colours, 


1 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  575 : 
The  ocean  of  Reason  is  the  same  as 
what  is  elsewhere  called  the  ocean 
of  Being,  viz.,  the  Noutnenon,  or 
Divine  substratum  of  all  pheno- 
menal being  and  thought. 

2 “ Those  arrows  were  God’s,  not 
yours”  (Koran  viii.  17);  i.e.,  Man’s 
reason  proceeds  from  God,  the 

“Only  Real  Agent.” 

:t  Alluding  to  the  “Believer’s 


lost  camel  ” (Book  II.  Story  XII., 
infra).  Men  seek  wisdom,  and  do 
not  know  that  in  themselves  is  the 
reflected  wisdom  of  God  (Gulshan 
i.  Raz,  1.  435). 

4 The  real  Soul,  i.e.,  the  spirit 
which  God  “breathed  into  man” 
(Koran  xv.  29).  “ In  yourselves 

are  signs ; will  ye  not  behold 
them  ?”  (Koran  li.  21). 


STORY  v.]  THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS. 


23 


These  colours  veil  the  light  from  thee. 

But  when  night  veils  those  colours  from  thee, 

Thou  seest  that  colours  are  seen  only  through  light. 

As  there  is  no  seeing  outward  colours  without  light, 

So  it  is  with  the  mental  colours  within. 

Outward  colours  arise  from  the  light  of  sun  and  stars, 
And  inward  colours  from  the  Light  on  high. 

The  light  that  lights  the  eye  is  also  the  heart’s  Light ; 
The  eye’s  light  proceeds  from  the  Light  of  the  heart. 
But  the  light  that  lights  the  heart  is  the  Light  of  God, 
Which  is  distinct  from  the  light  of  reason  and  sense. 

At  night  there  is  no  light,  and  colours  are  not  seen ; 
Hence  we  know  what  light  is  by  its  opposite,  darkness. 
At  night  no  colours  are  visible,  for  light  is  lacking. 

How  can  colour  be  the  attribute  of  dark  blackness  ? 
Looking  on  light  is  the  same  as  looking  on  colours ; 
Opposite  shows  up  opposite,  as  a Frank  a Negro. 

The  opposite  of  light  shows  what  is  light, 

Hence  colours  too  are  known  by  their  opposite. 

God  created  pain  and  grief  for  this  purpose, 

To  wit,  to  manifest  happiness  by  its  opposites.1 
Hidden  things  are  manifested  by  their  opposites ; 

But,  as  God  has  no  opposite,  He  remains  hidden. 

God’s  light  has  no  opposite  in  the  range  of  creation 
Whereby  it  may  be  manifested  to  view. 

Perforce  “ Our  eyes  see  not  Him,  though  He  sees  us.”  2 
Behold  this  in  the  case  of  Moses  and  Mount  Sinai.3 

Discern  form  from  substance,  as  lion  from  desert, 

Or  as  sound  and  speech  from  the  thought  they  convey. 
The  sound  and  speech  arise  from  the  thought ; 

Thou  knowest  not  where  is  the  Ocean  of  thought ; 

Yet  when  thou  seest  fair  waves  of  speech, 


1  See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  92. 

Mr.  Mansel  (Bampton  Lectures,  p. 

49)  says  : “A  thing  can  be  known 
as  that  which  it  is  only  by  being 
distinguished  from  that  which  it  is 
not.”  But  the  Infinite  Deity  ex 


hypothesi  includes  all  things  ; so 
there  is  nothing  to  contrast  Him 
with. 

2 Koran  vi.  103. 

3 Koran  vii.  1 39:  “He  said, 

‘ Thou  shalt  not  see  me.’  ” 


24 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  i. 


Thou  knowest  there  is  a glorious  Ocean  beneath  them. 
When  waves  of  thought  arise  from  the  Ocean  of  Wisdom, 
They  assume  the  forms  of  sound  and  speech. 

These  forms  of  speech  are  born  and  die  again, 

These  waves  cast  themselves  back  into  the  Ocean. 

Form  is  born  of  That  which  is  without  form, 

And  goes  again,  for,  “Verily  to  Him  do  we  return.”  1 
Wherefore  to  thee  every  moment  come  death  and  “ return.” 
Mustafa  saith,  “The  world  endureth  only  a moment.” 

So,  thought  is  an  arrow  shot  by  God  into  the  air. 

How  can  it  stay  in  the  air  ? It  returns  to  God. 

Every  moment  the  world  and  we  are  renewed,2 
Yet  we  are  ignorant  of  this  renewing  for  ever  and  aye. 
Life,  like  a stream  of  water,  is  renewed  and  renewed, 
Though  it  wears  the  appearance  of  continuity  in  form. 
That  seeming  continuity  arises  from  its  swift  renewal, 

As  when  a single  spark  of  fire  is  whirled  round  swiftly.3 
If  a single  spark  be  whirled  round  swiftly, 

It  seems  to  the  eye  a continuous  line  of  fire. 

This  apparent  extension,  owing  to  the  quick  motion, 
Demonstrates  the  rapidity  with  which  it  is  moved. 

If  ye  seek  the  deepest  student  of  this  mystery, 

Lo ! ’tis  Husamu-’d-Din,  the  most  exalted  of  creatures  ! 


Story  VI.  ’ Omar  and  the  Ambassador  (p.  38). 

The  hare,  having  delivered  his  companions  from  the 
tyranny  of  the  lion,  in  the  manner  just  described, 
proceeds  to  improve  the  occasion  by  exhorting  them  to 
engage  in  a greater  and  more  arduous  warfare,  viz.,  the 
struggle  against  their  inward  enemy,  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh.  He  illustrates  his  meaning  by  the  story  of  an 
ambassador  who  was  sent  by  the  Emperor  of  Rum 
to  the  Khalifa  ’Omar.  On  approaching  Medina  this 

1 Koran  ii.  151.  newed  by  fresh  effluxes  of  being  from 

2 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  645  : All  the  Divine  Noumenon. 

phenomena  are  every  moment  re-  3 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  710. 


STORY  vi.]  ’OMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR. 


25 


ambassador  inquired  for  'Omar’s  palace,  and  learned  that 
’Omar  dwelt  in  no  material  palace,  but  in  a spiritual 
tabernacle,  only  visible  to  purified  hearts.  At  last  he 
discerned  ’Omar  lying  under  a palm-tree,  and  drew  near 
to  him  in  fear  and  awe.  'Omar  received  him  kindly,  and 
instructed  him  in  the  doctrine  of  the  mystical  union 
with  God.  The  ambassador  heard  him  gladly,  and  asked 
him  two  questions,  first,  How  can  souls  descend  from 
heaven  to  earth  ? and  secondly,  With  what  object  are 
souls  imprisoned  in  the  bonds  of  flesh  and  blood  ? 'Omar 
responded,  and  the  ambassador  accepted  his  teaching,  and 
became  a pure-hearted  Sufi.  The  hare  urged  his  com- 
panions to  abjure  lust  and  pride,  and  to  go  and  do 
likewise. 

God’s  agency  reconciled  with  man  s f reewill  (p.  39). 

The  ambassador  said,  “0  Commander  of  the  faithful, 
How  comes  the  soul  down  from  above  to  earth  ? 

How  can  so  noble  a bird  be  confined  in  a cage  ? ” 

He  said,  “ God  speaks  words  of  power  to  souls, — 

To  things  of  naught,  without  eyes  or  ears, 

And  at  these  words  they  all  spring  into  motion  ; 

At  His  words  of  power  these  nothings  arise  quickly, 

And  strong  impulse  urges  them  into  existence. 

Again,  He  speaks  other  spells  to  these  creatures, 

And  swiftly  drives  them  back  again  into  not-being. 

He  speaks  to  the  rose’s  ear,  and  causes  it  to  bloom ; 

He  speaks  to  the  tulip,  and  makes  it  blossom. 

He  speaks  a spell  to  body,  and  it  becomes  soul ; 

He  speaks  to  the  sun,  and  it  becomes  a fount  of  light. 
Again,  in  its  ear  He  whispers  a word  of  power, 

And  its  face  is  darkened  as  by  a hundred  eclipses. 

What  is  it  that  God  says  to  the  ear  of  earth, 

That  it  attends  thereto  and  rests  steadfast  ? 

What  is  it  that  Speaker  says  to  the  cloud, 

That  it  pours  forth  rain-water  like  a water-skin  ? 


26 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  i. 


Whosoever  is  bewildered  by  wavering  will,1 2 
In  his  ear  hath  God  whispered  His  riddle, 

That  He  may  bind  him  on  the  horns  of  a dilemma  ; 

For  he  says,  ‘ Shall  I do  this  or  its  reverse  ? ’ 

Also  from  God  comes  the  preference  of  one  alternative ; 
’Tis  from  God’s  impulsion  that  man  chooses  one  of  the 
two. 

If  you  desire  sanity  in  this  embarrassment, 

Stuff  not  the  ear  of  your  mind  with  cotton. 

Take  the  cotton  of  evil  suggestions  from  the  mind’s  ear.- 
That  the  heavenly  voice  from  above  may  enter  it, 

That  you  may  understand  that  riddle  of  His, 

That  you  may  be  cognisant  of  that  open  secret. 

Then  the  mind’s  ear  becomes  the  sensorium  of  inspiration  ; 
For  what  is  this  Divine  voice  but  the  inward  voice  ? 3 
The  spirit’s  eye  and  ear  possess  this  sense, 

The  eye  and  ear  of  reason  and  sense  lack  it. 

The  word  ‘ compulsion  ’ makes  me  impatient  for  love’s 
sake ; 

’Tis  he  who  loves  not  who  is  fettered  by  compulsion. 

This  is  close  communion  with  God,  not  compulsion, 

The  shining  of  the  sun,  and  not  a dark  cloud. 

Or,  if  it  be  compulsion,  ’tis  not  common  compulsion, 

It  is  not  the  domination  of  wanton  wilfulness. 

O son,  they  understand  this  compulsion 

For  whom  God  opens  the  eyes  of  the  inner  man. 

Things  hidden  and  things  future  are  plain  to  them  ; 

To  speak  of  the  past  seems  to  them  despicable. 

They  possess  freewill  and  compulsion  besides,4 
As  in  oyster-shells  raindrops  become  pearls. 


1 The  poet’s  insistence  on  the 
doctrine  of  God  being  the  Fd’il  i 
llaqiqi,  or  Only  Real  Agent,  with- 
out whose  word  no  being  and  no 
action  can  be,  leads  him  to  the 
question  of  freewill  and  compulsion 
of  man's  will  (see  Gulshan  i Raz, 

1-  555)- 

2 So  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  442. 

3 The  leading  principle  of  all 


mysticism  is  that,  independently  of 
sense  and  reason,  man  possesses  an 
inward  sense,  or  intuition,  which 
conveys  to  him  a knowledge  of  God 
bv  direct  apprehension  (see  Gulshan 
i Raz,  1.  431). 

4  Their  wills  are  identified  with 
God’s  will,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
saint  Daquqi  (infra,  Book  III. 
Story  XII.) 


STORY  VI.]  ’OMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR. 


27 


Outside  the  shell  they  are  raindrops,  great  and  small ; 
Inside  they  are  precious  pearls,  big  and  little. 

These  men  also  resemble  the  musk  deer’s  bag ; 

Outside  it  is  blood,  but  inside  pure  musk  ; 

Yet,  say  not  that  outside  ’twas  mere  blood, 

Which  on  entering  the  bag  becomes  musk. 

Nor  say  that  outside  the  alembic  ’twas  mere  copper, 
And  becomes  gold  inside,  when  mixed  with  elixir. 

In  you  freewill  and  compulsion  are  vain  fancies, 

But  in  them  they  are  the  light  of  Almighty  power. 

On  the  table  bread  is  a mere  lifeless  thing, 

When  taken  into  the  body  it  is  a life-giving  spirit. 
This  trausmutation  occurs  not  in  the  table’s  heart, 

’Tis  soul  effects  this  transmutation  with  water  of  life. 
Such  is  the  power  of  the  soul,  0 man  of  right  views ! 
Then  what  is  the  power  of  the  Soul  of  souls  ? (God). 
Bread  is  the  food  of  the  body,  yet  consider, 

How  can  it  be  the  food  of  the  soul,  0 son  ? 

Flesh-born  man  by  force  of  soul 
Cleaves  mountains  with  tunnels  and  mines. 

The  might  of  Ferhad’s  soul  cleft  a hill; 

The  might  of  the  Soul’s  soul  cleaves  the  moon.1 
If  the  heart  opens  the  mouth  of  mystery’s  store, 

The  soul  springs  up  swiftly  to  highest  heaven. 

If  tongue  discourses  of  hidden  mysteries, 

It  kindles  a fire  that  consumes  the  world. 

Behold,  then,  God’s  action  and  man’s  action  ; 

Know,  action  does  belong  to  us  ; this  is  evident. 

If  no  actions  proceeded  from  men, 

How  could  you  say,  ‘ Why  act  ye  thus  ? ’ 

The  agency  of  God  is  the  cause  of  our  action, 

Our  actions  are  the  signs  of  God’s  agency ; 
Nevertheless  our  actions  are  freely  willed  by  us, 
Whence  our  recompense  is  either  hell  or  ‘ The  Friend.’ 

1 As  a sign  of  the  last  day  (Koran  liv.  1). 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Story  VII.  The  Merchant  and  his  Clever  Parrot  (p.  42). 

There  was  a certain  merchant  who  kept  a parrot  in  a 
cage.  Being  about  to  travel  to  Hindustan  on  business, 
he  asked  the  parrot  if  he  had  any  message  to  send  to  his 
kinsmen  in  that  country,  and  the  parrot  desired  him  to  tell 
them  that  he  was  kept  confined  in  a cage.  The  merchant 
promised  to  deliver  this  message,  and  on  reaching  Hindu- 
stan, duly  delivered  it  to  the  first  flock  of  parrots  he  saw. 
On  hearing  it  one  of  them  at  once  fell  down  dead.  The 
merchant  was  annoyed  with  his  own  parrot  for  having 
sent  such  a fatal  message,  and  on  his  return  home 
sharply  rebuked  his  parrot  for  doing  so.  Bnt  the  parrot 
no  sooner  heard  the  merchant’s  tale  than  he  too  fell 
down  dead  in  his  cage.  The  merchant,  after  lamenting 
his  death,  took  his  corpse  out  of  the  cage  and  threw 
it  away ; but,  to  his  surprise,  the  corpse  immediately 
recovered  life,  and  flew  away,  explaining  that  the  Hindu- 
stani parrot  had  only  feigned  death  to  suggest  this  way 
of  escaping  from  confinement  in  a cage. 

Saints  are  preserved  from  cdl  harm 1 (p.  43). 

As  to  a “ man  of  heart,”  he  takes  no  hurt, 

Even  though  he  should  eat  deadly  poison. 

He  who  gains  health  from  practising  abstinence  is  safe ; 
The  poor  disciple  is  safe  in  the  midst  of  fever. 

The  prophet  said,  “ 0 disciple,  though  you  be  bold, 

Yet  enter  not  into  conflict  with  every  foe.” 

Within  you  is  a Nimrod  ; enter  not  his  fire ; 

But  if  you  must  do  so,  first  become  an  Abraham.2 
If  you  are  neither  swimmer  nor  seaman, 

Cast  not  yourself  into  the  sea  out  of  self-conceit. 

1 This  is  a comment  on  the  saying  blood  ! but  if  a man  of  heart  eats 
of  Faridu-’d-Din  Attar,  “Thou  art  poison,  ’tis  as  honey.” 
a man  of  lusts,  O fool ! In  dust  eat  2 See  Koran  xxi.  68,  and  Rod- 

well’s  note. 


STORY  VII.]  THE  MERCHANT  AND  HIS  PARROT.  29 

A swimmer  brings  pearls  from  the  deep  sea ; 

Yea,  he  plucks  gain  from  the  midst  of  perils. 

If  the  saint  handles  earth,  it  becomes  gold  ; 

If  a sinner  handles  gold,  it  turns  to  dust. 

Whereas  the  saint  is  well-pleasing  to  God, 

In  his  actions  his  hand  is  the  hand  of  God. 

But  the  sinner’s  hand  is  the  hand  of  Satan  and  demons, 
Because  he  is  ensnared  in  falsity  and  fraud. 

If  folly  meets  him,  he  takes  it  for  wisdom  ; 

Yea,  the  learning  gained  by  the  wicked  is  folly. 

Whatever  a sick  man  eats  is  a source  of  sickness, 

But  if  a saint  imbibe  infidelity  it  becomes  faith. 

Ah  ! footman  who  contendest  with  horsemen, 

Thou  wilt  not  succeed  in  carrying  the  day ! 

The  jealousy  of  God1  (p.  46). 

The  w’hole  world  is  jealous  for  this  cause, 

That  God  surpasseth  the  world  in  jealousy. 

God  is  as  a soul  and  the  world  as  a body, 

And  bodies  derive  their  good  and  evil  from  souls. 

He  to  whom  the  sanctuary  of  true  prayer  is  revealed 
Deems  it  shameful  to  turn  back  to  mere  formal  religion. 
He  who  is  master  of  the  robes  of  a king 
Brings  shame  on  his  lord  by  petty  huckstering. 

He  who  is  admitted  to  the  king’s  presence-chamber 
Would  show  disrespect  by  tarrying  at  the  doorway. 

If  the  king  grants  him  license  to  kiss  his  hand, 

He  would  err  were  he  to  kiss  merely  the  king’s  foot. 
Though  to  lay  head  at  the  king’s  feet  is  due  obeisance, 

In  the  case  supposed  it  would  be  wrong  to  kiss  the  feet. 
The  king’s  jealousy  would  be  kindled  against  him 
Who,  after  he  had  seen  his  face,  preferred  his  mere  per- 
fume. 

1 This  is  a comment  on  the  Hadis,  jealousy  He  prohibits  ‘ All  pollutions 
“Verily  Sa’d  is  a jealous  man,  and  both  outward  and  inward.’ ” (Ko- 
I am  more  jealous  than  he,  and  God  ran  vi.  1 52.) 
is  more  jealous  than  I,  and  of  His 


God’s  jealousy  may  be  likened  to  a grain  of  wheat, 

But  man’s  jealousy  is  but  empty  chaff. 

For  know  ye  that  the  source  of  jealousy  is  in  God, 
And  man’s  jealousy  is  only  an  offshoot  from  God’s. 
But  let  me  now  quit  this  subject,  and  make  complaint 
Of  the  severity  of  That  Fickle  Fair  One. 


Complaints  of  God's  harsh  dealings  v:ith  His  adoring 
slaves  (p.  47). 

“ Wherefore  dost  thou  abandon  thy  creed  and  faith  ? 
What  matters  it  if  it  be  heathen  or  true  ? 

Why  hast  thou  forsaken  thy  Beloved  ? 

What  matters  it  if  she  be  fair  or  ugly  ? ” 1 

Let  me  then,  I say,  make  complaint 
Of  the  severity  of  That  Fickle  Fair  One. 

I cry,  and  my  cries  sound  sweet  in  His  ear ; 

He  requires  from  the  two  worlds  cries  and  groans. 

How  shall  I not  wail  under  His  chastening  hand  ? 

How  shall  I not  be  in  the  number  of  those  bewitched  by 
Him  ? 

How  shall  I be  other  than  night  without  His  day  ? 
Without  the  vision  of  His  face  that  illumes  the  day  ? 

His  bitters  are  very  sweets  to  my  soul, 

My  sad  heart  is  a lively  sacrifice  to  my  Beloved. 

1 am  enamoured  of  my  own  grief  and  pain, 

For  it  makes  me  well-pleasing  to  my  peerless  King. 

I use  the  dust  of  my  grief  as  salve  for  my  eyes, 

That  my  eyes,  like  seas,  may  teem  with  pearls. 

The  tears  which  are  shed  because  of  His  chastening 
Are  very  pearls,  though  men  deem  them  mere  tears. 

’Tis  “ The  Soul  of  souls,”  of  whom  I am  making  complaint ; 
Yet  I do  not  complain  ; — I merely  state  my  case. 

1 This  is  a quotation  from  Hakim  Sanai,  and  forms  the  text  of  the 
following  discourse. 


STORY  VII.]  THE  MERCHANT  AND  HIS  PARROT. 


My  heart  says,  “ He  has  injured  me,” 

But  I laugh  at  these  pretended  injuries. 

Do  me  justice,  0 Thou  who  art  the  glory  of  the  just, 
Who  art  the  throne,  and  I the  lintel  of  Thy  door! 

But,  in  sober  truth,  where  are  throne  and  doorway  ? 
Where  are  “We”  and  “I?”  There  where  our  Beloved 
is ! 

0 Thou,  who  art  exempt  from  “ Us”  and  “Me,” — 

Who  pervadest  the  spirits  of  all  men  and  women  ; 

When  man  and  woman  become  one.  Thou  art  that  One ! 
When  their  union  is  dissolved,  lo ! Thou  abidest ! 

Thou  hast  made  these  “ Us  ” and  “ Me  ” for  this  purpose, 
To  wit,  to  play  chess  with  them  by  Thyself.1 
When  Thou  shalt  become  one  entity  with  “ Us  ” and 
“ You,” 

Then  wilt  Thou  show  true  affection  for  these  lovers. 

When  these  “We  ” and  “ Ye  ” shall  all  become  one  Soul, 
Then  they  will  be  lost  and  absorbed  in  the  “ Beloved.” 
These  are  plain  truths.  Come  then,  0 Lord  ! 

WTho  art  exalted  above  description  and  explanation  ! 

Is  it  possible  for  the  bodily  eye  to  behold  Thee  ? 

Can  mind  of  man  conceive  Thy  frowns  and  Thy  smiles?2 
Are  hearts,  when  bewitched  by  Thy  smiles  and  frowns, 

In  a fit  state  to  see  the  vision  of  Thyself? 

When  our  hearts  are  bewitched  by  Thy  smiles  and  frowns, 
Can  wre  gain  life  from  these  two  alternating  states  ? 

The  fertile  garden  of  love,  as  it  is  boundless, 

Contains  other  fruits  besides  joy  and  sorrow. 

The  true  lover  is  exalted  above  these  two  states, 

He  is  fresh  and  green  independently  of  autumn  or  spring  ! 

Pay  tithe  on  Thy  beauty,  0 Beauteous  One  ! 

Tell  forth  the  tale  of  the  Beloved,  every  whit ! 


1 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  140,  and 
Omar  Khayyam  Quatr.,  270. 

2 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  745  : 
Frowns  are  the  occultation  of  the 
Beloved  by  the  veil  of  phenomena  ; 
smiles,  the  revelation  of  Absolute 
Being  to  its  votaries.  Sa’di  (Guli- 


stan,  Book  II.  Story  XI.)  says : 
“ The  vision  of  God  to  the  pious 
consists  of  manifestation  and  oc- 
cultation ; He  shows  Himself,  and 
again  withdraws  Himself  from  our 
sight  ” 


32 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


For  through  coquetry  His  glances 

Are  still  inflicting  fresh  wounds  on  my  heart. 

I gave  Him  leave  to  shed  my  blood,  if  He  willed  it ; 

I only  said,  “ Is  it  right  ? ” and  He  forsook  me. 

Why  dost  Thou  flee  from  the  cries  of  us  on  earth  ? 

Why  pourest  Thou  sorrow  on  the  heart  of  the  sorrowful  ? 
0 Thou  who,  as  each  new  morn  dawns  from  the  east, 

Art  seen  uprising  anew,  like  a bright  fountain ! 

What  excuse  makest  Thou  for  Thy  witcheries  ? 

0 Thou  whose  lips  are  sweeter  than  sugar, 

Thou  that  ever  renewest  the  life  of  this  old  world, 

Hear  the  cry  of  this  lifeless  body  and  heart ! 

But,  for  God’s  sake,  leave  off  telling  of  the  Rose ; 

Tell  of  the  Bulbul  who  is  severed  from  his  Rose. 

My  ardour  arises  not  from  joy  or  grief, 

My  sense  mates  not  with  illusion  and  fancy. 

My  condition  is  different,  for  it  is  strange. 

Deny  it  not ! God  is  all-powerful. 

Argue  not  from  the  condition  of  common  men, 

Stumble  not  at  severity  and  at  mercy. 

For  mercy  and  severity,  joy  and  sorrow,  are  transient, 
And  transient  things  die ; “ God  is  heir  of  all.” 1 
’Tis  dawn ! 0 Protector  and  Asylum  of  the  dawn  ! 

Make  excuse  for  me  to  my  lord  Husamu-’d-Din  ! 

Thou  makest  excuses  for  “ Universal  Reason  and  Soul ; ” 2 
Soul  of  souls  and  Gem  of  life  art  Thou ! 

The  light  of  my  dawn  is  a beam  from  Thy  light, 

Shining  in  the  morning  draught  of  Thy  protection  ! 

Since  Thy  gift  keeps  me,  as  it  were,  intoxicated, 

What  is  this  spiritual  wine  that  causes  me  this  joy  ? 
Natural  wine  lacks  the  ferment  in  my  breast, 

The  spheres  lag  behind  me  in  revolutions ! 

Wine  is  intoxicated  with  me,  not  I with  it ! 

1 Koran  xv.  23.  hath  created  you  from  one  Soul,  and 

2 i.e.,  the  Logos,  and  First  Soul,  of  him  created  his  wife”  (Koran 
supposed  to  be  referred  to  in  the  iv.  i).  See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  203. 
text : “ 0 men,  fear  your  Lord,  who 


THE  HARPER. 


33 


6T0RY  VIII.] 

The  world  takes  its  being  from  me,  not  I from  it ! 

I am  like  bees,  and  earthly  bodies  like  wax,1 
I build  up  these  bodies  as  with  my  own  wax  ! 

Stoky  VIII.  The  Harper  (p.  50). 

In  the  time  of  the  Khalifa  ’Omar  there  lived  a harper, 
whose  voice  was  as  sweet  as  that  of  the  angel  Israfil,  and 
who  was  in  great  request  at  all  feasts.  Hut  he  grew  old, 
and  his  voice  broke,  and  no  one  would  employ  him  any 
longer.  In  despair  he  went  to  the  burial-ground  of 
Yathrub,  and  there  played  his  harp  to  God,  looking  to 
Him  for  recompense.  Having  finished  his  melody  he  fell 
asleep,  and  dreamed  he  was  in  heaven.  The  same  night 
a divine  voice  came  to  ’Omar,  directing  him  to  go  to  the 
burial-ground,  and  relieve  an  old  man  whom  he  should 
find  there.  Omar  proceeded  to  the  place,  found  the 
harper,  and  gave  him  money,  promising  him  more  when 
he  should  need  it.  The  harper  cast  away  his  harp,  saying 
that  it  had  diverted  him  from  God,  and  expressed  great 
contrition  for  his  past  sins.  ’Omar  then  instructed  him 
that  his  worldly  journey  was  now  over,  and  that  he  must 
not  give  way  to  contrition  for  the  past,  as  he  was  now 
entered  into  the  state  of  ecstasy  and  intoxication  of  union 
with  God,  and  in  this  exalted  state  regard  to  past  and 
future  should  be  swept  away.  The  harper  acted  on  his 
instructions,  and  sang  no  more. 


Apology  for  applying  the  term  “ Bride  ” to  God  (p.  52). 

Mustafa  became  beside  himself  at  that  sweet  call, 

His  prayer  failed  on  “ the  night  of  the  early  morning  halt.” 
He  lifted  not  head  from  that  blissful  sleep,2 
So  that  his  morning  prayer  was  put  off  till  noon. 

1 I.e.,  in  his  spiritual  exaltation  2 The  night  of  his  marriage  with 
he  feels  himself  as  the  Logos,  where-  Safiyya. 
from  the  whole  material  creation 
emanates. 


C 


34 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


On  that,  his  wedding  night,  in  presence  of  his  bride, 

His  pure  soul  attained  to  kiss  her  hands. 

Love  and  mistress  are  both  veiled  and  hidden, 

Impute  it  not  as  a fault  if  I call  Him  “ Bride.” 

I would  have  kept  silence  from  fear  of  my  Beloved, 

If  He  had  granted  me  but  a moment’s  respite. 

But  He  said,  “ Speak  on,  ’tis  no  fault, 

Tis  naught  but  the  necessary  result  of  the  hidden  decree, 
’Tis  a fault  only  to  him  who  only  sees  faults. 

How  can  the  Pure  Hidden  Spirit  notice  faults?  ” 

Faults  seem  so  to  ignorant  creatures, 

Not  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  of  Benignity. 

Blasphemy  even  may  be  wisdom  in  the  Creator’s  sight, 
Whereas  from  our  point  of  view  it  is  grievous  sin. 

If  one  fault  occur  among  a hundred  beauties, 

’Tis  as  one  dry  stick  in  a garden  of  green  herbs. 

Both  weigh  equally  in  the  scales, 

For  the  two  resemble  body  and  soul. 

Wherefore  the  sages  have  said  not  idly, 

“ The  bodies  of  the  righteous  are  as  pure  souls.” 

Their  words,  their  actions,  their  praises, 

Are  all  as  a pure  soul  without  spot  or  blemish. 


’ Omar  rebukes  the  Harper  for  brooding  over  and  bewailing 
the  past  (p.  57). 

Then  ’Omar  said  to  him,  “ This  wailing  of  thine 
Shows  thou  art  still  in  a state  of  ‘ sobriety.’  ” 

Afterwards  he  thus  urged  him  to  quit  that  state, 

And  called  him  out  of  his  beggary  to  absorption  in  God  : 

“ Sobriety  savours  of  memory  of  the  past ; 

Past  and  future  are  what  veil  God  from  our  sight. 

Burn  up  both  of  them  with  fire  ! How  long 

Wilt  thou  be  partitioned  by  these  segments  as  a reed  ? 

So  long  as  a reed  has  partitions  ’tis  not  privy  to  secrets, 
Nor  is  it  vocal  in  response  to  lip  and  breathing. 

While  circumambulating  the  house  thou  art  a stranger ; 


35 


story  ix.]  THE  ARAB  AND  II  IS  WIFE. 

When  thou  enterest  iu  thou  art  at  home. 

Thou  whose  knowledge  is  ignorance  of  the  Giver  of  know- 
ledge, 

Thy  wailing  contrition  is  worse  than  thy  sin. 

The  road  of  the  * annihilated  ’ is  another  road  ; 

Sobriety  is  wrong,  and  a straying  from  that  other  road. 

0 thou  who  seekest  to  be  contrite  for  the  past, 

How  wilt  thou  be  contrite  for  this  contrition  ? 

At  one  time  thou  adorest  the  music  of  the  lute, 

At  another  embracest  wailing  and  weeping.” 

While  the  “ Discerner  ” reflected  these  mysteries, 

The  heart  of  the  harper  was  emancipated. 

Like  a soul  he  was  freed  from  weeping  and  rejoicing, 

His  old  life  died,  and  he  was  regenerated. 

Amazement  fell  upon  him  at  that  moment, 

For  he  was  exalted  above  earth  and  heaven, 

An  uplifting  of  the  heart  surpassing  all  uplifting  : — 

1 cannot  describe  it;  if  you  can,  say  on! 

Ecstasy  and  words  beyond  all  ecstatic  words ; — 
Immersion  in  the  glory  of  the  Lord  of  glory  ! 

Immersion  wherefrom  was  no  extrication, — 

As  it  were  identification  with  the  Very  Ocean  ! 

Partial  Reason  is  as  naught  to  Universal  Reason, 

If  one  impulse  dependent  on  another  impulse  be  naught; 
But  when  that  impulse  moves  this  impulse, 

The  waves  of  that  sea  rise  to  this  point.1 


Story  IX.  The  Aral  and  his  Wife  (p.  58). 

An  Arab  lived  with  his  wife  in  the  desert  in  extreme 
poverty,  so  that  they  became  a reproach  to  their  neigh- 
bours. The  wife  at  last  lost  patience,  and  began  to  abuse 
her  husband,  and  to  urge  him  to  improve  their  condition. 
The  Arab  rebuked  her  for  her  covetousness,  reminding  her 
that  the  Prophet  had  said,  “Poverty  is  my  glory,”  and 

1 I.e.,  he  is  possessed  by  the  Deity  as  an  “ Energumen,”  and  the  Deity 
works  these  ecstatic  states  in  him. 


36 


THE  MASH  AVI. 


[book  i. 


showing  her  how  poverty  was  a better  preparation  for 
death  than  riches,  and  finally  threatening  to  divorce  her 
if  she  persisted  in  her  querulous  ways.  The  wife,  how- 
ever, by  blandishments  reduced  her  husband  to  obedience, 
as  wives  always  do,  and  made  him  promise  to  carry  out  her 
wishes.  She  directed  him  to  go  and  represent  their  case 
to  the  Khalifa  at  Bagdad,  and  to  make  him  an  offering 
of  a pot  of  water,  that  being  the  only  present  they  could 
afford  to  make.  Accordingly  the  Arab  travelled  to  Bagdad, 
and  laid  his  offering  at  the  feet  of  the  Khalifa,  who  received 
it  graciously,  and  in  return  filled  the  pot  with  pieces  of 
gold,  and  then  sent  him  back  to  his  home  in  a boat  up 
the  river  Tigris.  The  Arab  was  lost  in  wonder  at  the 
benignity  of  the  Khalifa,  who  had  recompensed  him  so 
bountifully  for  his  petty  offering  of  a drop  of  water.  The 
story  contains  several  digressions,  on  Pharaoh,  on  the 
prophet  Salih,  and  on  Adam  and  the  angels,  and  the  poet, 
apropos  of  its  disconnectedness,  compares  it  to  eternity,  as 
it  has  no  beginning  and  no  end. 


Men  subdued  by  women's  wiles  (p.  62). 

In  this  manner  she  pleaded  with  gentle  coaxing, 

The  while  her  tears  fell  upon  her  cheeks. 

How  could  his  firmness  and  endurance  abide 
When  even  without  tears  she  could  charm  his  heart  ? 
That  rain  brought  forth  a flash  of  lightning 
Which  kindled  a spark  in  the  heart  of  that  poor  man. 
Since  the  man  was  the  slave  of  her  fair  face, 

How  was  it  when  she  stooped  to  slavish  entreaties  ? 
When  she  whose  airs  set  thy  heart  a-quaking, — 
When  she  weeps,  how  feelest  thou  then  ? 

When  she  whose  coquetry  makes  thy  heart  bleed 
Condescends  to  entreaties,  how  is  it  then  ? 

She  who  subdues  us  with  her  pride  and  severity, 
What  plea  is  left  us  when  she  begins  to  plead  ? 

When  she  who  traded  in  naught  but  bloodshed 


STORY  IX.]  THE  ARAB  AND  HIS  WIFE. 


37 


Submits  at  last,  ah  ! what  a profit  she  makes  ! 

God  has  adorned  them  “fair  in  the  sight  of  men  ; ” 1 
From  her  whom  God  has  adorned  how  can  man  escape  ? 
Since  He  created  him  “to  dwell  together  with  her,”2 
How  can  Adam  sever  himself  from  his  Eve  ? 

Though  he  be  Rustam,  son  of  Zal,  and  braver  than  Hamza, 
Yet  he  is  submissive  to  the  behests  of  his  dame. 

He  by  whose  preaching  the  world  was  entranced 
Was  he  who  spake  the  two  words,  “ 0 Humaira ! ” 3 
Though  water  prevails  over  fire  in  might, 

Yet  it  boils  by  fire  when  in  a cauldron. 

When  the  cauldron  intervenes  between  these  two, 

Air  (desire)  makes  as  naught  the  action  of  the  water. 
Apparently  thou  art  the  ruler  of  thy  wife,  like  water  ; 

In  reality  thou  art  ruled  by  and  suppliant  to  her. 

Such  is  the  peculiarity  of  man, 

He  cannot  withstand  animal  desire ; that  is  his  failing. 
The  Prophet  said  that  women  hold  dominion 
Over  sages  and  over  men  of  heart, 

But  that  fools,  again,  hold  the  upper  hand  over  women, 
Because  fools  are  violent  and  exceedingly  froward. 

They  have  no  tenderness  or  gentleness  or  amity, 

Because  the  animal  nature  sways  their  temperament. 
Love  and  tenderness  are  qualities  of  humanity, 

Passion  and  lust  are  qualities  of  animality. 

Woman  is  a ray  of  God,  not  a mere  mistress, 

The  Creator’s  self,  as  it  were,  not  a mere  creature ! 


Moses  and  Pharaoh,  alike  doers  of  God’s  will  as  Light  and 
Darkness,  Poison  and  Antidote  (p.  63). 

Verily,  both  Moses  and  Pharaoh  walked  in  the  right  way, 
Though  seemingly  the  one  did  so,  and  the  other  not. 

By  day  Moses  wept  before  God, 

At  midnight1  Pharaoh  lifted  up  his  cry, 

1 Koran  iii.  12.  3 Muhammad  said  these  words  to 

2 Koran  iii.  189.  his  wife,  Ayisha. 


38 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Saying,  “ What  a yoke  is  this  upon  my  neck,  0 God ! 

W ere  it  not  for  this  yoke  who  would  boast,  ‘ I am  ? ’ 
Because  Thou  hast  made  Moses’  face  bright  as  the  moon, 
And  hast  made  the  moon  of  my  face  black  in  the  face. 
Can  my  star  ever  shine  brighter  than  the  moon  ? 

If  it  be  eclipsed,  what  remedy  have  I ? 

Though  princes  and  kings  beat  drums, 

And  men  beat  cymbals  because  of  my  eclipse,1 
They  beat  their  brass  dishes  and  raise  a clamour, 

And  make  my  moon  ashamed  thereby, 

I,  who  am  Pharaoh,  woe  is  me  ! The  people’s  clamour 
Confounds  my  boast,  ‘ I am  Lord  Supreme  ! ’ 2 
Moses  and  I are  Thy  nurslings  both  alike, 

Yet  Thy  axe  cuts  down  the  branches  in  Thy  woods. 

Some  of  these  branches  Thou  plantest  in  the  ground, 
Others  Thou  castest  away  as  useless. 

Can  branch  strive  against  axe  ? Not  so. 

Can  branch  elude  the  power  of  the  axe?  Nay, 

0 Lord  of  the  power  that  dwells  in  Thy  axe, 

In  mercy  make  these  crooked  things  straight ! ” 


Man  and  wife  types  of  the  spirit  and  the  flesh  (p.  67). 

The  dissension  of  this  husband  and  wife  is  a parable ; 
They  are  types  of  thy  animal  and  rational  souls. 

This  husband  and  wife  are  the  reason  and  the  llesh, 

A couple  joined  together  for  good  and  for  evil. 

And  in  this  earthly  house  this  linked  pair 
Day  and  night  are  ever  at  variance  and  strife. 

The  wife  is  ever  seeking  dainties  for  domestic  needs, 
Namely,  bread  and  meat  and  her  own  dignity  and  position. 
Like  the  wife,  the  animal  soul  seeks  comfort, 

Sometimes  carnal,  sometimes  ambitious ; 

Reason  has  no  care  for  these  matters, 

In  its  mind  is  naught  but  regard  to  Allah. 

1 Compare  the  ancient  custom  of  3 Koran  lxxix.  24.  Pharaoh’s 
ringing  bells  to  still  thunder.  boast. 


STORY  IX.]  THE  ARAB  AND  HIS  WIFE. 


39 


Though  the  secret  moral  hereof  is  a bait  and  snare, 

Hear  its  outward  form  to  the  end. 

If  spiritual  manifestations  had  been  sufficient, 

The  creation  of  the  world  had  been  needless  and  vain. 

If  spiritual  thought  were  equivalent  to  love  of  God, 
Outward  forms  of  temples  and  prayers  would  not  exist. 
Presents  which  friends  make  one  to  another 
Are  naught  but  signs  and  indications, 

To  give  outward  testimony  and  witness 
Of  the  love  concealed  within  the  heart. 

Because  outward  attentions  are  evidence 
Of  secret  love,  0 beloved  ! 

The  witness  may  be  true  or  false, — 

Now  drunk  with  real  wine,  now  with  sour  whey ; 

He  who  drinks  fermented  whey  displays  drunkenness, 
Makes  a noise,  and  reels  to  and  fro. 

That  hypocrite  in  prayers  and  fasts 
Displays  exceeding  diligence, 

That  men  may  think  him  drunk  with  love  of  God ; 

But  if  you  look  into  the  truth,  he  is  drowned  in  hypocrisy. 

In  fine,  outward  actions  are  guides 

To  show  the  way  to  what  is  concealed  within. 

Sometimes  the  guide  is  true,  sometimes  false, 

Sometimes  a help,  and  at  other  times  a hindrance. 

0 Lord,  grant,  in  answer  to  my  prayers,  discernment, 
That  I may  know  such  false  signs  from  the  true ! 

Know  you  how  discernment  accrues  to  the  sense  ? 

’Tis  when  sense  “ sees  by  the  light  of  Allah.” 

If  effects  are  obscure,  still  causes  testify ; 

Kindred,  for  instance,  shows  that  there  is  love. 

But  he  to  whom  God’s  light  is  the  guide 
Is  no  longer  a slave  to  effects  and  causes. 

When  the  light  of  Allah  illumes  his  senses, 

A man  is  no  longer  a slave  to  effects. 

When  love  of  God  kindles  a flame  in  the  inward  man, 

He  burns,  and  is  freed  from  effects. 

He  has  no  need  of  signs  to  assure  him  of  love, 


40 


THE  MA  SNA  VI, 


[book  i. 


For  love  casts  its  own  light  up  to  heaven. 

Other  details  are  wanting  to  complete  this  subject, 
But  take  this  much,  aud  all  hail  to  you  ! 

Though  reality  is  exposed  to  view  in  this  form, 

Form  is  at  once  nigh  to  and  far  from  reality. 

For  instance,  these  two  resemble  water  and  a tree  ; 
When  you  look  to  their  essence  they  are  far  apart ; 
Yet  see  how  quickly  a seed  becomes  a high  tree 
Out  of  water,  along  with  earth  and  sunshine  ! 

If  you  turn  your  eyes  to  their  real  essence, 

These  two  are  far,  far  apart  from  each  other! 

But  let  us  quit  this  talk  of  essences  and  properties, 
And  return  to  the  story  of  those  two  wealth-seekers. 


How  God  made  Adam  superior  to  the  Angels  in  icisdom 
and  honour  (p.  68). 

He  said,  “ By  Allah,  who  knoweth  hidden  secrets, 

Who  created  pure  Adam  out  of  dust ; — 

In  the  form,  three  cubits  high,  which  he  gave  him, 

He  displayed  the  contents  of  all  spirits,  all  decrees! — 
Communicated  to  him  the  indelible  tablet  of  existence,1 
That  he  might  know  all  that  is  written  on  those  tablets, 
All  that  should  be  first  and  last  to  endless  eternity 
He  taught  him,  with  the  knowledge  of  his  own  ‘ names,’ 2 
So  that  the  angels  were  beside  themselves  at  his  in- 
struction, 

And  gained  more  sanctity  from  his  sanctification. 

The  expansion  of  their  minds,  which  Adam  brought  about, 
Was  a thing  unequalled  by  the  expansion  of  the  heavens. 
For  the  wide  expanse  of  that  pure  mind 
The  wide  space  of  the  seven  heavens  was  not  enough.” 
The  Prophet  said  that  God  has  declared, 

“ I am  not  contained  in  aught  above  or  below, 

I am  not  contained  in  earth  or  sky,  or  even 

1 The  tablet  on  which  God  writes  His  eternal  decrees. 
a Koran  ii.  29. 


STORY  IS.]  THE  ARAD  AND  HIS  WIFE. 


4i 


In  highest  heaven.  Know  this  for  a surety,  0 beloved  ! 
Yet  am  I contained  in  the  believer’s  heart ! 

If  ye  seek  me,  search  in  such  hearts  ! ” 

He  said  also,  “ Enter  the  hearts  of  my  servants 1 
To  gain  the  paradise  of  beholding  Me,  0 fearer  of  God.” 
Highest  heaven,  with  all  its  light  and  wide  expanse, 
When  it  beheld  Adam,  was  shaken  from  its  place ! 

Highest  heaven  is  greatness  itself  revealed ; 

But  what  is  form  when  reality  draws  nigh  ? 

Every  angel  declared,  “ In  times  of  yore 
We  bore  friendship  to  the  plains  of  earth  ; 

We  were  wont  to  sow  the  seed  of  service  on  the  earth. 
Wherefore  we  bore  a wondrous  attachment  to  it. 

What  was  this  attachment  to  that  house  of  earth 
When  our  own  natures  are  heavenly  ? 

What  was  the  friendship  of  lights  like  us  to  darkness  ? 
How  can  light  dwell  together  with  darkness  ? 

0 Adam  ! that  friendship  arose  from  the  scent  of  thee, 
Because  the  earth  is  the  warp  and  weft  of  thy  body. 

Thy  earthly  body  was  taken  from  there, 

Thy  pure  spirit  of  light  was  shed  down  from  here  ! 

But  our  souls  were  enlightened  by  thy  spirit 2 
Long,  long  before  earth  had  diverted  it  to  itself. 

We  used  to  be  on  earth,  ignorant  of  the  earth, — 

Ignorant  of  the  treasure  buried  within  it. 

When  we  were  commanded  to  depart  from  that  place, 

We  felt  sorrow  at  turning  our  steps  away  from  it. 

So  that  we  raised  many  questions,  saying, 

‘ 0 Lord  ! who  will  come  to  take  our  place  ? 

Wilt  Thou  barter  the  glory  of  our  praises  and  homage 
For  the  vain  babble  (of  men)  ? ’ 

The  commands  of  God  then  diffused  joy  upon  us  ; He  said, 
‘ What  are  ye  saying  at  such  length  ? 

What  ye  give  tongue  to  so  foolishly 

Is  as  the  words  of  spoiled  children  to  their  father. 

1 Koran  lxxxix.  29.  Adam,  the  “ Perfect  Man,”  or 

- The  Logos,  the  first  of  created  Microcosm. 
beiDgs,  was  afterwards  embodied  in 


42 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  I. 


I knew  of  myself  what  ye  thought, 

But  I desired  that  ye  should  speak  it ; 

As  this  boasting  of  yours  is  very  improper, 

So  shall  my  mercy  be  shown  to  prevail  over  my  wrath  : 

0 angels,  in  order  to  show  forth  that  prevailing, 

1 inspired  that  pretension  to  cavil  and  doubt ; 

If  you  say  your  say,  and  I forbear  to  punish  you, 

The  gainsayers  of  my  mercy  must  hold  their  peace. 

My  mercy  equals  that  of  a hundred  fathers  and  mothers  ; 
Every  soul  that  is  born  is  amazed  thereat. 

Their  mercy  is  as  the  foam  of  the  sea  of  my  mercy  ; 

It  is  mere  foam  of  waves,  but  the  sea  abides  ever ! 

What  more  shall  I say  ? In  that  earthly  shell 
There  is  naught  but  foam  of  foam  of  foam  of  foam  ! ’ ” 
God  is  that  foam ; God  is  also  that  pure  sea, 

For  His  words  are  neither  a temptation  nor  a vain  boast. 


Plurality  and  Partial  Evil,  though  seemingly  opposed 
to  Unity,  subserve  Good  (p.  73). 

The  story  is  now  concluded,  with  its  ups  and  downs, 

Like  lovers’  musings,  without  beginning  or  ending. 

It  has  no  beginning,  even  as  eternity, 

Nor  ending,  for  ’tis  akin  to  world  without  end. 

Or  like  water,  each  drop  whereof  is  at  once 
Beginning  and  end,  and  also  has  no  beginning  or  end. 
But  God  forbid ! This  story  is  not  a vain  fable, 

’Tis  the  ready  money  of  your  state  and  mine,  be  sure  ! 
Before  every  Sufi  who  is  enlightened 
Whatever  is  past  is  never  mentioned. 

When  his  whole  thoughts  are  absorbed  in  present  ecstasy, 
No  thought  of  consequences  enters  his  mind.1 
Arab,  water-pot,  and  angels  are  all  ourselves ! 

“ Whatsoever  turneth  from  God  is  turned  from  Him.”  2 
Know  the  husband  is  reason,  the  wife  lust  and  greed  ; 

1 He  is  the  “son  of  the  time  present  and  instant,”  as  said  above. 

2 Koran  li.  9. 


STORY  IS.]  THE  ARAD  AND  HIS  WIFE. 


43 


She  is  vested  with  darkness  and  a gainsayer  of  reason. 
Learn  now  whence  springs  the  root  of  this  circumstance, 
From  this,  that  the  Whole  has  parts  of  divers  kinds. 

These  parts  of  the  Whole  are  not  parts  in  relation  to  it, — 
Not  in  the  way  that  rose’s  scent  is  a part  of  the  rose. 

The  beauty  of  the  green  shoot  is  part  of  the  rose’s  beauty, 
But  the  turtle-dove’s  cooing  is  a part  of  that  Bulbul’s 
music. 

But  if  I engage  in  doubts  and  answers, 

How  can  I give  water  to  thirsty  souls  ? 

Yet,  if  you  are  perplexed  by  Whole  and  finite  parts, 

Have  patience,  for  “patience  is  the  key  of  joy.” 

Be  abstinent, — abstinent  from  vague  thoughts, 

Since  there  are  lions  in  that  desert  (of  thoughts). 
Abstinence  is  the  prince  of  medicines, 

As  scratching  only  aggravates  a scab. 

Abstinence  is  certainly  the  root  of  medicine ; 

Practise  abstinence,  see  how  it  invigorates  thy  soul ! 
Accept  this  counsel  and  give  ear  thereto, 

That  it  may  be  to  thee  as  an  earring  of  gold ! 

Nay,  not  a mere  earring,  but  that  thou  mayest  be  a mine 
of  gold, 

Or  that  thou  mayest  surpass  moon  and  Pleiades. 

First,  know  creation  is  in  various  forms  ; 

Souls  are  as  various  as  the  letters  from  Alif  to  Yd. 

In  this  variety  of  letters  there  seems  disorder. 

Though  in  fact  they  agree  in  an  integral  unity. 

In  one  aspect  they  are  opposed,  in  another  united ; 

In  one  aspect  capricious,  in  another  serious. 

The  day  of  judgment  is  the  day  of  the  great  review ; 
Whoso  is  fair  and  enlightened  longs  for  that  review  ; 
Whoso,  like  a Hindoo,  is  black  (with  sin), 

The  day  of  review  will  sound  the  knell  of  his  disgrace. 
Since  he  has  not  a face  like  a sun, 

He  desires  only  night  like  to  a veil ! 

If  his  thorn  puts  not  forth  a single  rosebud, 

The  spring  in  disclosing  him  is  his  foe. 


44 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  I. 


But  he  who  is  from  head  to  foot  a perfect  rose  or  lily, 

To  him  spring  brings  rejoicing. 

The  useless  thorn  desires  the  autumn, 

That  autumn  may  associate  itself  with  the  garden  ; 

And  hide  the  rose’s  beauty  and  the  thorn’s  shame, 

That  men  may  not  see  the  bloom  of  the  one  and  the 
other’s  shame,. 

That  common  stone  and  pure  ruby  may  appear  all  as  one. 
True,  the  Gardener  knows  the  difference  even  in  autumn, 
But  the  sight  of  One  is  better  than  the  world’s  sight. 

That  One  Person  is  Himself  the  world,  as  He  is  the  sun, 
And  every  star  in  heaven  is  a part  of  the  sun ; 

That  One  Person  is  Himself  the  world,  and  the  rest 
Are  all  His  dependents  and  parasites,  0 man  ! 

He  is  the  perfect  world,  yet  He  is  single  ; 

He  holds  in  hand  the  writing  of  the  whole  of  existence. 
Wherefore  all  forms  and  colours  of  beauty  cry  out, 

“ Good  news ! good  news  ! Lo  ! the  spring  is  at  hand  ! ” 
If  the  blossoms  did  not  shine  as  bright  helmets, 

How  could  the  fruits  display  their  globes  ? 

When  the  blossoms  are  shed  the  fruits  come  to  a head, 
When  the  body  is  destroyed  the  soul  lifts  up  its  head. 

The  fruit  is  the  substance,  the  blossom  only  its  form, 
Blossom  the  good  news,  and  fruit  the  promised  boon. 
When  the  blossoms  fall  the  fruit  appears, 

When  the  former  vanish  the  fruit  is  tasted. 

Till  bread  is  broken,  how  can  it  serve  as  food  ? 

Till  the  grapes  are  crushed,  how  can  they  yield  wine  ? 

Till  citrons  be  pounded  up  with  drugs, 

How  can  they  afford  healing  to  the  sick  ? 

Stoky  X.  The  Man  who  was  Tattooed  (p.  74). 

It  was  the  custom  of  the  men  of  Qazwin  to  have  various 
devices  tattooed  upon  their  bodies.  A certain  coward 
went  to  the  artist  to  have  such  a device  tattooed  on  his 
back,  and  desired  that  it  might  be  the  figure  of  a lion. 


45 


RTORY  x.]  THE  MAN  WHO  WAS  TATTOOED. 

But  when  he  felt  the  pricks  of  the  needles  he  roared  with 
pain,  and  said  to  the  artist,  “ What  part  of  the  lion  are 
you  now  painting?  ” The  artist  replied,  “ I am  doing  the 
tail.”  The  patient  cried,  “ Never  mind  the  tail ; go  on 
with  another  part.”  The  artist  accordingly  began  in 
another  part,  but  the  patient  again  cried  out  and  told  him 
to  try  somewhere  else.  Wherever  the  artist  applied  his 
needles,  the  patient  raised  similar  objections,  till  at  last 
the  artist  dashed  all  his  needles  and  pigments  on  the 
ground,  and  refused  to  proceed  any  further. 


The  Prophet’s  counsels  to  'Ali  to  folloio  the  direction  of  the 
Pir  or  Spiritual  Guide,  and  to  endure  his  chastisements 
patiently  (p.  75). 

The  Prophet  said  to  ’Ali,  “ 0 ’Ali, 

Thou  art  the  Lion  of  God,  a hero  most  valiant ; 

Yet  confide  not  in  thy  lion-like  valour, 

But  seek  refuge  under  the  palm-trees  of  the  ‘ Truth.’ 
Whoso  takes  obedience  as  his  exemplar 
Shares  its  proximity  to  the  ineffable  Presence. 

Do  thou  seek  to  draw  near  to  Reason  ; let  not  thy  heart 
Rely,  like  others,  on  thy  own  virtue  and  piety. 

Come  under  the  shadow  of  the  Man  of  Reason,1 
Thou  canst  not  find  it  in  the  road  of  the  traditionists. 

That  man  enjoys  close  proximity  to  Allah; 

Turn  not  away  from  obedience  to  him  in  any  wise ; 

For  he  makes  the  thorn  a bed  of  roses, 

And  gives  sight  to  the  eyes  of  the  blind. 

His  shadow  on  earth  is  as  that  of  Mount  Qaf, 

His  spirit  is  as  a Simurgh  soaring  on  high. 

He  lends  aid  to  the  slaves  of  the  friends  of  God, 

And  advances  to  high  place  them  who  seek  him. 

Were  I to  tell  his  praises  till  the  last  day, 

1 I.e.,  the  Pir,  or  Perfect  Shaikh,  or  Spiritual  Director.  So  St.  John  of 
the  Cross  and  St.  Theresa  enjoin  obedience  to  the  Director  (Vaughan, 
xii.  122). 


My  words  would  not  be  too  many  nor  admit  of  curtail- 
ment, 

He  is  the  sun  of  the  spirit,  not  that  of  the  sky, 

For  from  his  light  men  and  angels  draw  life. 

That  sun  is  hidden  in  the  form  of  a man, 

Understand  me  ! Allah  knows  the  truth. 

0 ’Ali,  out  of  all  forms  of  religious  service 
Choose  thou  the  shadow  of  that  dear  friend  of  God ! 
Every  man  takes  refuge  in  some  form  of  service, 

And  chooses  for  himself  some  asylum  ; 

Do  thou  seek  refuge  in  the  shadow  of  the  wise  man. 

That  thou  mayest  escape  thy  fierce  secret  foes, 

Of  all  forms  of  service  this  is  fittest  for  thee ; 

Thou  shalt  surpass  all  who  were  before  thee. 

Having  chosen  thy  Director,  be  submissive  to  him, 

Even  as  Moses  submitted  to  the  commands  of  Khizr.1 
Have  patience  with  Khizr’s  actions,  0 sincere  one ! 

Lest  he  say,  ‘ There  is  a partition  between  us.’ 

Though  he  stave  in  thy  boat,  yet  hold  thy  peace ; 

Though  he  slay  a young  man,  heave  not  a sigh. 

God  declares  his  hand  to  be  even  as  God’s  hand, 

For  He  saith,  ‘The  hand  of  God  is  over  their  hands.’2 
The  hand  of  God  impels  him  and  gives  him  life ; 

Nay,  not  life  only,  but  an  eternal  soul. 

A friend  is  needed  ; travel  not  the  road  alone, 

Take  not  thy  own  way  through  this  desert ! 

Whoso  travels  this  road  alone 

Only  does  so  by  aid  of  the  might  of  holy  men. 

The  hand  of  the  Director  is  not  weaker  than  theirs ; 

His  hand  is  none  other  than  the  grasp  of  Allah  ! 

If  absent  saints  can  confer  such  protection, 

Doubtless  present  saints  are  more  powerful  than  absent. 
If  such  food  be  bestowed  on  the  absent, 

What  dainties  may  not  the  guest  who  is  present  expect  ? 
The  courtier  who  attends  in  the  presence  of  the  king 

1 See  Koran  xviii.  for  the  story  of  Moses  and  Khizr.  It  is  also  giren 
in  Parnell’s  ‘ Hermit.’  • Koran  xlviii,  io. 


47 


story  xi.]  THE  LION  WHO  HUNTED. 

Is  served  better  than  the  stranger  outside  the  gate. 
The  difference  between  them  is  beyond  calculation ; 
One  sees  the  light,  the  other  only  the  veil. 

Strive  to  obtain  entrance  within, 

If  thou  wouldst  not  remain  as  a ring  outside  the  door. 
Having  chosen  thy  Director,  be  not  weak  of  heart, 
Nor  yet  sluggish  and  lax  as'  water  and  mud ; 

But  if  thou  takest  umbrage  at  everv  rub, 

How  wilt  thou  become  a polished  mirror  ? ” 


Story  XI.  The  Lion  who  Hunted  with  the  Wolf 
and  the  Fox  (p.  76). 

A lion  took  a wolf  and  a fox  with  him  on  a hunting 
excursion,  and  succeeded  in  catching  a wild  ox,  an  ibex, 
and  a hare.  He  then  directed  the  wolf  to  divide  the  prey. 
The  wolf  proposed  to  award  the  ox  to  the  lion,  the  ibex  to 
himself,  and  the  hare  to  the  fox.  The  lion  was  enraged 
with  the  wolf  because  he  had  presumed  to  talk  of  “ I ” 
and  “ Thou,”  and  “ My  share  ” and  “ Thy  share,”  when  it 
all  belonged  of  right  to  the  lion,  and  he  slew  the  wolf  with 
one  blow  of  his  paw.  Then,  turning  to  the  fox,  he  ordered 
him  to  make  the  division.  The  fox,  rendered  wary  by  the 
fate  of  the  wolf,  replied  that  the  whole  should  be  the  por- 
tion of  the  lion.  The  lion,  pleased  with  his  self-abnegation , 
gave  it  all  up  to  him,  saying,  “ Thou  art  no  longer  a fox, 
but  myself.” 

Till  man  destroys  “ self”  he  is  no  true  friend  of 
God  (p.  77). 

Once  a man  came  and  knocked  at  the  door  of  his  friend. 
His  friend  said,  “ Who  art  thou,  0 faithful  one?” 

He  said,  “’Tis  I.”  He  answered,  “There  is  no  admit- 
tance. 

There  is  no  room  for  the  ‘ raw  ’ at  my  well-cooked  feast. 
Naught  but  fire  of  separation  and  absence 


48 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  I. 


Can  cook  the  raw  one  and  free  him  from  hypocrisy ! 

Since  thy  ‘ self  ’ has  not  yet  left  thee, 

Thou  must  be  burned  in  fiery  flames.” 

The  poor  man  went  away,  and  for  one  whole  year 
Journeyed  burning  with  grief  for  his  friend’s  absence. 

His  heart  burned  till  it  was  cooked ; then  he  went  again 
And  drew  near  to  the  house  of  his  friend. 

He  knocked  at  the  door  in  fear  and  trepidation 
Lest  some  careless  word  might  fall  from  his  lips. 

His  friend  shouted,  “Who  is  that  at  the  door?” 

He  answered,  “ ’Tis  Thou  who  art  at  the  door,  0 Beloved  ! ” 
The  friend  said,  “ Since  ’tis  I,  let  me  come  in, 

There  is  not  room  for  two  ‘ I’s  ’ in  one  house.” 


Story  XII.  Joseph  and  the  Mirror  (p.  So). 

An  old  friend  came  to  pay  his  respects  to  Joseph,  and, 
after  some  remarks  upon  the  bad  behaviour  of  his  brethren, 
Joseph  asked  him  what  present  he  had  brought  to  show 
his  respect.  The  friend  replied  that  he  had  long  considered 
what  gift  would  be  most  suitable  to  offer,  and  at  last  had 
fixed  upon  a mirror,  which  he  accordingly  produced  from  his 
pocket  and  presented  to  Joseph,  at  the  same  time  begging 
him  to  admire  his  own  beauteous  face  in  it. 


Defect  and  Not-being  the  Mirror  wherein  Absolute  Perfect 
Being  is  reflected 1 (p.  8i). 

He  drew  forth  a mirror  from  his  side 
A mirror  is  what  Beauty  busies  itself  with. 

Since  Not-being  is  the  mirror  of  Being, 

If  you  are  wise,  choose  Not-being  (self-abnegation). 

Being  may  be  displayed  in  that  Not-being, 

Wealthy  men  show  their  liberality  on  the  poor. 

He  who  is  an  hungered  is  the  clear  mirror  of  bread, 

1 Compare  the  parallel  passage  in  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  135,  and  the  notes 
thereon. 


STORY  XII.]  JOSEPH  AND  THE  MIRROR. 


49 


The  tinder  is  the  mirror  of  the  flint  and  steel. 

Not-being  and  Defect,  wherever  they  occur, 

Are  the  mirrors  of  the  Beauty  of  all  beings. 

Because  Not-being  is  a clear  filtered  essence, 

Wherein  all  these  beings  are  infused. 

When  a garment  is  made  by  a good  tailor, 

’Tis  an  evidence  of  the  tailor’s  art. 

Logs  of  wood  would  not  be  duly  shaped 
Did  not  the  carpenter  plan  outline  and  detail. 

The  leech  skilled  in  setting  bones  goes 
Where  lies  the  patient  with  a broken  leg. 

If  there  were  no  sick  and  infirm, 

How  could  the  excellence  of  the  leech’s  art  be  seen  ? 

If  vile  base  copper  were  not  mingled, 

How  could  the  alchemist  show  his  skill  ? 

Defects  are  the  mirrors  of  the  attributes  of  Beauty, 

The  base  is  the  mirror  of  the  High  and  Glorious  One, 
Because  one  contrary  shows  forth  its  contrary,1 
As  honey’s  sweetness  is  shown  by  vinegar’s  sourness. 
Whoso  recognises  and  confesses  his  own  defects 
Is  hastening  in  the  way  that  leads  to  perfection ! 

But  he  advances  not  towards  the  Almighty 
Who  fancies  himself  to  be  perfect. 

No  sickness  worse  than  fancying  thyself  perfect 
Can  infect  thy  soul,  0 arrogant  misguided  one  ! 

Shed  many  tears  of  blood  from  eyes  and  heart, 

That  this  self-satisfaction  may  be  driven  out. 

The  fault  of  Iblis  lay  in  saying,  “ I am  better  than  he,” 2 
And  this  same  weakness  lurks  in  the  soul  of  all  creatures. 


1 Cp.  “ Religio  Medici,”  Sect.  35  : 

“ Herein  is  divinity  conformant  unto 
philosophy,  and  not  only  generation 
founded  on  contrarieties,  but  also 
creation.  God,  being  all  things,  is 


contrary  unto  nothing  ; out  of  which 
were  made  all  things,  and  so  nothing 
became  something,  and  Omneity  in- 
formed nullity  into  existence.” 

2 Koran  vii.  11. 


D 


5° 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Story  XIII.  The  Prophet' s Scribe  (p.  81). 

The  Prophet  had  a scribe  who  used  to  write  down  the 
texts  that  fell  from  his  lips.  At  last  this  scribe  became 
so  conceited  that  he  imagined  all  this  heavenly  wisdom 
proceeded  from  his  own  wit,  and  not  from  the  Prophet. 
Puffed  up  with  self-importance,  he  fancied  himself  inspired, 
and  his  heart  was  hardened  against  his  master,  and  he 
became  a renegade,  like  the  fallen  angels  Harut  and 
Marut.  He  took  his  own  foolish  surmises  to  be  the  truth, 
whereas  they  were  all  wide  of  the  mark,  as  those  of  the 
deaf  man  who  went  to  condole  with  a sick  neighbour,  and 
answered  all  his  remarks  at  cross  purposes. 


How  philosophers  deceive  themselves  (p.  32). 

On  the  last  day,1  “ when  Earth  shall  quake  with  quaking,” 
This  earth  shall  give  witness  of  her  condition. 

For  she  “ shall  tell  out  her  tidings  openly,” 

Yea,  earth  and  her  rocks  shall  tell  them  forth! 

The  philosopher  reasons  from  base  analogies 
(True  reason  comes  not  out  of  a dark  corner) ; 

The  philosopher  (I  say)  denies  this  in  his  pride  of  intellect. 
Say  to  him,  “Go,  dash  thy  head  against  a wall ! ” 

The  speech  of  water,  of  earth,  of  mire, 

Is  audible  by  the  ears  of  men  of  heart ! 

The  philosopher,  who  denies  Divine  Providence, 

Is  a stranger  to  the  perceptions  of  saints. 

He  says  that  the  flashes  of  men’s  morbid  imaginations 
Instil  many  vain  fancies  into  men’s  minds. 

But,  on  the  contrary,  ’tis  his  perverseness  and  want  of 
faith 

Which  implant  in  himself  this  vain  fancy  of  negation. 

The  philosopher  denies  the  existence  of  the  Devil ; 

At  the  same  time  he  is  the  Devil’s  laughing-stock. 

1 Koran  xcix.  1-4. 


5' 


STORY  XIV.]  THE  CHINESE  AND  GREEK  ARTISTS. 

If  thou  hast  not  seen  the  Devil,  look  at  thyself, 

Without  demon’s  aid  how  came  that  blue  turban  1 on  thy 
brow  ? 

Whosoever  has  a doubt  or  disquietude  in  his  heart 
Is  a secret  denier  and  philosopher. 

Now  and  then  he  displays  firm  belief, 

But  that  slight  dash  of  philosophy  blackens  his  face. 
Beware,  0 believers ! That  lurks  in  you  too  ; 

You  may  develop  innumerable  states  of  mind. 

All  the  seventy  and  two  heresies  lurk  in  you  ; 

Have  a care  lest  one  day  they  prevail  over  you  ! 

He  in  whose  breast  the  leaf  of  true  faith  is  grown 
Must  tremble  as  a leaf  from  fear  of  such  a catastrophe. 
Thou  makest  a mock  of  Iblis  and  the  Devil, 

Because  thou  art  a fine  man  in  thy  own  sight ; 

But  when  thy  soul  shall  tell  thy  wretched  faults, 

What  lamentation  thou  wilt  cause  to  the  faithful ! 

The  sellers  of  base  gold  sit  smiling  in  their  shops, 

Because  the  touchstone  is  not  as  yet  in  their  sight. 

0 Veiler  of  sins  ! strip  not  the  veil  from  us  ; 

Lend  us  aid  on  the  day  of  trial ! 


Story  XIV.  The  Chinese  and  the  Greek  Artists  (p.  86). 

The  Chinese  and  the  Greeks  disputed  before  the  Sultan 
which  of  them  were  the  better  painters ; and,  in  order  to 
settle  the  dispute,  the  Sultan  allotted  to  each  a house  to 
be  painted  by  them.  The  Chinese  procured  all  kinds  of 
paints,  and  coloured  their  house  in  the  most  elaborate  way. 
The  Greeks,  on  the  other  hand,  used  no  colours  at  all, 
but  contented  themselves  with  cleansing  the  walls  of  their 
house  from  all  filth,  and  burnishing  them  till  they  were 
as  clear  and  bright  as  the  heavens.  When  the  two  houses 
were  offered  to  the  Sultan’s  inspection,  that  painted  by 
the  Chinese  was  much  admired ; but  the  Greek  house 

1 Blue  turbans  were  considered  a sign  of  hypocrisy  (Hafiz,  Ode  5). 


52 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


carried  off  the  palm,  as  all  the  colours  of  the  other  house 
were  reflected  on  its  walls  with  an  endless  variety  of 
shades  and  hues. 


Knowledge  of  the  heart  preferable  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  schools  (p.  86). 

The  knowledge  of  men  of  heart  bears  them  up, 

The  knowledge  of  men  of  the  body  weighs  them  down. 
When  ’tis  knowledge  of  the  heart,  it  is  a friend ; 

When  knowledge  of  the  body,  it  is  a burden. 

God  saith,  “ As  an  ass  bearing  a load  of  books,”  1 
The  knowledge  which  is  not  of  Him  is  a burden. 
Knowledge  which  comes  not  immediately  from  Him 
Endures  no  longer  than  the  rouge  of  the  tirewoman. 
Nevertheless,  if  you  bear  this  burden  in  a right  spirit 
’Twill  be  removed,  and  you  will  obtain  joy. 

See  you  bear  not  that  burden  out  of  vainglory, 

Then  you  will  behold  a store  of  true  knowledge  within. 
When  you  mount  the  steed  of  this  true  knowledge, 
Straightway  the  burden  will  fall  from  your  back. 

If  you  drink  not  His  cup,  how  will  you  escape  lusts  ? 

You,  who  seek  no  more  of  Him  than  to  name  His  name? 
What  do  His  name  and  fame  suggest  ? The  idea  of  Him. 
And  the  idea  of  Him  guides  you  to  union  with  Him. 
Know  you  a guide  without  something  to  which  it  guides  ? 
Were  there  no  roads  there  would  be  no  ghouls. 

Know  you  a name  without  a thing  answering  to  it  ? 

Have  you  ever  plucked  a rose  (Gul)  from  Gdf  and  Ldm  ? 
You  name  His  name ; go,  seek  the  reality  named  by  it! 
Look  for  the  moon  in  heaven,  not  in  the  water ! 

If  you  desire  to  rise  above  mere  names  and  letters, 

Make  yourself  free  from  self  at  one  stroke ! 

Like  a sword  be  without  trace  of  soft  iron ; 

Like  a steel  mirror,  scour  off  all  rust  with  contrition  ; 
Make  yourself  pure  from  all  attributes  of  self, 

1 Koran  Ixii.  5. 


COUNSELS  OF  RESERVE. 


53 


STORY  XV.] 

That  you  may  see  your  own  pure  bright  essence  ! 

Yea,  see  in  your  heart  the  knowledge  of  the  Prophet, 
Without  book,  without  tutor,  without  preceptor. 

The  Prophet  saith,  “ He  is  one  of  my  people, 

Whoso  is  of  like  temper  and  spirit  with  me. 

Ilis  soul  beholds  me  by  the  selfsame  light 
Whereby  I myself  behold  him, — 

Without  traditions  and  scriptures  and  histories, 

In  the  fount  of  the  water  of  life.” 

Learn  the  mystery,  “I  was  last  night  a Kurd, 

And  this  morning  am  become  an  Arab.”  1 

This  mystery  of  “ last  night  ” and  “ this  morning  ” 

Leads  you  into  the  road  that  brings  you  to  God. 

But  if  you  want  an  instance  of  this  secret  knowledge, 
Hear  the  story  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Chinese. 


Story  XV.  Counsels  of  Reserve  given  by  the  Prophet  to 
his  Freedman  Zaul  (p.  87). 

At  dawn  the  Prophet  said  to  Zaid, 

“ How  is  it  with  thee  this  morning,  0 pure  disciple  ? ” 

He  replied,  “Thy  faithful  slave  am  I.”  Again  he  said, 

“ If  the  garden  of  faith  has  bloomed,  show  a token  of  it.” 
He  answered,  “ I was  athirst  many  days, 

By  night  I slept  not  for  the  burning  pangs  of  love  ; 

So  that  1 passed  by  days  and  nights, 

As  the  point  of  a spear  glances  off  a shield. 

For  in  that  state  all  faith  is  one, 

A hundred  thousand  years  and  a moment  are  all  one ; 
World  without  beginning  and  world  without  end  are  one ; 
Reason  finds  no  entrance  when  mind  is  thus  lost.” 

The  Prophet  again  urged  Zaid  to  deliver  to  him  a present 
from  that  celestial  region,  as  a token  that  he  had  really 
been  there  in  the  spirit.  Zaid  answered  that  he  had  seen 

1 Syad  Abu’l  Wafa,  an  unlettered  ing  the  night  in  prayer,  found  him- 
Kurd,  found  a paper  with  the  words  self  able  tounderstand  Arabic(Luck- 
Bismillah  upon  it,  and,  after  spend-  now  Commentator). 


54 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


the  eight  heavens  and  the  seven  hells,  and  the  destinies  of 
all  men,  whether  bound  to  heaven  or  hell.  The  body,  he 
said,  is  as  a mother,  and  the  soul  as  her  infant,  and  death 
is  the  time  of  parturition,  when  it  becomes  manifest  to 
what  class  the  infant  soul  belongs.  As  on  the  day  of 
judgment  it  will  be  manifest  to  all  men  whether  a soul 
belongs  to  the  saved  or  to  the  lost,  so  now  it  was  plain  and 
manifest  to  him.  He  went  on  to  ask  the  Prophet  if  he 
should  publish  this  secret  knowledge  of  his  to  all  men, 
or  hold  his  peace.  The  Prophet  told  him  to  hold  his 
peace.  Zaid,  however,  proceeded  to  detail  the  vision 
of  the  last  judgment,  which  he  had  seen  when  in  the 
spirit ; and  the  Prophet  again  commanded  him  to  pause, 
adding  that  “ God  is  never  ashamed  to  say  the  truth,” 1 
and  allows  His  Prophet  to  speak  forth  the  truth,  but 
that  for  Zaid  to  blab  forth  the  secrets  seen  in  ecstatic 
vision  would  be  wrong.  Zaid  replied  that  it  was  im- 
possible for  one  who  had  once  beheld  the  Sun  of  “ The 
Truth  ” to  keep  his  vision  a secret.  But  the  Prophet  in 
reply  instructed  him  that  all  men  are  masters  of  their  own 
wills,  and  that  he  must  not  reveal  what  God  has  determined 
to  keep  secret  till  the  last  day,  in  order  to  leave  men  till 
then  under  the  stimulus  of  hope  and  fear,  and  to  give  them 
the  credit  of  “ believing  what  is  not  seen.”  2 More  honour 
is  given  to  the  warder  of  a castle  who  faithfully  executes 
his  trust  at  a distance  from  the  court  than  to  those 
courtiers  who  serve  constantly  under  the  king’s  own  eye. 
Zaid  submitted  to  the  Prophet’s  injunctions,  and  remained 
self-contained  in  his  ecstatic  visions.  Anecdotes  of  the 
sage  Luqman,  of  King  Solomon,  and  of  a conflagration  in 
the  days  of  the  Khalifa  ’Omar  complete  the  section. 

The  Prophet's  final  counsels  of  “ Reserve  ” (p.  91). 

The  Prophet  said,  “ My  companions  are  as  the  stars, 
Lights  to  them  that  walk  aright,  missiles  against  Satan. 

If  every  man  had  strength  of  eyesight 

1 Koran  xxxiii.  53.  2 Koran  ii.  2. 


STORY  XV.] 


COUNSELS  OF  RESERVE. 


55 


To  look  straight  at  the  light  of  the  sun  in  heaven, 

What  need  were  there  of  stars,  0 humble  one, 

To  one  who  was  guided  by  the  light  of  the  sun  ? 

Neither  moon  nor  planets  would  be  needed 
By  one  who  saw  directly  the  Sun  of  ‘The  Truth.’ 

The  Moon 1 declares,  as  also  the  clouds  and  shadows, 

‘ I am  a man,  yet  it  hath  been  revealed  to  me.’ 2 
Like  you,  I was  naturally  dark, 

’Twas  the  Sun’s  revelation  that  gave  me  such  light. 

I still  am  dark  compared  to  the  Sun, 

Though  I am  light  compared  to  the  dark  souls  of  men. 
Therefore  is  my  light  weak,  that  you  may  bear  it, 

For  you  are  not  strong  enough  to  bear  the  dazzling  Sun. 

I have,  as  it  were,  mixed  honey  with  vinegar, 

To  succour  the  sickness  of  your  hearts. 

When  you  are  cured  of  your  sickness,  0 invalid, 

Then  leave  out  the  vinegar  and  eat  pure  honey. 

When  the  heart  is  garnished  and  swept  clear  of  lust, 
Therein  ‘ The  God  of  Mercy  sitteth  on  His  throne.’  3 
Then  God  rules  the  heart  immediately, 

When  it  has  gained  this  immediate  connection  with  Him. 
This  subject  is  endless ; but  where  is  Zaid, 

That  I may  tell  him  again  not  to  seek  notoriety  ? 

’Tis  not  wise  to  publish  these  mysteries, 

Since  the  last  day  is  approaching  to  reveal  all  things.” 
Now  you  will  not  find  Zaid,  for  he  is  fled, 

He  sprang  from  the  place  where  the  shoes  were  left,4 
Scattering  the  shoes  in  his  hurry. 

If  you  had  been  Zaid,  you  too  would  have  been  lost, 

As  a star  is  lost  when  the  sun  shines  on  it ; 

For  then  you  see  no  trace  or  sign  of  it, 

No  place  or  track  of  it  in  the  milky  way. 

Our  senses  and  our  endless  discourses 

Are  annihilated  in  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  our  King. 

Our  senses  and  our  reason  within  us 

1 I.e.,  the  Prophet.  3 Koran  xx.  4. 

2 Koran  xviii.  no.  4 I.e.,  the  vestibule  of  the  house. 


56 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Are  as  waves  on  waves  “ assembled  before  us.” 1 
When  night  returns  and  ’tis  the  time  of  the  sky’s  levee, 
The  stars  that  were  hidden  come  forth  to  their  work. 
The  people  of  the  world  lie  unconscious, 

With  veils  drawn  over  their  faces,  and  asleep  ; 

But  when  the  morn  shall  burst  forth  and  the  sun  arise 
Every  creature  will  raise  its  head  from  its  couch  ; 

To  the  unconscious  God  will  restore  consciousness  ; 

They  will  stand  in  rings  as  slaves  with  rings  in  ears  ; 
Dancing  and  clapping  hands  with  sougs  of  praise, 
Singing  with  joy,  “ Our  Lord  hath  restored  us  to  life ! ” 
Shedding  their  old  skins  and  bones, 

As  horsemen  stirring  up  a cloud  of  dust. 

All  pressing  on  from  Not-being  to  Being, 

On  the  last  day,  as  well  the  thankful  as  the  unthankful. 


Story  XVI.  ’All's  Forbearance  (p.  92). 

’Ali,  the  “ Lion  of  God,”  was  once  engaged  in  conflict 
with  a Magian  chief,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  struggle  the 
Magian  spat  in  his  face.  ’Ali,  instead  of  taking  vengeance 
on  him,  at  once  dropped  his  sword,  to  the  Magian’s  great 
astonishment.  On  his  inquiring  the  reason  of  such  for- 
bearance, ’Ali  informed  him  that  the  “ Lion  of  God  ” did 
not  destroy  life  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  own  vengeance, 
but  simply  to  carry  out  God’s  will,  and  that  whenever  he 
saw  just  cause,  he  held  his  hand  even  in  the  midst  of  the 
strife,  and  spared  the  foe.  The  Prophet,  ’Ali  continued, 
had  long  since  informed  him  that  he  would  die  by  the 
hand  of  his  own  stirrup-bearer  (Ibn  Maljun),  and  the 
stirrup-bearer  had  frequently  implored  ’Ali  to  kill  him, 
and  thus  save  him  from  the  commission  of  that  great 
crime  ; but  ’Ali  said  he  always  refused  to  do  so,  as  to  him 
death  was  as  sweet  as  life,  and  he  felt  no  anger  against  his 
destined  assassin,  who  was  only  the  instrument  of  God’s 

1 Koran  xxxvi.  53. 


’ALI’S  FORBEARANCE. 


57 


STORY  XVI.] 

eternal  purpose.  The  Magian  chief,  on  hearing  ’Ali’s 
discourse,  was  so  much  affected  that  he  embraced  Islam, 
together  with  all  his  family,  to  the  number  of  fifty  souls. 


How  the  Prophet  whispered  to  ’Ali’s  stirrup-hearer  that  he 
would  one  day  assassinate  his  master  (p.  90). 

The  Prophet  whispered  in  the  ear  of  my  servant 
That  one  day  he  would  sever  my  head  from  my  neck. 

The  Prophet  also  warned  by  inspiration  me,  his  friend, 
That  the  hand  of  my  servant  would  destroy  me. 

My  servant  cried,  “ 0 kill  me  first, 

That  I may  not  become  guilty  of  so  grievous  a sin  ! ” 

I replied,  “ Since  my  death  is  to  come  from  thee, 

How  can  I balk  the  fateful  decree  ? ” 

He  fell  at  my  feet  and  cried,  “0  gracious  lord, 

For  God’s  sake  cleave  now  my  body  in  twain, 

That  such  an  evil  deed  may  not  be  wrought  by  me, 

And  my  soul  burn  with  anguish  for  its  beloved.” 

I replied,  “ What  God’s  pen  has  written,  it  has  written  ; 
In  presence  of  its  writings  knowledge  is  confounded  ; 
There  is  no  anger  in  my  soul  against  thee, 

Because  I attribute  not  this  deed  to  thee  ; 

Thou  art  God’s  instrument,  God’s  hand  is  the  agent. 

How  can  I chide  or  fret  at  God’s  instrument  ? ” 

He  said,  “ If  this  be  so,  why  is  there  retaliation  ? ” 1 
I answered,  “ ’Tis  from  God,  and  ’tis  God’s  secret ; 

If  He  shows  displeasure  at  His  own  acts, 

From  His  displeasure  He  evolves  a Paradise ; 

He  feels  displeasure  at  His  own  acts, 

Because  He  is  a God  of  vengeance  as  of  mercy. 

In  this  city  of  events  He  is  the  Lord, 

In  this  realm  He  is  the  King  who  plans  all  events. 

If  He  crushes  His  own  instruments. 

He  makes  those  crushed  ones  fair  in  His  sight. 

1 I.e .,  why  is  the  rule  “an  eye  for  an  eye”  enjoined  in  the  Koran,  ii. 
173? 


5» 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


Know  the  great  mystery  of  ‘ Whatever  verses  we  cancel, 
Or  cause  you  to  forget,  we  substitute  better  for  them.’ 1 
Whatever  law  God  cancels,  He  makes  as  a weed, 

And  in  its  stead  He  brings  forth  a rose. 

So  night  cancels  the  business  of  the  daytime, 

When  the  reason  that  lights  our  minds  becomes  inanimate. 
Again,  night  is  cancelled  by  the  light  of  day, 

And  inanimate  reason  is  rekindled  to  life  by  its  rays. 
Though  darkness  produces  this  sleep  and  quiet, 

Is  not  the  ‘ water  of  life  ’ in  the  darkness  ? 2 
Are  not  spirits  refreshed  in  that  very  darkness  ? 

Is  not  that  silence  the  season  of  heavenly  voices  ? 

For  from  contraries  contraries  are  brought  forth, 

Out  of  darkness  was  created  light. 

The  Prophet’s  wars  brought  about  the  present  peace, 

The  peace  of  these  latter  days  resulted  from  those  wars. 
That  conqueror  of  hearts  cut  off  a thousand  heads, 

That  the  heads  of  his  people  might  rest  in  peace.” 


God’s  rebuke  to  Adam  for  scorning  Iblis  (p.  9). 

To  whomsoever  God’s  order  comes, 

He  must  smite  with  his  sword  even  his  own  child. 

Fear  then,  and  revile  not  the  wicked, 

For  the  wicked  are  impotent  under  God’s  commands. 

In  presence  of  God’s  commands  bow  down  the  neck  of 
pride. 

Scoff  not  nor  chide  even  them  that  go  astray ! 

One  day  Adam  cast  a look  of  contempt  and  scorn 
Upon  Iblis,  thinking  what  a wretch  he  was. 

He  felt  self-important  and  proud  of  himself, 

And  he  smiled  at  the  actions  of  cursed  Iblis. 

God  Almighty  cried  out  to  him,  “ 0 pure  one, 

Thou  art  wholly  ignorant  of  hidden  mysteries. 

If  I were  to  blab  the  faults  of  the  unfortunate, 

1 Koran  ii.  100.  in  the  land  of  darkness  discovered 

2 Alluding  to  the  “ water  of  life  ” by  Khizr. 


STORY  XVI.] 


'A LI'S  FORBEARANCE. 


59 


I should  root  up  the  mountains  from  their  bases, 

And  lay  bare  the  secrets  of  a hundred  Adams, 

And  convert  a hundred  fresh  Iblises  into  Musulmans.’ 
Adam  answered,  “ I repent  me  of  my  scornful  looks  ; 

Such  arrogant  thoughts  shall  not  be  mine  again. 

0 Lord,  pardon  this  rashness  in  Thy  slave  ; 

1 repent ; chastise  me  not  for  these  words  ! ” 

0 Aider  of  aid-seekers,  guide  us, 

For  there  is  no  security  in  knowledge  or  wealth  ; 

“ Lead  not  our  hearts  astray  after  Thou  hast  guided 
us,”1 

And  avert  the  evil  that  the  “ Pen  ” has  written. 

Turn  aside  from  our  souls  the  evil  written  in  our  fates, 
Repel  us  not  from  the  tables  of  purity  ! 

0 God,  Thy  grace  is  the  proper  object  of  our  desire ; 

To  couple  others  with  Thee  is  not  proper. 

Nothing  is  bitterer  than  severance  from  Thee, 

Without  Thy  shelter  there  is  naught  but  perplexity. 

Our  worldly  goods  rob  us  of  our  heavenly  goods, 

Our  body  rends  the  garment  of  our  soul. 

Our  hands,  as  it  were,  prey  on  our  feet ; 

Without  reliance  on  Thee  how  can  we  live  ? 

And  if  the  soul  escapes  these  great  perils, 

It  is  made  captive  as  a victim  of  misfortunes  and  fears, 
Inasmuch  as  when  the  soul  lacks  union  with  the  Beloved, 
It  abides  for  ever  blind  and  darkened  by  itself. 

If  Thou  showest  not  the  way,  our  life  is  lost ; 

A life  living  without  Thee  esteem  as  dead ! 

If  Thou  findest  fault  with  Thy  slaves, 

Verily  it  is  right  in  Thee,  0 Blessed  One  ! 

If  Thou  shouldst  call  sun  and  moon  obscure, 

If  Thou  shouldst  call  the  straight  cypress  crooked, 

If  Thou  shouldst  declare  the  highest  heaven  base, 

Or  rich  mines  and  oceans  paupers, — 

All  this  is  the  truth  in  relation  to  Thy  perfection  ! 

Thine  is  the  dominion  and  the  glory  and  the  wealth ! 


1 Koran  iii.  6. 


6o 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  i. 


For  Thou  art  exempt  from  defect  and  not-being. 

Thou  givest  existence  to  things  non-existent,  and  again 
Thou  makest  them  non-existent. 


Epilogue  to  Book  I.  (p.  99). 

Alas ! the  forbidden  fruits  were  eaten, 

And  thereby  the  warm  life  of  reason  was  congealed. 

A grain  of  wheat  eclipsed  the  sun  of  Adam,1 
Like  as  the  Dragon’s  tail 2 dulls  the  brightness  of  the 
moon. 

Behold  how  delicate  is  the  heart,  that  a morsel  of  dust 
Clouded  its  moon  with  foul  obscurity  ! 

When  bread  is  “ substance,”  to  eat  it  nourishes  us ; 

When  ’tis  empty  “form,”  it  profits  nothing. 

Like  as  the  green  thorn  which  is  cropped  by  the  camel, 
And  then  yields  him  pleasure  and  nutriment ; 

When  its  greenness  has  gone  and  it  becomes  dry, — 

If  the  camel  crops  that  same  thorn  in  the  desert, 

It  wounds  his  palate  and  mouth  without  pity, 

As  if  conserve  of  roses  should  turn  to  sharp  swords. 

When  bread  is  “ substance,”  it  is  as  a green  thorn  ; 

When  ’tis  “form,”  ’tis  as  the  dry  and  coarse  thorn. 

And  thou  eatest  it  in  the  same  way  as  of  yore 
Thou  wert  wont  to  eat  it,  0 helpless  being, — 

Eatest  this  dry  thing  in  the  same  manner, 

After  the  real  “ substance  ” is  mingled  with  dust ; 

It  has  become  mingled  with  dust,  dry  in  pith  and  rind. 

0 camel,  now  beware  of  that  herb ! 

The  Word  is  become  foul  with  mingled  earth ; 

The  water  is  become  muddy  ; close  the  mouth  of  the  well, 
Till  God  makes  it  again  pure  and  sweet ; 

Yea,  till  He  purifies  what  He  has  made  foul. 

Patience  will  accomplish  thy  desire,  not  haste. 

Be  patient,  God  .knows  what  is  best. 

1 Muhammadans  think  the  for-  2 The  descending  node  of  the 
bidden  fruit  to  have  been  wheat.  moon  (see  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  233). 


ISooll  EE. 


PROLOGUE. 

The  composition  of  this  Masnavi  has  been  delayed  for  a 
season.1 

Time  is  needed  for  blood  to  become  milk. 

Till  thy  fortune  comes  forth  as  a new-born  babe, 

Blood  becomes  not  milk,  sweet  and  pleasant  to  the  mind. 
When  that  light  of  God,  Husamu-’d-Din 
Turned  his  course  down  from  the  summit  of  heaven, — 
While  he  had  ascended  to  sublimest  verities, 

In  the  absence  of  his  spring  the  buds  blossomed  not, — 
But  when  out  of  that  sea  he  came  to  shore, 

The  lute  of  the  poesy  of  the  Masnavi  sounded  again. 

This  Masnavi,  which  is  the  polisher  of  spirits, — 

Its  recommencement  occurred  on  the  day  of  “ Opening.” 
The  commencement  date  of  this  precious  work 
Was  the  year  six  hundred  and  sixty-two  of  the  Flight. 
The  Bulbul  started  on  this  date  and  became  a hawk ; 

Yea,  a hawk  to  hunt  out  these  mysteries. 

May  the  wrist  of  the  King  be  the  resting-place  of  this 
hawk, 

And  may  this  door  be  open  to  the  people  for  ever ! 

1 The  delay  was  caused  by  the  grief  of  Husam  for  the  death  of  his  wife. 


( 62  ) 


Story  I.  The  Sufi’s  Beast  (p.  103). 

After  anecdotes  of  the  man,  in  the  time  of  ’Omar,  who 
mistook  his  eyelash  for  the  new  moon,  of  one  who  stole  a 
snake  and  got  bitten  by  it,  and  of  ’Isa’s  foolish  disciple 
who  besought  the  Lord  to  teach  him  the  spell  whereby 
he  raised  the  dead,  comes  the  following  story. 

A certain  Sufi,  after  a long  day’s  journey,  arrived  at  a 
monastery,  where  he  put  up  for  the  night,  and  strictly 
enjoined  his  servant  to  groom  his  ass  carefully  and  give 
him  plenty  of  litter  and  fodder.  The  servant  assured  him 
that  his  minute  directions  were  superfluous,  and  promised 
to  attend  to  the  ass  most  carefully  ; but  when  his  master’s 
back  was  turned  he  neglected  the  ass,  and  the  poor 
animal  remained  all  night  without  water  or  food.  Conse- 
quently he  was  weak  and  unfit  to  travel  next  morning, 
and  in  spite  of  the  blows  and  kicks  that  were  showered  on 
him,  could  not  carry  his  master,  but  had  to  be  led.  The 
other  Sufis  who  were  travelling  with  his  owner  thought 
that  the  ass  was  useless,  and  when  they  arrived  at  the 
place  where  they  halted  for  the  night,  they  sold  the  ass  to 
a traveller,  and  with  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  bought  deli- 
cate viands  and  torches,  and  made  a feast.  The  owner  of 
the  ass,  who  was  ignorant  of  this  transaction,  shared  the 
feast,  and  joined  in  the  chorus  sung  by  the  others,  “The 
ass  is  gone,  the  ass  is  gone,”  without  attaching  any  sense 
to  the  words,  and  blindly  following  their  example.  Next 
morning  he  asked  his  servant  what  had  become  of  the  ass, 
and  the  servant  told  him  it  had  been  sold,  adding  that  he 
thought  he  had  known  it  overnight,  because  he  had  heard 
him  singing  “ The  ass  is  gone  ” along  with  the  other 


THE  SUFI'S  BEAST. 


63 


STORY  I.] 

Sufis.  In  the  course  of  this  story  there  occur  anecdotes 
of  God  consulting  with  the  angels  as  to  the  creation  of 
man,  of  a king  who  lost  his  hawk  and  found  it  again  in 
the  house  of  a poor  old  man,  and  of  Shaikh  Ahmad  Khiz- 
rawiya  buying  sweetmeats  for  his  creditors. 


IVhy  the  poet  veils  his  doctrines  in  fables  (p.  104). 

What  is  it  hinders  me  from  expounding  my  doctrines 
But  this,  that  my  hearers’  heart  incline  elsewhere. 

Their  thoughts  are  intent  on  that  Sufi  guest ; 

They  are  immersed  in  his  affairs  neck  deep. 

So  I am  compelled  to  turn  from  my  discourse 
To  that  story,  and  to  set  forth  his  condition. 

But,  0 friend,  think  not  this  Sufi  a mere  outward  form, 
As  children  see  in  a vine  nothing  but  raisins. 

0 son,  our  bodies  are  as  dried  grapes  and  raisins ; 

If  you  are  a man,  cast  away  these  things. 

If  you  pass  on  to  the  pure  mysteries  of  God, 

You  will  be  exalted  above  the  nine  heavenly  spheres. 
Now  hear  the  outward  form  of  my  story, 

But  yet  separate  the  grain  from  the  chaff. 

Why  the  prophets  were  sent  (p.  106). 

God  sent  the  prophets  for  this  purpose, 

Namely,  to  sever  infidelity  from  faith. 

God  sent  the  prophets  to  mankind 

That  they  might  gather  the  pure  grain  on  their  tray. 

Infidel  and  faithful,  Musulman  and  Jew, 

Before  the  prophets  came,  seemed  all  as  one. 

Before  they  came  we  were  all  alike, 

No  one  knew  whether  he  was  right  or  wrong. 

Genuine  coin  and  base  coin  were  current  alike ; 

The  world  was  a night,  and  we  travellers  in  the  dark, 
Till  the  sun  of  the  prophets  arose,  and  cried, 

“ Begone,  0 slumber  ; welcome,  0 pure  light ! ” 


64 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  IX. 


Now  the  eye  sees  how  to  distinguish  colours, 

It  sees  the  difference  between  rubies  and  pebbles. 
The  eye  distinguishes  jewels  from  dust, 

Hence  it  is  dust  makes  the  eye  smart. 

Makers  of  base  coin  hate  the  daylight, 

Coins  of  pure  gold  love  the  daylight, 

Because  daylight  is  the  mirror  that  reflects  them, 
So  that  they  see  their  own  perfect  beauty. 


Mystical  Meaning  of  “ Daylight  ” (p.  106). 

God  has  named  the  resurrection  “ that  day  ; ” 

Day  shows  off  the  beauty  of  red  and  yellow. 

Wherefore  “ Day  ” in  truth  is  the  mystery  of  the  saints  ; 
One  day  of  their  moons  is  as  whole  years. 

Know,  “ Day”  is  the  reflection  of  the  mystery  of  the  saints, 
Eye-closing  night  that  of  their  hidden  secrets. 

Therefore  hath  God  revealed  the  chapter  “ Daylight,”  1 
Which  daylight  is  the  light  of  the  heart  of  Mustafa. 

On  the  other  view,  that  daylight  means  “The  Friend,” 

It  is  also  a reflection  of  the  same  prophet. 

For,  as  it  is  wrong  to  swear  by  a transitory  being, 

How  can  we  suppose  a transitory  being  spoken  of  by  God  ? 
The  Friend  of  God  said,  “ I love  not  them  that  set ! ” 2 
How,  then,  could  Allah  have  meant  a transitory  being  ? 
Again,  the  words  “ by  the  night  ” mean  Muhammad’s 
veiling, 

Namely,  the  fair  earthly  body  that  he  bore  ; 

When  his  sun  proceeded  from  heaven  on  high 
Into  that  body’s  night,  it  said,  “He  hath  not  forsaken  thee;” 
Union  with  God  arose  out  of  the  depth  of  that  disgrace; 
That  boon  was  the  word,  “ He  hath  not  been  displeased.” 

1 Koran  xciii.  : “ By  tho  daylight  night  overshadowed  Abraham,  he 
and  by  the  night  thy  Lord  hath  not  beheld  a star,  and  he  said,  ‘ This  is 
forsaken  thee  nor  been  displeased.”  my  Lord  ; ’ but  when  it  set  he  said 

2 Koran  vi.  76  : “ And  when  the  ‘ I love  not  gods  which  set.’  ” 


STORY  I.] 


THE  SUFI’S  BEAST. 


65 


Expressions  of  religious  or  other  feeling  derive  their  only 
value  from  the  state  of  mind  from  which  they  proceed 
(p.  107). 

Every  expression  is  the  sign  of  a state  of  mind  ; 

That  state  is  a hand,  the  expression  an  instrument. 

A goldsmith’s  instruments  in  the  hand  of  a cobbler 
Are  as  grains  of  wheat  sown  on  sand. 

The  tools  of  a cobbler  in  the  hand  of  a cultivator 
Are  as  grass  before  a dog  or  bones  before  an  ass. 

The  words,  “ I am  the  Truth  ” were  light  in  Mansur’s 1 
mouth, 

In  the  mouth  of  Pharaoh  “I  am  the  Lord  Supreme”  was 
blasphemy. 

The  staff  in  the  hand  of  Moses  was  a witness, 

In  the  hands  of  the  magicians  it  was  naught. 

For  this  cause  ’Isa  taught  not  to  that  foolish  man 
The  words  of  power  whereby  he  raised  the  dead. 

For  he  who  is  ignorant  misuses  the  instrument ; 

If  you  strike  flint  on  mud  you  will  get  no  fire. 

Hand  and  instrument  resemble  flint  and  steel ; 

You  must  have  a pair;  a pair  is  needed  to  generate. 

He  who  has  no  peer  or  member  is  the  “ One,” 

An  uneven  number,  One  without  dispute ! 

Whoso  says  “one”  and  “two,”  and  so  on, 

Confesses  thereby  the  existence  of  the  “ One.” 

When  the  illusion  of  seeing  double  is  swept  away, 

They  who  say  “ one  ” and  “ two  ” are  even  as  they  who  say 
“ One.” 

If  you  take  “ One  ” as  your  ball  in  his  tennis-field, 

It  is  made  to  revolve  by  the  strokes  of  his  bat.2 

Yea,  the  ball  that  is  even  and  without  fault 

Is  made  to  revolve  by  the  strokes  of  the  King’s  hand. 

0 man  of  double  vision,3  hearken  with  attention, 

1 Mansur  Hallaj,  a celebrated  2 l.e.,  unity  is  made  to  appear 
Sufi  who  was  put  to  death  at  Bag-  plurality  (see  Gulshan  i Raz 
dad  in  309  a.h.  for  using  these  710) 

words.  3 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  104. 

B 


66 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


Seek  a cure  for  your  defective  sight  by  listening. 
Many  are  the  holy  words  that  find  no  entrance 
Into  blind  hearts,  but  they  enter  hearts  full  of  light. 
But  the  deceits  of  Satan  enter  crooked  hearts, 

Even  as  crooked  shoes  fit  crooked  feet. 

Though  you  repeat  pious  expressions  again  and  again, 
If  you  are  a fool,  they  affect  you  not  at  all ; — 

Nay,  not  though  you  set  them  down  in  writing, 

And  though  you  proclaim  them  vauntingly ; 

Wisdom  averts  its  face  from  you,  0 man  of  sin, 
Wisdom  breaks  away  from  you  and  takes  to  flight ! 


On  Taqlid,  Hind  imitation  or  cant  (p.  112). 

“ 0 wretch,  why  did  you  not  come  and  say  to  me, 

‘ Such  and  such  a disastrous  affair  has  occurred  ? ’ ” 

The  servant  replied,  “ By  Allah,  I came  again  and  again, 
That  I might  acquaint  you  with  the  matter. 

You  were  always  saying,  ‘The  ass  is  gone,  my  lad  ! ’ 
Along  with  the  others  in  high  excitement ; 

So  I went  away,  thinking  you  knew  all  about  it, 

And  were  pleased  at  the  transaction,  being  a wise  man.” 
The  Sufi  said,  “ They  were  all  singing  the  same  words, 

So  I felt  impelled  to  sing  them  as  well. 

Blind  imitation  of  them  has  undone  me. 

Cursed  be  that  blind  imitation  ! ” 

The  effect  of  blindly  imitating  unprofitable  conduct 
Is  that  men  cast  away  honour  for  a morsel  of  bread. 

The  ecstasy  of  that  company  cast  a reflection, 

Whereby  that  Sufi’s  heart  became  ecstatic  like  them. 

You  need  many  reflections  from  your  associates 
In  order  to  draw  water  from  the  peerless  Ocean. 

The  first  reflection  cast  is  mere  blind  imitation ; 

After  it  has  been  often  repeated  you  may  test  its  truth. 
Till  it  is  thus  verified,  take  it  not  from  your  friends; 

The  drop,  not  yet  become  pearl,  sever  not  from  its  shell. 


STORY  I.] 


THE  SUFI’S  BEAST. 


67 


Evil  influence  of  covetousness  (p.  1 1 2). 

Would  you  have  eyes  and  ears  of  reason  clear, 

Tear  off  the  obstructing  veil  of  greed ! 

The  blind  imitation  of  that  Sufi  proceeded  from  greed  : 
Greed  closed  his  mind  to  the  pure  light. 

Yea,  ’twas  greed  that  led  astray  that  Sufi, 

And  brought  him  to  loss  of  property  and  ruin. 

Greed  of  victuals,  greed  of  that  ecstatic  singing 
Hindered  his  wits  from  grasping  the  truth. 

If  greed  stained  the  face  of  a mirror, 

That  mirror  would  be  as  deceitful  as  we  men  are.1 
If  a pair  of  scales  were  greedy  of  riches, 

Would  they  tell  truly  the  weight  of  anything? 

The  Prophet  saith,  “ 0 people,  through  singleness  of  mind, 
I ask  of  you  no  recompense  for  my  prophesying ; 2 
I am  a guide ; God  buyeth  my  guidance  for  you, 

God  giveth  you  my  guidance  in  both  worlds. 

True,  a guide  deserves  his  wages ; 

Wages  are  due  to  him  for  directing  you  aright. 

But  what  are  my  wages  ? The  vision  of  The  Friend. 

Abu  Bakr  indeed  offered  me  forty  thousand  pieces  of  gold, 
But  his  forty  thousand  pieces  were  no  wages  for  me.3 
How  could  I take  brass  beads  for  pearls  of  Aden  ? ” 

I will  tell  you  a tale  ; hearken  attentively. 

That  you  may  know  how  greed  closes  up  the  ears. 

Every  man  subject  to  greed  is  a miser. 

Can  eyes  of  hearts  clouded  with  greed  see  clearly  ? 

The  illusion  of  rank  and  riches  blinds  his  sight, 

Like  hair  dropping  down  before  his  eyes. 

1 The  Turkish  commentator  trans-  3 Abu  Bakr  made  over  all  his 

lates  thus.  The  Lucknow  copy  reads  goods  to  the  Prophet  in  aid  of  the 
Ba  sati  for  Ala  sti.  expedition  to  Syria. 

2 Koran  xi.  53. 


68 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ii. 


Story  II.  The  Pauper  and  the  Prisoners  (p.  1 1 3). 

A certain  pauper  obtained  admittance  to  a prison,  and 
annoyed  the  prisoners  by  eating  up  all  their  victuals,  and 
leaving  them  none.  At  last  they  made  a formal  complaint 
to  the  Qazi,  and  prayed  him  to  banish  the  greedy  pauper 
from  the  prison.  The  Qazi  summoned  the  pauper  before 
him,  and  asked  him  why  he  did  not  go  to  his  own  house 
instead  of  living  on  the  prisoners.  The  pauper  replied 
that  he  had  no  house  or  means  of  livelihood  except  that 
supplied  by  the  prison  ; whereupon  the  Qazi  ordered  him 
to  be  carried  through  the  city,  and  proclamation  to 
be  made  that  he  was  a pauper,  that  no  one  might  be 
induced  to  lend  him  money  or  trade  with  him.  Accord- 
ingly the  attendants  sought  for  a camel  whereon  to  carry 
him  through  the  city,  and  at  last  induced  a Kurd  who 
sold  firewood  to  lend  his  camel  for  the  purpose.  The 
Kurd  consented  from  greed  of  reward,  and  the  pauper, 
being  seated  on  the  camel,  was  carried  through  the  city 
from  morning  till  evening,  proclamation  being  made  in 
Persian,  Arabic,  and  Kurdish  that  he  was  a pauper. 
When  evening  came  the  Kurd  demanded  payment,  but 
the  pauper  refused  to  give  him  anything,  observing  that 
if  he  had  kept  his  ears  open  he  must  have  heard  the  pro- 
clamation. Thus  the  Kurd  was  led  by  greed  to  spend 
the  day  in  useless  labour. 

Satan’s  office  in  the  world  (p.  1 14). 

The  pauper  said,  “Your  beneficence  is  my  sustenance ; 

To  me,  as  to  aliens,  your  prison  is  a paradise. 

If  you  banish  me  from  your  prison  in  reprobation, 

I must  needs  die  of  poverty  and  affliction.” 

Just  so  Iblis  said  to  Allah,  “ 0 have  compassion  ; 

Lord ! respite  me  till  the  day  of  resurrection.1 
For  in  this  prison  of  the  world  I am  at  ease, — 

1 Koran  vii.  13. 


STORY  II.]  THE  PAUPER  AND  THE  PRISONERS.  69 

That  I may  slay  the  children  of  my  enemies. 

From  every  one  who  has  true  faith  for  food, 

And  as  bread  for  his  provisions  by  the  way, 

I take  it  away  by  fraud  or  deceit, 

So  that  they  raise  bitter  cries  of  regret. 

Sometimes  I menace  them  with  poverty,1 
Sometimes  I blind  their  eyes  with  tresses  and  moles.” 

In  this  prison  the  food  of  true  faith  is  scarce, 

And  by  the  tricks  of  this  dog  what  there  is  is  lost. 

In  spite  of  prayers  and  fasts  and  endless  pains, 

Our  food  is  altogether  devoured  by  him. 

Let  us  seek  refuge  with  Allah  from  Satan. 

Alas ! we  are  perishing  by  his  insolence. 

The  dog  is  one,  yet  he  enters  a thousand  forms ; 2 
Whatever  he  enters  straight  becomes  himself. 

Whatever  makes  you  shiver,  know  he  is  in  it, — 

The  Devil  is  hidden  beneath  its  outward  form. 

When  he  finds  no  form  at  hand,  he  enters  your  thoughts, 
To  cause  them  to  draw  you  into  sin. 

From  your  thoughts  proceeds  destruction, 

When  from  time  to  time  evil  thoughts  occur  to  you. 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  pleasure,  sometimes  of  business, 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  science,  sometimes  of  house  and 
home. 

Sometimes  thoughts  of  gain  and  traffic, 

Sometimes  thoughts  of  merchandise  and  wealth. 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  money  and  wives  and  children, 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  wisdom  or  of  sadness. 

Sometimes  thoughts  of  household  goods  and  fine  linen, 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  carpets,  sometimes  of  sweepers. 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  mills,  gardens,  and  villas, 
Sometimes  of  clouds  and  mists  and  jokes  and  jests. 
Sometimes  thoughts  of  peace  and  war, 

Sometimes  thoughts  of  honour  and  disgrace. 

Ah  ! cast  out  of  your  head  these  vain  imaginations, 

1 Koran  ii.  279. 

- Cf.  Gulshan  i Raz,  p.  86. 


70 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


Ah ! sweep  out  of  your  heart  these  evil  suggestions. 

Cry,  “ There  is  no  power  nor  strength  but  in  God  ! ” 

To  avert  the  Evil  One  from  the  world  and  your  own  soul. 

It  is  the  true  Beloved  who  causes  all  outward  earthly 
heauty  to  exist  (p.  1 1 5 ). 

Whatsoever  is  perceived  by  sense  He  annuls, 

But  He  stablishes  that  which  is  hidden  from  the  senses. 
The  lover’s  love  is  visible,  his  Beloved  hidden. 

The  Friend  is  absent,  the  distraction  he  causes  present. 
Renounce  these  affections  for  outward  forms, 

Love  depends  not  on  outward  form  or  face. 

Whatever  is  beloved  is  not  a mere  empty  form, 

Whether  your  beloved  be  of  the  earth  or  of  heaven. 
Whatever  be  the  form  you  have  fallen  in  love  with, — 
Why  do  you  forsake  it  the  moment  life  leaves  it  ? 

The  form  is  still  there ; whence,  then,  this  disgust  at  it  ? 
Ah  ! lover,  consider  well  what  is  really  your  beloved. 

If  a thing  perceived  by  outward  senses  is  the  beloved, 
Then  all  who  retain  their  senses  must  still  love  it ; 

And  since  love  increases  constancy, 

How  can  constancy  fail  while  form  abides  ? 1 
But  the  truth  is,  the  sun’s  beams  strike  the  wall, 

And  the  wall  only  reflects  that  borrowed  light. 

Why  give  your  heart  to  mere  stones,  0 simpleton  ? 

Go  ! seek  the  source  of  light  which  shineth  alway  ! 

Distinguish  well  true  dawn  from  false  dawn, 

Distinguish  the  colour  of  the  wine  from  that  of  the  cup ; 
So  that,  instead  of  many  eyes  of  caprice, 

One  eye  may  be  opened  through  patience  and  constancy. 
Then  you  will  behold  true  colours  instead  of  false, 

And  precious  jewels  in  lieu  of  stones. 

But  what  is  a jewel  ? Nay,  you  will  be  an  ocean  of  pearls  ; 
Yea,  a sun  that  measures  the  heavens! 

1 This  couplet  exercises  both  the  Turkish  and  the  Lucknow  com- 
mentators. 


71 


STORY  II.]  THE  PAUPER  AND  THE  PRISONERS. 

The  real  Workman  is  hidden  in  Ilis  workshop, 

Go  you  into  that  workshop  and  see  Him  face  to  face. 
Inasmuch  as  over  that  Workman  His  work  spreads  a 
curtain, 

You  cannot  see  Him  outside  His  work. 

Since  His  workshop  is  the  abode  of  the  Wise  One, 

Whoso  seeks  Him  without  is  ignorant  of  Him. 

Come,  then,  into  His  workshop,  which  is  Not-being,1 
That  you  may  see  the  Creator  and  creation  at  once. 
Whoso  has  seen  how  bright  is  the  workshop 
Sees  how  obscure  is  the  outside  of  that  shop. 

Rebellious  Pharaoh  set  his  face  towards  Being  (egoism). 
And  was  perforce  blind  to  that  workshop. 

Perforce  he  looked  for  the  Divine  decree  to  change, 

And  hoped  to  turn  his  destiny  from  his  door. 

While  destiny  at  the  impotence  of  that  crafty  one 
All  the  while  was  secretly  mocking. 

He  slew  a hundred  thousand  guiltless  babes 

That  the  ordinance  and  decree  of  Allah  might  be  thwarted. 

That  the  prophet  Moses  might  not  be  born  alive, 

He  committed  a thousand  murders  in  the  land. 

He  did  all  this,  yet  Moses  was  born, 

And  was  protected  against  his  wrath. 

Had  he  but  seen  the  Eternal  workshop. 

He  had  refrained  hand  and  foot  from  these  vain  devices. 
Within  his  house  was  Moses  safe  and  sound, 

While  he  was  killing  the  babes  outside  to  no  purpose. 

Just  so  the  slave  of  lusts  who  pampers  his  body 
Fancies  that  some  other  man  bears  him  ill-will ; 

Saying  this  one  is  my  enemy,  and  this  one  my  foe, 

While  it  is  his  own  body  which  is  his  enemy  and  foe. 

He  is  like  Pharaoh,  and  his  body  is  like  Moses, 

He  runs  abroad  crying,  “ Where  is  my  foe  ? ” 

While  lust  is  in  his  house,  which  is  his  body, 

He  bites  his  finger  in  spite  against  strangers. 

1 I.e.,  annihilation  of  self  and  of  all  phenomenal  being,  regarding  self  as 
naught  in  the  presence  of  the  Deity. 


72 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ii. 


Then  follows  an  anecdote  of  a man  who  slew  his  mother 
because  she  was  alway  misconducting  herself  with 
strangers,  and  who  excused  himself  by  pleading  that  if 
he  had  not  done  so  he  would  have  been  obliged  to  slay 
strangers  every  day,  and  thus  incur  blood-guiltiness.  Lust 
is  likened  to  this  abandoned  mother ; when  it  is  once  slain, 
you  are  at  peace  with  all  men.  In  answer  to  an  objection 
that  if  this  were  so  the  prophets  and  saints,  who  have 
subdued  lust,  would  not  have  been  hated  and  oppressed 
as  they  were,  it  is  pointed  out  that  they  who  hated  the 
prophets  in  reality  hated  themselves,  just  as  sick  men 
quarrel  with  the  physician  or  boys  with  the  teacher. 
Prophets  and  saints  are  created  to  test  the  dispositions  of 
men,  that  the  good  may  be  severed  from  the  bad.  The 
numerous  grades  of  prophets,  of  saints,  and  of  holy  men 
are  ordained,  as  so  many  curtains  of  the  light  of  God,  to 
tone  down  its  brilliance,  and  make  it  visible  to  all  grades 
of  human  sight. 

Story  III.  The  King  and  his  Two  Slaves  (p.  1 1 8). 

A king  purchased  two  slaves,  one  extremely  handsome, 
and  the  other  very  ugly.  He  sent  the  first  away  to  the 
bath,  and  in  his  absence  questioned  the  other.  He  told 
him  that  the  first  slave  had  given  a very  bad  account  of 
him,  saying  that  he  was  a thief  and  a bad  character,  and 
asked  if  it  was  true.  The  second  slave  replied  that  the 
first  was  everything  that  was  good,  his  inward  qualities 
corresponding  to  the  beauty  of  his  outward  appearance, 
and  that  whatever  he  had  told  the  king  was  worthy  of 
credit.  The  king  replied  that  beauty  was  only  an  accident, 
and  that,  according  to  the  tradition,  accidents  “ endure 
only  two  moments;” — that  at  death  the  animal  soul  is 
destroyed, — that  the  text,  “ Whoso  shall  present  himself 
with  beauty  shall  receive  tenfold  reward,”  1 does  not  refer 
to  outward  accidents,  but  to  the  “ substance,”  the  eternal 

1 Koran  vi.  161. 


STORY  III.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES. 


73 


soul.  The  slave  in  reply  urged  that  the  accidents  of  good 
works  and  thoughts  will  in  some  way  bear  fruit  in  the 
next  world,  pointing  out  that  thought  is  always  the  pre- 
cursor of  the  completed  work,  as  the  plan  of  the  architect 
precedes  the  building,  and  the  gardener’s  design  the 
perfect  fruit  resulting  from  his  labours.  He  added  that 
the  world  is  only  the  realised  thought  of  “ Universal 
Reason.” 1 The  king  then  sent  away  the  slave  with  whom 
he  had  held  this  discourse,  and  summoned  the  other,  and 
told  him  that  his  fellow  slave  had  given  a bad  account  of 
him,  and  asked  what  he  had  to  say.  He  replied  that  his 
fellow  slave  was  a liar  and  a rascal,  and  the  king  then 
dismissed  him,  observing  that,  in  accordance  with  the  tra- 
dition, “ Every  man  is  hidden  under  his  own  tongue,”  his 
tongue  had  betrayed  his  inner  vileness.  “ The  safety  of  a 
man  lies  in  holding  his  tongue.” 


The  apostolical  succession  of  the  prophets  and  the 
saints  (p.  1 20). 

With  that  “ brightness  of  lightning  ” 2 He  kindled  their 
souls 

So  that  Adam  acquired  knowledge  from  that  light. 

That  which  shone  from  Adam  was  gathered  by  Seth, 
Wherefore  Adam  made  him  his  viceroy  when  he  saw  it. 
When  Noah  received  the  gift  of  that  lustre, 

He  became  a soul  bearing  pearls  in  the  tempest  of  the 
flood. 

By  that  light  the  soul  of  Abraham  was  led, 

Without  fear  he  entered  Nimrod’s  fiery  furnace. 

When  Iskmael  sought  out  that  light, 

He  meekly  laid  his  head  beneath  his  father’s  bright  knife. 
The  soul  of  David  was  warmed  by  its  heat, 

Iron  became  pliable  by  the  force  of  his  weaving.3 

1 I.e.,  the  Logos  as  Demiurge.  inspiration  is  likened  to  a light 
Koran  xxiv.  43.  The  prophetic  handed  on  from  one  to  another. 

3 Koran  xxi.  80. 


74 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


When  Solomon  was  nurtured  by  its  fruition, 

The  devils  became  the  submissive  slaves  of  his  will. 

When  Jacob  bowed  his  head  to  the  Divine  decree, 

He  recovered  his  sight  at  the  scent  of  his  son.1 
When  moonlike  Joseph  saw  that  brilliant  sun, 

He  became  so  expert  as  he  was  in  interpreting  dreams. 
When  the  staff  drew  might  from  the  hand  of  Moses, 

It  devoured  the  realm  of  Pharaoh  at  a mouthful. 

When  the  soul  of  Jirjis 2 became  privy  to  its  light, 

He  sacrificed  his  life  seven  times,  and  regained  it. 

When  Zakhariah  3 boasted  of  his  love  for  it, 

He  ransomed  his  life  in  the  hollow  of  the  tree. 

When  Jonah  swallowed  a draught  from  that  cup, 

He  found  repose  in  the  belly  of  the  fish. 

When  John  the  Baptist  became  filled  with  its  unction, 

He  laid  his  head  in  the  golden  charger  in  ardour  for  it. 
When  Jethro  became  aware  of  this  exaltation, 

He  risked  his  life  to  find  it. 

Patient  Job  gave  thanks  for  seven  years, 

For  in  his  calamities  he  saw  signs  of  its  approach. 

When  Khizr  and  Elias  boasted  of  gaining  it, 

They  found  the  water  of  life  and  were  no  more  seen. 
When  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary,  found  that  ladder  of  ascent, 

He  ascended  to  the  height  of  the  fourth  heaven. 

When  Muhammad  gained  that  blessed  possession, 

In  a moment  he  cleft  asunder  the  disk  of  the  moon.4 
When  Abu  Bakr  became  the  exemplar  of  that  grace, 

He  was  companion  of  that  Lord,  and  a “ faithful  witness.'’ 
When  ’Omar  was  enraptured  with  that  beauty, 

Like  a mind  he  discerned  true  and  false.5 
When  Osman  viewed  those  brilliant  sights, 

He  diffused  light  and  became  “ Lord  of  the  two  lights.”0 


1 Koran  lxxvii.  96. 

2 Jirjis  or  St.  George  is  supposed 
by  Muhammadans  to  be  the  same 
person  as  Khizr  or  Elias. 

3 Zakhariah  the  prophet  is  said 

to  have  taken  refuge  from  his  per- 

secutors in  the  hollow  of  a tree. 


4 Koran  liv.  1. 

5 ’Omar  was  called  “ The  Dis- 
cerner.” 

6 He  bore  this  name  because  he 
had  two  daughters  of  Muhammad 
as  his  wives. 


75 


STORY  III.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES. 


When  Martaza  (’Ali)  shined  with  its  reflection, 

He  became  the  “ Lion  of  God  ” in  the  soul’s  domain. 
When  his  two  sons  were  illumined  by  this  light, 

They  became  the  “ Pearly  earrings  of  highest  heaven  ; ” 1 
One  of  them  losing  his  life  by  poison, 

The  other  losing  his  head  as  he  went  about  his  march. 
When  Junaid  was  succoured  by  the  forces  of  that  light, 
His  ecstatic  states  exceeded  counting. 

Bayazid  saw  his  way  to  increased  fruition  thereof, 

And  gained  from  God  the  name  “ Polestar  of  Gnostics.’- 
What  time  King  Mansur  became  victorious,2 
He  left  his  throne  and  hastened  to  the  stake. 

When  Karkhi  of  Karkh  became  its  keeper, 

He  became  lord  of  love  and  of  the  breath  of  Jesus. 
Ibrahim  son  of  Adham  rode  his  horse  to  that  point, 

And  became  king  of  kings  of  equity. 

And  that  Shakik  starting  from  that  junction 
Became  a sun  of  wit  and  acute  of  genius. 

Fazfl  from  a highway  robber  became  a sage  of  the  way,3 * 
When  he  was  regarded  with  esteem  by  the  King. 

To  Bishr  Hafi  the  doctrine  was  announced, 

And  he  set  his  face  towards  the  desert  of  inquiry. 

When  Zu-l-Nun  became  distraught  with  care  for  it, 
Egypt  (Milk)  as  sugar  became  the  house  of  his  soul. 
When  Sari i lost  his  head  in  seeking  the  way  thereto, 

His  rank  was  exalted  above  the  seats  of  the  mighty. 

A hundred  thousand  great  (spiritual)  kings 
Exalted  by  this  divine  light  approach  the  world. 

Their  names  remain  hidden  through  God’s  jealousy ; 
Every  beggar  tells  not  their  names.5 


1 A tradition  gives  this  title  to 
Hasan  and  Hussain. 

2 Mansiir  Kalla j,  the  celebrated 
Sufi  impaled  at  Bagdad.  Shah  or 
King  was  a title  often  assumed  by 
darveshes. 

3 The  “way”  means  the  Sufi 

doctrines. 


4 All  these  saints  lived  in  the 
second  and  third  centuries  of  the 
Flight. 

5 In  the  introduction  to  the  Na- 
fahatu-’l  Uns,  Jami  says  there  are 
always  4000  saints  on  the  earth  who 
are  not  even  known  to  one  another. 


76 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


Story  IV.  The  Falcon  and  the  Owls  (p.  125). 

A certain  falcon  lost  his  way,  and  found  himself  in  the 
waste  places  inhabited  by  owls.  The  owls  suspected  that 
he  had  come  to  seize  their  nests,  and  al)  surrounded  him 
to  make  an  end  of  him.  The  falcon  assured  them  that  he 
had  no  such  design  as  they  imputed  to  him,  that  his 
abode  was  on  the  wrist  of  the  king,  and  that  he  did  not 
envy  their  foul  habitation.  The  owls  replied  that  he  was 
trying  to  deceive  them,  inasmuch  as  such  a strange  bird 
as  he  could  not  be  a favourite  of  the  king.  The  falcon 
repeated  that  he  was  indeed  a favourite  of  the  king,  and 
that  the  king  would  assuredly  destroy  their  houses  if  they 
injured  him,  and  proceeded  to  give  them  some  good 
advice  on  the  folly  of  trusting  to  outward  appearances. 
He  said,  “ It  is  true  I am  not  homogeneous  with  the 
king,  but  yet  the  king’s  light  is  reflected  in  me,  as  water 
becomes  homogeneous  with  earth  in  plants.  I am,  as  it 
were,  the  dust  beneath  the  king’s  feet ; and  if  you  become 
like  me  in  this  respect,  you  will  be  exalted  as  I am. 
Copy  the  outward  form  you  behold  in  me,  and  perchance 
you  will  reach  the  real  substance  of  the  king.” 


The  right  use  of  forms  (p.  1 26). 

That  my  outward  form  may  not  mislead  you. 
Digest  my  sweet  advice  before  copying  me. 

Many  are  they  who  have  been  captured  by  form, 
Who  aimed  at  form,  and  found  Allah. 

After  all,  soul  is  linked  to  body, 

Though  it  in  nowise  resembles  the  body. 

The  power  of  the  light  of  the  eye  is  mated  with  fat, 
The  light  of  the  heart  is  hidden  in  a drop  of  blood. 
Joy  harbours  in  the  kidneys  and  pain  in  the  liver, 
The  lamp  of  reason  in  the  brains  of  the  head  ; 

Smell  in  the  nostrils  and  speech  in  the  tongue, 


STORY  V.] 


THE  THIRSTY  MAN. 


77 


Concupiscence  in  the  flesh  and  courage  in  the  heart. 

These  connections  are  not  without  a why  and  a how, 

But  reason  is  at  a loss  to  understand  the  how. 

Universal  Soul  had  connection  with  Partial  Soul,1 
Which  thence  conceived  a pearl  and  retained  it  in  its 
bosom. 

From  that  connection,  like  Mary, 

Soul  became  pregnant  of  a fair  Messiah  ; — 

Not  that  Messiah  who  walked  upon  earth  and  water, 

But  that  Messiah  who  is  higher  than  space.2 
Next,  as  Soul  became  pregnant  by  the  Soul  of  souls, 

So  by  the  former  Soul  did  the  world  become  pregnant ; 
Then  the  World  brought  forth  another  world, 

And  of  this  last  are  brought  forth  other  worlds. 

Should  I reckon  them  in  my  speech  till  the  last  day 
I should  fail  to  tell  the  total  of  these  resurrections.3 


Story  V.  The  Thirsty  Man  who  threw  Bricks  into 
the  Water  (p.  1 26). 


A thirsty  man  discovered  a tank  of  water,  but  conld  not 
drink  of  it  because  it  was  surrounded  by  a high  wall.  He 
took  some  of  the  bricks  off  the  top  of  the  wall  and  cast 
them  over  it  into  the  water.  The  water  cried  out,  “ What 
advantage  do  you  gain  . by  doing  this  ? ” He  made 
answer,  “The  first  advantage  is  this,  that  I hear  your 
voice ; and  the  second,  that  the  more  bricks  I pull  off  the 
wall,  the  nearer  I approach  to  you.”  The  moral  is,  that  so 
long  as  the  wall  of  the  body  intervenes,  we  cannot  reach 
the  water  of  life.  The  abasement  of  the  body  brings  men 
nearer  to  union  with  the  Deity.  Destroy,  therefore,  the 


1 This  is  a figurative  account  of 
the  emanations  of  Absolute  Being, 
whereby  the  world  of  phenomena  is 
constituted.  The  idea  comes  from 
Plotinus  (see  Gulshan  i Raz,  p.  21, 
note,  and  p.  66). 

2 I.e.,  the  spirit  of  the  Prophet 


Muhammad,  whom  the  Sufis  identify 
with  the  Primal  Soul. 

3  “ Continually  is  creation  born 
again  in  a new  creation  ” (Gulshan 
i Raz,  p.  66).  By  constant  effluxes 
from  Absolute  Being  the  world  of 
phenomena  is  every  moment  re- 
newed. 


78 


THE  MASH  AVI. 


[book  ii. 


fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul.  Then  follows 
another  parable  to  illustrate  the  folly  of  procrastination  in 
this  important  matter. 


“ It  was  not  ye  who  shot,  but  God  shot ; and  those  arrows 
were  God’s,  not  yours”  (p.  130).1 

’Tis  God’s  light  that  illumines  the  senses’  light, 

That  is  the  meaning  of  “ Light  upon  light.”  2 
The  senses’  light  draws  us  earthwards. 

God’s  light  calls  us  heavenwards. 

As  objects  of  sense  are  of  base  condition, 

God’s  light  is  an  ocean,  and  the  senses’  light  a dewdrop. 
But  that  light  which  is  “ upon  this  light  ” is  not  seen, 
Save  through  signs  and  holy  discourses. 

Since  the  senses’  light  is  gross  and  dense, 

It  lies  hidden  in  the  black  pupil  of  the  eye. 

When  you  cannot  see  the  senses’  light  with  the  eye, 

How  can  you  see  with  the  eye  the  Light  of  the  mind  ? 

As  the  senses’  light  is  hidden  in  these  gross  veils, 

Must  not  that  Light  which  is  pure  be  also  hidden  ? 

Like  the  senses,  this  world  is  ruled  by  a hidden  Power. 

It  confesses  its  impotence  before  that  hidden  Power, 
Which  sometimes  exalts  it  and  sometimes  lays  it  low, 
Sometimes  makes  it  dry  and  sometimes  moist. 

The  hand  is  hidden,  yet  we  see  the  pen  writing ; 

The  horse  is  galloping,  yet  the  rider  is  hid  from  view. 

The  arrow  speeds  forth,  yet  the  bow  is  not  seen ; 

Souls  are  seen,  the  Soul  of  souls  (God)  is  hidden. 

Break  not  the  arrow,  for  it  is  the  arrow  of  the  King ; 

Yea,  it  is  an  arrow  from  the  bow  of  Wisdom. 

“Ye  shot  not  when  ye  shot,”  was  said  by  God ; 

God’s  action  has  predominance  over  all  actions. 

Break  your  own  passion,  break  not  that  arrow, 

The  eye  of  passion  takes  milk  to  be  blood. 

1 Koran  viii.  17,  meaning,  “God  is  the  Fa’il  i Ilaqiqi,  or  only  Real 
Agent.”  2 Koran  xxiv.  35. 


story  vi.]  LUQMAN’S  MASTER  EXAMINES  HIM. 


79 


Kiss  that  arrow  and  bear  it  to  the  King, 

Yea,  though  it  be  stained  with  your  own  blood. 
Whatsoever  is  seen  is  weak  and  base  and  impotent ; 

What  is  hidden  is  equally  fierce  and  headstrong. 

We  are  the  captured  game  ; who  is  the  snare  ? 

We  are  the  balls  ; where  is  the  bat  ? 

He  tears  and  mends  ; who  is  this  tailor  ? 

He  fans  and  kindles  the  llame  ; who  is  this  kindler  ? 

At  one  time  He  makes  the  faithful  one  an  infidel, 

At  another  lie  makes  the  atheist  a devotee ! 

Next  comes  an  anecdote  of  a dirty  man  who  refused  to 
bathe  because  he  was  ashamed  to  go  into  the  water,  with  the 
moral  that  “ Shame  hinders  religion  ; ” 1 and  then  another 
of  Zu’l  Ni'm,  a celebrated  Egyptian  Sufi  of  the  third 
century  A.H.  Zu’l  Nun  appeared  to  his  ignorant  friends 
to  be  mad,  and  they  accordingly  confined  him  in  a mad- 
house. After  a time  they  thought  that  he  was  not  really 
mad,  but  had  feigned  madness  for  some  deep  purpose,  and 
they  went  to  the  madhouse  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  his 
health.  When  they  arrived  there,  Zu’l  Nun  asked  them 
who  they  were,  and  they  answered  that  they  were  his 
devoted  friends,  who  were  now  convinced  that  the  story  of 
his  being  mad  was  a calumny.  Zu’l  Nun  jumped  up  and 
drove  them  away  with  sticks  and  stones,  saying  that  true 
friendship  would  have  been  manifested  in  sharing  his 
troubles,  even  as  pure  gold  is  tried  by  fire. 

Story  VI.  Luqman’s  Master  examines  him  and  discovers 
his  Acuteness  (p.  132). 

Luqman  the  Sage,2  who  is  sometimes  identified  with 
Esop,  and  sometimes  with  the  nephew  of  the  prophet 
Job,  though  “gifted  with  wisdom  by  God,”  was  a slave. 

1 Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,vol.  religion;”  and  the  other,  “Shame 
ii.  pp.  379  and  418,  gives  two  pro-  hinders  getting  a livelihood.” 
verbs — one,  “Shame  is  a part  of  2 See  Koran  xxxi.  Another  anec- 
dote of  his  wit  occurs  in  Book  I. 


So 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  II. 


His  master,  however,  discovered  his  worth,  and  became 
extremely  attached  to  him,  so  that  he  never  received  any 
delicacy  without  giving  Luqman  a share  of  it.  One  day, 
having  received  a water-melon,  he  gave  Luqman  the  best 
part  of  it,  and  Luqman  devoured  it  with  such  apparent 
relish  that  his  master  was  tempted  to  taste  it.  To  his 
surprise  he  fouud  it  very  bitter,  and  asked  Luqman  why 
he  had  not  told  him  of  this.  Luqman  replied  that  it  was 
not  for  him,  who  lived  on  his  master’s  bounty,  to  complain 
if  he  now  and  then  received  disagreeable  things  at  his 
hands.  Thus,  though  to  outward  appearance  a slave, 
Luqman  showed  himself  to  be  a lord. 

Love  endures  hardships  at  the  hands  of  the  Beloved  (p.  1 34). 

Through  love  bitter  things  seem  sweet, 

Through  love  bits  of  copper  are  made  gold. 

Through  love  dregs  taste  like  pure  wine, 

Through  love  pains  are  as  healing  balms. 

Through  love  thorns  become  roses, 

And  through  love  vinegar  becomes  sweet  wine. 

Through  love  the  stake  becomes  a throne, 

Through  love  reverse  of  fortune  seems  good  fortune. 
Through  love  a prison  seems  a rose  bower, 

Without  love  a grate  full  of  ashes  seems  a garden. 
Through  love  burning  fire  is  pleasing  light, 

Through  love  the  Devil  becomes  a Houri. 

Through  love  hard  stones  become  soft  as  butter, 

Without  love  soft  wax  becomes  hard  iron. 

Through  love  grief  is  as  joy, 

Through  love  Ghouls  turn  into  angels. 

Through  love  stings  are  as  honey, 

Through  love  lions  are  harmless  as  mice. 

Through  love  sickness  is  health, 

Through  love  wrath  is  as  mercy. 

Through  love  the  dead  rise  to  life, 

Through  love  the  king  becomes  a slave. 


STORY  VII.]  MOSES  AND  THE  SHEPHERD. 


81 


Even  when  an  evil  befalls  you,  have  due  regard ; 

Regard  well  him  who  does  you  this  ill  turn. 

The  sight  which  regards  the  ebb  and  flow  of  good  and  lL 
Opens  a passage  for  you  from  misfortune  to  happiness. 
Thence  you  see  the  one  state  moves  you  into  the  other, 
One  opposite  state  generating  its  opposite  in  exchange. 

So  long  as  you  experience  not  fears  after  joys, 

How  can  you  look  for  pleasures  after  disgusts  ? 

While  ye  fear  the  doom  of  the  angel  on  the  left  hand, 
Men  hope  for  the  bliss  of  the  angel  on  the  right.2 
May  you  gain  two  wings  ! 3 A fowl  with  only  one  winr 
Is  impotent  to  fly,  0 well-intentioned  one  ! 

Now  either  permit  me  to  hold  my  peace  altogether, 

Or  give  me  leave  to  explain  the  whole  matter. 

And  if  you  mislike  this  and  forbid  that, 

Who  can  tell  what  your  desire  is  ? 

You  must  have  the  soul  of  Abraham  in  order  with 
light 

To  see  the  mansions  of  Paradise  in  the  fire. 

Step  by  step  he  ascended  above  sun  and  moon, 

And  so  lagged  not  below,  as  a ring  that  fastens  a door. 
Since  the  “ Friend  of  God  ” ascended  above  the  heavens, 
And  said,  “ I love  not  Gods  that  set ; ” 4 
So  this  world  of  the  body  is  a breeder  of  misconceptions 
In  all  who  have  not  fled  from  lust. 


Story  YII.  Moses  and  the  Shepherd  (p.  138). 


Next  follows  an  anecdote  of  Bilkis,  Queen  of  Sheba, 
whose  reason  was  enlightened  by  the  counsels  of  the 


Hoopoo  sent  to  her  by  King 

1 The  doctrine  of  Heraclitus,  that 
opposite  states  generate  one  another, 
is  discussed  by  J elaludin  in  a passage 
quoted  in  Lumsden’s  Grammar,  ii. 
323,  and  is  mentioned  in  the  Phaedo 
and  the  Nicomachtean  Ethics. 

2 An  anacoluthon(see  Koran  1. 16). 


Solomon.  Outward  sense  is 

3 The  two  wings  are  hope  and 
fear,  both  of  which  are  needed  to 
guide  men’s  religious  flight  (see 
Book  III.  on  “Probability  the 
guide  of  life  ”). 

4 Koran  vi.  77. 


F 


82 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  II. 


as  opposed  to  true  reason  as  Abu  Jahl  was  to  Muhammad  ; 
and  when  the  outward  senses  are  replaced  by  the  true 
inner  reason,  man  sees  that  the  body  is  only  foam,  and  the 
heart  the  limitless  ocean.  Afterwards  comes  an  anecdote 
of  a philosopher  who  was  struck  blind  for  cavilling  at  the 
verse,  “ What  think  ye  ? If  at  early  morn  your  waters 
shall  have  sunk  away,  who  will  then  give  you  clear  Tun- 
ing water  ? ” 1 This  is  succeeded  by  the  story  of  Moses 
and  the  shepherd.  Moses  once  heard  a shepherd  praying 
as  follows : “0  God,  show  me  where  Thou  art,  that  I may 
become  Thy  servant.  I will  clean  Thy  shoes  and  comb  Thy 
hair,  and  sew  Thy  clothes,  and  fetch  Thee  milk.”  When 
Moses  heard  him  praying  in  this  senseless  manner,  he 
rebuked  him,  saying,  “ 0 foolish  one,  though  your  father 
was  a Musulman,  you  have  become  an  infidel.  God  is  a 
Spirit,  and  needs  not  such  gross  ministrations  as,  in  your 
ignorance,  you  suppose.”  The  shepherd  was  abashed  at 
his  rebuke,  and  tore  his  clothes  and  fled  away  into  the 
desert.  Then  a voice  from  heaven  was  heard,  saying,  “ O 
Moses,  wherefore  have  you  driven  away  my  servant  ? Your 
office  is  to  reconcile  my  people  with  me,  not  to  drive  them 
away  from  me.  I have  given  to  each  race  different  usages 
and  forms  of  praising  and  adoring  me.  I have  no  need  of 
their  praises,  being  exalted  above  all  such  needs.  I regard 
not  the  words  that  are  spoken,  but  the  heart  that  offers 
them.  I do  not  require  fine  words,  but  a burning  heart. 
Men’s  ways  of  showing  devotion  to  me  are  various,  but  so 
long  as  the  devotions  are  genuine,  they  are  accepted.” 


Religious  forms  indifferent  (p.  1 39). 

A voice  came  from  God  to  Moses, 

“ Why  hast  thou  sent  my  servant  away  ? 

Thou  hast  come  to  draw  men  to  union  with  me, 
Not  to  drive  them  far  away  from  me. 

1 Koran  lxvii.  30. 


STORY  VII.]  MOSES  AND  THE  SHEPHERD. 


S3 

So  far  as  possible,  engage  not  in  dissevering ; 

‘ The  thing  most  repugnant  to  me  is  divorce.’ 1 
To  each  person  have  1 allotted  peculiar  forms, 

To  each  have  I given  particular  usages. 

What  is  praiseworthy  in  thee  is  blamable  in  him, 

What  is  poison  for  thee  is  honey  for  him. 

What  is  good  in  him  is  bad  in  thee, 

What  is  fair  in  him  is  repulsive  in  thee. 

I am  exempt  from  all  purity  and  impurity, 

I need  not  the  laziness  or  alacrity  of  my  people. 

I created  not  men  to  gain  a profit  from  them, 

But  to  shower  my  beneficence  upon  them. 

In  the  men  of  Hind  the  usages  of  Hind  are  praiseworthy, 
In  the  men  of  Sind  those  of  Sind. 

I am  not  purified  by  their  praises, 

’Tis  they  who  become  pure  and  shining  thereby. 

I regard  not  the  outside  and  the  words, 

I regard  the  inside  and  the  state  of  heart. 

I look  at  the  heart  if  it  be  humble, 

Though  the  words  may  be  the  reverse  of  humble. 

Because  the  heart  is  substance,  and  words  accidents, 
Accidents  are  only  a means,  substance  is  the  final  cause. 
How  long  wilt  thou  dwell  on  words  and  superficialities  ? 

A burning  heart  is  what  I want ; consort  with  burning  ! 
Kindle  in  thy  heart  the  flame  of  love, 

And  burn  up  utterly  thoughts  and  fine  expressions. 

0 Moses ! the  lovers  of  fair  rites  are  one  class, 

They  whose  hearts  and  souls  burn  with  love  are  another. 
Lovers  must  burn  every  moment, 

As  tax  and  tithe  are  levied  on  a ruined  village. 

If  they  speak  amiss,  call  them  not  sinners ; 

If  a martyr  be  stained  with  blood,  wash  it  not  away. 
Blood  is  better  than  water  for  martyrs, 

This  fault  is  better  than  a thousand  correct  forms. 

No  need  to  turn  to  the  Ka’ba  when  one  is  in  it, 

And  divers  have  no  need  of  shoes. 


1 A tradition. 


THE  MASNAVI. 


84 


[book  II. 


One  does  not  take  a drunken  man  as  a guide  on  the  way, 
Nor  speak  of  darns  to  torn  garments. 

The  sect  of  lovers  is  distinct  from  all  others, 

Lovers  have  a religion  and  a faith  of  their  own. 

Though  the  ruby  has  no  stamp,  what  matters  it  ? 

Love  is  fearless  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  of  fear. 


Beware,  if  thou  offerest  praises  or  thanksgivings, 

And  know  them  to  be  even  as  the  babble  of  that  shepherd  ; 
Though  thy  praises  be  better  compared  with  his, 

Yet  in  regard  to  God  they  are  full  of  defects. 

How  long  wilt  thou  say,  ‘ They  obscure  the  truth, 

For  it  is  not  such  as  they  fancy  ’ ? 

Thy  own  prayers  are  accepted  only  through  mercy, 

They  are  suffered  as  the  prayers  of  an  impure  woman. 

If  her  prayers  are  made  impure  by  the  flow  of  blood, 
Thine  are  stained  with  metaphors  and  similitudes. 

Blood  is  impure,  yet  its  stain  is  removed  by  water ; 

But  that  impurity  of  ignorance  is  more  lasting, 

Seeing  that  without  the  blessed  water  of  God 

It  is  not  banished  from  the  man  who  is  subject  to  it. 

0 that  thou  wouldst  turn  thy  face  to  thy  own  prayers, 
And  become  cognisant  of  the  meaning  of  thy  ejaculations, 
And  say,  ‘ Ah  ! my  prayers  are  as  defective  as  my  being ; 
0 requite  me  good  for  evil ! ’ ” 


Moses  questions  God  as  to  the  reason  of  the  flourishing 
state  of  the  wicked  (p.  1 40). 

Moses  said,  “ 0 beneficent  Creator, 

With  whom  a moment’s  remembrance  is  as  long  ages, 

I see  Thy  plan  distorted  in  this  world  of  earth  and  water ; 
My  heart,  like  the  angel’s,  feels  a difficulty  thereat. 

With  what  object  hast  thou  framed  this  plan, 

And  sowed  therein  the  seeds  of  evil  ? 

Why  hast  thou  kindled  the  fire  of  violence  and  wrong  ? 
Why  burnt  up  mosques  and  them  who  worship  therein  ? 


story  viii.]  THE  MAN  AND  THE  PET  BEAR.  85 

Paradise  is  attached  to  requirements  unpleasant  to  us, 
Hell  is  attached  to  things  flattering  our  lusts. 

The  branch  full  of  sap  is  the  main  fuel  of  thy  fire. 

‘They  that  are  burnt  with  fire  are  near  to  Kausar.’ 1 
Whoso  is  in  prison  and  acquainted  with  troubles, 

That  is  in  requital  for  his  gluttony  and  lusts. 

Whoso  is  in  a palace  and  enjoying  wealth, 

That  is  in  reward  for  toils  and  troubles. 

Whoso  is  seen  enjoying  uncounted  gold  and  silver, 

Know  that  he  strove  patiently  to  acquire  it. 

He,  whose  soul  is  exempt  from  natural  conditions, 

And  who  possesses  the  power  of  overriding  causes, 

Can  see  without  causes,  like  eyes  that  pierce  night ; 

But  thou  who  art  dependent  on  sense  attend  to  causes. 

Having  left  Jesus,  thou  cherishest  an  ass  (lust),2 
And  art  perforce  excluded,  like  an  ass; 

The  portion  of  Jesus  is  knowledge  and  wisdom, 

Not  so  the  portion  of  an  ass,  0 asinine  one ! 

Thou  pitiest  thine  ass  when  it  complains ; 

So  art  thou  ignorant,  thy  ass  makes  thee  asinine. 

Keep  thy  pity  for  Jesus,  not  for  the  ass, 

Make  not  thy  lust  to  vanquish  thy  reason. 

Leave  thy  natural  lusts  to  whine  and  howl, 

Tear  thee  from  them,  escape  that  snare  of  the  soul ! 


Story  VIII.  The  Man  who  made  a Pet  of  a Bear  (p.  143).3 

A kind  man,  seeing  a serpent  overcoming  a bear,  went 
to  the  bear’s  assistance,  and  delivered  him  from  the  serpent. 
The  bear  was  so  sensible  of  the  kindness  the  man  had 
done  him  that  he  followed  him  about  wherever  he  went, 
and  became  his  faithful  slave,  guarding  him  from  every- 
thing that  might  annoy  him.  One  day  the  man  was 
lying  asleep,  and  the  bear,  according  to  his  custom, 
1 A saying  of  the  Prophet. 

2 Cp.  St.  Francis,  “My  brother,  the  ass.”  3 Anwari  Suhaili,  i.  27. 


86 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ii. 


was  sitting  by  him  and  driving  off  the  flies.  The  flies 
became  so  persistent  in  their  annoyances  that  the  bear 
lost  patience,  and  seizing  the  largest  stone  he  could  find, 
dashed  it  at  them  in  order  to  crush  them  utterly ; but  un- 
fortunately the  flies  escaped,  and  the  stone  lighted  upon 
the  sleeper’s  face  and  crushed  it.  The  moral  is,  “ Do  not 
make  friends  with  fools.”  In  the  course  of  this  story 
occur  anecdotes  of  a blind  man,  of  Moses  rebuking  the 
worshippers  of  the  calf,  and  of  the  Greek  physician 
Galen  and  a madman. 

He  who  needs  mercy  finds  it  (p.  143). 

Doing  kindness  is  the  game  and  quarry  of  good  men, 

A good  man  seeks  in  the  world  only  pains  to  cure. 
Wherever  there  is  a pain  there  goes  the  remedy, 
Wherever  there  is  poverty  there  goes  relief. 

Seek  not  water,  only  show  you  are  thirsty, 

That  water  may  spring  up  all  around  you. 

That  you  may  hear  the  words,  “ The  Lord  gives  them  to 
drink,” 1 

Be  athirst ! Allah  knows  what  is  best  for  you. 

Seek  you  the  water  of  mercy  ? Be  downcast, 

And  straightway  drink  the  wine  of  mercy  to  intoxication. 
Mercy  is  called  down  by  mercy  to  the  last. 

Withhold  not,  then,  mercy  from  any  one,  0 son  ! 

If  of  yourself  you  cannot  journey  to  the  Ka’ba, 

Represent  your  helplessness  to  the  Reliever. 

Cries  and  groans  are  a powerful  means, 

And  the  All-Merciful  is  a mighty  nurse. 

The  nurse  and  the  mother  keep  excusing  themselves, 

Till  their  child  begins  to  cry. 

In  you  too  has  God  created  infant  needs ; 

When  they  cry  out,  their  milk  is  brought  to  them ; 

God  said,  “ Call  on  God  ; ” continue  crying,  * 

So  that  the  milk  of  His  love  may  boil  up.2 

1 Koran  lxxvi.  21.  2 Koran  xvii.  no. 


stoky  VIII.]  THE  MAN  AND  THE  PET  BEAR. 


87 


Moses  and  the  ivorshipper  of  the  calf  (p.  145). 

Moses  said  to  one  of  those  full  of  vain  imaginations, 

“ 0 malevolent  one,  through  error  and  heresy 
You  entertain  a hundred  doubts  as  to  my  prophethood. 
Notwithstanding  these  proofs,  and  my  holy  character. 
You  have  seen  thousands  of  miracles  done  by  me, 

Yet  they  only  multiply  your  doubts  and  cavils. 

Through  doubts  and  evil  thoughts  you  are  in  a strait, 

You  speak  despitefully  of  my  prophethood. 

I brought  the  host  out  of  the  Red  Sea  before  all  men, 
That  ye  might  escape  the  oppression  of  the  Egyptians. 
For  forty  years  meat  and  drink  came  from  heaven, 

And  water  sprang  from  the  rock  at  my  prayer. 

My  staff  became  a mighty  serpent  in  my  hand, 

Water  became  blood  for  my  ill-conditioned  enemy. 

The  staff  became  a snake,  and  my  hand  bright  as  the  sun  ; 
From  the  reflection  of  that  light  the  sun  became  a star. 
Have  not  these  incidents,  and  hundreds  more  like  them. 
Banished  these  doubts  from  you,  0 cold-hearted  one  ? 

The  calf  lowed  through  magic, 

And  you  bowed  down  to  it,  saying,  ‘Thou  art  my  God.’1 

The  golden  calf  lowed ; but  what  did  it  say, 

That  the  fools  should  feel  all  this  devotion  to  it  ? 

You  have  seen  many  more  wondrous  works  done  by  me, 
But  where  is  the  base  man  who  accepts  the  truth  ? 

What  is  it  that  charms  vain  men  but  vanity  ? 

What  else  pleases  the  foolish  but  folly  ? 

Because  each  kind  is  charmed  by  its  own  kind, 

Does  a cow  ever  seek  the  lion  ? 

Did  the  wolf  show  love  to  Joseph,2 
Or  only  fraud  upon  fraud  with  a view  to  devour  him  ? 
True,  if  it  lose  his  wolf-like  nature  it  becomes  a friend  ; 
Even  as  the  dog  of  the  cave  became  a son  of  man.3 

1 See  Koran  xx.  go.  2 Koran  xii.  17.  3 Koran  xviii.  17. 


88 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ix. 


When  good  Abu  Bakr  saw  Muhammad, 

He  recognised  his  truth,  saying,  ‘ This  one  is  true  ; ’ 
When  Abu  Bakr  caught  the  perfume  of  Muhammad, 
He  said,  ‘ This  is  no  false  one.’ 

But  Abu  Jahl,  who  was  not  one  of  the  sympathisers, 
Saw  the  moon  split  asunder,  yet  believed  not. 

If  from  a sympathiser,  to  whom  it  is  well  known, 

I withhold  the  truth,  still  ’tis  not  hidden  from  him ; 
But  he  who  is  ignorant  and  without  sympathy, 
However  much  I show  him  the  truth,  he  sees'  it  not. 
The  mirror  of  the  heart  must  needs  be  polished 
Before  you  can  distinguish  fair  and  foul  therein.” 


Story  IX.  The  Gardener  and  the  Three  Friends  (p.  148). 

A voice  came  from  heaven  to  Moses,  saying,  “0  Moses, 
why  didst  thou  not  visit  me  when  I was  sick  ? ” Moses 
inquired  the  meaning  of  this  dark  saying,  and  the  answer 
was,  “ When  one  of  God’s  saints  is  sick,  God  regards  his 
sickness  as  His  own  ; and,  therefore,  he  who  desires  to  hold 
companionship  with  God  must  not  forsake  the  saints.”  1 
This  is  illustrated  by  a story  of  a gardener  who  saw  three 
friends  walking  in  his  garden,  and  making  free  with  his 
fruit.  Knowing  he  could  not  prevail  against  them  while 
they  remained  united,  he  contrived  by  tricks  to  separate 
them,  and  then  proceeded  to  chastise  them  one  by  one. 
And  this  caused  one  of  them  to  make  the  reflection  that 
he  had  acted  very  foolishly  in  deserting  his  friends. 


Story  X.  Bdyazid  and  the  Saint  (p.  149). 

The  celebrated  Sufi,  Abu  Yazi'd  or  Bayazfd  of  Bistam, 
in  Khorasan,  who  lived  in  the  third  century  of  the  Flight, 
was  once  making  a pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and  visiting  all 
the  “ Tillars  of  insight  ” who  lived  in  the  various  towns 
1 Cp.  Matthew  xxv,  40. 


BAYAZID  AND  THE  SAINT. 


89 


STORY  X.] 

that  lay  on  his  route.  At  last  he  discovered  the  “ Khizr 
of  the  age  ” in  the  person  of  a venerable  Darvesh,  with 
whom  he  held  the  following  conversation : — 

The  Sage  said,  “"Whither  are  you  going,  0 Bayazid? 
Where  will  you  bring  your  caravan  to  a halt  ? ” 

Bayazid  replied,  “At  dawn  I start  for  the  Ka’ba.” 

Quoth  the  Sage,  “ What  provision  for  the  way  have  you  ? ” 
He  answered,  “ I have  two  hundred  silver  dirhams ; 

See  them  tied  up  tightly  in  the  corner  of  my  cloak.” 

The  Sage  said,  “ Circumambulate  me  seven  times  ; 

Count  this  better  than  circumambulating  the  Ka’ba  ; 

And  as  for  the  dirhams,  give  them  to  me,  0 liberal  one, 
And  know  you  have  finished  your  course  and  obtained 
your  wish, 

You  have  made  the  pilgrimage  and  gained  the  life  to  come, 
You  have  become  pure,  and  that  in  a moment  of  time. 

Of  a truth  that  is  God  which  your  soul  sees  in  me, 

For  God  has  chosen  me  to  be  His  house. 

Though  the  Ka’ba  is  the  house  of  His  grace  and  favours, 
Yet  my  body  too  is  the  house  of  His  secret. 

Since  He  made  that  house  He  has  never  entered  it, 

But  none  but  That  Living  One  enters  this  house.1 
When  you  have  seen  me  you  have  seen  God, 

And  have  circumambulated  the  veritable  Ka’ba. 

To  serve  me  is  to  worship  and  praise  God ; 

Think  not  that  God  is  distinct  from  me. 

Open  clear  eyes  and  look  upon  me, 

That  you  may  behold  the  light  of  God  in  a mortal. 

The  Beloved  once  called  the  Ka’ba  ‘ My  house,’ 

But  has  said  to  me  ‘ 0 my  servant  ’ seventy  times.1 
0 Bayazid,  you  have  found  the  Ka’ba, 

You  have  found  a hundred  precious  blessings.” 

Bayazid  gave  heed  to  these  deep  sayings, 

And  placed  them  as  golden  earrings  in  his  ears. 

1 Alluding  to  the  Hadis  : “ Heaven  and  earth  contain  me  not,  but  the 
heart  of  my  faithful  servant  contains  me.” 


go 


THE  MASK  A VI. 


[book  n. 


Then  follow  anecdotes  of  the  Prophet  paying  a visit  to 
one  of  his  disciples  who  lay  sick,  of  Shaikh  Bahlol,  nick- 
named “The  Madman.”  who  was  a favourite  at  the  court 
of  Harunu-’r-Eashid,  and  of  the  people  of  Moses. 


Tlie  sweet  uses  of  adversity  (p.  1 50). 

The  sick  man  said,  “ Sickness  has  brought  me  this  boon, 
That  this  Prince  (Muhammad)  has  come  to  me  this  morn, 
So  that  health  and  strength  may  return  to  me 
From  the  visit  of  this  unparalleled  King. 

0 blessed  pain  and  sickness  and  fever ! 

0 welcome  weariness  and  sleeplessness  by  night ! 

Lo ! God  of  His  bounty  and  favour 

Has  sent  me  this  pain  and  sickness  in  my  old  age ; 

He  has  given  me  pain  in  the  back,  that  I may  not  fail 
To  spring  up  out  of  my  sleep  at  midnight ; 

That  I may  not  sleep  all  night  like  the  cattle, 

God  in  His  mercy  has  sent  me  these  pains. 

At  my  broken  state  the  pity  of  kings  has  boiled  up, 

And  hell  is  put  to  silence  by  their  threats ! ” 

Pain  is  a treasure,  for  it  contains  mercies ; 

The  kernel  is  soft  when  the  rind  is  scraped  off. 

0 brother,  the  place  of  darkness  and  cold 
Is  the  fountain  of  life  and  the  cup  of  ecstasy. 

So  also  is  endurance  of  pain  and  sickness  and  disease. 

For  from  abasement  proceeds  exaltation. 

The  spring  seasons  are  hidden  in  the  autumns, 

And  autumns  are  charged  with  springs ; flee  them  not. 
Consort  with  grief  and  put  up  with  sadness, 

Seek  long  life  in  your  own  death  ! 

Since  ’tis  bad,  whatever  lust  says  on  this  matter 
Heed  it  not,  its  business  is  opposition. 

But  act  contrary  thereto,  for  the  prophets 
Have  laid  this  injunction  upon  the  world.1 

1 Freytag  quotes  a saying  of  right  course”  (Arabum  Proverbia, 
'Omar,  “A  fool  may  indicate  the  i.  p.  566). 


•STORY  x.]  BAY  A ZID  AND  THE  SAINT.  9» 

Though  it  is  right  to  take  counsel  in  affairs, 

That  you  may  have  less  to  regret  in  the  upshot ; — 

The  prophets  have  laboured  much 
To  make  the  world  revolve  on  this  pivot  stone ; 1 
But,  in  order  to  destroy  the  people,  lust  desires 
To  make  them  go  astray  and  lose  their  heads ; — 

The  people  say,  ‘ With  whom  shall  we  take  counsel  ? ' 

The  prophets  answer,  ‘ With  the  reason  of  your  chief.’ 
Again  they  say,  * Suppose  a child  or  a woman  enter, 

Who  lacks  reason  and  clear  judgment ; ’ 

They  reply,  ‘ Take  counsel  with  them, 

And  act  contrary  to  what  they  advise.’ 

Know  your  lust  to  be  woman,  and  worse  than  woman ; 
Woman  is  partial  evil,  lust  universal  evil. 

If  you  take  counsel  with  your  lust, 

See  you  act  contrary  to  what  that  base  one  advises. 

Even  though  it  enjoin  prayers  and  fasting, 

It  is  treacherously  laying  a snare  for  you.’ 

You  must  abandon  and  ignore  your  own  knowledge, 

And  dip  your  hand  in  the  dish  of  abnegation  of  knowledge, 
Whatever  seems  profitable,  flee  from  it, 

Drink  poison  and  spill  the  water  of  life. 

Contemn  whatever  praises  you, 

Lend  to  paupers  your  wealth  and  profits ! 

Quit  your  sect  and  be  a subject  of  aversion, 

Cast  away  name  and  fame  and  seek  disgrace  ! ” 


God  the  Author  of  good  and  evil  (p.  156). 

If  you  seek  the  explanation  of  God’s  love  and  favour, 

In  connection  therewith  read  the  chapter  “ Brightness.”  2 
And  if  you  say  evil  also  proceeds  from  Him, 

Yet  what  damage  is  that  to  His  perfection  ? 

1 The  law  defining  the  right  brightness,  and  by  the  night  when 

course.  it  darkeneth,  thy  Lord  hath  not  for- 

2 Koran  sciii. : “By  the  noonday  saken  thee  nor  been  displeased.’’ 


92 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


To  send  that  evil  is  one  of  His  perfections. 

I will  give  you  an  illustration,  0 arrogant  one  ; 

The  heavenly  Artist  paints  His  pictures  of  two  sorts, 
Fair  pictures  and  pictures  the  reverse  of  fair. 

Joseph  he  painted  fair  and  made  him  beautiful ; 

He  also  painted  ugly  pictures  of  demons  and  ’ afrits . 
Both  sorts  of  pictures  are  of  His  workmanship, 

They  proceed  not  from  His  imperfection,  but  His  skill. 
That  the  perfection  of  His  wisdom  may  be  shown, 

And  the  gainsayers  of  His  art  be  put  to  shame. 

Could  He  not  paint  ugly  things  He  would  lack  art, 
And  therefore  He  creates  Guebers  as  -well  as  Moslems. 
Thus,  both  infidelity  and  faith  bear  witness  to  Him, 
Both  alike  bow  down  before  His  almighty  sway. 

But  know,  the  faithful  worship  Him  willingly, 

For  they  seek  and  aim  at  pleasing  Him ; 

While  Guebers  worship  Him  unwillingly, 

Their  real  aim  and  purpose  being  quite  otherwise. 


Evil  itself  is  turned  into  rjood  for  the  good  (p.  157). 

The  Prophet  said  to  that  sick  man, 

“ Pray  in  this  wise  and  allay  your  difficulties ; 

‘ Give  us  good  in  the  house  of  our  present  world, 

And  give  us  good  in  the  house  of  our  next  world.1 
Make  our  path  pleasant  as  a garden, 

And  be  Thou,  O Holy  One,  our  goal ! ’ ” 

The  faithful  will  say  on  the  last  day,  “ 0 King ! 

Was  not  Hell  on  the  route  all  of  us  travelled  ? 

Hid  not  faithful  as  well  as  infidels  pass  through  it  ? 

Yet  on  our  way  we  perceived  not  the  smoke  of  the  fire ; 
Nay,  it  seemed  Paradise  and  the  mansion  of  the  blessed.” 
Then  the  King  will  answer,  “ That  green  garden, 

As  it  appeared  to  you  on  your  passage  through  it, 

W as  indeed  Hell  and  the  place  of  dread  torment ; 

1 “ O Lord,  give  us  good  in  this  save  us  from  the  torment  of  the  fire  ” 
world  and  good  in  the  next,  and  (Koran  ii.  1 97 )* 


BAYAZID  AND  THE  SAINT. 


93 


STORY  X.] 

Yet  for  you  it  became  a garden  green  with  trees. 

Since  you  have  laboured  to  make  hellish  lusts, 

And  the  fire  of  pride  that  courts  destruction, — 

To  make  these,  I say,  pure  and  clean, — 

And,  to  please  God.  have  quenched  those  fires, 

So  that  the  fire  of  lust,  that  erst  breathed  flame, 

Has  become  a holy  garden  and  a guiding  light, — 

Since  you  have  turned  the  fire  of  wrath  to  meekness, 

And  the  darkness  of  ignorance  to  shining  knowledge, 
Since  you  have  turned  the  fire  of  greed  into  bounty, 

And  the  vile  thorns  of  malice  into  a rose-garden ; 

Since  you  have  quenched  all  these  fires  of  your  own 
For  my  sake,  so  that  those  poisons  are  now  pure  sweets  ; — 
Since  you  have  made  fiery  lust  as  a verdant  garden, 

And  have  sowed  therein  the  seed  of  fidelity, 

So  that  nightingales  of  prayer  and  praise 
Ever  warble  sweetly  around  this  garden ; — 

Since  you  have  responded  to  the  call  of  God, 

And  have  drawn  water  out  of  the  hell  of  lust, — 

For  this  cause  my  hell  also,  for  your  behoof, 

Becomes  a verdant  garden  and  yields  leaves  and  fruit.” 
What  is  the  recompense  of  well-doing,  0 son  ? 

It  is  kindness  and  good  treatment  and  rich  requital. 

Have  ye  not  said,  “We  are  victims, 

Mere  nothings  before  eternal  Being  ? 

If  we  are  drunkards  or  madmen, 

’Tis  that  Cup-bearer  and  that  Cup  which  make  us  so. 

We  bow  dowm  our  heads  before  His  edict  and  ordinance, 
We  stake  precious  life  to  gain  His  favour. 

While  the  thought  of  the  Beloved  fills  our  hearts, 

All  our  work  is  to  do  Him  service  and  spend  life  for  Him. 
Wherever  He  kindles  His  destructive  torch, 

Myriads  of  lovers’  souls  are  burnt  therewith. 

The  lovers  who  dwell  within  the  sanctuary 

Are  moths  burnt  with  the  torch  of  the  Beloved’s  face.” 

0 heart  haste  thither,1  for  God  will  shine  upon  you, 

1 I.e.,  to  annihilation  of  self  in  God,  as  a moth  in  the  flame. 


94 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ii. 


And  seem  to  you  a sweet  garden  instead  of  a terror. 

He  will  infuse  into  your  soul  a new  soul, 

So  as  to  fill  you,  like  a goblet,  with  wine. 

Take  up  your  abode  in  His  soul ! 

Take  up  your  abode  in  heaven,  0 bright  full  moon  ! 

Like  the  heavenly  Scribe,1  He  will  open  your  heart's  book 
That  He  may  reveal  mysteries  unto  you. 

Abide  with  your  Friend,  since  you  have  gone  astray, 
Strive  to  be  a full  moon  ; you  are  now  a fragment  thereof. 
Wherefore  this  shrinking  of  the  part  from  its  whole  ? 
Why  this  association  with  its  foes  ? 

Behold  Genus  become  Species  in  due  course, 

Behold  secrets  become  manifest  through  his  light ! 

So  long  as  woman-like  you  swallow  blandishments. 

How,  0 wise  man,  can  you  get  relief  from  false  flatteries  ? 
These  flatteries  and  fair  words  and  deceits  (of  lust) 

You  take,  and  swallow,  just  like  women. 

But  the  reproaches  and  the  blows  of  Darveshes 
Are  really  better  for  you  than  the  praises  of  sinners. 

Take  the  light  blows  of  Darveshes,  not  the  honey  of  sinners. 
And  become,  by  the  fortune  of  good,  good  yourself. 
Because  from  them  the  robe  of  good  fortune  is  gained, 

In  the  asylum  of  the  spirit  blood  becomes  life. 

Story  XI.  Mo' avia  and  Tblis  (p.  158). 

Mo’ avia,  the  first  of  the  Ommiad  Khalifas,  was  one  day 
lying  asleep  in  his  palace,  when  he  was  awakened  by  a 
strange  man.  Mo’ avia  asked  him  who  he  was,  and  he 
replied  that  he  was  Iblis.  Mo’avia  then  asked  him  why 
he  had  awakened  him,  and  Iblis  replied  that  the  hour 
of  prayer  was  come,  and  he  feared  Mo’avia  would  be  late. 
Mo’avia  answered,  “Nay!  it  could  never  have  been  your 
intention  to  direct  me  in  the  right  way.  How  can  I trust 
a thief  like  you  to  guard  my  interests  ? ” Iblis  answered, 
“Remember  that  I was  bred  up  as  an  angel  of  light, 

1 Atarid  or  Mercury. 


story  xi.]  M<yA  VIA  AND  IDLIS.  95 

and  that  I cannot  quite  abandon  my  original  occupation. 
You  may  travel  to  Rome  or  Cathay,  but  still  you  retain 
the  love  of  your  fatherland.  I still  retain  my  love  of  God, 
who  fed  me  when  I was  young ; nay,  even  though  I re- 
volted from  Him,  that  was  only  from  jealousy  (of  Adam), 
and  jealousy  proceeds  from  love,  not  from  denial  of  God. 
I played  a game  of  chess  with  God  at  Ilis  own  desire,  and 
though  I was  utterly  checkmated  and  ruined,  in  my  ruin 
I still  experience  God’s  blessings.”  Mo’avia  answered, 
“ What  you  say  is  not  credible.  Your  words  are  like  the 
decoy  calls  of  a fowler,  which  resemble  the  voices  of  the 
birds,  and  so  lure  them  to  destruction.  You  have  caused 
the  destruction  of  hundreds  of  mortals,  such  as  the  people 
of  Noah,  the  tribe  of  ’Ad,1  the  family  of  Lot,  Nimrod, 
Pharaoh,  Abu  Jahl,  and  so  on.”  Iblis  retorted,  “You  are 
mistaken  if  you  suppose  me  to  be  the  cause  of  all  the  evil 
vou  mention.  I am  not  God,  that  I should  be  able  to 
make  good  evil,  or  fair  foul.  Mercy  and  vengeance  are 
twin  divine  attributes,  and  they  generate  the  good  and 
evil  seen  in  all  earthly  things.  I am,  therefore,  not  to 
blame  for  the  existence  of  evil,  as  I am  only  a mirror, 
which  reflects  the  good  and  evil  existing  in  the  objects 
presented  to  it.”  Mo’avia  then  prayed  to  God  to  guard 
him  against  the  sophistries  of  Iblis,  and  again  adjured 
Iblis  to  cease  his  arguments  and  tell  plainly  the  reason 
why  he  had  awakened  him.  Iblis,  instead  of  answering, 
continued  to  justify  himself,  saying  how  hard  it  was  that 
men  and  women  should  blame  him  when  they  did  any- 
thing wrong,  instead  of  blaming  their  own  evil  lusts. 
Mo’avia,  in  reply,  reproached  him  with  concealing  the 
truth,  and  ultimately  brought  him  to  confess  that  the  true 
reason  why  he  had  awakened  him  was  this,  that  if  he 
had  overslept  himself,  and  so  missed  the  hour  of  prayer, 
he  would  have  felt  deep  sorrow  and  have  heaved  many 
sighs,  and  each  of  these  sighs  would,  in  the  sight  of  God, 
have  counted  for  as  many  as  two  hundred  ordinaiy  prayers. 

1 See  Koran  xi.  63. 


96 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


The  value  of  sighs  (p.  162). 

A certain  man  was  going  into  the  mosque, 

Just  as  another  was  coming  out. 

He  inquired  of  him  what  had  occurred  to  the  meeting, 
That  the  people  were  coming  out  of  the  mosque  so  soon. 
The  other  told  him  that  the  Prophet 
Had  concluded  the  public  prayers  and  mysteries. 
“Whither  go  you,”  said  he,  “0  foolish  one, 

Seeing  the  Prophet  has  already  given  the  blessing  ? ” 

The  first  heaved  a sigh,  and  its  smoke  ascended ; 

That  sigh  yielded  a perfume  of  his  heart’s  blood. 

The  other,  who  came  from  the  mosque,  said  to  him, 

“ Give  me  that  sigh,  and  take  my  prayers  instead.” 

The  first  said,  “ I give  it,  and  take  your  prayers.” 

The  other  took  that  sigh  with  a hundred  thanks. 

He  went  his  way  with  deep  humility  and  contrition, 

As  a hawk  who  had  ascended  in  the  track  of  the  falcon. 
That  night,  as  he  lay  asleep,  he  heard  a voice  from  heaven, 
“ Thou  hast  bought  the  water  of  life  and  healing ; 

The  worth  of  what  thou  hast  chosen  and  possessed 
Equals  that  of  all  the  people’s  accepted  prayers.” 

To  illustrate  the  treachery  of  wolves  in  sheep’s  clothing, 
— of  Satans  rebuking  sin  and  preaching  religion — an 
anecdote  is  told  of  a master  of  a house  who  caught  a thief, 
but  was  induced  to  let  him  escape  by  the  stratagem  of  the 
thief’s  confederate,  who  cried  that  he  had  got  the  real  thief 
elsewhere.  Apropos  of  the  same  theme,  the  poet  nest 
relates  the  story  of  “those  who  built  a mosque  for  mis- 
chief,” as  recorded  in  the  Koran.1  The  tribe  of  Bani 
Ganim  built  a mosque,  and  invited  the  Prophet  to  dedi- 
cate it.  The  Prophet,  however,  discovered  that  their  real 
motive  was  jealousy  of  the  tribe  of  Bani  Amru  Ibn  Auf,  and 
of  the  mosque  at  Kuba,  near  Medina,  and  a treacherous 

1 Koran  ix.  108. 


MO' A VIA  AND  I BUS. 


97 


STORY  XI.] 

understanding  with  the  Syrian  monk  Abu  Amir,  and 
therefore  he  refused  their  request,  and  ordered  the  mosque 
to  be  razed  to  the  ground. 


Wisdom  tlic  believer’s  lost  camel  (p.  165). 

My  people  adopt  my  law  without  obeying  it, 

They  take  that  coin  without  assaying  it. 

The  Koran’s  wisdom  is  like  the  “ believer’s  lost  camel,”  1 
Every  one  is  certain  his  camel  is  lost. 

You  have  lost  your  camel  and  seek  it  diligently  ; 

Yet  how  will  you  find  it  if  you  know  not  your  own  ? 

What  was  lost  ? Was  it  a female  camel  that  you  lost  ? 

It  escaped  from  your  hand,  and  you  are  in  a maze. 

The  caravan  is  come  to  be  loaded, 

Your  camel  is  vanished  from  the  midst  of  it. 

You  run  here  and  there,  your  mouth  parched  with  heat ; 
The  caravan  moves  on,  and  night  approaches. 

Your  goods  lie  on  the  ground  in  a dangerous  road, 

You  hurry  after  your  camel  in  all  directions. 

You  cry  “ 0 Moslems,  who  has  seen  a camel, 

Which  escaped  from  its  stable  this  morning  ? 

To  him  who  shall  give  me  news  of  my  camel 
I will  give  a reward  of  so  many  dirhems.” 

You  go  on  seeking  news  of  your  camel  from  every  one, 
And  every  lewd  fellow  flatters  you  with  a fresh  rumour, 
Saying,  “ I saw  a camel ; it  w*ent  this  way  ; 

’Twas  red,  and  it  went  towards  this  pasture.” 

Another  says,  “Its  ear  was  cropped.” 

Another  says,  “ Its  cloth  was  embroidered.” 

Another  that  it  had  only  one  eye, 

Another  that  it  had  lost  its  hair  from  mange. 

To  gain  the  reward  every  base  fellow 

Mentions  a hundred  marks  without  any  foundation. 

1 This  is  a proverb  ascribed  to  Ali.  It  means,  people  are  always  losing 
wisdom  and  seeking  it  like  a lost  camel  (Frey tag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  i. 
P-  3S5)- 


G 


98 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


All  false  doctrines  contain  an  element  of  truth  (p.  165). 

Just  so  every  one  in  matters  of  doctrine 

Gives  a different  description  of  the  hidden  subject. 

A philosopher  expounds  it  in  one  way, 

And  a critic  at  once  refutes  his  propositions. 

A third  censures  both  of  them  ; 

A fourth  spends  his  life  in  traducing  the  others. 

Every  one  mentions  indications  of  this  road, 

In  order  to  create  an  impression  that  he  has  gone  it. 

This  truth  and  that  truth  cannot  be  all  true, 

And  yet  all  of  them  are  not  entirely  astray  in  error. 
Because  error  occurs  not  without  some  truth, 

Fools  buy  base  coins  from  their  likeness  to  real  coins. 

If  there  were  no  genuine  coins  current  in  the  world, 

How  could  coiners  succeed  in  passing  false  coins  ? 

If  there  were  no  truth,  how  could  falsehood  exist? 
Falsehood  derives  its  plausibility  from  truth. 

’Tis  the  desire  of  right  that  makes  men  buy  wrong ; 

Let  poison  be  mixed  with  sugar,  and  they  eat  it  at  once. 
If  wheat  were  not  valued  as  sweet  and  good  for  food, 

The  cheat  who  shows  wheat  and  sells  barley  would  make 
no  profit ! 

Say  not,  then,  that  all  these  creeds  are  false, 

The  false  ones  ensnare  hearts  by  the  scent  of  truth. 

Say  not  that  they  are  all  erroneous  fancies, 

There  is  no  fancy  in  the  universe  without  some  truth. 
Truth  is  the  “night  of  power”1  hidden  amongst  other 
nights, 

In  order  to  try  the  spirit  of  every  night. 

Not  every  night  is  that  of  power,  0 youth, 

Nor  yet  is  every  night  quite  void  of  power. 

In  the  crowd  of  rag-wearers  there  is  but  one  Faqir ; 2 
Search  well  and  find  out  that  true  one. 

1 The  night  on  which  the  Koran  2 So  in  the  Phsedo,  “Many  are  the 
was  revealed.  wandbearers,  but  few  the  Mystics.” 


99 


STORY  xu.]  THE  FOUR  HINDUSTANIS. 

Tell  the  wary  and  discerning  believer 
To  distinguish  the  king  from  the  beggar. 

If  there  were  no  bad  goods  in  the  world, 

Every  fool  might  be  a skilful  merchant ; 

For  then  the  hard  art  of  judging  goods  would  be  easy. 

If  there  were  no  faults,  one  man  could  judge  as  well  as 
another. 

Again,  if  all  were  faulty,  skill  would  be  profitless. 

If  all  wood  were  common,  there  would  be  no  aloes. 

He  who  accepts  everything  as  true  is  a fool, 

But  he  who  says  all  is  false  is  a knave. 

Story  XII.  The  Four  Hindustanis  who  censured  one 
another  (p.  167). 

Four  Hindustanis  went  to  the  mosque  to  say  their 
prayers.  Each  one  duly  pronounced  the  Takhir,  and  was 
saving  his  prayers  with  great  devotion,  when  the  Mu’azzin 
happened  to  come  in.  One  of  them  immediately  called 
out,  “0  Mu’azzin,  have  you  yet  called  to  prayer  ? It  is  time 
to  do  so.”  Then  the  second  said  to  the  speaker,  “ Ah ! 
you  have  spoken  words  unconnected  with  worship,  and 
therefore,  according  to  the  Hadis,  you  have  spoiled  your 
prayers.” 1 Thereupon  the  third  scolded  the  last  speaker, 
saying,  “ 0 simpleton,  why  do  you  rebuke  him  ? Rather 
rebuke  yourself.”  Last  of  all,  the  fourth  said,  “ God  be 
praised  that  I have  not  fallen  into  the  same  ditch  as  my 
three  companions.”  The  moral  is,  not  to  find  fault  with 
others,  but  rather,  according  to  the  proverb,'2  to  be  ad- 
monished by  their  bad  example.  Apropos  of  this  proverb, 
a story  is  told  of  two  prisoners  captured  by  the  tribe  of 
Ghuz.  The  Ghuzians  were  about  to  put  one  of  them  to 
death,  to  frighten  the  other,  and  make  him  confess  where 
the  treasure  was  concealed,  when  the  doomed  man  dis- 
covered their  object,  and  said,  “ 0 noble  sirs,  kill  my 
companion,  and  frighten  me  instead.” 

1 Mishkat  ul  Masabih,  by  Mat-  2 Frey  tag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  i. 
thews,  i.  205.  628. 


IOO 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ii. 


Story  XIII.  The  Old  Man  and  the  Physician  (p.  169). 

An  old  man  complained  to  his  physician  that  he  suffered 
from  headache.  The  physician  replied,  “That  is  caused 
by  old  age.”  The  old  man  next  complained  of  a defect  in 
his  sight,  and  the  physician  again  told  him  that  his  malady 
was  due  to  old  age.  The  old  man  went  on  to  say  that  he 
suffered  from  pain  in  the  back,  from  dyspepsia,  from  short- 
ness of  breath,  from  nervous  debility,  from  inability  to 
walk,  and  so  on ; and  the  physician  replied  that  each  of 
these  ailments  was  likewise  caused  by  old  age.  The  old 
man,  losing  patience,  said,  “ 0 fool,  know  you  not  that  God 
has  ordained  a remedy  for  every  malady  ? ” The  physician 
answered,  “ This  passion  and  choler  are  also  symptoms  of 
old  age.  Since  all  your  members  are  weak,  you  have  lost 
the  power  of  self-control,  and  fly  into  a passion  at  every 
word.” 

Pad  'principles  always  produce  had  acts  (p.  169). 

Fools  laud  and  magnify  the  mosque, 

While  they  strive  to  oppress  holy  men  of  heart. 

But  the  former  is  mere  form,  the  latter  spirit  and  truth. 
The  only  true  mosque  is  that  in  the  hearts  of  saints. 

The  mosque  that  is  built  in  the  hearts  of  the  saints 
Is  the  place  of  worship  of  all,  for  God  dwells  there. 

So  long  as  the  hearts  of  the  saints  are  not  afflicted, 

God  never  destroys  the  nation. 

Our  forefathers  lifted  their  hands  against  the  prophets ; 
Seeing  their  bodies,  they  took  them  for  ordinary  men. 

In  you  also  abide  the  morals  of  those  men  of  old ; 

How  can  you  avoid  fearing  that  you  will  act  like  them  ? 
The  morals  of  those  unthankful  ones  dwell  in  you, 

Your  urn  will  not  always  return  unbroken  from  the  well. 
Seeing  that  all  these  bad  symptoms  are  seen  in  you, 

And  that  you  are  one  with  those  men,  how  can  you  escape  ? 


STORY  XIV.]  THE  CARRIER  AND  THE  SCHOLAR. 


ior 


STORY  XIV.  The  Arab  Carrier  and  the  Scholar  (p.  17 1). 

An  Arab  loaded  his  camel  with  two  sacks,  filling  one 
with  wheat  and  the  second  with  sand,  in  order  to  balance 
the  first.  As  he  was  proceeding  on  his  way  he  met  a 
certain  tradition-monger,  who  questioned  him  about  the 
contents  of  his  sacks.  On  learning  that  one  contained 
nothing  but  sand,  he  pointed  out  that  the  object  might  be 
attained  much  better  by  putting  half  the  wheat  in  one 
sack  and  half  in  the  other.  On  hearing  this  the  Arab 
was  so  struck  by  his  sagacity  that  he  conceived  a great 
respect  for  him,  and  mounted  him  on  his  camel.  Then  he 
said,  “As  you  possess  such  great  wisdom,  I presume  that 
you  are  a king  or  a Vazir,  or  at  least  a very  rich  and 
powerful  noble.”  The  theologian  replied,  “ On  the  con- 
trary, I am  a very  poor  man ; all  the  riches  my  learning 
has  brought  me  are  weariness  and  headaches,  and  I know 
not  where  to  look  for  a loaf  of  bread.”  The  Arab  said, 
“ In  that  case  get  off  my  camel  and  go  your  way,  and  suffer 
me  to  go  mine,  for  I see  your  learning  brings  ill  luck.”  The 
moral  of  the  story  is  the  worthlessness  of  mere  human 
knowledge,  and  its  inferiority  to  the  divine  knowledge 
proceeding  from  inspiration.  This  thesis  is  further  illus- 
trated by  an  account  of  the  mighty  works  which  were 
done  by  the  saint  Ibrahim  bin  Adham,  through  the  divine 
knowledge  that  God  had  given  him.  Ibrahim  was  origi- 
nally prince  of  Balkh,  but  renounced  his  kingdom  and 
became  a saint.  One  day  he  was  sitting  by  the  shore 
mending  his  cloak,  when  one  of  his  former  subjects  passed 
by  and  marvelled  to  see  him  engaged  in  such  a mean  occu- 
pation. The  saint  at  once,  by  inspired  knowledge,  read 
his  thoughts,  and  thus  corrected  his  false  impressions. 
He  took  the  needle  with  which  he  was  mending  his  cloak 
and  cast  it  into  the  sea.  Then  with  a loud  voice  he  cried 
out,  “ 0 needle,  rise  again  from  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and 
come  back  again  into  my  hands.”  Without  a moment’s 


102 


THE  MASNA  VI. 


[book  II. 


delay  thousands  of  fishes  rose  to  the  surface  of  the  sea, 
each  bearing  in  its  mouth  a golden  needle,  and  cried  out, 
“0  Shaikh,  take  these  needles  of  God!”  Ibrahim  then 
turned  to  the  noble,  saying,  “ Is  not  the  kingdom  of  the 
heart  better  than  the  contemptible  earthly  kingdom  I 
formerly  possessed?  What  you  have  just  seen  is  a very 
trifling  sign  of  my  spiritual  power — as  it  were,  a mere  leaf 
plucked  to  show  the  beauty  of  a garden.  You  have  now 
caught  the  scent  of  this  garden,  and  it  ought  to  attract 
your  soul  to  the  garden  itself,  for  you  must  know  that 
scents  have  great  influence,  e.y.,  the  scent  of  Joseph’s  coat,1 
which  restored  Jacob’s  sight,  and  the  scents  which  were 
loved  by  the  Prophet.”2 


Story  XV.  The  Man  who  boasted  that  God  did  not  punish 
him  for  his  sins,  and  Jethro’s  answer  to  him  (p.  175). 

That  person  said  in  the  time  of  Shu’aib  (Jethro), 

“ God  has  seen  many  faults  done  by  me ; 

Yea,  how  many  sins  and  faults  of  mine  has  He  seen, 
Nevertheless  of  His  mercy  He  punishes  me  not.” 

God  Almighty  spake  in  the  ear  of  Shu’aib, 

Addressing  him  with  an  inner  voice  in  answer  thereto, 
“Why  hast  thou  said,  ‘I  have  sinned  so  much, 

And  God  of  His  mercy  has  not  punished  my  sins  ? ” 

Thou  sayest  the  very  reverse  of  the  truth,  0 fool ! 
Wandering  from  the  way  and  lost  in  the  desert ! 

How  many  times  do  I smite  thee,  and  thou  knowest  not? 
Thou  art  bound  in  my  chains  from  head  to  foot. 

On  thy  heart  is  rust  on  rust  collected, 

So  thou  art  blind  to  mysteries. 

Thy  rust,  layer  on  layer,  0 black  kettle ! 

Makes  the  aspect  of  thy  inner  parts  foul. 

If  that  smoke  touched  a new  kettle, 

It  would  show  the  smut,  were  it  only  as  a grain  of  barley  ; 

1 Koran  xii.  93.  loved  perfumes  and  fair  women  and 

2 There  is  a Hadis : “The  Prophet  brightness  of  eyes  in  prayer.” 


STORY  XV.]  THE  MAN  WHO  BOASTED. 


103 


For  everything  is  made  manifest  by  its  opposite, 

In  contrast  with  its  whiteness  that  black  shows  foul. 

But  when  the  kettle  is  black,  then  afterwards 
Who  can  see  on  it  the  impression  of  the  smoke  ? 

If  the  blacksmith  be  a negro, 

llis  face  agrees  in  colour  with  the  smoke. 

But  if  a man  of  Rum  does  blacksmith’s  work, 

His  face  becomes  grimed  by  the  smoke  fumes ; 

Then  he  quickly  perceives  the  impression  of  his  fault, 

So  that  he  wails  and  cries  ‘ 0 Allah  ! ’ 

When  he  is  stubborn  and  follows  his  evil  practices, 

He  casts  dust  in  the  eyes  of  his  discernment. 

He  recks  not  of  repentance,  and,  moreover,  that  sin 
Becomes  dear  to  his  heart,  so  that  he  becomes  without 
faith, 

Old  shame  for  sin  and  calling  on  God  quit  him, 

Rust  five  layers  deep  settles  on  his  mirror, 

Rust  spots  begin  to  gnaw  his  iron, 

The  colour  in  his  jewel  grows  less  and  less. 

When  you  write  on  white  paper, 

What  is  written  is  read  at  a glance  ; 

But  when  you  write  on  the  face  of  a written  page, 

It  is  not  plain,  reading  it  is  deceptive  ; 

For  that  black  is  written  on  the  top  of  other  black, 

Both  the  writings  are  illegible  and  senseless. 

Or  if,  in  the  third  place,  you  write  on  the  page, 

And  then  blacken  it  like  an  infidel’s  soul, 

Then  what  remedy  but  the  aid  of  the  Remedier  ? 

Despair  is  copper  and  sight  its  elixir. 

Lay  your  despair  before  Him, 

That  you  may  escape  from  pain  without  medicine.” 

When  Shu’aib  spoke  these  aphorisms  to  him, 

From  that  breath  of  the  soul  roses  bloomed  in  his  heart, 
His  soul  heard  the  revelations  of  heaven  ; 

He  said,  “ If  He  has  punished  me,  where  is  the  sign  of  it  ? ” 
Shu’aib  said,  “ 0 Lord,  he  repels  my  arguments, 

He  seeks  for  a sign  of  that  punishment.” 


104  THE  M A SNA  VI.  [book 

The  Veiler  of  sins  replied,  “I  will  tell  him  no  secrets, 
Save  only  one,  in  order  to  try  him. 

One  sign  that  I punish  him  is  this, 

That  he  observes  obedience  and  fasting  and  prayer, 

And  devotions  and  almsgiving,  and  so  on, 

Yet  never  feels  the  least  expansion  of  soul. 

He  performs  the  devotions  and  acts  enjoined  by  law, 
Yet  derives  not  an  atom  of  relish  from  them. 

Outward  devotion  is  sweet  to  him,  spirit  is  not  sweet, 
Huts  in  plenty,  but  no  kernel  in  any  of  them. 

Relish  is  needed  for  devotions  to  bear  fruit, 

Kernels  are  needed  that  seeds  may  yield  trees. 

How  can  seeds  without  kernels  become  trees  ? 

Form  without  soul  (life)  is  only  a dream.” 


Story  XVI.  The  Gluttonous  Sufi  (p.  178). 

In  a certain  convent  there  lived  a Sufi  whose  conduct 
gave  just  offence  to  the  brethren.  They  brought  him 
before  their  Shaikh  and  thus  accused  him,  “ This  Sufi 
has  three  very  bad  qualities  ; he  babbles  exceedingly  like 
a bell,  at  his  meals  he  eats  more  than  twenty  men,  and 
when  he  sleeps  he  is  as  one  of  the  Seven  Sleepers.”  The 
Shaikh  then  admonished  him,  insisting  on  the  obligation 
of  keeping  to  the  golden  mean,  and  reminding  him  that 
even  the  prophet  Moses 1 was  once  rebuked  by  Khizr  for 
speaking  to  excess.  But  the  delinquent  excused  himself 
on  the  grounds  that  the  mean  is  relative,  what  is  excess 
in  one  man  being  moderation  in  another,  that  he  who  is 
led  by  the  spirit  is  no  longer  subject  to  the  outward  law, 
and  that  the  “ inner  voice,”  which  rules  such  an  one’s 
conduct,  is  its  own  evidence. 


1 Koran  xviii.  77. 


STORY  XVI. ] 


THE  GLUTTONOUS  SUFI. 


i°5 


The  mean  is  relative  (p.  178). 

He  said,  “ Though  the  path  of  the  mean  is  wisdom, 
Yet  is  this  same  mean  also  relative. 

The  water  which  is  insufficient  for  a camel 
Is  like  an  ocean  to  a mouse. 

Whoso  has  four  loaves  as  his  daily  allowance, 
Whether  he  eat  two  or  three,  he  observes  the  mean. 
But  if  he  eat  all  four  he  transgresses  the  mean, 

A very  slave  to  greed,  and  voracious  as  a duck. 
Whoso  has  an  appetite  for  ten  loaves, 

Know,  though  he  eat  six,  he  observes  the  mean. 

If  I have  an  appetite  for  fifty  loaves, 

While  you  can  manage  only  six,  we  are  not  on  a par. 
You  are  wearied  with  ten  prostrations  in  prayer, 
Whilst  I can  endure  five  hundred. 

Such  an  one  goes  barefoot  to  the  Ka’ba, 

Whilst  another  faints  with  going  to  the  mosque.” 


The  ecstatic  state  v;liich  exalts  the  subject  of  it  above 
law  (p.  179). 

“ At  times  my  state  resembles  a dream, 

My  dreaming  seems  to  them  infidelity. 

Know  my  eyes  sleep,  but  my  heart  is  awake  ; 

My  body,  though  torpid,  is  instinct  with  energy. 

The  Prophet  said,  ‘ Mine  eyes  sleep, 

But  my  heart  is  awake  with  the  Lord  of  mankind.’ 
Your  eyes  are  awake  and  your  heart  fast  asleep, 

My  eyes  are  closed,  and  my  heart  at  the  ‘open  door.’ 
My  heart  has  other  five  senses  of  its  own  ; 

These  senses  of  my  heart  view  the  two  worlds. 

Let  not  a weakling  like  you  censure  me, 

What  seems  night  to  you  is  broad  day  to  me  ; 

What  seems  a prison  to  you  is  a garden  to  me, 
Busiest  occupation  is  rest  to  me. 


io6 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  ii. 


T our  feet  are  in  the  mire,  to  me  mire  is  rose, 

W hat  to  you  is  funeral  wailing  is  marriage  drum  to  me. 
While  I seem  on  earth,  abiding  with  you  in  the  house, 

I ascend  like  Saturn  to  the  seventh  heaven. 

Tis  not  I who  companion  with  you,  ’tis  my  shadow ; 

My  exaltation  transcends  your  thoughts, 

Because  I have  transcended  thought, 

Yea,  I have  sped  beyond  reach  of  thought. 

I am  lord  of  thought,  not  overlorded  by  thought, 

As  the  builder  is  lord  of  the  building. 

All  creatures  are  enslaved  to  thought ; 

For  this  cause  are  they  sad  at  heart  and  sorrowful. 

I send  myself  on  an  embassy  to  thought, 

And,  at  will,  spring  back  again  from  thought. 

I am  as  the  bird  of  heaven  and  thought  as  the  fly, 

How  can  the  fly  lend  a helping  hand  to  me  ? 

Whoso  has  in  him  a spark  of  the  light  of  Omnipotence, 
However  much  he  eats,  say  * Eat  on  ; ’ ’tis  lawful  to  him.” 

To  the  spiritual  man  the  “ inner  voice  ” is  its  own  evidence, 
and  needs  no  other  proof  (p.  179). 

“ If  you  are  a true  lover  of  my  soul, 

This  truth-fraught  saying  of  mine  is  no  vain  pretence, — 

‘ Though  I talk  half  the  night  I am  superior  to  you 
And  again,  ‘ Fear  not  the  night ; here  am  I,  your  kins- 
man.’ 

These  two  assertions  of  mine  will  both  seem  true  to  you 
The  moment  you  recognise  the  voice  of  your  kinsman. 
Superiority  and  kinsmanskip  are  both  mere  assertions, 
Yet  both  are  recognised  for  truth  by  men  of  clear  wit. 

The  nearness  of  the  voice  proves  to  such  an  one 
That  the  voice  proceeds  from  a friend  who  is  near. 

The  sweetness  of  the  kinsman’s  voice,  too,  0 beloved, 
Proves  the  veracity  of  that  kinsman. 

But  the  uninspired  fool  who  from  ignorance 


STORY  XVII.] 


THE  TREE  OF  LIFE. 


107 


Cannot  tell  the  voice  of  a stranger  from  a friend’s, — 

To  him  the  friend’s  saying  seems  a vain  pretension, 

His  ignorance  is  the  material  cause  of  his  disbelief. 

To  the  wise,  whose  hearts  are  enlightened, 

The  mere  sound  of  that  voice  proves  its  truth.” 

“ When  you  say  to  a thirsty  man,  ‘ Come  quickly  ; 

This  is  water  in  the  cup,  take  and  drink  it,’ 

Does  the  thirsty  man  say,  ‘ This  is  a vain  pretension  ; 
Go,  remove  yourself  from  me,  0 vain  pretender, 

Or  proceed  to  give  proofs  and  evidence 

That  this  is  generic  water,  and  concrete  water  thereof  ’ ? 

Or  when  a mother  cries  to  her  sucking  babe, 

‘ Come,  0 son,  I am  thy  mother,’ 

Does  the  babe  answer,  ‘ 0 mother,  show  a proof 
That  I shall  find  comfort  from  taking  thy  milk  ’? 

In  the  hearts  of  every  sect  that  has  a taste  of  the  truth 
The  sight  and  the  voice  of  prophets  work  miracles. 
When  the  prophets  raise  their  cry  to  the  outward  ear, 
The  souls  of  each  sect  bow  in  devotion  within ; — 
Because  never  in  this  world  hath  the  soul’s  ear 
Heard  from  any  man  the  like  of  that  cry. 

That  poor  man  in  that  strange  sweet  voice 
Recognises  the  voice  of  God,  ‘ Verily  I am  nigh.’  ” 1 


Story  XVII.  The  Tree  of  Life  (p.  1 80). 

The  preceding  story  is  followed  by  a short  anecdote  of 
the  infants  of  the  Virgin  Mary  and  the  mother  of  John  the 
Baptist  leaping  in  their  mothers’  wombs,2  and  in  reply  to 
matter  of  fact  cavillers  and  questioners  of  this  anecdote, 
the  poet  says  we  must  look  at  its  spirit  and  essential  basis 
rather  than  its  outward  form.  This  introduces  the  story 
of  the  tree  of  life.  A certain  wise  man  related  that  in 

1 “And  when  my  servants  ask  cry  of  him  that  crieth,  when  he 
thee  concerning  me,  then  will  I be  crieth  unto  me”  (Koran  ii.  182). 
nigh  unto  them.  I will  answer  the  2 Luke  i.  41. 


108  THE  M A SNA  VI.  [book  ii. 

Hindustan  there  was  a tree  of  such  wonderful  virtue  that 
whosoever  ate  of  its  fruit  lived  for  ever.  Hearing  this,  a 
king  deputed  one  of  his  courtiers  to  go  in  quest  of  it. 
The  courtier  accordingly  proceeded  to  Hindustan,  and 
travelled  all  over  that  country,  inquiring  of  every  one  he 
met  where  this  tree  was  co  be  found.  Some  of  these  per- 
sons professed  their  entire  ignorance,  others  joked  him, 
and  others  gave  him  false  information ; and,  finally,  he 
had  to  return  to  his  country  with  his  mission  unaccom- 
plished. He  then,  as  a last  resource,  betook  himself  to  the 
sage  who  had  first  spoken  of  the  tree,  and  begged  for 
further  information  about  it,  and  the  sage  replied  to  him 
as  follows : — 

The  Shaikh  laughed,  and  said  to  him,  “ 0 friend, 

This  is  the  tree  of  knowledge,  0 knowing  one ; 

Very  high,  very  fine,  very  expansive, 

The  very  water  of  life  from  the  circumfluent  ocean. 

Thou  hast  run  after  form,  0 ill-informed  one, 

Wherefore  thou  lackest  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  substance. 
Sometimes  it  is  named  tree,  sometimes  sun, 

Sometimes  lake,  and  sometimes  cloud. 

’Tis  one,  though  it  has  thousands  of  manifestations  ; 

Its  least  manifestation  is  eternal  life ! 

Though  ’tis  one,  it  has  a thousand  manifestations, 

The  names  that  fit  that  one  are  countless. 

That  one  is  to  thy  personality  a father, 

In  regard  to  another  person  He  may  be  a son. 

In  relation  to  another  He  may  be  wrath  and  vengeance, 
In  relation  to  another,  mercy  and  goodness. 

He  has  thousands  of  names,  yet  is  One, — 

Answering  to  all  of  His  descriptions,  yet  indescribable. 
Every  one  who  seeks  names,  if  he  is  a man  of  credulity, 
Like  thee,  remains  hopeless  and  frustrated  of  his  aim. 
Why  cleavest  thou  to  this  mere  name  of  tree, 

So  that  thou  art  utterly  balked  and  disappointed  ? 

Pass  over  names  and  look  to  qualities, 

So  that  qualities  may  lead  thee  to  essence  ! 


STORY  XVIII.] 


THE  YOUNG  DUCKS. 


109 


The  differences  of  sects  arise  from  His  names  ; 

When  they  pierce  to  His  essence  they  find  His  peace ! ” 

This  story  is  followed  by  another  anecdote  illustrative 
of  the  same  thesis  that  attending  merely  to  names  and 
outward  forms,  rather  than  to  the  spirit  and  essence  of 
religion,  leads  men  into  error  and  delusion.  Four  persons, 
a Persian,  an  Arab,  a Turk,  and  a Greek,  were  travelling 
together,  and  received  a present  of  a dirhem.  The  Persian 
said  he  would  buy  “ angur”  with  it,  the  Arab  said  he 
would  buy  “ indb ,”  while  the  Turk  and  the  Greek  were 
for  buying  “tizuni”  and  “astaphil”  ( staphyle ),  respectively. 
Now  all  these  words  mean  one  and  the  same  thing,  viz., 
“ grapes ; ” but,  owing  to  their  ignorance  of  each  other’s 
languages,  they  fancied  they  each  wanted  to  buy  some- 
thing different,  and  accordingly  a violent  quarrel  arose 
between  them.  At  last  a wise  man  who  knew  all  their 
languages  came  up  and  explained  to  them  that  they  were 
all  wishing  for  one  and  the  same  thing. 

Story  XVIII.  The  Young  Ducks  who  were  brought  up 
under  a Hen  (p.  184). 

Although  a domestic  fowl  may  have  taken  thee, 

Who  art  a duckling,  under  her  wing  and  nurtured  thee, 
Thy  mother  was  a duck  of  that  ocean, 

Thy  nurse  was  earthy,  and  her  wing  dry  land. 

The  longing  for  the  ocean  which  fills  thy  heart, — 

That  natural  longing  of  thy  soul  comes  from  thy  mother. 
Thy  longing  for  dry  land  comes  to  thee  from  thy  nurse  ; 
Quit  thy  nurse,  for  she  will  lead  thee  astray. 

Leave  thy  nurse  on  the  dry  land  and  push  on, 

Enter  the  ocean  of  real  Being,  like  the  ducks ! 

Though  thy  nurse  may  frighten  thee  away  from  water, 

Do  thou  fear  not,  but  haste  on  into  the  ocean ! 

Thou  art  a duck,  and  flourishest  on  land  and  water, 

And  dost  not,  like  a domestic  fowl,  dig  up  the  house. 


I IO 


THE  MASK  AVI. 


[book  ii. 


Thou  art  a king  of  “ the  sons  of  Adam  honoured  by  God,”  1 
And  settest  foot  alike  on  sea  and  land ; — 

For  impress  on  thy  mind,  “We  have  carried  them  by  sea” 
Before  the  words,  “We  have  carried  them  by  land.” 

The  angels  go  not  on  dry  land, 

And  the  animals  know  nothing  of  the  sea ; 

Thou  in  body  art  an  animal,  in  thy  soul  an  angel ; 

Hence  thou  goest  both  upon  earth  and  on  heaven.” 

Hence  to  outward  view  “ He  is  a man  like  you,” 2 
While  to  his  sharp-seeing  heart  “it  hath  been  revealed.” 
His  earthy  form  has  fallen  on  earth, 

His  spirit  revolving  above  highest  heaven. 

0 boy,  we  are  all  of  us  waterfowl, 

The  sea  knows  full  well  our  language. 

Solomon 3 is,  as  it  were,  that  sea,  and  we  as  the  birds ; 

In  Solomon  we  hold  our  course  to  eternity. 

Along  with  Solomon  plunge  into  the  ocean,4 

Then,  like  David,  the  water  will  make  us  coats-of-mail. 

That  Solomon  is  present  to  every  one, 

But  negligence  closes  their  eyes  and  bewitches  them. 
Hence,  through  ignorance,  sloth,  and  folly, 

Though  he  stands  hard  by  us,  we  are  shut  off  from  him. 
The  noise  of  thunder  makes  the  head  of  the  thirsty  ache  ; 
When  he  knows  not  that  it  unlocks  the  blessed  showers, 
His  eyes  are  fixed  on  the  running  stream, 

Unwitting  of  the  sweetness  of  the  rain  from  heaven. 

He  urges  the  steed  of  his  desire  towards  the  caused , 

And  perforce  remains  shut  off  from  the  Causer. 

Whoso  beholds  the  Causer  face  to  face, 

How  can  he  set  his  heart  on  things  catised  on  earth  ? 


1 Koran  xvi.  72  : “ And  now  have 
we  honoured  the  sons  of  Adam,  by 
sea  and  by  land  have  we  carried 
them.” 

2 Koranxviii.no:  “Say,  In  sooth 

I am  only  a man  like  you.  It  hath 


been  revealed  unto  me  that  your  God 
is  one  only  God.” 

3 Koran  xxvii.  1 6 : “Solomon  said, 
O men,  we  have  been  taught  the 
speech  of  birds.” 

4 Koran  xxvii.  44  and  xxi.  So. 


36001?  m. 


Story  I.  The  Travellers  who  ate  the  Young  Elephant  (p.  190). 

A party  of  travellers  lost  their  way  in  a wilderness,  and 
were  well  nigh  famished  with  hunger.  While  they  were 
considering  what  to  do,  a sage  came  up  and  condoled  with 
them  on  their  unfortunate  plight.  He  told  them  that 
there  were  many  young  elephants  in  the  adjacent  woods, 
one  of  which  would  furnish  them  an  ample  meal,  but  at 
the  same  time  he  warned  them  that  if  they  killed  one, 
its  parents  would  in  all  probability  track  them  out  and 
be  revenged  on  them  for  killing  their  offspring.  Shortly 
after  the  travellers  saw  a plump  young  elephant,  and 
could  not  resist  killing  and  eating  it.  One  alone  refrained. 
Then  they  lay  down  to  rest ; but  no  sooner  were  they  fast 
asleep  than  a huge  elephant  made  his  appearance  aud 
proceeded  to  smell  the  breath  of  each  one  of  the  sleepers 
in  turn.  Those  whom  he  perceived  to  have  eaten  of  the 
young  elephant’s  flesh  he  slew  without  mercy,  sparing 
only  the  one  who  had  been  prudent  enough  to  abstain. 


God’s  care  for  His  children  (p.  190). 

0 son,  the  pious  are  God’s  children, 

Absent  or  present  He  is  informed  of  their  state. 
Deem  Him  not  absent  when  they  are  endangered, 
For  He  is  jealous  for  their  lives. 

He  saith,  “ These  saints  are  my  children, 

Though  remote  and  alone  and  away  from  their  Lord. 
For  their  trial  they  are  orphans  and  wretched, 


I 12 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  III. 


Yet  in  love  I am  ever  holding  communion  with  them. 
Thou  art  backed  by  all  my  protection, 

My  children  are,  as  it  were,  parts  of  me. 

Verily  these  Darveshes  of  mine 

Are  thousands  on  thousands,  and  yet  no  more  than  One ; 
For  if  not,  how  did  Moses  with  one  magic  staff 
Turn  the  realm  of  Pharaoh  upside  down  ? 

And  if  it  were  not  so,  how  did  Noah  with  one  curse 
Make  East  and  West  alike  drowned  in  his  flood? 

Nor  could  one  prayer  of  eloquent  Lot 

Have  razed  their  strong  city  against  their  will, — 

Their  mighty  city,  like  to  Paradise, 

Became  as  a Tigris  of  black  water ; go,  see  its  vestige. 
Towards  Syria  is  this  vestige  and  memorial, 

Thou  seest  it  in  passing  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem. 

Thousands  of  God-fearing  prophets 

In  every  age  hold  divine  chastisements  in  hand. 

Should  I tell  of  them  my  limits  would  be  exceeded, 

And  not  hearts  only  but  very  hills  would  bleed.” 


Evil  deeds  give  mens  prayers  an  ill  savour  in  God's 
nostrils  (p.  192). 

Thou  art  asleep,  and  the  smell  of  that  forbidden  fruit 
Ascends  to  the  azure  skies, — 

Ascends  along  with  thy  foul  breath, 

Till  it  overpowers  heaven  with  stench  ; — 

Stench  of  pride,  stench  of  lust,  stench  of  greed. 

All  these  stink  like  onions  when  a man  speaks. 

Though  thou  swearest,  saying,  “When  have  I eaten? 
Have  I not  abstained  from  onions  and  garlic  ? ” 

The  very  breath  of  that  oath  tells  tales, 

As  it  strikes  the  nostrils  of  them  that  sit  with  thee. 

So  too  prayers  are  made  invalid  by  such  stenches,1 
That  crooked  heart  is  betrayed  by  its  speech. 

1 “Whoever  eats  garlie  or  onions  must  keep  away  from  me  or  from  the 
Masjid"  (Mishkat  ul  Masabih,  ii.  321). 


STORY  I.] 


THE  HUNGRY  TRAVELLERS. 


1 *3 

The  answer  to  that  prayer  is,  “ Be  ye  driven  into  hell,” 1 
The  staff  of  repulsion  is  the  reward  of  all  deceit. 

But,  if  thy  speech  be  crooked  and  thy  meaning  straight, 
Thy  crookedness  of  words  will  be  accepted  of  God. 

That  faithful  Bilal,  when  he  called  to  prayer, 

Would  devoutly  cry,  “Come  hither,  come  hither!  ” 

At  last  men  said,  “ 0 Prophet,  this  call  is  not  right, 

This  is  wrong ; now,  what  is  thy  intention  ? 

0 Prophet,  and  0 ambassador  of  the  Almighty, 

Provide  another  Mu’azzin  of  better  talent, 

’Tis  an  error  at  the  beginning  of  our  divine  worship 
To  utter  the  words,  ‘ Come  to  the  asylum  ! ’ ” 2 
The  wrath  of  the  Prophet  boiled  up,  and  he  said 
(Uttering  one  or  two  secrets  from  the  fount  of  grace), 

“ 0 base  ones,  in  God’s  sight  the  ‘ Ho  ! * of  Bilal 
Is  better  than  a hundred  ‘ Come  hithers  ’ and  ejaculations. 
Ah ! excite  not  a tumult,  lest  I tell  forth  openly 
Your  secret  thoughts  from  first  to  last. 

If  ye  keep  not  your  breath  sweet  in  prayer, 

Go,  desire  a prayer  from  the  Brethren  of  Purity ! ” 

For  this  cause  spake  God  to  Moses, 

At  the  time  he  was  asking  aid  in  prayer, 

“ 0 Moses ! desire  protection  of  me 

With  a mouth  that  thou  hast  not  sinned  withal." 

Moses  answered,  “ I possess  not  such  a mouth.” 

God  said,  “ Call  upon  me  with  another  mouth  ! 

Act  so  that  all  thy  mouths 

By  night  and  by  day  may  be  raising  prayers. 

When  thou  hast  sinned  with  one  mouth, 

With  thy  other  mouth  cry,  “ 0 Allah ! ” 

Or  else  cleanse  thy  own  mouth, 

And  make  thy  spirit  alert  and  quick. 

Calling  on  God  is  pure,  and  when  purity  approaches, 
Impurity  arises  and  takes  its  departure. 

Contraries  flee  away  from  contraries  ; 

1 Koran  xxiii.  no:  “He  will  say,  2 Rules  for  the  call  to  prayer 
‘ Be  ye  driven  down  into  it,  and  are  given  in  Mishkat  ul  Masabih, 
address  me  not.’  ” i.  141. 

H 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  ni. 


1 14 

When  day  dawns  night  takes  flight. 

When  the  pure  name  (of  God)  enters  the  mouth, 
Neither  does  impurity  nor  that  impure  mouth  remain ! ” 


The  man  whose  calling  “ 0 Allah  ” was  equivalent  to  God's 
answering  him,  “ Here  am  I”  1 (p.  192). 

That  person  one  night  was  crying,  “ 0 Allah  ! ” 

That  his  mouth  might  be  sweetened  thereby, 

And  Satan  said  to  him,  “ Be  quiet,  0 austere  one ! 

How  long  wilt  thou  babble,  0 man  of  many  words  ? 

No  answer  comes  to  thee  from  nigh  the  throne, 

How  long  wilt  thou  cry  ‘ Allah  ’ with  harsh  face  ? ” 

That  person  was  sad  at  heart  and  hung  his  head, 

And  then  beheld  Khizr  present  before  him  in  a vision, 
Who  said  to  him,  “ Ah  ! thou  hast  ceased  to  call  on  God, 
Wherefore  repentest  thou  of  calling  upon  Him  ? ” 

The  man  said,  “ The  answer  ‘ Here  am  I ’ came  not, 
Wherefore  I fear  that  I am  repulsed  from  the  door.” 
Khizr  replied  to  him,  “ God  has  given  me  this  command  ; 
Go  to  him  and  say,  ‘ 0 much-tried  one, 

Did  not  I engage  thee  to  do  my  service  ? 

Did  not  I engage  thee  to  call  upon  me  ? 

That  calling  ‘Allah  ’ of  thine  rvas  my  ‘ Here  am  I,’ 

And  that  pain  and  longing  and  ardour  of  thine  my 
messenger ; 

Thy  struggles  and  strivings  for  assistance 
Were  my  attractions,  and  originated  thy  prayer. 

Thy  fear  and  thy  love  are  the  covert  of  my  mercy, 

Each  ‘ O Lord  ! ’ of  thine  contains  many  ‘ Here  am  IV 
The  soul  of  fools  is  alien  from  this  calling  on  God, 
Because  it  is  not  their  wont  to  cry,  * 0 Lord  ! ’ 

On  their  mouths  and  hearts  are  locks  and  bonds,2 
That  they  may  not  cry  to  God  in  time  of  distress. 

God  gave  Pharaoh  abundance  of  riches  and  wealth, 

1 Or,  “What  dost  thou  require  of  me!  ’ 


a Koran  ii.  6. 


STORY  II.]  THE  VILLAGER  AND  THE  TOWNSMAN.  115 

So  that  he  boasted  that  he  was  ‘ Lord  Supreme.’ 

In  the  whole  of  his  life  he  suffered  no  headache, 

So  that  he  never  cried  to  God,  wretch  that  he  was. 

God  granted  him  the  absolute  dominion  of  the  world, 

But  withheld  from  him  pain  and  sorrow  and  cares ; 
Because  pain  and  sorrow  and  loads  of  cares 
Are  the  lot  of  God’s  friends  in  the  wTorld. 

Pain  is  better  than  the  dominion  of  the  world, 

So  that  thou  mayest  call  on  God  in  secret. 

The  cries  of  those  free  from  pain  are  dull  and  cold, 

The  cries  of  the  sorrowful  come  from  the  burning  hearts.” 


Story  II.  The  Villager  who  invited  the  Townsman  to 
visit  him  (p.  193). 

A certain  villager  paid  a visit  to  the  town,  and  there 
received  hospitality  from  one  of  the  townsmen.  At  his 
departure  the  villager  was  profuse  of  thanks,  and  pressed 
the  townsman  to  come  and  see  him  in  his  village,  and 
bring  his  family  with  him.  The  townsman  hesitated  long 
before  accepting  bis  invitation,  having  doubts  as  to  his 
sincerity,  and  remembering  the  Hadis,  “ Caution  consists 
in  suspecting  others.” 1 But  after  ten  years’  solicitation  he 
at  length  yielded,  and  set  off  with  his  family  to  the  village. 
On  his  arrival  the  villager  shut  the  door  in  his  face,  say- 
ing that  he  did  not  know  him,  and  the  townsman  had  to 
pass  five  nights  in  the  cold  and  rain.  At  last,  exhausted 
with  suffering,  he  implored  the  villager  to  give  him 
shelter,  promising  to  render  service  in  return.  The  villager 
granted  it  on  condition  that  he  would  protect  his  garden 
from  the  wolves.  The  townsman  accepted  this  condition, 
and  taking  bow  and  arrows,  proceeded  to  patrol  the  garden, 
but,  owing  to  the  rain  and  the  darkness,  and  his  own  fears, 
ended  by  shooting  the  villager’s  pet  ass  in  mistake  for  a 
wolf.  The  villager  abused  him  roundly,  saying  that  he 

1 Frey  tag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  i.  p.  370,  ascribes  this  saying  to  the  poet 
Aqzam  bin  Zaid. 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  m. 


1 16 

himself  would  not  have  taken  an  ass  for  a wolf,  even  on 
the  darkest  night.  The  townsman  replied,  “ If  that  be  so. 
you  are  self-convicted  of  inhumanity,  for  you  must  have 
recognised  me,  your  friend  of  ten  years’  standing,  the 
moment  I knocked  at  your  door.  As  for  me,  I am  igno- 
rant of  all  but  Allah,  and,  moreover,  was  unable  to  see  in 
the  darkness ; and  God  has  said,  * No  criminality  is  im- 
puted to  the  blind.’ 1 But  your  blindness  in  refusing  to 
recognise  me  was  wilful,  and  your  claims  to  humanity 
are  thus  proved  to  be  false  by  the  test  to  which  you  have 
been  submitted.” 

Jesus  healing  the  sick  (p.  195). 

The  house  of  ’Isa  was  the  bancjuet  of  men  of  heart, 

Ho  ! afflicted  one,  cjuit  not  this  door  ! 

From  all  sides  the  people  ever  thronged, 

Many  blind  and  lame,  and  halt  and  afflicted. 

To  the  door  of  the  house  of  ’Isa  at  dawn, 

That  with  his  breath  he  might  heal  their  ailments. 

As  soon  as  he  had  finished  his  orisons, 

That  holy  one  would  come  forth  at  the  third  hour ; 

He  viewed  those  impotent  folk,  troop  by  troop, 

Sitting  at  his  door  in  hope  and  expectation ; 

He  spoke  to  them,  saying,  “ 0 stricken  ones ! 

The  desires  of  all  of  you  have  been  granted  by  God  ; 
Arise,  walk  without  pain  or  affliction, 

Acknowledge  the  mercy  and  beneficence  of  God  ! ” 

Then  all,  as  camels  whose  feet  are  shackled, 

When  you  loose  their  feet  in  the  road, 

Straightway  rush  in  joy  and  delight  to  the  halting-place. 
So  did  they  run  upon  their  feet  at  his  command. 

How  many  afflictions  caused  by  thyself  to  thyself 
Hast  thou  escaped  through  these  princes  of  the  faith  ? 
How  long  that  lameness  of  thine  was  thy  steed  ! 

How  seldom  was  thy  soul  void  of  sorrow  and  grief ! 


1 Koran  xxiv.  60. 


STORY  II.]  THE  VILLAGER  AND  THE  TOWNSMAN.  117 

0 careless  straggler,  bind  a rope  upon  thy  feet, 

Lest  thou  lose  even  thine  own  self ! 

But  thy  ingratitude  and  unthankfulness 
Forget  the  honey  draught  thou  hast  sipped. 

That  road  was  perforce  closed  to  thee 

When  thou  didst  wound  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  heart. 

Quick  ! clasp  them  and  ask  pardon  of  them  ; 

Like  the  clouds,  shed  tears  of  lamentation, 

So  that  their  rose-garden  may  bloom  for  thee, 

And  their  ripe  fruits  burst  open  of  themselves. 

Press  around  that  door,  be  not  viler  than  a dog, 

If  thou  wouldest  rival  the  Seven  Sleepers’  dog. 

God’s  claims  to  our  gratitude  (p.  195). 

Whereas  want  of  fidelity  is  shameful  even  in  dogs, 

How  can  it  be  right  in  men  ? 

God  Almighty  Himself  makes  boast  of  fidelity, 

Saying,  “ Who  more  faithful  to  his  promise  than  We  ? ” 1 
Know,  infidelity  is  fidelity  to  God’s  adversary, 

No  one  has  pre-eminence  over  the  rights  of  God. 

The  claims  of  a mother  are  less  than  God’s,  for  He, 

That  bounteous  One,  made  her  debtor  for  thy  embryo. 

He  gave  thee  a form  whilst  thou  wast  in  her  womb, 

In  her  womb  He  gave  thee  needful  rest  and  nurture. 

He  viewed  her  as  a part  united  to  thee, 

Then  His  wisdom  separated  that  united  part. 

God  devised  a thousand  plans  and  arts, 

To  make  thy  mother  lavish  affection  upon  thee. 
Wherefore  the  claims  of  God  predominate  over  the  mother’s, 
Whoso  acknowledges  not  God’s  claims  is  a fool. 

He  who  made  mother  and  breast  and  milk 
United  mother  to  father  also, — despise  Him  not! 

O Lord,  0 Ancient  of  days,  Thy  mercies, 

Whether  known  to  us  or  unknown,  are  all  from  Thee ! 
Thou  hast  commanded,  saying,  “ Remember  thy  God,” 
Because  God’s  claims  are  never  exhausted ! 

1 Koran  ix.  1 1 2. 


1 1 8 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


Since  thou  hast  been  led  astray  by  faithless  men, 

Turn  now  from  thy  evil  doubts  to  the  opposite  mind. 

I am  free  from  error  and  all  faithlessness  ; 

Thou  must  come  to  me  and  rescind  evil  doubts. 

Cut  off  these  evil  doubts  and  cast  them  away, 

For  in  the  presence  of  such  thou  becomest  double. 
Therefore  thou  hast  chosen  harsh  friends  and  companions  ; 
If  I ask  where  they  are  thou  sayest  they  are  gone. 

The  good  friend  goes  up  to  highest  heaven, 

Evil  friends  sink  beneath  the  bottom  of  the  earth, 

Whilst  thou  art  left  alone  in  the  midst,  forlorn, 

Even  as  the  fires  left  by  the  departed  caravan.” 

0 brave  friend,  grasp  His  skirt, 

Who  is  removed  alike  from  the  world  above  and  below ; 
Who  neither,  like  Jesus,  ascends  to  heaven, 

Nor,  like  Korak,  sinks  into  the  earth ; 

Who  will  abide  with  thee  in  the  house  and  abroad 
When  thou  lackest  house  and  home. 

He  will  bring  forth  peace  out  of  perturbations, 

And  when  thou  art  afflicted  will  keep  His  promise. 

How  false  'pretensions  to  sanctity  are  distinguished  from 
true  sanctity  (p.  203). 

0 son,  a hundred  thousand  tests  await  thee, 

Whoever  thou  art  who  sayest  “ I am  a prince  of  the  gate,” 
If  the  vulgar  detect  not  such  an  one  by  tests, 

Yet  the  skilled  wayfarers  seek  of  him  a sign. 

When  a man  makes  pretension  to  be  a tailor, 

The  master  places  before  him  a piece  of  silk, 

Saying,  “ Cut  out  a large  head-dress,” 

And  failure  in  the  test  leads  him  to  the  pillory. 

If  all  the  evil  men  were  not  tested, 

Every  catamite  would  through  fraud  pass  for  a Rustam. 
Suppose  he  wears  the  semblance  of  one  clad  in  mail, 

Yet  when  wounded  he  is  at  once  taken  captive. 

The  God-intoxicated  are  not  sobered  by  old  age, 

They  remain  beside  themselves  till  the  last  trump. 


STORY  II.]  THE  VILLAGER  AND  THE  TOWNSMAN.  119 

The  wine  of  God  is  true,  and  not  false, 

But  thou  hast  drunk  only  sour  whey. 

Thou  inakest  thyself  out  to  be  a Junaid  or  a Bayazid ; 

Go ! for  do  I not  know  a hatchet  from  a ploughshare  ? 

0 plotter,  how  canst  thou  conceal  by  fraud 
Baseness,  sloth,  covetousness,  and  lust  ? 

Thou  holdest  thyself  out  as  a lover  of  God, 

But  thou  hast  coquetted  with  the  evil  demon. 

The  lover  and  the  beloved  on  the  last  day 
Will  be  joined  together  and  raised  in  sight  of  all. 

How  foolish  and  silly  thou  hast  made  thyself  ! 

Thou  hast  drunk  blood  of  grapes,  nay,  my  blood  ! 

Go  ! for  I know  thee  not.  Get  away  ! 

1 am  a lover  beside  himself,  whose  words  are  wild. 

Thou  fanciest  thyself  near  to  God, 

Saying,  “ The  maker  of  the  dish  is  not  far  from  the  dish.” 
Knowest  thou  not  that  the  nearness  of  saints  to  God 
Involves  the  power  to  do  mighty  works  and  signs  ? 

Iron  was  as  wax  in  the  hands  of  David, 

Wax  in  thy  hands  is  as  iron. 

God’s  nearness  and  His  beneficence  are  common  to  all. 

But  only  eminent  saints  enjoy  inspired  love. 

Nearness  is  of  various  kinds,  0 son, 

The  sun  shines  alike  on  rocks  and  on  gold. 

Yet  the  sun  possesses  a nearness  to  gold, 

Whereof  the  common  willow  has  no  cognisance. 

The  dry  branch  and  the  green  are  alike  near  the  sun, 

Does  the  sun  veil  himself  from  either  ? 

Yet  what  is  the  nearness  of  that  green  branch, 

Wherefrom  thou  eatest  ripe  fruits  ? 

But  as  for  the  dry  branch,  from  its  nearness  to  the  sun. 
What  does  it  but  more  quickly  grow  dry  and  sapless  ? 

Be  not  intoxicated  after  the  manner  of  this  branch, 
Which,  when  it  becomes  sober,  has  cause  for  repentance, 
But,  like  those  drunkards  who,  when  they  drink  wine, 
Bear  ripe  fruits  of  wisdom  of  penitence. 


120 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


Story  III.  The  Jackal  who  pretended  to  he  a Peacock 
(p.  204). 

A jackal  fell  into  a dye-pit,  and  his  skin  was  dyed  of 
various  colours.  Proud  of  his  splendid  appearance,  he 
returned  to  his  companions,  and  desired  them  to  address 
him  as  a peacock.  But  they  proceeded  to  test  his  preten- 
sions, saying.  “ Dost  thou  scream  like  a peacock,  or  strut 
about  gardens  as  peacocks  are  wont  to  do  ? ” And  he  was 
forced  to  admit  that  he  did  not,  whereupon  they  rejected 
his  pretensions.  Another  story,  also  on  the  subject  of  false 
pretenders,  follows.  A proud  man  who  lacked  food  pro- 
cured a skin  full  of  fat,  greased  his  beard  and  lips  with  it, 
and  called  on  his  friends  to  observe  how  luxuriously  he 
had  dined.  But  his  belly  was  vexed  at  this,  because  it  was 
hungry,  and  he  was  destroying  his  chance  of  being  invited 
to  dinner  by  his  friends.  So  the  belly  cried  to  God,  and  a 
cat  came  and  carried  off  the  skin  of  fat,  and  so  the  man’s 
false  pretences  were  exposed.  The  poet  takes  occasion  to 
point  out  that  Pharaoh’s  pretensions  to  divinity  exactly 
resembled  the  pretensions  of  this  jackal,  and  adds  that  all 
such  false  pretenders  may  be  detected  by  the  mark  noted 
in  the  Koran,  “ Ye  shall  know  them  by  the  strangeness  of 
their  speech.” 1 This  recalls  the  story  of  Harut  and  Marut, 
two  angels  who  were  very  severe  on  the  frailties  of  man- 
kind, and  whom  God  sent  down  upon  the  earth  to  be 
tempted,  with  the  result  that  they  both  succumbed  to  the 
charms  of  the  daughters  of  men.2 

Story  IV.  Moses  and  Pharaoh  (p.  207). 

Then  follows  a long  account  of  the  birth  of  Moses,  of 
Pharaoh’s  devices  to  kill  him  in  bis  infancy,  of  his  educa- 
tion in  Pharaoh’s  house,  of  his  desiring  Pharaoh  to  let  the 
children  of  Israel  go,  and  of  his  contest  with  the  magicians 

1 Koran  xlvii.  32.  J Koran  ii.  96. 


STORY  IV.]  MOSES  AND  PHARAOH.  121 

of  Egypt,  and  his  victory  over  them.  In  the  course  of  the 
story  the  following  anecdote  is  narrated  : — 

A snake-catcher,  who  was  following  his  occupation  in 
the  mountains,  discovered  a large  snake  frozen  by  the 
cold,  and,  imagining  it  to  be  dead,  he  tied  it  up  and  took 
it  to  Baghdad.  There  all  the  idlers  of  the  city  Hocked 
together  to  see  it,  and  the  snake,  thawed  by  the  warmth 
of  the  sun,  recovered  life,  and  immediately  destroyed  the 
spectators. 

Comparison  of  Jtcshly  lust  to  the  snake  (p.  213). 

Lust  is  that  snake ; How  say  you  it  is  dead  ? 

It  is  only  frozen  by  the  pangs  of  hunger. 

If  it  obtains  the  state  of  Pharaoh, 

So  as  to  command  the  (frozen)  rivers  to  How, 

Straightway  it  is  led  to  pride  like  Pharaoh’s, 

And  it  plunders  the  goods  of  many  a Moses  and  Aaron. 
Through  pressure  of  want  this  snake  is  as  a fly, 

It  becomes  a gnat  through  wealth  and  rank  and  luxury. 
Beware,  keep  that  snake  in  the  frost  of  humiliation, 

Draw  it  not  forth  into  the  sunshine  of  ’Iraq  ! 

So  long  as  that  snake  is  frozen,  it  is  well ; 

When  it  finds  release  from  frost  you  become  its  prey. 
Conquer  it  and  save  yourself  from  being  conquered, 

Pity  it  not,  it  is  not  one  who  bears  affection. 

For  that  warmth  of  the  sun  kindles  its  lust, 

And  that  bat  of  vileness  flaps  its  wings. 

Slay  it  in  sacred  war  and  combat, 

Like  a valiant  man  will  God  requite  you  with  union. 
When  that  man  cherished  that  snake, 

That  stubborn  brute  was  happy  in  the  luxury  of  warmth ; 
And  of  necessity  worked  destruction,  0 friend  ; 

Yea,  many  more  mischiefs  than  I have  told. 

If  you  wish  to  keep  that  snake  tied  up 
Without  trouble,  be  faithful,  be  faithful ! 

But  how  can  base  men  attain  this  wish  ? 


122 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 


It  requires  a Moses  to  slay  serpents  ; 

And  a hundred  thousand  men  were  slain  by  his  serpent, 
In  dire  confusion,  according  to  his  purpose. 

Story  Y.  The  Elephant  in  a Dark  Room  (p.  217). 

Some  Hindoos  were  exhibiting  an  elephant  in  a dark 
room,  and  many  people  collected  to  see  it.  But  as  the 
place  was  too  dark  to  permit  them  to  see  the  elephant, 
they  all  felt  it  with  their  hands,  to  gain  an  idea  of  what  it 
was  like.  One  felt  its  trunk,  and  declared  that  the  beast 
resembled  a water-pipe  ; another  felt  its  ear,  and  said  it 
must  be  a large  fan ; another  its  leg,  and  thought  it 
must  be  a pillar ; another  felt  its  back,  and  declared  the 
beast  must  be  like  a great  throne.  According  to  the 
part  which  each  felt,  he  gave  a different  description  of 
the  animal.  One,  as  it  were,  called  it  “ Dal and  another 
“ Alif.” 

Comparison  of  the  sensual  eye  to  the  hand  of  one  that  felt 
the  elephant  (p.  217). 

The  eye  of  outward  sense  is  as  the  palm  of  a hand, 

The  whole  of  the  object  is  not  grasped  in  the  palm. 

The  sea  itself  is  one  thing,  the  foam  another ; 

Neglect  the  foam,  and  regard  the  sea  with  your  eyes. 
Waves  of  foam  rise  from  the  sea  night  and  day, 

You  look  at  the  foam  ripples  and  not  the  mighty  sea. 

We,  like  boats,  are  tossed  hither  and  thither, 

We  are  blind  though  we  are  on  the  bright  ocean. 

Ah  ! you  who  are  asleep  in  the  boat  of  the  body, 

You  see  the  water  ; behold  the  Water  of  waters  ! 

Under  the  water  you  see  there  is  another  Water  moving  it, 
Within  the  spirit  is  a Spirit  that  calls  it. 

Where  were  Moses  and  Jesus  when  that  Sun 
Showered  down  water  on  the  fields  sown  with  corn  ? 
Where  were  Adam  and  Eve  what  time 
God  Almighty  fitted  the  string  to  His  bow  ? 


123 


STORY  V.]  THE  ELEPHANT  IN  A DARK  ROOM. 

The  one  form  of  speech  is  evil  and  defective ; 

The  other  form,  which  is  not  defective,  is  perfect. 

If  I speak  thereof  your  feet  stumble, 

Yet  if  I speak  not  of  it,  woe  be  to  you ! 

And  if  I speak  in  terms  of  outw-ard  form, 

You  stick  fast  in  that  same  form,  0 son. 

You  are  footbouud  like  the  grass  in  the  ground, 

And  your  head  is  shaken  by  the  wind  uncertainly. 

Your  foot  stands  not  firmly  till  you  move  it, 

Nay,  till  you  pluck  it  not  up  from  the  mire. 

When  you  pluck  up  your  foot  you  escape  from  the  mire, 
The  way  to  this  salvation  is  very  difficult. 

When  you  obtain  salvation  at  God’s  hands,  0 wanderer. 
You  are  free  from  the  mire,  and  go  your  way. 

When  the  suckling  is  weaned  from  its  nurse, 

It  eats  strong  meats  and  leaves  the  nurse. 

You  are  bound  to  the  bosom  of  earth  like  seeds. 

Strive  to  be  weaned  through  nutriment  of  the  heart. 

Eat  the  w’ords  of  wisdom,  for  veiled  light 
Is  not  accepted  in  preference  to  unveiled  light. 

When  you  have  accepted  the  fight,  0 beloved, 

When  you  behold  what  is  veiled  without  a veil, 

Like  a star  you  will  walk  upon  the  heavens ; 

Nay,  though  not  in  heaven,  you  will  walk  on  high. 

Keep  silence,  that  you  may  hear  Him  speaking 
Words  unutterable  by  tongue  in  speech. 

Keep  silence,  that  you  may  hear  from  that  Sun 
Things  inexpressible  in  books  and  discourses. 

Keep  silence,  that  the  Spirit  may  speak  to  you  ; 

Give  up  swimming  and  enter  the  ark  of  Noah  ; 

Not  like  Canaan  when  he  was  swimming. 

Who  said,  “I  desire  not  to  enter  the  ark  of  Noah  passing 


124 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  m. 


Noah  and  his  unbelieving  son  Canaan  (p.  218). 

Noah  cried,  “ Ho ! child,  come  into  the  ark  and  rest, 

That  you  be  not  drowned  in  the  flood,  0 weak  one.” 1 
Canaan  said,  “ Nay ! I have  learned  to  swim, 

I have  lit  a torch  of  my  own  apart  from  thy  torch.” 

Noah  replied,  “ Make  not  light  of  it,  for  ’tis  the  flood  of 
destruction, 

Swimming  with  hands  and  feet  avails  naught  to-day. 

The  wmd  of  wrath  and  the  storm  blow  out  torches ; 
Except  the  torch  of  God,  all  are  extinguished.” 

He  answered,  “ Nay ! I am  going  to  that  high  mountain, 
For  that  will  save  me  from  all  harm.” 

Noah  cried,  “ Beware,  do  not  so,  mountains  are  now  as 
grass ; 

Except  the  Friend  none  can  save  thee.” 

He  answered,  “ Why  should  I listen  to  thy  advice  ? 

For  thou  desirest  to  make  me  one  of  thy  flock. 

Thy  speech  is  by  no  means  pleasing  to  me, 

I am  free  from  thee  in  this  world  and  the  next.” 

Thus  the  more  good  advice  Noah  gave  him, 

The  more  stubborn  refusals  he  returned. 

Neither  was  his  father  tired  of  advising  Canaan, 

Nor  did  his  advice  make  any  impression  on  Canaan  ; 
While  they  were  yet  talking  a violent  wave 
Smote  Canaan’s  head,  and  he  was  overwhelmed. 


Reconciliation  of  the  two  traditions , “Acquiescence  in  in- 
fidelity is  infidelity ,”  and  “ Whoso  acquiesces  not  in  God’s 
ordinance  desires  another  Lord  besides  me  ” (p.  219). 

Yesterday  an  inquirer  questioned  me, 

Since  he  was  interested  in  the  foregoing  narrative, 
Saying,  “The  Prophet,  whose  words  are  as  a seal, 

1 Koran  xi.  44. 


story  v.]  THE  ELEPHANT  IN  A DARK  ROOM. 


125 


Said,  ‘Acquiescence  in  infidelity  is  infidelity.’ 

And  again,  ‘ Acquiescence  in  God's  ordinance 
Is  incumbent  on  all  true  believers.’ 

Infidelity  and  hypocrisy  are  not  ordained  of  God  ; 

If  I acquiesce  in  them  I am  at  variance  with  God. 

And  yet,  if  I acquiesce  not,  that  again  is  wrong ; 

What  way  of  escape  is  there  from  this  dilemma  ? ” 

I said  to  him,  “This  infidelity  is  ordained,  not  ordinance,1 
Though  this  infidelity  is  the  work  of  the  ordinance. 
Therefore  distinguish  the  ordinance  from  the  ordained, 
That  thy  difficulty  may  be  at  once  removed. 

I acquiesce  in  infidelity  so  far  as  it  is  God’s  ordinance, 
Not  so  far  as  it  is  our  evil  and  foul  passions. 

Infidelity  qud  ordinance  is  not  infidelity, 

Call  not  God  an  infidel.  Set  not  foot  in  this  place. 
Infidelity  is  folly,  ordained  infidelity  wisdom, 

How  can  mercy  and  vengeance  be  the  same  ? 

Ugliness  of  the  picture  is  not  ugliness  of  the  painter, 

Not  so,  for  he  erases  ugly  pictures. 

The  ability  of  the  painter  is  shown  in  this, 

That  he  can  paint  both  ugly  and  beautiful  pictures. 

If  I should  pursue  this  argument  properly, 

So  that  questions  and  answers  should  be  prolonged, 

The  unction  of  the  mystery  of  love  would  escape  me, 

The  picture  of  obedience  would  become  another  picture.” 


Bewilderment  from  intense  love  of  God  puts  an  end  to 
all  thinking  and  argument 2 (p.  219). 

A certain  man  whose  hair  was  half  grey  came  in  haste 
To  a barber  who  was  a friend  of  his, 

Saying,  “ Pluck  out  the  white  hairs  from  my  beard, 

For  I have  selected  a young  bride,  0 my  son. 

The  barber  cut  off  his  beard  and  laid  it  before  him, 
Saying,  “ Do  you  part  them,  the  task  is  beyond  me.” 

1 Or  “ decreed,  not  decree  ” ( maqzi  nai  qaza).  I confess  I do  not  under- 
stand the  distinction.  2 See  Gulshan  i.  Raz,  1.  287. 


126 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


Questions  are  white  and  answers  black  : do  you  choose, 
For  the  man  of  faith  knows  not  how  to  choose. 

Thus,  one  smote  Zaid  a blow, 

And  Zaid  attacked  him  for  his  treachery. 

The  striker  said,  “ Let  me  first  ask  you  a question, 

Give  me  an  answer  to  it  and  then  strike  me ; 

I struck  your  back  and  a bruise  appeared, 

Now  I ask  you  a question  in  all  kindliness. 

Did  this  bruise  proceed  from  my  hand, 

Or  from  the  smitten  part  of  your  back,  0 complainer  ? ” 
Zaid  replied.  “Through  pain  I am  not  in  a condition 
To  enter  upon  thought  and  consideration  of  this. 

You,  who  are  free  from  pain,  think  this  out ; 

Such  trifling  thoughts  occur  not  to  a man  in  pain.” 

[Men  in  pain  have  no  time  for  other  thoughts, 

Whether  you  enter  mosque  or  Christian  church. 

Your  carelessness  and  injustice  suggest  thoughts 
And  unprecedented  difficulties  to  your  imagination. 

The  man  in  pain  cares  only  for  the  faith, 

He  is  aware  only  of  man  and  his  work. 

He  sets  God’s  command  upon  his  head  and  face, 

And  for  thinking,  he  puts  it  aside.1] 

Stoky  VI.  The  Lover  who  read  Sonnets  to  his  Mistress 
(p.  220). 

A lover  was  once  admitted  to  the  presence  of  his 
mistress,  but,  instead  of  embracing  her,  he  pulled  out  a 
paper  of  sonnets  and  read  them  to  her,  describing  her 
perfections  and  charms  and  his  own  love  towards  her  at 
length.  His  mistress  said  to  him,  “You  are  now  in  mv 
presence,  and  these  lover’s  sighs  and  invocations  are  a 
waste  of  time.  It  is  not  the  part  of  a true  lover  to  waste 
his  time  in  this  way.  It  shows  that  I am  not  the  real 
object  of  your  affection,  but  that  what  you  really  love  is 
your  own  effusions  and  ecstatic  raptures.  I see,  as  it  were, 

1 The  four  last  couplets  are  omitted  in  the  Bulaq  edition. 


STORY  VI.]  THE  LOVER  AND  HIS  MISTRESS. 


127 


the  water  which  I have  longed  for  before  me,  and  yet  you 
withhold  it.  I am,  as  it  were,  in  Bulgaria,  and  the  object 
of  your  love  is  in  Cathay.  One  who  is  really  loved  is  the 
single  object  of  her  lover,  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  his 
desires.  As  for  you,  you  are  wrapped  up  in  your  own 
amorous  raptures,  depending  on  the  varying  states  of  your 
own  feelings,  instead  of  being  wrapped  up  in  me.” 


The  true  mystic  must  not  stop  at  mere  subjective  religious 
emotions,  but  seek  absolute  union  with  God  (p.  220). 1 

Whoso  is  restricted  to  religious  raptures  is  but  a man  ; 
Sometimes  his  rapture  is  excessive,  sometimes  deficient. 
The  Sufi  is,  as  it  were,  the  “ son  of  the  season,” 

But  the  pure  (Sdji)  is  exalted  above  season  and  state. 
Religious  raptures  depend  on  feelings  and  will, 

But  the  pure  one  is  regenerated  by  the  breath  of  Jesus. 
You  are  a lover  of  your  own  raptures,  not  of  me  ; 

You  turn  to  me  only  in  hope  of  experiencing  raptures. 
Whoso  is  now  defective,  now  perfect, 

Is  not  adored  by  Abraham ; he  is  “ one  that  sets.” 

Because  the  stars  set,  and  are  now  up,  now  down, 

He  loved  them  not;  “ I love  not  them  that  set.” 2 
Whoso  is  now  pleasing  and  now  unpleasing 
Is  at  one  time  water,  at  another  fire. 

He  may  be  the  house  of  the  moon,  but  not  the  true  moon  ; 
Or  as  the  picture  of  a mistress,  but  not  the  living  one. 

The  mere  Sufi  is  the  “ child  of  the  season  ; ” 

He  clings  to  seasons  as  to  a father, 

But  the  pure  one  is  drowned  in  overwhelming  love. 

A child  of  any  one  is  never  free  from  season  and  state. 
The  pure  one  is  drowned  in  the  light  “ that  is  not  be- 
gotten,” 

“ What  begets  not  and  is  not  begotten”  is  God.3 
Go ! seek  such  love  as  this,  if  you  are  alive  ; 

1 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  850.  2 Koran  vi.  77. 

3 Koran  cxii.  3. 


128 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 


If  not,  you  are  enslaved  by  varying  seasons. 

Gaze  not  on  your  own  pictures,  fair  or  ugly, 

Gaze  on  your  love  and  tbe  object  of  your  desire. 

Gaze  not  at  the  sight  of  your  own  weakness  or  vileness, 
Gaze  at  object  of  your  desire,  0 exalted  one. 

Story  VII.  The  Man  who  prayed  earnestly  to  he  fed 
without  work  (p.  221). 

In  the  time  of  the  prophet  David  there  was  a man  who 
used  to  pray  day  and  night,  saying,  “ Thou  hast  created 
me  weak  and  helpless ; give  me  my  daily  bread  without 
obliging  me  to  work  for  it.”  The  people  derided  him  for 
making  such  a foolish  petition,  but  he  still  persisted,  and 
at  last  a cow  ran  into  his  house  of  its  own  accord,  and 
he  killed  and  ate  it.  This  illustrates  the  saying  of  the 
Prophet  that  God  loves  earnest  petitioners,  because  He 
regards  the  sincerity  of  the  prayer  more  than  the  nature 
of  the  thing  prayed  for.  All  things  praise  God.  but  the 
praises  of  inanimate  things  are  different  from  the  praises 
of  men,  and  those  of  a Sunni  different  from  those  of  a 
Compulsionist  ( Jahri ).  Each  says  the  other  is  in  the 
way  of  error,  but  none  but  the  truly  spiritual  man  knows 
the  truth. 


Knowledge  or  conviction  opposed  to  opinion  (p.  223). 

Little  is  known  by  any  one  but  the  spiritual  man, 
Who  has  in  his  heart  a touchstone  of  vital  truth. 

The  others,  hovering  between  two  opinions, 

Fly  towards  their  nest  on  a single  wing. 

Knowledge  has  two  wings,  opinion  only  one  wing ; 
Opinion  is  weak  and  lopsided  in  its  flight. 

The  bird  having  but  one  wing  quickly  drops  down, 
And  again  flies  on  two  steps  or  more. 

This  bird  of  opinion  goes  on  rising  and  falling 
On  one  wing,  in  hope  to  reach  his  nest. 


stout  viii. ] THE  BOYS  AS'D  THEIR  TEACHER. 


139 


When  he  escapes  from  opinion  and  knowledge  is  seen, 
This  bird  gains  two  wings  and  spreads  both  of  them. 
Afterwards  he  “ goes  upright  on  a straight  path, 

Not  grovelling  on  his  face  or  creeping.” 1 

He  flies  up  on  two  wings  even  as  the  angel  Gabriel, 

Free  of  opinion,  of  duplicity,  and  of  vain  talk. 

Though  the  whole  world  say  to  him, 

“ Thou  art  firm  in  the  road  of  God’s  faith,” 

He  is  not  made  more  ardent  by  their  saying  this, 

Nor  is  his  lofty  soul  inclined  from  its  course. 

And  though  all  say  to  him,  “ Thou  art  in  the  wrong  way, 
Thou  thinkest  thyself  a rock  who  art  but  a blade  of  grass,” 
He  relapses  not  into  opinion  at  their  rebukes, 

Nor  is  he  vexed  at  their  malevolence. 

Nay,  even  if  sea  and  mountains  should  cry  out, 

Saying,  “ Thou  art  mated  with  error,” 

He  would  not  relapse  one  jot  into  vain  imaginations, 

Nor  would  he  be  grieved  by  the  reproaches  of  his  foes. 

Story  VIII.  The  Boys  and  their  Teacher  (p.  223). 

To  illustrate  the  force  of  imagination  or  opinion,  a story 
is  told  of  a trick  played  by  boys  upon  their  master.  The 
boys  wished  to  obtain  a holiday,  and  the  sharpest  of  them 
suggested  that  when  the  master  came  into  the  school  each 
boy  should  condole  with  him  on  his  alleged  sickly  appear- 
ance. Accordingly,  when  he  entered,  one  said,  “ 0 master, 
how  pale  you  are  looking!”  and  another  said,  ‘‘You  are 
looking-  very  ill  to-dav,”  and  so  on.  The  master  at  first 
answered  that  there  was  nothing  the  matter  with  him,  but 
as  one  boy  after  another  continued  assuring  him  that  he 
looked  very  ill,  he  was  at  length  deluded  into  imagining 
that  he  must  really  be  ilL  So  he  returned  to  his  house, 
making  the  boys  follow  him  there,  and  told  his  wife  that 
he  was  not  well,  bidding  her  mark  how  pale  he  was.  His 
wife  assured  him  he  was  not  looking  pale,  and  offered  to 


1 Koran  lxvii.  22. 


I 


130 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  hi. 


convince  him  by  bringing  a mirror  ; but  he  refused  to  look 
at  it,  and  took  to  his  bed.  He  then  ordered  the  boys  to  begin 
their  lessons ; but  they  assured  him  that  the  noise  made 
his  head  ache,  and  he  believed  them,  and  dismissed  them 
to  their  homes,  to  the  annoyance  of  their  mothers.  Apro- 
pos of  the  sharpness  of  the  boy  who  devised  this  trick, 
the  poet  takes  occasion  to  controvert  the  opinion  of  the 
MxCtazalites , that  all  men  are  born  with  equal  ability,  and 
to  express  his  agreement  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Sunnis, 
that  the  innate  capacities  of  men  vary  very  greatly. 


Story  IX.  The  Darvesh  who  Broke  his  Vow  (p.  225). 

There  was  once  a Darvesh  who  took  up  his  abode  in 
the  mountains,  in  order  to  enjoy  perfect  solitude.  In  that 
place  were  many  fruit-trees,  and  the  Darvesh  made  a vow 
that  he  would  never  pluck  any  of  the  fruit,  but  eat  only 
what  was  shaken  down  by  the  wind.  For  a long  time  he 
kept  his  vow ; but  a time  came  when  there  was  no  wind, 
and  consequently  no  fruit  was  shaken  down.  The  Darvesh 
was  true  to  his  vow  for  five  days,  but  he  could  then  endure 
the  pangs  of  hunger  no  longer,  and  he  stretched  out  his 
hand  and  plucked  some  of  the  fruit  from  the  branches. 
The  reason  of  this  lapse  on  his  part  was  that  he  had 
omitted  to  say  “ If  God  will  ” when  making  his  vow  ; and 
as  nothing  can  be  accomplished  without  God’s  aid,  he 
could  not  possibly  keep  his  vow.  Shortly  afterwards  the 
chief  of  the  police  visited  the  mountains  in  pursuit  of  a 
band  of  robbers,  and  arrested  the  Darvesh  along  with  them, 
and  cut  off  his  hand.  When  he  discovered  his  mistake  he 
apologised  very  earnestly ; but  the  Darvesh  reassured  him. 
saying  that  men  were  not  to  blame,  as  God  had  evidently 
designed  to  punish  him  for  breaking  his  vow  by  depriving 
him  of  the  hand  which  had  sinned  in  plucking  the  fruit.1 

1 Cp.  Craniner. 


STORY  is.]  THE  DARVESH  WHO  BROKE  HIS  VOW.  131 


All  things  dependent  upon  the  will  of  God  (p.  226). 

Therefore  hath  God  commanded,  “ Alake  an  exception, 
Couple  the  words  ‘If  God  will’  with  your  vows.1 
Because  the  governance  of  actions  is  in  my  hands, 

The  wills  of  all  are  subject  to  my  will. 

Every  moment  I impart  a fresh  bias  to  the  heart, 

Every  instant  I set  a fresh  mark  on  the  heart ; 

Each  day  I am  engaged  in  a fresh  work,2 
There  is  naught  that  swerves  from  my  purpose.” 

There  is  a tradition,  “ The  heart  is  like  a feather 
In  the  desert,  which  is  borne  captive  by  the  winds  ; 3 
The  wind  drives  it  everywhere  at  random, 

Now  to  right  and  now  to  left  in  opposite  directions." 
According  to  another  tradition,  know  the  heart  is  like 
To  water  in  a kettle  boiling  on  the  fire. 

So  every  moment  a fresh  purpose  occurs  to  the  heart, 

Not  proceeding  from  itself,  but  from  its  situation, 

Why,  then,  are  you  confident  about  the  heart’s  purposes  ? 
Why  make  you  vows  only  to  be  covered  with  shame  ? 

All  these  changes  proceed  from  the  effect  of  God’s  will ; 
Although  you  see  the  pit,  you  cannot  avoid  it. 

The  strange  thing  is,  not  that  winged  fowl 
Fall  into  the  deadly  snare  without  seeing  it, 

But  that  they  see  the  snare  and  the  limed  twig, 

And  yet  fall  into  it,  whether  they  will  or  no  ; 

Their  eyes  and  ears  are  open  and  the  snare  is  in  front, 
Yet  they  fly  into  the  snare  with  their  own  wings ! 

Comparison  of  the  divine  decrees  to  something  that  is  hidden, 
yet  whose  effects  are  seen  (p.  226). 

Behold  that  king’s  son  clad  in  rags, 

With  bare  head  and  fallen  into  distress ; 

Consumed  by  lusts  and  riotous  living, 

1 Koran  xviii.  23.  s Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,vol. 

1 Koran  lv.  29  ; cp.  John  v.  17.  iii.  p.  490. 


132 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 


Having  sold  all  his  clothes  and  substance  ; 

Having  lost  house  and  home,  utterly  disgraced, 

Fulfilling  the  desire  of  his  enemies  by  his  disgrace 
If  he  sees  a pious  man  he  cries,  “ 0 sir, 

Aid  me,  for  the  love  of  God ; 

For  I have  fallen  into  this  dire  disgrace  ; 

I have  squandered  goods  and  gold  and  wealth. 

Aid  me  so  that  perchance  I may  escape  hence, 

And  extricate  myself  from  this  deep  slough.” 

He  repeats  this  prayer  to  high  and  low, 

“ Release  me,  release  me,  release  me  ! ” 

His  eyes  and  ears  are  open,  and  he  is  free  from  bonds, 

No  jailer  watches  him,  no  chain  binds  him  ; 

What,  then,  is  the  bond  from  which  he  asks  release  ? 
What  is  the  prison  from  which  he  seeks  an  exit  ? 

’Tis  the  bond  of  God’s  purpose  and  hidden  decrees ; 

Ah ! none  but  the  pure  in  sight  can  see  that  bond  ; 
Though  not  visible,  that  bond  exists  in  concealment ; 

’Tis  more  stringent  than  prison  or  chains  of  iron, 

For  the  mason  can  pull  down  prison  walls, 

And  blacksmiths  can  break  asunder  iron  chains ; 

But,  strange  to  say,  this  ponderous  hidden  bond, — 
Blacksmiths  are  impotent  to  break  this  asunder ! 

Ahmad  alone  could  see  that  bond  on  Omm  Jahil’s 
back,1 

And  the  rope  of  palm  fibre  bound  upon  her  neck ; 

Yea,  he  saw  wood  on  the  back  of  the  wife  of  Bu  Lahab, 
And  she,  the  bearer  of  the  firewood,  said  it  was  heavy. 

No  eye  but  his  saw  that  rope  and  that  firewood, 

For  to  him  things  unseen  were  visible. 

The  others  explained  it,  saying 

That  Ahmad  was  beside  himself,  and  they  in  their  senses. 
Nevertheless  from  the  weight  of  the  load  her  back  bent, 
And  she  complained  of  its  weight  before  him, 

1 See  Koran  cxi. : Abu  Lahab,  at  hammad  declared  that  they  should 
the  instigation  of  his  wife,  Omni  be  “ burned  in  the  fiery  flame,”  and 
Jahil,  rejected  Muhammad’s  claim  the  wife  “laden  with  firewood,  and 
to  the  prophetic  office,  and  Mu-  on  her  neck  a rope  of  palm  fibre.’’ 


'33 


story  x.]  THE  OLD  MAN  AND  HIS  SONS. 

Saying,  “ Aid  me  to  escape  from  this  load, 

And  to  shake  off  this  grievous  burden.” 

He  who  sees  clearly  these  indications, 

Does  he  not  know  also  the  doomed  from  the  elect  ? 

Yea,  he  knows  them,  yet  conceals  it  by  command  of  God, 
Since  God  permits  him  not  to  reveal  it. 

Story  X.  The  Old  Man  who  made  no  Lamentation  at  the 
Death  of  his  Sons  (p.  229). 

After  short  anecdotes  of  Pharaoh’s  magicians,  of  the 
mule  who  complained  to  the  camel  that  he  was  always 
stumbling,  and  of  the  prophet  Ezra,  comes  the  story  of 
the  old  man  who  wept  not  for  the  death  of  his  sons. 

An  old  man  who  was  noted  for  sanctity,  and  who 
realised  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  “ The  ’ulama  of  the  faith 
are  as  the  prophets  of  Israel,”  lost  all  his  sons,  but  showed 
no  grief  or  regret.  His  wife  therefore  rebuked  him  for 
his  want  of  feeling,  whereupon  he  replied  to  her  as 
follows : — 

He  turned  to  his  wife  and  said,  “ 0 dame, 

The  harvest  of  December  is  not  as  that  of  July  ; 

Though  they  be  dead  or  though  they  be  living, 

Are  they  not  equally  visible  to  the  eyes  of  the  heart  ? 

I behold  them  clearlv  before  me, 

Wherefore  should  I disfigure  my  countenance  like  you  ? 
Though  they  have  gone  forth  by  revolution  of  fortune, 
They  are  with  me  still,  playing  round  me. 

The  cause  of  lamentation  is  separation  or  parting, 

But  I am  still  with  my  dear  ones,  and  embrace  them. 
Ordinary  people  may  see  them  in  dreams, 

But  I see  them  clearly,  though  wide  awake. 

I conceal  myself  a while  from  this  world, 

I shake  down  the  leaves  of  outward  sense  from  the  tree. 
Know,  0 wife,  outward  sense  is  captive  to  reason, 

And  reason,  again,  is  captive  to  spirit. 


134  THE  MASNAVI.  [book  iii. 

Spirit  unlooses  the  chained  hands  of  reason  ; 

Yea,  it  opens  all  things  that  are  closed. 

Sensations  and  thoughts  resemble  weeds 
Which  occupy  the  surface  of  pure  water. 

The  hand  of  reason  put  these  weeds  aside, 

And  the  pure  water  is  then  visible  to  the  wise. 

Weeds  in  plenty  cover  the  stream  like  bubbles ; 

When  they  are  swept  aside,  the  water  is  seen ; 

But  when  God  unlooses  not  the  hands  of  reason, 

The  weeds  on  our  water  grow  thick  through  carnal  lust ; 
Yea,  they  cover  up  your  water  more  and  more, 

While  your  lust  is  smiling  and  your  reason  weeping. 
When  fear  of  God  binds  the  hands  of  lust, 

Then  God  unlooses  the  two  hands  of  reason. 

Then  the  powerful  senses  are  subdued  by  you. 

When  you  submit  to  reason  as  your  commander. 

Then  your  sleepless  sense  is  lulled  into  sleep, 

That  mysteries  may  appear  to  the  soul. 

You  behold  visions  when  broad  awake, 

And  the  gates  of  heaven  are  open  before  you.” 

Story  XI.  Bdhlol  and  the  Damcsh  (p.  232). 

The  foregoing  story  is  followed  by  anecdotes  of  a blind 
saint  who  was  miraculously  enabled  to  read  the  Koran, 
of  Luqman  and  David,  and  a description  of  the  saints  who, 
mindful  of  the  saying,  “ Patience  is  the  key  of  happiness,” 
resign  themselves  to  the  dispensations  of  Providence,  and 
never  pray  to  have  them  altered.  The  story  of  Bahlol 
and  the  Darvesh  is  then  given  as  an  example  of  this 
resignation  to  the  will  of  God.  Bahlol  once  paid  a visit 
to  a saintly  Darvesh,  and  asked  him  how  he  fared.  The 
Darvesh  replied,  “ I fare  like  a man  who  directs  the 
course  of  the  world  as  he  wills,  to  whom  death  and  life 
are  subservient,  and  whom  the  stars  themselves  obey.” 
Bahlol  then  pressed  him  to  explain  his  meaning  more 
clearly,  and  the  Darvesh  replied  as  follows : — 


*35 


story  xi.]  BAHLOL  AND  THE  DARVESII. 

He  said,  “This  at  least  is  notorious  to  all  men, 

That  the  world  obeys  the  command  of  God. 

Not  a leaf  falls  from  a tree 
Without  the  decree  and  command  of  that  Lord  of  lords ; 
Not  a morsel  goes  from  the  mouth  down  the  throat 
Till  God  says  to  it,  ‘Go  down.’ 

Desire  and  appetite,  which  are  the  reins  of  mankind, 

Are  themselves  subservient  to  the  rule  of  God. 

Hear  this  much,  that,  whereas  the  totality  of  actions 
Is  not  effected  without  God's  direction, 

When  the  decree  of  God  becomes  the  pleasure  of  man, 
Then  man  desires  the  fulfilment  of  God’s  decrees ; 

And  this  too  spontaneously,  not  in  hope  of  reward, 

But  because  his  very  nature  is  congruous  therewith. 

He  desires  not  even  his  own  life  for  himself, 

Nor  is  he  relying  on  the  hope  of  sweets  of  life  to  come. 
Whatever  path  is  taken  by  the  eternal  decree, 

Whether  it  be  life  or  death,  ’tis  all  one  to  him. 

He  lives  for  the  sake  of  God,  not  for  wealth  ; 

He  dies  for  the  sake  of  God,  not  in  fear  and  grief. 

His  faith  is  based  on  his  desire  to  do  God’s  will, 

Not  on  hope  to  gain  paradise  with  its  groves  and  founts. 
His  avoidance  of  infidelity  is  also  for  God’s  sake, 

It  proceeds  not  from  fear  of  falling  into  the  fire. 

Thus  this  temper  of  his  arises  from  his  very  nature, 

Not  from  any  discipline  and  endeavour  of  his  own. 

At  times  he  laughs  when  he  contemplates  God’s  pleasure, 
God’s  decrees  are  to  him  as  sweetmeats  of  sugar. 

I ask,  does  not  the  world  march  agreeably  to  the  will 
And  commands  of  a man  rejoicing  in  this  disposition  ? 
Why,  then,  should  such  an  one  make  prayers  and  petitions, 
Saying,  ‘ 0 God,  change  such  and  such  a decree  ? ’ 

His  own  death  and  his  children’s  deaths 

For  God’s  sake  seem  to  him  as  sweets  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  view  of  that  faithful  one  his  children’s  deaths 
Are  as  sweetmeats  to  a starving  beggar. 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  hi. 


136 

Why,  therefore,  should  he  make  prayers 
Unless  he  pray  for  what  is  pleasing  to  God  ? 

These  prayers  and  petitions,  not  those  of  self-pity 
Make  that  man  to  be  endued  with  salvation. 

He  utterly  burnt  up  all  his  self-pity, 

At  the  time  when  he  lit  the  lamp  of  love  to  God. 

His  love  was  the  hell  that  burned  up  his  inclinations ; 
Yea,  he  burned  up  his  own  inclinations  one  by  one.” 

Story  XII.  The  Visions  seen  by  the  Saint  Daquqi  (p.  232). 

To  illustrate  the  exalted  state  of  identification  of  the 
will  with  the  Divine  will  just  described,  the  poet  tells  the 
story  of  the  visions  and  mighty  works  of  the  holy  Daquqi. 
Daquqi  was  journeying  in  pious  fervour,  and  in  hope  to 
see  the  splendour  of  “The  Friend”  in  human  shape,  the 
Ocean  in  a drop  of  water,  and  the  Sun  in  an  atom,  when 
late  one  evening  he  arrived  at  the  sea-shore.  Turning  his 
eyes  to  heaven,  he  saw  seven  great  lights  never  before  seen 
of  men,  for  “ God  directs  whom  He  will.”  1 Overwhelmed 
with  awe,  he  watched  these  lights,  and  while  he  still 
watched  them  they  united  into  one  light.  Still  more 
amazed,  he  watched  on,  and  the  single  light  shortly 
assumed  the  likeness  of  seven  men.  Afterwards  these 
seven  men  changed  into  seven  trees ; but,  strange  to  say, 
although  crowds  of  people  were  passing  by,  none  of  them 
could  see  these  trees,  so  that  Daquqi  shared  the  feelings  of 
the  apostles  “ who  lost  all  hope  ” (of  convincing  the  world), 
“ and  deemed  that  they  were  reckoned  as  liars.”  2 Possess- 
ing his  soul  in  patience,  Daquqi  still  watched  on,  and  saw 
the  seven  trees  bowing  down  in  prayer,  and  was  reminded 
of  the  text,  “Plants  and  trees  bend  in  adoration.”3  Pre- 
sently the  seven  trees  again  changed  into  seven  men,  and 
Daqiiqi  was  appointed  to  conduct  their  devotions.  While 
he  was  yet  acting  as  Imam  in  front  of  them,  and  they  were 
following  the  prayers  he  recited,  a ship  was  seen  in  great 

1 Koran  ii.  136.  2 Koran  xii.  no.  s Koran  lv.  5. 


STORY  XII.]  THE  VISIONS  SEEN  BY  DAQUQI.  137 

distress  and  all  but  lost.  At  Daquqi’s  earnest  prayer  the 
crew  were  saved,  but  straightway  vanished  from  sight ; and 
this  led  his  followers  to  doubt  the  reality  of  the  miracle 
which  had  just  been  performed  before  their  eyes. 


Description  of  a saint  whose  will  was  identified  with 
God's  will  (p.  232). 

That  Daquqi  possessed  a sweet  aspect, 

As  a lover  of  God  and  a worker  of  miracles. 

He  resembled  the  moon  of  heaven  come  down  on  earth, 
He  was  as  a light  to  them  that  walked  in  darkness. 

He  rarely  tarried  in  one  place, 

And  seldom  stayed  two  days  in  one  village. 

He  said,  “ If  I tarry  in  one  house  two  days, 

Attachment  to  that  house  becomes  a passion  with  me. 

I guard  myself  from  being  deceived  into  loving  a home  ; 
Up ! Soul,  and  travel  in  search  of  eternal  wealth. 

My  heart’s  inclination  is  not  satisfied  by  houses, 

So  that  they  should  be  places  of  temptation  for  me.” 

Thus  by  day  he  travelled,  and  by  night  prayed, 

His  eyes  were  always  gazing  on  the  King  as  a falcon’s ; 
Cut  off  from  mankind,  though  not  for  any  fault. 

Severed  from  men  and  women,  though  not  for  baseness ; 
Having  compassion  on  mankind,  and  wholesome  as  water, 
A kind  intercessor,  and  one  whose  prayers  were  heard. 
Benevolent  to  the  good  and  the  bad,  and  a firm  ally, 
Better  than  a mother,  and  kinder  than  a father. 

The  Prophet  said,  “ To  you,  0 blessed  ones, 

I am  as  a father,  affectionate  and  indulgent ; 

For  this  cause,  that  you  are  all  portions  of  me.” 
Wherefore  should  you  tear  away  the  parts  from  the  whole  ? 
If  the  part  be  severed  from  its  whole  it  is  useless  ; 

If  a limb  be  rent  from  the  body  it  dies. 

Till  it  is  again  joined  to  its  whole, 

'Tis  a dead  thing,  and  a stranger  to  life. 


138 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 

Thus  Daquqi,  in  devotions  and  praises  and  prayers, 

Was  ever  seeking  the  particular  favourites  of  God. 
Throughout  his  long  journeyings  his  object  was  this, 

To  interchange  a word  with  the  favourites  of  God. 

He  cried  continually  as  he  went  his  way, 

“ 0 Lord,  let  me  draw  near  to  Thy  chosen  ones  ! ” 


So  Daquqi  (the  mercy  of  God  be  upon  him !) 

Said,  “I  journeyed  long  time  to  East  and  to  West, 

I journeyed  years  and  months  for  love  of  that  Moon, 
Heedless  of  the  way,  absorbed  in  God. 

With  bare  feet  I trod  upon  thorns  and  flints, 

Seeing  I was  bewildered,  and  beside  myself,  and  senseless. 
Think  not  my  feet  touched  the  earth. 

For  the  lover  verily  travels  with  the  heart. 

What  knows  the  heart  of  road  and  stages  ? 


What  of  distant  and  near,  while  it  is  drunk  with  love  ? 
Distance  and  nearness  are  attributes  of  bodies, 

The  journeyings  of  spirits  are  after  another  sort. 

You  journeyed  from  the  embryo  state  to  rationality 
Without  footsteps  or  stages  or  change  of  place, 

The  journey  of  the  soul  involves  not  time  and  place. 

And  my  body  learnt  from  the  soul  its  mode  of  journeyingj 
Now  my  body  has  renounced  the  bodily  mode  of  jour- 
neying ; 

It  journeys  secretly  and  without  form,  though  under  a 
form.” 

He  added,  “ One  day  I was  thus  filled  with  longing 
To  behold  in  human  form  the  splendours  of  ‘The  Friend,’ 
To  witness  the  Ocean  gathered  up  into  a drop, 

The  Sun  compressed  into  a single  atom  ; 

And  when  I drew  near  to  the  shore  of  the  sea 
The  day  was  drawing  to  a close.” 


STORY  VII.]  THE  MAN  WHO  PRAYED  TO  BE  FED.  139 


All  religions  are  in  substance  one  and  the  same  (p.  237). 

In  the  adorations  and  benedictions  of  righteous  men 
The  praises  of  all  the  prophets  are  kneaded  together. 

All  their  praises  are  mingled  into  one  stream, 

All  the  vessels  are  emptied  into  one  ewer. 

Because  He  that  is  praised  is,  in  fact,  only  One, 

In  this  respect  all  religions  are  only  one  religion. 

Because  all  praises  are  directed  towards  God’s  light, 

Their  various  forms  and  figures  are  borrowed  from  it. 

Hen  never  address  praises  but  to  One  deemed  worthy, 
They  err  only  through  mistaken  opinions  of  Him. 

So,  when  a light  falls  upon  a wall, 

That  wall  is  a connecting-link  between  all  its  beams ; 

Yet  when  it  casts  that  reflection  back  to  its  source, 

It  wrongly  shows  great  as  small,  and  halts  in  its  praises. 
Or  if  the  moon  be  reflected  in  a well, 

And  one  looks  down  the  well,  and  mistakenly  praises  it, 
In  reality  he  is  intending  to  praise  the  moon, 

Although,  through  ignorance,  he  is  looking  down  the  well. 
The  object  of  his  praises  is  the  moon,  not  its  reflection ; 
His  infidelity  arises  from  mistake  of  the  circumstances. 
That  well-meaning  man  goes  wrong  through  his  mistake  ; 
The  moon  is  in  heaven,  and  he  fancies  it  in  the  well. 

By  these  false  idols  mankind  are  perplexed, 

And  driven  by  vain  lusts  to  their  sorrow. 

Story  VII.  ( cont  inued ).  The  Man  in  the  time  of  the  Prophet 
David  who  prayed  to  be  fed  without  having  to  work  for 
his  food  (p.  241). 

After  the  petitioner  had  slain  and  eaten  the  cow,  the 
owner  of  the  cow  came  up  and  accused  him  of  theft,  and 
seizing  him  by  the  collar,  dragged  him  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  the  prophet  David.  When  he  had  stated  his  case, 
David  ordered  the  accused  to  make  restitution,  telling  him 


140 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


that  he  must  not  break  the  law.  At  this  order  the  accused 
redoubled  his  cries,  telling  David  that  he  was  siding  with 
an  oppressor.  David  was  staggered  at  the  man’s  assurance, 
and  finally  resolved  to  take  further  time  for  consideration 
before  deciding  the  case.  After  private  meditation  he  re- 
versed his  former  sentence,  and  directed  the  plaintiff  to 
relinquish  his  claim.  On  the  plaintiff  refusing  to  do  this, 
and  stoutly  protesting  against  David’s  injustice,  David 
further  ordered  that  all  the  plaintiff’s  goods  should  be 
given  to  the  accused.  The  reason  for  this  decision  was, 
that  David  discovered  the  plaintiff  had  formerly  slain  the 
grandfather  of  the  accused,  and  stolen  all  his  goods. 
David  then  led  all  the  Mussulmans  to  a tree  in  the  desert 
where  the  murder  had  been  perpetrated,  and  there  put 
the  murderer  to  death. 


The  hands  and  feet  of  criminals  letray  their  crimes 
even  in  this  world  (p.  244). 

He  of  himself  lifted  the  veil  that  hid  his  crime ; 

Had  he  not  done  so,  God  would  have  kept  it  hidden. 
Criminals  and  sinners,  even  in  the  course  of  sinning, 
Themselves  rend  the  coverings  of  their  crimes. 

Their  sins  are  veiled  among  the  heart’s  secrets, 

Yet  the  criminal  himself  exposes  them  to  view, 

Saying,  “ Behold  me  wearing  a pair  of  horns, 

A cow  of  hell  in  sight  of  all  men.” 

Thus,  even  here,  in  the  midst  of  thy  sin,  thy  hand  and  foot 
Bear  witness  of  the  secrets  of  thy  heart. 

Thy  secret  thought  is  as  a governor  who  says  to  thee, 

“ Tell  forth  thy  convictions,  withhold  them  not 
Especially  in  seasons  of  passion  and  angry  talk 
It  betrays  thy  secrets  one  by  one. 

Thy  secret  sins  and  crimes  govern  haud  and  foot, 

Saying,  “ Disclose  us  to  men,  0 hand  and  foot ! ” 

And  since  these  witnesses  take  the  bit  in  their  mouths, 
Especially  in  times  of  passion  and  wrath  and  revenge, 


btory  vii.]  THE  MAN  WHO  PRAYED  TO  BE  FED.  141 


Therefore  the  same  God  who  appointed  this  governor 
To  blazon  forth  thy  secret  sins  to  the  world 
Is  also  able  to  create  many  more  governors 
To  divulge  thy  secret  sins  on  the  day  of  judgment.1 

0 man  whose  only  handiwork  is  crime  and  sin, 

Thy  secret  sins  are  manifest ; no  divulging  is  needed. 
There  is  no  need  to  proclaim  thy  sins, 

All  men  are  cognisant  of  thy  sin-burnt  heart. 

Thy  soul  every  moment  casts  up  sparks  of  fire, 

Which  say,  “ See  me  a man  destined  to  the  fire ; 

I am  a part  of  the  fire,  and  go  to  join  my  whole ; 

Not  a light,  so  that  I should  join  the  Source  of  light.” 

Comparison  of  lust  to  the  murderer  in  the  story 
(p.  245). 

Kill  thine  own  lust  and  give  life  to  the  world ; 

It  has  killed  its  lord,  reduce  it  to  servitude. 

That  claimant  of  the  cow  is  thy  lust ; Beware  ! 

It  has  made  itself  lord  and  master. 

That  slayer  of  the  cow  is  thy  reason  ; Go ! 

Be  not  obdurate  to  the  prayers  of  him  that  kills  the  cow. 
Reason  is  a poor  captive,  and  ever  cries  to  God 
For  meat  on  its  dish  without  labouring  and  toiling. 

On  what  depends  its  getting  meat  without  toiling  ? 

On  its  killing  the  cow  of  the  body,  the  source  of  evil. 

Lust  says,  “ Why  hast  thou  killed  my  cow  ? ” 

It  says,  “Because  lust’s  cow  is  the  form  of  the  body.”'2 
Reason,  the  Lord’s  child,  has  become  a pauper, 

Lust,  the  murderer,  has  become  a lord  and  chief. 

Know’st  thou  what  is  meat  untoiled  for  ? 

’Tis  the  food  of  spirits  and  the  aliment  of  the  Prophet. 
But  it  is  attainable  only  by  slaying  the  cow ; 

Treasure  is  gained  by  digging,  0 digger  of  treasure ! 

1 “On  that  day  shall  their  hands  2 Bahau-’d-Din  Amili,  in  his  Nan 
speak  unto  us,  and  their  feet  shall  wa  Halwa,  chap,  iv.,  compares  lust 
bear  witness  of  that  which  they  to  a cow,  referring  to  Koran  ii.  63. 
have  done  ” (Koran  xxxvi.  65). 


142 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  hi. 


Story  XIII.  The  People  of  Saba  (p.  247). 

After  an  anecdote  of  ’Isa  being  obliged  to  ascend  a 
mountain  to  get  away  from  the  fools  comes  the  story 
of  the  men  of  Saba.  “A  sign  there  wras  to  Saba  in  their 
dwelling-places — two  gardens,  the  one  on  the  right  hand 
and  the  other  on  the  left ; — ‘ Eat  ye  of  your  Lord’s 
supplies,  and  give  thanks  to  Him ; goodly  is  the  country 
and  gracious  is  the  Lord.’  But  they  turned  aside,  so  we 
sent  upon  them  the  flood  of  Iram.  Such  was  our  retribu- 
tion on  them  for  their  ingratitude.”1  The  men  of  Saba 
were  all  fools,  and  brought  destruction  on  themselves  by 
their  ingratitude  to  God.  One  was  far-sighted,  and  yet 
blind  ; another  sharp  of  hearing,  and  yet  deaf ; and  a third 
naked,  and  yet  wearing  a long  robe.  Avarice  is  blind  to 
its  own  faults,  but  sees  those  of  others ; the  sharp-eared 
deaf  man  hears  death  approaching  others,  but  not  himself  ; 
and  the  long-robed  naked  man  is  he  who  fears  robbers, 
though  he  has  nothing  to  lose.  In  fact,  all  these  men  of 
Saba  were  afflicted  with  follies  and  self-delusions  of  this 
kind,  and  gave  no  thanks  to  God  for  the  blessings  which 
they  enjoyed.  Accordingly  thirteen  prophets  were  sent  to 
admonish  them,  but  their  admonitions  were  not  listened 
to,  the  men  of  Saba  questioning  their  divine  mission 
and  demanding  a miracle  as  a sign.  They  also  told 
the  prophets  a parable  of  a clever  hare,  who,  wishing  to 
frighten  an  elephant  away  from  a fountain,  went  to  the 
elephant,  pretending  to  be  an  ambassador  from  the  moon.2 
The  prophets  were  naturally  indignant  at  the  effrontery 
of  the  men  of  Saba  in  misapplying  parables  to  discredit 
their  divine  mission,  and  reminded  them  that  wicked  men 
had  flouted  the  prophet  Noah  in  the  same  way  when  he 
was  warning  them  of  the  flood.  And  they  demonstrated 
at  length  how  the  men  of  Saba  had  misapplied  the  parable 
of  the  hare  and  the  elephant,  and  again  adjured  them  to 

1 Koran  xxxiv.  14. 

2 Anvar  i Suhaili,  chap.  iv.  Story  IV. 


STORY  XIII.] 


THE  PEOPLE  OF  SABA. 


M3 


believe.  But  the  men  of  Saba  continued  refractory,  and 
would  not  accept  the  prophets’  counsels.  They  plied 
the  prophets  with  the  arguments  of  the  Compulsionists 
(< Jabriy&n ),  and  refused  to  be  convinced  of  the  fallacy  of 
their  reasoning.  So  at  last  the  prophets  despaired  of 
them,  and  left  them  to  their  doom. 


Not  every  one  can  properly  use  similitudes  and  parables 
in  divine  matters  (p.  252). 

The  faculty  of  using  similitudes  is  peculiar  to  a saint 
Who  is  signally  marked  by  knowledge  of  hidden  mysteries. 
What  know  you  of  the  mystery  hid  in  aught,  that  you 
In  your  folly  should  use  similitudes  of  curl  and  cheek? 
Moses  took  his  staff  to  be  a stick,  though  it  was  not ; 

It  was  a serpent,  and  its  mystery  was  revealed. 

If  a saint  such  as  he  knew  not  the  mystery  of  a staff, 
What  know  you  of  the  mystery  of  the  snare  and  grains  ? 
When  the  eye  of  a Moses  erred  as  to  a similitude, 

How  can  a presumptuous  mouse  understand  one  ? 

Those  similitudes  of  yours  are  changed  into  serpents 
To  tear  you  into  pieces  with  their  jaws. 

Such  a parable  did  cursed  Iblis  use, 

So  that  he  became  cursed  of  God  till  the  day  of  doom. 
Such  a parable  did  Korah  use  in  his  argument, 

So  that  he  was  swallowed  up  in  the  earth  with  his  wealth. 
Such  parables  know  to  be  as  crows  and  owls, 

Whereby  a hundred  households  are  annihilated. 

When  Noah  was  building  the  ark  in  the  desert, 

A hundred  parable-mongers  attacked  him  with  irony, 
Saying,  “In  the  desert,  where  is  no  water  or  well, 

He  builds  a boat ! What  ignorant  folly  is  this ! ” 


144 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


The  arguments  of  the  Jabriyan,  i.e.,  the  Fatalists  or 
Compulsionists  (p.  255). 

The  men  of  Saba  said,  “ 0 preachers,  enough  ! 

What  you  say  is  enough,  if  there  are  any  wise  here. 

God  has  placed  a ‘lock  upon  our  hearts,’1 
And  no  man  can  overcome  the  Creator. 

That  great  Painter  has  painted  us  thus ; 

His  painting  cannot  be  altered  by  argument. 

Keep  telling  for  ever  a stone  to  become  a ruby, 

Keep  telling  for  ever  the  old  to  become  young ! 

Tell  earth  to  assume  the  quality  of  water, 

Bid  water  to  become  honey  or  milk  ! 

God  is  the  creator  of  heaven  and  them  that  dwell  therein  ; 
Also  of  water  and  of  earth,  and  them  that  dwell  therein ; 
To  heaven  He  gave  its  revolutions  and  its  purity, 

To  the  earth  its  dark  look  and  appearance. 

Can  the  heaven  will  to  become  as  dregs  ? 

Can  earth  will  to  assume  the  clearness  of  pure  wine  ? 

That  Person  has  assigned  to  each  its  lot. 

Can  mountain  by  endeavour  become  as  grass  ? ” 

The  prophets  answered,  “ Verily  God  has  created 
Some  qualities  in  you  which  you  cannot  alter ; 

But  He  has  created  other  accidental  qualities, 

Which,  being  objectionable,  may  be  made  good. 

Bid  stone  become  gold — that  is  impossible  ; 

Bid  copper  become  gold — that  is  possible. 

Bid  sand  bloom  as  a rose — it  cannot ; 

Bid  dust  turn  to  mud — that  is  within  its  capacity. 

God  has  sent  some  pains  for  which  there  is  no  cure, 

Such,  for  instance,  as  lameness,  loss  of  nose,  and  blindness. 
God  has  sent  other  pains  for  which  there  are  cures, 

To  wit,  crooked  mouth  and  headache. 

God  has  ordained  these  remedies  of  His  mercy  ; 

The  use  of  these  in  pain  and  anguish  is  not  in  vain 


1 Koran  xxxvi.  6. 


STORY  XIII.] 


THE  PEOPLE  OF  SABA. 


'45 


Nay,  the  majority  of  pains  may  be  cured ; 

When  you  seek  those  cures  earnestly  yon  find  them.” 

The  men  of  Saba  replied,  “O  men,  these  pains  of  ours 
Are  not  of  the  sort  that  admit  of  cure. 

Long  time  ye  utter  these  presages  and  warnings, 

But  our  bonds  are  made  thereby  heavier  every  moment. 

If  our  sickness  admitted  of  a cure, 

It  would  certainly  have  been  lessened  by  your  spells. 
When  the  body  is  obstructed  water  reaches  not  the  liver, 
Though  one  drinks  the  ocean,  it  passes  elsewhere. 

Then  of  course  the  hands  and  feet  become  dropsical, 

And  yet  that  draught  does  not  quench  the  thirst.” 

The  prophets  replied,  “ To  despair  is  wrong, 

The  mercy  and  grace  of  God  are  boundless. 

One  must  not  despair  of  the  grace  of  such  a Benefactor, 
One  must  cling  to  the  stirrup-straps  of  God. 

Ah  ! many  are  the  conditions  which  at  first  are  hard, 

But  are  afterwards  relieved  and  lose  their  harshness. 
Oftentimes  hope  succeeds  to  hopelessness, 

Many  times  does  sunlight  succeed  to  darkness. 

We  admit  that  ye  are  weighted  as  with  stones, 

And  that  ye  have  locks  upon  your  ears  and  your  hearts.1 
No  condition  of  ours  is  altogether  as  we  wish, 

Our  business  is  to  be  resigned  and  to  obey. 

God  has  enjoined  this  servitude  upon  us ; 

We  say  not  this  merely  on  our  own  authority. 

We  enjoy  life  on  condition  of  doing  His  will ; 

If  He  bids  us,  we  sow  our  seed  upon  the  sand. 

The  soul  of  the  prophet  cares  for  naught  but  God, 

It  has  naught  to  do  with  approving  or  disapproving  His 
works.” 

The  men  of  Saba  replied,  If  ye  yourselves  are  happy, 
Ye  make  us  miserable  and  annoy  and  disturb  us. 

Our  souls  were  void  of  all  anxieties, 

And  ye  have  plunged  us  into  cares  and  anxieties. 

1 Koran  lxi.  5 : “ God  led  their  hearts  astray.” 

K 


146 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


The  comfort  and  harmony  which  we  enjoyed  heretofore 
Have  been  rent  in  pieces  by  your  evil  presages. 

We  used  to  be  as  parrots  munching  sugar, 

Ye  have  made  us  as  fowls  brooding  on  death. 

On  every  side  stories  inspiring  anxiety, 

On  every  side  sounds  exciting  fears  : 

On  every  side  in  the  world  an  evil  presage, 

On  every  side  evil  portents  threatening  punishment : — 
This  is  the  burden  of  your  parables  and  presages, 

This  the  purport  of  your  awe-inspiring  stories.” 

The  prophets  replied,  “Our  evil  presages 
Are  corroborated  by  the  state  of  your  souls. 

Suppose  you  are  sleeping  in  a place  of  danger, 

And  serpents  are  drawing  near  to  bite  your  heads, 

A kind  friend  will  inform  you  of  your  danger, 

Saying,  ‘ Jump  up,  lest  the  serpent  devour  you.’ 

You  reply,  ‘ Why  do  you  utter  evil  presages?  ’ 

He  answers,  ‘ What  presage  ? Up,  and  see  for  yourself ! 
By  means  of  this  evil  presage  I rouse  you, 

And  release  you  from  danger  and  lead  you  to  your  home.’ 
Like  a prophet  he  warns  you  of  hidden  danger, 

For  a prophet  sees  what  worldlings  cannot  see.” 


Mercy  inclines  the  good  to  devotion,  but  vengeance  the  bad 
(p.  257). 

If  you  do  a kindness  to  a generous  man,  ’tis  fitting, 

For  each  kindness  he  will  return  seven  hundredfold. 
When  you  treat  a base  man  with  scorn  and  contumely, 
He  will  become  your  slave  in  all  sincerity. 

Infidels  when  enjoying  prosperity  do  wrong, 

When  they  ai’e  in  hell  they  cry,  “ 0 our  Lord  ! ” 

For  base  men  are  purified  when  they  suffer  evil, 

And  when  they  enjoy  prosperity  they  do  evil. 

Wherefore  the  mosque  of  their  devotion  is  hell, 

As  the  snare  is  the  fetter  of  wild  fowl. 

The  prison  is  the  hermitage  of  the  wicked  thief, 


story  xm.]  THE  PEOPLE  OF  SABA.  147 

For  when  he  is  there  he  is  ever  crying  to  God. 

Whereas  the  object  of  man’s  being  is  to  worship  God, 

Hell  is  ordained  as  a place  of  worship  for  the  proud.1 
Man  has  the  power  to  engage  in  any  actions  soever, 

But  worship  of  God  is  the  main  object  of  his  existence. 
Read  the  text,2  “ I have  not  created  .Jinns  and  men  but  to 
worship  me.” 

The  only  object  of  the  world  is  to  worship  God. 

Though  the  object  of  a book  is  to  teach  an  art, 

If  you  make  a pillow  of  it,  it  serves  that  purpose  too. 

Yet  its  main  object  is  not  to  serve  as  a pillow, 

But  to  impart  knowledge  and  useful  instruction. 

If  you  use  a sword  for  a tent-peg, 

You  prefer  the  worse  use  of  it  to  the  better. 

Though  the  object  of  all  men’s  being  is  wisdom, 

Yet  each  man  has  a different  place  of  worship. 

The  place  of  worship  of  the  noble  is  nobility, 

The  place  of  worship  of  the  base  is  degradation. 

Smite  the  base  to  make  them  bow  the  head, 

Give  to  the  noble  to  make  them  repay  liberally. 

Inasmuch  as  the  base  are  evil  and  arrogant, 

Hell  and  humbling  are  the  “ small  gate  ” for  them. 

Verily  God  has  created  two  places  of  adoration, 

Hell  for  the  base  and  increased  bliss  for  the  noble. 

Even  so  Moses  made  a small  gate  in  Jerusalem,3 
To  make  the  Israelites  bow  the  head  in  entering  it. 

The  discussion  is  continued  and  illustrated  by  anecdotes 
of  the  Sufi  who  preferred  a table  with  no  food  upon  it, 
because  he  ever  sought  “not-being”  ; of  Jacob’s  vision  of 
Joseph ; and  of  a devout  slave  who  obtained  leave  of  his 
master  to  say  his  prayers  in  a mosque,  but  tarried  there 
so  long  that  the  doors  were  shut,  and  he  could  not  get 
out,  nor  his  master  in.  The  prophets  at  last  despaired  of 
making  any  impression  upon  the  unbelievers,  but  called  to 

1 God  said,  “Come  ye  either  in  2 Koran  li.  56. 
obedience,  or  in  spite  of  your  wishes  ” 3 See  Koran  ii.  55,  with  Sale’s 

(Koran  xli.  10).  note. 


148 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 


mind  the  text  “When  at  last  the  Apostles  lost  all  hope, 
and  deemed  that  they  were  reckoned  as  liars,  our  aid 
reached  them,  and  we  delivered  whom  we  would,  but  our 
vengeance  was  not  averted  from  the  wicked.”1 


The  despair  of  the  prophets  (p.  259). 


The  prophets  said,  “ How  long,  in  our  benevolence, 

Shall  we  give  to  this  and  that  one  good  advice  ? 

How  long  shall  we  hammer  cold  iron  in  vain  ? 

How  long  waste  breath  in  blowing  into  a lattice  ? 

Men  are  moved  by  God’s  decree  and  fixed  ordinance,2 
As  sharp-set  teeth  are  caused  by  heat  of  belly. 

’Tis  Primal  Soul  that  dominates  the  Second  Soul,3 
Fish  begins  to  stink  at  the  head,  not  the  tail. 

Yet  be  advised  and  keep  your  steed  straight  as  an  arrow, 
When  God  says  ‘ Proclaim  ’ we  must  obey.4 

0 men,  ye  know  not  to  which  party  ye  belong/’ 

Exert  yourselves  then,  till  ye  see  which  ye  are. 

When  you  place  goods  upon  a ship, 

You  do  it  in  trust  that  the  voyage  will  be  prosperous ; 
You  know  not  which  of  the  two  events  will  befall  you, 
Whether  you  will  be  drowned  or  come  safe  to  land. 

If  you  say,  “Till  I know  which  will  be  my  fate 

1 will  not  set  foot  upon  the  ship ; 

Shall  I be  drowned  on  the  voyage  or  a survivor  ? 

Reveal  to  me  in  which  class  I shall  be. 

I shall  not  undertake  the  voyage  on  the  chance — 

On  the  bare  hope  of  reaching  land,  as  the  rest  do.’ 

In  that  case  no  trade  at  all  will  be  undertaken  by  you, 
As  the  secret  of  these  two  events  is  always  hidden. 

The  lamp  of  the  heart,  that  is  a timid  trader, 


1 Koran  xii.  1 1. 

'l  “All  things  have  we  created 
after  a fixed  decree, 

Every  action  great  and  small 
is  written.” 

— Koran  liv.  49. 

;t  The  Logos  or  first  Emanation 


produced  the  second  or  “ Universal 
Soul.” 

4 “ 0 Apostle  ! proclaim  all  that 
hath  been  sent  down  ” (Koran  v.  71 ). 

6 “ Which  party,”  i.c.,  those 
doomed  to  be  saved  or  those  doomed 
to  destruction. 


STORY  XIII.] 


THE  PEOPLE  OF  SABA. 


149 


Acquires  neither  loss  nor  gain  by  its  ventures.1 
Nay,  it  acquires  loss,  for  it  is  precluded  from  gain ; 
’Tis  the  lamp  that  takes  fire  that  acquires  light. 

Since  all  things  are  dependent  on  probability, 
Religion  is  so  first  of  all,  for  thereby  you  find  release. 
In  this  world  no  knocking  at  the  door  is  possible 
Save  hope,  and  God  knows  what  is  best.” 


Probability  the  guide  of  life  in  religion  as  well  as  in 
common  matters.  “ Religion  dependent  on  hope  and 
fear”*  ( p.  259). 

The  final  cause  of  trading  is  hope  or  probability, 

When  traders  work  themselves  lean  as  spindles.3 
When  the  merchant  goes  to  his  shop  in  the  morning, 

He  does  so  in  hope  and  probability  of  gaining  bread. 

If  you  have  no  hope  of  getting  bread,  why  go  ? 

There  is  the  fear  of  loss,  since  you  are  not  strong. 

But  does  not  this  fear  of  utter  loss  in  your  trade 
Become  weakened  in  the  course  of  your  exertions  ? 

You  say,  “ Although  the  fear  of  loss  is  before  me, 

Yet  I feel  greater  fear  in  remaining  idle. 

I have  a better  hope  through  exerting  myself ; 

My  fear  is  increased  by  remaining  idle.” 

Why  then,  0 faint-hearted  one,  in  the  matter  of  religion 
Are  you  paralysed  by  the  fear  of  loss  ? 

See  you  not  how  the  traders  in  this  market  of  ours 
Make  large  profits,  both  apostles  and  saints  ? 

What  a mine  of  wealth  awaits  them  on  leaving  it, 

Seeing  they  make  such  profits  while  still  here ! 

Fire  is  soft  to  them  as  cotton  raiment, 

The  ocean  bears  them  gently  like  a porter  ; 

Iron  in  their  hands  is  soft  as  wax. 

The  winds  are  their  obedient  slaves. 

1 “ Nothing  shall  be  reckoned  to  a 2 So  Sa’di  Bostan,  Book  I.  Cp. 
man  save  that  for  which  he  hath  Butler’s  Analogy,  Conclusion, 
made  effort”  (Koran  liii.  40).  3 I.e.,  exert  themselves  much. 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  III. 


150 


Story  XIV.  Miracles  ‘performed  by  the  Prophet 
Muhammad  (p.  260). 

It  is  related  that  the  Prophet  was  once  present  at  a 
banquet,  and  after  he  had  eaten  and  drunk,  his  servant 
Anas  threw  the  napkin  which  he  had  used  into  the  fire, 
and  the  napkin  was  not  burnt,  but  only  purified  by  the 
fire.  On  another  occasion  a caravan  of  Arabs  was  travelling 
in  the  desert,  and  was  in  sore  distress  through  lack  of 
water,  whereupon  the  Prophet  miraculously  increased  the 
water  in  a single  water-skin,  so  that  it  sufficed  to  supply 
the  needs  of  all  the  travellers.  Moreover,  the  negro  who 
carried  the  water-skin  was  rendered  as  white  and  fair  as 
Joseph.  Again,  a heathen  woman  came  to  the  Prophet 
carrying  her  infant,  aged  only  two  months,  and  the  infant 
saluted  the  Prophet  as  the  veritable  apostle  of  God.  Again, 
when  the  Prophet  was  about  to  put  on  his  sandals,  an 
eagle  swooped  down  upon  one  of  them  and  carried  it  off, 
when  a viper  was  seen  to  drop  from  the  sandal.  The 
Prophet  was  at  first  inclined  to  grumble  at  this  stroke 
of  ill-luck ; but  when  he  saw  the  viper  his  discontent  was 
turned  into  thankfulness  to  God,  who  had  thus  miraculously 
saved  him  from  being  bitten  by  the  viper. 

In  dijfcidties  there  is  provided  a way  of  salvation  1 (p.  263). 

In  this  tale  there  is  a warning  for  thee,  0 Soul, 

That  thou  mayest  acquiesce  in  God’s  ordinances, 

And  be  wary  and  not  doubt  God’s  benevolence, 

When  sudden  misfortunes  befall  thee. 

Let  others  grow  pale  from  fear  of  ill  fortune, 

Do  thou  smile  like  the  rose  at  loss  and  gain ; 

For  the  rose,  though  its  petals  be  torn  asunder, 

Still  smiles  on,  and  it  is  never  cast  down. 

It  says,  “ Why  should  I fall  into  grief  in  disgrace  ? 

1 Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  vol.  iii.  p.  334. 


story  xv.]  THE  LANGUAGE  OF  ANIMALS.  15 1 

I gather  beauty  even  from  the  thorn  of  disgrace.’’ 
Whatsoever  is  lost  to  thee  through  God’s  decree 
Know  of  a surety  is  so  much  gained  from  misfortune. 
What  is  Sufiism  ? Tis  to  find  joy  in  the  heart 
Whensoever  distress  and  care  assail  it. 

Know  troubles  to  be  that  eagle  of  the  Prophet’s 
Which  carried  off  the  sandal  of  that  holy  one, 

In  order  to  save  his  foot  from  the  bite  of  the  viper — 

0 excellent  device ! — to  preserve  him  from  harm. 

’Tis  said,  Mourn  not  for  your  slaughtered  cattle 
If  a wolf  has  handed  your  flocks ; ” 

For  that  calamity  may  avert  a greater  calamity, 

And  that  loss  may  ward  off  a more  grievous  loss. 

Story  XV.  The  Man  who  asked  Moses  to  teach  him  the 
lanrjuarjc  of  animals  (p.  264). 

A certain  man  came  to  Moses  and  desired  to  be  taught 
the  language  of  animals,  for,  he  said,  men  used  their 
language  only  to  get  food  and  for  purposes  of  deception, 
and  possibly  a knowledge  of  animals’  languages  might 
stimulate  his  faith.  Moses  was  very  unwilling  to  comply 
with  his  request,  as  he  knew  such  knowledge  would  prove 
destructive  to  him,  but,  on  his  persisting,  took  counsel  of 
God,  and  finally  taught  him  the  language  of  fowls  and 
dogs.  Next  morning  the  man  went  amongst  the  fowls, 
and  heard  a discussion  between  the  cock  and  the  dog. 
The  dog  was  abusing  the  cock  for  picking  up  the  morsels 
of  bread  which  fell  from  their  master’s  table,  because  the 
cock  could  find  plenty  of  grains  of  corn  to  eat,  whereas 
the  dog  could  only  eat  bread.  The  cock,  to  appease  him, 
said  that  on  the  morrow  the  master’s  horse  would  die,  and 
then  the  dog  would  have  enough  and  to  spare.  The 
master,  hearing  this,  at  once  sold  his  horse,  and  the  dog, 
being  disappointed  of  his  meal,  again  attacked  the  cock. 
The  cock  then  told  him  the  mule  would  die,  whereupon 
the  master  sold  the  mule.  Then  the  cock  foretold  the 


152 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  III. 


death  of  a slave,  and  the  master  again  sold  the  slave.  At 
this  the  dog,  losing  patience,  upbraided  the  cock  as  the 
chief  of  deceivers,  and  the  cock  excused  himself  by 
showing  that  all  three  deaths  had  taken  place  just  as 
he  had  predicted,  but  the  master  had  sold  the  horse,  mule, 
and  slave,  and  had  thrown  the  loss  on  others.  He  added 
that,  to  punish  him  for  his  fraudulent  dealing,  the  master 
would  himself  die  on  the  morrow,  and  there  would  be 
plenty  for  the  dog  to  eat  at  the  funeral  feast.  Hearing 
this,  the  master  went  to  Moses  in  great  distress,  and 
prayed  to  be  saved.  Moses  besought  the  Lord  for  him, 
and  gained  permission  that  he  should  die  in  the  peace 
of  God. 

Why  freewill  is  good  for  man  (p.  264). 

God  said,  “Do  thou  grant  his  earnest  request, 

Enlarge  his  faculty  according  to  his  freewill. 

Freewill  is  as  the  salt  to  piety, 

Otherwise  heaven  itself  were  matter  of  compulsion. 

In  its  revolutions  reward  and  punishment  were  needless, 
For  ’tis  freewill  that  has  merit  at  the  great  reckoning. 

If  the  whole  world  were  framed  to  praise  God, 

There  would  be  no  merit  in  praising  God. 

Place  a sword  in  his  hand  and  remove  his  impotence, 

To  see  if  he  turns  out  a warrior  or  a robber. 

Because  freewill  is  that  wherewith  ‘ we  honour  Adam,’ 1 
Half  the  swarm  become  bees  and  half  wasps. 

The  faithful  yield  honeycombs  like  bees, 

The  infidels  yield  store  of  poison  like  wasps. 

For  the  faithful  feed  on  choice  herbs, 

So  that,  like  bees,  their  chyle  yields  life-giving  food, 
Whilst  infidels  feed  on  filth  and  garbage, 

And  generate  poison  according  to  their  food.” 

Men  inspired  of  God  are  the  fountain  of  life ; 

Men  of  delusions  are  a synonym  for  death. 

In  the  world  the  praise  “ Well  done,  faithful  servant ! ” 

1 Koran  xvii.  72. 


153 


story  xvi.]  THE  WOMAN  AND  HER  INFANTS. 

Is  given  to  freewill  which  is  used  with  prudence. 

If  all  dissolute  men  were  shut  up  in  prison, 

They  would  all  be  temperate  and  devout  and  pious. 
"When  power  of  choice  is  absent  actions  are  worthless ; 
But  beware  lest  death  snatch  away  your  capital ! 

Your  power  of  choice  is  a capital  yielding  profit, 
Remember  well  the  day  of  final  account ! 


Story  XVI.  The  Woman  who  lost  all  her  infant's 
(p.  267). 

A woman  bore  many  children  in  succession,  but  none 
of  them  lived  beyond  the  age  of  three  or  four  months.  In 
great  distress  she  cried  to  God.  and  then  beheld  in  a vision 
the  beautiful  gardens  of  Paradise,  and  many  fair  mansions 
therein,  and  upon  one  of  these  mansions  she  read  her  own 
name  inscribed.  And  a voice  from  heaven  informed  her 
that  God  would  accept  the  sorrows  she  had  endured  in 
lieu  of  her  blood  shed  in  holy  war,  as,  owing  to  her  sex, 
she  was  unable  to  go  out  to  battle  like  the  men.  On 
looking  again,  the  woman  beheld  in  Paradise  all  the 
children  she  had  lost,  and  she  cried,  “ 0 Lord ! they  were 
lost  to  me,  but  were  safe  with  Thee  ! ” 

This  story  is  followed  by  anecdotes  of  Hamza  going  out 
to  battle  without  his  coat-of-mail,  of  the  Prophet  advising 
a man  who  complained  of  being  cheated  in  his  bargains 
to  take  time  before  completing  them,  and  of  the  death 
of  Bilal,  Muhammad’s  crier,  and  by  illustrations  of  the 
illusive  nature  of  the  world,  of  the  difference  between 
things  self-evident  and  mere  matters  of  inference,  and 
between  knowing  a thing  through  illustrations  and  on  the 
authority  of  others,  and  knowing  it  as  it  really  is  in  its 
essence. 


154 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  hi. 


The  difference  betvjeen  knowing  a thing  merely  by  similitudes 
and  on  the  authority  of  others,  and  knowing  the  very 
essence  thereof  (p.  272). 

God’s  mercy  is  known  through  the  fruits  thereof, 

But  who  save  God  knows  His  essence  ? 1 

No  one  knows  the  very  essence  of  God’s  attributes 

But  only  in  their  effects  and  by  similitudes. 

A child  knows  naught  of  the  nature  of  sexual  intercourse, 
Except  what  you  tell  him,  that  it  is  like  sweetmeats. 

Yet  how  far  does  the  pleasure  of  sexual  intercourse 
Really  resemble  that  derived  from  sweetmeats  ? 
Nevertheless  the  fiction  produces  a relation 
Between  you,  with  your  perfect  knowledge,  and  the  child  ; 
So  that  the  child  knows  the  matter  by  similitude, 

Though  he  knows  not  its  essence  or  actual  nature. 

Hence  if  he  says,  “ I know  it,”  ’tis  not  far  wrong, 

And  if  he  says,  “ I know  it  not,”  ’tis  not  wrong. 

Should  one  say,  “Do  you  know  Noah, 

That  prophet  of  God  and  luminary  of  the  Spirit  ? ” 

If  you  say,  “ Do  I not  know  him,  for  that  moon 
Is  more  famed  than  the  sun  and  moon  of  heaven  ? 

Little  children  in  their  schools, 

And  elders  in  their  mosques, 

All  read  his  name  prominently  in  the  Koran, 

And  preachers  tell  his  story  from  times  of  yore  ; ” — 

You  say  true,  for  you  know  him  by  report, 

Though  the  real  nature  of  Noah  is  not  revealed  to  you. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  you  say,  “ What  know  I of  Noah 
As  his  contemporaries  knew  him  ? 

I am  a poor  ant — what  can  I know  of  the  elephant  ? 
What  knows  a fly  of  the  motions  of  the  elephant  ? ” — 
This  statement  also  is  true,  0 brother, 

Seeing  that  you  know  not  his  real  nature. 

But  this  impotence  to  perceive  real  essence, 

1 There  is  a Hadis,  “Think  on  God’s  mercies,  and  not  on  His  essence.” 


STORY  XVII.]  THE  VAKIL  OF  BOKHARA. 


'55 


Though  common  to  ordinary  men,  is  not  universal ; 

Because  essence  and  its  deepest  secrets 

Are  open  and  manifest  to  the  eyes  of  the  perfect. 

Negation  and  affirmation  of  one  proposition  are  lawful ; 
When  the  aspects  differ  the  relation  is  double. 

“ Thou  castest  not  when  thou  castest  ” 1 shows  such 
relation, 

Here  negation  and  affirmation  are  both  correct. 

Thou  castest  it,  since  it  is  in  thy  hand, 

Thou  casteth  not,  since  ’tis  God  who  affords  the  strength. 
The  might  of  the  sons  of  Adam  is  limited, 

How  can  a handful  of  sand  shatter  an  army  ? 

The  sand  was  in  man’s  hands,  the  casting  was  God’s. 
Owing  to  the  two  relations  negation  and  affirmation  are 
both  true. 

The  infidels  know  the  prophets, 

As  well  as  they  doubtless  know  their  own  children  ; 

Yea.  the  infidels  know  them  as  well  as  their  own  sons, 

By  a hundred  tokens  and  a hundred  evidences, 

But  from  envy  and  malice  conceal  their  knowledge, 

And  incline  themselves  to  say,  “We  know  them  not.” 

So  when  God  says  in  one  place  “ knows  them,” 

In  another  He  says,  “ None  knows  them  beside  me.” 

For  in  truth  they  are  hid  under  God’s  overshadowing,2 
And  none  but  God  knows  them  by  actual  experience. 
Therefore  take  this  declaration  with  its  context, 
Remembering  how  you  know  and  do  not  know  Noah. 


Story  XVII.  The  Vakil  of  the  Prince  of  Bokhara  (p.  272). 

The  Prince  of  Bokhara  had  a Vakil  who,  through  fear 
of  punishment  for  an  offence  he  had  committed,  ran  away 
and  remained  concealed  in  Kuhistan  and  the  desert  for  the 

1 Koran  viii.  17.  Said  of  the  the  commentator  says  the  allusion  is 

sand  cast  into  the  eyes  of  the  men  to  Moses  at  Mount  Sinai.  Koran 
of  Mecca  at  Beder.  vii.  1 39. 

2 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  354,  where 


i$6 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 


space  of  ten  years.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  being  unable 
to  endure  absence  from  his  lord  and  his  home  any  longer,  he 
determined  to  return  to  Bokhara  and  throw  himself  at  his 
lord’s  feet,  and  endure  whatever  punishment  his  lord  might 
be  pleased  to  inflict  upon  him.  His  friends  did  all  they 
could  to  dissuade  him,  assuring  him  that  the  Prince’s  wrath 
was  still  hot  against  him,  and  that  if  he  appeared  at  Bok- 
hara he  would  be  put  to  death,  or  at  least  imprisoned  for 
the  rest  of  his  life.  He  replied,  “ 0 advisers,  be  silent,  for 
the  force  of  the  love  which  is  drawing  me  to  Bokhara  is 
stronger  than  the  force  of  prudent  counsels.  When  love 
pulls  one  way  all  the  wisdom  of  Abu  Hanifa  and  Ash- 
Shafi’i  is  impotent  to  withstand  it.  If  it  shall  please  my 
lord  to  slay  me,  I will  yield  up  my  life  without  reluctance, 
for  this  life  of  estrangement  from  him  which  I am  now 
leading  is  the  same  as  death,  and  release  from  it  will  be 
eternal  happiness.  I will  return  to  Bokhara  and  throw 
myself  at  my  lord’s  feet,  and  say  to  him,  ‘ Deal  with  me 
as  thou  wilt,  for  I can  no  longer  bear  absence  from  thee, 
and  life  or  death  at  thy  hands  is  all  the  same  to  me ! ’ ” 
Accordingly,  he  journeyed  back  to  Bokhara,  counting  the 
very  toils  and  discomforts  of  the  road  sweet  and  delightful, 
because  they  were  steps  in  his  homeward  course.  When 
he  reached  Bokhara  his  friends  and  relations  all  warned 
him  not  to  show  himself,  as  the  Prince  was  still  mindful  of 
his  offence  and  bent  on  punishing  him  ; but  he  replied  to 
them  as  to  his  other  advisers,  that  he  was  utterly  regard- 
less of  his  life,  and  was  resolved  to  commit  himself  to  his 
lord’s  good  pleasure.  He  then  went  to  the  court  and  threw 
himself  at  his  lord’s  feet  and  swooned  away.  The  Prince, 
seeing  the  strong  affection  borne  to  him  by  his  repentant 
servant,  conceived  a similar  affection  towards  him,  and 
descended  from  his  throne  and  graciously  raised  him  from 
the  ground,  and  pardoned  his  offence.  Thus  it  is  that 
eternal  life  is  gained  by  utter  abandonment  of  one’s  own 
life.  When  God  appears  to  His  ardent  lover  the  lover  is 
absorbed  in  Him,  and  not  so  much  as  a hair  of  the  lover 


story  xvii.]  THE  VAKIL  OF  BOKHARA. 


'57 


remains.  True  lovers  are  as  shadows,  and  when  the  sun 
shines  in  glory  the  shadows  vanish  away.  He  is  a true 
lover  of  God  to  whom  God  says,  “I  am  thine,  and  thou 
art  mine ! ” 

In  the  course  of  this  story,  which  is  narrated  at  great 
length,  are  introduced  anecdotes  of  a lover  and  his  mis- 
tress, of  the  Virgin  Mary  being  visited  by  the  “ Blessed 
Spirit”  or  Angel  Gabriel,1  of  the  fatal  mosque,  of  Galen’s 
devotion  to  carnal  learning,  of  Satan’s  treachery  to  the 
men  of  Mecca  at  the  battle  of  Bedr,2  and  of  Solomon  and 
the  gnat.  There  also  occur  comments  on  various  texts, 
and  a curious  comparison  of  the  trials  and  wholesome 
afflictions  of  the  righteous  to  the  boiling  of  pot-herbs  in 
a saucepan  by  the  cook. 


The  reply  of  the  lover  when  asked  by  his  mistress  which  city 
of  all  those  he  had  seen  was  most  pleasing  in  his  sight 
(p.  276). 

A damsel  said  to  her  lover,  “ 0 fond  youth, 

You  have  visited  many  cities  in  your  travels ; 

Which  of  those  cities  seems  most  delightful  to  you  ? ” 

He  made  answer,  “ The  city  wherein  my  love  dwells. 

In  whatever  nook  my  queen  alights, 

Though  it  be  as  the  eye  of  a needle,  ’tis  a wide  plain  ; 
Wherever  her  Yusuf-like  face  shines  as  a moon, 

Though  it  be  the  bottom  of  a well,  ’tis  Paradise. 

With  thee,  my  love,  hell  itself  were  heaven. 

With  thee  a prison  would  be  a rose-garden. 

With  thee  hell  would  be  a mansion  of  delight, 

Without  thee  lilies  and  roses  would  be  as  flames  of  fire ! ” 


1 Koran  xix.  18. 


2 Koran  viii.  10. 


158 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  III. 


The  answer  of  the  Vakil  to  those  who  advised  him  not  to 
court  death  by  yielding  himself  up  to  his  lord  (p.  2 77). 

He  said,  “ I am  a drawer  of  water  ; water  attracts  me, 
Even  though  I know  water  may  be  my  death. 

No  drawer  of  water  flees  from  water, 

Even  though  it  may  cause  him  a hundred  deaths. 

Though  it  may  make  my  hand  and  belly  dropsical, 

My  love  for  water  will  never  be  lessened, 

I should  say,  when  they  asked  me  about  my  belly, 

‘ Would  that  the  ocean  might  flow  into  it ! ’ 

Though  the  bottle  of  my  belly  were  burst  with  water, 

And  though  I should  die,  my  death  would  be  acceptable. 
Wheresoever  I see  one  seeking  water,  I envy  him, 

And  cry,  1 Would  I were  in  his  place  ! ’ 

My  hand  is  a tabor  and  my  belly  a drum, 

Like  the  rose  I beat  the  drum  of  love  of  water. 

Like  the  earth  or  like  a foetus  I devour  blood, 

Since  I became  a lover  this  is  my  occupation. 

If  that  ‘Faithful  Spirit’  should  shed  my  blood, 

I would  drink  it  up  drop  by  drop  like  the  earth. 

At  night  I boil  on  the  fire  like  a cooking-pot, 

From  morn  till  eve  I drink  blood  like  the  sand. 

It  repents  me  that  I planned  a stratagem, 

And  that  I fled  from  before  his  wrath. 

Tell  him  to  sate  his  wrath  on  my  poor  life, 

He  is  the  ‘ Feast  of  Sacrifice,’  and  I his  loving  cow.1 
The  cow,  whether  it  eats  or  sleeps, 

Thinks  of  naught  but  sacrificing  itself. 

Know  me  to  be  that  cow  of  Moses  which  gave  its  life, 
Each  part  of  me  gives  life  to  the  righteous. 

That  cow  of  Moses  was  made  a sacrifice, 

And  its  least  part  became  a source  of  life. 

That  murdered  man  leapt  up  from  his  deadness 

1 The  Id  ul  Azha,  or  the  Feast  of  the  month  Zul  Hijja.  It  is  also 
Sacrifices,  held  on  the  tenth  day  of  called  “ The  Cow  Festival.” 


STORY  XVII.]  THE  VAKIL  OF  BOKHARA. 


159 


At  the  words,  ' Strike  the  corpse  with  part  of  her.’ 1 2 

0 pious  ones,  slay  the  cow  (of  lust), 

If  ye  desire  true  life  of  soul  and  spirit ! 

I died  as  a mineral  and  arose  a plant, 

1 died  as  a plant  and  rose  again  an  animal. - 
I died  as  an  animal  and  arose  a man. 

Why  then  should  I fear  to  become  less  by  dying  ? 

I shall  die  once  again  as  a man 

To  rise  an  angel  perfect  from  head  to  foot ! 

Again  when  I suffer  dissolution  as  an  angel, 

I shall  become  what  passes  the  conception  of  man  ! 

Let  me  then  become  non-existent,  for  non-existence 
Sings  to  me  in  organ  tones,  ‘To  him  shall  we  return.’3 
Know  death  to  be  the  gathering  together  of  the  people, 
The  water  of  life  is  hidden  in  the  land  of  darkness. 

Like  a water-lily  seek  life  there  ! 

Yea,  like  that  drawer  of  water,  at  the  risk  of  life, 
Water  will  be  his  death,  yet  he  still  seeks  water, 

And  still  drinks  on, — and  God  knows  what  is  right. 

0 lover,  cold-hearted  and  void  of  loyalty. 

Who  from  fear  for  your  life  shun  the  beloved ! 

0 base  one,  behold  a hundred  thousand  souls 
Dancing  towards  the  deadly  sword  of  his  love  : 

Behold  water  in  a pitcher  ; pour  it  out ; 

Will  that  water  run  away  from  the  stream  ? 

When  that  water  joins  the  water  of  the  stream 
It  is  lost  therein,  and  becomes  itself  the  stream. 

Its  individuality  is  lost,  but  its  essence  remains, 

And  hereby  it  becomes  not  less  nor  inferior. 

1 will  hang  myself  upon  my  lord’s  palm-tree 
In  excuse  for  having  fled  away  from  him  ! ” 

Even  as  a ball  rolling  along  on  head  and  face, 


1 This  refers  to  Koran  ii.  63. 
The  cow  was  to  be  sacrificed  in  order 
that  a murderer  might  be  discovered 
by  striking  the  corpse  with  a piece 
of  her  flesh. 

2 I.e.,  Earth  losing  its  own  form 

becomes  vegetable,  vegetable  again 


perishes  to  feed  and  be  transmuted 
into  animal,  and  in  like  manner 
animal  becomes  man.  See  the  pas- 
sage of  Milton  quoted  below,  and 
Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  490  and  note. 

3  Koran  ii.  153:  “Verily  we  are 
God’s,  and  to  Him  shall  we  return.” 


160  THE  MASNA  VI.  [book  in. 

He  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  Prince  with  streaming  eyes. 

The  people  were  all  on  the  alert,  expecting 
That  the  Prince  would  burn  him  or  hang  him, 

Saying,  “ Moth-like  he  has  seen  the  blaze  of  the  light, 
And  fool-like  has  plunged  therein  and  lost  his  life.” 

But  the  torch  of  love  is  not  like  that  torch, 

’Tis  light,  light  in  the  midst  of  light, 

’Tis  the  reverse  of  torches  of  fire, 

It  appears  to  be  fire,  but  is  all  sweetness. 

Love  generates  love.  “ If  ye  love  God , God  will  love 
yovj  ” 1 (p.  289). 

That  Bokharian  then  cast  himself  into  the  flame, 

But  his  love  made  the  pain  endurable  ; 

And  as  his  burning  sighs  ascended  to  heaven, 

The  love  of  the  Prince  was  kindled  towards  him. 

The  heart  of  man  is  like  the  root  of  a tree, 

Therefrom  grow  the  leaves  on  firm  branches.2 
Corresponding  to  that  root  grow  up  branches 
As  well  on  the  tree  as  on  souls  and  intellects. 

The  tops  of  the  perfect  trees  reach  the  heavens, 

The  roots  firm,  and  the  branches  in  the  sky. 

Since  then  the  tree  of  love  has  grown  up  to  heaven, 

How  shall  it  not  also  grow  in  the  heart  of  the  Prince  ? 

A wave  washes  away  the  remembrance  of  the  sin  from  his 
heart, 

For  from  each  heart  is  a window  to  other  hearts ; 

Since  in  each  heart  there  is  a window  to  other  hearts, 
They  are  not  separated  and  shut  off  like  two  bodies. 

Thus,  even  though  two  lamp-dishes  be  not  joined, 

Yet  their  light  is  united  in  a single  ray. 

No  lover  ever  seeks  union  with  his  beloved, 

But  his  beloved  is  also  seeking  union  with  him. 

1 Koran  iii.  29.  tree,  its  root  firmly  fixed,  and  its 

2 “Seest  thou  not  to  what  God  branches  in  the  heaven”  (Koran 
likeneth  a good  word?  To  a good  xiv.  29). 


STORY  XVII.]  THE  VAKIL  OF  BOKHARA.  161 

But  the  lover’s  love  makes  his  body  lean, 

While  the  beloved’s  love  makes  hers  fair  and  lusty. 

When  in  this  heart  the  lightning  spark  of  love  arises, 

Be  sure  this  love  is  reciprocated  in  that  heart. 

When  the  love  of  God  arises  in  thy  heart, 

Without  doubt  God  also  feels  love  for  thee. 

The  noise  of  clapping  of  hands  is  never  heard 
From  one  of  thy  hands  unaided  by  the  other  hand. 

The  man  athirst  cries,  “ Where  is  delicious  water?  ” 
Water  too  cries,  “Where  is  the  water-drinker?” 

This  thirst  in  my  soul  is  the  attraction  of  the  water ; 

I am  the  water’s  and  the  water  is  mine. 

God’s  wisdom  in  His  eternal  foreknowledge  and  decree 
Made  us  to  be  lovers  one  of  the  other. 

Nay  more,  all  the  parts  of  the  world  by  this  decree 
Are  arranged  in  pairs,  and  each  loves  its  mate. 

Every  part  of  the  world  desires  its  mate, 

Just  as  amber  attracts  blades  of  straw. 

Heaven  says  to  earth,  “All  hail  to  thee ! 

We  are  related  to  one  another  as  iron  and  magnet.” 
Heaven  is  man  and  earth  woman  in  character ; 

Whatever  heaven  sends  it,  earth  cherishes. 

When  earth  lacks  heat,  heaven  sends  heat ; 

When  it  lacks  moisture  and  dew,  heaven  sends  them. 

The  earthy  sign  1 succours  the  terrestrial  earth, 

The  watery  sign  (Aquarius)  sends  moisture  to  it ; 

The  windy  sign  sends  the  clouds  to  it, 

To  draw  off  unwholesome  exhalations. 

The  fiery  sign  (Leo)  sends  forth  the  heat  of  the  sun, 

Like  a dish  heated  red-hot  in  front  and  behind. 

The  heaven  is  busily  toiling  through  ages, 

Just  as  men  labour  to  provide  food  for  women. 

And  the  earth  does  the  woman’s  work,  and  toils 
In  bearing  offspring  and  suckling  them. 

Know  then  earth  and  heaven  are  endued  with  sense, 
Since  they  act  like  persons  endued  with  sense. 

1 J.e.,  of  the  Zodiac. 


L 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


162 


[book  hi. 


If  these  two  lovers  did  not  suck  nutriment  from  each 
other, 

Why  should  they  creep  together  like  man  and  wife  ? 
Without  the  earth  how  could  roses  and  saffron  grow  ? 

For  naught  can  grow  from  the  sole  heat  and  rain  of 
heaven. 

This  is  the  cause  of  the  female  seeking  the  male, 

That  the  work  of  each  may  be  accomplished. 

God  has  instilled  mutual  love  into  man  and  woman, 

That  the  world  may  be  perpetuated  by  their  union. 

Earth  says  to  the  earth  of  the  body,  “ Come  away, 

Quit  the  soul  and  come  to  me  as  dust. 

Thou  art  of  my  genus,  and  wilt  be  better  with  me, 

Thou  had’st  better  quit  the  soul  and  fly  to  me ! ” 

Body  replies,  “ True,  but  my  feet  are  fast  bound, 

Though  like  thee  I suffer  from  separation.” 

W ater  calls  out  to  the  moisture  of  the  body, 

“ 0 moisture,  return  to  me  from  your  foreign  abode  ! ” 
Fire  also  calls  out  to  the  heat  of  the  body, 

“ Thou  art  of  fire  ; return  to  thy  root ! ” 

In  the  body  there  are  seventy-and-two  diseases ; 

It  is  ill  compacted  owing  to  the  struggle  of  its  elements. 
Disease  comes  to  rend  the  body  asunder, 

And  to  drag  apart  its  constituent  elements. 

The  four  elements  are  as  birds  tied  together  by  the  feet ; 
Death,  sickness  and  disease  loose  their  feet  asunder. 

The  moment  their  feet  are  loosed  from  the  others, 

The  bird  of  each  element  flies  off  by  itself. 

The  repulsion  of  each  of  these  principles  and  causes 
Inflicts  every  moment  a fresh  pang  on  our  bodies. 

That  it  may  dissolve  these  composite  bodies  of  ours, 

The  bird  of  each  part  tries  to  fly  away  to  its  origin  ; 

But  the  wisdom  of  God  prevents  this  speedy  end, 

And  preserves  their  union  till  the  appointed  day. 

He  says,  “ 0 parts,  the  appointed  time  is  not  yet; 

It  is  useless  for  you  to  take  wing  before  that  day.” 


STORY  XVII.]  THE  VAKIL  OF  BOKHARA. 


163 

But  as  each  part  desires  reunion  with  its  original, 

How  is  it  with  the  soul  who  is  a stranger  in  exile  ? 

It  says,  “ 0 parts  of  my  habitation  here  below, 

My  absence  is  sadder  than  yours,  as  I am  heaven-born. 
The  body  loves  green  pastures  and  running  water, 

For  this  cause  that  its  origin  is  from  them. 

The  love  of  the  soul  is  for  life  and  the  living  one, 

Because  its  origin  is  the  Soul  not  bound  to  place. 

The  love  of  the  soul  is  for  wisdom  and  knowledge, 

That  of  the  body  for  houses,  gardens,  and  vineyards  ; 

The  love  of  the  soul  is  for  things  exalted  on  high, 

That  of  the  body  for  acquisition  of  goods  and  food. 

The  love  too  of  Him  on  high  is  directed  to  the  soul : 

Know  this  for  ‘ He  loves  them  that  love  Him.’  ” 1 
The  sum  is  this,  that  whoso  seeks  another, 

The  soul  of  that  other  who  is  sought  inclines  to  him. 

Let  us  quit  the  subject. — Love  for  that  soul  athirst 
Was  kindled  in  the  breast  of  the  Prince  of  Bokhara. 

The  smoke  of  that  love  and  the  grief  of  that  burning 
heart 

Ascended  to  his  master  and  excited  his  compassion. 


The  praises  addressed  to  the  Prince  by  the  Vakil  (p.  296). 

He  said,  “ 0 phcenix  of  God  and  goal  of  the  spirit, 

I thank  thee  that  thou  hast  come  back  from  Mount  Qaf ! 
0 Israfil  of  the  resurrection-day  of  love, 

0 love,  love,  and  heart’s  desire  of  love  ! 

Let  thy  first  boon  to  me  be  this, 

To  lend  thine  ear  to  my  orisons. 

Though  thou  knowest  my  condition  clearly, 

0 protector  of  slaves,  listen  to  my  speech. 

A thousand  times,  0 prince  incomparable, 

Has  my  reason  taken  flight  in  desire  to  see  thee, 

And  to  hear  thee  and  to  listen  to  thy  words, 

1 Koran  v.  59. 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  hi. 


164 

And  to  behold  thy  life-giving  smiles. 

Thy  inclining  thine  ear  to  my  supplications 
Is  as  a caress  to  my  misguided  soul. 

The  baseness  of  my  heart’s  coin  is  known  to  thee, 

But  thou  hast  accepted  it  as  genuine  coin. 

Thou  art  proud  towards  the  arrogant  and  proud ; 

All  clemencies  are  as  naught  to  thy  clemency. 

First  hear  this,  that  while  I remained  in  absence, 

First  and  last  alike  escaped  me. 

Secondly,  hear  this,  0 prince  beloved, 

That  I searched  much,  but  found  no  second  to  thee. 
Thirdly,  that  when  I had  departed  outside  thee, 

I said  it  was  like  the  Christian  Trinity.1 
Fourthly,  when  my  harvest  was  burned  up, 

I knew  not  the  fourth  from  the  fifth. 

Wheresoever  thou  findest  blood  on  the  roads, 

Trace  it,  and  ’tis  tears  of  blood  from  my  eyes. 

My  words  are  thunder,  and  these  sighs  and  tears 
Are  drawn  by  it  as  rain  from  the  clouds. 

I am  distracted  between  speaking  and  weeping. 

Shall  I weep,  or  shall  I speak,  or  what  shall  I do  ? 

If  I speak,  my  weeping  ceases ; 

If  I weep,  I cease  to  praise  and  magnify  thee.” 

He  spoke  thus,  and  then  fell  to  weeping, 

So  that  high  and  low  wept  with  him. 

So  many  “Ahs”  and  “ Alases”  proceeded  from  his  heart, 
That  the  people  of  Bokhara  formed  a circle  round  him. 
Talking  sadly,  weeping  sadly,  smiling  sadly, 

Men  and  women,  small  and  great,  were  all  assembled. 

The  whole  city  wept  in  concert  with  him  ; 

Men  and  women  mingled  together  as  on  the  last  day. 
Then  Heaven  said  to  Earth, 

“ If  you  never  saw  a resurrection-day,  see  it  here  ! ” 
Reason  was  amazed,  saying,  “ What  love,  what  ecstacy ! 

Is  his  separation  more  wondrous,  or  his  reunion  ? ” 

1 “ They  surely  are  infidels  who  for  there  is  no  God  but  one  God  ” 
say,  ‘ God  is  the  third  of  three,’  (Koran  v.  77). 


story  XVIII.]  THE  DEADLY  MOSQUE. 


165 


Story  XVIII.  The  Deadly  Mosque  (p.  278). 

In  the  suburbs  of  a certain  city  there  was  a mosque  in 
which  none  could  sleep  a night  and  live.  Some  said  it 
was  haunted  by  malevolent  fairies ; others,  that  it  was 
under  the  baneful  influence  of  a magic  spell ; some  pro- 
posed to  put  up  a notice  warning  people  not  to  sleep  there, 
and  others  advised  that  the  door  should  be  kept  locked. 
At  last  a stranger  came  to  that  city  and  desired  to  sleep 
in  the  mosque,  saying  that  he  did  not  fear  to  risk  his  life, 
as  the  life  of  the  body  was  naught,  and  God  has  said, 
“ Wish  for  death  if  you  are  sincere.”1  The  men  of  the 
city  warned  him  again  and  again  of  the  danger,  and  re- 
buked him  for  his  foolhardiness,  reminding  him  that  not 
improbably  Satan  was  tempting  him  to  his  own  destruc- 
tion, as  he  tempted  the  men  of  Mecca  at  the  battle  of  Bedr.2 
The  stranger,  however,  would  not  be  dissuaded,  but  per- 
sisted in  his  purpose  of  sleeping  in  the  mosque.  He  said 
that  he  was  as  one  of  the  devoted  agents  of  the  Ismailians, 
who  were  always  ready  to  sacrifice  their  lives  at  the  bid- 
ding of  their  chiefs,  and  that  the  terrors  of  death  did  not 
appal  him  any  more  than  the  noise  of  a little  drum  beaten 
by  a boy  to  scare  away  birds  could  appal  the  great  drum- 
bearing camel  that  used  to  march  at  the  head  of  King 
Mahmud's  army.  Accordingly,  he  slept  in  the  mosque, 
and  at  midnie-ht  he  was  awakened  bv  a terrible  voice,  as  of 
one  about  to  attack  him.  But  instead  of  being  dismayed, 
he  bethought  himself  of  the  text  “Assault  them  with  thy 
horsemen  and  thy  footmen,”  3 and  confronted  his  unseen 
foe,  challenging  him  to  show  himself  and  stand  to  his  arms. 
At  these  words  the  spell  was  dissipated,  and  showers  of 
gold  fell  on  all  sides,  which  the  brave  hero  proceeded  to 
appropriate. 

1 Koran  ii.  88.  2 Koran  viii.  50.  3 Koran  xvii.  66. 


1 66 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  hi. 


The  “ knowledge  of  certainty  ” and  the  “ eye  of  certainty 
(p.  283). 


Our  body  and  substance  are  snow,  doomed  to  perish. 

God  is  He  who  buys  them,  for  “ God  hath  bought  them.”  1 
You  prefer  this  perishing  snow  to  God’s  price 
Because  you  are  in  doubt  and  have  not  certainty ; 

And,  strange  to  say,  opinion  abides  in  you,  0 weak  one, 
And  never  flies  away  to  the  garden  of  certainty. 

Every  opinion  is  aiming  at  certainty,  0 son, 

And  more  and  more  moves  its  wings  towards  certainty. 
When  it  reaches  knowledge  it  stands  erect, 

And  its  knowledge  again  hastes  on  towards  certainty, 
Because  in  the  approved  road  of  the  faith 
Knowledge  is  lower  than  certainty,  but  above  opinion. 
Know  knowledge  aspires  to  certainty, 

And  certainty  again  to  sight  and  ocular  evidence. 

In  the  chapter,  “ Desire  of  riches  occupieth  you,”2 
After  “ Nay,”  read  “ Would  that  ye  knew  ! ” 

Knowledge  conducts  you  to  sight,  0 knower  ! 

“If  ye  are  certain,  ye  shall  see  hell-fire.” 

Sight  follows  on  certainty  with  no  interval, 

Just  as  reasoned  knowledge  is  born  of  opinion. 

See  the  account  of  this  in  the  chapter  cited, 

How  knowledge  of  certainty  becomes  the  eye  of  certainty. 
As  for  me,  I am  above  both  opinion  and  certainty  ; 

My  head  is  not  affected  by  your  cavils. 

Since  my  mouth  has  eaten  of  His  sweetmeats, 

I am  become  clear-sighted,  and  see  Him  face  to  face ! 


1 “ Verily  of  the  faithful  hath 
God  bought  their  persons  and  their 
substance,  on  condition  of  Paradise 
for  them  in  return  ” (Koran  ix.  112). 

2 “ The  desire  of  riches  occupieth 
you  till  ye  come  to  the  grave.  Nay  ! 


but  in  the  end  ye  shall  know.  Nay  ! 
would  that  ye  knew  it  with  know- 
ledge of  certainty.  Surely  ye  shall 
see  hell-fire.  Ye  shall  surely  see 
with  the  eye  of  certainty  ” (Koran 
cii.) 


STORY  XVIII.]  THE  DEADLY  MOSQUE. 


167 


The  righteous  are  exposed  to  trials  for  their  improvement,  as 
pot-herbs  arc  boiled  to  make  them  fit  for  food  (p.  284). 

Behold  these  pot-herbs  boiling  in  the  pot, 

How  they  jump  and  toss  about  in  the  heat  of  the  fire. 
Whilst  they  are  boiling,  they  keep  leaping  up, 

Even  to  the  top  of  the  pot,  and  utter  cries, 

Saying  to  the  housewife,  “ Why  do  you  set  us  on  the'fire  ? 
Now  you  have  bought  us,  why  should  you  afllict  us  ? ” 

The  housewife  pushes  them  down  with  her  spoon,  saying, 
“ Be  still,  and  boil  well,  and  leap  not  off  the  fire. 

I do  not  boil  you  because  I dislike  you, 

But  that  you  may  acquire  a good  savour  and  taste. 

When  you  become  food  you  will  be  mingled  with  life ; 
This  trial  is  not  imposed  on  you  to  distress  you. 

In  the  gai’den  you  drank  water  soft  and  fresh ; 

That  water-fed  one  was  reserved  for  this  fire. 

Mercy  was  first  shown  to  it  before  vengeance, 

That  mercy  might  train  it  to  be  proof  against  trial ; 

Mercy  was  shown  to  it  previously  to  vengeance, 

That  it  might  acquire  its  substance  of  being. 

Because  flesh  and  skin  grow  not  without  tender  care, 

How  should  they  not  grow  when  warmed  by  the  Friend’s 
love. 

If  vengeance  follows  as  a necessary  consequence, 

That  you  may  make  an  offering  of  that  substance, 

Mercy  follows  again  to  compensate  for  it, 

That  you  may  be  purified  and  raised  above  your  nature. 

I am  Abraham,  and  you  his  son  under  the  knife. 

Lay  down  your  head  ! ! I have  seen  I must  sacrifice  you.’ 1 
Yield  your  head  to  vengeance,  your  heart  to  constancy, 
That  I may  cut  your  throat  like  an  Ismailian’s. 

I cut  off  your  head,  but  that  head  is  such 
That  it  is  restored  to  life  by  being  cut  off ! ” 


1 Koran  xxxvii.  101. 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  III. 


1 68 

My  main  object  herein  is  to  inculcate  resignation, 

0 Mussulman ! it  behoves  you  to  seek  resignation.1 
0 pot-herbs,  you  boil  in  trials  and  sufferings 
That  neither  existence  nor  self  may  remain  in  you. 
Though  you  once  smiled  in  that  earthly  garden, 

You  are  really  roses  of  the  garden  of  life  and  sight. 

If  you  are  torn  away  from  the  garden  of  earth, 

You  become  sweet  food  to  revive  man’s  life ; 

Yea,  become  his  food  and  strength  and  thought ! 2 
You  were  only  milk,  you  become  a lion  of  the  forest ! 

You  issue  from  God’s  attributes  at  first ; 

Return  again  back  to  those  attributes  with  all  speed ! 

You  come  from  the  clouds  and  sunshine  and  sky, 

Then  assume  moral  qualities  and  ascend  the  sky. 

You  come  in  the  form  of  rain  and  sunshine, 

You  depart  endued  with  excellent  attributes. 

You  begin  as  a part  of  the  sun,  clouds,  and  stars, 

You  rise  to  be  breath,  act,  word,  and  thought! 

The  life  of  animals  comes  from  the  death  of  plants. 

True  is  the  saying,  ‘ Kill  me,  0 faithful  ones  ! ’ 

Since  such  exaltation  awaits  us  after  death. 

True  it  is  that  ‘ In  our  death  is  life.’ 

Acts,  words,  and  faith  are  the  food  of  the  King, 

So  that  in  this  ascent  one  attains  to  heaven. 

Thus,  as  pot-herbs  become  the  food  of  men, 

They  rise  above  the  grade  of  plants  to  that  of  animals.” 

Objections  of  fools  to  the  Masnavi  (p.  285 ). 

A certain  goose  pops  his  head  out  of  his  coop, 

And  displays  himself  as  a critic  of  the  Masnavi, 

Saying,  “ This  poem,  the  Masnavi,  is  childish  ; 

1 According  to  its  etymology,  Islam  means  self-surrender  to  God,  as 
well  as  safety,  peace,  and  obedience  to  divine  laws. 

2 Cp.  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  v.  482 — 

“ Flow’rs  and  their  fruit, 

Man’s  nourishment,  by  gradual  scale  sublim’d 
To  vital  spirits  aspire,  to  animal, 

To  intellectual.” 


story  xviii.]  THE  DEADLY  MOSQUE.  169 

Tis  but  a story  of  the  prophets,  and  so  on. 

’Tis  not  an  account  of  the  arguments  and  deep  mysteries, 
Whereto  holy  men  direct  their  attention  ; — 

Concerning  asceticism,  and  so  on  to  self-annihilation, 

Step  by  step,  up  to  communion  with  God ; — 

A11  explanation  and  definition  of  each  several  state, 
Whereto  the  men  of  heart  ascend  in  their  flight.” 

Whereas  the  Book  of  God  resembles  the  Masnavi  in  this, 
The  infidels  abused  it  in  the  same  manner, 

Saying,  ‘ It  contains  old  tales  and  stories  ; ’ 1 

There  is  no  deep  analysis  or  lofty  investigation  therein. 

Little  boys  can  understand  it ; 

It  only  contains  commands  and  prohibitions, 

Accounts  of  Yusuf  and  his  curled  locks, 

Accounts  of  Jacob,  of  Zulaikka  and  her  love, 

Accounts  of  Adam,  of  the  wheat,  and  of  the  serpent 
Iblis, 

Accounts  of  Hud,  of  Noah,  of  Abraham,  and  the  fire.” 

Know  the  words  of  the  Koran  are  simple, 

But  within  the  outward  sense  is  an  inner  secret  one.3 
Beneath  that  secret  meaning  is  a third, 

Whereat  the  highest  wit  is  dumbfoundered. 

The  fourth  meaning  has  been  seen  by  none 
Save  God,  the  Incomparable  and  All-sufficient. 

Thus  they  go  on,  even  to  seven  meanings,  one  by  one, 
According  to  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  without  doubt. 
Do  thou,  0 son,  confine  not  thy  view  to  the  outward 
meaning, 

Even  as  the  demons  saw  in  Adam  only  clay.3 

The  outward  meaning  of  the  Koran  is  like  Adam’s  body, 

For  its  semblance  is  visible,  but  its  soul  is  hidden. 

0 reviling  dog  ! thou  makest  a clamour, 

1 Koran  xxvii.  7. 

2 There  is  a Hadis  to  the  effect  that  each  word  of  the  Koran  has  seven 

meanings.  See  Koran  iii.  5.  3 Koran  xvii.  63. 


170 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  nr. 


Tliou  makest  thy  abuse  of  the  Koran  thy  destruction.1 
This  is  not  a lion,  wherefrom  thou  canst  save  thy  life, 
Or  canst  secure  thyself  from  his  talons  ! 

The  Koran  cries  out  even  to  the  last  day, 

“ 0 people,  given  up  as  a prey  to  ignorance, 

If  ye  have  imagined  me  to  be  only  empty  fables, 

Ye  have  sown  the  seed  of  reviling  and  infidelity. 

Ye  yourselves  who  abuse  me  will  see  yourselves 
Annihilated,  and  made  like  a tale  that  is  told  ! ” 


Solomon  and  the  Gnat  (p.  295). 

A gnat  came  in  from  the  garden  and  fields, 

And  called  on  Solomon  for  justice, 

Saying,  “ 0 Solomon,  you  extend  your  equity 
Over  demons  and  the  sons  of  Adam  and  fairies. 

Fish  and  fowl  dwell  under  the  shelter  of  your  justice ; 
Where  is  the  oppressed  one  whom  your  mercy  has  not 
sought  ? 

Grant  me  redress,  for  I am  much  afflicted, 

Being  cut  off  from  my  garden  and  meadow  haunts.” 

Then  Solomon  replied,  “ 0 seeker  of  redress, 

Tell  me  from  whom  do  you  desire  redress  ? 

Who  is  the  oppressor,  who,  puffed  up  with  arrogance, 

Has  oppressed  you  and  smitten  your  face  ? ” 

The  gnat  replied,  “ He  from  whom  I seek  redress  is  the 
Wind, 

’Tis  he  who  has  emitted  the  smoke  of  oppression  at  me  ; 
Through  his  oppression  I am  in  a grievous  strait, 

Through  him  I drink  blood  with  parched  lips ! ” 

Solomon  replied  to  him,  “ 0 sweet-voiced  one, 

1 The  Lucknow  commentator  says  Masnavi,  and  on  the  leaves  being 
that  Faizi  (brother  of  Abul  Fazl,  turned  over,  this  passage  presented 
Akbar’s  minister)  once  spoke  dis-  itself, 
respectfully  of  the  Koran  and  the 


STORY  XVIII.]  THE  DEADLY  MOSQUE. 


171 


You  must  hear  the  command  of  God  with  all  your  heart. 
God  has  commanded  me  saying,  ‘ 0 dispenser  of  justice, 
Never  hear  one  party  without  the  other ! ’ 

Till  both  parties  come  into  the  presence, 

The  truth  is  never  made  plain  to  the  judge.” 

When  the  Wind  heard  the  summons,  it  came  swiftly. 

And  the  gnat  instantly  took  flight. 

In  like  manner  the  seekers  of  God’s  presence-seat, — 
When  God  appears,  those  seekers  vanish. 

Though  that  union  is  life  eternal, 

Yet  at  first  that  life  is  annihilation. 

The  book  ends  with  the  beginning  of  a story  which  is 
finished  in  the  fourth  book. 


ifiSOOfc  5U. 


Story  I.  The  Lover  and  his  Mistress  (p.  303). 

The  fourth  book  begins  with  an  address  to  Husamu-’d- 
Din,  and  this  is  followed  by  the  story  of  the  lover  and  his 
mistress,  already  commenced  in  the  third  book.  A certain 
lover  had  been  separated  from  his  mistress  for  the  space  of 
seven  years,  during  which  he  never  relaxed  his  efforts  to  find 
her.  At  last  his  constancy  and  perseverance  were  rewarded, 
in  accordance  with  the  promises  “The  seeker  shall  find,” 
and  “ Whoso  shall  have  wrought  an  atom’s  weight  of 
good  shall  behold  it.”  1 One  night,  as  he  was  wandering 
through  the  city,  he  was  pursued  by  the  patrol,  and,  in 
order  to  escape  them,  took  refuge  in  a garden,  where  he 
found  his  long-sought  mistress.  This  occasioned  him  to 
reflect  how  often  men  “ hate  the  things  that  are  good  for 
them,”  2 and  led  him  to  bless  the  rough  patrol  who  had 
procured  him  the  bliss  of  meeting  with  his  mistress. 
Apropos  of  this,  an  anecdote  is  told  of  a preacher  who  was 
in  the  habit  of  blessing  robbers  and  oppressors,  because 
their  evil  example  had  turned  him  to  righteousness.  The 
moment  the  lover  found  himself  alone  with  his  mistress, 
he  attempted  to  embrace  her,  but  his  mistress  repulsed 
him,  saying,  that  though  no  men  were  present,  yet  the 
wind  was  blowing,  and  that  showed  that  God,  the  mover 
of  the  wind,  was  also  present.  The  lover  replied,  “ It  may 
be  I am  lacking  in  good  manners,  but  I am  not  lacking 
in  constancy  and  fidelity  towards  you.”  His  mistress  re- 
plied, “One  must  judge  of  the  hidden  by  the  manifest;  I 
see  for  myself  that  your  outward  behaviour  is  bad,  and 

1 Koran  xeix.  7.  2 Koran  ii.  213. 

172 


173 


story  i.]  THE  LOVER  AND  HIS  MISTRESS. 

thence  I cannot  but  infer  that  your  boast  of  bidden  virtues 
is  not  warranted  by  actual  facts.  You  are  ashamed  to 
misconduct  yourself  in  the  sight  of  men,  but  have  no 
scruple  to  do  so  in  the  presence  of  the  All-seeing  God,  and 
hence  I doubt  the  existence  of  the  virtuous  sentiments 
which  you  claim  to  possess,  but  which  can  only  be  known 
to  yourself.”  To  illustrate  this,  she  told  the  story  of  a 
Sufi  and  his  faithless  wife.  This  wife  was  one  day  enter- 
taining a paramour,  when  she  was  surprised  by  the  sudden 
return  of  her  husband.  On  the  spur  of  the  moment  she 
threw  a woman’s  dress  over  her  paramour  and  presented 
him  to  her  husband  as  a rich  lady  who  had  come  to  pro- 
pose a marriage  between  her  son  and  the  Sufi’s  daughter, 
saying  she  did  not  care  for  wealth,  but  only  regarded 
modesty  and  rectitude  of  conduct.  To  this  the  Sufi 
replied,  that  as  from  her  coming  unattended  it  was  plain 
that  the  lady  had  not  the  wealth  she  pretended  to  have, 
it  was  more  than  probable  that  her  pretensions  to  extra- 
ordinary modesty  and  humility  were  also  fictitious.  The 
lover  then  proceeded  to  excuse  himself  by  the  plea  that  he 
had  wished  to  test  his  mistress,  and  ascertain  for  himself 
whether  she  was  a modest  woman  or  not.  He  said  he 
of  course  knew  beforehand  that  she  would  prove  to  be  a 
modest  woman,  but  still  he  wished  to  have  ocular  demon- 
stration of  the  fact.  His  mistress  reproved  him  for  trying 
to  deceive  her  with  false  pretences,  assuring  him  that 
after  he  had  been  detected  in  a fault,  his  only  proper 
course  was  to  confess  it,  as  Adam  had  done.  Moreover, 
she  added  that  an  attempt  to  put  her  to  the  test  would 
have  been  an  extremely  unworthy  proceeding,  only  to  be 
paralleled  by  Abu  Jalil’s  attempt  to  prove  the  truth  of 
the  Prophet’s  claims  by  calling  on  him  to  perform  a 
miracle. 


174 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  IV. 


The  sold  of  good  in  things  evil.  Evil  only  relative 
(P-  303)- 

The  lover  invoked  blessings  on  that  rough  patrol, 

Because  their  harshness  had  wrought  bliss  for  him. 

They  were  poison  to  most  men,  but  sweets  to  him, 
Because  those  harsh  ones  had  united  him  with  his  love. 
In  the  world  there  is  nothing  absolutely  bad ; 

Know,  moreover,  evil  is  only  relative. 

In  the  world  there  is  neither  poison  nor  antidote, 

Which  is  not  a foot  to  one  and  a fetter  to  another ; 

To  one  the  power  of  moving,  to  another  a clog ; 

To  one  a poison,  to  another  an  antidote. 

Serpents’  poison  is  life  to  serpents, 

In  relation  to  mankind  it  is  death. 

To  the  creatures  of  the  sea  the  sea  is  a garden, 

To  the  creatures  of  the  land  it  is  fatal. 

In  the  same  way,  0 man,  reckon  up  with  intelligence 
The  relations  of  these  things  in  endless  variety. 

In  relation  to  this  man  Zaid  is  as  Satan, 

In  relation  to  another  he  is  as  a Sultan. 

The  latter  calls  Zaid  a sincere  Mussulman, 

The  former  calls  him  a Gueber  deserving  to  be  killed. 
Zaid,  one  and  the  same  person,  is  life  to  the  one, 

And  to  the  other  an  annoyance  and  a pest. 

If  you  desire  that  God  may  be  pleasing  to  you, 

Then  look  at  Him  with  the  eyes  of  them  that  love  Him. 
Look  not  at  that  Beauty  with  your  own  eyes, 

Look  at  that  Object  of  desire  with  His  votaries’  eyes ; 
Shut  your  own  eyes  from  beholding  that  sweet  Object, 
And  borrow  from  His  admirers  their  eyes ; 

Nay,  borrow  from  Him  both  eyes  and  sight, 

And  with  those  eyes  of  His  look  upon  His  face, 

In  order  that  you  may  not  be  disappointed  with  the 
sight. 

God  says,  “ Whoso  is  God’s,  God  also  is  his.” 


*75 


STORY  i.]  THE  LOVER  AND  HIS  MISTRESS. 

God  says,  “I  am  his  eye,  his  hand,  his  heart,”1 
That  his  good  fortune  may  emerge  from  adversity. 

Whatsoever  is  hateful  to  you,  if  it  should  lead  you 
To  your  beloved,  at  once  becomes  agreeable  to  you. 

Why  God  is  named  “ Hearing ,”  “Seeing,”  and  “ Knowing  ” 
(P-  307). 

God  calls  himself  “ Seeing,”  to  the  end  that 

His  eye  may  every  moment  scare  you  from  sinning. 

God  calls  himself  “ Hearing,”  to  the  end  that 
You  may  close  your  lips  against  foul  discourse. 

God  calls  himself  “ Knowing,”  to  the  end  that 
You  may  be  afraid  to  plot  evil. 

These  names  are  not  mere  accidental  names  of  God, 

As  a negro  may  be  called  Kafv.r  (white) ; 

They  are  names  derived  from  God’s  essential  attributes, 
Not  mere  vain  titles  of  the  First  Cause. 

For  if  so,  they  would  be  only  empty  pleasantries, 

Like  calling  the  deaf  a hearer  and  the  blind  a seer, 

Or  a name  like  “ impudent  ” for  a modest  man. 

Or  “ beautiful  ” for  an  ugly  negro. 

Or  such  a title  as  “ Haji  ” for  a new-born  boy. 

Or  that  of  “ Ghdzi  ” applied  to  a noble  idler. 

If  such  titles  as  these  are  used  in  praising  persons 
Who  do  not  possess  the  qualities  implied,  ’tis  wrong ; 
’Twould  be  jesting  or  mockery  or  madness. 

“ God  is  exalted  above”  what  is  said  by  evil  men.2 

I knew  you  before  I met  you  face  to  face, 

That  you  had  a fair  face  but  an  evil  heart ; 

Yea,  I knew  you  before  I saw  you, 

That  you  were  rooted  in  iniquity  through  guile. 

When  my  eye  is  red  owing  to  inflammation, 

I know  ’tis  so  from  the  pain,  though  I see  it  not. 

1 “ My  servant  draws  nigh  to  me  and  by  me  he  sees,  hears,  talks 
by  pious  deeds  till  I love  him,  and,  walks,  and  feels.” — Hadis. 
when  I love  him,  I am  his  eye,  his  3 Cp.  Koran  svi.  3. 
ear,  his  tongue,  his  foot,  his  hand, 


176 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  iv. 


You  regarded  me  as  a lamb  without  a shepherd ; 

You  fancied  that  I had  no  guardian. 

Lovers  have  suffered  chastisement  for  this  cause, 

That  they  have  cast  ill-timed  looks  at  fair  ones. 

They  have  supposed  the  fawn  to  have  no  shepherd, 

They  have  supposed  the  captive  to  be  going  a begging ; 
Till  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  an  arrow  pierces  them, 
Saying,  “ I am  her  guardian  ; look  not  at  her  rashly  ! ” 
What ! am  I less  than  a lamb  or  a fallow  deer, 

That  I should  have  none  to  shepherd  me  ? 

Nay,  I have  a Guardian  worthy  of  dominion, 

Who  knows  every  wind  that  blows  upon  me. 

He  is  aware  whether  that  wind  is  chill  or  mild, 

He  is  not  ignorant  nor  absent,  0 mean  one. 

The  carnal  soul  is  made  by  God  blind  and  deaf ; 

I saw  with  the  heart’s  eye  your  blindness  afar  off. 

For  this  cause  I never  incjuired  about  you  for  eight  years, 
Because  I saw  you  filled  with  ignorance  and  duplicity. 
Why  indeed  should  I inquire  about  one  in  the  furnace, 
Who  is  bowed  down  with  reproach,  like  yourself  ? 

Comparison  of  the  world  to  a lath  stove , and  of  piety 
to  the  hot  bath  (p.  307). 

The  lust  of  the  world  is  like  a bath  stove, 

Whereby  the  bath  of  piety  is  heated ; 

But  the  lot  of  the  pious  is  purity  from  the  stove’s  filth, 
Because  they  dwell  iu  the  bath  and  in  cleanliness. 

The  rich  are  as  those  that  carry  dung 
To  heat  the  furnace  of  the  bath  withal. 

God  has  instilled  into  them  cupidity, 

That  the  bath  may  be  warmed  and  pleasant. 

Quit  this  stove  and  push  on  into  the  bath  ; 

Know  quitting  the  stove  to  be  the  bath  itself. 

Whoso  is  in  the  stove-room  is  as  a servant 
To  him  who  is  temperate  and  prudent. 

Your  lust  is  as  fire  in  the  world, 


177 


story  ii.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 

With  a hundred  greedy  mouths  wide  open. 

In  the  judgment  of  reason  this  gold  is  foul  dung, 
Although,  like  dung,  it  serves  to  kindle  the  fire. 

Whoso  was  born  in  the  stove-room  and  never  saw  purity, 
The  smell  of  sweet  musk  is  disagreeable  to  him. 

In  illustration  of  this,  a story  follows  of  a tanner  who 
was  accustomed  to  bad  smells  in  the  course  of  his  trade, 
and  who  was  half  killed  by  the  smell  of  musk  in  the  bazaar 
of  the  perfumers,  but  was  cured  by  the  accustomed  smell 
of  dung. 

Story  II.  The  Building  of  the  “ Most  Remote  Temple  ” at 
Jerusalem  (p.  3 1 1 ). 

King  David  purposed  to  build  a temple  at  Jerusalem, 
but  was  forbidden  to  do  so  by  a divine  voice,  because  he 
had  been  a man  of  blood.  But,  it  was  added,  the  work 
should  be  accomplished  by  his  son  Solomon,  and  Solomon’s 
work  would  be  reckoned  the  same  as  David’s,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  texts,  “The  faithful  are  brethren,”  and 
“ Sages  are  as  a single  soul,”  and  “ We  make  no  distinction 
between  any  of  the  apostles.”  1 Accordingly,  when  Solo- 
mon came  to  the  throne,  he  set  about  the  building,  which 
was  attended  with  many  miraculous  circumstances,  e.g., 
the  stones  in  the  quarry  crying  out  and  moving  of  them- 
selves to  the  site  of  the  temple.  Bilqis,  Queen  of  Saba, 
sent  Solomon  a present  of  forty  camels  laden  with  ingots 
of  gold  ; but  Solomon  would  not  receive  them,  and  sent 
her  messengers  back  with  a letter  commanding  her  to 
abandon  the  worship  of  the  sun  and  embrace  Islam.2  At 
the  same  time  he  charged  the  messengers  to  report  fully 
to  the  Queen  all  they  had  seen  in  his  kingdom,  and  to 
urge  her  to  comply  with  his  commands  to  renounce  her 
sovereignty  and  present  herself  in  all  humility  at  his 

1 Koran  xlix.  10  ; xxxi.  27  ; ii.  2 The  letter  is  given  in  Koran 
285.  xxvii.  30. 


M 


i~8 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  IV. 


court.  As  she  delayed  to  come,  Solomon  again  sent  to 
assure  her  that  he  had  no  sinister  views  regarding  her, 
and  desired  her  attendance  at  his  court  solely  for  her  own 
spiritual  benefit.  At  last  Bilqis  renounced  her  royal  state 
and  cast  away  all  care  for  worldly  things,  and,  impelled  by 
earnest  desire  to  learn  the  true  faith,  presented  herself  at 
the  court  of  King  Solomon.  Then  Solomon  commanded 
that  the  throne  of  Bilqis  should  be  brought  from  Saba, 
and  an  ’Afrit  offered  to  fetch  it,  but  Asaf,  the  vizier, 
anticipated  him.1  Afterwards  Solomon  proceeded  with 
the  building  of  the  temple,  wherein  he  was  assisted  by 
devils  and  fairies.  Then  God  tried  Solomon  by  placing 
on  his  throne  a false  counterpart  of  him.  His  miracle- 
working  signet  was  stolen  by  a devil  named  Sakhar,  who 
thereupon  assumed  his  shape  and  personated  him  for  forty 
days,  during  which  Solomon  had  to  wander  about  and  beg 
bis  bread.  After  this  he  regained  his  throne,  and  having 
completed  the  temple,  began  to  worship  therein.  One  day 
he  observed  that  a tuft  of  coarse  grass  had  sprung  up  in  a 
corner  of  the  temple,  and  he  was  greatly  distressed  because 
he  thought  it  portended  the  ruin  of  the  building,  but  he 
took  comfort  from  the  thought  that  while  he  himself  lived 
the  temple  would  not  be  allowed  to  fall  into  ruin  ; so  long 
as  he  lived,  at  least,  he  would  root  up  all  evil  weeds  that 
threatened  the  safety  of  the  temple,  as  well  the  temple 
built  with  hands  as  the  spiritual  temple  in  his  heart. 

In  the  course  of  this  story,  which  is  told  at  great  length, 
there  occur  anecdotes  of  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
’Othman,  of  the  miracles  of  ’Abd  Ullah  Moghrabi,  and 
others,  of  which  abstracts  are  given  below. 

1 All  these  legends  are  derived  from  Koran  xxi.,  xxvii.,  and  xxxviii. 
See  Sale’s  notes. 


STORY  II.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 


179 


Though  philosophers  cull  man  the  microcosm,  divines  call 
him  the  macrocosm  (p.  314). 

I11  outward  form  thou  art  the  microcosm, 

But  in  reality  the  macrocosm.1 2 

Seemingly  the  bough  is  the  cause  of  the  fruit, - 

But  really  the  bough  exists  because  of  the  fruit. 

Were  he  not  impelled  by  desire  of  fruit, 

The  gardener  would  never  have  planted  the  tree. 
Therefore  in  reality  the  tree  is  born  from  the  fruit, 
Though  seemingly  the  fruit  is  born  from  the  tree. 

For  this  cause  Mustafa  said,  “ Adam  and  all  prophets 
Are  my  followers  and  gather  under  my  standard. 

Though  to  outward  view  I am  a son  of  Adam, 

In  reality  I am  his  first  forefather, 

Because  the  angels  worshipped  him  for  my  sake, 

And  ’twas  in  my  footsteps  that  he  ascended  to  heaven. 
Hence  in  reality  our  first  parent  was  my  offspring, 

As  in  reality  the  tree  is  born  of  its  own  fruit.” 

What  is  first  in  thought  is  last  in  act. 

Thought  is  the  special  attribute  of  the  Eternal. 

This  product  goes  forth  from  heaven  very  swiftly, 

And  comes  to  us  like  a caravan.3 


’Tis  not  a long  road  that  this  caravan  travels ; 

Can  the  desert  stop  the  deliverer  ? 

The  heart  travels  to  the  Ka’ba  every  moment, 

And  by  divine  grace  the  body  acquires  the  same  power. 
Distance  and  nearness  affect  only  the  body, 

What  do  they  matter  in  the  place  where  God  is  ? 

When  God  changes  the  body, 

It  regards  not  parasangs  or  miles. 

Even  on  earth  there  is  hope  of  approaching  God. 

Press  on  like  a lover,  and  cease  vain  words,  0 son ! 


1 This  refers  to  Muhammad,  who 
is  at  once  the  “ First  reason”  (Logos) 
and  the  “ Perfect  man,”  who  is  “ the 
sum  of  all  the  worlds  ” and  the 
“Great  world.”  See  Notices  et 
Extraits  des  MSS.,  x.  p.  86. 

2 He  was  also  the  final  cause  of 

creation.  “ If  it  had  not  been  for 


thee,  the  worlds  had  not  been 
created.” 

3  Muhammad  as  the  Logos  is  the 
channel  by  which  divine  grace  is 
conveyed  to  man.  The  “ change  of 
the  body  ” i3  an  allusion  to  the 
ascension  of  Muhammad  (Mi  raj). 


180  THE  M A SNA  VI.  [book  iv. 

In  the  course  of  his  rebuke  to  the  messengers  of  Bilqis 
for  bringing  him  mere  gold  instead  of  a humble  heart, 
Solomon  tells  the  story  of  the  druggist  who  used  soap- 
stone or  Persian  earth  for  a weight.  A man  came  to 
him  to  buy  sugar-candy,  and  as  he  had  no  weight  at  hand, 
he  used  a lump  of  soapstone  instead ; but,  while  his  back 
was  turned,  the  purchaser  stole  a bit  of  the  soapstone. 
The  druggist,  though  he  saw  what  he  was  doing,  would 
not  interrupt  him,  for  he  knew  that  the  more  soapstone 
the  purchaser  stole,  the  less  sugar-candy  he  would  get. 
In  like  manner  the  more  men  grasp  at  the  transitory 
wealth  of  this  world,  the  less  they  will  obtain  of  the  stable 
wealth  of  the  world  to  come. 

Part  of  Solomons  message  to  Bilqis  (p.  317). 

Report  to  Bilqis  what  marvels  ye  have  seen, 

And  what  plains  of  gold  belong  to  Solomon ; 

How  ye  beheld  forty  mansions  faced  with  gold, 

And  how  ye  were  ashamed  of  your  presents ; 

That  she  may  know  Solomon  is  not  covetous  of  gold  ; 

He  has  received  gold  from  the  Creator  of  gold. 

The  moment  he  wills  it,  every  grain  of  earth’s  dust 
Is  changed  into  gold  and  precious  pearls. 

For  this  cause,  0 thou  that  lovest  gold, 

On  the  last  day  God  will  make  earth  all  silver  (white).1 

Quit  thy  wealth,  even  if  it  be  the  realm  of  Saba ; 

Thou  wilt  find  many  realms  not  of  this  earth. 

What  thou  callest  a throne  is  only  a prison ; 

Thou  thinkest  thyself  enthroned,  but  art  outside  the  door. 
Thou  hast  no  sovereignty  over  thine  own  passions, 

How  canst  thou  sway  good  and  evil  ? 

Thy  hair  turns  white  without  thy  concurrence, 

Take  shame  to  thyself  for  thy  evil  passions. 

Whoso  bows  his  head  to  the  King  of  kings 

Will  receive  a hundred  kingdoms  not  of  this  world ; 

1 A Hadis. 


STORY  II.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  181 

But  the  delight  of  bowing  down  before  God 
Will  seem  sweeter  to  thee  than  countless  glories. 

An  anecdote  follows  of  a darvesh  who  saw  in  a dream 
some  saints,  and  prayed  them  to  provide  him  with  his 
daily  bread  without  obliging  him  to  mix  in  worldly  affairs. 
The  saints  ordered  him  to  go  to  the  forest,  and  there  he 
found  that  all  the  wild  fruits  were  rendered  fit  for  his 
food.  Having  a few  grains  of  gold  by  him,  which  he  had 
gained  by  worldly  labour  before  this  miracle  had  been 
wrought  for  him,  he  was  about  to  give  them  to  a poor 
woodcutter  who  was  passing  that  way.  But  this  wood- 
cutter was  a saint,  and  at  once  read  his  thoughts,  and  to 
show,  like  Solomon,  that  he  had  no  need  of  worldly  wealth, 
he  offered  up  a short  prayer  to  God,  and  straightway  his 
bundle  of  firewood  was  changed  into  gold,  and  immediately 
after,  at  another  prayer,  was  changed  back  again  into 
firewood. 

Ibrahim  bin  Adham  and  his  fondness  for  music 1 (p.  3 1 8). 

Haste  to  renounce  thy  kingdom,  like  Ibrahim  bin  Adham. 
To  obtain,  like  him,  the  kingdom  of  eternity. 

At  night  that  king  would  sleep  on  his  throne, 

With  his  guards  of  state  surrounding  his  palace, 

Though  he  needed  no  guards  for  the  purpose 
Of  warding  off  robbers  and  vagabonds  ; 

For  he  who  is  a just  king  knows  everything, 

And  is  safe  from  harm  and  his  mind  is  at  peace. 

Justice  is  the  guardian  of  his  steps, 

Xot  guards  with  drums  round  his  palace. 

His  purpose  in  having  this  band  of  music  was  this, 

To  recall  to  his  longing  heart  that  call  of  God.2 
The  wailing  of  horn  and  the  thunder  of  drum 

1 Music  is  much  used  in  the  reli-  Dervishes,”  by  J.  P.  Brown,  p. 
gious  sendees  of  the  “Maulavi”  197. 

order  of  Darveshes,  founded  by  2 “ Am  not  I your  lord  ?”  (Koran 
Jalalu-d-Din  Rumi.  See  “The  vii.  171). 


182 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  IV. 


Resemble  in  some  sort  that  dread  “trumpet  blast.”1 
Wherefore  philosophers  say  that  we  have  learned 
Our  melodies  from  those  of  the  revolving  spheres. 

The  song  of  the  spheres  in  their  revolutions 
Is  what  men  sing  with  lute  and  voice. 

The  faithful  hold  that  the  sweet  influences  of  heaven 
Can  make  even  harsh  voices  melodious. 

As  we  are  all  members  of  Adam, 

We  have  heard  these  melodies  in  Paradise ; 

Though  earth  and  water  have  cast  their  veil  upon  us, 
We  retain  faint  reminiscences  of  those  heavenly  songs. 
But  while  we  are  thus  shrouded  by  gross  earthly  veils, 
How  can  the  tones  of  the  dancing  spheres  reach  us  ? 2 

Hence  it  is  that  listening  to  music  is  lovers’  food, 
Because  it  recalls  to  them  their  primal  union  with  God. 
The  inward  feelings  of  the  mind  acquire  strength, 

Nay,  are  shown  outwardly,  under  influence  of  music. 
The  fire  of  love  burns  hotter  under  stimulus  of  music, 
Even  as  occurred  in  the  case  of  the  nut-gatherer. 


Ibrahim’s  abdication  (p.  318). 

Once  that  noble  Ibrahim,  as  he  sat  on  his  throne, 

Heard  a clamour  and  noise  of  cries  on  the  roof, 

Also  heavy  footsteps  on  the  roof  of  his  palace. 

He  said  to  himself,  “ Whose  heavy  feet  are  those  ? ” 

He  shouted  from  his  window,  “ Who  goes  there  ? 

’Tis  no  man’s  step ; surely  ’tis  a fairy.” 

His  guards,  filled  with  confusion,  bowed  their  heads, 
Saying,  “It  is  we  who  are  going  the  rounds  in  search.” 
He  said,  “ What  seek  ye  ? ” They  said,  “ Our  camels.” 3 
He  said,  “ Who  ever  searched  for  camels  on  a housetop  ? ” 

1 “ When  there  shall  be  a trumpet  spheres”  was  as  well  known  to 

blast,  that  shall  be  a dreadful  day  ” Persian  poets  as  to  Shakespeare. 
(Koran  lxxiv.  7).  3 This  is  an  allusion  to  the  story 

2 The  so-called  Pythagorean  doc-  of  the  “Believer’s  lost  camel.”  Book 
trine  of  the  “ Harmony  of  the  ii.,  Story  xi. 


183 


STORY  II.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 

They  said,  “ We  follow  thy  example, 

Who  seekest  union  with  God  while  sitting  on  a throne.'’ 
This  was  all,  and  no  man  ever  saw  him  again. 

Just  as  fairies  are  invisible  to  men. 

His  substance  was  hid  from  men,  though  he  was  with  them, 
For  what  can  men  see  save  the  outward  aspect  and  dress  ? 
As  he  was  removed  from  the  sight  of  friends  and  strangers. 
His  fame  was  noised  abroad  like  that  of  the  ’Anka. 

For  the  soul  of  every  bird  that  reaches  Mount  Qaf 
Confers  glory  on  the  whole  family  of  birds.1 

The  anecdote  of  the  nut-gatherer,  introduced  in  the 
above  story,  is  only  another  version  of  the  story  of  the 
thirsty  man  who  threw  bricks  into  the  water  in  order  to 
hear  the  sound  of  the  splash.2  This  is  followed  by  an 
address  to  Husamu-’d-Din,  in  which  the  poet  says  that 
his  object  in  writing  the  Masnavi  was  to  elicit  words  from 
Husam,  as  his  words  were  the  same  as  the  words  of  God. 


Solomon’s  preaching  to  the  people  of  Bilqis.  The  art  of 
preaching  (p.  321). 

1 tell  the  tale  of  Saba  in  lovers’  style. 

When  the  breeze  bore  Solomon’s  words  to  that  garden. 
’Twas  as  when  bodies  meet  souls  at  the  resurrection. 

Or  as  when  boys  return  to  their  loved  homes. 

The  people  of  love  are  hidden  amongst  the  peoples, 

As  a liberal  man  encompassed  by  the  contumely  of  the 
base. 

Souls  are  disgraced  by  union  with  bodies, 

Bodies  are  ennobled  by  union  with  souls. 

Arise,  0 lovers ; this  sweet  draught  is  yours  ; 

Ye  are  they  that  endure  ; eternal  life  is  yours. 

Ho ! ye  that  seek,  arise  and  take  your  fill  of  love. 

Snuff  up  that  perfume  of  Yusuf ! 

1 This  alludes  to  the  well-known  poem  of  Faridu-d-Din  ’Attar,  the 
“Mantiqu-t-Tair.”  2 Book  ii.,  Story  v. 


i84  THE  MASNAVI.  [book  iv. 

Approach,  0 Solomon,  thou  that  knowest  birds’  language, 
Sound  the  note  of  every  bird  that  draws  near.1 
When  God  sent  thee  to  the  birds, 

He  taught  thee  first  the  notes  of  all  the  birds. 

To  the  predestinarian  bird  talk  predestination, 

To  the  bird  with  broken  wings  preach  patience, 

To  the  patient  well-doer  preach  comfort  and  pardon, 

To  the  spiritual  ’Anka  relate  the  glories  of  Mount  Qaf, 

To  the  pigeon  preach  avoidance  of  the  hawk, 

To  the  lordly  hawk  mercy  and  self-control ; 

As  for  the  bat,  who  lingers  helpless  in  the  dark, 

Acquaint  him  with  the  society  of  the  light ; 

To  the  fighting  partridge  teach  peace, 

To  the  cock  the  signs  of  dawning  day. 

In  this  way  deal  with  all  from  the  hoopoo  to  the  eagle. 

Then  follows  a long  account  of  various  miraculous  inci- 
dents that  occurred  during  the  childhood  of  the  Prophet, — 
how  he  was  suckled  by  Halima,  a woman  of  the  Bani 
Sa’ad, — how  the  idols  bowed  down  before  him, — how  he 
strayed  from  home, — how  his  grandfather,  Abd  ul  Muttalib, 
prayed  to  God  that  he  might  be  found, — and  how  he  was 
at  last  found  in  the  Ka’ba  and  restored  to  his  grandfather. 
Next  a story  is  told  of  a cur  who  attacked  a blind  man 
(Kiir)  in  the  street,  rather  than  hunt  the  wild  ass  ( Gor ) on 
the  mountains  in  company  with  well-bred  dogs.  This  is 
an  illustration  of  the  thesis  that  mankind  is  prone  to  run 
after  mean  earthly  objects,  and  to  neglect  aspiring  to  the 
spiritual  world. 

Solomon's  admonitions  to  Bilqis  (p.  32  7). 

Ah ! Bilqis,  bestir  thyself  now  the  market  is  thronged, 
Flee  away  from  them  whose  traffic  is  unprofitable  ! 2 
Arise,  Bilqis,  now  that  thou  hast  the  choice, 

1 Koran  xxvii.  16.  There  is  a bought  error  at  the  price  of  guidance, 
Hadis,  “Speak  to  men  according  to  but  their  traffic  hath  not  been  gain- 
the  amount  of  their  intelligence.”  ful”  (Koran  ii.  15). 

2 “These  are  they  who  have 


STORY  II.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 


185 


Before  that  death  lays  his  heavy  hand  upon  thee. 

Soon  will  death  pull  thy  ears,  as  if  thou  wert 
A thief  dragged  before  the  officer  in  deadly  fear. 

How  Ion"  wilt  thou  steal  shoes  from  asses  of  the  world  ? 

D 

If  thou  must  steal,  steal  pearls  of  the  world  above. 

Thy  sisters  have  found  the  kingdom  that  lasts  for  ever, 
Thou  cleavest  to  the  kingdom  of  darkness. 

Happy  is  he  who  quits  this  earthly  kingdom, 

Which  sooner  or  later  death  will  destroy. 

Arise  ! 0 Bilqis,  at  least  behold 

The  kingdom  of  the  roval  kings  of  the  faith ! 

In  reality  they  are  seated  in  the  garden  of  the  spirit, 
Though  to  outward  view  they  are  guiding  their  friends. 
That  spiritual  garden  accompanies  them  everywhere, 

Vet  it  is  never  revealed  to  the  eyes  of  the  people, — 

Its  fruits  ever  asking  to  be  gathered, 

Its  fount  of  life  welling  up  to  be  drunk  ! 

Go  round  about  the  heavens  without  aid  of  wings, 

Like  sun  or  full  moon  or  new  moon ! 

Thou  wilt  move  as  a spirit  without  aid  of  feet, 

Thou  wilt  eat  sweet  viands  without  mouth  or  palate. 

No  crocodile  of  sorrow  will  attack  thy  bark, 

Nor  will  sad  thoughts  of  death  assail  thee. 

Thou  wilt  be  at  once  queen,  army,  and  throne, 

Endued  with  good  fortune  and  fortune  itself.1 
Thou  sayest  thou  art  a great  queen  of  good  fortune  ; 

But  thy  fortune  is  apart  from  thee  and  will  soon  fade, 
Thou  wilt  be  left  like  a beggar  without  sustenance  ; 
Therefore,  0 chosen  one,  become  thy  own  fortune. 

When,  0 spiritual  one,  thou  hast  become  thy  own  fortune, 
Then,  being  thyself  thy  fortune,  thou  wilt  never  lose  it. 
How,  0 fortunate  one,  canst  thou  ever  lose  thyself, 

When  thy  real  self  is  thy  treasure  and  thy  kingdom  ? 

1 Union  attained,  all  duality  and  non).  (See  Gulshan  i Raz,  11.  835 
separate  phenomenal  existence  are  and  845.) 
swallowed  up  in  the  One  (Xoume- 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  iv. 


1 86 


How  men  and  demons  helped  Solomon  in  building  the 
temple  (p.  327). 

When  Solomon  laid  the  foundations  of  the  temple, 

Men  and  Jinns  came  and  lent  their  aid  to  the  work, 
Some  of  them  with  good-will,  and  others  on  compulsion, 
Even  as  worshippers  follow  the  road  of  devotion. 

Men  are  as  demons,  and  lust  of  wealth  their  chain, 
Which  drags  them  forth  to  toil  in  shop  and  field. 

This  chain  is  made  of  their  fears  and  anxieties. 

Deem  not  that  these  men  have  no  chain  upon  them. 

It  causes  them  to  engage  in  labour  and  the  chase, 

It  forces  them  to  toil  in  mines  and  on  the  sea, 

It  urges  them  towards  good  and  towards  evil. 

God  saith,  “ On  their  necks  is  a rope  of  palm  fibre,”  1 
And  “ Verily  on  their  necks  have  we  placed  ropes,”  2 
“We  make  this  rope  out  of  their  own  dispositions ; 
There  is  none  either  impure  or  intelligent, 

But  we  have  fastened  his  work  about  his  neck.”3 
Thy  lust  is  even  as  fire  burning  in  thy  evil  deeds ; 

The  black  coal  of  these  deeds  is  lighted  by  the  fire ; 

The  blackness  of  the  coal  is  first  hidden  by  the  fire, 

But,  when  it  is  burnt,  the  blackness  is  made  visible. 


The  building  of  the  prophets  was  without  lust, 

And  accordingly  its  splendour  ever  increased. 

Yea,  many  are  the  noble  temples  they  have  raised, 
Though  all  were  not  named  “The  Most  Remote  Temple.” 
The  Ka’ba,  whose  renown  waxes  greater  every  moment, 
Owed  its  foundation  to  the  piety  of  Abraham. 

Its  glory  is  not  derived  from  stones  and  mortar, 

But  from  being  built  without  lust  or  strife. 

Neither  are  the  prophets’  writings  like  other  writings ; 

1 Koran  iii.  5.  him  a book,  which  shall  be  shown  to 

2 Koran  xxxvi.  7.  him  wide  open.  Read  thy  book  ; 

3 “And  every  man’s  work  have  there  needeth  none  but  thyself  to 
we  fastened  about  his  neck,  and  on  make  out  an  account  against  thee 
the  last  day  will  we  bring  forth  to  that  day  ” (Koran  xvii.  14.) 


i»7 


story  ii.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 

Nor  their  temples,  nor  their  works,  nor  their  families  ; 

Nor  their  manners,  nor  their  wrath,  nor  their  chastise- 
ments ; 

Nor  their  dreams,  nor  their  reason,  nor  their  words. 

Each  one  of  them  is  endued  with  a different  glory, 

Each  soul’s  bird  winged  with  different  feathers. 

Ho ! pious  ones,  build  the  lively  temple  of  the  heart, 

That  the  Divine  Solomon  may  be  seen,  and  peace  be  upon 
you ! 

And  if  your  demons  and  fairies  be  recalcitrant, 

Your  good  angels  must  place  collars  on  their  necks. 

If  your  demons  go  astray  through  guile  and  fraud. 
Chastisement  must  overtake  them  swift  as  lightning. 

Be  like  Solomon,  so  that  your  demons 
May  dig  stones  for  your  spiritual  edifice. 

Be  like  Solomon,  free  from  evil  thoughts  and  guile, 

So  that  carnal  demons  and  Jinns  maybe  submissive  to  you. 
Your  heart  is  as  Solomon’s  signet;  take  good  care 
That  it  falls  not  a prey  to  demons. 

For  then  demons  will  rule  over  you  as  over  Solomon. 
Guard  then  your  signet  from  the  demons,  and  be  at  peace. 

Then  follows  a story  of  a poet  who  recited  a panegyric 
in  honour  of  a liberal  king.  The  king  commanded  that 
he  should  receive  one  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  but  the 
vazir.  named  Abu-’l-Hasan,  gave  him  ten  thousand.  The 
poet  went  to  his  home  well  contented,  but  after  some  years 
fell  into  poverty,  and  naturally  bethought  him  of  the 
generous  king  and  his  vazir,  who  had  before  assisted  him. 
Sibawayh,  the  grammarian  of  Shiraz,  says  "Allah”  is 
derived  from  “Alah”  (fleeing  for  refuge),  and  thus  we 
see  all  creatures,  and  even  the  elements  themselves,  ever 
looking  to  Allah  to  sustain  them  in  existence.  The  poet, 
therefore,  again  presented  himself  to  the  king  with  a new 
panegyric,  and  the  king,  on  hearing  it,  commanded  as 
before  that  a thousand  pieces  of  gold  should  be  given  him. 
But  the  new  vazir,  who  was  also  named  Abu-’l-Hasan, 


1 88 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  IV. 


persuaded  the  king  that  the  exchequer  could  not  afford 
this  large  outlay,  and  kept  the  poet  waiting  so  long  for 
his  money,  that  at  last  he  was  glad  to  get  away  with  only 
one  hundred  pieces  of  gold.  These  two  vazirs  recall  Asaf, 
the  good  vazir  of  King  Solomon,  who  deserves  the  title 
“ Light  upon  light,” 1 and  Haman,  the  evil  vazir  of 
Pharaoh,  who  turned  his  heart  against  Moses,  and  brought 
many  plagues  upon  the  kingdom  of  Egypt. 


Hovj  all  creatures  cry  to  God  for  sustenance  (p.  329). 

Yea,  all  the  fish  in  the  seas, 

And  all  feathered  fowl  in  the  air  above, 

All  elephants,  wolves,  and  lions  of  the  forest, 

All  dragons  and  snakes,  and  even  little  ants, 

Yea,  even  air,  water,  earth,  and  fire, 

Draw  their  sustenance  from  Him,  both  winter  and  summer. 
Every  moment  this  heaven  cries  to  Him,  saying, 

“ 0 Lord,  quit  not  Thy  hold  of  me  for  a moment ! 

The  pillar  of  my  being  is  Thy  aid  and  protection ; 

The  whole  is  folded  up  in  that  right  hand  of  Thine.”  2 
And  earth  cries,  “0  keep  me  fixed  and  steadfast, 

Thou  who  hast  placed  me  on  the  top  of  waters ! ” 

All  of  them  are  waiting  and  expecting  His  aid, 

All  have  learned  of  Him  to  represent  their  needs. 

Every  prophet  extols  this  prescription, 

“ Seek  ye  help  with  patience  and  with  prayer.”3 
Ho  ! seek  aid  of  Him,  not  of  another  than  Him, 

Seek  water  in  the  ocean,  not  in  a dried-up  channel. 

The  next  anecdote  is  that  of  the  raven  who  taught  Cain 
the  art  of  digging  graves  and  burying  corpses,  as  told  in 
Koran  v.  34.  This  is  designed  to  illustrate  the  thesis  that 
unaided  human  reason  can  discover  no  new  truth,  unless 
inspired  by  Divine  wisdom,  of  which  the  prophets,  and 
especially  “ Universal  Reason,”  or  the  Prophet  Muhammed, 

1 Koran  xxiv.  35.  s Koran  xxxix.  67.  3 Koran  ii.  148. 


story  II.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  189 

are  the  channels.  Thus  physicians  and  herbalists  have 
derived  their  knowledge  of  the  virtues  of  plants  from 
the  instructions  originally  given  by  King  Solomon  when 
he  classified  the  plants  that  grew  in  the  court  of  the 
temple.  The  inner  eye  sees  more  than  is  visible  to  the 
sight  of  the  vulgar.  To  illustrate  this,  an  anecdote  is 
told  of  a Sufi  who  had  accompanied  his  friends  to  a 
beautiful  garden,  but  instead  of  looking  about  and  enjoying 
the  fragrance  of  the  flowers  and  fruits,  sat  with  his  head 
sunk  on  his  breast  in  Sufi  fashion.  His  friends  said  to 
him,  in  the  words  of  the  Koran,  “ Look  at  the  signs  of 
God’s  mercy,  how  after  its  death  He  cjuickeneth  the 
earth  ! ’M  He  answered  them  that  these  signs  were  far 
more  plainly  visible  to  him  in  his  heart  than  in  the 
outward  creation,  which  was  merely  as  it  were  a blurred 
reflection  from  the  spiritual  creation  enshrined  in  his 
heart.  For  God  says,  “ The  life  of  the  world  is  naught 
but  a cheating  fruition.”2  In  other  words,  “ Nature  con- 
ceals God,  but  the  supernatural  in  man  reveals  Him.”3 


On  cleansing  the  inward  temple  of  the  heart  from  self-conceit 
and  reliance  on  carnal  reason  (p.  333). 

When  the  body  bows  in  worship,  the  heart  is  a temple, 
And  where  there  is  a temple,  there  bad  friends  are  weeds. 
When  a liking  for  bad  friends  grows  up  in  you, 

Flee  from  them,  and  avoid  converse  with  them. 

Root  up  those  weeds,  for,  if  they  attain  full  growth, 

They  will  subvert  you  and  your  temple  together. 

O beloved,  this  weed  is  deviation  from  the  “ right  way,” 
You  crawl  crookedly,  like  infants  unable  to  walk. 

Fear  not  to  acknowledge  your  ignorance  and  guilt, 

That  the  Heavenly  Waster  may  not  withhold  instruction. 

1 Koran  xxx.  49.  but  by  reason  of  the  supernatural 

2 Koran  iii.  182.  in  man,  which  alone  reveals  him 

3 “But  is  it  unreasonable  to  confess  and  proves  him  to  exist  ?”  (Jacobi, 
that  we  believe  in  God,  not  by  reason  quoted  in  Sir  W.  Hamilton’s  Lec- 
of  the  nature  which  conceals  him,  tures  on  Metaphysics,  vol.  i.  p.  40). 


190 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  IV. 


When  you  say,  “ I am  ignorant;  0 teach  me,” 

Such  open  confession  is  better  than  false  pride. 

0 ingenuous  one,  learn  of  our  father  Adam, 

"Who  said  of  yore,  “ 0 Lord,  we  have  dealt  unjustly.”1 
He  made  no  vain  excuses  and  prevaricated  not, 

Nor  did  he  raise  the  standard  of  guile  and  craft. 

On  the  other  hand,  Iblis  raised  arguments,  saying, 

“ I used  to  be  honourable ; Thou  hast  disgraced  me. 

My  stain  is  owing  to  Thee  ; Thou  art  my  dyer ; 

Thou  hast  caused  my  sin  and  transgression.” 

Read  the  text,  “ Lord,  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  err,”2 
That  you  plead  not  compulsion,  and  so  err  (like  Iblis). 
How  long  will  you  climb  into  that  tree  of  compulsion  ? 
How  long  cast  out  of  sight  your  own  freewill  ? 

How  long,  like  Iblis  and  his  evil  crew, 

Throw  the  blame  of  your  own  sins  upon  God  ? 

How  were  you  compelled  to  sin  when  you  took  such 
pleasure 

And  pride  in  engaging  in  those  sins  ? 

Does  a man  feel  such  pleasure  in  acting  on  compulsion 
As  he  exhibits  when  committing  wrong  actions? 

You  battle  like  twenty  men  against  those 
Who  give  you  good  advice  not  to  do  that  act ; 

Saying  to  them,  “This  is  right  and  quite  proper; 

Who  dissuades  me  from  it  but  men  of  no  account?” 

Does  a man  acting  on  compulsion  talk  like  this  ? 

Or  rather  one  who  is  erring  of  his  own  freewill  ? 
Whatever  your  lust  wills  you  deem  freewill, 

What  reason  demands  you  deem  compulsion. 

Whoso  is  wise  and  prudent  knows  this, 

That  cleverness  comes  from  Iblis,  but  love  from  Adam. 
Cleverness  is  like  Canaan’s  swimming  in  the  ocean  ; 3 
’Tis  no  l’iver  or  small  stream ; ’tis  the  mighty  ocean. 

Away  with  this  attempt  to  swim  ; quit  self-conceit. 

1 Koran  vii.  22.  is  the  burden  of  many  of  ’Omar 

8 He  said,  ‘‘That  thou  hast  caused  Khayyam’s  poems, 
me  to  err"  (Koran  vii.  15).  This  3 Koran  xi.  43.  See  Book  iii., 

Story  v. 


STORY  II.]  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 


191 


’Twill  not  save  you  ; Canaan  was  drowned  at  last. 

Love  is  as  the  ark  appointed  for  the  righteous, 

Which  annuls  the  danger  and  provides  a way  of  escape. 
Sell  your  cleverness  and  buy  bewilderment ; 

Cleverness  is  mere  opinion,  bewilderment  intuition. 
Make  sacrifice  of  your  reason  at  the  feet  of  Mustafa, 
Say,  “God  sufficeth  me,  for  He  is  sufficient  for  me.”1 
Do  not,  like  Canaan,  hang  back  from  entering  the  ark. 
Being  puffed  up  with  vain  conceit  of  cleverness. 

He  said,  “ I will  escape  to  the  top  of  high  mountains. 
Why  need  I put  myself  under  obligation  to  Noah  ? ” 


Ah  ! better  for  him  had  he  never  learnt  swimming ! 

Then  he  would  have  based  his  hopes  on  Noah’s  ark. 
Would  he  had  been  ignorant  of  craft  as  a babe ! 

Then  like  a babe  he  would  have  clung  to  his  mother. 
Would  he  had  been  less  full  of  borrowed  knowledge  ! 
Then  he  would  have  accepted  inspired  knowledge  from  his 
father. 


When,  with  inspiration  at  hand,  you  seek  book-learning, 
Your  heart,  as  if  inspired,  loads  you  with  reproach.2 
Traditional  knowledge,  when  inspiration  is  available, 

Is  like  making  ablutions  with  sand  when  water  is  near. 
Make  yourself  ignorant,  be  submissive,  and  then 
You  will  obtain  release  from  your  ignorance. 

For  this  cause,  0 son,  the  Prince  of  men  declared, 

“The  majority  of  those  in  Paradise  are  the  foolish.”3 
Cleverness  is  as  a wind  raising  storms  of  pride  ; 

Be  foolish,  so  that  your  heart  may  be  at  peace ; 

Not  with  the  folly  that  doubles  itself  by  vain  babble, 

But  with  that  arising  from  bewilderment  at  “ The  Truth.” 
Those  Egyptian  women  who  cut  their  hands  were  fools 4 — 


1 Koran  ix.  130. 

2 Knowledge  of  “ The  Truth ” is  to 
be  attained  not  by  exercise  of  the 
reason,  but  by  illumination  from 
above.  When  the  light  of  “ The 
Truth”  is  revealed,  reason  is  drowned 
in  bewilderment.  Gulshan  i Raz, 
Answer  ii. 


3 Frey  tag,  Arabum  Proverbia, 
vol.  ii.  p.  898  ; I Cor.  iv.  10. 

4 “They  were  amazed  at  Yusuf, 
and  cut  their  hands,  and  said.  ‘ God 
keep  us,  this  is  no  man  ! ’ ” (Koran 
xii.  31). 


192 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


Fools  as  to  their  hands,  being  amazed  at  Yusuf’s  face. 
Make  sacrifice  of  reason  to  love  of  “ The  Friend,” 

True  reason  is  to  be  found  where  He  is. 

Men  of  wisdom  direct  their  reason  heavenwards, 

Vain  babblers  halt  on  earth  where  no  “ Friend  ” is. 

If  through  bewilderment  your  reason  quits  your  head, 
Every  hair  of  your  head  becomes  true  reason  and  a head. 

Then  follow  commentaries  on  the  text,  “ 0 thou  enfolded 
in  thy  mantle  ; ” 1 on  the  proverb,  “ Silence  is  the  proper 
answer  to  a fool ; ” on  the  Hadis,  “ God  created  the  angels 
with  reason  and  the  brutes  with  lust,  but  man  he  created 
with  both  reason  and  lust ; the  man  who  follows  reason  is 
higher  than  the  angels,  and  the  man  who  follows  lust  is 
lower  than  the  brutes ; ” on  the  text,  “ As  to  those  in  whose 
heart  is  a disease,  it  will  add  doubt  to  their  doubt,  and 
they  shall  die  infidels,”  2 and  a comparison  of  the  struggle 
between  reason  and  lust  to  that  between  Majnun  and  his 
she-camel,  he  trying  to  get  to  his  mistress  Laila,  and  the 
she-camel  trying  to  run  home  to  her  foal. 

Story  III.  The  Youth  who  wrote  a letter  of  complaint 
about  his  rations  to  the  King  (p.  337). 

A certain  youth  in  the  service  of  a great  king  was 
dissatisfied  with  his  rations,  so  he  went  to  the  cook  and 
reproached  him  with  dishonouring  his  master  by  his 
stinginess.  The  youth  would  not  listen  to  his  excuses, 
but  wrote  off  an  angry  letter  of  complaint  to  the  king,  in 
terms  of  outward  compliment  and  respect,  but  betraying 
an  angry  spirit.  On  receiving  this  letter,  the  king 
observed  that  it  contained  only  complaints  about  meat 
and  drink,  and  evinced  no  aspirations  after  spiritual  food, 
and  therefore  needed  no  answer,  as  “ the  proper  answer  to 
a fool  is  silence.”3  When  the  youth  received  no  answer 

1 Koran  lxxiii.  1.  3 SeeFreytag,  Arabum  Proverbia, 

2 Koran  ix.  126.  i.  551,  for  a parallel. 


>93 


story  hi.]  THE  YOUTH  AND  HIS  RATIONS. 

to  his  letter,  he  was  much  surprised,  and  threw  the  blame 
on  the  cook  and  on  the  messeuger,  ignoring  the  fact  that 
the  folly  of  his  own  letter  was  the  real  reason  of  its  being 
left  unanswered.  He  wrote  in  all  five  letters,  but  the 
king  persisted  in  his  refusal  to  reply,  saying  that  fools 
are  enemies  to  God  and  man,  and  that  he  who  has  any 
dealings  with  a fool  fouls  his  own  nest.  Fools  only 
regard  material  meat  and  drink,  whereas  the  food  of  the 
wise  is  the  light  of  God,  as  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  “ I 
pass  the  night  in  the  presence  of  my  Lord,  who  giveth  me 
meat  and  drink,”1  and  again,  “ Fasting  is  the  food  of  God,” 
i.c.,  the  means  by  which  spiritual  food  is  obtained.2 


Explanation  of  the  text,  “And  Moses  conceived  a secret  fear 
within  him.  IVe  said  ‘Fear  not,  for  thou  shalt  be 
uppermost  ( over  Pharaoh’s  magicians)  ’ ” 3 (p.  340). 

Moses  said,  “ Their  sorcery  confuses  them  ; 

What  can  I do?  These  people  have  no  discernment.” 

God  said,  “I  will  generate  in  them  discernment ; 

I will  make  their  undiscerning  reason  to  see  clearly. 
Although  like  a sea  their  waves  cast  up  foam, 

0 Moses,  thou  shalt  prevail  over  them  ; fear  not ! ” 

The  magicians  gloried  in  their  own  achievements, 

But  when  Moses’  rod  became  a snake,  they  were  con- 
founded. 

Whoso  boasts  of  his  beauty  and  wit, 

The  stone  of  death  is  a touchstone  of  his  boasts. 

Sorcerv  fades  away,  but  the  miracles  of  Moses  advance. 
Both  resemble  a dish  falling  from  a roof : 

The  noise  of  the  dish  of  sorcery  leaves  only  cursing ; 

The  noise  of  the  dish  of  faith  leaves  edification. 

When  the  touchstone  is  hidden  from  the  sight  of  all, 

Then  come  forth  to  battle  and  boast,  0 base  coin ! 

Tour  time  for  boasting  is  when  the  touchstone  is  away ; 

1 Koran  xxvi.  79.  2 See  Mishkat  ul  Masabih,  vol.  i.  p.  463. 

3 Koran  xx.  70. 


194 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


The  hand  of  power  will  soon  crush  your  exaltation. 

The  base  coin  says  to  me  with  pride  every  moment, 

“ 0 pure  gold,  how  am  I inferior  to  you  ? ” 

The  gold  replies,  “ Even  so,  0 comrade  ; 

But  the  touchstone  is  at  hand  ; be  ready  to  meet  it ! ” 
Death  of  the  body  is  a benefaction  to  the  spiritual ; 

What  damage  has  pure  gold  to  dread  from  the  shears  ? 

If  the  base  coin  were  of  itself  far-sighted, 

It  would  reveal  at  first  the  blackness  it  shows  at  last. 

If  it  had  showed  its  blackness  at  first  on  its  face, 

’Twould  have  avoided  hypocrisy  now  and  misery  at  last. 
’Twould  have  sought  the  alchemy  of  grace  in  due  time  ; 
Its  reason  would  have  prevailed  over  its  hypocrisy. 

If  it  became  broken-hearted  through  its  own  bad  state, 
’Twould  look  onward  to  Him  that  heals  the  broken ; 
’Twould  look  to  the  result  and  be  broken-hearted, 

And  be  made  whole  at  once  by  the  Healer  of  broken  hearts. 
Divine  grace  places  base  copper  in  the  alembic, 
Adulterated  gold  is  excluded  from  that  favour. 

0 adulterated  gold,  boast  not,  but  see  clearly 
That  thy  Purchaser  is  not  blind  to  thy  defects. 

The  light  of  the  judgment-day  will  enlighten  his  eyes 
And  destroy  the  glamour  of  thy  fascinations. 

Behold  them  that  have  regard  to  the  ultimate  result, 

And  also  the  regrets  of  foolish  souls  and  them  envy. 
Behold  them  that  regard  only  the  present, 

And  cast  away  from  their  minds  thoughts  of  evil  to  come. 


Story  IV.  Bayazul  and  his  impious  sayings  when 
beside  himself  (p.  343). 

The  holy  saint  Bayazid  before  his  death  predicted  the 
birth  of  the  saint  Abu-’l-Hasan  Khirqani,  and  specified  all 
the  peculiar  qualities  which  would  be  seen  in  him.  And 
after  his  death  it  came  to  pass  as  he  had  predicted,  and 
Abu-’l-Hasan,  hearing  what  Bayazid  had  said,  used  to  fre- 
quent his  tomb.  One  day  he  visited  the  tomb  as  usual, 


'95 


story  iv.]  BAYAZID  AND  HIS  SAYINGS. 

and  found  it  covered  with  snow,  and  a voice  was  heard 
saying,  “ The  world  is  fleeting  as  snow.  I am  calling  thee  ! 
Follow  me  and  forsake  the  world  ! 

Row  Bayazid  cried  out,  when  beside  himself,  “ Glory  be  to 
me!"  and  hoiv  his  disciples  were  scandalised  at  this 
saying,  and  how  Bayazid  ansivered  them  (p.  349). 

Once  that  famous  saint  Bayazid  came  to  his  disciples, 
Saying,  “ Lo,  I myself  am  God  Almighty.” 

That  man  of  spiritual  gifts  being  visibly  beside  himself, 
Said,  “ There  is  no  God  beside  me  ; worship  me  ! ” 

Next  morning,  when  his  ecstatic  state  had  passed, 

They  said,  “You  said  so  and  so,  which  was  impious.” 

He  answered,  “ If  I do  so  again, 

Straightway  slay  me  with  your  knives ! 

God  is  independent  of  me  ; I am  in  the  body. 

If  I say  that  again  you  must  kill  me ! ” 

When  that  holy  person  had  given  this  injunction, 

Each  of  his  disciples  made  ready  his  knife. 

Again  that  overflowing  cup  became  beside  himself, 

And  his  recent  injunctions  passed  from  his  mind. 
Alienation  came  upon  him,  reason  went  astray, 

The  dawn  shone  forth  and  his  lamp  paled  at  its  light. 

Reason  is  like  an  officer  when  the  king  appears ; 

The  officer  then  loses  his  power  and  hides  himself. 

Reason  is  God’s  shadow  ; God  is  the  sun. 

What  power  has  the  shadow  before  the  sun  ? 

When  a man  is  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit 
The  qualities  of  humanity  are  lost  in  him. 

Whatever  he  says  is  really  said  by  that  spirit, 

Though  it  seems  to  proceed  from  the  man’s  mouth. 

When  the  spirit  has  this  rule  and  dominance  over  him, 
The  agent  is  the  property  of  the  spirit,  and  not  himself ; 
His  self  is  departed,  and  he  has  become  the  spirit. 

The  Turk  without  instruction  speaks  Arabic  ; 1 

1 Alluding  to  the  story  of  the  Kurd,  Syad  Abu-’l-Wafa,  Book  i.  Story 
xiv.  note. 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


196 

When  he  returns  to  himself  he  knows  not  a word  of  it. 
Seeing  God  is  lord  of  spirits  and  of  man, 

How  can  He  be  inferior  in  power  to  a spirit  ? 

When  the  eagle  of  alienation  from  self  took  wing, 
Bayazid  began  to  utter  similar  speeches ; 

The  torrent  of  madness  bore  away  his  reason, 

And  he  spoke  more  impiously  than  before. 

“ Within  my  vesture  is  naught  but  God, 

Whether  you  seek  Him  on  earth  or  in  heaven.” 

His  disciples  all  became  mad  with  horror, 

And  struck  with  their  knives  at  his  holy  body. 

Each  one,  like  the  assassins  of  Kardkoh,1 
Without  fear  aimed  at  the  body  of  his  chief. 

Each  who  aimed  at  the  body  of  the  Shaikh, — 

His  stroke  was  reversed  and  wounded  the  striker. 

No  stroke  took  effect  on  that  man  of  spiritual  gifts, 

But  the  disciples  were  wounded  and  drowned  in  blood. 
Each  who  had  aimed  a blow  at  his  neck, 

Saw  his  own  throat  cut,  and  gave  up  the  ghost ; 

He  who  had  struck  at  his  breast 

Had  cleft  his  own  breast  and  killed  himself. 

They  who  knew  better  that  lord  of  felicity, 

Who  had  not  courage  enough  to  strike  a deadly  blow, 
Their  half-knowledge  held  their  hands  back  ; 

They  saved  their  lives  but  slightly  wounded  themselves. 
On  the  morrow  those  disciples,  diminished  in  number, 
Raised  lamentations  in  their  houses. 

They  went  to  Bayazid,  thousands  of  men  and  women, 
Saying,  “ The  two  worlds  are  hidden  in  thy  vestui’e ; 

If  this  body  of  thine  were  that  of  a man, 

It  would  have  perished  of  sword-wounds,  like  a man’s. 
The  man  in  his  senses  fought  with  him  beside  himself, 
And  thrust  the  thorn  into  his  own  eyes.” 

Ah  ! you  who  smite  with  your  sword  him  beside  himself, 
You  smite  yourself  therewith  ; Beware  ! 

1 A kill  in  Mazandaran. 


story  iv.]  BAYAZID  AND  HIS  SAYINGS. 


197 


For  he  that  is  beside  himself  is  annihilated  and  safe  ; 

Yea,  he  dwells  in  security  for  ever. 

His  form  is  vanished,  he  is  a mere  mirror ; 

Nothing  is  seen  in  him  but  the  reflection  of  another. 

If  you  spit  at  it,  you  spit  at  your  own  face, 

And  if  you  hit  that  mirror,  you  hit  yourself  ; 

And  if  you  see  an  ugly  face  in  it,  ’tis  your  own, 

And  if  you  see  an  ’Isa  there,  you  are  its  mother  Mary. 

He  is  neither  this  nor  that — he  is  void  of  form  ; 

'Tis  your  own  form  which  is  reflected  back  to  you. 

But  when  the  discourse  reaches  this  point,  lip  is  closed  ; 
When  pen  reaches  this  point,  it  is  split  in  twain. 

Close  then  your  lips,  though  eloquence  be  possible. 

Keep  silence  ; God  knows  the  right  way  ! 

This  is  followed  by  an  anecdote  of  the  Prophet  appoint- 
ing an  Hudhaili  youth  to  be  captain  of  a band  of  warriors 
amongst  whom  were  many  older  and  more  experienced 
soldiers,  and  of  the  objections  made  to  this  appointment, 
and  of  the  Prophet’s  answer  to  the  objectors. 


Why  the  Prophet  promoted  the  youth  to  command  his 
seniors  (p.  351 ). 

The  Prophet  said,  “ 0 ye  who  regard  only  the  outside, 
Regard  him  not  as  a youth  void  of  talents. 

Many  are  they  whose  beards  are  black  yet  are  old, 
Many  too  have  white  beards  and  hearts  like  pitch. 

1 have  made  trial  of  his  wisdom  often  and  often, 

And  that  youth  has  shown  himself  old  in  his  actions. 
Age  consists  in  maturity  of  wisdom,  0 son, 

Not  in  whiteness  of  the  beard  and  hair. 

How  can  any  one  be  older  than  Iblis  ? 

Yet,  if  he  has  no  wisdom,  he  is  naught. 

Suppose  him  an  infant,  if  he  has  ’Isa’s  soul, 

He  is  pure  from  pride  and  from  carnal  lust. 

That  whiteness  of  the  hair  is  a sign  of  maturity 


98 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


Only  to  purblind  eyes  whose  vision  is  limited. 

Since  that  shortsighted  one  judges  by  outward  signs, 

He  seeks  the  right  course  by  outward  tokens. 

For  his  sake  I said  that  if  ye  desire  counsel 
Ye  ought  to  make  choice  of  an  old  man. 

He  who  has  emerged  from  the  veil  of  blind  belief 
Beholds  by  the  light  of  God  all  things  that  exist. 

His  pure  light,  without  signs  or  tokens, 

Cleaves  for  him  the  rind  and  brings  him  to  the  kernel. 

To  the  regarder  of  externals,  genuine  and  base  coin  are 
alike. 

How  can  he  know  what  is  inside  the  basket  ? 

Many  are  the  gold  coins  made  black  with  smoke, 

So  that  they  elude  the  clutches  of  greedy  thieves ; 

Many  are  the  copper  coins  gilded  with  gold, 

And  sold  as  gold  to  men  of  slender  wits. 

We  who  regard  the  inside  of  the  world, 

We  look  at  the  heart  and  disregard  the  outside. 

The  judges  who  confine  their  view  to  externals 
And  base  their  decisions  on  outward  appearances, 

As  they  testify  and  make  outward  show  of  faith,1 
Are  straightway  dubbed  faithful  by  men  of  externals. 
Therefore  these  heretics,  who  regard  only  externals, 

Have  secretly  shed  the  blood  of  many  true  believers. 
Strive  then  to  be  old  in  wisdom  and  in  faith, 

That,  like  Universal  Reason,  you  may  see  within.” - 

Story  Y.  The  Three  Fishes  (p.  352). 

This  story,  which  is  taken  from  the  book  of  Kalila  and 
Datnnah,3  is  as  follows.  There  was  in  a secluded  place 
a lake,  which  was  fed  by  a running  stream,  and  in  this 
lake  were  three  fishes,  one  very  wise,  the  second  half  wise, 

1 “And  some  there  are  who  say,  to  Muhammad.  “The  first  thing 

‘ We  believe  in  God  and  in  the  last  which  God  created  was  (’aql)  Reason 
day,’  yet  they  are  not  believers”  or  Intelligence,”  i.c.,  the  Logos. 
(Koran  ii.  7).  3 Anvar  i Suhaili,  Book  i.  Story 

2 Universal  Reason,  here  applied  15. 


STORY  v.]  THE  THREE  FISHES.  199 

and  the  third  foolish.  One  day  some  fishermen  passed 
by  that  lake,  and  having  espied  the  fish,  hastened  home  to 
fetch  their  nets.  The  fish  also  saw  the  fishermen  and 
were  sorely  disquieted.  The  very  wise  fish,  without  a 
minute’s  delay,  quitted  the  lake  and  took  refuge  in  the 
running  stream  which  communicated  with  it,  and  thus 
escaped  the  impending  danger.  The  half  wise  fish  delayed 
doing  anything  till  the  fishermen  actually  made  their 
appearance  with  their  nets.  He  then  floated  upon  the 
surface  of  the  water,  pretending  to  be  dead,  and  the 
fishermen  took  him  up  and  threw  him  into  the  stream,  and 
by  this  device  he  saved  his  life.  But  the  foolish  fish  did 
nothing  but  swim  wildly  about,  and  was  taken  and  killed 
by  the  fishermen. 

The  marks  of  the  wise  man,  of  the  half  wise,  and  of 
the  fool  (p.  351 ). 

The  wise  man  is  he  who  possesses  a torch  of  his  own ; 

He  is  the  guide  and  leader  of  the  caravan. 

That  leader  is  his  own  director  and  light ; 

That  illuminated  one  follows  his  own  lead. 

He  is  his  own  protector ; do  ye  also  seek  protection 
From  that  light  whereon  his  soul  is  nurtured. 

The  second,  he,  namely,  who  is  half  wise, 

Knows  the  wise  man  to  be  the  light  of  his  eyes. 

He  clings  to  the  wise  man  like  a blind  man  to  his  guide, 
So  as  to  become  possessed  of  the  wise  man’s  sight. 

But  the  fool,  who  has  no  particle  of  wisdom, 

Has  no  wisdom  of  his  own,  and  quits  the  wise  man. 

He  knows  nothing  of  the  way,  great  or  small, 

And  is  ashamed  to  follow  the  footsteps  of  the  guide. 

He  wanders  into  the  boundless  desert, 

Sometimes  halting  and  despairing,  sometimes  running. 

He  has  no  lamp  wherewith  to  light  himself  on  his  way, 
Nor  half  a lamp  which  might  recognise  and  seek  light. 

He  lacks  wisdom,  so  as  to  boast  of  being  alive, 

And  also  half  wisdom,  so  as  to  assume  to  be  dead  ? 


200 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book.  IV. 


That  half  wise  one  became  as  one  utterly  dead 
In  order  to  rise  up  out  of  his  degradation. 

If  you  lack  perfect  wisdom,  make  yourself  as  dead 
Under  the  shadow  of  the  wise,  whose  words  give  life. 
The  fool  is  neither  alive  so  as  to  companion  with  ’Isa, 
Nor  yet  dead  so  as  to  feel  the  power  of  ’Isa’s  breath. 
His  blind  soul  wanders  in  every  direction, 

And  at  last  makes  a spring,  but  springs  not  upwards. 


The  counsels  of  the  bird  (p.  253). 

A man  captured  a bird  by  wiles  and  snares ; 

The  bird  said  to  him,  “ 0 noble  sir, 

In  your  time  you  have  eaten  many  oxen  and  sheep, 
And  likewise  sacrificed  many  camels ; 

You  have  never  become  satisfied  with  their  meat, 

So  you  will  not  be  satisfied  with  my  flesh. 

Let  me  go,  that  I may  give  you  three  counsels, 
Whence  you  will  see  whether  I am  wise  or  foolish. 

The  first  of  my  counsels  shall  be  given  on  your  wrist, 
The  second  on  your  well-plastered  roof, 

And  the  third  I will  give  you  from  the  top  of  a tree. 
On  hearing  all  three  you  will  deem  yourself  happy. 

As  regards  the  counsel  on  your  wrist,  ’tis  this, — 

‘ Believe  not  foolish  assertions  of  any  one  ! ’ ” 

When  he  had  spoken  this  counsel  on  his  wrist,  he  flew 
Up  to  the  top  of  the  roof,  entirely  free. 

Then  he  said,  “ Do  not  grieve  for  what  is  past ; 

When  a thing  is  done,  vex  not  yourself  about  it.” 

He  continued,  “Hidden  inside  this  body  of  mine 
Is  a precious  pearl,  ten  drachms  in  weight. 

That  jewel  of  right  belonged  to  you, 

Wealth  for  yourself  and  prosperity  for  your  children. 
You  have  lost  it,  as  it  was  not  fated  you  should  get  it, 
That  pearl  whose  like  can  nowhere  be  found.” 
Thereupon  the  man,  like  a womau  in  her  travail, 

Gave  vent  to  lamentations  and  weeping. 


MOSES  AND  PHARAOH. 


201 


STORY  VI. J 


The  bird  said  to  him,  “ Did  I not  counsel  you,  saying, 

‘ Beware  of  grieving  over  what  is  past  and  gone  ? 

When  ’tis  past  and  gone,  why  sorrow  for  it  ? 

Either  you  understood  not  my  counsel  or  are  deaf. 

The  second  counsel  I gave  you  was  this,  namely, 

‘ Be  not  misguided  enough  to  believe  foolish  assertions.’ 

O fool,  altogether  I do  not  weigh  three  drachms. 

Iiow  can  a pearl  of  ten  drachms  be  within  me  ? 

The  man  recovered  himself  and  said,  “Well  then, 

Tell  me  now  your  third  good  counsel ! ” 

The  bird  replied,  “ You  have  made  a fine  use  of  the  others, 
That  I should  waste  my  third  counsel  upon  you ! 

To  give  counsel  to  a sleepy  ignoramus 
Is  to  sow  seeds  upon  salt  land. 

Torn  garments  of  folly  and  ignorance  cannot  be  patched. 
0 counsellors,  waste  not  the  seed  of  counsel  on  them ! ” 


Story  VI.  Moses  and  Pharaoh  (p.  3 5 4).1 

Then  follows  a very  long  account  of  the  dealings  of 
Moses,  an  incarnation  of  true  reason,  with  Pharaoh,  the 
exponent  of  mere  opinion  or  illusion.  It  begins  with  a 
long  discussion  between  Moses  and  Pharaoh.  Moses  tells 
Pharaoh  that  both  of  them  alike  owe  their  bodies  to  earth 
and  their  souls  to  God,  and  that  God  is  their  only  lord. 
Pharaoh  replies  that  he  is  lord  of  Moses,  and  chides  Moses 
for  his  want  of  gratitude  to  himself  for  nurturing  him  in 
his  childhood.  Mcses  replies  that  he  recognises  no  lord 
but  God,  and  reminds  Pharaoh  how  he  had  tried  to  kill 
him  in  his  infancy.  Pharaoh  complains  that  he  is  made 
of  no  account  by  Moses,  and  Moses  retorts  that  in  order 
to  cultivate  a waste  field  it  is  necessary  to  break  up  the 
soil : and  in  order  to  make  a good  garment,  the  stuff  must 
first  be  cut  up ; and  in  order  to  make  bread,  the  wheat 
must  first  be  ground  in  the  mill,  and  so  on.  The  best 

1 This  story  is  an  expansion  of  Koran  xliii.  50  and  following  verses,  and 
of  Koran  xi. 


202 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  iv. 


return  he  can  make  to  Pharaoh  for  his  hospitality  to  him 
in  his  infancy  is  to  set  him  free  from  his  lust-engendered 
illusions,  like  a fish  from  the  fish-hook  which  has  caught 
him.  Pharaoh  then  twits  Moses  with  his  sorceries  in 
changing  his  staff  into  a sequent,  and  thereby  beguiling 
the  people.  Moses  replies  that  all  this  was  accomplished 
not  by  sorcery,  like  that  of  Pharaoh’s  own  magicians,  but 
by  the  power  of  God,  though  Pharaoh  could  not  see  it, 
owing  to  his  want  of  perception  of  divine  things.  The 
ear  and  the  nose  cannot  see  beautiful  objects,  but  only 
the  eye,  and  similarly  the  sensual  eye,  blinded  by  lust,  is 
impotent  to  behold  spiritual  truth.  On  the  other  hand, 
men  of  spiritual  insight,  whose  vision  is  purged  from  lust, 
become  as  it  were  all  eyes,  and  no  longer  see  double,  but 
only  the  One  sole  real  Being.  Man’s  body,  it  is  true,  is 
formed  of  earth,  but  by  discipline  and  contrition  it  may 
be  made  to  reflect  spiritual  verities,  even  as  coarse  and 
hard  iron  may  be  polished  into  a steel  mirror.  Pharaoh 
ought  to  cleanse  the  rust  of  evil-doing  from  his  soul,  and 
then  he  would  be  able  to  see  the  spiritual  truths  which 
Moses  was  displaying  before  him.  The  door  of  repentance 
is  always  open.  Moses  then  promised  that  if  Pharaoh 
would  obey  one  admonition  he  should  receive  in  return 
four  advantages.  Pharaoh  was  tempted  by  this  promise, 
and  asked  what  the  admonition  was.  Moses  answered 
that  it  was  this,  that  Pharaoh  should  confess  that  there  is 
no  God  except  the  One  Creator  of  all  things  in  heaven  and 
on  earth.  Pharaoh  then  prayed  him  to  expound  the  four 
advantages  he  had  promised,  saying  that  possibly  they 
might  cure  him  of  infidelity,  and  cause  him  to  become 
a vessel  of  mercy,  instead  of  one  of  wrath.  Moses  then 
explained  that  they  were  as  follows: — (i.)  Health.  (2.) 
Long  life,  ending  in  the  conviction  that  death  is  gain. 
Even  as  one  who  knows  of  a treasure  hid  in  a ruined 
house  pulls  down  the  house  to  find  that  treasure,  so  does 
the  wise  man,  full  of  years  aud  experience,  pull  down  the 
house  of  the  body  to  gain  the  treasure  of  eternal  life. 


story  vi.]  MOSES  AND  PHARAOH.  203 

The  tradition  “ I was  a hidden  treasure,”  See.,  bears  on  this 
matter.  (3.)  A better  kingdom  than  that  of  Egypt,  one 
of  peace  in  place  of  one  of  enmity  and  contention.  (4.) 
Perpetual  youth.  Pharaoh  then  proceeded  to  take  counsel 
with  his  wife,  Asiya,  whether  it  would  be  advisable  to 
quit  his  infidelity  and  believe  in  the  promises  of  Moses. 
Asiya,  being  a pious  woman  and  well  inclined  to  Moses, 
whom  she  had  nurtured  in  his  infancy,  urged  him  to  do 
so,  but  Pharaoh  said  he  would  first  consult  his  vazir 
Haman.  Asiya  had  a bad  opinion  of  Hainan,  whom  she 
knew  to  be  as  blind  to  spiritual  truths  as  Pharaoh  him- 
self, and  she  did  her  best  to  dissuade  Pharaoh  from 
consulting  him.  To  illustrate  Haman’s  spiritual  blind- 
ness, she  told  the  story  of  a royal  falcon  who  fell  into  the 
hands  of  an  ignorant  old  woman.  This  old  woman  knew 
nothing  of  the  virtues  of  a falcon,  and  was  displeased  at 
the  falcon’s  appearance,  and  said  to  it,  “ What  was  your 
mother  about  to  leave  your  claws  and  beak  so  long?” 
She  then  proceeded  to  trim  them  short,  according  to  her 
fancy,  and  of  course  spoiled  the  falcon  for  all  purposes  of 
falconry.  Pharaoh,  however,  would  not  be  diverted  from 
his  purpose  of  consulting  Haman,  and  Asiya  was  fain  to 
console  herself  with  the  reflection  that  like  always  herds 
with  like,  and  so  Pharaoh  must  needs  consort  with 
Haman,  who  was  in  so  many  respects  a duplicate  of 
himself.  To  illustrate  this  she  recalled  the  story  of  a 
woman  whose  infant  had  crawled  to  the  brink  of  a canal, 
where  it  persisted  in  remaining,  at  the  imminent  peril  of  its 
life,  despite  all  her  calls  and  entreaties.  In  her  distress 
she  asked  aid  of  ’Ali,  who  told  her  to  place  another  infant 
on  the  top  of  the  bank.  She  did  so,  and  her  own  infant, 
seeing  its  playfellow,  left  the  brink  of  its  own  accord  and 
came  to  join  its  fellow.  The  spirit  of  man  is  of  like  genus 
with  the  holy  prophets,  but  man’s  animal  lust  with  the 
demons.  And  as  things  of  like  nature  attract  one 
another,  so  unlike  things  repel  one  another.  Thus  it 
is  said  that  when  holy  men  pray  to  be  delivered  from 


204 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  IV. 


hell,  hell  also  pi-ays  that  they  may  be  kept  away  from  it. 
Pharaoh  then  proceeded  to  consult  Haman,  and  Haman, 
on  hearing  that  Moses  had  proposed  to  Pharaoh  to  humble 
himself  and  confess  the  supreme  lordship  of  Allah,  was 
indignant  and  rent  his  clothes,  saying,  “ Is  not  the  king- 
dom of  Egypt  thine  ? Art  thou  not  mightier  than  this 
despicable  fellow  ? 1 Who  is  he  to  degrade  Pharaoh  from 
his  ‘ supreme  lordship  ? ’ ” So  Pharaoh  listened  to  Haman 
and  refused  to  be  converted  to  the  true  faith.  Then 
Moses  was  much  discouraged,  but  he  was  consoled  by  a 
voice  from  heaven  assuring  him  that  he  was  well-beloved 
of  God,  because  in  spite  of  disappointments  and  through 
good  and  evil  he  clung  to  God. 


On  the  tradition,  “I  was  a hidden  treasure  and  1 desired 
to  he  lcnown,  and  I created  the  world  in  order  to  he 
known”  (p.  360). 


Destroy  your  house,  and  with  the  treasure  hidden  in  it 2 
You  will  be  able  to  build  thousands  of  houses. 

The  treasure  lies  under  it ; there  is  no  help  for  it ; 
Hesitate  not  to  pull  it  down  ; do  not  tarry ! 

For  with  the  coin  of  that  treasure 
A thousand  houses  can  be  built  without  labour. 

At  last  of  a surety  that  house  will  be  destroyed, 

And  the  divine  treasure  will  be  seen  beneath  it. 

But  ’twill  not  belong  to  you,  because  in  truth3 
That  prize  is  the  wages  for  destroying  the  house. 

When  one  has  not  done  the  work  he  gets  no  wmges; 
“Man  gets  nothing  he  has  not  worked  for.”4 5 
Then  you  will  bite  your  finger,  saying,  “Alas! 

That  bright  moon  was  hidden  under  a cloud. 


1 See  Koran  xliii.  50. 

2 Compare  the  Iladis,  “Die  before 

you  die,”  i.e.,  mortify  your  carnal 

desires,  and  you  will  find  spiritual 
treasure. 

5 The  Turkish  commentator  trans- 


lates ruh  by  Ilaqq  Yoluna,  “ for  the 
sake  of  truth,”  “in  the  way  of  truth.” 
The  Lucknow  commentator,  as 
usual,  shirks  the  difficulty. 

4 Koran  liii.  40. 


STORY  VI.] 


MOSES  AND  PHARAOH. 


205 


I did  not  do  what  they  told  me  for  my  good ; 

Now  house  and  treasure  are  lost  and  my  hand  is  empty.” 
You  have  taken  your  house  on  lease  or  hired  it ; 

’Tis  not  your  own  property  to  buy  and  sell. 

As  to  the  term  of  the  lease,  it  is  till  your  death  ; 

In  that  term  you  have  to  turn  it  to  use. 

If  before  the  end  of  the  term  of  the  lease 
You  omit  to  derive  profit  from  the  house, 

Then  the  owner  puts  you  out  of  it. 

And  pulls  it  down  himself  to  find  the  gold-mine. 

While  you  are  now  smiting  your  head  in  deep  regret, 
And  now  tearing  your  beard  to  think  of  your  folly. 
Saying,  “ Alas  ! that  house  belonged  to  me  ; 

I was  blind  and  did  not  derive  profit  from  it. 

Alas  ! the  wind  has  carried  off  my  dwelling 

For  ever  ! ‘ 0 misery  that  rests  on  slaves ! ’ 1 

In  that  house  of  mine  I saw  but  forms  and  pictures ; 

I was  enchanted  with  that  house  so  fleeting ! 

I was  ignorant  of  the  treasure  hidden  beneath  it, 
Otherwise  I would  have  grasped  an  axe  as  a perfume. 

Ah  ! if  I had  administered  the  justice  of  the  axe, 

I should  now  have  been  quit  of  sorrow. 

But  I fixed  my  gaze  on  outward  forms, 

Like  an  infant  I sported  with  playthings. 

Well  said  the  famous  Hakim  Sauai, 

‘ Thou  ai't  a child  ; thy  house  is  full  of  pictures.’ 

In  his  divine  poem  he  gives  this  advice, 

1 Sweep  away  the  dust  from  thy  house  ! ’ ” 


They  who  recognise  the  almighty  power  of  God  do  not  ask 
where  heaven  is  or  where  hell  is  (p.  366). 

“ 0 Pharaoh,  if  you  are  wise,  I show  you  mercy ; 

But  if  you  are  an  ass,  I give  you  the  stick  as  an  ass. 

So  I will  drive  you  out  of  your  stable, 

1 Koran  xxxvi.  29. 


THE  MASNA  VI. 


206 


[book  iv. 


Even  as  I make  your  head  and  ears  bleed  with  my  stick. 

In  this  stable  asses  and  men  alike 

Are  deprived  of  peace  by  your  oppressions. 

See ! I have  brought  a staff  for  the  purpose  of  correcting 
Every  ass  who  does  not  prove  tractable. 

It  turns  into  a serpent  in  vengeance  against  you, 

Because  you  have  become  a serpent  in  deed  and  character. 
You  are  an  evil  serpent,  swelled  to  the  size  of  a hill. 

Yet  look  at  the  Serpent  (constellation)  in  heaven. 

This  staff  is  a foretaste  to  you  of  hell, 

Saying,  ‘ Ho,  take  refuge  in  the  light ! 

Otherwise  you  will  fall  into  my  jaws, 

And  will  find  no  escape  from  my  clutches ! ’ 

This  staff  even  now  became  a serpent, 

So  that  you  need  not  ask,  ‘ Where  is  God’s  hell  ? ’ 

God  makes  a hell  wheresoever  He  wills ; 

He  makes  the  very  sky  a snare  and  trap  for  birds. 

He  produces  pains  and  aches  in  your  teeth, 

So  that  you  say,  ‘ ’Tis  a hell  and  serpent’s  bite.’ 

Or  again  He  makes  your  spittle  as  honey, 

So  that  you  say,  ‘ ’Tis  heaven  and  wine  of  Paradise.’ 

He  makes  sugar  to  grow  in  your  mouth, 

That  you  may  know  the  might  of  the  divine  decrees. 
Therefore,  bite  not  the  innocent  with  your  teeth  ; 

Bear  in  mind  the  divine  stroke  that  tarries  not.” 

God  made  the  Nile  blood  to  the  Egyptians, 

He  preserved  the  Israelites  from  the  peril, 

That  you  might  know  how  God  discerns 
Between  the  wise  and  the  foolish  wayfarers. 

The  Nile  learned  of  God  discernment 

When  it  let  the  ones  through  and  engulphed  the  others. 

God’s  mercy  made  the  Nile  wise, 

His  wrath  made  Cain  foolish. 

Of  His  mercy  He  created  wisdom  in  inanimate  things, 
And  of  His  wrath  He  deprived  the  wise  of  wisdom. 

Of  His  mercy  wisdom  accrued  to  inanimate  things, 

As  a chastisement  He  took  wisdom  from  the  wise. 


STORY  VI.] 


MOSES  AND  PHARAOH. 


207 


Here  at  His  command  wisdom  was  shed  down  like  rain, 
Whilst  there  wisdom  saw  His  wrath  and  tied  away. 

Clouds  and  sun,  and  moon  and  lofty  stars, 

All  come  and  go  in  obedience  to  His  ordinance ; 

No  one  of  them  comes  save  at  His  appointed  time ; 

It  lingers  not  behind  nor  anticipates  that  time. 

Whereas  you  understood  not  this  secret,  the  prophets 
Have  instilled  this  knowledge  into  stone  and  staff ; 

So  that  you  may  infer  that  other  inanimate  things 
Without  doubt  resemble  in  this  stones  and  staves. 

The  obedience  of  stone  and  staff  is  shown  to  you. 

And  informs  you  of  that  of  other  inanimate  things. 

They  cry,  “ We  are  all  aware  of  God  and  obey  Him ; 

We  are  not  destructive  by  mere  fortuitous  chance.” 

Thus  you  know  the  water  of  the  Nile  when  in  flood 
Made  distinction  between  the  Egyptians  and  the  Israelites. 
You  know  the  others  are  wise  as  earth,  who,  when  cleft, 
Knew  Qarun  and  swallowed  him  up  in  vengeance. 

Or  like  the  moon,  who  heard  the  command  and  hasted 
To  sever  itself  into  two  halves  in  the  sky.1 
Or  like  the  trees  and  stones,  which  in  all  places 
Were  seen  to  bow  down  at  the  feet  of  Mustafa. 

The  arguments  between  a Sunni  and  a Materialist 2 ( Dahri ) 
decided  by  the  arbitrament  of  fire  (p.  367). 

Last  night  a Sunni  said,  “The  world  is  transitory; 

The  heavens  will  pass  away  ; ‘ God  will  be  the  heir.’  ”3 
A philosopher  replied,  “ How  know  you  they  are  transi- 
tory ? 

How  knows  the  rain  the  transitory  nature  of  the  cloud  ? 
Are  you  not  a mere  mote  floating  in  the  sunbeams  ? 

How  know  you  that  the  sun  is  transitory  ? 

A mere  worm  buried  in  a dung-heap, 

1 Koran  liv.  1.  yun.  Schmolders,  Ecoles  Philoso- 

- Ghazzali  divides  the  ancient  phiques,  p.  29. 

Greek  philosophers  into  three  classes  3 Koran  xv.  23. 

— Dahriyun,  Tabayi’un,  and  Ilahi- 


208 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[BOOK  IV. 


How  can  it  know  the  origin  and  end  of  the  earth  ? 

In  blind  belief  you  have  accepted  this  from  your  father, 
And  through  folly  have  clung  to  it  ever  since. 

Tell  me  what  is  the  proof  of  its  transitoriness, 

Or  else  be  silent  and  indulge  not  in  idle  talk.” 

The  Sunni  said,  “ One  day  I saw  two  persons 
Engaged  in  argument  on  this  deep  question, — 

Yea,  in  dispute  and  controversy  and  argument. 

At  last  a crowd  was  gathered  round  them. 

I proceeded  towards  that  company 

To  inform  myself  of  the  subject  of  their  discourse. 

One  said,  ‘ This  sky  will  pass  away  ; 

Doubtless  this  building  had  a builder.’ 

The  other  said,  ‘ It  is  eternal  and  without  period  ; 

It  had  no  builder,  or  it  was  its  own  builder.’ 

The  first  said,  ‘ Do  you  then  deny  the  Creator, 

The  Bringer  of  dav  and  night,  the  Sustainer  of  men  ? ’ 
He  answered,  ‘ Without  proof  I will  not  listen 
To  what  you  say : ’tis  only  based  on  blind  belief. 

Go ! bring  proof  and  evidence,  for  never 
Will  I accept  this  statement  without  proof.’ 

H e answered,  ‘ The  proof  is  within  my  heart, 

Yea,  my  proofs  are  hidden  in  my  heart. 

From  weakness  of  vision  you  see  not  the  new  moon  ; 

If  I see  it,  be  not  angry  with  me  ! ’ 

Much  talk  followed,  and  the  people  were  perplexed 
About  the  origin  and  end  of  the  revolving  heavens. 

Then  the  first  said,  ‘ 0 friend,  within  me  is  a proof 
Which  assures  me  of  the  transitoriness  of  the  heavens. 

I hold  it  for  certain,  and  the  sign  of  certainty 
In  him  who  possesses  it  is  entering  into  fire. 

Know  this  proof  is  not  to  be  expressed  in  speech, 

Any  more  than  the  feeling  of  love  felt  by  lovers. 

The  secret  I labour  to  express  is  not  revealed 
Save  by  the  pallor  and  emaciation  of  my  face. 

When  the  tears  course  down  my  cheeks, 

They  are  a proof  of  the  beauty  and  grace  of  my  beloved.’ 


STORY  VII.]  THE  COURTIER  WHO  QUARRELLED.  209 


The  other  said,  “ I take  not  these  for  a proof, 

Though  they  may  be  a proof  to  common  people.” 

The  Sunni  said,  “ When  genuine  and  base  coin  boast, 
Saying,  ‘Thou  art  false,  I am  good  and  genuine,’ 

Fire  is  the  test  ultimately, 

When  the  two  rivals  are  cast  into  the  furnace.” 

Accordingly  both  of  them  entered  the  furnace, 

Both  leapt  into  the  fiery  flame  ; 

And  the  philosopher  was  burnt  to  ashes, 

But  the  God-fearing  Sunni  was  made  fairer  than  before. 

Story  VII.  The  Courtier  who  quarrelled  with  his  Friend 
for  saving  his  Life  (p.  369). 

A king  was  enraged  against  one  of  his  courtiers,  and 
drew  liis  sword  to  slay  him.  The  bystanders  were  all 
afraid  to  interfere,  with  the  exception  of  one  who  boldly 
threw  himself  at  the  king’s  feet  and  begged  him  to  spare 
the  offender.  The  king  at  once  stayed  his  hand,  and  laid 
down  his  sword,  saying,  “ As  you  have  interceded  for  him, 
I would  gladly  pardon  him,  even  if  he  had  acted  as  a very 
demon.  I cannot  refuse  your  entreaties,  because  they  are 
the  same  as  my  own.  In  reality,  it  is  not  you  who  make 
these  entreaties  for  him,  but  I who  make  them  through 
your  mouth.  I am  the  real  actor  in  this  matter,  you  are 
only  my  agent.  Remember  the  text,  4 You  shot  not  when 
you  shot ; ’ 1 you  are,  as  it  were,  the  foam,  and  I the  mighty 
ocean  beneath  it.  The  mercy  you  show  to  this  offender  is 
really  shown  by  me,  the  king.”  The  offender  was  accord- 
ingly released  and  went  his  way ; but,  strange  to  say,  he 
showed  no  gratitude  to  his  protector,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
omitted  to  greet  him  when  he  met  him,  and  in  other  ways 
refused  to  recognise  the  favour  he  had  received  from  him. 
This  behaviour  excited  remark,  and  people  questioned  him 
as  to  the  cause  of  his  ingratitude  to  his  benefactor.  He 

1 Koran  viii.  17. 


0 


210 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  iv. 


replied.  “ I had  offered  up  my  life  to  the  king  when  this 
man  intervened.  It  was  a moment  when,  according  to 
the  tradition,  ‘ I was  with  God  in  such  a manner  that 
neither  prophet  nor  angel  found  entrance  along  with  me,’ 1 
and  this  man  intruded  between  us.  I desired  no  mercy 
save  the  king’s  blows  ; I sought  no  shelter  save  the  king. 
If  the  king  had  cut  off  my  head  he  would  have  given  me 
eternal  life  in  return  for  it.  My  duty  is  to  sacrifice  my 
life ; it  is  the  king’s  prerogative  to  give  life.  The  night 
which  is  made  dark  as  pitch  by  the  king  scorns  the 
brightness  of  the  brightest  festal  day.  He  who  beholds 
the  king  is  exalted  above  all  thoughts  of  mercy  and 
vengeance.  Of  a man  raised  to  this  exalted  state  no 
description  is  possible  in  this  world,  for  he  is  hidden  in 
God,  and  words  like  ‘ mercy  ’ and  ‘ vengeance  ’ only  express 
men’s  partial  and  weak  views  of  the  matter.  It  is  true 
‘God  taught  Adam  the  names  of  all  things,’2  but  that 
means  the  real  qualities  of  things,  and  not  such  names 
as  ordinary  men  use,  clad  in  the  dress  of  human  speech. 
The  words  and  expressions  we  use  have  merely  a relative 
truth,  and  do  not  unfold  absolute  truth.” 

He  illustrates  this  by  the  reply  made  to  the  angel 
Gabriel  by  Abraham  when  he  was  cast  into  the  fire  by 
Nimrod.3  Gabriel  asked  him  if  he  could  assist  him,  and 
Abraham  answered,  “No!  I have  no  need  of  your  help.” 
When  one  has  attained  union  with  God  he  has  no  need  of 
intermediaries.  Prophets  and  apostles  are  needed  as  links 
to  connect  ordinary  men  with  God,  but  he  who  hears  the 
“ inner  voice  ” within  him  has  no  need  to  listen  to  outward 
words,  even  of  apostles.  Although  that  intercessor  is 
himself  dwelling  in  God,  yet  my  state  is  higher  and  more 
lovely  than  his.  Though  he  is  God’s  agent,  yet  I desire 
not  his  intercession  to  save  me  from  evil  sent  me  by  God, 
for  evil  at  God’s  hand  seems  to  me  good.  What  seems 
mercy  and  kindness  to  the  vulgar  seems  wrath  and  ven- 

1 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  120.  3 See  Koran  xxi.  68,  and  the  Com- 

2 Koran  ii.  29.  inentators  thereon. 


STORY  VII.]  THE  COURTIER  WHO  QUARRELLED.  211 

geance  to  God-intoxicated  saints.  God’s  severity  and 
chastisements  serve  to  exalt  his  saints,  though  they  make 
the  vulgar  more  ungodly  than  before,  even  as  the  water 
of  the  Nile  was  pure  water  to  the  Israelites,  but  blood 
to  the  Egyptians. 


Moses  asks  the  Almighty,  “ Why  hast  Thou  made  men  to 
destroy  them  ? 1 ” (p.  371 ). 

Moses  said,  “ 0 Lord  of  the  day  of  account, 

Thou  makest  forms;  wherefore,  then.destroyest  Thou  them  ? 
Thou  makest  charming  forms,  both  men  and  women ; 
Wherefore,  then,  dost  Thou  lay  them  waste  r'  ” 

God  answered,  “ I know  that  this  query  of  thine 
Proceeds  not  from  negation  or  vain  curiosity. 

Otherwise  I should  chastise  and  punish  thee ; 

Yea,  I should  rebuke  thee  for  this  question. 

But  thou  seekest  to  discover  in  my  actions 
The  ruling  principle  and  the  eternal  mystery, 

In  order  to  inform  the  people  thereof, 

And  to  make  ‘ ripe  ’ every  ‘ raw  ’ person. 

Yea,  0 messenger,  thou  questionest  me  that  I may  reveal 
My  ways  to  the  people,  though  thou  knowest  them. 

O Moses,  go  and  sow  seed  in  the  ground 
In  order  to  do  justice  to  this  question.” 

When  Moses  had  sowed  and  his  seed  had  grown  up, 

He  took  a sickle  and  reaped  the  com, 

And  then  a divine  voice  reached  his  ears  : — 

“ Why  hast  thou  sown  and  nurtured  the  corn, 

And  then  cut  it  down  directly  it  was  ripe  ? ” 

Moses  replied,  “ Lord,  I cut  it  and  lay  it  low 
Because  here  I have  grain  and  straw. 

Grain  is  out  of  place  in  the  straw-yard, 

And  straw  is  useless  in  the  wheat-barn. 

1 So  Job  x.  8 : “ Thy  hands  have  made  me,  yet  Thou  dost  destroy  me.” 


212 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


’Tis  wrong  to  mix  these  two, 

It  is  needful  to  sift  them  one  from  the  other.” 

God  said,  “From  whom  learnest  thou  this  knowledge 
Whereby  thou  hast  constructed  a threshing-floor  ? ” 

Moses  said,  “ 0 Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  discernment.” 
God  said,  “ Then  have  not  I also  discernment? 

Amongst  my  creatures  there  are  pure  spirits, 

And  also  dark  and  befouled  spirits. 

The  oyster-shells  are  not  all  of  the  same  value ; 

Some  contain  pearls,  and  others  black  stones. 

It  is  needful  to  discern  the  bad  from  the  good, 

Just  as  much  as  to  sift  wheat  from  straw. 

The  people  of  this  world  exist  in  order  to  manifest 
And  to  disclose  the  1 hidden  treasure.’ 

Read,  ‘ I was  a hidden  treasure,  and  desired  to  be  known  ; ’ 
Hide  not  the  hidden  treasure,  but  disclose  it. 

Your  true  treasure  is  hidden  under  a false  one, 

Just  as  butter  is  hidden  within  the  substance  of  milk. 

The  false  one  is  this  transitory  body  of  yours, 

The  true  one  your  divine  soul. 

Long  time  this  milk  is  exposed  to  view, 

And  the  soul’s  butter  is  hidden  and  of  no  account. 

Churn  your  milk  assiduously  with  knowledge, 

So  that  what  is  hidden  in  it  may  be  disclosed ; 

Because  this  mortal  is  the  guide  to  immortality, 

As  the  cries  of  revellers  indicate  the  cup-bearer.” 

Story  YIII.  The  Prince  who , after  having  been  beguiled 
by  a Courtesan , returned  to  his  True  Love  (p.  3 73). 

A certain  king  dreamed  that  his  dearly  beloved  son,  a 
youth  of  great  promise,  had  come  to  an  untimely  end. 
On  awaking  he  was  rejoiced  to  find  that  his  son  was  still 
alive ; but  he  reflected  that  an  accident  might  carry  him  off 
at  any  moment,  and  therefore  decided  to  marry  him  with- 
out delay,  in  order  that  the  succession  might  be  secured. 


STORY  VIII.]  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  COURTESAN.  213 

Accordingly  he  chose  the  daughter  of  a pious  Darvesh  as  a 
bride  for  his  soil,  and  made  preparations  for  the  wedding. 
But  his  wife  and  the  other  ladies  of  his  harem  did  not 
approve  of  the  match,  considering  it  below  the  dignity  of 
the  prince  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a beggar.  The  king 
rebuked  them,  saying  that  a Darvesh  who  had  renounced 
worldly  wealth  for  the  sake  of  God  was  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  an  ordinary  beggar,  and  insisted  on  the 
consummation  of  the  marriage.  After  the  marriage  the 
prince  refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with  his  bride, 
though  she  was  very  fair  to  look  on,  and  he  carried  on  an 
intrigue  with  an  ugly  old  woman  who  had  bewitched  him 
by  sorcery.  After  a year,  however,  the  king  found  some 
physicians  who  succeeded  in  breakiug  the  spell,  and  the 
prince  returned  to  his  senses,  and  his  eyes  were  opened  to 
the  superior  attractions  of  his  wife,  and  he  renounced  his 
ugly  paramour  and  fell  in  love  with  his  wife.  This  is  a 
parable,  the  true  wife  beiug  the  Deity,  the  old  paramour 
the  world,  and  the  physicians  the  prophets  and  saints. 
Another  illustration  is  a child  who  played  at  besieging  a 
mimic  fort  with  his  fellows,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  it 
and  keeping  the  others  out.  At  this  moment  God  “ be- 
stowed on  him  wisdom,  though  a child,”  1 and  it  became  to 
him  a day  “ when  a man  flees  from  his  brethren,”  2 and  he 
recognised  the  emptiness  of  this  idle  sport,  and  engaged 
in  the  pursuit  of  holiness  and  piety.  This  is  followed  by 
an  anecdote  of  a devotee  who  had  so  concentrated  his 
thoughts  on  things  above  that  he  was  utterly  careless  of 
all  earthly  troubles,  and  was  cheerful  and  rejoicing  even 
in  the  midst  of  a severe  famine. 

1 Koran  xix.  13.  2 Koran  lxxx.  34. 


214 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  IV. 


The  world  is  the  outward  form,  of  “ Universal  Reason " 
{Muhammad),  and  he  who  grieves  him,  must  expect 
trouble  in  the  world 1 (p.  377). 

The  whole  world  is  the  outward  form  of  Universal  Reason. 
For  it  is  the  father  of  all  creatures  of  reason. 

When  a man  acts  basely  towards  Universal  Reason, 

Its  form,  the  world,  shows  its  teeth  at  him. 

Be  loyal  to  this  father  and  renounce  disobedience, 

That  this  earthy  house  may  furnish  you  golden  carpets. 
Then  the  judgment-day  will  be  the  “ cash  of  your  state,” 
Earth  and  heavens  will  be  transfigured  before  you.2 
I am  ever  in  concord  with  this  father  of  ours, 

And  earth  ever  appears  to  me  as  a Paradise. 

Each  moment  a fresh  form,  a new  beauty, 

So  that  weariness  vanishes  at  these  ever-fresh  sights. 

I see  the  world  filled  with  blessings, — 

Fresh  waters  ever  welling  up  from  new  fountains. 

The  sound  of  those  waters  reaches  my  ears, 

My  brain  and  senses  are  intoxicated  therewith. 

Branches  of  trees  dancing  like  fair  damsels, 

Leaves  clapping  hands  like  singers. 

These  glories  are  a mirror  shining  through  a veil ; 

If  the  mirror  were  unveiled,  how  would  it  be  ? 

I tell  not  one  in  a thousand  of  them, 

Because  every  ear  is  stopped  with  doubt. 

To  men  of  illusions  these  tales  are  mere  good  tidings, 

But  men  of  knowledge  deem  them  not  tidings,  but  ready 
cash. 

This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  Ezra  or  ’Uzair  and 
his  sons.3  On  his  return  from  Babylon,  whither  he  had 
been  carried  captive  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  Ezra  beheld  the 
ruins  of  Jerusalem,  and  he  said,  “ How  shall  God  give  life 
to  this  city  after  it  hath  been  dead  ? ” And  God  caused 

1 “ Aql  i Kull,  Universal  Reason,  2 Koran  xiv.  49. 

or  the  Logos,  was  identified  with  the  3 This  story  comes  from  Koran 

prophet  Muhammad.”  ii.  261. 


215 


STORY  ix.]  THE  MULE  AND  THE  CAMEL. 

him  to  die  for  a hundred  years,  and  then  raised  him  again 
to  life,  and  said  to  him,  “How  long  hast  thou  waited?” 
He  said,  “I  have  waited  a day.  God  said,  “Nay,  thou 
hast  waited  a hundred  years.  Look  at  the  dead  bones  of 
thine  ass ; we  will  raise  them  and  clothe  them  with  tlesh.”  1 
Ezra  was  raised  from  the  dead  as  a young  man,  whereas 
his  sons  were  then,  of  course,  very  old  men.  They  met 
him,  and  asked  if  he  had  seen  their  father.  He  replied, 
“ I have  seen  him  ; he  is  coming.”  Some  of  them  rejoiced, 
considering  this  good  news ; but  others,  who  had  loved 
him  more  dearly,  knew  him  and  fainted  with  joy.  What 
was  mere  good  tidings  to  the  men  of  opinion  was  the 
“ ready  money  of  their  state  ” to  men  of  real  knowledge. 


Story  IX.  The  Mule  and  the  Camel  (p.  379). 

A mule  said  to  a camel,  “ How  is  it  that  I am  always 
stumbling  and  falling  down,  whilst  you  never  make  a false 
step  ? ” The  camel  replied,  “ My  eyes  are  always  directed 
upwards,  and  I see  a long  way  before  me,  while  your  eyes 
look  down,  and  you  see  only  what  is  immediately  under 
your  feet.”  The  mule  admitted  the  truth  of  the  camel’s 
statement,  and  besought  him  to  act  as  his  guide  in  future, 
and  the  camel  consented  to  do  so.  Just  so  partial  reason 
cannot  see  beyond  the  grave,  but  real  reason  looks  onward 
to  the  day  of  judgment,  and,  therefore,  is  enabled  to  steer 
a better  course  in  this  world.  For  this  cause,  men  having 
only  partial  reason  or  mere  opinion  of  their  own  ought 
to  follow  the  guidance  of  the  saints,  according  to  the  text, 
“ 0 believers,  enter  not  upon  any  affair  ere  God  and  his 
Apostle  lead  the  way.”  2 

Then  follows  another  anecdote  of  an  Egyptian  who 
asked  an  Israelite  to  draw  water  for  him  from  the  Nile, 
because  the  water  of  the  Nile  turned  to  blood  when  drawn 
by  an  Egyptian.  Afterwards  the  Egyptian  asked  the 

1 Cp.  Ezekiel  xxxvii.  2 Koran  xlix.  i. 


216 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  iv. 


Israelite  to  pray  for  him,  and  the  Israelite  admonished 
him  to  renounce  his  egotism  and  conceit  of  his  own  exist- 
ence, which  blinded  his  eyes  to  divine  verities.  In  illus- 
tration of  this  he  tells  the  same  story  of  an  adulterous 
woman,  which  is  known  as  the  “Merchant’s  Tale”  in 
Chaucer.  This  woman,  desiring  to  carry  on  an  intrigue 
with  her  paramour,  climbed  up  a pear-tree  to  gather  the 
fruit,  and  when  she  had  reached  the  top  she  looked  down, 
and  pretended  that  she  saw  her  husband  misconducting 
himself  with  another  woman.  The  husband  assured  her 
there  was  no  one  but  himself  there,  and  desired  her  to 
come  down  and  see  for  herself.  She  came  down  and  ad- 
mitted there  was  no  one  there.  Her  husband  then,  at 
her  request,  ascended  the  tree,  and  she  at  once  called  her 
paramour,  and  began  to  amuse  herself  with  him.  Her 
husband  saw  her  from  his  post  in  the  tree,  and  began  to 
abuse  her ; but  she  declared  there  was  no  man  with  her, 
and  that  the  pear-tree  made  her  husband  see  double,  just 
as  it  had  made  her  see  double  previously. 


The  evolution  of  man  (p.  385 ). 

First  he  appeared  in  the  class  of  inorganic  things,1 
Next  he  passed  therefrom  into  that  of  plants. 

For  years  he  lived  as  one  of  the  plants, 

Remembering  naught  of  his  inorganic  state  so  different ; 
And  when  he  passed  from  the  vegetive  to  the  animal  state 
He  had  no  remembrance  of  his  state  as  a plant, 

Except  the  inclination  he  felt  to  the  world  of  plants, 
Especially  at  the  time  of  spring  and  sweet  flowers. 

Like  the  inclination  of  infants  towards  their  mothers. 
Which  know  not  the  cause  of  their  inclination  to  the  breast, 
Or  the  excessive  inclination  of  young  disciples 
Towards  their  noble  and  illustrious  teachers. 

1 This  doctrine  is  not  transmigra-  Anima.”  The  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  317, 
tion  of  soul  (tanasukh),  but  evolution  teaches  this  evolution-doctrine,  but 
of  soul  based  on  Aristotle’s  “ De  condemns  tanasukh,  1.  106. 


STORY  IX.]  THE  MULE  AND  THE  CAMEL.  217 

The  disciple’s  partial  reason  comes  from  that  Reason, 

The  disciple’s  shadow  is  from  that  bough. 

When  the  shadows  in  the  disciples  cease, 

They  know  the  reason  of  their  attachment  to  the  teachers. 
For,  0 fortunate  one,  how  can  the  shadow  move, 

Unless  the  tree  that  casts  the  shadow  move  as  well  ? 
Again,  the  great  Creator,  as  you  know, 

Drew’  man  out  of  the  animal  into  the  human  state. 

Thus  man  passed  from  one  order  of  nature  to  another, 

Till  he  became  wise  and  knowing  and  strong  as  he  is  now. 
Of  his  first  souls  he  has  now  no  remembrance, 

And  he  will  be  again  changed  from  his  present  soul. 

In  order  to  escape  from  his  present  soul  full  of  lusts 
He  must  behold  thousands  of  reasonable  souls. 

Though  man  fell  asleep  and  forgot  his  previous  states, 
Yet  God  will  not  leave  him  in  this  self-forgetfulness; 
And  then  he  will  laugh  at  his  own  former  state, 

Saying,  “What  mattered  my  experiences  when  asleep? 
When  I had  forgotten  my  prosperous  condition, 

And  knew  not  that  the  grief  and  ills  I experienced 
Were  the  effect  of  sleep  and  illusion  and  fancy  ? 

In  like  manner  this  world,  which  is  only  a dream, 

Seems  to  the  sleeper  as  a thing  enduring  for  ever. 

But  when  the  morn  of  the  last  day  shall  dawn, 

The  sleeper  will  escape  from  the  cloud  of  illusion  ; 
Laughter  will  overpower  him  at  his  own  fancied  griefs 
When  he  beholds  his  abiding  home  and  place. 

Whatever  you  see  in  this  sleep,  both  good  and  evil, 

Will  all  be  exposed  to  view  on  the  resurrection  day. 
Whatever  you  have  done  during  your  sleep  in  the  world 
Will  be  displayed  to  you  clearly  when  you  awake. 
Imagine  not  that  these  ill  deeds  of  yours  exist  not 
In  this  sleep  of  yours,  and  will  not  be  revealed  to  you. 
But  your  present  laughter  will  turn  to  weeping  and  woe 
On  the  day  of  revealing,  0 you  who  oppress  captives ! 
Your  present  wailing  and  sorrow  and  griefs, 

On  the  other  hand,  will  be  joy  when  you  awake. 


218 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


O you,  who  have  rent  the  garments  of  many  Josephs, 
You  will  rise  from  your  heavy  sleep  as  a wolf. 

Your  bad  qualities  will  rise  in  the  shape  of  wolves 
And  rend  you  limb  from  limb  in  vengeance. 

By  the  law  of  retaliation  blood  sleeps  not  after  death ; 
Say  not,  “I  shall  die  and  obtain  pardon.” 

The  retaliation  of  this  world  is  illusive, 

It  is  mere  sport  compared  to  the  retaliation  to  come. 
Therefore  God  calls  the  world  “ a pastime  and  a sport,”  1 
For  punishment  in  this  world  is  sport  compared  to  that. 
Here  punishment  is  as  the  repression  of  quarrels, 

There  it  is  as  castration  or  circumcision. 

But  this  discourse  is  endless,  0 Moses, 

Go  and  leave  these  asses  to  their  grazing  ! 

Let  them  fatten  themselves  with  the  food  they  love, 

For  they  are  very  wolves  and  objects  of  my  wrath. 


Zu'l  Qarnain  at  Mount  Qaf 2 (p.  387). 

Zu’l  Qarnain  journeyed  to  Mount  Qaf  ; 

He  saw  it  was  formed  of  a bright  emerald, 

Forming  as  it  were  a ring  round  the  world, 

Whereat  all  people  are  filled  with  wonder. 

He  said,  “ Thou  mighty  hill,  what  are  other  hills  ? 

Before  thee  they  are  mere  playthings.” 

The  Mount  replied,  “Those  hills  are  my  veins, 

But  they  are  not  like  me  in  beauty  and  importance. 

A hidden  vein  from  me  runs  to  every  city, 

The  quarters  of  the  world  are  bound  to  my  veins. 

When  God  desires  an  earthquake  under  any  city, 

He  bids  me  shake  one  of  my  veins. 

Then  in  anger  I shake  that  vein 

Which  is  connected  with  that  particular  city. 

When  lie  says,  ‘Enough,’  my  vein  remains  still, 

1 Koran  xxix.  64.  The  Koran  uses  the  name  of  Alex- 

2 Zu’l  Qarnain,  Chaucer’s  Dul-  ander  or  (perhaps)  Khizr. 
karn,  means  “He  of  the  two  horns.” 


STORY  IX.]  THE  MULE  AND  THE  CAMEL. 


219 


I remain  still,  and  then  haste  to  perform  my  work. 

Now  still  like  a plaster,  and  now  operating ; 

Now  still  like  thought,  and  then  speaking  my  thought. 
But  they  who  are  void  of  reason  imagine 
That  these  earthcjuakes  proceed  from  earth’s  vapours.” 
Just  so  an  ant,  who  saw  a pen  writing  on  paper, 
Delivered  himself  to  another  ant  in  this  way  : — 

‘That  pen  is  making  very  wonderful  figures, 

Like  hyacinths  and  lilies  and  roses.’ 

The  other  said,  ‘ The  finger  is  the  real  worker, 

The  pen  is  only  the  instrument  of  its  working.’ 

A third  ant  said,  ‘ No ; the  action  proceeds  from  the 
arm, 

The  weak  finger  writes  with  the  arm’s  might.’ 

So  it  went  on  upwards,  till  at  last 
A prince  of  the  ants,  who  had  some  wit, 

Said,  ‘ Ye  regard  only  the  outward  form  of  this  marvel, 
Which  form  becomes  senseless  in  sleep  and  death. 

Form  is  only  as  a dress  or  a staff  in  the  hand, 

It  is  only  from  reason  and  mind  these  figures  proceed.’ 

But  he  knew  not  that  this  reason  and  mind 

Would  be  but  lifeless  things  without  God’s  impulsion. 


The  angel  Gabriel  appears  to  the  Prophet  Muhammad 
(p.  388). 

Mustafa  said  to  the  angel  Gabriel, 

“ 0 friend,  show  me  thy  form  as  it  really  is ; 

Show  it  to  me  openly  and  perceptibly, 

That  I may  behold  thee  with  my  eyes.” 

Gabriel  said,  “ Thou  canst  not  do  so,  thou  art  too  weak, 
Thy  senses  are  exceeding  weak  and  frail.” 

Muhammad  said,  “ Show  it,  that  this  body  of  mine  may 
see 

To  what  extent  its  senses  are  frail  and  impotent. 

True,  man’s  bodily  senses  are  frail, 


22q 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  iv. 


But  he  possesses  within  him  a mighty  property.1 
This  body  resembles  flint  and  steel, 

But  like  them  it  has  the  power  of  kindling  fire. 

Flint  and  steel  are  able  to  generate  fire, 

From  them  springs  fire  which  can  destroy  its  parents.” 

As  he  continued  importuning  him,  Gabriel  displayed 
His  awful  form,  whereat  the  mountains  were  rent  asunder. 
It  occupied  the  sky  from  east  to  west. 

And  Mustafa  swooned  with  fear. 

When  Gabriel  beheld  him  swooning  with  fear, 

He  came  and  clasped  him  in  his  arms. 


Address  to  Husamu-  d-Din  (p.  389). 

0 light  of  God,  Husamu-’d-Din,  admit 
This  ass’s  head  into  that  melon-garden  ! 

For  when  this  ass  is  killed  in  the  slaughter-house 
That  kitchen  will  bestow  upon  him  a new  existence. 

From  me  proceeds  the  form,  from  thee  the  spirit ; 

Nay,  form  and  spirit  both  proceed  from  thee  ! 

Thou  art  as  Muhammad  in  heaven,  0 brilliant  Sun  ! 

Be  also  as  Muhammad  on  earth  for  ever  and  ever ! 

So  that  earth  and  heaven  on  high  may  be  united 
With  one  heart,  one  worship,  one  aspiration ! 

And  schism  and  polytheism  and  duality  disappear, 

And  Unity  abide  in  the  Real  Spiritual  Being ! 

When  my  spirit  recognises  thy  spirit, 

We  remember  our  essential  union  and  origiu. 

1 See  the  parallel  passage  in  Gul-  mystic  “inner  light”  or  spiritual 
shan  i Raz,  1.  431,  and  the  note  intuition, 
thereon.  This  property  is  the 


Boo  I?  V. 


Story  I.  The  Prophet  and  his  Infidel  Guest  (p.  393). 

After  the  usual  address  to  Husamu-’d-Din  follows  a 
comment  on  the  precept  addressed  to  Abraham,  “Take 
four  birds  and  draw  them  towards  thee,  and  cut  them 
in  pieces.”1  The  birds  are  explained  to  be  the  duck  of 
gluttony,  the  cock  of  concupiscence,  the  peacock  of  ambi- 
tion and  ostentation,  and  the  crow  of  bad  desires,  and 
this  is  made  the  text  of  several  stories.  Beginning  with 
gluttony,  the  poet  tells  the  following  story  to  illustrate 
the  occasion  of  the  Prophet’s  uttering  the  saying,  “ Infidels 
eat  with  seven  bellies,  but  the  faithful  with  one.”  One 
day  some  infidels  begged  food  and  lodging  of  the  Prophet. 
The  Prophet  was  moved  by  their  entreaties,  and  desired 
each  of  his  disciples  to  take  one  of  the  infidels  to  his  house 
and  feed  and  lodge  him,  remarking  that  it  was  their  duty 
to  show  kindness  to  strangers  at  his  command,  as  much  as 
to  do  battle  with  his  foes.  So  each  disciple  selected  one  of 
the  infidels  and  carried  him  off  to  his  house  ; but  there  was 
one  big  and  coarse  man,  a very  giant  Og,  whom  no  one 
would  receive,  and  the  Prophet  took  him  to  his  own  house. 
In  his  house  the  Prophet  had  seven  she-goats  to  supply 
his  family  with  milk,  and  the  hungry  infidel  devoured  all 
the  milk  of  those  seven  goats,  to  say  nothing  of  bread 
and  other  viands.  He  left  not  a drop  for  the  Prophet’s 
family,  who  were  therefore  much  annoyed  with  him,  and 
when  he  retired  to  his  chamber  one  of  the  servant-maids 
locked  him  in.  During  the  night  the  infidel  felt  very 
unwell  in  consequence  of  having  overeaten  himself,  and 

1 Koran  ii.  262. 


221 


222 


THE  .\/.4S.Y/l  F/. 


[book  v. 


tried  to  get  out  into  the  open  air,  but  was  unable  to  do 
so,  owing  to  the  door  being  locked.  Finally,  he  was  very 
sick,  and  defiled  his  bedding.  In  the  morning  he  was 
extremely  ashamed,  and  the  moment  the  door  was  opened 
he  ran  away.  The  Prophet  was  aware  of  what  had  happened, 
but  let  the  man  escape,  so  as  not  to  put  him  to  shame.  After 
he  had  gone  the  servants  saw  the  mess  he  had  made,  and 
informed  the  Prophet  of  it;  but  the  Prophet  made  light 
of  it,  and  said  he  would  clean  it  up  himself.  His  friends 
were  shocked  at  the  thought  of  the  Prophet  soiling  his 
sacred  hands  with  such  filth,  and  tried  to  prevent  him, 
but  he  persisted  in  doing  it,  calling  to  mind  the  text, 
“ As  thou  livest,  0 Muhammad,  they  were  bewildered  by 
drunkenness,”  1 and  being,  in  fact,  urged  to  it  by  a divine 
command.  While  he  was  engaged  in  the  work  the  infidel 
came  back  to  look  for  a talisman  which  he  had  left  behind 
him  in  his  hurry  to  escape,  and  seeing  the  Prophet’s  occu- 
pation he  burst  into  tears,  and  bewailed  his  own  filthy 
conduct.  The  Prophet  consoled  him,  saying  that  weeping 
and  penitence  would  purge  the  offence,  for  God  says, 
“ Little  let  them  laugh,  and  much  let  them  weep  ; ” 2 and 
again,  “ Lend  God  a liberal  loan ; ” 3 and  again,  “ God  only 
desireth  to  put  away  filthiness  from  you  as  His  household, 
and  with  cleansing  to  cleanse  you.”4  The  Prophet  then 
urged  him  to  bear  witness  that  God  was  the  Lord,  even  as 
was  done  by  the  sons  of  Adam,5  and  explained  how  the 
outward  acts  of  prayer  and  fasting  bear  witness  of  the 
spiritual  light  within.  After  being  nurtured  on  this 
spiritual  food  the  infidel  confessed  the  truth  of  Islam, 
and  renounced  his  infidelity  and  gluttony.  He  returned 
thanks  to  the  Prophet  for  bringing  him  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  faith  and  regenerating  him,  even  as 
’Isa  had  regenerated  Lazarus.  The  Prophet  was  satisfied 
of  his  sincerity,  and  asked  him  to  sup  with  him  again. 
At  supper  he  drank  only  half  the  portion  of  milk  yielded 


1 Koran  xv.  72. 
" Koran  ix.  33. 


s Koran  lxxiii.  20. 
* Koran  xxxiii.  33. 


6 Koran  vii.  17 1. 


STORY  i.]  THE  PROPHET  AND  HIS  GUEST. 


by  one  goat,  and  steadfastly  refused  to  take  more,  saying 
he  felt  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  little  he  had  already 
taken.  The  other  guests  marvelled  much  to  see  his 
gluttony  so  soon  cured,  and  were  led  to  reflect  on  the 
virtues  of  the  spiritual  food  administered  to  him  by  the 
Prophet. 

Outward  acts  bear  witness  of  the  state  of  the  heart  within 
(P-  396). 

Prayer  and  fasting  and  pilgrimage  and  holy  war 
Bear  witness  of  the  faith  of  the  heart. 

Giving  alms  and  offerings  and  quitting  avarice 
Also  bear  witness  of  the  secret  thoughts. 

So,  a table  spread  for  guests  serves  as  a plain  sign, 
Saying,  “ 0 guest,  I am  your  sincere  well-wisher.” 

So,  offerings  and  presents  and  oblations 

Bear  witness,  saying,  “ I am  well  pleased  with  you.” 

Each  of  these  men  lavishes  his  wealth  or  pains, — 

What  means  it  but  to  say,  “ I have  a virtue  within  me, 
Tea,  a virtue  of  piety  or  liberality, 

Whereof  my  oblations  and  fasting  bear  witness  ” ? 
Fasting  proclaims  that  he  abstains  from  lawful  food, 

And  that  therefore  he  doubtless  avoids  unlawful  food. 
And  his  alms  say,  “ He  gives  away  his  own  goods  ; 

It  is  therefore  plain  that  he  does  not  rob  others.” 

If  he  acts  thus  from  fraud,  his  two  witnesses 
(Fasting  and  alms)  are  rejected  in  God’s  court ; — 

If  the  hunter  scatters  grain 

Hot  out  of  mercy,  but  to  catch  game  : — 

If  the  cat  keeps  fast,  and  remains  still 
In  fasting  only  to  entrap  unwary  birds : — 

Making  hundreds  of  people  suspicious, 

And  giving  a bad  name  to  men  who  fast  and  are  liberal ; — 
Yet  the  grace  of  God,  despite  this  fraud. 

May  ultimately  purge  him  from  all  this  hypocrisy. 

Mercy  may  prevail  over  vengeance,  and  give  the  hypocrite 


224 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  v. 


Such  light  as  is  not  possessed  by  the  full  moon. 

God  may  purge  his  dealings  from  that  hypocrisy, 

And  in  mercy  wash  him  clean  of  that  defilement. 

In  order  that  the  pardoning  grace  of  God  may  be  seen, 
God  pardons  all  sins  that  need  pardon. 

Wherefore  God  rains  down  water  from  the  sign  Pisces, 

To  purify  the  impure  from  their  impurities.1 

Thus  acts  and  words  are  witnesses  of  the  mind  within, 
From  these  two  deduce  inferences  as  to  the  thoughts. 
When  your  vision  cannot  penetrate  within, 

Inspect  the  water  voided  by  the  sick  man. 

Acts  and  words  resemble  the  sick  man’s  water, 

Which  serves  as  evidence  to  the  physician  of  the  body. 
But  the  physician  of  the  spirit  penetrates  the  soul, 

And  thence  ascertains  the  man’s  faith. 

Such  an  one  needs  not  the  evidence  of  fair  acts  and  words ; 
“ Beware  of  such,  they  spy  out  the  heart.” 

Require  this  evidence  of  act  and  word  only  from  one 
Who  is  not  joined  to  the  divine  Ocean  like  a stream. 

But  the  light  of  the  traveller  arrived  at  the  goal, 

Verily  that  light  fills  deserts  and  wastes. 

That  witness  of  his  is  exempt  from  bearing  witness, 

And  from  all  trouble  and  risk  and  good  works. 

Since  the  brilliance  of  that  jewel  beams  forth, 

It  is  exempted  from  these  obligations. 

Wherefore  require  not  from  him  act  and  word  evidence, 
Because  both  worlds  through  him  bloom  like  roses. 

What  is  this  evidence  but  manifestation  of  hidden  things, 
Whether  it  be  evidence  in  word,  or  deed,  or  otherwise  ? 
Accidents  serve  only  to  manifest  the  secret  essence ; 

The  essential  quality  abides,  and  accidents  pass  away. 
This  mark  of  gold  endures  not  the  touchstone, 

But  only  the  gold  itself,  genuine  and  undoubted. 

These  prayers  and  holy  war  and  fasting 
Will  not  endure,  only  the  noble  soul  endures. 

1 “ Islam  is  the  baptism  of  God”  (Koran  ii.  132). 


STORY  I.]  THE  PROPHET  AND  HIS  GUEST. 


225 


The  soul  exhibits  acts  and  words  of  this  sort, 

Then  it  rubs  its  substance  on  the  touchstone  of  God’s 
command, 

Saying,  *•  My  faith  is  true,  behold  my  witnesses ! ” 

But  witnesses  are  open  to  suspicion. 

Know  that  witnesses  must  be  purified, 

And  their  purification  is  sincerity,  on  that  you  may  depend. 
The  witness  of  word  consists  in  speaking  the  truth, 

The  witness  of  acts  in  keeping  one’s  promises. 

If  the  witness  of  word  lie,  its  evidence  is  rejected, 

And  if  the  witness  of  act  play  false,  it  is  rejected. 

Your  words  and  acts  must  be  without  self-contradiction 
In  order  to  be  accepted  without  question. 

“ Your  aims  are  different,”  1 and  you  contradict  yourselves, 
You  sew  by  day,  and  tear  to  pieces  by  night. 

How  can  God  listen  to  such  contradictory  witness. 

Unless  He  be  pleased  to  decide  on  it  in  mercy  ? 

Act  and  word  manifest  the  secret  thoughts  and  mind, 
Both  of  them  expose  to  view  the  veiled  secret. 

When  your  witnesses  are  purified  they  are  accepted, 
Otherwise  they  are  arrested  and  kept  in  durance. 

They  enter  into  conflict  with  you,  0 stiff-necked  one  ; 

“ Stand  aloof  and  wait  for  them,  for  they  too  wait.”'- 


Prayers  for  spiritual  enlightenment  (p.  399). 

0 God,  who  hast  no  peer,  bestow  Thy  favour  upon  me  ; 
Since  Thou  hast  with  this  discourse  put  a ring  in  my  ear, 
Take  me  by  the  ear,  and  draw  me  into  that  holy  assembly 
Where  Thy  saints  in  ecstasy  drink  of  Thy  pure  wine ! 
Now  that  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  smell  its  perfume. 
Withhold  not  from  me  that  musky  wine,  0 Lord  of  faith  ! 
Of  Thy  bounty  all  partake,  both  men  and  women, 

Thou  art  ungrudging  in  bounties,  0 Hearer  of  prayer. 
Prayers  are  granted  by  Thee  before  they  are  uttered, 

1 Koran  xcii.  4.  for  their  punishment,  as  they  wait 

2 Koran  xxxii.  50.  l.e. , Wait  thou  for  thy  downfall  (Rodwell). 

P 


226 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[boo  k V. 


Thou  openest  the  door  to  admit  hearts  every  moment ! 
How  many  letters  Thou  writest  with  Thy  Almighty  pen  ! 
Through  marvelling  thereat  stones  become  as  wax. 

Thou  writest  the  Nun  of  the  brow,  the  Sad  of  the  eye, 
And  the  Jim  of  the  ear,  to  amaze  reason  and  sense. 

These  letters  exercise  and  perplex  reason  ; 

Write  on,  0 skilful  Fair-writer  ! 

Imprinting  every  moment  on  Not-being  the  fair  forms 
Of  the  world  of  ideals,  to  confound  all  thought ! 1 
Yea,  copying  thereon  the  fair  letters  of  the  page  of  ideals, 
To  wit,  eye  and  brow  and  moustache  and  mole  ! 

For  me,  I will  be  a lover  of  Not-being,  not  of  existence, 
Because  the  beloved  of  Not-being  is  more  blessed.2 
God  made  reason  a reader  of  all  these  letters, 

To  suggest  to  it  reflections  on  that  outpouring  of  grace.3 
Reason,  like  Gabriel,  learns  day  by  day 
Its  daily  portion  from  the  “Indelible  Tablet.”  4 
Behold  the  letters  written  without  hands  on  Not-being ! 
Behold  the  perplexity  of  mankind  at  those  letters ! 

Every  one  is  bewildered  by  these  thoughts, 

And  digs  for  hidden  treasure  in  hope  to  find  it. 


This  bewilderment  of  mankind  as  to  their  true  aims  is 
compared  to  the  bewilderment  of  men  in  the  dark  looking 
in  all  directions  for  the  Qibla,  and  recalls  the  text,  “ 0 the 
misery  that  rests  upon  my  servants.” 5 

Then  follow  reflections  on  the  sacrifice  by  Abraham  of 
the  peacock  of  ambition  and  ostentation.  Next  comes  a 
discourse  on  the  thesis  that  all  men  can  recognise  the 
mercies  of  God  and  the  wrath  of  God ; but  God’s  mercies 
are  often  hidden  in  His  chastisements,  and  vice  versd,  and 


1 Here  we  have  another  Platonic 
doctrine.  “Some  say  the  belief  of 
the  Sufis  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
Mushraqin  (Platonists).”  Dabistan  i 
Muzahib,  by  Shea  and  Troyer,  iii. 
281. 

2 I.e.,  I will  recognise  the  nonen- 

tity of  all  this  phenomenal  being, 

and  court  self-annihilation. 


3 The  Bulaq  translator  renders 
An  Harvard,  thus. 

4 The  “ Indelible  Tablet  ” (of 
God’s  decrees)  is  here  applied  to  the 
Logos, — the  channel  through  whom 
God  renews  the  “ world  of  creation  ” 
day  by  day. 

6 Koran  xxxvi.  29. 


STORY  II.] 


THE  ARAB  AND  HIS  DOG. 


227 


it  is  only  men  of  deep  spiritual  discernment  who  can  re- 
cognise acts  of  mercy  and  acts  of  wrath  concealed  in  their 
opposites.  The  object  of  this  concealment  is  to  try  and 
test  men’s  dispositions ; according  to  the  text,  “ To  prove 
which  of  you  will  be  most  righteous  in  deed.”  1 


Story  II.  The  A mb  and  his  Doy  (p.  402). 

The  doctrine  of  the  Mu’tazalites,2  already  mentioned, 
that  all  men’s  intellects  are  alike  and  equal  at  birth, 
is  again  controverted,  and  the  poet  dwells  on  the  essen- 
tial ditferences  which  characterise  the  intellects  akin  to 
Universal  Reason  or  the  Logos,  and  those  swayed  by 
partial  or  carnal  reason  ; the  former,  like  the  children  of 
Israel,  seeking  exaltation  through  self-abasement ; and 
the  others,  like  Pharaoh,  running  after  worldly  rank  and 
power,  to  their  own  destruction.  In  order  to  make  pro- 
bation of  men,  as  already  explained,  God  fills  the  world 
with  deceptions,3 — making  apparent  blessings  destructive 
to  us,  and  apparent  evils  salutary.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
men  try  to  deceive  God.  they  fail  signally.  Hypocritical 
weeping  and  wailing  like  that  of  Joseph’s  brethren  is  at 
once  detected  by  God.  Thus  a certain  Arab  had  a dog 
to  which  he  was  much  attached  ; but  one  day  the  dog 
died  of  hunger.  He  at  once  began  to  weep  and  wail,  and 
disturbed  the  whole  neighbourhood  by  his  ostentatious 
grief.  One  of  the  neighbours  came  and  inquired  into 
the  matter,  and  on  hearing  that  the  dog  had  died  of 
hunger,  he  asked  the  Arab  why  he  had  not  fed  him  from 
the  wallet  of  food  which  he  had  in  his  hand.  The  Arab 
said  that  he  had  collected  this  food  to  support  himself,  and 
made  it  a principle  not  to  part  with  any  of  it  to  any  one 
who  could  not  pay  for  it but  that,  as  his  tears  cost  him 

1 Koran  lxvii.  2. 

- The  Mu’tazalites  were  one  of  the  principal  unorthodox  sects.  See 
Sale,  Prelim.  Disc.,  p.  112. 

3 “Of  them  who  devise  stratagems,  God  is  best”  (Koran  iii.  47). 


228 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


nothing,  he  was  pouring  them  forth  in  token  of  the  sorrow 
he  felt  for  his  dog’s  death.  The  neighbour,  on  hearing 
this,  rebuked  him  for  his  hypocrisy,  and  went  his  way. 

Then  follows  a commentary  on  the  text,  “ Almost  would 
the  infidels  strike  thee  down  with  their  very  looks  when 
they  hear  the  reading  of  the  Koran.”  1 


Story  III.  The  Sage  and  the  Peacock  (p.  404). 

A sage  went  out  to  till  his  field,  and  saw  a peacock 
busily  engaged  in  destroying  his  own  plumage  with  his 
beak.  At  seeing  this  insane  self-destruction  the  sage 
could  not  refrain  himself,  but  cried  out  to  the  peacock  to 
forbear  from  mutilatiDg  himself  and  spoiling  his  beauty 
in  so  wanton  a manner.  The  peacock  then  explained  to 
him  that  the  bright  plumage  which  he  admired  so  much 
was  a fruitful  source  of  danger  to  its  unfortunate  owner, 
as  it  led  to  his  being  constantly  pursued  by  hunters,  whom 
he  had  no  strength  to  contend  against ; and  he  had  accord- 
ingly decided  on  ridding  himself  of  it  with  his  own  beak, 
and  making  himself  so  ugly  that  no  hunter  would  in 
future  care  to  molest  him.  The  poet  proceeds  to  point 
out  that  worldly  cleverness  and  accomplishments  and 
wealth  endanger  man’s  spiritual  life,  like  the  peacock’s 
plumage ; but,  nevertheless,  they  are  appointed  for  our 
probation,  and  without  such  trials  there  can  be  no  virtue. 


“ There  is  no  monkery  in  Islam  ” 2 (p.  405). 

Tear  not  thy  plumage  off,  it  cannot  be  replaced  ; 
Disfigure  not  thy  face  in  wantonness,  0 fair  one  ! 
That  face  which  is  bright  as  the  forenoon  sun, — 
To  disfigure  it  were  a grievous  sin. 

’Twere  paganism  to  mar  such  a face  as  thine  ! 

The  moon  itself  would  weep  to  lose  sight  of  it ! 

1 Korun  lxviii.  51. 


2 A Uadis. 


229 


STORY  III.]  THE  SAGE  AND  THE  PEACOCK. 

Knowest  thou  not  the  beauty  of  thine  own  face  ? 

Quit  this  temper  that  leads  thee  to  war  with  thyself ! 

It  is  the  claws  of  thine  own  foolish  thoughts 
That  in  spite  wound  the  face  of  thy  quiet  soul. 

Know  such  thoughts  to  be  claws  fraught  with  poison, 
Which  score  deep  wounds  on  the  face  of  thy  soul. 

Rend  not  thy  plumage  off,  but  avert  thy  heart  from  it, 

For  hostility  between  them  is  the  law  of  this  holy  war. 
Were  there  no  hostility,  that  war  would  be  impossible. 
Hadst  thou  no  lust,  obedience  to  the  law  could  not  be.1 
Hadst  thou  no  concupiscence  there  could  be  no  abstinence. 
Where  no  antagonist  exists,  what  need  is  there  of  armies? 
Ah ! make  not  thyself  an  eunuch,-  become  not  a monk, 
Because  chastity  is  mortgaged  to  lust. 

Without  lust  denial  of  lust  is  impossible ; 

No  man  can  display  bravery  against  the  dead. 

God  says,  “Expend,”3  therefore  earn  money, 

Since  expenditure  is  impossible  without  previous  gain. 
Although  the  passage  contains  only  the  word  “ Expend,” 
Read  “Acquire  first,  and  then  expend.” 

In  like  manner,  when  the  King  of  kings  says  “ Abstain.”4 
It  implies  an  object  of  desire  wherefrom  to  abstain. 

Again,  “Eat  ye,”5  is  said  recognising  the  snares  of  lust, 
And  afterwards,  “ Exceed  not,”  to  enjoin  temperance. 
When  there  is  no  subject, 

The  existence  of  a predicate  is  not  possible.0 
When  thou  endurest  not  the  pains  of  abstinence, 

And  fulfillest  not  the  terms,  thou  gainest  no  reward. 

How  easy  those  terms  ! how  abundant  that  reward  ! — 

A reward  that  enchants  the  heart  and  charms  the  soul  ! 

This  is  followed  by  the  admonition  that  the  only  way 

1 Cp.  Bp.  Butler,  “On  a state  of  5 Koran  vi.  142:  “Eat  of  their 
probation  as  implying  trial  and  dan-  fruit,  but  be  not  prodigal,  and  exceed 


ger  ” (Analogy,  Chap.  iv.  Pt.  1). 

2 Probably  referring  to  Origen. 

3 Koran  ii.  264. 

4 Koran  iii.  200. 


not.” 


B Or,  “ If  there  be  no  supporter, 
there  can  be  nothing  supported.” 


230 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


to  be  safe  from  one’s  internal  enemies  is  to  annihilate 
self,  and  to  be  absorbed  in  the  eternity  of  God,  as  the 
light  of  the  stars  is  lost  in  the  light  of  the  noonday  sun. 
Everything  but  God  is  at  once  preyed  on  by  others,  and 
itself  preys  on  others,  like  the  fowl  which,  when  catching 
a worm,  was  itself  caught  by  a cat.  Men  are  so  intent 
on  their  own  low  objects  of  pursuit  that  they  see  not 
their  foes  who  are  trying  to  make  them  their  prey.  Thus 
it  is  said,  “ Before  them  have  we  set  a barrier,  and  behind 
them  a barrier,  so  that  they  shall  not  see.”1  Persons 
who  lust  after  the  vile  pleasures  of  this  world,  and  desire 
long  life,  not  to  serve  God,  but  to  satisfy  their  own  carnal 
lusts,  resemble  the  crow  slain  by  Abraham,  because  he 
only  lived  for  the  sake  of  carrion  ; or  Iblis,  who  prayed 
to  be  respited  till  the  day  of  judgment,  not  for  the  pur- 
pose of  reforming  himself,  but  only  to  do  mischief  to 
mankind.'2 

Prayers  to  Gocl  to  change  our  base  inclinations  and  give 
us  higher  aspirations  (p.  409). 

0 Thou  that  changest  earth  into  gold, 

And  out  of  other  earth  madest  the  father  of  mankind, 
Thy  business  is  changing  things  and  bestowing  favours, 
My  business  is  mistakes  and  forgetfulness  and  error. 
Change  my  mistakes  and  forgetfulness  to  knowledge  ; 

1 am  altogether  vile,  make  me  temperate  and  meek. 

O Thou  that  convertest  salt  earth  into  bread, 

And  bread  again  into  the  life  of  men ; 

Thou  who  madest  the  erring  soul  a guide  to  men, 

And  him  that  erred  from  the  way  a prophet ; 3 
Thou  makest  some  earth-born  men  as  heaven, 

And  multipliest  heaven-born  saints  on  earth  ! 

But  whoso  seeks  his  water  of  life  in  worldly  joys, 

To  him  comes  death  quicker  than  to  the  rest. 

The  eyes  of  the  heart  which  behold  the  heavens 

1 Koran  xxxvi.  8.  2 Koran  vii.  13.  3 Koran  xciii.  7- 


STORY  III.]  THE  SAGE  AND  THE  PEACOCK. 


23r 


See  that  the  Almighty  Alchemist  is  ever  working  here. 
Mankind  are  ever  being  changed,  and  God’s  elixir 
Joins  the  body’s  garment  without  aid  of  needle. 

On  the  day  that  you  entered  upon  existence, 

You  were  first  fire,  or  earth,  or  air. 

If  you  had  continued  in  that,  your  original  state, 

How  could  you  have  arrived  at  this  dignity  of  humanity  ? 
But  through  change  your  first  existence  remained  not ; 

In  lieu  thereof  God  gave  you  a better  existence. 

In  like  manner  He  will  give  you  thousands  of  existences, 
One  after  another,  the  succeeding  ones  better  than  the 
former. 

Regard  your  original  state,  not  the  mean  states, 

For  these  mean  states  remove  you  from  your  origin. 

As  these  mean  states  increase,  union  recedes  ; 

As  they  decrease,  the  unction  of  union  increases. 

From  knowing  means  and  causes  holy  bewilderment  fails  ; 
Yea,  the  bewilderment  that  leads  you  to  God’s  presence. 
You  have  obtained  these  existences  after  annihilations ; 
Wherefore,  then,  do  you  shrink  from  annihilation  ? 

What  harm  have  these  annihilations  done  you 
That  you  cling  so  to  present  existence,  0 simpleton  ? 
Since  the  latter  of  your  states  were  better  than  the  former, 
Seek  annihilation  and  adore  change  of  state. 

You  have  already  seen  hundreds  of  resurrections 
Occur  every  moment  from  your  origin  till  now  ; 

One  from  the  inorganic  state  to  the  vegetive  state, 

From  the  vegetive  state  to  the  animal  state  of  trial ; 
Thence  again  to  rationality  and  good  discernment ; 

Again  you  will  rise  from  this  world  of  sense  and  form. 

Ah ! 0 crow,  give  up  this  life  and  live  anew ! 

In  view  of  God’s  changes  cast  away  your  life  ! 

Choose  the  new,  give  up  the  old, 

For  each  single  present  year  is  better  than  three  past. 

This  is  followed  by  a commentary  on  the  saying  of  the 
Prophet,  “ Pity  the  pious  man  who  falls  into  sin,  and  the 


232 


THE  MASH  AVI. 


[book  V. 


rich  man  who  falls  into  poverty,  and  the  wise  man  who 
falls  into  the  company  of  fools.”  This  is  illustrated  by  an 
anecdote  of  a young  deer  who  was  placed  in  the  asses’ 
stable,  and  jeered  at  and  maltreated  by  them.  This 
suggests — 

Story  IV.  Muhammad  Khwarazm  Shah  and  the  Rdfizis 
of  Sabzawar  (p.  4 1 1 ). 

Muhammad  Shah  was  the  last  prince  but  one  of  the 
Khwarazm  dynasty  of  Balkh,  to  which  family  both  the 
poet’s  mother  and  grandmother  belonged.  He  was  the 
reigning  prince  in  A.D.  1209,  the  year  in  which  the  poet’s 
father  fled  from  Balkh,  and  was  defeated  by  Chingiz  Khan 
a year  or  two  later.  In  one  of  his  campaigns  Muhammad 
Shah  captured  the  city  of  Sabzawar,  in  Khorasan,  which 
city  was  inhabited  by  Rafizis  or  rank  Shi’as,  naturally 
most  obnoxious  to  a Sunni  prince  claiming  descent  from 
the  first  Khalif  Abu  Bakr.  After  the  city  was  taken  the 
inhabitants  came  out,  and  proceeded  with  all  humility  to 
beg  their  lives,  offering  to  pay  any  amount  of  ransom  and 
tribute  that  he  might  impose  upon  them.  But  the  prince 
replied  that  he  would  spare  their  lives  only  on  one  con- 
dition, viz.,  that  they  produced  from  Sabzawar  a man 
bearing  the  name  Abu  Bakr.  They  represented  to  him 
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  in  the  whole  city  a single 
man  bearing  a name  so  hateful  to  the  Shi’as  ; but  the  prince 
was  inexorable,  and  refused  to  alter  the  conditions.  So 
they  went  and  searched  all  the  neighbourhood,  and  at  last 
found  a traveller  lying  at  the  roadside  at  the  point  of 
death,  who  bore  the  name  of  Abu  Bakr.  As  he  was  un- 
able to  walk,  they  placed  him  on  a bier  and  carried  him 
into  the  king’s  presence.  The  king  reproached  them  for 
their  contempt  and  neglect  of  this  pious  Sunni,  the  only 
true  heart  amongst  them,  and  reminded  them  of  the  say- 
ing of  the  Prophet,  “ God  regards  not  your  outward  show 
and  your  wealth,  but  your  hearts  and  your  deeds.”  In  this 


story  iv.]  MUHAMMAD  SHAH  AND  THE  RAFIZIS.  233 

parable,  says  the  poet,  Sabzawar  is  the  world,  the  poor 
Sunni  the  man  of  God,  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  and 
the  king  is  God  Almighty,  who  seeks  a true  heart  amongst 
evil  men. 


Satan’s  snares  for  mankind  (p.  413). 

Thus  spake  cursed  Iblis  to  the  Almighty, 

“ I want  a mighty  trap  to  catch  human  game  withal.” 

God  gave  him  gold  and  silver  and  troops  of  horses, 
Saying,  “ You  can  catch  my  creatures  with  these.” 

Iblis  said,  “ Bravo  ! ” but  at  the  same  time  hung  his  lip, 
And  frowned  sourly  like  a bitter  orange. 

Then  God  offered  gold  and  jewels  from  precious  mines 
To  that  laggard  in  the  faith, 

Saying,  “ Take  these  other  traps,  0 cursed  one.” 

But  Iblis  said,  “Give  me  more,  0 blessed  Defender.” 

God  gave  him  succulent  and  sweet  and  costly  wines, 

And  also  store  of  silken  garments. 

But  Iblis  said,  “ 0 Lord,  I want  more  aids  than  these, 

In  order  to  bind  men  in  my  twisted  rope 
So  firmly  that  Thy  adorers,  who  are  valiant  men, 

May  not,  man-like,  break  my  bonds  asunder.” 

When  at  last  God  showed  him  the  beauty  of  women, 
Which  bereaves  men  of  reason  and  self-control, 

Then  Iblis  clapped  his  hands  and  began  to  dance, 

Saying,  “ Give  me  these ; I shall  quickly  prevail  with 
these ! ” 

This  is  followed  by  comments  on  the  text,  “ Of  goodliest 
fabric  we  created  man,  and  then  brought  him  down  to 
the  lowest  of  the  low,  saving  those  who  believe  and  do 
the  things  that  are  right ; ” 1 and  on  the  verses, — 

“ If  thou  goest  the  road,  they  will  show  thee  the  road  ; 

If  thou  becomest  naught,  they  will  turn  thee  to  being.” 

1 Koran  xcv.  4. 


234 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


Story  V.  The  Man  who  claimed  to  be  a Prophet  (p.  417). 

A man  cried  out  to  the  people,  “ I am  a prophet ; yea. 
the  most  excellent  of  the  prophets.”  The  people  seized 
him  by  the  collar,  saying,  “ How  are  you  any  more  a 
prophet  than  we  are?”  He  replied,  “Ye  came  to  earth 
from  the  spirit-world  as  sleeping  children,  seeing  nothing 
of  the  way ; but  I came  hither  with  my  eyes  open,  and 
marked  all  the  stages  of  the  way  like  a guide.”  On  this 
they  led  him  before  the  king,  and  begged  the  king  to 
punish  him.  The  king,  seeing  that  he  was  very  infirm, 
took  pity  on  him,  and  led  him  apart  and  asked  him 
where  his  home  was.  The  man  replied,  “ 0 king,  my 
home  is  in  the  house  of  peace  (heaven),  and  I am  come 
thence  into  this  house  of  reproach.”  The  king  then  asked 
him  what  he  had  been  eating  to  make  him  rave  as  he  did, 
and  he  said  if  he  lived  on  mere  earthly  bread  he  should 
not  have  claimed  to  be  a prophet.  His  preaching  was 
entirely  thrown  away  on  worldly  men,  who  only  desire 
to  hear  news  of  gold  or  women,1  and  are  annoyed  with 
all  who  speak  to  them  of  the  eternal  life  to  come.  They 
cleave  to  the  present  life  so  fast  that  they  hate  those 
who  tell  them  of  another.  They  say,  “ Ye  are  telling  us 
old  fables  and  raving  idly  ; ” and  when  they  see  pious  men 
prospering  they  envy  them,  and,  like  Satan,  become  more 
opposed  to  them.  God  said,  “ What  thinkest  thou  of  him 
who  holdeth  back  a servant  of  God  when  he  prayeth  ? ” 2 
The  king  then  said  to  him,  “ What  is  this  inspiration  of 
yours,  and  what  profit  do  you  derive  from  it  ? ” The  man 
answered,  “What  profit  is  there  that  I do  not  derive  from 
it?  I grant  I am  not  rich  in  worldly  wealth,  yet  the 
inspiration  God  teaches  me  is  surely  as  precious  as  that 
which  He  taught  the  bees.3  God  taught  them  to  make 
wax  and  honey,  and  He  teaches  me  nobler  things  than 
these.  Whoso  has  his  face  reddened  with  celestial  wine 

1 Koran  iii.  12.  2 Koran  xcvi.  9.  :l  Koran  xvi.  70. 


STORY  v.]  THE  PRETENDED  PROPHET.  235 

is  a prophet  of  like  disposition  with  Muhammad,  and 
whoso  is  unaffected  by  that  spiritual  drink  is  to  be  ac- 
counted an  enemy  to  God  and  man.” 


The  Prophet’ s prayer  for  the  envious  people  (p.  419). 

0 Thou  that  givest  aliment  and  power  and  stability, 

Set  free  the  people  from  their  instability. 

To  the  soul  that  is  bent  double  by  envy 
Give  uprightness  in  the  path  of  duty, 

Give  them  self-control,  “ weigh  down  their  scales,”  1 
Release  them  from  the  arts  of  deceivers. 

Redeem  them  from  envying,  0 gracious  One, 

That  through  envy  they  be  not  stoned  like  Iblis.-’ 

Even  in  their  fleeting  prosperity,  see  how  the  people 
Burn  up  wealth  and  men  through  envy  ! 

See  the  kings  who  lead  forth  their  armies 
To  slay  their  own  people  from  envy  ! 

Lovers  of  sweethearts  have  conceived  jealousy, 

And  attempted  one  another’s  lives, 

Read  “ Wais  and  Ramin”  and  “ Khosrau  and  Shirin, 

To  see  what  these  fools  have  done  to  one  another. 

Lovers  and  beloved  have  both  perished  : 

And  not  themselves  only,  but  their  love  as  well. 

'Tis  God  alone  who  agitates  these  nonentities, 

Making  one  nonenity  fall  in  love  with  another. 

In  the  heart  that  is  no  heart  envy  comes  to  a head, 

Thus  Being  troubles  nonentity. 

This  is  followed  by  an  anecdote  of  a lover  who  recounted 
to  his  mistress  all  the  services  he  had  done,  and  all  the 
toils  he  had  undergone  for  her  sake,  and  inquired  if  there 
was  anything  else  he  could  do  to  testify  the  sincerity  of 
his  love.  His  mistress  replied,  “ All  these  things  you 
have  done  are  but  the  branches  of  love ; you  have  not 

1 Koran  ci.  5. 

2 Koran  xv.  17.  The  sin  of  Iblis  was  his  envy  of  Adam. 


236 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  v. 


yet  attained  to  the  root,  which  is  to  give  up  life  itself 
for  the  sake  of  your  beloved.”  The  lover  accordingly 
gave  up  his  life,  and  enjoyed  eternal  fruition  of  his  love, 
according  to  the  text,  “ 0 thou  soul  which  art  at  rest, 
return  to  thy  Lord,  pleased,  and  pleasing  Him.”  1 

This  is  followed  by  a statement  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
jurist  Abu  Hanifa,  to  whose  school  the  poet  belonged, 
that  weeping,  even  aloud,  during  prayer  does  not  render 
the  prayers  void,  provided  that  the  weeping  be  caused 
by  thoughts  of  the  world  to  come,  and  not  by  thoughts 
of  this  present  world.2  And,  apparently  in  allusion  to 
the  name  Abu  Hanifa,  the  poet  recalls  the  text,  “ They 
followed  the  faith  of  Abraham,  the  orthodox  ” ( Hanifun ).3 

Story  VI.  The  Disciple  who  blindly  imitated  his  Shaikh 
(p.  421). 

An  ignorant  youth  entered  an  assembly  of  pious  persons 
who  were  being  addressed  by  a holy  Shaikh.  He  saw  the 
Shaikh  weeping  copiously,  and  in  mere  blind  and  senseless 
imitation  he  copied  the  Shaikh’s  behaviour,  and  wept  as 
copiously  himself,  though  he  understood  not  a word  of  the 
discourse.  In  fact,  he  behaved  just  like  a deaf  man  who 
sees  those  around  him  laughing,  and  laughs  himself  out  of 
compliment  to  them,  though  he  knows  not  the.  subject  of 
their  merriment,  and  is  obliged  to  have  it  explained  to  him 
before  he  can  laugh  again  with  real  perception  of  the  joke. 
After  he  had  wept  in  this  ignorant  way  for  some  time  he 
made  due  obeisance  to  the  Shaikh,  and  took  his  departure. 
But  one  of  the  Shaikh’s  true  disciples,  being  jealous  for 
the  honour  of  his  master,  followed  him,  and  thus  addressed 
him,  “I  adjure  you  by  Allah  that  you  go  not  and  say,  ‘I 
saw  the  Shaikh  weeping,  and  I too  wept  like  him.’  Your 
ignorant  and  mere  imitative  weeping  is  totally  unlike  the 
weeping  of  that  holy  saint.  Such  weeping  as  his  is  only 

1 Koran  lxxxix.  27.  2 Mishkat  ul  Masabih,  i.  p.  209,  note. 

3 Koran  iv.  124. 


=37 


STORY  VI.]  THE  DISCIPLE  AND  HIS  SHAIKH. 

possible  to  one  who  has,  like  him,  waged  the  spiritual  war 
for  thirty  years.  His  weeping  is  not  caused  by  worldly 
griefs,  but  by  the  deep  concerns  of  the  spirit.  You  can- 
not perceive  by  reason  or  sense  the  spiritual  mysteries 
that  are  open  and  plain  to  his  enlightened  vision,  any 
more  than  the  darkness  can  behold  the  light.  His  breath- 
ings are  as  those  of  ’Isa,  and  not  like  mere  human  sighs 
raised  by  worldly  sorrows.  His  tears  and  his  smiles  and 
his  speeches  are  not  his  own,  but  proceed  from  Allah. 
Fools  like  you  are  ignorant  of  the  motive  and  design  of 
saints’  actions,  and  therefore  only  harm  themselves  if  they 
try  to  imitate  them,  without  understanding  their  meaning.” 
To  illustrate  this  a curious  story  is  told  of  a foolish  lady 
who  copied  a trick  of  her  clever  slave-girl,  without  under- 
standing the  modus  operandi,  and  by  so  doing  caused  her 
own  death.  In  like  manner  parrots  are  taught  to  speak 
without  understanding  the  words.  The  method  is  to  place 
a mirror  between  the  parrot  and  the  trainer.  The  trainer, 
hidden  by  the  mirror,  utters  the  words,  and  the  parrot, 
seeing  his  own  reflection  in  the  mirror,  fancies  another 
parrot  is  speaking,  and  imitates  all  that  is  said  by  the 
trainer  behind  the  mirror.  So  God  uses  prophets  and 
saints  as  mirrors  whereby  to  instruct  men,  being  Himself 
all  the  time  hidden  behind  these  mirrors,  viz.,  the  bodies 
of  these  saints  and  prophets;  and  men,  when  they  hear 
the  words  proceeding  from  these  mirrors,  are  utterly 
ignorant  that  they  are  really  being  spoken  by  “ Universal 
Reason”  or  the  “Word  of  God”  behind  the  mirrors  of 
the  saints. 

The  worthlessness  of  mere  blind  imitation  ( taqlid ) of 
religious  exercises  (p.  421). 

"When  a friend  tells  a joke  to  his  friend. 

The  deaf  man  who  listens  laughs  twice  over ; — 

The  first  time  from  imitation  and  foolishness, 

Because  he  sees  all  the  party  laughing ; — 

Yet,  though  he  laughs  like  the  others, 


THE  MASNAVI. 


238 


[book  v. 


He  is  then  ignorant  of  the  subject  of  their  laughter  ; — 
Then  he  inquires  what  the  laughter  was  about, 

And,  on  hearing  it,  proceeds  to  laugh  a second  time. 
Wherefore  the  blind  imitator  is  like  a deaf  man, 

In  regard  to  the  joy  he  feigns  to  feel. 

The  light  is  the  Shaikh’s,  the  fountain  the  Shaikh’s, 

And  the  outpouring  of  joy  is  also  the  Shaikh’s,  not  his. 
’Tis  like  water  in  a vessel,  or  light  through  a glass ; 

If  they  think  they  come  from  themselves,  they  are  wrong. 
When  the  vessel  leaves  the  fountain,  it  sees  its  error ; 

It  sees  the  water  in  it  comes  from  the  fountain. 

The  glass  also  learns,  when  the  moon  sets, 

That  its  light  proceeded  from  the  shining  of  the  moon. 
When  his  eyes  are  opened  by  the  command,  “Arise  ! ”1 
Then  that  disciple  smiles  a second  time,  like  the  dawn. 

He  laughs  also  at  his  own  previous  laughter, 

Which  overtook  him  out  of  mere  blind  imitation. 

When  he  returns  from  his  long  and  distant  wanderings 
He  says,  “ Lo  ! this  was  the  truth,  this  the  secret ! 

With  what  blindness  and  misconception  did  I pretend 
To  experience  joy  in  that  distant  valley? 

What  a delusion  I was  under ! what  a mistake  ! 

My  feeble  wit  conjured  up  vain  imaginations.” 

How  can  an  infant  on  the  road  know  the  thoughts  of  men  ? 
How  far  its  fancies  are  removed  from  true  knowledge  ! 
The  thoughts  of  infants  run  on  the  nurse  and  milk, 

Or  on  raisins  or  nuts,  or  on  crying  and  wailing. 

The  blind  imitator  is  like  a feeble  infant, 

Even  though  he  possesses  fine  arguments  and  proofs. 

His  preoccupation  with  obscure  arguments  and  proofs 
Drags  him  away  from  insight  into  truth. 

His  stock  of  lore,  which  is  the  salve  of  his  eves, 

Bears  him  off  and  plunges  him  in  difficult  questions. 

Ah  ! man  of  imitation,  come  out  of  Bokhara ! 2 


1 Koran  lxxiv.  2.  Dawn  smiles  of  the  “ Sahih  Eokhari the  first 

first  as  “ false  dawn,  ” and  the  second  and  most  esteemed  collection  of 
time  as  “ true  dawn.”  traditions. 

2 Alluding  to  Bokhari,  the  author 


STORY  vi.]  THE  DISCIPLE  AND  HIS  SHAIKH. 


2 39 


And  humble  yourself  in  order  to  be  exalted. 

Then  you  will  behold  another  Bokhara  within  you, 
Whereof  the  heroes  ignore  these  questions  of  law. 
Though  a footman  may  be  swift  of  foot  on  laud, 

Yet  on  the  sea  he  is  as  one  with  ruptured  tendons. 

That  footman  is  only  “carried  by  land,”  1 
But  he  who  is  “ carried  by  sea  ” is  the  truly  learned  one. 
The  King  of  kings  showers  special  favours  upon  him  ; 
Know  this,  0 man  pledged  to  vain  illusions ! 


The  mere  legal  theologian  is  impotent  to  lehold  the 
light  of  the  Spirit  (p.  422). 


When  the  day  dawns  from  heaven  night  flees  away  ; 
What,  then,  can  its  darkness  know  of  the  nature  of  light  ? 
The  gnat  scuds  away  before  the  blast  of  the  winds ; 

What,  then,  knows  the  gnat  of  the  savour  of  the  winds? 
When  the  Eternal  appears  the  transitory  is  annulled ; 
What,  then,  knows  the  transitory  of  the  Eternal  ? 

When  He  sets  foot  on  the  transitory  He  bewilders  it ; 
When  it  is  become  naught  He  sheds  his  light  upon  it.2 
If  you  wish,  you  can  adduce  hundreds  of  precedents, 

But  I take  no  heed  of  them,  0 man  poor  in  spirit ! 

The  letters  Lam,  Mim,  and  Ha,  Mini  prefixed  to  some 
Suras 

Resemble  the  staff  of  Moses,  when  fully  understood.3 
Ordinary  letters  resemble  these  to  outward  view, 

But  are  far  beneath  them  in  signification. 

If  an  ordinary  man  take  a staff  and  try  it, 

Will  it  prove  like  the  staff  of  Moses  in  the  test  ? 

This  breath  of  Tsa  is  not  like  every  ordinary  breath, 
Which  proceeds  from  mere  human  joy  or  sorrow. 

These  Alif,  Mim,  Ha  and  Mim,  0 father, 


1 Koran  xvii.  72.  The  roan  of 
‘•external  knowledge”  is  “carried 
only  by  land,”  but  the  mystic  is  led 
over  sea  as  well. 

2 When  reason  is  annihilated,  the 

“ Truth  ” is  reflected  in  the  resulting 


caput  mortuum  or  Not-being,  as  in  a 
mirror  (Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  125). 

3  These  letters  were  supposed  to 
have  mysterious  meanings.  See  Rod- 
well,  Koran,  p.  17,  note. 


240 


THE  MASNAV1. 


[book  V. 


Proceed  from  the  Lord  of  mankind. 

If  you  have  sense,  regard  not  in  the  same  way  as  these 
Every  ordinary  Ahf  and  Lam  which  resembles  these  ; 
Although  these  sacred  letters  consist  of  common  ones. 
And  resemble  common  ones  in  their  composition. 
Muhammad  himself  was  formed  of  flesh  and  skin, 
Although  no  man  is  of  the  same  genus  as  he. 

He  had  flesh  and  skin  and  bones, 

Although  no  man  resembles  him  in  composition  ; 

Because  in  his  composition  were  contained  divine  powers, 
Whereby  all  human  flesh  was  confounded. 

In  like  manner  the  composition  of  the  letters  Ha,  Mim 
Is  far  exalted  above  ordinary  compounds  of  letters ; 
Because  from  these  mysterious  compositions  comes  life, 
Even  as  utter  confusion  follows  the  last  trump. 

That  staff  becomes  a serpent  and  divides  the  Nile, 

Like  the  staff  of  Ha,  Mim,  by  the  grace  of  God. 

Its  outward  form  resembles  the  outward  forms  of  others. 
Yet  the  disk  of  a cake  differs  much  from  the  moon’s  disk. 
The  saint’s  weeping  and  laughter  and  speech 
Are  not  his  own,  but  proceed  from  God. 

Whereas  fools  look  only  to  outward  appearances, 

These  mysteries  are  totally  hidden  from  them  ; 

Of  necessity  the  real  meaning  is  veiled  from  them, 

For  the  mystery  is  lost  in  the  intervening  medium. 

Then  follows  an  anecdote  of  a man  who  heard  whelps 
barking  in  their  mother’s  womb.  A voice  came  from 
heaven  and  explained  that  these  whelps  were  like  the  men 
who  have  not  emerged  into  the  light  of  truth,  but  are  still 
veiled  in  spiritual  darkness,  and,  though  they  make  pre- 
tensions to  spiritual  sight,  their  discourses  are  useless, 
both  to  procure  spiritual  food  for  themselves,  and  to  warn 
their  hearers  of  spiritual  dangers. 

Next  comes  an  anecdote  of  a pious  man  of  Zarwan,  who 
made  a point  of  giviug  to  the  poor  four  times  the  legal 
amount  of  alms  due  from  his  growing  crops.  Thus,  instead 


241 


story  vii.]  HOW  ADAM  TIMS  CREATED. 

of  paying  one-tenth  on  each  crop,  which  is  the  legal 
amount  enjoined  by  the  Prophet,1  he  was  wont  to  pay 
one-tenth  of  the  green  ears  of  corn,  another  tenth  of  the 
ripe  wheat,  a third  tenth  of  the  threshed  grain,  and  a 
fourth  of  the  bread  made  therefrom,  and  so  on  with  grapes 
and  other  produce  of  his  garden.  In  recognition  of  his 
piety  God  blessed  his  garden  and  made  it  bear  fruit 
abundantly.  But  his  sons,  who  were  blind  to  spiritual 
matters,  saw  only  his  lavish  expenditure  upon  the  poor, 
and  could  not  see  the  divine  blessing  upon  the  garden, 
called  down  by  his  liberality,  and  rebuked  him  for  his 
extravagance.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  divine  bounty, 
because  God’s  ability  to  bestow  bounties,  unlike  human 
ability,  is  unbounded  and  infinite. 


Story  VII.  How  Adam  was  created  out  of  a handful  of 
earth  brought  by  an  Angel  (p.  428). 

When  the  Almighty  determined  to  create  mankind  to 
be  proved  by  good  and  evil,  He  deputed  the  angel  Gabriel 
to  bring  a handful  of  earth  for  the  purpose  of  forming 
Adam’s  body.  Gabriel  accordingly  girded  his  loins  and 
proceeded  to  the  Earth  to  execute  the  divine  commands. 
But  the  Earth,  being  apprehensive  that  the  man  so  created 
would  rebel  against  God  and  draw  down  God’s  curse  upon 
her,  remonstrated  with  Gabriel,  and  besought  him  to 
forbear.  She  represented  that  Gabriel  would  at  the  last 
day  be  pre-eminent  over  all  the  eight  angels  who  would 
then  support  the  throne,2  and  that  it  therefore  was  only 
right  that  he  should  prefer  mercy  to  judgment.  At  last 
Gabriel  granted  her  prayer,  and  returned  to  heaven  with- 
out taking  the  handful  of  earth.  Then  God  deputed 
Michael  on  the  same  errand,  and  the  Earth  made  similar 
excuses  to  him,  and  he  also  listened  to  her  crying,  and 
returned  to  heaven  without  taking  a handful.  He  excused 

1 Miskat  ill  Masabih,  i.  417.  2 Koran  lxix.  17. 

Q 


242 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  v. 


himself  to  the  Almighty  by  citing  the  example  of  the 
people  to  whom  the  prophet  Jonah  was  sent,  who  were 
delivered  from  the  threatened  penalty  in  consequence  of 
their  lamentation  for  their  sins  ; 1 — and  the  text,  “ If  He 
please,  He  will  deliver  you  from  that  which  ye  shall  cry  to 
Him  to  avert.”  2 Then  God  sent  the  angel  Israfil  on  the 
same  errand,  and  he  also  was  diverted  from  the  execution 
of  it  by  a divine  intimation.  At  last  God  sent  ’Izrail,  the 
angel  of  death,  who,  being  of  sterner  disposition  than  the 
others,  resolutely  shut  his  ears  to  the  Earth’s  entreaties, 
and  brought  back  the  required  handful  of  earth.  The 
Earth  pressed  him  with  the  argument  that  God’s  command 
to  bear  away  a handful  of  her  substance  against  her  will 
did  not  override  the  other  divine  command  to  take  pity 
on  suppliants  ; but  ’Izrail  would  not  listen  to  her,  remark- 
ing that,  according  to  the  canons  of  theological  interpreta- 
tion, it  was  not  allowable  to  have  recourse  to  analogical 
reasoning  to  evade  a plain  and  categorical  injunction.  He 
added,  that  in  executing  this  injunction,  painful  though 
it  might  be,  he  was  to  be  regarded  only  as  a spear  in  the 
hand  of  the  Almighty.  The  moral  is,  that  when  any  of 
God’s  creatures  do  us  a harm,  we  ought  to  regard  them 
only  as  instruments  of  God,  who  is  the  Only  Beal  Agent. 

God  the  Only  Eeal  Agent  (p.  431). 

Do  not,  like  fools,  crave  mercy  from  the  spear, 

But  from  the  King  in  whose  hand  the  spear  is  held. 
Wherefore  do  you  cry  to  spear  and  sword, 

Seeing  they  are  captives  in  the  hand  of  that  Noble  One  ? 
He  is  as  Azar,  maker  of  idols  ; I am  only  the  idol ; 
Whatever  instrument  He  makes  me,  that  I am. 

If  He  makes  of  me  a cup,  a cup  am  I ; 

If  He  makes  of  me  a dagger,  a dagger  am  I. 

If  He  makes  me  a fountain,  I pour  forth  water ; 

If  He  makes  me  fire,  I give  forth  heat. 

1 Koran  x.  98.  2 Koran  vi.  41. 


STORY  VII.]  HOW  ADAM  WAS  CREATED. 


=43 


If  He  makes  me  rain,  I produce  rich  crops ; 

If  He  makes  me  a dart,  I pierce  bodies. 

If  He  makes  me  a snake,  I dart  forth  poison ; 

If  He  makes  me  a friend,  I serve  my  friends. 

I am  as  the  pen  in  the  fingers  of  the  writer, 

I am  not  in  a position  to  obey  or  not  at  will. 

On  the  return  of  ’Izrail  to  heaven  with  the  handful  of 
earth,  God  said  he  would  make  him  the  angel  of  death. 
’Izrail  represented  that  this  would  make  him  very  hateful 
to  men ; but  God  said  ’Izrail  would  operate  by  disease  and 
sickness,  and  men  would  not  look  for  any  cause  beyond 
these  diseases,  according  to  the  text,  “ He  is  nearer  to  you 
than  ye  are;  yet  ye  see  Him  not.”  1 Moreover,  death  is  in 
reality  a boon  to  the  spiritual,  and  it  is  only  fools  who  cry, 
“ Would  that  this  world  might  endure  for  ever,  and  that 
there  were  no  such  thing  as  death  ! ” 

Death  is  gain,  for  “ God  will  change  their  evil  things  into 
good  things ”2  (p.  432). 

One  said,  The  world  would  be  a pleasant  place 
If  death  never  set  foot  within  it.” 

Another  answered,  “ If  there  were  no  death. 

The  complicated  world  would  be  worth  not  a jot. 

It  would  be  a crop  raised  in  a desert, 

Left  neglected  and  never  threshed  out. 

Thou  fanciest  that  to  be  death,  which  is  life, 

Thou  sowest  thy  seed  in  salt  ground. 

Carnal  reason  deceives  us ; do  thou  contradict  it, 

For  that  fool  takes  what  is  really  death  to  be  life. 

0 God,  show  us  all  things  in  this  house  of  deception, — 
Show  them  all  as  they  really  are  ! ” 3 

It  is  said  in  the  Hadis  that  on  the  last  day 

1 Koran  lvi.  84.  light  that  shines  in  the  heart,  and 

- Koran  xxv.  70.  The  “final  resti-  shows  the  nature  of  all  things  as 
tution !!  of  all  by  free  grace.  they  really  are.” 

3 Cp.  the  Hadis : “ Inspiration  is  a 


244 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 

The  command,  “ Arise,”  will  come  to  every  single  bodv. 
The  blast  of  the  last  trump  will  be  God’s  command 
To  every  atom  to  lift  its  head  from  the  earth. 

The  souls,  also,  of  each  will  return  to  their  bodies, 

Even  as  sense  returns  to  bodies  awaking  from  sleep. 

On  that  morn  each  soul  will  recognise  its  own  bodv, 

And  return  to  its  own  ruin  like  hidden  treasure. 

It  will  recognise  its  own  body  and  enter  it. 

The  soul  of  the  goldsmith  will  not  enter  the  tailor ; 

The  soul  of  the  wise  will  enter  the  body  of  the  wise, 

The  soul  of  the  unjust  the  body  of  the  unjust. 

In  like  manner  as  the  souls  will  fly  into  their  clay, 

So  will  the  books  fly  into  their  right  hands  and  left.1 
God  will  place  in  their  hands  their  books  of  greed  and 
liberality, 

Of  sin  and  piety,  and  whatever  they  have  practised. 

When  they  shall  awake  from  sleep  on  that  morning, 

All  the  evil  and  good  they  have  done  will  recur  to  them. 

Every  thought  which  has  dwelt  in  them  during  life 

Will  appear  as  a form  visible  to  all,2 

Like  the  thought  of  an  architect  realised  in  a house, 

Or  the  perfect  plant  issuing  from  the  seed  in  the  ground. 

From  onion  and  saffron  and  poppy 

The  hand  of  spring  will  unfold  the  secret  of  winter. 

This  one  will  be  verdant  and  flourish,  saying,  “ We  are  the 
pious ; ” 

That  other  will  hang  his  head  like  the  violet, — 

With  tears  starting  from  his  eyes  through  deadly  fear ; 
Yea,  tens  of  founts  of  tears  through  terrible  dread  ; 

With  eyes  wide  opened  in  deadly  apprehension 
Lest  his  book  may  be  placed  in  his  left  hand. 

Then  will  the  evildoer  be  sent  to  the  fiery  prison, 

1 See  Koran  lxix.  iS. 

2 See  the  parallel  passage  in  Gnlshan  i Raz,  1.  690. 


STORY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAz. 


245 


For  thorn  can  in  no  wise  escape  the  flame. 

When  his  guardian  angels  behind  and  before, 

Who  before  were  unseen,  shall  appear  like  patrols, 

They  will  hurry  him  off,  pricking  him  with  their  spears, 
And  saying.  “ 0 dog,  begone  to  thy  kennel ! 

Then  the  prisoner  will  cry,  “ 0 Lord,  I am  a hundred. 

Yea,  a hundred  times  as  wicked  as  Thou  sayest. 

But  in  mercy  Thou  veilest  my  sins, 

Otherwise  my  vileness  were  known  to  Thy  all-seeing  eye. 
But,  independently  of  my  own  works  and  warfare, — 
Independently  of  my  faith  or  unfaith,  good  or  evil, — 
Independently  of  my  poor  devotion  to  Thee. 

And  of  my  thoughts  and  thethoughtsof  hundreds  like  me, — 
I fix  my  hopes  on  Thy  mercy  alone. 

Whether  Thou  adjudge  me  upright  or  rebellious, 

I sue  for  free  pardon  from  Thy  unbought  justice. 

0 Lord,  who  art  gracious  without  thought  of  consequence, 

1 set  my  face  towards  that  free  grace  of  Thine  ; 

1 have  no  regard  to  my  own  acts. 

I set  my  face  towards  this  hope, 

Seeing  that  Thou  gavest  me  my  being  first  of  all ; 

Thou  gavest  me  the  garment  of  being  unasked, 

Wherefore  I firmly  trust  in  Thy  free  grace.” 

When  he  thus  enumerates  his  sins  and  faults, 

God  at  last  will  grant  him  pardon  as  a free  gift, 

Saying,  “ 0 angels,  bring  him  back  to  me, 

Since  the  eyes  of  his  heart  were  set  on  hope, 

Without  care  for  consequences  I set  him  free, 

And  draw  the  pen  through  the  record  of  his  sins  ! 

Story  VIII.  Mahmud  and  Aytiz 1 (p.  434). 

Mahmud,  the  celebrated  king  of  Ghazni,  had  a favourite 
named  Ayaz,  who  was  greatly  envied  by  the  other  courtiers. 
One  day  they  came  to  the  king  and  informed  him  that 

1 All  the  latter  part  of  this  story  is  a parable  of  the  last  judgment. 


246 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


Ayaz  was  in  the  habit  of  retiring  to  a secret  chamber, 
and  locking  himself  in,  and  that  they  suspected  he  had 
there  concealed  coin  stolen  from  the  treasury,  or  else  wine 
aud  forbidden  drink.  The  fact  was,  that  Ayaz  had  placed 
in  that  chamber  his  old  shoes  and  the  ragged  dress 
which  he  used  to  wear  before  the  king  had  promoted  him 
to  honour,  and  used  to  retire  there  every  day  and  wear 
them  for  a time,  in  order  to  remind  himself  of  his  lowly 
origin,  and  to  prevent  himself  from  being  puffed  up  with 
pride.  This  he  did  in  accordance  with  the  text,  “ Let  man 
reflect  out  of  what  he  was  created.”  1 The  intoxication  of 
the  present  life  puffs  up  many  with  false  pride,  even  as 
Iblis,  who  refused  to  worship  Adam,  saying,  “ Who  is 
Adam,  that  he  should  be  lord  over  me  ? ” This  he  said 
because  he  was  one  of  the  Jinn,  who  are  all  created  of  fire.'2 
Adam,  on  the  other  hand,  confessed  his  own  vileness, 
saying,  “Thou  hast  formed  me  out  of  clay.”  The  king 
was  well  assured  of  the  fidelity  of  Ayaz  ; but  in  order  to 
confute  those  who  suspected  him,  he  ordered  them  to  go 
by  night  and  break  open  that  chamber  and  bring  away 
all  the  treasure  and  other  things  hidden  in  it.  It  is  a 
characteristic  of  evildoers  to  think  evil  of  the  saints, 
because  they  judge  of  their  conduct  by  the  light  of  their 
own  evil  natures,  as  the  crooked  foot  makes  a crooked 
footprint,  and  as  the  spider  sees  things  distorted  through 
the  web  he  has  spun  himself.  The  king’s  conduct  in  this 
did  not  betoken  any  diminution  of  his  love  for  Ayaz, 
because  lover  and  beloved  are  always  as  one  soul,  though 
they  may  be  opposed  to  outward  view.  Accordingly  the 
courtiers  proceeded  to  the  chamber  of  Ayaz  at  night,  and 
broke  open  the  door,  and  searched  the  floor  and  the  walls, 
but  found  only  the  old  shoes  and  the  ragged  dress.  They 
then  returned  to  the  king  discomfited  and  shamefaced, 
even  as  the  wicked  who  have  slandered  the  saints  will 
be  on  the  day  of  judgment,  according  to  the  text,  “ On 
the  resurrection  day  thou  shalt  see  those  who  have  lied 

1 Koran  lxxxvi.  5.  2 Koran  xviii.  4S  and  lv.  14. 


STORY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ. 


247 


of  God  with  their  faces  black.”  1 Then  they  besought  the 
king  to  pardon  their  offence,  but  he  refused,  saying  that 
their  offence  bad  been  committed  against  Ayiu,  and  that 
he  would  leave  it  to  Ayaz  to  decide  whether  they  should 
be  punished  or  pardoned.  If  Ayaz  showed  mercy  it  would 
be  well ; and  if  he  punished  it  would  be  well  also,  for 
"the  law  of  retaliation  is  the  security  for  life.”2  Only 
he  enjoined  him  to  pronounce  the  sentence  without  delay, 
because  “Waiting  is  punishment.” 

A description  of  genuine  union  vrith  God  (p.  438). 

A loved  one  said  to  her  lover  to  try  him, 

Early  one  morning,  “ 0 such  an  one,  son  of  such  an  one, 

I marvel  whether  you  hold  me  more  dear, 

Or  yourself ; tell  me  truly,  0 ardent  suitor  ! ” 

He  answered,  “ I am  so  entirely  absorbed  in  you, 

That  I am  full  of  you  from  head  to  foot. 

Of  my  own  existence  nothing  but  the  name  remains, 

In  my  being  is  nothing  besides  you,  0 Object  of  desire  ! 
Therefore  am  I thus  lost  in  you, 

Just  as  vinegar  is  absorbed  in  honey; 

Or  as  a stone,  which  is  changed  into  a pure  ruby, 

Is  filled  with  the  bright  light  of  the  sun. 

In  that  stone  its  own  properties  abide  not, 

It  is  filled  with  the  sun’s  properties  altogether ; 

So  that,  if  afterwards  it  holds  itself  dear, 

’Tis  the  same  as  holding  the  sun  dear,  0 beloved  ! 

And  if  it  hold  the  sun  dear  in  its  heart, 

’Tis  clearly  the  same  as  holding  itself  dear. 

Whether  that  pure  ruby  hold  itself  dear, 

Or  hold  the  sun  dear. 

There  is  no  difference  between  the  two  preferences ; 

On  either  hand  is  naught  but  the  light  of  dawn. 

But  till  that  stone  becomes  a ruby  it  hates  itself, 

For  till  it  becomes  one  ‘ I,’  it  is  two  separate  ‘ I’s,’ 

2 Koran  ii.  175. 


1 Koran  xxxix.  61. 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


For  ’tis  then  darkened  and  purblind, 

And  darkness  is  the  essential  enemy  of  light. 

If  it  then  hold  itself  dear,  it  is  an  infidel ; 

Because  that  self  is  an  opponent  of  the  mighty  Sun. 
Wherefore  ’tis  unlawful  for  the  stone  then  to  say  ‘ I,’ 
Because  it  is  entirely  in  darkness  and  nothingness.” 
Pharaoh  said,  “I  am  the  Truth,”  and  was  laid  low. 
Mansur  Hallaj  said,  “ I am  the  Truth,”  and  escaped  free.1 
Pharaoh’s  “ I ” was  followed  by  the  curse  of  God  ; 
Mansur’s  “I”  was  followed  by  the  mercy  of  God,  0 beloved  ! 
Because  Pharaoh  was  a stone,  Mansur  a ruby ; 

Pharaoh  an  enemy  of  light,  Mansur  a friend. 

0 prattler,  Mansur’s  “ I am  He  ” was  a deep  mystic  saying, 
Expressing  union  with  the  light,  not  mere  incarnation.2 


Story  IX.  The  sincere  repentance  of  JYasuh  (p.  443). 

Ayaz,  in  weighing  the  pros  and  cons  in  regard  to  par- 
doning the  courtiers,  remarks  that  professions  of  faith  and 
penitence  when  contradicted  by  acts  are  worthless,  accord- 
ing to  the  text,  If  ye  ask  them  who  hath  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  they  will  say  ‘ God ; ’ yet  they 
devise  lies.”3  And  in  illustration  of  this  he  tells  a story 
of  a faithless  husband  who  retired  to  a secret  chamber 
ostensibly  to  say  his  prayers,  but  really  to  carry  on  an 
intrigue  with  a slave-girl,  and  the  falsity  of  whose  pre- 
tences was  demonstrated  by  ocular  proof  of  his  condition. 
In  like  manner,  on  the  day  of  resurrection  man’s  hands 
and  eyes  and  feet  will  bear  witness  against  him  of  the  evil 
actions  done  by  him,  thus  confuting  his  pretences  to  piety. 
The  test  of  a sincere  repentance  is  abhorrence  of  past  sins 
and  utter  abandonment  of  all  pleasure  in  them, — the  old 
love  for  sin  being  superseded  by  the  new  love  for  holiness. 


1 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  Answer  vii. 
p.  45.  Mansur  Hallaj  (woolcarder), 
the  celebrated  Sufi  who  was  put  to 
death  at  Bagdad  iri  309  (A.  H.). 

2 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  454,  and 

note.  The  doctrine  of  the  descent 


of  the  Deity  into  man  (llalul),  or 
incarnation,  is  rejected  both  by 
Rumi  and  Shabistari  in  favour  of  the 
doctrine  of  intimate  union  ( Wahdat). 

3  Koran  xxix.  61. 


STORY  IX.]  THE  REPENTANCE  OF  NASUH.  249 

Such  a repentance  was  that  of  Nasuh.  Nasuh  in  his 
youth  disguised  himself  in  female  attire  and  obtained  em- 
ployment a§  attendant  at  the  women’s  baths,  where  he 
used  to  carry  on  shameful  intrigues  with  some  of  the 
women  who  frequented  the  bath.  At  last,  however,  his 
eyes  were  opened  to  the  wickedness  of  his  conduct,  and 
he  went  to  a holy  man  and  besought  him  to  pray  for  him. 
The  holy  man,  imitating  the  long-suffering  of  the  “ Yeiler 
of  sins,”  did  not  so  much  as  name  his  sin,  but  prayed,  say- 
ing, “ God  give  thee  repentance  of  the  sin  thou  knowest ! ” 
The  prayer  of  that  holy  man  was  accepted,  because  the 
prayers  of  such  an  one  are  the  same  as  God’s  own  will, 
according  to  the  tradition,  “ My  servant  draws  nigh  to  me 
by  pious  works  till  I love  him  ; and  when  I love  him  I 
am  his  ear,  his  eye,  his  tongue,  his  foot,  his  hand ; and  by 
me  he  hears,  sees,  talks,  walks,  and  feels.”  Nasuh  then 
returned  to  the  bath  a truly  repentant  man  ; but  soon 
afterwards  one  of  the  women  frequenting  the  bath  lost  a 
valuable  jewel,  and  the  king  gave  order  that  all  persons 
connected  with  the  bath  should  be  stripped  and  searched. 
When  the  officers  came  to  the  bath  to  execute  this  order 
Nasuh  was  overwhelmed  with  fear,  for  he  knew  that  if 
his  sex  were  discovered  he  would  certainly  be  put  to  death. 
In  his  fear  he  called  upon  God  for  deliverance,  and  swooned 
with  fear  and  became  beside  himself,  so  that  his  natural 
self  was  annihilated,  and  he  became  a new  creature,  even 
as  a corpse  rising  from  the  grave.  When  he  came  to 
himself  he  found  that  the  lost  jewel  had  been  found,  and 
those  who  had  suspected  him  came  and  begged  his  pardon. 
Shortly  afterwards  the  king’s  daughter  sent  for  him  to 
come  and  wash  her  head ; but,  in  spite  of  her  imperative 
commands,  he  refused  to  place  himself  again  in  the  way 
of  temptation,  lest  he  might  fall  again,  and  God  might 
“ make  easy  to  him  the  path  to  destruction.”  1 


1 Koran  xcii.  10. 


250 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  v. 


Man's  members  will  bear  witness  against  him  on  the  day  of 

judgment,  and  confute  his  claims  to  piety  (p.  443). 

On  the  resurrection  day  all  secrets  will  be  disclosed  ; 

Yea,  every  guilty  one  will  be  convicted  by  himself. 

Hand  and  foot  will  bear  testimony  openly 
Before  the  Almighty  concerning  their  owner’s  sins. 

Hand  will  say,  “I  stole  such  and  such  things 
Lip  will  say,  “ I asked  for  such  and  such  things.” 

Foot  will  say,  “ I went  after  my  own  desires  ; ” 

Arm  will  say,  “ I embraced  the  harlot.” 

Eye  will  say,  “ I looked  after  forbidden  things  ; ” 

Ear  will  say,  “ I listened  to  evil  talk.” 

Thus  the  man  will  be  shown  to  be  a liar  from  head  to  foot, 
Since  his  own  members  will  prove  him  to  be  a liar. 

Story  X.  The  Lion,  the  Fox,  and  the  Ass  (p.  445). 

As  an  instance  of  false  and  insincere  repentance,  a story 
is  next  told,  which  is  also  found  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the 
Anwar  i Suhaili.  A lion  had  been  wounded  in  fight  with 
a male  elephant,  and  was  unable  to  hunt  game  for  himself. 
In  this  strait  he  called  a fox  who  was  wont  to  attend  upon 
him,  and  to  live  on  the  meat  that  was  left  from  his  re- 
pasts, just  as  disciples  attending  on  a saint  subsist  on  the 
heavenly  food  dropping  from  his  lips.  He  called  this  fox, 
and  bade  him  go  and  entice  some  animal  to  come  near  his 
lair,  so  that  he  might  kill  it  and  make  a meal  of  it.  The 
fox  went  and  searched  the  neighbourhood,  and  at  last  found 
a lean  and  hungry  ass  who  was  grazing  in  a stony  place 
where  there  was  little  or  no  grass.  The  fox,  after  making 
due  salutations,  condoled  with  the  ass  on  his  unfortunate 
condition  ; but  the  ass  replied  that  it  was  his  divinely 
appointed  lot,  and  that  it  would  be  impious  to  complain 
of  the  dispensations  of  Providence.  He  also  instanced 
the  case  of  the  ass  of  a water-carrier,  which,  after  having 
starved  and  worked  hard  in  its  master’s  service,  by  chance 


2,1 


STORY  x.]  THE  LION,  THE  FOX,  AND  THE  ASS. 

found  admittance  to  the  king’s  stables,  where  it  was  struck 
by  the  sleek  appearance  of  the  horses.  But  one  day  the 
horses  were  taken  out  to  battle,  and  returned  in  a most 
miserable  plight,  some  grievously  wounded,  and  others 
dyiug.  After  seeing  this  sight  it  determined  that  its  own 
hard  life  was  preferable,  and  returned  to  its  master.  The 
fox  replied  that  the  ass  was  wrong  in  carrying  passive 
resignation  to  such  an  extent  as  to  refuse  to  try  to  better 
his  condition  when  the  opportunity  of  doing  so  presented 
itself,  because  God  says,  “ Go  in  quest  of  the  bounties  of 
God.”  1 He  added,  if  the  ass  would  come  with  him,  he 
would  take  him  to  a delightful  meadow,  where  he  would 
never  lack  plenty  of  grass  all  the  year  round.  The  ass 
rejoined  that  the  command  to  strive  for  sustenance  was 
only  issued  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  man’s  faith. 
The  fox  replied  that  this  exalted  faith  was  only  vouchsafed 
to  a few  great  saints,  because  the  Prophet  describes  con- 
tentment as  a treasure,  and  treasure  is  not  found  by  every 
one.  The  ass  rejoined  that  the  fox  was  perverting  the 
Scripture,  as  no  pious  man  who  trusted  in  God  was  ever 
forsaken.  In  illustration  of  this  he  told  an  anecdote  of  a 
devotee  who  determined  to  put  the  matter  to  the  test, 
and  went  out  into  the  desert,  trusting  only  to  God  to 
supply  his  wants,  and  resolved  to  seek  no  aid  of  man,  and 
not  to  exert  himself  in  any  way  to  gain  food.  He  lay 
down  on  a stone  and  went  to  sleep ; and  God  sent  a 
caravan  of  travellers  that  way,  who  found  him,  and  forced 
him  to  take  food  in  spite  of  himself.  The  fox  again 
pressed  the  ass  to  try  to  better  his  condition,  saying  that 
God  had  given  men  hands  to  use,  and  not  to  do  nothing 
with.  The  ass  answered  that  he  knew  of  no  occupation 
and  exertion  better  than  trust  in  God,  as  worldly  occupa- 
tions often  lead  to  ruin,  according  to  the  text,  “ Throw  not 
yourselves  with  your  own  hands  into  ruin.”  2 But  though 
the  ass  repeated  all  these  excellent  precepts,  yet  it  was 
only  so  much  cant  on  his  part,  because  he  was  not  firmly 

1 Koran  Ixii.  io.  2 Koran  ii.  191. 


252 


THE  MASNA  VI. 


[book  V. 

rooted  in  the  faith.  He  had  all  the  time  a carnal  hanker- 
ing after  the  pleasant  grazing-ground  the  fox  told  him 
of,  and  the  objections  he  made  were  only  a parrot-like 
repetition  of  precepts  heard,  but  not  thoroughly  under- 
stood and  taken  to  heart.  To  illustrate  the  worthless 
nature  of  mere  imitated  religion  and  profession  divorced 
from  practice,  a story  is  told  of  an  infamous  fellow  who 
used  to  carry  a dagger  to  protect,  as  he  said,  his  honour, 
though  his  every  action  showed  that  he  had  neither 
honour  to  protect  nor  manliness  to  protect  it.  The  ass 
though,  like  Abraham,  he  had  broken  his  idols,  had  not 
a sufficiently  rooted  faith  to  leap,  like  Abi’aham,  into  the 
fire,  and  thus  prove  his  faith.  [Here  the  poet  apologises 
for  the  trivial  illustrations  he  uses  by  citing  the  text, 
“ Verily  God  is  not  ashamed  to  set  forth  as  well  the  instance 
of  a gnat  as  of  any  nobler  object.”  *]  Finally  the  ass 
yielded  to  the  fox’s  enticement,  and  accompanied  him  to 
the  lion’s  lair.  The  lion,  being  famished  with  hunger, 
sprang  upon  him  the  moment  he  appeared.  Being,  how- 
ever, weak  with  sickness  and  fasting,  he  missed  his  aim, 
and  the  ass  escaped  with  a slight  wound.  Then  the  fox 
blamed  the  lion  for  his  precipitation,  and  the  lion,  after 
excusing  himself  as  best  he  could,  persuaded  the  fox  to  try 
to  allure  the  ass  a second  time  into  his  lair.  The  fox  con- 
sented to  try,  observing  that  experience  would  probably 
have  been  thrown  away  on  an  ass,  and  his  vows  of  repent- 
ance forgotten.  Those  who  lapse  from  repentance,  in  for- 
getfulness of  their  former  experience,  may  be  compared 
to  the  Jews  changed  into  apes  and  swine  by  ’Isa.2  The 
fox  was  received  by  the  ass  with  many  reproaches  for 
having  deceived  him  ; but  he  at  last  managed  to  persuade 
the  ass  that  what  he  had  seen  was  not  a real  lion,  but  only 
a harmless  talisman ; and  the  silly  ass  allowed  himself  to 
be  again  deluded,  and  forgot  his  vows  of  repentance, 
and  again  followed  the  fox  to  the  lion’s  lair,  where  he 
speedily  met  his  doom. 

1 Koran  ii.  24.  2 Koran  v.  65. 


STORY  x.]  THE  LION,  THE  FOX,  AND  THE  ASS. 


Men  who  make  professions  of  holiness  merely  from  blind 
imitation  of  others  arc  detected  and  confuted  by  the 
opposition  between  their  words  and  their  deeds  (p.  449). 

A man  asked  a camel,  saying,  “ Ho  ! whence  comest  thou, 
Thou  beast  of  auspicious  footstep  ? ’’ 

He  replied,  “ From  the  hot  bath  of  thy  street.” 

The  man  said,  “That  is  proved  false  by  thy  dirty  legs ! ” 
So,  when  stubborn  Pharaoh  saw  Moses’  staff  a serpent, 
And  begged  for  a delay  (to  fetch  magicians)1  and  relented, 
Wise  men  said,  “ He  ought  to  have  become  harsher, 

If  he  really  be,  as  he  says,  the  Lord  Supreme.2 
What  could  miracles  such  as  these  of  serpents, 

Or  even  dragons,  matter  to  the  majesty  of  his  divinity  ? 

If  he  be  really  Lord  Supreme,  seated  on  his  throne. 

What  need  has  he  to  wheedle  a worm  like  Moses  ? ” 

0 babbler,  while  thy  soul  is  drunk  with  mere  date  wine, 
Thy  spirit  hath  not  tasted  the  genuine  grapes. 

For  the  token  of  thy  having  seen  that  divine  light 
Is  this,  to  withdraw  thyself  from  the  house  of  pride. 
When  a fowl  flies  to  the  salt  water. 

It  has  never  beheld  the  blessing  of  sweet  water ; 

But  its  faith  is  mere  imitation  of  other  fowl, 

And  its  soul  has  never  seen  the  face  of  real  faith. 
Wherefore  the  blind  imitator  encounters  great  perils, — 
Perils  of  the  road,  of  robbers,  of  cursed  Satans. 

But  when  he  has  seen  the  light  of  God,  he  is  safe 
From  the  agitation  of  doubt,  and  is  firm  in  the  faith. 

Till  the  foam  has  landed  on  the  shore  aud  dry  land. 
Which  is  its  home,  it  is  ever  tossed  to  and  fro. 

’Tis  at  home  on  the  land,  but  a stranger  on  the  water. 
While  it  remains  a stranger,  it  must  be  tossed  about. 
When  its  eyes  are  opened,  and  it  sees  the  vision  of  land, 
Satan  has  no  longer  any  domination  over  it. 

Although  the  ass  repeated  verities  to  the  fox, 

1 Koran  xx.  25.  2 Koran  xxviii.  38. 


254 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


He  spoke  them  idly  and  in  the  way  of  cant. 

He  praised  the  water,  hut  was  not  eager  to  drink ; 

He  rent  his  garments  and  his  hair,  but  was  no  real  lover. 
The  excuse  of  a hypocrite  is  rejected,  not  approved, 
Because  it  comes  only  from  the  lips,  not  from  the  heart. 
He  has  the  scent  of  the  apple,  but  not  a piece  of  it, 

And  the  scent  only  for  the  purpose  of  misleading  others. 
Thus  a woman’s  onset  in  the  midst  of  a battle  array, — 
She  keeps  in  line,  and  forms  part  of  the  battle  array, 

Yet,  though  she  looks  a very  lion  as  she  stands  in  line, 
Her  hand  begins  to  tremble  as  soon  as  she  takes  a sword. 
Woe  to  him  whose  reason  is  like  a woman 
While  his  lust  is  like  a resolute  man ! 

Of  a certainty  his  reason  will  be  worsted  in  the  fight, 

And  his  imitation  of  a man  will  only  lead  him  to  ruin. 
Happy  is  he  whose  reason  is  masculine, 

And  his  ugly  lust  feminine  and  under  subjection  ! 

Though  the  mere  imitator  quotes  a hundred  proofs, 

They  are  all  based  on  opinion,  not  on  conviction. 

He  is  only  scented  with  musk,  he  is  not  himself  musk  ; 

He  smells  of  musk,  but  is  really  naught  but  dung. 

For  his  dung  to  become  musk,  0 disciple, 

He  must  graze  year  after  year  in  the  divine  pasture. 

For  he  who,  like  the  musk-deer,  feeds  on  saffron  of  Kboten 
Must  not  eat  grass  and  oats  like  asses. 

That  man  of  cant  has  at  his  tongue’s  end 
A hundred  proofs  and  precepts,  but  there  is  no  life  in 
him. 

When  the  preacher  has  himself  no  light  or  life, 

How  can  his  words  yield  leaves  and  fruit  ? 

He  impudently  preaches  to  others  to  walk  aright, 

While  himself  he  is  unsteady  as  a reed  shaken  by  wind. 
Thus,  though  his  preaching  is  very  eloquent, 

It  hides  within  it  unsteadiness  in  the  faith. 


STORY  x.]  THE  LION,  THE  FOX,  AND  THE  ASS. 


-33 


In  order  to  gain  true  wisdom  man  must  shake  off 
worldly  illusions  (p.  453). 

The  fox  said,  “ In  my  pure  wine  there  are  no  dregs  : 

These  vain  suspicions  are  not  becoming. 

All  this  is  only  baseless  suspicion,  0 simple  one, 

Else  you  would  know  I am  not  plotting  against  you. 

You  repudiate  me  on  account  of  your  own  bad  fancies  ; 
Why  do  you  thus  suspect  your  true  friends  ? 

Think  well  of  the  ‘ Brothers  of  purity/  1 
Even  though  they  show  harshness  toward  you  ; 

For  when  evil  suspicion  takes  hold  of  you, 

It  severs  you  from  hundreds  of  friends. 

If  a tender  friend  treats  you  roughly  to  try  you, 

’Tis  contrary  to  reason  to  distrust  him. 

Though  I bear  a bad  name,  my  nature  is  not  malevolent ; 
What  you  saw  was  not  dangerous,  it  was  only  a talisman. 
But  even  if  there  were  danger  in  that  object  of  suspicion, 
Friends  always  pardon  an  offence.” 

This  world  of  illusions,  fancies,  desires,  and  fears, 

Is  a mighty  obstacle  in  the  traveller’s  path. 

Thus,  when  these  forms  of  delusive  imaginations 
Misled  Abraham,  who  was  a very  mountain  of  wisdom. 

He  said  of  the  star,  “This  is  my  Lord,”2 

Having  fallen  into  the  midst  of  the  world  of  illusion. 

He  thus  interpreted  the  meaning  of  sun  and  stars, — 

Yea,  he,  that  great  man  who  threaded  jewels  of  interpre- 
tation, 

Seeing  then  that  this  world  of  eye-fascinating  illusion 
Seduced  from  the  right  path  such  a mountain  as  Abraham, 
So  that  he  said  of  the  star,  “ This  is  my  Lord,” — 

What  will  not  its  illusions  effect  on  a stupid  ass  ? 

Human  reason  is  drowned,  like  the  high  mountains, 

In  the  flood  of  illusion  and  vain  imaginations. 

The  very  mountains  are  overwhelmed  by  this  flood, 

1 A society  at  Basra,  “ lhhwanu-s-safa,”  who  wrote,  about  9S0  A.D.,  an 
encyclopaedia  of  philosophy  (trans.  by  Dieterici).  2 Koran  vi.  76. 


256 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  v. 


Where  is  safety  to  be  found  save  in  Noah’s  ark  ? 

By  illusions  that  plunder  the  road  of  faith 

The  faithful  have  been  split  into  seventy-two  sects. 

But  the  man  of  conviction  escapes  illusion ; 

He  does  not  mistake  his  eyelash  for  the  new  moon. 

He  who  is  divorced  from  ’Omar’s  light 
Is  deceived  by  his  own  crooked  eyelash.1 
Thousands  of  ships,  in  all  their  majesty  and  pomp, 

Have  gone  to  pieces  in  this  sea  of  illusion. 

Then  follows  an  anecdote  of  Shaikh  Muhammad  of 
Ghazni,  who  was  named  “ Sar  i Razi,”  because  he  used  to 
take  only  a vine-leaf  to  break  his  fast.  He  dwelt  a long 
time  in  the  desert,  and  was  there  miraculously  preserved 
from  death,  and  directed  by  divine  intimation  to  proceed 
to  Ghazni,  and  beg  money  of  the  rich  and  distribute  it  to 
the  poor.  After  he  had  done  this  some  time  a second 
intimation  came  to  him  to  beg  no  longer,  as  the  money 
for  his  charities  would  be  supplied  to  him  miraculously. 
He  at  last  attained  to  such  a degree  of  spiritual  insight 
that  he  knew  the  wants  of  those  who  came  to  him  for  aid 
before  they  uttered  them.  He  said  the  reason  of  this 
preternatural  discernment  was,  that  he  had  purified  his 
heart  of  all  but  the  love  of  God,  and  thus,  whenever 
thoughts  of  anything  besides  God  occurred  to  his  mind, 
he  knew  they  did  not  appertain  to  him,  but  must  have 
been  in  some  way  suggested  to  him  by  the  person  asking 
aid  of  him. 

Then  follow  some  reflections  on  the  power  of  fasting 
and  abstinence  to  subdue  the  carnal  lusts  which  lead  man 
to  destruction ; and  two  short  anecdotes  to  illustrate  the 
thesis  that  God  never  fails  to  provide  sustenance  for  those 
who  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  but  place  absolute 
trust  in  Him. 

The  fate  of  the  ass  then  suggests  to  the  poet  another 
train  of  reflections.  After  the  lion  had  slain  the  ass,  he 

1 Alluding  to  the  first  anecdote  in  Book  ii. 


stokyx.]  THE  LION , THE  FOX,  AND  THE  ASS. 


257 


went  to  the  river  to  quench  his  thirst,  telling  the  fox  to 
watch  the  dead  body  till  he  returned ; but  the  moment 
the  lion’s  back  was  turned  the  fox  ate  up  the  heart  and 
liver,  which  are  the  daintiest  parts.  When  the  lion  re- 
turned and  inquired  for  them,  the  fox  assured  him  that 
the  ass  had  possessed  neither  a heart  nor  a liver,  for  if  he 
had  he  would  never  have  shown  himself  so  stupid.  Men 
without  understanding  are  not  really  men  at  all,  but  only 
simulacra  or  forms  of  men.  For  lack  of  understanding 
many  will  cry  in  the  world  to  come,  Had  we  but  heark- 
ened or  understood,  we  had  not  been  among  the  dwellers 
in  the  flame.”  1 Then  follows  a story  of  a monk  (Diogenes) 
who  took  a lantern  and  searched  all  through  a bazaar 
crowded  with  men  to  find,  as  he  said,  a man. 

The  monk’s  search  for  a man  (p.  459). 

The  monk  said.  “ I am  searching  everywhere  for  a man 
Who  lives  by  the  life  of  the  breath  of  God.” 

The  other  said,  “ Here  are  men  ; the  bazaar  is  full ; 

These  are  surely  men,  0 enlightened  sage  ! ” 

The  monk  said,  “ I seek  a man  who  walks  straight 
As  well  in  the  road  of  anger  as  in  that  of  lust. 

Where  is  one  who  shows  himself  a man  in  anger  and  lust  ? 
In  search  of  such  an  one  I run  from  street  to  street. 

If  there  be  one  who  is  a true  man  in  these  two  states, 

I will  yield  up  my  life  for  him  this  day ! ” 

The  other,  who  was  a fatalist,  said,  “ What  you  seek  is 
rare. 

But  you  are  ignorant  of  the  force  of  the  divine  decree ; 
You  see  the  branches,  but  ignore  the  root. 

We  men  are  but  branches,  God’s  eternal  decree  the  root. 
That  decree  turns  from  its  course  the  revolving  sky, 

And  makes  foolish  hundreds  of  planets  like  Mercury. 

It  reduces  to  helplessness  the  world  of  devices ; 

It  turns  steel  and  stone  to  water. 


1 Koran  lxxvii.  10. 


R 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


258 


[book  V. 


0 you  who  attribute  stability  to  these  steps  on  the  road, 
You  are  one  of  the  raw  ones ; yea,  raw,  raw  ! 

When  you  have  seen  the  millstone  turning  round, 

Then,  prithee,  go  and  see  the  stream  that  turns  it. 

When  you  have  seen  the  dust  rising  up  into  the  air, 

Go  and  mark  the  air  in  the  midst  of  the  dust. 

You  see  the  kettles  of  thought  boiling  over, 

Look  with  intelligence  at  the  fire  beneath  them. 

God  said  to  Job,  ‘Out  of  my  clemency 

1 have  given  a grain  of  patience  to  every  hair  of  thine.’ 
Look  not,  then,  so  much  at  your  own  patience  ; 

After  seeing  patience,  look  to  the  Giver  of  patience. 

How  long  will  you  confine  your  view  to  the  waterwheel  ? 
Lift  up  your  head  and  view  also  the  water.” 


Story  XI.  The  Musulman  who  tried  to  convert  a Magian 
(p.  460). 

A Musulman  pressed  a Magian  to  embrace  the  true 
faith.  The  Magian  replied,  “ If  God  wills  it,  no  doubt  I 
shall  do  so.”  The  Musulman  replied,  “ God  certainly 
wills  it,  that  your  soul  may  be  saved  from  hell ; but  your 
own  evil  lusts  and  the  Devil  hold  you  back.”  The  Magian 
retorted,  using  the  arguments  of  the  Jabriijan  or  “ Com- 
pulsionists,”  that  on  earth  God  is  sole  sovereign,  and  that 
Satan  and  lust  exist  and  act  only  in  furtherance  of  God’s 
will.  To  hold  that  God  is  pulling  men  one  way  and  Satan 
another  is  to  derogate  from  God’s  sovereignty.  Man  cannot 
help  moving  in  the  direction  he  is  most  strongly  impelled 
to  go ; if  he  is  impelled  wrongly  he  is  no  more  to  blame 
than  a building  designed  for  a mosque  but  degraded  into 
a fire-temple,  or  a piece  of  cloth  designed  for  a coat  but 
altered  into  a pair  of  trousers.  The  truth  is,  that  whatever 
occurs  is  according  to  God’s  will,  and  Satan  himself  is  only 

1 Kuini’8  own  doctrine  seems  to  be  like  Butler’s  (“  Analogy,”  I.  6),  viz., 
that  although  the  doctrine  of  compulsion  or  necessity  be  true,  still  men 
cannot  help  acting  as  if  they  were  free-agents. 


STORY  XI.]  THE  MUSULMAN  AND  THE  MAGI  AN.  259 


one  of  His  agents.  Satan  resembles  the  Turkoman’s  dog 
who  sits  at  the  door  of  the  tent,  and  is  “ vehement  against 
aliens,  but  full  of  tenderness  to  friends.”  1 The  Musulman 
then  replied  with  the  arguments  of  the  Qadarians  and 
Mu' tazilites,  to  prove  the  freedom  of  the  will  and  conse- 
quent responsibility  of  man  for  his  actions.  He  urged  that 
man’s  free  agency  and  consequent  responsibility  are  recog- 
nised in  common  parlance,  as  when  we  order  a man  to  act 
in  a certain  way, — that  God  expressly  assumes  man  to  be 
a free  agent  by  addressing  commands  and  prohibitions  to 
him.  and  by  specially  exempting  some,  such  as  the  blind, - 
from  responsibility  for  certain  acts, — that  our  internal 
consciousness  assures  us  of  our  power  of  choice,  just  as 
outward  sense  assures  us  of  properties  in  material  objects, 
— and  that  it  is  just  as  sophistical  to  disbelieve  the  declara- 
tions of  the  interior  consciousness,  as  those  of  the  outward 
senses  as  to  the  reality  of  the  material  world.  He  then 
told  an  anecdote  of  a man  caught  robbing  a garden  and 
defending  himself  with  the  fatalist  plea  of  irresponsibility, 
to  whom  the  owner  of  the  garden  replied  by  administering 
a very  severe  beating,  and  assuring  him  that  this  beating 
was  also  predestined,  and  that  he  therefore  could  not  help 
administering  it.  He  concluded  his  argument  by  repeating 
that  the  traditions,  “Whatever  God  wills  is,”  and  “The 
pen  is  diy,  and  alters  not  its  writing,”  are  not  inconsistent 
with  the  existence  of  freewill  in  man.  They  are  not 
intended  to  reduce  good  action  and  evil  to  the  same  level, 
but  good  actions  will  always  entail  good  consequences, 
and  bad  actions  the  reverse.  A devotee  admired  the 
splendid  apparel  of  the  slaves  of  the  Chief  of  Herat,  and 
cried  to  Heaven,  “ Ah  ! learn  from  this  Chief  how  to  treat 
faithful  slaves ! ” Shortly  after  the  Chief  was  deposed, 
and  his  slaves  were  put  to  the  torture  to  make  them  reveal 
where  the  Chief  had  hidden  his  treasure,  but  not  one  would 
betray  the  secret.  Then  a voice  from  heaven  came  to  the 
devotee,  saying,  “ Learn  from  them  how  to  be  a faithful 

1 Koran  xlviii.  29.  2 Koran  xxiv.  60. 


260 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 

slave,  and  then  look  for  recompense.”  The  Magian,  un- 
convinced by  the  arguments  of  the  Musulman,  again  plied 
him  with  “ Compulsionist  ” arguments,  and  the  discussion 
was  protracted,  with  the  usual  result  of  leaving  both  the 
disputants  of  the  same  opinion  as  when  they  began.  The 
poet  remarks  that  the  contest  of  the  “ Compulsionists  ” and 
the  advocates  of  man’s  free  agency  will  endure  till  the  day 
of  judgment;  for  nothing  can  resolve  these  difficulties 1 but 
the  true  love  which  is  “ a gift  imparted  by  God  to  whom 
He  will.”2 


Love  puts  reason  to  silence  (p.  467). 

Love  is  a perfect  muzzle  of  evil  suggestions  ; 

Without  love  who  ever  succeeded  in  stopping  them? 

Be  a lover,  and  seek  that  fair  Beauty, 

Hunt  for  that  Waterfowl  in  every  stream  ! 

How  can  you  get  water  from  that  which  cuts  it  off? 

How  gain  understanding  from  what  destroys  under- 
standing ? 

Apart  from  principles  of  reason  are  other  principles 
Of  light  and  great  price  to  be  gained  by  love  of  God. 
Besides  this  reason  of  yours  God  has  other  reasons 
Which  will  procure  for  you  heavenly  nourishment. 

By  your  carnal  reason  you  may  procure  earthly  food. 

By  God-given  reason  you  may  mount  the  heavens. 

When,  to  win  enduring  love  of  God,  you  sacrifice  reason, 
God  gives  you  “a  tenfold  recompense;  ”3  yea,  seven  hun- 
dred fold. 

When  those  Egyptian  women  sacrificed  their  reason,4 
They  penetrated  the  mansion  of  Joseph’s  love  ; 

The  Cup-bearer  of  life  bore  away  their  reason, 

They  were  filled  with  wisdom  of  the  world  without  end. 
Joseph’s  beauty  was  only  an  offshoot  of  God’s  beauty ; 

Be  lost,  then,  in  God’s  beauty  more  than  those  women. 

1 The  Prophet  said,  “Sit  not  with  3 Koran  vi.  161. 

a disputer  about  fate,  nor  converse  4 “ And  when  they  saw  him  they 
with  him.’’  were  amazed  at  him,  and  cut  their 

2 Koran  iii.  66.  hands”  (Koran  xii.  31). 


story  viii.]  MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ.  261 

Love  of  God  cuts  short  reasonings,  0 beloved, 

For  it  is  a present  refuge  from  perplexities. 

Through  love  bewilderment  befalls  the  power  of  speech, 

It  no  longer  dares  to  utter  what  passes  ; 

For  if  it  sets  forth  an  answer,  it  fears  greatly 
That  its  secret  treasure  may  escape  its  lips. 

Therefore  it  closes  lips  from  saying  good  or  bad, 

So  that  its  treasure  may  not  escape  it. 

Iu  like  manner  the  Prophet’s  companions  tell  us, 

“ When  the  Prophet  used  to  tell  us  deep  sayings, 

That  chosen  one,  while  scattering  pearls  of  speech, 

Would  bid  us  preserve  perfect  quiet  and  silence.” 

So,  when  the  mighty  phcenix  hovers  over  your  head,' 
Causing  your  soul  to  tremble  at  the  motion  of  its  wings, 
You  venture  not  to  stir  from  your  place, 

Lest  that  bird  of  good  fortune  should  take  wing. 

You  hold  your  breath  and  repress  your  coughs, 

So  as  not  to  scare  that  phoenix  into  flying  away. 

And  if  one  say  a word  to  you,  whether  good  or  bad, 

You  place  finger  on  lip,  as  much  as  to  say,  “ Be  silent.” 
That  phoenix  is  bewilderment,2  it  makes  you  silent ; 

The  kettle  is  silent,  though  it  is  boiling  all  the  while. 

Story  VIII.  ( continued ).  Mahmud  and  Ay&z  (p.  467). 

The  poet  now  returns  to  the  story  of  Mahmud  and  Ayaz, 
which  is  continued  at  intervals  till  the  end  of  the  book. 
The  king  inquired  of  Ayaz  what  made  him  continually 
visit  his  old  shoes  and  garments,  as  Majnun  used  to  visit 
his  Laila,  or  as  a Christian  regularly  visits  his  priest  to 
obtain  absolution  for  his  sins.  Why  should  he  call  to 
these  dead  things,  like  a fond  mother  calling  to  her  dead 
infant,  were  it  not  that  faith  and  love  made  them,  as  it 
were,  living  beings  to  him  ? The  eye  sees  what  it  brings 

1 It  is  supposed  to  bring  good  the  light  of  absolute  Being  draws 

fortune.  near  to  him,  and  “ blinds  him  with 

2 Bewilderment  is  the  “ truly  excess  of  light.”  See  Gulshan  i Raz, 
mystical  darkness  of  ignorance  ” p.  1 3,  and  notes. 

which  falls  upon  the  mystic  when 


262 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  v. 


with  it  to  see  ; it  can  see  nothing  but  what  it  has  gained 
the  faculty  of  seeing.  Thus  the  face  of  Laila,  which  seemed 
so  lovely  to  the  eyes  of  Majnun,  made  clairvoyant  by  love, 
seemed  to  strangers  to  have  no  claims  to  beauty.  The 
earthly  forms  which  here  surround  us  are,  as  it  were, 
vessels  fraught  with  spiritual  wine,  only  visible  to  those 
who  have  learnt  to  discern  the  deep  things  of  the  Spirit. 

Love  and  faith  are  a mighty  spell  (p.  467). 

0 Ayaz,  what  is  this  love  of  yours  for  your  old  shoes, 
Which  resembles  the  love  of  a lover  for  his  mistress  ? 

You  have  made  these  old  shoes  your  object  of  devotion, 
Just  as  Majnun  made  an  idol  of  his  Laila ! 

You  have  bound  the  affection  of  your  soul  to  them, 

And  hung  them  up  in  your  secret  chamber. 

How  long  will  you  say  orisons  to  this  old  pair  of  shoes  ? 
And  breathe  your  oft-told  secrets  into  inanimate  ears  ? 
Like  the  Arab  lover  to  the  house  of  his  dead  mistress, 
You  address  to  them  long  invocations  of  love. 

Of  what  great  Asaf  were  your  shoes  the  house  ? 

Is  your  old  garment,  think  you,  the  coat  of  Yusuf? 

Like  a Christian  who  confesses  to  a priest 

His  past  year’s  sins  of  fornication,  fraud,  and  deceit ; 

In  order  that  the  priest  may  absolve  him  of  those  sins  ; 
He  thinks  the  priest’s  absolution  the  same  as  God’s ! 

That  priest  is  unable  to  condemn  or  to  absolve  ; — 

But  faith  and  love  are  a mighty  enchantment ! 

God's  dealings  visible  to  the  spiritual  (p.  468). 

The  wine  is  from  that  world,  the  vessels  from  this ; 

The  vessels  are  seen,  but  the  wine  is  hidden ! — 

Hidden  indeed  from  the  sight  of  the  carnal, 

But  open  and  manifest  to  the  spiritual ! 

0 God,  our  eyes  are  blinded ! 

0 pardon  us,  our  sins  are  a heavy  burden ! 


STORY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ. 


263 


Thou  art  hidden  from  us,  though  the  heavens  are  filled 
With  Thy  light,  which  is  brighter  than  sun  and  moon ! 
Thou  art  hidden,  yet  revealest  our  hidden  secrets ! 

Thou  art  the  source  that  causes  our  rivers  to  flow. 

Thou  art  hidden  in  Thy  essence,  but  seen  by  Thy  bounties. 
Thou  art  like  the  water,  and  we  like  the  millstone. 

Thou  art  like  the  wind,  and  we  like  the  dust ; 

The  wind  is  unseen,  but  the  dust  is  seen  by  all. 

Thou  art  the  spring,  and  we  the  sweet  green  garden ; 
Spring  is  not  seen,  though  its  gifts  are  seen. 

Thou  art  as  the  soul,  we  as  hand  and  foot ; 

Soul  instructs  hand  and  foot  to  hold  and  take. 

Thou  art  as  reason,  we  like  the  tongue ; 

’Tis  reason  that  teaches  the  tongue  to  speak. 

Thou  art  as  joy,  and  we  are  laughing ; 

The  laughter  is  the  consequence  of  the  joy. 

Our  every  motion  every  moment  testifies, 

For  it  proves  the  presence  of  the  Everlasting  God. 

So  the  revolution  of  the  millstone,  so  violent, 

Testifies  to  the  existence  of  a stream  of  water. 

0 Thou  who  art  above  our  conceptions  and  descriptions, 
Dust  be  on  our  heads,  and  upon  our  similitudes  of  Thee ! 
Yet  Thy  slaves  never  cease  devising  images  of  Thee ; 
They  cry  to  Thee  alway,  “ My  life  is  Thy  footstool ! ” 

Like  that  shepherd  who  cried,  “ 0 Lord ! 1 
Come  nigh  to  thy  faithful  shepherd, 

That  he  may  cleanse  thy  garment  of  vermin. 

And  mend  thy  shoes,  and  kiss  the  hem  of  thy  robe  ! ” 

No  one  equalled  that  shepherd  in  love  and  devotion, 
Though  his  manner  of  expressing  it  was  most  faulty. 

His  love  pitched  its  tent  on  the  heavens, 

He  himself  was  as  the  dog  at  the  tent-door. 

When  the  sea  of  love  to  God  boiled  up, 

It  touched  his  heart,  but  it  touches  your  ears  only. 

The  thesis  that  silence  may  indicate  emotions  too  deep 

1 Alluding  to  Story  vii.  Book  II. 


264 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  V. 


for  expression,  while  eloquent  expressions  may  indicate 
that  the  ears  only,  and  not  the  heart,  have  been  touched, 
is  next  illustrated  by  a ludicrous  anecdote  of  a dwarf  who 
disguised  himself  as  a woman,  and  presented  himself  at  a 
sermon  addressed  to  women.  This  dwarf  played  a trick 
on  a woman  sitting  next  him,  which  made  her  cry  out, 
and  the  preacher  fancied  that  his  sermon  had  touched 
her  heart ; but  the  dwarf  said  that  if  her  heart  had  been 
touched  she  would  not  have  betrayed  her  feelings  by 
publishing  them  to  the  whole  congregation. 

The  king  then  again  pressed  Ayaz  to  explain  the 
mystery  of  his  regard  for  the  old  shoes  and  rags,  in  order 
to  admonish  the  courtiers,  for  he  said  that  the  beauty  of 
true  holiness  is  such  that  it  attracts  even  infidels.  To 
illustrate  this  he  told  an  anecdote  of  a Musulman  who 
tried  to  convert  a Gueber  in  the  time  of  Bayazid.  The 
Gueber  said  that  he  admired  andenviedthe  faith  of  Bayazid, 
though  he  had  no  power  to  imitate  it ; but  as  for  the  faith 
of  the  missionary  who  was  trying  to  convert  him,  it  only 
inspired  him  with  aversion,  because  it  was  plainly  insincere 
and  hypocritical.  And  he  told  an  anecdote  of  a harsh- 
voiced Mu’azzin  who  went  into  a heathen  country  and 
there  uttered  the  call  to  prayer.  It  happened  that  there 
was  a girl  in  that  place  who  had  long  been  inclined  to 
embrace  Islam,  much  to  the  grief  of  her  parents ; but 
when  she  heard  this  harsh  call  she  was  at  once  cured  of 
her  wish  to  forsake  her  own  religion.  Her  father  was  so 
delighted  at  this  that  he  ran  out  and  loaded  the  Mu’azzin 
with  gifts.  The  Gueber  said  the  missionary  had  cured 
him  of  the  wish  to  embrace  Islam,  just  as  the  girl  was 
cured  by  the  Mu’azzin’s  harsh  voice.  But  he  said  he  still 
retained  his  reverence  for  the  faith  of  Bayazid,  though  he 
failed  to  understand  how  so  much  spirituality  as  was  seen 
in  Bayazid  could  be  contained  in  an  earthly  body.  He 
gave  a curious  illustration  of  his  meaning.  A man  brought 
home  a piece  of  meat  weighing  over  half  a man,  to  provide 
a meal  for  a guest ; but  his  wife,  who  was  very  greedy,  ate 


STORY  XII.]  THE  DEVOTEE  AND  THE  WINE-JAR.  265 

it  all  up  secretly.  When  the  man  missed  his  meat  he 
asked  his  wife  for  it,  and  she  said  the  cat  had  eaten  it. 
The  man  took  the  cat  and  weighed  her,  and  found  she 
weighed  only  half  a man.  Then  he  said  to  his  wife,  “ If 
this  half-?«a«  is  all  cat, where  is  the  meat? — and  if  it  is  meat, 
where  is  the  cat  ? ” The  Gueber  said  this  was  exactly  the 
difficulty  he  felt  about  the  spirit  and  the  body  of  Bayazid. 
He  concluded  by  saying,  in  the  words  of  the  Hadis,  “ The 
true  believer  is  attached  to  others,  and  others  are  attached 
to  him,  but  the  hypocrite  inspires  affection  in  no  one.” 

Story  XII.  The  Devotee  who  broke  the  nobles  wine-jar 
(p.  471). 

A certain  noble,  who  lived  under  the  Christian  dis- 
pensation when  wine  was  allowed,  sent  his  servant  to  a 
monastery  to  fetch  some  wine.  The  servant  went  and 
bought  the  wine,  and  was  returning  with  it,  when  he 
passed  the  house  of  a very  austere  and  testy  devotee.  This 
devotee  called  out  to  him,  “ What  have  you  got  there  ? ” 
The  servant  said,  “ Wine,  belonging  to  such  a noble.”  The 
devotee  said,  “ What ! does  a follower  of  God  indulge  in 
wine  ? Followers  of  God  should  have  naught  to  do  with 
pleasure  and  drinking  ; for  wine  is  a very  Satan,  and  steals 
men’s  wits.  Your  wits  are  not  too  bright  already,  so  you 
have  no  need  to  render  them  still  duller  by  drink.”  In  illus- 
tration of  this,  he  told  the  story  of  one  Ziayi  Dalaq,  a very 
tall  man,  who  had  a dwarfish  brother.  This  brother  one 
day  received  him  very  ungraciously,  only  half  rising  from 
his  seat  in  answer  to  his  salutation,  and  Ziayi  Dalaq 
said  to  him,  “ You  seem  to  think  yourself  so  tall  that  it  is 
necessary  to  clip  off  somewhat  of  your  height.”  Finally  the 
devotee  broke  the  wine-jar  with  a stone,  and  the  servant 
went  and  told  his  master.  The  noble  was  very  wrathful  at 
the  presumption  of  the  devotee  in  taking  upon  himself  to 
prohibit  wine,  as  condemned  by  the  law  of  nature,  when  it 
had  not  been  prohibited  by  the  Gospel,  and  he  took  a thick 


266 


THE  MASNA  VI. 


[book  V. 


stick  and  went  to  the  devotee’s  house  to  chastise  him.  The 
devotee  heard  of  his  approach  and  hid  himself  under  some 
wool,  which  belonged  to  the  ropemakers  of  the  village.  He 
said  to  himself,  “To  tell  an  angry  man  of  his  faults  one 
needs  to  have  a face  as  hard  as  a mirror,  which  reflects  his 
ugliness  without  fear  or  favour.”  Just  so  the  Prince  of 
Tirmid  was  once  playing  chess  with  a courtier,  and  being 
checkmated,  got  into  a rage  and  threw  the  chessboard  at 
his  courtier’s  head.  So  before  playing  the  next  game 
the  courtier  protected  his  head  by  wrappings  of  felt. 
Then  the  neighbours  of  the  devotee,  hearing  the  noise, 
came  out  and  interceded  for  him  with  the  noble,  telling 
him  that  the  devotee  was  half-witted,  and  could  not  be 
held  responsible  for  his  actions ; and  moreover,  that  as  he 
was  a favourite  of  God,1  it  was  useless  to  attempt  to  slay 
him  before  his  time,  for  the  Prophet  and  other  saints 
had  been  miraculously  preserved  in  circumstances  fatal  to 
ordinary  persons.  The  noble  refused  to  be  pacified  ; but 
the  neighbours  redoubled  their  entreaties,  urging  that  he 
had  so  much  pleasure  in  his  nobility  that  he  could  well 
dispense  with  the  pleasure  of  wine.  The  noble  strenuously 
denied  this,  saying  that  no  other  pleasure  of  nobility 
or  what  not,  could  compensate  him  for  the  loss  of  wine, 
which  made  him  sway  from  side  to  side  like  the  jessamine. 
The  prophets  themselves  had  rejected  all  other  pleasures  for 
that  of  spiritual  intoxication,  and  he  who  has  once  embraced 
a living  mistress  will  never  put  up  with  a dead  one.  The 
moral  is,  that  spiritual  pleasures,  typified  by  wine,  are  not 
to  be  bartered  away  for  earthly  pleasures.  The  Prophet 
said,  “The  world  is  carrion,  and  they  who  seek  it  are 
dogs  ; ” and  the  Koran  says,  “ The  present  life  is  no  other 
than  a pastime  aud  a sport ; but  the  future  mansion  is 
life  indeed.”  2 

] Half-witted  persons  are  supposed  to  be  divinely  protected. 

2 Koran  xxix.  64. 


8T0RY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ. 


267 


Description  of  a devotee  who  trusted  to  the  liyht  of  nature 
(P-  473)- 

His  brain  is  dried  up ; and  as  for  his  reason, 

It  is  now  less  than  that  of  a child. 

Age  and  abstinence  have  added  infirmity  to  infirmity, 

And  his  abstinence  has  yielded  him  no  rejoicing. 

He  has  endured  toils,  but  gained  no  reward  from  his  Friend; 
He  has  done  the  work,  but  has  not  been  paid. 

Either  his  work  has  lacked  value, 

Or  the  time  of  recompense  is  not  decreed  as  yet. 

Either  his  works  are  as  the  works  of  the  Jews,1 
Or  his  reward  is  held  back  till  the  appointed  time. 

This  grief  and  sorrow  are  enough  for  him, 

That  in  this  valley  of  pain  he  is  utterly  friendless. 

With  sad  eyes  he  sits  in  his  corner, 

With  frowning  face  and  downcast  looks. 

There  is  no  oculist  who  cares  to  open  his  eyes,2 
Nor  has  he  reason  enough  to  discover  the  eye-salve. 

He  strives  earnestly  with  firm  resolve  and  in  hope, 

His  work  is  done  on  the  chance  of  being  right. 

The  vision  of  “ The  Friend  ” is  far  from  his  course, 

For  he  loses  the  kernel  in  his  love  for  the  shell. 

Story  VIII.  ( continued ).  Mahmud  and  Aydz  (p.  476). 

Mahmud  again  presses  Ayaz  to  reveal  his  secrets,  re- 
marking that  even  if  they  suggest  sad  thoughts,  they  will 
benefit  the  hearers.  The  wise  man  is  as  a guest-house, 
and  he  admits  all  the  thoughts  that  occur  to  him,  whether 
of  joy  or  of  sorrow,  with  the  same  welcome,  knowing  that, 
like  Abraham,  he  may  entertain  angels  unawares.  This 
is  illustrated  by  the  story  of  a woman  who  drove  away 
a valued  guest  by  a petulant  remark,  which  he  was  not 

1 “But  as  to  the  infidels,  their  - I.e.,  he  has  no  director  (Mur skid 
works  are  like  the  mirage  in  the  i hdrnil)  to  instruct  him  in  the  right 
desert  ” (Koran  xxiv.  39).  course. 


268  THE  MASH  AVI.  [book  v. 

intended  to  hear,  and  afterwards  repented  her  discourtesy 
so  deeply  that  she  put  on  mourning  and  turned  her  house 
into  an  inn.  Let  grief  as  well  as  joy  lodge  in  the  heart, 
for  grief  is  sent  for  our  benefit  as  well  as  joy.  Endure 
woe  patiently,  like  Joseph  and  Job,  and  regard  it  as  a 
blessing,  saying  with  Solomon,  “ Stir  me  up,  0 Lord,  to 
be  thankful  for  Thy  favour  which  Thou  hast  showed  upon 
me  ! ” 1 Mahmud  then  praises  Ayaz  for  being  a true  man 
who  can  control  both  lust  and  anger.  Those  who  are 
carried  away  by  anger  or  lust,  like  the  girl  of  whom  an 
anecdote  is  told,  do  not  deserve  the  name  of  men.  When 
anger  or  lust  takes  hold  of  a man  reason  departs  from  him. 
Then  comes  an  anecdote  of  a cowardly  Sufi  who  boasted 
of  his  bravery,  but  had  not  courage  enough  even  to  slay 
a captive  infidel.  Verily,  the  “ greater  warfare,”  viz.,  that 
against  one’s  own  lusts  and  passions,  demands  as  much 
courage  as  the  “ lesser  warfare  ” against  the  infidels.  This 
is  illustrated  by  a story  of  a saint  named  Tyazi,  who,  after 
having  been  a great  warrior  against  the’infidels,  renounced 
the  world  and  applied  himself  to  wage  the  “ greater  war- 
fare ” against  his  own  lusts.  One  day,  while  sitting  in  his 
cell,  he  heard  the  noise  of  the  army  going  out  to  fight,  and 
his  carnal  passion  urged  him  to  go  and  join  in  the  fight, 
but  he  thus  rebuked  it : — 

’Iydzi’s  rebuke  to  his  passion,  which  lusted  to  join  in  the 
“ lesser  warfare  ” (p.  480). 

I said,  “ 0 foul  and  faithless  passion, 

Whence  have  you  derived  this  inclination  to  war  ? 

Tell  me  truly,  0 passion,  is  this  your  trickery  ? 

Or  else  is  it  stubbornness  shunning  obedience  to  God  ? 

If  you  say  not  truly  I will  attack  you, 

And  will  afflict  you  more  severely  with  discipline.” 
Passion  then  heaved  a cry  from  its  breast, 

And  without  mouth  vented  the  following  complaint : — 


1 Koran  xxvii.  19. 


STORY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ. 


269 


“ In  this  cell  you  slay  me  every  day  ; 

You  slay  my  life  like  the  life  of  a Gueber. 

Not  a soul  is  aware  of  my  condition  ; 

You  drag  me  along  without  food  or  sleep. 

In  the  fight  with  one  wound  I shall  quit  the  body, 

And  the  people  will  admire  my  valour  and  self-devotion.’’ 
I said,  “ 0 bad  passion,  you  live  as  an  infidel, 

And  as  an  infidel  you  will  die  ; shame  be  upon  you  ! 

In  both  worlds  you  are  naught  but  a hypocrite ; 

In  the  two  worlds  only  an  unprofitable  servant. 

I have  vowed  to  God  never  to  quit  this  cell 
While  life  remains  in  this  body  ; 

Because  whatever  the  body  does  in  this  privacy 
Is  not  done  to  make  a fair  show  before  men. 

Its  movements  and  its  rest  in  the  privacy  of  this  cell 
Are  not  intended  for  the  sight  of  any  besides  God. 

This  is  the  ‘ greater  warfare,’  that  the  ‘ lesser ; ’ 

Both  these  warfares  have  their  Kustams  and  Haidars. 
They  are  not  to  be  fought  by  one  whose  reason  and  sense 
Flee  away  as  soon  as  a mouse  wags  its  tail. 

Such  persons  must  shun  the  array  of  battle, 

And  keep  aloof  from  it  even  as  women  do.” 

This  is  followed  by  an  anecdote  of  another  brave  war- 
rior who  “ was  among  the  faithful,  and  made  good  what 
he  had  promised  to  God.”  1 Then  comes  a long  story  of  a 
prince  of  Egypt  who  saw  the  portrait  of  a damsel  belong- 
ing to  the  Chief  of  Mausil,  and  conceived  an  ardent  passion 
for  her,  and  sent  an  army  to  take  her  by  force.  The  army 
succeeded  in  capturing  her,  and  set  out  on  the  return 
march  ; but  on  the  way  the  captain  of  the  army  fell  in 
love  with  the  damsel,  and  she  returned  his  affection. 
When  they  reached  Egypt  she  was  made  over  to  the 
prince,  but  at  once  took  a dislike  to  him,  as  he  was 
not  nearly  so  manly  as  her  beloved  captain.  The  prince 
discovered  her  secret,  and  though  he  might  justly  have 


1 Koran  xxsiii.  23. 


270 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  t. 


resented  the  treachery  of  the  captain,  he  refrained,  and 
showed  true  manliness  in  the  “ greater  warfare  ” by  par- 
doning his  fault  and  uniting  him  with  the  damsel  to  whom 
he  was  so  much  attached. 


Ideas  gained  from  hearing  a thing  lead  to  seeing  it 
(P-  483). 

A person  put  this  question  to  a philosopher, 

'•  0 sage,  what  is  true  and  what  is  false  ? 

The  sage  touched  his  ear  and  said,  “ This  is  false, 

But  the  eye  is  true  and  its  report  is  certain.” 

The  ear  is  false  in  relation  to  the  eve, 

And  most  assertions  are  related  to  the  ear.1 
If  a bat  turn  away  its  eyes  from  the  sun, 

Still  it  is  not  veiled  from  some  idea  of  the  sun  : 

Its  very  dread  of  the  sun  frames  an  idea  of  the  sun, 

And  that  idea  scares  it  away  to  the  darkness. 

That  idea  of  light  terrifies  it, 

And  makes  it  cling  to  the  murky  night. 

Just  so  ’tis  your  idea  of  your  terrible  foe 
Which  makes  you  cling  to  your  friends  and  allies. 

0 Moses,  thy  revelations  shed  glory  on  the  mount, 

But  that  frightened  one  endured  not  thy  realities.2 
Be  not  too  proud,  but  know  that  you  must  first  endure 
The  idea  of  the  Truth,  and  thence  come  to  the  reality. 

No  one  is  frightened  by  the  mere  idea  of  fighting. 

For  “no  courage  is  needed  before  fighting  begins.”3 
In  the  mere  idea  of  fighting  a coward  can  imagine 
Himself  as  attacking  and  retreating  like  a Rustam. 

The  pictures  of  Rustam  on  the  wall  of  a bath 
Are  similar  to  a coward’s  ideas  of  fighting. 

But  when  these  ideas  are  tested  by  actual  sight, 

1 I.e.,  are  based  on  hearsay.  the  sight  of  the  sun,  men  cannot  at 

• “When  God  manifested  Himself  once  endure  the  full  blaze  of  the 
to  the  mount  He  turned  it  to  dust,  beatific  vision, 
and  Moses  fell  in  a swoon  ” (Koran  3 A proverb  not  given  by  Freytag. 
vii.  139).  As  the  bat  cannot  endure 


STORY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ. 


271 


What  of  the  coward  then?  His  bravery  is  gone  ! 

Strive,  then,  from  mere  hearing  to  press  on  to  seeing ; 1 
What  ear  has  told  you  falsely  eye  will  tell  truly. 

Then  ear  too  will  acquire  the  properties  of  an  eye  ; 

Your  ears,  now  worthless  as  wool,  will  become  gems  ; 

Yea,  your  whole  body  will  become  a mirror, 

It  will  be  as  an  eye  or  a bright  gem  in  your  bosom. 

First  the  hearing  of  the  ear  enables  you  to  form  ideas, 
Then  these  ideas  guide  you  to  the  Beloved. 

Strive,  then,  to  increase  the  number  of  these  ideas, 

That  they  may  guide  you,  like  Majnun,  to  the  Beloved. 

Concerning  the  unbelievers  who  sag,  “ There  is  only  this  our 
])resent  life  ; we  live  and  we  die,  and  naught  but  time 
dcstroyeth  us”2  (p.  483). 

To  return  ; that  prince  played  the  fool, 

And  took  delight  in  the  society  of  the  damsel. 

0 prince,  suppose  your  dominion  extend  from  east  to 

west, 

Yet.  as  it  endures  not,  esteem  it  transitory  as  lightning ; 
Yea,  0 sleeping  heart,  know  the  kingdom  that  endures 
not 

For  ever  and  ever  is  only  a mere  dream. 

1 marvel  how  long  you  will  indulge  in  vain  illusion, 
Which  has  seized  you  by  the  throat  like  a headsman. 
Know  that  even  in  this  world  there  is  a place  of  refuge  : 3 
Hearken  not  to  the  unbeliever  who  denies  it. 

His  argument  is  this : he  says  again  and  again, 

“If  there  were  aught  beyond  this  life  we  should  see  it.” 
But  if  the  child  sees  not  the  state  of  reason, 

Does  the  man  of  reason  therefore  forsake  reason  ? 

And  if  the  man  of  reason  sees  not  the  state  of  love, 

Is  the  blessed  moon  of  love  thereby  eclipsed  ? 

1 Ideas  and  types  lead  men  on  to  3 Place  of  refuge,  i.e.,  heavenly 
actual  sight  when  they  are  strong  visions  ; — a foretaste  of  the  world 
enough  to  bear  it.  Job  xlii.  5.  to  come  (Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  679). 


272 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


The  beauty  of  Joseph  was  not  visible  to  his  brethren  ; 
Was  it  therefore  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  Jacob? 

The  eyes  of  Moses  regarded  his  staff  as  a stick, 

But  the  divine  eye  saw  it  to  be  a deadly  serpent. 

The  eye  of  the  head  was  at  issue  with  the  divine  eye, 

But  the  latter  prevailed  and  gave  convincing  proof. 

To  the  eyes  of  Moses  his  hand  looked  a mere  hand, 

But  to  the  divine  eye  it  appeared  a flashing  light. 

This  subject  in  its  entirety  is  endless, 

But  to  the  unbeliever  it  is  a mere  fanciful  idea. 

The  only  realities  to  him  are  lust  and  gluttony  ; 

Speak  not  then  to  him  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Beloved. 

To  us  believers  lust  and  gluttony  are  only  ideas, 

Therefore  we  behold  alway  the  beauty  of  the  Beloved. 

To  all  men  whose  creed  is  lust  and  gluttony 

Applies  the  text,  “ To  you  be  your  creed,  to  me  mine.” 1 

In  the  face  of  negations  like  these  cut  short  speech, 

“ 0 Ahmad,  say  little  to  an  old  Fire-worshipper ! ” 

“ We  distribute  among  them,"  '2  to  some  carnal  lusts,  and 
to  others  angelic  qualities  (p.  486). 

If  the  prince  lacked  the  animal  manliness  of  asses, 

Yet  he  possessed  the  true  manliness  of  the  prophets. 

He  renounced  lust  and  anger  and  concupiscence, 

And  showed  himself  a man  of  the  lineage  of  the  prophets. 
Grant  that  he  lacked  the  virility  of  asses, 

Yet  God  esteemed  him  a lord  of  lords. 

Let  me  be  dead,  so  long  as  God  regards  me  with  favour ! 

I am  better  off  than  the  living  who  are  rejected  of  God  ; 
The  former  is  the  kernel  of  manliness,  the  latter  only  the 
rind  ; 

The  former  is  borne  to  Paradise,  the  latter  to  hell. 

The  Prophet  says,  “Paradise  is  annexed  to  tribulation, 
But  hell-fire  follows  indulgence  in  lust.” 3 
0 Ayaz,  who  slayest  demons  like  a male  lion, 

1 Koran  cix.  6.  - Koran  xliii.  31. 

3 Cp.  Frey  tag,  Arabura  Proverbia,  vol.  ii.  p.  165. 


STORY  VIII.] 


MAHMUD  AND  AYAZ. 


=73 


Manliness  of  asses  is  naught,  manliness  of  mind  much. 
What  sort  of  man  dost  thou  think  him  who  sports  as  a 
boy, 

But  who  has  no  comprehension  of  these  chief  matters  ? 

0 thou  who  hast  seen  the  light  of  my  commandments, 
And  risked  thy  life  to  perform  them  faithfully, 

Hear  a tale  of  the  sweetness  of  my  commandments, 

That  the  meaning  of  this  sweetness  may  be  made  plain. 

The  story  which  follows  is  one  in  which  Ayaz  is  himself 
the  chief  actor,  and  hence  it  may  perhaps  be  inferred  that 
this  part  of  the  poem  had  not  received  its  final  revision 
when  the  poet  died.  The  king  showed  to  all  his  courtiers 
in  turn  a valuable  jewel,  and  asked  them  its  value.  Each 
declared  it  to  be  priceless.  He  thereupon  ordered  each 
of  them  to  break  it  to  pieces,  but  they  refused,  one  after 
the  other ; on  which  he  praised  them  highly  and  gave 
them  presents.  Finally  the  jewel  came  into  the  hands  of 
Ayaz,  and  he,  not  being  a mere  imitator  like  the  rest,  nor 
being  tempted  by  the  rewards  given  to  the  rest,  decided 
that  the  king’s  command  ought  to  be  obeyed  at  all  costs, 
and  therefore  broke  the  jewel  to  pieces.  Blind  imitation 
of  current  fashions  and  ruling  “ public  opinion  ” is  the 
wav  of  the  world,  but  its  worthlessness  is  at  once  mani- 
fested  when  it  is  put  to  the  test.  True  faith  is  a reason- 
able faith,  not  one  adopted  and  held  in  mechanical  and 
parrot-like  fashion.  The  king  then  commanded  that  those 
courtiers  whose  faith  had  been  shown  to  be  mere  “ taqlicl  ” 
or  imitation,  and  not  vital  and  intelligent,  should  be  put 
to  death  ; but  Ayaz  interceded  for  them,  saying,  “ 0 Lord, 
punish  them  not  if  they  forget  or  fall  into  sin  ; ” 1 although 
their  plea  that  they  sinned  through  forgetfulness  is  of 
no  more  weight  than  the  plea  of  having  sinned  through 
drunkenness,  seeing  that  both  forgetfulness  and  drunken- 
ness are  wilfully  incurred.  Those  who  die  in  amity  with 
God  have  no  cause  to  fear  death, — “ It  cannot  harm  them, 


1 Koran  ii.  286. 


S 


274 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  v. 


for  to  their  Lord  will  they  return  ; ” 1 but  those  who  die  at 
enmity  with  God  are  in  a very  different  position,  and  have 
therefore  a very  strong  claim  for  mercy.  The  Egyptian 
magicians,  when  threatened  by  Pharaoh  with  death  for 
believing  in  Moses,  recognised  the  truth  that  death  in 
such  a cause  would  unite  them  with  God,  and  that 
extinction  of  the  phenomenal  self,  on  which  Pliaraoh 
prided  himself,  would  bring  them  to  the  real  Self  from 
whom  they  had  been  estranged  by  life  on  earth.  Like 
Habib,  the  carpenter  of  Antioch,  who  was  martyred  for 
taking  the  part  of  ’Isa’s  two  apostles  in  that  city,  they 
said,  “ 0 that  my  people  knew  how  gracious  God  hath 
been  to  me,  and  that  He  hath  made  me  one  of  His 
honoured  ones!  ”2  A man  can  only  say  “ I”  with  truth 
when  he  has  mortified  self,  and  unlearnt  to  say  “ I ” in 
the  sense  in  which  Pharaoh  said  it.  Fakhru-’d-Din  Kazi3 
discoursed  learnedly  on  this  point,  saying  much  of  “ in- 
carnation ” and  “ union  ” as  the  modes  in  which  the  real 
“ I ” of  the  Deity  indwells  in  the  human  soul ; but  as  he 
lacked  the  true  mystic  unction,  his  words  only  serve  to 
darken  counsel.4  But  here  Ayaz  breaks  off,  saying,  “ Who 
am  I that  I should  say  to  the  Almighty,  ‘ Grant  pardon  to 
these  offenders  ’ ? ” The  Omniscient  God  needs  not  to 
be  informed  of  their  case,  for  He  knows  all ; nor  to  be  re- 
minded of  it,  for  He  forgets  nothing ; nor  to  be  urged  to 
act  mercifully,  for  He  created  men  “ for  their  own  benefit, 
and  not  to  derive  benefit  from  them.”  Such  intercession, 
therefore,  implies  ignorance  of  God,  and  “ such  only  of 
His  servants  as  are  possessed  of  knowledge  of  God  truly 
fear  God.”  5 God  is  at  once  centre  and  circumference  of 
the  universe,  and  the  only  true  wisdom  consists  in  absolute 
self-surrender  to  His  will,  and  this  surrender  of  self  will 
bring  with  it  its  own  exceeding  great  reward. 

1 Koran  xxvi.  50.  Do  Slane’s  Ibn  Khallikan,  ii. 

2 Koran  xxxvi.  25.  652. 

3 A great  theologian  of  Khorasan  4 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  453,  note, 

who  lived  from  A.D.  1150  to  I2IO.  8 Koran  xxxv.  25. 


JBoolJ  Lt£. 


PROLOGUE  (p.  492). 

0 life  of  the  heart,  Husamu-’d-Din, 

My  zeal  burnt  within  me  to  write  this  sixth  part ! 

The  Masnavi  became  a standard  through  thy  influence, 
Thy  sword  ( Husain ) has  made  it  an  exemplar  to  the  world. 
0 spiritual  one,  I now  offer  it  to  thee, — 

This  sixth  part  of  the  entire  Masnavi. 

Enlighten  the  world’s  six  sides  with  its  six  parts, 

That  it  may  illuminate  him  who  is  not  illuminated ! 

Love  has  naught  to  do  with  five  senses  or  six  sides, 

Its  only  aim  is  to  be  attracted  to  the  Beloved  ! 

But  haply  leave  may  be  given  me  hereafter 
To  tell  those  mysteries  so  far  as  they  can  be  told, 

In  a discourse  more  closely  approximating  to  the  facts 
Than  these  faint  indications  of  those  abstruse  matters. 
Mysteries  are  not  communicable,  save  to  those  who  know  ; 
Mystery  in  the  ear  of  infidels  is  no  mystery. 

Nevertheless,  this  is  a call  to  you  from  God ; 

It  matters  not  to  Him  whether  ye  accept  or  reject  it. 
Noah  repeated  His  call  for  nine  hundred  years, 

But  his  people  only  increased  in  rebellion. 

Never  did  he  draw  back  from  admonishing  them, 

Never  did  he  retire  into  the  cave  of  silence. 

He  said,  “ At  the  barking  and  howling  of  the  dogs 
No  caravan  ever  tui’ned  back  in  its  road. 

Nor  does  the  full  moon  on  a bright,  night  cease  shining 
Because  of  the  howling  of  dogs  on  earth. 

The  moon  sheds  her  light,  and  the  dogs  howl ; 

Every  one  acts  according  to  his  nature. 

275 


276 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vi. 


To  each  one  his  office  is  allotted  by  the  divine  decree, 
And  he  acts  agreeably  to  his  nature.” 

Art  thou  thirsting  for  the  Ocean  of  spirituality  ? 

Disport  thyself  on  this  island  of  the  Masnavi ! 

Disport  thyself,  so  long  as  thou  seest  every  moment 
Spiritual  verities  revealed  in  this  Masnavi. 

When  the  wind  blows  the  weeds  off  the  water, 

The  water  then  shows  forth  its  own  purity. 

Behold  the  bright  and  fresh  sprays  of  coral, 

And  the  princely  fruits  growing  in  the  water  of  life ! 

So,  when  the  Masnavi  is  purged  of  letters  and  words, 

It  drops  all  these,  and  appears  as  the  sea  of  Unity. 

Then  speaker  and  hearer  and  spoken  words 
All  three  give  up  the  ghost  in  that  consummation. 

Bread -giver  and  bread-eater  and  bread  itself 
Are  purified  of  their  forms  and  turn  to  dust. 

But  their  essences  in  each  of  these  three  grades 
Are  distinguished,  as  in  those  states,  so  eternally.1 
Their  form  turns  to  dust,  but  their  essence  not ; 

If  one  says  it  does,  tell  him  it  does  not. 

In  the  world  of  spirits  all  three  await  judgment, 
Sometimes  wearing  their  earthly  forms,  sometimes  not. 

The  worth  of  a man  depends  on  the  objects  of  his 
aspiration  (p.  495). 

One  day  a student  asked  a preacher, 

Saying,  “ 0 most  orthodox  ornament  of  the  pulpit, 

I have  a question  to  ask,  0 lord  of  learning ; 

Tell  me  the  answer  to  it  in  this  congregation. 

A bird  sat  on  the  top  of  a wall ; 

Which  was  best,  its  head  or  its  tail  ?” 

He  replied,  “ If  its  face  was  towards  the  town, 

And  its  tail  to  the  villages,  then  its  face  was  best. 

But  if  its  tail  was  towards  the  town,  and  its  face 

1 Koran  xxxvi.  32  : “But  all  gathered  together  shall  be  set  before  us." 


BOOK  VI.] 


PROLOGUE. 


277 


Towards  the  villages,  then  prefer  its  tail  to  its  face.” 

A bird  flies  with  its  wings  towards  its  nest, 

The  wings  of  a man  are  his  aspiration  and  aim. 

If  a lover  be  befouled  with  good  and  evil, 

Yet  regard  not  these ; regard  rather  his  aspiration. 
Though  a falcon  be  all  white  and  unmatched  in  form, 

If  he  hunts  mice  he  is  contemptible  and  worthless. 

And  if  an  owl  fixes  his  affection  on  the  king, 

He  is  a falcon  in  reality;  regard  not  his  outward  form. 
Adam’s  clay  was  kneaded  in  the  limits  of  a trough, 

Yet  was  he  exalted  above  heaven  and  stars. 

“ We  have  honoured  Adam”  1 was  not  addressed  to  the  sky, 
But  to  Adam  himself,  full  of  defects  as  he  was. 

Did  one  ever  propose  to  earth  or  heaven  to  receive 
Beauty,  reason,  and  speech  and  aspiration  ? - 
Would  you  ever  offer  to  the  heavens 
Beauty  of  face  and  acuteness  of  thought? 

0 son,  did  you  ever  present  your  silver  body 

As  an  offering  to  the  damsels  pictured  on  bath  walls? 

Kay,  you  pass  by  those  pictures  though  fair  as  Huris, 

And  offer  yourself  sooner  to  half-blind  old  women. 

What  is  there  in  the  old  women  which  the  pictures  lack, 
Which  draws  you  from  the  pictures  to  the  old  women  ? 
Say  not,  for  I will  say  it  in  plain  words, — 

'Tis  reason,  sense,  perception,  thought,  and  life. 

In  the  old  woman  life  is  infused, 

While  the  pictures  of  the  bath  have  no  life. 

If  the  pictures  of  the  bath  should  stir  with  life  (soul), 
They  would  uproot  your  love  to  all  the  old  women. 

What  is  soul?  ’Tis  acquainted  with  good  and  evil, — 
Rejoicing  at  pleasant  things,  grieving  at  ills. 

Since,  then,  the  principle  of  soul  is  knowledge. 

He  who  knows  most  is  most  full  of  soul. 

Knowledge  is  the  effect  flowing  from  soul ; 

1 Koran  xvii.  72.  Man  undertook  to  bear  it,  but  hath 

2 “We  proposed  to  the  heavens  proved  unjust  and  senseless”  (Ko- 
and  to  the  earth  to  receive  the  de-  ran  xxxiii.  72). 

posit,  but  they  refused  the  burden. 


278 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vi. 


He  who  has  most  of  it  is  most  godlike. 

Seeing  then,  beloved,  that  knowledge  is  the  mark  of 
soul, 

He  who  knows  most  has  the  strongest  soul. 

The  world  of  souls  is  itself  entirely  knowledge, 

And  he  who  is  void  of  knowledge  is  void  of  soul. 

When  knowledge  is  lacking  in  a man’s  nature, 

His  soul  is  like  a stone  on  the  plain. 

Primal  Soul  is  the  theatre  of  God’s  court, 

Soul  of  souls  the  exhibition  of  God  Himself. 

All  the  angels  were  pure  reason  and  soul, 

Yet  when  the  new  soul  of  Adam  came,  they  were  as  its 
body. 

When  in  joy  they  crowded  round  that  new  soul,1 
They  bowed  before  it  as  body  does  before  soul. 


Fear  of  men’s  censure  the  greatest  obstacle  to  acceptance 
of  the  true  faith  (p.  496). 

0 Husamu-’d-Din,  I might  tell  some  of  thy  many  virtues, 
Were  it  not  for  the  fear  of  the  evil  eyes. 

From  evil  eyes  and  malice-empoisoned  breaths 
Already  have  I suffered  fatal  wounds. 

Therefore  I cannot  relate  thy  ecstatic  states, 

Save  by  hints  of  the  ecstatic  states  of  others. 

This  manoeuvre  is  one  of  the  devices  of  the  heart, 
Whereby  the  heart’s  feet  wend  their  way  to  the  truth. 
Many  hearts  and  souls  would  become  lovers  of  God 
Did  not  evil  eyes  or  evil  ears  hold  them  back. 

Of  these  Abu  Talib,  the  Prophet’s  uncle,  was  one  ; 

The  malice  of  the  Arabs  scared  him  from  the  faith. 

He  said,  “ What  will  the  Arabs  say  of  me  ? 

That  my  own  nephew  has  perverted  me  from  my  religion  ! ” 
Muhammad  said,  “ 0 uncle,  confess  the  faith  to  me, 

That  I may  strive  with  God  for  thee  ! ” 

1 “ We  said  unto  the  angels,  ‘Prostrate  yourselves  before  Adam,’  and 
they  prostrated  themselves,  except  Iblis”  (Koran  vi.  io). 


PROLOGUE. 


279 


BOOK  VI.] 

He  said,  “Nay  ; it  will  be  published  by  them  that  hear  ; 
‘A  secret  known  to  more  than  two  is  known  to  every  one.’  1 
As  I live  in  the  midst  of  these  Arabs, 

It  will  cause  me  to  lose  caste  with  them.” 

Yet,  had  the  mighty  grace  of  God  led  the  way, 

How  could  this  fear  have  vied  with  God’s  attraction  ? 

0 Granter  of  aid,  lend  us  aid 
In  this  dilemma  of  the  feeble  will. 

Prayers  for  right  guidance  in  the  use  of  free  will , which 
gift  was  refused  by  heavens  and  earth,  but  accepted  by 
man  to  his  own  peril 2 (p.  497). 

This  flux  and  reflux  of  resolves  came  to  me  from  Thee, 
Else  these  tides  of  will  had  rested  still,  0 God ! 

By  the  same  fiat  whereby  thou  madest  me  thus  irre- 
solute, 

Of  Thy  mercy  deliver  me  from  this  irresolution ! 

Thou  triest  me  ; 0 give  me  aid  ! 

For  men  are  as  women  through  this  trial. 

How  long,  0 Lord,  is  this  trial  to  last  ? 

Give  me  one  ruling  principle,  not  ten  principles  ! 

The  whole  world  flees  away  from  its  own  will  and  being 
Towards  self-abandonment  and  intoxication. 

In  order  to  escape  a while  from  self-consciousness, 

Men  incur  the  reproach  of  wine  and  strong  drink  ; 

For  all  know  well  this  existence  is  a snare, 

This  thought  and  memory  and  will  only  a hell. 

Therefore  they  flee  from  self  to  being  beside  themselves, 
Call  it  intoxication  or  call  it  preoccupation,  0 guided  one. 

Ere  it  is  annihilated,  no  single  soul 

Finds  admittance  to  the  divine  hall  of  audience. 

What  is  “ ascension  ” to  heaven  ? Annihilation  of  self  ; 
Self-abandonment  is  the  creed  and  religion  of  lovers. 

1 Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  iii.  222. 

2 Koran  xxxiii.  72,  quoted  above.  “ Deposit  ” is  here  interpreted  of  the 
will,  the  ability  to  go  right  or  wrong. 


Story  I.  The  Hindu  Slave  v:ho  loved  his  Master  s 
Daughter  (p.  498). 

A certain  man  liad  a Hindu  slave,  whom  he  had 
brought  up  along  with  his  children,  one  of  whom  was  a 
daughter.  When  the  time  came  for  giving  the  girl  in 
marriage  many  suitors  presented  themselves,  and  offered 
large  marriage  portions  to  gain  her  alliance.  At  last  her 
father  selected  one  who  was  by  no  means  the  richest  or 
noblest  of  the  number,  but  pious  and  well-mannered.  The 
women  of  the  family  would  have  preferred  one  of  the 
richer  youths,  but  the  father  insisted  on  having  his  own 
way,  and  the  mamage  was  settled  according  to  his  wishes. 
As  soon  as  the  Hindu  slave  heard  of  this  he  fell  sick,  and 
the  mistress  of  the  family  discovered  that  he  was  in  love 
with  her  daughter,  and  aspired  to  the  honour  of  marrying 
her.  She  was  much  discomposed  at  this  unfortunate 
accident,  and  consulted  her  husband  as  to  what  was  best 
to  be  done.  He  said,  “ Keep  the  affair  quiet,  and  I will 
cure  the  slave  of  his  presumption,  in  such  a wav  that, 
according  to  the  proverb,  ‘ The  Shaikh  shall  not  be  burnt, 
yet  the  meat  shall  be  well  roasted.’  ” He  directed  his  wife 
to  flatter  the  slave  with  the  hope  that  his  wish  would  be 
granted,  and  the  girl  given  to  him  in  marriage.  He  then 
celebrated  a mock  marriage  between  the  slave  and  the 
girl,  but  at  night  substituted  for  the  girl  a boy  dressed  in 
female  attire,  with  the  result  that  the  bridegroom  passed 
the  night  in  quarrelling  with  his  supposed  bride.  Next 
morning  he  had  an  interview  with  the  girl  and  her  mother, 
and  said  he  would  have  no  more  to  do  with  her,  as,  though 
her  appearance  was  very  seductive  at  a distance,  closer 
acquaintance  with  her  had  altogether  destroyed  the  charm. 
Just  so  the  pleasures  of  the  world  seem  sweet  till  they  are 

280 


STORY  X.] 


THE  HINDU  SLA  VE. 


281 


tried,  and  then  they  are  found  to  be  very  bitter  and  re- 
pulsive. The  Prophet  has  declared  that  “ Patience  is  the 
key  of  joy ; ” 1 in  other  words,  that  he  who  controls  and 
restrains  himself  from  grasping  at  worldly  pleasures  will 
find  true  happiness ; but  this  precept  makes  no  lasting 
impression  on  the  bulk  of  mankind.  When  bitter  experi- 
ence overtakes  them,  as  the  pain  of  burning  afflicts  children, 
or  moths  sporting  with  fire,  or  the  paiu  of  amputation  a 
thief,  they  curse  the  delusive  temptations  which  brought 
this  pain  upon  them ; but  uo  sooner  is  the  pain  abated 
than  they  run  after  the  same  pleasures  as  eagerly  as  ever. 
This  is  divinely  ordained,  that  “ God  may  bring  to  naught 
the  craft  of  the  infidels.”  2 Their  hearts  have,  as  it  were, 
been  kindled  on  the  tinder-box  of  bitter  experience,  but 
God  has  put  out  the  sparks  of  good  resolution,  and  caused 
them  to  forget  their  experience  and  vows  of  abstinence, 
according  to  the  text,  “ Often  as  they  kindle  a beacon-fire 
for  war  doth  God  quench  it.”3  This  is  illustrated  by  an 
anecdote  of  a man  who  heard  a footstep  in  his  house  at 
night,  and  at  once  struck  a light ; but  the  thief  put  it  out 
without  being  observed,  and  the  man  remained  under  the 
impression  that  it  had  gone  out  of  itself.  This  leads  the 
poet  again  to  dwell  on  his  favourite  theme  of  the  sole 
agency  of  Allah. 

Then,  to  supply  the  necessary  corrective  of  this  doctrine, 
another  anecdote  is  told  concerning  Mahmud  and  Ayaz. 
The  courtiers  grumbled  because  Ayaz  received  the  stipend 
of  thirty  courtiers,  and  Mahmud  by  a practical  test  con- 
vinced them  that  the  talents  of  Ayaz  equalled  those  of 
thirty  men.  The  courtiers  replied  that  this  was  due  to 
God’s  grace,  not  to  any  merit  on  the  part  of  Ayaz  ; and  the 
king  confuted  them  by  pointing  out  that  man’s  responsi- 
bility and  merit,  or  demerit,  for  his  actions  are  recognised 
in  the  Koran.  Iblis  was  condemned  for  saying  to  God, 
“ Thou  hast  caused  me  to  err,”  4 and  Adam  was  commended 

1 Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  iii.  270.  2 Koran  viii.  18. 

3 Koran  v.  69.  4 Koran  vii.  15  and  22. 


282 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 

for  saying,  “We  have  blackened  ourselves.”1  And  else- 
where it  is  said,  “ Whosoever  shall  have  wrought  an 
atom’s  weight  of  good  shall  behold  it ; and  whoso  shall 
have  wrought  an  atom’s  weight  of  evil  shall  behold  it.”  2 


Story  II.  The  Fowler  and  the  Bird  (p.  502). 

A fowler  went  out  to  catch  birds,  and  disguised  himself 
by  wrapping  his  head  up  in  leaves  and  grass,  so  as  to 
avoid  frightening  the  birds  away  from  his  snare.  A bird 
of  some  sagacity  came  near  him,  and  suspected  something 
wrong,  but  foolishly  lingered  near,  and  began  to  question 
him  as  to  his  business.  The  fowler  said  he  was  a hermit 
who  had  retired  from  the  world  and  dressed  himself  in 
weeds  for  the  health  of  his  soul.  The  bird  said  he  was 
surprised  to  see  a Musulman  doing  this  in  contraven- 
tion of  the  Prophet’s  precept,  “There  is  no  monkery  in 
Islam,”  and  his  repeated  declarations  that  Islam  involves 
association  with  the  faithful  and  avoidance  of  a solitary 
life.  The  fowler  replied  that  a solitary  life  was  allowed  in 
heathen  countries  for  the  soul’s  health.3  The  bird  then 
asked  what  the  grains  of  wheat  were  that  were  strewed 
on  the  trap.  The  fowler  replied  that  they  were  the  pro- 
perty of  an  orphan,  which  had  been  deposited  with  him 
in  consequence  of  his  known  probity.  The  bird  then 
asked  permission  to  eat  some,  as  he  was  very  hungry,  and 
the  fowler,  with  much  pretended  reluctance,  allowed  him  to 
do  so.  The  moment  he  touched  the  grain  the  trap  closed 
upon  him,  and  he  found  himself  a prisoner.  He  then 
abused  the  fowler  for  his  trickery,  but  the  fowler  said  he 
had  only  himself  to  blame  for  his  greediness  in  eating  the 
food  which  belonged  to  an  orphan.  The  moral  is,  that  it 
is  not  destiny  which  leads  people  into  afflictions,  but  their 
own  errors  and  vices. 

1 Koran  vii.  15  and  22.  2 Koran  xcix.  7. 

3 See  Miskkat  ul  Masabih,  ii.  541. 


STORY  II.]  THE  FOWLER  AND  THE  BIRD. 


283 


The  bird’s  cries  to  God  for  aid  (p.  505). 

When  he  had  eaten  the  grain  he  was  caught  in  the 
trap, 

And  began  to  recite  the  chapters  “ Ydsin  ” and  “ An’am.” 

Then  he  began  to  wail  and  cry  loudly, 

So  that  the  very  fowler  and  his  trap  shook  with  grief. 

He  said,  “ My  back  is  broken  by  the  conflict  of  my 
thoughts ; 

0 Beloved  One,  come  and  stroke  my  head  in  mercy ! 

The  palm  of  Thy  hand  on  my  head  gives  me  rest, 

Thy  hand  is  a sign  of  Thy  bounteous  providence. 

Remove  not  Thy  shadow  from  my  head, 

1 am  afflicted,  afflicted,  afflicted  ! 

Sleep  has  deserted  my  eyes 

Through  my  longing  for  Thee,  0 Envy  of  cypresses! 
Though  I be  unworthy  of  Thy  favour,  how  were  it 
If  Thou  shouldst  regard  the  griefs  of  unworthy  me  ? 
What  claim  of  right  can  a non-existent  thing  make 
To  have  the  doors  of  Thy  bounty  opened  to  it  ? 

Yet  Thy  bounty  had  regard  to  my  senseless  dust, 

And  endued  it  with  the  ten  jewels  of  the  senses  ; — 

Five  external  senses  and  five  internal  senses, 

Whereby  inanimate  seed  became  a living  man. 

0 Light  on  high ! what  is  repentance  without  Thy  grace 
But  a mere  mockery  of  the  beard  of  repentance ; 

Thou  rootest  up  the  hairs  of  such  repentance, 

Repentance  is  the  shadow,  Thou  the  shining  Moon. 

Alas  ! Thou  hast  ruined  my  house  and  home  ; 

How  can  I cease  wailing  while  Thou  oppressest  me  ? 

How  can  I flee  away  when  there  is  no  living  away  ? 
Without  Thy  sustaining  lordship  there  is  no  slave. 

0 take  my  life,  Thou  that  art  the  source  of  life ! 

For  apart  from  Thee  I am  wearied  of  my  life. 

1 am  a lover  well  versed  in  lovers’  madness, 

I am  weary  of  learning  and  sense. 


284 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vl 


Since  my  bashfulness  is  destroyed,  I will  publish  secrets ; 
How  long  must  I bear  this  trepidation  and  anxiety  ? 
Formerly  I was  covered  by  modesty  as  by  a veil, 

Now  I will  leap  from  it  under  Thy  coverlet ! 

O comrades,  our  Beloved  has  closed  up  all  paths ; 

We  are  as  lame  deer,  and  He  as  a raging  lion. 

Say  what  remedy  is  there  but  resignation 1 

When  one  is  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  raging  lion  ? ” 

The  poet  then  passes  on  to  the  subject  of  the  need  for 
constant  watchfulness,  in  order  to  avoid  the  snares  of  the 
world,  and  not  to  miss  the  divine  blessing  whenever  it 
may  appear.  There  is  a tradition,  “ When  half  the  night 
has  passed  Allah  will  descend  to  earth,  and  cry,  ‘ Ho,  ye 
that  ask,  it  shall  be  answered  to  you  ; and  ye  that  crave 
pardon,  it  shall  be  pardoned  to  you  ; and  ye  that  petition, 
your  petitions  shall  be  granted.’”  But  all  who  sleep  the 
sleep  of  negligence  will  miss  the  promised  blessing.  This 
is  illustrated  by  the  story  of  a lover  who  obtained  an  assig- 
nation with  his  mistress,  but  when  she  came,  was  found 
asleep,  and  was  accordingly  rejected. 


Story  III.  The  Drunken  Turkish  Amir  and  the 
Minstrel  (p.  507). 

Then  follow  exhortations  to  undergo  “the  pains  of 
negation,”  as  they  are  called  in  the  Gulshan  i Iiaz, — i.e., 
even  as  the  great  saint  and  poet  Faridu-’d-Din  ’Attar  cast 
away  his  drugs,  to  cast  one’s  own  will,  knowledge,  power, 
and  “self”  into  the  unique  river  of  “annihilation,”2  and 
from  that  state  to  rise  to  the  higher  state  of  eternal  exist- 
ence in  God.  The  end  and  object  of  all  negation  is  to 
attain  to  subsequent  affirmation,  as  the  negation  in  the 
creed,  “There  is  no  God,”  finds  its  complement  and  pur- 
pose in  the  affirmation  “but  God.”  Just  so  the  purpose 

1 “To  God  I commit  my  case”  (Koran  xl.  47).  2 Koran  cxii.  4. 


STORY  III.]  THE  AMlR  AND  THE  MINSTREL.  285 

of  negation  of  self  is  to  clear  the  way  for  the  apprehension 
of  the  fact  that  there  is  no  existence  but  The  One.  The 
intoxication  of  life  and  its  pleasures  and  occupations  veils 
the  Truth  from  men’s  eyes,  and  they  ought  to  pass  on 
to  the  spiritual  intoxication  which  makes  men  beside 
themselves  and  lifts  them  to  the  beatific  vision  of  eternal 
Truth.  This  is  the  same  thing  as  saying  they  must  pass 
on  from  negation  to  affirmation,  from  ignorance  to  the 
highest  knowledge.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  story  of 
the  Turkish  noble  and  the  minstrel,  which  is  given  with  an 
apology  for  using  illustrations  derived  from  drunkenness. 
A Turkish  noble  awoke  from  his  drunken  sleep,  and  called 
his  minstrel  to  enliven  him.  The  minstrel  was  a spiritual 
man,  and  proceeded  to  improve  the  occasion  by  singing  a 
song  with  a deep  spiritual  meaniug  : — 

“ I know  not  if  thou  art  a moon  or  an  idol, 

I know  not  what  thou  recjuirest  of  me. 

I know  not  what  service  to  pay  thee, 

Whether  to  keep  silence  or  to  speak. 

Thou  art  not  apart  from  me,  yet,  strange  to  say, 

I know  not  where  I am,  or  where  thou  art. 

I know  not  wherefore  thou  art  dragging  me, 

Now  embracing  me,  and  now  wounding  me  ! ” 

Thus  the  whole  of  his  song  consisted  of  repetitions  of  the 
woi’ds,  “ I know  not.”  At  last  the  noble  could  endure  it 
no  longer,  and  he  took  a stick  and  threatened  to  beat  the 
minstrel,  saying,  “ 0 wretch,  tell  us  something  you  do 
know,  and  do  not  repeat  what  you  do  not  know.  If  I 
ask  you  whence  you  come  or  what  you  have  eaten,  and 
you  answer  only  by  negations,  your  answer  is  a waste  of 
time.  Say  what  you  mean  by  all  these  negations.”  The 
minstrel  replied,  “ My  meaning  is  a concealed  one.  I 
fear  to  make  affirmations  in  opposition  to  your  negations, 
so  I state  negations  that  you  may  get  a hint  of  the  corre- 
sponding affirmations  from  them.  I now  hint  the  truth 
to  you  in  my  song ; and  when  death  comes  to  you,  you 


THE  MASNAVI. 


286 


[book  VI. 


will  learn  the  mysteries  which  at  present  I can  only 
hint.” 


Spiritual  mysteries  set  forth  in  the  Masnavi  under  similes 
of  intoxication  (p.  507). 

That  wrine  of  God  is  gained  from  that  minstrel,1 
This  bodily  wine  from  this  minstrel. 

Both  of  these  have  one  and  the  same  name  in  speech, 
But  the  difference  between  their  worth  is  great. 

Men’s  bodies  are  like  pitchers  with  closed  mouths ; 
Bew7are,  till  you  see  what  is  inside  them. 

The  pitcher  of  this  body  bolds  the  water  of  life, 

Whilst  that  one  holds  deadly  poison. 

If  you  look  at  the  contents  you  are  wise ; 

If  you  look  only  at  the  vessel  you  are  misguided. 

Know  words  resemble  these  bodies, 

And  the  meaning  resembles  the  soul. 

The  body’s  eyes  are  ever  intent  on  bodies, 

The  soul’s  eyes  on  the  reasonable  soul ; 

Wherefore,  in  the  figures  of  the  words  of  the  Masnavi, 
The  form  misleads,  but  the  inner  meaning  guides. 

In  the  Koran  it  is  declared  that  its  parables 
“ Mislead  some  and  guide  some.”  2 
0 God ! when  a spiritual  man  talks  of  wine, 

How  can  a fellow  spiritual  man  mistake  his  meaning  ? 

Thus  that  minstrel  began  his  intoxicating  song, 

“ 0 give  me  Thy  cup,  Thou  whom  I see  not ! 

Thou  art  my  face  ; what  wonder  if  I see  it  not  ? 

Extreme  nearness  acts  as  an  obscuring  veil.3 

1 “A  wine-cup  tempered  at  the  camphor  fountain  shall  the  just  quaff” 
(Koran  lxxvi.  5).  2 Koran  ii.  24. 

3 See  couplet  122  of  the  Gulshan  i Raz  : — 

“ When  the  object  looked  at  is  very  close  to  the  eye, 

The  eye  is  darkened  so  that  it  cannot  see  it.” 
l.c.,  When  man  is  united  with  God  he  can  no  longer  behold  Him,  for  he 
is  dwelling  in  Him. 


287 


STORY  III.]  THE  AMtR  AND  THE  MINSTREL. 

Thou  art  my  reason  ; what  wonder  if  I see  Thee  not 
Through  the  multitude  of  intervening  obstacles  ? 

Thou  art  ‘nearer  to  me  than  my  neck  vein,’1 
How  can  I call  to  Thee,  ‘ Ho,’  as  if  thou  wert  far  off? 
Nay,  but  I will  mislead  some  by  calling  in  the  desert, 

To  hide  my  Beloved  from  those  of  whom  I am  jealous!  ” 

This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  the  Prophet  and 
’Ayisha.  ’Ayisha  was  once  sitting  with  the  Prophet 
without  her  veil,  when  a blind  man  came  in.  ’Ayisha, 
knowing  well  the  jealous  disposition  of  her  husband,  at 
once  prepared  to  retire,  on  which  the  Prophet  said,  “The 
man  is  blind  and  cannot  see  you.”  ’Ayisha  replied  by 
signs  that  though  the  man  could  not  see  her  she  could 
see  him.  Just  so  the  spiritual  man  is  jealous  of  exposing 
his  mysteries  to  the  gaze  of  the  profane,  and  from  excess  of 
caution  veils  them  in  signs  and  hints. 

Then  comes  a commentary  on  the  tradition,  “ Die  before 
you  die,”  i.e.,  mortify  your  carnal  passions  and  lusts,  and 
deny  and  annihilate  your  carnal  “self”  before  the  death 
of  the  body  overtakes  you.  Men  who  put  off  repentance 
till  they  are  at  the  point  of  death  are  likened  to  the 
Shi’as  of  Aleppo,  who  every  year  on  the  ’Ashura,  or  tenth 
day  of  Muharram,  meet  at  the  Antioch  gate  to  bewail 
the  martyrdom  of  Hasan  and  Husain.  Once,  while  they 
were  thus  engaged,  a Sunni  poet  arrived  at  the  city,  and 
inquired  the  reason  of  this  excessive  grief  and  mourning. 
The  Shi'as  rebuked  him  for  his  ignorance  of  sacred  history, 
and  he  said,  “ This  martyrdom  happened  a long  time  ago  ; 
but  it  would  seem,  from  your  excessive  grief,  that  the 
news  of  it  had  only  just  reached  you.  You  must  have  been 
sleeping  all  this  time  not  to  have  heard  it  before,  and 
now  you  are  mourning  for  your  own  sleepiness  ! ” To  the 
truly  spiritual,  who  have  drunk  of  God’s  wine  and  bear 
the  “ tokens  of  it  on  their  foreheads,”  2 death  is  an  occasion 
for  rejoicing,  not  for  wailing.  The  man  who  is  engrossed 
1 Koran  1.  15.  2 Koran  xlviii.  29. 


288 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


with  the  trifling  pleasures  of  the  world  and  blind  to  the 
ample  provision  made  for  the  soul  is  like  an  ant  in  a barn 
of  wheat,  toiling  to  carry  off  a single  grain,  when  ample 
stores  of  wheat  are  already  at  its  disposal.  Spiritual  men 
must  continue  urging  the  worldly  to  repent  and  avail 
themselves  of  this  heavenly  provision  for  their  souls, 
careless,  like  Noah,  whether  their  preaching  is  listened 
to  or  not.  This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  a man 
who  knocked  at  the  door  of  an  empty  house  at  midnight, 
in  order  to  give  notice  that  it  was  time  to  prepare  the 
meal  taken  at  dawn  in  Ramazan. 


Reasons  for  knocking  at  the  empty  house  (p.  512). 

You  have  said  your  say;  now  hear  my  answer, 

So  as  not  to  remain  in  astonishment  and  bewilderment. 
Though  to  you  this  time  seems  midnight, 

To  me  the  dawn  of  joyful  morn  seems  nigh. 

To  the  vulgar  all  parts  of  the  world  seem  dead, 

But  to  God  they  are  instinct  with  sense  and  love. 

And  as  to  your  saying  that  “ this  house  is  empty, 

Why  then  should  I beat  a drum  before  it  ? ” 

Know  that  the  people  of  God  expend  money, 

And  build  many  mosques  and  holy  places, 

And  spend  health  and  wealth  in  distant  pilgrimages, 

In  ecstatic  delight,  like  intoxicated  lovers ; 

And  none  of  them  ever  say,  “The  Ka’ba  is  empty 
How  can  one  who  knows  the  truth  say  that  ? 

These  people  are  ranged  in  battle  array, 

And  risk  their  lives  to  gain  God’s  favour ; 

One  plunged  in  calamities  like  Job  himself, 

Another  exhibiting  patience  like  Jacob. 

Thousands  of  them  are  thirsty  and  afflicted, 

Striving  in  earnest  desire  to  do  God’s  will. 

I likewise,  in  order  to  please  the  merciful  God, 


STORY  IV.]  THE  PURCHASE  OF  BILAL. 


289 


Beat  my  drum  at  every  door  in  hope  of  dawu. 

Seek  ye  a purchaser  who  will  pay  you  gold  ; 

Where  will  you  find  one  more  liberal  than  God  ? 

He  buys  the  worthless  rubbish  which  is  your  wealth, 

He  pays  you  the  light  that  illumines  your  heart. 

He  accepts  these  frozen  and  lifeless  bodies  of  yours, 

And  gives  yon  a kingdom  beyond  what  you  dream  of. 

He  takes  a few  drops  of  your  tears, 

And  gives  you  the  divine  fount  sweeter  than  sugar. 

He  takes  your  sighs  fraught  with  grief  and  sadness, 

And  for  each  sigh  gives  rank  in  heaven  as  interest. 

In  return  for  the  sigh-wind  that  raised  tear-clouds, 

God  gave  Abraham  the  title  of  “ Father  of  the  Faithful.” 

Come ! in  this  incomparable  and  crowded  mart 

Sell  your  old  goods  and  take  a kingdom  in  payment ! 


Story  IV.  The  Purchase  of  Bilal  (p.  513). 

To  illustrate  the  rich  recompense  that  is  awarded  to 
those  who  are  faithful  in  tribulation,  the  story  of  Bilal  is 
next  recounted  at  length.  Bilal  was  an  Abyssinian  slave 
belonging  to  a Jew  of  Mecca,  and  had  incurred  his  master’s 
displeasure  in  consequence  of  having  embraced  Islam. 
For  this  offence  his  master  tortured  him  by  exposing 
him  to  the  heat  of  the  midday  sun,  and  beating  him  with 
thorns.  But,  notwithstanding  his  anguish,  Bilal  would 
not  recant  his  faith,  and  uttered  only  the  cry,  “ Ahad, 
Ahad!”  “The  One,  the  One  God!”  At  this  moment 
Abu  Bakr,  the  “ Faithful  witness,”  happened  to  pass  by, 
and  was  so  struck  by  his  constancy  that  he  resolved  to  buy 
him  of  the  Jew.  After  much  higgling  and  attempts  at 
cheating  on  the  Jew’s  part  he  succeeded  in  doing  so,  and 
at  once  set  him  free.  When  the  Prophet  heard  of  this 
purchase  he  said  to  Abu  Bakr,  “ Give  me  a share  in  him  ; ” 
but  Abu  Bakr  told  him,  somewhat  to  his  annoyance,  that 
he  had  already  set  him  free.  Notwithstanding  this  Bilal 

T 


290 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  VI. 


attached  himself  to  the  Prophet,  and  was  afterwards  pro- 
moted to  the  honourable  post  of  the  Prophet’s  Muazzin. 

This  is  followed  by  the  story  of  Hilal,  another  holy  man 
who.  like  Bilal  and  Luqman  and  Joseph,  served  a noble 
in  the  capacity  of  groom.  His  affections  were  set  on  things 
above,  and  he  was  ever  pressing  upwards  towards  the  high 
mark  of  spiritual  exaltation,  and  saying,  like  Moses,  “ I 
will  not  stop  till  I reach  the  confluence  of  the  two  seas, 
and  for  years  will  I journey  on.”  1 Herein  he  presented  a 
great  contrast  to  ordinary  men,  who  are  ever  giving  way 
to  their  lusts,  and  so  being  dragged  down  into  the  state  of 
mere  animals,  or  even  lower.  Hilal’s  master  was  a Musul- 
man,  yet  one  whose  eyes  were  only  partially  open  to  the 
truth.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  asking  his  guests  their 
age;  and  if  they  answered  doubtfully,  saying,  “Perhaps 
eighteen,  or  seventeen,  or  sixteen,  or  even  fifteen,”  he  would 
rebuke  them,  saying,  “ As  you  seem  to  be  putting  yourself 
lower  and  lower,  you  had  better  go  back  at  once  to  your 
mother’s  womb.”  These  guests  are  a type  of  men  who 
lower  themselves  from  the  rank  of  humanity  to  that  of 
animals.  This  master,  however,  was  blind  to  Hilal’s 
spiritual  excellence,  and  allowed  him  to  drag  on  a miser- 
able existence  in  his  stables.  At  last  Hilal  fell  sick ; but 
no  one  cared  for  him,  till  the  Prophet  himself,  warned  by 
a divine  intimation,  came  to  visit  him,  and  commiserated 
his  wretched  condition.  Hilal  proved  himself  to  be  faith- 
ful through  tribulation ; for,  instead  of  grumbling  at  his 
lot,  he  replied,  “How  is  that  sleep  wretched  which  is 
broken  by  the  advent  of  the  Sun  of  prophecy  ? or  how  can 
he  be  called  athirst  on  whose  head  is  poured  the  water  of 
life  ? ” In  truth,  Hilal  had  by  degrees  become  purified 
from  the  stain  of  earthly  existence  and  earthly  qualities, 
and  washed  in  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life,  i.c.,  the 
holy  revelations  of  the  Prophet,  till  he  had  attained  the 
exalted  grade  of  purity  enjoined  on  those  who  would  study 
God’s  Word  aright.2 

1 Koran  xviii.  59.  2 Koran  lvi.  79. 


STORY  IV.] 


THE  PURCHASE  OF  BILAL. 


291 


Growth  in  grace  is  accomplished  by  slow  degrees,  and 
not  per  saltum  (p.  5 1 9). 

Since  you  have  told  the  story  of  Hilal  (the  new  moon) 
Now  set  forth  the  story  of  Badr  (the  full  moon). 

That  new  moon  and  that  full  moon  are  now  united, 
Removed  from  duality  and  defect  and  shortcomings. 

That  Hilal  is  now  exalted  above  inward  defect ; 

His  outward  defects  served  as  degrees  of  ascension. 

Night  after  night  that  mentor  taught  him  grades  of  ascent 
And  through  his  patient  waiting  gave  him  happiness. 

The  mentor  says,  “ 0 raw  hastener,  through  patient 
waiting, 

You  must  climb  to  the  summit  step  by  step. 

Boil  your  pot  by  degrees  and  in  a masterly  way  ; 

Food  boiled  in  mad  haste  is  spoiled. 

Doubtless  God  could  have  created  the  universe 
By  the  fiat  ‘ Be  ! ’ in  one  moment  of  time  ; 

Why,  then,  did  He  protract  His  work  over  six  days, 

Each  of  which  ecjualled  a thousand  years,  0 disciple  ? 
Why  does  the  formation  of  an  infant  take  nine  months  ? 
Because  God’s  method  is  to  work  by  slow  degrees. 

Why  did  the  formation  of  Adam  take  forty  days? 
Because  his  clay  was  kneaded  by  slow  degrees. 

Not  hurrying  on  like  you,  0 raw  one, 

Who  claim  to  be  a Shaikh  whilst  yet  only  a child  ! 

You  run  up  like  a gourd  higher  than  all  plants, 

But  where  is  your  power  of  resistance  or  combat  ? 

You  have  leant  on  trees  or  on  walls, 

And  so  mounted  up  like  a gourd,  0 little  dog  rose ; 

Even  though  your  prop  may  be  a lofty  cypress, 

At  last  you  are  seen  to  be  dry  and  hollow. 

O gourd,  your  bright  green  hue  soon  turns  yellow, 

For  it  is  not  a natural  but  an  artificial  colour.” 

This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  an  ugly  old  hag 
who  painted  her  face  to  make  it  look  pretty,  but  was 
detected  and  exposed  to  scorn. 


292 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


Story  V.  The  Sufi  and  the  Qtizi  (p.  521 ). 

A sick  man  labouring  under  an  incurable  disease  went 
to  a physician  for  advice.  The  physician  felt  bis  pulse, 
and  perceived  that  no  treatment  would  cure  him,  and 
therefore  told  him  to  go  away  and  do  whatever  he  had  a 
fancy  for.  This  was  the  advice  given  by  God  to  the 
Israelites  when  they  were  seen  to  be  incurable  by  the 
admonitions  of  the  prophets.  “ Do  what  you  will,  but 
God’s  eye  is  on  all  your  doings.”  1 The  sick  man  blessed 
the  physician  for  his  agreeable  prescription,  and  at  once 
went  to  a stream,  where  he  saw  a Sufi  bathing  his  feet. 
He  was  seized  with  a desire  to  hit  the  Sufi  on  the  back, 
and,  calling  to  mind  the  physician’s  advice,  at  once  carried 
his  wish  into  effect.  The  Sufi  jumped  up,  and  was  about 
to  return  the  blow,  but  when  he  saw  the  weakly  and  infirm 
condition  of  his  assailant  he  restrained  himself.  He  dis- 
regarded his  present  angry  impulse,  and  had  regard  to 
the  future,  so  that  the  non-existent  future  became  to  him 
more  really  existent  than  the  existing  present.  Here  the 
poet  digresses  to  point  out  that  when  wise  men  recognise 
the  true  relative  importance  of  the  present  and  the  future 
they  cease  to  shrink  from  death  and  annihilation,  which 
lifts  them  to  a higher  and  nobler  life.  This  is  illustrated 
by  an  anecdote  of  Mahmud  of  Ghazni,  quoted  from  Faridu- 
’d-Din  ’Attar.  Mahmud,  in  one  of  his  campaigns,  took 
prisoner  a Hindu  boyT,  who  at  first  regarded  him  with  the 
greatest  dread,  in  consequence  of  the  stories  he  had  heard 
of  him  from  his  mother,  but  afterwards  experienced  Mah- 
mud’s kindness  and  tenderness,  and  came  to  know  him  and 
love  him.  So  it  is  with  death.  According  to  the  Hadis, 
“Those  who  have  passed  away  do  not  grieve  because  of 
death,  but  because  of  wasted  opportunities  in  life.”  The 
Masnavi  is  “a  shop  of  poverty  and  self-abnegation,”  and 
a treasury  containing  only  the  doctrines  of  “ Unity  ; ” and 
if  its  stories  suggest  aught  else,  that  is  due  to  the  evil 

1 Koran  xli.  40. 


-93 


story  v.]  THE  SUFI  AND  THE  QAZI. 

promptings  of  Iblis,  who  also  misled  the  Prophet  himself 
to  attribute  undue  power  to  the  idols  Lat  and  'Uzza  and 
Manat,  in  a verse  which  was  afterwards  cancelled.1  The 
Sufi,  being  full  of  the  spirit  of  self-abnegation,  did  not 
retaliate  on  his  weak  assailant,  but  led  him  before  the 
QiizL  On  learning  the  facts  of  the  case  the  Qazi  said, 
“ This  Faqir  is  sick  to  death,  and  you,  being  a Sufi,  are, 
according  to  your  profession,  dead  to  the  world.  How,  then, 
can  I award  a penalty  against  him  in  your  favour  ? I am 
a judge,  not  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.”  The  Sufi  was 
dissatisfied  with  this  view  of  the  case,  and  again  pressed 
the  Qazi  to  do  him  justice.  On  this  the  Qazi  asked  the 
sick  Faqir  how  much  money  he  had.  and  on  his  replying. 
“ Six  dirhams,”  took  pity  on  him,  and  let  him  off  with 
a fine  of  three  dirhams  only.  The  moment  the  sentence 
was  pronounced  the  sick  Faqir  went  up  to  the  Qazi  and 
struck  him  a blow  on  the  back,  and  cried  out,  “ Now  take 
the  other  three  dirhams  and  let  me  go ! ” The  Sufi  then 
pointed  out  to  the  Qazi  that  by  his  ill-timed  leniency  to 
the  Faqir  he  had  brought  this  blow  upon  himself,  aud 
urged  him  to  apply  in  his  own  case  those  principles  of 
mercy  and  forgiveness  which  he  had  proposed  in  the 
case  of  another.  The  Qazi  said  that,  for  his  part,  he  recog- 
nised every  blow  and  misfortune  that  might  befall  him  as 
divinely  ordained,  and  sent  for  his  good,  according  to  the 
text,  ‘'Laugh  little  and  weep  much,”2  and  that  his  judg- 
ment in  the  matter  of  the  Faqir  had  not  been  dictated  by 
impulse,  but  by  inspiration.3  The  Sufi  again  asked  him 
how  evils  and  misfortunes  could  proceed  from  the  divine 
fount  of  good,  and  the  Qazi  replied  that  what  seems  good 
and  evil  to  us  has  no  absolute  existence,  but  is  merely 
as  the  foam  on  the  surface  of  the  vast  ocean.  Moreover, 
every  misfortune  occurring  to  the  faithful  in  this  life 
will  be  amply  compensated  for  in  the  life  to  come.  The 
Sufi  asked  why  this  world  should  not  be  so  arranged 
that  only  good  should  be  experienced  in  it,  and  the  Qazi 

1 Koran  liii.  19,  and  Rodwell’s  note. 

2 Koran  ix.  84.  3 Koran  liii.  3. 


294 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


replied  by  telling  him  an  anecdote  of  a Turk  and  a tailor. 
The  Turk,  who  typifies  the  careless  pleasure-seeker,  was 
so  intent  on  listening  to  the  jokes  and  amusing  stories  of 
the  tailor,  typifying  the  seductive  world,  that  he  allowed 
himself  to  be  robbed  of  the  silk  which  was  to  furnish  him 
with  a vesture  for  eternity.  The  Sufi  again  retorted  that 
he  did  not  see  why  the  world  would  not  get  on  better 
without  the  evil  in  it,  and  the  Qazi  replied  with  the 
poet’s  favourite  argument  that  there  would  be  no  pos- 
sibility of  being  virtuous  if  there  were  no  temptations 
to  be  vicious.  As  Bishop  Butler  says,  this  life  is  a state 
of  probation,  and  such  a state  necessarily  involves  trials 
and  difficulties  and  dangers  to  be  resisted  and  overcome. 

The  dead  regret  not  dying,  but  having  lost  opportunities 
in  life  (p.  525). 

Well  said  that  Leader  of  mankind, 

That  whosoever  passes  away  from  the  world 
Does  not  grieve  and  lament  over  his  death, 

But  grieves  ever  over  lost  opportunities. 

He  says,  “ Why  did  I not  keep  death  always  in  view, 
Which  is  the  treasury  of  wealth  and  sustenance  ? 

Why  did  I blindly  all  my  life  set  my  affections 
On  vain  shadows  which  perish  at  death  ? 

My  regret  is  not  that  I have  died, 

But  that  I rested  on  these  vain  shadows  in  life. 

I saw  not  that  my  body  was  a mere  shadow  or  foam, 
Which  foam  rises  out  of  and  lives  on  the  Ocean  (God). 
When  the  Ocean  casts  its  foam-drops  to  land, 

Go  to  the  graveyard  and  behold  them, 

And  ask  them,  “ Where  is  your  motion  and  activity  ? 

The  Ocean  has  cast  you  into  a mortal  sickness ! ” 

They  will  answer  by  their  condition,  if  not  with  words, 

“ Put  this  cjuestion  to  the  Oceau,  not  to  us ! ” 

How  can  mere  foam  move  unless  moved  by  the  waves  ? 
How  can  dust  mount  on  high  unless  raised  by  wind  ? 


STORY  v.]  THE  SUFI  AND  THE  QAZI.  295 

When  you  see  the  dust-cloud,  see  the  wind  too ! 

When  you  see  the  foam,  see  the  ocean  that  heaves  it  ! 

Ah ! look  till  yon  see  your  own  real  final  cause, 

The  rest  of  you  is  only  fat  and  flesh,  warp  and  woof. 
Your  fat  kindles  no  light  or  flame  in  a lamp ; 

Your  kneaded  flesh  is  not  good  for  roasting. 

Burn  up,  then,  all  this  body  of  yours  with  discernment  ; 
Rise  to  sight,  to  sight,  to  sight ! 

Virtue  cannot  exist  icitJwv.t  temptation  and  difficulties  to 
be  overcome  (p.  531 ). 

The  Sufi  said,  “ The  Great  Helper  is  able 
To  procure  for  us  profit  without  loss. 

He  who  casts  into  the  fire  roses  and  trees 
Can  accomplish  good  without  injury  to  any. 

He  who  extracts  the  rose  from  the  thorn 
Can  also  turn  this  winter  into  spring. 

He  who  exalts  the  heads  of  the  cypresses 
Is  able  also  out  of  sadness  to  bring  joy. 

He  by  whose  fiat  all  non-existent  things  exist, 

What  harm  to  Him  were  it  if  He  made  them  eternal  ? 

He  who  gave  to  the  body  a soul  and  made  it  live, 

What  loss  to  Him  were  it  if  He  never  caused  it  to  die  ? 
How  would  it  be  if  That  Liberal  One  were  to  give 
Their  hearts’  desire  to  his  slaves  without  toil, 

And  keep  away  from  these  feeble  ones 
The  ambushed  snares  of  lust  and  temptations  of  Iblis  ? ” 
The  Qazi  said,  “ If  there  were  no  bitter  things, 

And  no  opposition  of  fair  and  foul,  stone  and  pearl, 

And  no  lust  or  Satan  or  concupiscence, 

And  no  wounds  or  war  or  fraud, 

Pray,  0 destroyer  of  virtue,  by  what  name  and  title 
Could  the  King  of  kings  address  His  slaves  ? 

How  could  He  say,  ‘ 0 temperate  or  0 meek  one ! ’ 

Or,  1 0 courageous  one,  or  0 wise  one  ? ’ 

How  could  there  be  temperate,  gentle,  or  liberal  men 


296 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


If  there  were  no  cursed  Satan  to  tempt  them  astray  ? 
Rustam  and  Hamza  would  be  all  the  same  as  cowards ; 
Wisdom  and  knowledge  would  be  useless  and  vain. 
Wisdom  and  knowledge  serve  to  guide  the  wanderers ; 
Were  there  but  one  road  wisdom  would  be  needless. 

To  pamper  the  house  of  your  body  fleeting  as  water, 

Do  you  think  it  right  to  ruin  both  worlds? 

I know  you  are  pure  of  guile  and  ripe, 

And  ask  this  only  to  edify  the  ignorant. 

The  ills  of  fortune  and  all  troubles  soever 

Are  better  than  exile  from  God  and  neglect  of  Him  ; 

For  the  former  pass  away,  but  the  latter  abide  ; 

He  is  happy  who  carries  a wary  heart  before  God.”  1 

This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  a woman  who 
complained  of  the  hard  life  she  had  to  lead  with  her 
husband  owing  to  his  poverty,  and  was  silenced  by  being 
asked  whether  she  would  prefer  to  be  divorced.  No 
troubles  are  so  hard  to  bear  as  separation  from  the 
Beloved.  Fasting  and  holy  war  bring  pains  with  them, 
but  not  so  great  as  those  incurred  by  banishment  from 
God.  In  the  midst  of  their  troubles  God  is  ever  caring 
for  His  servants,  and  they  must  not  let  their  tribula- 
tions blot  out  the  memory  of  God’s  previous  goodness 
to  them. 

To  do  this  shows  an  entire  absence  of  growth  in  grace. 
This  is  illustrated  by  au  anecdote  of  a sage  and  a monk. 
The  sage  asked  the  monk  which  was  the  older,  his  white 
beai’d  or  himself.  The  monk  replied  that  he  himself  was 
older  by  some  years,  whereupon  the  sage  rebuked  him 
for  his  ignorance,  saying  his  beard  had  grown  pure  and 
white,  but  he  was  still  black  with  sin,  and  had  progressed 
not  at  all  in  goodness  since  he  was  born. 

1 Koran  xxvi.  88. 


STORY  v.]  THE  SUFI  AND  THE  QAZI.  297 

Each  of  our  members  testifies  to  God’s  bounties  towards  us 
(p.  632). 

Inquire  now,  I pray,  of  each  one  of  your  members ; 

These  dumb  members  have  a thousand  tongues. 

Inquire  the  detail  of  the  bouuties  of  the  All-sustainer, 
Which  are  recorded  in  the  volume  of  the  universe. 

Day  and  night  you  are  eagerly  asking  for  news, 

Whilst  every  member  of  your  body  is  telling  you  news. 
Since  each  member  of  your  body  issued  from  Not- 
being, 

How  much  pleasure  has  it  seen,  and  how  much  pain? 

For  no  member  grows  and  flourishes  without  pleasure. 
And  each  member  is  weakened  by  every  pain.1 
The  member  endures,  but  that  pleasure  is  forgotten, 

Yet  not  all  forgotten,  but  hidden  from  the  senses. 

Like  summer  wherein  cotton  is  produced, — 

The  cotton  remains,  but  the  summer  is  forgotten. 

Or  like  ice  which  is  formed  in  great  frost, — 

The  frost  departs,  but  the  ice  is  still  before  us. 

The  ice  is  mindful  of  that  extreme  cold, 

And  even  in  winter  that  crop  is  mindful  of  the  summer. 
In  like  manner,  0 son,  every  member  of  your  body 
Tells  you  tales  of  God’s  bounties  to  your  body. 

Even  as  a woman  who  has  borne  twenty  children, — 

Each  child  tells  a tale  of  pleasure  felt  by  her. 

She  became  not  pregnant  save  after  sexual  pleasure, 

Can  a garden  bloom  without  the  spring  ? 

Pregnant  women  and  their  teeming  wombs 
Tell  tales  of  love  frolics  in  the  spring. 

So  every  tree  which  nurtures  its  fruits 

Has  been,  like  Mary,  impregnated  by  the  Unseen  King. 

Though  fire’s  heat  be  hidden  in  the  midst  of  water, 

Yet  a thousand  boiling  bubbles  prove  it  present. 

Though  the  heat  of  the  fire  be  working  unseen, 

Yet  its  bubbles  signify  its  presence  plainly. 

In  like  manner,  the  members  of  those  enjoying  “ union  ” 
1 Cp.  Nicoui.  Ethics,  x.,  iv.  6. 


298  THE  M A SNA  VI.  [book  vi. 

Become  big  with  child,  viz.,  with  forms  of  “ states  ” and 
“ words.”  1 

Gazing  on  the  beauty  of  these  forms  they  stand  agape, 
And  the  forms  of  the  world  vanish  from  their  sight. 

These  spiritual  progenies  are  not  born  of  the  elements, 
And  are  perforce  invisible  to  the  sensual  eye. 

These  progenies  are  born  of  divine  apparitions, 

And  are  therefore  hidden  by  veils  without  colour. 

I said  “ born,”  but  in  reality  they  are  not  born  ; 

I used  this  expression  only  by  way  of  indication. 

But  keep  silence  till  the  King  bids  you  speak, 

Offer  not  your  nightingale  songs  to  these  roses  ; 

For  they  themselves  are  saying  to  you  in  loud  tones, 

“ 0 nightingale,  hold  your  peace,  and  listen  to  us  ! ” 

Those  two  kinds  of  fair  forms  (ecstatic  states  and  words) 
Are  undeniable  proofs  of  a previous  “ union  ; ” 

Yea,  those  two  kinds  of  exalted  manifestations 
Are  the  evident  fruits  of  a preceding  wedlock. 

The  ecstasy  is  past,  but  your  members  recall  it ; 

Ask  them  about  it,  or  call  it  to  mind  vourself. 

When  sorrow  seizes  you,  if  you  are  wise, 

You  will  question  that  sorrow-fraught  moment, 

Saying  to  it,  “O  sorrow,  who  now  deniest 

Thy  portion  of  bounty  given  thee  by  the  Perfect  One, 

Even  if  each  moment  be  not  to  thee  a glad  spring, 

Yet  of  what  is  thy  body,  like  a rose-heap,  a storehouse  ? 
Thy  body  is  a heap  of  roses,  thy  thought  rosewater  ; 
’Twere  strange  if  rosewater  ignored  the  rose-heap ! ” 

Story  YI.  The  Faqir  and  the  Hidden  Treasure  (p.  533). 

Notwithstanding  the  clear  evidence  of  God’s  bounty, 
engendering  these  spiritual  states  in  men,  philosophers 
and  learned  men,  wise  in  their  own  conceit,  obstinately 
shut  their  eyes  to  it,  and  look  afar  off  for  what  is  really 

1 Compare  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  624.  Ecstatic  words  and  states  are  the 
offspring  of  communion  with  God. 


STORY  VI.]  THE  FAQIR  AND  THE  TREASURE.  299 

close  to  them,  so  that  they  incur  the  penalty  of  “ being 
branded  on  the  nostrils,”1  adjudged  against  unbelievers. 
This  is  illustrated  by  the  story  of  a poor  Faqir  who  prayed 
to  God  that  he  might  be  fed  without  being  obliged  to  work 
for  his  food.  A divine  voice  came  to  him  in  his  sleep 
and  directed  him  to  go  to  the  house  of  a certain  scribe 
and  take  a certain  writing  that  he  should  find  there.  He 
did  so,  and  on  reading  the  writing  found  that  it  contained 
directions  for  fiuding  a hidden  treasure.  The  directions 
were  as  follows  : — “ Go  outside  the  city  to  the  dome  which 
covers  the  tomb  of  the  martyr ; turn  your  back  to  the 
tomb  and  your  face  towards  Mecca,  place  an  arrow  in 
your  bow,  and  where  the  arrow  falls  there  dig  for  the 
treasure.”  But  before  the  Faqir  had  time  to  commence 
the  search  the  rumour  of  the  writing  and  its  contents 
had  reached  the  king,  who  at  once  sent  and  took  it  away 
from  the  Faqir,  and  began  to  search  for  the  treasure  on 
his  own  account.  After  shooting  many  arrows  and  digging 
in  all  directions  the  king  failed  to  find  the  treasure,  and 
got  weary  of  searching,  and  returned  the  writing  to  the 
Faqir.  Then  the  Faqir  tried  what  he  could  do,  but  failed 
altogether  to  hit  the  spot  where  the  treasure  was  buried. 
At  last,  despairing  of  success  by  his  own  unaided  efforts, 
he  cast  his  care  upon  God,  and  implored  the  divine  assist- 
ance. Then  a voice  from  heaven  came  to  him,  saying, 
“You  were  directed  to  fix  an  arrow  on  your  bow,  but  not 
to  draw  your  bow  with  all  your  might,  as  you  have  been 
doing.  Shoot  as  gently  as  possible,  that  the  arrow  may 
fall  close  to  you,  for  the  hidden  treasure  is  indeed  ; nearer 
to  you  than  your  neck-vein.’  ” 2 Men  overlook  the  spiritual 
treasures  close  to  them,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  that 
prophets  have  no  honour  in  their  own  countries,  as  is 
illustrated  by  the  cases  of  the  saint  Abu-’l-Hasan  Khirqani 
and  the  Prophet  Hud  or  Heber. 

1 Koran  lxviii.  16.  2 Koran  1.  15. 


300 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  VI. 


God  rules  men  by  alternations  of  hope  and  fear  (p.  533). 

This  sad  Faqir  too  put  up  his  cries  for  aid, 

And  bore  off  the  ball  of  acceptance  from  the  field. 

But  at  times  he  distrusted  the  efficacy  of  his  prayers, 

On  account  of  the  delay  in  answering  them. 

Again,  hope  of  the  mei’cy  of  the  Lord 
Arose  in  his  heart  as  an  earnest  of  rejoicing. 

When  he  was  hopeless  and  ceasing  to  pray  in  weariness 
He  heard  from  God  the  word  “ Ascend  ! ” 

God  is  an  Abaser  and  an  Exalter  ; 

Without  these  two  processes  nothing  comes  into  being. 
Behold  the  abasement  of  earth  and  uplifting  of  heaven  ; 
Without  these  two  heaven  would  not  revolve,  0 man  ! 

The  abasement  and  exaltation  of  earth  is  otherwise, 

Half  the  year  is  barren,  half  green  and  verdant. 

The  abasement  and  exaltation  of  weary  time 
Is  otherwise  again, — half  day  and  half  night. 

The  abasement  and  exaltation  of  this  compound  body 
Is  now  health  and  now  grievous  sickness. 

Know  all  the  conditions  of  the  world  are  in  this  wise, — 
Drought,  famine,  peace,  war,  and  trials. 

This  world  flies,  as  it  were,  with  these  two  wings ; 
Through  these  all  souls  are  homes  of  hope  and  fear  ; 

So  that  the  world  keeps  trembling  like  leaves, 

In  the  cold  and  hot  winds  of  death  and  resurrection. 

Till  the  jar  of  pure  wine  of  our  Tsa  (Unity) 

Shall  supersede  the  jar  of  many-coloured  wine  (plurality), 
For  that  world  (of  unity)  is  as  a saltpau  ; 

Whatever  enters  it  loses  its  varied  hues. 

On  the  text,  “ Verily  I am  about  to  place  a Khalifa  or 
Vicegerent  on  earth"  1 (p.  540). 

Whereas  the  aim  and  will  of  the  Merciful  God 
Inclined  to  the  revelation  and  manifestation  of  Himself, 
And  one  opposite  cannot  be  shown  but  by  its  opposite, 

1 Koran  ii.  28. 


STORY  VI.]  THE  FAQIR  AND  THE  TREASURE.  301 

And  that  Unique  King  of  kings  has  no  opposite  or  peer,1 
Therefore  that  Lord  of  the  heart  set  up  a Khalifa, 

To  serve  as  a mirror  to  reflect  His  own  sovereignty. 
Therefore  He  gave  him  unlimited  purity  and  light, 

And  on  the  other  side  He  set  darkness  opposing  the 
light.2 

C4od  set  up  two  standards,  a white  and  a black  one, 

The  one  Adam  and  the  other  Iblis ; 

And  between  these  two  mighty  armies 
Ensued  war  and  battle  and  all  we  have  witnessed. 

Thus,  too,  in  the  second  generation  lived  pure  Abel ; 

Cain  was  the  opposite  of  his  pure  light. 

In  like  manner  these  two  standards  of  right  and  wrong 
Were  borne  aloft  till  the  age  of  Nimrod. 

Nimrod  was  the  opponent  and  adversary  of  Abraham, 

And  their  opposing  camps  warred  and  fought  one  another. 
When  God  grew  weary  of  the  length  of  this  war, 

His  fire  was  appointed  to  arbitrate  between  them. 

He  commanded  fire  and  its  flaming  torment 
To  settle  the  matter  in  dispute  between  them. 

Age  after  age  these  two  parties  contended, 

Even  till  the  time  of  Pharaoh  and  gentle  Hoses. 

Between  these  two  the  war  was  waged  for  years, 

And  when  it  passed  all  bounds  and  affliction  increased 
God  made  the  water  of  the  Nile  a judge  between  them, 
That  the  one  who  deserved  pre-eminence  should  endure. 
In  like  manner  it  went  on  till  the  time  of  Mustafa 
And  Abu  Jahl,  that  prince  of  iuiquity. 

Likewise  did  God  ordain  a punishment  for  the  Thamud, 
Namely,  an  earthquake  which  destroyed  their  lives. 
Likewise  a punishment  for  the  Adites, 

Namely,  a swiftly  rising  and  violent  wind. 

Likewise  God  ordained  acute  punishment  for  Qarun ; 

For  the  earth  concealed  wrath  under  its  mildness, 

Till  all  its  mildness  was  converted  into  wrath, 

1 Because,  as  Sir  T.  Browne  says,  2 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  265,  and 
“ God  is  all  things.”  note. 


302 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  VI. 


And  it  swallowed  up  Qarun  and  his  wealth  in  its  depth. 

So  with  the  mouthful  which  nourishes  your  body 
And  wards  off  the  darts  of  hunger  like  a cuirass, 

When  God  instils  wrath  into  this  mouthful  of  bread. 

That  same  bread  will  choke  you  like  a halter. 

This  same  garment  which  protects  you  from  the  cold, 

God  may  give  it  the  quality  of  intense  cold, 

So  that  this  warm  vest  may  become  to  your  body 
Cold  as  ice  and  biting  as  frost ; 

So  that  you  will  cast  off  these  furs  and  silks, 

And  seek  for  a refuge  from  cold  with  cold  itself. 

You  have  only  one  eye,  not  two  (for  these  two  possi- 
bilities). 

You  have  forgotten  the  stury  of  the  “shadowing  cloud.”1 
God’s  command  came  to  city  and  village, 

And  to  house  and  wall,  saying,  “Afford  no  shade ! 

Ward  not  off  the  pouring  rain  and  the  sun’s  heat ; ” 

Till  those  men  hasted  to  listen  to  the  prophet  Shu’aib, 
Saying,  ‘ 0 king,  have  pity ; most  of  us  are  dead  ! ’ 

But  read  the  rest  of  the  tale  in  the  commentaries. 

When  that  Omnipotent  hand  made  the  staff  a serpent, 

If  you  have  reason,  that  portent  should  suffice. 

You  have  sight  indeed,  but  fail  to  mark  carefully ; 

Your  eyes  are  dimmed  and  closed  with  fat. 


The  heavenly  treasure  lies  “ nearer  to  us  than  our  neck-vein  ” 
(P-  544)- 

The  Faqir  was  in  this  state  when  a divine  voice  came, 
And  God  thus  solved  his  difficulties, 

Saying,  “ The  voice  told  you  to  place  an  arrow  on  the 
bow, — 

It  did  not  bid  you  draw  the  bowstring  to  the  utmost ; 

It  did  not  bid  you  draw  the  bow  with  all  your  might ; 

It  said,  ‘Adjust  an  arrow,’  not  ‘ Draw  the  bow  fully.’ 


1 Koran  xxvi.  189.  The  cloud  emitted  heat  instead  of  rain,  to  punish 
those  who  disregarded  Shu'aib,  or  Jethro. 


STORY  VI.]  THE  FAQIR  AND  THE  TREASURE. 


303 


You  elevated  the  bow  to  excess, 

You  magnified  unduly  the  bowman’s  art, 

Go  ! abandon  this  strong  bowmanship, 

Fix  an  arrow  on  the  string,  but  make  it  not  fiy  far. 

When  it  falls,  dig  in  that  spot  and  search, 

Abandon  force  and  seek  the  treasure  with  humility.” 

God  is  “ what  is  nearer  to  you  than  your  neck-vein,” 
You  have  cast  the  arrow  of  speculation  afar  off. 

0 you,  who  have  made  ready  your  bow  and  arrows, 

The  game  is  close  to  you,  and  you  shoot  too  far  off. 

The  further  a man  shoots,  the  further  off  he  is, 

And  the  more  removed  from  the  treasure  he  seeks. 

The  philosopher  kills  himself  with  thinking, 

Tell  him  that  his  back  is  turned  to  that  treasure  ; 

Tell  him  that  the  more  he  runs  to  and  fro, 

The  further  he  is  removed  from  his  heart’s  desire. 

The  Almighty  says,  “ Make  efforts  in  our  ways,”  1 
Not  “ Make  efforts  away  from  us,”  0 restless  one. 

Like  Canaan,  who  went  away,  from  shame  to  follow  Noah, 
Up  to  the  top  of  that  lofty  mountain, 

The  more  he  sought  safety  on  that  mountain, 

The  further  was  he  removed  from  the  safe  asylum. 

So  this  Faqir,  in  search  of  that  hidden  treasure, 

Day  after  day  drew  his  bow  stronger  and  stronger ; 

And  the  harder  he  drew  his  bow, 

The  further  was  he  from  the  seat  of  that  treasure. 

This  parable  applies  to  all  times, 

For  the  soul  of  the  ignorant  is  pledged  to  misfortune. 
Because  the  ignorant  man  is  ashamed  of  a master, 
Perforce  he  goes  and  opens  a new  school  for  himself. 

That  school  is  higher  than  your  true  master,  0 beloved, 
And  hard  of  access,  and  full  of  scorpions  and  snakes. 
Straightway  overthrow  it,  and  turn  back  again 
To  the  green  garden  and  sweet  watered  meadows. 

Not  like  Canaan,  who,  through  pride  and  ignorance, 
Sought  his  ark  of  safety  on  a protecting  mountain. 

1 Koran  xxix.  69. 


3°4 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  VI. 


His  far-shooting  learning  veiled  his  eyes, 

While  his  heart’s  desire  was  all  the  while  in  his  grasp. 

Ah ! oftentimes  have  learning  and  genius  and  wit 
Proved  to  the  traveller  to  be  Ghouls  and  highwaymen ! 
“The  majority  of  those  in  Paradise  are  the  simple,”1 
Who  have  escaped  the  snares  of  philosophy. 

Strip  yourself  bare  of  overweening  intellect, 

That  grace  may  ever  be  shed  upon  you  from  above. 
Cleverness  is  the  opposite  of  humility  and  submission, 
Quit  cleverness,  and  consort  with  simple-mindedness ! 

Story  YII.  The  Three  Travellers  (p.  545). 

A Musulman  was  travelling  with  two  unbelievers,  a 
Jew  and  a Christian,  like  wisdom  linked  with  the  flesh 
and  the  devil.  God  was  “ nigh  unto  His  faithful  ser- 
vant,” 2 and  when  the  first  stage  was  completed  He 
caused  a present  of  sweetmeats  to  be  laid  before  the 
travellers.  As  the  Jew  and  the  Christian  had  already 
eaten  their  evening  meal  when  the  sweetmeats  arrived, 
they  proposed  to  lay  them  aside  till  the  morrow ; but  the 
Musulman,  who  was  keeping  fast,  and  therefore  could 
not  eat  before  nightfall,  proposed  to  eat  them  that  night. 
To  this  the  other  two  refused  to  consent,  alleging  that 
the  Musulman  wanted  to  eat  the  whole  of  the  sweetmeats 
himself.  Then  the  Musulman  proposed  to  divide  them 
into  three  portions,  so  that  each  might  eat  his  own  por- 
tion when  he  pleased ; but  this  also  was  objected  to  by 
the  others,  who  quoted  the  proverb,  “ The  divider  is  in 
hell.”  The  Musulman  explained  to  them  that  this  pro- 
verb meant  the  man  who  divides  his  allegiance  between 
God  and  lust ; but  they  still  refused  to  give  way,  and  the 
Musulman  therefore  submitted,  and  lay  down  to  sleep  in 
the  endurance  of  the  pangs  of  hunger.  Next  morning, 
when  they  awoke,  it  was  agreed  between  them  that  each 
should  relate  his  dreams,  and  that  the  sweetmeats  should 
1 A Uadis.  Cp.  I Cor.  i.  25,  26.  - Koran  ii.  1S2. 


STORY  VII.]  THE  THREE  TRA  VELLERS. 


305 


be  awarded  to  him  whose  dream  was  the  best.  The  Jew 
said  that  he  had  dreamed  that  Moses  had  carried  him  to 
the  top  of  Mount  Sinai,  and  shown  him  marvellous  visions 
of  the  glory  of  heaven  and  the  angels.  The  Christian 
said  he  had  dreamed  that  ’Isa  had  carried  him  up  to 
the  fourth  heaven  and  shown  him  all  the  glories  of  the 
heavens.  Finally  the  Musulman  said  that  the  Prophet 
Muhammad  had  appeared  to  him  in  person,  and  after 
commending  him  for  his  piety  in  saying  his  prayers  and 
keeping  fast  so  strictly  on  the  previous  night,  had  com- 
manded him  to  eat  up  those  divinely  provided  sweetmeats 
as  a reward,  and  he  had  accordingly  done  so.  The  Jew 
and  the  Christian  were  at  first  annoyed  with  him  for  thus 
stealing  a march  upon  them  ; but  on  his  pointing  out  that 
he  had  no  option  but  to  obey  the  Prophet’s  commands, 
they  admitted  that  he  had  done  right,  and  that  his  dream 
was  the  best,  as  he  had  been  awake,  while  they  were 
asleep.  The  moral  is,  that  the  divine  treasure  is  revealed 
as  an  immediate  intuition  to  those  who  seek  it  with 
prayer  and  humble  obedience,  and  not  to  those  who  seek 
to  infer  and  deduce  its  nature  and  quality  from  the  lofty 
abstractions  of  philosophy. 


Lofty  'philosophical  speculation  does  not  lead  to  the 
knowledge  of  God  (p.  547). 

The  Musulman  said,  “ 0 my  friends, 

My  lord,  the  Prophet  Muhammad,  appeared  to  me, 
And  said,  ‘ The  Jew  has  hurried  to  the  top  of  Sinai, 
And  plays  a game  of  love  with  God’s  interlocutor ; 

The  Christian  has  been  carried  by  ’Isa,  Lord  of  bliss, 
Up  to  the  summit  of  the  fourth  heaven  ; 

Thou  who  art  left  behind  and  hast  endured  anguish, 
Arise  quickly  and  eat  the  sweetmeats  and  confections ! 
Those  two  clever  and  learned  men  have  ascended, 

And  read  their  titles  of  dignity  and  exaltation ; 

U 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vl 


306 

Those  two  exalted  ones  have  found  exalted  science, 

And  rivalled  the  very  angels  in  intellect ; 

0 humble  and  simple  and  despised  one, 

Arise  and  eat  of  the  banquet  of  the  divine  sweets  ! ” 

They  said  to  him,  “ Then  you  have  been  gluttonous  ; 

Well  indeed  ! you  have  eaten  all  the  sweets  ! ” 

He  answered,  “ When  my  sovereign  lord  commanded  me, 
Who  am  I that  I should  abstain  from  obeying  ? 

Would  you,  0 Jew,  resist  the  commands  of  Moses 
If  he  bade  you  do  something,  either  pleasant  or  not  ? 
Would  you,  0 Christian,  rebel  against  ’Isa’s  commands, 
Whether  those  commands  were  agreeable  or  the  reverse  ? 
How  could  I rebel  against  the  1 Glory  of  the  prophets  ’ ? 
Nay,  I ate  the  sweets,  and  am  now  happy.” 

They  replied,  “ By  Allah,  you  have  seen  a true  vision  ; 
Your  vision  is  better  than  a hundred  like  ours. 

Your  dream  was  seen  by  you  when  awake,  0 happy  one, 
For  it  was  seen  to  be  real  by  your  being  awake.” 

Quit  excessive  speculation  and  inordinate  science, 

’Tis  service  of  God  and  good  conduct  that  gains  its  end. 
’Tis  for  this  that  God  created  us, 

“ We  created  not  mankind  save  to  worship  us.”  1 
What  profit  did  his  science  bring  to  Samiri  ? 2 
His  science  excluded  him  from  God’s  portals. 

Consider  what  Qarun  gained  by  his  alchemy ; 

He  was  swallowed  up  in  the  depths  of  the  earth. 

Abu-1  Jahl,  again,  what  gained  he  from  his  wit 

Save  to  be  hurled  head-foremost  into  hell  for  infidelity  ? 

Know  real  science  is  seeing  the  fire  directly, 

Not  mere  talk,  inferring  the  fire  from  the  smoke. 

Your  scientific  proofs  are  more  offensive  to  the  wise 
Than  the  urine  and  breath  whence  a physician  infers. 

If  these  be  your  only  proofs,  0 son, 

Smell  foul  breath  and  inspect  urine  like  physicians. 

Such  proofs  are  as  the  staff  of  a blind  man, 

1 Koran  li.  56. 

2 Samiri,  the  maker  of  the  golden  calf.  Qarun  Korah. 


STORY  VII.]  THE  THREE  TRAVELLERS. 


307 


Which  prove  only  the  blindness  of  the  holder. 

All  your  outcry  and  pompous  claims  and  bustle 
Only  say,  “ I cannot  see,  hold  me  excused  ! ” 

This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  a peasant  who, 
hearing  a proclamation  issued  by  the  Prince  of  Tirmid, 
to  the  effect  that  a large  reward  would  be  given  to  him 
who  should  take  a message  to  Samarcand  in  the  space  of 
four  days,  hurried  to  Tirmid  by  relays  of  post-horses  in 
the  utmost  haste,  and  threw  the  whole  city  into  alarm, 
as  the  people  thought  that  his  extreme  haste  and  bustle 
must  portend  the  approach  of  an  enemy  or  some  other 
calamity.  But  when  he  was  admitted  to  the  presence  of 
the  prince,  all  he  had  to  say  was,  that  he  had  hurried  to 
inform  him  that  he  could  not  go  to  Samarcand  so  quickly. 
The  prince  was  very  augry  with  him  for  making  all  this 
disturbance  about  nothing,  and  threatened  to  punish  him. 


The  uses  of  chastisements  (p.  550). 

He  said,  “ Alms  of  mercy  repel  calamity,1 
Alms  cure  thy  sickness,  0 son  ! 

’Tis  not  charitable  to  burn  up  the  poor, 

Or  to  put  out  the  eyes  of  the  meek.” 

The  prince  replied,  “ Kindness  is  good  in  its  place, 
Provided  you  do  kindness  in  its  proper  place. 

If  at  chess  you  put  the  king  in  the  rook’s  place 

That  is  wrong ; and  so  if  you  put  the  knight  in  the  king’s, 

The  law  prescribes  both  rewards  and  chastisements. 

The  king’s  place  is  the  throne,  the  horse’s  the  gate. 

What  is  justice  but  putting  each  in  his  place  ? 

What  injustice  but  putting  each  in  what  is  not  his  place  ? 
Nothing  is  vain  of  all  that  God  has  created, 

Whether  vengeance  or  mercy,  or  plain  dealing  or  snares. 
Not  one  of  all  these  is  good  absolutely, 

1 Freyta",  Arabum  Proverbia,  iii.  277. 


3°8 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


Nor  is  any  one  of  them  absolutely  bad. 

Each  is  harmful  or  beneficial  according  to  its  place, 
Wherefore  knowledge  of  these  points  is  proper  and  useful. 
Ah  ! many  are  the  chastisements  sent  to  the  poor 
Which  are  more  beneficial  to  him  than  bread  and  sweets ; 
Because  sweets  out  of  season  excite  biliousness, 

While  blows  make  him  pure  from  impurity. 

Strike  the  poor  man  timely  blows, 

Which  may  save  him  from  being  beheaded  later.” 

The  peasant,  in  reply,  urged  the  prince  not  to  be  over 
hasty  in  punishing  him,  but  to  take  counsel  with  suitable 
advisers,  as  enjoined  in  various  texts,1  and  in  the  Hadis 
prohibiting  monkery,  and  warned  him  that  if  he  shunned 
the  advice  and  society  of  his  equals  he  would  assuredly 
be  led  astray  by  wretched  companions.2  In  illustration 
of  this  a story  is  told  of  a mouse  who  conceived  a great 
affection  for  a frog  living  in  a neighbouring  pond.3  That 
he  might  be  able  to  communicate  with  his  friend  at  all 
times,  he  fastened  a string  to  the  frog’s  leg,  and  the  other 
end  of  it  to  his  own.  The  proverb  says,  “ Occasional 
intermission  of  visits  augments  love,”  4 but  ardent  lovers 
desire  to  be  in  communication  with  the  object  of  their 
love  without  intermission.  The  frog  was  at  first  unwilling 
to  enter  into  such  close  relations  with  an  animal  of  another 
species,  but  at  last  allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded  to  do 
so,  against  his  better  judgment.  Shortly  afterwards  a 
raven  swooped  down  on  the  mouse  and  carried  him  off, 
and  the  frog,  being  fastened  to  the  mouse,  was  dragged 
off  and  destroyed  along  with  it.  The  raven’s  friends  said 
to  him,  “How  is  it  you  managed  to  catch  an  animal  that 
lives  in  the  water  ? ” and  he  replied,  “ Because  it  was  so 
silly  as  to  consort  with  one  of  another  species  that  lived 
on  dry  land.” 

1 Koran  lxvii.  22,  iii.  155,  xlii.  36.  2 Koran  xliii.  37. 

3 Anvari  Suhaili,  Chap.  vii.  Story  III. 

4 Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  i.  287. 


STORY  VII.]  THE  THREE  TRA  VELLERS. 


309 


Comparison  of  the  body  to  the  mouse,  and  the  sold  to  the 
frog  (p.  5 53)- 

The  two  friends  discussed  the  matter  long, 

And  after  discussion  this  plan  was  settled, 

That  they  should  fetch  a long  string, 

By  means  of  which  to  communicate  with  one  another. 

The  mouse  said,  “ One  end  must  be  tied  to  your  leg. 

And  the  other  end  to  the  leg  of  me,  your  double, 

That  by  this  contrivance  we  two  may  be  united, 

And  be  mingled  together  like  soul  and  body.” 

Body  is  like  a string  tied  to  soul’s  foot, 

That  string  drags  soul  down  to  earth. 

The  soul  is  the  frog  in  the  water  of  ecstatic  bliss ; 
Escaping  from  the  mouse  of  the  body,  it  is  in  bliss. 

The  mouse  of  the  body  drags  it  back  with  that  string ; 

Ah ! what  sorrow  it  tastes  through  being  dragged  back  ! 
If  it  were  not  dragged  down  by  that  insolent  mouse, 

The  frog  would  remain  at  peace  in  its  water. 

On  the  last  day,  when  you  shall  awake  from  sleep, 

You  will  learn  the  rest  of  this  from  the  Sun  of  truth ! 

In  illustration  of  the  thesis  that  the  sense  which  per- 
ceives the  unseen  and  spiritual  world  is  superior  to  the 
other  senses,  and  is  exempt  from  death  and  decay,  the 
poet  tells  an  anecdote  of  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghazni  and 
some  robbers.  One  night,  when  walking  about  the  city 
alone,  he  fell  in  with  a band  of  robbers.  He  told  them 
he  was  one  of  them,  and  proposed  that  each  should  tell 
his  own  special  talent.  Accordingly,  one  said  he  could 
hear  what  the  dogs  said  when  they  barked ; another 
that  his  sight  was  so  good  that  when  he  saw  a man  at 
night  he  could  recognise  him  without  fail  next  day ; 
another  said  his  talent  lay  in  the  strength  of  his  arms, 
whereby  he  dug  holes  through  the  walls  of  houses ; 
another  said  he  could  divine  by  his  sense  of  smell  where 


3io 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  VI. 


gold  was  hidden ; another  said  his  wrist  was  so  strong 
that  he  could  throw  a rope  farther  than  any  one.  At 
last  it  came  to  the  turn  of  the  king,  and  he  told  them 
that  his  talent  lay  in  his  beard,  for  when  he  wagged  it 
he  could  deliver  criminals  from  the  executioner.  The 
robbers  then  went  to  the  king’s  palace,  and,  each  of  them 
co-operating  by  the  exercise  of  his  peculiar  talent,  they 
broke  into  it,  and  plundered  a large  sum  of  money. 
The  king,  after  witnessing  the  burglary,  withdrew  from 
them  secretly,  and,  having  summoned  his  Vazir,  gave 
orders  for  their  apprehension.  No  sooner  were  the 
robbers  brought  before  the  king  than  the  one  whose 
talent  lay  in  recognising  by  day  those  whom  he  had 
seen  in  the  darkness  of  night  at  once  knew  him,  and 
said  to  the  others,  “ This  is  the  man  who  said  his  talent 
lay  in  his  beard ! ” Thus  the  only  one  whose  talent 
profited  him  at  the  time  of  need  was  he  who  could 
recognise  by  day  what  he  had  previously  seen  by  night ; 
for  he  appealed  to  the  king  to  exercise  his  talent  of 
deliverance,  and  the  king  listened  to  his  entreaty,  and 
delivered  him  from  the  executioner. 


He  whose  eyes  discern  God  in  the  world  is  safe  from 
destruction  (p.  555 ). 

He  who,  when  he  had  once  seen  a person  at  night, 
Recognised  him  without  fail  when  he  saw  him  by  day, 
Saw  the  king  upon  the  throne,  and  straightway  cried, 
“This  was  he  who  accompanied  us  on  our  nightly  walk; 
This  is  he  whose  beard  possessed  such  rare  talent ; 

Our  arrest  is  due  to  his  sagacity.” 

He  added,  “ ‘ Yea,  he  was  with  you,’ 1 this  great  king ; 
He  beheld  our  actions  and  heard  our  secrets. 

My  eyes  guided  me  to  recognise  that  king  at  night, 

And  dwelt  lovingly  on  his  face,  like  the  moon  at  night. 

1 Koran  lvii.  4. 


story  viii.]  THE  PENSIONER  OF  THE  PREFECT.  31 1 

Now,  therefore,  I will  implore  his  grace  for  myself, 

For  he  will  never  avert  his  face  from  him  that  knew  him.” 
Know  the  eye  of  the  ‘ knower  ’ is  a safeguard  in  both 
worlds, 

For  therein  ye  will  find  a very  Bahram  to  aid  you. 

For  this  cause  Muhammad  was  the  intercessor  for  faults, 
Because  his  eye  ‘ did  not  wander  ’ 1 from  the  King  of 
kings. 

In  the  night  of  this  world,  when  the  sun  is  hidden, 

He  beheld  God,  and  placed  his  hopes  on  Him. 

His  eyes  were  anointed  with  the  words,  ‘We  opened  thy 
heart,’  2 

He  beheld  what  Gabriel  himself  had  not  power  to  see.”3 

The  story  of  the  frog  is  concluded  by  the  lamentations 
of  the  frog  over  his  folly  in  consorting  with  an  animal  of 
a different  genus  to  his  own,  on  which  Reason  warns  him 
that  homogeneity  lies  in  spirit,  not  in  outward  form ; 
and  this  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  a man  named 
’Abdu’l  Ghaus,  who  was  the  son  of  a fairy  mother,  and 
consequently  homogeneous  with  the  fairies,  though  only 
an  ordinary  man  to  outward  appearance. 


Story  YIII.  The  Man  who  received  a Pension  from  the 
Prefect  of  Tabriz  (p.  559). 

These  reflections  on  the  nothingness  of  outward  form 
compared  to  spirit  lead  the  poet  to  the  corollary  that 
often  men  whose  outward  forms  are  buried  in  the  grave 
are  greater  benefactors  to  the  poor  and  helpless  than 
men  still  living  in  the  body.  This  is  illustrated  by  the 
story  of  the  man  who  was  maintained  by  the  Prefect  of 
Tabriz.  This  man  incurred  heavy  debts  on  the  credit  of 
his  pension,  even  as  the  Imam  Ja’far  Sadiq  was  able  to 
capture  a strong  fort  single-handed  through  the  power  of 
1 Koran  liii.  17.  2 Koran  xciv.  1.  3 Gulshan  i Raz,  1.  120. 


312 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


God  assisting  him.  When  the  creditors  became  pressing 
the  man  journeyed  to  Tabriz  to  seek  further  aid ; but  on 
arriving  there  he  found  the  Prefect  was  dead.  On  learn- 
ing this  he  was  much  cast  down,  but  eventually  recognised 
that  he  had  erred  in  looking  to  a creature  instead  of 
his  Creator  for  aid,  according  to  the  text,  “ The  infidels 
equalise  others  with  their  Lord.”1  This  obliquity  of 
spiritual  sight,  causing  him  to  see  a mere  human  bene- 
factor, where  the  real  benefactor  was  God  alone,  is  illus- 
trated by  anecdotes  of  a man  buying  bread  at  Kashan,  of 
Sultan  Khwarazm  Shah  deluded  into  misliking  a fine 
horse  by  the  interested  advice  of  his  Yazir,  and  of  Joseph, 
who  when  imprisoned  by  Pharaoh  was  induced  to  trust 
for  deliverance  to  the  intercession  of  the  chief  butler 
rather  than  to  God  alone,  for  which  cause  “he  remained 
several  years  in  prison.”  A charitable  person  of  Tabriz 
endeavoured  to  raise  funds  for  the  poor  man,  and  appealed 
to  the  citizens  to  aid  him,  but  only  succeeded  in  collecting 
a very  small  sum.  He  then  visited  the  Prefect’s  tomb, 
and  implored  assistance  from  him ; and  the  same  night 
the  Prefect  appeared  to  him  in  a dream,  and  gave  him 
directions  where  to  find  a great  treasure,  and  directed 
him  to  make  over  this  treasure  to  the  poor  man.  Thus 
the  dead  Prefect  proved  a more  liberal  benefactor  than 
the  citizens  of  Tabriz  who  were  still  living. 


The  poor  man’s  regrets  for  having  placed  his  trust  in 
man  and  not  in  God  (p.  561). 

When  he  recovered  himself  he  said,  “ 0 God, 

I have  sinned  in  looking  for  aid  to  a creature ! 
Although  the  Prefect  showed  great  liberality, 

It  was  in  no  wise  equal  to  Thy  bounty. 

He  gave  me  a cap,  but  Thou  my  head  full  of  sense ; 

He  gave  me  a garment,  but  Thou  my  tall  form. 

" Koran  xii.  42. 


1 Koran  vi.  1. 


STORY  VIII.]  THE  PENSIONER  OF  THE  PREFECT. 


313 


He  gave  me  gold,  but  Thou  my  hand  which  counts  it  ; 

He  gave  me  a horse,  but  Thou  my  reason  to  guide  it ; 

He  gave  me  a lamp,  but  Thou  my  lucid  eyes ; 

He  gave  me  sweetmeats,  but  Thou  my  appetite  for  them ; 
He  gave  me  a pension,  but  Thou  my  life  and  being ; 

His  gift  was  gold,  but  Thine  true  blessings ; 

He  gave  me  a house,  but  Thou  heaven  and  earth  ; 

Iu  Thy  house  he  and  a hundred  like  him  are  nourished. 
The  gold  was  of  Thy  providing,  he  did  not  create  it ; 

The  bread  of  Thy  providing,  and  furnished  to  him  by  Thee. 
Thou  also  didst  give  him  his  liberality, 

For  thereby  Thou  didst  augment  his  happiness. 

I made  him  my  Qibla,  and  directed  my  prayers  to  him  ; 

I turned  away  my  eyes  from  Thee,  the  $*^«-maker ! 
Where  was  he  when  the  Supreme  Dispenser  of  faith 
Sowed  reason  in  the  water  and  clay  of  man, 

And  drew  forth  from  Not-being  this  heavenly  dome, 

And  spread  out  the  carpet  of  the  earth  ? 

Of  the  stars  He  made  torches  to  illumine  the  sky, 

And  of  the  four  elements  locks  with  keys  (of  reason). 

Ah ! many  are  the  buildings  visible  and  invisible 
Which  God  has  made  between  heaven’s  dome  and  earth. 
Man  is  the  astrolabe  of  those  exalted  attributes, 

The  attribute  of  man  is  to  manifest  God’s  signs. 
Whatever  is  seen  in  man  is  the  reflection  of  God, 

Even  as  the  reflection  of  the  moon  in  water.” 

Say  not  two,  know  not  two,  call  not  on  two ! 

Know  the  slave  is  obliterated  in  his  lord ! 

So  the  lord  is  obliterated  in  God  that  created  him  ; 

Yea,  lost  and  dead  and  buried  in  his  Creator! 

When  you  regard  this  lord  as  separate  from  God, 

You  annihilate  at  once  text  and  paraphrase. 

With  eyes  and  heart  look  beyond  mere  water  and  clay, 
God  alone  is  the  Qibla regard  not  two  Quiblas  ! 

If  you  regard  two  you  lose  the  benefit  of  both  ; 

A spark  falls  on  the  tinder  and  the  tinder  vanishes ! 


314 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vi. 


Joseph  kept  in  prison  a long  time  for  having  placed  his 
hopes  of  release  in  man  and  not  in  God  (p.  567). 

In  like  manner  Joseph,  in  the  prison, 

With  humble  and  earnest  supplications 
Begged  aid,  saying,  “ When  you  are  released, 

And  are  occupied  with  your  ministrations  to  the  king, 
Remember  me,  and  entreat  the  king 
To  release  me  too  from  this  prison.” 

How  can  one  prisoner  fettered  in  the  snare 
Procure  release  for  a fellow  prisoner  ? 

The  people  of  the  world  are  all  prisoners, 

Awaiting  death  on  the  stake  of  annihilation  ; 

Except  one  or  two  rare  exceptions, 

Whose  bodies  are  in  prison  but  their  souls  in  heaven. 

Afterwards,  because  Joseph  had  looked  to  man  for  aid, 
He  remained  in  prison  for  many  years.1 
The  Devil  caused  the  man  to  forget  Joseph, 

And  blotted  Joseph’s  words  from  his  remembrance ; 

And  on  account  of  this  fault  of  that  holy  man 
God  left  him  in  the  prison  for  many  years. 


Story  IX.  The  King  and  his  Three  Sons  (p.  571 ). 

A certain  king  had  three  sons,  who  were  the  light  of 
his  eyes,  and,  as  it  were,  a fountain  whence  the  palm-tree 
of  his  heart  drank  the  water  of  bliss.  One  day  he  called 
his  sons  before  him  and  commanded  them  to  travel 
through  his  realm,  and  to  inspect  the  behaviour  of  the 
governors  and  the  state  of  the  administration ; and  he 
strictly  charged  them  not  to  go  near  a particular  fort 
which  he  named.  But,  according  to  the  saying,  “ Man 
hankers  after  what  is  forbidden,”  the  three  princes  dis- 
obeyed their  father,  and,  before  going  anywhere  else, 
1 Koran  xii.  42. 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 


3'5 


proceeded  to  visit  this  fort.  The  result  was,  that  they 
fell  into  calamities,  and  had  occasion  to  repeat  the  text, 
“ Had  we  but  hearkened  or  understood,  we  had  not  been 
among  the  dwellers  in  the  flame.”  1 The  fort  was  full  of 
pictures,  images  and  forms,  and  amongst  them  was  a 
portrait  of  a beautiful  damsel,  the  daughter  of  the  King 
of  China,  which  made  such  a deep  impression  on  the 
three  princes  that  they  all  became  distracted  with  love, 
and  determined  to  journey  to  the  court  of  the  King  of 
China  and  sue  for  the  hand  of  his  daughter. 


The  significance  of  forms1  (p.  574). 

Be  not  intoxicated  with  these  goblets  of  forms, 

Lest  you  become  a maker  and  worshipper  of  idols. 

Pass  by  these  cups  full  of  forms,  linger  not; 

There  is  wine  in  the  cups,  but  it  proceeds  not  from  them. 
Look  to  the  Giver  of  the  wine  with  open  mouth  ; 

When  His  wine  comes,  is  not  cup  too  small  to  hold  it  ? 

0 Adam,  seek  the  reality  of  my  love, 

Quit  the  mere  husk  and  form  of  the  wheat. 

When  sand  was  made  meal  for  “ The  Friend  of  God,”  3 
Know,  0 master,  the  form  of  wheat  was  dispensed  with. 
Form  proceeds  from  the  world  that  is  without  form, 

Even  as  smoke  arises  from  fire. 


The  Divine  art  without  form  designs  forms  (ideals),4 
Those  forms  fashion  bodies  with  senses  and  instruments. 
Whatever  the  form,  it  fashions  in  its  own  likeness 
Those  bodies  either  to  good  or  to  evil. 

1 Koran  lxvii.  io.  poet  runs  through  nearly  all  these 

2 Surat,  or  “ form,”  means  picture,  meanings. 

image,  outward  appearance  as  op-  3 Sale’s  Koran,  p.  75,  note, 
posed  to  reality,  conception  or  4 I.e.,  the  archetypes  in  the  “Intel- 
e “form  of  thought,”  the  “archK  lectual  Presence  ” or  “ world  of  corn- 
types”  or  “ideas”  in  the  Divine  mand,”  which  are  afterwards  set 
mind,  “the  Substantial  forms”  of  forth  in  the  “ world  of  creation  ” or 
the  Realist  philosophy.  Here  the  sensible  objects. 


3i6 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


If  the  form  be  blessing,  the  man  is  thankful ; 

If  it  be  suffering,  he  is  patient ; 

If  it  be  cherishing,  he  is  cheerful ; 

If  it  be  bruising,  he  is  full  of  lamentation  ! 

Since  all  these  forms  are  slaves  of  Him  without  form, 
Why  do  they  deny  their  Lord  and  Master  ? 

They  exist  only  through  Him  that  is  without  form  ; 

What,  then,  means  their  disavowal  of  their  Sustainer  ? 
This  very  denial  of  Him  proceeds  from  Him, 

This  act  is  naught  but  a reflection  from  Himself ! 

The  forms  of  the  walls  and  roofs  of  houses 
Know  to  be  shadows  of  the  architect’s  thought ; 

Although  stones  and  planks  and  bricks 

Find  no  entrance  into  the  sanctuary  of  thought, 

Verily  the  Absolute  Agent  is  without  form, 

Form  is  only  a tool  in  His  hands. 

Sometimes  that  Formless  One  of  His  mercy 
Shows  His  face  to  His  forms  from  behind  the  veil  of 
Not-being, 

That  every  form  may  derive  aid  therefrom, — 

From  its  perfect  beauty  and  power. 

Again,  when  that  Formless  One  hides  His  face, 

Those  forms  set  forth  their  needs. 

If  one  form  sought  perfection  from  another  form, 

That  would  be  the  height  of  error. 

Why  then,  0 simpleton,  do  you  set  forth  your  needs 
To  one  who  is  as  needy  as  yourself  ? 

Since  forms  are  slaves,  apply  them  not  to  God, 

Seek  not  to  use  a form  as  a similitude  of  God.1 
Seek  Him  with  humbleness  and  self-abasement, 

For  thought  yields  naught  but  forms  of  thought. 

Still,  if  you  are  unable  to  dispense  with  forms, 

Those  occurring  independently  of  your  thought  are  best.'2 


1 See  Koran  xlii.  9. 


- l.c.,  the  similitudes  used  in  the  Koran. 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 


3 17 


The  “ Truth”  which  is  our  real  self,  lies  hidden  ivithin  our 
phenomenal  and  visible  self,  and  the  Prophets  reveal 
it  to  ns  (p.  576). 

“ Now  have  we  seen  what  the  king  saw  at  the  first, 

When  that  Incomparable  One  abjured  us.” 

The  prophets  have  many  claims  to  our  gratitude, 
Because  they  forewarn  us  of  our  ultimate  lot, 

Saying,  “What  ye  sow  will  yield  only  thorns ; 

If  ye  fly  that  way,  ye  will  fly  astray. 

Take  seed  of  us  to  yield  you  a good  harvest, 

Fly  with  our  wings  to  hit  the  mark  with  your  arrow. 

Now  ye  know  not  the  truth  and  nature  of  the  ‘ Truth,’ 1 
But  at  the  last  ve  will  erv,  ‘That  was  the  “ Truth.”  ’ 

The  Truth  is  yourself,  but  not  your  mere  bodily  self, 

Your  real  self  is  higher  than  ‘ you  ’ and  * me.’ 

This  visible  ‘ you  ’ which  you  fancy  to  be  yourself 
Is  limited  in  place,  the  real  ‘ you  ’ is  not  limited. 

Why,  0 pearl,  linger  you  trembling  in  your  shell  ? 

Esteem  not  yourself  mere  sugar-cane,  but  real  sugar. 

This  outward  ‘you’  is  foreign  to  your  real  ‘you  ;’ 

Cling  to  your  real  self,  quit  this  dual  self. 

Your  last  self  attains  to  your  first  (real)  self 

Onlv  through  your  attending  earnestly  to  that  union. 

Your  real  self  lies  hid  beneath  your  outward  self, 

For  ‘ I am  the  servant  of  him  who  looks  into  himself.’  ” - 
“ What  a youth  sees  only  when  reflected  in  a glass, 

Our  wise  old  fathers  saw  long  ago  though  hid  in  stones. 
But  we  disobeyed  the  advice  of  our  father, 

And  rebelled  against  his  affectionate  counsels. 

We  made  light  of  the  king’s  exhortations, 

And  slighted  his  matchless  intimations. 

Now  we  have  all  fallen  into  the  ditch, 

1 “The  Truth,”  JZ  Haqq,  the  and  the  Hadis,  “ Whoso  knows  him- 

Divine  Noumenon.  self  knows  his  Lord.” 

2 See  Gulshan  i Raz,  Answer  III., 


318 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


Wounded  and  crushed  in  this  fatal  struggle. 

We  relied  on  our  own  reason  and  discernment, 

And  for  that  cause  have  fallen  into  this  calamity. 

We  fancied  ourselves  free  from  defects  of  sight, 

Even  as  those  affected  by  colour-blindness. 

Now  at  last  our  hidden  disease  has  been  revealed, 

After  we  have  been  involved  in  these  calamities.” 

“ The  shadow  of  a guide  is  better  than  directions  to  God, 
To  be  satisfied  is  better  than  a hundred  nice  dishes. 

A seeing  eye  is  better  than  a hundred  walking-sticks, 

Eye  discerns  jewels  from  mere  pebbles.” 

The  princes  ascertained  the  name  of  the  lady  depicted 
in  the  fort  from  an  old  Shaikh,  who  warned  them  of  the 
perils  they  would  encounter  on  their  journey  to  China, 
and  told  them  that  the  King  of  China  would  not  bestow 
his  favour  on  those  who  tried  to  gain  it  by  tricks  and 
clever  stratagems,  but  solely  on  those  who  were  prepared 
to  yield  up  their  lives  to  him,  according  to  the  saying,  “ Die 
before  you  die.”  This  is  illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  a 
Chief  of  Bokhara,  who  made  it  a rule  never  to  bestow  his 
bounty  on  beggars  who  asked  for  it,  but  only  on  those 
who  awaited  his  pleasure  in  silence.  A certain  Faqir 
tried  many  stratagems  to  evade  this  rule,  but  his  craft 
was  at  once  seen  through  by  the  Chief,  and  turned  to  his 
own  confusion.  The  thesis  that  the  unbought  free  grace 
of  God  is  superior  to  any  blessing  obtainable  by  human 
exertion  and  contrivance  is  further  illustrated  by  an 
absurd  anecdote  of  two  youths,  one  of  whom  trusted  for 
protection  to  his  own  contrivance,  and  found  it  a broken 
reed.  The  Prophet  said,  “ Two  there  are  who  are  never 
satisfied — the  lover  of  the  world  and  the  lover  of  know- 
ledge;” and  he  who  loves  knowledge  will  continue  to  trust 
in  his  knowledge,  in  spite  of  all  exhortations  and  expe- 
rience. But  the  eldest  prince  advised  his  brothers  to 
risk  the  perils  and  persevere  in  the  journey,  reminding 
them  that  “ Patience  is  the  key  of  joy.”  Accordingly 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 


3>9 


they  abandoned  their  country  and  their  parents,  like 
Ibrahim  Adham,  who  renounced  the  throne  of  Balkh,  and 
like  the  old  Arabian  king  Amru’l  Qais,  who  fled  from 
the  pursuit  of  his  female  adorers  to  seek  the  Spiritual 
Beloved  iu  a far  country. 


How  the  irrinces  discoursed  until  one  another  in  figurative 
language  concerning  their  beloved  mistress  (p.  581). 

They  told  their  secrets  to  one  another  in  dark  sayings, 
Speaking  beneath  their  breath  in  fear  and  trembling. 
None  but  God  was  privy  to  their  secrets, 

None  but  Heaven  was  partner  in  their  sighs. 

Yea,  they  used  technical  expressions  one  to  another, 

And  possessed  intelligence  to  extract  the  sense. 

The  vulgar  learn  the  words  of  this  “language  of  birds,” 
And  make  boast  of  their  mastery  thereof ; 

But  these  words  are  only  the  outward  form  of  the 
language, 

The  “ raw  ” man  is  ignorant  of  the  birds’  meaning. 

He  is  the  true  Solomon  who  knows  the  birds’  language, 

A demon,  though  he  usurp  his  kingdom,  is  quite  another. 
The  demon  has  taken  upon  him  the  form  of  Solomon, 

His  knowledge  is  fraud,  not  “ what  we  have  been  taught.” 1 
When  Solomon  was  blessed  with  inspiration  from  God, 

He  learned  birds’  language  from  “ what  we  were  taught.”  1 
But  thou  art  only  a bird  of  the  air ; understand  then 
That  thou  hast  never  seen  the  true  spiritual  birds ! 

The  nest  of  the  Simurgh  is  beyond  Mount  Qaf,2 
Not  every  thought  can  attain  thereto  ; 

Save  thoughts  which  catch  a glimpse  thereof, 

And  after  the  vision  are  again  shut  off. 

Yet  not  all  shut  off,  rather  intermitted  for  a wise  end, 

1 Koran  xxvii.  16.  birds”  (Si  murgk),  and  is  used  as  a 

2 Simurgh, “Oiseau  extraordinaire  type  of  the  Divine  Unity  which  em- 
qui  reside  au  Caucase,”  as  M.  Gar-  braces  all  plurality. 

cin  de  Tassy  calls  it,  means  “thirty 


320 


THE  MA  SNA  VI. 


[book  VI. 


For  the  blessing  abides,  though  shut  off  and  hidden  ! 

In  order  to  preserve  that  body  which  is  as  a soul, 

The  Sun  is  veiled  for  a while  behind  a cloud ; 

In  order  not  to  melt  that  soul-like  body, 

The  Sun  withdraws  itself  as  from  ice. 

For  thy  soul’s  sake  seek  counsel  of  these  inspired  ones.1 
Ah  ! rob  not  their  words  of  their  technical  meanings  ! 

Zulaiklia  applied  to  Yusuf  the  names  of  all  things, 
Beginning  with  wild  rue  and  ending  with  frankincense. 
She  veiled  his  name  under  all  other  names. 

And  imparted  her  secret  meaning  to  her  confidants. 
When  she  said,  “ The  wax  is  melted  by  the  fire,” 

She  meant,  “ My  lover  is  wroth  with  me.” 

So  when  she  said,  “ See,  the  moon  is  risen  ! ” 

Or,  “ Lo  ! the  willow-bough  is  putting  forth  leaves ; ” 

Or  if  she  said,  “ The  leaves  quiver  in  the  wind,” 

Or,  “The  wild  rue  yields  perfume  as  it  burns ; ” 

Or  if  she  said,  “ The  rose  tells  her  tale  to  the  Bulbul,” 
Or,  “The  king  sings  his  love-strain  ;” 

Or  if  she  said,  “ Ah  ! what  a blessed  lot ! ” 

Or,  “Who  hath  disturbed  my  heart’s  repose?” 

Or  if  she  said,  “ The  water-carrier  hath  brought  water,” 
Or,  “ Lo  ! the  sun  emerges  from  the  clouds;  ” 

Or  if  she  said,  “ Last  night  the  victuals  were  boiled,” 
Or,  “ The  food  was  perfectly  cooked  ; ” 

Or  if  she  said,  “My  bread  is  without  savour,” 

Or',  “ The  heavens  are  revolving  the  wrong  way  ; ” 

Or  if  she  said,  “ My  head  aches  with  pain,” 

Or,  “ My  headache  is  now  relieved  ; ” — 

If  she  gave  thanks,  ’twas  for  being  united  to  Yusuf ; 

If  she  wailed,  ’twas  that  she  was  separated  from  him. 
Though  she  gave  vent  to  thousands  of  names, 

Her  meaning  and  purport  was  only  Yusuf ; 

Was  she  an  hungred,  when  she  pronounced  his  name, 
She  became  filled  and  cheered  by  his  nourishment. 

Her  thirst  was  quenched  by  Yusuf’s  name, 

1 I.e.,  the  prophets  and  saints. 


321 


STORY  is.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 

His  name  was  spiritual  water  to  her  soul. 

Was  she  in  pain,  by  pronouncing  his  mighty  name 
At  once  her  pain  was  turned  into  joy. 

In  tbe  cold  it  was  a warm  garment ; 

Her  lover’s  name  accomplished  all  this  through  love. 
Strangers  may  pronounce  the  “pure  name”  of  God, 

Yet  it  effects  no  such  marvels,  for  they  lack  love. 

All  that  ’Isa  accomplished  by  the  name  of  Jehovah, 
Zulaikha  attained  through  the  name  “Yusuf.” 

When  the  soul  is  intimately  united  with  God, 

To  name  the  one  is  the  same  as  naming  the  other. 
Zulaikha  was  empty  of  self  and  filled  with  love  of  Yusuf, 
And  there  flowed  out  of  her  jar  what  it  contained. 

The  scent  of  the  saffron  of  union  made  her  smile, 

The  stench  of  the  onion  of  separation  made  her  weep. 
Each  to  have  in  his  heart  a hundred  meanings, — 

Such  is  not  the  creed  of  true  love  and  devotion. 

“ The  Friend  ” is  to  the  lover  as  day  to  the  sun, 

The  material  sun  is  a veil  over  the  face  of  the  real  day. 
Whoso  distinguishes  not  the  veil  from  “ The  Friend’s”  face 
Is  a worshipper  of  the  sun  ; of  such  an  one  beware  ! 

“ The  Friend  ” is  the  real  day,  and  daily  food  of  lovers, 
The  heart  and  the  heart’s  torment  of  His  lovers. 

After  enduring  many  toils  and  misfortunes  the  three 
princes  at  last  arrived  in  the  metropolis  of  China,  and 
thereupon  the  eldest  prince  expressed  his  intention  of 
presenting  himself  before  the  king,  as  he  could  wait  no 
longer.  His  brothers  tried  to  dissuade  him  from  risking 
his  life,  pointing  out  that  if  he  acted  on  blind  impulse 
and  vain  conceit  he  would  surely  go  astray,  for  “ a con- 
ceit hath  naught  of  truth ; ” 1 and  they  further  urged  him 
to  listen  to  the  counsels  of  the  Pir,  or  Spiritual  Director. 
But  the  eldest  brother  refused  to  be  dissuaded  from  his 
purpose,  saying  he  would  no  longer  hide  his  passion  for 
his  beloved,  like  one  who  beats  a drum  under  a blanket, 
1 Koran  x.  37. 


X 


322 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vi. 


but  would  proclaim  it  openly,  and  take  the  risk  of  what- 
ever might  ensue.  He  added  that  he  was  convinced 
that  he  should  obtain  his  desire  in  some  way  or  other,  if 
not  in  the  way  that  he  expected  ; — according  to  the  text, 
“Whoso  feareth  God,  to  him  will  he  grant  a prosperous 
issue,  and  will  provide  for  him  in  a way  he  reckoned 
not.”  1 Seekers  after  God  fancy  that  He  is  far  from  them, 
and  that  they  must  travel  far  to  reach  Him  ; but  these 
are  both  erroneous  suppositions;  and  just  as  arithmeticians 
work  out  true  answers  to  their  problems  by  the  “Method 
of  Errors,”  2 so  must  the  seekers  of  God  from  these  errors 
work  out  the  conviction  that  God  is  very  nigh  to  them 
that  call  upon  Him  faithfully.  To  illustrate  this  an 
anecdote  is  told  of  a man  of  Bagdad  who  was  in  great 
distress,  and  who,  after  calling  on  God  for  aid,  dreamt 
that  a great  treasure  lay  hid  in  a certain  spot  in  Egypt. 
He  accordingly  journeyed  to  Egypt,  and  there  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  patrol,  who  arrested  him,  and  beat  him 
severely  on  suspicion  of  being  a thief.  Calling  to  mind 
the  proverb  that  “falsehood  is  a mischief  but  truth  a 
remedy,” 3 he  determined  to  confess  the  true  reason  of 
his  coming  to  Egypt,  and  accordingly  told  them  all  the 
particulars  of  his  dream.  On  hearing  them  they  believed 
him,  and  one  of  them  said,  “You  must  be  a fool  to 
journey  all  this  distance  merely  on  the  faith  of  a dream. 
I myself  have  many  times  dreamt  of  a treasure  lying  hid 
in  a certain  spot  in  Bagdad,  but  was  never  foolish  enough 
to  go  there.”  Now  the  spot  in  Bagdad  named  by  this 
person  was  none  other  than  the  house  of  the  poor  man 
of  Bagdad,  and  he  straightway  returned  home,  and  there 
found  the  treasure.  And  he  gave  thanks,  and  recognised 
how  “God  causes  ease  to  follow  troubles,”4  aud  how 
“Men  hate  what  is  good  for  them,”6  and  how  God 
delays  the  answer  to  prayer,  and  allows  men  to  remain 

1 Koran  lxv.  2.  3 Freytag,  Arabian  Proverbia,  ii. 

2 I.e.,  “The  Rule  of  Position.”  379. 

Khuldsat  ul  Ilisdb,  Book  iv.  4 Koran  ii.  2 1 3. 

r>  Koran  lxv.  7. 


323 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 

poor  and  hungry  for  a season,  in  order  to  make  them 
call  upon  Him,  even  as  the  Prophet  said,  “My  servant  is 
a lute  which  sounds  best  when  it  is  empty.” 


Why  the  answer  to  prayer  is  delayed  (p.  586). 

Ah  ! many  earnest  suppliants  wail  forth  prayers, 

Till  the  smoke  of  their  wailing  rises  to  heaven ; 

Yea,  the  perfume  of  the  incense  of  sinners’  groans 
Mounts  up  above  the  lofty  roof  of  heaven. 

Then  the  angels  supplicate  God,  saying, 

“ 0 Thou  that  hearest  prayer  and  relievest  pain, 

Thy  faithful  slave  is  bowing  down  before  Thee. 

He  knows  of  none  on  whom  to  rely  save  Thee ; 

Thou  bestowest  favours  on  the  helpless. 

Every  suppliant  obtains  his  desire  from  Thee.” 

God  makes  answer,  “ The  delay  in  granting  his  prayer 
Is  intended  to  benefit  him,  not  to  harm  him. 

His  pressing  need  draws  him  from  his  negligence  to  me ; 
Yea,  drags  him  by  the  hair  into  my  courts. 

If  I at  once  remove  his  need  he  will  go  away, 

And  will  be  destroyed  in  his  idle  sports. 

Though  he  is  wailing  with  heartfelt  cry  of  ‘ 0 Aider ! ’ 

Bid  him  wail  on  with  broken  heart  and  contrite  breast. 
His  voice  sounds  sweet  in  my  ears, 

And  his  wailing  and  cries  of  ‘ 0 God ! ’ 

In  this  way  by  supplication  and  lamentation 
He  prevails  with  me  altogether.” 

It  is  on  account  of  their  sweet  voices 
That  choice  parrots  and  nightingales  are  prisoned  in 
cages. 

Ugly  owls  and  crows  1 are  never  prisoned  in  cages  ; 

Such  a thing  was  never  heard  of  in  history. 

The  disappointments  of  the  pious,  be  sure, 

Are  appointed  for  this  wise  purpose. 

1 I.e.,  hardened  sinners  like  Pharaoh. 


324 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vi. 


The  eldest  brother  then  delayed  no  longer,  but  rushed 
into  the  presence  of  the  King  and  kissed  his  feet.  The 
King,  like  a good  shepherd,  was  well  aware  of  the  troubles 
and  cravings  of  his  sheep.  He  knew  that  the  prince  had 
abjured  earthly  rank  and  dignity  through  love  for  his 
daughter,  even  as  a Sufi  casts  away  his  robe  when  over- 
powered by  ecstatic  rapture.  The  only  reason  why  the 
prince  had  lagged  behind  in  the  race  and  not  presented 
himself  to  the  King  before  was  that  hitherto  he  had 
lacked  the  “inner  eye”  or  spiritual  sense  which  discerns 
spiritual  verities,  and  had  been  consequently  blind  to  the 
King’s  perfections.  They  who  lack  this  inner  spiritual 
sense  can  no  more  appreciate  spiritual  pleasures  than  a 
man  lacking  the  sense  of  smell  can  enjoy  the  perfume  of 
fiowers,  or  a eunuch  the  society  of  fair  women.  But  his 
eyes  had  now  been  opened  by  the  King’s  grace,  and  he 
had  escaped  from  the  bondage  of  worldly  lusts  and  illu- 
sions, and,  taught  by  experience,  had  resolved  never  again 
to  be  led  captive  by  them. 

This  is  illustrated  by  the  anecdote  of  the  Qazi  who  was 
beguiled  by  the  wife  of  a dwarf.  The  dwarf  and  his  wife 
were  very  poor,  and  one  day  the  dwarf  said  to  his  wife, 
“ God  has  given  you  arched  brows  and  arrowy  glances 
and  all  manner  of  witchery ; go  and  ensnare  some  rich 
man,  so  that  we  may  extract  money  from  him  ! ” So  the 
woman  went  to  the  court  of  the  Qazi,  pretending  to  have 
a grievance  ; and  when  she  saw  the  Qazi  she  beguiled  him, 
and  induced  him  to  pay  her  a visit  at  night.  While  the 
Qazi  was  sitting  with  her  the  dwarf  returned  home  and 
knocked  violently  at  the  door,  and  the  Qazi,  in  a great 
fright,  hid  himself  in  a large  chest.  The  dwarf  at  once 
fetched  a porter,  and  told  him  to  take  the  chest  to  the 
bazar  and  sell  it.  On  the  way  to  the  bazar  the  Qazi 
cried  out  to  the  porter  to  fetch  the  Deputy ; aud  when 
the  Deputy  came  he  redeemed  the  chest  for  one  hundred 
dinars,  and  thus  the  Qazi  escaped.  Next  year  the 
woman  went  to  the  court  and  tried  to  seduce  the  Qazi  a 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS.  325 

second  time  ; but  he  said,  “ Begone  ; I have  escaped  from 
your  toils  once,  and  will  not  fall  into  them  again.” 
The  action  of  the  Deputy  in  freeing  the  Qiizi  reminds 
the  poet  of  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  “ Of  him,  of  whom 
I am  the  master,  ’Ali  also  is  master,”  and  is  therefore 
able  to  free  him  from  slavery. 

The  eldest  prince  at  last  fell  sick  of  hope  deferred, 
and  gave  up  the  ghost.  But  though  he  failed  to  obtain 
the  King’s  daughter,  the  object  of  his  earthly  attachment, 
he  obtained  union  with  the  King,  the  real  spiritual  object 
of  his  love,  and  the  eternal  fruition  of  dwelling  in  Him. 


The  joys  of  union  with  the  Spiritual  Beloved  are 
inexpressible  in  speech  (p.  595). 

In  short,  the  King  cherished  him  lovingly, 

And  he  like  a moon  waned  in  that  sun. 

That  waning  of  lovers  makes  them  wax  stronger, 
Just  as  the  moon  waxes  brighter  after  waning. 
Ordinary  sick  persons  crave  a remedy  for  sickness, 
But  the  lovesick  one  cries,  “ Increase  my  waning ! 

I have  never  tasted  wine  sweeter  than  this  poison, 
No  health  can  be  sweeter  than  this  sickness ! 

No  devotion  is  better  than  this  siu  (of  love), 

Years  are  as  a moment  compared  to  this  moment ! ” 
Long  time  he  dwelt  with  the  King  in  this  manner, 
With  burning  heart,  as  a lively  sacrifice. 


Thus  his  life  passed,  yet  he  gained  not  the  union  he 
wished. 

Patient  waiting  consumed  him,  his  soul  could  not  bear  it ; 
He  dragged  on  life  with  pain  and  gnashing  of  teeth, 

At  last  life  ended  before  he  had  attained  his  desire. 

The  form  of  his  earthly  Beloved  was  hidden  from  him ; 


326 


THE  MASH  AVI. 


[book  vi. 


He  departed,  and  found  union  with  the  Spiritual  Beloved. 
Then  he  said,  “ Though  she  lacks  clothes  of  silk  and  wool, 
’Tis  sweeter  to  embrace  her  without  those  veils. 

I have  become  naked  of  the  body  and  its  illusions, 

I am  admitted  into  the  most  intimate  union.” 

The  story  admits  of  being  told  up  to  this  point, 

But  what  follows  is  hidden  and  inexpressible  in  w'oi’ds. 

If  you  should  speak  and  try  a hundred  ways  to  express  it, 
’Tis  useless ; the  mystery  becomes  no  clearer. 

You  can  ride  on  saddle  and  horse  up  to  the  sea-coast, 

But  then  you  must  use  a horse  of  wood  ( i.e .,  a boat). 

A horse  of  wood  is  useless  on  dry  land, 

It  is  the  special  conveyance  of  voyagers  by  sea. 

Silence  is  this  horse  of  wood, 

Silence  is  the  guide  and  support  of  men  at  sea. 

This  Silence  which  causes  you  annoyance 
Is  uttering  cries  of  love  audible  to  the  spiritual. 

You  say,  “How  strange  the  spiritual  man  is  silent!” 

He  answers,  “ How  strange  you  have  no  ears ! 

Though  I utter  cries,  you  hear  them  not ; 

Sensual  ears,  however  sharp,  are  deaf  to  my  cries.” 

The  spiritual  man,  as  it  were,  cries  in  his  sleep, 

Uttering  thousands  of  words  of  comfort ; 

While  the  carnal  man  at  his  side  hears  nothing  at  all, 

For  he  is  asleep,  and  deaf  to  the  other’s  voice. 

But  the  perfect  spiritualist  who  has  broken  his  boat 
Plunges  into  the  sea  as  a fish  of  the  sea  (of  Truth). 

He  is  then  neither  silent  nor  speaking,  but  a mystery, 

No  words  are  available  to  express  his  condition. 

That  mai-vellous  one  is  in  neither  of  these  states  ; 

’Twould  be  irreverent  to  explain  his  state  more  fully. 
These  illustrations  are  weak  and  inappropriate, 

But  no  fitter  ones  are  obtainable  from  sensible  objects. 

When  the  eldest  prince  died,  the  youngest  was  sick 
and  could  not  come ; but  the  second  brother  came  to  the 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 


327 


court  to  attend  his  funeral.  There  the  King  observed 
him,  and  took  pity  on  him  and  entreated  him  kindly. 
He  instilled  into  him  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  verities 
hidden  beneath  phenomenal  objects,  and  conveyed  to 
him  as  deep  a perception  of  spiritual  truths  as  is  not 
gained  by  a Sufi  after  years  of  fasting  and  retirement 
from  the  world.  It  is  a fact,  that  when  the  pure  spirit 
escapes  from  the  bonds  of  the  body,  God  gives  it  sight 
to  behold  the  things  of  the  spirit.  The  logician  denies 
the  possibility  of  this  divine  illumination  of  the  heart,  but 
he  is  confuted  by  the  Prophet,  who  swore  “ by  the  star  ” 
that  the  Koran  was  revealed  to  him  by  divine  illumina- 
tion.1 Those  who  cleave  to  their  heresy  ( Bid’ at ) and 
obstinate  unbelief  are  like  to  incur  the  punishment  in- 
flicted on  the  tribe  of  ’Ad  for  disbelieving  the  Prophet 
Hud.2  Earthly  forms  are  only  shadows  of  the  Sun  of 
the  Truth, — a cradle  for  babes,  but  too  small  to  hold 
those  who  have  grown  to  spiritual  manhood.  When  the 
prince  was  thus  nourished  by  the  spiritual  food  given 
him  by  the  King,  which  was  such  as  the  angels  of  heaven 
subsist  upon,  not  the  unspiritual  food  of  Christians  and 
those  who  give  partners  to  God,  he  began  to  be  puffed 
up  with  self-conceit,  and  forget  what  he  owed  to  the 
King,  and  rebelled  against  him.  The  King  was  cut  to 
the  heart  by  his  ingratitude,  which  exactly  resembled 
that  of  Nimrod.  When  Nimrod  was  an  infant  he  was 
taken  by  his  mother  to  sea,  and  the  ship  being  wrecked, 
all  that  were  in  it  perished,  save  only  the  infant  Nimrod, 
who  was  saved  through  the  pity  of  ’Izra'il,  the  Angel  of 
Death.  God  spared  him,  and  nurtured  him  without 
the  aid  of  mother  or  nurse;  but  when  he  grew  up  he 
proved  ungrateful,  and  was  puffed  up  with  self-conceit  and 
egotism,  and  showed  enmity  against  God  and  Abraham, 
His  servant.  When  the  prince  found  himself  cast  off  by 
the  King  he  came  to  himself,  and  repented  and  humbled 


1 Koran  liii.  1. 


2 Koran  xlvi.  20. 


328 


THE  M A SNA  VI. 


[book  vi. 


himself  with  deep  contrition.  The  King  then  par- 
doned him ; but  his  doom  had  already  been  decreed  by 
God,  and  he  was  slain  by  the  King  he  had  injured, 
acknowledging  the  King’s  goodness  to  him  with  his  latest 
breath. 


The  death  of  the  second  prince  (p.  60 1 ). 

In  short,  the  vengeance  of  That  Jealous  One  (God) 

After  one  year  bore  him  to  the  grave. 

When  the  King  awoke  out  of  his  trance  to  conscious- 
ness, 

His  Mars-like  eyes  shed  tears  of  blood. 

When  that  incomparable  one  looked  into  his  quiver, 

He  saw  that  one  of  his  arrow-shafts  was  missing. 

He  cried  to  God,  “What  has  become  of  my  arrow  ? ” 

God  answered,  “ Thy  arrow  is  fixed  in  his  throat ! ” 

That  King,  bountiful  as  the  sea,  had  pardoned  him ; 
Nevertheless  his  arrow  had  dealt  him  a mortal  wound. 

He  was  slain,  and  cried  out  with  his  last  breath, 

“The  King  is  all  in  all,  my  slayer  and  my  saviour. 

If  he  is  not  both  these,  he  is  not  all  in  all ; 

Nay,  he  is  both  my  slayer  and  my  mourner ! ” 

That  expiring  martyr  also  gave  thanks, 

That  the  King  had  smitten  his  body,  not  his  spirit ; 

For  the  visible  body  must  perforce  perish, 

Ere  the  spirit  can  live  in  happiness  for  evermore. 

Though  he  incurred  chastisement,  it  affected  his  body 
only, 

And  as  a friend  he  now  goes,  free  of  pain,  to  his 
Friend. 

Thus  at  first  he  clung  to  the  King’s  stirrup, 

But  at  last  went  his  way  guided  by  perfect  sight. 

Finally  the  youngest  brother,  who  was  the  weakest  of 
all,  succeeded  where  his  brothers  had  failed,  and  obtained 


STORY  IX.]  THE  KING  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS.  329 

his  earthly  mistress,  the  king’s  daughter,  as  his  bride, 
and  the  Spiritual  Beloved  as  well. 

Here  the  Masnavi  breaks  off ; but,  according  to  the 
Bulaq  edition,  the  following  conclusion  was  supplied  by 
Jalalu-’d-Din’s  son,  Bahau-’d-Din  Sultan  \ alad  : — 

Part  of  the  story  remains  untold  ; it  was  retained 
In  his  mind  and  was  not  disclosed. 

The  story  of  the  princes  remains  unfinished, 

The  pearl  of  the  third  brother  remains  unstrung. 

Here  speech,  like  a camel,  breaks  down  on  its  road ; 

I will  say  no  more,  but  guard  my  tongue  from  speech. 

The  rest  is  told  without  aid  of  tongue 
To  the  heart  of  him  whose  spirit  is  alive. 


Note  on  Apocryphal  Supplements  to  the  Masnavi. 

In  the  Lucknow  edition  there  follows  an  epilogue 
written  by  Muhammad  Hahi  Bakhsh,  giving  a continuation 
of  the  story  of  the  third  brother,  but  nothing  of  the  kind 
is  found  in  any  of  the  other  editions. 

The  Bulaq  edition  adds  a so-called  Book  VII.,  but  this 
is  known  to  be  a comparatively  recent  forgery.  Haji 
Khalfa  says : — “ It  is  notorious  that  the  Masnavi  is  con- 
tained in  six  books,  but  a seventh  book  has  made  its 
appearance,  put  forth  by  Isma'il  Dadah,  the  commentator. 
He  also  wrote  a commentary  on  it,  and  therein  replied 
with  eloquence  and  strenuousness  to  those  who  denied  its 
genuineness.  He  says  in  his  commentary  that  when  he 
came  to  write  out  his  fifth  volume  in  the  year  1035  A.H., 
he  met  with  Book  VII.  in  a copy  of  the  Masnavi  dated 
814  A.H.  He  bought  it  and  read  it  through,  and  was 
satisfied  that  it  was  undoubtedly  a composition  of  the 


33° 


THE  MASNAVI. 


[book  vl 


author  of  the  Masnavi.  But  the  other  Darveshes  of  the 
Maulavi  order  denied  the  genuineness  of  the  Seventh 
Book.”  1 

The  contents  of  this  Seventh  Book  consist  of  com- 
ments on  various  texts  and  traditions,  illustrated  by  stories 
of  no  interest.  They  have  nothing  in  common  with 
the  Epilogue  of  Muhammad  Ilahi  Bakhsh,  found  in  the 
Lucknow  edition. 

1 Haji  Khalfa,  v.  377.  Ismd’il  was  a Darvesh  of  the  Maulavi  order,  sur- 
named  Anquravi,  from  his  native  place  Anquri,  in  Anatolia. 


NOTE. 


33' 


Supplement  to  Note  i,  p.  77. 

See  Yonge's  Translation  of  Philo  Judaeus,  vol.  i.  p.  459  : “At  all  events 
we  shall  speak  with  justice,  if  we  say  that  the  Creator  of  the  universe  is 
also  the  father  of  His  creatures,  and  that  the  mother  was  the  Knowledge 
(Epistemc)  of  the  Creator,  with  whom  God  uniting,  but  not  as  a man 
unites,  became  the  father  of  creation.  And  this  Knowledge  having  re- 
ceived the  seed  of  God,  when  the  day  of  her  travail  arrived,  brought  forth 
her  only  and  well-beloved  son  perceptible  by  the  external  senses,  namely 
the  world.  Accordingly  Wisdom  (Sophia)  is  represented  by  some  of  the 
beings  of  the  divine  company  as  speaking  of  herself  in  this  manner, — ‘ God 
created  me  as  the  first  of  His  works,  and  before  the  beginning  of  time  did 
He  establish  me.’  For  it  was  necessary  that  all  things  which  came  under 
the  head  of  the  creation  should  be  younger  than  the  mother  and  nurse  of 
the  whole  universe.” 

In  another  passage,  Philo  says  Wisdom,  the  daughter  of  Good,  is  both 
male  and  female,  both  father  and  mother  (Yonge,  vol.  ii.  p.  205)  and  ac- 
cording to  this  view  the  “ mystical  marriage,”  as  the  Gulshan  i Raz  calls 
it  (Couplet  622),  takes  place  not  between  God  and  Wisdom,  but  between 
the  male  and  female  manifestations  of  Wisdom,  viz.,  the  Logos  or 
Demiurge  and  Sophia.  This  is  the  view  held  by  Rumi  in  the  text.  As 
Shahrastani  does  not  mention  Philo  among  the  Alexandrian  philosophers 
noticed  by  him,  it  may  perhaps  be  inferred  that  Philo  was  not  known  to 
the  Moslems  directly,  and  that  his  ideas  were  filtered  through  Plotinus 
before  reaching  them.  Plotinus's  language  about  the  Logos,  the  divine 
thought  conceived  in  the  divine  mind  ( Endiathetos ) and  the  same  divine 
thought  brought  forth  (Logos  prophorikos),  is  obviously  connected  with 
Philo’s  idea  of  a mystical  marriage.  The  Universe  is  the  “petrified 
intelligence  ” of  the  Deity,  as  it  has  been  called,  the  word  expressing  the 
divine  thought. 

The  best  summary  of  the  Logos  doctrine,  as  interpreted  by  Muhammadan 
writers,  is  “Die  Lehre  von  der  Weltseele  ” by  Dieterici  (Leipzig,  1872), 
chiefly  derived  from  the  Ikhwanu-s-Safa,  but  he  does  not  pay  much 
attention  to  the  parentage  of  these  ideas.  Renan  (“  Averroes  ”)  and  Munk 
(“Melanges”)  have  done  more  in  this  direction.  Tholuck  touches  the 
question,  but  shirks  full  discussion  of  it.  See  his  Ssutismus,  Cap.  V., 
especially  pp.  196,  220,  and  those  which  follow. 


Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  & Co. 
Edinburgh  & London 


Date  Due 


. 

F 

<JU1M  | 

3 rivo 

>njn 

rHWt 

1197 

I nov  t a 

199? 

<$) 

