Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world’s  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that’s  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book’s  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 


Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non- commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google’s  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

Maintain  attribution  The  Google  “watermark”  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

-I-  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can’t  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book’s  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 


About  Google  Book  Search 


Google’s  mission  is  to  organize  the  world’s  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world’s  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  /  /books  .  google  .  com/ 


HARVARD 

COLLEGE 

LIBRARY 


Digitized  by 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


Digitized  by  LnOOQle 


Digitized  by 


Digitized  by 


THE 

SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


[4] 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


£on)on 

HENRY  FROWDE 
Oxford  Unxvei^xty  Press  Warehouse 
Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


({tew  ^ox%> 

MACMILLAN  Sc  CO.,  66  FIFTH  AVENUE 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 

TRANSLATED 

BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 

AND  EDITED  BY 

F.  MAX  ^OLLER^ 

\\  '// 

VOL.  IV 

Second  Edition 


Worli 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 

1895  (1  I 

I  I 

[All  rights  reserved^ 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


X  M  L  ^2  0,.'^. 


PRINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 

BY  HORACE  HART.  PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


THE  ZEND-AVESTA 


PART  I 

THE  VENDIdAd 

TRANSLATED  BY 

JAMES  DARMESTETER 

Second  Edition 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
1895 

lAU  rights  reserved} 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


NOTE. 


The  completion  of  this  second  edition  of  Professor 
Darmesteter’s  translation  of  the  Avesta  has  been  inter¬ 
rupted  by  the  sudden  and  untimely  death  of  the  author. 
Fortunately,  he  had  already  revised  the  proof-sheets  of  his 
translation  of  the  Vendiddd,  and  completed  his  manu¬ 
script  of  the  Introduction  and  Fragments.  And,  as  the 
original  manuscripts  and  collations,  from  which  the  text 
of  the  Fragments  was  derived,  are  mostly  in  my  posses¬ 
sion,  the  revision  of  the  remaining  proof-sheets  has  been 
chiefly  in  my  hands,  but  has  been  carried  out  strictly  in 
accordance  with  the  author  s  views,  as  ascertained  from  his 
French  translation  of  the  Avesta.  I  have  only  to  add 
that,  though  differing  from  my  lamented  friend  in  some 
of  his  more  speculative  opinions,  I  am  convinced  that  it 
would  be  difficult  to  find  a  sounder  scholar,  a  more 
brilliant  writer,  and  a  more  estimable  man,  all  united  in 
the  same  individual. 

E.  W.  WEST. 


Ma}\  1895. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

pAgk 

Chapter  I.  The  Discovery  of  the  Zend-Avesta  .  .  xiii 

„  11.  The  Interpretation  of  the  Zend-Avesta  xxvii 

„  III.  The  Formation  of  the  Zend-Avesta  .  xxxi 

„  IV.  Parthian  Elements  in  the  Avesta  .  .  xlvii 

„  V.  BrAhmanical,  Buddhist,  and  Greek  Ele¬ 
ments  . li 

„  VI.  Jewish  Elements  in  the  Religion  .  .  Ivii 

„  VII.  Achaemenian  and  Earlier  Elements  .  lx 
„  VIII.  Age  and  Growth  of  the  Avesta  .  Ixiv 

„  IX.  Conclusions . Ixvii 

„  X.  The  VendIdAd . Ixx 

TRANSLATION  OF  THE  VENDIdAD. 

Fargard  I.  An  enumeration  of  sixteen  perfect  lands 
created  by  Ahura  Mazda,  and  of  as  many 
plagues  created  in  opposition  by  Angra  Mainyu  I 

Fargard  II.  Myths  of  Yima . lo 

Fargard  III.  The  Earth . 21 

I  (1-6).  What  comforts  most  the  Genius  of  the  Earth?  .  22 

II  (7-1 1).  What  discomforts  most  the  Genius  of  the  Earth  ?  24 

111(12-35).  What  rejoices  the  Earth  most  ?  ...  26 

IV  (36-42).  A  development  forbidding  the  burial  of  the  dead  32 

Fargard  IV.  Contracts  and  Outrages  ....  34 

I  (•) . 35 

I  a  (2).  Classification  of  the  contracts  according  to  the 

value  of  their  object . 35 

(3-4).  A  contract  is  cancelled  by  paying  the  amount  of 
the  contract  higher  by  one  degree  .  .  .  *36 

(5-10).  Religious  responsibility  of  the  family  for  the 
breach  of  a  contract  by  one  of  its  members ...  36 

(i  I- 16).  Punishment  of  the  Mihir-Dru^  (one  who  breaks 
a  contract) . 38 

II  a  (17).  Definition  of  the  outrages  known  as  dgerepta 

(threatening  attitude),  avaoirlrta  (assault),  aredur 

(blows) . 39 

(18-21).  Penalties  for  menaces . 40 

(22-25).  Assaults . 41 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


CONTENTS. 


IX 


(26-29),  Blows . 42 

(30-33).  Wounds . 42 

(34-36).  Wounds  causing  blood  to  flow  ...  43 

(37-39).  Broken  bones . 44 

(40-43).  Manslaughter .......  44 

III  a  (44-45).  Contract  of  charity  to  co-religionists  .  .  45 

IV  a  (46).  Heinousness  of  false  oath . 46 

^  III  b  (47-49  a).  Dignity  of  wealth ;  of  marriage ;  of  phy¬ 
sical  weal . 46  — 

IV  b  (49  b-55).  Heinousness  of  £dse  oath.  Ordeal  .  .  48 

Fargard  V . 49 

I  (1-7).  If  a  man  defile  the  fire  or  the  earth  with  dead 

matter  (Nasu)  involuntarily  or  unconsciously,  it  is  no  sin  .  50 

II  (8-9).  Water  and  fire  do  not  kill . 52 

III  (10-14).  Disposal  of  the  dead  during  winter,  when  it  is 

not  possible  to  take  them  to  the  Dakhma  ....  53 

IV  (15-20).  Why  Ahura,  while  forbidding  man  to  defile 

water,  sends  water  from  the  heavens  down  to  the  Dakhmas, 
covered  with  corpses.  How  he  purifies  that  water  .  .  54 

V  (21-26).  On  the  excellence  of  purity  and  of  the  law  that 

show^  how  to  recover  purity,  when  lost  .  .  56 

VI  (27-38).  On  the  defiling  power  of  the  Nasu  being 
greater  or  less,  according  to  the  greater  or  less  dignity 

of  the  being  that  dies . 58 

VII  (39-44).  On  the  management  of  sacrificial  implements 

defiled  with  Nasu  .  61 

VIII  (45-62).  On  the  treatment  of  a  woman  who  has  been 

delivered  of  a  still-bom  child ;  and  what  is  to  be  done 
with  her  clothes . 62 


Fargard  VI . 67 

I  (1-9).  How  long  the  earth  remains  unclean,  when  defiled 
by  the  dead . .  .  .67 


II  (10-25).  Penalties  for  defiling  the  ground  with  dead  matter  68 

III  (26-41).  Purification  of  the  different  sorts  of  water, 

when  defiled  by  the  dead . 71 

IV  (42-43).  Purification  of  the  Haoma  •  •  •  •  73 

^  V  (44-51).  The  place  for  corpses ;  the  Dakhmas  .  74 

Fargard  VII . 76 

I  (1-5).  How  long  after  death  the  Dru^  Nasu  takes  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  corpse . 76 

II  (6-9).  How  far  the  defiling  power  of  the  Dru^  Nasu  extends  78 

III  (10-22).  Cleansing  of  clothes  defiled  by  the  dead.  .  79 

IV  (23-24).  Eating  of  Nasu  an  abomination  ...  81 

V  (25-27).  Bringing  Nasu  to  fire  or  water  an  abomination  82 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


X 


CONTENTS. 


VI  (28-3  5).  Cleansing  of  wood  and  com  defiled  by  the  dead 

VII  a  (36-40).  Physicians ;  their  probation 

VII  b  (41-44).  Their  fees . 

VIII  (45-59).  Purification  of  the  earth,  of  the  Dakhmas. 

The  Dakhmas  and  the  Daevas . 

IX  (60-72).  Treatment  of  a  woman  who  has  brought  forth 

a  still-born  child . 

X  (73-75).  Cleansing  of  vessels  defiled  by  the  dead  . 

XI  (76-77).  Cleansing  of  the  cow . 

XII  (78-79).  Unclean  libations . 

Fargard  VIII.  . . 

I  (i“3).  Purification  of  the  house  where  a  man  has  died  . 

II  (4-13).  Funerals . 

III  (14-22).  Purification  of  the  ways  along  which  the 

corpse  has  been  carried . 

IV  (23-25).  No  clothes  to  be  thrown  on  a  corpse 

V  (26-32).  Unlawful  lusts . 

VI  (33-34).  A  corpse  when  dried  up  does  not  contaminate 
^  VII  (35-72).  Purification  of  the  man  defiled  by  the  dead  . 
^  Vlll  (73-80).  Purification  of  the  fire  defiled  by  the  dead  . 

IX  (81-96).  The  Bahrim  fire . 

X  (97-107).  Purification  in  the  wilderness  .  .  .  . 

y' 

Fargard  IX.  The  Nine  Nights*  BarashnCm  . 


83 

85 

86 


91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

95 

96 

99 

102 

103 
105 

105  ^ 

113 
115' 
119 

122 


I  a  (i-ii).  Description  of  the  place  for  cleansing  the  un¬ 
clean  (the  Barashnfim-gih) . 

I  b  (12-36).  Description  of  the  cleansing  .  .  .  . 

II  (37-44).  Fees  of  the  cleanser . 

III  (47-57).  The  false  cleanser ;  his  punishment 


123 

126 

132 


Fargard  X.  Spells  recited  during  the  process  of 

THE  CLEANSING . 


136 


Fargard  XI.  Special  spells  for  the  cleansing  of  the 
several  objects . 


142 


Fargard  XII.  The  Upaman:  how  long  it  lasts  for 
different  relatives . 


148 


Fargard  XIII.  The  Dog . 155 

I  (1-7).  The  dog  of  Ormazd  and  the  dog  of  Ahriman  .  155 

I  a  ( 1-4).  Holiness  of  the  dog  Vanghipara  (‘the  hedge-hog  *)  155 

I  b  (5-7).  Hatefulness  of  the  dog  Zairimyangura  (‘  the 

tortoise*) . 157 

II  (8-16).  The  several  kinds  of  dogs.  Penalties  for  the 

murder  of  a  dog . 157 

III  (17-19).  On  the  duties  of  the  shepherd’s  dog  and  the 

house-dog . 159 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


CONTENTS. 


XI 


PACE 

IV  (20-28).  On  the  food  due  to  the  dog  ....  160 

V  (29-38).  On  the  mad  dog  and  the  dog  diseased ;  how 

they  are  to  be  kept,  and  cured . 163 

VI  (39-40).  On  the  excellence  of  the  dog  ....  164 

VII  (41-43).  On  the  wolf-dog . 165 

VIII  (44-48).  On  the  virtues  and  vices  of  the  dog  .  166 

IX  (49).  Praise  of  the  dog . 168 

X  (50-56).  The  water-dog . 168 

Fargard  XIV.  The  atonement  for  the  murder  of  a 

WATER-DOG  .  .  169 

Fargard  XV . 176 

I  (1-8).  On  five  sins  the  commission  of  which  makes  the 

sinner  a  Peshdtanu . 176 

II  a  (9-12).  On  unlawful  unions  and  attempts  to  procure 

miscarriage . 178 

II  b  (13-19).  On  the  obligations  of  the  illegitimate  father 

towards  the  mother  and  the  child . 179 

III  (20-45).  On  the  treatment  of  a  bitch  big  with  young  .  180 

IV  (46-51).  On  the  breeding  of  dogs . 184 

Fargard  XVI . 185 

1(1-7).  On  the  uncleanness  of  women  during  their  sickness  185 

II  (8-12).  What  is  to  be  done  if  that  state  lasts  too  long  .  187 

III  (13-18).  Sundry  laws  relating  to  the  same  matter  .  188 

Fargard  XVII.  Hair  and  Nails . 190 

Fargard  XVIII . 193 

I  (1-13).  On  the  unworthy  priest  and  enticers  to  heresy  .  193 

II  (14-29).  The  holiness  of  the  cock,  the  bird  of  Sraosha,  who 
awakes  the  world  for  prayer  and  for  the  protection  of  Atar  196 

j  III  (30-59).  On  the  four  sins  that  make  the  Dru^  pregnant 
^  with  a  brood  of  fiends . 200'' 

IV  (60-65).  ^  ®vil  caused  by  the  {7ahi  (‘  the  prostitute  *)  204 

V  (66-76).  How  intercourse  with  a  Dashtin  woman  is  to 

be  atoned  for . 206 

Fargard  XIX . 208 


I  (1-3).  Angra  Mainyu  sends  the  demon  Bfiiti  to  kill 
Zarathortra :  Zarathujtra  sings  aloud  the  Ahuna-Vairya, 
and  the  demon  flies  away,  confounded  by  the  sacred  words 
and  by  the  Glory  of  Zarathortra . 

I  a  (4-10).  Angra  Mainyu  himself  attacks  him  and  pro¬ 
pounds  riddles  to  be  solved  under  pain  of  death 

II  (11-16).  How  to  destroy  the  uncleanness  bom  from  a 

contact  with  the  dead  .  . . 

III  (17-19).  How  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  creation 


209 

210 

212 

214— 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Xll 


CONTENTS. 


PACK 

IV  (20>25).  How  to  purify  man  and  clothes  defiled  by  the  dead  215 

V  (26-34).  On  the  remuneration  of  deeds  after  death ;  on  the 
fate  of  the  wicked  and  the  righteous  ;  the  K\n\2d  bridge  217 

I I  a  (35-42).  A  series  of  invocations . 220 

_ _  VI  (43-47).  The  demons,  dismayed  by  the  birth  of  the 

Prophet,  rush  back  into  hell . 224 

Fargard  XX.  Thrita  and  the  origin  of  medicine  .  225 

Fargard  XXI . 230 

I  (i).  Praise  of  the  holy  bull  .  .  .  .  .  .  231 

11(2-3).  Invocation  addressed  to  rain  as  a  healing  power .  231 

III  a  (4-7).  Joint  invocation  addressed  to  the  waters  and 

to  the  light  of  the  sun . 231 

111b  (8-1 1).  Joint  invocation  addressed  to  the  waters 
and  to  the  light  of  the  moon . 233 

III  c  (12-17).  invocation  addressed  to  the  waters 

and  to  the  light  of  the  stars . 233 

IV  (18-23).  Spells  against  disease . 235 

Fargard  XXII.  Angra  Mainyu  creates  99,999  diseases: 
Ahura  Mazda  applies  for  healing  to  the  Holy 
Word  and  to  Airyaman . 236 

FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 

I.  Westergaard’s  Fragments . 245 

II.  Zend  Fragments  in  the  Zend-Pahlavi  Farhang  .  252 

III.  Zend  Fragments  quoted  in  the  Pahlavi  Com¬ 

mentary  OF  the  Yasna . 258 

IV.  Zend  Fragments  quoted  in  the  Pahlavi  Com¬ 


mentary  OF  THE  VENDIdAd . 260 

V.  Tahmuras*  Fragments . 275 

VI.  ErpatistAn  and  NIrangistAn . 300 

VII.  Sundry  Fragments . 369 

VIII.  AOGEMAIDfe . 372 


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Transla¬ 
tions  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East . 387 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

The  Discovery  of  the  Zend-Avesta. 

The  Zend-Avesta  is  the  sacred  book  of  the  Parsis,  that 
is  to  say,  of  the  few  remaining  followers  of  that  religion 
which  reigned  over  Persia  at  the  time  when  the  second 
successor  of  Mohammed  overthrew  the  Sassanian  dynasty 
(64a  A.  C.)^,  and  which  has  been  called  Dualism,  or  Maz- 
deism,  or  Magism,  or  Zoroastrianism,  or  Fire-worship, 
according  as  its  main  tenet,  or  its  supreme  God  *,  or  its 
priests,  or  its  supposed  founder,  or  its  apparent  object  of 
worship  has  been  most  kept  in  view.  In  less  than  a  century 
after  their  defeat,  most  of  the  conquered  people  were  brought 
over  to  the  faith  of  their  new  rulers,  either  by  force,  or 
policy,  or  the  attractive  power  of  a  simpler  form  of  creed. 
But  many  of  those  who  clung  to  the  faith  of  their  fathers, 
went  and  sought  abroad  for  a  new  home,  where  they  might 
freely  worship  their  old  gods,  say  their  old  prayers,  and 
perform  their  old  rites.  That  home  they  found  at  last 
among  the  tolerant  Hindus,  on  the  western  coast  of  India 
and  in  the  peninsula  of  Guzerat  There  they  throve  and 
there  they  live  still,  while  the  ranks  of  their  co-religionists 
in  Persia  are  daily  thinning  and  dwindling  away 


'  At  the  battle  of  Nihftvand.  *  Ahant  Mazda. 

*  They  settled  first  at  Sai^^,  not  far  from  Damftn ;  thence  they  spread  over 
Sniat,  Nowsfiri,  Broach,  and  Kambay;  and  within  the  last  two  centuries  they 
haTe  settled  at  Bombay,  which  now  contains  the  bulk  of  the  Paisi  people^ 
nearly  90,000  souls  (89,887  according  to  the  census  in  1891). 

*  A  century  ago,  it  is  said,  they  still  numbered  nearly  ioo/>oo  souls ;  but 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


XIV 


VENDiDAD. 


As  the  Parsis  are  the  ruins  of  a  people,  so  are  their 
sacred  books  the  ruins  of  a  religion.  There  has  been  no 
other  great  belief  in  the  world  that  ever  left  such  poor  and 
meagre  monuments  of  its  past  splendour.  Yet  great  is  the 
value  which  that  small  book,  the  Avesta,  and  the  belief  of 
that  scanty  people,  the  Parsis,  have  in  the  eyes  of  the  his¬ 
torian  and  theologian,  as  they  present  to  us  the  last  reflex 
of  the  ideas  which  prevailed  in  Iran  during  the  five  cen¬ 
turies  which  preceded  and  the  seven  which  followed  the 
birth  of  Christ,  a  period  which  gave  to  the  world  the  Gos¬ 
pels,  the  Talmud,  and  the  Qur’4n.  Persia,  it  is  known,  had 
much  influence  on  each  of  the  movements  which  produced, 
or  proceeded  from,  those  three  books ;  she  lent  much  to 
the  first  heresiarchs,  much  to  the  Rabbis,  much  to  Moham¬ 
med.  By  help  of  the  Parsi  religion  and  the  Avesta,  we  are 
enabled  to  go  back  to  the  very  heart  of  that  most  mo¬ 
mentous  period  in  the  history  of  religious  thought,  which 
saw  the  blending  of  the  Aryan  mind  with  the  Semitic,  and 
thus  opened  the  second  stage  of  Aryan  thought. 

Inquiries  into  the  religion  of  ancient  Persia  began  long 
ago,  and  it  was  the  old  enemy  of  Persia,  the  Greek,  who 
first  studied  it.  Aristotle^,  Hermippus  *,  and  many  others* 
wrote  of  it  in  books  of  which,  unfortunately,  nothing  more 
than  a  few  fragments  or  merely  the  titles  have  come  down 
to  us.  We  find  much  valuable  information  about  it,  scat¬ 
tered  in  the  accounts  of  historians  and  travellers,  extending 
over  ten  centuries,  from  Herodotos  down  to  Agathias  and 
Procopius  (from  450  B.C.  to  550  A.C.)  The  clearest  and 
most  faithful  account  of  the  dualist  doctrine  is  found  in  the 
treatise  De  hide  et  Osiride^  ascribed  to  Plutarch.  But 


there  now  remain  no  more  than  8,000  or  9,000,  scattered  in  Yazd  and  the 
surrounding  viUages  (Dosabhoy  Framji,  Histoiy  of  the  Parsis. — Houtnm- 
Schindler  gave  8,499  in  1879 »  number  there  were  6,483  in  Yazd,  1,756 

in  Kirm&n,  150  in  Teher^  :  see  Z.  D.  M.  G.,  1882,  p.  55). 

‘  Diogenes  Laertius,  Prooemium  8. 

*  Pliny,  Hist  Nat.  XXX,  i,  2.  Cf.  Windischmann,  Zor,  Stud.  p.  288. 

’  Dinon,  Theopompus  (the  8th  book  of  his  Philippica),  Hermodoms, 
Heraclides  Cumanus. 

^  All  this  store  of  information  has  been  collected  by  Brisson  (see  below), 
Kleuker  (see  below),  and  Windischmann  (Zoroastrische  Stndien,  260  seq.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  I. 


XV 


Zoroastrianism  was  never  more  eagerly  studied  than  in  the 
first  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  though  without  anything 
of  the  disinterested  and  almost  scientific  curiosity  of  the 
earlier  times.  Religious  and  philosophic  sects,  in  search  of 
new  dogmas,  eagerly  received  whatever  came  to  them 
bearing  the  name  of  Zoroaster.  As  Xanthos  the  Lydian, 
who  is  said  to  have  lived  before  Herodotos,  had  mentioned 
Zoroastrian  Aoyia  there  came  to  light,  in  those  later  times, 
scores  of  oracles,  styled  A6yia  rod  Ztapoiarpov,  or  ‘  Oracula 
Chaldalca  sive  Magica,’  the  work  of  Neo-Platonists  who 
were  but  very  remote  disciples  of  the  Median  sage.  As 
his  name  had  become  the  very  emblem  of  wisdom,  they 
would  cover  with  it  the  latest  inventions  of  their  ever- 
deepening  theosophy.  Zoroaster  and  Plato  were  treated 
as  if  they  had  been  philosophers  of  the  same  school,  and 
Hierocles  expounded  their  doctrines  in  the  same  book. 
Proclus  collected  seventy  Tetrads  of  Zoroaster  and  wrote 
commentaries  on  them  *  ;  but  we  need  hardly  say  that 
Zoroaster  commented  on  by  Proclus  was  nothing  more  or 
less  than  Proclus  commented  on  by  Proclus.  Prodicus  the 
Gnostic  possessed  secret  books  of  Zoroaster  ® ;  and,  upon 
the  whole,  it  may  be  said  that  in  the  first  centuries  of 
Christianity,  the  religion  of  Persia  was  more  studied  and 
less  understood  than  it  had  ever  been  before.  The  real 
object  aimed  at,  in  studying  the  old  religion,  was  to  form 
a  new  one. 

Throughout  the  Middle  Ages  nothing  was  known  of 
Mazdeism  but  the  name  of  its  founder,  who  from  a  Magus 
was  converted  into  a  magician  and  master  of  the  hidden 
sciences.  It  was  not  until  the  Renaissance  that  real  in¬ 
quiry  was  resumed.  The  first  step  was  to  collect  all  the 
information  that  could  be  gathered  from  Greek  and  Roman 
writers.  That  task  was  undertaken  and  successfully  com¬ 
pleted  by  Bamab6  Brisson  A  nearer  approach  to  the 


^  See  Nicolaus  Damascenas,  Didot,  Fragm.  Hist  III,  409. 

*  Fabridus,  Graeca  Bibliotheca,  fourth  ed.  p.  309  seq. 

*  Clemens  Alexandrinns,  Stromata  I.  Ct  Porphyrins,  de  vita  Plotini,  §  16. 

*  *De  regio  Peisamm  prindpatu  libri  bres,’  Paris,  1590.  The  second  book 
is  devoted  to  the  religion  and  manners  of  the  ancient  Persians. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


XVI 


vendJdAd. 


original  source  was  made  in  the  following  century  by 
Italian,  English,  and  French  travellers  in  Asia.  Pietro 
della  Valle,  Henry  Lord,  Mandelslo,  Ovington,  Chardin, 
Gabriel  du  Chinon,  and  Tavernier  found  Zoroaster’s  last 
followers  in  Persia  and  India,  and  made  known  their  exis¬ 
tence,  their  manners,  and  the  main  features  of  their  belief 
to  Europe.  Gabriel  du  Chinon  saw  their  books  and  recog¬ 
nised  that  they  were  not  all  written  in  the  same  language, 
their  original  holy  writ  being  no  longer  understood  except 
by  means  of  translations  and  commentaries  in  another 
tongue. 

In  the  year  1700,  a  professor  at  Oxford,  Thomas  Hyde, 
the  greatest  Orientalist  of  his  time  in  Europe,  made  the 
first  systematic  attempt  to  restore  the  history  of  the  old 
Persian  religion  by  combining  the  accounts  of  the  Moham¬ 
medan  writers  with  ‘  the  true  and  genuine  monuments  of 
ancient  Persia^.’  Unfortunately  the  so-called  genuine 
monuments  of  ancient  Persia  were  nothing  more  than 
recent  Persian  compilations  or  refacimenti*.  But  not¬ 
withstanding  this  defect,  which  could  hardly  be  avoided 
then,  and  a  distortion  of  critical  acumen  the  book  of 
Thomas  Hyde  was  the  first  complete  and  true  picture 
of  modern  Parsiism,  and  it  made  inquiry  into  its  history 
the  order  of  the  day.  A  warm  appeal  made  by  him  to  the 
zeal  of  travellers,  to  seek  for  and  procure  at  any  price  the 
sacred  books  of  the  Parsis,  did  not  remain  ineffectual,  and 
from  that  time  scholars  bethought  themselves  of  studying 
Parsiism  in  its  own  home. 


‘  *Vetenim  Penanim  et  Parthomm  et  Medorum  religionis  historia/ 
Oxford,  1700. 

*  The  Saddar,  an  excellent  text-book  of  Parstism,  of  which  he  gave  an 
incorrect  edition  (the  only  one  still  in  existence)  and  an  incorrect  translation, 
superseded  only  lately  by  West’s  translation  in  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East. — 
A  Persian  metrical  translation  of  the  Pahlavi  AxdSi  Vlr&f’s  visit  to  hell. — The 
Farhangi  Jih&nglrt,  a  Persian  dictionary  compiled  in  1609  and  explaining 
many  Pahlavi  and  Pazend  terms. 

*  Being  struck  with  the  many  analogies  between  the  Zoroastrian  and  the 
biblical  systems,  he  recognised  in  Abraham  the  first  lawgiver  of  ancient  Persia, 
in  Magism  a  Sabean  corruption  of  the  primeval  faith,  and  in  Zoroaster 
a  reformer,  who  had  learnt  the  forgotten  truth  from  the  exiled  Jews  in 
Babylon. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  I. 


.  XVll 


Eighteen  years  later,  a  countryman  of  Hyde,  George 
Boucher,  received  from  the  Parsis  in  Surat  a  copy  of  the 
VendidAd  SAda,  which  was  brought  to  England  in  1723 
by  Richard  Cobbe  But  the  old  manuscript  was  a  sealed 
book,  and  the  most  that  could  then  be  made  of  it  was  to 
hang  it  by  an  iron  chain  to  the  wall  of  the  Bodleian  Library*, 
as  a  curiosity  to  be  shown  to  foreigners.  A  few  years  later, 
a  Scotchman,  named  Fraser,  went  to  Surat,  with  the  view  of 
obtaining  from  the  Parsis,  not  only  their  books,  but  also  a 
knowledge  of  their  contents.  He  was  not  very  successful 
in  the  first  undertaking,  and  utterly  failed  in  the  second. 

In  1754  a  young  man,  twenty  years  old,  Anquetil 
Duperron,  a  scholar  of  the  Ecole  des  Langues  Orientales 
in  Paris,  happened  to  see  a  facsimile  of  four  leaves  of  the 
Oxford  VendidAd,  which  had  been  sent  from  England,  a 
few  years  before,  to  Etienne  Fourmont,  the  Orientalist. 
He  determined  at  once  to  give  to  France  both  the  books 
of  Zoroaster  and  the  first  European  translation  of  them. 
Too  impatient  to  set  off,  to  wait  for  a  mission  from  the 
government  which  had  been  promised  to  him,  he  enlisted 
as  a  private  soldier  in  the  service  of  the  French  East  India 
Company ;  he  embarked  at  Lorient  on  the  24th  of  February, 
1755,  and  after  three  years  of  endless  adventures  and  dan¬ 
gers  through  the  whole  breadth  of  Hindustan,  at  the  very 
time  when  war  was  waging  between  France  and  England, 
he  arrived  at  last  in  Surat,  where  he  stayed  among  the 
Parsis  for  three  years  more.  Here  began  another  struggle, 
not  less  hard,  but  more  decisive,  against  the  same  mistrust 
and  ill-will  which  had  disheartened  Fraser ;  but  he  came 
out  of  it  victorious,  and  prevailed  at  last  on  the  Parsis 
to  part  both  with  their  books  and  their  knowledge.  He 
came  back  to  Paris  on  the  14th  of  March,  1764,  and  de¬ 
posited  on  the  following  day  at  the  Biblioth^que  Royale 
the  whole  of  the  Zend-Avesta  and  copies  of  several  tradi- 


^  It  was  entitled :  *  Leges  sacrae  ritns  ex  litnrgia  Zoroastri,  .  . .  scripsit  banc 
libnim  Tched  Divdadi  filins/  Vendidad  ((7dt  D6v  D&t)  being  mistaken  for 
a  man*8  name.  Tbe  manuscript  was  written  in  the  year  1050  of  Yazdgard 
(i6So>i68i  A.D.) 

*  It  is  numbered  nowadays,  Orientalia,  33a. 

[4]  b 


*1 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


XVlll 


VENDioAD. 


tional  books.  He  spent  ten  years  in  studying  the  material 
he  had  collected,  and  published  in  1771  the  first  European 
translation  of  the  Zend-Avesta 

A  violent  dispute  broke  out  at  once,  as  half  the  learned 
world  denied  the  authenticity  of  the  Avesta,  which  it  pro¬ 
nounced  a  forgery.  It  was  the  future  founder  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  William  Jones,  a  young  Oxonian  then, 
who  opened  the  war.  He  had  been  wounded  to  the  quick 
by  the  scornful  tone  adopted  by  Anquetil  towards  Hyde 
and  a  few  other  English  scholars:  the  Zend-Avesta  suf¬ 
fered  for  the  fault  of  its  introducer,  Zoroaster  for  Anquetil. 
In  a  pamphlet  written  in  French*,  with  a  verve  and  in  a 
style  which  showed  him  to  be  a  good  disciple  of  Voltaire, 
W.  Jones  pointed  out,  and  dwelt  upon,  the  oddities  and 
absurdities  with  which  the  so-called  sacred  books  of  Zo¬ 
roaster  teemed.  It  is  true  that  Anquetil  had  given  full  scope 
to  satire  by  the  style  he  had  adopted  :  he  cared  very  little 
for  literary  elegance,  and  did  not  mind  writing  Zend  and 
Persian  in  French ;  so  the  new  and  strange  ideas  he  had 
to  express  looked  stranger  still  in  the  outlandish  garb  he 
gave  them.  Yet  it  was  less  the  style  than  the  ideas  that 
shocked  the  contemporary  of  Voltaire*.  His  main  argu¬ 
ment  was  that  books,  full  of  such  silly  tales,  of  laws  and 
rules  so  absurd,  of  descriptions  of  gods  and  demons  so 
grotesque,  could  not  be  the  work  of  a  sage  like  Zoroaster, 
nor  the  code  of  a  religion  so  much  celebrated  for  its  sim¬ 
plicity,  wisdom,  and  purity.  His  conclusion  was  that  the 
Avesta  was  a  rhapsody  of  some  modem  Guebre.  In  fact 
the  only  thing  in  which  Jones  succeeded  was  to  prove  in  a 
decisive  manner  that  the  ancient  Persians  were  not  equal 
to  the  lumi^res  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  that  the 
authors  of  the  Avesta  had  not  read  the  Encyclop^die. 

Jones’s  censure  was  echoed  in  England  by  Sir  John 


*  ‘Zend-Avesta,  onvrage  de  Zoroastre,  contenant  les  Id^s  TWologiques, 
Physiques  et  Morales  de  ce  L^gislateur. .  . .  Traduit  en  Fnin9ois  sur  I'Original 
Zend.*  Par  M.  Anquetil  Du  Perron,  3  vols.  in  4®,  Paris,  1771. 

*  *  Lettre  k  M.  A*  ♦  ♦  du  P*  ♦  *,  dans  laquelle  est  compris  Texamen  de  sa 
traduction  des  livres  attribu^  k  Zoroastre.’ 

’  Cf.  Voltaire’s  article  on  Zoroaster  in  the  Dictionnaire  philosophique. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  1. 


XIX 


Chardin  and  Richardson,  in  Germany  by  Meiners.  Richard¬ 
son  tried  to  give  a  scientific  character  to  the  attacks  of 
Jones  by  founding  them  on  philological  grounds^.  That 
the  Avesta  was  a  fabrication  of  modem  times  was  shown, 
he  argued,  by  the  number  of  Arabic  words  he  fancied  he 
found  both  in  the  Zend  and  Pahlavi  dialects,  as  no  Arabic 
element  was  introduced  into  the  Persian  idioms  earlier  than 
the  seventh  century;  also  by  the  harsh  texture  of  the 
Zend,  contrasted  with  the  rare  euphony  of  the  Persian  ; 
and,  lastly,  by  the  radical  difference  between  the  Zend 
and  Persian,  both  in  words  and  grammar.  To  these  objec¬ 
tions,  drawn  from  the  form,  he  added  another  derived  from 
the  uncommon  stupidity  of  the  matter. 

In  Germany,  Meiners,  to  the  charges  brought  against  the 
newly-found  books,  added  another  of  a  new  and  unexpected 
kind,  namely,  that  they  spoke  of  ideas  unheard  of  before, 
and  made  known  new  things.  ‘  Pray,  who  would  dare 
ascribe  to  Zoroaster  books  in  which  are  found  numberless 
names  of  trees,  animals,  men,  and  demons  unknown  to  the 
ancient  Persians  ;  in  which  are  invoked  an  incredible  num¬ 
ber  of  pure  animals  and  other  things,  which,  as  appears 
from  the  silence  of  ancient  writers,  were  never  known,  or  at 
least  never  worshipped,  in  Persia  ?  What  Greek  ever  spoke 
of  H6m,  of  Jemshld,  and  of  such  other  personages  as  the 
fabricators  of  that  rhapsody  exalt  with  every  kind  of  praise, 
as  divine  heroes  ?  * 

Anquetil  and  the  Avesta  found  an  eager  champion  in 
the  person  of  Kleuker,  professor  in  the  University  of  Riga. 
As  soon  as  the  French  version  of  the  Avesta  appeared,  he 
published  a  German  translation  of  it,  and  also  of  Anquetils 
historical  dissertations  Then,  in  a  series  of  dissertations 
of  his  own  he  vindicated  the  authenticity  of  the  Zend 


*  *  A  Dissertation  on  the  Langnages,  Literature,  and  Manners  of  Eastern 
Nations/  Oxford,  *777* 

*  *  De  Zoroastiis  vita,  instituti^  doctrina  et  libris,’  in  the  Novi  Commentaiii 
Sodetatis  Regiae,  Goettingen,  1778-1779. 

*  ‘  2^d-Avesta . . .  nach  dem  Franzoesischen  des  Herm  Anqnetil  Du  Perron/ 
3  vols.  in  4®,  1776. 

*  *  Anbang  zum  Zend-Avesta,*  2  vols.  in  4®,  1781. 

b  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


XX 


VENDtoAD. 


books.  Anquetil  had  already  tried  to  show,  in  a  memoir 
on  Plutarch,  that  the  data  of  the  Avesta  fully  agree  with 
the  account  of  the  Magian  religion  given  in  the  treatise  on 
‘  Isis  and  Osiris.'  Kleuker  enlarged  the  circle  of  comparison 
to  the  whole  of  ancient  literature. 

In  the  field  of  philology,  he  showed,  as  Anquetil  had 
already  done,  that  Zend  has  no  Arabic  elements  in  it,  and 
that  Pahlavi  itself,  which  is  more  modern  than  Zend,  does 
not  contain  any  Arabic,  but  only  Semitic  words  of  the 
Aramean  dialect,  which  are  easily  accounted  for  by  the 
close  relations  of  Persia  with  Aramean  lands  in  the  time 
of  the  Sassanian  kings.  He  showed,  lastly,  that  Arabic 
words  appear  only  in  the  very  books  which  Parsi  tradition 
itself  considers  modem. 

•Another  stanch  upholder  of  the  Avesta  was  the  numis- 
matologist  Tychsen,  who,  having  begun  to  read  the  book 
with  a  prejudice  against  its  authenticity,  quitted  it  with 
a  conviction  to  the  contrary.  ‘  There  is  nothing  in  it,'  he 
writes,  ‘  but  what  befits  remote  ages,  and  a  man  philo¬ 
sophising  in  the  infancy  of  the  world.  Such  traces  of  a 
recent  period  as  they  fancy  to  have  found  in  it,  are  either 
due  to  misunderstandings,  or  belong  to  its  later  portions. 
On  the  whole  there  is  a  marvellous  accordance  between  the 
Zend-Avesta  and  the  accounts  of  the  ancients  with  regard 
to  the  doctrine  and  institutions  of  Zoroaster.  Plutarch 
agrees  so  well  with  the  Zend  books  that  I  think  no  one 
will  deny  the  close  resemblance  of  doctrines  and  identity 
of  origin.  Add  to  all  this  the  incontrovertible  argument  to 
be  drawn  from  the  language,  the  antiquity  of  which  is 
established  by  the  fact  that  it  was  necessary  to  translate 
a  part  of  the  Zend  books  into  Pahlavi,  a  language  which 
was  growing  obsolete  as  early  as  the  time  of  the  Sassanides. 
Lastly,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  Zoroaster  left  books  which 
were,  through  centuries,  the  groundwork  of  the  Magic  reli¬ 
gion,  and  which  were  preserved  by  the  Magi,  as  shown  by  a 
series  of  documents  from  the  time  of  Hermippus.  There¬ 
fore  I  am  unable  to  see  why  we  should  not  trust  the  Magi 
of  our  days  when  they  ascribe  to  Zoroaster  those  traditional 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  I. 


XXI 


books  of  their  ancestors,  in  which  nothing  is  found  to  indi¬ 
cate  fraud  or  a  modem  hand 

Two  years  afterwards,  in  1793,  was  published  in  Paris  a 
book  which,  without  directly  dealing  with  the  Avesta,  was 
the  first  step  taken  to  make  its  authenticity  incontrovertible. 
It  was  the  masterly  memoir  by  Sylvestre  de  Sacy,  in  which 
the  Pahlavi  inscriptions  of  the  first  Sassanides  were  deci¬ 
phered  for  the  first  time  and  in  a  decisive  manner.  De 
Sacy,  in  his  researches,  had  chiefly  relied  on  the  Pahlavi 
lexicon  published  by  Anquetil,  whose  work  vindicated  itself 
thus — better  than  by  heaping  up  arguments — by  promoting 
discoveries.  The  Pahlavi  inscriptions  gave  the  key,  as  is 
well  known,  to  the  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions,  which 
were  in  return  to  put  beyond  all  doubt  the  genuineness 
of  the  Zend  language. 

Tychsen,  in  an  appendix  to  his  Commentaries,  pointed 
to  the  importance  of  the  new  discovery :  ‘  This,*  he  writes, 
‘  is  a  proof  that  the  Pahlavi  was  used  during  the  reign  of 
the  Sassanides,  for  it  was  from  them  that  these  inscrip¬ 
tions  emanated,  as  it  was  by  them — nay,  by  the  first  of 
them,  Ardeshtr  Bdbagdn — that  the  doctrine  of  Zoroaster 
was  revived.  One  can  now  understand  why  the  Zend  books 
were  translated  into  Pahlavi.  Here,  too,  everything  agrees, 
and  speaks  loudly  for  their  antiquity  and  genuineness.* 

About  the  same  time  Sir  William  Jones,  then  president 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  which  he  had  just  founded, 
resumed  in  a  discourse  delivered  before  that  Society  the  same 
question  he  had  solved  in  such  an  off-hand  manner  twenty 
years  before.  He  was  no  longer  the  man  to  say,  ‘  Sied-il  k  un 
homme  n^  dans  ce  si^le  de  s*infatuer  de  fables  indiennes  ?  * 
and  although  he  had  still  a  spite  against  Anquetil,  he  spoke 
of  him  with  more  reserve  than  in  1771.  However,  his 
judgment  on  the  Avesta  itself  was  not  altered  on  the 
whole,  although,  as  he  himself  declared,  he  had  not  thought 
it  necessary  to  study  the  text.  But  a  glance  at  the  Zend 
glossary  published  by  Anquetil  suggested  to  him  a  remark 

'  *  Commentatio  prior  observationes  historico-criticas  de  Zoroastre  ejosque 
scriptis  et  pladtis  exhibens.*  Goettingen,  in  the  Novi  Comment.  Soc.  Reg.  1791. 


Digitized  by  GooqIc' 


XXll 


VENOtDAD. 


which  makes  Sir  William  Jones,  in  spite  of  himself,  the 
creator  of  the  comparative  grammar  of  Sanskrit  and  Zend. 
‘When  I  perused  the  Zend  glossary/  he  writes,  ‘I  was 
inexpressibly  surprised  to  find  that  six  or  seven  words  in  ten 
are  pure  Sanscrit,  and  even  some  of  their  inflexions  formed 
by  the  rules  of  theVyacaran\  as  yushmdcam,  the  geni¬ 
tive  plural  of  yushmad.  Now  M.  Anquetil  most  certainly, 
and  the  Persian  compiler  most  probably,  had  no  knowledge 
of  Sanscrit,  and  could  not,  therefore,  have  invented  a  list  of 
I  Sanscrit  words  ;  it  is,  therefore,  an  authentic  list  of  Zend 
I  words,  which  has  been  preserved  in  books  or  by  tradition ; 
it  follows  that  the  language  of  the  Zend  was  at  least  a  dia¬ 
lect  of  the  Sanscrit,  approaching  perhaps  as  nearly  to  it  as 
the  Pricrit,  or  other  popular  idioms,  which  we  know  to  have 
been  spoken  in  India  two  thousand  years  ago^.’  This  con¬ 
clusion,  that  Zend  is  a  Sanskrit  dialect,  was  incorrect,  the 
connection  assumed  being  too  close ;  but  it  was  a  great 
thing  that  the  near  relationship  of  the  two  languages  should 
have  been  brought  to  light 

In  1798  Father  Paulo  de  St.  Barthdemy  further  developed 
Joneses  remark  in  an  essay  on  the  antiquity  of  the  Zend 
language  *  He  showed  its  affinity  with  the  Sanskrit  by  a 
list  of  such  Zend  and  Sanskrit  words  as  were  least  likely  to 
have  been  borrowed,  viz.  those  that  designate  the  degrees 
of  relationship,  the  limbs  of  the  body,  and  the  most  general 
and  essential  ideas.  Another  list,  intended  to  show,  on  a 
special  topic,  how  closely  connected  the  two  languages  are, 
contains  eighteen  words  taken  from  the  liturgic  language 
used  in  India  and  Persia.  This  list  was  not  very  happily 
drawn  up,  as  out  of  the  eighteen  instances  there  is  not  a  single 
one  that  stands  inquiry  ;  yet  it  was  a  happy  idea,  and  one 
which  has  not  even  yet  yielded  all  that  it  promised.  His 
conclusions  were  that  in  a  far  remote  antiquity  Sanskrit 
was  spoken  in  Persia  and  Media,  that  it  gave  birth  to  the 
Zend  language,  and  that  the  Zend-Avesta  is  authentic : 
‘Were  it  but  a  recent  compilation,’  he  writes, ‘as  Jones 

‘  The  Sanskrit  Grammar.  •  Asiatic  Researches,  II,  §  3. 

’  *  De  antiquitate  et  affinitate  linguae  samscredamicae  et  germanicae,’  Rome, 
1798. 


Digitized  by  i^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  I. 


XXlll 


asserts,  how  is  it  that  the  oldest  rites  of  the  Parsis,  that  the 
old  inscriptions  of  the  Persians,  the  accounts  of  the  Zoroas- 
trian  religion  in  the  classical  writers,  the  liturgic  prayers  of 
the  Parsis,  and,  lastly,  even  their  books  do  not  reveal 
the  pure  Sanskrit,  as  written  in  the  land  wherein  the  Parsis 
live,  but  a  mixed  language,  which  is  as  different  from  the 
other  dialects  of  India  as  French  is  from  Italian  ?  ’  This 
amounted,  in  fact,  to  saying  that  the  Zend  is  not  derived 
from  the  Sanskrit,  but  that  both  are  derived  from  another 
and  older  language.  The  Carmelite  had  a  dim  notion 
of  that  truth,  but,  as  he  failed  to  express  it  distinctly,  it  was 
lost  for  years,  and  had  to  be  re-discovered. 

The  first  twenty-five  years  of  this  century  were  void  of  re¬ 
sults,  but  the  old  and  sterile  discussions  as  to  the  authenticity 
of  the  texts  continued  in  England.  In  1808  John  Leyden 
regarded  Zend  as  a  Prakrit  dialect,  parallel  to  Pali ;  Pali 
being  identical  with  the  Magadhi  dialect  and  Zend  with  the 
Sauraseni^  In  the  eyes  of  Erskine  Zend  was  a  Sanskrit 
dialect,  imported  from  India  by  the  founders  of  Mazdeism, 
but  never  spoken  in  Persia  His  main  argument  was  that 
Zend  is  not  mentioned  among  the  seven  dialects  which 
were  current  in  ancient  Persia  according  to  the  Farhang-i 
Jehangiri  ^  and  that  Pahlavi  and  Persian  exhibit  no  close 
relationship  with  Zend. 

In  Germany,  Meiners  had  found  no  followers.  The 
theologians  appealed  to  the  Avesta  in  their  polemics^, 
and  Rhode  sketched  the  religious  history  of  Persia  after 
the  translations  of  Anquetil  *. 

Erskine’s  essay  provoked  a  decisive  answer  ®  from  Em¬ 
manuel  Rask,  one  of  the  most  gifted  minds  in  the  new 
school  of  philology,  who  had  the  honour  of  being  a  pre- 


^  Asiatic  Researches,  X.  ■  Ibid.  X. 

*  A  large  Persian  dictionaiy  compiled  in  India  in  the  reign  of  Jehangir. 

*  *  Erlauteningen  znm  Nenen  Testament  ans  einer  neneroffheten  Morgenland- 
ischen  Quelle,  f*&yoi  dir^  iyaroXcav,*  Riga,  1775. 

»  •  Die  Heilige  Sage  . . .  des  Zend- Volks,’  Francfort,  i8ao. 

*  *  Ueber  das  Alter  und  die  Echtheit  der  2^d-Sprache  und  des  2^nd  Avesta  * 
(uberseizt  von  F.  H.  von  der  Hagen),  Berlin,  1826.  Remarks  on  the  Zend 
Language  and  the  Zend-Avesta  (Transactions  of  the  Bombay  branch  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  III,  524). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


XXIV 


vendJdAd. 


cursor  of  both  Grimm  and  Burnouf.  He  showed  that  the 
list  of  the  Jehangiri  referred  to  an  epoch  later  than  that  to 
which  Zend  must  have  belonged,  and  to  parts  of  Persia 
different  from  those  where  it  must  have  been  spoken ;  he 
showed  further  that  modern  Persian  is  not  derived  from 
Zend,  but  from  a  dialect  closely  connected  with  it ;  and, 
lastly,  he  showed  what  was  still  more  important,  that  Zend 
was  not  derived  from  Sanskrit.  As  to  the  system  of  its 
sounds,  Zend  approaches  Persian  rather  than  Sanskrit; 
and  as  to  its  grammatical  forms,  if  they  often  remind  one 
of  Sanskrit,  they  also  often  remind  one  of  Greek  and  Latin, 
and  frequently  have  a  special  character  of  their  own.  Rask 
also  gave  the  paradigm  of  three  Zend  nouns,  belonging  to 
different  declensions,  as  well  as  the  right  pronunciation  of 
the  Zend  letters,  several  of  which  had  been  incorrectly 
given  by  Anquetil.  This  was  the  first  essay  on  Zend 
grammar,  and  it  was  a  masterly  one. 

The  essay  published  in  1831  by  Peter  von  Bohlen  on  the 
origin  of  the  Zend  language  threw  the  matter  forty  years 
back.  According  to  him,  Zend  is  a  Prakrit  dialect,  as  it 
had  been  pronounced  by  Jones,  Leyden,  and  Erskine.  His 
mistake  consisted  in  taking  Anquetil’s  transcriptions  of  the 
words,  which  are  often  so  incorrect  as  to  make  them  look 
like  corrupted  forms  when  compared  with  Sanskrit.  And, 
what  was  worse,  he  took  the  proper  names  in  their  modern 
Parsi  forms,  which  often  led  him  to  comparisons  that  would 
have  appalled  Manage.  Thus  Ahriman  became  a  Sanskrit 
word  ariman,  which  would  have  meant  ‘the  fiend;’  yet 
Bohlen  might  have  seen  in  Anquetil’s  work  itself  that  Ahri¬ 
man  is  nothing  but  the  modern  form  of  Angra  Mainyu, 
words  which  hardly  remind  one  of  the  Sanskrit  ariman. 
Again,  the  angel  Vohu-man6,  or  ‘good  thought,’  was 
reduced,  by  means  of  the  Parsi  form  Bah  man,  to  the 
Sanskrit  b4hum4n,  ‘a  long-armed  god.’ 

At  length  came  Burnouf.  From  the  time  when  Anquetil 
had  published  his  translation,  that  is  to  say,  during  seventy 
years,  no  real  progress  had  been  made  in  knowledge  of  the 
Avesta  texts.  The  notion  that  Zend  and  Sanskrit  are  two 
kindred  languages  was  the  only  new  idea  that  had  been 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  I. 


XXV 


acquired,  but  no  practical  advantage  for  the  interpretation 
of  the  texts  had  resulted  from  it.  AnquetiFs  translation 
was  still  the  only  guide,  and  as  the  doubts  about  the 
authenticity  of  the  texts  grew  fainter,  the  authority  of  the 
translation  became  greater,  the  trust  reposed  in  the  Avesta 
being  reflected  on  to  the  work  of  its  interpreter.  The  Parsis 
had  been  the  teachers  of  Anquetil;  and  who  could  ever 
understand  the  holy  writ  of  the  Parsis  better  than  the 
Parsis  themselves?  There  was  no  one  who  even  tried 
to  read  the  texts  by  the  light  of  Anquetil’s  translation, 
to  obtain  a  direct  understanding  of  them. 

About  1825  Eugene  Burnouf  was  engaged  in  a  course  of 
researches  on  the  geographical  extent  of  the  Aryan  lan¬ 
guages  in  India.  After  he  had  defined  the  limits  which 
divide  the  races  speaking  Aryan  languages  from  the  native 
non-brahmanical  tribes  in  the  south,  he  wanted  to  know  if 
a  similar  boundary  had  ever  existed  in  the  north-west ;  and 
if  it  is  outside  of  India  that  the  origin  of  the  Indian  lan¬ 
guages  and  civilisation  is  to  be  sought  for.  He  was  thus 
led  to  study  the  languages  of  Persia,  and,  first  of  all,  the 
oldest  of  them,  the  Zend.  But  as  he  tried  to  read  the  texts 
by  help  of  Anquetifs  translation,  he  was  surprised  to  find 
that  this  was  not  the  clue  he  had  expected.  He  saw  that 
two  causes  had  misled  Anquetil:  on  the  one  hand,  his 
teachers,  the  Parsi  dasturs,  either  knew  little  themselves  or 
taught  him  imperfectly,  not  only  the  Zend,  but  even  the 
Pahlavi  intended  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  Zend ;  so 
that  the  tradition  on  which  his  work  rested,  being  incorrect 
in  itself,  corrupted  it  from  the  very  beginning ;  on  the  other 
hand,  as  Sanskrit  was  unknown  to  him  and  comparative 
grammar  did  not  as  yet  exist,  he  could  not  supply  the 
defects  of  tradition  by  their  aid.  Burnouf,  laying  aside  tradi¬ 
tion  as  found  in  Anquetil's  translation,  consulted  it  as  found 
in  a  much  older  and  purer  form,  in  a  Sanskrit  translation  of 
the  Yasna  made  in  the  fifteenth  century  by  the  Parsi  Nerio- 
sengh  in  accordance  with  the  old  Pahlavi  version.  The 
information  given  by  Neriosengh  he  tested,  and  either  con¬ 
firmed  or  corrected,  by  a  comparison  of  parallel  passages 
and  by  the  help  of  comparative  grammar,  which  had  just 


Digitized  by  f^ooQle 


XXVI 


vend!  D  Ad. 


been  founded  by  Bopp,  and  applied  by  him  successfully 
to  the  explanation  of  Zend  forms.  Thus  he  succeeded 
in  tracing  the  general  outlines  of  the  Zend  lexicon  and 
in  fixing  its  grammatical  forms,  and  founded  the  only 
correct  method  of  interpreting  the  Avesta.  He  also  gave 
the  first  notions  of  a  comparative  mythology  of  the  Avesta 
and  the  Veda,  by  showing  the  identity  of  the  Vedic  Yama 
with  the  Avesta  Yima,  and  of  TraitAna  with  Thra^taona  and 
FerfdOn.  Thus  he  made  his  ‘  Commentaire  sur  le  Yasna  * 
a  marvellous  and  unparalleled  model  of  critical  insight  and 
steady  good  sense,  equally  opposed  to  the  narrowness  of 
mind  which  clings  to  matters  of  fact  without  rising  to  their 
cause  and  connecting  them  with  the  series  of  associated 
phenomena,  and  to  the  wild  and  uncontrolled  spirit  of 
comparison,  which,  by  comparing  everything,  confounds 
everything.  Never  sacrificing  either  tradition  to  comparison 
or  comparison  to  tradition,  he  knew  how  to  pass  from  the 
one  to  the  other,  and  was  so  enabled  both  to  discover  facts 
and  to  explain  them. 

At  the  same  time  the  ancient  Persian  inscriptions  at 
Persepolis  and  Behistun  were  deciphered  by  Burnouf  in 
Paris,  by  Lassen  in  Bonn,  and  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  in 
Persia.  Thus  was  revealed  the  existence,  at  the  time  of 
the  first  Achaemenian  kings,  of  a  language  closely  con¬ 
nected  with  that  of  the  Avesta,  and  the  last  doubts  as  to 
the  authenticity  of'the  Zend  books  were  at  length  removed. 
It  would  have  required  more  than  an  ordinary  amount  of 
scepticism  to  look  still  upon  the  Zend  as  an  artificial 
language,  of  foreign  importation,  without  root  in  the  land 
where  it  was  written,  and  in  the  conscience  of  the  people 
for  whom  it  was  written,  at  the  moment  when  a  twin  lan¬ 
guage,  bearing  a  striking  likeness  to  it  in  nearly  every 
feature,  was  suddenly  making  itself  heard  from  the  mouth 
of  Darius,  and  speaking  from  the  very  tomb  of  the  first 
Achaemenian  king.  That  unexpected  voice  silenced  all 
controversies,  and  the  last  echoes  of  the  loud  discussion 
which  had  been  opened  in  1771  died  away  unheeded  ^ 


^  The  attacks  of  John  Romer  Zend :  Is  it  an  Original  Language  ?  ’  London, 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  II. 


XXVll 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  Interpretation  of  the  Zend-Avesta. 

The  peace  did  not  last  long,  and  a  year  after  the  death 
of  Burnouf  a  new  controversy  broke  out,  which  still  con¬ 
tinues,  the  battle  of  the  methods,  that  is,  the  dispute 
between  those  who,  to  interpret  the  Avesta,  rely  chiefly  or 
exclusively  on  tradition,  and  those  who  rely  only  on  com¬ 
parison  with  the  Vedas.  The  cause  of  the  rupture  was 
the  rapid  progress  made  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedic 
language  and  literature:  the  deeper  one  penetrated  into 
that  oldest  form  of  Indian  words  and  thoughts,  the 
more  striking  appeared  its  close  affinity  with  the  Avesta 
words  and  thoughts.  Many  a  mysterious  line  in  the 
Avesta  received  an  unlooked-for  light  from  the  poems  of  . 
the  Indian  if/shis,  and  the  long-forgotten  past  and  the 
origin  of  many  gods  and  heroes,  whom  the  Parsi  worships 
and  extols  without  knowing  who  they  were  and  whence 
they  came,  were  suddenly  revealed  by  the  Vedas.  Em¬ 
boldened  by  its  bright  discoveries,  the  comparative  method 
took  pity  on  its  slower  and  less  brilliant  rival,  which  was 
then  making  its  first  attempts  to  unravel  the  Pahlavi  tradi¬ 
tional  books.  Is  it  worth  while,  said  the  Vedic  scholars  ^ 
to  try  slowly  and  painfully  to  extract  the  secret  of  the  old 
book  from  that  uncouth  literature  ?  Nay,  is  there  any  hope 
that  its  secret  is  there  ?  Translating  the  Avesta  in  accord-  ^ 
ance  with  the  Pahlavi  is  not  translating  the  Avesta,  but 
only  translating  the  Pahlavi  version,  which,  wherever  it  has 
been  deciphered,  is  found  to  wander  strangely  from  the 
true  meaning  of  the  original  text.  Tradition,  as  a  rule, 
is  wont  to  enforce  the  ideas  of  its  own  ages  into  the  books 
of  past  ages.  From  the  time  when  the  Avesta  was  written 
to  the  time  when  it  was  translated,  many  ideas  had  under¬ 
gone  great  changes :  such  ideas,  tradition  must  needs  either 


1855)  caUed  forth  a  refritation  only  in  Bombay  (Dhanjibai  Framji,  '  On  the 
Origin  and  the  Authenticity  of  tbe  Aryan  Family  of  Languages,  the  Zend- 
Aresta  and  the  Huzvarash,’  1861). 

‘  Roth,  Benfcy,  Hang.  Cf.  Revue  Critique,  1877,  II,  81. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


XXVIU 


vendIdAd. 


misunderstand  or  not  understand  at  all,  and  tradition  is 
always  either  new  sense  or  nonsense.  The  key  to  the 
Avesta  is  not  the  Pahlavi,  but  the  Veda.  The  Avesta  and 
the  Veda  are  two  echoes  of  one  and  the  same  voice,  the 
reflex  of  one  and  the  same  thought :  the  Vedas,  therefore, 
are  both  the  best  lexicon  and  the  best  commentary  to  the 
Avesta. 

The  traditional  school '  replied  that  translating  Zend  by 
means  of  Sanskrit  and  the  Avesta  by  means  of  the  Vedas, 
because  Zend  and  the  Avesta  are  closely  related  to  San¬ 
skrit  and  the  Vedas,  is  forgetting  that  relationship  is  not 
identity,  and  that  what  interests  the  Zend  scholar  is  not  to 
know  how  far  Zend  agrees  with  Sanskrit,  but  what  it  is  in 
itself :  what  he  seeks  for  in  the  Avesta,  is  the  Avesta,  not 
the  Veda*  Both  the  Vedic  language  and  the  Vedas  are 
quite  unable  to  teach  us  what  became  in  Persia  of  those 
elements,  which  are  common  to  the  two  systems,  a  thing 
which  tradition  alone  can  teach  us.  By  the  comparative 
method,  the  Zend  meregha,  which  means  ‘a  bird,*  would 
assume  the  meaning  of  ^gazelle*  to  accord  with  the  San¬ 
skrit  mrigSL ;  ratu,  ‘  a  part  of  the  day,*  would  be  extended 
to  ‘  a  season*  out  of  regard  for  ritw ;  mainyu,  ‘  a  spirit,’  and 
dahyu,  ‘a  province,*  would  be  degraded  to  ‘anger’  and  to 
‘a  set  of  thieves,’  and  ‘the  demons,*  the  Dafivas,  would 
ascend  from  their  dwelling  in  hell  up  to  heaven,  to  meet 
their  philological  brothers,  the  Indian  Devas.  The  tradi¬ 
tional  method,  as  it  starts  from  matters  of  fact,  moves 
always  in  the  field  of  reality;  the  comparative  method 
starts  from  an  hypothesis,  moves  in  a  vacuum,  and  builds 
up  a  fanciful  religion  and  a  fanciful  language. 

Such  being  the  methods  of  the  two  schools,  it  often  hap¬ 
pened  that  a  passage,  translated  by  two  scholars,  one  of 
each  school,  took  so  different  an  aspect  that  a  layman 
would  have  been  quite  unable  to  suspect  that  it  was  one 
and  the  same  passage  he  had  read  twice.  Yet  the  di¬ 
vergence  between  the  two  methods  is  more  apparent  than 
real,  and  proceeds  from  an  imperfect  notion  of  the  field  in 


*  Spiegel,  Justi. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  II. 


XXIX 


which  each  of  them  ought  to  work.  They  ought  not  to 
oppose,  but  assist  one  another,  as  they  are  not  intended  to 
instruct  us  about  the  same  kind  of  facts,  but  about  two 
kinds  of  facts  quite  different  and  independent.  No  lan-^ 
guage,  no  religion,  that  has  lived  long  and  changed  much, 
can  be  understood  at  any  moment  of  its  development, 
unless  we  know  what  it  was  before  and  what  it  became 
afterwards.  The  language  and  religion  of  the  Avesta  record 
but  a  moment  in  the  long  life  of  the  Iranian  language  and 
thought,  so  that  we  are  unable  to  understand  them,  unless 
we  know  whence  they  came  and  what  they  became.  What 
they  became  we  learn  directly  from  tradition,  since  the  tradi¬ 
tion  arose  from  the  very  ideas  which  the  Avesta  expresses  ; 
whence  they  came  we  learn  indirectly  from  the  Vedas,  be¬ 
cause  the  Vedas  come  from  the  same  source  as  the  Avesta. 
Therefore  it  cannot  happen  that  the  tradition  and  the  Veda 
will  really  contradict  one  another,  if  we  take  care  to  ask 
from  each  only  what  it  knows,  from  one  the  present,  and 
from  the  other  the  past.  Each  method  is  equally  right 
and  equally  efficacious  at  its  proper  time  and  in  its  right 
place.  The  first  place  belongs  to  tradition,  as  it  comes 
straight  from  the  Avesta.  The  second  inquiry,  to  be  suc¬ 
cessful,  requires  infinite  prudence  and  care :  the  Veda  is  not 
the  past  of  the  Avesta,  as  the  Avesta  is  the  past  of  tra¬ 
dition  ;  the  Avesta  and  Veda  are  not  derived  from  one  j 
another,  but  from  one  and  the  same  original,  diversely 
altered  in  each,  and,  therefore,  there  are  two  stages  of 
variation  between  them,  whereas  from  the  Avesta  to  tradi¬ 
tion  there  is  only  one.  The  Veda,  if  first  interrogated, 
gives  no  valuable  evidence,  as  the  words  and  gods,  common 
to  the  two  systems,  may  not  have  retained  in  both  the 
same  meaning  they  had  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period :  they 
may  have  preserved  it  in  one  and  lost  it  in  the  other,  or 
they  may  have  both  altered  it,  but  each  in  a  different  way. 
The  Veda,  generally  speaking,  cannot  help  us  in  discovering 
matters  of  fact  in  the  Avesta,  but  only  in  explaining  them 
when  discovered  by  tradition.  If  we  review  the  discoveries 
made  by  the  masters  of  the  comparative  school,  it  will  be 
seen  that  they  have  in  reality  started,  without  noticing  it. 


Digitized  by  f^ooQle 


XXX 


VENDfDAD. 


from  facts  formerly  established  by  tradition.  In  fact  tradi¬ 
tion  gives  the  materials,  and  comparison  puts  them  in  order. 

It  is  not  possible,  either  to  know  the  Avesta  without  the 
former,  or  to  understand  it  without  the  latter. 

The  traditional  school,  and  especially  its  indefatigable 
and  well-deserving  leader,  Spiegel,  made  us  acquainted  with 
the  nature  of  the  old  Iranian  religion  by  gathering  together 
all  its  materials ;  the  comparative  school  tried  to  explain 
its  growth.  The  traditional  school  published  the  text  and 
the  traditional  translations,  and  produced  the  first  Parsi 
grammar,  the  first  Pahlavi  grammar,  and  the  first  transla¬ 
tion  of  the  Avesta  which  had  been  made  since  Anquetil. 

The  danger  with  it  is  that  it  shows  itself  too  apt  to  stop  at 
tradition,  instead  of  going  from  it  to  comparison.  When  it 
undertakes  to  expound  the  history  of  the  religion,  it  cannot 
but  be  misled  by  tradition.  Any  living  people,  although 
its 'existing  state  of  mind  is  but  the  result  of  various 
and  changing  states  through  many  successive  ages,  yet,  at 
any  particular  moment  of  its  life,  keeps  the  remains  of  its 
former  stages  of  thought  in  order,  under  the  control  of  the 
principle  that  is  then  predominant.  Thus  it  happens  that 
its  ideas  are  connected  together  in  a  way  which  seldom 
agrees  with  their  historical  sequence :  chronological  order  is 
lost  to  sight  and  replaced  by  logical  order,  and  the  past  is 
read  into  the  present  Comparison  alone  can  enable  us  to 
put  things  in  their  proper  place,  to  trace  their  birth,  their 
growth,  their  changes,  their  former  relations,  and  lead  us 
from  the  logical  order,  which  is  a  shadow,  to  the  historical 
order,  which  is  the  substance. 

The  comparative  school  developed  Indo-Iranian  mytho¬ 
logy.  Roth  showed  after  Burnouf  how  the  epical  history 
of  Iran  was  derived  from  the  same  source  as  the  myths 
of  Vedic  India,  and  pointed  out  the  primitive  identity  of 
Ahura  Mazda,  the  supreme  god  of  Iran,  with  Varu«a,  the  ^ 
supreme  god  of  the  Vedic  age.  In  the  same  direction 
Windischmann,  in  his  ‘Zoroastrian  Essays'  and  in  his 
studies  on  Mithra  and  AnAhita,  displayed  singular  sagacity. 

But  the  dangers  of  the  method  came  to  light  in  the  works 
of  Haug,  who,  giving  a  definite  form  to  a  system  still 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


XXXI 


fluctuating,  converted  Mazdeism  into  a  religious  revolu¬ 
tion  against  Vedic  polytheism,  found  historical  allusions  to 
that  schism  both  in  the  Avesta  and  in  the  Veda,  pointed 
out  curses  against  Zoroaster  in  the  Vedas,  and,  in  short, 
transformed,  as  it  were,  the  two  books  into  historical 
pamphlets 

In  the  contest  about  the  authenticity  of  the  Avesta,  one 
party  must  necessarily  have  been  right  and  the  other 
wrong;  but  in  the  present  struggle  the  issue  is  not  so 
clear,  as  both  parties  are  partly  right  and  partly  wrong. 
Both  of  them,  by  following  their  principles,  have  rendered 
such  services  to  science  as  seem  to  give  each  a  right  to 
ding  to  its  own  method  more  firmly  than  ever.  Yet  it  is 
to  be  hoped  that  they  will  see  at  last  that  they  must  be 
allies,  not  enemies,  and  that  their  common  work  must  be 
b^^n  by  the  one  and  completed  by  the  other. 


CHAPTER  III. 

The  Formation  of  the  Zend-Avesta. 

§  I.  The  collection  of  Zend  fragments,  known  as  the 
Zend-Avesta  *,  is  divided,  in  its  usual  form,  uito  two  parts. 

The  first  part,  or  the  Avesta  properly  so  called,  contains 
the  Vendldid,  the  Visp^rad,  and  the  Yasna.  The  Ven- 
didid  is  a  compilation  of  religious  laws  and  of  mythical 
tales ;  the  Visp^rad  is  a  collection  of  litanies  for  the  sacri¬ 
fice  ;  and  the  Yasna  is  composed  of  litanies  of  the  same 


‘  It  would  be  unjust,  when  speaking  of  Haug.  not  to  recall  the  invaluable 
services  be  rendered  in  the  second  part  of  his  career,  as  a  Pahlavi  scholar. 
He  was  the  first  who  thought  of  illustrating  the  Pahlavi  of  the  books  by  the 
Pahlavi  of  the  inscriptions,  and  thus  determined  the  reading  of  the  principal 
elements  in  the  manuscript  Pahlavi. 

*  A  very  improper  designation,  as  Zend  means  *  a  commentary  or  explana¬ 
tion,*  and  was  applied  only  to  explanatory  texts,  to  the  translations  of  the 
Avesta.  Avesta  (froni  the  old  Persian  fibarti,  ‘the  law  ;*  see  Oppert,  Journal 
Asiatiqne,  1872,  Marses  the  proper  name  of  the  original  texts.  What  it  is 
customary  to  call  *the  Zend  language’  ought  to  be  named  ‘the  Avesta  lan¬ 
guage  ;  ’  the  Zend  being  no  language  at  all ;  and,  if  the  word  be  used  as  the 
designation  of  one,  it  can  be  rightly  applied  only  to  the  Pahlavi.  The  ex¬ 
pression  ‘  Avesta  and  Zend  ’  is  often  used  in  the  Pahlavi  commentary  to 
designate  ‘  the  law  with  its  traditional  and  revealed  explanation.’ 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


XXXll 


vendIdad. 


kind  and  of  five  hymns  or  G^thas  written  in  a  special 
dialect,  older  than  the  general  language  of  the  Avesta. 

These  three  books  are  found  in  manuscripts  in  two  dif¬ 
ferent  forms :  either  each  by  itself,  in  which  case  they  are 
generally  accompanied  by  a  Pahlavi  translation;  or  the 
three  mingled  together  according  to  the  requirements  of 
the  liturgy,  as  they  are  not  each  recited  separately  in  their 
entirety,  but  the  chapters  of  the  different  books  are  inter¬ 
mingled  ;  and  in  this  case  the  collection  is  called  the 
Vendid^d  S4da  or  ‘Vendidid  pure,’  as  it  exhibits  the 
original  text  alone,  without  a  translation. 

The  second  part,  generally  known  as  the  Khorda 
Avesta  or  ‘Small  Avesta,’  is  composed  of  short  prayers 
which  are  recited  not  only  by  the  priests,  but  by  all  the 
faithful,  at  certain  moments  of  the  day,  month,  or  year,  and 
in  presence  of  the  different  elements ;  these  prayers  are 
I  the  five  G4h,  the  thirty  formulas  of  the  Strdzah,  the  three 
Afrig^n,  and  the  six  Ny^yij.  But  it  is  also  usual  to  include 
in  the  Khorda  Avesta,  though  they  are  no  real  part  of  it, 
the  Ya^ts  or  hymns  of  praise  and  glorification  to  the  several 
Izads,  and  a  number  of  fragments,  the  most  important  of 
which  is  the  Hadh6kht  Nask. 

§  2.  That  tRe  extent  of  the  sacred  literature  of  Mazdeism 
was  formerly  much  greater  than  it  is  now,  appears  not  only 
from  internal  evidence,  that  is,  from  the  fragmentary  cha¬ 
racter  of  the  book,  but  is  also  proved  by  historical  evidence. 
In  the  first  place,  the  Arab  conquest  proved  fatal  to  the 
religious  literature  of  the  Sassanian  ages,  a  great  part  of 
which  was  either  destroyed  by  the  fanaticism  of  the  con¬ 
querors  and  the  new  converts,  or  lost  during  the  long 
exodus  of  the  Parsis.  Thus  the  Pahlavi  translation  of  the 
Vendid^d,  which  was  not  finished  before  the  latter  end  of  the 
Sassanian  dynasty,  contains  not  a  few  Zend  quotations  from 
books  which  are  no  longer  in  existence:  whole  chapters 
also,  or  large  quotations,  of  lost  books  are  preserved  in 
Pahlavi  and  Parsi  tracts,  like  the  Nirangistin  and  the 
Aogemaid^  ;  and  numerous  quotations,  from  texts  unknown 
before,  have  recently  come  to  light  in  a  Pahlavi  RavAet 
discovered  in  Bombay.  It  is  a  tradition  with  the  Parsis, 


Digitized  by  i^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


XXXlll 


that  the  Yaxts  were  origrinally  thirty  in  number,  there 
having  been  one  for  each  of  the  thirty  Izads  who  preside 
over  the  thirty  days  of  the  month ;  yet  there  are  only 
eighteen  now  extant.  The  Bundahix  contains  much  matter 
which  is  not  spoken  of  in  the  existing  Avesta,  but  which 
appears  to  have  been  taken  from  Zend  books  that  were  still 
in  the  hands  of  its  compiler. 

What  helped  to  preserve  the  Avesta  is  obvious ;  taken 
as  a  whole,  it  does  not  profess  to  be  a  religious  encyclo¬ 
pedia,  but  only  a  liturgical  collection,  and  it  bears  more 
likeness  to  a  Prayer  Book  than  to  the  Bible.  It  can  be 
readily  conceived  that  the  Vendiddd  S&da,  which  had  to 
be  recited  every  day,  would  be  more  carefully  preserved 
than  the  Yaxts,  which  are  generally  recited  once  a  month  ; 
and  these  again  more  carefully  than  other  books,  which, 
however  sacred  they  might  be,  were  not  used  in  the  per¬ 
formance  of  worship.  Many  texts,  no  doubt,  were  lost  in 
consequence  of  the  Arab  conquest,  but  mostly  such  as  would 
have  more  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  theologian  than  in 
those  of  the  priest.  But  we  are  no  longer  in  the  dark  as 
to  the  character  and  the  contents  of  that  larger  literature 
of  which  our  Avesta  is  a  remnant :  that  literature  is  known 
to  us,  in  its  general  outlines,  through  a  Pahlavi  analysis 
which  was  made  in  the  ninth  century,  two  centuries  after 
the  Arab  conquest  and  at  a  time  when  the  sacred  literature 
of  the  Sassanian  times  was  still  in  existence.  West’s  trans¬ 
lation  of  that  synopsis  ^  is  the  greatest  service  rendered  in 
the  last  twenty  years  in  the  field  of  Avesta  scholarship, 
and  has  for  the  first  time  rendered  a  history  of  Avesta 
literature  possible. 

§  3.  During  the  Sassanian  period,  while  Zoroastrianism 
was  the  state  religion,  the  collection  of  sacred  writings  was 
composed  of  twenty-one  books  or  Nasks,  distributed  into 
three  classes,  each  of  seven  Nasks;  being  called  respec¬ 
tively  the  G4tha  group  (g4s4n),  the  group  of  the  law  (d4t), 
and  the  group  of  the  Hadha-mathra ;  or  the  theological 
group,  the  legal  group,  and  the  mixed  group. 


^  Pahlavi  Texts,  IV  (fonning  voL  xxxvii  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East). 


[41 


c 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


XXXIV 


vendIdAd. 


The  seven  G4tha  Nasks,  thus  named  because  they  are 
mostly  a  development  of  the  GAthas,  are : — 

The  St6t  Yart  (Dk.  VIII,  46) ; 

The  Satkar  (Dk.  VIII,  2 ;  IX,  2) ; 

The  Var^-m4nsar  (Dk.  VIII,  3 ;  IX,  24) ; 

The  Bak  (Dk.  VIII,  4 ;  IX,  47) ; 

The  Vastag  (Dk.  VIII,  12) ; 

The  H4dh6kht  (Dk.  VIII,  45) ; 

The  Spand  (Dk.  VIII,  14). 

We  possess  the  St6t  Vast  (in  Zend  Staota  y^snya) 
in  its  entirety :  it  is  the  core  of  the  aggregate  known  as  the 
Yasna,  and  the  most  holy  part  of  the  Avesta.  It  contains 
thirty-three  chapters,  of  which  twenty-two  are  metrical  and 
written  in  an  archaic  style,  these  being  the  Githas,  properly 
so  called,  and  the  three  chief  prayers  (Ahuna  Vairya, 
Ashem  Vohfl,  and  YdNh6  hitim);  eleven  chapters  are 
written  in  prose  and  in  the  common  dialect  K 

The  Sfltkar,  the  Var.yt-m4nsar,  and  the  Bak  contain 
each  twenty-two  chapters,  answering  to  the  twenty-two 
G^thas,  of  which  they  are  mere  commentaries  or  para¬ 
phrases.  We  possess  small  fragments  of  the  Siltkar  ^  and 
one  chapter  of  the  Var.rt-m4nsar®.  Three  chapters  of  the 
Bak,  which  are  commentaries  to  the  three  chief  prayers 
aforesaid,  have  been  incorporated  in  the  Yasna  ^ 

Nothing  is  left  of  the  Va.ftag,  of  which  the  Dinkart  gives 
no  analysis,  as  the  author  had  neither  its  Avesta,  nor  its 
Zend  (neither  its  original  text,  nor  its  Pahlavi  translation), 
in  an  authentic  form  before  him. 

Of  the  H^dhdkht  we  have  three  chapters  counted  as 
Yasts^,  and  one  inserted  in  the  Yasna®. 

The  Spand,  which  is  dedicated  to  the  story  of  Zoroaster, 
has  been  indirectly  preserved,  in  a  modem  form,  in  the 
Zardu.rt  N4ma  and  in  ArdA  Vir&f*s  visit  to  hell. 


»  Gathas  (Yasna  XXVIII-LIV)  and  Yasna  XlV-XVIl,  XXII-XXVII,  LVI. 

*  Fragments  to  Vd.  II,  6 ;  Tahmuras*  Fragm.  LXIV-LXVIII  (?). 

*  Westergaard’s  Fragm.  IV  (  =  Farg.  XXIII  of  the  Varrt-m&nsar  NaslcX 

*  Chapters  XIX,  XX.  XXL 

*  Yajts  XI  and  XXI,  XXII. 

*  The  so-called  Fshdsha-mtthra  (Yasna  LVIII). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


XXXV 


§  4.  The  Legal  group  contains: — 

The  Nik4tam  (Dk.  VIII,  16)  ; 

The  Ganb4-sar-n(^t  (Dk.  VIII,  21) ; 

The  Hdspdram  (Dk.  VIII,  28) ; 

The  Sakmm  (Dk.  VIIL  38) ; 

The  VendtdAd  (Dk.  VIII,  44)  ; 

The  TSTitradAt  (Dk.  VIII,  13) ; 

The  Bak^n  Yast  (Dk.  VIII,  15). 

Only  the  first  five  of  these  Nasks  are  strictly  legal ;  the 
last  two  deal  with  cosmogony  and  mythology. 

Of  those  five  legal  Nasks,  one  has  been  preserved  in  its 
entirety,  the  Vendidfid^  The  N!k4tfim,  the  GanbA- 
sar-ni^at,  and  the  Sakitfim  are  represented  by  a  few 
fragments.  An  important  section  of  the  Hfispftram  has 
been  preserved,  in  text  and  translation,  in  the  Pahlavi 
ErpatistAn  and  NirangistAn  ^ 

The  iffitradAt,  which  gives  an  historical  account  of 
mankind  and  Iran  from  the  creation  of  the  world  till  the 
advent  of  Zoroaster,  has  been  indirectly  preserved  in  part 
of  the  BundahLf  and  in  the  Sh^hnima. 

The  Bak&n  Y a.yt  was  a  collection  of  prayers  in  honour  of 
the  several  Yazatas.  From  that  Nask  are  derived  sixteen 
of  our  Yajts,  to  which  may  be  added  the  H6m  Ya.yt  (Yasna 
IX-XI)  and  the  Sr6sh  Ya^  (Yasna  LVII). 

§  5.  The  third  group  of  Nasks,  the  HadhamSthra,  is  the 
least  known  and  the  least  well  preserved.  It  contained  : — 

The  D4md4t  (Dk.  VIII,  5) ; 

TheN4tar(Dk.  VIII,6); 

The  (Dk.  VIII,  7); 

The  Rat-d^t-itag  (Dk.  VIII,  8) ; 

The  BarLf  (Dk.  VIII,  9)  ; 

The  Ka.fkisrav  (Dk.  VIII,  10); 

The  Vtrt4sp-s4st  (Dk.  VIII,  ii). 

The  D&md&t  was  the  Zoroastrian  Genesis;  the  cos¬ 
mogonic  part  of  the  Bundahlr  is  derived  from  it  There 
remains  one  Zend  fragment  of  it  ^ 


*  See  below,  the  Introdaction  to  the  Vendtd&d. 

*  See  below,  p.  300  seq.  *  Fragm.  Vd.  H,  ao  c. 

C  2 


Digitized  by  LjOOqIc 


XXXVl 


VENDtoAD. 


We  know  nothing  of  the  Nitar,  of  which  the  Dinkart 
has  no  analysis. 

The  G4h  and  Slr6za  may  be  derived  from  the  P&^ag 
that  treats  of  the  G4h4nbirs  and  of  the  relations  between 
the  liturgy  and  the  divisions  of  time. 

The  Rat-d4t-ttag  treats  of  the  arrangement  of  the 
sacrifice.  It  is  represented  by  two  fragments  ^ 

The  Bari.r  is  of  an  ethical  character;  the  Ka.rktsrav 
teaches  how  to  prevent  the  sacrifice  being  ill-managed  and 
turning  to  the  benefit  of  the  demons.  No  fragment  has 
been  referred  to  either  of  these  two  Nasks  with  any 
certainty 

The  Vi.rt4sp-s4st,  or  ‘the  Introduction  of  Vtrtisp/ 
treated  of  the  conversion  of  Vixtdsp  by  Zoroaster  and 
of  his  wars  against  Ar^sp.  It  is  represented  by  the 
Vi.rt4sp  Yaxt  (Yt.  XXIV)  and  the  Afrin  Paighambar 
Zartfi.rt  (Yt.  XXIII).  It  is  one  of  the  sources  of  the 
Zardu.rt  Ndma. 

§  6.  From  this  rapid  review  we  may  draw  the  following 
conclusions : — 

(1)  Out  of  the  twenty-one  Nasks  of  the  Sassanian  Avesta, 
we  possess  two  in  their  entirety  (the  Vendid^d  and  the 
St6t  Ya^t)  and  the  most  important  part  of  a  third  (the 
Bak^n  Yai't). 

(2)  We  have  a  considerable  part  of  four  Nasks :  the  Bak, 
the  Hddhdkht,  the  Vi.rt4sp“s4st,  and  the  HClspdram ;  and 
several  fragments  of  most  of  the  others. 

(3)  We  know  indirectly,  through  the  medium  of  Pahlavi 
translations  or  compilations^  the  contents  of  many  Nasks 
of  which  we  have  few  or  no  remnants  in  their  original 
language :  the  D4md4t,  the  VUt4sp-s4st,  the  ATitrad^t, 
and  the  Spand.  In  short  we  possess  specimens,  more  or 
less  considerable,  of  fifteen  Nasks,  and  the  complete  text 
of  the  two  Nasks  which  were  considered  all-important. 
For  the  Vendid^d,  being  the  book  of  purification;  was  to 
the  priest  the  chief  of  the  legal  Nasks,  and  this  is  most 


*  Tahmnras’  Fragm.  LVIII ;  Fragm.  to  Vd.  VII,  43. 

*  The  quotations  in  the  Pahlavi  Nlrangist&n  may  be  referred  to  the 
Kajktsrav. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


XXXVli 


likely  the  reason  to  which  we  owe  its  preservation.  As  to 
the  Gdthas,  they  were  already  to  the  Zoroastrians  of  the 
Sassanian  age  just  what  they  are  to  the  Parsis  of  to-day  : 
their  paramount  sanctity  was  the  same  as  it  is  now,  and 
their  extent  was  the  same,  as  appears  from  the  fact  that 
the  three  G&thic  Nasks  which  were  developed  around  the 
G&thas,  or  artificially  attached  to  them,  are  composed 
each  of  twenty-two  Fargards,  answering  one  by  one  to  the 
twenty-two  G4thas  of  our  Yasna.  Therefore  the  many 
losses  that  the  Sassanian  Avesta  underwent  in  the  last 
twelve  centuries  did  not  bear  on  the  essential  parts ;  and 
the  loss,  however  considerable  it  may  be,  is  neither  absolute, 
as  much  of  the  matter  survived  under  a  Pahlavi  garb,  nor 
perhaps  irreparable,  as  the  Zend  finds  made  in  the  Pahlavi 
literature  afford  a  hope  for  fresh  and  more  important 
recoveries,  when  that  deep  quarry,  only  half  opened,  has 
been  worked  out  through  all  its  strata. 

§  7.  It  is  not  only  the  general  outlines  of  the  Sassanian 
Avesta  we  find  sketched  in  the  Dinkart ;  it  furnishes  us  also 
with  a  history  of  its  formation  \  which  may  be  summed  up 
as  follows : — 

The  twenty-one  Nasks  were  formed  by  Ahura  Mazda 
himself  out  of  the  twenty-one  words  of  the  Ahuna  Vairya. 
They  were  brought  by  Zoroaster  to  king  Vi^tdsp.  Two 
copies  of  the  complete  scriptures  were  written  by  order 
of  the  king:  one  was  deposited  in  the  treasury  at  Shapig^n, 
the  other  in  the  Record  Office 

When  Alexander  invaded  Persia,  the  copy  in  the  Record 
Office  was  burnt,  and  the  one  in  ShaptgAn  was  carried 
off  by  the  Greeks,  who  had  it  translated  into  their  own 
language. 

One  of  the  Parthian  kings,  Valkhash,  ordered  all  the 
scattered  remnants  of  the  Avesta,  which  had  been  preserved, 
either  in  manuscript  or  by  oral  tradition,  to  be  searched 
for  and  collected. 


‘  In  two  different  concordant  documents,  one  at  the  end  of  Dinkart  III 
(West,  1. 1.  pp.  XXX  and  xxxi),  the  other  in  the  beginning  of  Dinkart  IV  (ibid. 

411-415). 

*  dez-i  nipi^t,  *the  fortress  for  books  :*  cf.  the  Hebrew  idd  nnp. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


xxxvm 


VENDfoAD. 


The  founder  of  the  Sassanian  dynasty,  Ardashlr  (aii- 
241 ),  called  to  his  court  the  high-priest  Tansar,  gave  him 
the  commission  to  gather  and  complete  the  scattered  frag¬ 
ments,  and  invested  his  work  with  official  authority. 

Ardashlr's  son,  Sh^hptihr  I  (241-272),  ordered  the  docu¬ 
ments  relating  to  profane  sciences  (medicine,  astronomy, 
geography,  philosophy),  which  were  scattered  amongst  the 
Hindus  and  the  Greeks,  to  be  collected  and  embodied 
in  the  Avesta. 

At  last  ShAhpClhr  II,  son  of  Auhrmazd  (309-379),  to 
check  the  sects  that  were  distressing  the  religion,  ordered 
a  general  disputation  between  them:  the  champion  of 
orthodoxy,  AdarbAd,  son  of  Mahraspand,  submitting  him¬ 
self  to  a  fire-ordeal,  went  through  it  victoriously,  and  the 
king  proclaimed :  ‘  Now  we  have  seen  the  true  religion  on 
earth,  we  will  not  suffer  any  false  religion,’  and  he  acted 
accordingly. 

§  8.  This  account  may  be  divided  into  two  parts,  one 
extending  from  the  origin  to  the  time  of  Alexander,  the 
other  relating  to  the  restoration  of  the  Avesta  after  the 
Greek  invasion.  These  two  accounts  differ  widely  in 
character,  the  first  being  vague  and  legendary,  the  second 
being  precise  in  its  data  and  its  dates,  referring  also  to 
an  historical  period.  We  shall  here  have  to  do  only  with 
the  second  document,  of  which  the  import  is  that  the 
Avesta  is  a  collection  that  was  formed  on  three  occasions 
out  of  old  fragments :  the  first  edition  emanating  from 
a  Parthian  king,  Valkhash:  the  second  from  the  first 
Sassanian  king,  Ardashir  BAbagAn  (211-241);  the  third 
and  last  from  king  Shihpfihr  I  (241-272).  Let  us  consider 
each  of  these  three  times,  one  by  one. 

§  9.  One  may  be  surprised,  at  first  sight,  by  the  part 
ascribed  to  an  Arsacide  prince  in  this  religious  evolution 
Most  Byzantine,  Parsi,  and  Muhammedan  writers  agree 
that  it  was  the  Sassanian  dynasty  which  raised  the  Zoroas- 
trian  religion  from  the  state  of  humiliation  into  which  the 
Greek  invasion  had  made  it  sink,  and,  while  it  gave  the 


^  Spiegel,  Eranische  Alterthnmskimde  III,  78a,  n.  i. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


XXXIX 


signal  for  a  revival  of  the  old  national  spirit,  made  Maz- 
deism  one  of  the  corner  stones  of  the  new  establishment 
Therefore  it  seems  strange  to  hear  that  the  first  step  taken 
to  make  Mazdeism  a  state  religion  was  taken  by  one  of 
those  very  Philhellenic  Parthian  princes,  who  were  fully 
imbued  with  Greek  ideas  and  manners.  Yet  this  view  must 
not  be  accepted  unreservedly.  Ardashir  is  nowhere  men¬ 
tioned  as  professing  a  religion  different  from  that  of  his 
predecessors.  In  the  struggle  between  Ardav^n  and  Arda¬ 
shir,  there  was  no  religious  interest  at  stake,  but  only 
a  political  one  ;  and  we  are  expressly  told  by  Hamza  *  that 
Ardashir  and  his  adversaries  belonged  to  the  same  con¬ 
fession.  Nay,  we  shall  see  that  one  of  the  charges  brought 
against  him,  by  his  adversaries,  was  his  wanton  infraction 
of  the  Zoroastrian  laws.  There  is  therefore  nothing  that 
makes  it  impossible  to  admit  that  in  the  time  and  at  the 
court  of  a  Parthian  prince  a  Zoroastrian  movement  may 
have  originated. 

§  lo.  There  were  four  kings  at  least®  who  bore  the  name 
of  Valkhash :  the  most  celebrated  and  best  known  of  the 
four  was  Vologeses  I,  the  contemporary  of  Nero.  Now 
that  Zoroastrianism  prevailed  with  him,  or  at  least  around 
him,  we  see  from  the  conduct  of  his  brother  Tiridates,  who 
was  a  Magian  (Magus)  * ;  and  by  this  term  we  must  not 
understand  a  magician  but  a  Zoroastrian  priest.  That  he 
was  a  priest  appears  from  Tacitus*  testimony  ®  ;  that  he 
was  a  Zoroastrian  is  shown  by  his  scruples  about  the  wor- 


^  S.  de  Sacy,  M^moires  snr  qnelqnes  antiquity  de  la  Perse.  Cf.  Ma9oudi, 
n,  135. 

*  Hamzae  Ispahensis  Annales,  ed.  Gottwaldt,  p.  31  (in  the  translation). 

*  Perhaps  five  (sec  de  Longp^rier,  M^oire  snr  la  Nnmismatiqne  des  Arsa- 
cides,  p.  111). 

*  ‘  Magns  ad  eum  Tiridates  venerat '  (Pliny,  Nat  Hist.  XXX,  6). 

*  Pliny  very  often  confounds  Magism  and  Magia,  Magians  and  Magicians. 
We  know  from  Pliny,  too,  that  Tiridates  refns^  to  initiate  Nero  into  his 
art ;  hot  the  cause  was  not,  as  he  assumes,  that  it  was  *  a  detestable,  frivolous, 
and  vain  art,*  but  because  Mazdean  law  forbids  the  holy  knowledge  to  be 
revealed  to  laymen,  much  more  to  foreigners  (Yart  IV,  10 ;  cf.  Philostrati 
Vita  Soph.  1, 10). 

*  *  Nec  recusaturum  Tiridatem  aedpiendo  diademati  in  urbem  venire,  nisi 
sacerdotii  religione  attineretur*  (Ann.  XV,  34). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


xl 


vendidAd. 


ship  of  the  elements.  When  he  came  from  Asia  to  Rome 
to  receive  the  crown  of  Armenia  at  the  hands  of  Nero,  he 
avoided  coming  by  sea,  and  rode  along  the  coasts^,  ‘  because 
the  Magi  are  forbidden  to  defile  the  sea  This  is  quite 
in  the  spirit  of  later  Zoroastrianism,  and  savours  much  of 
Mazdeism.  That  Vologeses  himself  shared  the  religious 
scruples  of  his  brother  appears  from  his  answer  to  Nero, 
who  insisted  upon  his  coming  to  Rome  also  :  ‘  Come  your¬ 
self,  it  is  easier  for  you  to  cross  such  immensity  of  sea 
What  we  know  moreover  of  his  personal  character  quali¬ 
fies  him  for  taking  the  initiative  in  a  religious  work.  He 
seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  contemplative  mind  rather 
than  a  man  of  action,  which  often  excited  the  anger  or 
scorn  of  his  people  against  him  ;  he  had  the  glory  of  break¬ 
ing  with  the  family  policy  of  Parthian  kings  by  giving  his 
brothers  a  share  in  the  empire,  instead  of  strangling  them 
(Tacitus,  Annales,  XV,  i,  a).  At  that  time  the  East  was 
in  religious  fermentation  ;  Christianity  was  in  its  infancy  ; 
gnostic  sects  were  rife:  moreover  religion  was  fast  becoming 
part  of  politics.  Vologeses  was  called  by  the  people  of 
Adiabene  against  their  king  Izates,  who  had  turned  Jew 
(Josephus,  Antiq.  XX,  4,  2)  and  himself  offered  the  help  of 
his  cavalry  to  Vespasian  against  Jerusalem. 

The  namesakes  of  Vologeses  I  had  too  short  or  too 
uncertain  a  lease  of  power  for  any  one  of  them  to  be  likely 
to  compete  with  him  as  the  author  of  that  first  religious 
restoration.  We  shall  therefore  assume  that  the  Valkhash 
of  the  Dinkart  is  the  same  as  Vologeses  I  \  and,  in  this 
,  hypothesis,  we  will  ascribe  the  first  collection  of  Zoroastrian 
1  fragments  to  the  third  quarter  of  the  first  century  (50-75), 


'  He  crossed  only  the  Hellespont. 

^  ^  Navigare  noluerat,  quoniam  inspnere  in  maria,  aliisqne  mortalium  necessi- 
tatibns  violare  natnram  earn  ias  non  putant  *  (Pliny,  1. 1.  Cf.  Introd.  X,  8  seq.) 

’  Dio  Cassins,  LXIII,  4.  The  answer  was  mUtaken  for  an  insnlt  by  Nero, 
and,  as  it  seems,  by  Dio  himself.  In  fact  Vologeses  remained  to  the  last 
faithful  to  the  memory  of  Nero  (Suet.  Nero,  57). 

*  This  hypothesis,  which  was  for  the  first  time  proposed  in  the  first  edition 
of  this  translation  (1880),  seems  to  have  been  generally  accepted  (Gutschmid, 
*  Persia/  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  XVIII,  603 ;  West,  Pahlavi  Texts, 
IV,  413,  note  5). 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


xli 


which  is  nearly  the  time  when  the  first  evangelical  narra¬ 
tives  were  written. 

§  II.  Between  Vologeses  and  Ardashir,  for  nearly  two 
centuries,  there  is  a  blank  in  the  religious  history  of  Iran. 
With  Ardashir,  Zoroastrianism  became  the  religion  of  the 
state.  The  founder  of  the  new  dynasty  belonged,  through 
his  grandmother,  to  one  of  the  local  royal  families  of  Persia, 
the  Bazrangis,  and  through  his  grandfather,  Sds4n,  to  the 
sacerdotal  race.  Sds&n  had  in  his  hands  the  management 
of  the  temple  of  An4hita  (the  Iranian  Artemis)  at  Istakhar. 
By  birth  a  king  and  a  priest,  Ardashir  reduced  to  a  formula 
the  throne-and-altar  theory :  ‘  Be  aware,  my  son,’  he  wrote 
in  his  political  testament,  ‘that  religion  and  royalty  are 
two  brothers  that  cannot  subsist  one  without  the  other; 
for  royalty  rests  on  religion  and  religion  has  royalty  to 
protect  it  Agathias  reports  that  Ardashir  was  initiated 
in  the  doctrine  of  the  Magi  and  could  himself  celebrate 
their  mysteries ;  that,  from  his  accession  to  the  throne, 
their  race,  formerly  little  honoured,  got  the  upper  hand 
both  in  public  and  private  affairs  ;  they  became  his  constant 
counsellors,  and  had  the  management  of  justice  in  their 
hands.  Whereas  the  Parthians  boasted  their  title  of  Phil- 
hellenist,  the  Sassanian  king  styled  himself  Mazdayasn, 
^  Worshipper  of  Mazda.’  It  seemed  as  if  Ahura  Mazda 
had  ascended  the  throne  with  him. 

§  12.  Ardashir  had  a  man  of  the  name  of  Tansar  to  help 
him  in  his  work  of  religious  restoration.  He  had  been  one 
of  those  petty  local  sovereigns  called  Muliik  ut-tav4if, 
‘  Kings  of  provinces,’  among  whom  the  Iranian  empire 
was  divided  under  the  nominal  suzerainty  of  the  Parthian 
emperor.  ‘  Belonging  to  the  Platonic  sect  he  had  given 
up  his  throne  to  his  son  and  embraced  a  religious  life. 
When  Ardashir  rose  up  against  the  Mulilk  ut-tav4if,  Tansar 
welcomed  him  as  the  saviour  of  the  empire,  became  his 
missionary,  preached  submission  to  him,  and  sent  preachers 
in  his  interest  through  the  provinces  He  had  written  an 


1  Mafoodi,  Les  prairies  d*or,  II,  162.  ^  Ma^ondi,  II,  161. 

*  Kitib  et-tanblh,  ed.  de  Goeje,  99.  C£  S.  de  Sacy,  in  Ma9oudi,  IX,  329. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


xlii 


vendIdad. 


apology  of  Ardashir  in  answer  to  a  reproachful  letter  from 
one  of  the  princes  threatened  by  Ardashir’s  ambition, 
(Jasnasf,  king  of  Tabarist&n.  Tansar’s  letter,  translated 
from  the  original  Pahlavi  into  Arabic  by  Ibn  al-Muqaffa, 
in  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century,  and  nearly  five  cen¬ 
turies  later  (laio  a.  D.)  from  Arabic  into  Persian  by  Mu¬ 
hammad  bin  ul-Hasan,  author  of  a  history  of  Tabaristdn, 
has  come  down  to  us  in  its  secondary  form,  not  free  from 
interpolations  which  are  easily  detected,  so  that  the  original 
authentic  text  is  clearly  recognisable  under  the  modern 
accretions 

That  letter,  which  is  the  oldest  and  most  important  record 
of  the  religious  history  of  Zoroastrian  Persia,  sets  in  a 
strong  light  the  moral  forces  that  made  the  success  of  the 
Sassanian  revolution.  Ardashir  was  the  happy  leader  of 
a  necessary  reaction  against  the  political  anarchy  of  the 
Parthian  system,  and  against  the  moral,  social,  and  religious 
anarchy  that  was  the  outcome  of  the  political  one. 

The  Parthian  kings,  in  the  last  two  centuries  of  the 
dynasty,  had  been  hardly  more  than  feudal  chiefs,  only 
so  far  recognised  by  the  local  princes  (the  Mulfik  ut-tav4if) 
as  they  had  strength  to  make  themselves  recognised.  Each 
province  had  its  own  dynasty,  old  or  new.  The  legend  ran 
that  Alexander,  on  his  death-bed,  fearing  lest  Persia,  after 
his  death,  should  revenge  her  wrongs  on  Greece,  listened 
to  the  perfidious  advice  of  his  vizier  Aristotle  and  divided 
Iran  between  ninety  petty  sovereigns,  to  weaken  her  for 
ever.  Such  was  at  any  rate  the  condition  of  Iran  in  the 
beginning  of  the  third  century  A.D.  It  was  in  order  to 
restore  the  unity  of  the  Iranian  empire  that  Ardashir  rose. 
He  suppressed  those  of  the  Mulfik  ut-tav4if  who  declined 
to  recognise  him  as  king  of  kings,  and  sent  their  heads 
as  trophies  to  An4hita’s  temple*.  It  was  decided  by  a 
council  of  Magi  that  those  Mulfik  who  would  come  and 
deposit  their  crowns  at  the  feet  of  the  ShAhinsh^h,  to  receive 


^  See  the  text  and  translation  of  that  letter  (Lettre  de  Tansar  an  Roi  de 
Tabaristan)  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1894, 1,  185-350,  502-555. 

*  Tabari. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


xliii 


them  again  from  his  hands,  would  retain  their  title  of 
Sh&h  At  the  time  when  Tansar  wrote,  fourteen  years 
had  elapsed  since  Ardashlr  had  begun  his  work :  a  part 
of  it  was  done,  the  unity  of  the  empire  was  restored ;  the 
only  political  task  that  remained  to  be  performed  was  to 
avenge  Dara’s  murder  on  Alexander's  successors,  and  to 
exact  from  them  the  old  tribute  they  had  formerly  paid 
to  Persia  for  Egypt  and  Syria 

§  13.  Then  remained  the  work  of  moral  restoration.  The 
Sh&hinshdh  s  second  task  is  to  re-establish  ‘  the  law  of  the 
Andents '  ®).  How  shall  that  ideal  of  the 

past  be  brought  again  to  light?  There  lay  the  difficulty, 
as  the  Avesta  was  all  but  lost,  and  the  tradition  of  the  law 
had  been  obliterated  by  revolutions  and  anarchy.  ‘  You 
know  that  Alexander  burnt  in  Istakhar^  our  sacred  books 
written  on  twelve  thousand  ox-hides.  There  remained 
something  of  it  in  memory,  but  it  was  only  legends  and 
traditions*:  nothing  more  was  known  of  the  religious  laws 
and  ordinances  ® ;  and  at  last,  by  the  corruption  of  the  men 
of  those  times,  by  the  disappearance  of  the  law,  the  love  of 
novelties  and  apocrypha  and  the  wish  for  notoriety,  even 
those  legends  and  traditions  passed  away  from  the  memory 
of  the  people,  so  that  there  was  not  a  particle  authentifc 


*  Journal  Asiatiqae,  1. 1.  513-514. 

*  *  Now  the  Sbfthinsh&h  intends  to  go  to  war  against  Rdm  and  he  will  not 
rest  till  he  has  avenged  Dara’s  blood  on  the  Alexandrides,  enriched  his  own 
treasury  and  the  treasury  of  the  state,  and  restored  the  towns  which  Alexander 
spiteihlly  destroyed  in  Fftrs.  He  must  exact  from  them  the  tribute  which  they 
always  paid  to  our  kings  for  the  Coptic  country  and  Syria,  which  our  kings  had 
formerly  conquered  in  the  land  of  the  Hebrews,  at  the  time  of  the  invasion  of 
Bokht-Nasr*  (1.1.  pp.  548-549). — Ardash!r*s  pretensions  are  expressed  by 
Herodian  in  terms  remarkably  concordant  with  those  in  Tansar’s  letter :  *  He 
pretended  to  have  unquestionable  rights  to  the  possession  of  all  the  provinces 
in  Asia  lying  between  the  Euphrates,  the  Aegean  sea,  and  the  Propontis :  as 
all  those  countries,  as  far  as  Ionia  and  Carla,  had  always  been  governed  by 
satraps  of  their  nation  from  the  days  of  Cyrus,  who  transferred  the  empire  from 
the  Medes  to  the  Persians,  to  the  time  of  Darius,  who  was  conquered  by 
Alexander:  therefore  by  entering  into  possession  of  the  old  heritage  of  his 
ancestors  he  would  not  wrong  the  Romans.*  Qoumal  Asiatique,  1894,  p.  549.) 

*  The  Paoiryb  <fka^  in  the  Avesta.  *  Persepolis. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


xliv 


VENDiDAD. 


left.  Therefore  we  must  absolutely  have  an  upright  and 
honest  man  to  revise  the  Religion^.'  Tansar  himself  con¬ 
fesses  that  Ardashir  does  not  pretend  to  re-establish  the 
old  order  in  its  entirety,  nor  even  to  keep  it  free  from  the 
admixture  of  new  elements.  He  takes  liberties  with  it, 
and,  whereas  he  comes  forward  to  correct  the  new  order 
(sunnati  Akhirin)  by  the  light  of  the  older  one,  he  does 
not  waive  the  right  of  correcting  what  may  be  wrong  in  the 
old  law.  Therefore,  by  his  own  confession,  his  restoration 
is  an  adaptation.  How  little  he  was  embarrassed  in  his 
work  by  the  authority  of  authentic  written  texts,  Tansar 
lets  us  easily  guess,  ‘  When  the  ShAhinshdh  wants  to  sup¬ 
press  any  iniquity  of  the  Ancients,  which  does  not  suit  the 
necessities  of  the  present,  they  say :  “  This  is  the  old 
custom,  it  is  the  rule  of  the  Ancients.”  Iniquity,  past  or 
present,  is  a  thing  to  be  reproved,  whether  it  comes  from 
the  Ancients  or  from  the  Moderns.  But  the  ShAhinsh4h 
has  power  over  the  Religion,  and  God  is  his  ally^ ;  and  in 
this  destroying  and  changing  of  the  order  of  tyranny,  I  see 
him  better  armed  and  adorned  with  more  virtues  than  the 
Ancients.  No  king  attempted  what  he  did.  The  Religion 
being  lost  and  history  forgotten,  what  man  could  judge 
him?  Besides,  even  in  the  times  when  men  had  perfect 
knowledge  of  their  religion  and  were  closely  attached  to  it, 
they  felt  the  need  of  a  powerful  and  wise  king  in  times  of 
doubt ;  for  if  the  Religion  is  not  enlightened  by  reason,  it 
has  no  steadiness 

It  is  no  wonder  therefore  that  Zoroastrians  of  the  time 
may  have  considered  Ardashir  a  sacrilegious  heretic.  One 
of  his  acts  that  created  the  greatest  indignation  was  that  he 
had  the  sacred  fires  of  the  Mulflk  ut-tavAif  extinguished : 
a  crime  that  would  have  cost  any  other  man  his  life :  ‘  no 
man  before  him,*  exclaimed  king  6^asnasf,  ‘had  ventured 
on  such  a  sacrilege.*  Tansar  threw  back  the  charge  of 
sacrilege  on  the  shoulders  of  the  Muldk  ut-tav4if :  they 


^  Lettre  de  Tansar,  1. 1.  p.  212. 
® 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  III. 


xlv 


had  no  right  to  have  a  second  fire  of  their  own :  ‘  it  was  a 
bad  innovation,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  the  old  kings.' 
It  is  more  likely  that  the  unity  of  the  royal  fire  was  a  new 
dogma,  invented  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  to  serve  the 
usurper’s  political  devices ;  and  Atar  himself,  when  found 
to  favour  anarchy,  was  treated  like  any  other  rebel.  In 
fact  many  were  the  laws,  introduced  by  Ardashir,  that  were 
disapproved  by  public  opinion  as  unwarranted  innovations : 
such  were  the  laws  on  the  strict  division  of  the  people  into 
classes  with  their  functions,  rights,  and  distinctive  marks ; 
and  the  laws  on  heredity.  His  restoring  the  Law  of  the 
Ancients,  said  CFasnasf,  is  nothing  else  than  destroying  the 
real  Law 

§  14.  How  far  these  reforms  were  represented  as  resting 
on  the  mere  will  and  reason  of  the  king,  or  on  the  authority 
of  religious  texts,  we  do  not  know.  As  to  the  religious 
texts  themselves,  and  their  collection  into  a  body  of  doc¬ 
trines,  the  Dinkart  has  the  following:  ‘Ardashir  had  all 
the  scattered  teaching  (4m6k-i  pargandak)  brought  together 
to  the  capital  under  the  high  authority  of  Tansar ;  Tansar 
came ;  him  alone  he  accepted  {frkg  patiraft) ;  and  from  all 
the  others  he  took  away  authority.’  In  other  words,  among 
theZoroastrian  schools, there  were  current  several  collections 
of  religious  texts,  more  or  less  authentic,  and  it  was  the  one 
taught  by  Tansar  that  was  stamped  by  Ardashir  with  an 
ofiicial  character.  From  another  text  in  the  Dinkart  it 
appears  that  the  Ardashir  compilation  contained  two  classes 
of  texts :  texts  that  were  incorporated  as  they  were,  and 
other  texts  that  were  conjecturally  restored  by  Tansar, 
the  P6ry6tk^,  so  as  to  make  a  collection  that  should  be  an 
exact  reproduction  of  the  VtrtAsp  Avesta,  the  lost  treatise 
of  Shapigin  * :  which  is  as  much  as  saying  that  the  Arda¬ 
shir  Avesta  is  a  compound  of  texts  anterior  to  Tansar  and 
texts  emanating  from  Tansar,  the  whole  being  an  ideal 
restoration  of  a  primitive  Avesta,  of  the  ‘old  law’  or  of 
what  was  supposed  to  be  the  old  law,  in  the  time  of 
Ardashir. 

'  Journal  Asiatique,  1894,  No.  3,  p.  514. 

*  See  the  text  in  the  Guimet  Zend-Avesta,  III,  p.  xxxi,  note  2. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


xlvi 


VENOioAD. 


§  15.  Ardashlr’s  collection  was  not  a  canon  closed.  His 
successor  ShAhpClhr  I  (241-272),  the  conqueror  of  Valeri- 
anus,  had,  we  are  told,  the  scientific  and  philosophic  frag¬ 
ments,  scattered  in  India  and  Greece,  collected  and 
embodied  in  the  A  vesta.  This  is  a  confession  that  part  of 
the  Avesta  was  translated  or  imitated  from  foreign  sources : 
but  it  is  a  confession  that  a  Zoroastrian  might  easily  make, 
as  it  was  an  accepted  legend  that  Alexander  had  the  Avesta 
translated  into  Greek,  so  that  they  could  borrow  back  from 
the  Greeks  without  being  indebted  to  them.  To  us  it  tells 
a  different  tale,  namely,  that  the  scientific  Nasks  of  the 
Avesta^,  of  which  unfortunately  very  little  is  left*,  were 
written  under  Shdhpfihr  I,  in  imitation  of  Greek  and  San¬ 
skrit  scientific  treatises. 

§  16.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  a  body  of  Scriptures, 
formed  so  recently  and  with  such  visible  accretions,  should 
obtain  at  once  sufficient  authority  to  command  universal 
respect  and  check  the  sectarian  spirit.  In  vain  did  Ardashtr 
put  the  secular  arm  at  the  service  of  the  new  orthodoxy  ® : 
the  inquisition  disgusted  the  older  generation  and  could 
not  ensure  the  triumph  of  one  particular  system.  The  old 
free  believers,  not  yet  confined  in  the  immovable  limits  of 
orthodox  dogma,  went  on  growing  and  branching  off  into 
independent  heresies.  One  of  these,  Manicheism,  became 
at  one  moment  powerful  even  at  the  court  of  Shdhpfihr. 
The  execution  of  Manes  under  ShAhpfihr’s  successor, 
Bahr4m  I  (272-276),  did  not  stop  the  progiess  of  the 
heresies,  and  it  was  only  under  Shihpfihr  II  (309-379) 
that,  through  Adarbdd  Mahraspand’s  devotion,  the  ortho- 


^  The  fragments  treating  of  medicine  and  astronomy,  time  and  space,  natnre 
and  creation,  generation  and  coimption  (yahvdnishn  vinasishn;  y4v€<ns  ictd 
ipOapffis ;  ^  Tansar,  p.  lo  b). 

*  Of  the  Hadha-mftthra  Nasks  the  contents  of  only  one  are  sufficiently  known 
(the  Dimdfid). 

*  *  The  Sh&hinsh&h  has  ordered  that  if  a  man  swerve  from  the  Religion  he 
should  be  put  in  prison,  and  that  for  a  whole  year  without  ceasing  the  clergy 
should  read  to  him,  and  admonish  him,  and  give  him  proofs  and  dissipate  his 
doubts.  If  he  repent  and  confess  his  error,  he  is  set  at  liberty;  if  through 
obstinacy  and  pride  he  harden  in  infidelity,  he  is  put  to  death.'  (Letter  of 
Tansar,  fol.  la  a,)— Cf.  Vd.  XVIII,  9,  10  j  Mlnbkhard  XV,  22-25. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  IV. 


xlvii 


dox  doctrine  prevailed  in  a  decisive  way.  After  a  public 
controversy  with  his  opponents,  he  appealed  to  God’s  judg¬ 
ment  and  had  molten  brass  poured  on  his  breast :  he  went 
through  the  ordeal  unscathed,  and  confounded  the  heretics. 
During  the  ordeal  he  may  have  repeated  the  G&tha  lines : — 

‘  O  Good  Spirit,  Ahura  Mazda,  by  thy  fire  thou  decidest 
between  the  opponents,  according  to  the  greater  degree  of 
piety  and  sanctity ;  and  many  of  those  who  see  it  believe 
in  thy  law*  (Yasna  XLVII,  6). 

The  king  announced  that  the  true  religion  having  mani¬ 
fested  itself  in  a  visible  way,  any  false  religion  (ag-dtnih) 
could  be  tolerated  no  more.  That  great  religious  event 
must  have  taken  place  about  the  year  330 ;  for  the  perse¬ 
cution  of  the  Christians  began  in  that  year.  It  was  about 
the  time  when  the  Fathers  at  Nicaea  organised  Christianity 
into  an  orthodox  state  religion. 

After  Adarb^d  the  canon  was  closed.  Whether  he 
added  his  contribution  to  the  bulk  of  the  sacred  texts, 
like  his  predecessors  under  Ardashir  and  Shdhpfihr,  there 
is  no  evidence  either  to  prove  or  disprove :  in  any  case,  the 
Avesta  after  him  underwent  no  change  of  any  sort.  The 
Parsi  tradition  makes  him  the  last  of  the  founders  of 
the  religion,  and,  forgetting  the  teachers  between  Zoroaster 
and  Adarbid,  makes  these  two  names  the  Alpha  and 
Omega  of  the  Avesta  history 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Parthian  Elements  in  the  Avesta. 

§  I.  From  the  preceding  it  appears  that  the  Sassanian 
Avesta,  as  fixed  by  Adarbid  Mahraspand  in  the  beginning 


^  The  Patet  sums  tip  the  religions  tradition  as  follows  : — 

*  I  keep  steady  in  the  religion  which  the  Lord  H6rmezd  and  the  Amshaspands 
tanght  the  worshipped  Frdhar  of  Zartusht,  the  Spitamide ; 

*  which  Zartusht  taught  Viit^sp ; 

'which  Vtrtasp  tanght  Frash6shtar,  Jiimtsp,  and  Isfandyir; 

'  which  the  latter  taught  the  faithful  in  this  world  ; 

'  which  by  a  continuous  tradition  came  down  to  the  ordainer  of  the  holy  law, 
Adarb^  Mahraspand,  who  for  its  sake  submitted  to  the  ordeal  and  came  out 
of  It  victoriously.’ 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


xlviii 


VENDtoAD. 


of  the  fourth  century,  represents  three  successive  accretions 
at  least,  the  first  due  to  Vologeses  in  the  middle  of  the 
first  century,  the  second  to  Ardashir  and  Tansar  in  the 
middle  of  the  third  century,  and  the  third  to  Sh&hpfihr  I, 
at  the  end  of  the  same.  Now  we  must  inquire  whether  the 
texts  of  these  successive  editions  belong,  all  or  in  part, 
to  an  older  Avesta,  anterior  to  the  Greek  conquest  The 
evidence  in  the  Dlnkart  and  in  Tansar’s  letter  prepares  us 
to  suppose  that  the  post-Alexandrian  element,  at  least  as 
far  as  the  form  goes,  must  be  con^derable.  The  internal 
evidence  allows  us  to  give  greater  precision  to  that  in¬ 
ference. 

§  2.  One  of  the  best-known  and  most  brilliant  pieces  of 
the  Avesta,  the  H6m  Yart,  appears  to  contain  an  allusion 
to  Alexander.  It  is  said  of  Haoma,  the  plant-god,  whose 
worship  is  the  centre  of  the  Mazdean  liturgy,  that  ‘he 
overthrew  the  usurping  KeresAni  who  arose,  longing  for 
sovereignty,  and  said :  henceforth  no  priest  will  go  at  his 
wish  through  the  country  to  teach  the  law.*  Now,  the 
only  persecutor  of  religion  of  whom  Parsi  tradition  makes 
mention  before  the  Arabs  is  Alexander.  He  is  the  third 
in  that  trinity  of  tyrants  created  by  Ahriman,  who  desired 
to  have  made  them  immortal  for  the  destruction  of  the 
world.  But  the  first  two,  Zoh4k  and  Afr^syAb,  were  bom 
and  died  before  Zarathartra  was  born,  so  that  Alexander 
alone  of  the  three  could  appear  as  an  anti-Zoroastrian 
persecutor;  which  makes  us  wonder  whether  the  usurper 
confounded  by  Haoma  might  not  be  the  Greek  conqueror. 
Now  that  epithet  Keresdni,  literally  a  bandit,  is  translated 
or  transcribed  in  Pahlavi  by  KilisyAk,  which  is  the  name 
given  in  the  Pahlavi  literature  to  the  infidels  of  R6m. 
Therefore,  for  the  old  mediaeval  tradition  the  Keres&ni 
usurper  was  neither  a  d^v  nor  a  Turanian,  he  was  a  Greek. 
If  the  Keres^ni  persecutor  were  a  Greek,  he  could  be  no 
other  than  Alexander.  A  mediaeval  Pahlavi  apocalypse, 
the  Bahman  Ya.rt  (II,  ig),  passing  in  review  the  restorers 
of  religion,  begins  with  the  Arsacide  who  destroyed  ‘  the 
impious  Alexander,  the  Kilisy4k.’ 

If  the  Keresdni  is  Alexander,  the  passage  quoted  and  the 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  IV. 


xllx 


whole  of  the  Hdm  Yart,  which  forms  a  coherent  whole, 
cannot  have  been  written  before  the  death  of  Alexander  or 
more  accurately  before  the  fall  of  the  Greek  domination  in 
Persia.  It  was  about  150  B.C.  that  Mithridates  the  Great 
(b.c.  1 71-137)  dealt  the  last  blow  to  the  Kilisy^k.  There¬ 
fore  the  H6m  Yart  could  hardly  have  been  written  before 
the  middle  of  the  second  century  before  our  era. 

§  3.  If  the  Avesta,  or  part  of  it,  were  composed  under 
the  Arsacidae,  an  important  fact,  otherwise  unaccounted 
for,  is  explained  ipso  facto :  namely  the  fact  that  the 
Avesta  seems  to  ignore  the  existence  of  an  Iranian  empire. 
The  highest  political  unity  is  the  dahyu,  a  name  which  in 
the  inscriptions  of  Darius  denoted  the  satrapies,  the  pro¬ 
vincial  kingdoms  of  Media,  Bactriana,  Sogdiana,  Arachosia, 
Aria,  Parthia,  &c.  The  highest  political  power  is  the 
daNhupaiti,  the  chief  of  a  dahyu.  The  one  universal  daNhu- 
paiti,  the  one  daNhupaiti  of  all  dahyus,  is  Mithra^  This 
refers  to  a  time  when  there  was  no  real  daNhupaiti  of  all 
dahyus,  no  Sh4hinsh4h,  when  the  real  power  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  independent  local  kings.  This  is  the  period  of 
the  Provincial  kings,  the  Mulfkk  ut-tav4if;  and  this  very 
name,  MuKlk  ut-tav&if,  is  nothing  less  than  a  literal  transla¬ 
tion  of  the  Zend  daNhupaiti. 

§  4.  At  the  time  when  the  Avesta  took  its  definitive 
form,  Chaldaea  was  inhabited  by  Arab  tribes,  it  was 
already  a  sort  of  Irdq  Arab!.  To  the  writer  of  the  Avesta, 
Babylon  (Bawri)  is  the  residence  of  A^i  Dah4ka  ^  and  Asi 
Dahika  represents  the  Arab  race.  It  is  not  only  in 
the  later  Shihn&ma  that  he  is  made  the  son  of  an  Arab 
king;  both  the  Bundahir,  which  reproduces  old  Avesta 
documents  ^  and  the  Avesta  book  of  the  Genealogies 
itself,  made  him  a  descendant  of  TA^,  the  eponym  of  the 


»  Yasnal,!!. 

■  Yt.  V,  29.— Elsewhere,  Yt.  XV,  19,  Asi  is  described  as  offering  up  a  sacri¬ 
fice  to  Vayu  in  the  unaccessible  KviriMta.  We  know  from  Hamza  (p.  32)  that 
this  was  the  name  of  a  palace  (the  Knlang  palace,  the  fortress  of  the  Stork) 
which  Asi  Dah&ka  had  bnilt  in  Babylon. 

’  Son  of  Khrfitftsp  (corrupted  to  Mardds  in  Firdausi),  son  of  Z&tnlg&y,  spn  of 
Vtrafehang,  son  of  T^^  (Bund.  XXXI,  6). 

[4]  d 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


1 


vendIdad. 


Now  the  oldest  period  known  when  the  Arabs  settled 
along  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  is  the  second  half  of  the 
Arsacide  period.  We  know  that  at  that  time  Holwin  was  on 
the  frontier  between  the  Iranians  and  Arabs.  The  region 
east  of  Holw4n  ‘  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Provincial  kings 
(MulQk  ut-tav^if  =  daNhu-paitis)  who  were  all  Persians, 
and  did  not  recognise  the  authority  of  the  Arabs.  Ir4q 
and  Sav4d  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Arabs,  who  were 
waging  a  perpetual  war  with  one  another,  as  they  are  used 
to  do  Therefore  the  texts  in  which  the  Arab  A^ri  Dah4ka 
appears  as  reigning  in  Babylon  belong  to  a  time  when 
Arabs  were  already  settled  in  Mesopotamia. 

A  certain  Zaini-gdor  or  Z4inig4v  ^  is  mentioned  once  in 
the  Avesta  as  being  conquered  and  killed  by  Frangrasyan  ^ 
who  on  that  one  occasion  was  invested  with  the  royal 
Hvsirend  and  who,  accordingly,  in  the  Sh&hnima,  is  credited 
with  having  delivered  Iran  from  an  Arab  invasion :  in  the 
absence  of  Kai-K^Cls,  it  says,  invaders  flowed  over  Iran 
from  every  side,  both  Turanians  and  Arabs:  ‘the  Arabs 
were  conquered  by  the  Turanians.’  Perhaps  the  key  to  the 
AfrAsy^Lb  enigma  is  here.  One  can  hardly  understand  how 
the  Turanians  beyond  the  Oxus,  whom  Air&sydb  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  represent,  could  repel  the  Arabs  coming  from  over 
the  Euphrates.  But  one  must  bear  in  mind  that  Afr^sy4b*s 
career  ends  on  the  banks  of  the  ATa^^ta  lake,  in  Adar- 
ba^^n®,  north  of  Mesopotamia.  On  another  side,  the 
legendary  history  of  Yemen  telJs  of  the  Tubba'h  Abfl 
Kurrub’s  invasions  into  Mesopotamia  and  his  struggles  with 


’  T^,  a  brother  of  Hdshang  and  the  ancestor  of  the  Tl^^tks  (Altrad&d  Nask, 
in  Dlnkart  VIII.  13,  8). 

*  Tabari,  tr.  Zotenberg,  II,  8-9.  The  Hatra,  Htra,  and  Ghassanian  king¬ 
doms  were  already  flourishing  in  the  first  century  of  our  era.  The  Ghassanians 
reigned  at  Damas  when  Panlus  was  a  prisoner  there. 

‘  Bearing  the  same  name  as  Ari  Dahdka*s  grandfather  (p.  xlix). 

*  Yt.  XIX,  93.  The  translation  in  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  is  to  be 
corrected  as  follows  :  ‘that  glory  that  Frangrasyan,  the  Turanian,  bore,  when 
the  wicked  Zainigou  was  kiUed.*  (Cf.  Greater  Bundahlr ;  *  There  was  a  fiend 
called  Zintg&v  who  had  poison  in  his  eye :  he  had  come  from  the  country  of 
the  Arabs  to  reign  on  Iran-Shahr :  any  man  he  gazed  at  with  his  evil  eye,  he 
killed.  The  Iranians  called  Frdsyiv  into  their  country,  he  killed  that  Ztnigfiv.*) 

*  Yt.  XVII,  42. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  V. 


]i 


the  Turanians  of  Adarbai^n' ;  so  that  the  wars  of  Fran- 
grasyan  and  Zainig^u  may  be  an  echo  of  the  predatory 
struggles  between  the  Arabs  from  the  south  and  those 
Turanians  of  north-western  Iran  who  were  for  centuries  the 
plague  of  that  country,  and  whom  Khusrd  N6shirv4n  tried 
at  last  to  imprison  in  the  Caucasus. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Brahmanical,  Buddhist,  and  Greek  Elements. 

§  I.  The  political  and  social  circumstances  which  the 
Avesta  reflects  being  those  of  the  Parthian  time,  one  may 
easily  expect  to  find  in  its  doctrine  the  reaction  of  those 
civilisations,  or  religions,  which  flourished  during  that  period 
either  in  Iran  or  in  the  neighbouring  countries.  In  fact,  ^ 
we  find  in  the  Avesta  either  polemics  against,  or  loans  j 
from,  the  great  contemporary  systems,  the  Brdhmanical,  \ 
the  Buddhist,  the  Greek,  and  the  Jewish. 

§  a.  The  true  Zoroastrian  is  called  a  Mazdayasna,  ‘  a 
worshipper  of  Mazda  in  contradistinction  to  the  Dafiva- 
yasna,  ‘  the  worshipper  of  the  Dadvas.’  Da^va  is  generally 
understood  as  ‘  a  demon,*  and  that  is  the  meaning  it  has  in 
the  derived  d^v  and  in  most  of  the  Zend  texts  generally; 
as  it  is  applied  to  the  evil  forces  of  nature,  like  the  Wind- 
Da£va,  or  to  the  evil  forces  of  the  soul,  like  Afehma, 

‘  Wrath ;*  Akem  Man6,  ‘  Bad  Thought;’  Tardmaiti,  ‘  Pride.’ 
But  it  must  also  have  applied  to  false  gods,  for  the  Dafiva- 
yasna  is  not  a  bad  Zoroastrian,  it  is  a  man  who  does  not 
belong  to  the  Zoroastrian  system,  it  is  a  foreigner,  an 
Anaryan.  Doctors  must  practise  on  Da^vayasnas  before 
treating  Mazdayasnas,  which  is  a  rule  clear  and  practical 
only  if  the  Da^vayasna  is  a  worshipper  of  the  false  gods, 
of  Indian,  Assyrian,  or  Greek  idols  ;  for  the  test  is  simple 
enough.  The  word  may  have  applied  first  and  more 


‘  Tabari,  J,  505  ;  Hamza,  tr.  p.  98. 

*  The  Sassanian  kings  took  on  their  coins  the  title  of  Mazdayasn,  instead 
of  the  Phi Ihe lien  of  the  Arsacidae. 

d  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


lii 


vendIdAd. 


especially  to  the  Indian  religions  and  to  the  worshippers 
of  Devas. 

§  3.  The  disparaging  meaning  of  the  word  Deva  in 
Zoroastrianism  was  formerly  interpreted  as  a  sign  that 
Zoroaster’s  religion  was  bom  in  an  Indo-Iranian  period, 
from  a  moral  reaction  against  Vedic  polytheism,  which  sent 
to  hell  the  former  gods.  This  theory,  as  far  as  I  can  see, 
has  no  longer  any  supporter :  it  has  been  seen  that  it  all 
rests  on  a  few  lexicographical  particularities,  not  on  inner 
historical  evidence.  In  fact  Zoroastrianism  has  much  in 
common  with  the  Vedic  Pantheon ;  its  supreme  God, 
Ahura  Mazda,  is  not  more  different  from  the  g^reat  Asura, 
Varu«a,  than  Zeus  is  from  Jupiter  ;  the  Zoroastrian  Apollo, 
Mithra,  answers  exactly  to  the  Vedic  Mitra.  The  worship 
is  centred  on  both  sides  around  the  sacred  plant  (Soma — 
Haoma)  and  the  sacred  fire  (Agni — Atar).  The  mythological 
I  struggle  between  the  God  of  the  Lightning,  Indra,  and  the 
serpent  Ahi  is  transferred  to  Atar  (the  Fire)  and  A.d. 
Yama,  son  of  Vivasvat,  and  Traitana  revive  in  Yima,  son  of 
Vivangha«t,  and  Thra^taona.  How  those  analogies  are  to 
be  accounted  for,  whether  they  are  the  relics  of  an  old 
Indo-Iranian  religion,  or  whether  they  have  been,  entirely  or 
partly,  borrowed  from  either  side  by  the  other,  remains  an 
^  open  question,  which  we  are  neither  prepared  to  answer  in 
the  negative,  nor  to  answer  at  all.  But  thus  much  is  clear  that 
there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  or  symptom  of  any  such 
inner  upheaval,  rejecting  a  Vedic  or  quasi-Vedic  religion,  as 
was  supposed  to  have  taken  place  in  prehistoric  periods. 

§  4.  This  only  remains,  that  when  Zoroastrianism,  with 
the  exclusive  character  which  belongs  to  moral  religions, 
wanted  to  brand  and  condemn  the  most  dangerous  rival 
it  encountered  amongst  its  neighbours,  it  found  no  more 
characteristic  name  to  designate  the  false  gods  and  the 
demons  than  the  name  given  to  divine  beings  in  the  false 
religions  of  India  which  had  so  many  followers  in  the 
eastern  provinces  of  the  empire.  It  went  so  far  as  to  take 
the  names  of  three  Indian  devas  to  designate  those  arch¬ 
demons  which  it  opposes  artificially  and  systematically 
to  the  Amesha-Spe«tas ;  they  are  Iz/dra,  Saurva,  and 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  V. 


liii 


Nminghaithya,  given  as  counterparts  to  Asha  Vahirta, 
‘  Perfect  Righteousness Khshathra  Vairya,  ‘Good  Govern¬ 
ment  ; '  and  Spe^ita  Armaiti,  ‘  Humility.’  There  is  nothing 
in  their  Avesta  character  that  reminds  one  of  Indra  the 
Storm  God,  of  5arva  a  name  of  ^’iva,  or  of  NAsatya  the 
Ajvin ;  they  are  Wickedness,  Tyranny,  and  Pride,  by  the 
mere  fact  of  their  opposition  to  the  three  Amshaspands,  and 
it  appears  clear  thereby  that  their  present  character  is  not 
the  result  of  a  prolonged  evolution  in  the  inner  circle  of 
Zoroastrianism. 

§  5.  The  Dadva  Bftiti  who,  by  order  of  Angra  Mainyu, 
tries  to  kill  Zarathujtra  on  his  being  bom,  is  according 
to  the  Greater  Bundahu  ‘the  demon  who  resides  in  the 
idols’  (bdt),  and  is  the  same  as  Bdt&sp  worshipped  in  India. 
BAt&sp,  the  founder  of  the  Samanean  or  Buddhist  sect,  is 
no  less  a  personage  than  the  Bodhisattva,  from  which  it 
follows  that  Bditi  is  nothing  but  the  object  of  the  Buddhist 
worship,  the  Buddha,  or  better  the  Bodhi.  In  fact  once 
Bditi  is  called  Bdidhi  \  Therefore,  at  the  time  when  the 
legend  of  Zarathortra  was  written  down,  Buddhism  was 
one  of  the  religions  with  which  he  was  supposed  to  have  to 
struggle.  The  composer  of  the  nineteenth  Fargard  of  the 
Vendid&d,  therefore,  knew  of  Buddhism,  and  this  accounts 
for  the  striking  analogies  between  the  l^end  of  Zarathor- 
tra’s  temptation  by  Angra  Mainyu  and  5akya’s  temptation 
by  M&ra.  The  Zoroastrian  writer  thought  it  fair  to 
borrow  such  an  edifying  l^end  from  the  very  religion  he 
opposed. 

§  6.  Another  passage  in  the  Yarts  mentions  contro¬ 
versies  victoriously  carried  on  by  Zoroastrians  against  that 
impostor  Gaotema.  Here,  again,  it  is  striking  to  find 
Zoroastrians  engaged  in  religious  warfare  with  an  enemy 
who  bears  one  of  the  names  of  Buddha,  Gotama.  Contro¬ 
versies  were  to  the  taste  of  both  sects :  Gotama,  in  the 
G&takaLSj  seems  to  pass  all  his  life  in  confounding  heretics  ; 
and  late  tradition  ascribes  to  Zoroaster,  as  one  of  his  most 


»  Farg.  XI,  9. 


Digitized  by 


liv 


vend}dAd. 


glorious  feats,  the  defeat  and  conversion  of  a  great  Indian 
sage  ATangfraga^. 

[  §  7.  Buddhism  was  brought  beyond  the  Indus  as  early 

as  Aroka’s  reign,  though  it  was  only  under  the  Graeco- 
Bactrian  kings  (250-1258.0.)  and  under  the  Indo-Greeks 
(first  century  before  Christ)  that  it  spread  widely  in  the 
eastern  provinces  of  Iran.  One  of  the  greatest  Indo- 
Greeks,  Menander — Milinda,  was  revered  as  a  Buddhist 
saint.  In  the  middle  of  the  first  century  B.C.  Bactriana 
was  famed  for  its  Buddhist  priests,  the  So/mavaioi,  the 
Shamans.  In  the  first  century  of  our  era,  Kanishka’s  coins 
present,  in  an  instructive  eclecticism,  all  the  deities  of  the 
Indo-Scythian  empire,  Greek  gods,  Brahmanical  devas, 
Buddha,  and  the  principal  yazatas  of  Mazdeism.  If  there¬ 
fore  the  alleged  allusions  to  Buddhism  are  accepted,  the 
Avesta  passages  where  they  occur  cannot  have  been  written 
earlier  than  the  second  century  before  our  era,  though  they 
may  bear  a  later  date,  as  Buddhism  was  uprooted  from 
Eastern  Iran  only  by  Islam. 

§  8.  We  have  already  seen  that  Alexander  was  known  to 
the  composer  of  the  H6m  Yart,  nay  more,  that  it  must  be 
posterior  to  the  fall  of  the  Greek  domination  in  Iran  (about 
150  B.C.).  There  was  time  enough  for  Greek  influence 
to  permeate  the  Zoroastrian  schools,  and  so  it  did. 

§  9.  The  doctrine  of  the  Magi  on  the  duration  of  the 
world  prevalent  during  the  Achaemenian  period  is  known 
from  Theopompus,  a  writer  contemporary  with  Philip  and 
Alexander.  The  existence  of  the  world  is  divided  into 
periods  of  three  thousand  years.  During  the  first  two 
periods  Ormazd  and  Ahriman  reign  alternately;  during 
the  third  period  they  struggle,  and  destroy  each  other  s 
work ;  at  the  end,  Ahriman  is  conquered  and  men  live 
happily,  needing  no  food  and  casting  no  shadow. 

This  same  doctrine  is  found  in  Zoroastrian  books,  but 
with  a  characteristic  difference.  The  world  lasts  four  periods 
of  three  thousand  years  each :  the  third  period  is  filled,  as 
in  Theopompus,  with  the  mixture  and  conflict  of  the  two 
principles;  the  fourth  period,  that  opens  with  the  apparition 
of  Zoroaster  and  the  true  religion,  ends  with  the  ruin  of 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  V. 


Iv 


Ahriman,  the  resurrection  and  future  life.  But  in  the  first 
two  periods  the  agreement  ceases.  In  the  pre- Alexandrian 
conception,  each  period  belongs  to  each  of  the  two  princi-  ^ 
pies  in  turn ;  the  spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian  doctrine  is  quite 
mystical  During  three  thousand  years  the  world  had  only 
a  spiritual,  unseen  form,  and  it  remained  uncorrupted, 
unmoving,  not  perceptible.  In  the  next  period  of  three 
thousand  years,  it  received  material  form  and  began  to 
move,  though  it  was  still  free  from  Ahriman. 

§  lo.  That  period  of  spiritual,  ideal  existence  of  the 
world,  preceding  its  material  and  sensible  apparition,  re-  ^ 
minds  one  strikingly  of  the  Platonic  ideas,  and  it  can 
hardly  have  entered  Zoroastrianism  before  Greek  philo¬ 
sophy  penetrated  the  East.  This  hypothesis  will  seem  less 
bold  than  it  does  at  first  sight,  if  we  remember  that,  on  the 
confession  of  old  Parsi  tradition  itself,  texts  on  ‘  generation 
and  corruption’  (yahvfinishn  u-vin^lsishn),  recovered 
from  the  Greeks,  were  embodied  in  the  sacred  books  as  late 
as  the  end  of  the  third  century  of  our  era ;  and  that  the 
high- priest  Tansar,  the  man  who  played  so  important  ^ 
a  part  in  Ardashtr’s  religious  revolution,  was  expressly 
represented  as  a  member  of  the  Platonic  sect.  Without  i 
pressing  conclusions  too  hard  as  to  facts  and  dates,  this 
much  can  be  safely  inferred  from  the  preceding,  that 
Platonic  doctrines  had  found  their  way  to  Persia  in  the 
first  centuries  of  the  Christian  era. 

Platonism  of  course  means  Neo- Platonism,  that  is  to  say 
that  philosophic  compound,  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  Plato, 
which  permeated  all  the  speculations  of  the  centuries  before 
Christ  and  long  after,  and  which  finds  its  first  and  most 
influential  expression  in  Philo  Judaeus.  In  Philo  is  found, 
as  far  as  I  know,  the  first  exact  parallel  to  the  Avesta 
doctrine  mentioned  above.  As  God  perceived  that  no  work 
can  be  beautiful  but  from  a  beautiful  model,  and  that  any 
sensible  object  needs  an  ideal  archetype,  ‘  when  he  wanted 
to  create  this  visible  world,  he  first  drew  the  intelligible 
one’  (PovkriOels  rdv  Sparbv  tovtopI  Koa-pjov  bruxiovpyfjaaLf  irpo- 
€^€Tvvov  TOP  poffTop).  The  dpards  K6ap.o%  is  the  gadthya  sti, 
the  vor(T6$  is  the  mainyava. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


Ivi 


vendJdAd. 


§  II.  The  first  Genius  under  Ahura  is  Vohu  Man6, 

‘  Good  Thought/  who  is  his  first  spiritual  creation  and  the 
moving  principle  of  the  world.  He  was  created  first  of  all 
beings ;  through  him  in  the  beginning  Ahura  created  the 
world  and  the  religion ;  and  Ahura  takes  his  advice  before 
proceeding  to  any  of  his  acts.  Besides  being  his  first 
creation  and  the  instrument  of  his  other  creations,  he  is  the 
type  of  mankind.  At  last,  in  the  next  world,  he  is  the 
intercessor  between  Ahura  and  man. 

When  we  define  Vohu  Man6  in  the  words  of  the  Avesta, 
we  define  the  Logos :  and  inversely  Vohu  Man6  may  be 
defined  in  the  same  terms  as  Philo’s  Aoyoy  0clo9 :  ‘  as  the 
first  manifestation  of  the  divine  powers,  he  is  the  first-born, 
the  first  archangel  of  God;  as  an  ideal  type  of  human 
nature,  he  is  the  perfect  man.’  Like  Vohu  Man6  in  the 
G&thas  and  still  more,  the  Logos  is  the  instrument  of 
creation.  Like  him,  he  is  the  perfect  intercessor,  for  he 
applies  to  the  Father  to  obtain  for  men  the  forgiveness 
of  sins  and  plenty  of  benefits.  As  Zarathortra  applies  to 
Vohu  Man6  for  his  first  instruction,  so  is  the  Logos  the 
messenger  of  God,  his  elect,  the  transmitter  of  his  revela¬ 
tions.  Both  Philo’s  Logos  and  the  Avesta  Vohu  Man6  are 
God’s  first-born  and  first  instrument,  the  ideal  man,  the 
intercessor,  the  revealcr. 

§  12.  If  Vohu  Mand  is  a  Zoroastrian  adaptation  of  the 
Logos,  it  will  follow  that  the  Amshaspands  themselves 
are  a  post- Alexandrian  development;  for  Vohu  Man6  is 
the  type  of  the  Amshaspands.  As  Vohu  Mand  was  chosen 
to  represent  mankind,  so  there  grew  up  round  this  initial 
ideal  divine  abstractions  that  might  be  attached,  somehow, 
to  the  other  departments  of  nature  to  help  like  Vohu 
Mand,  and  with  him,  in  the  creation  of  the  world.  This  is 
the  series  of  the  six  Amesha  Spe«tas : 

Vohu  Mand,  Good  Thought,  reigning  over  Man  (and  cattle). 


Asha  Vahijta, 

Perfect  Righteousness, 

Fire. 

Khshathra  Vairya,  Good  Royalty, 

>1 

Metals. 

Spe/ita  Armaiti, 

Pious  Modesty, 

Earth. 

Haurvatdt, 

Health, 

Waters. 

Ameretit, 

Immortality, 

»> 

Plants. 

Here  again  Philo  presents  us  with  a  striking  parallel. 


Digitized  by  LjOOqIc 


INTRODUCTION,  VI. 


Ivii 


Between  God  and  the  world,  the  Logos  is  only  the  first 
of  a  series  of  divine  abstractions  or  powers  (\oyot,  or  bvvi- 
ficis) :  in  one  passage,  unfortunately  mutilated,  he  enu¬ 
merates  six  of  them,  the  0€4or  koyos  being  the  first.  The 
third,  fj  /3ao*iXixi},  ‘  the  Royal  virtue,’  answers  literally  to  the 
third  member  of  the  Zoroastrian  series,  Khshathra,  Vairya. 
The  other  members  of  the  Philonian  series  irowyriio},  ‘  the 
Creative  virtue;’  tXcwy, ‘the  power  of  Mercy;’  i/o/mo^crtic?/, ‘the 
L^slative  virtue,*  have  no  counterpart  in  the  Avesta 
series,  which  prevents  our  attributing  any  particular  his¬ 
torical  importance  to  the  coincidence  of  Khshathra  Vairya 
with  the  paaiXiicq :  yet  the  coincidence  is  not  quite  acci¬ 
dental  :  it  was  made  possible  only  by  the  fact  that  both  i 
Philo  and  the  organisers  of  the  Avesta  system  moved  in  a  ] 
common  atmosphere  of  moral  and  metaphysical  abstractions. 

In  fact  tXewy,  though  not  one  of  the  Amesha  Spe«tas,  might 
have  become  one,  and  in  fact  is  consecrated  and  invoked 
with  Khshathra  Vairya  under  the  name  of  Marejsrdika 
*  Mercy.’  The  vono$€Tiicq  is  sanctified  in  rfka&ra,  ‘  the  Law,’ 
or  in  Mathra  Spentsi,  ‘  the  Holy  Word.’ 

This  is  the  Gnostic  atmosphere,  and  the  Gdthas,  which 
are,  on  the  whole,  a  poem  to  the  glory  of  the  Amesha 
Spefftas  and  the  virtues  they  impersonate,  may  be  termed  j 
the  first  monument  of  Gnosticism,  but  of  practical,  purely  j 
ethic  Gnosticism,  permeated  by  a  strong  sense  of  reality  ' 
and  a  deep  pre-occupation  with  morality :  abstraction  here 
is  only  a  means  of  edification.  Philo  is  nearer  the  true  ' 
Gnostics  than  the  writers  of  the  Githas  :  they  were  mere 
moralists,  with  no  metaphysical  instinct. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Jewish  Elements  in  the  Religion. 

§  I.  The  Jewish  influence,  less  visible  in  the  doctrine 
than  the  Greek,  is  prominent  in  the  general  views  and  the 
form  of  the  book. 


*  Yt.  II,  2,  7. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


Iviii 


vendJdAd. 


The  Avesta  and  the  Pentateuch  are  the  only  two  reli¬ 
gious  books  known  in  which  legislation  descends  from  the 
heavens  to  the  earth  in  a  series  of  conversations  between 
the  lawgiver  and  his  God.  Without  attaching  undue 
importance  to  this  correspondence,  we  shall  be  more  im¬ 
pressed  .with  the  fact  that  both  books  have  the  same  object, 
viz.  to  write  the  history  of  the  creation  and  mankind  ;  and 
in  mankind,  more  especially,  the  history  of  the  elect  race 
(the  Iranians  here,  the  Hebrews  there),  and  in  that  race  the 
history  of  the  true  religion  (the  religion  of  Mazda,  revealed 
by  Mazda  to  Zarathortra,  and  the  religion  of  Jehovah, 
revealed  by  Jehovah  to  Moses).  The  ultimate  end  of  both 
books  is  to  teach  the  faithful  the  rule  of  life. 

§  a.  Here  is  a  series  of  particular  concordances  that  show 
more  clearly  the  unity  of  their  plan : 

(i)  Creation  of  the  world. — Jehovah  creates  the  world  in 
six  days  ;  he  creates  successively  the  light,  the  heaven,  the 
sea,  the  earth  and  the  plants,  the  lights  in  the  firmament, 
the  animals,  and  lastly  man. 

Ahura  Mazda  creates  the  world  in  six  periods ;  he 
creates  successively  the  heaven,  the  water,  the  earth,  the 
plants,  the  animals,  and  man. 

(a)  Creation  of  man. — All  the  human  race,  in  Genesis,  is 
descended  from  one  couple,  man  and  woman,  Adam  and  Eve 
(Adam  means  ‘  man  ’). 

All  the  human  race,  in  the  Avesta,  is  descended  from  one 
couple,  man  and  woman,  Mashya  and  Mashyana  (Mashya 
means  ‘  man  ’). 

(3)  The  Deluge. — Jehovah  intends  to  destroy  the  human 
race,  on  account  of  its  wickedness,  and  to  renew  it  He 
brings  about  the  deluge,  but  saves  one  just  man,  Noah, 
with  his  family  and  a  couple  of  each  species  of  animals. 
Noah,  on  his  advice,  builds  an  ark,  in  which  he  takes 
refuge,  with  his  people,  and  from  which  he  goes  out  after¬ 
wards  to  repeople  the  earth. 

In  course  of  time,  the  earth  shall  be  laid  waste  by  the 
snows  and  rains  of  three  long  winters,  the  Mahrkdsha 
winters.  Ahura,  in  order  to  repeople  his  earth  with 
superior  races,  orders  kind  Yima  to  build  an  underground 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  VI. 


lix 


palace,  the  Var  of  Yima,  where  the  finest  specimens  of 
human,  animal,  and  vegetable  species  will  live  till  the 
moment  when,  the  evil  days  being  over,  they  shall 
open  the  doors  of  the  Var  and  repeople  the  earth  with 
a  better  race. 

(4)  Division  of  the  Earth. — Noah  has  three  sons,  Shem, 
Ham,  and  Japhet,  the  ancestors  of  the  three  races  between 
which  the  earth  is  divided. 

Thra^taona,  the  avenger  and  successor  of  Yima,  has 
three  sons,  Airya,  Sairima,  and  TOra,  between  whom  the 
earth  is  divided :  Airya  receives  Iran,  the  centre  of  the 
earths  surface,  Sairima  receives  the  West,  and  Tfira 
the  East. 

Putting  aside  the  legend  of  Airya,  killed  by  his  brothers, 
which  reminds  one,  but  not  closely  enough,  of  Joseph 
persecuted  by  his  brethren,  we  arrive  at  the  fact  that  is  the 
central  interest  of  the  two  books  : 

(5)  The  Revelation.  Zarathujtra  converses  with  Ahura, 
as  Moses  with  Jehovah,  and  receives,  like  him,  the  revelation 
of  the  laws  of  every  description,  on  the  Mountain  of  the 
Holy  Conversations,  as  Moses  did  on  Sinai. 

(6)  Both  Moses  and  Zarathortra  had  forerunners. 

A  first  covenant  was  made  by  Jehovah  with  Noah. 

The  Iranian  Noah,  Yima,  had  been  first  offered  to  act  ( 
the  part  of  a  lawgiver,  which  he  modestly  declined.  ’ 

Moses  was  preceded  by  three  patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob.  So  Zarathu^ra  was  preceded  by  three  great 
saints,  who  practised  before  him  the  worship  of  Haoma: 
Vivangha«t,  Athwya,  and  Thrita. 

§  3.  Certainly  it  would  not  be  safe  to  affirm  that  the 
coincidences  between  Genesis  and  the  Avesta  are  due  to 
a  cUrect  action  of  one  on  the  other.  The  newly-recovered 
fragments  of  a  Chaldaean  Genesis  leave  room  open  for 
a  third  medium.  However,  the  myths  of  the  creation  and 
the  deluge,  the  only  part  of  the  Biblico-Chaldaean  myth- 
ol<^  which  has,  in  a  rather  mutilated  form,  come  down  to 
us,  differ  so  widely  in  the  Bible  and  the  Babylonian  tablets, 
that  it  is  only  out  of  scientific  scruple  that  we  leave  the 
Chaldaean  door  open.  For  the  other  points  of  comparison, 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


lx 


vendIdAd. 


we  are  obliged,  for  want  of  any  Chaldaean  remains,  to  let 
the  Bible  and  the  Avesta  alone  stand  face  to  face. 

If  the  Mazdean  Genesis  rests  on  a  Chaldaean  basis,  the 
date  of  the  loan  remains  indefinite,  as  it  may  virtually  have 
taken  place  at  any  date  between  the  time  when  Iran  came 
into  contact  with  Chalda^  and  the  time  when  the  Chaldaean 
mythology  died  out.  If  it  rests  on  the  Biblical  tradition, 
the  loan  can  hardly  have  taken  place  earlier  than  the  time 
when  Judaism  began  to  spread  beyond  Palestine,  that  is  to 
say,  the  first  century  before  Christ  and  the  first  after. 
There  were  at  that  time  Jewish  communities  in  Media, 
Parthia,  Susiana,  and  Mesopotamia ;  the  king  of  Adiabene, 
Izates,  was  converted  to  Judaism  about  58  A.D.;  and  Jewish 
schools  were  flourishing  in  Babylonia  and  in  the  Greek 
towns.  So  the  Ms^  could  meet  with  doctors  of  Judaism 
as  well  as  with  teachers  of  Platonism. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Achaemenian  and  Earlier  Elements. 

§  I.  From  the  preceding  disquisitions  we  assume  that 
the  Avesta  doctrine  is  not  one  and  self-sufficient:  but  it 
contains  elements  borrowed  from  foreign  systems,  from 
India,  Greece,  and  Judaea.  It  directs  its  polemic  against 
India  and  borrows  from  her,  though  in  a  hostile  spirit.  It 
owes  to  Greece  some  of  its  teaching,  and  to  Judaea  its 
historical  views.  And  all  these  foreign  elements  were 
borrowed  in  the  Parthian  period. 

But  these  elements,  however  important  they  may  be,  do 
not  constitute  the  whole  of  Zoroastrianism,  for  there  are 
essential  doctrines  in  it,  the  existence  of  which  can  be 
traced  back  far  beyond  the  Parthian  period  and  the  Greek 
conquest,  with  historical  evidence.  One  may,  with  certain 
accuracy,  distinguish  in  Zoroastrianism  what  is  old,  pre- 
Alexandrian,  or  Achaemenian  from  what  is  late,  or  post- 
Alexandrian. 

§  2.  The  fundamental  basis  of  Mazdeism,  the  belief  in 
a  supreme  God,  the  organiser  of  the  world,  Ahura  Mazda, 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  VII. 


Ixi 


is  as  old  as  anything  we  know  of  Persia.  Darius  pro¬ 
claims  Auramazda,  the  greatest  of  all  gods,  a  powerful 
God,  who  made  this  earth,  who  made  that  heaven,  who 
made  man,  who  made  Darius  king. 

The  gods  invoked  with  the  Persian  Zeus  (Auramazda) 
are,  according  to  Herodotos,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the  Earth, 
the  Wind,  the  Waters,  that  is  to  say,  natural  Deities.  The 
two  greatest  gods,  next  to  him,  according  to  Artaxerxes 
Mnemon,  are  Mithra  and  Anahata  (AnAhita),  that  is  to  say, 
a  God  of  the  Light  and  a  Goddess  of  the  Waters.  There  ^ 
is  no  allusion  to,  no  mention,  no  indication  whatever,  of  the 
Amesha  Spe«tas,  nor  of  that  crowd  of  abstract  divinities  so 
characteristic  of  the  later  Mazdeism.  This  is  no  wonder ; 
as  we  have  seen  already  that  the  Amesha  Spe«tas  are  i 
a  Platonic  development. 

§  3.  The  principle  of  dualism  is  pre- Alexandrian.  This 
is  implied,  in  the  time  of  Darius,  by  the  great  king  stating 
that  Ahura  *  created  welfare  (shiy^tim)  for  man  ^ ’  in  the 
time  of  Herodotos,  by  the  religious  war  waged  by  the  Magi 
against  the  ants,  snakes,  and  other  noxious  creatures,  which 
shows  that  the  distinction  of  Ormazdian  and  Ahrimanian  t/ 
creatures  was  already  in  existence.  Moreover,  at  the  end 
of  the  Achaemenian  period,  Aristotle  knows  of  a  Good 
Spirit  and  the  Evil  One,  Zeus — Oromazdes  and  Ades — 
Areimanios. 

§  4.  Already  in  the  Achaemenian  Mazdeism,  the  exis¬ 
tence  of  the  world  was  limited  to  twelve  thousand  years, 
distributed  into  four  periods,  the  character  of  which  was 
altered  in  the  post- Alexandrian  period,  to  humour  the  Neo- 
Platonic  tendencies  of  the  age.  It  was  already  an  estab¬ 
lished  dogma  that  Ahriman  would  be  conquered  at  last 
and  that  men  would  live  again.  The  belief  in  resurrection 
and  a  future  life  implies  the  correlative  belief  in  future  ‘ 
rewards  and  punishments,  which  plays  a  great  part  in  the  ' 
post- Alexandrian  religion,  but  must  have  belonged  to  the  ‘ 
older  stratum. 


^  See  Rawlinson,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  x,  p.  291 ; 
Benfey,  Die  Persischen  Keilinschriften,  pp.  63,  95. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixii 


VESDtDkD. 


§  5.  The  practical  and  utilitarian  morality  of  the  Avesta 
was  one  of  the  older  traits  of  the  national  character. 
In  the  eyes  of  king  Darius  and  the  contemporaries  of 
Herodotos,  as  in  those  of  the  writer  of  VendidcLd  III,  and 
of  all  good  Parsis  of  the  present  day,  the  two  greatest 
merits  of  a  citizen  were  the  facetting  and  rearing  of 
a  numerous  family,  and  the  fruitful  tilling  of  the  soil. 
Truthfulness  was  already  considered  the  paramount  virtue, 
and  the  balance  of  merits  and  demerits  was  already  known 
at  least  to  the  earthly  judge. 

§  6.  The  worship  of  the  elements,  water,  fire,  and  earth, 
and  respect  for  their  purity  were  already  in  practice.  It 
was  forbidden  to  sully  the  waters  or  the  fire,  to  throw 
a  corpse  into  the  fire,  or  to  bury  it  in  the  earth  until 
reduced  to  a  fleshless,  incorruptible  skeleton. 

§  7.  There  were  two  sorts  of  sacrifices :  the  bloody 
sacrifice,  of  which  a  survival  has  lingered  to  this  day  in  the 
Atash  z6hr,  and  the  bloodless  sacrifice,  consisting  essen¬ 
tially  of  the  Haoma-offering  and  libations,  of  which  there 
is  no  direct  mention  in  the  classics,  but  which  indirect 
evidence  obliges  us  to  ascribe  to  the  older  religion. 

§  8.  Thus  the  principles  of  the  Achaemenian  religion 
may  be  summed  up  as  follows : 

(i)  As  far  as  dogma  goes:  the  existence  of  two  con¬ 
flicting  supreme  powers,  one  good  and  the  other  evil, 

I  Ormazd  and  Ahriman ;  the  final  defeat  of  Ahriman  after 
1  twelve  thousand  years ;  and  the  resurrection.  Also  a  num- 
'  ber  of  naturalistic  deities,  amongst  which  were  Mithra  and 
Andhita. 

(a)  Morals :  veneration  of  truth,  family,  and  agriculture. 

(3)  Liturgy :  a  bloody  sacrifice  and  a  bloodless  sacrifice 
(Haoma).  Certain  laws  of  purity  extending  to  the  waters, 
the  fire,  and  the  earth.  Burning  or  burying  corpses  for¬ 
bidden. 

§  9.  The  Achaemenian  religion  was  practised  in  the 
south  as  well  as  in  the  north  of  Iran,  in  Persia  as  well 
as  in  Media.  It  had  its  centre  in  Media  and  its  sacerdotal 
class  belonged  to  a  Median  tribe,  the  Magi.  The  priest¬ 
hood  was  hereditary — as  it  still  is  nowadays  amongst  the 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  VII. 


Ixiii 


Parsis — and  the  Magi  were  to  Mazdeism  what  the  Levites 
and  Cohanim  were  to  Judaism.  The  sacerdotal  tribe 
spread  wherever  Mazdeism  extended ;  and  in  spite  of  the 
intense  provincial  hatred  which  the  Persians  lx>re  to  the 
Medians,  their  former  masters,  and  which  the  Pseudo- 
Smerdis’  usurpation  was  not  sufficient  to  smother,  still 
the  Magi  were  in  the  Persian  idea  the  only  true,  authorised 
priests.  No  sacrifice  was  of  any  value  which  had  not  been 
performed  by  a  Magus :  only  a  Magus  could  make  himself 
heard  by  the  gods. 

§  lo.  The  supposed  founder  of  the  religion  was  named 
Zarathurtra,  a  personage  that  must  have  been  known  to 
the  pre-Alexandrian  religion,  as  Dino  mentions  him,  and 
his  protectors,  king  Vtjt^spa  ('Tordo-Tn/?)  and  ViJt4spa*s 
brother  Zairivairi  {Zapiibpns),  were  already,  in  the  time  of 
Alexander,  heroes  of  epic  songs  which  were  current  in 
Asia.  As  to  the  birthplace  of  Zarathu.rtra,  all  Zoroastrian 
texts  agree  with  the  old  classic  tradition  in  placing  it  in 
Media.  Whether  Zarathartra  was  an  historical  or  a  legen¬ 
dary  personage  it  is  difficult  to  decide,  and  to  some  extent 
useless,  as  Zoroastrianism  no  longer  appears  to  be  one 
homogeneous  religious  monument,  since  we  are  confronted 
with  two  Zoroastrianisms,  one  anterior  and  the  other  [/ 
posterior  to  Alexander.  The  Pseudo-Xanthos,  which  is 
at  any  rate  anterior  to  the  first  century  B.C.,  and  may  be 
much  older,  makes  Zarathartra  the  founder  of  Magism  and 
the  first  of  a  series  of  grand  chiefs  of  Magism  who  succeeded 
one  another  till  Alexander’s  time.  Zarathu.rtra  would 
therefore  be  an  old  chief  of  the  priestly  caste,  a  Mobeddn- 
Mobed,  a  ZarathiLrtrdtema  icar’  i^oxrjv,  whether  historical  or 
l^endary.  As  his  legend  is  known  to  us  only  from  Avesta 
sources,  we  have  no  means  of  distinguishing  in  it  what  may 
be  older  from  what  may  be  a  later  development. 

§  1 1.  Zoroastrianism,  whether  prior  to  Alexander  or  in  its 
post-Alexandrian  form,  was  never  a  simple  religion  ;  it  was 
the  result  of  an  historical  elaboration  of  complex  materials. 

It  was  a  growth  in  which  one  easily  discerns  Aryan  / 
elements,  which  it  has  in  common  with  India,  and  new 
original  elements.  Its  Aryan  elements  may  be  termed  : 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixiv 


VENDtoAD. 


the  supreme  Gk)d,  the  God  of  the  Heaven,  Ahura  Mazda ; 
the  God  of  the  heavenly  light,  Mithra ;  the  worship  of  the 
elementary  divinities,  Waters,  Fire,  and  Earth ;  a  number 
of  storm  myths  and  m)^ical  legends ;  and  the  worship  of 
Haoma.  Purely  Iranian  are:  the  dualistic  conception  of 
the  world,  its  limited  duration  of  twelve  thousand  years 
with  its  four  periods ;  the  continual  conflict  of  Ormazd  and 
Ahriman,  and  the  latter’s  defeat ;  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  the  notion  of  purity  carried  to  the  extreme,  the 
prohibition  of  burning  or  burying  the  dead,  and  the  throw¬ 
ing  away  of  corpses  to  dogs  and  birds  of  prey. 

§  I  a.  Some  of  the  new  dogmas  may  be  the  independent 
development  of  Aryan  elements :  for  instance,  the  dualistic 
conception  may  have  grown  out  of  the  mythical  struggles 
between  gods  and  demons.  But  the  Great  year  and  the 
resurrection  are  things  quite  new,  which  seem  to  betray 
external  influences.  Of  the  Scythian  origin  of  Zoroastrianism 
it  will  be  idle  to  speak,  till  the  advocates  of  the  system 
have  brought  something  like  historical  or  rational  evidence 
in  its  favour.  The  only  civilisation  of  which  we  know  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Media  was  that  of  the  Assyro-Chal- 
daeans,  which  in  many  things  was  the  instructor  of  the 
Medes  and  taught  them  their  art,  their  writing,  and  their 
political  organisation.  Unfortunately,  too  little  is  known 
of  the  inner  aspects  of  the  Chaldaean  religion.  One  may 
wonder  if  the  Frashd-kereti,  that  renewal  of  the  world  that 
is  to  take  place  at  the  end  of  the  Great  year  of  twelve 
millennia,  was  derived  from  the  Semitic  myths  of  the  annual 
revival  of  Adonis  and  Tammuz.  Even  the  idea  of  resur¬ 
rection  seems  to  be  attested  on  the  so-called  Cyrus*  cylinder 
of  Babylon.  If  these  hypotheses  turn  out  to  be  correct, 
older  Magism  may  be  defined  as  an  Aryan  growth  under 
Chaldaean  influences. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Age  and  Growth  of  the  Avesta. 

§  I.  The  internal  evidence  of  the  doctrines  has  thus 
confirmed  the  half-historical  evidence  of  the  texts,  and 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  VI IT. 


Ixv 


led  US  to  believe  that  the  Avesta  is  the  embodiment  and 
the  fusion  of  two  teachings,  one  of  which  belonged  to  the 
Achaemenian  age,  whereas  the  other  could  not  be  older  • 
than  the  fall  of  the  Greek  domination  in  Iran.  One  might 
therefore  divide  the  Avesta.  so  far  as  the  doctrine  goes, 
into  pre- Alexandrian  and  post- Alexandrian  texts.  The 
Vendid^d  may  be  taken  as  the  best  specimen  of  the  texts 
imbued  with  the  pre-Alexandrian  spirit,  as  its  general  , 
laws  are  Achaemenian  in  tone,  and  a  great  part  of  it  may 
be  interpreted  by  means  of  classical  testimonies  regarding  ' 
the  Achaemenian  age.  The  Githas  may  be  taken  as  the 
best  specimen  of  the  post-Alexandrian  spirit,  as  they  are 
filled  with  ideas  of  post-Alexandrian  growth. 

§  2.  The  date  of  the  Gdthas,  if  not  exactly  determinable, 
may  yet  be  fixed  between  rather  narrow  limits.  They  can ' 
hardly  be  older  than  the  first  century  before  our  era,  or 
even  before  Philo  of  Alexandria ;  for  the  neo-Platonic  ideas 
and  beings  are  found  in  them  just  in  the  Philonian  stage. 
They  cannot  be  dated  later  than  the  time  of  the  Scythian 
kings,  Kanishka  and  Huvishka,  who  reigned  in  India 
between  78  and  130  A.D.,  and  who  left  on  their  coins 
records  of  many  of  the  Zoroastrian  divinities,  not  only  the 
old  elementary  ones,  like  Mci/jo— Mithra,  Tctpo — Tighri, 
Oa6o — VcLta,  Moo — Mmingha  ;  but  also  the  new  abstract 
deities,  like  Oai;ti;5a— Vanawti,  Opkayvo — ^Verethraghna,  and 
the  Amshaspand  ^aopr\oap — Khshathra  Vairya.  If  it  is 
assumed  ,  that  the  idea  Vohu  Man6  was  inspired  by  Philo 
or  his  school,  the  Gdthas  will  be  thereby  ascribed  to  the 
first  century  of  our  era.  It  is  just  the  period  when  we 
find  Vologeses  and  the  first  historical  mention  of  an 
attempt  to  form  a  systematic  religious  code. 

The  Githas  present  therefore  this  apparent  contradiction, 
that,  being  the  oldest  part  of  the  Avesta,  they  represent,  at 
the  same  time,  the  latest  growth  of  the  Zoroastrian  spirit.  , 
This  is  contradictory  only  to  those  who  in  a  text  confound  ' 
the  date  of  its  composition  with  the  date  of  the  ideas  it 
expresses.  The  Vendid&d  may  be  at  the  same  time  later 
than  the  Githas  in  its  composition  and  older  in  its  material.  I 
The  writer  of  the  Vendtdid  had  the  G&thas  before  his  eyes, 
[4]  e 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixvi 


vendIdAd. 


though  he  expressed  ideas  and  facts  far  anterior  to  the  time 
when  the  G4thas  could  have  been  written  or  thought  of. 

But  if  the  G^thas  were  written  in  the  first  century  of  our 
era,  it  follows  that  they  must  have  been  written  in  a  dead 
language.  Names  like  Vaninda,  Oado,  5aor6var,  on  the 
Indo-Scythian  coins,  show  that  at  the  end  of  that  century 
the  Zend  was  no  longer  a  living  language,  but  had  already 
been  brought  to  the  level  of  the  popular  Pahlavi  stage. 
Though  the  possibility  remains  that  what  we  call  the 
Philonian  concept  may  be  older  than  Philo,  its  best-known 
exponent ;  and  that  the  G^thas  may  therefore  be  brought 
back  as  far  as  the  first  or  second  century  before  Christ,  an 
epoch  when  we  find  already  the  neo- Platonic  spirit  in 
the  later  productions  of  Jewish  ethics,  like  the  Proverbs 
and  Ecclesiastes.  In  this  hypothesis,  the  Zend  might  have 
been  still  a  living,  or  rather  a  dying,  language,  judging 
from  its  state  of  decomposition.  As  to  the  country  to 
which  it  belonged,  only  one  thing  can  be  safely  affirmed  : 
it  was  not  Persia.  It  may  have  been  Media,  which  re¬ 
mained  to  the  last  the  centre  of  Zoroastrianism  and  the 
Zoroastrian  priesthood  ;  it  may  have  been  the  eastern  part 
of  Iran,  where  a  modern  dialect,  the  Afghan,  appears  to  be 
a  lineal  descendant  of  the  Zend. 

One  question  remains  to  be  settled.  Allowing  that 
a  part  of  the  Avesta  is  post- Alexandrian,  is  there  a  part 
of  it  which  belongs  to  the  pre-Alexandrian  age,  namely, 
that  part  which,  so  far  as  its  contents  go,  belongs  to  the 
old  religious  stratum  ? 

Certainly  it  would  be  most  hazardous  to  deny  the  exis¬ 
tence  of  a  sacred  literature  under  the  Achaemenian  kings, 
though  no  historical  evidence  can  be  brought  forward  to 
support  its  assumption.  Nay  more,  if  the  GMhas  are 
supposed  to  have  been  written  in  a  dead  language,  we  are 
obliged  to  assume  the  existence  of  an  old  literature  and 
the  survival  of  fragments  of  it ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  write 
in  a  dead  language  unless  one  has  under  one’s  eyes  models 
composed  at  a  time  when  the  language  was  living.  But  if 
there  has  ever  been  such  a  thing  as  an  Achaemenian 
Avesta,  and  even  if  fragments  of  it  were  in  the  hands  of  the 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  IX. 


Ixvii 


post- Alexandrian  Diaskeuasts,  one  thing  is  certain ;  there  is 
not  one  page  of  that  older  Avesta  that  is  literally  reproduced 
in  the  newer  Avesta.  Those  theogonies  which  the  Magi 
in  the  time  of  Herodotos  sang  at  the  sacrifice  have  nothing 
to  do  with  our  G4thas,  since  our  G&thas  contain  elements 
which  did  not  enter  the  Iranian  mind  till  Iran  was  over¬ 
whelmed  by  the  Greek  conquest  Neither  were  they  like 
our  Yarts,  because  the  composition  of  our  Yarts  was 
directed  by  an  historical  and  chronological  principle,  of 
biblical  origin.  Only  the  laws  of  the  Vendid^d,  which, 
most  of  them,  are  as  old  as  the  older  Zoroastrianism,  may 
be  supposed  to  be  a  partial  reproduction  of  an  Achae- 
menian  Avesta ;  but  even  they  are  presented  in  a  form  that 
implies  the  new  evolution.  A  Magus  of  the  old  days  was  as 
energetic  as  an  Avesta  Athravan  in  protecting  the  purity 
of  the  earth  against  any  defilement;  but  he  would  not 
have  spoken  of  the  earth  as  Sp^a  Armaiti. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Conclusions. 

§  I.  Zoroastrianism  is  an  historical  religion,  that  is  to 
say,  one  that  has  changed  in  course  of  time,  not  only  by 
an  inner  evolution,  but  also  under  the  reaction  of  foreign 
schools  and  political  events. 

§  2.  In  the  remotest  period,  the  Median  priests,  the 
Magi,  elaborated  on  a  naturalistic  basis,  not  different  from 
what  is  found  in  Indian,  Greek,  and  Italian  paganisms, 
an  original  system,  not  free  from  Semitic  elements.  Its 
characteristics  are:  dualism,  the  limited  duration  of  the 
world,  the  resurrection,  the  worship  of  pure  elements,  and 
the  ethics  of  labour.  That  system  spread  from  Media  to  j 
Persia,  and  was  dominant  under  the  Achaemenians.  It  is  1 
Zoroastrianism  proper ;  no  direct  documents  of  it  are  left ; 
but  it  is  known  indirectly  through  the  inscriptions,  through 
the  testimony  of  the  classics,  and  through  the  documents  of 
the  neo-Zoroastrianism,  which  received  its  dogmas  and 
gave  them  a  new  form. 


e  2 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


Ixviii 


VENDtoAD. 


§  3.  Alexander  s  invasion  brought  in  its  wake  political 
and  moral  anarchy.  Zoroastrianism  did  not  perish  ;  its 
dogmas,  its  worship,  and  part  of  its  mythology  survived ; 
but  for  want  of  a  sacred  authoritative  book,  there  was  no 
Zoroastrian  orthodoxy.  At  the  same  time,  the  barriers 
between  East  and  West  being  broken,  all  religions  and 
systems  were  brought  face  to  face.  The  religious  question 
became  the  order  of  the  day.  Buddhism  and  Brahmanism 
pushed  from  the  East,  Judaism  from  the  West,  Hellenism 
ruled  all  over  Iran.  In  the  systems  that  from  all  the  four 
points  of  the  compass  spread  into  Iran,  either  with  a  con¬ 
scious  propagandist  spirit,  or  through  the  slow,  blind  influ¬ 
ences  of  every-day  contacts,  Zoroastrianism  found  both 
what  repelled  and  what  attracted  it  Its  practical  and 
moral  ideal  revolted  against  the  inert  ascetidsm  of  Bud¬ 
dhism,  the  ethical  indifference  of  Brdhmanism,  and  the 
superstitious,  low  worship  of  immoral  Devas. 

§  4.  Greece  and  Palestine,  on  the  contrary,  brought  to  it 
novel,  fascinating,  and  edifying  thoughts.  How  far  and 
deep  Hellenism  made  its  influence  felt  is  symbolically 
expressed  on  the  coins  of  the  Philhellen  Arsacidae.  Not 
that  I  think  that  Zeus  impressed  in  any  active  way  the 
worshippers  of  Ahura,  though  Herodotos  and  Aristotle  had 
recognised  their  affinities,  as  the  Sassanians  did  later  on. 
It  was  Greek  philosophy  that  reacted  on  the  Zoroastrian 
schools.  Platonism  was  there,  as  it  was  in  Western  Asia, 
‘  the  bond  between  the  East  and  Greece.*  What  struck  the 
Mazdean  sages  most  in  it  was  what  at  the  same  time 
impressed  the  Hellenist  Jews  so  much :  the  idea  of  the 
Logos,  that  divine  intelligence  abstracted  from  God  and 
interposed  between  him  and  the  world  ;  also  the  concept 
of  an  ideal  world,  the  heavenly  unseen  prototype  of  the 
material  one.  After  the  Iranian  Logos,  Vohu  Mand,  rose 
the  Amshaspands,  to  share  with  him  the  government  of  the 
soul  and  the  world.  Then  came  a  host  of  divine  abstrac¬ 
tions,  to  impersonate  all  the  spiritual  and  material  forces 
of  nature.  In  spite  of  the  dryness  and  scholastic  rigour  with 
which  the  doctors  invested  Mazdeism,  one  cannot  help 
admiring  the  practical  good  sense  and  idea  of  proportion 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  IX. 


Ixix 


which  presided  over  the  choice  of  these  divine  abstractions 
and  represented  their  impulses;  and  when  one  contrasts 
them  with  the  Eons  of  the  Gnostics  and  the  Sephiroth  of 
the  Cabbalists,  which  starting  from  the  same  point,  the 
First  Intelligence,  fell  .engulfed  in  mystical  nihilism,  one  can 
understand  why  and  how  Mazdeism  was,  next  to  Christi¬ 
anity,  the  only  one  among  the  religious  systems  inspired 
with  Plato’s  spirit  that  lived  and  deserved  to  live. 

§  5.  Judaism  inspired  Zoroastrianism  in  a  different, 
though  not  less  powerful,  way.  It  answered  certain  ques¬ 
tions  of  which  Mazdeism  had  not  thought.  Its  sacred 
book  supplied  the  Mazdean  doctors  with  its  solutions 
of  those  questions.  It  gave  them  even  its  historical  and 
chronological  framework.  The  creation,  the  deluge,  the 
genealogies,  the  patriarchs,  the  division  of  races,  the  Reve¬ 
lation  were  all  told  in  a  Zoroastrian  spirit.  Perhaps  the 
very  idea  of  an  Avesta  was  suggested  by  the  Bible.  The 
very  divisions  of  the  Bible  were  adopted  in  the  Avesta : 
the  classification  of  the  Nasks  into  D4ta  (the  Law),  G4tha 
(metaphysics)  and  Hadha-m4thra,  is  the  classification  of  the 
Biblical  texts  into  Thora  (Law),  Nebiim  (Prophets),  and 
Ketfibim.  When  Islam  assimilated  the  Zoroastrians  to  the 
People  of  the  Book,  it  evinced  a  rare  historical  sense  and 
solved  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  the  Avesta. 

§  6.  Thus,  in  the  centuries  about  the  Christian  era,  was 
elaborated  in  Iran  a  new  religion,  not  differing  essentially 
from  the  old  one,  which,  in  fact  was  nothing  more  than  this 
old  religion,  adapted  to  the  new  necessities  of  its  spiritual 
and  political  surroundings,  better  armed  against  rivals  and 
made  stronger  by  borrowing  from  every  one  of  its  com¬ 
petitors.  All  these  novelties  Zoroastrianism  could  adopt 
and  assimilate  to  itself  without  losing  its  own  physiognomy, 
and  there  are  few  instances  of  foreign  elements  and  concepts 
so  freely  borrowed  by  a  religion  and  so  harmoniously 
blended  in  the  original  mould. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


Ixx 


vendIdAd. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  VendIdAd. 

§  I.  According  to  Pars!  tradition  the  VendtdAd  ^  is  the 
only  Nask,  out  of  the  twenty-one,  that  was  preserved  in  its 
entirety  ^  This  is  a  statement  to  which  it  is  difficult  to 
trust;  for,  if  there  is  anything  that  shows  how  right  the 
Parsis  are  in  admitting  that  the  Avesta  is  only  a  collection 
of  fragments,  it  is  the  fragmentary  character  of  the  Vendi- 
ddd  that  strikes  us  most 

The  Vendiddd  has  often  been  described  as  the  book  of 
the  laws  of  the  Parsis  ;  it  may  be  more  exactly  called  the 
code  of  purification,  a  description,  however,  which  is  itself 
1  only  so  far  correct  that  the  laws  of  purification  are  the 
object  of  the  largest  part  of  the  book. 

1/  The  first  two  chapters  deal  with  mythical  matter,  with¬ 
out  any  direct  connection  with  the  general  object  of  the 
Vendiddd,  and  are  remnants  of  an  old  epic  and  cosmogonic 
literature.  The  first  deals  with  the  creations  and  counter- 
I  creations  of  Ahura  Mazda  and  Angra  Mainyu ;  the  second 
.  speaks  of  Yima,  the  founder  of  civilisation.  Although 
there  was  no  particular  reason  for  placing  them  in  the 
Vendiddd,  as  soon  as  they  were  admitted  into  it  they  were 
naturally  put  at  the  beginning,  because  they  referred  to 
the  first  ages  of  the  world.  Three  chapters  of  a  mythical 
character,  about  the  origin  of  medicine,  were  put  at  the 
end  of  the  book,  for  want  of  any  better  place,  but  might 
as  well  have  been  kept  apart®,  as  was  the  so-called  Ha- 
dh6kht  Nask  fragment.  There  is  also  another  mythical 
Fargard,  the  nineteenth,  which,  as  it  treats  of  the  revelation 
of  the  law  by  Ahura  to  Zarathortra,  would  have  been  more 
suitably  placed  at  the  b^inning  of  the  Vendiddd  proper, 
that  is,  as  the  third  Fargard. 


‘  The  word  Vendldfid  is  a  corruption  of  V  tda6v6-d&tem  (d&tem),  the  ‘anti¬ 
demoniac  law.'  It  is  sometimes  applied  to  the  whole  of  the  law  (Vendtd&d 
Sada). 

*  See  above,  p.  xxxii 

*  As  an  introduction  to  a  code  of  laws  on  physicians;  see  Faig.VIl,  36-44. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxi 


The  Other  sixteen  chapters  deal  chiefly  with  religious 
observances,  although  mythical  fragments,  or  moral  digres¬ 
sions,  are  met  with  here  and  there,  which  are  more  or  less 
artificially  connected  with  the  text,  and  which  were  most 
probably  not  written  in  connection  with  the  passages  which 
they  follow  \ 

§  a.  A  rough  attempt  at  regular  order  appears  in  these 
sixteen  chapters:  nearly  all  the  matter  contained  in  the 
eight  chapters  from  V  to  XI.I  deals  with  impurity  arising 
from  the  dead  and  the  way  of  dispelling  it ;  but  the  subject 
is  again  treated,  here  and  there,  in  other  Fargards*,  and 
matter  irrelevant  to  the  subject  has  also  found  its  way  into 
these  same  eight  Fargards^.  Fargards  XIII  and  XIV  are 
devoted  to  the  dog,  but  must  be  completed  with  a  part  of 
the  XVth.  Fargards  XVI,  XVII,  and  most  part  of  XVIII 
deal  with  several  sorts  of  uncleanness,  and  their  proper 
place  should  rather  have  been  after  the  Xllth  Fargard. 
Fargard  III  is  devoted  to  the  earth  ^  ;  Fargard  IV  stands  by 
itself,  as  it  deals  with  a  matter  which  is  treated  only  there, 
namely,  civil  and  penal  laws 

No  better  order  prevails  within  these  several  parts: 
prescriptions  on  one  and  the  same  subject  are  scattered 
about  through  several  Fargards,  without  any  subject  being 
treated  at  once  in  a  full  and  exhaustive  way;  and  this 
occasions  needless  repetitions®. 

The  main  cause  of  this  disorder  was,  of  course,  that  the  | 
advantage  of  order  is  rarely  felt  by  Orientals ;  but  it  was  • 
further  promoted  by  the  very  form  of  exposition  adopted  by 
the  first  composers  of  the  VendtdAd.  The  law  is  revealed 
by  Ahura  in  a  series  of  answers  to  questions  put  to  him  by 


»  For  instance,  Farg.V,  15-20;  III,  24-29;  30-32;  33;  IV,  47-49. 

•  III,  14-21 ;  36  scq. ;  XIX,  11-25. 

•  The  passages  on  medicine  (VII,  36-44),  and  on  the  sea  Vonra-kasha  (V, 
15-20). 

•  It  contains  two  digressions,  the  one  on  fhneral  laws,  the  other  on  hus¬ 
bandry.  See  Farg.  Ill,  Introd. 

•  It  contains  one  digression  on  physical  well-being,  which  must  have  belonged 
originally  to  Farg.  III.  See  Farg.  IV,  Introd. 

•  V,  27-30 -VII,  6-9;  V,  45-54-VII,  60-69;  V,  57-62-VII,  17-22. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixxii 


VENDtoAD. 


Zarathujtra ' ;  and  as  these  questions  are  not  of  a  general 
character,  but  refer  to  details,  the  matter  is  much  broken  up 
into  fragments,  each  of  which,  consisting  of  a  question  with 
its  answer,  stands  by  itself,  as  an  independent  passage. 

We  shall  treat  in  the  following  pages,  first  of  the  laws  of 
purification,  then  of  the  civil  laws,  and,  lastly,  of  the 
penalties  both  religious  and  civil. 

A. 

§  3.  The  first  object  of  man  is  purity,  yao^dmi :  ‘  purity 
is  for  man,  next  to  life,  the  greatest  good 

Purity  and  impurity  have  not  in  the  Vendidad  the 
exclusively  spiritual  meaning  which  they  have  in  our  lan¬ 
guages  :  they  do  not  refer  to  an  inward  state  of  the  soul, 
but  chiefly  to  a  physical  state  of  the  body.  Impurity 
or  uncleanness  may  be  described  as  the  state  of  a  person 
or  a  thing  that  is  possessed  of  the  demon ;  and  the  object 
of  purification  is  to  expel  the  demon. 

The  principal  means  by  which  uncleanness  enters  man 
is  death,  as  death  is  the  triumph  of  the  demon. 

When  a  man  dies,  as  soon  as  the  soul  has  parted  from 
the  body,  the  Drq^  Nasu  or  Corpse-Dru^  falls  upon  the 
dead  from  the  regions  of  hell,  and  whoever  thenceforth 
touches  the  corpse  becomes  unclean,  and  makes  unclean 
whomsoever  he  touches 

The  Drq^  is  expelled  from  the  dead  by  means  of  the 
Sag-did,  ‘the  look  of  the  dog:*  ‘a  four-eyed  dog’  or 
‘a  white  one  with  yellow  ears’  is  brought  near  the  body 
and  is  made  to  look  at  the  dead ;  as  soon  as  he  has  done 
so,  the  Dru^  flees  back  to  hell  \ 


^  The  outward  form  of  the  Vendidad  has  been  often  compared  with  that  of 
the  Books  of  Moses.  But  in  reality,  in  the  Bible,  there  is  no  conversation 
between  God  and  the  lawgiver :  the  law  comes  down  unasked,  and  God  gives 
commands,  but  gives  no  answers.  In  the  Vendid^,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the 
wish  of  man,  not  the  will  of  God,  that  is  the  first  cause  of  the  revelation. 
Man  must  ask  of  Ahnra,  who  knows  everything,  and  is  plensed  to  answer 
(XVIII,  13  seq.) ;  the  law  is  ‘the  question  to  Ahnra,*  dhdiri  frashnd. 

*  Farg.  V,  21,  from  Yasna  XLVllI  (XLVII),  5.  »  Farg.  VII,  i  seq. 

*  In  the  shape  of  a  fly.  ‘  The  fly  that  came  to  the  smell  of  the  dead  body 
was  thought  to  be  the  corpse-spirit  that  came  to  take  possession  of  the  dead  in 
the  name  of  Ahriman  ’  (Justi,  Persien,  p.  88). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxiii 


The  is  expelled  from  the  living,  whom  she  has 

seized  through  their  contact  with  the  dead,  by  a  process  of 
washings  with  ox’s  urine  (g6m^z  or  ntrang)  and  with 
water,  combined  with  the  Sag*did  \ 

The  real  import  of  these  ceremonies  is  shown  by  the 
spells  which  accompany  their  performance :  ‘  Perish,  O 
fiendish  Dru^I  Perish,  O  brood  of  the  fiend!  Perish,  O 
world  of  the  fiend!  Perish  away,  O  Dn\f!  Rush  away, 
O  Dri\f !  Perish  away,  O  Dn^l  Perish  away  to  the 
regions  of  the  north,  never  more  to  give  unto  death  the 
living  world  of  the  holy  spirit  I  ’ 

Thus,  in  the  death  of  a  man,  there  is  more  involved  than 
the  death  of  one  man:  the  power  of  death,  called  forth 
from  hell,  threatens  from  the  corpse,  as  from  a  stronghold, 
the  whole  world  of  the  living,  ready  to  seize  whatever  may 
fall  within  his  reach,  and  ‘  from  the  dead  defiles  the  living, 
and  from  the  living  rushes  upon  the  living.’  When  a  man 
dies  in  a  house,  there  is  danger  for  three  days  lest  some¬ 
body  else  should  die  in  that  house 

The  notion  or  feeling,  out  of  which  these  ceremonies  grew, 
was  far  from  unknown  to  the  other  Indo-European  peoples : 
what  was  peculiar  to  Mazdeism  was  that  it  carried  it  to  an 
extreme,  and  preserved  a  clearer  sense  of  it,  while  elsewhere 
it  grew  dimmer  and  dimmer,  and  faded  away.  In  fact, 
when  the  Greek,  going  out  of  a  house  where  a  dead  man 
lay,  sprinkled  himself  with  water  from  the  ipbiviov  at  the 
door,  it  was  death  that  he  drove  away  from  himself.  The 
Vedic  Indian,  too,  although  his  rites  were  intended  chiefly 
for  the  benefit  of  the  dead,  considered  himself  in  danger 
and,  while  burning  the  corpse,  cried  aloud :  ‘  Away,  go 
away,  O  Death !  injure  not  our  sons  and  our  men !  ’  (Rig- 
veda  X,  i8,  i.) 

§  4.  As  to  the  rites  by  means  of  which  the  Dru^  is 
expelled,  they  are  the  performance  of  myths.  There  is 
nothing  in  worship  but  what  existed  before  in  mythology. 
What  we  call  a  practice  is  only  an  imitation  of  gods,  an 
ofAoWir  as  man  fancies  he  can  bring  about  the  things 


*  Faig.  VIII,  35-72 ;  IX,  12-36.  *  Saddar  78. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixxiv 


vendJoAd. 


he  wants,  by  performing  the  acts  which  are  supposed  to 
have  brought  about  things  of  the  same  kind  when  practised 
by  the  gods. 

The  Parsis,  being  at  a  loss  to  find  four-eyed  dogs,  inter¬ 
pret  the  name  as  meaning  a  dog  with  two  spots  above  the 
eyes  ^ :  but  it  is  clear  that  the  two-spotted  dog's  services 
are  only  accepted  for  want  of  a  four-eyed  one,  or  of  a  white 
one  with  yellow  ears,  which  amounts  to  saying  that  there 
were  myths,  according  to  which  the  death-fiend  was  driven 
away  by  dogs  of  that  description.  This  reminds  one  at 
once  of  the  three-headed  Kerberos,  watching  at  the  doors 
of  hell,  and,  still  more,  of  the  two  brown,  four-eyed  dogs  of 
Yama,  who  guard  the  ways  to  the  realm  of  death  ^ 

The  identity  of  the  four-eyed  dog  of  the  Parsi  with 
Kerberos  and  Yama’s  dogs  appears,  moreover,  from  the 
Parsi  tradition  that  the  yellow-eared  dog  watches  at 
the  head  of  the  iTinva/  bridge,  which  leads  from  this  to  the 
next  world,  and  with  his  barking  drives  away  the  fiend 
from  the  souls  of  the  holy  ones,  lest  he  should  drag  them 
to  hell 

Wherever  the  corpse  passes  by,  death  walks  with  it ; 
all  along  the  way  it  has  gone,  from  the  house  to  its  last 
resting-place,  a  spirit  of  death  is  breathing  and  threatening 
the  living.  Therefore,  no  man,  no  flock,  no  being  whatever 
that  belongs  to  the  world  of  Ahura,  is  allowed  to  pass  by 


‘  In  practice  they  are  still  less  particular :  *  The  Sag-dtd  may  be  performed 
by  a  shepherd’s  dog,  by  a  honse-dog,  by  a  Vohunazga  dog  (see  Farg.  XIII, 
19,  n.)t  or  by  a  young  dog  (a  dog  four  months  old),’  Comm,  ad  Farg.  VII,  a. 
As  birds  of  prey  are  as  fiend-smiting  as  the  dog,  they  are  Nasu-sm iters  like 
him,  and  one  may  appeal  to  their  services,  when  there  is  no  dog  at  hand  (see 
Faxg.  Vn,  3,  n.  3). 

*  Rig-veda  X,  14,  10  seq. 

•  Gr.  Rav.  p.  59a.  Allusions  to  this  myth  are  found  in  Farg.  XIII,  9,  and 
XIX,  3a  The  Commentary  ad  Farg.  XIII,  17  has:  'There  are  dogs  who 
watch  over  the  earthly  regions ;  there  are  others  who  watch  over  the  fourteen 
heavenly  regions.’  The  birth  of  the  yellow-eared  dog  is  described  in  the 
Rav&et  (1.  c.)  as  follows  :  '  Ormazd,  wishing  to  keep  the  body  of  the  first  man, 
Gaydmart,  from  the  assaults  of  Ahriman,  who  tried  to  kill  him,  cried  out : 
**  O  thou  yellow-eared  dog,  arise !  ”  and  directly  the  dog  barked  and  shook  his 
two  ears ;  and  the  unclean  Satan  and  the  fiends,  when  they  saw  the  dreadful 
looks  of  the  yellow-eared  dog,  and  heard  his  barking,  were  sore  afndd  and  fled 
down  to  helL’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxv 


that  way  until  the  deadly  breath,  that  blows  through  it,  has 
been  blown  away  to  hell  The  four-eyed  dog  is  made  to 
go  through  the  way  three  times,  or  six  times,  or  nine  times, 
while  the  priest  helps  the  look  of  the  dog  with  his  spells, 
dreaded  by  the  Dru^. 

§  5.  The  use  of  gdmfiz  in  cleansing  the  unclean  is  also 
derived  from  old  mythic  conceptions  The  storm  floods 
that  cleanse  the  sky  of  the  dark  fiends  in  it  were  described 
in  a  class  of  m}^hs  as  the  urine  of  a  gigantic  animal  in  the 
heavens.  As  the  floods  from  the  bull  above  drive  away 
the  fiend  from  the  god,  so  do  they  from  man  here  below, 
they  make  him  ‘free  from  the  death-demon^  (frinasu), 
and  the  death-fiend  flees  away  hellwards,  pursued  by 
the  fiend-smiting  spell :  ‘  Perish  thou,  O  Dru^  •  •  •  >  never 
more  to  give  over  to  Death  the  living  world  of  the  good 
spirit !  * 

§  6.  As  uncleanness  is  nothing  else  than  the  contagion 
of  death,  it  is  at  its  greatest  intensity  when  life  is  just 
departing.  The  Nasu  at  that  moment  defiles  ten  persons 
around  the  corpse  ® :  when  a  year  is  over,  the  corpse  defiles 
no  longer^.  Thus  the  notion  of  uncleanness  is  quite  the 
reverse  of  what  it  is  elsewhere  :  the  corpse,  when  rotten,  is 
less  unclean  than  the  body  still  all  but  warm  with  life ; 
death  defiles  least  when  it  looks  most  hideous,  and  defiles 
most  when  it  might  look  majestic.  The  cause  is  that  in 
the  latter  case  the  death-demon  has  just  arrived  in  the 
fulness  of  his  strength,  whereas  in  the  former  case  time  has 
exhausted  his  power. 

§  7.  As  the  focus  of  the  contagion  is  in  the  corpse,  it 
must  be  disposed  of  so  that  death  may  not  spread  abroad. 
On  this  point  the  old  Indo-European  customs  have  been 
completely  changed  by  Mazdeism.  The  Indo-Europeans 
either  burnt  the  corpse  or  buried  it :  both  customs  are  held 
to  be  sacrilegious  in  the  A  vesta. 

§  8.  This  view  originated  from  the  notion  of  the  holiness 


^  Farg.  Vin,  14-22. 

*  Onn.  Ahr.  $  124.  The  use  of  gdin6z  has  been  lately  found  to  be  known  in 
Basse-Bretagne  (Lnzel,  Le  Nirang  des  Parsis  en  Basse-Bretagne,  M^lnsine,  493). 
»  Farg.  V,  27 ;  cf.  n.  5.  «  Farg.  VIH,  33-34. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixxvi 


VENDfDAD. 


of  the  elements  being  pushed  to  an  extreme.  The  elements, 
fire,  earth,  and  water  are  holy,  and  during  the  Indo-Iranian 
period  they  were  already  considered  so,  and  in  the  Vedas 
they  are  worshipped  as  godlike  beings.  Yet  this  did  not 
prevent  the  Indian  from  burning  his  dead ;  death  did  not 
appear  to  him  so  decidedly  a  work  of  the  demon,  and  the 
dead  man  was  a  traveller  to  the  other  world,  whom  the  fire 
kindly  carried  to  his  heavenly  abode  ‘  on  his  undecaying, 
flying  pinions,  wherewith  he  killed  the  demons.’  The  fire 
was  in  that,  as  in  the  sacrifice,  the  god  that  goes  from  earth 
to  heaven,  from  man  to  god,  the  mediator,  the  god  most 
friendly  to  man.  In  Persia  it  remains  more  distant  from 
him  ;  being  an  earthly  form  of  the  eternal,  infinite,  godly 
light  no  death,  no  uncleanness  can  be  allowed  to  enter  it, 
as  it  is  here  below  the  purest  offspring  of  the  good  spirit, 
the  purest  part  of  his  pure  creation.  Its  only  function  is  to 
repel  the  fiends  with  its  bright  blazing.  In  every  place 
where  Parsis  are  settled,  an  everlasting  fire  is  kept,  the 
Bahrdm  fire,  which,  ‘preserved  by  a  more  than  Vestal  care*,’ 
and  ever  fed  with  perfumes  and  dry  well-blazing  wood, 
whichever  side  its  flames  are  brought  by  the  wind,  goes 
and  kills  thousands  and  thousands  of  fiends,  as  Bahr&m 
does  in  heaven*.  If  the  necessities  of  life  oblige  us  to 
employ  fire  for  profane  uses,  it  must  be  only  for  a  time 
an  exile  on  our  hearth,  or  in  the  oven  of  the  potter,  and  it 
must  go  thence  to  the  Right-Place  of  the  fire  (D4ity6 
Gdtu),  the  altar  of  the  Bahr&m  fire,  there  to  be  restored  to 
the  dignity  and  rights  of  its  nature 
At  least,  let  no  gratuitous  and  wanton  degradation  be 
inflicted  upon  it :  even  blowing  it  with  the  breath  of  the 
mouth  is  a  crime  ^ ;  burning  the  dead  is  the  most  heinous 


^  Ignem  coelitus  delapsnm  (Ammian.  Marcel.  XXVII,  6);  Cedienas; 
Elisaeus ;  Recogn.  Clement.  IV,  29 ;  Clem.  Homil.  TX,  6 ;  Henry  Lord. 

*  J.  Fryer,  A  New  Account  of  F^t  India  and  Persia,  1698,  p.  265. 

»  Farg.  VIII,  81-96;  79-80. 

*  Extinguishing  it  is  a  mortal  sin  (Rav&ets ;  Elisaeus ;  c£  Strabo  XV,  14). 

*  A  custom  still  existing  with  the  T&zlk,  an  Iranian  tribe  in  Eastern  Persia, 
(de  Khanikoff,  Ethnographie  de  la  Perse).  Strabo  XV,  14.  Manu  has  the 
same  prescription  (IV,  53).  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  8,  n.  10. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxvii 


of  sins:  in  the  times  of  Strabo  it  was  a  capital  crime  and 
the  Avesta  expresses  the  same,  when  putting  it  in  the 
number  of  those  sins  for  which  there  is  no  atonement 

Water  was  looked  upon  in  the  same  light.  Bringing 
dead  matter  to  it  is  as  bad  as  bringing  it  to  the  fire  The 
Magi  are  said  to  have  overthrown  a  king  for  having  built 
bath-houses,  as  they  cared  more  for  the  cleanness  of  water 
than  for  their  own 

§  9.  Not  less  holy  was  the  earth,  or,  at  least,  it  became 
so.  There  was  a  goddess  who  lived  in  her,  Spe«ta  Armaiti ; 
no  corpse  ought  to  defile  her  sacred  breast :  burying  the 
dead  is,  like  burning  the  dead,  a  deed  for  which  there 
is  no  atonement®.  It  was  not  always  so  in  Persia:  the 
burning  of  the  dead  had  been  forbidden  for  years  ®,  while 
the  burying  was  still  general.  Cambyses  had  roused 
the  indignation  of  the  Persians  by  burning  the  corpse  of 
Amasis :  yet.  years  later,  Persians  still  buried  their  dead. 
But  the  priests  already  felt  scruples,  and  feared  to  defile 
a  god.  Later  on,  with  the  ascendancy  of  the  Magian  reli¬ 
gion,  the  sacerdotal  observances  became  the  general  law 

§  10.  Therefore  the  corpse  is  laid  on  the  summit  of  a 
mountain,  far  from  man,  from  water,  from  tree,  from  fire, 
and  from  the  earth  itself,  as  it  is  separated  from  it  by  a 
layer  of  stones  or  bricks®.  Special  buildings,  the  Dakhmas, 


»  Strabo  XV,  14;  c£  Herod.  Ill,  16. 

•  Faig.  I,  17;  cf.  Farg.VlII,  74. 

•  Faig.VII,  35-37;  Strabo  XV,  14;  Herod.  I,  138. 

•  King  Balflsh  (Josn^  le  Stylite,  traduction  Martin,  §  xx).  It  seems  as  if 
there  were  a  confusion  between  BalsUh  and  Kavit ;  at  any  rate,  it  shows  that 
bathing  smacked  of  heresy.  Jews  were  forbidden  to  perform  the  legal  ablutions 
(Flint,  Culturgeschichte  der  Juden,  9). 

•  Farg.  I,  13.  •  From  the  reign  of  Cyrus. 

^  Still  the  wonhip  of  the  earth  seems  not  to  have  so  deeply  penetrated 
the  general  religion  as  the  worship  of  fire.  The  laws  about  the  disposal  of  the 
dead  were  interpreted  by  many,  it  would  seem,  as  intended  only  to  secure  the 
parity  of  water  and  fire,  and  they  thought  that  they  might  be  at  peace  with 
religion  if  they  had  taken  care  to  bury  the  corpse,  so  that  no  part  of  it  might 
be  taken  by  animals  to  fire  or  water  (Farg.  Ill,  41,  n.  7). 

•  Farg.  VI,  44  seq. ;  VIII,  10  scq.  Cf.  IX,  ii,  n.  5.  Moreover,  the  Dakhma 
is  ideally  separated  from  the  ground  by  means  of  a  golden  thread,  which  is 
supposed  to  keep  it  suspended  in  the  air  (Ravaet,  ap.  Spiegel,  Uebersetznng  des 
Avesta  II,  XXXVI). 


Digitized  by  LjOOqIc 


Ixxvili 


VENDfoAD. 


were  erected  for  this  purpose  There  far  from  the  world 
the  dead  were  left  to  lie,  beholding  the  sun  \ 

§  II.  Not  every  corpse  defiles  man,  but  only  those  of 
such  beings  as  belong  to  the  world  of  Ahura,  They  are 
the  only  ones  in  whose  death  the  demon  triumphs.  The 
corpse  of  an  Ahrimanian  creature  does  not  defile ;  as  its 
life  was  incarnate  death,  the  spring  of  death  that  was  in 
it  is  dried  up  with  its  last  breath:  it  killed  while  alive,  it 
can  do  so  no  more  when  dead;  it  becomes  clean  by  dying^ 
None  of  the  faithful  are  defiled  by  the  corpse  of  an  Ashe- 
maogha  or  of  a  Khrafstra.  Nay,  killing  them  is  a  pious 
work,  as  it  is  killing  Ahriman  himself. 

§  12.  Not  only  real  death  makes  one  unclean,  but  partial 
death  too.  Everything  that  goes  out  of  the  body  of  man 
is  dead,  and  becomes  the  property  of  the  demon.  The 
going  breath  is  unclean,  it  is  forbidden  to  blow  the  fire  with 
it  and  even  to  approach  the  fire  without  screening  it  from 
the  contagion  with  a  Pen6m  *.  Parings  of  nails  and  cut¬ 
tings  or  shavings  of  hair  are  unclean,  and  become  weapons 
in  the  hands  of  the  demons  unless  they  have  been  protected 
by  certain  rites  and  spells  ®.  Any  phenomenon  by  which 
the  bodily  nature  is  altered,  whether  accompanied  with 
danger  to  health  or  not,  was  viewed  as  a  work  of  the  demon, 
and  made  the  person  unclean  in  whom  it  took  place.  One 
of  these  phenomena,  which  is  a  special  object  of  attention 


>  'The  Dakhma  is  a  round  building,  and  is  designated  by  some  writers, 
“  The  Tower  of  Silence.**  A  round  pit,  about  six  feet  deep^  is  surrounded  by  an 
annular  stone  pavement,  about  seven  feet  wide,  on  which  the  dead  bodies  are 
placed.  This  place  is  enclosed  all  round  by  a  stone  wall  some  twenty  feet 
high,  with  a  small  door  on  one  side  for  taking  the  body  in.  The  whole  is 
built  up  of  and  paved  with  stone.  The  pit  has  communication  with  three 
or  more  closed  pits,  at  some  distance,  into  which  the  rain  washes  out  the  liquids 
and  the  remains  of  the  dead  bodies’  (Dadabhai  Naoroji,  The  Manners  and 
Customs  of  the  Parsees,  Bombay,  1864,  p.  16).  Cf.  Farg.  VI,  50.  A  Dakhma 
is  the  first  building  the  Parsis  erect  when  settling  in  a  new  place  (Dosabhoy 
Framji). 

^  The  Avesta  and  the  Commentator  attach  great  importance  to  that  point : 
it  is  as  if  the  dead  man’s  life  were  thus  prolonged,  since  he  can  still  behold  the 
sun.  '  Grant  us  that  we  may  long  behold  the  sun,*  said  the  Indian  ^^i. 

*  Farg.  V,  35  seq.  *  See  above,  p.  Ixxvi. 

*  See  Faig.  XIV,  8,  n.  10.  •  Farg.  XVII. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODirCTION,  X. 


Ixxix 


in  the  VendidAd,  is  the  uncleanness  of  women  during  their 
menses.  The  menses  are  sent  by  Ahriman  especially 
when  they  last  beyond  the  usual  time :  therefore  a  woman, 
as  long  as  they  last,  is  unclean  and  possessed  of  the  demon : 
she  must  be  kept  confined,  apart  from  the  faithful  whom 
her  touch  would  defile,  and  from  the  fire  which  her  very 
look  would  injure;  she  is  not  allowed  to  eat  as  much  as  she 
wishes,  as  the  strength  she  might  acquire  would  accrue  to 
the  fiends.  Her  food  is  not  given  to  her  from  hand  to 
hand,  but  is  passed  to  her  from  a  distance^,  in  a  long 
leaden  spoon.  The  origin  of  all  these  notions  is  in  certain 
physical  instincts,  in  physiological  psychology,  which  is  the 
reason  why  they  are  found  among  peoples  very  far  removed 
from  one  another  by  race  or  religion  \  But  they  took  in 
Persia  a  new  meaning  as  they  were  made  a  logical  part 
of  the  whole  religious  system. 

§  13.  A  woman  that  has  just  been  delivered  of  a  child 
is  also  unclean  although  it  would  seem  that  she  ought  to 
be  considered  pure  amongst  the  pure,  since  life  has  been 
increased  by  her  in  the  world,  and  she  has  enlarged  the 
realm  of  Ormazd.  But  the  strength  of  old  instincts  over¬ 
came  the  drift  of  new  principles.  Only  the  case  when  the 
woman  has  been  delivered  of  a  still-born  child  is  examined 
in  the  Vendid&d.  She  is  unclean  as  having  been  in  contact 
with  a  dead  creature ;  and  she  must  first  drink  g6m^z  to 
wash  over  the  grave  in  her  womb.  So  utterly  unclean  is 
she,  that  she  is  not  even  allowed  to  drink  water,  unless  she 
is  in  danger  of  death;  and  even  then,  as  the  sacred  element 
has  been  defiled,  she  is  liable  to  the  penalty  of  a  Pesh6- 
tanu  It  appears  from  modem  customs  that  the  treatment 
is  the  same  when  the  child  is  bom  alive:  the  reason  of 
which  is  that,  in  any  case,  during  the  first  three  days  after 
delivery  she  is  in  danger  of  death  ®.  A  great  fire  is  lighted 


*  Farg.  I,  18-19;  XVI,  ii.  Ct  Bond.  III. 

*  Farg.  XVI,  15.  •  Cf.  Leviticas.  See  Pliny  VII,  13. 

*  Farg.  V,  45  scq.  *  Farg.  VII,  70  seq. 

*  *  When  there  is  a  pregnant  woman  in  a  house,  one  must  take  care  that  there 
be  fire  continually  in  it;  when  the  child  is  brought  forth,  one  must  bum 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixxx 


VENDfDAD. 


to  keep  away  the  fiends,  who  use  then  their  utmost  efforts 
to  kill  her  and  her  child  \  She  is  unclean  only  because  the 
death-fiend  is  in  her. 

I  §  14.  Logic  required  that  the  sick  man  should  be  treated 
I  as  an  unclean  one,  that  is,  as  one  possessed.  Sickness, 
being  sent  by  Ahriman,  ought  to  be  cured  like  all  his  other 
‘  works,  by  washings  and  spells.  In  fact,  the  medicine  of 
^  spells  was  considered  the  most  powerful  of  all*,  and 
although  it  did  not  oust  the  medicine  of  the  lancet  and 
that  of  drugs,  yet  it  was  more  highly  esteemed  and  less 
mistrusted.  The  commentator  on  the  VendtdAd  very 
sensibly  observes  that  if  it  does  not  relieve,  it  will  surely 
do  no  harm  ®,  which  seems  not  to  have  been  a  matter  of 
course  with  those  who  heal  by  the  knife  and  physic.  It 
appears  from  the  last  Fargard  that  all  or,  at  least,  many 
diseases  might  be  cured  by  spells  and  Barashnfim  washing. 
It  appears  from  Herodotos  and  Agathias  that  contagious 
diseases  required  the  same  treatment  as  uncleanness ;  the 
sick  man  was  excluded  from  the  community  of  the  faithful  ^ 
until  cured  and  cleansed  according  to  the  rites 

§  15.  The  unclean  are  confined  in  a  particular  place, 
apart  from  all  clean  persons  and  objects,  the  Arm&rt-gdh  ®, 
which  may  be  described,  therefore,  as  the  Dakhma  for  the 
living.  All  the  unclean,  all  those  struck  with  temporary 
death,  the  man  who  has  touched  dead  matter,  the  woman 
in  her  menses,  or  just  delivered  of  child,  the  leper  or  the 
man  who  has  made  himself  unclean  for  ever  by  carrying 
a  corpse  alone®,  stay  there  all  the  time  of  their  un¬ 
cleanness. 

§  16.  Thus  far  for  general  principles.  From  the  diversity 

a  candle,  or,  better  still,  a  fire,  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  to  render  the 
D^ys  and  Dm^s  nnable  to  harm  the  child ;  for  there  is  great  danger  during  those 
three  days  and  nights  after  the  birUi  of  the  child  ’  (Saddar  16). 

1  *  When  the  child  is  being  bom,  one  brandishes  a  sword  on  the  four  sides, 
lest  fairy  Aal  kill  it  *  (Polack,  Persien  1,  223).  In  Rome,  three  gods,  Interci- 
dona,  Pilumnus,  and  Deverra,  keep  her  threshold,  lest  Sylvanus  come  in  and 
harm  her  (Augustinus,  De  Civ.  D.  VI,  9). 

*  Farg.  VII,  44,  »  Ibid. 

*  Herod.  I,  138.  *  Agathias  II,  23. 

*  The  Arm&rt-g&h  for  women  in  their  menses  is  called  Dasht&nist^. 

^  Herod.  1. 1.  j  Faig.  H,  29.  •  Farg.  Ill,  19. 


Digitized  by 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxxi 


of  circumstances  arises  a  system  of  casuistry,  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  which  may  be  followed  first  through  the  glosses  to 
the  Vendldad,  in  which  the  labours  of  several  generations 
of  theologians  are  embodied,  and,  later  on,  through  the 
Rav4ets.  We  will  give  a  few  instances  of  it,  as  found  in 
the  Vendidftd  itself. 

The  process  of  the  cleansing  varies  according  to  the 
degree  of  uncleanness ;  and,  again,  the  degree  of  unclean¬ 
ness  depends  on  the  state  of  the  thing  that  defiles  and  the 
nature  of  the  thing  that  is  defiled. 

The  ui)cleanness  from  the  dead  is  the  worst  of  all,  and  it 
is  at  its  utmost  when  contracted  before  the  Nasu  has  been 
expelled  from  the  corpse  by  the  Sag-did ' :  it  can  be  cured 
only  by  means  of  the  most  complicated  system  of  cleansing, 
the  nine  nights’  Barashnfim 

If  the  Nasu  has  already  been  expelled  from  the  corpse, 
as  the  defiling  power  was  less,  a  simple  washing  once  made, 
the  Ghosel,  is  enough®. 

The  defiling  power  of  the  Nasu  reaches  farther,  if  the 
death  has  just  taken  place,  and  if  the  dying  creature  occu¬ 
pied  a  higher  rank  in  the  scale  of  beings  ^ ;  for  the  more 
recent  the  victory  of  the  demon,  or  the  higher  the  being  he 
has  overcome,  the  stronger  he  must  have  been  himself. 

Menstruous  women  are  cleansed  by  the  Ghosel 

As  for  things  they  are  more  or  less  deeply  defiled  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  d^ee  of  penetrability  :  metal  vessels  can 
be  cleansed,  earthen  vessels  cannot®;  leather  is  more  easily 
cleansed  than  woven  cloth  ;  hard  wood  than  soft  wood  ®. 
Wet  matter  is  a  better  conductor  of  uncleanness  than  dry 
matter,  and  corpses  cease  to  defile  after  a  year 


^  Farg.  VIII,  35-36;  98-99;  cf.VII,  29-30,  and  n.  6  to  30. 

*  Farg.  IX.  The  Banishnhm,  originally  meant  to  remove  the  nncleanness 
from  the  dead,  became  a  general  instrument  of  holiness.  Children  when  putting 
on  the  Kdst!  (Farg.  XVIII,  9,  n.  3)  perform  it  to  be  cleansed  from  the  natural 
undeanness  they  have  contracted  in  the  womb  of  their  mothers.  It  is  good  for 
every  one  to  perform  it  once  a  year. 

»  Farg.  VIII,  36.  «  Farg.  V,  37  seq. ;  VII,  i  seq. 

*  Farg.  XVI,  la.  •  Farg.  VII,  73  seq. 

»  Farg.  VII,  14  seq.  •  Farg.  VU,  a8  seq. 

•Farg.  VIII,  33-34. 


[4]  f 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixxxii 


vend!dAd. 


B. 

§  17.  In  the  cases  heretofore  reviewed,  religious  purposes 
are  alone  concerned.  There  is  another  order  of  laws,  in 
which,  although  religion  interferes,  yet  it  is  not  the  root 
of  the  matter;  namely,  the  laws  about  contracts  and 
assaults,  to  which  the  fourth  Fargard  is  devoted,  and 
which  are  the  only  remains  extant  of  the  civil  and  penal 
legislation  of  Zoroastrianism. 

The  contracts  were  divided  into  two  classes,  according 
to  their  mode,  and  according  to  the  valye  of  their  object  K 
As  to  their  mode  they  are  word-contracts  or  hand-con¬ 
tracts  :  as  to  their  object,  they  are  sheep-contracts,  ox- 
contracts,  man-contracts,  or  field-contracts,  which  being 
estimated  in  money  value  are  contracts  to  the  amount  of 
3,  I  a,  500  istlrs,  and  upwards 
No  contract  can  be  made  void  by  the  will  of  one  party 
alone;  he  who  breaks  a  contract  is  obliged  to  pay  the  value 
of  the  contract  next  higher  in  value. 

The  family  and  the  next  of  kin  are,  it  would  seem, 
answerable  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  contract,  a  principle  of 
the  old  Indo-European  civil  law 

§  18.  Assaults  are  of  seven  degrees :  igerepta,  avaoirtrta*, 
stroke,  sore  wound,  bloody  wound,  broken  bone,  and  man¬ 
slaughter.  The  gravity  of  the  gfuilt  does  not  depend  on 
the  gravity  of  the  deed  only,  but  also  on  its  frequency. 
Each  of  these  seven  crimes  amounts,  by  its  being  repeated 
without  having  been  atoned  for,  to  the  crime  that  imme¬ 
diately  follows  in  the  scale,  so  that  an  ^erepta  seven  times 
repeated  amounts  to  manslaughter. 


C. 

§  19.  Every  crime  makes  the  gfuilty  man  liable  to  two 
penalties,  one  here  below,  and  another  in  the  next  world. 


*  Sec  p.  35,  n.  3. 

’  An  isttr  {amr^p)  is  as  much  as  four  dirhems  (5paxM)*  dirhem  is 
esdmated  by  modem  tradition  as  a  little  more  than  a  rupee,  but  the  authority 
is  doubtful  (see  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xviii,  p.  180,  n.  a). 

*  Farg.  IV,  5  seq.  *  Two  different  sorts  of  menaces;  see  IV,  17. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxxiii 


The  penalty  here  below  consists  of  a  certain  number  of 
stripes  with  the  Aspah6-artra  or  the  Sraoshd-^arana  \ 

The  unit  for  heavy  penalties  is  two  hundred  stripes ;  the 
crime  and  the  criminal  thus  punished  are  called  Pesh6- 
tanu  or  Tanu-pcretha  (Parsi:  Tandfiihr).  The  two  words 
literally  mean,  ‘one  who  pays  with  his  own  body,’  and 
‘payment  with  one’s  body,*  and  seem  to  have  originally 
amounted  to  *  worthy  of  death,  worthiness  of  death ;  *  and 
in  effect  the  word  Pesh6-tanu  is  often  interpreted  in  the 
Pahlavi  Commentary  by  margarz&n,  ‘worthy  of  death.* 
But,  on  the  whole,  it  was  attached  to  the  technical  meaning 
of  ‘  one  who  has  to  receive  two  hundred  strokes  with  the 
horse-whip  K*  The  lowest  penalty  in  the  Vendtd4d  is  five 
stripes,  and  the  degrees  from  five  stripes  to  Peshdtanu  are 
ten,  fifteen,  thirty,  fifty,  seventy,  ninety,  two  hundred.  For 
instance,  ftgerepta  is  punished  with  five  stripes,  avaoiri.rta 
with  ten,  stroke  with  fifteen,  sore  wound  with  thirty, 
bloody  wound  with  fifty,  broken  bone  with  seventy,  man¬ 
slaughter  with  ninety ;  a  second  manslaughter,  committed 
without  the  former  being  atoned  for,  is  punished  with  the 
Pesh6tanu  penalty.  In  the  same  way  the  six  other  crimes, 
repeated  eight,  or  seven,  or  six,  or  five,  or  four,  or  three 
times  make  the  committer  go  through  the  whole  series 
of  penalties  up  to  the  Peshdtanu  penalty. 


*  The  general  fonnula  is  literally,  *  Let  (the  priest ;  probably,  the  Sraoshl- 

Tarez)  strike  so  many  strokes  with  ^e  Aspah6-artra,  so  many  strokes  with  the 
Sraosh6-iarana.*  Artra  means  in  Sanskrit  *  a  goad,'  so  that  Aspah^-artra  may 
mean  *  a  horse^oad ;  *  but  Aspendikiji  translates  it  by  dnrra,  *  a  thong,'  which 
suits  the  sense  better,  and  agrees  with  etymology  too  ('  an  instrument  to  drive 
a  horse,  a  whip;’  axtra,  from  the  root  az,  ‘to  drive;*  it  is  the  Aspah^-artra 
which  is  referred  to  by  Sozomenos  II,  13 :  l/iofftw  itfiots  aiirop  ifioffd- 

rtuor  oi  fidtyoi  (the  Sraoshft-varez),  fita(6/upoi  wpo<ncwric<u  riv  Ijkiov),  Sraoshd- 
iarana  is  translated  by  ^ftbnk,  ‘a  whip/  which  agrees  with  the  Sanskrit  trans¬ 
lation  of  the  5t‘Sr6shdi&aranfim  sin,  ‘yat  tribhir  go^bumasS/agh^UUs  prdyar- 
iHtyam  bhavati  tftvanmktram,  a  sin  to  be  punished  with  three  strokes  with 
a  whip.'  It  seems  to  follow  that  Aspah6-artra  and  Sraosh6-ibuana  are  one  and 
the  same  instrument,  designated  with  two  nam^,  first  in  reference  to  its  shape, 
and  then  to  its  use  (Sraoshfi-^arana  meaning  ‘  the  instrument  for  penalty,’  or 
'  the  instrument  of  the  Sraoshk-varez  ?  ’).  The  Aspah^-artra  is  once  called  axtra 
mairya,  ‘  the  artra  for  the  account  to  be  given,*  that  is,  ‘  for  the  payment  of  the 
penalty’  (Farg.  XVIII,  4). 

•  Faig.  IV,  ao,  at,  24,  as,  a8,  a,,  3a,  33,  35, 36, 38, 39, 41, 4a ;  V,  44 ;  VI, 
S,  9, 19,  48,  &C. 

f  2 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


Ixxxiv 


VENDioAD. 


§  20.  If  one  reviews  the  different  crimes  described  in  the 
VendidAd,  and  the  respective  penalties  prescribed  for  them» 
one  cannot  but  wonder  at  first  sight  at  the  strange  inequality 
between  crime  and  penalty.  Beccaria  would  have  felt  un¬ 
comfortable  while  reading  the  Vendtd&d.  It  is  safer  to  kill 
a  man  than  to  serve  bad  food  to  a  shepherd’s  dog,  for  the 
manslayer  gets  off  with  ninety  stripes,  whereas  the  bad 
master  is  at  once  a  Pesh6tanu\  and  will  receive  two 
hundred  stripes.  Two  hundred  stripes  are  awarded  if  one 
tills  land  in  which  a  corpse  has  been  buried  within  the 
year  %  if  a  woman  just  delivered  of  a  child  drinks  water®,  if 
one  suppresses  the  menses  of  a  woman  \  if  one  performs 
a  sacrifice  in  a  house  where  a  man  has  just  died  if  one 
neglects  fastening  the  corpse  of  a  dead  man  so  that  birds 
or  dogs  may  not  take  dead  matter  to  trees  and  rivers®. 
Two  hundred  stripes  if  one  throws  on  the  ground  a  bone 
of  a  man’s  corpse,  or  of  a  dog’s  carcase,  as  big  as  two  ribs  ; 
four  hundred  if  one  throws  a  bone  as  big  as  an  arm  bone, 
six  hundred  if  one  throws  a  skull,  one  thousand  if  the 
whole  corpse"^.  Four  hundred  stripes  if  one,  being  in  a 
state  of  uncleanness,  touches  water  or  trees  ®,  four  hundred 
if  one  covers  with  a  cloth  a  dead  man’s  feet,  six  hundred 
if  one  covers  his  l^s,  one  thousand  if  the  whole  body® 
be  so  covered.  Five  hundred  stripes  for  killing  a  whelp, 
six  hundred  for  killing  a  stray  dog,  seven  hundred  for 
a  house-dog,  eight  hundred  for  a  shepherd’s  dog,  one 
thousand  stripes  for  killing  a  VanghApara  dog^®,  ten 
thousand  stripes  for  killing  a  water-dog^'. 

Capital  punishment  is  expressly  pronounced  only  against 
the  false  cleanser'®  and  the  ‘  carrier  alone '®.’ 

Yet  any  one  who  bethinks  himself  of  the  spirit  of  the  old 
Aryan  legislation  will  easily  conceive  that  there  may  be  in 


‘  Faig.  IV,  40,  and  XIII,  24. 

*  Faig.  VII,  70  seq. 

»  Farg.  V,  39-44. 

Farg.  VI,  18  seq. 

•  Farg.  VIII,  23  seq. 

“  Farg.  XIV,  i  seq. 

“  Farg.  Ill,  14  seq.  Yet  there  were 


*  Faig.  VI,  5. 

*  Farg.  XVI,  13  seq. 

•  Faig.  VI,  47  seq. 

•  Farg.  VIII,  104  seq. 

>•  Farg.  XIII,  8  seq.  and  4. 

“  Farg.  IX,  47  seq. 

capital  crimes.  See  below,  $  23. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxxv 


its  eyes  many  crimes  more  heinous,  and  to  be  punished 
more  severely,  than  manslaughter:  offences  against  man 
injure  only  one  man;  offences  against  gods  endanger  alLl; 
mankind.  No  one  should  wonder  at  the  unqualified  cleanser ' 
being  put  to  death  who  reads  Demosthenes’  Neaera ;  the 
Persians  who  defiled  the  ground  by  burying  a  corpse  were 
not  more  severely  punished  than  the  Greeks  were  for  de¬ 
filing  with  corpses  the  holy  ground  of  Delos  or  than  the 
conquerors  at  Arpnousae  ;  nor  would  the  Athenians,  who 
put  to  death  Atarbes^  have  much  stared  at  the  awful 
revenge  taken  for  the  murder  of  the  sacred  dog.  There  is 
hardly  any  prescription  in  the  Vendid4d,  however  odd  and 
absurd  it  may  seem,  but  has  its  counterpart  or  its  explana¬ 
tion  in  other  Aryan  legislations:  if  we  had  a  Latin  or  a 
Greek  Vendiddd,  I  doubt  whether  it  would  look  more 
rational. 

§  21.  Yet,  if  theoretically  the  very  absurdity  of  its  prin¬ 
ciples  is  nothing  peculiar  to  the  Mazdean  law,  nay,  is  a 
proof  of  its  authenticity,*  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it 
could  ever  have  been  actually  applied  in  the  form  stated 
in  the  texts.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  murder  of 
a  shepherd’s  dog  could  have  actually  been  punished  with 
eight  hundred  stripes,  much  more  whether  the  murder  of 
a  water-dog  could  have  been  really  punished  with  ten  thou¬ 
sand  stripes,  unless  we  suppose  that  human  endurance  was 
different  in  ancient  Persia  from  what  it  is  elsewhere,  or 
even  in  modem  Persia  herself  ^  Now  as  we  see  that  in 
modem  tradition  bodily  punishment  is  estimated  in  money 
value,  that  is  to  say,  converted  into  fines,  a  conversion 
which  is  alluded  to  in  the  Pahlavi  translation^,  it  may 
readily  be  admitted  that  as  early  as  the  time  of  the  last 
edition  of  the  Vend!d4d,  that  conversion  had  already  been 
made.  In  the  Ravdets,  two  hundred  stripes,  or  a  Tan&fOhr, 
are  estimated  as  equal  to  three  hundred  isttrs  or  twelve 
hundred  dirhems,  or  thirteen  hundred  and  fifty  rupees ; 


*  Diodor.  XII,  58.  •  Aelianos,  Hist.  Var.  V,  17. 

*  In  the  time  of  Chardin,  the  number  of  stripes  inflicted  on  the  guilty  never 

exceeded  three  hundred ;  in  the  old  German  law,  two  hundred ;  in  the  Hebrew 
law,  forty.  *  Ad  Farg.  XIV,  a. 

f.3 


Digitized  by  LjOOqIc 


Ixxxvi 


vend!dAd. 


a  stripe  is  therefore  about  equal  to  six  rupees  \  How  far 
that  system  prevailed  in  practice,  whether  the  guilty  might 
take  advantage  of  this  commutation  of  his  own  accord, 
or  only  with  the  assent  of  the  judge,  we  cannot  decide.  It 
is  very  likely  that  the  riches  of  the  fire-temples  came  for 
the  most  part  from  that  source,  and  that  the  sound  of  the 
dirhems  often  made  the  Sraoshd-^arana  fall  from  the  hands 
of  the  Mobeds.  That  the  system  of  financial  penalties 
did  not,  however,  suppress  the  system  of  bodily  penalties, 
appears  from  the  customs  of  the  Parsis  who  apply  both, 
and  from  the  Pahlavi  Commentary  which  expressly  dis¬ 
tinguishes  three  sorts  of  atonement :  the  atonement  by 
money  (khv&stak),  the  atonement  by  the  Sraoshd-^arana, 
and  the  atonement  by  cleansing. 

§  22.  This  third  element  of  atonement  is  strictly  religious. 
It  consists  in  repentance,  which  is  manifested  by  avowal 
of  the  guilt  and  by  the  recital  of  a  formula  of  repentance, 
the  Patet.  The  performance  of  the  Patet  has  only  a 
religious  effect:  it  saves  the  sinner  from  penalties  in  the 
other  world,  but  not  from  those  here  below ;  it  delivers  him 
before  God,  but  not  before  man.  When  the  sacrilegious 
cleanser  has  repented  his  sin,  he  is  not  the  less  flayed  and 
beheaded,  but  his  soul  is  saved  \  Yet,  although  it  has  no 
efficacy  in  causing  the  sin  to  be  remitted,  the  absence  of  it 
has  power  to  cause  it  to  be  aggravated 

§  23.  Thus  far  for  sins  that  can  be  atoned  for.  There 
are  some  that  are  anAperetha,* inexpiable,’  which  means, 
as  it  seems,  that  they  are  punished  with  death  here  below, 
and  with  torments  in  the  other  world. 

Amongst  the  an&peretha  sins  are  named  the  burning 
of  the  dead,  the  burying  of  the  dead  ^  the  eating  dead 
matter®,  unnatural  sin®,  and  self-pollution’^.  Although 


*  In  later  Parstism  every  sin  (and  every  good  deed)  has  its  value  in  money 
tixed,  and  may  thus  be  weighed  in  the  scales  of  Rashnu.  If  the  number  of  the 
good-deed  dirhems  outweigh  the  number  of  sin  dirhems,  the  soul  is  saved. 
Herodotos  noticed  the  same  principle  of  compensation  in  the  Persian  law  of 
his  time  (I,  137;  cf.VII,  194). 

*  Farg.  IX,  49,  n. ;  cf.  Ill,  ao  seq.  *  Farg.  IV,  ao,  a4,  a8,  3a,  35,  &c. 

*  Farg.  I,  13,  17;  Strabo  XV,  14.  *  Farg.  VII,  a3  seq. 

*  Farg.  I,  I  a  ;  cf.  VIII.  3a.  ’  Faig.  VIII,  27. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxxvii 


it  is  not  expressly  declared  that  these  sins  were  punished 
Mrith  death,  yet  we  know  it  of  several  of  them,  either  from 
Greek  accounts  or  from  Parsi  tradition.  There  are  also 
whole  classes  of  sinners  whose  life,  it  would  seem,  can  be 
taken  by  any  one  who  detects  them  in  the  act,  such  as  the 
courtezan,  the  highwayman,  the  Sodomite,  and  the  corpse- 
burner 

§  24.  Such  are  the  most  important  principles  of  the 
Mazdean  law  that  can  be  gathered  from  the  Vendid^d. 
These  details,  incomplete  as  they  are,  may  give  us  an  idea, 
if  not  of  the  Sassanian  practice,  at  least  of  the  Sassanian 
ideal.  That  it  was  an  ideal  which  intended  to  pass  into 
practice,  we  know  from  the  religious  wars  against  Armenia, 
and  from  the  fact  that  very  often  the  superintendence  of 
justice  and  the  highest  offices  of  the  state  were  committed 
to  Mobeds. 

We  must  now  add  a  few  words  on  the  plan  of  the  fol¬ 
lowing  translation.  As  to  our  method  we  beg  to  refer  to 
the  second  chapter  above.  It  rests  on  the  Parsi  tradition, 
corrected  or  confirmed  by  the  comparative  method.  The 
Parsi  tradition  is  found  in  the  Pahlavi  Commentary  *,  the 
understanding  of  which  was  facilitated  to  us  first  by  the 
Gujarati  translation  and  paraphrase  of  Aspendidrji  and 
by  a  Persian  transliteration  and  translation  belonging  to 
the  Haug  Collection  in  Munich  S  for  the  use  of  which  we 
were  indebted  to  the  obliging  kindness  of  the  Director  of 
the  State  Library  in  Munich,  Professor  von  Halm.  The 


*  Sec  p.  113,  n.  4',  Faig.  XVIII.  65. 

*  Oar  qaotations  refer  to  the  text  given  in  Spiegel's  edition,  but  corrected 
after  the  London  xnanoscript. 

’  Bombaj,  1842,  2  vols.  in  8yo. 

*  Unfortunately  the  copy  is  incomplete :  there  are  two  lacanae,  one  from 
I,  1 1  to  the  end  of  the  chapter ;  the  other,  more  extensive,  from  VI,  26  to  IX. 
The  perfect  accordance  of  this  Persian  translation  with  the  Gujarati  of  Aspen- 
diiiji  shows  that  both  are  derived  from  one  and  the  same  source.  Their 
accordance  is  striking  even  in  mistakes;  for  instance,  the  Pahlavi  av^star 

a  transliteration  of  the  Zend  a-vistra.  *  without  pastures'  (VII,  26), 
is  misread  by  the  Persian  translator  ^z4st&r,^\-^\^  *he  who  wishes.'  owing 
to  the  ambiguity  of  the  Pahlavi  letter  p  (av  or  Av),  and  it  is  translated  by 
Aspendi&rji  /&&hiniir,  *  the  wisher.' 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ixxxviii 


vend!dAd. 


Rav&ets  and  the  Saddar^  frequently  gave  us  valuable 
information  as  to  the  traditional  meaning  of  doubtful  pas¬ 
sages.  As  for  the  works  of  European  scholars,  we  are 
much  indebted  to  the  Commentary  on  the  Avesta  by  Pro¬ 
fessor  Spiegel,  and  to  the  translations  in  the  second  edition 
of  Martin  Haug’s  Essays. 

We  have  followed  the  text  of  the  Avesta  as  given  by 
Westei^aard  ;  the  division  into  paragraphs  is  according  to 
Westei^aard;  but  we  have  given  in  brackets  the  corre¬ 
sponding  divisions  of  Professor  Spinel’s  edition.  The 
singularly  exact  analysis  of  the  Vendid4d  contained  in  the 
Dinkart  has  proved  of  great  value.  For  the  first  chapter 
we  owe  much  to  the  Commentary  in  an  unpublished 
chapter  of  the  Great  Bundahij.  The  analyses  of  the 
Nasks  in  the  Dinkart,  the  Great  Bundahij  and  the  essay 
of  Jiwanji  Modi  on  the  funeral  customs  of  the  Parsis  have 
thrown  valuable  light  on  many  points  of  detail. 

Many  passages  in  the  VendidAd  S4da  are  mere  quota¬ 
tions  from  the  Pahlavi  Commentary  which  have  crept  into 
the  S&da  text :  we  have  not  admitted  them  into  the  text. 
They  are  generally  known  to  be  spurious  from  their  not 
being  translated  in  the  Commentary  * :  yet  the  absence  of 
a  Pahlavi  translation  is  not  always  an  unmistakable  sign  of 
such  spuriousness.  Sometimes  the  translation  has  been  lost 
in  our  manuscripts,  or  omitted  as  having  already  been  given 
in  identical  or  nearly  identical  terms.  When  we  thought 
that  this  was  the  case,  we  have  admitted  the  untranslated 
passages  into  the  text,  but  in  brackets  \ 

We  have  divided  the  principal  Fargards  into  several 
sections  according  to  the  matter  they  contain :  this  divi¬ 
sion,  which  is  meant  as  an  attempt  to  resolve  the  Vendid&d 
into  its  primitive  fragments,  has,  of  course,  no  traditional 


>  The  prose  Saddar  (as  found  in  the  Great  Ravftet),  which  differs  considerably 
from  the  Saddar  in  verse,  as  translated  by  Hyde. 

*  Without  speaking  of  their  not  being  connected  with  the  context  See 
Faig.  I.  4,  15,  20 ;  II,  6,  ao;  V,4;  VII,  53-54. 

’  Faig.  VII,  3 ;  VIII,  95.  Formulae  and  enumerations  are  often  left  untrans¬ 
lated,  although  they  must  be  considered  part  of  the  text  (VIII,  73 ;  XI,  9,  la ; 
XX,  6,  &c.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION,  X. 


Ixxxix 


authority,  the  divisions  into  pars^raphs  being  the  only  ones 
that  rest  upon  the  authority  of  the  manuscripts. 

The  translation  will  be  found,  in  many  passages^  to  differ 
greatly  from  the  translations  published  heretofore  The 
nature  of  this  series  of  translations  did  not  allow  us  to  give 
full  justificatory  notes:  but  we  have  endeavoured  in 
most  cases  to  make  the  explanatory  notes  commend  to 
scholars  the  new  meanings  we  have  adopted  ;  and,  in  some 
instances,  we  hope  that  the  original  text,  read  anew,  will 
by  itself  justify  our  translation. 

We  must  not  conclude  this  introduction  without  ten¬ 
dering  our  warmest  thanks  to  Mr.  E.  W.  West,  who  kindly 
revised  the  MS.  of  the  translation  before  it  went  to  press, 
and  who  has,  we  hope,  succeeded  in  making  our  often 
imperfect  English  more  acceptable  to  English  readers. 

JAMES  DARMESTETER. 

Paris  : 

October,  1894. 


'  Complete  translations  of  the  Vendid&d  have  been  published  by  Anquetil 
Dnperron  in  France  (Paris,  1771)  ;  by  Professor  Spiegel  in  Germany  (Leipzig, 
185a)  ;  by  Canon  de  Harlez  in  ^Iginrn  (Louvain,  1877).  The  translation  of 
Professor  Spiegel  was  translated  into  English  by  Professor  Bleeck,  who  added 
nseihl  information  from  inedited  Gujarati  translations  (Hertford,  1864). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


A  LIST  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS 
USED  IN  THIS  VOLUME. 


Asp.  =  Aspendi&rji’s  translation. 

Bund.  =  Bundahij;  Arabic  numbers  refer  to  the  chapter  (accord¬ 
ing  to  Justi’s  edition);  Roman  numbers  refer  to  the  page  and 
line. 

Comm.  =  The  Pahlavi  Commentary. 

Or.  Rav.  =  Le  Grand  Ravdet  (in  the  Biblioth^que  Nationale  in 
Paris,  Supplement  Persan,  No.  47). 

Orm.  Ahr.  =  Ormazd  et  Ahriman,  Paris,  Vieweg,  1877. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


vendIdAd. 


Digitized  by 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


vendidAd. 


Fargard  I. 


This  chapter  is  an  enumeration  of  sixteen  perfect  lands  created 
by  Ahura  Mazda,  and  of  as  many  plagues  created  in  opposition  by 
Angra  Mainyu. 

Many  attempts  have  been  made,  not  only  to  identify  these  six¬ 
teen  lands,  but  also  to  draw  historical  conclusions  from  their  order 
of  succession,  as  representing  the  actual  order  of  the  migrations 
and  settlements  of  the  old  Iranian  tribes^.  But  there  is  nothing  in 
the  text  to  support  such  wide  inferences.  We  have  here  nothing 
more  than  a  geographical  description  of  Iran,  seen  from  the  reli¬ 
gious  point  of  view. 

Of  these  sixteen  lands  there  are  nine,  as  follows : — 


ZEND  NAME. 


OLD  PERSIAN. 


Sughdha (2)  Suguda 
Mduru  (3)  Margu 
Bikhdhi  (4)  B&khtri 
Har6yu  (6)  Haraiva 
VehrkSna  (9)  ¥arkdna 
Harahvaiti  (10)  Harauvati 

Hafitumant  (ii) 

Ragha  (12)  Ragi’ 
Haptahimlu(i5)  Huidava 

which  can  be  identified  with 


GREEK. 

loylUainj 

Mapytai^ 


MODERN  NAME. 
Soghd  jAw  (Samarkand) 


Marv 


Bdtcrpa  Balkh 
*Ap€la  Har6(rud) 

*YpKapia  Gurgdn,  Gor^n 
*Apax»(rla  Ar-rokha^  ^j\ 

Arghand-(db) 

*ETVft(u>^po9  Helmend  jjJU 

*Payai  RaV  (jj 

’lydoi  Hind  (Pa^ffib), 

certainty,  as  we  are  able  to  follow  their 


*  Rhode,  Die  heilige  Sage  des  Zendvolks,  p.  61 ;  Heeren,  Ideen 
zur  Geschichte,  I,  p.  498 ;  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumskunde  I, 
p.  526;  Haug  in  Bunsen's  work,  Aegypten’s  Stellung,  V,  2nd  part, 
p.  104;  Kiepert,  Monatsberichte  der  Berliner  Akademie,  1856, 
p.  621.  Cf.  the  mythological  interpretation  by  M.  Br^al,  ‘De  la 
g^graphie  de  TAvesta'  (in  the  Mdanges  de  mythologie  et  de 
linguistique,  p.  187  seq.) 

*  See  however  §  16,  note  3. 

[4]  B 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


2 


VENDtoAD. 


names  from  the  records  of  the  Achaemenian  kings  or  the  works  of 
classical  writers  down  to  the  map  of  modern  Iran. 

For  the  other  lands  we  are  confined  for  information  to  the 
Pahlavi  Commentary,  from  which  we  get : 


ZEND  NAME. 

Vafikereta  (7) 
Urva(8) 
Varena  (14) 
Rangha  {16) 


PAHLAVI  NAME.  MODERN  NAME. 


KtpW  JjlTKibul 

M6shan  Mesene 

Patashkhvirgar  orDailam  Tabaristin  or  Gtldn 

Arvastdni  Rfim  Eastern  Mesopotamia 


The  identification  of  Nisdya  (5)  and  ATakhra  {13)  remains  an 
open  question,  as  there  were  several  cities  of  that  name.  We 
know,  however,  that  Nisfiya  lay  between  Balkh  and  Marv.  The 
first  province  Airyanem  Va%A,  or  Irin-V6^,  we  identify  with  the 
mediaeval  Arrfin  (nowadays  known  as  Karabagh). 

There  must  have  been  some  systematical  idea  in  the  order 
followed,  though  it  is  not  apparent,  except  in  the  succession  of 
Sughdha,  Mduru,  Bdkhdhi,  Nisdya,  Har6yu,  Vafekereta  (numbers  2-7), 
which  form  one  compact  group  of  north-eastern  provinces ;  the  last 
two  provinces,  Himlu  and  Rangha  (numbers  15-16),  are  the  two 
limitroph  provinces,  east  and  west  (Indus  and  Tigris) ;  and  the 
Rangha  brings  us  back  to  the  first  province,  IrSn-V^,  whose 
chief  river,  the  Vanguhi  Dditya,  or  Aras,  springs  from  the  same 
mountains  as  the  Rangha-Tigris. 

The  several  plagues  created  by  Angra  Mainyu  to  mar  the  native 
perfection  of  Ahura's  creations  give  instructive  information  on  the 
religious  condition  of  several  of  the  Iranian  countries  at  the  time 
when  this  Fargard  was  written.  Hardt  seems  to  have  been  the 
seat  of  puritan  sects  that  pushed  rigorism  to  the  extreme  in  the 
law  of  purification.  Sorcery  was  prevalent  in  the  basin  of  the 
Helmend  river,  and  the  Paris  were  powerful  in  Cabul,  which  is 
a  Zoroastrian  way  of  saying  that  the  Hindu  civilisation  prevailed  in 
those  parts,  which  in  fact  in  the  two  centuries  before  and  after 
Christ  were  known  as  White  India,  and  remained  more  Indian  than 
Iranian  till  the  Musulman  conquest 

I.  Ahura  Mazda  spake  unto  Spitama  ^  Zarathu^tra, 
saying : 


^  Or  Spitamide.  Zarathurtra  was  descended  from  Spitama  at 
the  fifth  generation. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


FARGARD  I. 


3 


I  have  made  every  land  dear  (to  its  people), 
even  though  it  had  no  charms  whatever  in  it  ^ :  had 
I  not  made  every  land  dear  (to  its  people),  even 
though  it  had  no  charms  whatever  in  it,  then  the 
whole  living  world  would  have  invaded  the  Airyana 
Va^6  *. 

3  (5).  The  first  of  the  good  lands  and  countries 
which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the  Airyana 
Va^6®,  by  the  Vanguhi  D4itya*. 

' '  Every  one  fancies  that  the  land  where  he  was  bom  and  has  been 
brought  up  is  the  best  and  fairest  land  that  I  have  created '  (Comm.) 

*  Greater  Bundahish :  *  It  is  said  in  the  Sacred  Book :  had  I  not 
created  the  Genius  of  the  native  place,  all  mankind  would  have 
gone  lo  Erin-V^,  on  account  of  its  pleasantness.’ — On  Airyanem 
Va%^6  or  Erdn-V6^,  see  following  note.— Clause  2  in  the  Ven- 
dSddd  Sida  is  composed  of  Zend  quotations  in  the  Commentary 
that  illustrate  the  alternative  process  of  the  creation :  *  First,  Ahura 
Mazda  would  create  a  land  of  such  kind  that  its  dwellers  might 
like  it,  stnd  there  could  be  nothing  more  delightful.  Then  he  who 
is  all  death  would  bring  against  it  a  counter-creation.' 

•  Airyanem  Va^g^,  Irin-V^,  is  the  holy  land  of  Zoroastrianism ; 
Zoroaster  was  bom  and  founded  his  religion  there  (Bund.  XX,  32  ; 
XXXII,  3) :  the  first  animal  couple  appeared  there  (Bund.  XIV,  4 ; 
Zid  Sparam,  IX,  8).  From  its  name,  *  the  Iranian  seed,’  it  seems  to 
have  been  considered  as  the  original  seat  of  the  Iranian  race.  It  has 
been  generally  supposed  to  belong  to  Eastern  Iran,  like  the  provinces 
which  are  enumerated  after  it,  chiefly  on  account  of  the  name  of 
its  river,  the  Vanguhi  Dditya,  which  was  in  the  Sassanian  times 
(as  V $h)  the  name  of  the  Oxus.  But  the  Bundahish  distinctly  states 
that  Ir&n-V^  is  ‘bordering  upon  Adarbai^n'  (XXIX,  12) ;  now, 
Adarbaiffdn  is  bordered  by  the  Caspian  Sea  on  the  east,  by  the 
Rangha  provinces  on  the  west,  by  Media  proper  on  the  south,  and 
by  Ajrdn  on  the  north.  The  Rangha  provinces  are  out  of  question, 
since  they  are  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  Fargard  (§  20),  and  the 
climatic  conditions  of  Irdn-V^  with  its  long  winter  likewise  ex¬ 
clude  Media  and  suit  Arr&n,  where  the  summer  lasts  hardly  tw  o 
months  (cf.  §  4,  note  6).  The  very  name  agrees,  as  the  country 


*  For  this  note  see  next  page. 
B  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


4 


vend{dAd. 


Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  the  serpent  in  the  river  *  and 
Winter,  a  work  of  the  Daevas  •. 

4  (9).  There  are -ten  winter  months  there,  two 
summer  months^;  and  those  are  cold  for  the  waters  *, 
cold  for  the  earth,  cold  for  the  trees  *.  Winter  falls 
there,  the  worst  of  all  plagues. 

5  (13).  The  second  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
plain*®  which  the  Sughdhas  inhabit**. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 


known  as  ArrSn  seems  to  have  been  known  to  the  Greeks  as 
*ApuufLa  (Stephanus  Byz.),  which  brings  it  close  to  our  Airyanem. 
On  the  Vanguhi  Dditya,  see  following  note. 

*  The  Vanguhi  Dditya,  belonging  to  Arrdn,  must  be  the  modern 
Aras  (the  classic  Araxes).  The  Aras  was  named  Vanguhi,  like  the 
Oxus,  but  distinguished  from  it  by  the  addition  D&itya,  which  made 
it  ‘  the  Vanguhi  of  the  Law  *  (the  Vanguhi  by  which  Zoroaster 
received  the  Law). 

*  ‘  There  are  many  Khrafstras  in  the  Dditik,  as  it  is  said,  The 
Diitik  full  of  Khrafstras'  (Bund.  XX,  13).  Snakes  abound  on 
the  banks  of  the  Araxes  (Morier,  A  Second  Journey,  p.  250) 
nowadays  as  much  as  in  the  time  of  Pompeius,  to  whom  they 
barred  the  way  from  Albania  to  Hyrcania  (Plut.) 

®  Arrin  (Karabagh)  is  celebrated  for  its  cold  winter  as  well  as 
for  its  beauty.  At  the  Naurdz  (first  day  of  spring)  the  fields  still  lie 
under  the  snow.  The  temperature  does  not  become  milder  before 
the  second  fortnight  of  April;  no  flower  is  seen  before  May. 
Summer,  which  is  marked  by  the  migration  of  the  nomads  from 
the  plain  to  the  mountains,  begins  about  the  20th  of  June  and 
ends  in  the  middle  of  August. 

Vendiddd  Sada :  *  It  is  known  that  [in  the  ordinary  course 
of  nature]  there  are  seven  months  of  summer  and  five  of  winter ' 
(see  Bund.  XXV). 

®  Some  say :  ‘  Even  those  two  months  of  summer  are  cold  for 
the  waters  . . (Comm. ;  cf.  Mainy6-i-khard  XLIV,  20). 

*  Vend.  Sida :  ‘  There  reigns  the  core  and  heart  of  winter.' 

Doubtful.  ”  Old  P.  Suguda ;  Sogdiana. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  I. 


5 


and  he  counter-created  the  locust^,  which  brings 
death  unto  cattle  and  plants. 

6  (17).  The  third  of  the  good  lands  and  countries 
which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,* was  the  strong,  holy 
Mduru  *. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  plunder  and  sin  \ 

7  (21).  The  fourth  of  the  good  lands  and  coun¬ 
tries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the  beautiful 
Bdkhdhi  *  with  high-lifted  banners. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all 
death,  and  he  counter-created  the  ants  and  the  ant¬ 
hills®. 

8  (25).  The  fifth  of  the  good  lands  and  countries 
which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  Nisdya®,  that 
lies  between  M6uru  and  Bdkhdhi. 


'  ‘  The  plague  that  fell  to  that  country  was  the  bad  locust :  it 
devours  the  plants  and  death  comes  to  the  cattle  ’  (Gr.  Bund.) 

*  Margu  ;  fdapytanf ;  Marv. 

*  Doubtful.— The  Gr.  Bd.  has:  ‘The  plague  that  fell  to  that 
country  was  the  coming  and  going  of  troops :  for  there  is  always 
there  an  evil  concourse  of  horsemen,  thieves,  robbers,  ahfi  heretics, 
who  speak  untruth  and  oppress  the  righteous.' — Marv  continued 
to  be  the  resort  of  Turanian  plunderers  till  the  recent  Russian 
annexation. 

^  Bdkhtri ;  Baierpa ;  Balkh. 

•  *  The  corn-carrying  ants '  (Asp. ;  cf.  Farg.  XIV,  5). 

•  By  contradistinction  to  other  places  of  the  same  name.  There 
was  a  Nisdya,  in  Media,  where  Darius  put  to  death  the  Mage 
Gaumdta  (Bahistdn  I,  58).  There  was  also  a  Nisd  in  Firs, 
another  in  Kirmdn,  a  third  again  on  the  way  from  Amol  to  Marv 
(Tabari,  tr.  Noeldeke,  p.  loi,  2),  which  may  be  the  same  as  Ntcraux, 
the  capital  of  Parthia  (Uap^owura  ap.  Isid.  of  Charax  12) ;  cf.  Pliny 
VI,  25  (29).  One  may  therefore  be  tempted  to  translate,  ‘  Nisdya 
between  which  and  Bdkhdhi  Mduru  lies ;  ’  but  the  text  hardly  admits 
of  that  construction,  and  we  must  suppose  the  existence  of  another 
Nis&ya  on  the  way  from  Balkh  to  Marv. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


6 


vendIdAd. 


Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  aH  death, 
and  he  counter-created  the  sin  of  unbeliefs 

9  (29).  The  sixth  of  the  good  lands  and  countries 
which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the  house- 
deserting  Hardyu 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  tears  and  wailing 

(33).  The  seventh  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was 
Va6kereta  S  of  the  evil  shadows. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Main)ru,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  the  Pairika  KnSthaiti,  who 
clave  unto  Keresdspa  ® 


^  There  are  people  there  ‘who  doubt  the  existence  of  God' 
(Comm.) 

*  Har6yu,  Old  P.  Haraiva  (transcribed  in  Greek  and  Latin  *Ap€[a 
Aria  instead  of  'Apc/a  Haria,  by  a  confusion  with  the  name  of  the 
Aryans) ;  P.  H  ar  6  (in  Firdausi  and  in  Har6-r^d ;  Harftt  is  an  Arabi- 
cised  form. — ‘  The  house-deserting  Har6 :  because  there,  when  a 
man  dies  in  a  house,  the  people  of  the  house  leave  it  and  go. 
We  keep  the  ordinances  for  nine  days  or  a  month ;  they  leave 
the  house  and  absent  themselves  from  it  for  nine  days  or  a  month ' 
(Gr.  Bd.)  Cf.Vd.V,  42. 

*  ‘The  tears  and  wailing  for  the  dead,’ the  voceros.  The 
tears  shed  over  a  dead  man  grow  to  a  river  that  prevents  his  cross¬ 
ing  the  ATinvat  bridge  (Saddar  96 ;  Ardd  Virdf  XVI,  7,  10). 

*  Vadkereta,  an  older  name  of  Kdbul  (Kdpdl :  Comm,  and  Gr. 
Bd.) ;  perhaps  the  Ptolemeian  Baydpda  in  Paropanisus  (Ptol.  VI,  18). 

®  The  Pairika,  in  Zoroastrian  mythology,  symbolises  idolatry 
(uzdds-parastih).  The  land  of  Kdbul,  till  the  Musulman  in¬ 
vasion,  belonged  to  the  Indian  civilisation  and  was  mostly  of  Brah- 
manical  and  Buddhistic  religion.  The  Pairika  Khndthaiti  will 
be  destroyed  at  the  end  of  the  world  by  Saoshyafit,  the  unborn  son 
of  Zarathortra  (when  all  false  religions  vanish  before  the  true  one ; 
Vd.  XIX,  5). — Sima  Keresispa,  the  Garshisp  of  later  tradition,  is 
the  type  of  impious  heroism :  he  let  himself  be  seduced  to  the 
Da6va-worship,  and  Zoroaster  saw  him  punished  in  hell  for  his  con¬ 
tempt  of  Zoroastrian  observances. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  I. 


7 


1 1  (37).  The  eighth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  Urva 
of  the  rich  pastures 

Thereupon  came  Ang^  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  the  sin  of  pride  *. 

12  (41).  The  ninth  of  the  good  lands  and  countries 
which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  Khne«ta  which 
the  Vehrk4nas*  inhabit. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  a  sin  for  which  there  is  no 
atonement,  the  unnatural  sin 

13  (45)*  The  tenth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
beautiful  Harahvaiti®. 

Thereupon  came  Angp:a.  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  a  sin  for  which  there  is  no 
atonement,  the  burying  of  the  dead  ®. 

14  (49).  The  eleventh  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
bright,  glorious  Hadtuma^t 


*  Urva,  according  to  Gr.  Bd.  MIshan,  that  is  to  say  Mesene 
(M«<n)in)),  the  region  of  lower  Euphrates,  famous  for  its  fertility 
(Herodotos  I,  rps) :  it  was  for  four  centuries  (from  about 
150  B.c.  to  325  A.n.)  the  seat  of  a  flourishing  commercial  state. 

*  ‘  The  people  of  Mflshan  are  proud :  there  are  no  people  worse 
than  they  ’  (Gr.  Bd.) 

*  ‘  Khnenta  is  a  river  in  Vehrkina  (Hyrcania) '  (Comm.) ;  con¬ 
sequently  the  river  GorgSin. 

*  See  Farg.VIII,  31-32. 

*  Harauvati;  'hpaxwria',  corrupted  into  Ar-rokha^  (name  of 
the  country  in  the  Arabic  literature)  and  Arghand  (in  the  modem 
name  of  the  river  Arghand-ib). 

*  See  Farg.  Ill,  36  seq. 

^  The  basin  of  the  'Erv^tov^wf  or  Erymanthns,  now  Hermend, 
Helmend,  that  is  to  say,  the  region  of  Saist&n. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8 


vend!dAd. 


Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all 
death,  and  he  counter-created  the  evil  work  of 
witchcraft 

15  (53).  And  this  is  the  sign  by  which  it  is  known, 
this  is  that  by  which  it  is  seen  at  once :  wheresoever 
they  may  go  and  raise  a  cry  of  sorcery,  there  *  the 
worst  works  of  witchcraft  go  forth.  From  there  they 
come  to  kill  and  strike  at  heart,  and  they  bring 
locusts  as  many  as  they  want®. 

(59)*  The  twelfth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was 
Ragha®  of  the  three  races®. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  the  sin  of  utter  unbelief*. 

17  (63).  The  thirteenth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
strong,  holy  ATakhra  *. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 


^  In  Ha6tuma;rt. — ‘  The  plague  created  against  SaistSn  is  abun¬ 
dance  of  witchcraft :  and  that  character  appears  from  this,  that  all 
people  from  that  place  practise  astrology :  those  wizards  produce .  . . 
snow,  hail,  spiders,  and  locusts '  (Gr.  Bd.)  Saistdn,  like  Kdbul,  was 
half  Indian  (Ma90udi,  II,  79-82),  and  Brahmans  and  Buddhists 
have  the  credit  of  being  proficient  in  the  darker  sciences. 

*  This  clause  seems  to  be  a  quotation  in  the  Pahlavi  Commentary. 

’  Ragha,  transcribed  Rdk  and  identified  by  the  Commentary 

with  Adarbaijr^n  and  'according  to  some'  with  Rai  (the  Greek 
‘Paya/  in  Media).  There  were  apparently  two  Raghas,  one  in 
Atropatene;  another  in  Media. 

*  *  That  means  that  the  three  classes,  priests,  warriors,  and 
husbandmen,  were  well  organised  there '  (Comm,  and  Gr.  Bd.) 

*  ‘They  doubt  themselves  and  cause  other  people  to  doubt' 
(Comm.) 

*  There  were  two  towns  of  that  name  (ATarkh),  one  in  Khorasan, 
and  the  other  in  Ghaznin. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  I. 


9 


and  he  counter-created  a  sin  for  which  there  is  no 
atonement,  the  cooking  of  corpses  *. 

i8  (67).  The  fourteenth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
four-cornered  Varena®,  for  which  was  born  Thra€- 
taona,  who  smote  Aai  Dahika. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  abnormal  issues  in  women  ® 
and  barbarian  oppression  *. 

^9  (72).  The  fifteenth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
Seven  Rivers*. 

Thereupon  came  Angra  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  abnormal  issues  in  women 
and  excessive  heat. 

20  (76).  The  sixteenth  of  the  good  lands  and 
countries  which  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  created,  was  the 
land  by  the  sources  (?)  of  the  Rangha  *,  where  people 
live  who  have  no  chiefs 


*  ‘  Cooking  a  corpse  and  eating  it.  They  cook  foxes  and  weasels 
and  eat  them  ’  (Gr.  Bd.)  See  Farg.  VIII,  73-74. 

*  Yarn,  identified  by  the  Comm,  either  with  Patashkhvfirgar 
orwith  Dailam  (that  is  to  say  Tabaristfin  or  Gtlin).  The  Gr. 
Bd.  identifies  it  with  Mount  Damfivand  (which  belongs  to  Patash- 
kbvfiigar) :  this  is  the  mountain  where  Asi  Dahfika  was  bound 
with  iron  bonds  by  Thra6taona. — ‘Four-cornered:'  Tabaristan 
has  rudely  the  shape  of  a  quadrilateral. 

*  Farg,  XVI,  1 1  seq. 

^  The  aborigines  of  the  Caspian  littoral  were  Anarian  savages, 
the  so-called  ‘  Demons  of  Mdzana.' 

®  Hapta  hindava,  the  basin  of  the  affluents  of  the  Indus,  the 
modem  Pa^^b  (=the  Five  Rivers),  formerly  called  Hind,  by 
contradistinction  to  Sindh,  the  basin  of  the  lower  river. 

*  ‘ Arvast&n-i-R6m  (Roman  Mesopotamia)’  (Comm.),  that  is  to 
say,  the  basin  of  the  upper  Tigris  (Rangha  =  Arvand  =  Tigris). 

^  ‘  People  who  do  not  hold  the  chief  for  a  chief  ’  (Comm.),  which 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


lO 


vendIdAd. 


Thereupon  came  Angpiti  Mainyu,  who  is  all  death, 
and  he  counter-created  Winter*,  a  work  of  the 
Daevas  *. 

21  (8i).  There  are  still  other  lands  and  countries  *, 
beautiful  and  deep,  longing  and  asking  for  the  good, 
and  bright. 


Fargard  II. 

Yima  (CPamsh^aQ. 

This  Fargard  may  be  divided  into  two  parts. 

First  part  (1-20).  Ahura  Mazda  proposes  to  Yima,  the  son  of 
Vfvanghat,  to  receive  the  law  from  him  and  to  bring  it  to  men. 
On  his  refusal,  he  bids  him  keep  his  creatures  and  make  them 
prosper.  Yima  accordingly  makes  them  thrive  and  increase,  keeps 
death  and  disease  away  from  them,  and  three  times  enlarges  the 
earth,  which  had  become  too  narrow  for  its  inhabitants. 

Second  part  (21  to  the  end).  On  the  approach  of  a  dire  winter, 
which  is  to  destroy  every  living  creature,  Yima,  being  advised  by 
Ahura,  builds  a  Vara  to  keep  there  the  finest  representatives  of 
every  kind  of  animals  and  plants,  and  they  live  there  a  life  of 
perfect  happiness. 

It  is  difficult  not  to  acknowledge  in  the  latter  legend  a  Zoroastrian 
adaptation  of  the  deluge,  whether  it  was  borrowed  from  the  Bible 
or  from  the  Chaldaean  mythology.  The  similitude  is  so  striking 
that  it  did  not  escape  the  Musulmans,  and  Ma90udi  states  that 
certain  authors  place  the  date  of  the  deluge  in  the  time  of  (^msh6</. 
There  are  essential  and  necessary  differences  between  the  two 
legends,  the  chief  one  being  that  in  the  monotheistic  narration  the 


is  the  translation  for  asraosha  (Comm,  ad  XVI,  18),  *  rebel 
against  the  law,'  and  would  well  apply  to  the  non-Mazdean  people 
of  Arvastin-i-Rftm. 

^  The  severe  winters  in  the  upper  valleys  of  the  Tigris. 

*  TheVendtddd  Sfida  has  here:  taozyi^a  danh^ur  aiwirtdra, 
which  the  Gr.  Bd.  understands  as :  ‘  and  the  Tijik  (the  Arabs)  are 
oppressive  there.' 

•  *  Some  say :  Persis '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  II. 


II 


deluge  is  sent  as  a  punishment  from  God,  whereas  in  the  dualistic 
version  it  is  a  plague  from  the  Daevas :  but  the  core  of  the  two 
legends  is  the  same :  the  hero  in  both  is  a  righteous  man  who, 
forewarned  by  God,  builds  a  refuge  to  receive  choice  specimens  of 
mankind,  intended  some  day  to  replace  an  imperfect  humanity, 
destroyed  by  a  universal  calamity. 

I. 

I.  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda : 

O  Ahura  Mazda,  most  beneficent  Spirit,  Maker 
of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One  1 

Who  was  the  first  mortal,  before  myself,  Zara- 
thu.rtra,  with  whom  thou,  Ahura  Mazda,  didst 
converse  whom  thou  didst  teach  the  Religion  of 
Ahura,  the  Religion  of  Zarathu^ra  ? 

2  (4).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  : 

The  fair  Yima,  the  good  shepherd®,  O  holy  Zara- 
thuytra !  he  was  the  first  mortal,  before  thee, 
Zarathuytra,  with  whom  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  did  con¬ 
verse,  whom  I  taught  the  Religion  of  Ahura,  the 
Religion  of  Zarathu^tra. 

3(7).  Unto  him,  O  Zarathurtra,  I,  Ahura  Mazda, 
spake,  saying :  ‘  Well,  fair  Yima,  son  of  Vlvanghat, 
be  thou  the  preacher  and  the  bearer  of  my 
Religion !  ’ 

And  the  fair  Yima,  O  Zarathurtra,  replied  unto 
me,  saying : 

‘  I  was  not  bom,  I  was  not  taught  to  be  the 
preacher  and  the  bearer  of  thy  Religion.’ 

4  (i  i).  Then  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  said  thus  unto  him, 
O  Zarathortra : 


*  ‘  On  the  ReHgion  ’  (Comm.) 

*  ‘  His  being  a  good  shepherd  means  that  he  held  in  good  con¬ 
dition  herds  of  men  and  herds  of  animals '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by 


12 


VENDtoAo. 


‘  Since  thou  dost  not  consent  to  be  the  preacher 
and  the  bearer  of  my  Religion,  then  make  thou  my 
world  increase,  make  my  world  grow:  consent  thou 
to  nourish,  to  rule,  and  to  watch  over  my  world.’ 

5  (14).  And  the  fair  Yima  replied  unto  me,  O 
Zarathu5tra,  saying : 

‘  Yes !  I  will  make  thy  world  increase,  I  will  make 
thy  world  grow.  Yes!  I  will  nourish,  and  rule,  and 
watch  over  thy  world.  There  shall  be,  while  I  am 
king,  neither  cold  wind  nor  hot  wind,  neither  disease 
nor  death.’ 

7  (17)’.  Then  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  brought  two 
implements  unto  him :  a  golden  seal  and  a  poniard 
inlaid  with  gold  *.  Behold,  here  Yima  bears  the 
royal  sway ! 

8  (20).  Thus,  under  the  sway  of  Yima,  three 
hundred  winters  passed  away,  and  the  earth  was 
replenished  with  flocks  and  herds,  with  men  and 
dogs  and  birds  and  with  red  blazing  fires,  and  there 
was  room  no  more  for  flocks,  herds,  and  men. 

9.  Then  I  warned  the  fair  Yima,  saying :  ‘  O  fair 
Yima,  son  of  Vlvanghat,  the  earth  has  become  full 
of  flocks  and  herds,  of  men  and  dogs  and  birds 
and  of  red  blazing  fires,  and  there  is  room  no  more 
for  flocks,  herds,  and  men.’ 


'  §  6  is  composed  of  unconnected  Zend  quotations,  which  are 
no  part  of  the  text  and  are  introduced  by  the  commentator  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  that  *  although  Yima  did  not  teach  the  law  and 
train  pupils,  he  was  nevertheless  a  faithful  and  a  holy  man,  and 
rendered  men  holy  too  (?).*  See  Fragments  to  the  Vendtddd, 

*  As  the  symbol  and  the  instrument  of  sovereignty.  ‘  He  reigned 
supreme  by  the  strength  of  the  ring  and  of  the  poniard '  (Asp.)  Thus 
Faridftn  gives  royal  investiture  to  Ir^  ‘  with  the  sword  and  the 
seal,  the  ring  and  the  crown  *  (Firdausi). — The  king  is  master  *  of 
the  sword,  the  throne,  and  the  ring.' 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  II. 


13 


10.  Then  Yima  stepped  forward,  in-light’,  south¬ 
wards  *,  on  the  way  of  the  sun  *,  and  (afterwards)  he 
pressed  the  earth  with  the  golden  seal,  and  bored  it  ' 
with  the  poniard,  speaking  thus : 

‘  O  Spe«ta  Armaiti  *,  kindly  *  open  asunder  and 
stretch  thyself  afar,  to  bear  flocks  and  herds  and 
men.’ 

1 1.  And  Yima  made  the  earth  grow  larger  by 
one-third  than  it  was  before,  and  there  came  flocks 
and  herds  and  men,  at  their  will  and  wish,  as  many 
as  he  wished. 

12  (23).  Thus,  under  the  sway  of  Yima,  six 
hundred  winters  passed  away,  and  the  earth  was 
replenished  with  flocks  and  herds,  with  men  and 
dogs  and  birds  and  with  red  blazing  fires,  and  there 
was  room  no  more  for  flocks,  herds,  and  men. 

13.  And  I  warned  the  fair  Yima,  saying:  ‘  O  fair 
Yima,  son  of  Vivanghat,  the  earth  has  become  full 
of  flocks  and  herds,  of  men  and  dogs  and  birds 
and  of  red  blazing  fires,  and  there  is  room  no  more 
for  flocks,  herds,  and  men.’ 

14.  Then  Yima  stepped  forward,  in  light,  south- 


'  That  is  to  say,  his  body  being  all  resplendent  with  light.  Cf. 
Albtrftni's  Chronology  (tr.  by  Sachau,  p.  20a):  ‘Jam  rose  on 
that  day  (Naur6z)  like  the  sun,  the  light  beaming  forth  from  him, 
as  though  he  shone  like  the  sun.’ 

*  The  warm  South  is  the  region  of  Paradise  (Yasht  XXII,  7) : 
the  North  is  the  seat  of  the  cold  winds,  of  the  demons  and  hell 
(Vd.  XIX,  I ;  VII,  2). 

*  Thence  is  derived  the  following  tradition  recorded  by  G.  du 
Chinon :  *  Ils  en  nomment  un  qui  s'allait  tons  les  jours  promener 
dans  le  Ciel  du  Soleil  d’oh  il  aportait  la  sciance  des  Astres,  aprez 
les  avoir  visit^s  de  si  prez.  Ils  nomment  ce  grand  personnage 
Gemachid’  (Relations  nouvelles  du  Levant,  Lyon,  1671,  p.  478). 

*  The  Genius  of  the  Earth. 

®  ‘  Do  this  out  of  kindness  to  the  creatures '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by 


14 


vendJdAd. 


wards,  on  the  way  of  the  sun,  and  (afterwards)  he 
pressed  the  earth  with  the  golden  seal,  and  bored  it 
with  the  poniard,  speaking  thus  : 

‘  O  Spe»ta  Armaiti,  kindly  open  asunder  and 
stretch  thyself  afar,  to  bear  flocks  and  herds  and 
men.’ 

1 5.  And  Yima  made  the  earth  grow  larger  by 
two-thirds  than  it  was  before,  and  there  came  flocks 
and  herds  and  men,  at  their  will  and  wish,  as  many 
as  he  wished. 

16  (26).  Thus,  under  the  sway  of  Yima,  nine 
hundred  winters  passed  away^,  and  the  earth  was 
replenished  with  flocks  and  herds,  with  men  and 
dogs  and  birds  and  with  red  blazing  fires,  and  there 
was  room  no  more  for  flocks,  herds,  and  men. 

1 7  (28).  And  I  warned  the  fair  Yima,  saying : 
‘  O  fair  Yima,  son  of  Vtvanghat,  the  earth  has  be¬ 
come  full  of  flocks  and  herds,  of  men  and  dogs  and 
birds  and  of  red  blazing  fires,  and  there  is  room  no 
more  for  flocks,  herds,  and  men.’ 

18  (31).  Then  Yima  stepped  forward,  in  light, 
southwards,  on  the  way  of  the  sun,  and  (afterwards) 
he  pressed  the  earth  with  the  golden  seal,  and  bored 
it  with  the  poniard,  speaking  thus : 

‘  O  Spe»ta  Armaiti,  kindly  open  asunder  and 
stretch  thyself  afar,  to  bear  flocks  and  herds  and 
men.’ 

19  (37).  And  Yima  made  the  earth  grow  larger 
by  three-thirds  than  it  was  before,  and  there  came 


^  Yima,  according  to  Yt.  IX,  10,  made  immortality  reign  on  the 
earth  for  a  thousand  years.  The  remaining  century  was  spent  in 
the  Vara  (‘  for  a  hundred  years,  Gim  was  in  the  Var,’  says  the  Gr. 
Bund.)  On  Yima’s  fall,  see  Yt.  XIX,  34  ;  cf.  Yt.  V,  25-31. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  II. 


15 


flocks  and  herds  and  men,  at  their  will  and  wish,  as 
many  as  he  wished. 


II. 

2 1  (42)  *.  The  Maker,  Ahura  Mazda,  called  to¬ 
gether  a  meeting  of  the  celestial  Yazatas  in  the 
Airyana  Va^6  of  high  renown,  by  the  Vanguhi 
Diitya 

The  fair  Yima,  the  good  shepherd,  called  together 
a  meeting  of  the  best  of  the  mortals  ®,  in  the  Airyana 
Va6^6  of  high  renown,  by  the  Vanguhi  Diitya. 

To  that  meeting  came  Ahura  Mazda,  in  the 
Airyana  Va^6  of  high  renown,  by  the  Vanguhi 
D&itya ;  he  came  together  with  the  celestial  Yazatas. 

To  that  meeting  came  the  fair  Yima,  the  good 
shepherd,  in  the  Airyana  Va^6  of  high  renown,  by 
the  Vanguhi  Dditya ;  he  came  together  with  the 
best  of  the  mortals. 

22  (46).  And  Ahura  Mazda  spake  unto  Yima, 
saying : 

‘O  fair  Yima,son  of  Vlvanghat!  Upon  the  material 
world  the  evil  winters  are  about  to  fall,  that  shall 
bring  the  fierce,  deadly  frost ;  upon  the  material 
world  the  evil  winters  *  are  about  to  fall,  that  shall 


*  §  20  belongs  to  the  Commentary.  See  Fragments  to  the 
Vendid&d. 

*  See  Farg.  I,  notes  to  §  2. 

*  The  best  types  of  mankind,  chosen  to  live  in  the  Var  during 
the  Malkbr&n  and  repeople  the  earth  when  the  Var  opens. 

*  The  Commentary  has  here  MalkdrSn,  a  word  wrongly  identified 
with  the  Hebrew  Malqdx,  which  designates  the  beneficent  autumn 
rains.  Malkdxin  are  the  winters  let  loose  by  a  demon  or  wizard 
named  Malkdr,  in  Zend  Mahrkfisha  ‘the  death-causing’  (see 
Westergaard’s  Fragments,  VIII). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i6 


vendJdAd. 


make  snow-flakes  fall  thick,  even  an  aredvl  deep  on 
the  highest  tops  of  mountains 

23  (52).  ‘And  the  beasts  that  live  in  the  wilder¬ 
ness®,  and  those  that  live  on  the  tops  of  the 
mountains  *,  and  those  that  live  in  the  bosom  of  the 
dale  *  shall  take  shelter  in  underground  abodes. 

24  (57).  ‘  Before  that  winter,  the  country  would 
bear  plenty  of  grass  for  cattle,  before  the  waters 
had  flooded  it  Now  after  the  melting  of  the  snow, 
O  Yima,  a  place  wherein  the  footprint  of  a  sheep 
may  be  seen  will  be  a  wonder  in  the  world. 

25  (61).  ‘Therefore  make  thee  a  Vara,  long  as 
a  riding-ground  on  every  side  of  the  square®,  and 
thither  bring  the  seeds  of  sheep  and  oxen,  of  men, 
of  dogs,  of  birds,  and  of  red  blazing  fires  ®. 

‘  Therefore  make  thee  a  Vara,  long  as  a  riding- 
ground  on  every  side  of  the  square,  to  be  an  abode 
for  men ;  a  Vara,  long  as  a  riding-ground  on  every 
side  of  the  square,  for  oxen  and  sheep. 

26  (65)  ‘  There  thou  shalt  make  waters  flow  in  a 
bed  a  hithra  long ;  there  thou  shalt  settle  birds,  on 
the  green  that  never  fades,  with  food  that  never 
fails.  There  thou  shalt  establish  dwelling-places, 
consisting  of  a  house  with  a  balcony,  a  courtyard, 
and  a  gallery’. 


'  ‘  Even  where  it  (the  snow)  is  least,  it  will  be  one  Vitasti  two 
fingers  deep’  (Comm.);  that  is,  fourteen  fingers  deep. 

*  The  Comm,  has,  strangely  enough,  ‘  for  instance,  Ispfihfin.’ 

'  *  For  instance,  Apfirsfin  (the  Upairisadna  or  Hindfi-Kfish).’ 

*  ‘  For  instance,  Khorastfin  (the  plain  of  Khorasan).’ 

®  ‘Two  hfilhras  long  on  every  side'  (Comm.)  A  hfithra  is 
about  an  English  mile. 

'  That  is  to  say,  specimens  of  each  species. 

’  The  last  three  words  are  &ra{  X«yd/Mi>a  of  doubtfiil  meaning. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  H. 


17 


27  {70).  ‘Thither  thou  shalt  bring  the  seeds  of 
men  and  women,  of  the  greatest,  best,  and  finest 
on  this  earth  ^ ;  thither  thou  shalt  bring  the  seeds  of 
every  kind  of  cattle,  of  the  greatest,  best,  and  finest 
on  this  earth. 

28  (74).  ‘Thither  thou  shalt  bring  the  seeds  of 
every  kind  of  tree,  of  the  highest  of  size  and  sweetest 
of  odour  on  this  earth  * ;  thither  thou  shalt  bring  the 
seeds  of  every  kind  of  fruit,  the  best  of  savour  and 
sweetest  of  odour  ®.  All  those  seeds  shalt  thou  bring, 
two  of  every  kind,  to  be  kept  inexhaustible  there,  so 
long  as  those  men  shall  stay  in  the  Vara. 

29  (80).  ‘  There  shall  be  no  humpbacked,  none 
bulged  forward  there ;  no  Impotent,  no  lunatic ;  no 
one  malicious,  no  liar ;  no  one  spiteful,  none  jealous ; 
no  one  with  decayed  tooth,  no  leprous  to  be  pent 
up*,  nor  any  of  the  brands  wherewith  Angra  Mainyu 
stamps  the  bodies  of  mortals  ®. 

30  (87).  ‘  In  the  largest  part  of  the  place  thou 
shalt  make  nine  streets,  six  in  the  middle  part,  three 
in  the  smallest.  To  the  streets  of  the  largest  part 
thou  shalt  bring  a  thousand  seeds  of  men  and 
women ;  to  the  streets  of  the  middle  part,  six  hun- 


*  The  best  specimens  of  mankind,  to  be  the  origin  of  the  more 
perfect  races  of  the  latter  days. 

*  ‘  The  highest  of  size,  like  the  cypress  and  the  plane-tree ;  the 
sweetest  of  odour,  like  the  rose  and  the  jessamine  ’  (Comm.) 

*  ‘The  best  of  savour,  like  the  date;  the  sweetest  of  odour,  like 
the  citron  ’  (Comm.) 

*  ‘  A  man,  afflicted  with  leprosy,  is  not  allowed  to  enter  a  town  and 
mix  with  the  other  Persians '  (Herod.  1,  138 ;  he  was  supposed  to 
have  sinned  against  the  sun).  Ctesias  has  a  tale  of  how  Megabyzes 
escaped  his  enemies  by  simulating  leprosy. 

*  In  order  that  the  new  mankind  may  be  exempt  from  all  moral 
and  physical  deformities. 

[4]  C 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


i8 


VENotDAD. 


dred ;  to  the  streets  of  the  smallest  part,  three 
hundred  \  That  Vara  thou  shalt  seal  up  with  thy 
golden  seal,  and  thou  shalt  make  a  door,  and  a 
window  self-shining  within.’ 

31  (93).  Then  Yima  said  within  himself;  ‘How 
shall  I  manage  to  make  that  Vara  which  Ahura 
Mazda  has  commanded  me  to  make  ?  ’ 

And  Ahura  Mazda  said  unto  Yima :  ‘  O  fair 
Yima,  son  of  Vivanghat !  Crush  the  earth  with 
a  stamp  of  thy  heel,  and  then  knead  it  with  thy 
hands,  as  the  potter  does  when  kneading  the  potter’s 
clay 

[32.  And  Yima  did  as  Ahura  Mazda  wished ; 
he  crushed  the  earth  with  a  stamp  of  his  heel,  he 
kneaded  it  with  his  hands,  as  the  potter  does  when 
kneading  the  potter’s  clay®.] 

33  {97)'  And  Yima  made  a  Vara,  long  as  a  riding- 
ground  on  every  side  of  the  square.  There  he 
brought  the  sedds  of  sheep  and  oxen,  of  men,  of 
dogs,  of  birds,  and  of  red  blazing  fires.  .  He  made 
a  Vara,  long  as  a  riding-ground  on  every  side  of 
the  square,  to  be  an  abode  for  men ;  a  Vara,  long  as 
a  riding-ground  on  every  side  of  the  square,  for 
oxen  and  sheep. 

34  (loi).  There  he  made  waters  flow  in  a  bed 
a  hithra  long ;  there  he  settled  birds,  on  the  g^reen 
that  never  fades,  with  food  that  never  fails.  There 

'  This  division  of  the  Var  into  three  quarters  very  likely  answers 
the  distinction  of  the  three  classes. 

*  In  the  Shih  Nimah  (ramshid  teaches  the  Dtvs  to  make  and 
knead  clay  ‘by  mixing  the  earth  with  water;'  and  they  build 
palaces  at  his  bidding.  It  was  his  renown,  both  as  a  wise  king 
and  a  great  builder,  that  caused  the  Musulmans  to  identify  him 
with  Solomon. 

'  From  the  Vendidid  S&da. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  II. 


19 


he  established  dwelling-places,  consisting  of  a  house 
with  a  balcony,  a  courtyard,  and  a  gallery. 

35  (106).  There  he  brought  the  seeds  of  men  and 
women,  of  the  greatest,  best,  and  finest  on  this 
earth ;  there  he  brought  the  seeds  of  every  kind  of 
cattle,  of  the  greatest,  best,  and  finest  on  this  earth. 

36  (no).  There  he  brought  the  seeds  of  every 
kind  of  tree,  of  the  highest  of  size  and  sweetest  of 
odour  on  this  earth  ;  there  he  brought  the  seeds  of 
every  kind  of  fruit,  the  best  of  savour  and  sweetest 
of  odour.  All  those  seeds  he  brought,  two  of  every 
kind,  to  be  kept  inexhaustible  there,  so  long  as 
those  men  shall  stay  in  the  Vara. 

37  (116).  And  there  were  no  humpbacked,  none 
bulged  forward  there;  no  impotent,  no  lunatic;  no 
one  malicious,  no  liar ;  no  one  spiteful,  none  jealous ; 
no  one  with  decayed  tooth,  no  leprous  to  be  pent 
up,  nor  any  of  the  brands  wherewith  Angra  Mainyu 
stamps  the  bodies  of  mortals. 

38  (123).  In  the  largest  part  of  the  place  he  made 
nine  streets,  six  in  the  middle  part,  three  in  the 
smallest.  To  the  streets  of  the  largest  part  he 
brought  a  thousand  seeds  of  men  and  women ;  to 
the  streets  of  the  middle  part,  six  hundred ;  to  the 
streets  of  the  smallest  part,  three  hundred.  That 
Vara  he  sealed  up  with  the  golden  ring,  and  he 
made  a  door,  and  a  window  self-shining  within. 

39  (129).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  are  the  lights  that  give  light  in 
the  Vara  which  Yima  made  ? 

40(131).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘There  are  \ 
uncreated  lights  and  created  lights^.  The  one  j 

'  The  endless  light,  which  is  eternal,  and  artificial  lights.  The  i 
Commentary  has  here  the  following  Zend  quotation:  'The  un- 

C  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


20 


’V’EtfotoAD. 


thing  missed  there  is  the  sight  of  the  stars,  the  moon,  ^ 
and  the  sun  h  and  a  year  seems  only  as  a  day*.  , 

41  (133)*  ‘Every  fortieth  year,  to  every  couple  1 

two  are  born,  a  male  and  a  female  ®.  And  thus  it  j 

is  for  every  sort  of  cattle.  And  the  men  in  the  \ 

Vara  which  Yima  made  live  the  happiest  life  V  ' 

42  (137).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  \ 

Holy  One  !  Who  is  he  who  brought  the  Religion  \ 
of  Mazda  into  the  Vara  which  Yima  made  ?  | 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  was  the  bird  Kar- 
shipta®,  O  holy  Zarathuj’tra !  ’ 

43  (140).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 


created  light  shines  from  above ;  all  the  created  lights  shine  from 
below/ 

*  The  people  in  the  Var  cannot  see  them,  since  the  Var  is 
underground.  That  is  why  the  Var  has  lights  of  its  own. 

*  As  there  is  no  daily  revolution  of  the  sun. 

*  Cf.  the  description  of  Iran-v8^  according  to  a  later  source,  the 
]\Iainy6-i-khard  (as  translated  by  West) :  ‘  Hdrmezd  created  jErS-vfes 
better  than  the  remaining  places  and  districts ;  and  its  goodness 
was  this,  that  men’s  life  is  three  hundred  years ;  and  cattle  and 
sheep,  one  hundred  and  fifty  years;  and  their  pain  and  sickness  are 
little,  and  they  do  not  circulate  falsehood,  and  they  make  no 
lamentation  and  weeping;  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  demon  of 
Avarice,  in  their  body,  is  little,  and  in  ten  men,  if  they  eat  one  loaf, 
they  are  satisfied ;  and  in  every  forty  years,  from  one  woman  and 
one  man,  one  child  is  born  ;  and  their  law  is  goodness,  and  religion 
the  primeval  religion,  and  when  they  die,  they  are  righteous 
(  =  blessed);  and  their  chief  is  Gdpatshdh,  and  the  ruler  and  king* 
is  Srosh’  (XLIV,  24). 

^  ‘They  live  there  for  150  years;  some  say,  they  never  die 
(Comm.) 

®  ‘  The  bird  Karshipta  dwells  in  the  heavens :  were  he  living  on 
the  earth,  he  would  be  the  king  of  birds.  He  brought  the  Religion 
into  the  Var  of  Yima,  and  recites  the  Avesta  in  the  language  of 
birds'  (Bund.  XIX  and  XXIV).  The  Comm,  identifies  the  Kar- 
shiptan  with  the  A^akhravak,  that  is  the  A'akravaka  of  poetical 
reputation  in  India. 


Digitized 


d  by  CjOO^IC- 


FARGARD  III. 


21 


Holy  Onel  Who  are  the  Lord  and  the  Master 
there  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Urvata^-nara^,  O  Zara- 
thu^tra  !  and  thyself,  Zarathu^tra.’ 


Fargard  IIL 

The  Earth. 

‘  Les  Gufebres/  says  Chardin  (ed.  Langlfes,  VIII,  358),  *  regardent 
ragriculture,non  seulement  comme  une  profession  belle  et  innocente, 
mais  aussi  comme  m^ritoire  et  noble,  et  ils  croient  que  c’est  la 
premise  de  toutes  les  vocations,  celle  pour  quoi  le  Dieu  souverain 
et  les  dieux  inKrieurs,  comme  ils  parlent,  ont  le  plus  de  complaisance 
et  qu’ils  recompensent  le  plus  largement  Cette  opinion,  tournee 
cn  cr^ance  parmi  eux,  fait  qu*ils  se  portent  naturellement  k  travailler 
\  la  tcrre  et  qu'ils  s'y  exercent  le  plus :  leurs  prStres  leur  enseignent 
que  la  plus  vertueuse  activity  est  d’engendrer  des  enfants  (cf.  Farg. 
IV,  47)  et  aprfes  de  cultiver  une  terre  qui  serait  en  friche  (cf.  infra, 
§  4),  de  planter  un  arbre  soit  fruitier,  soit  autre.* 

The  classical  writers  (Xenophon,  Oeconomica,  IV,  4  seq. ; 
Polybius,  X,  28,  quoted  §  4,  note)  express  themselves  to  the  same 
effect,  and  their  testimony  has  been  lately  corroborated,  in  a  most 
unexpected  way,  by  a  Greek  inscription  *,  emanating  from  no  less 
an  authority  than  King  Darius  himself,  who  congratulates  his 
satrap  in  Asia  Minor,  Gadates,  ‘  for  working  well  the  King's  earth 
and  transplanting  in  lower  Asia  the  fruits  of  the  country  beyond 


'  Zarathurtra  had  three  sons  during  his  lifetime,  Isa^/-vdstra, 
Hvare--^thra,  and  Urvata^/-nara,  who  were  respectively  the  fathers 
and  chiefs  of  the  three  classes,  priests,  warriors,  and  husbandmen. 
Urvatsuf-nara,  as  a  husbandman,  was  chosen  to  be  the  ahu  or 
temporal  Lord  of  the  Var,  on  account  of  the  Var  being  under¬ 
ground.  Zarathortra,  as  a  heavenly  priest,  was,  by  right,  the  ratu 
or  Spiritual  Lord  in  Airyana  Va6^6,  where  he  founded  the  Religion 
by  a  sacrifice  (Bund.  XXXIII  and  Introd.  Ill,  15). 

*  Discovered  at  Deremendjik,  near  Magnesia,  on  the  Maeander : 

Cousin  and  Deschamps  (Bulletin  de  Correspondance  hell^nique, 
XIII,  529). 


Digitized  by  LjOOqIc 


22 


VENDtDAo. 


Euphrates  (^c  ifiijw  cWowf  yrjVy  Tovg  ir€pav  E^parov  Kopirovs  M, 

Korm  lijs  *Aaias  fUprj  fcoro^vrcwr). 

The  third  Fargard  may  serve  as  a  Commentary  to  those  texts. 
The  principal  subject  is,  as  the  Dinkard  has  it : 

What  comforts  most  the  Genius  of  the  Earth  (§§  i-6)? 

What  discomforts  most  the  Genius  of  the  Earth  (§§  7-1 1)  ? 

What  rejoices  the  Earth  most  (§§  ia-35)? 

In  each  of  these  three  developments  a  series  of  five  objects  is  con¬ 
sidered.  Series  I  and  II,  though  expressed  in  symmetrical  terms, 
do  not  answer  one  another :  there  is  greater  symmetry,  as  to  the 
ideas,  between  the  second  series  and  the  third.  Series  I  and  II 
are  a  dry  enumeration.  The  third  series  contains  two  interesting 
digressions,  one  on  the  funeral  laws  (§§  14-21),  and  the  other  on 
the  sanctity  of  husbandry  (§§  24-33). 

The  Fargard  ends  with  a  development  forbidding  the  burial  of 
the  dead  (§§  36-42) :  it  is  a  sort  of  commentary  to  §  8. 

The  subject  of  this  chapter  has  become  a  commonplace  topic 
with  the  Parsis,  who  have  treated  it  more  or  less  antithetically  in 
the  Mainy6-i-khard  (chaps.  V  and  VI)  and  in  the  Rav&ets  (Gr. 
Rav.  pp.  434-437)- 


I. 

I.  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  Which  is  the  first  place  where  the  Earth  * 
feels  most  happy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  the  place  whereon 
one  of  the  faithful  steps  forward,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thurtra  1  with  the  log  in  his  hand  *,  the  Baresma  *  in 
his  hand,  the  milk*  in  his  hand,  the  mortar*  in  his 


‘  ‘  The  Genius  of  the  Earth  ’  (Comm.) 

*  The  wood  for  the  fire  altar. 

’  The  Baresma  (now  called  barsom)  is  a  bundle  of  sacred 
twigs  which  the  priest  holds  in  his  hand  while  reciting  the 
prayers.  (See  Farg.  XIX,  i8  seq.  and  notes.) 

*  The  so-called  ^iv  or  ^tvfim,  one  of  the  elements  of  the 
Haoma  sacrifice. 

*  The  Hfivana  or  mortar  used  in  crushing  the  Haoma  or 
H6m. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  III. 


23 


hand,  lifting  up  his  voice  in  good  accord  with  reli¬ 
gion,  and  beseeching  Mithra  *,  the  lord  of  the  roll¬ 
ing  country-side,  and  Rima  JIvSiStr3LK' 

2,  3  (6-10).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Which  is  the  second  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  most  happy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  the  place  whereon 
one  of  the  faithful  erects  a  house  with  a  priest 
within  ®,  with  cattle,  with  a  wife,  with  children,  and 
good  herds  within ;  and  wherein  afterwards  the 
cattle  continue  to  thrive,  virtue  to  thrive  *,  fodder  to 
thrive,  the  dog  to  thrive,  the  wife  to  thrive,  the 
child  to  thrive,  the  fire  to  thrive,  and  every  blessing 
of  life  to  thrive.’ 

4  (i  i).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Which  is  the  third  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  most  happy? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered ;  ‘  It  is  the  place  where 
one  of  the  faithful  sows  most  corn,  gfrass,  and  fruit, 
O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  where  he  waters  ground 
that  is  dry,  or  drains  ground  that  is  too  wet®.’ 


•  Mithra,  the  Persian  Apollo,  sometimes  like  him  identified  with 
the  Sun,  is  invoked  here  as  making  the  earth  fertile.  ^  Why  do  not 
you  worship  the  Sun  ?  asked  king  Yazdgard  the  Christians.  Is  he 
not  the  god  who  lights  up  with  his  rays  all  the  world,  and  through 
whose  warmth  the  food  of  men  and  cattle  grows  ripe  ? '  (Elisaeus.) 

•  The  god  that  gives  food  its  savour:  he  is  an  acolyte  to 
Mithra. 

•  With  the  domestic  chaplain  (the  Panthakt). 

•  By  the  performance  of  worship. 

•  Under  die  Achaemanian  kings  countrymen  who  brought  water 
to  places  naturally  dry  received  the  usufruct  of  the  ground  for  five 
generations  (Polybius,  X,  28).  But  for  those  underground  canals 
(called  Kandts),  which  bring  water  from  the  mountains  all  through 
^e  Iranian  desert,  Persia  would  starve. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


24 


VENDtDAD. 


5  (15).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  1  Which  is  the  fourth  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  most  happy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘It  is  the  place  where 
there  is  most  increase  of  flocks  and  herds.’ 

6  (18).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Which  is  the  fifth  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  most  happy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘It  is  the  place  where 
flocks  and  herds  yield  most  dung.’ 

II. 

7  (21).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Which  is  the  first  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  sorest  grief? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  It  is  the  neck  of  Are- 
zhra  S  whereon  the  hosts  of  fiends  rush  forth  from 
the  burrow  of  the  Dru^  *.’ 

8  (25).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  Which  is  the  second  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  sorest  grief? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  It  is  the  place  wherein 
most  corpses  of  dogs  and  of  men  lie  .buried 


*  The  neck  of  Arezftra  (ArezflrahS  grtva)  is  ‘a  mount  at  the 
gate  of  hell,  whence  the  demons  rush  forth'  (Bund.  XII,  8; 
D&distin  XXXIII,  5) ;  it  is  also  called  ‘  the  'head  of  Arezhra  ’ 
(Farg.  XIX,  45),  or  ‘the  back  of  Arezftra’  (Bund.  XII,  2). 
Arezhra  was  a  fiend,  son  of  Ahriman,  who  was  killed  by  the  first 
man,  Gaydmarrf  (Mainyd-i-khard  XXVII,  15).  The  mount  named 
from  him  lies  in  the  North  (which  is  the  seat  of  the  demons) :  it 
seems  to  belong  to  the  Alborz  chain,  like  the  Damivand  (Bund. 
XII,  8),  where  Azi  Dahfika  was  bound  (Farg.  I,  18,  notes). 

*  Hell,  the  Dru^  being  assimilated  to  a  burrowing  Khrafstra. 
Cf.  Farg.  VII,  24. 

'  ‘  It  is  declared  in  the  good  religion,  that,  when  they  conceal 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  III. 


25 


9  (28).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Which  is  the  third  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  sorest  gfrief? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  It  is  the  place  whereon 
stand  most  of  those  Dakhmas  on  which  the  corpses 
of  men  are  deposited 

10  (31).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Which  is  the  fourth  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  sorest  grief? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  the  place  wherein 
are  most  burrows  of  the  creatures  of  Angra 
Mainyu 

1 1  (34).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Which  is  the  fifth  place  where  the 
Earth  feels  sorest  grief? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  the  place  whereon 


a  corpse  beneath  the  ground,  Spend&rmad,  the  archangel,  shudders ; 
it  is  just  as  severe  as  a  serpent  or  scorpion  would  be  to  any  one  in 
a  sleeping-garment,  and  it  is  also  just  like  that  to  the  ground. 
When  thou  makest  a  corpse  beneath  the  ground  as  it  were 
apparent,  thou  makest  the  ground  liberated  from  that  affliction’ 
(Saddar  XXXIII,  tr,  by  West,  in  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
XXIV).  Cf.  Vd.  VI,  51 ;  VII,  45. 

’  With  regard  to  Dakhmas,  see  Farg.  VI,  45.  ‘  Nor  is  the 
Earth  happy  at  that  place  whereon  stands  a  Dakhma  with  corpses 
upon  it ;  for  that  patch  of  ground  will  never  be  clean  again  till  the 
day  of  resurrection '  (Gr.  Rav.  435,  437).  Although  the  erection 
of  Dakhmas  is  enjoined  by  the  law,  yet  the  Dakhma  in  itself  is  as 
unclean  as  any  spot  on  the  earth  can  be,  since  it  is  always  in 
contact  with  the  dead  (cf.  Farg.  VII,  55).  The  impurity  which 
would  otherwise  be  scattered  over  the  whole  world,  is  thus  brought 
together  to  one  and  the  same  spot.  Yet  even  that  spot,  in  spite  of 
the  Rav&et,  is  not  to  lie  defiled  for  ever,  as  every  fifty  years  the 
Dakhmas  ought  to  be  pulled  down,  so  that  their  sites  may  be 
restored  to  their  natural  purity  (see  Farg.  VII,  49  seq.  and  this 

Far?-  §  13)- 

’  ‘Where  there  are  ipost  Khrafstras’  (noxious  animals). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


26 


vendJdAd. 


the  wife  and  children  of  one  of  the  faithful’,  O 
Spitama  Zarathurtra !  are  driven  along  the  way  of 
captivity,  the  dry,  the  dusty  way,  and  lift  up  a  voice 
of  wailing.’ 

III. 

12  (38).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Who  is  the  first  that  rejoices  the 
Earth  with  greatest  joy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  he  who  digs  out 
of  it  most  corpses  of  dogs  and  men 

13  (41).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  Who  is  the  second  that  rejoices  the 
Earth  with  greatest  joy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘It  is  he  who  pulls 
down  most  of  those  Dakhmas  on  which  the  corpses 
of  men  are  deposited  ®.’ 

14  (44).  Let  no  man  alone  by  himself*  carry 
a  corpse®.  If  a  man  alone  by  himself  carry  a  corpse. 


’  Killed  by  an  enemy. 

*  This  joy  answers  the  second  grief  of  the  earth  (§  8 ;  cf.  note). 
There  is  no  counterpart  given  to  the  first  grief  (§  7),  because,  as  the 
Commentary  naively  expresses  it, ‘it  is  not  possible  now  so  to  dig  out 
hell,’  which  will  be  done  at  the  end  of  the  world  (Bund.  XXX,  32). 

*  This  answers  the  third  grief  (§  9 ;  cf.  note). 

*  No  ceremony  in  general  can  be  performed  by  one  man  alone. 
Two  Mobeds  are  wanted  to  perform  the  Vendiddd  service,  two 
priestsforthe  Barashnfim,  two  persons  for  the  Sag-dtd  (Anquetil, 
II,  584  n.)  It  is  never  good  that  the  faithful  should  be  alone,  as 
the  fiend  is  always  lurking  about,  ready  to  take  advantage  of  any 
moment  of  inattention.  If  the  faithful  be  alone,  there  is  no  one  to 
make  up  for  any  negligence  and  to  prevent  mischief  arising  from  it. 
Never  is  the  danger  greater  than  in  the  present  case,  when  the 
fiend  is  close  at  hand,  and  in  direct  contact  with  the  fiiithful. 

*  A  corpse  from  which  the  Nasu  has  not  been  expelled  by  the 
Sag-dtd  ceremony  (described  Vd.  VIII,  14-22). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  III. 


27 


the  Nasu  ^  rushes  upon  him,  to  defile  him,  from  the 
nose  of  the  dead,  from  the  eye,  from  the  tongue, 
from  the  jaws,  from  the  sexual  organs,  from  the 
hinder  parts.  This  Dnif  Nasu  falls  upon  him, 
[stains  him]  even  to  the  end  of  the  nails,  and  he  is 
unclean,  thenceforth,  for  ever  and  ever. 

15  (49).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  shall  be  the  place  of  that  man 
who  has  carried  a  corpse  [alone]  *  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘It  shall  be  the  place 
on  this  earth  wherein  is  least  water  and  fewest 
plants,  whereof  the  ground  is  the  cleanest  and  the 
driest  and  the  least  passed  through  by  flocks  and 
herds,  by  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda,  by  the  conse¬ 
crated  bundles  of  Baresma,  and  by  the  faithful 

(55)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  far  from  the  fire  ?  How  far  from 
the  water  ?  How  far  from  the  consecrated  bundles 
of  Baresma  ?  How  far  from  the  faithful  ? 

^7(57)*  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Thirty  paces  * 
from  the  fire,  thirty  paces  from  the  water,  thirty 
paces  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma, 
three  paces  from  the  faithful. 


'  The  word  Nasu  has  two  meanings :  it  means  either  the  corpse 
(nas&i),  or  the  corpse-demon  (the  Dru^  Nasu,  that  is  to  say  the 
demon  who  takes  possession  of  the  dead  body  and  makes  his 
presence  felt  by  the  decomposition  of  the  body  and  infection). 

*  He  cannot  purify  himself  like  the  Nasd-sdl^r  (Vd.  VIII,  13). 
‘  He  who  carries  a  man,  knowing  that  the  man  is  dead  and  that 
the  Sag-did  has  not  been  performed,  commits  a  sin  worthy  of 
death  (margarz&n)/  As  the  absence  of  Sag-dtd  makes  the  in¬ 
fection  worse,  it  is  the  same  crime  as  if  a  man  were  to  introduce 
a  plague  into  the  country. 

*  To  avoid  any  contact  of  that  man  with  pure  beings. 

*  A  pace  (g&ma)  is  as  much  as  three  feet  (pddha ;  Vd.  IX,  8). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


28 


VENDtoAo. 


1 8,  19  (58-63).  ‘There,  on  that  place,  shall  the 
worshippers  of  Mazda  erect  an  enclosure ',  and 
therein  shall  they  establish  him  with  food,  therein 
shall  they  establish  him  with  clothes,  with  the 
coarsest  food  and  with  the  most  worn-out  clothes. 
That  food  he  shall  live  on,  those  clothes  he  shall 
wear,  and  thus  shall  they  let  him  live,  until  he  has 
grown  to  the  age  of  a  Hana,  or  of  a  Zaurura,  or  of 
a  Pairi^ta-khshudra  ®. 

20,  21  (64-71).  ‘  And  when  he  has  grown  to  the 
age  of  a  Hana,  or  of  a  Zaurura  ®,  or  of  a  Pairi^ta- 
khshudra,  then  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  shall 
order  a  man  strong,  vigorous,  and  skilful  *,  to  cut  the 
head  off  his  neck  *,  in  his  enclosure  on  the  top  of 
the  mountain :  and  they  shall  deliver  his  corpse  unto 
the  greediest  of  the  corpse-eating  creatures  made  by 
the  beneficent  Spirit,  unto  the  vultures,  with  these 
words :  “  The  man  here  has  repented  of  all  his  evil 
thoughts,  words,  and  deeds.  If  he  has  committed 
any  other  evil  deed,  it  is  remitted  by  his  repentance*: 
if  he  has  committed  no  other  evil  deed,  he  is  absolved 
by  his  repentance,  for  ever  and  ever.”  ’ 


*  The  Armef  t-gdh,  the  place  for  the  unclean;  see  Introd.  V,  15. 

*  Hana  means,  literally,  *an  old  man;'  Zaurura,  *a  man 
broken  down  by  age;'  Pairijta-khshudra,  ‘one  whose  seed  is 
dried  up.'  These  words  have  acquired  the  technical  meanings  of 
‘  fifty,  sixty,  and  seventy  years  old.' 

•  When  he  is  near  his  death.  The  carrier  alone  (§vak-bar), 
being  margarrin  (see  p.  27,  n.  2),  ought  to  have  been  put  to  death 
at  once.  The  rigour  of  theory  was  abated  in  practice  and  delayed 
to  the  moment  when  the  guilty  man  was  to  have  paid  to  nature  the 
debt  due  to  religion. 

*  *  Trained  to  operations  of  that  sort '  (Comm.) ;  a  headsman. 

•  Perhaps  :  ‘  to  flay  him  alive  and  cut  off  his  head.'  Cf.  Farg.  IX, 
49,  text  and  note. 

•  By  the  performance  of  the  Patet 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  III. 


29 


22  (72).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Who  is  the  third  that  rejoices  the 
Earth  with  greatest  joy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  he  who  fills  up 
most  burrows  of  the  creatures  of  Angra  Mainyu 

23  (75)-  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Who  is  the  fourth  that  rejoices  the 
Earth  with  greatest  joy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  he  who  sows  most 
com,  grass,  and  fruit,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  I  who 
waters  ground  that  is  dry,  or  drains  ground  that  is 
too  wet 

24  (79).  ‘  Unhappy  is  the  land  that  has  long  lain 
unsown  with  the  seed  of  the  sower  and  wants 
a  good  husbandman,  like  a  well-shapen  maiden  who 
has  long  gone  childless  and  wants  a  good  husband. 

25  (84).  ‘  He  who  would  till  the  earth,  O  Spitama 
Zarathurtra  I  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with 
the  right  arm  and  the  left,  unto  him  will  she  bring 
forth  plenty  of  fruit :  even  as  it  were  a  lover  sleep¬ 
ing  with  his  bride  on  her  bed ;  the  bride  will  bring 
forth  children,  the  earth  will  bring  forth  plenty  of 
fruit  *. 

26,  27  (87-90),  ‘  He  who  would  till  the  earth, 
O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra  I  with  the  left  arm  and  the 
right,  with  the  right  arm  and  the  left,  unto  him  thus 
says  the  Earth  :  “  O  thou  man !  who  dost  till  me 
with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with  the  right  arm 
and  the  left,  here  shall  I  ever  go  on  bearing,  bring- 


•  This  joy  answers  the  fourth  grief  of  the  earth  (§  10). 

'  This  is  identical  with  §  4,  which  is  developed  in  the  following 
clauses  (§§  24-34), 

’  The  text  has :  ‘  she  brings  either  a  son  or  plenty  of  fruit,’  she 
being  either  the  woman  or  the  earth. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


30 


VENDtnAD. 


ing  forth  all  manner  of  food,  bringing  com  first  to 
theeV’ 

28,  29  (91-95).  ‘  He  who  does  not  till  the  earth, 
O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra !  with  the  left  arm  and  the 
right,  with  the  right  arm  and  the  left,  unto  him  thus 
says  the  Earth :  “  O  thou  man !  who  dost  not  till 
me  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with  the  right 
arm  and  the  left,  ever  shalt  thou  stand  at  the  door 
of  the  stranger,  among  those  who  beg  for  bread; 
the  refuse  and  the  crumbs  of  the  bread  are  brought 
unto  thee  *,  brought  by  those  who  have  profusion  of 
wealth.’” 

30  (96).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  is  the  food  that  fills  the  Religion 
of  Mazda  ®  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  sowing  com  again 
and  again,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra  ! 

31  (99).  ‘  He  who  sows  com,  sows  righteousness : 
he  makes  the  Religion  of  Mazda  walk,  he  suckles 
the  Religion  of  Mazda ;  as  well  as  he  could  do  with 
a  hundred  man’s  feet,  with  a  thousand  woman’s 
breasts  *,  with  ten  thousand  sacrificial  formulas  *. 

32  (105).  ‘When  barley  was  created,  the  Daevas 


’  ‘  Whep  something  good  grows  up,  it  will  grow  up  for  thee 
first*  (Comm.)  Perhaps:  ‘bringing  to  thee  profusion  of  com' 
(‘  some  say,  she  will  bring  to  thee  15  for  10 ;  *  Comm.) 

*  ‘They  take  for  themselves  what  is  good  and  send  to  thee 
what  is  bad '  (Comm.) 

•  Literally,  ‘  What  is  the  stomach  of  the  law  ?  ’ 

^  ‘  He  makes  the  Religion  of  Mazda  as  fat  as  a  child  could  be 
made  by  means  of  a  hundred  feet,  that  is  to  say,  of  fifty  servants 
walking  to  rock  him ;  of  a  thousand  breasts,  that  is,  of  five  hundred 
nurses '  (Comm.) 

®  With  the  recitation  of  10,000  Y6ngh6  h&tim,  that  is  to  say,  as 
if  one  had  performed  for  his  weal  as  many  sacrifices  as  contain 
10,000  YSngh6  hdtam. 


Digitized  by 


FARGARD  HI. 


31 


Started  up’;  when  it  grew*,  then  fainted  the  Daevas’ 
hearts ;  when  the  knots  came  ®,  the  Daevas  groaned ; 
when  the  ear  came,  the  Daevas  flew  away  *.  In  that 
house  the  Daevas  stay,  wherein  wheat  perishes®. 
It  is  as  though  red  hot  iron  were  turned  about  in 
their  throats,  when  there  is  plenty  of  corn  *. 

33  (i  1 1).  ‘  Then  let  people  learn  by  heart  this  holy 
saying :  “  No  one  who  does  not  eat,  has  strength  to 
do  heavy  works  of  holiness  strength  to  do  works 
of  husbandry,  strength  to  beget  children.  By  eating 
every  material  creature  lives,  by  not  eating  it  dies 

V  * 

away. 

34(116).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Who  is*  the  fifth  that  rejoices  the 
Earth  with  greatest  joy  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘[It  is  he  who  kindly 
and  piously  gives  ®  to  one  of  the  faithful  who  tills 
the  earth,]  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra ! 

35  (1 18).  ‘  He  who  would  not  kindly  and  piously 
gfive  to  one  of  the  faithful  who  tills  the  earth,  O 
Spitama  Zarathurtra !  Spe«ta  Armaiti  *  will  throw 
him  down  into  darkness,  down  into  the  world  of  woe, 
the  world  of  hell,  down  into  the  deep  abyss 

‘  John  Barleycorn  got  up  again. 

And  sore  surpris’d  them  all. 

*  Doubtful.  ’  Doubtful. 

*  The  general  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  how  the  D6vs  are 
broken  down  ‘  by  the  growing,  the  increasing,  and  the  ripening  of 
the  com  ’  (Dink^d,  1. 1.  §  10). 

*  Doubtful.  •  Doubtful. 

*  ‘Like  the  performance  of  the  dvSzda  hdmist’  (the  longest 
and  most  cumbersome  of  all  Zoroastrian  ceremonies). 

*  The  Ashd-d&d  or  alms.  The  bracketed  clause  is  from  the 
Vend!d&d  S&da. 

*  The  Genius  of  the  Earth  offended. 

Conjectural  translation. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


32 


vendJoAd. 


IV. 

36  (122).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  bury  in  the  earth  either 
the  corpse  of  a  dog  or  the  corpse  of  a  man,  and  if 
he  shall  not  disinter  it  within  half  a  year,  what  is 
the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘Five  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-artra  five  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraoshd-iarana 

37  (126).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  bury  in  the  earth  either 
the  corpse  of  a  dog  or  the  Corpse  of  a  man,  and  if 
he  shall  not  disinter  it  within  a  year,  what  is  the 
penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘A  thousand  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-artra,  a  thousand  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-^arana.’ 

38  (130).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  bury  in  the  earth  either 
the  corpse  of  a  dog  or  the  corpse  of  a  man,  and  if 
he  shall  not  disinter  it  within  the  second  year,  what 
is  the  penalty  for  it  ?  What  is  the  atonement  for 
it  What  is  the  cleansing  from  it  ? 

39(135)-  Ahura  Mazda’ answered :  ‘For  that 
deed  there  is  nothing  that  can  pay,  nothing  that  can 
atone,  nothing  that  can  cleanse  from  it;  it  is  a 
trespass  for  which  there  is  no  atonement,  for  ever 
and  ever.’ 

40  (137).  When  is  it  so  ? 

‘  It  is  so,  if  the  sinner  be  a  professor  of  the 


^  See  Introduction. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  III. 


33 


Religion  of  Mazda,  or  one  who  has  been  taught 
in  it^ 

‘  But  if  he  be  not  a  professor  of  the  Religion  of 
Mazda,  nor  one  who  has  been  taught  in  it  then  his 
sin  is  taken  from  him,  if  he  makes  confession  of  the 
Religion  of  Mazda  and  resolves  never  to  commit 
again  such  forbidden  deeds  \ 

41  (142).  ‘The  Religion  of  Mazda  indeed,  O 
Spitama  Zarathu^tra!  takes  away  from  him  who 
makes  confession  of  it  the  bonds  of  his  sin^ ;  it  takes 
away  (the  sin  of)  breach  of  trust*;  it  takes  away  (the 
sin  of)  murdering  one  of  the  faithful®;  it  takes  away 
(the  sin  of)  burying  a  corpse^;  it  takes  away  (the 
sin  of)  deeds  for  which  there  is  no  atonement ;  it 
takes  away  the  worst  sin  of  usury  ® ;  it  takes  away 
any  sin  that  may  be  sinned. 


•  A  bom  Zoroastrian  or  a  catechist :  in  both  cases,  he  must  have 
known  that  he  was  committing  sin. 

•  He  did  not  know  that  he  was  committing  sin. 

•  He  makes  Patet  and  says  to  himself,  ‘I  will  never  henceforth 
sin  again’  (Comm.) 

^  If  not  knowingly  committed ;  see  §  40  and  the  following  notes, 

®  Doubtful.  From  the  Commentary  it  appears  that  draosha 
mast  have  meant  a  different  sort  of  robbery ;  *  He  knows  that  it  is 
forbidden  to  steal,  but  he  fancies  that  robbing  the  rich  to  give  to  the 
poor  is  a  pious  deed  *  (Comm.) 

•  Or  better,  ‘  a  Mazdean,'  but  one  who  has  committed  a  capital 
crime  ;  ‘he  knows  that  it  is  allowed  to  kill  the  margarzdn,  but  he 
does  not  know  that  it  is  not  allowed  to  do  so  without  an  order 
from  the  judge.'  Cf.  VIII,  74  note. 

^  *  He  knows  that  it  is  forbidden  to  bury  a  corpse ;  but  he  fancies 
that  if  one  manages  so  that  dogs  or  foxes  may  not  take  it  to  the  fire 
and  to  the  water,  he  behaves  piously  ’  (Comm.) — ^He  fancies  that  the 
prohibition  of  burying  the  dead  is  meant  only  for  the  protection  of 
the  fire  and  the  water,  not  of  the  earth  herself. 

•  Or,  possibly,  ‘  the  sin  of  usury.’  *  He  knows  that  it  is  lawful 

[4]  D 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


34 


vendJoAd. 


42  (149).  ‘  In  the  same  way  the  Religion  of 
Mazda,  O  Spitama  ZarathuJtra !  cleanses  the  faith¬ 
ful  from  every  evil  thought,  word,  and  deed,  as 
a  swift-rushing  mighty  wind  cleanses  the  plain 
‘  So  let  all  the  deeds  he  doeth  be  henceforth  good, 
O  Zarathu.ftra !  a  full  atonement  for  his  sin  is 
effected  by  means  of  the  Religion  of  Mazda.’ 


Fargard  IV. 

Contracts  and  Outrages. 

This  Fargard  is  the  only  one  in  the  Vendtdid  that  deals  strictly 
with  legal  objects. 

I  a.  Classification  of  the  contracts  according  to  the  value  of  their 
object  (§  2). — A  contract  is  cancelled  by  paying  the  amount  of  the 
contract  higher  by  one  degree  (§§  3-4). 

Religious  responsibility  of  the  family  for  the  breach  of  a  contract 
by  one  of  its  members  (§§  5-10). 

Punishment  of  the  Mihir-Dru^  (one  who  breaks  a  contract), 
(§§  11-16). 

II  a.  Definition  of  the  outrages  known  as  ftgerepta  (threatening 
attitude),  avaoirixta  (assault),  areduj  (blows),  (§  17). 

Penalties  for  menaces  (§§  18-21);  for  assaults  (§§  22-25);  for 
blows  (§§  26-29) ;  wounds  (§§  30-33) ;  for  wounds  causing 
blood  to  flow  (§§  34-36) ;  for  broken  bones  (§§  37-39) ;  for  man¬ 
slaughter  (§§  40-43)- 

III  a.  Contract  of  charity  to  co-religionists  (§§  44-45). 

IV  a.  Heinousness  of  false  oath  (§  46). 

III  b.  Dignity  of  wealth;  of  marriage;  of  physical  weal  (§§  47-49  a). 

IV  b.  Heinousness  of  false  oath.  Ordeal  (§§  49  b-55). 

Part  of  this  Fargard  has  been  made  unduly  obscure  by  the  trans¬ 
position  of  §  46,  wrongly  inserted  between  the  clause  on  charity 
(§§  44-45)  and  the  corresponding  development  on  the  dignity  of 
material  goods.  This  transposition  is  found  in  all  known  manu¬ 
scripts  and  belonged  to  the  older  text  from  which  they  are  derived. 


to  take  high  interest,  but  he  does  not  know  that  it  is  not  lawful  to 
do  so  from  the  faithful '  (Comm.) 

'  ‘  From  chaff  *  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  IV. 


35 


I. 

I.  He  that  does  not  restore  a  loan  to  the  man 
who  lent  it,  steals  the  thing  and  robs  the  man  \  This 
he  doeth  every  day,  every  night,  as  long  as  he  keep 
in  his  house  his  neighbours  property,  as  though  it 
were  his  own  \ 

la. 

2  (4).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  How  many  in  number  are  thy  contracts,  O 
Ahura  Mazda  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  are  six  in  num¬ 
ber,  O  holy  Zarathurtra^  The  first  is  the  word- 
contract  ^  ;  the  second  is  the  hand-contract  ® ;  the 
third  is  the  contract  to  the  amount  of  a  sheep  ® ;  the 


*  ‘  He  is  a  thief  when  he  takes  with  a  view  not  to  restore  ;  he  is 
a  robber  w^hen,  being  asked  to  restore,  he  answers,  I  will  not ' 
(Comm.) 

*  Every  moment  that  he  holds  it  unlawfully,  he  steals  it  anew. 

‘  The  basest  thing  with  Persians  is  to  lie ;  the  next  to  it  is  to  be  in 
debt,  for  this  reason  among  many  others,  that  he  who  is  so,  must 
needs  sink  to  lying  at  last'  (Herod.  I,  183).  The  debtor  in  ques¬ 
tion  is  of  course  the  debtor  of  bad  faith,  *  he  who  says  to  a  man, 
Give  me  this,  I  will  restore  it  to  thee  at  the  proper  time,  and  he 
says  to  himself,  I  will  not  restore  it '  (Comm.) 

*  At  first  view  it  seems  as  if  the  classification  were  twofold,  the 
contracts  being  defined  in  the  first  two  clauses  by  their  mode  of 
being  entered  into,  and  in  the  last  four  by  their  amount.  Yet  it 
appears  from  the  following  clauses  that  even  the  word-contract  and 
the  hand-contract  are  indicative  of  a  certain  amount,  which,  however, 
the  commentators  did  not,  or  were  unable  to,  determine. 

^  The  word-contract  may  be  a  contract  of  which  the  object  are 
words:  the  contract  of  jddangdi  (ukhdh6  -va^ah),  by  which  one 
offers  to  speak  and  intervene  for  some  one's  benefit,  or  the  contract 
between  master  and  pupil  (for  teaching  the  sacred  texts). 

*  The  contract  for  hiring  labour  (?). 

*  ‘Viz.  to  the  amount  of  3  isttrs  [in  weight],'  (Comm.)  An 
isttr  {trraTTip)  is  as  much  as4dirhems  {^paxpn)- 

D  2 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


36 


VENotoAD. 


fourth  is  the  contract  to  the  amount  of  an  ox  ’ ;  the 
fifth  is  the  contract  to  the  amount  of  a  man  * ;  the 
sixth  is  the  contract  to  the  amount  of  a  field  ®,  a  field 
in  good  land,  a  fruitful  one,  in  good  bearing 

3  (13).  The  word-contract  is  fulfilled  by  words  of 
mouth. 

It  is  cancelled  by  the  hand-contract ;  he  shall  give 
as  damages  the  amount  of  the  hand-contract. 

4  (16).  The  hand-contract  is  cancelled  by  the 
sheep-contract ;  he  shall  give  as  damages  the  amount 
of  the  sheep-contract. 

The  sheep-contract  is  cancelled  by  the  ox-con¬ 
tract  ;  he  shall  give  as  damages  the  amount  of  the 
ox-contract. 

The  ox-contract  Is  cancelled  by  the  man-contract; 
he  shall  give  as  damages  the  amount  of  the  man- 
contract 

The  man-contract  is  cancelled  by  the  field-con¬ 
tract  ;  he  shall  give  as  damages  the  amount  of  the 
field-contract. 

5  (24).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  1  If  a  man  break  the  word-contract,  how  many 
are  involved  in  his  sin  *  ? 


‘  ‘To  the  amount  of  12  isttrs  (=48  dirhems),’  (Comm.) 

*  ‘To  the  amount  of  500  dirhems.’  The  exact  translation 
would  be  rather,  ‘  The  contract  to  the  amount  of  a  human  being’ 
(promise  of  marriage). 

*  ‘Upwards  of  500  istlrs.’ 

*  A  sort  of  gloss  added  to  define  more  accurately  the  value  of 
the  object,  and  to  indicate  that  it  is  greater  than  that  of  the  pre¬ 
ceding  one. 

"  Literally,  how  much  is  involved?  The  joint  responsibility  of 
the  family  was  a  principle  in  the  Persian  law  :  ‘  Leges  apud  eos 
impendio  formidatae,  et  abominandae  aliae,  per  quas  ob  noxam 
unius  omnis  propinquitas  perit  ’  (Am.  Marcellinus  XXIII,  6). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IV. 


37 


Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  sin  makes  his 
Nabinazdi^s^  answerable  for  three  hundred 
(years) 

6  (26).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  If  a  man  break  the  hand-contract,  how  many 
are  involved  in  his  sin  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  sin  makes  his 
Nabinazdi.rtas  answerable  for  six  hundred  (years) 

7  (28).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  If  a  man  break  the  sheep-contract,  how  many 
are  involved  in  his  sin  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  His  sin  makes  his  Na- 
bdnazdi^s  answerable  for  seven  hundred  (years) 

8  (30).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  If  a  man  break  the  ox-contract,  how  many 
are  involved  in  his  sin  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  His  sin  makes  his  Na- 
bSnazdirtas  answerable  for  eight  hundred  (years)  ®.’ 


*  The  next  of  kin  to  the  ninth  degree. 

*  See  §  1 1.  This  passage  seems  to  have  puzzled  tradition. 
The  Commentary  says,  ‘  How  long,  how  many  years,  has  one  to 
fear  for  the  breach  of  a  word-contract  ? — the  Nabdnazdirtas  have  to 
fear  for  three  hundred  years ;  ’  but  it  does  not  explain  farther  the 
nature  of  that  fear ;  it  only  tries  to  reduce  the  circle  of  that  liability 
to  narrower  limits :  '  only  the  son  born  after  the  breach  is  liable  for 
it ;  the  righteous  are  not  liable  for  it ;  when  the  father  dies,  the  son, 
if  righteous,  has  nothing  to  fear  from  it.’  And  finally,  the  Raviets 
leave  the  kinsmen  wholly  aside ;  the  penalty  falling  entirely  upon 
the  real  offender,  and  the  number  denoting  only  the  duration  of  his 
punishment  in  hell :  ‘  He  who  breaks  a  word-contract,  his  soul  shall 
abide  for  three  hundred  years  in  hell  ’  (Gr.  Rav.  94). 

*  See  §  12.  ‘His  soul  shall  abide  for  six  hundred  years  in  hell’ 
(Gr.  Rav.  1. 1.) 

*  See  §  13.  ‘  His  soul  shall  abide  for  seven  hundred  years  in 
heU’  (Gr.  Rav.  1. 1.) 

*  See  §  14.  ‘  His  soul  shall  abide  for  eight  hundred  years  in  hell.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


38 


vendJdAd. 


9  (32).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  If  a  man  break  the  man-contract,  how  many 
are  involved  in  his  sin  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  His  sin  makes  his  Na- 
bAnazdiytas  answerable  for  nine  hundred  (years) 

10  (34).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  !  If  a  man  break  the  field-contract,  how 
many  are  involved  in  his  sin  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered ;  ‘  His  sin  makes  his  Na- 
binazdi^tas  answerable  for  a  thousand  (years) 

11  (36).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  break  the  word-contract, 
what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Three  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspahd-aJtra,  three  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6-iarana 

12  (39).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  man  break  the  hand-contract,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Six  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-a^tra,  six  hundred  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-^arana 

13  (42).  O  Maker  of  the  material" world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  break  the  sheep-contract, 
what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Seven  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-aytra,  seven  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6-iarana 


*  See  §  15.  '  His  soul  shall  abide  for  nine  hundred  years  in 
hell.' 

*  See  §  16.  ‘  His  soul  shall  abide  for  a  thousand  years  in  hell.’ 

*  One  tanifidhr  and  a  half,  that  is  1800  dirhems.  See  Introd. 

‘  Three  tanlffihrs,  or  3600  dirhems. 

*  Three  tandfflhrs  and  a  half,  or  4200  dirhems. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IV. 


39 


14  (45).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  break  the  ox-contract,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Eight  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-artra,  eight  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6-^rana 

15  (48).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  !  If  a  man  break  the  man-contract,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Nine  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah6-artra,  nine  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6->fau*ana 

16  (51).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  break  the  field-contract,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered ;  ‘  A  thousand  stripes ' 
with  the  Aspah^-artra,  a  thousand  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-^rana 

II  a. 

17  (54).  If  a  man  rise  up  with  a  weapon  in  his 
hand,  it  is  an  Agerepta^  If  he  brandish  it,  it  is 


'  Four  tanifiihrs,  or  4800  dirhems. 

’  Four  tandfiihrs  and  a  half,  or  5400  dirhems. 

•  Five  tan&Mhrs,  or  6000  dirhems. 

*  In  this  paragraph  are  defined  the  first  three  of  the  eight  out¬ 
rages  with  which  the  rest  of  the  Fargard  deals.  Only  these  three 
are  defined,  because  they  are  designated  by  technical  terms.  We 
subjoin  the  definitions  of  them  found  in  a  Sanskrit  translation  of 
a  Patet  (Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.  f.  B.  5,  154),  in  which  their  etymological 
meanings  are  better  preserved  than  in  the  Zend  definition  itself 

Agerepta,*  seizing,’  is  when  a  man  seizes  a  weapon  with  a  view 
to  smite  another. 

Avaoiri^ta,  ‘brandishing,’  is  when  a  man  brandishes  a  weapon 
with  a  view  to  smite  another. 

Aredux  is  when  a  man  actually  smites  another  with  a  weapon, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


40 


vend!dAd. 


an  Avaoirijta.  If  he  actually  smite  a  man  with 
malicious  aforethought,  it  is  an  Areduj.  Upon  the 
fifth  Areduj*  he  becomes  a  Pesh6tanu*. 

1 8  (58).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  He  that  committeth  an  Agerepta,  what 
penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Five  stripes  with 
the  Aspahd-aJtra,  five  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
iarana ; 

‘  On  the  second  Agerepta,  ten  stripes  with 
the  Aspahd-artra,  ten  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
iarana ; 

‘  On  the  third,  fifteen  stripes  with  the  Aspah6-ajtra, 
fifteen  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^rana. 

*9  (63)-  ‘  On  the  fourth,  thirty  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-aytra,  thirty  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-iarana ; 

‘  On  the  fifth,  fifty  stripes  with  the  AspahS-artra, 
fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-iarana; 

‘  On  the  sixth,  sixty  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-artra, 
sixty  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6->fcirana ; 

‘  On  the  seventh,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Aspah6- 
artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^fcirana.’ 

20  (67).  If  a  man  commit  an  Agerepta  for  the 
eighth  time,  without  having  atoned  for  the  preced¬ 
ing  ®,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Peshdtanu  : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-artra,  two  hun¬ 
dred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 


but  without  wounding  him,  or  inflicts  a  wound  which  is  healed 
within  three  days. 

‘  Viz.  on  the  sixth  commission  of  it,  as  appears  from  §  28. 

*  He  shall  receive  two  hundred  stripes,  or  shall  pay  1200  dirhems 
(see  Introd.) 

’  Literally,  ‘  without  having  undone  the  preceding.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FAKGARD  IV. 


41 


2 1  (70).  If  a  man  commit  an  Agerepta*,  and  refuse 
to  atone  for  it  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu  : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aJtra,  two  hun¬ 
dred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^rana.’ 

22  (73).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  commit  an  Avaoirirta,  what 
penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘Ten  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-artra,  ten  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^rana ; 

‘  On  the  second  Avaoirijta,  fifteen  stripes  with  the 
Aspahfe-artra,  fifteen  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^rana. 

23  (75)-  ‘On  the  third,  thirty  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-artra,  thirty  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-iarana ; 

‘  On  the  fourth,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra, 
fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^rana ; 

*On  the  fifth,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Aspah€- 
artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^rana ; 

‘On  the  sixth,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-iarana.’ 

24  (76).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  commit  an  Avaoirirta  for  the 
seventh  time,  without  having  atoned  for  the  pre¬ 
ceding,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  '  He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

25  {77)-  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  commit  an  Avaoiri^ta,  and 
refuse  to  atone  for  it,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 


'  Even  though  the  Agerepta  has  been  committed  for  the  first 
time. 

*  Literally,  *  and  does  not  undo  it.’  If  he  does  not  ofier  himself 
to  bear  the  penalty,  and  does  not  perform  the  Patet  (see  Introd.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


42 


vendIdAd. 


Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu  : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aytra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

26  (79).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  maft  commit  an  Aredu^,  what 
penalty  shall  he  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Fifteen  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-aJtra,  fifteen  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd->fcirana. 

27(81).  ‘On  the  second  Areduj,  thirty  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-aJtra,  thirty  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-iarana ; 

‘  On  the  third,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra, 
fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^arana ; 

*  On  the  fourth,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Aspahd- 
artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^rana ; 

‘  On  the  fifth,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-/fcirana.’ 

28.  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  If  a  man  commit  an  Areduj  for  the  sixth 
time,  without  having  atoned  for  the  preceding,  what 
penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

29  (82).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  commit  an  AreduJ,  and  re¬ 
fuse  to  atone  for  it,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  He  is  a  Peshdtanu  : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^arana.’ 

30  (85).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  smite  another  and  hurt  him 
sorely,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

31  (87).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Thirty  stripes 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IV. 


43 


with  the  Aspah^-artra,  thirty  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-iarana ; 

‘'The  second  time,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
aJtra,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-yfarana ; 

‘  The  third  time,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Aspahd- 
artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^rana ; 

‘  The  fourth  time,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

32  (89).  If  a  man  commit  that  deed  for  the  fifth 
time,  without  having  atoned  for  the  preceding,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aytra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-iarana.’ 

33  (90)'  If  a  commit  that  deed  and  refuse  to 
atone  for  it,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu  : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aytra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-iarana.’ 

34  (93)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  smite  another  so  that  the 
blood  come,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Fifty  stripes  with  the 
Aspahd-aytra,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana ; 

‘  The  second  time,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd->fcirana ; 

‘  The  third  time,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
a^tra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

35  (95).  If  he  commit  that  deed  for  the  fourth 
time,  without  having  atoned  for  the  preceding,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-ajtra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


44 


vendIdAd. 


36  (96).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  smite  another  so  that  the 
blood  come,  and  if  he  refuse  to  atone  for  it,  what  is 
the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^rana.’ 

37  (99)'  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  smite  another  so  that  he 
break  a  bone,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Seventy  stripes  with 
the  Aspah^-artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
iarana ; 

‘  The  second  time,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Aspah^- 
artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

38  (102).  If  he  commit  that  deed  for  the  third 
time,  without  having  atoned  for  the  preceding,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana’ 

39  {104).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  smite  another  so  that  he 
break  a  bone,  and  if  he  refuse  to  atone  for  it,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-a^tra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-iarana.’ 

40  (io6).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  smite  another  so  that  he 
give  up  the  ghost,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Ninety  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-aytra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-^rana.' 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IV. 


45 


41  (109).  If  he  commit  that  deed  again,  without 
having  atoned  for  the  preceding,  what  is  the  penalty 
that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Pesh6tanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah6-aytra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

42  (112).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  smite  another  so  that  he 
give  up  the  ghost,  and  if  he  refuse  to  atone  for  it, 
what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  is  a  Peshdtanu : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-artra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

43(115).  And  they  shall  thenceforth  in  their 
doings  walk  after  the  way  of  holiness,  after  the 
word  of  holiness,  after  the  ordinance  of  holiness. 

IIIa>. 

44  (118).  If  men  of  the  same  faith,  either  friends 
or  brothers,  come  to  an  agreement  together,  that 
one  may  obtain  from  the  other,  either  goods*,  or 
a  wife  *,  or  knowledge  let  him  who  desires  goods 

*  We  return  here  to  contracts;  the  logical  place  of  §§  44-45 
would  be  after  §  16. 

*  The  analysis  of  the  VendidAd  in  the  Dtnkard  has  here :  ‘  a  proof 
that  one  professes  the  Religion  well  is  to  grant  bountifully  to  the 
brethren  in  the  faith  any  benefit  they  may  ask  for/ 

*  Woman  is  an  object  of  contract,  like  cattle  or  fields:  she  is 
disposed  of  by  contracts  of  the  fifth  sort,  being  more  valuable  than 
cattle  and  less  so  than  fields.  She  is  sold  by  her  father  or  her 
guardian,  often  from  the  cradle.  *  Instances  are  not  wanting  of  the 
betrothal  of  a  boy  of  three  years  of  age  to  a  girl  of  two'  (see 
Dosabhoy  Framjee's  work  on  The  Parsees,  p.  77;  cf.  ‘A  Bill  to 
Define  and  Amend  the  Law  relating  to  Succession,  Inheritance, 
Marriage,  Ac.,'  Bombay,  1864). 

*  On  the  holiness  of  the  contract  between  pupil  and  teacher,  see 
Yt.  X,  1 16.  Cf.  above,  p.  35,  n.  4. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


46 


vendJdAd. 


have  them  delivered  to  him;  let  him  who  desires 
a  wife  receive  and  wed  her ;  let  him  who  desires 
knowledge  be  taught  the  holy  word, 

45  (*23).  during  the  first  part  of  the  day  and  the 
last,  during  the  first  part  of  the  night  and  the  last, 
that  his  mind  may  be  increased  in  intelligence  and 
W80C  strong  in  holiness.  So  shall  he  sit  up,  in  devo¬ 
tion  and  prayers,  that  he  may  be  increased  in  in¬ 
telligence  :  he  shall  rest  during  the  middle  part  of 
the  day,  during  the  middle  part  of  the  night  *,  and 
thus  shall  he  continue  until  he  can  say  all  the  words 
which  former  Adthrapaitis  *  have  said. 

IV  a. 

46  (128).  Before  the  boiling  water  publicly  pre¬ 
pared’,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra!  let  no  one  make 
bold  to  deny  having  received  [from  his  neighbour] 
the  ox  or  the  garment  in  his  possession. 

Illb. 

47  (130)*-  Verily  I  say  it  unto  thee,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu^tra!  the  man  who  has  a  wife  is  far  above 
him  who  lives  in  continence  * ;  he  who  keeps  a 
house  is  far  above  him  who  has  none ;  he  who  has 


’  He  sleeps  ‘  the  third  part  of  the  day  and  the  third  part  of  the 
night  ’  (Yasna  LXII,  5). 

*  A  teaching  priest  (Parsi  HSrbad). 

*  This  clause  is  intended  against  false  oaths  taken  in  the  so-called 
Var-ordeal  (see  §  54  n.)  It  ought  to  be  placed  before  §  49  bis, 
where  the  penalty  for  a  false  oath  is  given. 

*  §§  47-49  are  a  sort  of  commentary  to  the  beginning  of  §  44. 

*  What  king  Yazdgard  found  most  offensive  in  Christianity  was 
‘  that  the  Christians  praise  death  and  despise  life,  set  no  value  upon 
fecundity  and  extol  sterility,  so  that  if  their  disciples  would  listen  to 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IV. 


47 


children  is  far  above  the  childless  man  ^ ;  he  who 
has  riches  is  far  above  him  who  has  none. 

48  (134).  And  of  two  men,  he  who  fills  himself 
with  meat  receives  in  him  Vohu  Man6  *  much  better 
than  he  who  does  not  do  so  * ;  the  latter  is  all  but 
dead ;  the  former  is  above  him  by  the  worth  of  an 
Asperena  \  by  the  worth  of  a  sheep,  by  the  worth  of 
an  ox,  by  the  worth  of  a  man 

49  (^37)*  This  man  can  strive  against  the  onsets 
of  Ast6-vidh6tu  • ;  he  can  strive  against  the  well- 
darted  arrow;  he  can  strive  against  the  winter 


them,  they  would  no  longer  have  any  intercourse  with  women  and 
the  world  would  end  *  (Elisaeus). 

*  ‘In  Persia  there  are  prizes  given  by  the  king  to  those  who 
have  most  children*  (Herod.  I,  136).  ‘He  who  has  no  child,  the 
bridge  (of  Paradise)  shall  be  barred  to  him.  The  first  question  the 
angels  there  will  ask  him  is,  whether  he  has  left  in  this  world  a  sub¬ 
stitute  for  himself;  if  the  answer  be,  No,  they  will  pass  by  and  he  will 
stay  at  the  head  of  the  bridge,  full  of  grief  and  sorrow'  (Saddar  18; 
Hyde  19).  The  primitive  meaning  of  this  belief  is  explained  by 
Brahmanical  doctrine;  the  man  without  a  son  falls  into  hell,  because 
there  is  nobody  to  pay  him  the  family  worship. 

*  Vohu  Mand  is  at  the  same  time  the  god  of  good  thoughts  and 
the  god  of  cattle. 

*  ‘There  are  people  who  strive  to  pass  a  day  without  eating, 
and  who  abstain  from  any  meat;  we  strive  too  and  abstain,  namely, 
from  any  sin  in  deed,  thought,  or  word : ...  in  other  religions,  they 
fast  from  bread ;  in  ours,  we  fast  from  sin '  (Saddar  83). — ‘  The 
Zoroastrians  have  no  fasting  at  all.  He  who  fasts  commits  a  sin, 
and  must,  by  way  of  expiation,  give  food  to  a  number  of  poor 
people*  (Albtrfinf,  Chronology,  p.  217). 

*  A  dirhem. 

*  Or:  ‘  is  worth  an  Asperena,  worth  a  sheep,  worth  an  ox,  worth 
a  man,’  which  means,  according  to  the  Commentary :  ‘  deserves  the 
gift  of  an  Asperena,  of  a  sheep's  value,  an  ox’s  value,  a  man's 
value.’ 

*  Ast6-v!dh6tu,  the  demon  of  death  (Farg.  V,  8).  The  man  who 
eats  well  has  greater  vitality. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


48 


VENDioAo. 


fiend,  with  thinnest  gfarment  on ;  he  can  strive 
against  the  wicked  tyrant  and  smite  him  on  the 
head;  he  can  strive  against  the  ungodly  fasting 
Ashemaogha 


IVh. 

49  (bis).  On  the  very  first  time  when  that  deed  * 
has  been  done,  without  waiting  until  it  is  done 
again, 

50(143).  down  there®  the  pain  for  that  deed 
shall  be  as  hard  as  any  in  this  world:  even  as  if 
one  should  cut  off  the  limbs  from  his  perishable 
body  with  knives  of  brass,  or  still  worse  ; 

51  (146).  down  there  the  pain  for  that  deed  shall 
be  as  hard  as  any  in  this  world:  even  as  if  one 
should  nail  *  his  perishable  body  with  nails  of  brass, 
or  still  worse ; 

52  (149).  down  there  the  pain  for  that  deed  shall 
be  as  hard  as  any  in  this  world:  even  as  if  one 
should  by  force  throw  his  perishable  body  headlong 
down  a  precipice  a  hundred  times  the  height  of 
a  man,  or  still  worse; 

53  (*52)-  down  there  the  pain  for  that  deed  shall 
be  as  hard  as  any  in  this  world :  even  as  if  one 
should  by  force  impale®  his  perishable  body,  or 
still  worse. 

54  (i  54).  Down  there  the  pain  for  his  deed  shall 
be  as  hard  as  any  in  this  world :  to  wit,  the  deed  of 


‘  The  CommeiKary  has:  Mike  Mazdak,  son  of  Bimddt,’  the 
communistic  heresiarch  who  flourished  under  KobSd  (488-53*) 
and  was  put  to  death  under  Noshirvan. 

*  The  taking  of  a  false  oath.  Cf.  §  46.  *  In  hell. 

*  Doubtful.  *  DoubtfuL 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


49 


a  man,  who,  knowingly  lying,  confronts  the  brim- 
stoned,  golden  \  truth-knowing  water  with  an  appeal 
unto  Rashnu  *  and  a  lie  unto  Mithra  \ 

55  (156).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  He  who,  knowingly  lying,  confronts 
the  brimstoned,  golden,  truth-knowing  water  with 
an  appeal  unto  Rashnu  and  a  lie  unto  Mithra,  what 
is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay*? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Seven  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-a,rtra,  seven  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6-^arana/ 


Fargard  V, 

This  chapter  and  the  following  ones,  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth, 
deal  chiefly  with  uncleanness  arising  from  the  dead,  and  with  the 
means  of  removing  it  from  men  and  things. 

The  subjects  treated  in  this  Fargard  are  as  follows : — 

I  {1-7).  If  a  man  defile  the  fire  or  the  earth  with  dead  matter 
(Nasu),  involuntarily  or  unconsciously,  it  is  no  sin. 

II  (8-9).  Water  and  fire  do  not  kill. 

III  (10-14).  Disposal  of  the  dead  during  winter  when  it  is  not 
possible  to  take  them  to  the  Dakhma. 

IV  (15-20).  Why  Ahura,  while  forbidding  man  to  defile  water, 
sends  water  from  the  heavens  down  to  the  Dakhmas,  covered  with 
corpses.  How  he  purifies  that  water. 


^  The  water  before  which  the  oath  is  taken  contains  some  incense, 
brimstone,  and  one  danak  of  molten  gold  (Gr.  Rav.  loi). 

*  The  god  of  truth  (Yt.  XII).  The  formula  is  as  follows :  ‘  Be¬ 
fore  the  Amshaspand  Bahman,  before  the  Amshaspand  Ardibehesht, 
here  lighted  up  .  .  .  &c.,  I  swear  that  I  have  nothing  of  what  is 
thine,  N.  son  of  N.,  neither  gold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass,  nor  clothes, 
nor  any  of  the  things  created  by  Onnazd '  (1. 1. 96).  Cf.  above,  §  46. 

’  He  is  a  Mithra-dro^,  ‘  one  who  lies  to  Mithra.’ 

*  In  this  world. 

[4]  E 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


50 


vendIdAd. 


V  (21-26).  On  the  excellence  of  purity  and  of  the  law  that 
shows  how  to  recover  purity,  when  lost. 

VI  (27-38).  On  the  defiling  power  of  the  Nasu  being  greater  or 
less,  according  to  the  greater  or  less  dignity  of  the  being  that  dies. 

VII  (39-44).  On  the  management  of  sacrificial  implements  de¬ 
filed  with  Nasu. 

VIII  (45-62).  On  the  treatment  of  a  woman  who  has  been 
delivered  of  a  still-born  child ;  and  what  is  to  be  done  with  her 
clothes. 

la. 

I.  There  dies  a  man  in  the  depths  of  the  vale: 
a  bird  takes  flight  from  the  top  of  the  mountain 
down  into  the  depths  of  the  vale,  and  it  feeds  on 
the  corpse  of  the  dead  man  there :  then,  up  it  flies 
from  the  depths  of  the  vale  to  the  top  of  the 
mountain:  it  flies  to  some  one  of  the  trees  there, 
of  the  hard-wooded  or  the  soft-wooded,  and  upon 
that  tree  it  vomits  and  deposits  dung. 

2  (7).  Now,  lo!  here  is  a  man  coming  up  from 
the  depths  of  the  vale  to  the  top  of  the  mountain  ; 
he  comes  to  the  tree  whereon  the  bird  is  sitting ; 
from  that  tree  he  intends  to  take  wood  for  the  fire. 
He  fells  the  tree,  he  hews  the  tree,  he  splits  it  into 
logs,  and  then  he  lights  it  in  the  fire,  the  son  of 
Ahura  Mazda.  What  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay^? 

3  (i  i).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  There  is  no  sin 
upon  a  man  for  any  Nasu  that  has  been  brought  by 
dogs,  by  birds,  by  wolves,  by  winds,  or  by  flies. 

4  (12).  ‘  For  were  there  sin  upon  a  man  for  any 
Nasu  that  might  have  been  brought  by  dogs,  by 


'  For  defiling  the  fire  by  bringing  dead  matter  into  it  (see  Farg. 
VII,  25  seq.)  contrarily  to  the  rule,  ‘Put  ye  only  proper  and 
well-examined  fuel  (in  the  fire).’  For  the  purification  of  unclean 
wood,  see  Farg.  VII,  28  seq. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


51 


birds,  by  wolves,  by  winds,  or  by  flies,  how  soon  all 
this  material  world  of  mine  would  be  only  one 
Peshdtanu*,  bent  on  the  destruction  of  righteous¬ 
ness,  and  whose  soul  will  cry  and  wail®!  so 
numberless  are  the  beings  that  die  upon  the  face 
of  the  earth/ 

Ib. 

5  (15).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  I  Here  is  a  man  watering  a  corn-field.  The 
water  streams  down  the  field ;  it  streams  again ;  it 
streams  a  third  time ;  and  the  fourth  time,  a  dog, 
a  fox,  or  a  wolf  carries  some  Nasu  into  the  bed  of 
the  stream :  what  is  the  penalty  that  the  man  shall 
pay®  ? 

6  (19).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘There  is  no  sin 
upon  a  man  for  any  Nasu  that  has  been  brought  by 
dogs,  by  birds,  by  wolves,  by  winds,  or  by  flies. 

7  (20).  ‘  For  were  there  sin  upon  a  man  for  any 
Nasu  that  might  have  been  brought  by  dogs,  by 
birds,  by  wolves,  by  winds,  or  by  flies,  how  soon  all 
this  material  world  of  mine  would  be  only  one 
Pesh6tanu,  bent  on  the  destruction  of  righteousness, 
and  whose  soul  will  cry  and  wail !  so  numberless  are 
the  beings  that  die  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.’ 


*  ‘  People  guilty  of  death  ’  (Comm.)  Cf.  Yasna  LIII,  9  b. 

*  After  their  death,  ‘When  the  soul,  crying  and  beaten  off,  is 
driven  far  away  from  Paradise’  (Comm.)  This  is  imitated  from 
the  Githas  (Yasna  XLVI,  1 1  c;  LI,  13  b ;  cf.  Vd.  XIII,  8-9). 

*  For  defiling  the  earth  and  the  water :  ‘  If  a  man  wants  to  irri¬ 
gate  a  field,  he  must  first  look  after  the  water-channel,  whether 

there  is  dead  matter  in  it  or  not . If  the  water,  unknown  to 

him,  comes  upon  a  corpse,  there  is  no  sin  upon  him.  If  he 
has  not  looked  after  the  rivulet  and  the  stream,  he  is  unclean’ 
(Saddar  75). 

E  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


52 


vendIdAd. 


II  a. 

8  (23).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  I  Does  water  kill  *  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered ;  ‘  Water  kills  no  man : 
Ast6-vldh6tu  binds  him,  and,  thus  bound  *,  Vayu  ® 
carries  him  off ;  and  the  flood  takes  him  up  *,  the 
flood  takes  him  down®,  the  flood  throws  him  ashore ; 
then  birds  feed  upon  him.  When  he  goes  away®,  it 
is  by  the  will  of  Fate  he  goes.’ 

II  b. 

9  (29).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  Does  fire  kill  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Fire  kills  no  man : 
Ast6-vidhdtu  binds  him,  and,  thus  bound,  Vayu 
carries  him  off ;  and  the  fire  burns  up  life  and 
limb.  When  he  goes  away,  it  is  by  the  will  of 
Fate  he  goes.’ 


^  Water  and  fire  belong  to  the  holy  part  of  the  world,  and  come 
from  God:  how  then  is  it  that  they  kill?  ‘Let  a  Gueber  light 
a  sacred  fire  for  a  hundred  years,  if  he  once  fall  into  it,  he  shall  be 
burnt/  Even  the  Mobeds,  if  we  may  trust  Elisaeus,  complained 
that  the  fire  would  burn  them  without  regard  for  their  piety,  when 
to  adore  it  they  came  too  near  (Vartan's  War,  p.  211  of  the  French 
translation  by  TAbb^  Garabed).  The  answer  was  that  it  is  not 
the  fire  nor  the  water  that  kills,  but  the  demon  of  Death  and  Fate. 
‘  Nothing  whatever  that  I  created  in  the  world,  said  Ormazd,  does 
harm  to  man;  it  is  the  bad  Ndi  (read  Vai)  that  kills  the  man'  (Gr. 
Rav.  124). 

*  ‘  Astl-vahdt  is  the  bad  Vdi  who  seizes  the  life  (of  man) :  when 
his  hand  strokes  him,  it  is  lethargy;  when  he  casts  his  shadow 
upon  him,  it  is  fever ;  when  he  looks  in  his  eyes,  he  destroys  life 
and  it  is  called  Death '  (Bund.  XXVIII,  35).  Cf.  Farg.  IV,  49 ; 
XIX,  29. 

®  ‘The  bad  V^i'  (Comm.)  Vdi  (Vayu)  being  the  Genius  of 
Destiny,  good  or  evil. 

*  To  the  surface.  ®  To  the  bottom.  •  When  he  departs. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


53 


III. 

10  (34).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  the  summer  is  past  and  the  winter 
has  come,  what  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do’  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘In  every  house,  in 
every  borough,  they  shall  raise  three  rooms  for 
the  dead*.’ 

11  (37).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  large  shall  be  those  rooms  for 
the  dead  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Large  enough  not  to 
strike  the  skull  of  the  man,  if  he®  should  stand 
erect,  or  his  feet  or  his  hands  stretched  out :  such 
shall  be,  according  to  the  law,  the  rooms  for  the 
dead. 

12  (41).  ‘And  they  shall  let  the  lifeless  body  lie 
there,  for  two  nights,  or  for  three  nights,  or  a 
month  long,  until  the  birds  begin  to  f^y^  the  plants 
to  grow,  the  hidden  floods  *  to  flow,  and  the  wind  to 
dry  up  the  earth*. 


'  In  case  a  man  dies  during  the  snowy  season,  while  it  is 
difBcult  or  impossible  to  take  the  corpse  to  the  Dakhma,  which 
usually  stands  far  from  inhabited  places.  The  same  case  is  treated 
again  in  Farg.  VIII,  4  seq. 

*  One  for  men,  another  for  women,  a  third  for  children.  As 
not  every  house  is  considerable  or  rich  enough  to  have  these  three 
accommodations,  there  will  be  a  common  Z&d-marg  for  the  village. 
The  ZSd-marg  is  a  small  mud  house  where  the  corpse  is  laid,  to 
lie  there  till  it  can  be  taken  to  the  Dakhma  (Anquetil,  Zend-Avesta 
II,  583).  The  Z&d-marg  is  still  used  in  Persia,  and  in  the  Gqgarati 
provinces  (where  it  is  called  Nas&-kh&na,  ‘house  for  corpses’). 
In  Bombay  they  use  the  simpler  and  more  economical  method 
given  in  Farg.  VIII,  8. 

*  ‘  Being  in  life '  (Comm.) 

‘  They  were  hidden  under  the  earth. 

*  ‘  Until  the  winter  is  past  ’  (Comm.) 


*  To  come  back. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54 


vendIdAd. 


1 3  (44).  ‘  And  as  soon  as  the  birds  begin  to  fly, 
the  plants  to  grow,  the  hidden  floods  to  flow,  and 
the  wind  to  dry  up  the  earth,  then  the  worshippers 
of  Mazda  shall  lay  down  the  dead  (on  the  Dakhma), 
his  eyes  towards  the  sun. 

14  (46).  ‘  If  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  have  not, 
within  a  year,  laid  down  the  dead  (on  the  Dakhma), 
his  eyes  towards  the  sun,  thou  shall  prescribe  for 
that  trespass  the  same  penalty  as  for  the  murder  of 
one  of  the  faithfuP;  until  the  corpse  has  been  rained 
on,  until  the  Dakhma  has  been  rained  on,  until  the 
unclean  remains  have  been  rained  on,  until  the 
birds  have  eaten  up  the  corpse.’ 

IV. 

15  (49).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Is  it  true  that  thou,  Ahura  Mazda, 
seizest  the  waters  from  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  *  with 
the  wind  and  the  clouds  ? 

16  (51).  That  thou,  Ahura  Mazda,  takest  them 
down  to  the  corpses®?  that  thou,  Ahura  Mazda, 
takest  them  down  to  the  Dakhmas  ?  that  thou, 
Ahura  Mazda,  takest  them  down  to  the  unclean 
remains?  that  thou,  Ahura  Mazda,  takest  them 
down  to  the  bones  ?  and  that  then  thou,  Ahura 
Mazda,  makest  them  flow  back  unseen  ?  that  thou, 
Ahura  Mazda,  makest  them  flow  back  to  the  sea 
Pflitika  *  ? 

‘  See  Farg.  Ill,  41,  note;  cf.  below,  §§  21-26. 

*  Vouru-kasha  or  Fr&kh-kart,  the  Ocean,  wherefrom  all 
waters  come  and  whereto  they  return  (Farg.  XXI,  4). 

*  Zoroaster  wonders  that  Ormazd  fears  so  little  to  infringe 
his  own  laws  by  defiling  waters  with  the  dead.  In  a  Ravfiet,  he 
asks  him  bluntly  why  he  forbids  men  to  take  corpses  to  the  water, 
while  he  himself  sends  rain  to  the  Dakhmas  (Gr.  Rav.  125). 

*  The  sea  where  waters  are  purified  before  going  back  to  their 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


55 


*7  (53)*  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  It  is  even  so 
as  thou  hast  said,  O  righteous  Zarathu^ral  I, 
Ahura  Mazda,  seize  the  waters  from  the  sea  Vouru- 
kasha  with  the  wind  and  the  clouds. 

(55)'  ‘  Ahura  Mazda,  take  them  to  the 
corpses;  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  take  them  down  to  the 
Dakhmas ;  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  take  them  down  to  the 
unclean  remains ;  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  take  them  down 
to  the  bones;  then  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  make  them 
flow  back  unseen;  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  make  them 
flow  back  to  the  sea  Phitika. 

19  (56).  ‘The  waters  stand  there  boiling,  boiling 
up  in  the  heart  of  the  sea  Pditika,  and,  when 
cleansed  there,  they  run  back  again  from  the  sea 
Phitika  to  the  sea  Vouru-kasha,  towards  the  well- 
watered  tree^,  whereon  grow  the  seeds  of  my 
plants  of  every  kind  by  hundreds,  by  thousands,  by 
hundreds  of  thousands. 

20  (60).  ‘  Those  plants,  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  rain 
down  upon  the  earth  to  bring  food  to  the  faithful, 
and  fodder  to  the  beneficent  cow ;  to  bring  food  to 


gatheting  place,  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  (see  §  19).  ‘  All  the  thickness, 
salt,  and  impurity  of  the  sea  Pfittk  wishes  to  go  to  the  Friikh-kart 
sea;  but  a  mighty  high  wind,  blowing  from  the  Var  SatvSs,  drives 
it  away :  whatever  is  clean  and  movable  passes  to  the  Fr&kh-kart 
sea,  and  the  rest  (the  unclean  element)  flows  back  to  the  Pfltik  ’ 
(Bund.  XIII,  10). 

*  The  tree  of  all  seeds  (Harvisptokhm),  which  grows  in  the 
middle  of  the  sea  Vouru-kasha;  the  seeds  of  all  plants  are  on  it 
There  is  a  godlike  bird,  the  Sinamru,  sitting  on  that  tree ;  when¬ 
ever  he  flies  off  the  tree,  there  grow  out  of  it  a  thousand  boughs ; 
whenever  he  alights  on  it,  there  break  a  thousand  boughs,  the  seeds 
of  which  are  scattered  about,  and  rained  down  on  the  earth  by 
Tiftar  (Tirtrya),  the  rain-god  (Yt  XII,  17;  Minokhired  LXII,  37 
seq. ;  Bundsdiu  XXVII ;  cf.  Farg.  XX,  4  seq.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


56 


vendIdAd. 


my  people  that  they  may  live  on  it,  and  fodder  to 
the  beneficent  cow.’ 


V. 

2T  (63).  ‘This^  is  the  best,  this  is  the  fairest  of 
all  things,  even  as  thou  hast  said,  O  pure  [Zara- 
thujtra] !  ’ 

With  these  words  the  holy  Ahura  Mazda  rejoiced 
the  holy  Zarathu.ftra  * :  ‘  Purity  is  for  man,  next  to 
life,  the  greatest  good  ®,  that  purity,  O  Zarathu^tra, 
that  is  in  the  Religion  of  Mazda  for  him  who 
cleanses  his  own  self  with  good  thoughts,  words, 
and  deeds*.’ 

22  (68).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  This  Law,  this  fiend-destroying  Law 
of  Zarathurtra®,  by  what  greatness,  goodness,  and 
fairness  is  it  great,  good,  and  fair  above  all  other 
utterances  ? 

23(69).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘As  much 
above  all  other  floods  as  is  the  sea  Vouru-kasha, 
so  much  above  all  other  utterances  in  greatness, 
goodness,  and  fairness  is  this  Law,  this  fiend- 
destroying  Law  of  Zarathu.ftra. 

24  (71).  ‘As  much  as  a  great  stream  flows  swifter 
than  a  slender  rivulet,  so  much  above  all  other 
utterances  in  greatness,  goodness,  and  fairness  is 
this  Law,  this  fiend-destroying  Law  of  Zarathu^tra. 


’  The  cleansing,  the  purification. 

*  ‘  When  Zoroaster  saw  that  man  is  able  to  escape  sin  by  per¬ 
forming  good  works,  he  was  filled  with  joy  ’  (Comm.) 

*  Quotation  from  the  G&thas  (Yasna  XL VIII,  5  c). 

*  That  is  to  say,  ‘WTio  performs  the  rites  of  cleansing  according 
to  the  prescriptions  of  the  law.’ 

°  The  Law  (Ddtem),  that  part  of  the  religious  system  of 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


57 


‘As  high  as  the  great  tree^  stands  above  the 
small  plants  it  overshadows,  so  high  above  all  other 
utterances  in  greatness,  goodness,  and  fairness  is 
this  Law,  this  fiend-destroying  Law  of  Zarathu^tra. 

25  (73)-  ‘As  high  as  heaven  is  above  the  earth 
that  it  compasses  around,  so  high  above  all  other 
utterances  is  this  Law,  this  fiend-destroying  Law  of 
Mazda. 

‘  [Therefore],  he  will  apply  to  the  Ratu  *,  he  will 
apply  to  the  Sraoshi-varez  whether  for  a  draona- 
service*  that  should  have  been  undertaken*  and  has 
not  been  undertaken  ® ;  or  for  a  draona  that  should 
have  been  offered  up  and  has  not  been  offered  up ; 
or  for  a  draona  that  should  have  been  entrusted 
and  has  not  been  entrusted 


which  the  Vendtddd  is  the  specimen,  and  the  object  of  which  is 
the  purification  of  man. 

*  *  The  royal  cypress  above  small  herbs '  (Comm.) 

*  ‘To  take  the  rule'  (Comm.),  which  probably  means,  ‘to  know 
what  sort  of  penance  he  must  undergo;'  as,  when  a  man  has 
sinned  with  the  tongue  or  with  the  hand,  the  Dastur  (or  Ratu)  must 
prescribe  for  him  the  expiation  that  the  sin  requires.  The  Ratu  is 
the  chief  priest,  the  spiritual  head  of  the  community. 

*  ‘  To  weep  for  his  crime  *  (Comm.),  which  may  mean,  ‘  to  recite 
to  him  the  Patet,  or,  to  receive  at  his  hand  the  proper  number  of 
stripes.'  The  Sraosh&-varez  is  the  priest  that  superintends  the 
sacrifice.  He  receives  the  confession  of  the  guilty  man  and  very 
likely  wields  the  Sraoshd-^arana. 

^  The  Srdsh-darfin,  a  service  in  honour  of  any  of  the  angels, 
or  of  deceased  persons,  in  which  small  cakes,  called  draona,  are 
consecrated  in  their  names,  and  then  given  to  those  present  to  eat. 

*  When  it  ought  not  to  be. 

*  W'hen  it  ought  to  be. 

^  The  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  not  certain.  The  Com¬ 
mentary  has;  ‘Whether  he  has  thought  what  he  ought  not  to 
have  thought,  or  has  not  thought  what  he  ought  to  have  thought; 
whether  he  has  said  what  he  ought  not  to  have  said,  or  has  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


58 


vend!dAd. 


26  (81).  ‘The  Ratu  has  power  to  remit  him  one- 
third  of  his  penalty ' :  if  he  has  committed  any  other 
evil  deed,  it  is  remitted  by  his  repentance ;  if  he  has 
committed  no  other  evil  deed,  he  is  absolved  by  his 
repentance  for  ever  and  ever 

VI. 

27  (82).  O  Maker'  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  there  be  a  number  of  men  resting 
in  the  same  place,  on  the  same  carpet,  on  the  same 
pillows,  be  there  two  men  near  one  another,  or  five, 
or  fifty,  or  a  hundred,  close  by  one  another ;  and  of 
those  people  one  happens  to  die;  how  many  of 
them  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  ®  envelope  with  corrup¬ 
tion,  infection,  and  pollution  ? 

28  (86).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘If  the  dead 
one  be  a  priest,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  forth*, 
O  Spitama  ZarathuJtral  she  goes  as  far  as  the 
eleventh  and  defiles  the  ten®. 


said  what  he  ought  to  have  said ;  whether  he  has  done  what  he  ought 
not  to  have  done,  or  has  not  done  what  he  ought  to  have  done.’ 

*  When  the  Ratu  remits  one-third  of  the  sin,  God  remits  the 
whole  of  it  (Saddar  29). 

*  Cf.  Farg.  Ill,  41. 

'Nasu  (mW)  designates  both  the  corpse  and  the  corpse-demon 
(the  Dnt^  that  produces  the  corruption  and  infection  of  the  dead 
body). 

'  In  opposition  to  the  case  when  the  dead  one  is  an  Ashe- 
maogha  (§  35),  as  no  Nasu  issues  then. 

*  Literally,  ‘  If  she  goes  as  far  as  the  eleventh,  she  defiles  the 
tenth.’  That  is  to  say,  she  stops  at  the  eleventh  and  defiles  the 
next  ten.  In  the  Ravdets,  the  Avesta  distinctions  are  lost,  and 
the  defiling  power  of  the  Nasu  is  the  same,  whatever  may  have 
been  the  rank  of  the  dead :  ’  If  there  be  a  number  of  people  sleep¬ 
ing  in  the  same  place,  and  if  one  of  them  happen  to  die,  all  those 
around  him,  in  any  direction,  as  far  as  the  eleventh,  become  unclean 
if  they  have  been  in  contact  with  one  another’  (Gr.  Rav.  470). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


59 


‘  If  the  dead  one  be  a  warrior,  the  Dru/  Nasu 
rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^ra!  she  goes  as 
far  as  the  tenth  and  defiles  the  nine. 

‘  If  the  dead  one  be  a  husbandman,  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu5tra!  she 
goes  as  far  as  the  ninth  and  defiles  the  eight 

29  (92).  ‘  If  it  be  a  shepherd’s  dog,  the  Dn^ 
Nasu  rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  ZarathuJtra!  she 
goes  as  far  as  the  eighth  and  defiles  the  seven. 

‘  If  it  be  a  house-dog,  the  Dnif  Nasu  rushes 
forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra!  she  goes  as  far  as 
the  seventh  and  defiles  the  six. 

30  (96).  ‘  If  it  be  a  Vohunazgja  dog\  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathuitra!  she 
goes  as  far  as  the  sixth  and  defiles  the  five. 

‘  If  it  be  a  Tauruna  dog*,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes 
forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.ftra !  she  goes  as  far  as 
the  fifth  and  defiles  the  four. 

31  (100).  ‘If  it  be  a  porcupine  dog,  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.ftra !  she 
goes  as  far  cis  the  fourth  and  defiles  the  three. 

‘  If  it  be  a  6^asu  dog  ®,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes 
forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.ftra !  she  goes  as  far  as 
the  third  and  defiles  the  two. 

32(104).  ‘If  it  be  an  Aiwizu  dog,  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra !  she 
goes  as  far  as  the  second  and  defiles  the  next. 

*  If  it  be  a  Vlzu  dog,  the  Dn^  Nasu  rushes  forth, 
O  Spitama  Zarathu.^ra !  she  goes  as  far  as  the  next, 
she  defiles  the  next.’ 


*  A  dog  without  a  master  (see  Farg.  XIII,  19). 

*  A  hunting-dog. 

’  This  name  and  the  two  following,  Aiwizu  and  Vtzu,  are  left 
untranslated  in  the  Pahlavi  translation. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


6o 


VENDiDAD. 


33  (io8).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  it  be  a  weasel*,  how  many  of  the 
creatures  of  the  good  spirit  does  it  directly  defile, 
how  many  does  it  indirectly  defile  ? 

34(110).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘A  weasel 
does  neither  directly  nor  indirectly  defile  any  of  the 
creatures  of  the  good  spirit,  but  him  who  smites 
and  kills  it ;  to  him  the  uncleanness  clings  for  ever 
and  ever 

35  (1^3)®*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  1  If  the  dead  one  be  such  a  wicked,  two- 
footed  ruffian,  as  an  ungodly  Ashemaogha*,  how 
many  of  the  creatures  of  the  good  spirit  does  he 
directly  defile,  how  many  does  he  indirectly  defile  ? 

36(115).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘No  more 
than  a  frog  does  whose  venom  is  dried  up,  and  that 
•has  been  dead  more  than  a  year®.  Whilst  alive, 
indeed,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  such  a  wicked,  two- 
legged  ruffian  as  an  ungodly  Ashemaogha,  directly 
defiles  the  creatures  of  the  good  spirit,  and  indi¬ 
rectly  defiles  them. 

37(119).  ‘Whilst  alive  he  smites  the  water*; 
whilst  alive  he  blows  out  the  fire  * ;  whilst  alive  he 


’  A  weasel.  The  weasel  is  one  of  the  creatures  of  Ahura,  for  ‘  it 
has  been  created  to  fight  against  the  serpent  garza  and  the  other 
khrafstras  that  live  in  holes’  (Bund.  XIX,  27). 

*  Not  that  the  unclean  one  cannot  be  cleansed,  but  that  his  un¬ 
cleanness  does  not  pass  from  him  to  another. 

’  §§  36-38 ;  cf.  Farg.  XII,  21-24. 

*  Ashemaogha,  a  heretic. 

*  The  frog  is  a  creature  of  Ahriman’s,  and  one  of  the  most 
hateful.  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  5. 

*  By  defiling  it  (a  capital  crime ;  see  Farg.  VII,  25). 

'  He  extinguishes  the  Bahrfim  fire  (a  capital  crime ;  cf.  Farg. 
VII,  26). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


6l 


carries  off  the  cow  ’ ;  whilst  alive  he  smites  the 
faithful  man  with  a  deadly  blow,  that  parts  the  soul 
from  the  body  * ;  not  so  will  he  do  when  dead. 

38  (120).  ‘Whilst  alive,  indeed,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thuJtra !  such  a  wicked,  two-legged  ruffian  as  an  un¬ 
godly  Ashemaogha  robs  the  faithful  man  of  the  full 
possession  of  his  food,  of  his  clothing,  of  his  wood, 
of  his  bed,  of  his  vessels  ® ;  not  so  will  he  do  when 
dead 

VII. 

39  (122).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  !  When  into  our  houses  here  below  we 
have  brought  the  fire,  the  Baresma,  the  cups,  the 
Haoma,  and  the  mortar  ®,  O  holy  Ahura  Mazda  !  if 
it  come  to  pass  that  either  a  dog  or  a  man  dies 
there,  what  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

40(125).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Out  of  the 
house,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.ftra !  shall  they  take 
the  fire,  the  Baresma,  the  cups,  the  Haoma,  and  the 
mortar ;  they  shall  take  the  dead  one  out  to  the 
proper  place  *  whereto,  according  to  the  law,  corpses 
must  be  brought,  to  be  devoured  there.’ 

41  (128).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  shall  they  bring  back  the  fire 
into  the  house  wherein  the  man  has  died  ? 


*  As  a  cattle-lifter.  ’  As  an  assassin. 

*  By  defiling  them,  he  deprives  the  faithful  of  their  use. 

*  ‘  When  a  wicked  man  dies,  the  Dinf  who  was  with  him  during  his 
lifetime,  seizes  him  and  drags  him  down  to  Ahriman ;  therefore, 
his  body,  as  the  Dn^  is  no  longer  with  it,  becomes  pure.  On  the 
contrary,  when  it  is  a  righteous  man  that  dies,  the  Amshdspands 
take  his  soul  to  Ormazd  and  the  Dn\f  settles  in  the  house  of  the 
body  and  makes  it  impure  ’  (Gujastak  Abalish). 

*  In  order  to  perform  a  sacrifice.  *  The  Dakhma. 


Digitized  by 


62 


VENDtDAD. 


42  (129).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘They  shall 
wait  for  nine  nights  in  winter,  for  a  month  in  sum¬ 
mer^,  and  then  they  shall  bring  back  the  fire  to 
the  house  wherein  the  man  has  died.’ 

43  (^31)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  And  if  they  shall  bring  back  the  fire 
to  the  house  wherein  the  man  has  died,  within  the 
nine  nights,  or  within  the  month,  what  penalty 
shall  they  pay  ? 

44(134).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘They  shall  be 
Pesh6tanus :  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah6- 
artra,  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-/^arana.’ 

VIII. 

45  (*35)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  in  the  house  of  a  worshipper  of 
Mazda  there  be  a  woman  with  child,  and  if  being  a 
month  gone,  or  two,  or  three,  or  four,  or  five,  or  six, 
or  seven,  or  eight,  or  nine,  or  teh  months  gone  ®,  she 
bring  forth  a  still-born  child,  ivhat  shall  the  wor¬ 
shippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

46  (i  39)-  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  place  in 
that  Mazdean  house  whereof  the  ground  is  the 
cleanest  and  the  driest,  and  the  least  passed  through 
by  flocks  and  herds,  by  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda, 
by  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma,  and  by  the 
faithful ;  ’ — 

47  (i43)-  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  far  from  the  fire  ?  How  far  from 

^  Corruption  being  worse  in  summer. 

*  §§  45-64=Farg.  VII,  60-69. 

^  The  pregnancy,  without  lasting  more  than  nine  calendar 
months  (9  times  30  days),  generally  extends  along  ten  months  on 
the  calendar  (for  instance  from  January  10  to  October  10). 


Digitized  by  i^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


63 


the  water  ?  How  far  from  the  consecrated  bundles 
of  Baresma  ?  How  far  from  the  faithful  ? 

48  (144).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Thirty  paces 
from  the  fire ;  thirty  paces  from  the  water ;  thirty 
paces  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma ; 
three  paces  from  the  faithful ' ; — 

49  (145)*  ‘  place  shall  the  worshippers  of 

Mazda  erect  an  enclosure*,  and  therein  shall  they 
establish  her  with  food,  therein  shall  they  establish 
her  with  clothes.’ 

50  (147).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  is  the  food  that  the  woman  shall 
first  take  ? 

51(148).  Ahura  Mazda  answered;  ‘G6m6z* 
mixed  with  ashes,  three  draughts  of  it,  or  six, 
or  nine,  to  send  down  the  Dakhma  within  her 
womb  *. 

52(151).  ‘Afterwards  she  may  drink  boiling® 
milk  of  mares,  cows,  sheep,  or  goats,  with  pap  or 
without  pap*;  she  may  take  cooked  milk  without 


*  The  carrier  alone  is  kept  thirty  feet  from  the  faithful  (Farg.  Ill, 
18),  as  he  is  cut  off  from  the  community :  his  food  is  not  brought 
to  him,  he  has  a  store  prepared  for  him.  The  woman,  when 
armirt,  is  only  temporarily  isolated;  she  stays  in  the  house  and 
her  food  is  brought  to  her  all  but  from  hand  to  hand  (Farg. 
XVI,  6). 

*  The  place  for  the  man  or  woman  in  state  of  uncleanness,  or 
Arm8n-gih. 

*  Urine  of  the  ox:  the  so-called  Nirang-dtn;  cf.  Farg.  VIII, 
37;  XIX,  21.  ‘Three  cups,  or  six,  or  nine,  according  to  her 
strength  ’  (Asp.) 

*  Her  womb  is  a  Dakhma,  as  it  contained  a  dead  body. — These 
nine  draughts  of  gdm8z  mixed  with  ashes  are  like  an  interior 
Barashnhm,  as  the  Barashnhm  consists  of  nine  succesrive  purifica¬ 
tions  with  gdmfiz  and  dust. 

*  Doubtful.  *  Doubtful. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


64 


VENDtoAD. 


water,  meal  without  water,  and  wine  without 
water 

53  (154).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  long  shall  she  remain  so  ?  How 
long  shall  she  live  thus  on  milk,  meal,  and  wine  ? 

54  (i 55).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Three  nights 
long  shall  she  remain  so ;  three  nights  long  shall  she 
live  thus  on  milk,  meal,  and  wine.  Then,  when 
three  nights  have  passed,  she  shall  wash  her  body, 
she  shall  wash  her  clothes,  with  g6m6z  and  water, 
by  the  nine  holes  *,  and  thus  shall  she  be  clean.’ 

55  (157).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  long  shall  she  remain  so  ?  How 
long,  after  the  three  nights  have  gone,  shall  she  sit 
confined,  and  live  separated  from  the  rest  of  the 
worshippers  of  Mazda,  as  to  her  seat,  her  food,  and 
her  clothing? 

56  (158).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Nine  nights 
long  shall  she  remain  so :  nine  nights  long,  after  the 
three  nights  have  gone,  shall  she  sit  confined,  and 
live  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  worshippers  of 
Mazda,  as  to  her  seat,  her  food,  and  her  clothing. 
Then,  when  the  nine  nights  have  gone,  she  shall 
wash  her  body,  and  cleanse  her  clothes  with  g6m6z 
and  water®.’ 


'  *  The  water  would  be  defiled ;  *  cf.  Farg.  VII,  70  seq. 

*  She  shall  perform  the  nine  nights'  Barashnfim,  for  the 
details  of  which  see  Farg.  IX.  That  Barashnfim  is  taken  forty 
days  after  the  delivery. 

®  *  If  a  woman  brings  forth  a  still-born  child,  after  a  pregnancy 
of  one  month  to  ten  months,  the  first  food  she  shall  take  is  nirang 
(=g6m^z) ...  fire  and  ashes;  and  she  is  not  allowed  until  the 
fourth  day  to  take  water  or  salt,  or  any  food  that  is  cooked  with 
water  or  salt:  on  the  fourth  day  they  give  her  nirang,  that  she 
may  cleanse  herself  and  wash  her  clothes  with  it,  and  she  is  not 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  V. 


65 


57  (160)  *.  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  those  clothes,  when  once  washed 
and  cleansed,  ever  be  used  either  by  a  Zaotar,  or  by 
a  Havanan,  or  by  an  Atare-vakhsha,  or  by  a  Fra- 
baretar,  or  by  an  Abere<f,  or  by  an  Asnatar,  or  by 
a  Rathwi^kar,  or  by  a  Sraoshi-varez  ®,  or  by  any 
priest,  warrior,  or  husbandman  ®  ? 

58(162).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Never  can 
those  clothes,  even  when  washed  and  cleansed,  be 
used  either  by  a  Zaotar,  or  by  a  Hivanan,  or  by  an 
Atare-vakhsha,  or  by  a  Frabaretar,  or  by  an  Abere^/, 
or  by  an  Asnatar,  or  by  a  Rathwwkar,  or  by  a 
Sraosh4-varez,  or  by  any  priest,  warrior,  or  husband¬ 
man. 

59  (164).  ‘  But  if  there  be  in  a  Mazdean  house  a 
woman  who  is  in  her  sickness,  or  a  man  who  has 
become  unfit  for  work^  and  who  must  sit  in  the 
place  of  infirmity®,  those  clothes  shall  serve  for  their 


allowed  to  wash  herself  and  her  clothes  with  water  until  the  forty- 
first  day'  (Gr.  Rav.  568). 

'  §§  57-62 =Farg.  VII,  17-22. 

®  These  are  the  names  of  the  different  priests  who  were  engaged 
in  the  sacrifices.  The  Havanan  strains  the  Haoma;  the  Atare- 
vakhsha  kindles  the  fire ;  the  Frabaretar  brings  to  the  Zaotar  all 
that  he  needs;  the  Ahered  brings  the  water;  the  Asnatar  washes 
and  strains  the  Haoma;  the  Rathwlrkar  mixes  the  Haoma  and 
the  milk ;  the  Zaotar  chants  the  hymns  and  says  the  prayers ;  the 
Sraoshi-varez  superintends  the  sacrifice.  Nowadays  there  are  only 
two  priests,  the  Zaotar  (Zfitt)  and  the  Rathwlrkar  (Raspf),  the  latter 
performing  all  the  accessory  services  formerly  performed  by  several 
priests.  Cf.  Nhangistin,  §§  71  sq. 

•  In  short,  by  any  of  the  faithful,  w’hen  in  state  of  purity. 

•  An  Armirt;  literally,  ‘an  infirm  person,'  that  is  to  say,  one 

who  is  unclean,  during  the  time  of  his  uncleanness  (Farg.  IX, 
33  vrork  is  forbidden  to  him. 

•  The  Arm6rt-gih,  the  place  of  seclusion  of  the  Armirt. 

[4]  F 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


66 


vendIdAd. 


« 

coverings  and  for  their  sheets  \  until  they  can  with¬ 
draw  their  hands  for  prayer  ^ 

60(168).  ‘Ahura  Mazda,  indeed,  does  not  allow 
us  to  waste  anything  of  value  that  we  may  have,  not 
even  so  much  as  an  Asperena  s  ®  weight  of  thread, 
not  even  so  much  as  a  maid  lets  fall  in  spinning. 

61  (171).  ‘Whosoever  throws  any  clothing  on  a 
dead  body^,  even  so  much  as  a  maid  lets  fall  in 
spinning,  is  not  a  pious  man  whilst  alive,  nor  shall 
he,  when  dead,  have  a  place  in  Paradise. 

62  (174).  ‘  He  makes  himself  a  viaticum  unto  the 
world  of  the  wicked,  into  that  world  made  of 


^  The  clothing  defiled  by  the  dead  can  only  serve  for  Dashtin 
women,  even  after  it  has  been  washed  and  exposed  for  six  months 
to  the  light  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon  (Saddar  91 ;  cf.  Farg.  VII, 
10  seq.) 

*  Until  they  are  clean.  The  unclean  must  have  their  hands 
wrapped  in  an  old  piece  of  linen,  lest  they  should  touch  and  defile 
anything  clean. 

®  See  Farg.  IV,  48,  note  4. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  VIII,  23  seq.  It  appears  from  those  passages  that 
the  dead  must  lie  on  the  mountain  naked,  or  *  clothed  only  with 
the  light  of  heaven'  (Farg.  VI,  51).  The  modem  custom  is  to 
clothe  them  with  old  clothing  (Dadabhai  Naoroji,  Manners  and 
Customs  of  the  Parsis,  p.  15).  ‘When  a  man  dies  and  receives 
the  order  (to  depart),  the  older  the  shroud  they  make  for  him,  the 
better.  It  must  be  old,  worn  out,  but  well  washed :  they  must  not 
lay  anything  new  on  the  dead.  For  it  is  said  in  the  Zend  Vendtdfid, 
If  they  put  on  the  dead  even  so  much  as  a  thread  from  the  distaff 
more  than  is  necessary,  every  thread  shall  become  in  the  other 
world  a  black  snake  clinging  to  the  heart  of  him  who  made  that 
shroud,  and  even  the  dead  shall  rise  against  him  and  seize  him  by 
the  skirt,  and  say.  That  shroud  which  thou  madest  for  me  has  be¬ 
come  food  for  worms  and  vermin*  (Saddar  12).  After  the  fourth 
day,  when  the  soul  is  in  heaven,  then  rich  garments  are  offered  up 
to  it,  which  it  will  wear  in  its  celestial  life  (Saddar  87). 

*  ‘  Where  darkness  can  be  seized  with  the  hand  *  (Comm. ;  cf. 
Aogemaid£  28);  something  more  than  the  ‘visible  darkness.* 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  VI. 


67 


darkness,  the  offspring  of  darkness  which  is 
Darkness’  self.  To  that  world,  to  the  world  of 
Hell,  you  are  delivered  by  your  own  doings,  by 
your  own  religion,  O  sinners*  1’ 


Fargard  VI. 

I  (1-9).  How  long  the  earth  remains  unclean,  when  defiled  bj 
the  dead. 

II  (10-25).  Penalties  for  defiling  the  ground  with  dead  matter. 

III  (26-41).  Purification  of  the  different  sorts  of  water,  when 
defiled  by  the  dead. 

rV  (42-43).  Purification  of  the  Haoma. 

V  (44-51).  The.  place  for  corpses ;  the  Dakhmas. 

I. 

I.  How  long  shall  the  piece  of  ground  lie  fallow 
whereon  dogs  or  men  have  died  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  A  year  long  shall  the 
piece  of  ground  lie  fallow  whereon  dogs  or  men  have 
died,  O  holy  Zarathurtra! 

2  (3).  ‘  A  year  long  shall  no  worshipper  of  Mazda 
sow  or  water  that  piece  of  ground  whereon  dogs  or 
men  have  died ;  he  may  sow  as  he  likes  the  rest  of 
the  ground ;  he  may  water  it  as  he  likes  *. 

3  (5).  ‘  If  within  the  year  they  shall  sow  or  water 
the  piece  of  ground  whereon  dogs  or  men  have  died, 
they  are  guilty  of  the  sin  of  “  burying  the  dead  ” 


'  The  Commentary  has,  ‘the  place  of  those  who  impregnate 
darkness,  for  the  Dni^p  who  conceives  seed  from  the  sinner  comes 
from  that  place '  (cf.  Farg.  XVIII,  30  seq.) 

*  Quotation  from  the  Gfithas  (Yasna  XXXI,  20). 

*  Cf.  Farg.  VII,  45  seq. 

F  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


68 


vendIdad. 


towards  the  water,  towards  the  earth,  and  towards 
the  plants 

4  (7).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  If  worshippers  of  Mazda  shall  sow  or  water, 
within  the  year,  the  piece  of  ground  whereon  dogs 
or  men  have  died,  what  is  the  penalty  that  they 
shall  pay  ? 

5  (9).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  They  are  Peshd- 
tanus :  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-artra, 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6->feirana 

6(10).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  If  worshippers  of  Mazda  want  to  till  that 
piece  of  ground  again  ®,  to  water  it,  to  sow  it,  and  to 
plough  it,  what  shall  they  do  ? 

7(12).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  look 
on  the  ground  for  any  bones,  hair,  dung,  urine,  or 
blood  that  may  be  there.’ 

8  (13).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  If  they  shall  not  look  on  the  ground  for  any 
bones,  hair,  dung,  urine,  or  blood  that  may  be  there, 
what  is  the  penalty  that  they  shall  pay  ? 

9  (i 5).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘They  are  Pesh6- 
tanus:  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-artra, 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

II. 

10  (16).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 

*  ‘To  the  water  which  they  pour  out,  to  the  earth  which  they 
plough,  to  the  plants  which  they  sow  ’  (Comm.) 

*  ‘  If  they  plough  and  sow  it,  one  taniffthr  (see  Introd.  V,  19) ; 
if  they  pour  water  on  it,  one  taniffihr ;  if  they  plough,  sow,  and 
water  it,  two  tan&fflhrs  '  (Comm.) 

*  Even  when  a  year's  space  is  past,  the  ground  is  not  free  ipso 
facto. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VI. 


69 


a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large  as 
the  top  joint  of  the  little  finger,  and  if  grease  or 
marrow  flow  from  it  on  to  the  ground,  what,  penalty 
shall  he  pay  ? 

11  (18).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘ Thirty  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-artra,  thirty  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-iarana.’ 

12  (20).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large  as 
the  top  joint  of  the  fore-finger,  and  if  grease  or 
marrow  flow  from  it  on  to  the  ground,  what  penalty 
shall  he  pay  ? 

13  (24).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Fifty  stripes 
with  the  Aspah6-astra,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
iarana.’ 

14  (25).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large  as 
the  top  joint  of  the  middle  finger,  and  if  grease  or 
marrow  flow  from  it  on  to  the  ground,  what  penalty 
shall  he  pay  ? 

1 5  (29).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Seventy  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-a^tra,  seventy  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

16  (30),  O  Mciker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large 
as  a  finger  or  as  a  rib,  and  if  grease  or  marrow  flow 
from  it  on  to  the  gjround,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

17  (34).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  *  Ninety  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

(35)'  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


70 


vendJdAd. 


Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large 
as  two  fingers  or  as  two  ribs,  and  if  grease  or  marrow 
flow  from  it  on  to  the  ground,  what  penalty  shall 
he  pay  ? 

19  (39).  Ahura  Mzizda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Pesh6- 
tanu :  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspahd-aytra, 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-/^arana.’ 

20  (40).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large  as 
an  arm-bone  or  as  a  thigh-bone,  and  if  grease  or 
marrow  flow  from  it  on  to  the  ground,  what  penalty 
shall  he  pay  ? 

21  (44).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  Four  hundred 
stripes  with  the  Aspah^-a^tra,  four  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

22  (45).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
a  bone  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man,  as  large  as 
a  man’s  skull,  and  if  grease  or  marrow  flow  from  it 
on  to  the  ground,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

23  (49).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Six  hundred 
stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  six  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

24  (50).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  throw  on  the  ground 
the  whole  body  of  a  dead  dog,  or  of  a  dead  man, 
and  if  grease  or  marrow  flow  from  it  on  to  the 
ground,  what  penalty  shall  he  pay  ? 

25  (53)*  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  *A  thousand 
stripes  with  the  Aspah^-artra,  a  thousand  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6-^rana.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VI, 


71 


III. 

26  (54).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  worshipper  of  Mazda,  walking,  or 
running,  or  riding,  or  driving,  come  upon  a  corpse  in 
a  stream  of  running  water,  what  shall  he  do  ? 

27(56).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Taking  off 
his  shoes,  putting  off  his  clothes,  while  the  others 
■wait\  O  ZarathuJtra!  he  shall  enter  the  river,  and 
take  the  dead  out  of  the  water ;  he  shall  go  down 
into  the  water  ankle-deep,  knee-deep,  waist-deep,  or 
a  man’s  full  depth,  till  he  can  reach  the  dead  body*.’ 

28  (61).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If,  however,  the  body  be  already  falling 
to  pieces  and  rotting,  what  shall  the  worshipper  of 
Mazda  do  ? 

29  (63).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  shall  draw 
out  of  the  water  as  much  of  the  corpse  as  he  can 
grasp  with  both  hands,  and  he  shall  lay  it  down  on 
the  dry  ground;  no  sin  attaches  to  him  for  any 
bone,  hair,  grease,  dung,  urine,  or  blood  that  may 
drop  back  into  the  water.’ 

30  (65).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  part  of  the  water  in  a  pond  does 
the  Dru^  Nasu  defile  with  corruption,  infection, 
and  pollution  ? 

31  (66).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Six  steps  on 
each  of  the  four  sides.  As  long  as  the  corpse  has 


*  Ready  to  help  him  in  case  of  need. 

*  ‘  If  he  is  able  to  draw  out  the  corpse  and  does  so,  it  is  a  pious 
deed  worth  a  tandffihr  (that  is,  one  by  which  a  tan&ffihr  sin  can  be 
cancelled) ;  if  he  is  able  to  draw  it  out  and  does  not  do  so,  it  is  a 
taniffihr  sin.  G&gdmsp  says.  It  is  a  margarz&n  sin  (a  capital  crime)  ’ 
(Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


72 


vendIdAd. 


not  been  taken  out  of  the  water,  so  long  shall  that 
water  be  unclean  and  unfit  to  drink.  They  shall, 
therefore,  take  the  corpse  out  of  the  pond,  and  lay 
it  down  on  the  dry  ground. 

32  (69).  ‘  And  of  the  water  they  shall  draw  off  the 
half,  or  the  third,  or  the  fourth,  or  the  fifth  part, 
according  as  they  are  able  or  not;  and  after  the 
corpse  has  been  taken  out  and  the  water  has  been 
drawn  off,  the  rest  of  the  water  is  clean,  and  both 
cattle  and  men  may  drink  of  it  at  their  pleasure,  as 
before.’ 

33  (72).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  part  of  the  water  in  a  well  does 
the  Dru^  Nasu  defile  with  corruption,  infection,  and 
pollution  ? 

34  (73)*  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  As  long  as 
the  corpse  has  not  been  taken  out  of  the  water,  so 
long  shall  that  water  be  unclean  and  unfit  to  drink. 
They  shall,  therefore,  take  the  corpse  out  of  the 
well,  and  lay  it  down  on  the  dry  ground. 

35  (73)*  ‘  water  in  the  well  they  shall 

draw  off  the  half,  or  the  third,  or  the  fourth,  or  the 
fifth  part,  according  as  they  are  able  or  not ;  and 
after  the  corpse  has  been  taken  out  and  the  water 
has  been  drawn  off,  the  rest  of  the  water  is  clean, 
and  both  cattle  and  men  may  drink  of  it  at  their 
pleasure,  as  before.’ 

36  (74).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  part  of  a  sheet  of  snow  or  hail 
does  the  Dru^  Nasu  defile  with  corruption,  infection, 
and  pollution 

37  (75).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Three  steps ' 


*  Nine  feet  on  the  four  sides. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VI. 


73 


on  each  of  the  four  sides.  As  long  as  the  corpse 
has  not  been  taken  out  of  the  water,  so  long  shall 
that  water  be  unclean  and  unfit  to  drink.  They 
shall,  therefore,  take  the  corpse  out  of  the  water, 
and  lay  it  down  on  the  dry  ground. 

38  (78).  ‘  After  the  corpse  has  been  taken  out, 
and  the  snow  or  the  hail  has  melted,  the  water  is 
dean,  and  both  cattle  and  men  may  drink  of  it  at 
their  pleasure,  as  before.’ 

39  (79)'  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  part  of  the  water  of  a  running 
stream  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  defile  w'ith  corruption, 
infection,  and  pollution  ? 

40  (80).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Three  steps 
down  the  stream,  nine  steps  up  the  stream,  six  steps 
across.  As  long  as  the  corpse  has  not  been  taken 
out  of  the  water,  so  long  shall  the  water  be  unclean 
and  unfit  to  drink.  They  shall,  therefore,  take  the 
corpse  out  of  the  water,  and  lay  it  down  on  the  dry 
ground. 

41  (83).  ‘  After  the  corpse  has  been  taken  out  and 
the  stream  has  flowed  three  times  the  water  is 
clean,  and  both  cattle  and  men  may  drink  of  it  at 
their  pleasure,  as  before.’ 

IV. 

42  (84).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  the  Haoma  that  has  been  touched 
with  Nasu  from  a  dead  dog,  or  from  a  dead  man,  be 
made  clean  ag^ain  ? 

43  (^S)'  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  can,  O 
holy  Zarathu^tra !  If  it  has  been  prepared  for  the 


*  Three  times  the  measure  up  the  stream  (that  is  nine  feet). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


74 


vendJdAd. 


sacrifice  there  is  to  it  no  corruption,  no  death,  no 
touch  of  any  Nasu  *.  If  it  has  not  been  prepared 
for  the  sacrifice,  [the  stem]  is  defiled  the  length  of 
four  fingers  ® :  it  *  shall  be  laid  down  on  ®  the  ground, 
in  the  middle  of  the  house,  for  a  year  long.  When 
the  year  is  passed,  the  faithful  may  drink  of  its  juice 
at  their  pleasure,  as  before.’ 

V. 

44  (92).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Whither  shall  we  bring,  where  shall 
we  lay  the  bodies  of  the  dead  *,  O  Ahura  Mazda  ? 

45  (93)*  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  On  the  high¬ 
est  summits'^,  where  they  know  there  are  always 
corpse-eating  dogs  and  corpse-eating  birds,  O  holy 
Zarathujtra  I 

46  (95).  ‘  There  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda 
fasten  the  corpse,  by  the  feet  and  by  the  hair,  with 
brass,  stones,  or  clay,  lest  the  corpse-eating  dogs 
and  the  corpse-eating  birds  shall  go  and  carry  the 
bones  to  the  water  and  to  the  trees. 

47  (98).  ‘  If  they  shall  not  fasten  the  corpse,  so 
that  the  corpse-eating  dogs  and  the  corpse-eating 


'  Pounded  and  strained. 

*  Because  the  Haoma  is  the  plant  of  life ;  when  strained  for  the 
sacrifice,  it  is  the  king  of  healing  plants  (Bund.  XXIV) ;  the  dead 
shall  become  immortal  by  tasting  of  the  white  Haoma  (ib.  XXXI). 

’  Four  fingers  from  the  point  touched  by  the  Nasu.  That 
part  of  the  stem  shall  be  cut  off  (Frdmjt) :  the  rest  can  be  made 
clean. 

*  What  is  left  of  the  stem. 

‘  Perhaps  :  in  the  ground  (it  shall  be  buried). 

*  In  places  where  there  are  no  Dakhmas;  for  instance,  in  the 
country. 

'  ‘  On  the  top  of  a  mountain '  (Comm.)  Cf.  VIII,  10. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VI. 


75 


birds  may  go  and  carry  the  bones  to  the  water  and  to 
the  trees,  what  is  the  penalty  that  they  shall  pay  ?’ 

48(100).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘They  shall 
be  Peshdtanus :  two  hundred  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-a^tra,  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
i^rana.’ 

49  (loi).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Whither  shall  we  bring,  where  shall 
we  lay  the  bones  *  of  the  dead,  O  Ahura  Mazda  ? 

50  (102).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  wor¬ 
shippers  of  Mazda  shall  make  a  receptacle  *  out  of 
the  reach  of  the  dog,  of  the  fox,  and  of  the  wolf, 
and  wherein  rain-water  cannot  stay. 

51  (105).  ‘They  shall  make  it,  if  they  can  afford 
it,  with  stones,  plaster,  or  earth®;  if  they  cannot 
afford  it,  they  shall  lay  down  the  dead  man  on  the 
ground,  on  his  carpet  and  his  pillow,  clothed  with 
the  light  of  heaven,  and  beholding  the  sun 


*  When  the  flesh  has  been  stripped  oflF  the  bones,  they  may  be 
collected  in  a  stone  ossuary.  See  following  note. 

*  ‘When  the  corpse-eating  birds  have  eaten  the  fat,  that  fat 
which,  when  it  is  not  possible  to  eat  it,  becomes  rotten,  offensive, 
and  fraught  with  noxious  creatures,  then  men  shall  properly  con¬ 
vey  the  bones  away  to  the  bone-receptacle  (astddfln),  which  one 
is  to  elevate  so  from  the  ground,  and  over  which  a  roof  so  stands, 
that  in  no  way  does  the  rain  fall  upon  the  dead  matter,  nor  the 
water  reach  up  to  it  therein,  nor  are  the  dog  and  fox  able  to  go  to 
it,  and  for  the  sake  of  light  coming  to  it  a  hole  is  made  therein’ 
(Dfldistfln  XVIII,  3;  tr.  West). 

*  Such  stone  ossuaries  have  been  found  at  Bushir,  by  Mr. 
Malcolm;  earth  ossuaries,  found  at  Susa,  were  brought  to  the 
Louvre  by  M.  Dieulafoy. 

‘  The  dead  must  see  the  sun :  that  is  why  the  astddin  has  holes 
for  letting  the  light  in  (see  note  2  above). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


76 


vendIdad. 


Fargard  VII. 

1  (1-5).  How  long  after  death  the  Dru^  Nasu  takes  possession 
of  the  corpse. 

II  (6-9  =  V,  27-30).  How  far  the  defiling  power  of  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  extends. 

III  (10-22).  Cleansing  of  clothes  defiled  by  the  dead. 

IV  (23-24).  Eating  of  Nasu  an  abomination. 

V  (25-27).  Bringing  Nasu  to  fire  or  water  an  abomination. 

VI  (28-35).  Cleansing  of  wood  and  com  defiled  by  the  dead. 

VII  a  (36-40).  Physicians ;  their  probation. 

VII  b  (41-44).  Their  fees. 

VIII  (45-59).  Purification  of  the  earth,  of  the  Dakhmas.  The 
Dakhmas  and  the  DaSvas. 

IX  (60-72  ;  66-69  =  V,  45-54).  Treatment  of  a  woman  who 
has  brought  forth  a  still-bom  child. 

X  (73-75).  Cleansing  of  vessels  defiled  by  the  dead. 

XI  (76).  Cleansing  of  the  cow. 

XII  (78).  Unclean  libations. 

This  chapter  would  offer  tolerable  unity,  but  for  a  digression  on 
medicine,  which  would  be  better  placed  as  an  introduction  to  the 
last  three  chapters.  Sections  II  and  IX,  parts  of  which  have  already 
been  found  in  Fargard  V,  are  more  suitably  placed  here.  This 
chapter,  as  a  whole,  deals  with  the  action  of  the  Dr^^  Nasu,  from 
the  moment  she  takes  hold  of  the  corpse,  and  shows  how  and 
when  the  several  objects  she  has  defiled  become  clean,  namely, 
clothes,  wood,  com,  earth,  women,  vessels,  and  cows. 

I. 

I.  Zarathu^tra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O  Ahura 
Mazda,  most  beneficent  Spirit,  Maker  of  the  material 
world,  thou  Holy  One !  When  a  man  dies,  at  what 
moment  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  upon  him  ?’ 

2  (3).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Directly  after 
death,  as  soon  as  the  soul  has  left  the  body,  O 
Spitama  Zarathujtra!  the  Dru^  Nasu  comes  and 
rushes  upon  him,  from  the  regions  of  the  north in 


'  Hell  lies  in  the  north ;  cf.  II,  10  n. ;  III,  7  n. ;  XIX,  i 
Yt.  XXII,  26;  Bundahi/XV,  19. 


Digitized  by 


FARGARD  VII. 


77 


the  shape  of  a  raging  fly,  with  knees  and  tail  sticking 
out,  droning  without  end,  and  like  unto  the  foulest 
Khrafstras 

[3.  ‘  On  him  she  stays  until  the  dog  has  seen  the 
corpse  ®  or  eaten  it  up,  or  until  the  flesh-eating  birds 
have  taken  flight  towards  it  *.  When  the  dog  has 
seen  it  or  eaten  it  up,  or  when  the  flesh-eating  birds 
have  taken  flight  towards  it,  then  the  DrUjf  Nasu 
rushes  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north  in  the  shape 
of  a  raging  fly,  with  knees  and  tail  sticking  out, 
droning  without  end,  and  like  unto  the  foulest 
Khrafstras.’] 

4  (5).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  If  the  man  has  been  killed  by  a  dog,  or  by 
a  wolf,  or  by  witchcraft,  or  by  the  artifices  of  hatred  *, 
or  by  falling  down  a  precipice,  or  by  the  law  ®,  or  by 
calumny  ®,  or  by  the  noose  how  long  after  death 
does  the  Drug"  Nasu  come  and  rush  upon  the  dead  ? 

5  (6).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  At  the  next 
watch  after  death®,  the  Drii^  Nasu  comes  and 


'  Khrafstra  is  a  general  denomination  for  noxious  animals. 

*  Until  the  Sag-dtd  has  been  performed  (see  VIII,  16  seq.) 

*  The  Sag-did  may  be  performed  by  birds  of  prey  as  well  as 
by  dogs.  The  dog  smites  the  Nasu  when  it  brings  its  muzzle  near 
to  the  dead,  the  bird  (mountain  hawk,  sparrow  (?),  or  eagle)  when 
its  shadow  passes  over  the  body  (Comm,  ad  §  a ;  cf.  §  29).  §  3  is 
from  the  Vendiddd  S&da. 

*  ‘  By  poison  ’  (Comm.) 

*  Literally,  *  by  men;’  that  is  to  say,  put  to  death  by  the  com¬ 
munity  according  to  law  (Comm.) 

*  If  he  has  been  condemned  unjustly. 

*  If  he  has  strangled  himself. 

*  The  day  is  divided  into  five  watches  or  ratu.  If  the  man 
dies  a  natural  death,  the  Dru^  comes  directly ;  if  the  death  be 
violent  and  unlooked  for,  the  Urns'  comes  later  (as  the  corruption 
does  not  set  in  so  quickly). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


78 


VENDioAD. 


rushes  upon  the  dead,  from  the  regions  of  the 
north,  in  the  shape  of  a  raging  fly,  with  knees  and 
tail  sticking  out,  droning  without  end,  and  like  unto 
the  foulest  Khrafstras/ 

ll\ 

6  (7).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One  1 
If  there  be  a  number  of  men  resting  in  the  same  place,  on 
the  same  carpet,  on  the  same  pillows,  be  there  two  men 
near  one  another,  or  five,  or  fifty,  or  a  himdred,  close  by 
one  another ;  and  of  those  people  one  happens  to  die ; 
how  many  of  them  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  envelope  with 
corruption,  infection,  and  pollution  ? 

7  (ii).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘If  the  dead  one  be 
a  priest,  the  Drqjf  Nasu  rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathu- 
^tra  1  she  goes  as  far  as  the  eleventh  and  defiles  the  ten. 

*  If  the  dead  one  be  a  warrior,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes 
forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathui^tra  t  she  goes  as  far  as  the  tenth 
and  defiles  the  nine. 

‘If  the  dead  one  be  a  husbandman,  the  Dru^  Nasu 
rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathortra  I  she  goes  as  far  as 
the  ninth  and  defiles  the  eight. 

8  (17).  *  If  it  be  a  shepherd’s  dog,  the  Dn\f  Nasu  rushes 
forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  she  goes  as  far  as  the  eighth 
and  defiles  the  seven. 

‘  If  it  be  a  house  dog,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  forth,  O 
Spitama  Zarathurtra  !  she  goes  as  far  as  the  seventh  and 
defiles  the  six. 

9  (21),  ‘  If  it  be  a  Vohunazga  dog,  the  Dru^  Nasu 
rushes  forth,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  she  goes  as  far  as 
the  sixth  and  defiles  the  five. 

‘  If  it  be  a  Tauruna  dog,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  forth, 
O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  she  goes  as  far  as  the  fifth  and 
defiles  the  four 

1  §§  6-9  =  Farg.  V,  27-30. 

•  This  enumeration  is  less  complete  than  that  in  the  fifth  Far- 
gard,  as  it  comprises  only  the  first  four  sorts  of  dogs ;  the  rest  is  to 
be  supplied  as  in  Farg.  V,  31-38. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


FARGARD  VII. 


79 


.  .  .  ‘  Those  clothes  shall  serve  for  their  coverings  and 
for  their  sheets 


III. 

10  (26).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  What  part  of  his  bedding*  and  pillow 
does  the  Dnif  Nasu  defile  with  corruption,  infection, 
and  pollution  ? 

1 1  (2  7).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  Dri^f 
Nasu  defiles  with  corruption,  infection,  and  pollu¬ 
tion  the  upper  sheet  and  the  inner  garment  *.’ 

12  (28).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  Can  that  garment  be  made  clean,  O 
holy  Ahura  Mazda  I  that  has  been  touched  by  the 
carcase  of  a  dog  or  the  corpse  of  a  man? 

13  (29).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  It  can,  O  holy 
Zarathurtra  I  ’ 

How  so  ? 

‘  If  there  be  on  the  garment  seed,  or  blood,  or  dirt, 
or  vomit,  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  shall  rend  it  to 
pieces,  and  bury  it  under  the  g^round 

14  (33).  ‘  But  if  there  be  no  seed  [on  the  gar¬ 
ment],  nor  blood,  nor  dirt,  nor  vomit,  then  the 
worshippers  of  Mazda  shall  wash  it  with  gdmdz. 

15  (35).  ‘  If  it  be  leather,  they  shall  wash  it  with 
gdm^z  three  times,  they  shall  rub  it  with  earth  three 


*  This  phrase,  which  forms  part  of  §  19,  is  wrongly  inserted 
here. 

*  The  bedding  on  which  he  has  died. 

*  The  upper  sheet  of  the  bed  and  the  inner  garment  of  the  body, 
that  is  to  say,  only  those  clothes  which  have  been  in  direct  contact 
with  the  dead. 

*  According  to  the  Commentary  only  that  part  which  has  been 
defiled  is  rent  off ;  the  rest  may  still  be  used. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8o 


vendIdad. 


times^  they  shall  wash  it  with  water  three  times,  and 
afterwards  they  shall  expose  it  to  the  air  for  three 
months  at  the  window  of  the  house. 

‘  If  it  be  woven  cloth,  they  shall  wash  it  with 
g6m6z  six  times  they  shall  rub  it  with  earth  six 
times,  they  shall  wash  it  with  water  six  times,  and 
afterwards  they  shall  expose  it  to  the  air  for  six 
months  at  the  window  of  the  house. 

1 6  (37).  ‘The  spring  named  Ardv!  Stira,  O  Spi- 
tama  Zarathurtra !  that  spring  of  mine,  purifies  the 
seed  of  males,  the  womb  of  females,  the  milk  of 
females 

17®  (41).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  I  Can  those  clothes,  when  once  washed  and  cleansed, 
ever  be  used  either  by  a  Zaotar,  or  by  a  Hdvanan,  or  by  an 
Atare-vakhsha,  or  by  a  Frabaretar,  or  by  an  Abererf,  or  by 
an  Asnatar,  or  by  a  Rathwukar,  or  by  a  SraoshA-varez,  or 
by  any  priest,  warrior,  or  husbandman  ? 

18  (43).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Never  can  those 
clothes,  even  when  washed  and  cleansed,  be  used  either  by 
a  Zaotar,  or  by  a  Havanan,  or  by  an  Atare-vakhsha,  or 
by  a  Frabaretar,  or  by  an  Abere^/,  or  by  an  Asn&tar,  or  by 
a  Rathwukar,  or  by  a  Sraosh^-varez,  or  by  any  priest, 
warrior,  or  husbandman. 

19  (45).  ‘But  if  there  be  in  a  Mazdean  house  a  woman 
who  is  in  her  sickness,  or  a  man  who  has  become  unfit  for 
work,  and  who  must  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity,  those 
clothes  shall  serve  for  their  coverings  and  for  their  sheets, 
until  they  can  withdraw  their  hands  for  prayer. 

ao  (49).  ‘Ahura  Mazda,  indeed,  does  not  allow  us  to 
waste  anything  of  value  that  we  may  have,  not  even  so 


>  See  Farg.  XIX,  21. 

*  This  clause  is  a  quotation  from  Yasna  LXV,  5,  intended  to 
illustrate  the  cleansing  power  of  water.  Ardvt  Sfira  is  the  goddess 
of  the  waters.  Cf.  Farg.  XXI,  6  notes. 

»  §§  17-22  =  Farg.  V,  57-62. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  VII. 


8l 


much  as  an  Asperena’s  weight  of  thread,  not  even  so  much 
as  a  maid  lets  fall  in  spinning. 

21  (52).  *  Whosoever  throws  any  clothing  on  a  dead 
body,  even  so  much  as  a  maid  lets  fall  in  spinning,  is  not 
a  pious  man  whilst  alive,  nor  shall  he,  when  dead,  have 
a  place  in  Paradise. 

(55)-  ‘  He  makes  himself  a  viaticum  unto  the  world 
of  the  wicked,  into  that  world,  made  of  darkness,  the 
offspring  of  darkness,  which  is  Darkness’  self.  To  that 
world,  to  the  world  of  Hell,  you  are  delivered  by  your 
own  doings,  by  your  own  religion,  O  sinners !  ’ 

IV. 

23  (59).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  he  be  clean  again  who  has  eaten 
of  the  carcase  of  a  dog  or  of  the  corpse  of  a  man  ’  ? 

24  (60).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  cannot, 
O  holy  Zarathurtra !  His  burrow  ^  shall  be  dug  out, 
his  heart  shall  be  torn  out,  his  bright  eyes  shall  be 
put  out ;  the  Dru^  Nasu  falls  upon  him,  takes  hold 
of  him  even  to  the  end  of  the  nails,  and  he  is 
unclean,  thenceforth,  for  ever  and  ever®.’ 


*  The  carcase-eater  lodges  the  Nasu  in  himself;  he  becomes 
a  Nasu,  and  therefore  must  be  destroyed ;  cf.  below,  §  76  seq. 

*  His  house,  as  he  is  assimilated  to  a  devouring  Khrafstra; 
cf.  Farg.  Ill,  7. 

*  Till  the  resurrection.  *  It  is  prescribed  in  the  Vendiddd  that 
if  a  man  shall  eat  of  a  carcase,  his  house  and  family  shall  be 
destroyed,  his  heart  shall  be  tom  out  of  his  body,  his  eyes  shall 
be  put  out,  and  his  soul  shall  abide  in  hell  till  the  resurrection ' 
(Saddar  71).  ‘He  who  eats  of  a  carcase  with  sinful  intent  is  both 
unclean  and  margarzdn ;  Barashniim  and  Nfrang  are  of  no  avail 
for  him,  he  must  die.  If  there  has  been  no  sinful  intent,  he  may 
wash  himself;  one  may  give  him  the  ashes  and  the  gdm6z 
(Comm.);  he  is  unclean, he  is  not  margarzln*  (Old  Rav.  115  b). 

[4]  G 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


82 


VENDioAD. 


V. 

25  (65).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  he  be  clean  again,  O  holy  Ahura 
Mazda !  who  has  brought  a  corpse  with  filth  into  the 
waters,  or  unto  the  fire,  and  made  either  unclean  ? 

26  (66).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  cannot, 
O  holy  Zarathurtra !  Those  wicked  ones  it  is,  those 
Nasu-cutters,  that  most  increase  spiders  and  locusts’; 
those  wicked  ones  it  is,  those  Nasu-cutters,  that 
most  increase  the  grass-destroying  drought  *. 

27(69).  ‘Those  wicked  ones  it  is,  those  Nasu- 
cutters,  that  increase  most  the  power  of  the  winter  *, 
produced  by  the  fiends,  the  cattle-killing,  thick- 
snowing,  overflowing,  the  piercing,  fierce,  mischievous 
winter®.  Upon  them  comes  and  rushes  the  Dru^ 
Nasu,  she  takes  hold  of  them  even  to  the  end  of 
the  nails,  and  they  are  unclean,  thenceforth,  for  ever 
and  ever*.’ 


^  ‘  It  is  said  in  the  Avesta  that  when  there  are  many  gnats  and 
locusts  it  is  owing  to  corpses  having  been  brought  to  water  and  to 
fire '  (Saddar  72). 

*  §  26  refers  chiefly  to  the  damage  produced  by  the  defilement 
of  the  waters,  and  §  27  to  that  produced  by  the  defilement  of  the 
fire. 

*  '  In  the  same  way  (by  the  bringing  of  corpses  to  water  and  to 
fire),  winter  grows  colder,  and  summer  grows  warmer'  (Saddar  72). 

*  ‘  Whoever  shall  do  that  deed,  shall  pay  for  it  in  this  world  and 
in  the  next;  they  shall  flay  his  body  in  the  presence  of  the  as¬ 
sembly,  they  shall  tear  him  limb  from  limb,  and  his  corpse  shall  be 
thrown  away  to  dogs  and  ravens,  .  .  .  and  when  his  soul  comes 
to  the  other  world,  he  shall  suffer  tortures  from  the  D6vs.  If  he  has 
not  made  his  Patet,  his  soul  shall  remain  in  hell  till  the  day  of 
resurrection'  (Gr.  Rav.  p.  123). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  Vll. 


83 


VI. 

28  (72).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  the  wood  be  made  clean,  O  holy 
Ahura  Mazda!  whereunto  Nasu  has  been  brought 
from  a  dead  dog,  or  from  a  dead  man  ? 

29  (73).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  It  can,  O  holy 
Zarathurtra  I  ’ 

How  so  ? 

‘  If  the  Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled  *  by  the 
corpse-eating  dogs,  or  by  the  corpse-eating  birds  *, 
they  shall  lay  down,  apart  on  the  ground,  all  the 
wood  on  a  Vltasti  ®  all  around,  if  the  wood  be  dry ; 
on  a  FrirAthni  *  all  around,  if  it  be  wet ;  then  they 
shall  sprinkle  it  once  over  with  water,  and  it  shall 
be  clean  *. 

30  (78).  ‘  But  if  the  Nasu  has  already  been 
expelled  *  by  the  corpse-eating  dogs,  or  by  the 
corpse-eating  birds,  they  shall  lay  down,  apart  on 
the  ground,  all  the  wood  on  a  Frir&thni  all  around, 
if  the  wood  be  dry;  on  a  Fribizu^  all  around,  if  it 

*  That  is  to  say,  if  the  Sag-did  has  not  yet  been  performed. 
Read :  ‘  If  the  Nasu  has  been  expelled  . . .'  (that  is  to  say,  if  the 
Sag-dtd  has  been  performed).  See  note  6. 

*  See  above,  p.  77,  n.  3. 

*  Twelve  fingers ;  a  span. 

*  The  Frdrfithni  is,  as  it  seems,  as  much  as  a  forearm. 

*  ‘  After  a  year,’  according  to  the  Commentary. 

*  Read:  ‘But  if  the  Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled.’  It 
appears  from  the  similar  passages  (VIII,  35,  36,  and  98,  99)  and 
from  the  general  principles  of  uncleanness  that  the  words  ‘  If  the 
Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled,'  in  §  29,  have  been  misplaced 
there  from  §  30,  and  that  the  corresponding  words  in  §  30  belong 
to  §  29 ;  because  uncleanness  spreads  less  far,  wheii  the  Sag-dtd 
has  taken  place. 

’  A  measure  of  unknown  extent ;  ‘  an  arm’s  length,’  it  would  seem. 

G  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


84 


vendIdAd. 


be  wet ;  then  they  shall  sprinkle  it  once  over  with 
water,  and  it  shall  be  clean. 

3 1  (8 1 ).  ‘  Thus  much  of  the  wood  around  the  dead 
shall  they  lay  down,  apart  on  the  ground,  according 
as  the  wood  is  dry  or  wet ;  as  it  is  hard  or  soft ;  they 
shall  sprinkle  it  once  over  with  water,  and  it  shall  be 
clean.’ 

32  (83).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Can  the  corn  or  the  fodder  be  made 
clean,  O  holy  Ahura  Mazda!  whereunto  Nasu  has 
been  brought  from  a  dead  dog,  or  from  a  dead  man  ? 

33  {84),  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  It  can,  O  holy 
Zarathurtra !  ’ 

How  so  ? 

‘  If  the  Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled^  by  the 
corpse-eating  dogs,  or  by  the  corpse-eating  birds, 
they  shall  lay  down,  apart  on  the  ground,  all  the 
com  on  a  Frdrdthni  all  around,  if  the  corn  be  dry; 
on  a  Fribdzu  all  around,  if  it  be  wet;  then  they 
shall  sprinkle  it  once  over  with  water,  and  it  shall 
be  clean. 

34  {89).  ‘  But  if  the  Nasu  has  already  been 
expelled®  by  the  corpse-eating  dogs,  or  by  the 
corpse-eating  birds,  they  shall  lay  down,  apart  on 
the  ground,  all  the  corn  on  a  Fribizu  all  around,  if 
the  corn  be  dry ;  on  a  Vibcizu  * * * §  all  around,  if  it  be  wet; 
then  they  shall  sprinkle  it  once  over  with  water,  and 
it  shall  be  clean. 

35  (92)-  ‘  Thus  much  of  the  corn  around  the  dead 


*  Read:  ‘If  the  Nasu  has  already  been  expelled  .  .  See 

§  29  note. 

*  Read:  ‘If  the  Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled  .  .  See 

§  30  note. 

'  A  measure  of  unknown  extent;  ‘  an  ell,'  it  would  seem. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIl. 


85 


shall  they  lay  down,  apart  on  the  ground,  according 
as  the  com  is  dry  or  wet ;  as  it  is  sown  or  not  sown ; 
as  it  is  reaped  or  not  reaped ;  [as  it  is  beaten  or  not 
beaten]*;  as  it  is  winnowed  or  not  winnowed*;  [as  it 
is  grround  or  not  ground]  * ;  as  it  is  kneaded  [or  not 
kneaded]®;  they  shall  sprinkle  it  once  over  with 
water,  and  it  shall  be  clean.’ 

VII  a. 

36  (94).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  worshipper  of  Mazda  want  to 
practise  the  art  of  healing,  on  whom  shall  he  first 
prove  his  skill  ?  on  worshippers  of  Mazda  or  on 
worshippers  of  the  Daevas  *  ? 

37  {9^)’  Ahura  Mazda  answered ;  ‘  On  worship¬ 
pers  of  the  Daevas  shall  he  first  prove  himself, 
rather  than  on  worshippers  of  Mazda.  If  he  treat 
with  the  knife  a  worshipper  of  the  Dafivas  and  he 
die ;  if  he  treat  with  the  knife  a  second  worshipper  of 
the  Daevas  and  he  die ;  if  he  treat  with  the  knife  for 
the  third  time  a  worshipper  of  the  Dadvas  and  he 
die,  he  is  unfit  for  ever  and  ever. 

38  (99).  ‘  Let  him  therefore  never  attend  any 
worshipper  of  Mazda ;  let  him  never  treat  with  the 
knife  any  worshipper  of  Mazda,  nor  wound  him  with 
the  knife.  If  he  shall  ever  attend  any  worshipper 
of  Mazda,  if  he  shall  ever  treat  with  the  knife  any 
worshipper  of  Mazda,  and  wound  him  with  the  knife. 


’  From  the  Vend!d&d  Sida.  *  Doubtful. 

*  This  is  supplied,  as  it  seems  to  be  required  by  the  context 
and  by  the  Pahlavi  translation. 

*  On  Zoroastrians  or  on  idolaters  (or,  what  is  tantamount,  on 
Iranians  or  on  non-Iranians). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


86 


vendIdAd. 


he  shall  pay  for  his  wound  the  penalty  for  wilful 
murder 

39  (102).  ‘  If  he  treat  with  the  knife  a  worshipper 
of  the  Da6vas  and  he  recover ;  if  he  treat  with  the 
knife  a  second  worshipper  of  the  Da6vas  and  he 
recover ;  if  for  the  third  time  he  treat  with  the  knife 
a  worshipper  of  the  Da6vas  and  he  recover ;  then 
he  is  fit  for  ever  and  ever  *. 

40  (104).  ‘  He  may  henceforth  at  his  will  attend 
worshippers  of  Mazda ;  he  may  at  his  will  treat  with 
the  knife  worshippers  of  Mazda,  and  heal  them  with 
the  knife. 


Vll  b. 

41  (105).  ‘A  healer  shall  heal  a  priest  for  a  blessing 
of  the  just  ® ;  he  shall  heal  the  master  of  a  house  for 
the  value  of  an  ox  of  low  value ;  he  shall  heal  the 
lord  of  a  borough  *  for  the  value  of  an  ox  of  average 
value ;  he  shall  heal  the  lord  of  a  town  for  the  value 
of  an  ox  of  high  value ;  he  shall  heal  the  lord  of  a 
province  for  the  value  of  a  chariot  and  four®. 

42  (no).  ‘He  shall  heal  the  wife  of  the  master 
of  a  house  for  the  value  of  a  she-ass ;  he  shall  heal 
the  wife  of  the  lord  of  a  borough  for  the  value  of 


*  For  baodhd-varxta,  literally,  ‘done  with  full  conscience.* 

*  ‘  Some  say,  One  who  has  been  qualified  may  become  dis¬ 
qualified;  one  who  has  been  disqualified  shall  never  become 
qualified '  (Comm,  ad  §  43). 

*  The  priest  will  say  to  him :  Be  holy !  (that  is  to  say,  be  one  of 
the  blest  I)  ‘  Thus  he  will  become  holy  (i.e.  he  will  go  to  Paradise) ; 
there  is  no  equivalent  in  money.  Some  say.  It  is  given  when  the 
priest  has  not  3000  stirs  *  (Comm.) 

*  A  group  of  several  houses ;  Aspendi&rji  and  Anquetil  say,  ‘  a 
street.' 

*  ‘  A  value  of  seventy  stirs  *  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  Vn. 


87 


a  cow ;  he  shall  heal  the  wife  of  the  lord  of  a  town 
for  the  value  of  a  mare ;  he  shall  heal  the  wife  of 
the  lord  of  a  province  for  the  value  of  a  she-camel. 

43  (1 14).  ‘  He  shall  heal  the  heir  of  a  great  house 
for  the  value  of  an  ox  of  high  value ;  he  shall  heal 
an  ox  of  high  value  for  the  value  of  an  ox  of  aver¬ 
age  value ;  he  shall  heal  an  ox  of  average  value  for 
the  value  of  an  ox  of  low  value ;  he  shall  heal  an 
ox  of  low  value  for  the  value  of  a  sheep ;  he  shall 
heal  a  sheep  for  the  value  of  a  piece  of  meat  *. 

44  (i  18).  ‘  If  several  healers  offer  themselves  to¬ 
gether,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra!  namely,  one  who 
heals  with  the  knife,  one  who  heals  with  herbs,  and 
one  who  heals  with  the  Holy  Word  *,  let  one  apply 
to  the  healing  by  the  Holy  Word  :  for  this  one  is 
the  best-healing  of  all  healers  who  heals  with  the 
Holy  Word ;  he  will  best  drive  away  sickness  from 
the  body  of  the  faithful 

VI H. 

45  (122).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  long  after  the  corpse  of  a  dead 
man  has  been  laid  down  on  the  ground,  clothed 
with  the  light  of  heaven  and  beholding  the  sun,  is 
the  ground  clean  again  *  ? 


'  Cf.  the  tariflf  of  fees  for  the  cleanser,  Farg.  IX,  37  seq. 

*  ‘By  spells’  (Comm.;  cf.  Odyssea  XIX,  457).  This  classifi¬ 
cation  was  not  unknown  to  Asclepios :  he  relieved  the  sick  ‘  now 
with  caressing  spells,  now  with  soothing  drink  or  balsam,  now  with 
the  knife’  (Pindaros,  Pyth.  Ill,  51). 

*  Cf.  Yt  III,  6.  The  treatment  by  the  Holy  Word  seems  not  to 
consist  only  in  the  recitation  of  spells,  but  the  spells  must  be 
accompanied  by  the  ceremony  of  the  Barashnfim  (see  Farg.  XXII). 

*  Restored  to  the  purity  of  its  nature,  and  fit  to  till;  as  it  remains 
Nasu  till  that  time. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


88 


VENOtoAD. 


46(123).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘When  the 
corpse  of  a  dead  man  has  lain  on  the  ground 
for  a  year,  clothed  with  the  light  of  heaven,  and 
beholding  the  sun,  then  the  ground  is  clean  again, 
O  holy  Zarathu^tra  * !  ’ 

47  (i  24).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  How  long  after  the  corpse  of  a  dead  man  has 
been  buried  in  the  earth,  is  the  earth  clean  again  ? 

48(125).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘When  the 
corpse  of  a  dead  man  has  lain  buried  in  the  earth 
for  fifty  years  *,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra !  then  the 
earth  is  clean  again 

49  (126).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  How  long  after  the  corpse  of  a  dead 
man  has  been  laid  down  on  a  Dakhma,  is  the 
ground,  whereon  the  Dakhma  stands,  clean  again  ? 

50(127).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Not  until 
the  dust  of  the  corpse,  O  Spitama  Zarathvurtra ! 
has  mingled  with  the  dust  of  the  earth*.  Urge 
every  one  in  the  material  world,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thu^ra  !  to  pull  down  Dakhmas  *. 

51  (129).  ‘  He  who  should  pull  down  Dakhmas, 
even  so  much  thereof  as  the  size  of  his  own  body, 
his  sins  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  are  remitted  as 
they  would  be  by  a  Patet;  his  sins  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed  are  undone*. 

52  (132).  ‘  Not  for  his  soul  shall  the  two  spirits 


*  See  Farg.  VI,  i  seq. 

*  The  time  necessary  to  consume  the  corpse  to  its  last  particle. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  Ill,  36  seq. 

^  A  space  of  time  estimated  at  fifty  years  (Comm.)  Cf.  Farg. 

HI,  13. 

®  Cf.  Farg.  Ill,  9,  text  and  note,  and  §  13. 

*  ‘  A  tan&ffihr  sin  is  remitted  thereby  *  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VII. 


89 


wage  war  with  one  another  ^ ;  and  when  he  enters 
Paradise,  the  stars,  the  moon,  and  the  sun  shall 
rejoice  in  him  ;  and  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  shall  rejoice 
in  him,  saying :  “  Hail,  O  man  !  thou  who  hast  just 
passed  from  the  decaying  world  into  the  undecaying 
one*!’” 

55  *(137).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  Where  are  there  Daevas  ?  Where  is 
it  they  offer  worship  to  the  Daevas  ?  What  is  the 
place  whereon  troops  of  Daevas  rush  together, 
whereon  troops  of  Daevas  come  rushing  along  ? 
What  is  the  place  whereon  they  rush  together  to 
kill  their  fifties  and  their  hundreds,  their  hundreds 
and  their  thousands,  their  thousands  and  their  tens 
of  thousands,  their  tens  of  thousands  and  their 
myriads  of  myriads  ? 

56(138).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Those  Dakh- 
mas  that  are  built  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  O  Spi- 
tama  Zarathurtra  I  and  whereon  are  laid  the  corpses 
of  dead  men,  that  is  the  place  where  there  are 
Daevas,  that  is  the  place  whereon  troops  of  Daevas 


*  When  a  man  dies,  hell  and  Paradise,  fiends  and  gods  struggle 
for  the  possession  of  his  soul :  Ast6vidh6tur,  Vfzaresha,  and  the  bad 
Vayu  drag  the  souls  of  the  wicked  to  hell ;  Mithra,  Sraosha,  Rashnu, 
and  the  good  Vayu  take  the  souls  of  the  good  to  Paradise  (see 
Farg.  XIX,  29  seq. ;  Yt.  XXII ;  Mainy6-i-khard  II).  The  struggle 
lasts  for  three  days  and  three  nights  (the  sadis),  during  which  time 
the  relatives  of  the  dead  offer  up  prayers  and  sacrifices  to  Sraosha, 
Rashnu,  and  Vayu,  to  assure  him  their  protection  (cf.  IX,  56). 

*  Cf.  Yt.  XXII,  16  and  Farg.  XIX,  31. 

*  §§  53»  54  belong  to  the  Commentary;  they  are  composed  of 
disconnected  quotations,  part  of  which  refers  to  the  diflferent  deeds 
by  which  a  tandffihr  sin  may  be  redeemed,  while  the  other  part 
refers  to  the  rules  of  what  may  be  called  the  book-keeping  of  good 
actions  and  sins. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


90 


vendIdad. 


rush  together ;  whereon  troops  of  Daevas  come 
rushing  along;  whereon  they  rush  together  to  kill 
their  fifties  and  their  hundreds,  their  hundreds  and 
their  thousands,  their  thousands  and  their  tens  of 
thousands,  their  tens  of  thousands  and  their  myriads 
of  myriads. 

57  (140).  ‘  On  those  Dakhmas,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thiutra !  those  Daevas  take  food  and  void  filth. 
As  you,  men,  in  the  material  world,  you  cook  meal 
and  eat  cooked  meat,  so  do  they.  It  is,  as  it  were, 
the  smell  of  their  feeding  that  you  smell  there, 
O  men ! 

58  (143).  ‘  For  thus  they  go  on  revelling,  until 
that  stench  is  rooted  in  the  Dakhmas.  In  those 
Dakhmas  arise  the  infection  of  diseases,  itch,  hot 
fever,  na^za  *,  cold  fever,  rickets,  and  hair  untimely 
white  On  those  Dakhmas  meet  the  worst  mur¬ 
derers,  from  the  hour  when  the  sun  is  down  ®. 

59(148).  ‘And  people  of  small  understanding 
who  do  not  seek  for  better  understanding*,  the 
(7ainis  ®  make  those  diseases  grow  stronger  by  a 
third  *,  on  their  thighs,  on  their  hands,  on  their 
three-plaited  hair 


'  Doubtful. 

*  Albinism  was  regarded  as  sent  by  the  demons.  When  Zil  was 
born  with  white  hair,  his  father  S&m  exposed  on  the  Alborz  ^  that 
child  of  D6v,  with  an  old  man's  head '  (Firdausi). 

•  Cemeteries  are  the  meeting-place  of  robbers  and  murderers. 

*  ‘  Who  do  not  seek  for  instruction.' 

®  ‘  The  G^hi '  (Comm.)  The  G^ini  seems  to  be  the  (?ahi  as 
'  killing/  as  bringing  sickpess. 

•  The  general  meaning  of  the  sentence  seems  to  be  that,  for 
want  of  hygiene,  diseases  grow  worse  through  the  infection  from 
the  Dakhmas. 

^  Doubtful. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  VII. 


91 


IX. 

60'  (151).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  I  If  in  the  house  of  a  worshipper  of  Mazda  there  be 
a  woman  with  child,  and  if  being  a  month  gone,  or  two,  or 
three,  or  four,  or  five,  or  six,  or  seven,  or  eight,  or  nine,  or 
ten  months  gone,  she  bring  forth  a  still-born  child,  what 
shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

61  (155).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  The  place  in  that 
Mazdean  house  whereof  the  ground  is  the  cleanest  and 
the  driest,  and  the  least  passed  through  by  flocks  and 
herds,  by  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda,  by  the  consecrated 
bundles  of  baresma,  and  by  the  faithful ;  ’ — 

62  (158).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy. 
Onel  How  far  from  the  fire?  How  far  from  the  water? 
How  far  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of  baresma  ?  How 
far  from  the  faithful  ? 

63  (159).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Thirty  paces  from 
the  fire ;  thirty  paces  from  the  water ;  thirty  paces  from  the 
consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma;  three  paces  from  the 
faithful ; — 

64  (160).  ‘  On  that  place  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda 
erect  an  enclosure,  and  therein  shall  they  establish  her 
with  food,  therein  shall  they  establish  her  with  clothes.’ 

65  (162).  O  Maker  of  the  material  word,  thou  Holy 
One !  What  is  the  food  that  the  woman  shall  first  take  ? 

66  (163).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  G6m^z  mixed  with 
ashes,  three  draughts  of  it,  or  six,  or  nine,  to  send  down 
the  Dakhma  within  her  womb. 

67  (166).  ‘  Afterwards  she  may  drink  boiling  milk  of 
mares,  cows,  sheep,  or  goats,  with  pap  or  without  pap  ;  she 
may  take  cooked  milk  without  water,  meal  without  water, 
and  wine  without  water.’ 

68  (169),  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  1  How  long  shall  she  remain  so  ?  How  long  shall  she 
live  thus  on  milk,  meal,  and  wine  ? 


*  §§  60-69 =Farg.V,  45“54-  See  the  Commentary  there. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


92 


vendIdAd. 


69  (170).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘Three  nights  long 
shall  she  rentain  so ;  three  nights  long  shall  she  live  thus 
on  milk,  meal,  and  wine.  Then,  when  three  nights  have 
passed,  she  shall  wash  her  body,  she  shall  wash  her  clothes, 
with  gdmdz  and  water,  by  the  nine  holes,  and  thus  shall 
she  be  clean.' 

70  (172).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  But  if  fever  befall  her  unclean  body,  if 
these  two  worst  pains,  hunger  and  thirst,  befall  her, 
may  she  be  allowed  to  drink  water  ^  ? 

71  (175).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘She  may; 
the  first  thing  for  her  is  to  have  her  life  saved. 
From  the  hands  of  one  of  the  holy  men,  a  holy 
faithful  man,  who  knows  the  holy  knowledge  *,  she 
shall  drink  of  the  strength-giving  water.  But  you, 
worshippers  of  Mazda,  fi.x  ye  the  penalty  for  it. 
The  Ratu  being  applied  to,  the  SraoshA-varez  being 
applied  to®,  shall  prescribe  the  penalty  to  be  paid*.’ 

72  (18 1).  What  is  the  penalty  to  be  paid  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  deed  is  that  of 

a  Peshdtanu  :  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^ 
a^tra,  two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6->^arana®.’ 

X. 

73  {''83).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  the  eating-vessels  be  made  clean 


*  Before  those  three  days  have  passed. 

*  If  there  is  near  her  a  pious  and  intelligent  man,  who  recognises 
that  her  life  would  be  endangered  by  too  strict  an  adherence  to  the 
rule,  he  will  let  her  depart  from  it. 

*  See  Farg.  V,  25.  *  For  the  water  having  been  defiled. 

*  A  penalty  to  be  undergone  by  the  husband,  at  least  in  modem 
practice:  ‘If  through  fear  of  death  or  of  serious  illness  she  has 
drunk  water  before  the  appointed  time,  her  husband  shall  make 
Patet  for  her  fault  before  the  Dastur '  (Old  Rav.  98  b). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VII. 


93 


that  have  been  touched  by  Nasu  from  a  dog,  or  Nasu 
from  a  man  ? 

74  (184).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘They  can, 
O  holy  Zarathu^ra !  ’ 

How  so  ? 

‘  If  they  be  of  gold,  you  shall  wash  them  once 
with  gdmdz,  you  shall  rub  them  once  with  earth, 
you  shall  wash  them  once  with  water,  and  they  shall 
be  clean. 

‘  If  they  be  of  silver,  you  shall  wash  them  twice 
with  g6mdz,  you  shall  rub  them  twice  with  earth, 
you  shall  wash  them  twice  with  water,  and  they  shall 
be  clean. 

[75.  ‘If  they  be  of  brass,  you  shall  wash  them 
thrice  with  gdm^z,  you  shall  rub  them  thrice  with 
earth,  you  shall  wash  them  thrice  with  water,  and 
they  shall  be  clean. 

‘  If  they  be  of  steel,  you  shall  wash  them  four 
times  with  gdmdz,  you  shall  rub  them  four  times 
with  earth,  you  shall  wash  them  four  times  with 
water,  and  they  shall  be  clean. 

‘  If  they  be  of  stone,  you  shall  wash  them  six  times 
with  g6mdz,  you  shall  rub  them  six  times  with  earth, 
you  shall  wash  them  six  times  with  water,  and  they 
shall  be  clean  *.] 

‘  If  they  be  of  earth,  of  wood,  or  of  clay,  they  are 
unclean  for  ever  and  ever 

XI. 

76  {189).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  the  cow  be  made  clean  that  has 

'  From  the  Vendtdid  S&da. 

*  The  power  of  resistance  to  uncleanness  follows  the  value  of 
the  materials :  gold,  silver,  iron,  steel,  stone,  earth,  wood,  clay. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


94 


vendIdAd. 


eaten  of  the  carcase  of  a  dog,  or  of  the  corpse  of 
a  man  ? 

77(190).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘She  can,  O 
holy  Zarathu.ftra !  The  priest  shall  not,  within 
a  year,  take  from  her  either  milk  or  cheese  for 
the  libation,  nor  meat  for  the  libation  and  the 
Baresma  When  a  year  has  passed,  then  the 
faithful  may  eat  of  her  as  before 

XII. 

78  (193).  Who  is  he,  O  holy  Ahura  Mazda !  who, 
meaning  well  and  desiring  righteousness,  prevents 
righteousness?  Who  is  he  who,  meaning  well,  falls 
into  the  ways  of  the  Dru^*  ? 

79  (194).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘This  one, 
meaning  well  and  desiring  righteousness,  prevents 
righteousness  j  this  one,  meaning  well,  falls  into  the 
ways  of  the  Dru^,  who  offers  up  water  defiled  by 
the  dead  and  unfit  for  libation ;  or  who  offers  up  in 
the  dead  of  the  night  water  unfit  for  libation 


’  The  libation  waters  (Zaothra)  are  mixed  with  milk  (^v).  The 
cheese  (or  butter)  and  the  meat  are  elements  of  the  darhn  as 
gdshddi. 

*  ‘  Whatever  comes  from  her,  if  dropped,  is  clean ;  if  taken, 
unclean.  If  she  be  big  with  young,  the  young  is  bom  clean,  if 
conceived  before  her  eating  of  the  corpse ;  if  conceived  afterwards, 
it  is  bora  unclean  ’  (Comm.) 

*  Possibly,  ‘  works  for  the  Dru^.' 

*  ‘  From  what  hour  may  sacrifice  to  the  Good  Waters  be  offered  ? 
From  sunrise  to  sunset.  ...  He  who  offers  up  libations  to  the 
Good  Waters  after  sunset,  before  sunrise,  does  no  better  deed  than 
if  he  should  throw  them  downright  into  the  jaws  of  a  venomous 
snake  ’  (Ntrangistdn,  §  48). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


95 


Fargard  VIII. 

1  (1-3).  Purification  of  the  house  where  a  man  has  died. 

II  (4-13).  Funerals. 

III  {14-22).  Purification  of  the  ways  along  which  the  corpse 
has  been  carried. 

IV  (23-25).  No  clothes  to  be  thrown  on  a  corpse. 

V  (26-32).  Unlawful  lusts. 

(33“34)*  A  corpse  when  dried  up  does  not  contaminate. 

(35-72).  Purification  of  the  man  defiled  by  the  dead. 

VIII  (73-80).  Purification  of  the  fire  defiled  by  the  dead. 

IX  (81-96).  The  Bahr&m  fire. 

X  (97-107).  Purification  in  the  wilderness. 

This  chapter,  putting  aside  section  V,  may  be  entitled ;  Funerals 
and  Purification.  Logical  order  may  easily  be  introduced  into  it, 
by  arranging  the  sections  as  follows :  I,  IV,  II,  III,  VI,  VII,  X, 
VIII,  IX. 

I. 

1 .  If  a  dog  or  a  man  die  under  a  hut  of  wood 
or  a  hut  of  felt  *,  what  shall  the  worshippers  of 
Mazda  do  *  ? 

2  (4).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  They  shall  search 
for  a  Dakhma,  they  shall  look  for  a  Dakhma  all 
around  *.  If  they  find  it  easier  to  remove  the  dead, 
they  shall  take  out  the  dead,  they  shall  let  the  house 
stand,  and  shall  perfume  it  with  Urvisna  or  Vohh- 


’  A  movable  shelter,  by  contradistinction  to  a  fixed  abode,  some¬ 
thing  like  the  oba  of  the  Tartars,  one  of  those  huts  made  of 
boards  or  felt  and  called  thfiruma  by  the  Arabs,  which  served  as 
pavilions  for  princes  as  well  as  tents  for  nomads. 

*  That  sort  of  abode,  having  only  one  room,  can  have  no 
chamber  for  the  dead  (Farg.  V,  10). 

'  If  there  is  a  Dakhma  in  the  proximity,  they  remove  the 
corpse  at  once.  If  there  is  no  DaUuna  or  the  season  prevents 
its  access,  they  purify  the  hut  first 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


96 


vendJoAd. 


g^ona,  or  VohO-kereti,  or  HadhA-na6pata,  or  any 
other  sweet-smelling  plant 

3  (8).  ‘  If  they  find  it  easier  to  remove  the  house, 
they  shall  take  away  the  house,  they  shall  let  the 
dead  lie  on  the  spot,  and  shall  perfume  the  house 
with  Urvisna,  or  Vohfi-gaona,  or  Vohfi-kereti,  or 
HadhA-na6pata,  or  any  other  sweet-smelling  plant.’ 

II. 

4  (ii).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  If  in  the  house  of  a  worshipper  of  Mazda  a 
dog  or  a  man  happens  to  die,  and  it  is  raining  *,  or 
snowing,  or  blowing  ®,  or  it  is  dark,  or  the  day  is  at 
its  end,  when  flocks  and  men  lose  their  way,  what 
shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do®  ? 

5  (14).  Ahura  Mazda  answered;  ‘The  place  in 
that  house  whereof  the  ground  is  the  cleanest  and  the 
driest,  and  the  least  passed  through  by  flocks  and 
herds,  by  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda,  by  the  consecrated 
bundles  of  Baresma,  and  by  the  faithful;’ — 

6  (16).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  How  far  from  the  fire?  How  far  from  the 


^  *  So,  when  a  dog  or  a  man  dies,  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  take 
the  corpse  out  (from  the  house),  and  to  purify  the  house,  inside  and 
outside,  with  perfumes  burnt  on  the  fire'  (Comm.)  Cf.  XI,  4. 
Urvisna  is  the  rSsan  plant,  a  sort  of  garlic  ;  Vohfi-gaona,  Vohfi- 
kereti,  and  Hadhd-na6pata  are  respectively  (according  to  Fr&mji) 
benzoin,  aloe,  and  pomegranate. 

‘  *  No  corpse  must  be  taken  to  the  Dakhma  when  rain  is  falling, 
or  threatening.  If  one  is  overtaken  by  rain  on  the  way,  if  there  be 
a  place  to  lay  it  down,  they  shall  lay  it  down ;  if  there  be  none, 
they  must  go  on  and  take  it  to  the  Dakhma,  they  must  not  retrace 
their  steps; . .  .  When  arrived  at  the  Dakhma,  if  they  find  it  full  of 
water,  they  may  nevertheless  lay  down  the  corpse '  (Comm.) 

•  If  it  is  the  season  of  rain  or  snow.  Cf.  V,  10  seq. 


Digitized  by 


FARGARD  VIII. 


97 


water  ?  How  far  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of 
Baresma  ?  How  far  from  the  faithful? 

7  (17).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Thirty  paces 
from  the  fire ;  thirty  paces  from  the  water ;  thirty 
paces  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma ; 
three  paces  from  the  faithful; — 

8  (18).  ‘  On  that  place  they  shall  dig  a  grave 
half  a  foot  deep  if  the  earth  be  hard,  half  the  height 
of  a  man  if  it  be  soft  *;  [they  shall  cover  the  surface 
of  the  grave  with  ashes  or  cowdung]*;  they  shall 
cover  the  surface  of  it  with  dust  of  bricks,  of  stones, 
or  of  dry  earth  *. 

9  (21)®.  ‘And  they  shall  let  the  lifeless  body  lie 
there,  for  two  nights,  or  three  nights,  or  a  month 
long,  until  the  birds  begin  to  fly,  the  plants  to  grow, 
the  hidden  floods  to  flow,  and  the  wind  to  dry  up  the 
earth. 

10  (23).  ‘  And  when  the  birds  begin  to  fly,  the 
plants  to  grow,  the  hidden  floods  to  flow,  and  the  wind 
to  dry  up  the  earth,  then  the  worshippers  of  Mazda 
shall  make  a  breach  in  the  wall  of  the  house®, 


*  This  is  the  case  when  the  house  is  too  small  for  containing 
a  special  chamber  for  the  dead  (as  prescribed  Farg.  V,  10). 
Nowadays  they  dispense  even  with  that  grave :  the  corpse  is  laid 
on  the  floor,  on  a  slab  of  marble,  by  which  it  is  sufiSciently  isolated 
from  the  ground  to  prevent  its  being  defiled. 

*  Soft  earth,  being  not  impervious  to  liquids,  lets  contagion 
through  more  easily. 

*  Vendtdfld  SSda.  *  Substances  more  impervious. 

*  §§  9-'*o  j  cf  Farg.V,  12-13. 

*  ‘The  master  and  mistress  of  the  house  are  carried  away 
through  a  breach  (made  in  the  wall  of  the  house) ;  others  through 
the  door’  (Comm.) — ‘The  more  scrupulous  parties  have  it  [the 
body]  removed  by  a  side,  in  preference  to  the  usual  general 
entrance  ’  (H.  G.  Briggs,  The  Parsis,  1852,  p.  50). 

[4]  H 


Digitized  by 


Google 


98 


vend!dAd. 


and  two  men,  strong  and  skilful',  having  stripped 
their  clothes  off*,  shall  take  up  the  body  from  the 
clay  or  the  stones,  or  from  the  plastered  house*, 
and  they  shall  lay  it  down  on  a  place  where  they 
know  there  are  always  corpse-eating  dogs  and 
corpse-eating  birds. 

1 1  (29).  ‘  Afterwards  the  corpse-bearers  shall  sit 
down,  three  paces  from  the  dead,  and  the  holy  Ratu* 
shall  proclaim  to  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  thus : 
“  Worshippers  of  Mazda,  let  the  urine  be  brought 
here  wherewith  the  corpse-bearers  there  shall  wash 
their  hair  and  their  bodies !”’ 

1 2  (32).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  Which  is  the  urine  wherewith  the  corpse- 
bearers  shall  wash  their  hair  and  their  bodies  ? 
Is  it  of  sheep  or  of  oxen?  Is  it  of  man  or  of 
woman  ? 

13  (35).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  It  is  of  sheep 
or  of  oxen ;  not  of  man  nor  of  woman,  except  a  man 
or  a  woman  who  has  married  the  next-of-kin®;  these 


'  The  corpse-bearers  or  nasu-kasha  (Khindyas).  ‘The 
corpse  must  be  carried  by  two  persons  (see  Farg.  Ill,  13  seq.),  no 
matter  who  they  are ;  they  may  be  a  man  and  a  woman,  or  two 
women’  (Comm.) 

^  ‘  As  they  are  exchanged  for  the  special  clothes  in  which  they 
carry  corpses'  (Comm.),  the  so-called  ^&ma-i  dakhma,  ‘the 
Dakhma  clothes.’ 

’  The  Dakhma  (see  Farg.  VI,  50  seq.) 

*  The  priest  who  directs  the  funerals,  ‘the  chief  of  the  Nasu- 
kashas  ’  (Comm.),  the  so-called  Nasi-silSr. 

‘  The  next-of-kin  marriage  or  HvaStvadatha  (KhSlildid)  is  one 
of  the  good  works  that  Ahriman  dreads  most  (ShSyast  li-shiyast 
XVIII;  West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  1, 389).  ‘  Aharman  and  the  demons  are 
less  predominant  in  the  body  of  him  who  practises  KhSthdSd  ’  (West, 
II,  422).  Therefore  their  ma8sma  is  as  powerful  as  the  gdm8z. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


99 


shall  therefore  procure  the  urine  wherewith  the 
corpse-bearers  shall  wash  their  hair  and  their 
bodies 

III. 

14  (38).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  the  way,  whereon  the  carcases  of 
dog^  or  corpses  of  men  have  been  carried,  be  passed 
through  again  by  flocks  and  herds,  by  men  and 
women,  by  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda,  by  the  conse¬ 
crated  bundles  of  Baresma,  and  by  the  faithful  ? 

15  (40).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘It  cannot  be 
passed  through  again  by  flocks  and  herds,  nor  by 
men  and  women,  nor  by  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda,  nor 
by  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma,  nor  by  the 
faithful*. 

16  (41).  ‘  They  shall  therefore  cause  a  yellow  dog 
with  four  eyes  ®,  or  a  white  dog  with  yellow  ears,  to 
go  three  times  through  that  way  When  either  the 
yellow  dog  with  four  eyes,  or  the  white  dog  with 
yellow  ears,  is  brought  there,  then  the  Drii^  Nasu 
flies  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  [in  the  shape 
of  a  raging  fly,  with  knees  and  tail  sticking  out, 
droning  without  end,  and  like  unto  the  foulest 
Khrafstras®.] 


*  ‘When  back  in  the  village  they  perform  the  regular  Barash- 
niim  with  consecrated  gdm6z'  (Comm.) 

*  The  way  by  which  the  corpse  has  passed  is  haunted  by  the 
Dru^  Nasu :  the  Dru^  is  expelled  from  it  by  the  same  proceeding 
as  it  was  expelled  from  the  dead,  by  the  Sag- did.  The  Sag-did 
for  the  purification  of  the  way  seems  to  have  fallen  into  desuetude. 

*  A  dog  with  two  spots  above  the  eyes. 

*  ‘Afrag  says,  the  dog  goes  straight  along  the  length  of  the 
way;  Maidyd-mih  says,  he  goes  across  it  from  side  to  side’ 
(Comm.) 

‘  Cf.  Farg.  VII,  3. 

H  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


lOO 


vendIdAd. 


1 7  (45).  ‘  If  the  dog  goes  unwillingly,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu^ra,  they  shall  cause  the  yellow  dog  with 
four  eyes,  or  the  white  dog  with  yellow  ears,  to  go 
six  times  ^  through  that  way.  When  either  the 
yellow  dog  with  four  eyes,  or  the  white  dog  with 
yellow  ears,  is  brought  there,  then  the  Dri^  Nasu 
flies  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  [in  the  shape 
of -a  raging  fly,  with  knees  and  tail  sticking  out, 
droning  without  end,  and  like  unto  the  foulest 
Khrafstras.] 

18  (47).  ‘  If  the  dog  goes  unwillingly,  they  shall 
cause  the  yellow  dog  with  four  eyes,  or  the  white 
dog  with  yellow  ears,  to  go  nine  times  through  that 
way.  When  either  the  yellow  dog  with  four  eyes, 
or  the  white  dog  with  yellow  ears,  has  been  brought 
there,  then  the  Dnif  Nasu  flies  away  to  the  regions 
of  the  north,  [in  the  shape  of  a  raging  fly,  with  knees 
and  tail  sticking  out,  droning  without  end,  and  like 
unto  the  foulest  Khrafstras.] 

19  (49).  ‘An  Athravan  shall  first  go  along  the 
way  and  shall  say  aloud  these  victorious  words : 
“YathA  ahtl  vairyd*: — The  will  of  the  Lord  is 
the  law  of  righteousness. 

‘  “  The  gifts  of  Vohu-man6  *  to  the  deeds  done  in 
this  world  for  Mazda. 


'  ‘  Three  times  sufiBce  if  the  dog  goes  of  his  own  accord ;  if  he 
goes  by  force,  it  counts  as  nothing ;  if  he  goes  but  with  reluctance, 
that  shall  su£Sce’  (Comm,  ad  §  18). 

*  A  prayer  in  frequent  use,  and  considered  of  great  efficacy, 
generally  known  as  the  Ahuna  Vairya  or  Honover.  It  was  by 
reciting  it  that  Ormazd  in  his  first  conflict  with  Ahriman  drove 
him  back  to  hell  (Bund.  I). 

’  Of  Paradise,  as  Vohu-man6  (Good  Thought)  is  the  doorkeeper 
of  heaven  (cf.  Farg.  XIX,  31). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


lOI 


“‘He  who  relieves  the  poor  makes  Ahura  king. 

20  (52).  ‘  “  K^m-n4  mazdS.  ^ : — ^What  protector 
hast  thou  given  unto  me,  O  Mazda !  while  the  hate 
of  the  wicked  encompasses  me?  Whom  but  thy 
Atar  and  Vohu-man6  *,  through  whose  work  I  keep 
on:  the  world  of  righteousness  ?  Reveal  therefore 
to  me  thy  Religion  as  thy  rule  ® ! 

‘“K^  verethrem-^4* : — Who  is  the  victorious 
who  will  protect  thy  teaching  ?  Make  it  clear  that 
I  am  the  guide  for  both  worlds.  May  Sraosha 
come  with  Vohu-man6  and  help  whomsoever  thou 
pleasest,  O  Mazda ! 

21  (60).  ‘“Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda 
and  Armaiti  Spe»ta !  Perish,  O  fiendish  Dru^ ! 
Perish,  O  brood  of  the  fiend!  Perish,  O  creation 
of  the  fiend  I  Perish,  O  world  of  the  fiend  I  Perish 
away,  O  Drii^!  Rush  away,  O  Dru^l  Perish 
away,  O  Dnif  I  Perish  away  to  the  regions  of  the 
north,  never  more  to  give  unto  death  the  living 
world  of  Righteousness!” 

22  (63).  ‘Then  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  may 
at  their  will  bring  by  those  ways  sheep  and  oxen, 
men  and  women,  and  Fire,  the  son  of  Ahura 
Mazda,  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma,  and 
the  faithful. 


‘  Yasna  XLVI,  7. 

*  I  have  no  protection  to  expect  but  from  my  virtue  (Vohu-man6, 
‘Good  Thought’)  and  from  thy  fire,  which  in  the  fire  ordeal  (Var 
Ntrang)  will  show  my  innocence. 

*  That  is  to  say,  one  must  take  Religion  as  one’s  rule. 

*  Yasna  XLIV,  16.  This  stanza,  which  in  the  original  Gfitha 
refers  to  the  human  incarnation  of  Sraosha,  that  is  to  say,  to  king 
Virtfispa,  the  victorious  protector  of  the  Prophet  and  his  Religion, 
is  applied  here  to  the  god  Sraosha,  as  a  protector  of  the  soul  in  its 
passage  from  this  world  to  the  other  (Farg.  VII,  52). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


102 


vendIdAd, 


‘  The  worshippers  of  Mazda  may  afterwards  *  pre¬ 
pare  meals  with  meat  and  wine  in  that  house ;  it 
shall  be  clean,  and  there  will  be  no  sin,  as  before.’ 

IV. 

23  (65).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  throw  clothes,  either  of 
skin  or  woven,  upon  a  dead  body  enough  to  cover 
the  feet,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ®  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Four  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah6-aJtra,  four  hundred  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-iarana.’ 

24  (68).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  man  shall  throw  clothes,  either 
of  skin  or  woven,  upon  a  dead  body,  enough  to 
cover  both  legs,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay? 

Ahufa  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Six  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspahd-aJtra,  six  hundred  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

25  (71).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  man  shall  throw  clothes,  either  of 
skin  or  woven,  upon  a  dead  body,  enough  to  cover 
the  whole  body,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘A  thousand  stripes 


'  On  the  fourth  day.  For  three  days  and  nights  after  the  death 
it  is  forbidden  to  cook  meat  in  the  house  (Comm.) 

*  The  dead  must  be  stripped  of  his  clothes  and  is  exposed  on  the 
heights  ‘clothed  with  the  light  of  heaven*  (Farg.  VI,  51). — The 
modem  use  is  to  have  him  wrapped  in  a  shroud  as  old  and  as  much 
worn  out  as  possible  (Farg.  V,  61). 

•  See  Farg.  V,  60;  VII,  20. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


103 


with  the  Aspah^-aytra,  a  thousand  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

V. 

26  (74).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man,  by  force,  commits  the  un¬ 
natural  sin,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

.  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Eight  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-aftra,  eight  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraosh6-^arana.’ 

27  (77)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  man  voluntarily  commits  the 
unnatural  sin,  what  is  the  penalty  for  it?  What 
is  the  atonement  for  it?  What  is  the  cleansing 
from  it? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  For  that  deed  there  is 
nothing  that  can  pay,  nothing  that  can  atone,  nothing 
that  can  cleanse  from  it ;  it  is  a  trespass  for  which 
there  is  no  atonement,  for  ever  and  ever.’ 

28  (83)',  When  is  it  so? 

‘  It  is  so,  if  the  sinner  be  a  professor  of  the  Religion  of 
Mazda,  or  one  who  has  been  taught  in  it. 

‘  But  if  he  be  not  a  professor  of  the  Religion  of  Mazda, 
nor  one  who  has  been  taught  in  it,  then  his  sin  is  taken 
from  him,  if  he  makes  confession  of  the  Religion  of  Mazda 
and  resolves  never  to  commit  again  such  forbidden  deeds. 

29  (88).  ‘  The  Religion  of  Mazda  indeed,  O  Spitama 
Zarathurtra  I  takes  away  from  him  who  makes  confession 
of  it  the  bonds  of  his  sin  ;  it  takes  away  (the  sin  of) 
breach  of  trust ;  it  takes  away  (the  sin  of)  murdering  one  of 
the  faithful ;  it  takes  away  (the  sin  of)  burying  a  corpse  ; 
it  takes  away  (the  sin  of)  deeds  for  which  there  is  no 
atonement ;  it  takes  away  the  worst  sin  of  usury ;  it  takes 
away  any  sin  that  may  be  sinned. 


*  See  Farg.  Ill,  38-42,  text  and  notes. 


Digitized  by 


104 


VENctoAD. 


30  (95).  ‘In  the  same  way  the  Religion  of  Mazda,  O 
Spitama  Zarathiutra!  cleanses  the  faithful  from  every 
evil  thought,  word,  and  deed,  as  a  swift-rushing  mighty 
wind  cleanses  the  plain. 

‘  So  let  all  the  deeds  he  doeth  be  henceforth  good, 
O  Zarathujtral  a  full  atonement  for  his  sin  is  effected 
by  means  of  the  Religion  of  Mazda.’ 

31  (98).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Who  is  the  man  that  is  a  Da^va  ? 
Who  is  he  that  is  a  worshipper  of  the  Daevas  ?  that 
is  a  male  paramour  of  the  Daevas  ?  that  is  a  female 
paramour  of  the  Daevas  ?  that  is  a  wife  to  the 
Da^va  ^  ?  that  is  as  bad  as  a  Da^va  ?  that  is  in  his 
whole  being  a  Da^va  ?  Who  is  he  that  is  a  Da^va 
before  he  dies,  and  becomes  one  of  the  unseen 
Daevas  after  death  *  ? 

32  (102).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘The  man 
that  lies  with  mankind  as  man  lies  with  womankind, 
or  as  woman  lies  with  mankind,  is  the  man  that  is 
a  Da^va ;  this  one  is  the  man  that  is  a  worshipper 
of  the  Daevas,  that  is  a  male  paramour  of  the 
Daevas,  that  is  a  female  paramour  ’ of  the  Daevas, 
that  is  a  wife  to  the  DaSva ;  this  is  the  man  that  is 
as  bad  as  a  Dafiva,  that  is  in  his  whole  being  a 
Da6va ;  this  is  the  man  that  is  a  Da6va  before  he 
dies,  and  becomes  one  of  the  unseen  Daevas  after 
death :  so  is  he,  whether  he  has  lain  with  mankind 
as  mankind,  or  as  womankind 

*  ‘  As  a  wife  is  obedient  to  her  husband,  so  is  he  to  the  Daevas ' 
(Comm.) 

*  Demons  are  often  the  restless  souls  of  the  wicked,  excluded 
from  heaven.  The  Persian  sect  of  the  Mah&bddians  believed  that 
the  soul  that  had  not  spoken  and  done  good  became  an  Ahriman 
or^in  (Dabist&n). 

*  The  guilty  may  be  killed  by  any  one,  without  an  order  from 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


105 


VI. 

33  (*07)'  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Shall  the  man  be  clean  who  has 
touched  a  corpse  that  has  been  dried  up  and  dead 
more  than  a  year  *  ? 

34  (108).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  shall. 
The  dry  mingles  not  with  the  dry®.  Should  the  dry 
mingle  with  the  dry,  how  soon  all  this  material 
world  of  mine  would  be  only  one  Peshdtanu,  bent 
on  the  destruction  of  righteousness,  and  whose  soul 
will  cry  and  wail !  so  numberless  are  the  beings  that 
die  upon  the  face  of  the  earth 

VII. 

35  (ill).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Can  the  man  be  made  clean  that  has 

the  Dastur  (see  §  74  n.),  and  by  this  execution  an  ordinary  capital 
crime  may  be  redeemed  (Comm,  ad  VII,  52). 

•  The  corpse,  dried  up,  contains  no  longer  any  of  the  solid  and 
liquid  elements  that  generate  corruption  and  infection  (see  above, 
p.  75,  n.  2). 

•  This  principle  still  prevails  even  with  Musulman  Persians: 
*  Pour  encourir  leur  immondicit^  dans  Tattouchement  des  Chretiens 
et  autres  idolatres,  il  est  n^cessaire  que  s’ils  les  touchent,  leurs 
v8tements  soient  mouill^s.  C’est  k  cause,  disent-ils,  quMtans  secs 
rimmondicit^  ne  s'attache  pas;  ....  ce  qui  est  cause  que  dans 
les  villes  oh  leurs  Mullas  et  Docteurs  ont  plus  d’autorit^,  ils  font 
parfois  d^fendre  par  leurs  Kans  que  lorsqu’il  pleut,  les  Chretiens 
ne  sortent  pas  de  leurs  maisons,  de  crainte  que  par  accident,  venans 
h  les  heurter,  ils  ne  soient  rendus  immondes’  (G.  du  Chinon,  p.  88 
seq.;  cf.  Chardin).  Still  nowadays,  in  Persia,  the  Jews  are  not 
allowed  to  go  out  of  their  house  on  a  rainy  day,  lest  the  religious 
impurity,  conducted  through  the  rain,  should  pass  from  the  Jew  to 
the  Musulman. 

•  See  Farg.  V,  4. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


io6 


VENDtoAD. 


touched  the  corpse  of  a  dog  or  the  corpse  of  a 
man  ? 

36(113).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  can,  O 
holy  Zarathuitra !  ’ 

How  so  ? 

‘  If  the  Nasu  has  already  been  expelled  by  the 
corpse-eating  dogs,  or  by  the  corpse-eating  birds, 
he  shall  cleanse  his  body  with  g6m6z  and  water,  and 
he  shall  be  clean 

37  (117).  ‘  If  the  Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled 
by  the  corpse-eating  dogs,  or  by  the  corpse-eating 
birds®,  then  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  shall  dig 
three  holes  in  the  ground  ®,  and  he  shall  thereupon 
wash  his  body  with  g6m6z,  not  with  water.  They 
shall  then  lift  and  bring  my  dog^  they  shall  bring 
him  (thus  shall  it  be  done  and  not  otherwise)  in 
front  [of  the  man]  ®. 

38  (121).  ‘The  worshippers  of  Mazda  shall  dig 
three  other  holes  *  in  the  ground,  and  he  shall  there¬ 
upon  wash  his  body  with  g6m6z,  not  with  water. 
They  shall  then  lift  and  bring  my  dog,  they  shall 
bring  him  (thus  shall  it  be  done  and  not  otherwise) 
in  front  [of  the  man].  Then  shall  they  wait  until  he 


*  If  the  Sag-dtd  has  been  performed,  a  simple  ghosel  is  enough. 
Cf.  Farg.  VII,  29,  notes  i  and  5. 

’  If  the  Sag-did  has  not  been  performed,  the  Barashnilm  is 
necessary. 

*  The  first  three  holes,  which  contain  gdmSz.  For  the  dis¬ 
position  of  the  holes,  see  the  following  Fargard. 

Three  times ;  every  time  that  the  unclean  one  passes  from  one 
hole  to  another  (Comm,  ad  IX,  32). 

*  To  look  at  him,  pr,  rather,  at  the  Nasu  in  him,  whilst  the  priest 
sings  the  spells  that  drive  the  Nasu. 

*  Containing  gdmfiz  too. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


107 


is  dried  ^  even  to  the  last  hair  on  the  top  of  his 
head. 

39  (125).  ‘They  shall  dig  three  more  holes ^  in 
the  ground,  three  paces  away  from  the  preceding, 
and  he  shall  thereupon  wash  his  body  with  water 
not  with  g6m6z. 

40  (127).  ‘He  shall  first  wash  his  hands;  if  his 
hands  be  not  first  washed,  he  makes  the  whole  of 
his  body  unclean.  When  he  has  washed  his  hands 
three  times,  after  his  hands  have  been  washed,  thou 
shalt  sprinkle  with  water  ^  the  forepart  of  his 
skull  V 

41  (131).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  fore¬ 
part  of  the  skull,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu 
rush®  ? 


'  He  rubs  himself  dry  with  handfuls  of  dust  (see  IX,  29  seq.) 

*  Containing  water. 

’  As  a  master  does  not  take  away  the  dunghill  from  his  house 
with  his  own  hands,  but  has  it  taken  away  by  his  servants,  so  the 
water,  being  of  higher  dignity  than  the  g6m§z,  has  the  worst  of  the 
impurity  taken  by  the  g6m6z,  and  intervenes  only  when  there  is 
nothing  lefl  that  can  attain  it  (Abalish,  tr.  Barthelemy,  ch.  V  and 
note  29). 

*  The  water  is  shed  from  a  spoon,  tied  to  a  long  stick,  ‘  the  stick 
with  nine  knots'  (Farg.  IX,  14). 

^  Bareshndm;  from  which  word  the  whole  of  the  operation  has 
taken  its  name. 

*  The  Nasu  is  expelled  symmetrically,  from  limb  to  limb,  from 
the  right  side  of  the  body  to  the  left,  from  the  forepart  to  the  back 
parts,  and  she  flies,  thus  pursued,  downwards  from  the  top  of  the 
head  to  the  tips  of  the  toes.  The  retreating  order  of  the  Nasu 
is  just  the  reverse  of  the  order  in  which  she  invaded  the  different 
members  of  the  first  man :  she  entered  Gayomart  by  the  little 
toe  of  the  left  foot,  then  went  up  to  the  heart,  then  to  the 
shoulder,  at  last  to  the  summit  of  the  head  (Gr.  Bund.)  Death  still 
seizes  the  foot  first. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


io8 


vendIdAd. 


Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  In  front,  between  the 
brows,  the  T>tag  Nasu  rushes.’ 

42  (134).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  in  front, 
between  the  brows,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu 
rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  On  the  back  part  of 
the  skull  the  Drt^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

43  (^37)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  back 
part  of  the  skull,  whereon  does  the  Druj"  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘In  front,  on  the  jaws, 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

44  (140).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  in  front, 
on  the  jaws,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  right  ear  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

45  (143)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
ear,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Upon  the  left  ear  the 
Dri^f  Nasu  rushes.’ 

46  (146).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
ear,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  right  shoulder 
the  Dri^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

47  (149)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
shoulder,  whereon  does  the  Druf  Nasu  rush  } 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  *  Upon  the  left  shoulder 
the  Dn^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

48  (152).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


109 


Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
shoulder,  whereon  does  the  Dn^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  *  Upon  the  right  arm-pit 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

49  (155).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
arm-pit,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  left  arm-pit 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

50  (158).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
arm-pit,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  } 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘In  front,  upon  the 
chest,  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

51  (161).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  chest 
in  front,  whereon  does  the  Dmg  Nasu  rush  } 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  back  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

52  (164).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  back, 
whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  right  nipple 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

53  (167).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
nipple,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  U  pon  the  left  nipple 
the  Dnif  Nasu  rushes.’ 

54(170).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
nipple,  whereon  does  the  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  right  rib  the 
Druf  Nasu  rushes.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


no 


vendJdAd. 


55  (^73)-  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
rib,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Upon  the  left  rib  the 
Drt^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

56  (176).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  Onel  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
rib,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  right  hip  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

57  (*79)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
hip,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  left  hip  the 
Dnif  Nasu  rushes.’ 

58  (182).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
hip,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  sexual  parts 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.  If  the  unclean  one  be  a  man, 
thou  shalt  sprinkle  him  first  behind,  then  before; 
if  the  unclean  one  be  a  woman,  thou  shalt  sprinkle 
her  first  before,  then  behind.’ 

59  (187).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  When  the  good  waters  reach  the 
sexual  parts,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  right  thigh 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

60  (190).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
thigh,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  left  thigh 
the  T>rMg  Nasu  rushes.’ 

61  (193).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


Ill 


Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
thigh,  whereon  does  the  Dru^f  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  right  knee 
the  Dri^^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

62  (196).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
knee,  whereon  does  the  Dnif  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  left  knee  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

63  (199).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
knee,  whereon  does  the  Drt^f  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  right  leg  the 
Dni^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

64  (202).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
leg,  whereon  does  the  Dn\f  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Upon  the  left  leg  the 
Druf  Nasu  rushes.' 

65  (205).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
leg,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  right  ankle 
the  Drij^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

66  (208).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
ankle,  whereon  does  the  Dn^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  left  ankle 
the  Dni^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

67  (211).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
ankle,  whereon  does  the  Dni^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  *  Upon  the  right  instep 
the  Dn^f  Nasu  rushes.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


II2 


vendJoAd. 


68  (214),  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  right 
instep,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Upon  the  left  instep 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes.’ 

69  (217).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  When  the  good  waters  reach  the  left 
instep,  whereon  does  the  Dru^  Nasu  rush  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  She  turns  round  under 
the  sole  of  the  foot;  it  looks  like  the  wing  of 
a  fly, 

70(220).  ‘He  shall  press  his  toes  upon  the 
ground,  and  shall  raise  up  his  heels;  thou  shalt 
sprinkle  his  right  sole  with  water;  then  the  Dnif 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  sole.  Thou  shalt  sprinkle 
the  left  sole  with  water ;  then  the  Dnif  Nasu  turns 
round  under  the  toes;  it  looks  like  the  wing  of 
a  fly. 

71  (225),  ‘He  shall  press  his  heels  upon  the 
ground,  and  shall  raise  up  his  toes;  thou  shalt 
sprinkle  his  right  toe  with  water;  then  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  toe.  Thou  shalt  sprinkle 
the  left  toe  with  water ;  then  the  Dru^  Nasu  flies 
away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  in  the  shape 
of  a  raging  fly,  with  knees  and  tail  sticking  out, 
droning  without  end,  and  like  unto  the  foulest 
Khrafstras. 

[72.  ‘And  thou  shalt  say  aloud  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words : 

‘  “  The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law  of  holi¬ 
ness,”  &c. 

‘“What  protector  hast  thou  given  unto  me,  O 
Mazda!  while  the  hate  of  the  wicked  encompasses 
me  ?  ”  &c. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


”3 


‘“Who  is  the  victorious  who  will  protect  thy 
teaching  ?  ”  &c.  ^ 

‘  “  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti 
Spe«ta !  Perish,  O  fiendish  Dru^ !  Perish,  O  brood 
of  the  fiend !  Perish,  O  creation  of  the  fiend !  Perish 
O  world  of  the  fiend !  Perish  away,  O  Dru^ !  Rush 
away,  ODru^!  Perish  avray,  O  Dru^ !  Perish  away 
to  the  regions  of  the  north,  never  more  to  give  unto 
death  the  living  world  of  Righteousness  * !  ’”] 

VIII. 

73  (229).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  worshippers  of  Mazda,  walking,  or 
running,  or  riding,  or  driving,  come  upon  a  Nasu- 
buming  fire,-  whereon  Nasu  is  being  burnt  or 
cooked  *,  what  shall  they  do  ? 

74(233).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘They  shall 
kill  the  man  that  cooks  the  Nasu ;  surely  they  shall 
kill  him*.  They  shall  take  off  the  cauldron,  they 
shall  take  off  the  tripod. 

75  (237)*  ‘  Then  they  shall  kindle  wood  from  that 
fire ;  either  wood  of  those  trees  that  have  the  seed 
of  fire  in  them,  or  bundles  of  the  very  wood  that  was 
prepared  for  that  fire ;  then  they  shall  take  it  farther 
and  disperse  itj  that  it  may  die  out  the  sooner  ®. 

'  As  in  §§  19,  20.  *  From  the  Vendtdid  S&da;  cf.  §  21. 

’  For  food.  Cf.  Farg.  VII,  23-24. 

*  ‘  He  who  bums  Nasi  (dead  matter)  must  be  killed.  Burning 
or  cooldng  Nasi  from  the  dead  is  a  capital  crime.  .  .  .  Four  men 
can  be  put  to  death  by  any  one  without  an  order  from  the  Dastur : 
the  Na^-buraer,  the  highwayman,  the  Sodomite,  and  the  criminal 
taken  in  the  deed  ’  (Comm.) 

*  A  new  fire  is  kindled  from  the  Nasu-burning  fire :  this  new  fire 
is  disposed  in  such  a  way  that  it  should  die  out  soon :  before  it  has 
died  out,  they  kindle  a  new  fire  from  it  and  so  on  for  nine  times : 
the  ninth  fire,  derived  from  the  one  impure,  through  seven  inter- 

[4]  I 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


vendJdAd. 


1 14 


76  (242).  ‘  Thus  they  shall  lay  a  first  bundle  on 
the  ground*,  a  Vltasti*  away  from  the  Nasu-burning 
fire ;  then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it, 
that  it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

77  (245)*  ‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  second  bundle 
on  the  ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu- 
burning  fire ;  then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and 
disperse  it,  that  it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  third  bundle  on  the 
ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-burning  fire  ; 
then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it,  that 
it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  fourth  bundle  on  the 
ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-burning  fire; 
then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it,  that 
it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  fifth  bundle  on  the 
ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-burning  fire; 
then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it,  that 
it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  sixth  bundle  on  the 
ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-burning  fire ; 
then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it,  that 
it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

mediate  fires,  more  and  more  distant  from  the  original  impurity, 
will  represent  the  fire  in  its  native  purity  and  can  enter  into  the 
composition  of  a  Bahrfim  fire. — On  the  modem  process,  see 
Dosabhoy  Frdmjl,  History  of  the  Parsis,  II,  213. 

‘  In  a  hole  dug  for  that  purpose;  such  is  at  least  the  custom 
nowadays.  The  ceremony  is  thus  made  an  imitation  of  the  Ba- 
raslmfim.  The  unclean  fire,  represented  by  the  nine  bundles, 
passes  through  the  nine  holes,  as  the  unclean  man  does  (see  above, 
§  37  seq.  and  Farg.  IX,  12  seq.),  and  leaves  at  each  of  them  some 
of  the  uncleanness  it  has  contracted. 

*  A  span  of  twelve  fingers. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


II5 


‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  seventh  bundle  on  the 
ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-buming  fire ; 
then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it,  that 
it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

‘  They  shall  lay  down  an  eighth  bundle  on  the 
ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-buming  fire; 
then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it,  that 
it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

78  (245).  ‘  They  shall  lay  down  a  ninth  bundle  on 
the  ground,  a  Vltasti  away  from  the  Nasu-burning 
fire ;  then  they  shall  take  it  farther  and  disperse  it, 
that  it  may  die  out  the  sooner. 

79  (246).  ‘  If  a  man  shall  then  piously  bring  unto 
the  lire,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra!  wood  of  Urvfisna, 
or  Vohd-gaona,  or  VohO-kereti,  or  Hadhi-na^pata, 
or  any  other  sweet-smelling  wood ; 

80  (248).  ‘  Wheresoever  the  wind  shall  bring  the 
perfume  of  the  fire,  thereunto  the  fire  of  Ahura 
Mazda  shall  go  and  kill  thousands  of  unseen  Dadvas, 
thousands  of  fiends,  the  brood  of  darkness,  thousands 
of  couples  of  Yitus  and  Pairikas 

IX. 

81  (251).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  bring  a  Nasu-buming  fire  to 
the  D4ityd-g^tu*,  what  shall  be  his  reward  when  his 
soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 


*  It  will  have  all  the  power  of  the  BahrSm  fire. 

*  ‘The  proper  abode,’  the  Bahrdm  fire.  The  BahrSm  fire  is 
composed  of  a  thousand  and  one  fires  belonging  to  sixteen  different 
classes  (ninety-one  corpse-burning  fires,  eighty  dyers'  fires,  &c.) 
As  the  earthly  representative  of  the  heavenly  fire,  it  is  the  sacred 
centre  to  which  every  earthly  fire  longs  to  return,  in  order  to  be 
united  again,  as  much  as  possible,  with  its  native  abode.  The 

I  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Ii6 


vendIdAd. 


Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  ten 
thousand  fire-brands  to  the  Diity6-gitu/ 

82  (254).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  DAityd-gfitu  the 
fire  wherein  impure  liquid  has  been  burnt*,  what 
shall  be  his  reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with 
his  body? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  a  thou¬ 
sand  fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-gdtu. 

83  (257).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu  the 
fire  wherein  dung  has  been  burnt  *,  what  shall  be  his 
reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered ;  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  five 
hundred  fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-gitu.’ 

84  (258).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-gitu  the 
fire  from  the  kiln  of  a  potter,  what  shall  be  his 
reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  four 
hundred  fire-brands  to  the  Diity6-g4tu.’ 

more  it  has  been  defiled  by  worldly  uses,  the  greater  is  the  merit 
acquired  by  freeing  it  from  defilement. 

*  The  h£hr,  that  is  to  say  all  sort  of  impurity  that  comes  from 
the  body. 

*  ‘  The  fire  of  a  bath,’  according  to  Frfimjt ;  the  use  .  of  the  bath 
was  prohibited ;  according  to  Josuah  the  Stylite  (ch.  XX,  tr.  Martin), 
king  Balash  (484-488)  was  overthrown  by  the  Magi  for  having 
built  bath-houses.  The  reason  of  this  prohibition  was  probably 
that  it  entailed  the  defilement  of  the  fire,  as  they  were  warmed  with 
cowdung. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


II7 


85  (259).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g^tu  the 
fire  from  a  glazier’s  kiln,  what  shall  be  his  reward 
when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  to  the 
D4ity6-g4tu  as  many  fire-brands  as  there  were 
glasses  [brought  to  that  fire]*.’ 

86  (260).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g^tu  the 
fire  from  the  aonya  par6-bere^ya®,  what  shall  be 
his  reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be  the 
same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  to  the  D4ityd- 
g4tu  as  many  fire-brands  as  there  were  plants  *.’ 

87  (261).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu  the 
fire  from  under  the  puncheon  of  a  goldsmith,  what 
shall  be  his  reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with 
his  body? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  a 
hundred  fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu.’ 

88  (262).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu  the 
fire  from  under  the  puncheon  of  a  silversmith,  what 
shall  be  his  reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with 
his  body? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  ninety 
fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu.’ 


’  Doubtful. 

*  Meaning  unknown.  Perhaps  a  fire  for  burning  weeds. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


ii8 


vendIdAd. 


89  (263).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D&ity6-gAtu  the 
Are  from  under  the  puncheon  of  a  blacksmith,  what 
shall  be  his  reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with 
his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  eighty 
fire-brands  to  the  DAity6-gr4tu.’ 

90  (264).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-gitu  the 
fire  from  under  the  puncheon  of  a  worker  in  steel, 
what  shall  be  his  reward  when  his  soul  has  parted 
with  his  body? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  seventy 
fire-brands  to  the  DAity6-g4tu.’ 

91  (265).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  Ddityd-gAtu  the 
fire  of  an  oven  what  shall  be  his  reward  when  his 
soul  has  parted  from  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  sixty 
fire-brands  to  the  Ddityd-gitu.’ 

92  (266).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  DAity6-g4tu  the 
fire  from  under  a  cauldron*,  what  shall  be  his  reward 
when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  fifty 
fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-gitu.’ 

93  (267).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu  the 


^  A  baker's  fire. 


*  The  kitchen-fire. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


119 


fire  from  an  aonya  takhairya\  what  shall  be  his 
reward  when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  forty 
fire-brands  to  the  Ddity6-g4tu.’ 

94  (268).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  a  herdsman’s  fire  to  the 
D4ity6-gitu,  what  shall  be  his  reward  when  his  soul 
has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  thirty 
fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu.’ 

[95  (269)*.  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu  the 
fire  of  the  field  *,  what  shall  be  his  reward  when  his 
soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  twenty 
fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-g^tu.’] 

96  (270).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  bring  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu  the 
fire  of  his  own  hearth*,  what  shall  be  his  reward 
when  his  soul  has  parted  with  his  body  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘His  reward  shall  be 
the  same  as  if  he  had,  here  below,  brought  ten 
fire-brands  to  the  D4ity6-g4tu.’ 

X. 

97  (271).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Can  a  man  be  made  clean,  O  holy 

*  Meaning  unknown.  *  From  the  Vendtddd  Sdda. 

*  The  hunter's  fire,  an  encampment’s  fire. 

*  By  which  one  warms  one’s  self ;  the  fire  least  exposed  to  un¬ 
cleanness. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


120 


vendIdAd. 


Ahura  Mazda!  who  has  touched  a  corpse  in  a 
distant  place  in  the  wilderness^? 

98(272).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  can,  O 
holy  Zarathurtra.’ 

How  so  ? 

‘  If  the  Nasu  has  already  been  expelled  by  the 
corpse-eating  dogs  or  the  corpse-eating  birds,  he 
shall  wash  his  body  with  g6m6z;  he  shall  wash  it 
thirty  times,  he  shall  rub  it  dry  with  the  hand  thirty 
times,  beginning  every  time  with  the  head  *. 

99  (278).  ‘  If  the  Nasu  has  not  yet  been  expelled 
by  the  corpse-eating  dogs  or  the  corpse-eating  birds, 
he  shall  wash  his  body  with  gdm^z ;  he  shall  wash 
it  fifteen  times,  he  shall  rub  it  dry  with  the  hand 
fifteen  times*. 

100  (280).  ‘  Then  he  shall  run  a  distance  of  a 
HAthra*.  He  shall  run  until  he  meets  some  man 
on  his  way,  and  he  shall  cry  out  aloud  :  “  Here  am  I, 
one  who  has  touched  the  corpse  of  a  man,  and  who 
is  powerless  in  mind,  powerless  in  tongue,  power¬ 
less  in  hand®.  Do  make  me  clean.”  Thus  shall 
he  run  until  he  overtakes  the  man.  If  the  man 


*  Where  the  regular  process  of  purification  cannot  be  performed. 
— The  Pahlavi  Commentary  to  this  chapter  will  be  found  in  West, 
Pahlavi  Texts,  II,  p.  455. 

*  Perhaps  better  :  ‘  this  is  as  good  as  the  chief  purification '  (that 
is  to  say  as  a  regular  Barashnfim). — If  the  Sag-did  has  been  per¬ 
formed,  the  S!-shfi  (thirty fold  washing)  is  enough.  Cf.  above, 
§§  35.  3<5- 

*  If  the  Sag-did  has  not  been  performed,  he  cleanses  himself  in 
a  summary  way  till  he  comes  to  a  place  where  the  Barashnfim  can 
be  performed. 

*  See  p.  15,  n.  6. 

®  On  account  of  my  uncleanness,  I  am  arm6xt,  excluded  from 
active  life  and  unfit  for  any  work. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  VIII. 


I2I 


will  not  cleanse  him,  he  remits  him  the  third  of 
his  trespass*. 

101  (287).  ‘  Then  he  shall  run  another  Hithra, 
he  shall  run  off  again  until  he  overtakes  a  man ;  if 
the  man  will  not  cleanse  him,  he  remits  him  the  half 
of  his  trespass  *. 

102  (291).  ‘Then  he  shall  run  a  third  H4thra, 
he  shall  run  off  a  third  time  until  he  overtakes  a* 
man ;  if  the  man  will  not  cleanse  him,  he  remits  him 
the  whole  of  his  trespass. 

103  (294).  ‘  Thus  shall  he  run  forwards  until  he 
comes  near  a  house,  a  borough,  a  town,  an  inhabited 
district,  and  he  shall  cry  out  with  a  loud  voice: 
“  Here  am  I,  one  who  has  touched  the  corpse  of  a 
man,  and  who  is  powerless  in  mind,  powerless  in 
tongue,  powerless  in  hand.  Do  make  me  clean.”  If 
they  will  not  cleanse  him,  he  shall  cleanse  his  body 
with  g6m4z  and  water ;  thus  shall  he  be  clean 

104  (300).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  he  find  water  on  his  way  and  the 
water  make  him  subject  to  a  penalty  *,  what  is  the 
penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

105  (303).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Four  hun¬ 
dred  stripes  with  the  Aspah4-aytra,  four  hundred 
stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^^arana.’ 

106  (304).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  he  find  trees*  on  his  way  and  the 

*  As  be  takes  it  upon  his  own  head. 

’  The  half  of  the  remnant,  that  is  the  second  third. 

*  ‘  He  may  then  attend  to  his  business ;  he  may  work  and  till ; 
some  say  he  must  abstain  from  sacrifice  (till  he  has  undergone  the 
Barashnfim)’  (Comm.) 

*  As  he  defiled  it  by  crossing  it. 

*  ‘  Trees  fit  for  the  fire '  (Comm.)  If  he  touches  those  trees,  the 
fire  to  which  they  are  brought  becomes  unclean  by  his  fault. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


122 


vend!dAd. 


fire  make  him  subject  to  a  penalty,  what  is  the 
penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Four  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-axtra,  four  hundred  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-/^arana. 

107  (308),  ‘  This  is  the  penalty,  this  is  the  atone¬ 
ment  which  saves  the  faithful  man  who  submits  to 
it,  not  him  who  does  not  submit  to  it.  Such  a  one 
shall  surely  be  an  inhabitant  in  the  mansion  of  the 
Dru^’.’ 


Fargard  IX. 

The  Nine  Nights’  Barashnfim. 

I  a  (i-ii).  Descripiion  of  the  place  for  cleansing  the  unclean 
(the  Barashndm-gdh). 

I  b  (12-36).  Description  of  the  cleansing, 
n  (37-44)-  Fees  of  the  cleanser. 

Ill  (47-57).  The  false  cleanser ;  his  punishment. 

§§  45i  4^  belong  better  to  the  following  Fargard. 

The  ceremony  described  in  this  Fargard  is  known  among  the 
Parsis  as  Barashndm  nd  shaba,  or  *nine  nights'  Barashndm,’ 
because  it  lasts  for  nine  nights  (see  §  35)*.  It  is  the  great  purifi¬ 
cation,  the  most  efficacious  of  all ;  it  not  only  makes  the  defiled 
man  clean,  but  it  opens  to  him  the  heavens  (see  Farg.  XIX,  33). 
So,  although  it  was  formerly  intended  only  for  the  man  defiled  by 
the  dead,  it  became,  during  the  Parsi  period,  a  pious  work  which 
might  be  performed  without  any  corpse  having  been  touched; 
nay,  its  performance  was  prescribed,  once  at  least,  at  the  time  of  the 
Nfi  zfidf  (at  the  age  of  fifteen,  when  the  young  Parsi  becomes 
a  member  of  the  community),  in  order  to  wash  away  the  natural 
uncleanness  that  has  been  contracted  in  the  maternal  womb 
(Saddar  36)  *.  It  must  also  be  undergone  by  a  priest  who  wants 


*  Hell.  Imitated  from  Yasna  XLIX,  ii  d.  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  18. 

*  On  the  name  Barashnfim,  see  p.  107,  note  5. 

*  For  the  plan  of  the  Barashnfim-gih,  see  West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  II, 
P-  435- 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


123 


to  appear  before  the  Bahr&m  fire  or  perform  the  Yasna  or  the 
Vend!d&d  office. 

la. 

I.  Zarathu^ra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O  most 
beneficent  Spirit,  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  To  whom  shall  they  apply  here  below, 
who  want  to  cleanse  their  body  defiled  by  the 
dead?’ 

2  (4).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘To  a  pious  man', 
O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  I  who  knows  how  to  speak, 
who  speaks  truth,  who  has  learned  the  Holy  Word, 
who  is  pious,  and  knows  best  the  rites  of  cleansing 
according  to  the  law  of  Mazda.  That  man  shall  fell 
the  trees  off  the  surface  of  the  ground  on  a  space  of 
nine  Vibllzus  *  square ; 

3  (9).  ‘  in  that  part  of  the  ground  where  there  is 
least  water  and  where  there  are  fewest  trees,  the 
part  which  is  the  cleanest  and  driest,  and  the  least 
passed  through  by  sheep  and  oxen,  and  by  the  fire 
of  Ahura  Mazda,  by  the  consecrated  bundles  of 
Baresma,  and  by  the  faithful.’ 

4(11).  How  far  from  the  fire?  How  far  from 
the  water  ?  How  far  from  the  consecrated  bundles 
of  Baresma  ?  How  far  from  the  faithful  ? 

5(12).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Thirty  paces 
from  the  fire,  thirty  paces  from  the  water,  thirty 
paces  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma, 
three  paces  from  the  faithful. 

6  (13).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  dig  a  hole®,  two  fingers 

*  A  priest.  *  Nine  ells  (?).  See  Farg.  VII,  34. 

*  Those  holes  are  intended  to  receive  the  liquid  trickling  from 
the  body.  In  summer,  the  air  and  the  earth  being  dry  the  hole 
may  be  less  deep,  as  it  is  certain  that  it  will  be  empty  and  will  have 
room  enough  for  that  liquid. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


124 


VENDtDAD. 


deep  if  the  summer  has  come,  four  fingers  deep  if 
the  winter  and  ice  have  come. 

7  (14).  ‘  Thou  shalt  dig  a  second  hole,  two  fingers  deep 
if  the  summer  has  come,  four  fingers  deep  if  the  winter  and 
ice  have  come. 

‘Thou  shalt  dig  a  third  hole,  two  fingers  deep  if  the 
summer  has  come,  four  fingers  deep  if  the  winter  and  ice 
have  come. 

‘Thou  shaft  dig  a  fourth  hole,  two  fingers  deep  if  the 
summer  has  come,  four  fingers  deep  if  the  winter  and  ice 
have  come. 

‘Thou  shalt  dig  a  fifth  hole,  two  fingers  deep  if  the 
summer  has  come,  four  fingers  deep  if  the  winter  and  ice 
have  come. 

‘  Thou  shalt  dig  a  sixth  hole  *,  two  fingers  deep  if  the 
summer  has  come,  four  fingers  deep  if  the  winter  and  ice 
have  come.’ 

8  (14).  How  far  from  one  another  ? 

‘  One  pace.’ 

How  much  is  the  pace  ? 

‘  As  much  as  three  feet. 

9  (16).  ‘Then  thou  shalt  dig  three  holes  more*, 
two  fingers  deep  if  the  summer  has  come,  four 
fingers  deep  if  the  winter  and  ice  have  come.’ 

How  far  from  the  former  six  ? 

‘  Three  paces.’ 

What  sort  of  paces  ? 

‘  Such  as  are  taken  in  walking.’ 

How  much  are  those  (three)  paces  ? 

‘  As  much  as  nine  feet. 

10(22).  ‘Then  thou  shalt  draw  a  furrow  all 
around  with  a  metal  knife.’ 


'  These  six  holes  contain  gdm€z.  ‘The  holes  must  be  dug 
from  the  north  to  the  south  ’  (Comm.) 

*  The  three  holes  to  contain  water. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


125 


How  far  from  the  holes  ? 

‘  Three  paces.’ 

What  sort  of  paces  ? 

‘  Such  as  are  taken  in  walking.’ 

How  much  are  those  (three)  paces  ? 

‘  As  much  as  nine  feet. 

1 1  (24).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  draw  twelve  furrows  ^ ; 
three  of  which  thou  shalt  draw  to  surround  and 
divide  [from  the  rest}  (the  first)  three  holes ;  three 
thou  shalt  draw  to  surround  and  divide  (the  first) 
six  holes ;  three  thou  shalt  draw  to  surround  and 
divide  the  nine  holes ;  three  thou  shalt  draw  around 
the  [three]  inferior  holes,  outside  the  [six  other] 
holes  \  At  each  of  the  three  times  nine  feet  thou 
shalt  place  stones  as  steps  to  the  holes;  or  pot¬ 
sherds,  or  stumps  or  clods,  or  any  hard  matter 


*  *  The  furrows  must  be  drawn  during  the  day ;  they  must  be 
drawn  with  a  knife  ;  they  must  be  drawn  with  recitation  of  spells. 
While  drawing  the  furrows  the  cleanser  recites  three  Ashem-vohus 
(“holiness  is  the  best  of  all  good,”  &c.),  the  Fravardn6  (“  I  declare 
myself  a  worshipper  of  Mazda,  a  follower  of  Zarathurtra,  a  foe  of 
the  fiend,”  &c.),  the  Khshnfiman  of  Serosh,  and  the  of  Serosh ; 
they  must  be  drawn  from  the  north '  (Comm,  ad  §  32).  The  furrow, 
or  kesh,  plays  a  greater  part  in  the  Mazdean  liturgy  than  in  any 
other.  By  means  of  the  furrow,  drawn  with  proper  spells,  and 
according  to  the  laws  of  spiritual  war,  man  either  besieges  the 
fiend  or  intrenches  himself  against  him  (cf.  Farg.  XVII,  5).  In 
the  present  case  the  Dru^,  being  shut  up  inside  the  kesh  and  thus 
excluded  from  the  world  outside,  and  being  driven  back,  step  by 
step,  by  the  strength  of  the  holy  water  and  spells,  finds  at  last  no 
place  of  refuge  but  hell. 

*  ‘  The  three  holes  for  water,  the  six  holes  for  g6m6z '  (Comm.) 

*  The  nine  feet  between  the  holes  containing  g6m6z  and  those 
containing  water,  the  nine  feet  between  the  first  holes  and  the  fur¬ 
rows,  and  the  nine  feet  between  the  last  hole  and  the  furrows. 

^  Dddara. 

*  That  the  foot  of  the  unclean  one  may  not  touch  the  earth. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


126 


vendJdAd. 


Ib. 

12  (31).  ‘Then  the  man  defiled  shall  walk  to  the 
holes ;  thou,  O  Zarathu^tra !  shalt  stand  outside  by 
the  furrow,  and  thou  shalt  recite,  Nemas>^4  yk 
Armaitif  iskkk^ ;  and  the  man  defiled  shall  repeat, 
Nemas>^A  yk  irmaiti^  tzk^k. 

13  (35).  ‘  The  Dru^  becomes  weaker  and  weaker 
at  every  one  of  those  words  which  are  a  weaipon  to 
smite  the  fiend  Angra  Mainyu,  to  smite  A6shma  of 
the  murderous  spear*,  to  smite  the  MAzainya  fiends®, 
to  smite  all  the  fiends. 

14  (40).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  take  for  the  g6mez 
a  spoon  of  brass  or  of  lead.  When  thou  takest 
a  stick  with  nine  knots  *,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra ! 
to  sprinkle  (the  g6m6z)  from  that  spoon,  thou  shalt 
fasten  the  spoon  to  the  end  of  the  stick. 

15  (43)-  ‘They  shall  wash  his  hands  first.  If  his 
hands  be  not  washed  first,  he  makes  his  whole  body 
unclean.  When  he  has  washed  his  hands  three 
times,  after  his  hands  have  been  washed,  thou  shalt 
sprinkle  the  forepart  of  his  skull  ® ;  then  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  in  front,  between  his  brows*. 

16(50).  ‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  him  in  front  be¬ 
tween  the  brows ;  then  the  Dru,^  Nasu  rushes  upon 
the  back  part  of  the  skull. 

‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  back  part  of  the  skull ; 
then  the  Dru/  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  jaws. 


’  Yasna  XLIX.  10  c.  *  See  Farg.  X,  13. 

’  See  Farg.  X,  16. 

*  So  long  that  the  cleanser  may  take  g6m€z  or  water  from  the 
holes  and  sprinkle  the  unclean  one,  without  touching  him  and 
without  going  inade  the  furrows. 

*  With  g6m6z  at  the  first  six  holes,  with  water  at  the  next  three. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  VIII,  40-71. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


127 


‘Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  jaws;  then  the  Dinf 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the.  right  ear. 

17  (56).  ‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  right  ear;  then 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  ear. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  left  ear ;  then  the  Dru.^ 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  shoulder. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  right  shoulder ;  then  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  shoulder. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  left  shoulder ;  then  the 
Dnif  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  arm-pit. 

18  (64).  ‘Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  right  arm-pit; 
then  the  Dnif  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  arm-pit. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  left  arm-pit ;  then  the 
T>rvig  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  chest. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  chest ;  then  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the  back. 

19  (70).  ‘Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  back;  then  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  nipple. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  right  nipple ;  then  the 
Dni^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  nipple. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  left  nipple ;  then  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  rib. 

20  (76).  ‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  right  rib ;  then 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  rib. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  left  rib ;  then  the  Dru^ 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  hip. 

‘  Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  right  hip ;  then  the 
Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  hip. 

21  (82).  ‘Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  left  hip;  then 
the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  sexual  parts. 

‘Thou  shall  sprinkle  the  sexual  parts.  If  the 
unclean  one  be  a  man,  thou  shall  sprinkle  him  first 
behind,  then  before ;  if  the  unclean  one  be  a  woman, 
thou  shall  sprinkle  her  first  before,  then  behind; 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


128 


VENDioAn. 


then  the  Druf  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right 
thigh. 

22(88).  ‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  right  thigh; 
then  the  Dru^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  thigh. 

‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  thigh ;  then  the 
Dn^  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  knee. 

‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  right  knee;  then  the 
Dri^f  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  knee. 

23  (94).  ‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  knee ;  then 
the  Dm/  Nasu  mshes  upon  the  right  leg. 

‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  right  leg;  then  the 
Dri\f  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  leg. 

‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  leg ;  then  the  Dm/ 
Nasu  rushes  upon  the  right  ankle. 

‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  right  ankle;  then  the 
Drt/  Nasu  rushes  upon  the  left  ankle. 

24  (102).  ‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  ankle ; 
then  the  Dm/  Nasu  mshes  upon  the  right  instep. 

‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  right  instep;  then  the 
Dm/  Nasu  mshes  upon  the  left  instep. 

‘Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  instep;  then  the 
Dru/  Nasu  turns  round  under  the  sole  of  the  foot ; 
it  looks  like  the  wing  of  a  fly. 

25  (108).  ‘  He  shall  press  his  toes  upon  the 
ground  and  shall  raise  up  his  heels;  thou  shalt 
sprinkle  his  right  sole ;  then  the  Dru/  Nasu  mshes 
upon  the  left  sole. 

‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  sole ;  then  the  Dm/ 
Nasu  turns  round  under  the  toes;  it  looks  like  the 
wing  of  a  fly. 

26(113).  ‘He  shall  press  his  heels  upon  the 
gp'ound  and  shall  raise  up  his  toes;  thou  shalt 
sprinkle  his  right  toe ;  then  the  Dm/  Nasu  mshes 
upon  the  left  toe. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


129 


‘  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  left  toe ;  then  the 
Nasu  flies  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  in  the 
shape  of  a  ragging  fly,  with  knees  and  tail  sticking 
out,  droning  without  end,  and  like  unto  the  foulest 
Khrafstras. 

27  (118).  ‘And  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words : — 

‘"Yath4  ahft  vairyd : — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the 
law  of  righteousness. 

‘  “  The  gifts  of  Vohu-man6  to  deeds  done  in  this  world 
for  Mazda. 

‘  “  He  who  relieves  the  poor  makes  Ahura  king. 

‘  “  K^m-nil  mazdi : — What  protector  hadst  thou  given 
unto  me,  O  Mazda !  while  the  hate  of  the  wicked  encom¬ 
passes  me  ?  Whom,  but  thy  Atar  and  Vohu-mand,  through 
whose  work  I  keep  on  the  world  of  Righteousness  ?  Reveal 
therefore  to  me  thy  Religion  as  thy  rule  1 

‘“K^  verethrem-^4 ; — Who  is  the  victorious  who  will 
protect  thy  teaching  ?  Make  it  clear  that  I  am  the  guide 
for  both  worlds.  May  Sraosha  come  with  Vohu>mand 
and  help  whomsoever  thou  pleasest,  O  Mazda ! 

‘  “  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti 
Spe»ta !  Perish,  O  fiendish  !  Perish,  O  brood  of  the 
fiend  I  Perish,  O  world  of  the  fiend !  Perish  away,  O 
Dru^!  Rush  away,  O  !  Perish  away,  O  Drq^! 
Perish  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  never  more  to  give 
unto  death  the  living  world  of  Righteousness  * !  ” 

28  (119).  ‘At  the  first  hole  the  man  becomes 
freer  from  the  Nasu ;  then  thou  shalt  say  those 
victorious,  most  healing  words: — “Yath4  ahfi 
vairy6,”  &c.* 

‘  At  the  second  hole  he  becomes  freer  from  the  Nasu ; 
then  thou  shalt  say  those  victorious,  most  healing  words : — 
“  Yathi  ahfi  vairyd,”  &c. 


*  Cf.  Farg.VIII,  19-21.  *  As  in  preceding  clause. 

[4]  K 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


130 


VENDtDAD. 


‘At  the  third  hole  he  becomes  freer  from  the  Nasu; 
then  thou  shalt  say  those  victorious,  most  healing  words : — 
“Yath4  ahft  vairyd,”  &c. 

‘  At  the  fourth  hole  he  becomes  freer  from  the  Nasu ; 
then  thou  shalt  say  those  victorious,  most  healing  words : — 
“Yath4  ahA  vairyd,”  &c. 

‘  At  the  fifth  hole  he  becomes  freer  from  the  Nasu ; 
then  thou  shalt  say  those  victorious,  most  healing  words : — 
“  Y ath4  ahfi  vairyd,”  &c. 

‘  At  the  sixth  hole  he  becomes  freer  from  the  Nasu ; 
then  thou  shalt  say  those  victorious,  most  healing  words : — 
‘‘Yathd  ahd  vairyd,”  &c. 

29(120).  ‘Afterwards  the  man  defiled  shall  sit 
down,  inside  the  furrows  outside  the  furrows  of  the 
six  holes,  four  fingers  from  those  furrows.  There 
he  shall  cleanse  his  body  with  thick  handfuls  of 
dust. 

30  (123).  ‘  Fifteen  times  shall  they  take  up  dust 
from  the  ground  for  him  to  rub  his  body,  and  they 
shall  wait  there  until  he  is  dry  even  to  the  last  hair 
on  his  head. 

31  (125).  ‘When  his  body  is  dry  with  dust,  then 
he  shall  step  over  the  holes  (containing  water).  At 
the  first  hole  he  shall  wash  his  body  once  with  water ; 
at  the  second  hole  he  shall  wash  his  body  twice  with 
water;  at  the  third  hole  he  shall  wash  his  body  thrice 
with  water. 

32  (130).  ‘Then  he  shall  perfume  (his  body) 
with  Urvfisna,  or  Vohfi-gaona,  or  Vohfi-kereti,  or 
Hadhfi-na^pata,  or  any  other  sweet-smelling  plant ; 
then  he  shall  put  on  his  clothes,  and  shall  go  back 
to  his  house. 


^  Between  the  furrows  of  the  six  holes  containing  gdmSz  and 
the  furrows  of  the  holes  containing  water. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


131 


33  (133)'  ‘  He  shall  sit  down  there  in  the  place  of 
-infirmity^,  inside  the  house,  apart  from  the  other 
worshippers  of  Mazda.  He  shall  not  go  near  the 
fire,  nor  near  the  water,  nor  near  the  earth,  nor  near 
the  cow,  nor  near  the  trees,  nor  near  the  faithful, 
either  man  or  woman.  Thus  shall  he  continue  until 
three  nights  have  passed.  When  three  nights  have 
passed,  he  shall  wash  his  body,  he  shall  wash  his 
clothes  with  gdm^z  and  water  to  make  them  clean. 

34(137).  ‘Then  he  shall  sit  down  again  in  the 
place  of  infirmity,  inside  the  house,  apart  from  the 
other  worshippers  of  Mazda.  He  shall  not  go  near 
the  fire,  nor  near  the  water,  nor  near  the  earth,  nor 
near  the  cow,  nor  near  the  trees,  nor  near  the  faithful, 
either  man  or  woman.  Thus  shall  he  continue  until 
six  nights  have  passed.  When  six  nights  have 
passed,  he  shall  wash  his  body,  he  shall  wash  his 
clothes  with  gdmdz  and  water  to  make  them  clean. 

35(141).  ‘Then  he  shall  sit  down  again  in  the 
place  of  infirmity,  inside  the  house,  apart  from  the 
other  worshippers  of  Mazda.  He  shall  not  go  near 
the  fire,  nor  near  the  water,  nor  near  the  earth,  nor 
near  the  cow,  nor  near  the  trees,  nor  near  the 
faithful,  either  man  or  woman.  Thus  shall  he  con¬ 
tinue,  until  nine  nights  have  passed.  When  nine 
nights  have  passed,  he  shall  wash  his  body,  he  shall 
wash  his  clothes  with  gdmSz  and  water  to  make 
them  clean. 

36  (145).  ‘He  may  thenceforth  go  near  the  fire, 
near  the  water,  near  the  earth,  near  the  cow,  near 
the  trees,  and  near  the  faithful,  either  man  or 
woman. 


*  The  Ann^t-gih  (see  Farg.V,  59,  note  4). 
K  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


132 


vendIdAd. 


II.‘ 

37  (146).  ‘  Thou  shalt  cleanse  a  priest  for  a 
blessing  of  the  just*. 

‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  the  lord  of  a  province  for  the 
value  of  a  camel  of  high  value, 

‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  the  lord  of  a  town  for  the  value 
of  a  stallion  of  high  value. 

‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  the  lord  of  a  borough  for  the 
value  of  a  bull  of  high  value. 

‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  the  master  of  a  house  for  the 
value  of  a  cow  three  years  old. 

38  (151).  ‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  the  wife  of  the 
master  of  a  house  for  the  value  of  a  ploughing* 
cow. 

‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  a  menial  for  the  value  of  a 
draught  cow. 

‘Thou  shalt  cleanse  a  young  child  for  the  value 
of  a  lamb. 

39  (^54)-  ‘  These  are  the  heads  of  cattle — flocks 
or  herds — that  the  worehippers  of  Mazda  shall  give 
to  the  man  who  has  cleansed  them,  if  they  can  aflbrd 
it ;  if  they  cannot  aflbrd  it,  they  shall  give  him  any 
other  value  that  may  make  him  leave  their  houses 
well  pleased  with  them,  and  free  from  anger. 

40 (157).  ‘For  if  the  man  who  has  cleansed  them 
leave  their  houses  displeased  with  them,  and  full  of 
anger,  then  the  Dru^  Nasu  enters  them  from  the 
nose  [of  the  dead],  from  the  eyes,  from  the  tongue, 
from  the  jaws,  from  the  sexual  organs,  from  the 
hinder  parts. 


*  Cf.  the  tariff  for  the  fees  of  physicians,  Farg.VII,  41-43. 

*  See  Farg.VII,  41,  note  3.  •  Doubtfal. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


133 


41  (159).  ‘  And  the  Dn^  Nasu  rushes  upon  them 
even  to  the  end  of  the  nails,  and  they  are  unclean 
thenceforth  for  ever  and  ever. 

‘  Itgfrieves  the  sun  indeed,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra ! 
to  shine  upon  a  man  defiled  by  the  dead  ;  it  grieves 
the  moon,  it  grieves  the  stars. 

42  (162).  ‘  That  man  delights  them,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu^tra !  who  cleanses  from  the  Nasu  the  man 
defiled  by  the  dead  ;  he  delights  the  fire,  he  delights 
the  water,  he  delights  the  earth,  he  delights  the  cow, 
he  delights  the  trees,  he  delights  the  faithful,  both 
men  and  women.’ 

43(164).  Zarathu.rtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O 
Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One !  What 
shall  be  his  reward,  after  his  soul  has  parted  from 
his  body,  who  has  cleansed  from  the  Nasu  the  man 
defiled  by  the  dead  ' 

44(166).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘The  welfare’ 
of  Paradise  thou  canst  promise  to  that  man,  for  his 
reward  in  the  other  world.’ 

45*  (*67)*  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  O 
Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One !  How 
shall  I  fight  against  that  Dni^  who  from  the  dead 
rushes  upon  the  living  ?  How  shall  I  fight  against 
that  Nasu  who  from  the  dead  defiles  the  living  ?  ’ 

46  (169).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  *  Say  aloud 
those  words  in  the  G&thas  that  are  to  be  said 
twice 


*  Literally,  ‘  the  grease.* 

*  This  clause  and  the  following  one  as  far  as  ‘and  the 
Dm;  shall  fly  away'  are  further  developed  in  the  following 
Fargard. 

*  The  Bir-&mrflta  formulas,  as  enumerated  in  the  following 
Fargard. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


134 


VENDtDAn. 


‘  Say  aloud  those  words  in  the  Gdthas  that  are  to 
be  said  thrice  *. 

‘  Say  aloud  those  words  in  the  G&thas  that  are  to 
be  said  four  times 

‘  And  the  Dru^  shall  fly  away  like  the  well-darted 
arrow,  like  the  felt  of  last  year®,  like  the  annual 
garment®  of  the  earth.’ 


III. 

47(172).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  who  does  not  know  the  rites 
of  cleansing  according  to  the  law  of  Mazda,  offers  to 
cleanse  the  unclean,  how  shall  I  then  fight  against 
that  Dru^  who  from  the  dead  rushes  upon  the 
living  ?  How  shall  I  fight  against  that  Dnif  who 
from  the  dead  defiles  the  living  ? 

48(175).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Then,  O 
Spitama  Zarathu.ftra !  the  Dru^  Nasu  appears  to 
wax  stronger  than  she  was  before.  Stronger  then 
are  sickness  and  death  and  the  working  of  the  fiend 
than  they  were  before 

49  (177).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  What  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  worshippers  of 
Mazda  shall  bind  him;  they  shall  bind  his  hands 
first ;  then  they  shall  strip  him  of  his  clothes,  they 
shall  cut  the  head  off  his  neck,  and  they  shall  give 
over  his  corpse  unto  the  greediest  of  the  corpse- 


*  The  Thrif-^inrQta  and  A'athruf-imriita  formulas,  as 
enumerated  in  the  following  Fargard. 

*  The  felt  of  an  oba  made  for  a  season  (?).  Cf.  Farg.  VIII,  i. 

’  The  grass. 

‘  The  plague  and  contagion  are  stronger  than  ever. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  IX. 


135 


eating  creatures  made  by  the  beneficent  Spirit,  unto 
the  vultures,  with  these  words  * : — 

‘  “  The  man  here  has  repented  of  all  his  evil 
thoughts,  words,  and  deeds. 

50(183).  ‘“If  he  has  committed  any  other  evil 
deed,  it  is  remitted  by  his  repentance ;  if  he  has 
committed  no  other  evil  deed,  he  is  absolved  by  his 
repentance  for  ever  and  ever  ’ 

51(187).  Who  is  he,  O  Ahura  Mazda!  who 
threatens  to  take  away  fulness  and  increase  from 
the  world,  and  to  bring  in  sickness  and  death  ? 

52  (188).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  It  is  the  un¬ 
godly  Ashemaogha  ®,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra !  who 
in  this  material  world  cleanses  the  unclean  without 
knowing  the  rites  of  cleansing  according  to  the  law 
of  Mazda. 

53  (190)*  ‘  For  until  then,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^rtra! 
sweetness  and  fatness  would  flow  out  from  that 
land  and  from  those  fields,  with  health  and  healing, 
with  fulness  and  increase  and  gjrowth,  and  a  growing 
of  corn  and  grass 

54  (191).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 


’  ‘  The  cleanser  who  has  not  performed  the  cleansing  according 
to  the  rites,  shall  be  taken  to  a  desert  place ;  there  they  shall  nail 
him  with  four  nails,  they  shall  take  off  the  skin  from  his  body,  and 
cut  off  his  head.  If  he  has  performed  Patet  for  his  sin,  he  shall  be 
holy  (that  is,  he  shall  go  to  Paradise);  if  he  has  not  performed 
Patet,  he  shall  stay  in  hell  till  the  day  of  resurrection'  (Fraser 
Ravdet,  p.  398).  Cf.  Farg.  Ill,  20-21  and  note  5. 

*  See  Farg.  Ill,  20  seq.  ’  See  Farg.V,  35 

‘  Cf.  XIII,  52  seq.  The  false  cleanser  is  punished  as  would  be 
a  man  who  would  introduce  an  epidemic.  He  undergoes  the  same 
penalty  as  the  8vak-bar,  but  with  none  of  the  mitigation  allowed 
in  the  case  of  the  latter,  on  account  of  the  sacrilegious  character  of 
his  usurpation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


136 


vendIdAd. 


Holy  One !  When  are  sweetness  and  fatness  to 
come  back  again  to  that  land  and  to  those  fields, 
with  health  and  healing,  with  fulness  and  increase 
and  growth,  and  a  growing  of  com  and  grass  ? 

55,56(192,1 93).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Sweet¬ 
ness  and  fatness  will  never  come  back  again  to  that 
land  and  to  those  fields,  with  health  and  healing, 
with  fulness  and  increase  and  growth,  and  a  growing 
of  com  and  grass,  until  that  ungodly  Ashemaogha 
has  been  smitten  to  death  on  the  spot,  and  the  holy 
Sraosha  of  that  place  has  been  offered  up  a  sacrifice’, 
for  three  days  and  three  nights,  with  fire  blazing, 
with  Baresma  tied  up,  and  with  Haoma  prepared. 

57  (196).  ‘Then  sweetness  and  fatness  will  come 
back  again  to  that  land  and  to  those  fields,  with 
health  and  healing,  with  fulness  and  increase  and 
growth,  and  a  gp-owing  of  com  and  grass.’ 


Fargard  X. 

Nowadays,  before  laying  the  dead  in  the  coffin,  two  priests  recite 
the  Ahunavaiti  Githa  (Yasna  XXVIII-XXXIV)  :  it  is  the  so-called 
Gih  sdrnd  (chanting  of  the  Gathas:  g&th&o  sr&vay6iti).  From 
the  following  Fargard  it  appears  that  formerly  all  the  five  Gdthas 
and  the  Yasna  Haptanghditi  were  recited.  Certain  stanzas  were 
recited  several  times  and  with  a  certain  emphasis  (framrava):  and 
they  were  followed  with  certain  spells.  The  object  of  this  Fargard 
is  to  show  which  are  those  stanzas,  how  many  times  each  was  re¬ 
cited,  and  to  give  the  corresponding  spells. 

I.  Zarathu5*tra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O  Ahura 
Mazda!  most  beneficent  Spirit,  Maker  of  the  ma- 


'  The  sadis  sacrifice,  that  is  to  say,  the  sacrifice  that  is  offered 
up  to  Sraosha  for  three  days  and  three  nights  after  the  death  of 
a  man  for  the  salvation  of  his  soul. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


i 


FARGARD  X. 


137 


terial  world,  thou  Holy  One!  How  shall  I  fight 
against  that  Dru^  who  from  the  dead  rushes  upon 
the  living?  How  shall  I  fight  against  that  Dru^ 
who  from  the  dead  defiles  the  living  ?  ’ 

2  (3).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Say  aloud  those 
words  in  the  G4thas  that  are  to  be  said  twice 

‘  Say  aloud  those  words  in  the  Githas  that  are  to 
be  said  thrice 

*  Say  aloud  those  words  in  the  G&thas  that  are  to 
be  said  four  times 

3  (7).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  Which  are  those  words  in  the  Githas  that 
are  to  be  said  twice  ? 

4  (10).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  These  are  the 
words  in  the  G4thas  that  are  to  be  said  twice,  and 
thou  shalt  twice  say  them  aloud  * : — 

ahy4  yds4  .  .  .  urvinem  (Yasna  XXVIII,  2). 

humatenSm  . . .  mahl  (Yas.  XXXV,  2), 
ashahyd  4a<a?  sair^  . .  .  ahuby^l  (Yas.  XXXV,  8), 
yathi  th  1 .  . .  ahurd  (Yas.  XXXIX,  4), 
humiim  thw4  .  . .  hudaustemi  (Yas.  XLI,  3), 
thwdi  staotarasid  . . .  ahuri  (Yas.  XLI,  5). 

ujt4  ahmii .  . .  mananghd  (Yas.  XLIII,  1), 
spe«t4  mainyA  . .  .  ahurd  (Yas.  XLVH,  i), 
vohu  khshathrem  . .  .  vareshdnd  (Yas.  LI,  i), 
vahi^tA  IrtL  . .  .  jkyaothandii  (Yas.  LI  1 1,  i). 
5(10).  ‘And  after  thou  hast  twice  said  those 
Bi^-4mrAtas,  thou  shalt  say  aloud  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words : — 

*  The  so-called  Bu>&mrhta. 

*  The  Thri^&mrfita.  ’  The  iTathruf-inirdta. 

*  The  Bif -imrhta  are  the  opening  stanzas  of  the  five  Githas 
and  five  stanzas  in  the  Yasna  Haptanghiiti. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


138 


vendJdAd. 


‘  “  I  drive  away  Angra  Mainyu*  from  this  house, 
from  this  borough,  from  this  town,  from  this  land ; 
from  the  very  body  of  the  man  defiled  by  the  dead, 
from  the  very  body  of  the  woman  defiled  by  the 
dead ;  from  the  master  of  the  house,  from  the  lord 
of  the  borough,  from  the  lord  of  the  town,  from  the 
lord  of  the  land;  from  the  whole  of  the  world  of 
Righteousness. 

6  (12).  I  drive  away  the  Nasu®,  I  drive  away 
direct  defilement,  I  drive  away  indirect  defilement, 
from  this  house,  from  this  borough,  from  this  town, 
from  this  land;  from  the  very  body  of  the  man 
defiled  by  the  dead,  from  the  very  body  of  the 
woman  defiled  by  the  dead;  from  the  master  of 
the  house,  from  the  lord  of  the  borough,  from  the 
lord  of  the  town,  from  the  lord  of  the  land ;  from 
the  whole  of  the  world  of  Righteousness.”  ’ 

7  (13).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  Which  are  those  words  in  the  GSthas  that 
are  to  be  said  thrice  ? 

8  (16).  Ahura  Mazda  answered;  ‘These  are  the 
words  in  the  Gdthas  that  are  to  be  said  thrice,  and 
thou  shalt  thrice  say  them  aloud : — 

ashem  vohA  .  .  .  (Yas.  XXVII,  14), 
ye  smrt6  . . .  paid  (Yas.  XXXIII,  ii), 
hukhshathrdtem&i  . . .  vahutSi  (Yas.  XXXV,  5), 
du^vareniij .  .  .  vahy6  (Yas.  LI  1 1,  9). 

9  (16).  ‘After  thou  hast  thrice  said  those  Thri^- 
imrfitas,  thou  shalt  say  aloud  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words  : — 


*  The  chief  demon,  the  Dafiva  of  the  Dafivas. 

*  The  very  demon  with  whom  one  has  to  do  in  the  present  case. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  X. 


139 


‘“I  drive  away  Indra^  I  drive  away  Sauru*, 
I  drive  away  the  da6va  Naunghaithya  *,  from  this 
house,  from  this  borough,  from  this  town,  from  this 
land ;  from  the  very  body  of  the  man  defiled  by  the 
dead,  from  the  very  body  of  the  woman  defiled  by 
the  dead;  from  the  master  of  the  house,  from  the 
lord  of  the  borough,  from  the  lord  of  the  town,  from 
the  lord  of  the  land ;  from  the  whole  of  the  world  of 
Righteousness. 

10(18).  ‘“I  drive  away  Tauru\  I  drive  away 
Zairi*,  from  this  house,  from  this  borough,  from 
this  town,  from  this  land ;  from  the  very  body  of 
the  man  defiled  by  the  dead,  from  the  very  body 
of  the  woman  defiled  by  the  dead ;  from  the  master 
of  the  house,  from  the  lord  of  the  borough,  from 
the  lord  of  the  town,  from  the  lord  of  the  land  ; 
from  the  whole  of  the  holy  world.”' 

11  (19).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  Which  are  those  words  in  the  Githas 
that  are  to  be  said  four  times  ? 

12  (22).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  These  are  the 
words  in  the  Gfithas  that  are  to  be  said  four  times, 
and  thou  shalt  four  times  say  them  aloud  : — 

yathd  ahfi  vairy6  ...  *  (Yas.  XXVII,  13), 


’  Indra,  Sauni,  Nounghaithya,  Tauru,  and  Zairi  are  (with  Akem- 
mand,  here  replaced  by  the  Nasu),  the  six  chief  demons,  and 
stand  to  the  Amesha  Spe»tas  in  the  same  relation  as  Angra  Mainyu 
to  Speffta  Mainyu.  Indra  opposes  Asha  Vahirta  and  turns  men’s 
hearts  from  good  works ;  Sauru  opposes  Khshathra  Vairya,  he  pre¬ 
sides  over  bad  government ;  Ntfunghaithya  opposes  Spe»ta  Armaiti, 
he  is  the  demon  of  discontent;  Tauru  and  Zairi  oppose  Haurvatit 
and  Ameretit  and  poison  the  waters  and  the  plants. — ^Akem-mand, 
Bad  Thought,  opposes  Vohu-mand,  Good  Thought. 

*  Translated  Farg.VIII,  19. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VENOtnAD. 


r40 


mazdi  zd  mdi .  . .  dau  ahdm*  (Yas.  XXXIV,  15), 
4  airyain4  ishyd . . .  masat4  mazdau  *  (Yas.  LI  V.  i). 
13(22).  ‘After  thou  hast  said  those  A'athruJ- 
dmrhtas  four  times,  thou  shalt  say  aloud  these 
victorious,  most  healing  words : — 

‘  “  I  drive  away  A^shma,  the  fiend  of  the  mur¬ 
derous  spear®,  I  drive  away  the  da4va  Akatasha*, 
from  this  house,  from  this  borough,  from  this  town, 
from  this  land;  from  the  very  body  of  the  man 
defiled  by  the  dead,  from  the  very  body  of  the 
woman  defiled  by  the  dead;  from  the  master  of 
the  house,  from  the  lord  of  the  borough,  from  the 
lord  of  the  town,  from  the  lord  of  the  land;  from 
the  whole  of  the  world  of  Righteousness. 

14(24).  ‘“I  drive  away  the  Varenya  da^vas®, 
I  drive  away  the  wind-da4va,  from  this  house,  from 
this  borough,  from  this  town,  from  this  land ;  from 
the  very  body  of  the  man  defiled  by  the  dead,  from 
the  very  body  of  the  woman  defiled  by  the  dead ; 
from  the  master  of  the  house,  from  the  lord  of  the 
borough,  from  the  lord  of  the  town,  from  the  lord 
of  the  land;  from  the  whole  of  the  world  of 
Righteousness.” 

''S  (25)-  ‘These  are  the  words  in  the  G4thas  that 


*  Translated  Farg.  XI,  14. 

*  Translated  Farg.  XX,  11;  cf.  XI,  7. 

*  Alshma,  Khishm,  the  incarnation  of  anger:  he  sows  quarrel 
and  war.  ‘He  is  the  chief  source  of  evil  for  the  creatures  of 
Ormazd,  and  the  Kayani  heroes  mostly  perished  through  him’ 
(Bund.  XXVIII,  17). 

*  The  fiend  who  corrupts  and  perverts  men. 

*  The  fiendish  inhabitants  of  Varena  (Gtlfin).  Varena,  like  the 
neighbouring  MSzana  (Mfizandarin),  was  peopled  with  savage, 
non-Aryan  natives,  who  were  considered  men-demons.  Cf.  Farg.  I, 
18  and  notes. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  X. 


141 


are  to  be  said  twice;  these  are  the  words  in  the 
Githas  that  are  to  be  said  thrice;  these  are  the 
words  in  the  Githas  that  are  to  be  said  four  times. 

16  (26).  ‘These  are  the  words  that  smite  down 
Angra  Mainyu;  these  are  the  words  that  smite 
down  Aishma,  the  fiend  of  the  murderous  spear; 
these  are  the  words  that  smite  down  the  daivas  of 
Mizana  * ;  these  are  the  words  that  smite  down  all 
the  daivas. 

1 7  (30).  ‘  These  are  the  words  that  stand  against 
that  Dn\f,  against  that  Nasu,  who  from  the  dead 
rushes  upon  the  living,  who  from  the  dead  defiles 
the  living. 

18  (32).  ‘Therefore,  O  Zarathu^tra!  thou  shalt 
dig  nine  holes*  in  the  part  of  the  ground  where 
there  is  least  water  and  where  there  are  fewest 
trees;  where  there  is  nothing  that  may  be  food 
either  for  man  or  beast;  “for  purity  is  for  man, 
next  to  life,  the  gp'eatest  good,  that  purity,  O  Zara- 
thujtra,  that  is  in  the  Religion  of  Mazda  for  him 
who  cleanses  his  own  self  with  good  thoughts, 
words,  and  deeds®.” 

19  (38).  ‘Make  thy  own  self  pure,  O  righteous 
man!  any  one  in  the  world  here  below  can  win 
purity  for  his  own  self,  namely,  when  he  cleanses 
his  own  self  with  good  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds. 

30.  ‘“  Yath4  ahA  vairyd: — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the 
law  of  righteousness,”  &c.* 

“‘K^m-n4  mazd4: — What  protector  hast  thou  given 


'  The  demoniac  races  of  Mdzandar4n ;  Mdzandarin  was  known 
in  popular  tradition  as  a  land  of  fiends  and  sorcerers. 

*  The  nine  holes  for  the  Barashnfim ;  see  above,  p.  1 23,  §  6  seq. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  V,  21. 

*  The  rest  as  in  Farg.  VIII,  19,  20. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


142 


VENDtoAn. 


unto  me,  O  Mazda !  while  the  hate  of  the  wicked  encom¬ 
passes  me  ?  &c. 

Ke  verethrem-^4: — ^Who  is  the  victorious  who  will 
protect  thy  teaching  ?  ”  &c. 

‘  “  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti  Spewta  I 
Perish,  O  fiendish  Dn\^l  .  .  .  Perish  away  to  the  regions  of 
the  north,  never  more  to  give  unto  death  the  living  world 
of  Righteousness  !  ”  * 


Fargard  XI. 

This  chapter,  like  the  preceding,  is  composed  of  spells  intended 
to  drive  away  the  Nasu.  But  they  are  of  a  more  special  character, 
as  they  refer  to  the  particular  objects  to  be  cleansed,  such  as  the 
house,  the  fire,  the  water,  the  earth,  the  animals,  the  plants,  the 
man  defiled  with  the  dead.  Each  incantation  consists  of  two 
parts,  a  line  from  the  Gdthas  which  alludes,  or  rather  is  made  to 
allude,  to  the  particular  object  (§§  4,  5,  6,  7),  and  a  general 
exorcism,  in  the  usual  dialect  (§§  8-20),  which  is  the  same  for  all 
the  objects. 

I.  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O  Ahura 
Mazda!  most  beneficent  spirit.  Maker  of  the  ma¬ 
terial  world,  thou  Holy  One !  How  shall  I  cleanse 
the  house  ?  how  the  fire  ?  how  the  water  ?  how  the 
earth  ?  how  the  cow  ?  how  the  tree  ?  how  the  faith¬ 
ful  man  and  the  faithful  woman  ?  how  the  stars  ? 
how  the  moon  ?  how  the  sun  ?  how  the  boundless 
light?  how  all  good  things,  made  by  Mazda,  the 
offspring  of  the  holy  principle?' 

2  (4).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Thou  shalt  chant 
the  cleansing  words,  and  the  house  shall  be  clean ; 
clean  shall  be  the  fire,  clean  the  water,  clean  the 
earth,  clean  the  cow,  clean  the  tree,  clean  the  faith¬ 
ful  man  and  the  faithful  woman,  clean  the  stars, 
clean  the  moon,  clean  the  sun,  clean  the  boundless 


Digitized  by 


Google 


FARGARD  XI. 


143 


light,  clean  all  good  things,  made  by  Mazda,  the 
offspring  of  the  holy  principle. 

3  (7)*  [‘  So  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious,  most 
healing  words];  thou  shalt  chant  the  Ahuna-Vairya 
five  times :  “  The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law  of 
righteousness,”  &c. 

‘  The  Ahuna-Vairya  preserves  the  person  of  man : 

Yath4  ahft  vairyd : — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law 
of  righteousness,”  &c. 

“‘K^m-n4  mazdi: — What  protector  hast  thou  given 
unto  me,  O  Mazda  1  while  the  hate  of  the  wicked  encom* 
passes  me  ?  ”  &c. 

‘  “ Kf  verethrem-^4 ; — Who  is  the  victorious  who  will 
protect  thy  teaching?”  &c. 

‘  “  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti 
Spe«ta !  ”  &c.*  _ 

4  (9).  ‘  If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  house,  say 
these  words  aloud :  “  As  long  as  the  sickness  lasts 
my  great  protector  [is  he  who  teaches  virtue  to  the 
perverse] 

‘  If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  fire,  say  these 
words  aloud :  “  Thy  fire,  first  of  all,  do  we  approach 
with  worship,  O  Ahura  Mazda  ® !  ” 

5  (13).  ‘  If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  water,  say 
these  words  aloud  :  “  Waters  we  worship,  the  Ma6- 
kaifiti  waters,  the  Hebvainti  waters,  the  Fravazah 
waters  *,” 

‘  If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  earth,  say  these 


*  As  in  Farg.VIII,  19,  so. 

*  Yasna  XLIX,  i.  The  allusion  fe  not  quite  clear.  This  line 
was  recited  by  the  Genius  of  the  sky  at  the  moment  when  Ahriman 
was  invading  the  sky  (Gr.  Bd.)  Peibaps  the  small  house  of  man 
is  compared  here  with  that  large  house,  the  world. 

*  Yasna  XXXVI,  1.  *  Yasna  XXXVIU,  3. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


144 


vend!dad. 


words  aloud :  “  This  earth  we  worship,  this  earth 
with  the  women,  this  earth  which  bears  us  and 
those  women  who  are  thine,  O  Ahura  * !  ” 

6  (17).  ‘If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  cow,  say 
these  words  aloud ;  “  The  best  of  all  works  we 
will  fulfil  while  we  order  both  the  learned  and  the 
unlearned,  both  masters  and  servants  to  secure  for 
the  cattle  a  good  resting-place  and  fodder 

‘  If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  trees,  say  these 
words  aloud :  “For  him  ®,  as  a  reward,  Mazda  made 
the  plants  grow  up 

7(21).  ‘If  thou  wantest  to  cleanse  the  faithful 
man  or  the  faithful  woman,  say  these  words  aloud  : 
“  May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman  come  hither,  for 
the  men  and  women  of  Zarathujtra  to  rejoice,  for 
Vohu-man6  to  rejoice;  with  the  desirable  reward 
that  Religion  deserves.  I  solicit  for  holiness  that 
boon  that  is  vouchsafed  by  Ahura  * !  ” 

8  (25).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words.  Thou  shalt  chant  the  Ahuna- 
Vairya  eight  times  : — 


’  Yasna  XXXVIII,  i.  ‘Who  are  thine,’  that  is,  ‘who  are  thy 
wives.' 

*  Yasna  XXXV,  4.  ‘  Let  those  excellent  deeds  be  done  for  the 
behoof  of  cattle,  that  is  to  say,  let  stables  be  made,  and  water  and 
fodder  be  given  ’  (Comm.) 

*  ‘  For  him,'  that  is  to  say,  to  feed  him ;  also  ‘  out  of  him ;  ’  for 
it  was  from  the  body  of  the  first-born  bull  that,  after  his  death,  grew 
up  all  kinds  of  plants  (Bund.  IV). 

‘  Yasna  XLVIII,  6.  Cf.  Farg.  XVII,  5. 

*  Yasna  LIV,  i.  Cf.  Farg.  XX,  11.  There  is  no  special  spell 
for  the  cleansing  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  and  the  boundless 
light  (see  §§  i,  2),  because  they  are  not  defiled  by  the  unclean  one, 
they  are  only  pained  by  seeing  him  (Faig.  IX,  41);  as  soon  as  he 
is  clean,  they  are  freed  from  the  pain. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XI. 


H5 


‘  “  Y ath4  ah6  vairyd : — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law 
of  righteousness,”  &c. 

‘  “  K^m-n&  mazdd : — ^Whom  hast  thou  placed  to  protect 
me,  O  Mazda  ?  ”  &c. 

verethrem-^4 : — What  protector  hast  thou  given 
unto  me  ?  ”  &c. 

*  “  Who  is  the  victorious  ?  ”  &c. 

‘  “  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda !  ”  &c.* 

9  (26).  ‘  I  drive  away  A^hma  *,  I  drive  away  the 
Nasu,  I  drive  away  direct  defilement,  I  drive  away 
indirect  defilement. 

[‘  I  drive  away  Khrii,  I  drive  away  Khrhighni  ®. 

‘  I  drive  away  BOidhi,  I  drive  away  the  offspring 
of  BOidhi  ^ 

‘  I  drive  away  Ku«di,  1  drive  away  the  offspring 
of  Ku«di».] 

*  I  drive  away  the  gaunt  BhshySsta,  I  drive  away 
the  long-handed  BflshySsta*;  [I  drive  away  Muidhi'^, 
I  drive  away  Kapasti  *.] 

‘  I  drive  away  the  Pairika  ®  that  comes  upon  the 
fire,  upon  the  water,  upon  the  earth,  upon  the  cow, 
upon  the  tree.  I  drive  away  the  uncleanness  that 


*  As  in  Farg.  VIII,  19,  ao.  *  Sec  Farg.  X,  13. 

*  Khr^  and  Khrdighni  are  not  met  with  elsewhere ;  their  names 
mean,  apparently,  ‘  wound  ’  and  *  the  wounding  one.’  They  may 
have  been  mere  names  or  epithets  of  A^shma  khrftidru, 
'  A6shma  of  the  murderous  spear.’ 

*  Bfiidhi  may  be  another  pronunciation  of  Bditi  (see  Farg. 
XIX,  i). 

'  Kundi  is  very  likely  the  same  as  Kunda  (Vd.  XIX,  41,  138) 
who  b  the  riding-stock  of  the  sorcerers  (Bd.  XXVIII,  42). 

*  See  Farg.  XVIII,  16. 

’’  A  demon  unknown.  Perhaps  Intoxication. 

*  Unknown.  Perhaps  Colocynth,  the  t}’pe  of  the  bitter  plants 

*  A  female  demon,  the  modem  Pari,  often  associated  with  Yitu, 
*  the  wbard.’ 

L4]  L 


Digitized  by 


146 


VENDiOAD. 


comes  upon  the  fire,  upon  the  water,  upon  the  earth, 
upon  the  cow,  upon  the  tree. 

10  (32).  ‘I  drive  thee  away, O  mischievous  Angra 
Mainyu!  from  the  fire,  from  the  water,  from  the 
earth,  from  the  cow,  from  the  tree,  from  the  faithful 
man  and  from  the  faithful  woman,  from  the  stars, 
from  the  moon,  from  the  sun,  from  the  boundless 
light,  from  all  good  things,  made  by  Mazda,  the 
offspring  of  the  holy  principle. 

1 1  (33).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words ;  thou  shalt  chant  four  Ahuna- 
Vairyas 

‘“Yathiahft  vairyd  : — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law 
of  righteousness,”  &c. 

mazd4: — What  protector  hast  thou  given 
unto  me  ?  ”  &c. 

‘  “  K  ^  verethrem-^& : — Who  is  the  victorious ?  ”  &c. 

*  “  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  !  ”  &c.* 

12  (34).  ‘A^shma  is  driven  away;  away  the 
Nasu ;  away  direct  defilement,  away  indirect  de¬ 
filement. 

[‘  Khrfl  is  driven  away,  away  Khrfiighni ;  away 
Bilidhi,  away  the  offspring  of  BQidhi ;  away  Ku«di, 
away  the  offspring  of  Kuwdi.] 

‘  The  gaunt  BAshySsta  is  driven  away ;  away 
BdshySsta,  the  long-handed;  [away  Mfiidhi,  away 
Kapasti.] 

*  The  Pairika  is  driven  away  that  comes  upon  the 
fire,  upon  the  water,  upon  the  earth,  upon  the  cow, 
upon  the  tree.  The  uncleanness  is  driven  away  that 
comes  upon  the  fire,  upon  the  water,  upon  the  earth, 
upon  the  cow,  upon  the  tree. 


*  As  in  Farg.VIII,  19,  20. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XI. 


147 


1 3  (40).  ‘  Thou  art  driven  away,  O  mischievous 
Angra  Mainyu !  from  the  fire,  from  the  water,  from 
the  earth,  from  the  cow,  from  the  tree,  from  the 
faithful  man  and  from  the  faithful  woman,  from  the 
stars,  from  the  moon,  from  the  sun,  from  the  bound¬ 
less  light,  from  all  good  things,  made  by  Mazda,  the 
offspring  of  the  holy  principle. 

14(41).  ‘Then  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious, 
most  healing  words ;  thou  shalt  chant  “  MazdA  did 
mdi  ”  four  times :  “  O  Mazda !  say  unto  me  the  ex¬ 
cellent  words  and  the  excellent  works,  that  through 
the  good  thought  and  the  holiness  of  him  who  offers 
thee  the  due  meed  of  praise,  thou  mayest,  O  Lord ! 
make  the  world  of  Resurrection  appear,  at  thy  will, 
under  thy  sovereign  rule 

15.  ‘I  drive  away  Afishma,  I  drive  away  the  Nasu/ 
&c.* 

16.  ‘  I  drive  thee  away,  O  mischievous  Angra  Mainyu  I 
from  the  fire,  from  the  water,’  &c.  ® 

17.  ‘Then  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious,  most  healing 
words ;  thou  shalt  chant  the  Airyama  Ishyd  four  times : 
“  May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman  come  hither  !  ”  '  &c.* 

18.  ‘  A^shma  is  driven  away  ;  away  the  Nasu,*  &c.® 

19.  ‘  Thou  art  driven  away,0  mischievous  Angra  Mainyu  1 
from  the  fire,  from  the  water,’  &c.® 

20.  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  say  these  victorious,  most  healing 
words ;  thou  shalt  chant  five  Ahuna-Vairyas : — 

‘  “  Yathi  ahfi  vairy6 : — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law 
of  righteousness,”  &c. 

‘  “  K^m-n4  mazdA : — Whom  hast  thou  placed  to  protect 
me  ?  ”  &c. 


'  Yasna  XXXIV,  15. 
®  The  rest  as  in  §  10. 
‘  As  in  §  12. 


*  The  rest  as  in  §  9. 

*  As  in  §  7. 

*  As  in  §  13. 


Digitized  by 


148 


VENDfDAD. 


verethrem-^4: — Who  is  he  who  will  smite  the 
fiend  ?  ”  &c ' 

“‘Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti 
Spe^  !  Perish,  O  fiendish  Dn\f  I  Perish,  O  brood  of  the 
fiend  I  Perish,  O  world  of  the  fiend !  Perish  away,  O 
Dru^I  Rush  away,  O  Drt\^!  Perish  away,  O  Dn\fl 
Perish  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  never  more  to 
give  unto  death  the  living  world  of  Righteousness !  **  * 


Fargard  XII. 

This  chapter  is  found  only  in  the  Vendfd&d  Sdda ;  it  is  missing 
in  the  Zend-Pahlavi  Vendtdid.  This  is  owing,  as  it  seems,  only  to 
the  accidental  loss  of  some  folios  in  the  one  manuscript  from  which 
all  the  copies  as  yet  known  have  been  derived ;  and,  in  fact,  even 
in  the  most  ancient  manuscripts  the  following  Fargard  is  numbered 
the  thirteenth  (Westergaard,  Zend-Avesta,  preface,  p.  5). 

The  directions  in  the  preceding  chapter  are  general,  and  do  not 
depend  on  the  relationship  of  the  faithful  with  the  deceased  person ; 
whereas  those  in  this  Fargard  are  of  a  special  character,  and  apply 
only  to  the  near  relatives  of  the  dead.  Their  object  is  to  deter¬ 
mine  how  long  the  time  of ‘staying’ (up  am  an)  should  last  for 
different  relatives.  What  is  meant  by  this  word  is  not  explained ; 
but,  as  the  word  upaman  is  usually  employed  to  indicate  the 
staying  of  the  imclean  in  the  Arm6rt-gSh,  apart  from  the  faithful 
and  from  every  clean  object,  that  word  upaman  seems  to  show 
a  certain  period  of  mourning,  marked  by  abstention  from  usual 
avocations. 

The  length  of  the  upaman  varies  with  the  degrees  of  relation¬ 
ship  ;  and  at  every  degree  it  is  double  for  relations  who  have  died 
in  a  state  of  sin  (that  is,  with  a  sin  not  redeemed  by  the  Patet : 
cf.  p.  135,  note  i).  The  relative  length  of  the  upaman  is  as 
follows : — 

For  the  head  of  a  family  (§  7) :  6  months  (or  a  year), 

I  For  father  or  mother  (§  i)  ) 

First  degree.  \  For  son  or  daughter  (§  3)  >  30  days  (or  60). 

*  For  brother  or  sister  (§  5)  * 


*  See  Farg.  VIII,  19,  20. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XII. 


149 


Second  degree. 


'  For  grandfather  or 
mother  (§  9) 

I  For  grandson  or 
daughter  (§11) 

Third  degree.  For  uncle  or  aunt  (§13):  20  days  (or  40), 

_  ,  ,  I  For  male  cousin  or  female ) 

Fourth  degree.  ■[  eousin  (§  15) 

( For  the  son  or  daughter  of  a 
\  cousin  (§17) 


grand- 

grand- 1*5  days  (or  50). 


I 


Fifih  degree. 


15  days  (or  30). 
I  10  days  (or  20). 


Sixth  degree. 


I  For  the  grandson  or  the  grand- )  ’ 
t  daughter  of  a  cousin  (§  19)  |  5  ays  (or  10). 


I.  If  one’s  father  or  mother  dies,  how  long  shall 
they  stay  [in  mourning],  the  son  for  his  father,  the 
daughter  for  her  mother  ?  How  long  for  the 
righteous  ?  How  long  for  the  sinners '  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  thirty 
days  for  the  righteous,  sixty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

2  (5).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall 
it  be  clean  again  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘You  shall  wash  your 
bodies  three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes 
three  times,  you  shall  chant  the  GSthas  three 
times;  you  shall  offer  up  a  sacrifice  to  my  Fire, 
you  shall  bind  the  bundles  of  Baresma,  you  shall 
bring  libations  to  the  good  waters  * ;  then  the  house 
'  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may  enter,  then 
the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha-Spe«tas 
may  enter  ®,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  ’ 


*  How  long  if  the  dead  person  died  in  a  state  of  holiness 
(a  dahma)  ?  How  long  if  in  the  state  of  a  Peshdtanu  ? 

*  This  refers  probably  to  the  sacrifice  that  is  offered  on  each  of 
the  three  days  that  follow  the  death  of  a  Zoroastrian  for  the  salva¬ 
tion  of  his  soul. 

'  All  the  other  objects  over  which  the  Amesha-Spe»tas  preside 
(such  as  the  cow,  the  metals,  Ac.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VENDinAD. 


150 


3  (9).  If  one’s  son  or  daughter  dies,  how  long 
shall  they  stay,  the  father  for  his  son,  the  mother 
for  her  daughter?  How  long  for  the  righteous? 
How  long  for  the  sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  thirty 
days  for  the  righteous,  sixty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

4  (13).  O  Maker  of  the  material  worid,  thou  Holy  Onel 
How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall  it  be  clean  again  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G&thas  three  times ;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe«tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  ’ 

5  (17).  If  one’s  brother  or  sister  dies,  how  long 
shall  they  stay,  the  brother  for  his  brother,  the 
sister  for  her  sister  ?  How  long  for  the  righteous  ? 
How  long  for  the  sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  thirty 
days  for  the  righteous,  sixty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

6  (ai).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  Onel 
How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall  it  be  clean  again  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  Githas  three  times ;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spentas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  I  * 

7  (25).  If  the  master  of  the  house*  dies,  or  if  the 


*  The  chief  of  the  family,  the  paterfamilias.  The  Zoroas- 
trian  family  is  organised  on  the  patriarchal  system. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XII. 


I5I 


mistress  of  the  house  dies,  how  long  shall  they  stay? 
How  long  for  the  righteous?  How  long  for  the 
sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  ^  shall  stay  six 
months  for  the  righteous,  a  year  for  the  sinners.’ 

8  (a8).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One  ! 
How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house?  How  shall  it  be  clean 
again  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ^  You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G&thas  three  times ;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe//tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathuxtra ! ' 

9  (31).  If  one’s  grandfather  or  grandmother  dies, 
how  long  shall  they  stay,  the  grandson  for  his 
grandfather,  the  granddaughter  for  her  grand¬ 
mother  ?  How  long  for  the  righteous  ?  How 
long  for  the  sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  twenty- 
five  days  for  the  righteous,  fifty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

10  (34).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house?  How  shall  it  be 
clean  again? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G&thas  three  times ;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters ; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe^tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathuxtra  t  ’ 


^  All  the  familia,  both  relatives  and  servants. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


152 


vend!dAd. 


11  (37).  If  one’s  grandson  or  gfranddaughter  dies, 
how  long  shall  they  stay,  the  grandfather  for  his 
grandson,  the  g^ndmother  for  her  granddaughter  ? 
How  long  for  the  righteous?  How  long  for  the 
sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  twenty- 
five  days  for  the  righteous,  fifty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

12  (40).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  I  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall  it  be 
clean  again? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G&thas  three  times;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters ; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spentas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  1  ’ 

1 3  (43).  If  one’s  uncle  or  aunt  dies,  how  long 
shall  they  stay,  the  nephew  for  his  uncle,  the  niece 
for  her  aunt  ?  How  long  for  the  righteous  ?  How 
long  for  the  sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  twenty 
days  for  the  righteous,  forty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

14  (45).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  1  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall  it  be 
clean  again? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G&thas  three  times;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe»tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  !  ’ 

15  (48).  If  one’s  male  cousin  or  female  cousin 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XII. 


153 


dies,  how  long  shall  they  stay  ?  How  long  for  the 
righteous  ?  How  long  for  the  sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  They  shall  stay  fifteen 
days  for  the  righteous,  thirty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

16  (50).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  1  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall  it  be 
clean  again? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  *You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G4thas  three  times ;  you  shall  offer  up  a 
sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters ; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe«tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathortra  !  * 

^7  (53)-  If  the  son  or  the  daughter  of  a  cousin 
dies,  how  long  shall  they  stay  ?  How  long  for  the 
righteous  ?  How  long  for  the  sinners  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  stay  ten 
days  for  the  righteous,  twenty  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

(55).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  I  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house  ?  How  shall  it  be 
clean  again? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  G4thas  three  times;  you  shall  offer  up 
a  sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe/^tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathujtra  I  * 

19  (58).  If  the  grandson  of  a  cousin  or  the 
granddaughter  of  a  cousin  dies,  how  long  shall 
they  stay  ?  How  long  for  the  righteous  ?  How 
long  for  the  sinners? 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


154 


vendIdAd. 


Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  They  shall  stay  five 
days  for  the  righteous,  ten  days  for  the  sinners.’ 

20  (6o).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  How  shall  I  cleanse  the  house?  How  shall  it  be 
clean  again? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  You  shall  wash  your  bodies 
three  times,  you  shall  wash  your  clothes  three  times,  you 
shall  chant  the  GAthas  three  times ;  you  shall  offer  up 
a  sacrifice  to  my  Fire,  you  shall  bind  up  the  bundles  of 
Baresma,  you  shall  bring  libations  to  the  good  waters; 
then  the  house  shall  be  clean,  and  then  the  waters  may 
enter,  then  the  fire  may  enter,  and  then  the  Amesha- 
Spe»tas  may  enter,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  1  ’ 

21  (63).  If  a  man  dies,  of  whatever  race  he  is, 
who  does  not  belong  to  the  true  faith,  or  the  true 
lawS  what  part  of  the  creation  of  the  good  spirit 
does  he  directly  defile  ?  What  part  does  he  in¬ 
directly  defile  ? 

22  *  (65).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  No  more  than 
a  frog  does  whose  venom  is  dried  up,  and  that  has 
been  dead  more  than  a  year.  Whilst  alive,  indeed, 
O  Spitama  Zarathujtra!  such  wicked,  two-legged 
ruffian  as  an  ungodly  Ashemaogha,  directly  defiles 
the  creatures  of  the  Good  Spirit,  and  indirectly 
defiles  them. 

23  (70).  ‘Whilst  alive  he  smites  the  water; 
whilst  alive  he  blows  out  the  fire ;  whilst  alive  he 
carries  off  the  cow ;  whilst  alive  he  smites  the  faith¬ 
ful  man  with  a  deadly  blow,  that  parts  the  soul  from 
the  body ;  not  so  will  he  do  when  dead. 

24  (71).  ‘Whilst  alive,  indeed,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thurtra !  such  wicked,  two-legged  ruffian  as  an 


*  An  infidel,  whether  he  is  a  relation  or  not. 

*  22-24=Farg.V,  36-38,  text  and  notes. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIII. 


155 


ungodly  Ashemaogha,  robs  the  faithful  man  of  the 
full  possession  of  his  food,  of  his  clothing,  of  his 
wood,  of  his  bed,  of  his  vessels;  not  so  will  he 
do  when  dead.’ 


Fargard  XIII. 

The  Dog. 

1  (1-7).  The  dog  of  Ormazd  and  the  dog  of  Ahriman. 

(a.  1-4).  Holiness  of  the  dog  Vangh^para  (‘the  hedgehog'), 
(b.  5-7).  Hatefulness  of  the  dog  Zairimyangura  (‘the  tor¬ 
toise'). 

II  (8-16).  The  several  Idnds  of  dogs.  Penalties  for  the  murder 
of  a  dog. 

III  (17-19).  On  the  duties  of  the  shepherd's  dog  and  the  house¬ 
dog. 

IV  (20-28).  On  the  food  due  to  the  dog. 

V  (29-38).  On  the  mad  dog  and  the  dog  diseased ;  how  they 
are  to  be  kept,  and  cured. 

VI  (39-40).  On  the  excellence  of  the  dog. 

VII  (41-43).  On  the  wolf-dog. 

VIII  (44-48).  On  the  virtues  and  vices  of  the  dog. 

IX  (49-50).  Praise  of  the  dog. 

X  (50-54).  The  water-dog. 

This  Fargard  is  the  only  complete  fragment,  still  in  existence,  of 
a  large  canine  literature:  a  whole  section  of  the  Ganbd-sar-ni^t 
Nask  was  dedicated  to  the  dog  (the  so-called  Fargard  Pas(b- 
hadrvastdn;  West,  Dlnkard  (Pahlavi  Texts,  IV),  VIII,  23 ;  24,  5; 
33»  &c.) 

la. 

I.  Which  is  the  good  creature  among  the  creatures 
of  the  Good  Spirit  that  from  midnight  till  the  sun  is 
up  goes  and  kills  thousands  of  the  creatures  of  the 
Evil  Spirit  ? 

2  (3).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  dog  with 
the  prickly  back,  with  the  long  and  thin  muzzle,  the 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


vendIdad. 


156 


dog  Vanghipara*,  which  evil-speaking  people  call 
the  Ditsaka  * ;  this  is  the  good  creature  among  the 
creatures  of  the  Good  Spirit  that  from  midnight  till 
the  sun  is  up  goes  and  kills  thousands  of  the  crea¬ 
tures  of  the  Evil  Spirit 

3  (6).  ‘  And  whosoever,  O  Zarathu^tra !  shall  kill 
the  dog  with  the  prickly  back,  with  the  long  and 
thin  muzzle,  the  dogVanghipara,  which  evil-speaking 
people  call  the  Du^aka,  kills  his  own  soul  for  nine 
generations,  nor  shall  he  find  a  way  over  the 
Kinv^d  bridge  *,  unless  he  has,  while  alive,  atoned 
for  his  sin 

4  (10).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  kill  the  dog  with  the  prickly 
back,  with  the  long  and  thin  muzzle,  the  dog  Van- 
ghipara,  which  evil-speaking  people  call  the  Du^aka, 
what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 


*  The  hedgehog.  *  The  hedgehog,  according  to  the  Bund.  XIX, 
28,  is  created  in  opposition  to  the  ant  that  carries  off  grain,  as 
it  says  that  the  hedgehog,  every  time  that  it  voids  urine  into  an 
ant’s  nest,  will  destroy  a  thousand  ants'  (Bund.  XIX,  28 ;  cf.  Sad- 
dar  57).  When  the  Arabs  conquered  Saistan,  the  inhabitants 
submitted  on  the  condition  that  hedgehogs  should  not  be  killed 
nor  hunted  for,  as  they  got  rid  of  the  vipers  which  swarm  in 
that  country.  Every  house  had  its  hedgehog  (Yaqout,  Diction- 
naire  de  la  Perse,  p.  303).  Plutarch  counts  the  hedgehog  amongst 
the  animals  sacred  to  the  Magi  (Quaestiones  Conviviales,  IV,  5,  2 : 
Tovt  d*  diri  Zttpoa<n'pov  fiayovt  Ttufn  lity  iv  rott  it^urra  riy  x^/xriuoi' 
t’xiyoy). 

*  Dusaka  is  the  popular  name  of  the  hedgehog  (Pers.  susa). 
It  is  not  'without  importance  which  name  is  given  to  a  being : 
*  When  called  by  its  high  name,  it  is  powerful  *  (Comm.) ;  cf.  §  6, 
and  Farg.  XVIII,  15. 

*  The  bridge  leading  to  Paradise ;  see  Farg.  XIX,  30. 

*  Cf.  §  54.  Fr4mjt  translates :  ‘  He  cannot  atone  for  it  in  his 
life  even  by  performing  a  sacrifice  to  Sraosha*  (cf.  Farg.  IX,  56, 
text  and  note). 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIII. 


157 


Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘A  thousand  stripes 
with  the  Aspah6-aJtra,  a  thousand  stripes  with  the 
Sraosh6-/fcirana.  ’ 

Ib. 

5  (13).  Which  is  the  evil  creature  among  the 
creatures  of  the  Evil  Spirit  that  from  midnight  till 
the  sun  is  up  goes  and  kills  thousands  of  the  crea¬ 
tures  of  the  Good  Spirit  ? 

6(15).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘The  da^va 
Zairimyangura  *,  which  evil-speaking  people  call 
the  Zairimy4ka*,  this  is  the  evil  creature  among 
the  creatures  of  the  Evil  Spirit  that  from  midnight 
till  the  sun  is  up  goes  and  kills  thousands  of  the 
creatures  of  the  Good  Spirit. 

7(18).  ‘  And  whosoever,  O  ZarathuJtra !  shall  kill 
the  daSva  Zairimyangfura,  which  evil-speaking  people 
call  the  Zairimydka,  his  sins  in  thought,  word,  and 
deed  are  redeemed  as  they  would  be  by  a  Patet ;  his 
sins  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  are  atoned  for  ®. 

II. 

8(21).  ‘Whosoever  shall  smite  either  a  shep¬ 
herd’s  dog,  or  a  house-dog,  or  a  Vohunazga  dog*, 
or  a  trained  dog®,  his  soul  when  passing  to  the 
other  world,  shall  fly*  howling  louder  and  more 
sorely  grieved  than  the  sheep  does  in  the  lofty 
forest  where  the  wolf  ranges. 


*  The  tortoise  (Frimjt  and  Riviyats). 

*  ‘When  not  so  called  it  is  less  strong’ (Comm.)  Zairimydka 
is  a  lucky  name,  and  means,  as  it  seems,  who  lives  in  verdure ; 
Zairimyangura  seems  to  mean  ‘the  verdure-devourer.’ 

»  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  5.  «  See  §  19,  n.  a. 

*  A  hunting-dog.  *  ‘  From  Paradise  ’  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VENOiDAD. 


158 


9  (24).  ‘  No  soul  will  come  and  meet  his  departing 
soul  and  help  it,  howling  and  grieved  in  the  other 
world ;  nor  will  the  dogs  that  keep  the  \Kinvzd] 
bridge  ‘  help  his  departing  soul  howling  and  grieved 
in  the  other  world. 

10  (26).  ‘  If  a  man  shall  smite  a  shepherd’s  dog 
so  that  it  becomes  unfit  for  work,  if  he  shall  cut  off 
its  ear  or  its  paw,  and  thereupon  a  thief  or  a  wolf 
break  in  and  carry  away  [sheep]  from  the  fold, 
without  the  dog  giving  any  warning,  the  man  shall 
pay  for  the  loss,  and  he  shall  pay  for  the  wound  of 
the  dog  as  for  wilful  wounding  *, 

1 1  (31).  ‘  If  a  man  shall  smite  a  house-dog  so  that 
it  becomes  unfit  for  work,  if  he  shall  cut  off  its  ear 
or  its  paw,  and  thereupon  a  thief  or  a  wolf  break  in 
and  carry  away  [anything]  from  the  house,  without 
the  dog  giving  any  warning,  the  man  shall  pay  for 
the  loss,  and  he  shall  pay  for  the  wound  of  the  dog 
as  for  wilful  wounding 

12  (36).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  smite  a  shepherd’s  dog, 
so  that  it  gives  up  the  ghost  and  the  soul  parts  from 
the  body,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Eight  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspahd-ajtra,  eight  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraoshd-zfetrana.’ 

13  (39)-  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  smite  a  house-dog  so 
that  it  gives  up  the  ghost  and  the  soul  parts  from 
the  body,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Seven  hundred  stripes 


*  See  Farg.  XIX,  30. 

*  Baodhd-var^ ;  see  Farg.  VII,  380. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  Xlll. 


159 


with  the  Aspahd-artra,  seven  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

14  (42).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  1  If  a  man  shall  smite  a  Vohunazgja  dog 
so  that  it  gives  up  the  ghost  and  the  soul  parts  from 
the  body,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered;  ‘Six  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspah^-a^tra,  six  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraoshd-i^arana.’ 

*5  (45)'  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  smite  a  Tauruna  dog* 
so  that  it  gives  up  the  ghost  and  the  soul  parts 
from  the  body,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Five  hundred  stripes 
with  the  Aspahd-aJtra,  five  hundred  stripes  with 
the  Sraoshd-iarana.’ 

16  (48).  ‘  This  is  the  penalty  for  the  murder  of  a 
(Jasu  dog,  of  a  Vlsu  dog*,  of  a  porcupine  dog®,  of 
a  sharp-toothed  weasel  *,  of  a  swift-running  fox ;  this 
is  the  penalty  for  the  murder  of  any  of  the  creatures 
of  the  Good  Spirit  belonging  to  the  dog  kind,  ex¬ 
cept  the  water-dog  ®.’ 

III. 

17  (49).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  What  is  the  place  of  the  shepherd’s 
dog? 


*  Tauruna  seems  to  be  another  name  of  the  trained  or  hunt¬ 
ing-dog  (gf.  §  8  compared  with  §§  12-15),  though  tradition 
translates  it  *  a  dog  not  older  than  four  months/ 

*  Unknown.  Cf.  V,  31,  32.  *  A  porcupine.  Cf.  V,  31. 

*  A  weasel.  Cf.  V,  33. 

*  The  otter.  ‘For  the  penalty  in  that  case  is  most  heavy' 
(Comm.)  Cf.  §  52  seq.  and  Farg,  XIV. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


t6o 


VENDioAD. 


Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  comes  and  goes 
a  Yu^fisti*  round  about  the  fold,  watching  for  the 
thief  and  the  wolf.’ 

1 8  (51).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  !  What  is  the  place  of  the  house-dog  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  comes  and  goes 
a  HAthra  round  about  the  house,  watching  for  the 
thief  and  the  wolf.’ 

19  (53)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  What  is  the  place  of  the  Vohunazga 
dog? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  claims  none  of  those 
talents,  and  only  seeks  for  his  subsistence  *.’ 

IV. 

20  (55).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  give  bad  food  to  a  shepherd’s 
dog,  of  what  sin  does  he  make  himself  guilty  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  makes  himself 
guilty  of  the  same  guilt  as  though  he  should 
serve  bad  food  to  a  master  of  a  house  of  the 
first  rank®.’ 

21  (57).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  give  bad  food  to  a  house¬ 
dog,  of  what  sin  does  he  make  himself  guilty? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  makes  himself 


‘  A  distance  of  sixteen  H&thras  (16,000  paces). 

*  '  He  cannot  do  the  same  as  the  shepherd’s  dog  and  the  house¬ 
dog  do,  but  he  catches  Khrafstras  and  smites  the  Nasu’  (Comm.) 
It  is  ‘the  dog  without  a  master’  (ghartb),  the  vagrant  dog;  he  is 
held  in  great  esteem  (§  22),  and  is  one  of  the  dogs  which  can  be  used 
for  the  Sag-dtd. 

'  Invited  as  a  guest. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FAKGARD  XIII. 


l6l 


guilty  of  the  same  guilt  as  though  he  should  serve 
bad  food  to  a  master  of  a  house  of  middle  rank.’ 

22(59).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  give  bad  food  to  a  Vohunazga 
dog,  of  what  sin  does  he  make  himself  guilty  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  makes  himself 
guilty  of  the  same  gfuilt  as  though  he  should  serve 
bad  food  to  a  holy  man,  who  should  come  to  his 
house  in  the  character  of  a  priest*.’ 

23  (61).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  give  bad  food  to  a  Tauruna 
dog,  of  what  sin  does  he  make  himself  guilty  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  makes  himself 
guilty  of  the  same  guilt  as  though  he  should  serve 
bad  food  to  a  young  man,  born  of  pious  parents, 
and  who  can  already  answer  for  his  deeds*.’ 

24  {63).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  man  shall  give  bad  food  to 
a  shepherd’s  dog,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Peshdtanu  : 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aJtra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana 


*  The  Vohunazga  dog  has  no  domicile,  therefore  he  is  not  com¬ 
pared  with  the  master  of  a  house,  but  with  a  wandering  friar,  who 
lives  on  charity. 

*  Probably,  ‘Who  has  performed  the  nii-ziid,  fifteen  years  old.' 
The  young  dog  enters  the  community  of  the  faithful  at  the  age  of 
four  months,  when  he  is  fit  for  the  Sag-did  and  can  expel  the  Nasu. 

’  ‘  1  also  saw  the  soul  of  a  man,  whom  demons,  just  like  dogs, 
ever  tear.  That  man  gives  bread  to  the  dogs,  and  they  eat  it  not ; 
but  they  ever  devour  the  breast,  legs,  belly,  and  thighs  of  the  man. 
And  I  asked  thus :  What  sin  was  committed  by  this  body,  whose 
soul  suffers  so  severe  a  punishment  ?  Sr6sh  the  pious  and  Atar6 
the  angel  said  thus :  This  is  the  soul  of  that  wicked  man  who,  in 

[4]  M 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


162 


vendIdAd. 


25  (66).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  give  bad  food  to 
a  house-dog,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Ninety  stripes  with  the 
Aspah6-ajtra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-ifairana.’ 

26  (69).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  give  bad  food  to 
a  Vohunazga  dog,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Seventy  stripes  with 
the  Aspah6-artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
iarana.’ 

27  (72),  O  Maker,  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  man  shall  gdve  bad  food  to 
a  Tauruna  dog,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall 
pay  > 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Fifty  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-aytra,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^rana. 

28  (75).  ‘For  in  this  material  world,  O  Spitama 
ZarathuJtra !  it  is  the  dog,  of  all  the  creatures  of  the 
Good  Spirit,  that  most  quickly  decays  into  age,  while 
not  eating  near  eating  people,  and  watching  goods 
none  of  which  it  receives.  Bring  ye  unto  him  milk 
and  fat  with  meat*;  this  is  the  right  food  for  the 
dog*.’ 

the  world,  kept  back  the  food  of  the  dogs  oi  shepherds  and  house¬ 
holders  ;  or  beat  and  killed  them '  (ArdS  Vhif  XLVIII,  translated 
by  Haug). 

*  The  same  food  as  recommended  for  the  dog  by  Columella 
(Ordacea  farina  cum  sero,  VII,  i  a ;  cf.  Virgil,  Pasce  sero  pingui, 
Georg.  Ill,  406). 

*  ‘  Whenever  one  eats  bread  one  must  put  aside  three  mouthfuls 
and  give  them  to  the  dog  ...  for  among  all  the  poor  there  is  none 
poorer  than  the  dog’  (Saddar  31). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIII. 


163 


V. 

29  (80).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  there  be  in  the  house  of  a  wor¬ 
shipper  of  Mazda  a  mad  dog  that  bites  without 
barking,,  what  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

30  (82).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  put 
a  wooden  collar  around  his  neck,  and  they  shall  tie 
thereto  a  muzzle,  an  a^ti  *  thick  if  the  wood  be  hard, 
two  aJtis  thick  if  it  be  soft  To  that  collar  they 
shall  tie  it ;  by  the  two  sides  *  of  the  collar  they 
shall  tie  it. 

31  (86).  ‘  If  they  shall  not  do  so,  and  the  mad 
dog  that  bites  without  barking,  smite  a  sheep  or 
wound  a  man,  the  dog  shall  pay  for  the  wound  of 
the  wounded  as  for  wilful  murder  ®. 

32  (88).  ‘  If  the  dog  shall  smite  a  sheep  or  wound 
a  man,  they  shall  cut  off  his  right  ear. 

‘  If  he  shall  smite  another  sheep  or  wound  another 
man,  they  shall  cut  off  his  left  ear. 

33  (90)-  ‘  If  he  shall  smite  a  third  sheep  or  wound 
a  third  man,  they  shall  make  a  cut  in  his  right  foot*. 
If  he  shall  smite  a  fourth  sheep  or  wound  a  fourth 
man,  they  shall  make  a  cut  in  his  left  foot. 

34  (92).  ‘  If  he  shall  for  the  fifth  time  smite 
a  sheep  or  wound  a  man,  they  shall  cut  off  his  tail. 


'  A  measure  of  unknown  amount.  Frimjt  reads  irti,  ‘  a  brick  ’ 
thick. 

*  By  the  left  and  the  right  side  of  it 

*  According  to  Solon's  law,  the  dog  who  had  bitten  a  man 
was  to  be  delivered  to  him  tied  up  to  a  block  four  cubits  long 
(Plutarchus,  Solon  24).  The  Book  of  Deuteronomy  orders  the 
ox  who  has  killed  a  man  to  be  put  to  death. 

*  ‘They  only  cut  off  a  piece  of  flesh  from  the  foot'  (Brouillons 
d’Anquetil). 

M  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


164 


vendJdad. 


‘  Therefore  they  shall  tie  a  muzzle  to  the  collar ; 
by  the  two  sides  of  the  collar  they  shall  tie  it.  If 
they  shall  not  do  so,  and  the  mad  dog  that  bites 
without  barking,  smite  a  sheep  or  wound  a  man,  he 
shall  pay  for  the  wound  of  the  wounded  as  for  wilful 
murder.’ 

35  (97)'  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  there  be  in  the  house  of  a  wor¬ 
shipper  of  Mazda  a  mad  dog,  who  has  no  scent, 
what  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  They  shall  attend  him 
to  heal  him,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  would  do 
for  one  of  the  faithful/ 

36  (100).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  they  try  to  heal  him  and  fail,  what 
shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

37(102).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘They  shall 
put  a  wooden  collar  around  his  neck,  and  they  shall 
tie  thereto  a  muzzle,  an  ajti  thick  if  the  wood  be 
hard,  two  a.ytis  thick  if  it  be  soft.  To  that  collar 
they  shall  tie  it ;  by  the  two  sides  of  the  collar  they 
shall  tie  it. 

38  (102).  ‘  If  they  shall  not  do  so,  the  scentless 
dog  may  fall  into  a  hole,  or  a  well,  or  a  precipice,  or 
a  river,  or  a  canal,  and  come  to  grief :  if  he  come  to 
grief  so,  they  shall  be  therefore  Peshdtanus. 

VI. 

39  (106).  ‘  The  dog,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  I, 
Ahura  Mazda,  have  made  self-clothed  and  self-shod ; 
watchful  and  wakeful;  and  sharp-toothed;  bom  to 
take  his  food  from  man  and  to  watch  over  man's 
goods.  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  have  made  the  dog  strong 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIIl. 


165 


of  body  against  the  evil-doer,  when  sound  of  mind 
and  watchful  over  your  goods. 

40  ( 1 1 2).  ‘  And  whosoever  shall  awake  at  his 
voice,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.ftra !  neither  shall  the 
thief  nor  the  wolf  carry  anything  from  his  house, 
without  his  being  warned ;  the  wolf  shall  be  smitten 
and  torn  to  pieces ;  he  is  driven  away,  he  melts 
away  like  snow 

VII. 

41  (115).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  Which  of  the  two  wolves  deserves 
more  to  be  killed,  the  one  that  a  he-dog  begets 
of  a  she-wolf,  or  the  one  that  a  he-wolf  begets  of 
a  she-dog? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Of  these  two  wolves, 
the  one  that  a  he-dog  begets  of  a  she-wolf  deserves 
more  to  be  killed  than  the  one  that  a  he-wolf  begets 
of  a  she-dog. 

42  (117).  ‘For  the  dogs  born  therefrom  fall  on 
the  shepherd’s  dog,  on  the  house-dog,  on  the  Vohu- 
nazga  dog,  on  the  trained  dog,  and  destroy  the 
folds;  such  dogs  are  more  murderous,  more  mis¬ 
chievous,  more  destructive  to  the  folds  than  any 
other  dogs  *. 

43  (121).  ‘And  the  wolves  born  therefrom  fall 
on  the  shepherd’s  dog,  on  the  house-dog,  on  the 
Vohunazga  dog,  on  the  trained  dog,  and  destroy 
the  folds;  such  wolves  are  more  murderous,  more 


’  Doubtful. 

•  ‘Ultroque  gravis  succedere  tigrim 

Ausa  canis,  majore  tulit  de  sanguine  foetum. 

Sed  praeceps  virtus  ipsa  venabitur  aula: 

llle  tibi  et  pecudum  inulto  cum  sanguine  crescet.’ 

Gratius  Faliscus,  C)'neg.  165  seq. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


i66 


VENDtDAn. 


mischievous,  more  destructive  to  the  folds  than  any 
other  wolves. 

VIII. 

44  (124).  ‘  A  dog  has  the  characters  of  eight  sorts 
of  people : — 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  priest, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  warrior, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  husbandman, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  strolling  singer, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  thief, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  disu, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  courtezan, 

‘  He  has  the  character  of  a  child. 

45  (126).  ‘  He  eats  the  refuse,  like  a  priest’ ;  he  is 
easily  satisfied*,  like  a  priest;  he  is  patient,  like 
a  priest ;  he  wants  only  a  small  piece  of  bread,  like 
a  priest ;  in  these  things  he  is  like  unto  a  priest. 

‘  He  marches  in  front,  like  a  warrior ;  he  fights 
for  the  beneficent  cow,  like  a  warrior  ® ;  he  goes  first 
out  of  the  house,  like  a  warrior  * ;  in  these  things  he 
is  like  unto  a  warrior. 

46  (135).  ‘He  is  watchful  and  sleeps  lightly, 
like  a  husbandman ;  he  goes  first  out  of  the  house, 
like  a  husbandman  ® ;  he  returns  last  into  the  house, 
like  a  husbandman  • ;  in  these  things  he  is  like  unto 
a  husbandman. 

‘  He  is  fond  of  singing,  like  a  strolling  singer’; 

*  A  wandering  priest  (see  p.  161,  n.  i). 

*  ‘  Good  treatment  makes  him  joyous '  (Comm.) 

^  ‘  He  keeps  away  the  wolf  and  the  thief*  (Comm.) 

*  This  clause  is,  as  it  seems,  repeated  here  by  mistake  from  §  46. 
®  When  taking  the  cattle  out  of  the  stables. 

®  When  bringing  the  cattle  back  to  the  stables. 

’  The  so-called  Looris  of  nowadays. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


FARGARD  XIII, 


167 


he  wounds  him  who  gets  too  near  like  a  strolling 
singer ;  he  is  ill-trained,  like  a  strolling  singer ;  he 
is  changeful,  like  a  strolling  singer ;  in  these  things 
he  is  like  unto  a  strolling  singer. 

47  (143).  ‘  He  is  fond  of  darkness,  like  a  thief; 
he  prowls  about  in  darkness,  like  a  thief ;  he  is 
a  shameless  eater,  like  a  thief ;  he  is  therefore  an 
unfaithful  keeper,  like  a  thief*;  in  these  things  he 
is  like  unto  a  thief. 

‘  He  is  fond  of  darkness  like  a  disu  ® ;  he  prowls 
about  in  darkness,  like  a  disu ;  he  is  a  shameless 
eater,  like  a  disu;  he  is  therefore  an  unfaithful 
keeper,  like  a  disu ;  in  these  things  he  is  like  unto 
a  disu. 

48  (153).  ‘  He  is  fond  of  singling,  like  a  courtezan ; 
he  wounds  him  who  gets  too  near,  like  a  courtezan ; 
he  roams  along  the  roads,  like  a  courtezan;  he  is 
ill-trained,  like  a  courtezan;  he  is  changeful,  like 
a  courtezan^;  in  these  things  he  is  like  unto  a 
courtezan. 

‘  He  is  fond  of  sleep,  like  a  child ;  he  is  tender  like 
snow  ®,  like  a  child ;  he  is  full  of  tongue,  like  a  child ; 
he  digs  the  earth  with  his  paws  *,  like  a  phild ;  in 
these  things  he  is  like  unto  a  child. 


‘  He  insults  or  robs  the  passer  by,  like  a  Loori. — ‘  The  Looris 
wander  in  the  world,  seeking  their  life,  bed-fellows  and  fellow- 
travellers  of  the  dogs  and  the  wolves,  ever  on  the  roads  to  rob  day 
and  night  ’  (Firdausi). 

*  ‘  When  one  trusts  him  with  something,  he  eats  it  up  ’  (Comm.) 

*  According  to  Fr&mjt,  ‘  a  wild  beast,’ 

*  The  description  of  the  courtezan  follows  closely  that  of  the 
singer:  in  the  East  a  public  songstress  is  generally  a  prostitute. 
Loori  means  both  a  singer  and  a  prostitute. 

*  Doubtful. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


t68 


vend!dAd. 


IX. 

49  (163).  ‘  If  those  two  dogs  of  mine,  the  shep¬ 
herd’s  dog  and  the  house-dog,  pass  by  any  of  my 
houses,  let  them  never  be  kept  away  from  it. 

‘For  no  house  could  subsist  on  the  earth  made 
by  Ahura,  but  for  those  two  dogs  of  mine,  the 
shepherd’s  dog  and  the  house-dog’.’ 

X. 

50(166).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  When  a  dog  dies,  with  marrow  and 
seed  *  dried  up,  whereto  does  his  ghost  go  ? 

51  (167).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘It  passes  to 
the  spring  of  the  waters  *,  O  Spitama  ZarathuJtra  I 
and  there  out  of  them  two  water-dogs  are  formed : 
out  of  every  thousand  dogs  and  every  thousand  she- 
dogs,  a  couple  is  formed,  a  water-dog  and  a  water 
she-dog  *. 

52  (170).  ‘  He  who  kills  a  water-dog  brings  about 
a  drought  that  dries  up  pastures. 

‘  Until  then,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  1  sweetness  and 


‘  ‘  But  for  the  dog  not  a  single  head  of  cattle  would  remain  in 
existence '  (Saddar  31). 

*  Marrow  is  the  seat  of  life,  the  spine  is  ‘  the  column  and  the 
spring  of  life’  (Yt  X,  71);  the  sperm  comes  from  it  (Bundahir 
XVI).  The  same  theory  prevailed  in  India,  where  the  sperm  is 
called  ma^^i-samudbhava,  ‘what  is  bom  from  marrow;’  it 
was  followed  by  Plato  (Timaeus  74,  91 ;  cf.  Censorinus,  De  die 
natali,  5),  and  disproved  by  Aristotle  (De  Part.  Anim.  Ill,  7). 

’  To  the  spring  of  Ardvt  Sfira,  the  goddess  of  waters. 

‘  There  is  therefore  in  a  single  water-dog  as  much  life  and  holi¬ 
ness  as  in  a  thousand  dogs.  This  accounts  for  the  following. — 
The  water-dog  (udra  up&pa;  Persian  sag-IUbt)  is  the  otter. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIV. 


169 


fatness  would  flow  out  from  that  land  and  from  those 
fields,  with  health  and  healing,  with  fulness  and  increase 
and  growth,  and  a  growing  of  corn  and  grass.' 

53  (17 1 ).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  When  are  sweetness  and  fatness  to  come  back 
again  to  that  land  and  to  those  fields,  with  health  and 
healing,  with  fulness  and  increase  and  growth,  and  a  gfrow- 
ing  of  corn  and  grass  ? 

54j55(i7^)-  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Sweetness  and 
fatness  will  never  come  back  again  to  that  land  and  to 
those  fields,  with  health  and  healing,  with  fulness  and 
increase  and  growth,  and  a  growing  of  corn  and  grass, 
until  the  murderer  of  the  water-dog  has  been  smitten  to 
death  on  the  spot,  and  the  holy  soul  of  the  dog  has  been 
offered  up  a  sacrifice,  for  three  days  and  three  nights, 
with  fire  blazing,  with  Baresma  tied  up,  and  with  Haoma 
prepared  \ 

56  (174).  [‘Then  sweetness  and  fatness  will  come  back 
again  to  that  land  and  to  those  fields,  with  health  and 
healing,  with  fulness  and  increase  and  growth,  and  a  grow¬ 
ing  of  corn  and  grass  V] 


Fargard  XIV. 

This  Fargard  is  nothing  more  than  an  appendix  to  the  last 
clauses  in  the  preceding  Fargard  (§  50  seq.)  How  the  murder  of 
a  water-dog  (an  otter)  may  be  atoned  for  is  described  in  it  at  full 
length.  The  extravagance  of  the  penalties  prescribed  may  well 
make  it  doubtful  whether  the  legislation  of  the  Vendiddd  had 
ever  any  substantial  existence  in  practice.  These  exorbitant  pre¬ 
scriptions  seeTh  to  be  intended  only  to  impress  on  the  mind  of  the 
faithful  the  heinousness  of  the  offence  to  be  avoided. 


*  See  p.  136,  n.  i.  *  Cf.  Farg.  IX,  63-57- 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


170 


vendJcAd. 


I.  Zarathu^ra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O  Ahura 
Mazda,  most  beneficent  Spirit,  Maker  of  the  mate¬ 
rial  world,  thou  Holy  One !  He  who  smites  one  of 
those  water-dogs  that  are  bom  one  from  a  thousand 
dogs  and  a  thousand  she-dogs  so  that  he  gives  up 
the  ghost  and  the  soul  parts  from  the  body,  what  is 
the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ?  ’ 

2  (4).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  shall  pay 
ten  thousand  stripes  with  the  Aspah^artra,  ten 
thousand  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-/^arana  *. 

‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  bring  unto  the  fire 
of  Ahura  Mazda  ®  ten  thousand  loads  of  hard,  well 
dried,  well  examined*  wood,  to  redeem  his  own  soul. 

3  (6).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  bring  unto  the 
fire  of  Ahura  Mazda  ten  thousand  loads  of  soft 
wood,  of  UrvAsna,  Vohfl-gaona,  VohG-kereti,  Hadhi- 
na^pata  ®,  or  any  sweet-scented  plant,  to  redeem  his 
own  soul. 

4  (7).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  tie  ten  thousand 
bundles  of  Baresma,  to  redeem  his  own  soul. 


'  See  preceding  Fargard,  §  51. 

*  He  shall  pay  50  tan&rhhrs  (=15,000  ist}rs=6o,ooo  dirhems). 

*  If  he  can  afford  it,  he  will  atone  in  the  manner  stated  in  the 
Avesta;  if  he  cannot  afford  it,  it  will  be  sufiBcient  to  perform 
a  complete  Izam6  (sacrifice),'  (Comm.) 

’  To  the  altar  of  the  Bahrfim  fire. 

*  ‘  It  is  forbidden  to  take  any  ill-smelling  thing  to  the  fire  and  to 
kindle  it  thereon ;  it  is  forbidden  to  kindle  green  wood,  and  even 
though  the  wood  were  hard  and  dry,  one  must  examine  it  three 
times,  lest  there  may  be  any  hair  or  any  unclean  matter  upon  it  ’ 
(Gr.  Rav.)  Although  the  pious  Ar<fl  Vlrif  had  always  taken  the 
utmost  care  never  to  put  on  the  fire  any  wood  but  such  as  was 
seven  years  old,  yet,  when  he  entered  Paradise,  Atar,  the  genius  of 
fire,  showed  him  reproachfully  a  large  tank  full  of  the  water  which 
that  wood  had  exuded  (see  Ar<ia  Vtrif  X). 

®  See  above,  p.  96,  n.  i. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIV. 


171 


‘  He  shall  offer  up  to  the  Good  Waters  ten  thou¬ 
sand  Zaothra  libations  with  the  Haoma  and  the  milk, 
cleanly  prepared  and  well  strained,  cleanly  prepared 
and  well  strained  by  a  pious  man,  and  mixed  with 
the  roots  of  the  tree  known  as  HadhA-na^pata,  to 
redeem  his  own  soul. 

5  (9).  ‘He  shall  kill  ten  thousand  snakes  of  those 
that  go  upon  the  belly.  He  shall  kill  ten  thousand 
Kahrpus,  who  are  snzikes  with  the  shape  of  a  dog 
He  shall  kill  ten  thousand  tortoises  He  shall  kill  ten 
thousand  land-frogs*;  he  shall  kill  ten  thousand  water- 
frogs.  He  shall  kill  ten  thousand  corn-carrying  ants 


•  ‘MAr  binak  snakes:  they  are  dog-like,  because  they  sit 
on  their  hindparts '  (Comm.)  The  cat  {gurba=Kahrpu)  seems  to 
be  the  animal  intended.  In  a  paraphrase  of  this  passage  in  a  Parsi 
Ravdet,  the  cat  is  numbered  amongst  the  Khrafstras  which  it  is 
enjoined  to  kill  to  redeem  a  sin  (India  Office  Library,  VIII,  13); 
cf.  G.  du  Chinon,  p.  462 :  *Les  animaux  que  les  Gaures  ont  en 
horreur  sent  les  serpents,  les  couleuvres,  les  lezars,  et  autres  de 
cette  espece,  les  crapaux,  les  grenouYlles,  les  ^crevisses,  les  rats 
et  souris,  et  sur  tout  le  chat.’ 

•  Cf.  Farg.  XIII,  6-7. 

•  ‘  Those  that  can  go  out  of  water  and  live  on  the  dry  ground  ’ 
(Comm.)  *  Pour  les  grenouYllea  et  crapaux,  ils  disent  que  ce  sont 
ceux  (eux  ?)  qui  sont  cause  de  ce  que  les  hommes  meurent,  gdtans 
les  eaus  od  ils  habitent  continuellement,  et  que  d’autant  plus  qu’il  y 
en  a  dans  le  pals,  d'autant  plus  les  eaus  causent-elles  des  maladies 
et  enfin  la  mort,'  G.  du  Chinon,  p.  465. 

^  Herodotus  already  mentions  the  war  waged  by  the  Magi 
against  snakes  and  ants  (I,  140). — ‘Un  jour  que  j'^tois  surpris  de 
la  guerre  qu’ils  font  aux  fourmis,  ils  me  dirent  que  ces  animaux  ne 
faisaient  que  voler  par  des  amas  des  grains  plus  qu’il  n’^toit 
n^cessaire  pour  leur  nourriture,’  G.  du  Chinon,  p.  464.  Firdausi 
protested  against  the  proscription:  *Do  no  harm  to  the  corn¬ 
carrying  ant ;  a  living  thing  it  is,  and  its  life  is  dear  to  it.’  The 
celebrated  high-priest  of  the  Parsis,  the  late  Moola  Firooz,  entered 
those  lines  into  his  Pand  Ndmah,  which  may  betoken  better  days 
for  the  wise  little  creature. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


172 


vendIdAd. 


he  shall  kill  ten  thousand  ants  of  the  small,  venom¬ 
ous  mischievous  kind 

6  {i6).  ‘  He  shall  kill  ten  thousand  worms  of  those 
that  live  on  dirt ;  he  shall  kill  ten  thousand  raging 
flies  *. 

*  He  shall  fill  up  ten  thousand  holes  for  the  un¬ 
clean  ®. 

‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  to  godly  men  * 
twice  the  set  of  seven  implements  for  the  fire®,  to 
redeem  his  own  soul,  namely : — 

7  (20).  ‘  The  two  answering  implements  for  fire® ; 
a  broom  ^ ;  a  pair  of  tongs  ;  a  pair  of  round  bellows 
extended  at  the  bottom,  contracted  at  the  top;  a 
sharp-edged  sharp-pointed  ®  adze ;  a  sharp-toothed 
sharp-pointed  saw ;  by  means  of  which  the  worshipn 
pers  of  Mazda  procure  wood  for  the  fire  of  Ahura 
Mazda. 

8  (26).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  to  godly 
men  a  set  of  the  priestly  instruments  of  which  the 
priests  make  use,  to  redeem  his  own  soul,  namely : 
The  Ajtra  ® ;  the  meat-vessel ;  the  Paitidina  ;  the 


*  Perhaps:  ‘of  the  small,  venomous  kind,  \rith  a  mischievous 
track  ’  (Bund.  XIX,  28 :  ‘  when  the  grain-carrier  travels  over  the 
earth,  it  produces  a  hollow  track :  when  the  hedgehog  travels  over 
it,  the  track  goes  away  from  it  and  it  becomes  level : '  cf.  Farg. 
XIII,  a,  note). 

*  Corpse-flies ;  cf.  Farg.  VII,  2. 

*  ‘  The  holes  at  which  the  unclean  are  washed  ’  (Comm. ;  cf. 
Farg.  IX,  6  seq.) 

‘  To  priests.  *  For  the  sacred  fire. 

*  Two  receptacles,  one  for  the  wood,  another  for  the  incense. 

’  To  cleanse  the  Atash-dfin  or  fire-vessel  (Yasna  IX,  i). 

*  Literally,  ‘  sharp-kneed.’  •  The  AspahS-artra. 

As  everything  that  goes  out  of  man  is  unclean,  his  breath 
defiles  all  that  it  touches ;  priests,  therefore,  while  on  duty,  and  even 
laymen,  while  praying  or  eating,  must  wear  a  mouth-veil,  the 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIV. 


173 


Khrafstraghna  * ;  the  Sraosh6->ferana  * ;  the  cup  for 
the  Myazda®:  the  cups  for  mixing  and  dividing®; 
the  regular  mortar®;  the  Haoma  cups®;  and  the 
Baresma. 

9  (32).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  to  godly 
men  a  set  of  all  the  war  implements  of  which  the 
warriors  make  use,  to  redeem  his  own  soul ; 

‘  The  first  being  a  javelin,  the  second  a  sword,  the 
third  a  club,  the  fourth  a  bow,  the  fifth  a  saddle  with 
a  quiver  and  thirty  brass-headed  arrows,  the  sixth  a 
sling  with  arm-string  and  with  thirty  sling  stones  ’ ; 

‘  The  seventh  a  cuirass,  the  eighth  a  hauberk  ®,  the 
ninth  a  tunic®,  the  tenth  a  helmet,  the  eleventh  a 
girdle,  the  twelfth  a  pair  of  gjreaves. 

10  (41).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  to 
godly  men  a  set  of  all  the  implements  of  which  the 


Paitiddna  (Parsi  Pendm),  consisting  *  of  two  pieces  of  white 
cotton  cloth,  hanging  loosely  from  the  bridge  of  the  nose  to,  at 
least,  two  inches  below  the  mouth,  and  tied  with  two  strings  at  the 
back  of  the  head  ’  (Haug,  Essays,  2nd  ed.  p.  243,  n.  i ;  cf.  Comm, 
ad  Farg.  XVIII,  i,  and  Anquetil  II,  530). 

*  The  ‘  Khrafstpa-killer ; '  an  instrument  for  killing  snakes,  &c. 
It  is  a  stick  with  a  leather  thong  at  its  end,  something  like  the 
Indian  fly-flap. 

*  See  General  Introduction.  •  Doubtful.. 

*  The  cup  in  which  the  juice  of  the  h6m  and  of  the  urvardm 
(the  twigs  of  hadhd-na6pata  which  are  pounded  together  with 
the  h6m)  is  received  from  the  mortar  (Comm.) 

*  The  mortar  with  its  pestle. 

®  The  cup  on  which  twigs  of  Haoma  are  laid  before  being 
pounded,  the  so-called  tashtah  (Anquetil  II,  533);  ‘some  say, 
the  h6m-strainer  *  [a  saucer  with  nine  holes].  Comm. 

’  These  are  six  offensive  arms :  the  next  six  are  defensive  arms. — 
Cf.  W.  Jackson :  Herodotus  VII,  61,  or  the  Arms  of  the  Ancient 
Persians  illustrated  from  Iranian  Sources;  New  York,  1894. 

®  ‘  Going  from  the  helm  to  the  cuirass '  (Comm.) 

*  ‘  Under  the  cuirass '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


174 


vendJdAd. 


husbandmen  make  use,  to  redeem  his  own  soul, 
namely :  A  plough  with  yoke  and  . .  .  ^ ;  a  goad  for 
ox  ;  a  mortar  of  stone ;  a  round-headed  hand-mill 
for  grinding  corn ; 

1 1  (48).  ‘  A  spade  for  digging  and  tilling ;  one 
measure  of  silver  and  one  measure  of  gold.’ 

O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One ! 
How  much  silver  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  price  of  a  stallion.' 

O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One  ! 
How  much  gold  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  price  of  a  he-camel. 

12  (54).  ‘He  shall  godly  and  piously  procure  a 
rill  of  running  water®  for  godly  husbandmen,  to 
redeem  his  own  soul.’ 

O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One ! 
How  large  is  the  rill  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  The  depth  of  a  dog, 
and  the  breadth  of  a  dog  ®. 

13  (57).  ‘He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  a  piece 
of  arable  land  to  godly  men,  to  redeem  his  own  soul.’ 

O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One ! 
How  large  is  the  piece  of  land 

Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘As  much  as  can  be 
watered  with  such  a  rill  divided  into  two  canals  *. 

14  (60).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  procure  for 
godly  men  a  stable  for  oxen,  with  nine  hS.thras 
and  nine  nematas®,  to  redeem  his  own  soul.’ 


^  Yuy6-semi  ayazhdna  pairi-darezdna. 

*  The  most  precious  of  all  gifts  in  such  a  dry  place  as  Iran. 
Water  is  obtained  either  through  canals  of  derivation  or  through 
undergound  canals  (kdr6z,  kandt). 

*  Which  is  estimated  ‘  a  foot  deep,  a  foot  broad '  (Comm.) 

*  Doubtful.  ®  Meaning  unknown. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIV. 


*75 


O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One ! 
How  large  is  the  stable  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘It  shall  have  twelve 
alleys '  in  the  largest  part  of  the  house,  nine  alleys 
in  the  middle  part,  six  alleys  in  the  smallest  part. 

‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  to  godly  men 
goodly  beds  with  sheets  and  cushions,  to  redeem  his 
own  soul. 

15  (64).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  in  mar¬ 
riage  to  a  godly  man  a  virgin  maid,  whom  no  man 
has  known  *,  to  redeem  his  own  soul.’ 

O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One  ! 
What  sort  of  maid  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  A  sister  or  a  daughter 
of  his,  at  the  age  of  puberty,  with  ear-rings  in  her 
ears,  and  past  her  fifteenth  year. 

16  (67).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  give  to 
holy  men  twice  seven  head  of  small  cattle,  to  redeem 
his  own  soul. 

‘  He  shall  bring  up  twice  seven  whelps. 

‘  He  shall  throw  twice  seven  bridges  over  canals. 

17(70).  ‘He  shall  put  into  repair  twice  nine 
stables  that  are  out  of  repair. 

‘  He  shall  cleanse  twice  nine  dogs  from  stipti, 
andiriti,  and  vyangura  and  all  the  diseases  that  are 
produced  on  the  body  of  a  dog. 

‘  He  shall  treat  twice  nine  godly  men  to  their  fill 
of  meat,  bread,  strong  drink,  and  wine. 

*8  (73).  ‘This  is  the  penalty,  this  is  the  atone¬ 
ment  which  saves  the  faithful  man  who  submits  to 
it,  not  him  who  does  not  submit  to  it.  Such  a 

’  Twelve  ranks  of  stalls  (?). 

*  Match-making  is  a  good  work  (Farg.  IV,  44). 

*  Meaning  unknown. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


176 


VENDtOAD. 


one  shall  surely  be  an  inhabitant  in  the  mansion  of 
the  Dru^V 


Fargard  XV. 

I  (1-8).  On  five  sins  the  commission  of  which  makes  the  sinner 
a  Peshdtanu. 

II  a  (9-12).  On  unlawful  unions  and  attempts  to  procure  mis¬ 
carriage. 

II  b  (13-19).  On  the  obligations  of  the  illegitimate  father  towards 
the  mother  and  the  child. 

III  (20-45).  treatment  of  a  bitch  big  with  young. 

IV  (46-51).  On  the  breeding  of  dogs. 


I. 

I.  How  many  are  the  sins  that  men  commit  and 
that,  being  committed  and  not  confessed,  nor  atoned 
for,  make  their  committer  a  Peshdtanu  *  ? 

2  (4).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  There  are  five 
such  sins,  O  holy  Zarathurtra !  It  is  the  first  of 
these  sins  that  men  commit  when  a  man  teaches  one 
of  the  faithful  another  faith,  another  law®,  a  lower 
doctrine,  and  he  leads  him  astray  with  a  full  know¬ 
ledge  and  conscience  of  the  sin :  the  man  who  has 
done  the  deed  becomes  a  Peshdtanu. 

3  (9).  *  It  is  the  second  of  these  sins  when  a  man 
gives  bones  too  hard  or  food  too  hot  to  a  shepherd’s 
dog  or  to  a  house-dog ; 

4  (11).  ‘If  the  bones  stick  in  the  dog’s  teeth  or 
stop  in  his  throat ;  or  if  the  food  too  hot  burn  his 


>  Cf.  Farg.VIII,  107. 

*  That  is  to  say  :  he  shall  receive  two  hundred  strokes  with  the 
AspahS-artra  or  the  Sraoshd-^hirana ;  or  pay  three  hundred  isttrs. 

*  The  Commentary  has,  ‘  that  is,  a  creed  that  is  not  ours.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XV. 


177 


mouth  or  his  tongfue,  he  may  come  to  gprief  thereby ; 
if  he  come  to  grief  thereby,  the  man  who  has  done 
the  deed  becomes  a  Peshdtanu  *. 

5  {16).  ‘  It  is  the  third  of  these  sins  when  a  man 
smites  a  bitch  big  with  young  or  affrights  her  by 
running  after  her,  or  shouting  or  clapping  with  the 
hands ; 

6  (i  8).  ‘  If  the  bitch  fall  into  a  hole,  or  a  well,  or 
a  precipice,  or  a  river,  or  a  canal,  she  may  come  to 
grief  thereby ;  if  she  come  to  grief  thereby,  the  man 
who  has  done  the  deed  becomes  a  Peshdtanu  *. 

7  (22).  ‘  It  is  the  fourth  of  these  sins  when  a  man 
has  intercourse  with  a  woman  who  has  the  whites  or 
sees  the  blood,  the  man  that  has  done  the  deed 
becomes  a  Peshdtanu*. 

8  (25).  ‘  It  is  the  fifth  of  these  sins  when  a  man  has 
intercourse  with  a  woman  quick  with  child  *,  whether 
the  milk  has  already  come  to  her  breasts  or  has  not 
yet  come  :  she  may  come  to  grief  thereby ;  if  she 
come  to  grief  thereby  *,  the  man  who  has  done  the 
deed  becomes  a  Peshdtanu. 


'  He  who  gives  too  hot  food  to  a  dog  so  as  to  bum  his  throat  is 
margarz&n  (guilty  of  death);  he  who  gives  bones  to  a  dog  so  as 
to  tear  his  throat  is  margarz&n  (Gr.  Rav.  639). 

*  If  a  bitch  is  big  with  young  and  a  man  shouts  or  throws 
stones  at  her,  so  that  the  whelps  come  to  mischief  and  die,  he  is 
margarzin  (Gr.  Rav.  639). 

*  See  Farg.  XVI,  14  seq. 

*  When  she  has  been  pregnant  for  four  months  and  ten  days,  as 
it  is  then  that  the  child  is  formed  and  a  soul  is  added  to  its  body 
(Anquetil  II,  563). 

*  Or  better,  ‘  if  the  child  die.’  ‘  If  a  man  come  to  his  wife  [during 
her  pregnancy]  so  that  she  is  injured  and  bring  forth  a  still-born 
child,  he  is  margarzin'  (Old  Rav.  115  b). 

[4]  N 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


178 


vendIdAd. 


II  a. 

9  (30).  ‘  If  a  man  come  near  unto  a  damsel,  either 
dependent  on  the  chief  of  the  family  or  not  de¬ 
pendent,  either  delivered  [unto  a  husband]  or  not 
delivered*,  and  she  conceives  by  him,  let  her  not, 
being  ashamed  of  the  people,  produce  in  herself  the 
menses,  against  the  course  of  nature,  by  means  of 
water  and  plants  ®. 

10  (34).  ‘  And  if  the  damsel,  being  ashamed  of  the 
people,  shall  produce  in  herself  the  menses  against 
the  course  of  nature,  by  means  of  water  and  plants, 
it  is  a  fresh  sin  as  heavy  [as  the  first]  *. 

1 1  (36).  ‘  If  a  man  come  near  unto  a  damsel, 
either  dependent  on  the  chief  of  the  family  or  not 
dependent,  either  delivered  [unto  a  husband]  or  not 
delivered,  and  she  conceives  by  him,  let  her  not, 
being  ashamed  of  the  people,  destroy  the  fruit  in  her 
womb. 

12  (38).  ‘And  if  the  damsel,  being  ashamed  of 
the  people,  shall  destroy  the  fruit  in  her  womb, 
the  sin  is  on  both  the  father  and  herself,  the  murder 


'  ‘  Whether  she  has  a  husband  in  the  house  of  her  own  parents 
or  has  none ;  whether  she  has  entered  from  the  house  of  her  own 
parents  into  the  house  of  a  husband  [depending  on  another  chief 
of  family]  or  has  not  ’  (Comm.) 

*  By  means  of  drugs. 

*  ‘  It  is  a  tanSfOhr  sin  for  her :  it  is  sin  on  sin’  (the  first  sin  being 
to  have  allowed  herself  to  be  seduced),  Comm.  ‘  If  there  has  been 
no  sin  in  her  (if  she  has  been  forced),  and  if  a  man,  knowing  her 
shame,  wants  to  take  it  off  her,  he  shall  call  together  her  father, 
mother,  sisters,  brothers,  husband,  the  servants,  the  menials,  and 
the  master  and  the  mistress  of  the  house,  and  he  shall  say,  “  This 
woman  is  with  child  by  me,  and  I  rejoice  in.  it ;  ”  and  they  shall 
answer,  “  We  know  it,  and  we  are  glad  that  her  shame  is  taken  off 
her ;  ”  and  he  shall  support  her  as  a  husband  does'  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XV. 


179 


is  on  both  the  father  and  herself ;  both  the  father  and 
herself  shall  pay  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder  \ 

II  b. 

1 3  (40).  *  If  a  man  come  near  unto  a  damsel, 
either  dependent  on  the  chief  of  the  family  or  not 
dependent,  either  delivered  [unto  a  husband]  or  not 
delivered,  and  she  conceives  by  him,  and  she  says, 
"  I  have  conceived  by  thee ;  ”  and  he  replies,  “  Go 
then  to  the  old  woman  ®  and  apply  to  her  for  one  of 
her  drugs,  that  she  may  procure  thee  miscarriage 

14  (43).  ‘  And  the  damsel  goes  to  the  old  woman 
and  applies  to  her  for  one  of  her  drugs,  that  she  may 
procure  her  miscarriage ;  and  the  old  woman  brings 
her  some  Banga,  or  Shadta,  a  drug  that  kills  in  the 
womb  or  one  that  expels  out  of  the  womb  ®,  or 
some  other  of  the  drugs  that  produce  miscarriage 
and  [the  man  says],  “  Cause  thy  fruit  to  perish !  ” 
and  she  causes  her  fruit  to  perish ;  the  sin  is  on 
the  head  of  all  three,  the  man,  the  damsel,  and  the 
old  woman. 

1 5  (49).  ‘  If  a  man  come  near  unto  a  damsel, 
either  dependent  on  the  chief  of  the  family  or  not 
dependent,  either  delivered  [unto  a  husband]  or  not 
delivered,  and  she  conceives  by  him,  so  long  shall  he 
support  her,  until  the  child  be  born. 

16  (51).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 
child  comes  to  grief*  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 


*  For  baodhd-varjta;  cf.VII,  38. 

*  The  nurse  (FrSmjt)  or  the  midwife. 

*  Banga  is  bang  or  mang,  a  narcotic  made  from  hempseed, 
sha^ta  is  another  sort  of  narcotic. 

*  And  dies. 

N  2 


I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i8o 


VENDtoAo. 


17  (54).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  she  be  near  her  time,  which  is  the 
worshipper  of  Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

18  (56).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  If  a  man  come 
near  unto  a  damsel,  either  dependent  on  the  chief 
of  the  family  or  not  dependent,  either  delivered  [unto 
a  husband]  or  not  delivered,  and  she  conceives  by 
him,  so  long  shall  he  support  her,  until  the  child  be 
born  K 

19  (58).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her* .... 

‘  It  lies  with  the  faithful  to  look  in  the  same  way 
after  every  pregnant  female,  either  two-footed  or  four- 
footed,  two-footed  woman  or  four-footed  bitch.’ 

III. 

20  (61).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  (a  bitch  ®)  be  near  her  time,  which  is 
the  worshipper  of  Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

21  (63).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  whose 
house  stands  nearest,  the  care  of  supporting  her  is 
his  * ;  so  long  shall  he  support  her,  until  the  whelps 
be  bom. 

22  (65).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 


‘  §  i8=§  15. 

*  The  sentence  is  left  unfinished ;  Frdmjt  fills  it  with  the  words 
in  §  16,  ‘so  that  the  child/  &c.  It  seems  as  if  §§  17,  18  were  no 
part  of  the  original  text,  and  as  if  §  17  were  a  mere  repetition  of 
§  20,  which  being  wrongly  interpreted  as  referring  to  a  woman  would 
have  brought  about  the  repetition  of  §  15  as  an  answer.  See  §  20. 

*  The  subject  is  wanting  in  the  text:  it  is  supplied  from  the 
Commentary  and  from  the  sense. 

*  ‘  The  bitch  is  lying  on  the  high  road ;  the  man  whose  house 
has  its  door  nearest  shall  take  care  of  her.  If  she  dies,  he  shall 
carry  her  off  [to  dispose  of  the  body  according  to  the  law].  One 
must  support  her  for  at  least  three  nights :  if  one  cannot  support  her 
any  longer,  one  intrusts  her  to  a  richer  man  ’  (Comm,  and  FrimjJ). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XV. 


l8l 


whelps  come  to  gfrief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

23  (68).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  I  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  in  a  stable  for  camels,  which  is  the  worshipper 
of  Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

24  (70).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  who  built 
the  stable  for  camels  or  whoso  holds  it  *,  the  care  of 
supporting  her  is  his ;  so  long  shall  he  support  her, 
until  the  whelps  be  born. 

25  {76).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 
whelps  come  to  grief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

26  (77).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  in  a  stable  for  horses,  which  is  the  worshipper 
of  Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

27  (78).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  He  who  built 
the  stable  for  horses  or  whoso  holds  it,  the  care  of 
supporting  her  is  his ;  so  long  shall  he  support  her, 
until  the  whelps  be  born. 

28  (81).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 
whelps  come  to  grief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

29  (84).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  in  a  stable  for  oxen,  which  is  the  worshipper 
of  Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

30  (86).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  who  built 
the  stable  for  oxen  or  whoso  holds  it,  the  care  of 
supporting  her  is  his ;  so  long  shall  he  support  her, 
until  the  whelps  be  born. 


*  ‘  In  pledge  or  for  rent  ’  (Fr&mjt). 


Digitized  by 


i82 


vendIdAd. 


31  (89).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 
whelps  come  to  grief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

32  (92).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  in  a  sheep-fold,  which  is  the  worshipper  of 
Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

33  (94)'  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘He  who  built 
the  sheep-fold  or  whoso  holds  it,  the  care  of  support¬ 
ing  her  is  his ;  so  long  shall  he  support  her,  until 
the  whelps  be  born. 

34  (97)-  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her  so  that  the 
whelps  come  to  grief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

35  (too).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  on  the  earth-wall  *,  which  is  the  worshipper  of 
Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

36  (102).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  who 
erected  the  wall  or  whoso  holds  it,  the  care  of  sup¬ 
porting  her  is  his ;  so  long  shall  he  support  her, 
until  the  whelps  be  born. 

37  05).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 
whelps  come  to  grief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

38  (108).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  in  the  moat*,  which  is  the  worshipper  of 
Mazda  that  shall  support  her? 

39  (no).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  who  dug 
the  moat  or  whoso  holds  it,  the  care  of  supporting 


^  The  wall  around  the  house. 

*  The  moat  before  the  earth-wall. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XV. 


183 


her  is  his;  so  long  shall  he  support  her,  until  the 
whelps  be  bom. 

40  (i  12).  ‘  If  he  shall  not  support  her,  so  that  the 
whelps  come  to  grief,  for  want  of  proper  support,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  the  penalty  for  wilful  murder.’ 

41  (113).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  bitch  be  near  her  time  and  be 
lying  in  the  middle  of  a  pasture-field,  which  is  the 
worshipper  of  Mazda  that  shall  support  her  ? 

42  (115).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘He  who 
sowed  the  pasture-field  or  whoso  holds  it,  the  care 
of  supporting  her  is  his ;  [so  long  shall  he  support 
her,  until  the  whelps  be  bom.  If  he  shall  not 
support  her,  so  that  the  whelps  come  to  grief,  for 
want  of  proper  support,  he  shall  pay  for  it  the 
penalty  for  wilful  murder.] 

43  1 7)*  ‘He  shall  take  her  to  rest  upon  a  litter 
of  nemdvawta  or  of  any  foliage  fit  for  a  litter ;  so 
long  shall  he  support  her,  until  the  young  dogs  are 
capable  of  self-defence  and  self-subsistence.’ 

44  (122).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One!  When  are  the  dogs  capable  of  self- 
defence  and  self-subsistence? 

45  {^23).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘When  they 
are  able  to  run  about  in  a  circuit  of  twice  seven 
houses  around*.  Then  they  may  be  let  loose, 
whether  it  be  winter  or  summer. 

‘Young  dogs  ought  to  be  supported  for  six 
months*,  children  for  seven  years®. 


*  Probably  the  distance  of  one  yufyfirti ;  cf.  Farg.  XIII,  17. 

*  Catulos  sex  mensibus  primis  dum  corroborentur  emitti  non 
opoitet . . .  (Columella,  De  le  agraria,  VII,  la). 

'  The  age  when  they  are  invested  with  the  Kosti  and  Sadere, 
and  become  members  of  the  Zoroastrian  community. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


184 


vendIdAd. 


‘  Atar  the  son  of  Ahura  Mazda,  watches  as  well 
(over  a  pregnant  bitch)  as  he  does  over  a  woman.’ 

IV. 

46  (127).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  worshippers  of  Mazda  want  to  have 
a  bitch  so  covered  that  the  offspring  shall  be  one 
of  a  stropg  nature,  what  shall  they  do  ? 

47  (i  29).  Ahura  Meizda  answered :  ‘  They  shall 
dig  a  hole  in  the  earth,  in  the  middle  of  the  fold, 
half  a  foot  deep  if  the  earth  be  hard,  half  the  height 
of  a  man  if  the  earth  be  soft 

48  (131).  ‘  They  shall  first  tie  up  [the  bitch]  there, 
far  from  children  and  from  the  Fire,  the  son  of 
Ahura  Mazda  and  they  shall  watch  by  her  until 
a  dqg  comes  there  from  anywhere ;  then  another 
again,  and  then  a  third  again  ^  each  being  kept 
apart  from  the  former,  lest  they  should  assail  one 
another. 

49(134)*.  ‘The  bitch  being  thus  covered  by 


'  ‘  When  a  woman  becomes  pregnant  in  a  house,  it  is  necessary 
to  make  an  endeavour  so  that  there  may  be  a  continual  fire  in 
that  house,  and  to  maintain  a  good  watch  over  it.  And,  when  the 
child  becomes  separate  from  the  mother,  it  is  necessary  to  bum 
a  lamp  for  three  nights  and  days — if  they  bum  a  fire  it  would  be 
better — so  that  the  demons  and  fiends  may  not  be  able  to  do  any 
damage  and  harm ;  because,  when  a  child  is  boro,  it  is  exceedingly 
delicate  for  those  three  days '  (Saddar  XVI ;  West,  Pahlavi  Texts, 
m,  277). 

*  *  From  children,  lest  she  shall  bite  them ;  from  the  fire,  lest  it 
shall  hurt  her  ’  (Comm.) 

*  Cf.  Justinus  III,  4 :  maturiorem  futuram  conceptionem  rati,  si 
earn  singulae  per  plures  viros  experirentur. 

*  The  text  of  this  and  the  following  clause  is  corrupt,  and  the 
meaning  is  doubtful. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVI. 


185 


three  dogs,  grows  big  with  young,  and  the  milk 
comes  to  her  teats  and  she  brings  forth  a  young 
one  that  is  bom  from  several  dogs.’ 

50  (135).  If  a  man  smite  a  bitch  who  has  been 
covered  by  three  dogs,  and  who  has  already  milk, 
and  who  shall  bring  forth  a  young  one  born  from 
several  dogs,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

5*  (137)'  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Seven  hun¬ 
dred  stripes  with  the  Aspahfi-artra,  seven  hundred 
stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 


Fargard  XVI. 

I  {r-7).  On  the  uncleanness  of  women  during  their  sickness. 

II  (8-12).  What  is  to  be  done  if  that  state  lasts  too  long. 

III  (13-18).  Sundry  laws  relating  to  the  same  matter.  See 
Introd.  V,  12. 


I. 

1.  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One  1  If  there  be  in  the  house  of  a  worshipper  of 
Mazda  a  woman  who  has  the  whites  or  sees  blood, 
what  shall  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  do  ? 

2  (3).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  They  shall  clear 
the  way  ^  of  the  wood  there,  both  plants  and  trees  * ; 
they  shall  strew  dry  dust  on  the  gpround  ® ;  and  they 
shall  isolate  a  half,  or  a  third,  or  a  fourth,  or  a  fifth 


’  The  way  to  the  Dasht&nistin. 

*  Lest  the  wood  shall  be  touched  and  defiled  by  the  woman  on 
her  way  to  the  Dasht&nistfin. 

*  Lest  the  earth  shall  be  touched  and  defiled  by  her.  Cf.  Farg. 
IX,  II. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


vendJdAd. 


1 86 


part  of  the  house  lest  her  look  should  fall  upon 
the  fire/ 

3  (9).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One!  How  far  from  the  fire?  How  far  from  the 
water  ?  How  far  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of 
Baresma  ?  How  far  from  the  faithful  ? 

4(10).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Fifteen  paces 
from  the  fire,  fifteen  paces  from  the  water,  fifteen 
paces  from  the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma, 
three  paces  from  the  faithful/ 

5  (ii).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy 
One !  How  far  from  her  shall  he  stay,  who  bringfs 
food  to  a  woman  who  has  the  whites  or  sees  the 
blood? 

6  (12).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Three  paces* 
from  her  shall  he  stay,  who  brings  food  to  a  woman 
who  has  the  whites  or  sees  the  blood/ 

In  what  kind  of  vessels  shall  he  bring  her  bread  ? 
In  what  kind  of  vessels  shall  he  bring  her  barley- 
drink  ? 

‘  In  vessels  of  brass,  or  of  lead,  or  of  any  common 
metal  V 

7  (15).  How  much  bread  shall  he  bring  to  her? 
How  much  barley-drink  shall  he  bring  ? 

‘Two  danares*  of  dry  bread,  and  one  danare 
of  liquor,  lest  she  should  get  too  weak*. 

‘  Nowadays  a  room  on  the  ground-floor  b  reserved  for  that 
use. 

*  The  food  is  held  out  to  her  from  a  distance  in  a  metal  spoon. 

*  Earthen  vessels,  when  defiled,  cannot  be  made  clean;  but 
metal  vessels  can  (see  Farg.  VII,  73  seq.) 

*  A  danare  is,  according  to  Anquetil,  as  much  as  four  tolas; 
a  tola  is  from  105  to  175  grains. 

*  ‘  Sdshyds  says :  For  three  nighb  cooked  meat  is  not  allowed 
to  her,  lest  the  issue  shall  grow  stronger.’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVI. 


187 


‘  If  a  child  has  just  touched  her,  they  shall  first 
wash  his  hands  and  then  his  body  \ 

II. 

8  (21).  ‘  If  she  still  see  blood  after  three  nights 
have  passed,  she  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity 
until  four  nights  have  passed. 

‘  If  she  still  see  blood  after  four  nights  have 
passed,  she  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity  until 
five  nights  have  passed. 

9.  ‘If  she  still  see  blood  after  five  nights  have 
passed,  she  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity  until 
six  nights  have  passed. 

‘  If  she  still  see  blood  after  six  nights  have 
passed,  she  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity  until 
seven  nights  have  passed. 

10.  ‘  If  she  still  see  blood  after  seven  nights  have 
passed,  she  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity  until 
eight  nights  have  passed. 

‘  If  she  still  see  blood  after  eight  nights  have 
passed,  she  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  infirmity  until 
nine  nights  have  passed. 

11.  ‘If  she  still  see  blood  after  nine  nights  have 
passed,  this  is  a  work  of  the  Daevas  which  they 
have  performed  for  the  worship  and  glorification  of 
the  Daevas*. 


’  A  child  whom  she  suckles.  The  meaning  is.  Even  a  child,  if 
be  has  touched  her,  must  undergo  the  rites  of  cleansing.  The 
general  rule  is  given  in  the  Commentary :  ‘  Whoever  has  touched 
a  Dasht&n  woman  must  wash  his  body  and  his  clothes  with  gdm6z 
and  water.’  The  ceremony  in  question  is  the  simple  Ghosel,  not 
the  Barashnilm,  since  the  woman  herself  performs  the  former  only 
(see  below,  §  n  seq.) 

*  Abnormal  issues  are  a  creation  of  Ahriman’s  (Farg.  I,  18). 


*  Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


i88 


VENDtoAo. 


‘  The  worshippers  of  Mazda  shall  clear  the  way  ’ 
of  the  wood  there,  both  plants  and  trees  * ; 

1 2  (26).  ‘  They  shall  dig  three  holes  in  the  earth, 
and  they  shall  wash  the  woman  with  gdmfiz  by  two 
of  those  holes  and  with  water  by  the  third. 

‘  They  shall  kill  Khrafstras,  to  wit :  two  hundred 
corn-carrying  ants  •,  if  it  be  summer ;  two  hundred 
of  any  other  sort  of  the  Khrafstras  made  by  Angra 
Mainyu,  if  it  be  winter.’ 


III. 

13  (30).  If  a  worshipper  of  Mazda  shall  suppress 
the  issue  of  a  woman  who  has  the  whites  or  sees 
blood,  what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  He  is  a  Pesh6tanu ; 
two  hundred  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aytra,  two 
hundred  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd-^arana.’ 

H  (33)*  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One !  If  a  man  shall  again  and  again  lascivi¬ 
ously  touch  the  body  of  a  woman  who  has  the 
whites  or  sees  blood,  so  that  the  whites  turn  to 
the  blood  or  the  blood  turns  to  the  whites,  what  is 
the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  ? 

15  (36).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘For  the  first 
time  he  comes  near  unto  her,  for  the  first  time  he 
lies  by  her,  thirty  stripes  with  the  Aspah^-aJtra, 
thirty  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-/ferana. 

‘  For  the  second  time  he  comes  near  unto  her,  for 
the  second  time  he  lies  by  her,  fifty  stripes  with  the 
Aspah^-aJtra,  fifty  stripes  with  the  Sraosh6-i^arana. 


*  The  way  to  the  Barashn&m-gSh,  where  the  cleansing  takes 
place. 

*  See  Farg.  IX,  3  seq.  *  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  5. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVI. 


189 

‘  For  the  third  time  he  comes  near  unto  her,  for 
the  third  time  he  lies  by  her,  seventy  stripes  with 
the  Aspahd-artra,  seventy  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
^rana.’ 

16.  For  the  fourth  time  he  comes  near  unto  her, 
for  the  fourth  time  he  lies  by  her,  if  he  shall  press 
the  body  under  her  clothes,  if  he  shall  go  in  between 
the  unclean  thighs,  but  without  sexual  intercourse, 
what  is  the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay? 

Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  Ninety  stripes,  with 
the  Aspah6-artra,  ninety  stripes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
^arana. 

17  (39)*  ‘Whosover  shall  lie  in  sexual  inter¬ 
course  with  a  woman  who  has  the  whites  or  sees 
blood,  does  no  better  deed  than  if  he  should  bum 
the  corpse  of  his  own__^on,  bom  of  his  own  body 
and  dead  of  na^za*,  and  drop  its  fat  into  the 
fire  *. 

18  (41).  ‘  All  wicked,  embodiments  of  the  Dm/*, 
are  scomers  of  the  judge :  all  scomers  of  the  judge 
are  rebels  against  the  Sovereign  :  all  rebels  against 
the  Sovereign  are  ungodly  men  ;  and  all  ungodly 
men  are  worthy  of  death 


’  A  disease  (Farg.  VII,  58).  There  is  another  word  nieza,  *  a 
spear,’  so  that  one  may  translate  also  ‘  killed  by  the  spear '  (Asp.) 

•  ‘  Not  that  the  two  deeds  are  equal,  but  neither  is  good  ’ 
(Comm.)  The  sin  in  question  is  a  simple  tan&ffihr  (Farg.  XV,  7), 
and  therefore  can  be  atoned  for  by  punishment  and  repentance, 
whereas  the  burning  of  a  corpse  is  a  crime  for  which  there  is  no 
atonement  (Farg.  T,  17;  VIII,  73  seq.) 

*  Literally,  ‘  is  a  Peshdtanu ;  ’  ‘  he  is  a  tanifhhr  sinner,  that  is  to 
say,  margarzSn  (worthy  of  death),’  Comm. 


Digitized  by 


190 


vendIdAd. 


Fargard  XVII. 

Hair  and  Nails. 

Anything  that  has  been  separated  from  the  body  of  man  is  con¬ 
sidered  dead  matter  (nasu),  and  is  accordingly  unclean.  As  soon 
as  hair  and  nails  are  cut  off,  the  demon  takes  hold  of  them  and 
has  to  be  driven  away  from  them  by  spells,  in  the  same  way  as  he 
is  from  the  bodies  of  the  dead 

I. 

I.  Zarathujtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  O  Ahura 
Mazda,  most  beneficent  Spirit,  Maker  of  the  material 
world,  thou  Holy  One !  Which  is  the  most  deadly 
deed  whereby  a  man  offers  up  a  sacrifice  to  the 
Daevas  *  ?  ’ 

2  (3).  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :  ‘  It  is  when  a  man 
here  below,  combing  his  hair  or  shaving  it  off,  or 
paring  off  his  nails,  drops  them  ®  in  a  hole  or  in  a 
crack  *. 

3  (6).  ‘  Then  by  this  transgression  of  the  rites, 
Daevas  are  produced  in  the  earth ;  by  this  trans¬ 
gression  of  the  rites,  those  Khrafstras  are  produced 
in  the  earth  which  men  call  lice,  and  which  eat  up 
the  com  in  the  corn-field  and  the  clothes  in  the 
wardrobe. 

4(10).  ‘Therefore,  thou,  O  Zarathurtra!  when¬ 
ever  here  below  thou  shalt  comb  thy  hair  or  shave 


*  On  similar  views  and  customs  in  different  countries,  see  Notes 
and  Queries,  3rd  series,  X,  146;  Aulus  Gellius,  X,  15,  15; 
M^lusine,  1878,  pp.  79,  S49,  583 ;  L.  de  Rosny,  Histoire  des 
dynasties  divines,  308. 

*  AnyoflFence  to  religion  is  considered  an  offering  to  theDafivas, 
whose  strength  is  thereby  increased.  Cf.  Yt  V,  95. 

*  Without  performing  the  requisite  ceremonies. 

*  Doubtful. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVII. 


19I 


it  off,  or  pare  off  thy  nails,  thou  shalt  take  them 
away  ten  paces  from  the  faithful,  twenty  paces  from 
the  fire,  thirty  paces  from  the  water,  fifty  paces  from 
the  consecrated  bundles  of  Baresma. 

5  (13).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  dig  a  hole,  a  di^ti*  deep 
if  the  earth  be  hard,  a  vitasti  deep  if  it  be  soft; 
thou  shalt  take  the  hair  down  there  and  thou  shalt 
say  aloud  these  victorious  words  :  “For  him,  as 
a  reward,  Mazda  made  the  plants  grow  up®.” 

6  (i  7).  ‘  Thereupon  thou  shalt  draw  three  furrows 
with  a  knife  of  metal  around  the  hole,  or  six  furrows 
or  nine,  and  thou  shall  chant  the  Ahuna-Vairya 
three  times,  or  six,  or  nine. 

II. 

7  (19).  ‘  For  the  nails,  thou  shalt  dig  a  hole,  out 
of  the  house,  as  deep  as  the  top  joint  of  the  little 
finger;  thou  shalt  take  the  nails  down  there  and 
thou  shalt  say  aloud  these  victorious  words :  “  The 
things  that  the  pure  proclaim  through  Asha  and 
Vohu-man6  ®.” 

8  (24).  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  draw  three  furrows  with 


*  A  dlfti=ten  fingers.  A  vttasti= twelve  fingers. 

*  See  above,  XI,  6 ;  the  choice  of  this  line  was  determined  by 
the  presence  of  the  word  plants  in  it:  man  was  considered  a 
microcosm,  and  every  element  in  him  had  its  coimterpart  in  nature ; 
the  skin  is  like  the  sky,  the  flesh  is  like  the  earth,  the  bones  are  like 
the  mountains,  the  veins  are  like  the  rivers,  the  blood  in  the  body 
is  like  the  water  in  the  sea,  the  hair  is  like  the  plants,  the  more 
hairy  parts  are  like  the  forests  (Gr.Bund.)  Cf.  Rig-veda  X,  16,  3  ; 
Ilias  VII,  99  ;  Empedocles,  fr.  378;  Epicharmus  ap.  Plut.  Consol, 
ad  Apoll.  15 ;  Edda,  Grimnismal,  40. 

*  Yasna  XXXIII,  7 ;  understood  (with  a  play  upon  the  word 
sruy^,  ‘is  heard,'  and  ‘nails  of  both  hands')  as :  ‘O  Asha,  with 
Vohu-man6,  the  nails  of  the  pure  [are  for  you].' 


Digitized  by 


193 


VENDtoAo. 


a  knife  of  metal  around  the  hole,  or  six  furrows  or 
nine,  and  thou  shalt  chant  the  Ahuna-Vairya  three 
times,  or  six,  or  nine. 

9  (26).  ‘  And  then :  “  O  Ash6-zurta  bird  * !  these 
nails  I  announce  and  consecrate  unto  thee.  May 
they  be  for  thee  so  many  spears  and  knives,  so 
many  bows  and  falcon-winged  arrows,  and  so  many 
sling-stones  against  the  MAzainya  Dafiveis  ® !  ” 

10  (29).  ‘  If  those  nails  have  not  been  consecrated 
(to  the  bird),  they  shall  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
MAzainya  DaAvas  so  many  spears  and  knives,  so 
many  bows  and  falcon-winged  arrows,  and  so  many 
sling-stones  (against  the  MAzainya  Daevas)  ®. 

1 1  (30).  ‘  All  wicked,  embodiments  of  the  Dru^, 
are  scorners  of  the  judge ;  all  scorners  of  the  judge 
are  rebels  against  the  Sovereign  :  all  rebels  against 
the  Sovereign  are  ungodly  men ;  and  all  ungodly 
men  are  worthy  of  death*.’ 


‘  ‘  The  owl,'  according  to  modem  tradition.  The  word  literally 
means  ‘  friend  of  holiness.’  ‘  For  the  bird  Ashd-zurta  they  recite 
the  Avesta  formula ;  if  they  recite  it,  the  fiends  tremble  and  do  not 
take  up  the  nails ;  but  if  the  nails  have  had  no  spell  uttered  over 
them,  the  fiends  and  wizards  use  them  as  arrows  against  the  bird 
Ashd-zurta  and  kill  him.  Therefore,  when  the  nails  have  had  a  spell 
uttered  over  them,  the  bird  takes  and  eats  them  up,  that  the  fiends 
may  not  do  any  harm  by  their  means '  (Bundahir  XIX).  The  bird 
Ashd-zurta  is  also  called  Bird  of  Bahman  (Saddar  14),  both  names 
being  taken  from  the  first  words  of  the  line  quoted  above. 

*  See  above,  p.  140,  n.  5 ;  p.  141,  n.  i.  The  nails  are  cut  in  tiro 
and  the  fragments  are  put  in  the  hole  with  the  point  directed 
towards  the  north,  that  is  to  say,  against  the  breasts  of  the  Ddvs 
(see  above,  p.  76,  n.  i).  See  Anquetil,  Zend-Avesta  II,  117;  India 
OfiSce  Library,  ^^[II,  80. 

*  Repeated  by  mistake  from  §  10. 

*  See  preceding  Fargard,  §  18. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


193 


Fargard  XVIII. 

I  (i-i3).  On  the  unworthy  priest  and  enticers  to  heresy. 

II  (14-29).  The  holiness  of  the  cock,  the  bird  of  Sraosha,  who 
awakes  the  world  for  prayer  and  for  the  protection  of  Atar. 

III  (30-59).  On  the  four  sins  that  make  the  Dru^  pregnant  with 
a  brood  of  fiends. 

IV  (60-65).  On  the  evil  caused  by  the  G'ahi  (the  prostitute). 

V  (66-76).  How  intercourse  with  a  Dashtfin  woman  is  to  be 
atoned  for. 

I. 

I.  ‘There  is  many  a  one,  O  holy  Zarathujtra ! ’ 
said  Ahura  Mazda,  ‘  who  wears  a  wrong  PaitidSna 
and  who  has  not  girded  his  loins  with  the  Religion  ® ; 
when  such  a  man  says,  “  I  am  an  Athravan,”  he  lies ; 
do  not  call  him  an  Athravan,  O  holy  Zarathu.ytra !  ’ 
thus  said  Ahura  Mazda. 

2  (5).  ‘  He  holds  a  wrong  Khrafstraghna  *  in  his 
hand  and  he  has  not  gfirded  his  loins  with  the  Reli¬ 
gion  ;  when  he  says,  “  I  am  an  Athravan,”  he  lies  ; 
do  not  call  him  an  Athravan,  O  holy  Zarathurtra ! 
thus  said  Ahura  Mazda. 

3  (7).  *  He  holds  a  wrong  twig  *  in  his  hand  and 
he  has  not  girded  his  loins  with  the  Religion ;  when 
he  says,  “  I  am  an  Athravan,”  he  lies ;  do  not  call 
him  an  Athravan,  O  holy  Zarathu.ftra !  ’  thus  said 
Ahura  Mazda. 

*  See  above,  p.  172,  n.  10. 

*  The  word  translated  girded  is  the  word  used  of  theK6stt,the 
sacred  girdle  which  the  Parsi  must  never  part  with  (see  §  54) ;  the 
full  meaning,  therefore,  is,  ‘girded  with  the  law  as  with  a  Kdstl' 
(cf.  Yasna  IX,  26  [81]),  that  is  to  say,  ‘never  forsaking  the  law,'  or, 
as  the  Commentary  expresses  it,  ‘  one  whose  thought  is  all  on  the 
law’  (cf.  §  5). 

*  See  above,  p.  173,  n.  i. 

‘  The  bundles  of  Baresma  or  the  urvarim  (see  p.  22,  n.  3; 
p.  173,  n.  4).  - 

C-l]  O 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


194 


vend!dAd. 


4  (9).  ‘  He  wields  a  wrong  Artra  mairya '  and 
he  has  not  girded  his  loins  with  the  Religion ;  when 
he  says,  “  I  am  an  Athravan,”  he  lies ;  do  not  call 
him  an  Athravan,  O  holy  Zarathurtra !  ’  thus  said 
Ahura  Mazda. 

5  (ii).  ‘  He  who  sleeps  on  throughout  the  night, 
neither  performing  the  Yasna  nor  chanting  the 
hymns,  worshipping  neither  by  word  nor  by  deed, 
neither  learning  nor  teaching,  with  a  longing  for 
(everlasting)  life,  he  lies  when  he  says,  “  I  am  an 
Athravan,”  do  not  call  him  an  Athravan,  O  holy 
Zarathurtra  !  ’  thus  said  Ahura  Mazda. 

6  (14).  ‘  Him  thou  shalt  call  an  Athravan,  O  holy 
Zarathu^tra  !  who  throughout  the  night  sits  up  and 
demands  of  the  holy  Wisdom  *,  which  makes  man 
free  from  anxiety,  and  wide  of  heart,  and  easy  of 
conscience  at  the  head  of  the  KiuvdJ  bridge  ®,  and 
which  makes  him  reach  that  world,  that  holy  world, 
that  excellent  world  of  Paradise. 

7  (18).  ‘  (Therefore)  demand  of  me,  thou  upright 
one !  of  me,  who  am  the  Maker,  the  most  beneficent 
of  all  beings,  the  best  knowing,  the  most  pleased 
in  answering  what  is  asked  of  me ;  demand  of  me, 
that  thou  mayst  be  the  better,  that  thou  mayst  be 
the  happier.’ 

8  (2 1).  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  O  Maker 
of  the  material  world,  thou  Holy  One !  What  is  it 
that  brings  in  the  unseen  power  of  Death  ?  ’ 


*  The  artra  (Aspah^-artra)  with  which  the  priest,  as  a  Sraoshil- 
varez,  chastises  the  guilty. 

*  That  is  to  say,  studies  the  law  and  leams  from  those  who 
know  it. 

*  See  Farg.  XIX,  30.  ‘  It  gives  him  a  stout  heart,  when  standing 
before  the  A^nva/  bridge  ’  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


195 


9  (22).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  the  man 
that  teaches  a  wrong  Religion  * ;  it  is  the  man  who 
continues  for  three  springs*  without  wearing  the 
sacred  girdle  ®,  without  chanting  the  G4thas,  with¬ 
out  worshipping  the  Good  Waters. 

10  (25).  ‘  And  he  who  should  set  that  man  at 
liberty,  when  bound  in  prison  does  no  better  deed 
than  if  he  should  cut  a  man's  head  off  his  neok  K 


’  ‘  The  deceiver  Ashemaogha  ’  (Comm.) ;  the  heretic.  Cf.  Farg. 
XV,  2. 

*  ‘  For  three  years’  (Comm.) 

•  The  Kdstt,  which  must  be  worn  by  every  Parsi,  man  or  woman, 
from  their  fifteenth  year  of  age  (see  below,  §  54  seq.) ;  it  is  the  badge 
of  the  faithful,  the  girdle  by  which  he  is  united  both  with  Ormazd 
and  with  his  fellow-believers.  He  who  does  not  wear  it  must  be 
refused  water  and  bread  by  the  members  of  the  community;  he 
who  wears  it  becomes  a  participator  in  the  merit  of  all  the  good 
deeds  performed  all  over  the  Zarathustrian  world  (Saddar  10  and 
46).  The  Kdstt  consists  ‘of  seventy-two  interwoven  filaments, 
and  should  three  times  circumvent  the  waist  . .  .  Each  of  the 
threads  is  equal  in  value  to  one  of  the  seventy-two  Hdhs  of  the 
Izashnfi;  each  of  the  twelve  threads  in  the  six  lesser  cords  is 
equal  in  value  to  the  dawfizdih  hamfiist .  .  each  of  the  lesser 
cords  is  equal  in  value  to  one  of  the  six  Gahanbfirs ;  each  of  the 
three  circumventions  of  the  loins  is  equal  in  value  to  hum  at,  good 
thought,  hukhat,  good  speech,  huaresta,  good  work ;  the  binding 
of  each  of  the  four  knots  upon  it  confers  pleasure  on  each  of  the 
four  elements,  fire,  air,  water,  and  the  earth’  (Edal  Daru,  apud 
Wilson,  The  Parsi  Religion  Unfolded,  p.  163). 

Another  piece  of  clothing  which  every  Parsi  is  enjoined  to  wear 
is  the  Sadara,  or  sacred  shirt,  a  muslin  shirt  with  short  sleeves, 
that  does  not  reach  lower  than  the  hips,  with  a  small  pocket  at  the 
opening  in  front  of  the  shirt,  the  so-called  giribdn  or  kissai 
karfa,  ‘  the  pocket  for  good  deeds/  The  faithful  man  must,  while 
putting  on  his  Sadara,  look  at  the  girt  bin  and  ask  himself  whether 
it  is  full  of  good  deeds. 

^  See  Introd.  Ill,  10.  Cf.  §  la. 

^  Doubtful.  The  Commentary  seems  to  understand  the  sentence 
as  follows:  ‘He  who  should  free  him  from  hell  would  thus  per- 

O  2 


Digitized  by 


196 


vendIdAd. 


11  (27).  ‘For  the  blessing  uttered  by  a  wicked, 
ungodly  Ashemaogha  does  not  go  past  the  mouth 
(of  the  blesser) ;  the  blessing  of  two  Ashemaoghas  * 
does  not  go  past  the  tongue  ;  the  blessing  of  three  * 
is  nothing;  the  blessing  of  four*  turns  to  self¬ 
cursing. 

1 2  (29).  *  Whosoever  should  give  to  a  wicked,  un¬ 
godly  Ashemaogha  either  some  Haoma  prepared,  or 
some  Myazda  consecrated  with  blessings,  does  no 
better  deed  than  if  he  should  lead  a  thousand  horse 
against  the  boroughs  of  the  worshippers  of  Mazda, 
and  should  slaughter  the  men  thereof,  and  drive  off 
the  cattle  as  plunder. 

*3(32)-  ‘Demand  of  me,  thou  upright  one!  of 
me,  who  am  the  Maker,  the  most  beneficent  of  all 
beings,  the  best  knowing,  the  most  pleased  in 
answering  what  is  asked  of  me ;  demand  of  me,  that 
thou  mayst  be  the  better,  that  thou  mayst  be  the 
happier.' 

II. 

14  (33)*  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda  :  ‘Who 
is  the  SraoshA-varez  *  of  Sraosha  ?  the  holy,  strong 
Sraosha,  who  is  Obedience  incarnate,  a  Sovereign 
with  an  astounding  weapon 

form  no  less  a  feat  than  if  he  should  cut  off  the  head  of  a  man  and 
then  make  him  alive  again.’ 

*  Perhaps  better :  ‘  The  second  . . . ,  the  third  . . . ,  the  fourth 
blessing  of  an  Ashemaogha.’ 

*  ‘  Who  is  he  who  sets  the  world  in  motion  ? '  (Comm.)  Cf. 
P-  57.  n.  3- 

’  Sraosha,  Srdsh,  the  Genius  of  Active  Piety.  He  first  tied 
the  Baresma,  sacrificed  to  Ahura,  and  sang  the  Githas.  Thrice 
in  each  day  and  each  night  he  descends  upon  the  earth  to  smite 
Angra  Mainyu  and  his  crew  of  demons.  With  his  club  uplifted  he 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


197 


15  (34).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  It  is  the  bird 
named  Par6dar^\  which  ill-speaking  people  call 
Kahrkatds^  O  holy  Zarathu^ra!  the  bird  that 
lifts  up  his  voice  against  the  mighty  Ushah*: 

16  (37).  “‘Arise,  O  men!  recite  the  Ashem  yaaf 
vahi^tem  that  smites  down  the  Da6vas^  Lo! 
here  is  B{ishySsta,  the  long-handed®,  coming  upon 
you,  who  lulls  to  sleep  again  the  whole  living  world, 
as  soon  as  it  has  awoke :  ‘  Sleep !  *  [she  says,]  ‘O  poor 
man  I  the  time  •  is  not  yet  come.'  ” 

17  (41).  ‘  “On  the  three  excellent  things  be  never 
intent,  namely,  good  thoughts,  good  words,  and  good 
deeds ;  on  the  three  abominable  things  be  ever 

protects  the  world  from  the  demons  of  the  night,  and  the  dead 
from  the  terrors  of  death  and  from  the  assaults  of  Angra  Main}H 
and  Ast6-vtd6tu.  It  is  through  a  sacrifice  performed  by  Ormazd, 
as  a  Zdit,  and  Sr6sh,  as  a  Rispf,  that  at  the  end  of  time  Ahriman 
will  be  for  ever  vanquished  and  brought  to  nought  (Yasna  LVII; 
Yt.  xr,  &c.) 

*  *  He  who  foreshows  the  coming  dawn  ;  the  cock/ 

*  ‘  When  he  is  not  called  so,  he  is  powerful '  (Comm.)  Cf.  Farg. 
XIII,  2,  6. 

‘  Ushah,  the  second  half  of  the  night,  from  midnight  to  the 
dawn. 

*  The  cock  is  ‘  the  drum  of  the  world/  As  crowing  in  the  dawn 
that  dazzles  away  the  fiends,  he  crows  away  the  demons :  ‘  The  cock 
was  created  to  fight  against  the  fiends  and  wizards ;  ...  he  is  with 
the  dog  an  ally  of  Sr6sh  against  demons’  (Bundahij  XIX).  ‘No 
demon  can  enter  a  house  in  which  there  is  a  cock ;  and,  above  all, 
should  this  bird  come  to  the  residence  of  a  demon,  and  move  his 
tongue  to  chaunt  the  praises  of  the  glorious  and  exalted  Creator, 
that  instant  the  evil  spirit  takes  to  flight '  (Mirkhond,  History  of  the 
Early  Kings  of  Persia,  translated  by  Shea,  p.  57 ;  cf.  Saddar  32,  and 
J.  Ovington,  A  Voyage  to  Suratt,  1696,  p.  371). 

‘  The  demon  of  sleep,  laziness,  procrastination.  She  lulls  back 
to  sleep  the  world  as  soon  as  awaked,  and  makes  the  faithful  forget 
in  slumber  the  hour  of  prayer. 

*  ‘  To  perform  thy  religious  duties'  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


198 


VENOtDAD. 


intent,  namely,  bad  thoughts,  bad  words,  and  bad 
deeds.” 

18  (43).  ‘  On  the  first  part  of  the  night,  Atar,  the 
son  of  Ahura  Mazda,  calls  the  master  of  the  house 
for  help,  saying : 

19  {43)'  ‘“Up!  arise,  thou  master  of  the  house  ! 
put  on  thy  girdle  on  thy  clothes,  wash  thy  hands, 
take  wood,  bring  it  unto  me,  and  let  me  bum  bright 
with  the  clean  wood,  carried  by  thy  well-washed 
hands  \  Here  comes  Azi  *,  made  by  the  Dadvas, 
who  consumes  me  and  wants  to  put  me  out  of  the 
world.” 

20  (46).  ‘  On  the  second  part  of  the  night,  Atar, 
the  son  of  Ahura  Mazda,  calls  the  husbandman  for 
help,  saying : 

21  (46).  ‘“Up!  arise,  thou  husbandman!  Put 
on  thy  girdle  on  thy  clothes,  wash  thy  hands,  take 
wood,  bring  it  unto  me,  and  let  me  burn  bright  with 
the  clean  wood,  carried  by  thy  well-washed  hands. 
Here  comes  Azi,  made  by  the  Daevas,  who  consumes 
me  and  wants  to  put  me  out  of  the  world.” 

22  (48).  ‘  On  the  third  part  of  the  night,  Atar, 
the  son  of  Ahura  Mazda,  calls  the  holy  Sraosha 
for  help,  saying :  “  Come  thou,  holy,  well-formed 
Sraosha,  [then  he  brings  unto  me  some  clean  wood 
with  his  well-washed  hands*.]  Here  comes  Azi, 
made  by  the  Daevas,  who  consumes  me  and  wants 
to  put  me  out  of  the  world.” 


*  The  Parsi,  as  soon  as  he  has  risen,  most  put  on  the  Kdstt, 
wash  his  hands,  and  put  wood  on  the  fire. 

*  Azi,  the  demon  of  avidity ;  he  extinguishes  the  fire,  while  he 
devours  the  wood. 

*  The  text  seems  to  be  corrupt :  it  must  probably  be  emended 
into  ‘  bring  into  me  . . .’ 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


199 


23  (sO*  ‘And  then  the  holy  Sraosha  wakes  up 
the  bird  named  Parddar^,  which  ill-speaking  people 
call  Kahrkatis,  and  the  bird  lifts  up  his  voice 
against  the  mighty  Ushah  : 

24  (52).  ‘  “  Arise,  O  men !  recite  the  Ashem  yarf 
vahijtem  and  the  Ndismi  da6v6\  Lo!  here  is 
Bftshyasta,  the  long-handed,  coming  upon  you,  who 
lulls  to  sleep  again  the  whole  living  world  as  soon 
as  it  has  awoke :  ‘  Sleep  !  ’  [she  says,]  ‘O  poor  man! 
the  time  is  not  yet  come.’  ” 

25  (52).  ‘  “  On  the  three  excellent  things  be  never 
intent,  namely,  good  thoughts,  good  words,  and  good 
deeds;  on  the  three  abominable  things  be  ever 
intent,  namely,  bad  thoughts,  bad  words,  and  bad 
deeds.” 

26  (53).  ‘  And  then  bed-fellows  address  one 
another :  “  Rise  up,  here  is  the  cock  calling  me 
up.”  Whichever  of  the  two  first  gets  up  shall 
first  enter  Paradise :  whichever  of  the  two  shall 
first,  with  well-washed  hands,  bring  clean  vrood  unto 
Atar,  the  son  of  Ahura  Mazda,  Atar,  well  pleased 
with  him  and  not  angry,  and  fed  as  it  required,  will 
thus  bless  him : 

27  (58).  ‘  “  May  herds  of  oxen  and  sons  accrue  to 
thee  :  may  thy  mind  be  master  of  its  vow,  may  thy 
soul  be  master  of  its  vow,  and  mayst  thou  live  on  in 
the  joy  of  thy  soul  all  the  nights  of  thy  life.” 

‘  This  is  the  blessing  which  Atar  speaks  unto  him 
who  brings  him  dry  wood,  well  examined  by  the  light 
of  the  day,  well  cleansed  with  godly  intent. 


*  The  prayer :  ‘  Righteousness  is  the  best  of  all  good  . . (the 
Ashem  vohft),  and  the  profession  of  faith :  ‘  I  scorn  the  Daevas . . 
(Yasna  XII,  i). 


Digitized  by 


200 


vendJdAd. 


r 


28  (64).  ‘  And  whosoever  will  kindly  and  piously 
present  one  of  the  faithful  with  a  pair  of  these  my 
Parddarj  birds,  a  male  and  a  female,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu5tra !  it  is  as  though  he  had  given  *  a  house 
with  a  hundred  columns,  a  thpusand  beams,  ten  thou¬ 
sand  large  windows,  ten  thousand  small  windows. 

29  (67).  ‘  And  whosoever  shall  give  meat  to  one 
of  the  faithful,  as  much  of  it  as  the  body  of  this  Pard- 
dari  bird  of  mine,  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  need  not  interro¬ 
gate  him  twice ;  he  shall  directly  go  to  Paradise.’ 

III. 

30  (70).  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^ :  ‘  O  thou  wretched,  worth¬ 
less  Dru^ !  Thou  then,  alone  in  the  material  world, 
dost  bear  offspring  without  any  male  coming  unto 
thee?’ 

31  (74).  The  Dru^  demon  answered :  ‘  O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha !  It  is  not  so,  nor  do  I,  alone 
in  the  material  world,  bear  offspring  without  any 
male  coming  unto  me. 

32  (77)*  ‘  For  there  are  four  males  of  mine ;  and 
they  make  me  conceive  progeny  as  other  males 
make  their  females  conceive  by  their  seed  *.’ 

33  (78)'  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^f :  ‘  O  thou  wretched,  worth¬ 
less  Dru^!  Who  is  the  firgt  of  those  males  of 
thine?’ 

34  (79)*  The  Dru^  demon  answered :  ‘  O  holy. 


’  ‘  In  the  day  of  recompense  ’  (Comm.) ;  he  shall  be  rewarded  as 
though  he  had  given  a  house,  &c. ...  be  shall  receive  such  a  house 
in  Paradise. 

'  Sin  makes  the  Dntf  mother  of  a  spontaneous  progeny,  as  the 
sinner  is  ‘  the  brood  of  the  Dri)^’  (Yasna  LXI,  10). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


201 


well-formed  Sraosha !  He  is  the  first  of  my  males 
who,  being  entreated  by  one  of  the  faithful,  does  not 
give  him  anything,  be  it  ever  so  little,  of  the  riches 
he  has  treasured  up 

35  (82).  ‘  That  man  makes  me  conceive  progeny 
as  other  males  make  their  females  conceive  by  their 
seed’ 

36  (83).  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^ :  ‘  O  thou  wretched,  worth¬ 
less  Dru^ !  What  is  the  thing  that  can  undo  that  ?  ’ 

37  (84).  The  Dru^  demon  answered :  ‘  O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha !  This  is  the  thing  that  undoes 
it,  namely,  when  a  man  unasked,  kindly  and  piously, 
g^ves  to  one  of  the  faithful  something,  be  it  ever 
so  little,  of  the  riches  he  has  treasured  up. 

38  (87).  ‘  He  does  thereby  as  thoroughly  destroy 
the  fruit  of  my  womb  as  a  four-footed  wolf  does,  who 
tears  the  child  out  of  a  mother’s  womb.’ 

39  (88).  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  down  his  club 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^:  ‘  O  thou  wretched,  worthless 
Dru^l  Who  is  the  second  of  those  males  of  thine  ?  ’ 

40  (89).  The  Dru^  demon  answered :  ‘  O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha  !  He  is  the  second  of  my  males 
who,  making  water,  lets  it  fall  along  the  upper  fore¬ 
part  of  his  foot 

41  (92).  ‘  That  man  makes  me  conceive  progeny 
as  other  males  make  their  females  conceive  by  their 
seed.’ 

42  (93).  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^ :  ‘  O  thou  wretched, 
worthless  Dru^ !  What  is  the  thing  that  can  undo 
that  ? ’ 


>  Cf.  Farg.  Ill,  34. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


202 


vendIdAd. 


43  (94).  The  Dnif  demon  answered ;  ‘  O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha !  This  is  the  thing  that  undoes 
it,  namely,  when  the  man  rising  up  *  and  stepping 
three  steps  further  off,  shall  say  three  Ahuna- 
Vairya*,  two  humatanSm^  three  hukhshathrd- 
temSm*  and  then  chant  the  Ah-una-Vairya*  and 
offer  up  one  Y6«h6  hitSm*. 

44  (98).  ‘  He  does  thereby  as  thoroughly  destroy 
the  fruit  of  my  womb  as  a  four-footed  wolf  does,  who 
tears  the  child  out  of  a  mother’s  womb.’ 

45  (99)*  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^ :  *  O  thou  wretched, 
worthless  Dru^!  Who  is  the  third  of  those  males 
of  thine  ?’ 

46  (100).  The  Dru^  demon  answered:  ‘O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha !  He  is  the  third  of  my  males 
who  during  his  sleep  emits  seed. 

47  (102).  ‘That  man  makes  me  conceive  progeny 
as  other  males  make  their  females  conceive  progeny 
by  their  seed.’ 

48  (103).  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dru^ :  ‘  O  thou  wretched, 
worthless  Dru^!  What  is  the  thing  that  can  undo 
that?’ 


'  ‘  Nec  stando  mingens  . . .  facOe  visitur  Persa '  (Amm.  Marc. 
XXIII,  6);  Ar<iiVtrif  XXIV;  Mainy6-i-khard  II,  39 ;  Saddar  56. 
Cf.  Manu  IV,  47  seq.,  and  Polack,  Persien  I,  67 :  ‘  Von  einem  in 
Paris  weilenden  Perser  hinterbrachte  man  dem  Kdnig,  um  seine 
Emancipation  und  Abtrttnnigkeit  vom  Gesetz  zu  beweisen,  dass 
er  Schweinefleisch  esse  und  stebend  die  Function  verrichte.’ 

*  See  Farg.  VIII,  19. 

’  Yasna  XXXV,  2 ;  one  of  the  Bir-imrAta  (Farg.  X,  4). 

*  Yasna  XXXV,  5 :  one  of  the  Thrif-dmrftta  (Farg.  X,  8). 

*  Making  four  Ahuna-Vairya  in  all ;  cf.  Farg.  X,  12. 

*  See  Yasna  XXI. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


203 


49  (104).  The  Dru^  demon  answered:  ‘O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha !  this  is  the  thing  that  undoes 
it,  namely,  if  the  man,  when  he  has  risen  from  sleep, 
shall  say  three  Ahuna-Vairya,  two  humatanSm, 
three  hukhshathrdtemSm,  and  then  chant  the 
Ahuna-Vairya  and  offer  up  one  Y^»h6  h&tSm^ 

50  (107).  ‘  He  does  thereby  as  thoroughly  destroy 
the  fruit  of  my  womb  as  a  four-footed  wolf  does 
who  tears  the  child  out  of  a  mother  s  womb.’ 

51  (108).  Then  he  shall  speak  unto  Spe«ta  Ar- 
maiti  ^  saying :  ‘  O  Spenta  Armaiti,  this  man  do 
I  deliver  unto  thee®;  this  man  deliver  thou  back 
unto  me,  against  the  happy  day  of  resurrection ; 
deliver  him  back  as  one  who  knows  the  GcLthas,  who 
knows  the  Yasna  *,  and  the  revealed  Law  *,  a  wise 
and  clever  man,  who  is  Obedience  incarnate. 

52  (112).  ‘Then  thou  shalt  call  his  name  “  Fire- 
creature,  Fire-seed,  Fire-offspring,  Fire-land,”  or  any 
name  wherein  is  the  word  Fire*.’ 

53  I3)'  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Dnif :  ‘  O  thou  wretched,  worth¬ 
less  Dru^!  Who  is  the  fourth  of  those  males  of 
thine  ?’ 

54  (114).  The  Dru/’ demon  answered:  ‘O  holy. 


'  See  §  43  and  notes. 

*  The  Genius  of  the  Earth  (cf.  Farg.  II,  10). 

*  In  the  same  way  as  she  received  the  seed  of  the  dying  Gayo- 
mart,  from  which  she  let  grow,  in  the  shape  of  a  plant,  the  first 
human  couple,  Mashya  and  Mashy&na  (Bund.  XV,  1-2). 

*  The  Yasna  Hapta»hditi. 

*  Literally,  ‘  the  answers  made  to  the  questions  (of  Zarathuftra).’ 

*  Atar,  the  Fire,  is  the  ideal  father  of  the  son  to  be  bom,  as 
Spenta  Armaiti,  the  Earth,  is  his  ideal  mother.  The  fire  is  con¬ 
sidered  male  (IMnkard,  apud  West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  II,  410)  and  (as 
ApSm  Napit)  has  made  and  shaped  man  (Yt.  XIX,  5  a). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


204 


vend!dAd. 


well-formed  Sraosha !  This  one  is  my  fourth  male 
who,  either  man  or  woman,  being  more  than  fifteen 
years  of  age,  walks  without  wearing  the  sacred  girdle 
and  the  sacred  shirt 

55(115).  ‘At  the  fourth  step  *  we  Daevas,  at  once, 
wither  him  even  to  the  tongue  and  the  marrow,  and 
he  goes  thenceforth  with  power  to  destroy  the  world 
of  Righteousness,  and  he  destroys  it  like  the  Ydtus 
and  the  Za»das 

56  (117).  The  holy  Sraosha,  letting  his  club  down 
upon  her,  asked  the  Drug' :  ‘  O  thou  wretched, 
worthless  Dnif,  what  is  the  thing  that  can  undo 
that  ?’ 

57  (118).  The  Dru^  demon  answered:  ‘O  holy, 
well-formed  Sraosha !  There  is  no  means  of 
undoing  it; 

58  (120).  ‘  When  a  man  or  a  woman,  being  more 
than  fifteen  years  of  age,  walks  without  wearing  the 
sacred  girdle  or  the  sacred  shirt 

59  (120).  ‘  At  the  fourth  step  we  Daevas,  at  once, 
wither  him  even  to  the  tongue  and  the  marrow,  and 
he  goes  thenceforth  with  power  to  destroy  the  world 
of  Righteousness,  and  he  destroys  it  like  the  Yitus 
and  the  Za»das.’ 

IV. 

60  (122).  Demand  of  me,  thou  upright  one!  of 
me  who  am  the  Maker,  the  most  beneficent  of  all 


*  The  Kdstt  and  the  Sadara;  see  above,  p.  195,  n.  3.  It  is 
the  sin  known  as  kushd</  duv&rixn!  (Mainyd-i-khard  II,  35;  Ardi 
VtiifXXV,  6). 

’  ‘Going  three  steps  without  Kdstt  is  only  a  three  Sraoshd- 
^arana  sin ;  from  the  fourth  step,  it  is  a  tan&fdhr  sin'  (Comm.) 

*  The  Ydt  u  is  a  sorcerer ;  the  Za»da  is  an  apostle  of  Ahriman. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


205 


beings,  the  best  knowing,  the  most  pleased  in 
answering  what  is  asked  of  me;  demand  of  me 
that  thou  mayst  be  the  better,  that  thou  mayst  be 
the  happier. 

61  (123).  Zarathujtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda  :  ‘Who 
gfrieves  thee  with  the  sorest  grief?  Who  pains  thee 
with  the  sorest  pain  ?’ 

62  (i  24).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  It  is  the  (Pahi^, 
O  Spitama  Zarathujtra !  who  mixes  in  her  the  seed 
of  the  faithful  and  the  unfaithful,  of  the  worshippers 
of  Mazda  and  the  worshippers  of  the  Dadvas,  of  the 
wicked  and  the  righteous  *. 

63  (125).  ‘Her  look  dries  up  one-third  of  the 
mighty  floods  that  run  from  the  mountains,  O 
ZarathuJtra;  her  look  withers  one -third  of  the 
beautiful,  golden-hued,  growing  plants,  O  Zara- 
thu.rtra ; 

64  (127).  ‘Her  look  withers  one-third  of  the 
streng^  of  Spe«ta  Armaiti  ® ;  and  her  touch  withers 
in  the  faithful  one -third  of  his  good  thoughts,  of 
his  good  words,  of  his  good  deeds,  one- third  of 
his  strengfth,  of  his  victorious  power,  and  of  his 
holiness  *. 

65  (129).  ‘Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  O  Spitama 
Zarathui^tra !  such  creatures  ought  to  be  killed  even 


*  The  courtezan,  as  an  incarnation  of  the  female  demon  ^hi. 

*  ‘  [Whether  she  gives  up  her  body  to  the  faithful  or  to  the  un¬ 
faithful],  there  is  no  difference ;  when  she  has  been  with  three  men, 
she  is  guilty  of  death  ’  (Comm.) 

*  The  earth. 

*  ‘  If  a  (rahi  (courtezan)  look  at  running  waters,  they  fall ;  if  at 
trees,  they  are  stunted ;  if  she  converse  with  a  pious  man,  his  intel¬ 
ligence  and  his  holiness  are  withered  by  it  ’  (Saddar  67).  Cf.  Manu 
IV,  40  seq. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


206 


vend!dAd. 


more  than  gliding  snakes^,  than  howling  wolves, 
than  the  wild  she-wolf  that  falls  upon  the  fold,  or 
than  the  she-frog  that  falls  upon  the  waters  with  her 
thousandfold  brood.’ 


V. 

66  (133).  Demand  of  me,  thou  upright  one!  of 
me  who  am  the  Maker,  the  most  beneficent  of  all 
beings,  the  best  knowing,  the  most  pleased  in 
answering  what  is  asked  of  me ;  demand  of  me  that 
thou  mayst  be  the  better,  that  thou  mayst  be  the 
happier. 

67-68  (133).  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda: 
‘  If  a  man  shall  come  unto  a  woman  who  has  the 
whites  or  sees  blood,  and  he  does  so  wittingly  and 
knowingly*,  and  she  allows  it  wilfully,  wittingly, 
and  knowingly,  what  is  the  atonement  for  it,  what  is 
the  penalty  that  he  shall  pay  to  atone  for  the  deed 
they  have  done  ?’ 

69  (1 36).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  If  a  man 
shall  come  unto  a  woman  who  has  the  whites  or 
sees  blood,  and  he  does  so  wittingly  and  know- 
ingly,  and  she  allows  it  wilfully,  wittingly,  and 
knowingly ; 

70  (137).  ‘  He  shall  slay  a  thousand  head  of  small 
cattle;  he  shall  godly  and  piously  offer  up  to  the 


'  It  is  written  in  the  law  (the  Avesta) :  ‘  O  Zamut  Isfitamin  1  with 
regard  to  woman,  1  say  to  thee  that  any  woman  that  has  given  np 
her  body  to  two  men  in  one  day  is  sooner  to  be  killed  than  a  wolf, 
a  lion,  or  a  snake :  any  one  who  kills  such  a  woman  will  gain  as 
much  merit  by  it  as  if  he  had  provided  with  wood  a  thousand  fire- 
temples,  or  destroyed  the  dens  of  adders,  scorpions,  lions,  wolves, 
or  snakes  ’  (Old  Rav.  59  b). 

*  ‘  Knowing  her  state  and  knowing  that  it  is  a  sin  ’  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XVIII. 


207 


fire’  the  entrails®  thereof  together  with  Zaothra- 
libations  * ;  he  shall  bring  the  shoulder  bones  to  the 
Good  Waters*. 

71  (140).  ‘  He  shall  godly  and  piously  bring  unto 
the  fire  a  thousand  loads  of  soft  wood,  of  Urvdsna, 
Vohft-gaona,  Vohd-kereti,  Hadh4-na6pata,  or  of  any 
sweet-scented  plant  *. 

72  (142).  ‘  He  shall  tie  and  consecrate  a  thousand 
bundles  of  Baresma ;  he  shall  godly  and  piously  offer 
up  to  the  Good  Waters  a  thousand  Zaothra-libations, 
together  with  the  Haoma  and  the  milk,  cleanly  pre¬ 
pared  and  well  strained, — cleanly  prepared  and  well 
strained  by  a  pious  man,  and  mixed  with  the  roots  of 
the  tree  known  as  Hadh4-na6pata®. 

73  (144).  ‘  He  shall  kill  a  thousand  snakes  of  those 
that  go  upon  the  belly,  two  thousand  of  the  other 
kind;  he  shall  kill  a  thousand  land-frogs  and  two 
thousand  water-frogs  ;  he  shall  kill  a  thousand  corn¬ 
carrying  ants  and  two  thousand  of  the  other  kind 

’  To  the  Bahr&m  fire. 

*  The  dmentum  (afsman)  or  epipleon.  Catullus,  describing 
the  sacrifice  of  the  Magi,  has  (LXXXIX) ; 

‘  Accepto  veneretur  carmine  divos 

Omentum  in  flamraa  pingue  liquefaciens.’ 

Strabo  XV,  1 3  :  rov  inbrXov  ri  fiutfAv  TtOtmri,  \iyowri  rutr,  Arl  ri 
wvp.  ‘  Ascending  six  steps  they  showed  me  in  a  Room  adjoining 
to  the  temple,  their  Fire  which  they  fed  with  Wood,  and  sometimes 
Bum  on  it  the  Fat  of  the  Sheep’s  Tail.’  A  Voyage  Round  the 
World,  Dr.  J.  F.  Gemelli,  1698. 

*  The  ceremony  here  described  is  nearly  fallen  into  desuetude : 
it  is  the  so-called  Zdhr-itash  (zaothra  for  the  fire),  which  is  for 
the  fire  what  the  Zdhr>fib  is  for  the  waters. 

*  This  is  the  Zdhr-fib.  According  to  the  Shfiyast  (XI,  4), 
when  an  animal  is  immolated,  the  heart  is  offered  to  the  fire  and 
the  shoulder  is  offered  to  the  waters. 

»  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  3  seq. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  4,  and  p.  173,  n.  4.  »  Cf.  Farg.  XIV,  5. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


2o8 


vendIdAd. 


74(147).  ‘He  shall  throw  thirty  bridges  over 
canals ;  he  shall  undergo  a  thousand  stripes  with 
the  Aspah^-artra,  a  thousand  stripes  with  the 
Sraoshd-zfcirana  \ 

75  (i49)'  ‘  This  is  the  atonement,  this  is  the 
penalty  that  he  shall  pay  to  atone  for  the  deed 
that  he  has  done. 

76  (150).  ‘If  he  shall  pay  it,  he  makes  himself 
a  viaticum  into  the  world  of  the  holy  ones ;  if  he 
shall  not  pay  it,  he  makes  himself  a  viaticum  into 
the  world  of  the  wicked,  into  that  world,  made  of 
darkness,  the  offspring  of  darkness,  which  is  Dark¬ 
ness’  self*.’ 


Fargard  XIX. 

I.  Angra  Mainyu  sends  the  demon  Bfiiti  to  kill  Zarathiutra: 
Zarathu^a  sings  aloud  the  Ahuna-Vair)'a,  and  the  demon  flies 
away,  confounded  by  the  sacred  words  and  by  the  Glory  of  Zara- 
thurtra  (§§  1-3). 

I  a.  Angra  Mainyu  himself  attacks  hhn  and  propounds  riddles  to  be 
solved  under  pain  of  death.  The  Prophet  rejects  him  with  heavenly 
stones,  given  by  Ahura,  and  announces  to  him  that  he  will  destroy  his 
creation.  The  demon  promises  him  the  empire  of  the  world  if  he 
adores  him,  as  his  ancestors  have  done,  and  abjures  the  religion  of 
Mazda.  Zarathurtra  rejects  his  offers  scornfully.  He  announces 
he  will  destroy  him  with  the  arms  given  by  Ahura,  namely,  the 
sacrificial  implements  and  the  sacred  words.  Then  he  recites  the 
Ta^  thwt  peresfi,  that  is  to  say  the  Gfitha  in  which  he  asks  Ahura 
for  instruction  on  all  the  mysteries  of  the  material  and  spiritual 
world  (§§  4-io)- 

The  rest  of  the  Fargard  contains  specimens  of  the  several  ques¬ 
tions  asked  by  Zarathurtra  and  the  answers  given  by  Ahura.  It  is 
an  abridgement  of  the  Revelation  (cf.  Yt.  XXIV). 


'  Five  tanfifiilhrs,  that  is  six  thousand  dirhems. 
*  Cf.  Farg.  V,  62. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


209 


II  ( I  i-i 7).  How  to  destroy  the  uncleanness  born  from  a  contact 
with  the  dead  ? — By  invoking  the  Mazdean  Religion.  A  series  of 
invocations  taught  by  Ahura  and  developed  by  Zarathurtra 
(15-16). 

III  (18-19).  How  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  creation? — 
By  the  rites  of  the  Baresman. 

IV  (20-25).  How  to  purify  man  and  clothes  defiled  by  the 
dead  ? — With  gdm6z,  water,  and  perfume. 

V  (26-34).  On  the  remuneration  of  deeds  after  death;  on  the 
fate  of  the  wicked  and  the  righteous ;  the  JTinwzd  bridge. 

II  a  (34-42).  Another  series  of  invocations. 

VI  (43-47).  The  demons,  dismayed  by  the  birth  of  the  Prophet, 
rush  back  into  hell. 

As  may  be  seen  from  the  preceding  analysis,  the  essential  part 
of  this  Fargard  are  sections  I  and  VI,  the  rest  being  an  indefinite 
development.  It  appears  also  from  section  VI,  that  the  attacks  of 
Bfiid  and  Angra  Mainyu  against  Zarathuxtra  and  the  attempt  to 
seduce  him  are  supposed  to  take  place  at  the  moment  when  he  was 
bom,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  the  Nask  Varsht- 
mdnsar  (West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  IV,  226  seq.) 

L 

I.  From  the  region  of  the  north,  from  the  regions 
of  the  north  ^  forth  rushed  Angra  Mainyu,  the  deadly, 
the  Da^va  of  the  Daevas*.  And  thus  spake  the 
evil-doer  Angra  Mainyu,  the  deadly  :  ‘  Dnif,  rush 
down  and  kill  him,’  O  holy  Zarathurtra !  The 
Dru^  came  rushing  along,  the  demon  BCliti®,  who 
is  deceiving,  unseen  deaths 

2  (5).  Zarathurtra  chanted  aloud  the  Ahuna- 


*  From  hell;  cf.  p.  76,  n.  i. 

*  ‘  The  fiend  of  fiends,'  the  arch-fiend. 

*  Bfiiti  is  identified  by  the  Greater  Bundahish  with  the  B  fit,  the 
idol,  worshipped  by  Bfiddsp  (a  corruption  of  Bodhisattva).  Bfiiti 
would  be  therefore  a  personification  of  Buddhism,  which  was 
flourishing  in  Eastern  Iran  in  the  two  centuries  before  and  after 
Christ.  Bfiidhi  (Farg.  XI,  9)  may  be  another  and  more  correct 
pronunciation  of  Bodhi. 

*  Idolatry  (cf.  note  3)  being  the  death  of  the  soul. 

[4]  P 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


210 


vendIdAd. 


Vairya  ’ ;  ‘  The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law  of 
righteousness.  The  gifts  of  Vohu-man6  to  the 
deeds  done  in  this  world  for  Mazda.  He  who 
relieves  the  poor  makes  Ahura  king.’ 

He  offered  the  sacrifice  to  the  good  waters  of  the 
good  DSitya*!  He  recited  the  profession  of  the 
worshippers  of  Mazda®! 

The  Dru^  dismayed,  rushed  away,  the  demon 
Bhiti,  who  is  deceiving,  unseen  death. 

3  (7).  And  the  Dru^  said  unto  Angra  Mainyu : 

‘  Thou,  tormenter,  Angra  Mainyu  I  I  see  no  way  to 
kill  Spitama  Zarathu^tra,  so  great  is  the  glory  of 
the  holy  Zarathurtra.’ 

Zarathurtra  saw  (all  this)  within  his  soul :  ‘  The 
wicked,  the  evil-doing  Daevas  (thought  he)  take 
counsel  together  for  my  death.’ 

I  a. 

4(11).  Up  started  Zarathu.ftra,  forward  went 
Zarathu.ftra,  unabated  by  Akem-man6  *,  by  the 
hardness  of  his  malignant  riddles*;  he  went 
swinging  stones  in  his  hand,  stones  as  big  as  a 
house®,  which  he  obtained  from  the  Maker,  Ahura 
Mazda,  he  the  holy  Zarathurtra. 

’  See  above,  p.  100,  n.  2. 

•  The  river  in  Airyana  Va^6 ;  see  Farg.  I,  3. 

•  The  Fravarinfi  (Yasna  XI,  16).  *  See  Farg,  X,  10,  n.  i. 

'  This  is  a  fragment  of  an  old  legend  in  which  Zarathurtra  and 

Angra  Mainyu  played  respectively  the  parts  of  Oedipns  and  the 
Sphinx.  Cf.  Yt.  V,  8i,  where  the  same  legend  is  told  in  nearly 
the  same  terms  of  the  sorcerer  Akhtya  and  Ydirta  Fryananim. 

•  The  Commentary  has,  ‘  Some  say,  those  stones  are  the  Ahuna- 
Vairya.’  If  one  keeps  in  mind  how  much  the  Musulman  legend  of 
Ibrahim  owes  to  the  legend  of  Zoroaster,  one  may  easily  admit 
that  this  passage  in  our  text  is  the  origin  of  the  story  of  how  Iblis 
tempted  Ibrahim,  and  was  pelted  away,  whence  he  was  named 
‘  the  stoned  One  ’  (ar-ragimfi). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


21 1 


‘  Whereat  on  this  wide,  round  earth,  whose  ends 
lie  afar,  whereat  dost  thou  swing  (those  stones), 
thou  who  standest  by  the  upper  bank  of  the  river 
Dare^  \  in  the  mansion  of  Pouru^spa  ^  ?  * 

5(16).  Thus  Zarathu^tra  answered  Angra  Mainyu  : 
*  O  evil-doer,  Angra  Mainyu !  I  will  smite  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  the  Da^va ;  I  will  smite  the  Nasu,  a  creature 
of  the  Da^va ;  I  will  smite  the  Pairika  Knathaiti  ^ 
till  the  victorious  Saoshya^t  come  up  to  life  *  out  of 
the  lake  KSsava  ®,  from  the  region  of  the  dawn,  from 
the  regions  of  the  dawn.' 

6  (20).  Again  to  him  said  the  Maker  of  the  evil 
world,  Angra  Mainyu  :  ‘  Do  not  destroy  my  creatures, 
O  holy  Zarathu^tra !  Thou  art  the  son  of  Pouru- 
• ;  by  thy  mother  I  was  invoked  Renounce 
the  good  Religion  of  the  worshippers  of  Mazda,  and 
thou  shalt  gain  such  a  boon  as  Vadhaghna  ®  gained, 
the  ruler  of  the  nations.' 


*  ‘  The  Diriga  is  the  chief  of  the  rivers,  because  the  house  of 
Zartftsht's  father  stood  on  its  bank  and  Zarthsht  was  born  there ' 
(Bund.  XXIV,  15). 

*  The  father  of  Zarathurtra. 

*  The  incarnation  of  idolatry;  cf.  Farg.  I,  10. 

*  The  unborn  son  of  Zoroaster,  who,  at  the  end  of  time,  will 
destroy  Ahriman  and  bring  about  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
See  Yt.  XIII,  62  ;  XIX,  92,  94  seq. 

®  The  Zarah  sea  in  Saistin.  Cf.  Yt.  XV,  66. 

*  ‘  I  know  thee  *  (Comm.) 

^  The  Commentary  has,  *  Some  explain  thus :  Thy  forefathers 
worshipped  me:  worship  me  also.'  Zoroaster's  forefathers  must 
naturally  have  followed  a  false  religion,  since  he  announces  the 
true  one. 

*  Asi  Dah$ka  or  Zohdk,  who,  as  a  legendary  king,  is  said  to 
have  ruled  the  world  for  a  thousand  years.  Cf.  Mindkhard  LVII, 
24-25 :  '  Ahriman  shouted  to  Zarathsht  thus :  If  thou  desist  from 
this  good  religion  of  the  Mazda-worshippers,  then  I  will  give  thee 

P  2 


Digitized  by 


212 


vendIdAd. 


7  (24).  Spitama  Zarathu^tra  said  in  answer :  ‘  No ! 
never  will  I  renounce  the  good  Religion  of  the  wor¬ 
shippers  of  Mazda,  either  for  body  or  life,  though 
they  should  tear  away  the  breath !  ’ 

8  (27).  Again  to  him  said  the  Maker  of  the  evil 
world,  Angara  Mainyu  :  ‘  By  whose  Word  wilt  thou 
strike,  by  whose  Word  wilt  thou  repel,  by  whose 
weapon  will  the  good  creatures  (strike  and  repel) 
my  creation,  who  am  Angra  Mainyu  ?  ’ 

9  (29).  Spitama  Zarathiutra  said  in  answer ;  ‘  The 
sacred  mortar,  the  sacred  cups,  the  Haoma,  the 
Word  taught  by  Mazda,  these  are  my  weapons, 
my  best  weapons !  By  this  Word  will  I  strike, 
by  this  Word  will  I  repel,  by  this  weapon  will  the 
good  creatures  (strike  and  repel  thee),  O  evil-doer, 
Angra  Mainyu!  The  Good  Spirit  made  the  crea¬ 
tion  ^ ;  he  made  it  in  the  boundless  Time.  The 
Amesha-Spe«tas  made  the  creation,  the  good,  the 
wise  Sovereigns.’ 

10  (35).  Zarathu^ra  chanted  aloud  the  Ahuna- 
Vairya. 

The  holy  Zarathu^tra  said  aloud:  ‘This  I  ask 
thee :  teach  me  the  truth,  O  Lord 

II. 

1 1  (37).  Zarathu.ftra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  O 
Ahura  Mazda,  most  beneficent  spirit.  Maker  of  the 


a  thousand  years'  dominion  of  the  worldly  existence,  as  was  given 
to  the  Vadakin  monarch  Dahik  "  ’  (West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  III,  103). 

'  The  first  duty  of  every  good  Mazda- worshipper  is  to  think  of 
Ormazd  as  the  creator,  and  of  Ahriman  as  the  destroyer  (Min6- 
khard  II,  9). 

*  This  verse  is  the  beginning  of  the  Ta</  thwd  peresd  G4tha 
(Yasna  XLIV) ;  cf.  the  Introduction  to  the  Fargard. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


213 


material  world,  thou  Holy  One !  [he  was  sitting  by 
the  upper  bank  of  the  Dar^a  before  Ahura  Mazda, 
before  the  good  Vohu-man6,.  before  Asha  Vahirta, 
Khshathra  Vairya,  and  Spe»ta  Armaiti ;] 

12  (39).  *  How  shall  I  free  the  world  from  that 
Dru^,  from  that  evil-doer,  Angra  Mainyu  ?  How 
shall  I  drive  away  direct  defilement  ?  How  indirect 
defilement  ?  How  shall  I  drive  the  Nasu  from  the 
house  of  the  worshippers  of  Mazda  ?  How  shall 
I  cleanse  the  faithful  man  ?  How  shall  I  cleanse 
the  faithful  woman  ?  ’ 

13(42).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Invoke,  O 
Zarathu.rtra !  the  good  Religion  of  Mazda. 

‘  Invoke,  O  Zarathu^tra !  though  thou  see  them 
not,  the  Amesha-Spe»tas  who  rule  over  the  seven 
Karsh vares  of  the  earth*. 

‘  Invoke,  O  Zarathu^tra !  the  sovereign  Heaven, 
the  boundless  Time®,  and  Vayu^,  whose  action  is 
most  high. 

‘  Invoke,  O  Zarathu^ra !  the  powerful  Wind, 
made  by  Mazda;  and  Spe«ta  [Armaiti]*,  the  fair 
daughter  of  Ahura  Mazda. 

14  (46).  ‘Invoke,  O  Zarathu^ra!  my  Fravashi®, 
who  am  Ahura  Mazda,  the  greatest,  the  best,  the 
fairest  of  all  beings,  the  most  solid,  the  most  intel¬ 
ligent,  the  best  shapen,  the  highest  in  holiness,  and 
whose  soul  is  the  holy  Word  ! 

*  See  p.  211,  note  i.  •  See  §  39. 

*  By  contradistinction  to  the  duration  of  the  world,  which  is 
limited  to  12,000  years  (Bund.  XXXIV,  i). 

*  The  Genius  of  Destiny ;  cf.  Farg.  V,  9. 

*  The  fourth  Amesha-Spe»ta,  who  in  her  spiritual  character  is 
an  incarnation  of  pious  humility  and  in  her  material  character 
the  Genius  of  the  Earth ;  cf.  Farg.  II,  10. 

'  On  the  Fravashis,  see  Yt.  XIII.  '  Cf.  Yasna  I,  i. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


214 


vend!dAd. 


‘  Invoke,  O  Zarathustra !  this  creation  of  mine, 
who  am  Ahura  Mazda.’ 

15  (50).  Zarathurtra  imitated  my  words  from  me, 
(and  said) :  ‘  I  invoke  the  holy  creation  of  Ahura 
Mazda. 

‘  I  invoke  Mithra  *,  the  lord  of  the  rolling  country¬ 
side,  a  god  armed  with  beautiful  weapons,  with  the 
most  glorious  of  all  weapons,  with  the  most  vic¬ 
torious  of  all  weapons. 

‘  I  invoke  the  holy,  well-formed  Sraosha  *,  who 
wields  a  club  in  his  hand,  to  bear  upon  the  heads 
of  the  fiends  ®. 

16  (54).  ‘  I  invoke  the  most  glorious  Holy  Word. 

‘  I  invoke  the  sovereign  Heaven,  the  boundless 
Time,  and  Vayu,  whose  action  is  most  high. 

‘  I  invoke  the  mighty  Wind,  made  by  Mazda,  and 
Spe»ta  (Armaiti),  the  fair  daughter  of  Ahiira  Mazda. 

‘  I  invoke  the  good  Religioa  of  Mazda,  the  fiend- 
destroying  Law  of  Zarathurtra.’ 

III. 

17(58).  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda:  ‘O 
Maker  of  the  good  world,  Ahura  Mazda!  With 
what  manner  of  sacrifice  shall  I  worship,  with  what 
manner  of  sacrifice  shall  I  make  people  worship  this 
creation  of  Ahura  Mazda  *  ?  ’ 

18  (60).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘  Go,  O  Spitama 


*  See  p.  23,  n.  i, 

*  See  Farg.  XVIII,  14,  note. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  XVIII,  22  seq. ;  Yasna  LVII,  19  seq.;  Yasht  XI. 

*  The  sacrifice  intended  is  a  sacrifice  to  nature.  The  Bares- 
man,  as  representative  of  the  vegetal  nature,  receives  the  zaothra- 
libations,  which  are  representative  of  the  fertilizing  rains. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


215 


Zarathu^ra !  towards  the  high-growing  trees  \  and 
before  one  of  them  that  is  beautiful,  high-growing, 
and  mighty,  say  thou  these  words :  “  Hail  to  thee ! 
O  good,  holy  tree,  made  by  Mazda!  Ashem 
vohu 

19(63).  ‘[The  priest]  shall  cut  off  a  twig  of 
Baresma,  long  as  an  a6sha,  thick  as  a  yava  \ 
The  faithful  one,  holding  it  in  his  left  hand, 
shall  keep  his  eyes  upon  it  without  ceasing  \  whilst 
he  is  offering  up  to  Ahura  Mazda  and  to  the 
Amesha-Spe^^tas,  the  high  and  beautiful  golden 
Haomas,  and  Good  Thought  and  the  good  R&ta®, 
made  by  Mazda,  holy  and  excellent' 

IV, 

20  (67),  Zarathu5tra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  O  thou, 
all-knowing  Ahura  Mazda!  thou  art  never  asleep, 
never  intoxicated,  thou  Ahura  Mazda!  Vohu-man6® 


*  The  tree,  whatever  it  is,  from  which  the  Baresma  is  taken. 
See  p.  22,  n.  3. 

*  See  §  22. 

*  Perhaps :  ‘  long  as  a  ploughshare,  thick  as  a  barleycorn.’  Cf. 
the  English  system  of  measures,  in  which  three  barleycorns = one 
inch. — Cf.  Nirangistdn  90. 

*  The  Parsis  are  recommended  to  keep  their  eyes  on  the  Baresma 
during  the  sacrifice  :  *  A  man  is  offering  the  Darfin,  he  has  said  all 
the  required  Avesta,  but  he  has  not  looked  at  the  Baresma :  what 
is  the  rule  ?  It  would  have  been  better  if  he  had  looked  at  it : 
however  he  may  proceed  to  the  meal'  (Old  Rav.  97b).  Cf. 
Tahmuras'  Fragments,  XXX-XXXI. 

*  Rdta  impersonates  the  liberalities  done  by  men  to  God  (as 
offerings)  and  by  God  to  men  (as  riches,  &c.) 

*  Vohu-man6  is  often  used  as  a  designation  of  the  faithful  one, 
literally,  ‘  the  good-minded  ; '  this  is  the  meaning  which  is  given  to 
it  in  this  passage  by  the  Commentary,  and  it  certainly  belongs 
to  it  in  the  second  part  of  §  25 ;  but  in  the  first  part  of  the  same 
clause  it  is  translated  ‘  clothes,’  a  meaning  which  is  not  unlikely 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


216 


vendIdAd. 


gets  directly  defiled :  Vohu-mand  gets  indirectly 
defiled ;  the  Daevas  defile  him  from  the  bodies 
smitten  by  the  Daevas  * :  let  Vohu-mand  be  made 
clean.’ 

2 1  (70).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Thou  shalt 
take  some  gdmdz  from  a  bull  ungelded  and  such  as 
the  law  requires  it  *.  Thou  shalt  take  the  man  who 
is  to  be  cleansed  to  the  field  made  by  Ahura  ®  and 
the  man  that  is  to  cleanse  him  shall  draw  the 
furrows  *. 

22  (73).  ‘  He  shall  recite  a  hundred  Ashem 
vohu:  “Holiness  is  the  best  of  all  good:  it  is 
also  happiness.  Happy  the  man  who  is  holy  with 
perfect  holiness !  ” 

‘He  shall  chant  two  hundred  Ahuna-Vairya : 
“  The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  law  of  righteousness. 
The  gifts  of  Vohu-mand  to  the  deeds  done  in  this 
world  for  Mazda !  He  who  relieves  the  poor  makes 
Ahura  king.’’ 

‘  He  shall  wash  himself  four  times  with  the 


in  itself,  as  Vobu-mand,  being  the  Amshaspand  of  cattle,  may 
designate,  and  in  fact  did  designate,  the  skins  of  cattle  and  leather 
(Comm,  ad  Farg.  XVIII,  2).  On  the  whole  the  description  in 
the  text  applies  to  the  cleansing  both  of  the  man  and  of  the 
clothes,  and  Vohu-mand  sometimes  means  the  one,  and  sometimes 
the  other. — From  the  first  meaning  is  derived  the  modem  use  of 
V&hman,  ‘  Such  a  one,'  ‘  N.' 

*  From  dead  bodies. 

*  The  so-called  Varasid;  *it  must  be  of  a  white  colour;  if 
a  single  hair  on  its  body  be  found  other  than  white,  the  animal 
is  rejected  as  unfit  for  the  purpose’  (SorSbji  Kivasji  Khambitd, 
in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  VII,  180).  On  the  preparation  of  the 
gdmdz,  see  Wilson,  Farsi  Religion  Unfolded,  pp.  434-435. 

'  The  place  of  the  cleansing,  the  Barashnfim-gih  (see  Farg. 
IX,  3). 

*  See  Farg.  IX,  10. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


217 


gdmiz  from  the  ox,  and  twice  with  the  water  made 
by  Mazda*. 

23  (76).  ‘  Thus  Vohu-man6  shall  be  made  clean, 
and  clean  shall  be  the  man.  The  man  shall  take  up 
Vohu-man6  *  with  the  left  arm  and  the  right,  with 
the  right  arm  and  the  left :  and  thou  shalt  lay  down 
Vohu-man6  under  the  mighty  light  of  the  heavens, 
by  the  light  of  the  stars  made  by  the  gods,  until 
nine  nights  have  passed  away  ®. 

24  (80).  ‘  When  nine  nights  have  passed  away, 
thou  shalt  bring  libations  unto  the  fire,  thou  shalt 
bring  hard  wood  unto  the  fire,  thou  shalt  bring 
incense  of  Vohfi-gaona  unto  the  fire,  and  thou 
shalt  perfume  Vohu-man6  therewith. 

25  (82).  ‘  Thus  shall  Vohu-man6  be  made  clean, 
and  clean  shall  be  the  man^  He  shall  take  up 
Vohu-mand  with  the  right  arm  and  the  left,  with 
the  left  arm  and  the  right,  and  Vohu-man6  ®  shall 
say  aloud :  “  Glory  be  to  Ahura  Mazda  !  Glory  be 
to  the  Amesha-Spe»tas  !  Glory  be  to  all  the  other 
holy  beings.”  ’ 

V. 

26  (85).  ZarathuJtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  O 
thou  all-knowing  Ahura  Mazda :  Should  I  urge 


*  *  Or  better  six  times  with  the  gdm6z  and  thrice  with  the  water  ’ 
(Comm.;  cf.  Farg.  VIII,  37  seq. ;  IX,  28  seq.) 

*  ‘  The  clothes’  (Comm.) 

*  The  clothes  of  the  unclean  shall  be  exposed  to  the  air  for  nine 
nights,  all  the  time  while  he  himself  is  confined  in  the  Arm^t-gfih. 
The  rules  for  the  cleansing  of  clothes  that  have  been  worn  by  the 
dead  himself  are  different  (see  Farg.  VII,  12  seq.) 

*  ‘  Thus  Vohu-man6  shall  be  clean — the  clothes;  thus  the  man 
shall  be  clean — he  who  wears  those  clothes’  (Comm.) 

*  The  faithful  one. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


3i8 


vend!dAd. 


upon  the  godly  man,  should  I  urge  upon  the  godly 
woman,  should  I  urge  upon  the  wicked  Da^va- 
worshipper  who  lives  in  sin,  to  give  the  earth 
made  by  Ahura,  the  water  that  runs,  the  corn 
that  grows,  and  all  the  rest  of  their  wealth  ’  ?  ’ 

Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  Thou  shouldst,  O  holy 
Zarathui'tra.’ 

27  (89).  O  Maker  of  the  material  world,  thou 
Holy  One  !  Where  are  the  rewards  given  ?  Where 
does  the  rewarding  take  place  ?  Where  is  the 
rewarding  fulfilled  ?  Whereto  do  men  come  to 
take  the  reward  that,  during  their  life  in  the 
material  world,  they  have  won  for  their  souls  ? 

28  (90).  Ahura  Mazda  answered :  ‘  When  the 
man  is  dead,  when  his  time  is  over,  then  the 
wicked,  evil-doing  Daevas  cut  off  his  eyesight. 
On  the  third  night,  when  the  dawn  appears  and 
brightens  up,  when  Mithra,  the  god  with  beautiful 
weapons,  reaches  the  all-happy  mountains,  and  the 
sun  is  rising : 

29  (94).  ‘Then  the  fiend,  named  Vizaresha®, 
O  Spitama  Zarathujtra,  carries  off  in  bonds®  the 
souls  of  the  wicked  Da^va-worshippers  who  live 
in  sin.  The  soul  enters  the  way  made  by  Time, 
and  open  both  to  the  wicked  and  to  the  righteous. 
At  the  head  of  the  A'invaaf  bridge,  the  holy  bridge 


’  Cf.  §  29  end. 

*  The  demon  Vtzaresh  is  he  who,  during  that  struggle  of  three 
days  and  three  nights  with  the  souls  of  the  departed,  carries  terror 
on  them  and  beats  them:  he  sits  at  the  gate  of  hell  (Bund. 
XXVIII,  18). 

’  ‘  Every  one  has  a  noose  cast  around  his  neck :  when  a  man 
dies,  if  he  has  been  a  ri^teous  man,  the  noose  falls  from  his  neck ; 
if  a  wicked,  they  drag  him  with  that  noose  down  into  hell '  (G}mm. ; 
cf.  Farg.  V,  8). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


219 


made  by  Mazda  \  they  ask  for  their  spirits  and  souls 
the  reward  for  the  worldly  goods  which  they  gave 
away  here  below*. 

30  (98).  ‘  Then  comes  the  beautiful,  well-shapen, 
strong  and  well-formed  maid  ^  with  the  dogs  at  her 
sides  one  who  can  distinguish  who  has  many 
children  happy,  and  of  high  understanding. 

‘  She  makes  the  soul  of  the  righteous  one  go 
up  above  the  Hara-berezaiti  ^ ;  above  the  Kinyad 


'  The  ITmvsLd  bridge  extends  over  hell  and  leads  to  Paradise  ; 
for  the  souls  of  the  righteous  it  widens  to  the  length  of  nine  javelins  ; 
for  the  souls  of  the  wicked  it  narrows  to  a  thread,  and  they  fall 
down  into  hell  (cf.  Ardi  Viraf  V,  i ;  Dinkard  IX,  20,  3).  The 
Ainvsu/  bridge  has  become  the  Sirath  bridge  of  the  Musulmans. 
Not  long  ago  they  sang  in  Yorkshire  of  *  the  Brig  o*  Dread,  na 
brader  than  a  thread  ’  (Thoms,  Anecdotes,  89),  and  even  nowa¬ 
days  the  peasant  in  Nifevre  tells  of  a  little  board — 

‘Pas  pu  longue,  pas  pu  large 
Qu’un  chVeu  de  la  Sainte  Viarge,’ 
which  was  put  by  Saint  Jean  d'Archange  between  the  earth  and 
Paradise : 

‘  Ceux  qu’saront  la  raison  (ssl’oraison  ?)  d’Dieu 
Par  dessus  passeront. 

Ceux  qu’la  sauront  pas 

Au  bout  mourront/  (M^lusine,  p.  70.) 

*  Cf.  §  26,  and  Farg.  Ill,  34,  35 ;  XVIII,  33  seq. 

*  The  soul  of  the  dead,  on  the  fourth  day,  finds  itself  in  the 
presence  of  a  maid,  of  divine  beauty  or  fiendish  ugliness,  according 
as  he  himself  was  good  or  bad,  and  she  leads  him  into  heaven  or 
hell :  this  maid  is  his  own  Dadna,  his  Religion,  that  is  the  sum  of 
his  religious  deeds,  good  or  evil  (Yasht  XXII). 

*  The  dogs  that  keep  the  ITinyzd  bridge  (see  Farg.  XIII,  9). 

*  The  good  from  the  wicked. 

*  Doubtful.  Those  children  would  be  the  righteous,  as  the  sons 
of  the  Dni^  are  the  wicked  (Farg.  XVIII,  30  seq.) 

^  The  JCmvzd  bridge  rests  by  one  end  on  the  Alborz  (Hara-bere- 
zaiti)  and  by  the  other  on  the  A'ikdd  D&itik  in  Irdn  V^  (Comm, 
ad  §  loi  ed.  Sp. ;  Dinkard  IX,  20,  3). 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


220 


vendIdAd. 


bridge  she  places  it  in  the  presence  of  the  heavenly 
gods  themselves. 

31  (102).  ‘  Up  rises  Vohu-man6*  from  his  golden 
seat ;  Vohu-man6  exclaims  :  “  How  hast  thou  come 
to  us,  thou  Holy  One,  from  that  decaying  world  into 
this  undecaying  one  *  ?  ” 

32  (105).  ‘  Gladly  pass  the  souls  of  the  righteous 
to  the  golden  seat  of  Ahura  Mazda,  to  the  golden 
seat  of  the  Amesha-Spe«tas,  to  the  Gar6-nmAnem 
the  abode  of  Ahura  Mazda,  the  abode  of  the 
Amesha-Spe«tas,  the  abode  of  all  the  other  holy 
beings. 

33  (108).  ‘  As  to  the  godly  man  that  has  been 
cleansed  *,  the  wicked  evil-doing  Daevas  tremble  at 
the  perfume  of  his  soul  after  death,  as  doth  a  sheep 
on  which  a  wolf  is  pouncing  *. 

34  (i  10).  ‘  The  souls  of  the  righteous  are  gathered 
together  there :  Nairyd-sangha*  is  with  them  ;  a  mes¬ 
senger  of  Ahura  Mazda  is  Nairyd-sangha. 

II  a. 

‘  Invoke,  O  Zarathurtra !  this  very  creation  of 
Ahura  Mazda.’ 

35  (114).  Zarathurtra  imitated  those  words  of 


*  The  doorkeeper  of  Paradise ;  a  Zoroastrian  Saint-Pierre. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  VII,  52 ;  Yt.  XXII,  16. 

*  The  Garothradn  of  the  Parsis ;  literally,  ‘the  house  of  songs;' 
it  is  the  highest  Paradise. 

*  That  has  performed  the  Barashniim. 

®  Ormazd  is  all  perfume,  Ahriman  is  infection  and  stench  (Bun- 
dahix  I ;  Eznig,  Refutatio  Haeresiarum  II) ;  the  souls  of  their  fol¬ 
lowers  partake  of  the  same  qualities,  and  by  the  performance  of 
the  Barashnfhn  both  the  body  and  the  soul  are  perfumed  and 
sweetened. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  XXII,  7. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


221 


mine ;  ‘  I  invoke  the  holy  world,  made  by  Ahura 
Mazda. 

‘  I  invoke  the  earth  made  by  Ahura,  the  water 
made  by  Mazda,  the  holy  trees. 

‘  I  invoke  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  \ 

‘  I  invoke  the  beautiful  Heaven 

‘  I  invoke  the  endless  and  sovereign  Light  ®.’ 

36  (120).  ‘  I  invoke  the  bright,  blissful  Paradise 
of  the  Holy  Ones. 

‘  I  invoke  the  Gar6-nm4nem,  the  abode  of  Ahura 
Mazda,  the  abode  of  the  Amesha-Spe«tas,  the  abode 
of  all  the  other  holy  beings. 

‘  I  invoke  the  sovereign  Place  of  Eternal  Weal 
and  the  ICinvad  bridge  made  by  Mazda. 

37(123).  ‘I  invoke  the  good  Saoka®,  who  has 
the  good  eye. 

‘  I  invoke  the  whole  creation  of  weal. 

‘  1  invoke  the  mighty  Fravashis®  of  the  righteous. 

‘I  invoke  Verethraghna’,  made  by  Ahura,  who 
wears  the  Glory  made  by  Mazda*. 


’  See  Farg.  V,  15  seq. 

*  Asraan,  the  highest  heaven,  as  distinguished  from  the  firmament 
(thwdsha)  that  lies  nearer  the  earth. 

*  The  endless  Light  is  ‘the  place  of  Ormazd’  (Bund.  I);  it 
is  Infinite  Space  conceived  as  luminous. 

*  Misvfina  g&tva,  another  name  of  the  heavenly  spaces;  it 
designates  heaven  as  the  abode  and  source  of  all  blessings,  of  all 
savah,  or  saoka. 

*  A  Genius  defined,  ‘  Genius  of  the  good  eye,’  by  opposition  to 
‘  the  bad  eye.'  Saoka  (Sdk)  is  an  auxiliary  to  Mithra  (Mihr);  she 
receives  first,  from  above,  all  the  good  destined  to  man,  and  transmits 
it  to  the  lower  sky  or  firmament  (which  is  the  seat  of  Destiny) 
through  the  moon  and  Ardvisfir  (Gr.  Bund.) 

*  See  Yt.  XIII. 

^  The  Genius  of  Victory  (Bahr&m).  See  Yt.  XIV. 

*  The  kvzrend  (Khurra  or  Farr)  or  light  of  sovereignty.  Cf. 
§  39  and  see  Yt  XIX. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


222 


vendIdAd. 


‘  1  invoke  Tijtrya  the  bright  and  glorious  star, 
in  the  shape  of  a  golden-homed  bull  *. 

38  (127).  ‘I  invoke  the  holy,  beneficent  GAthas®, 
who  rule  over  the  Ratus*: 

‘  I  invoke  the  Ahunavaiti  Githa ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  U^tavaiti  Githa  ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  Spe«ta-mainyu  Githa ; 

*  I  invoke  the  Vohu-khshathra  Githa ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  Vahiitdwti  Githa. 

39(129).  ‘I  invoke  the  Karshvares  of  Arzahi 
and  Savahi ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  Karshvares  of  Fradadhafshu  and 
Vidadhafshu ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  Karshvares  of  Vourubarerti  and 
VouruzareJti ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  bright  Zf»aniratha* ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  bright,  glorious  Haituma»t  • ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  good  Ashi '' ; 

[‘  I  invoke  the  good  ATisti  * ;] 


‘  Tutrya  (Ttr),  the  star  of  rain.  See  Yt.  VIII. 

*  Tirtrya  appears  successively  under  three  forms,  during  the  month 
named  from  him  (the  first  month  of  summer,  31  June-ai  July): 
ten  days  as  a  man,  ten  days  as  a  bull,  ten  days  as  a  horse.  ‘  As 
a  bull  he  is  most  to  be  invoked’  (Comm.),  to  prepare  his  final 
victory  over  the  demon  of  Drought,  Apaosha. 

*  The  five  collections  of  hymns  which  form  the  oldest  and 
holiest  part  of  the  Yasna  and  of  the  Avesta  (Yasna  XXVIII- 
XXXIV;  XLIII-XLVI;  XLVII-L;  LI;  LIII);  they  are  named 
after  their  initial  words. 

*  The  chiefs  of  creation ;  '  they  rule  over  the  Ratus  inasmuch  as 
it  is  by  their  means  that  these  other  Ratus  are  invoked  ’  (Comm.) 

'  The  earth  is  divided  into  seven  Karshvares,  of  which  the 
central  one,  Afvaniratha,  is  the  finest  and  contains  Iran. 

*  See  Farg.  I,  14. 

’  Ashi  (Ashishvang),  the  Genius  that  imparts  riches  to  the 
righteous :  see  Yt.  XVII. 

*  An  angel  of  religious  knowledge. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XIX. 


223 


‘  I  invoke  the  most  pure  ATista  ^ ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  Glory  of  the  Aryan  regfions  * ; 

‘  I  invoke  the  Glory  of  the  bright  Yima,  the  good 
shepherd  ®. 

40(133),  ‘  Let  him  be  worshipped  with  sacrifice, 
let  him  be  gladdened,  gratified,  and  satisfied,  the 
holy  Sraosha,  the  well-formed,  victorious,  holy 
Sraosha  ^ 

‘  Bring  libations  unto  the  Fire,  bring  hard  wood 
unto  the  Fire,  bring  incense  of  Vohfl-gaona  unto 
the  Fire. 

‘  Offer  up  the  sacrifice  to  the  Vclzirta  fire®,  which 
smites  the  fiend  Spen/aghra  * :  bring  unto  it  the 
cooked  meat  and  full  overflowing  libations’. 

41  (137).  ‘Offer  up  the  sacrifice  to  the  holy 
Sraosha,  that  the  holy  Sraosha  may  smite  down 
the  fiend  Ku/»da  *,  who  is  drunken  without  drink¬ 
ing  *,  and  throws  down  into  the  Hell  of  the  Dru^f  the 
wicked  Da^va- worshippers,  who  live  in  sin. 

[42  ’®.  ‘I  invoke  the  Kara  fish  ”,  who  lives  beneath 
waters  in  the  bottom  of  the  deep  lakes. 

*  Religious  knowledge:  invoked  with  Da6na  (Religion;  Strdza,  24). 

*  The  light  of  sovereignty,  A»aren6,  which  if  secured  by  the 
Aryans  makes  them  rule  over  their  enemies  (cf.  §  37  and  Yt.  XIX, 

56-93)- 

’  See  Farg.  II,  2. 

*  That  he  may  smite  A^shma  and  the  other  fiends. 

*  The  fire  of  lightning. 

*  The  demon  that  prevents  the  fall  of  rain ;  a  companion  in  arms 
of  Apaosha. 

’  Doubtful.  *  The  same  as  Ku«di ;  see  Farg.  XI,  9. 

*  Whereas  Afishma,  the  other  arch-enemy  of  Sraosha,  borrows 
part  of  his  strength  from  drunkenness  (Yasna  X,  8). 

’*  From  the  Vendiddd  Sfida.  The  clause  may  have  belonged  to 
the  original  text ;  it  is  preceded  by  another  clause  which  certainly 

For  this  note  see  next  page. 


Digitized  by 


224 


VENDtoAr). 


*  I  invoke  the  ancient  and  sovereign  Merezu  the 
most  warlike  of  the  creatures  of  the  two  Spirits 

‘  I  invoke  the  seven  bright  Sru  / 

VI. 

43.  ‘They  cried  about,  their  minds  wavered  to 
and  fro  Angra  Mainyu  the  deadly,  the  Da6va  of 
the  Daevas;  Indra  the  Da^va,  Siuru  the  Da^va, 
Naunghaithya  the  Da6va,  Taurvi  and  Zairi  ; 
A6shma  of  the  murderous  spear Akatasha  the 
Da^va^*;  Winter,  made  by  the  Daevas;  the  de¬ 
ceiving,  unseen  Death ;  Zaurva  baneful  to  the 
fathers;  Bditi  the  Da^va*®;  Driwi*^  the  Da^va; 
Daiwi  the  Da^va ;  Kasvi  the  Da^va  ;  Paitisha  ** 
the  most  Da^va-like  amongst  the  Daevas.] 

did  not  belong  to  it,  and  part  of  which  is  cited  in  the  Commentary 
ad  Farg.VIII,  103,  where  it  would  have  been  more  suitably  placed : 
*  When  he  has  been  cleansed  in  the  next  inhabited  place,  he  may 
then  sow  and  till  the  pasture  fields,  as  food  for  the  sheep  and  as 
food  for  the  ox/ 

The  Kar-m&ht,  the  Ratu  or  chief  of  the  creatures  that  live  in 
water.  Cf.  Farg.  XX,  4,  note  ;  Yt.  XIV,  29. 

A  iira(  \€y6fi(vov.  From  its  two  epithets,  ‘  ancient  *  and  *  sove¬ 
reign,’  it  appears  that  it  must  designate  one  of  the  first  principles, 
that  is  to  say,  some  form  of  Heaven,  Light,  Space,  or  Time. 

Doubtful. 

Hapta  sravd  bdmya  hanaunghd  puthraunghd  pusaunghfi 
bavai/iti. 

Up  and  down,  in  hope  and  despair. 

See  Farg.  X,  9-10.  ”  See  Farg.  X,  13. 

”  See  Farg.  X,  13.  ”  Old  age. 

See  above,  p.  209,  n.  3. 

Malice ;  see  above,  Farg.  II,  29. 

”  Lying;  see  above,  Farg.  II,  29. 

**  Spite ;  see  above,  Farg.  II,  29, 

**  Opposition,  or  counter-action,  the  same  as  Paityira;  a  per¬ 
sonification  of  the  doings  of  Ahriman  and  of  his  marring  power. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


FARGARD  XX. 


225 


44  (140).  ‘And  the  evil-doing  DaSva,  Angra 
Mainyu,  the  deadly,  said :  “  What !  let  the  wicked, 
6vil-doing  Daevas  gather  together  at  the  head  of 
Arez<ira^•” 

45  (141).  ‘  They  rush  away  shouting,  the  wicked, 
evil-doing  Daevas ;  they  run  away  shouting,  the 
wicked,  evil-doing  Daevas ;  they  run  away  casting 
the  Evil  Eye,  the  wicked,  evil-doing  Daevas  :  “  Let 
us  gather  together  at  the  head  of  Arezhra  ! 

46  (143).  ‘  “  For  he  is  just  bom  the  holy  Zara- 
thurtra,  in  the  house  of  Poururaspa.  How  can  we 
procure  his  death  ?  He  is  the  weapon  that  fells  the 
fiends :  he  is  a  counter-fiend  to  the  fiends ;  he  is 
a  Dru^  to  the  Drug-.  Vanished  are  the  Da6va- 
worshippers,  the  Nasu  made  by  the  Da6va,  the 
false-speaking  Lie!” 

47  {147).  ‘  They  rush  away  shouting,  the  wicked, 
evil-doing  Daevas,  into  the  depths  of  the  dark, 
raging  world  of  hell. 

‘Ashem  vohd:  Holiness  is  the  best  of  all 
good.’ 


Fargard  XX. 

Thrita,  the  First  Healer. 

It  has  already  been  seen  (Farg.  VII,  44)  that  there  are  three 
kinds  of  medicine :  one  that  heals  with  the  knife,  one  that  heals 
with  herbs,  and  one  that  heals  with  sacred  spells.  The  present 
Fargard  deals  with  the  origin  of  medicine,  particularly  the  herbs- 
medicine.  Its  inventor  was  Thrita,  of  the  SSma  family,  to  whom 
Ahura  Mazda  brought  down  from  heaven  ten  thousand  healing 


’  At  the  gate  of  hell ;  see  above,  p.  24,  n.  i. 

[•»]  Q 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


226 


vendJdAd. 


plants  that  had  been  growing  up  around  the  tree  of  eternal  life,  the 
white  H6m  or  Gaokerena  (§  4). 

This  Thrita  is  mentioned  only  once  again  in  the  Avesta,  in 
Yasna  IX,  7,  where  he  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  first  priests 
of  Haoma.  This  accounts  for  his  medical  skill ;  as  Haoma  is  the 
plant  of  eternal  life,  it  is  but  natural  that  one  of  his  first  priests 
should  have  been  the  first  healer. 

This  Fargard  has  only  an  allusion  to  the  origin  of  the  knife- 
medicine,  which  was,  as  it  seems,  revealed  by  Khshathra  Vairya  (§  3). 
The  last  paragraphs  (§§  5-1 2)  deal  with  the  spell-medicine. 

The  functions  ascribed  here  to  Thrita  were  sometimes  con¬ 
ferred  on  his  semi-namesake  Thra6taona  ^  Hamza  makes  ThraS- 
taona  the  inventor  of  medicine  theTavids*  against  sickness  are 
inscribed  with  his  name,  and  we  find  in  the  Avesta  itself  his  Fravashi 
invoked  ‘  against  itch,  hot  fever,  humours,  cold  fever  incontinence, 
against  the  plagues  created  by  the  serpent*.'  We  see  from  the 
last  words  of  this  passage  that  disease  was  understood  as  coming 
from  the  serpent ;  in  other  words,  that  it  was  considered  a  sort 
of  poisoning  •,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  killer  of  the  serpent 
(Asi  Dahilui)  was  invoked  to  act  against  it 

I.  Zarathurtra  asked  Ahura  Mazda :  ‘  Ahura 

Mazda,  most  beneficent  Spirit,  Maker  of  the 
material  world,  thou  Holy  One !  Who  was  he 
who  first  of  the  healers  of  the  wise,  the  happy, 
the  wealthy,  the  glorious,  the  strong,  the  Para- 
dhitas  *,  drove  back  sickness  to  sickness,  drove  back 
death  to  death* ;  and  first  turned  away  the  point  of 

*  See  the  Westergaard  Fragments,  II. 

*  Ed.  Gottwaldt,  p.  23 ;  cf.  Mirkhond,  Early  Kings  of  Persia, 

tr.  by  Shea,  p.  152.  ®  Formulas  of  exorcism. 

*  Cf.  Farg.  VII,  58.  *  Yasht  XIII,  131. 

*  This  theory,  w^hich  modem  science  would  not  utterly  reject, 
accounts  for  the  great  part  which  the  serpent  plays  in  the  worship 
of  Asklepios ;  as  sickness  comes  from  him,  from  him  too  must  or 
may  come  the  healing. 

^  ‘  Those  who  knew  how  to  take  care  of  their  own  bodies,  like 
Isfandydr :  some  say  that  no  sword  could  wound  him '  (Comm.) 

®  The  Paradhita  or  P6shdid,the  kings  of  the  first  Iranian  dynasty. 

*  *  That  is  to  say,  who  kept  sickness  in  bonds,  who  kept  death  in 
bonds '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XX. 


227 


the  sword  and  the  fire  of  fever  from  the  bodies  of 
mortals  ?’ 

2  (ii).  Ahura  Mazda  answered:  ‘Thrita  it  was 
who  first  of  the  healers,  of  the  wise,  the  happy, 
the  wealthy,  the  glorious,  the  strong,  the  Para- 
dhStas,  drove  back  sickness  to  sickness,  drove 
back  death  to  death,  and  first  turned  away  the  point 
of  the  sword  and  the  fire  of  fever  from  the  bodies  of 
mortals. 

3  (12).  ‘He  asked  for  a  source  of  remedies;  he 
obtained  it  from  Khshathra-VairyaS  to  withstand 
sickness  and  to  withstand  death ;  to  withstand  pain 
and  to  withstand  fever;  to  withstand  S&rana  and 
to  withstand  S4rastya  *;  to  withstand  A^ana  and  to 
withstand  A^’ahva ;  to  withstand  Kurugha  and 
to  withstand  A^ivAka ;  to  withstand  Duruka  and  to 
withstand  Astairya;  to  withstand  the  evil  eye, 
rottenness,  and  infection  which  Angra  Main)ai  had 
created  against  the  bodies  of  mortals. 

4(15).  ‘  And  I  Ahura  Mazda  brought  down  the 
healing  plants  that,  by  many  hundreds,  by  many 
thousands,  by  many  myriads,  grow  up  all  around 
the  one  Gaokerena*. 


*  As  Khshathra-Vairya  presides  over  metals,  it  was  a  knife  he 
received,  *  of  which  the  point  and  the  base  were  set  in  gold/  He 
was  therefore  the  first  who  healed  with  the  knife,  as  well  as  the  first 
who  healed  with  herbs.  As  for  the  healing  with  the  holy  word,  see 
§§  5  and  seq. 

*  Headache  and  cold  fever. 

*  There  are  two  Haomas :  one  is  the  yellow  or  golden  Haoma, 
which  is  the  earthly  Haoma,  and  which,  when  prepared  for  the 
sacrifice,  is  the  king  of  healing  plants;  the  other  is  the  white 
Haoma  or  Gaokerena,  which  grows  up  in  the  middle  of  the  sea 
Vouru- Kasha,  where  it  is  surrounded  by  the  ten  thousand  healing 

Q  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


-  228 


VENDtoAD. 


5  (i8).  ‘All  this  do  we  achieve;  all  this  do  we 
order ;  all  these  prayers  do  we  utter,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  bodies  of  mortals  ’ ; 

6.  ‘  To  withstand  sickness  and  to  withstand  death ; 
to  withstand  pain  and  to  withstand  fever ;  to  with¬ 
stand  Sirana  and  to  withstand  Sirastya;  to  with¬ 
stand  A^ana  and  to  withstand  A^rahva;  to  withstand 
Kurugha  and  to  withstand  A^ivika ;  to  withstand 
Duruka  and  to  withstand  Astairya;  to  withstand 
the  evil  eye,  rottenness,  and  infection  which  Angra 
Mainyu  has  created  against  the  bodies  of  mortals. 

7  (19).  ‘To  thee,  O  Sickness,  I  say  avaunt!  to 
thee,  O  Death,  I  say  avaunt  I  to  thee,  O  Pain, 
I  say  avaunt  I  to  thee,  O  Fever,  I  say  avaunt! 
to  thee,  O  Evil  Eye,  I  say  avaunt !  to  thee,  O 
SArana,  I  say  avaunt!  and  to  thee,  O  Sirastya, 
I  say  avaunt!  to  thee,  O  A^rana,  I  say  avaunt! 
and  to  thee,  O  As’ahva,  I  say  avaunt !  to  thee, 
O  Kurugha,  I  say  avaunt!  and  to  thee,  O 
A^rivika,  I  say  avaunt!  to  thee,  O  Duruka,  I  say 
avaunt!  and  to  thee,  O  Astairya,  1  say  avaunt ! 

8  (21).  ‘Give  us,  O  Ahura,  that  powerful  sove¬ 
reignty,  by  the  strength  of  which  we  may  smite 
down  the  Dru^!  By  its  might  may  we  smite  the 
Dru^*! 


plants,  created  by  Ormazd  in  order  to  oppose  so  many  diseases  that 
had  been  created  by  Ahriman  (Bundahir  IX ;  cf.  Farg.  XXII,  a).  A 
frog  goes  swimming  around  the  Gaokerena  to  gnaw  it  down :  but 
two  Kar  Miht  (Farg.  XIX,  42)  keep  watch  and  circle  around  the 
tree,  so  that  the  head  of  one  of  them  is  continually  towards  the  frog 
(Bund.  XVIII). 

•  We  do  all  that  is  necessary  for  healing ;  we  give,  as  Dastobar 
(Dasthr),  the  necessary  prescriptions ;  we  recite  the  needed  prayers. 
— This  section  is  a  transition  to  the  spell-medicine. 

*  This  clause  is  borrowed,  with  some  alteration,  from  Yasna 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XX. 


229 


9  (23).  ‘I  drive  away  IshirS  and  1  drive  away 
Agh<iir6;  I  drive  away  Aghra  and  I  drive  away 
Ughra;  I  drive  away  sickness  and  I  drive  away 
death ;  I  drive  away  pain  and  I  drive  away  fever ; 
I  drive  away  Sirana  and  I  drive  away  S&rastya; 
I  drive  away  A.srana  and  I  drive  away  A^ahva ;  I 
drive  away  Kurugha  and  I  drive  away  A^rivika  ; 
I  drive  away  Duruka  and  I  drive  away  Astairya; 
I  drive  away  the  evil  eye,  rottenness,  and  infection 
which  Angra  Mainyu  has  created  against  the  bodies 
of  mortals. 

10  (25).  ‘I  drive  away  all  manner  of  sickness 
and  death,  all  the  Yitus  and  PairikasS  and  all  the 
wicked  6^ainis  \ 

11  (26).  ‘A  Airyamd  ishy6.  May  the  vow-ful- 
hlling  Airyaman®  come  here,  for  the  men  and  women 
of  Zarathunra  to  rejoice,  for  Vohu-man6  to  re¬ 
joice  ;  with  the  desirable  reward  that  Religion 
deserves.  I  solicit  for  holiness  that  boon  that  is 
vouchsafed  by  Ahura! 

12  (29).  ‘May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman  smite 
all  manner  of  sickness  and  death,  all  the  YStus  and 
Pairikas,  and  all  the  wicked  Gainis.’ 

[13.  Yath4  ahft  vairy6: — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the 
law  of  righteousness. 

The  gifts  of  Vohu-man6  to  the  deeds  done  in  this  world 
for  Mazda.  He  who  relieves  the  poor  makes  Ahura  king. 

XXXI,  4 ;  the  original  text  is,  ‘  May  that  strong  power  come  to  me, 
by  the  might  of  which  we  may  smite  down  the  Dn\f  1  ’ 

’  See  Farg.  XI,  9. 

*  ‘  Gai  ’  (Comm.),  that  is  Gahi ;  cf.  Farg.  XVIII,  62,  and  Farg. 
XXII,  2,  note. —  Clause  10  is  imitated  from  clause  12. 

’  On  Airyaman,  see  Farg.  XXII.  Clauses  11-12  are  borrowed 
from  Yasna  LIV,  1,  and  form  the  prayer  known  as  Airyama- 
ishyd. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


230 


vendJoAd. 


K^m-nA  mazdi  : — What  protector  hast  thou  given  unto 
me,  O  Mazda  I  while  the  hate  of  the  wicked  encompasses 
me  ?  Whom  but  thy  Atar  and  Vohu-mand,  through  whose 
work  I  keep  on  the  world  of  Righteousness  ?  Reveal  there¬ 
fore  to  me  thy  Religion  as  thy  rule ! 

Ke  verethrem-^4 Who  is  the  victorious  who  will 
protect  thy  teaching  ?  Make  it  clear  that  I  am  the  guide 
for  both  worlds.  May  Sraosha  come  with  Vohu-mand  and 
help  whomsoever  thou  pleasest,  O  Mazda  ! 

Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti  Spewta ! 
Perish,  O  fiendish  Dru^ !  Perish,  O  brood  of  the  fiend ! 
Perish,  O  world  of  the  fiend!  Perish  away,  O  Dru^! 
Perish  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  never  more  to 
give  unto  death  the  living  world  of  Righteousness '  1] 


Fargard  XXI. 

I  (i).  Praise  of  the  holy  bull. 

II  (2-3).  Invocation  addressed  to  rain  as  a  healing  power. 

III  a  (4-7).  Joint  invocation  addressed  to  the  waters  and  to  the 
light  of  the  sun. 

III  b  (8-1 1).  Joint  invocation  addressed  to  the  waters  and  to  the 
light  of  the  moon. 

IIIc  (12-17).  invocation  addressed  to  the  waters  and  to 
the  light  of  the  stars. 

IV  (18-21).  Spells  against  disease. 

The  largest  part  of  this  Fargard  is  filled  with  a  uniform  spell, 
intended,  as  it  seems,  for  the  protection  of  lying-in  women  (§§  6-7, 
lo-ii,  14-15),  who  are  under  the  special  care  of  Ardvi  Sfira 
Andhita,  the  great  goddess  of  the  waters.  That  spell  is  repeated 
three  times,  in  a  joint  invocation  to  the  sun,  to  the  moon,  and  to 
the  stars  respectively ;  that  strange  association  is  perhaps  owing  to 
the  fact  that  both  the  light  and  the  waters  spring  up  from  the 
Kara  Berezaiti  and  return  there  (see  p.  232,  note  i). 


*  See  Farg.  VIII,  19-20. 


Digitized  by  i^ooQle 


FARGARD  XXI. 


231 


I. 

I.  Hail,  bounteous  bull*!  Hail  to  thee,  bene¬ 
ficent  bull  I  Hail  to  thee,  who  makest  increase  I 
Hail  to  thee,  who  makest  growth !  Hail  to  thee, 
who  dost  bestow  his  part  *  upon  the  righteous  faith¬ 
ful,  and  wilt  bestow  it  on  the  faithful  yet  unborn ! 
Hail  to  thee,  whom  the  6^ahi  kills*,  and  the  ungodly 
Ashemaogha,  and  the  wicked  tyrant  *, 

II. 

2  (3).  ‘  Come,  come  on,  O  clouds,  from  up  above, 
down  on  the  earth,  by  thousands  of  drops,  by  myriads 
of  drops :  ’  thus  say,  O  holy  Zarathu^tra  I  ‘  to  de¬ 
stroy  sickness,  to  destroy  death,  to  destroy  the 
sickness  that  kills®,  to  destroy  death  that  kills,  to 
destroy  Gadha  and  Apagadha*. 

3  (9).  ‘  If  death  come  after  noon,  may  healing 
come  at  eve! 

‘  If  death  come  at  eve,  may  healing  come  at  night ! 

‘  If  death  come  at  night,  may  healing  come  at 
dawn ! 

‘  And  showers  shower  down  new  water,  new  earth, 
new  plants,  new  healing  powers,  and  new  healing. 

Ilia. 

4  (15).  ‘As  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  is  the  gathering 


*  The  primeval  bull  who  was  created  by  Ormazd  and  killed  by 
Ahriman  with  the  help  of  the  (?ahi. — Clause  t  b  to  be  recited  when 
one  meets  an  ox  or  any  kind  of  cattle,  Gr.  Rav.  386. 

*  Possibly,  ‘  who  dost  kill  the  Gahi '  (by  means  of  gdm^z). 

*  His  daily  food. 

*  The  wicked  kills  animals,  out  of  mere  cruelty,  beyond  his 
needs  (Yasna  XXIX,  i ;  XXXII,  12,  14:  XLVIII,  7). 

*  Cf.  Bund.  Ill,  3,  6,  4.  '  Names  of  diseases. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


232 


vendIdAd. 


place  of  the  waters  rising  up  and  going  down,  up 
the  aerial  way  and  down  the  earth,  down  the  earth 
and  up  die  aerial  way  ‘ :  thus  rise  up  and  roll  along ! 
thou  in  whose  rising  and  growing  Ahura  Mazda 
made  the  aerial  way. 

5  {20).  ‘Up!  rise  up  and  roll  along!  thou  swift- 
horsed  Sun,  above  Hara  Berezaiti,  and  produce 
light  for  the  world  (and  mayst  thou  [O  man  !]  rise 
up  there,  if  thou  art  to  abide  in  Gar6-nminem  *)  *, 
along  the  path  made  by  Mazda,  along  the  way  made 
by  the  gods,  the  watery  way  they  opened, 

6(23).  ‘And  the  Holy  Word  shall  keep  away 
the  evil  ® :  Of  thee  [O  child !]  I  will  cleanse  the 
birth  and  growth  ;  of  thee  [O  woman  !]  I  will  make 
the  body  and  the  strength  pure ;  I  make  thee  rich 
in  children  and  rich  in  milk  ; 


*  Waters  and  light  are  believed  to  flow  from  the  same  spring  and 
in  the  same  bed :  *  As  the  light  comes  in  through  Alborz  (Hara 
Berezaiti)  and  goes  out  through  Alborz,  so  water  also  comes  out 
through  Alborz  and  goes  away  through  Alborz’  (Bund.  XX,  4). 
Every  day  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  rise  up  from  AJborz,  and  every 
day  all  the  waters  on  the  earth  come  back  together  to  the  sea 
Vouru-kasha,  and  there  collected  come  down  again  to  the  earth 
from  the  peaks  of  Alborz  (Gr,  Rav.  431).  As  light  comes  from 
three  different  sources  (the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars),  the  waters 
are  invoked  three  times,  first  in  company  with  the  sun,  then  with 
the  moon,  lastly  with  the  stars,  as  if  there  should  be  three  dif¬ 
ferent  movements  of  the  rain  connected  with  the  three  movements 
of  light. 

*  Waters  come  down  from  the  sky  to  the  earth  and  rise  back 
from  the  earth  to  the  sky  (see  Farg.  V,  15  seq.) 

*  ‘  If  thou  art  a  righteous  man '  (Comm.) 

*  The  translation  of  this  clause  is  doubtfiiL 

*  The  spell  refers  to  the  cleansing  and  generative  power  of  the 
waters ;  cf.  the  invocation  to  Ardv!  Sflra,  Farg.  VII,  16 :  the  waters 
are  supposed  to  make  females  fertile  as  they  make  the  earth.  This 
spell  was  probably  pronounced  to  facilitate  childbirth. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XXI. 


233 


7  (27).  ‘  Rich  in  seed,  in  milk\  in  fat,  in  marrow, 
and  in  offspring.  I  shall  bring  to  thee  a  thousand 
pure  springs,  running  towards  the  pastures  that  give 
food  to  the  child. 


Ill  b. 

8  (30).  *  As  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  is  the  gathering  place 
of  the  waters,  rising  up  and  going  down,  up  the  aerial  way 
and  down  the  earth,  down  the  earth  and  up  the  aerial 
way : 

‘  Thus  rise  up  and  roll  along !  thou  in  whose  rising 
and  growing  Ahura  Mazda  made  the  earth. 

9  (31).  ‘  Up!  rise  up,  thou  Moon,  that  dost  keep 
in  thee  the  seed  of  the  bull  * ; 

‘  Rise  up  above  Kara  Berezaiti,  and  produce  light  for  the 
world  (and  mayst  thou  [O  man !]  rise  up  there,  if  thou  art 
to  abide  in  Gar6-nm4nem),  along  the  path  made  by 
Mazda,  along  the  way  made  by  the  gods,  the  watery  way 
they  opened. 

10  (32).  ‘  And  the  Holy  Word  shall  keep  away  the  evil : 
Of  thee  [O  child  1]  I  will  cleanse  the  birth  and  growth ;  of 
thee  [O  woman  1]  I  will  make  the  body  and  the  strength 
pure ;  I  make  thee  rich  in  children  and  rich  in  milk  ; 

11  (32).  ‘Rich  in  seed,  in  milk,  in  fat,  in  marrow,  and  in 
offspring.  I  shall  bring  to  thee  a  thousand  pure  springs, 
running  towards  the  pastures  that  give  food  to  the  child. 

Ill  c. 

12  (32).  ‘  As  the  sea  Vouru-kasha  is  the  gathering  place 


*  There  are,  in  the  text,  two  words  for  ‘  milk/  the  one  referring 
to  the  milk  of  women,  the  other  to  the  milk  of  c6ws. 

*  When  the  primeval  bull  died,  *  what  was  bright  and  strong  in 
his  seed  was  brought  to  the  sphere  of  the  moon,  and  when  it  was 
cleansed  there  in  the  light  of  the  astre,  two  creatures  were  shaped 
with  it,  a  male  and  a  female,  from  which  came  two  hundred  and 
seventy-two  kinds  of  animals '  (Bund.  IV,  X). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


234 


vendIdAd. 


of  the  waters,  rising  up  and  going  down,  up  the  aerial  way 
and  down  the  earth,  down  the  earth  and  up  the  aerial 
way : 

‘  Thus  rise  up  and  roll  along !  thou  in  whose  rising 
and  growing  Ahura  Mazda  made  everything  that 
grows  K 

13  (33)*  ‘Up!  rise  up,  ye  deep  Stars,  that  have 
in  you  the  seed  of  waters  * ; 

‘  Rise  up  above  Hara  Berezaiti,  and  produce  light  for  the 
world  (and  mayst  thou  [O  man  1]  rise  up  there,  if  thou  art 
to  abide  in  Gard-nm&nem),  along  the  path  made  by  Mazda, 
along  the  way  made  by  the  gods,  the  watery  way  they 
opened. 

14  (34).  ‘And  the  Holy  Word  shall  keep  away  the  evil : 
Of  thee  [O  child  !]  I  will  cleanse  the  birth  and  growth  ;  of 
thee  [O  woman !]  I  will  make  the  body  and  the  strength 
pure  ;  I  make  thee  rich  in  children  and  rich  in  milk  ; 

15  (34).  ‘  Rich  in  seed,  in  milk,  in  fat,  in  marrow,  and  in 
offspring.  I  shall  bring  to  thee  a  thousand  pure  springs, 
running  towards  the  pastures  that  will  give  food  to  the 
child. 

16  (34).  ‘As  the  sea Vouru-kasha  is  the  gathering  place 
of  the  waters,  rising  up  and  going  down,  up  the  aerial  way 
and  down  the  earth,  down  the  earth  and  up  the  aerial 
way : 

‘  Thus  rise  up  and  roll  along  I  ye  in  whose  rising 
and  growing  Ahura  Mazda  made  everything  that 
rises. 

17  (35).  ‘In  your  rising  away  will  the  \^z.hvviz\^ 
fly  and  cry,  away  will  the  Ay^hi  *  fly  and  cry,  away 
will  the  (7ahi,  who  follows  the  Yitu,  fly  and  cry. 


’  The  plants  that  grow  under  the  action  of  ‘  those  stars  that  have 
in  them  the  seed  of  waters '  (cf.  §  13). 

*  Cf.  Yt.  XII,  29. 

*  ‘  He  who  diminishes  glory,  Ahriman  ’  (Comm.) 

‘  ‘  Sterility,  Ahriman '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XXT. 


235 


IV. 

[18 ^  ‘I  drive  away  Ishir^  and  I  drive  away  Agh0ir6; 
I  drive  away  Aghra  and  I  drive  away  Ughra ;  I  drive 
away  sickness  and  I  drive  away  death ;  I  drive  away  pain 
and  I  drive  away  fever ;  I  drive  away  S&rana  and  I  drive 
away  S^rastya.  I  drive  away  A^ana  and  I  drive  away 
Ai^ahva ;  I  drive  away  Kurugha  and  I  drive  away  Asriv^ka ; 
I  drive  away  Duruka  and  I  drive  away  Astairya ;  I  drive 
away  the  evil  eye,  rottenness,  and  infection  which  Angra 
Mainyu  has  created  against  the  bodies  of  mortals. 

19.  ‘  I  drive  away  all  manner  of  sickness  and  death,  all 
the  Y&tus  and  Pairikas,  and  all  the  wicked  f^ainis. 

ao.  ‘A  Airyamd  ishyd: — May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airya- 
man  come  here,  for  the  men  and  women  of  Zarathartra 
to  rejoice,  for  Vohu-man6  to  rejoice ;  with  the  desirable 
reward  that  Religion  deserves.  I  solicit  for  holiness  that 
boon  that  is  vouchsafed  by  Ahura ! 

ai.  ‘  May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman  smite  all  manner 
of  sickness  and  death,  all  the  Y&tus  and  Pairikas,  and  all 
the  wicked  G^ainis. 

aa.  *  Yath4  ahfi  vairyd  : — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the 
law  of  righteousness ! 

‘  K^m-n4  mazdd: — What  protector  hast  thou  given 
unto  me  .  .  .? 

verethrem-^4: — Who  is  the  victorious  who  will 
protect  thy  teaching  .  .  .  ? 

23.  ‘  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti 
Spe^ita!  Perish,  O  fiendish  Dn:\^!  Perish,  O  brood  of 
the  fiend!  Perish,  O  world  of  the  fiend!  Perish  away, 
O  Dru^ !  Perish  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  never 
more  to  give  unto  death  the  living  world  of  Righteous¬ 
ness  !  ’] 


^  §§  i8-23=:Farg.  XX,  9-13. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


236 


vendIdAd. 


Fargard  XXII. 

It  has  already  been  seen  that  of  all  healers,  the  most  powerful  is 
the  one  who  treats  with  the  Holy  Word  (Mathra  Spewta),  that  is 
with  sacred  spells  (Farg.  VII,  44).  Of  all  sacred  spells,  the  most 
efficacious  is  the  Airyamd  ishyd,  which  forms  the  fifty-fourth  H4  of 
the  Yasna.  This  is  expressed  under  a  mythological  form  in  the 
following  Fargard  (cf.  Westergaard's  Fragments,  IV). 

Angra  Mainyu  having  created  99,999  diseases,  Ahura  applies 
for  remedy  to  the  Holy  Word  (Mathra  Spe«ta ;  §§  1-5). — How 
shall  I  manage?  asks  MUthra  Spe^a  (§  16).  Ahura  sends  his 
messenger  to  Airyaman  with  the  same  request 

This  Fargard  is  unfinished  or,  more  correctly,  the  end  of  it  is 
understood.  Airyaman  comes  at  once  to  Ahura’s  call,  and  digs  nine 
furrows.  It  is  no  doubt  in  order  to  perform  the  Barashnfim  \  by 
the  virtue  of  which  the  strength  of  the  demon  and  of  the  demon’s 
work  will  be  broken.  The  Fargard  ends  therefore  with  spells 
against  sickness  and  against  death,  added  to  the  usual  spells  of  the 
ordinary  Barashnfim. 

I. 

I .  Ahura  Mazda  spake  unto  Spitama  Zarathu^a, 
saying :  ‘I,  Ahura  Mazda,  the  Maker  of  all  good 
things,  when  I  made  this  mansion*,  the  beautiful, 
the  shining,  seen  afar  (there  may  I  go  up,  there 
may  I  arrive!) 

2  (5).  ‘  Then  the  ruffian  looked  at  me  ® ;  the 
ruffian  Angra  Mainyu,  the  deadly,  wrought  against 
me  nine  diseases,  and  ninety,  and  nine  hundred,  and 
nine  thousand,  and  nine  times  ten  thousand  diseases. 
So  mayst  thou  heal  me,  thou  most  glorious  MSthra 
Spewta  I 

3  (8).  ‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thou- 


*  See  Farg.  IX.  ’  ‘  The  Gardtmdn  ’  (Comm.),  Paradise. 

’  And  cast  on  me  the  evil  eye ;  ‘  it  was  by  casting  the  evil  eye 
on  the  good  creatures  of  Ormazd  that  Ahriman  corrupted  them ' 
(Eznig,  Refutatio  Haeresiarum  II).  Cf.  Farg.  XX,  3. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XXII. 


237 


sand  fleet,  swift-running  steeds;  I  offer  thee  up  a 
sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka  made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand  fleet, 
high-humped  camels ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice, 
O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

4  (12).  ‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a,  thou¬ 
sand  brown  oxen  that  do  not  push ;  I  offer  thee 
up  a  sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and 
holy. 

‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand 
females  big  with  young,  of  all  species  of  small 
cattle ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka, 
made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

5  (16).  ‘  And  I  will  bless  thee  with  the  fair 
blessing-spell  of  the  righteous,  the  friendly  blessing- 
spell  of  the  righteous,  that  makes  the  empty  swell 
to  fulness  and  the  full  to  overflowing,  that  comes 
to  help  him  who  was  sickening,  and  makes  the  sick 
man  sound  again. 

6  (20).  ‘  MSthra  Spe»ta,  the  all-glorious,  replied 
unto  me  ;  “  How  shall  I  heal  thee  ?  How  shall  I 
drive  away  from  thee  those  nine  diseases,  and  those 
ninety,  those  nine  hundred,  those  nine  thousand, 
and  those  nine  times  ten  thousand  diseases  ?  ”  ’ 

II. 

7  (22).  The  Maker  Ahura  Mazda  called  for 
Nairyd-sangha  * :  Go  thou,  Nairy6-sangha,  the 
herald,  and  drive  towards  the  mansion  of  Airya- 
man,  and  speak  thus  unto  him : 


'  The  Genius  of  the  good  eye ;  see  Farg.  XIX,  37,  and  note. 

*  The  messenger  of  Ahura  Mazda.  He  is  a  form  of  Atar,  the 
Fire  (Yasna  XVII,  1 1  [68]). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VENDioAD. 


.  238 

8  (23).  Thus  speaks  Ahura  Mazda,  the  Holy 
One,  unto  thee ; 

‘  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  the  Maker  of  all  good  things,  when 
I  made  this  mansion,  the  beautiful,  the  shining,  seen  afar 
(there  may  I  ascend,  there  may  I  arrive  I) 

9  (24).  ‘Then  the  ruffian  looked  at  me;  the  ruffian 
Angra  Mainyu,  the  deadly,  wrought  against  me  nine 
diseases,  and  ninety,  and  nine  hundred,  and  nine  thousand, 
and  nine  times  ten  thousand  diseases.  So  mayst  thou  heal 
me,  O  Airyaman,  the  vow-fulfiller ! 

10  (26).  ‘Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand 
fleet,  swift-running  steeds ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice, 
O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand  fleet,  high¬ 
humped  camels  ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka, 
made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

11  (30).  ‘Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand 
brown  oxen  that  do  not  push  ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice, 
O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand  females  big 
with  young,  of  all  species  of  small  cattle.  I  offer  thee  up 
a  sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

12  (34).  ‘And  I  will  bless  thee  with  the  fair  blessing- 
spell  of  the  righteous,  the  friendly  blessing-spell  of  the 
righteous,  that  makes  the  empty  swell  to  fulness  and  the 
full  to  overflowing,  that  comes  to  help  him  who  was 
sickening,  and  makes  the  sick  man  sound  again.’ 


III. 

13  (38).  In  obedience  to  Ahura  s  words  he  went, 
Nairy6-sangha,  the  herald;  he  drove  towards  the 
mansion  of  Airyaman,  he  spake  unto  Airyaman, 
saying  : 

14  (38)-  Thus  speaks  Ahura  Mazda,  the  Holy 
One,  unto  thee  :  ‘  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  the  Maker  of 
all  good  things,  when  I  made  this  mansion,  the 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FARGARD  XXII. 


239 


beautiful,  the  shining,  seen  afar  (there  may  I  go  up, 
there  may  I  arrive !) 

1 5  (39)*  ‘  Then  the  ruffian  looked  at  me ;  the 
ruffian  Angra  Mainjru,  the  deadly,  wrought  against 
me  nine  diseases,  and  ninety,  and  nine  hundred,  and 
nine  thousand,  and  nine  times  ten  thousand  diseases. 
So  mayst  thou  heal  me,  O  Airyaman,  the  vow- 
fulfiller ! 

16  (40).  ‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thou¬ 
sand  fleet,  swift-running  steeds ;  I  offer  thee  up  a 
sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and 
holy. 

‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand  fleet, 
high-humped  camels ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice, 
O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

17  (44).  ‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thou¬ 
sand  brown  oxen  that  do  not  push ;  I  offer  thee 
up  a  sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka,  made  by  Mazda  and 
holy. 

‘  Unto  thee  will  I  give  in  return  a  thousand 
females,  big  with  young,  of  all  species  of  small 
cattle ;  I  offer  thee  up  a  sacrifice,  O  good  Saoka, 
made  by  Mazda  and  holy. 

18  (48).  ‘And  I  will  bless  thee  with  the  fair 
blessing-spell  of  the  righteous,  the  friendly  blessing- 
spell  of  the  righteous,  that  makes  the  empty  swell 
to  fulness  and  the  full  to  overflowing,  that  comes  to 
help  him  who  was  sickening,  and  makes  the  sick 
man  sound  again.’ 


IV. 

19  (52).  Quickly  was  it  done,  nor  was  it  long, 
eagerly  set  off  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman,  towards 


Digitized  by 


240 


VENDfoAD. 


the  mountain  of  the  holy  Questions  \  towards  the 
forest  of  the  holy  Questions. 

20  (54).  Nine  kinds  of  stallions  brought  he  with 
him,  the  vow-fulfilling  Airj^aman  \ 

Nine  kinds  of  camels  brought  he  with  him,  the 
vow-fulfilling  Airyaman. 

Nine  kinds  of  bulls  brought  he  with  him,  the 
vow-fulfilling  Airyaman. 

Nine  kinds  of  small  cattle  brought  he  with  him, 
the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman. 

He  brought  with  him  the  nine  twigs®;  he  drew 
along  nine  furrows  ^ 

[ai  *.  ‘I  drive  away  Ishird  and  I  drive  away  Aghflirfi ; 
I  drive  away  Aghra  and  I  drive  away  Ughra;  I  drive 
away  sickness  and  I  drive  away  death ;  I  drive  away  pain 
and  I  drive  away  fever ;  I  drive  away  SArana  and  I  drive 
away  SArastya;  I  drive  away  Aarana  and  I  drive  away 
Axrahva  ;  I  drive  away  Kurugha  and  I  drive  away  A^ivAka ; 
I  drive  away  Duruka  and  I  drive  away  Astairya.  I  drive 
away  the  evil  eye,  rottenness,  and  infection  which  Angra 
Mainyu  has  created  against  the  bodies  of  mortals. 

22.  ‘  I  drive  away  all  manner  of  sickness  and  death,  all 
the  YAtus  and  Pairikas,  and  all  the  wicked  G^ainis. 

23.  ‘May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman  come  here,  for 
the  men  and  women  of  Zarathu^ra  to  rejoice,  for  Vohu- 


^  The  mountain  where  ‘  the  holy  conversations '  between  Ormazd 
and  Zoroaster  took  place  (cf.  Farg.  XIX,  1 1). 

*  According  to  Frdmjt»  *  He  brought  with  him  the  strength  of 
nine  stallions,'  to  infuse  it  into  the  sick  man  (cf.  Yasht  VIII,  24). 

*  That  is  to  say,  ‘the  nine-knotted  stick'  (Frdmjt;  cf.  Farg. 
IX,  14). 

*  To  perform  the  Barashnilm,  ‘the  great  service  of  the  Nirang- 
Din,  through  which  all  evil,  moral  and  natural,  including  evil 
passions,  disease,  and  death  will  be  removed '  (Wilson,  The  Parsi 
Religion,  p.  341). 

®  From  the  Vendiddd  Sdda ;  as  Farg.  XX,  9-13. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


FARGARD  XXII. 


241 


man6  to  rejoice ;  with  the  desirable  reward  that  Religion 
deserves.  I  solicit  for  holiness  that  boon  that  is  vouch¬ 
safed  by  Ahura. 

24.  ‘  May  the  vow-fulfilling  Airyaman  smite  all  manner 
of  sickness  and  death,  all  the  Y4tus  and  Pairikas,  and  all 
the  wicked  Gainis. 

25.  ‘  Yath4  ahfi  vairyd: — The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the 
law  of  righteousness.  The  gifts  of  Vohu-man6  to  the 
deeds  done  in  this  world  for  Mazda.  He  who  relieves 
the  poor  makes  Ahura  king. 

‘Ktfm-n4  mazd&: — What  protector  hast  thou  given 
unto  me,  O  Mazda!  while  the  hate  of  the  wicked  en¬ 
compasses  me?  Whom  but  thy  Atar  and  Vohu-man6, 
through  whose  work  I  keep  on  the  world  of  righteousness  ? 
Reveal  therefore  to  me  thy  Religion  as  thy  rule ! 

verethrem-^4 : — Who  is  the  victorious  who  will 
protect  thy  teaching  ?  Make  it  clear  that  I  am  the  guide 
for  both  worlds.  May  Sraosha  come  with  Vohu-man6  and 
help  whomsoever  thou  pleasest,  O  Mazda  ! 

‘  Keep  us  from  our  hater,  O  Mazda  and  Armaiti  Spe/«ta  I 
Perish,  O  fiendish  Dri^ !  Perish,  O  brood  of  the  fiend  1 
Perish,  O  world  of  the  fiend!  Perish  away,  O  Dn\^! 
Perish  away  to  the  regions  of  the  north,  never  more  to 
give  unto  death  the  living  world  of  Righteousness  I '] 


R 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS, 


R  2 


Digitized  by 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


I. 

WESTERGAARD’S  FRAGMENTS. 


These  are  the  fragments,  nine  in  number,  published  by  Wester- 
gaard  in  his  edition  of  the  Zend-Avesta  (pp.  331-334). 

1. 

This  formula,  according  to  a  modem  Raviyat,  is  recited  while 
putting  on  new  clothes. 

1.  Along  with  Vohu  Man6,  Asha  Vahijta,  and 
Khshathra  Vairya,  pronounce  thou,  for  the  men 
and  women  of  the  holy  Zarathuitra\  a  word  of 
celebration  and  sacrifice,  with  a  modest  (?)  voice. 

2.  Pronounce  thou  that  word,  O  Zarathuftra,  for 
sacrifice  and  prayer  unto  us,  the  Amesha-Spe»tas^, 
that  thereby  sacrifice  may  accrue  unto  the  Waters 
and  the  Plants,  and  unto  the  Fravashis  of  the 
righteous,  and  unto  the  Yazatas  of  the  spiritual 
world  and  of  this  world,  divine  creatures,  beneficent 
and  holy. 

II. 

FarIdOn  Vast. 

The  following  formulas  are  exactly  conceived  in  the  style  of  the 
Yaxt  formulas.  The  Iranian  Hercules,  ThraStaona-Faridiln,  as 
conqueror  of  Asi  DahUka,  is  invoked  against  brigands. — Asi  being 


’  For  the  faithful. 

*  The  Amesha-Spentas,  presiding  over  the  different  regions  of 
nature,  may  be  supposed  to  furnish  the  substance,  of  animal  or 
vegetable  origin,  of  which  clothes  are  made.  Cf.  Fragments  to  Vd. 
XVIII,  2. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


246 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


a  Serpent,  Thra6taona  appeared  as  well  in  a  medical  as  in  an  heroic 
character :  his  Fravashi  is  invoked  against  itch  and  other  diseases 
(Yt.  XIII,  131),  and  his  name  is  invoked  in  Tavtds  (talismans) 
against  illness,  fever,  and  poison. 

1.  Fravarin^.  I  confess  myself  a  worshipper  of  Mazda, 
a  follower  of  Zarathu.ftra,  one  who  hates  the  Daevas  and 
obeys  the  laws  of  Ahura  ; 

For  sacrifice,  prayer,  gfratification,  and  glorification  [unto 
HSlvani,  &c.] 

Khshnaothra.  Gratification  unto  the  Fravashi 
of  the  holy  Thra^taona,  son  of  Athwya. 

Yathi  ahil  vairy6. — ^The  Rdspi :  The  wish  of  the  Lord  . . . 
(let  this  Zaotar  proclaim  it !) 

The  Z6t :  Is  the  rule  of  Righteousness.  Let  the  righteous 
man  who  knows  it  proclaim  it ! 

2.  We  sacrifice  unto  Thra^taona,  son  of  Athwya, 
holy,  master  of  holiness,  to  save  the  pious  wor¬ 
shippers  from  the  brigand,  from  the  robber,  from 
the  Karapans'. 

3.  Yathd  ahA  vairyd. 

Yasnem/^a.  I  bless  the  sacrifice  and  prayer  and 
the  strength  and  vigour  of  the  Fravashi  of  Thrad- 
taona,  son  of  Athwya. 

Ashem  vohA.  AhmAi  \ 

III. 

VlSPA  HUMATA. 

A  prayer  which  it  is  recommended  to  recite  every  morning,  after 
the  prayer  of  the  Havan-gdh,  and  every  night  before  going  to  bed. 

I.  All  good  thoughts,  all  good  words,  all  good 
deeds  I  do  willingly. 

All  evil  thoughts,  all  evil  words,  all  evil  deeds 
I  do  unwillingly. 

^  ‘  The  blind/  those  who  are  blind  to  the  Law  of  Ahura. 

*  The  same  formula  as  Yart  III,  19. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


I.  westergaard’s  fragments. 


247 


2.  All  good  thoughts,  all  good  words,  all  good 
deeds  will  reach  Paradise. 

All  evil  thoughts,  all  evil  words,  all  evil  deeds 
will  reach  Hell. 

And  all  good  thoughts,  all  good  words,  all  good 
deeds  are  the  badge  of  the  righteous  for  Paradise. 

IV. 

Glorification  of  the  Airyama  Ishy6  prayer. 

This  fragment  is  the  twenty-third  and  last  Fargard  of  one  of  the 
G&thic  Nasks,  the  Varshtmdnsar,  which  was  a  commentary  in 
vulgar  Zend  on  the  Githa  texts.  Its  Pahlavi  translation  is  found 
in  the  Dinkart,  IX,  46.  See  the  Airyama  Ishy6  itself,  Yasna  LIV, 
VendldSd  XX,  11. 

1.  The  Airyama  Ishy6  I  declare,  O  pure  Spitama, 
the  greatest  of  all  words ;  I  created  it  as  the  most 
triumphant  of  all  words.  That  is  the  word  that 
the  Sao^yawts  ’  will  pronounce. 

2.  Through  it,  I  proclaim  it,  O  Spitama,  I  become 
sovereign  over  my  creation,  I,  Ahura  Mazda ;  and 
through  it  Angra  Mainyu,  of  the  bad  religion, 
shall  lose  the  sovereignty  over  his  own  creation, 
O  Spitama  Zarathu5tra. 

3.  Angra  Main)m  shall  hide  under  the  earth; 
under  the  earth  shall  the  demons  hide.  The  dead 
shall  rise  up,  life  shall  come  back  to  the  bodies  and 
they  shall  keep  the  breath. 

V. 

This  fragment  is  composed  of  two  series  of  invocations  which 
differ  only  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Lesser  Sirdza  differs  from 


’  The  great  saints  of  Mazdeism,  whose  virtue  and  merits  are  to 
bring  about  the  decisive  victory  of  Ahura  over  Angra  Mainyu  and 
the  production  of  the  resurrection. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


248 


fragments  of  the  nasks. 


the  Greater  one,  that  is  to  say,  the  first  is  introduced  by  the 
word  Khshnaothra*,  and  the  second  by  the  word  yazamaidS*. 
These  are  two  forms  of  Khshnfiman  for  a  Darfin  celebrated  on  the 
Bahr&m  day  for  the  benefit  of  a  member  of  the  family  who  is 
travelling. 

1.  [Khshnaothra.  Gratification]  to  Ahura  Mazda, 
bright  and  glorious ; 

To  the  Amesha-Spe«tas ; 

To  the  well-shapen  and  tail-formed  Strength ; 

To  Verethraghna,  made  by  Ahura,  and  to  the 
crushing  Ascendant ; 

To  the  Safety  of  the  roads  ; 

To  the  golden  instrument®  and  to  the  Saoke«ta 
mount,  made  by  Mazda  * ; 

To  all  the  Gods. 

2.  We  sacrifice  (yazamaid^)  to  Ahura  Mazda, 
bright  and  glorious. 

We  sacrifice  to  the  Amesha-Spe«tas ; 

We  sacrifice  to  the  well-shapen  and  tail-formed 
Strength  ; 

We  sacrifice  to  Verethraghna,  made  by  Ahura, 
and  to  the  crushing  Ascendant ; 

We  sacrifice  to  the  Safety  of  the  roads  ; 

We  sacrifice  to  the  golden  instrument  and  to  the 
Saoke»ta  mount,  made  by  Mazda ; 

We  sacrifice  to  all  the  holy  [Gods]. 

VI. 

These  are  the  formulas  recited  in  the  preparation  of  the  ^t*>dm 
(the  milk  that  mixed  with  urvarfim  and  hdm  makes  the  pard- 
h6m).  Those  formulas  are  found  in  the  Pahlavi  Commentary  to 
the  Nirangisldn,  §  68.  The  milch-goat  which  is  going  to  yield  the 

'  Not  expressed ;  the  object  is  in  the  genitive  case. 

*  ‘  We  worship,  we  sacrifice  to '  (the  object  being  in  the  accu¬ 
sative  case). 

’  See  Khdrsh8</  Ny&yir,  8  (Zend-Avesta,  part  ii). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


1.  westergaard’s  fragments. 


249 


milk,  is  introduced  into  the  Urvts-g&h,  whereupon  the  Mobed,  after 
reciting  three  Khshnaothra  and  one  Ashem  vohQ,  pronounces  the 
Fravar&n6  in  the  honour  of  the  present  G$h  and  of  the  animal 
which  is -milked. 

Fravar4n6.  I  confess  myself  a  worshipper  of 
Mazda,  a  follower  of  Zarathu.ytra,  one  who  hates 
the  Daevas,  and  obeys  the  laws  of  Ahura ;  [for 
sacrifice,  prayer,  gratification,  and  glorification  unto 
H4vani,  &c.] 

Khshnaothra.  Gratification,  for  sacrifice,  prayer, 
gratification,  and  glorification, 

[If  there  is  only  one  animal :] 

To  the  Body  of  the  Bull’,  to  the  Soul  of  the 
Bull ;  to  thy  soul,  to  thee  (tava),  O  Beneficent 
Bull. 

Yath&  ahCt  vairyd.  The  will  of  the  Lord,  &c.  . . . 

[If  there  are  two  of  them  :] 

To  the  Body  of  the  Bull,  to  the  Soul  of  the  Bull ; 
to  the  soul  of  you  both  (yuv4kem),  O  Beneficent 
Bulls. 

Yathi  ahO  vairyd  . . . 

[If  there  are  three  of  them 

To  the  Body  of  the  Bull,  to  the  Soul  of  the  Bull ; 
to  your  soul  (yushmdkem),  O  Beneficent  Bulls. 

Yathi  ahd  vairyd  . . . 


VTI. 

These  are  the  formulas  pronounced  during  the  preparation  of  the 
holy  water  or  Zaothra.  They  are  found  in  the  Pahlavi  Commen¬ 
tary  to  NirangistSn,  §  48. 

The  Mobed,  taking  in  hand  the  two  Zaothra  cups,  recites  a 
Khshnaothra  to  the  waters. 


’  Gout  has  become  the  general  name  of  all  animal  species. 
Cf.  Vd.  XXI,  I,  n.  I. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


250 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


r.  Khshnaothra.  Gratification,  for  sacrifice,  prayer, 
gfratification,  and  glorification. 

To  the  Good  Waters^  and  to  all  the  waters 
created  by  Mazda 

To  the  great  Sovereign  ApSm  Napd^*,  and  to 
the  water  created  by  Mazda ; 

To  thee,  O  Ahurini  [O  Water]  of  Ahura ! 

Yath4  ahd  vairyd. 

[He  puts  the  two  cups  on  the  surface  of  the  water  and 
says :] 

2.  We  praise  thee,  O  Ahurini,  [Water]  of  Ahura; 
we  offer  unto  thee  good  sacrifices  and  good  prayers, 
good  offerings,  offerings  of  assistance. 

[Then  he  dips  them,  takes  them  up  and  puts  them 
upon  the  Urvts-stone  while  he  pronounces  the  following 
words :] 

YazatanSm,  thwi,  ashaonSm,  kukhshntsha,  us- 
blbarimi,  rathwas^  berezat6,  gith^os^  sr&vay6irf : 
‘  I  take  thee  up,  may’st  thou  gratify  the  holy  Gods 
and  the  great  Ratu. — Let  him  sing  the  Geithas !’ 

VIIL 

The  following  fragment,  the  text  of  which  is  most  corrupt  and 
defies  translation,  seems  to  be  a  curse  to  destroy  an  enemy. 

I.  May  he  perish  in  the  year,  in  the  month! 

I,  worshipper  of  Mazda,  desire  to  make  him  perish 
by  my  spells.  If  a  man  utter  them,  the  evildoer 
shall  perish  thereby  quick  and  soon  .  .  .  May  none 
be  seized  by  that  Dru^! 


*  The  waters  of  the  present  sacrifice. 

*  See  Yarts  and  Sirdzas,  p.  6,  n.  i. 

’  The  waters  of  the  bowl  from  which  the  priest  draws  water. 
Cf.  the  Guimet  Zend-Avesta,  i,  409,  n.  s ;  416. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


1,  westergaard’s  fragments. 


25> 


2  . when  Mahrkfisha*  shall  perish 

and  the  army  of  the  Dni^  shall  be  thrown  down 
and  broken. 

IX. 

This  fragment  is  as  corrupt  as  the  preceding  one.  It  seems  to 
be  meant  as  a  glorification  of  the  Ahuna  Vairya. 

1.  Yathi  ah  A  vairyd. 

Give,  O  Mazda,  the  desired  reward*, — a  royalty 
befriending  what  is  good*, — the  desired  reward  that 
Religion  deserves*. 

2.  Yath4  ah6  vairyd.  This  is  the  Word  pro¬ 
nounced  by  Mazda,  the  lordly  Word,  the  MSthra 
Spe«ta,  the  undestructible  and  unfailing;  the  vic¬ 
torious,  evil-destroying,  healing  Word;  the  victorious 
Word  pronounced  by  Mazda;  which  utters  and 
uttered  health  ;  victorious  amongst  all. 

3  . In  it  were  uttered  strength,  victory, 

health,  healing,  prosperity,  waxing  and  increase, 
according  to  that  word  in  the  GcLthas :  *  all  that  can 
be  wished  for  by  your  loyal  servants*.’ 

He  who  relieves  the  poor  makes  Ahura  King®. 

4  Let  all  the  World  of  the  Good  Principle  listen  to  this 
sacrifice,  to  this  prayer,  to  this  gratification,  to  this  glori¬ 
fication  ! 

We  sacrifice  to  the  pious  Sraosha. 

We  sacrifice  to  the  Great  Master,  Ahura  Mazda  .... 


’  Mahrkfisha,  the  demon  who  is  going  to  send  the  deathly 
winters  in  prevision  of  which  Yima  is  ordered  to  build  the  Var  (see 
Vd.  II,  aa  and  notes). 

•  From  Yasna  XXXIV,  14  a.  ’  Yasna  LI,  i  a. 

•  Yasna  LIV,  i  (Airyama  ishyd). 

•  Yasna  LXV,  14  (=L,  11  d). 

•  The  last  line  of  the  Ahuna  Vairya. 

’  Yasna  LXX,  6-7.  , 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


II. 

ZEND  FRAGMENTS  IN  THE  ZEND- 
PAHLAVI  FARHANG. 


The  oldest  Zend  dictionary  in  existence,  the  so-called  Zend- 
Pahlavi  Farhang  or  Oyum-yak  Farhang’,  contains  a  number  of 
Zend  sentences  or  fragments  of  sentences,  which  are  adduced  as 
instances  of  the  Zend  words.  They  amount  to  the  number  of 
seventy,  of  which  forty-eight  are  new.  We  thought  it  necessary 
to  give  the  translation  of  these  forty-eight  fragments  only.  The 
indications  of  pages  refer  to  the  printed  edition. 

I  a  (pp.  6-7).  a^dha.  The  skin  on  the  head. 

There  are  two,  one  greater  and  one  lesser,  as  it  is  said  in 
the  Nikdtdm* : 

Which  is  the  greater  aedha  ? — That  one  which  is 
on  the  posterior  part  of  the  skull. 

Which  is  the  lesser  one  ? — That  one  which  is  on 
the  anterior  part  of  the  skull. 

1  b  (p.  7).  The  head  (vaghdhanem)  of  a  man. 

One  bone  of  the  skull. 

*  Haug-Hoshangji,  An  Old  Zend-Pahlavi  Glossary,  Bombay, 
1867. 

2  The  Nikatftm  is  the  fifteenth  Nask,  the  first  of  the  seven 
Legal  Nasks.  It  contained  thirty  Fargards,  the  third  of  which, 
named  R6shistan  (a  treatise  on  the  wounds),  gave  an  enumeration 
of  the  divers  members  of  the  body,  numbering  seventy-six.  The 
fragments  i  a-i  b  are  very  likely  taken  from  that  Fargard. — For 
an  analysis  of  the  Ntkdtfim,  see  Dinkart  VIII,  ch.  16-20  (in 
West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  IV). 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


II.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


253 


All  the  strokes  that  [have  pierced]  the  skull  are 
counted  [tandfOhr]*. 

The  others  shall  pay  the  ^z/ara  •  penalty. 


2  a  (p.  9).  With  victorious  eloquence. 

2  b.  A  fine,  well  considered,  well  balanced,  obe¬ 
dient  ®  speech. 

2  c.  An  honest  man  who  knows  how  to  speak, 
for  instance,  a  wise  man  who  makes  intercession  *. 

2  d.  One  whose  words  are  accepted. 


3  (p.  ii).  Sovereign,  unopposed. 

4  (p.  1 1).  Good  renown  here  below,  and  long  bliss 
to  the  soul  ®. 

5  (p.  1 1).  All  the  bodily  world  shall  become  free 
from  old  age  and  death,  from  corruption  and  rot, 
for  ever  and  ever  *. 

6  (p.  12).  A  horse  of  first  value,  amongst  the 
finest  of  the  country,  is  as  much  as  four  oxen  and 
four  cows  three  years  old. 

7  (p.  1 2).  As  much  as  this  earth. 


'  Which  implies  a  punishment  of  two  hundred  Sraoshd-^rana 
strokes.  The  words  in  brackets  are  wanting  in  the  text :  they  are 
supplied  from  the  Pahlavi  translation. 

*  The  hv2in.  or  khdr  penalty:  thirty  strokes  with  the  Sraoshd- 
^rana  (Vd.  IV,  30,  31). 

*  In  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  Ratu  or  Dastftr. 

*  Who  makes  G4dang6i:  see  Tahmuras'  Fragments,  XL VII, 
note. 

®  Good  renown  in  this  world  and  bliss  in  the  other.  Cf.  Yasna 
LXII,  6;  Yart  XVII,  22,  and  Tansar's  letter  to  the  King  of 
Tabaristan :  ‘  He  may  be  called  a  great  king  who  takes  more  to 
heart  the  weal  of  the  future  than  the  present  time,  in  order  to 
deserve  a  good  name  in  this  world  and  a  good  seat  in  the  next.* 
(Journal  Asiatique,  1894, 1,  512-513)- 

*  Cf.  Yajt  XIX,  II,  23.  89  ;  XXIV,  45. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


254 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


8  (p.  1 2).  The  smallest  of  those  stars  is  as  large 
as  the  head  of  a  man  of  middle  size 

9  (p.  1 2).  An  ashti  in  front,  as  much  in  depth  *. 

10  (p.  13).  There  where  the  sun  rises. 

1 1  (p.  1 3).  There  where  Ahura  Mazda  will  g^ve 
you  prosperity. 

12  (p.  14)®.  He  who  to  a  plaintiff  does  not  proffer 

place,  ordeal,  and  time  of  appointment  * ; 

and  all  the  operations  of  justice,  conformable  to 
the  law  and  the  rule,  worked  out  by  the  Ahu  and 
the  Ratu,  according  to  the  laws  of  Asha  Vahirta .  .  . 

13  (p.  14).  He  who  says  to  a  man  :  Make  amends 
unto  me. 

14  (p.  14).  When  two  men  appoint  a  time® .  .  . 

15  (pp.  14-15).  As  long  as  he  has  life. 

16.  And  the  young  Gay6-Maratan*. 

17.  In  the  time  when  those  men  were,  O  Zara- 
thujtra ! 


'  ‘  Amongst  the  stars  (says  the  Greater  Bundahish),  the  larger 
ones  are  as  large  as  a  jhui&t-house  (?) ;  the  middle  stars  are  as 
large  as  a  cah&rakdn  naptishu(?);  the  lesser  ones  are  as  large 
as  the  head  of  a  domestic  ox.  The  moon  is  as  large  as  a  riding- 
ground,  two  hSsars  long ;  the  sun  is  as  large  as  IrSn-V^^  ’  (thus 
in  Anaxagoras’  astronomy  the  sun  has  the  dimensions  of  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus). — From  a  comparison  between  the  Greater  Bundahish 
and  the  Zend  passage  quoted  in  the  Farhang  it  appears  that  the 
measurement  of  the  stars  was  discussed  several  dmes  and  not 
without  slight  variations  in  the  Avesta  (most  likely  in  the  cosmo¬ 
logical  Ddmd&t  Nask). 

*  Cf.  Vd.  XIII,  30. 

*  This  fragment  and  the  two  following  seem  to  be  taken  from 
the  Nikdtdm  Nask. 

*  The  defendant,  if  conscious  of  his  innocence,  will  propose  that 
he  should  go  through  the  whole  process  of  one  of  the  judicial 
ordeals. 

*  For  an  ordeal. 

*  Gayd-Maratan,  Gaydmard,  the  first  man.  Cf.  Yt.  XIII,  87. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


II.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


255 


18  (p.  15).  To  the  lesser  man  labour,  to  the  jgreater 
one,  commandment  (?). 

19.  On  went  Pounuaspa,  on  go  these  sons  of 
Thra^taona’s  (?). 

20.  He  makes  himself  gfuilty  of  the  yita  sin 

21  a  (p.  16).  A  year’s  delay  for  a  vird-maz6  con¬ 
tract*. 

2 1  b.  They  ®  boiled  up,  they  fell  back. 

22.  ya€tu^  zaSmand  (?) 

23.  yaojiina  surahs  (?) 

24.  Let  one  pluck  stems,  three  stems  *. 

25.  The  edge  of  a  razor. 

26.  If  they  have  come  [or  have  not  come]. 

27.  The  progeny  and  son  of  Ahura  Mazda. 

28  (p.  17).  The  several  sorts  of  com. 

29.  I  offer  up  the  sacrifice  to  the  Frazdinava 
waters  ®. 

30.  Who  is  the  judge  who  knows  the  law  ? 

It  is  the  one  who  sees  the  due  decision  •. 

31  (p.  18).  And  clothes  magnificently  wrought. 

32.  Lands  fit  for  tillage. 

33  (p-  ^9)*  All  the  agreements  in  the  world. 

34  (p.  23).  .  .  .  happiness  with  his  eyes^. 

35  (p*  30)'  Goods  carried  by  force. 

36  (p.  31).  gathwd-^tay^aflf. 


*  Yita,  yit:  the  sin  of  breaking  a  man’s  leg. 

*  A  contract  to  the  amount  of  a  man  (valued  150  ist!rs=5oo 
dirhems). 

*  The  waters.  *  For  the  Baresman  (Yasna  LVII,  6). 

*  A  river  or  lake  in  Saistan,  where  Vishtispa  sacrificed  to  the 
Goddess  of  Waters  (Yt.  V,  108). 

*  He  sees  the  right  and  legal  decision  which  results  from  the 
facts  of  the  case. — Cf.  West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  IV,  64,  note. 

’  This  refers  to  the  good  eye,  to  some  beneficent  being  who  sends 
luck  with  his  look :  cf.  Yt.  XIX,  94,  and  reversely  Yasna  IX,  29. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


256 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


37.  thwSm  khratu^  (?) 

38.  Which,  recited  to  Mazda,  protects  the  end  \ 

39  (p*  38).  The  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda  receives  food 
three  times  in  summer,  twice  in  winter  * ;  thus  does 
the  fire  of  the  faithful  man  ®. 

40  (p.  39).  Fifteen  sheep,  their  hind-feet. 

41  (p.  40).  Anywhere  in  this  world. — Whosoever 
in  the  bodily  world. — Whatsoever  of  the  world  of 
the  good  principle. 

42  (p.  41).  ivaiti  a^tshaya  (K\  a^tashaya). 

43.  As  much  as  twelve  steps  a»tare  thwSm  (?) 

44.  Twice  a  Daktirmaiti  is  a  Yu/yarti  *. 

Twice  as  much  as  a  Hithra  is  a  Ta^ra  ®, 

45  (p.  42).  From  the  coming  of  the  light* .  .  . 

46  (p.  43).  The  longest  day  is  the  day  of  twelve 
Hithras 

47.  The  shortest  Hithra  is  of  three  words  *. 


'  This  refers  perhaps  to  the  Ashem  Vohh,  which,  being  recited 
by  a  man  with  his  dying  breath,  saves  his  soul  (Yt.  XXI,  15). 

*  The  fire  is  fed  three  times  a  day  in  summer,  at  the  three  Gdhs 
of  the  day ;  only  twice  in  winter,  as  in  winter  there  are  only  two 
Gdhs,  the  Rapithvin  being  included  in  Hfivan. 

*  There  will  be  two  meals  in  winter,  one  in  the  morning, 
another  in  the  evening.  In  summer  there  is  a  third  meal,  at 
noon  (cf.  Yasna  IX,  ii). — The  passage  thirty-nine  is  taken  from 
the  Sakdtfim  Nask  (cf.  West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  IV,  480). 

^  A  Yu^axti  being  16,000  paces,  a  Dakhrmaiti  is  8,000  paces 
(cf.  West,  ibid.  56,  note). 

*  A  Hdthra  being  1,000  paces,  a  Ta^ra  is  as  much  as  a,ooo  paces. 

*  The  coming  of  the  light  (rao^nghSim  fragati)  is  the  name  of 
the  last  watch  of  the  night. 

^  Hdthra  is  a  measure  for  time  as  well  as  for  space.  ‘  A  summer 
day  (says  the  Bundahij,  XXV,  5)  is  of  twelve  h4sars;  a  winter 
day  is  of  six  hdsars.’ 

’  The  uses  and  values  of  the  H&thra  are  most  diverse:  as  a 
measure  for  short  intervals  of  time,  it  is  the  time  needed  to  pro¬ 
nounce  three  words. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


II.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


257 


48.  Three  steps  of  that  sort  of  steps  \ 

Here  is  for  the  judge,  here  is  for  the  witness*. 
Here  is  for  the  suit,  here  is  for  the  suitors. 


^  The  complete  meaning  of  the  sentence  would  seem  to  be : 
*  The  judge  and  the  witness  stand  in  a  circle  of  three  steps '  (Far- 
hang). 

*  The  Farhang  has :  *  All  the  speeches  of  the  suit  ought  to  be 
held  within  three  steps;  and  both  pleaders — both  defendant  and 
plaintiff — should  stand  within  a  circle  of  three  steps so  that  every¬ 
body  may  hear  distinctly  the  whole  of  the  debate. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


III. 


ZEND  FRAGMENTS  QUOTED  IN  THE 
PAHLAVI  COMMENTARY  OF  THE  YASNA. 


Yasna  IX,  I,  3^ 

Mithrd  zayi^  Zarathu^trem. 

‘  Mitra  armis  (?)  Zoroastrem  .  . 

These  words  are  found  in  the  Commentary  to  the  beginning  of 
the  Hdm  Yart :  Haoma  approached  Zarathu^tra  *  while  he  was 
washing  the  fire-altar  and  singing  the  Gdthas/  and  Zarathujtra  asked 
him  who  he  was.  The  Commentary  here  observes  that  Zarathurtra 
had  recognised  Haoma ;  *  as  it  appears  from  the  passage,  Mithrd 
z2Lyid  Zarathujtrem,  that  he  knew  him,  that  he  had  already  had 
appointments  with  most  of  the  Izeds  and  was  well  acquainted  with 
them.* — That  passage,  quoted  as  usual  by  its  first  words,  is  very 
likely  taken  from  the  Spand,  the  Nask  occupied  with  the  legend  of 
Zoroaster. 


Yasna  IX,  i,  4. 
amereza  gay^h6  stAna. 

This  quotation  refers  to  the  time  when  everybody  will  be  im¬ 
mortal  without  a  body.  It  may  be  translated  by  conjecture. 

‘  The  column  of  life^  [made]  marrowless.' 


Yasna  IX,  8,  27. 

Kd  thwSm  yim  Ahurem  MazdSm. — ‘Quis  te, 
Ahiira  Mazda  .  .  .  ? ' 

This  quotation  comes  after  the  description  of  the  three-headed 


^  The  first  Arabic  number  refers  to  Geldner's,  the  second  to 
Spiegel's  edition. 

•  The  spine. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


III.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


259 


serpent,  Asi  Dahdka.  Its  beginning  reminds  one  of  a  similar  and 
perhaps  identical  question  in  Vendfdid  XVIII,  61 :  K6  thwam 
yim  Ahurem  Mazd2[m  mazwtaya  inti  inaod,  ‘Who  grieves  thee, 
Ahura  Mazda,  with  the  sorest  grief?* 


Yasna  IX,  II,  35. 

Khshva^paya  va^na)^  bareshna  (or  barenu^). 

The  horned  serpent,  Ajeri  Srvara,  whom  Keresispa  killed, 
had  yellow  poison,  a  thumb  thick,  streaming  over  its  body, 
khshva^paya  va^naya  bareshna,  ‘  by  the  anus,  by  the  nose, 
by  the  head  (?).’  _ 

Yasna  XVII,  55  (ed.  Spiegel). 

apagay6h6. — Privation  of  life  .  .  . 

First  word  of  a  quotation  which  appears  in  passages  intended 
either  to  prolong  life  and  deprecate  the  death  of  a  friend  (generally 
under  the  form :  may  there  be  no  room  for  apagayShS,  XLl,  7 ; 
XLn,  i),  or  to  wish  death  to  an  enemy  (XLV,  4  ;  XL VIII,  10; 
LII,  8 ;  LXI,  10 ;  ed.  Sp.) 


Yasna  XXXI,  20  b  (ed.  Spinel), 
vlshd^  ( =  vlshia^y^a,  ‘  also  of  poison,'  at  the  end 
of  XLVIII,  II  d,  in  the  best  MSS.) 

Descriptive  of  the  bad  food  supplied  to  the  wicked  in  hell,  the 
vishayda</^  vish-gaitayda<//fei  of  Yt.  XXII,  36. 


Yasna  LVI,  i,  i  (ed.  Spiegel). 

bar6ithr6-ta62fem. — See  Fragments  at  Vd.  XVIII, 

14.  33  (Sp.)  _ 

Yasna  LXIV,  48  (ed.  Spiegel). 
p4dhav6  z4vare  gava  asa  srOma. 

A  corrupt  quotation  in  the  MSS.,  from  Yt.  XVI,  7. 


s  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


IV. 


ZEND  FRAGMENTS  QUOTED  IN  THE 
PAHLAVI  COMMENTARY  OF 
THE  VENDIdAD. 


VendIdAd  I,  a*. 

as6  rim6-d4ittm  ntid  ao^6-rimirtSm. 

‘A  place  that  gives  pleasure,  though  not  absolute 
pleasure.’ 

This  refers  to  the  present  condition  of  the  countries,  marred  by 
Ahriman’s  operations ;  every  man  finds  his  own  country  delightful, 
however  much  its  charm  may  have  been  spoiled  by  Ahriman. 

paoirlm  bittm. — ^  Firstly,  secondly/ 

‘Firstly,  the  good  operation  was  done  for  that  country  ; 
secondly,  after  the  Genius  of  the  Earth  had  done  all  its 
operations  in  that  country,  the  work  of  opposition  came 
against  it.  In  other  terms,  two  things  :  one  at  the  time  of 
creation,  the  other  afterwards/ 

dad  ahfi  paitydrem. — ‘  Then  to  this  an  opposition.* 

mash  md  rava  shatham  haitlm. — (?) 


VendIdAd  I,  4. 

It  is  known  that  [in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature] 
there  are  seven  months  of  summer  and  five  of 
winter*. 

^  The  last  five  lines  in  note  2,  page  3  above  are  to  be 
replaced  by  the  following :  Clause  2,  in  the  Vendtddd  Sdda,  is 
composed  of  Zend  quotations  in  the  Commentary :  for  which,  see 
below,  Fragments  to  the  Vendiddd. 

*  Whereas  in  Airyana  Va6^6  there  are  ten  months  of  winter 
and  two  of  summer. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


IV.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


261 


VendIdAd  I,  15. 

From  there  ^  they  come  to  kill  and  strike  at  heart, 
and  they  bring  locusts  as  many  as  they  want. 


VendIdAd  I,  16. 

va^dhanghd  ntid  uz6i^®. — Of  knowledge,  not  of 
love  (?)®. 

Refers  to  ‘  Ragha  of  the  three  races,’  the  native 
place  of  Zoroaster’s  mother. 


VendIdAd  I,  19. 

‘From  the  Eastern  river  to  the  Western  one’ 
(  =  Yt  X,  104). _ 

VendIdAd  I,  20. 

‘And  the  tao^ya  (?)^  oppression  of  the  country.’ 


VendIdAd  II,  6  (see  above,  p.  12,  note  i). 

‘Although  Yima  did  not  teach  the  law  and  train  pupils, 
he  was  nevertheless  one  of  the  faithful  and  a  holy  man, 
and  rendered  men  holy  too  (?).’ 

‘That  he  was  one  of  the  faithful®  appears  from  this 
passage: 


^  From  the  Ha6tuma^t  country  (Saistdn).  See  above,  Vd.  1, 15, 
note  I. 

*  The  word  dah&kdi,  found  only  in  is  probably  an  unfor¬ 
tunate  accretion  to  uz6Lr  read  as  as6i^. 

*  Ragha  knows  the  truth,  but  does  not  like  it.  Unbelief  is 
dominant  there  (Vd.  I,  16). 

*  According  to  the  greater  Bundahlr,  taosya  means  t&^ik, 
*  Arabic.’  Arab  tribes  were  established  in  the  basin  of  the  Rangha 
(the  Tigris)  long  before  the  Arab  conquest 

'  v6h-dfn,  a  member  of  the  Zoroastrian  community  (though 
prematurely  so). 


Digitized  by 


262 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


mriiidhi  tsid  mSthwem  ysid  Si^m^id  yd  dadva. — 

“  Say  that  formula  which  even  the  Dadvas  .  .  ' 

‘  That  he  was  holy  ^  appears  from  this  passage  : 

“We  sacrifice  to  the  Fravashi  of  the  holy  Yima, 
son  of  Vlvangha/"  '  (Yt.  XIII,  130). 

‘  That  he  rendered  men  holy  too  (?)  *  appears  from  this 
passage : 

abareshnva  pas^adta  as5ra  mashydkadibyd^' 

The  Commentary  then  proceeds  to  state  that  Yima  lost  by  his 
sin  the  gift  of  immortality,  and  remarks  that  (zim  and  Kdfts  were  both 
created  immortal  (a-dsh)  and  became  mortal  by  their  own  fault. 

‘  For  Gim  this  appears  from  the  following  passage  : 

“  Soon  he  changed  this^  to  death  by  the  fault  of 
his  tongue®.” " 

*  For  Kftfts  it  appears  from  this  passage : 

“  Thereupon  he®  let  him  flee  away ;  whereupon 
mortal  he  became  ' 


'  ahlav,  that  is,  *one  of  the  blessed’ 

*  Literally,  ‘he  put  the  distinctive  character  of  it  in  the  body 
of  man.' 

®  Literally,  ‘without  a  head,  afterwards,  without  a  chief,  for 
men.' 

*  His  immortality. 

®  ‘When  he  took  delight  in  words  of  falsehood  and  error'  (Yt. 
XIX,  34) ;  when  he  claimed  the  name  and  the  worship  of  a  god. 

*  Neryosengh,  who  was  in  the  act  of  putting  Kdfis  to  death. 

A  quotation  from  the  Sfttkar  Nask,in  which  the  legend  of  the 
greatness  and  fall  of  Kat-Kdfts  was  told  in  full  detail.  Kat-Kdfts 
had  become  king  of  the  seven  Karxvares  of  the  Earth  (cf.  Yt.  V, 
46),  and  all  demons  and  men  were  obedient  to  his  word ;  he  built 
seven  palaces  in  the  middle  of  Alborz,  one  of  gold,  two  of  silver, 
two  of  steel,  two  of  crystal ;  and  if  men,  broken  down  by  age  and  on 
the  point  of  breathing  their  last,  were  taken  round  his  palace,  they 
recovered  at  once  strength  and  youth.  But  the  demons,  whom  he 
kept  in  bonds,  took  counsel  how  to  get  rid  of  him  ;  and  to  achieve 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


IV.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


263 


VENDioAo  II,  16. 

The  Commentary  infers  from  the  threefold  proceeding  of  Yima 
towards  the  South  that,  on  entering  upon  any  new  enterprise,  one 
must  go  three  steps  southwards  and  recite  an  ahuna  vairya. 

‘  That  his  creation  [of  the  earth]  became  more  beautiful 
[towards  the  South]  appears  from  the  passage : 

usehi^ta^/  gkus  barsu/  daNhu^. — “  The  ox  rose  up, 
the  land  bore  [fruits],”  ’ 

‘  That  one  must  recite  an  Avesta  text  appears  from  the 
passage  in  the  Pa[s6]^h6r6n^: 

srlra  ukhdha  va^^u  sSsanghSm. — ? ' 

‘  That  that  text  is  the  Ahunvar  appears  from  the  passage 
Ahund  vairyd 


his  ruin  inspired  him  with  a  disgust  of  his  earthly  sovereignty  and 
a  longing  for  the  Kingdom  of  the  Gods.  Accordingly  he  went  over 
Alborz  with  an  army  of  demons  and  wicked  men,  and  rushed  down 
to  the  border  of  Darkness :  there  he  erected  a  statue  of  clay  to  the 
Fortune  of  the  Kaianides.  Then  he  entered  into  a  struggle  with 
the  Gods,  and  the  Creator  recalled  to  himself  the  royal  Glory  of 
the  Kaianides,  and  Kdds’  army  fell  from  above  down  to  the  earth ; 
Kids  himself  being  carried  along  the  Frdkh-kart  Sea  (the  Caspian 
Sea).  And  a  man,  closely  united  to  him,  ran  after  him,  and  after 
that  man  ran  the  messenger  of  Auhrmazd,  Neryosengh.  And  that 
man,  who  was  the  still  unborn  Kai-Khosrav,  cried  out :  ‘  Kill  him 
not,  O  Neryosengh  I  For  if  thou  killest  him,  there  will  be  no 
destroyer  of  the  chief  of  Tfirin :  for  to  this  man  Syivakhsh  shall 
be  bom,  and  to  Sydvakhsh,  I,  Kai-Khosrav,  shall  be  born,  who 
am  going  to  destroy  Tdr&n  and  its  king  and  its  armies.'  Ner¬ 
yosengh,  rejoiced  by  these  words,  thereupon  let  Kat-KSds  away ; 
thereupon  he  became  mortal  (Dfnkart  IX,  22,  4-12}. 

‘  Perhaps  the  Pasdx-haurvastdn  Fargard  in  the  Ganbd- 
sar-ni^at  Nask  (West,  Dinkart  VIII,  23,  §  19  ?). 

*  Perhaps  the  passage  meant  is  Vd.  XI,  3 :  *  The  Ahuna  Vair}^ 
preserves  the  person  of  man.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


264 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


VendIdAd  II,  20  a  (Westergaard). 

‘  Then  Yima  drew  to  a  close  the  holy  first  millen¬ 
nium  of  years 


VendIdad  II,  20  b. 

avaiti  bSz6. — ‘  Of  the  same  thickness  .  .  / 

‘  That  Cim,  three  times,  made  the  earth  as  large  as  it 
was  before,  appears  from  the  passage  : 

avaiti  bSz6.’ 


VendIdAd  II,  20  c. 

‘  Auhrmazd  kept  this  world  for  three  thousand  years  in 
a  spiritual  shape ;  for  three  thousand  years  he  kept  it  in 
a  material  shape,  but  without  any  opposition ;  three  thousand 
years  elapsed  from  the  coming  of  the  Opposition  to  the 
coming  of  the  Religion ;  three  thousand  years  will  elapse 
from  the  coming  of  the  Religion  to  the  resurrection.  As 
follows  from  the  passage : 

ATva^tem  zrvdnem  mainyava  sti^  ashaoni  dAta  as. 

“  How  long  did  the  holy  creation  remain  in  a 
spiritual  form  ?  ”  * 


VendIdAd  III,  14. 

n6i^  makhshi-beretd. — ‘  Nor  brought  by  flies  ’ 
(  =  Vd.  V,  3  ;  see  above,  p.  50). 

yo  visa//  a^taySm^  zaothrSm  Atarem  A  frabar6i//. 

‘  It  appears  from  this  passage  that  if  a  man  throw  his 

^  For  three  times  three  hundred  years  Yima  had  governed  and 
increased  the  earth :  the  last  century  of  his  millennial  reign  was 
passed  in  building  and  organising  the  Var.  (Cf.  above,  p.  14, 
note  I.) 

*  aStaySLm  in  MF  and  B’  (West);  Spiegel  has  afiySm,  Wester¬ 
gaard  has  aSvSm. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


IV,  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


265 


dast-sh6^  into  the  water,  it  is  as  if  he  had  thrown  hdhr 
into  the  fire.’ 

yatha  narem  du.ri4  zaretem. — ‘A  righteous  man 
bowed  down  with  age  ’  (see  the  passage  given  in  full 
in  the  Tahmuras  Frag^ments,  §  38). 

‘It  appears  from  this  passage  that  throwing  h6hr  into 
water  or  fire  is  as  bad  as  casting  nasS  (dead  matter)  on 
one  of  the  faithful.’ 

paoiryi  upaiti  paoiryd  nishasta. — ‘  For  the  first 
time  he  comes  near  unto  her,  for  the  first  time  he 
liesbyher’  (  =  Vd.  XVI,  15). 


VendIdAd  III,  15. 
yi  nar^  ^t^-aothremahd  yat6. — ? 

Words  inserted  in  the  London  manuscript  (L‘)  after  the  word 
hurkd-zemdtememita,  as  also  in  Vd.  V,  46. 


VendIdAd  III,  27. 
bAdha  idha  AfrasAni  daNhubyd. — ? 


VendIdAd  III,  40. 
y6i  he«ti  aiNh«u  zem6  kane»ti. 

‘  Those  who  bury  [corpses]  in  this  earth.' 


yd  nar^  ashaond  iririthushd  zemd  kehrpa  nikainti. 

‘  He  who  buries  the  corpse  of  a  righteous  man  who 
has  departed  .  .  .’ 

This  passage  is  quoted  by  VindS^f-gQshnasp,  as  establishing  that 
for  every  one  of  the  worms  that  eat  up  the  buried  corpse,  the  man 
who  did  the  burying  is  liable  to  a  tanifdhr  penalty. 


’  The  water  in  which  he  has  washed  his  hands. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


266 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


VENDIdAd  III,  42. 
spay^iti. — ‘  It  takes  away.' 

An  abridged  expression  of  the  principle  that  the  Zoroastrian 
religion  has  an  atonement  for  every  crime,  and  that  it  takes  away 
his  sin  from  the  man  who  confesses  and  expiates  it  (see  Vd.  Ill, 
41  seq.) 

pari  kavahmid(  nere/Z. — ‘  Away  from  any  man.’ 
ndiaf  marim  pairirtem. — .  .  .  ? 
vanghavi  mananghi. — ‘  To  Vohu  Mand.' 
tiiryanSm  dahyunSm. — ‘  Of  the  Turanian  nations.’ 

‘  Gd-gishnasp  said :  “  In  every  religion  there  are  righteous 
men,  as  appears  from  the  passage — Of  the  Turanian 
nations ;  ”  ’  (that  is  to  say,  from  the  passage :  ‘We worship 
the  Fravashis  of  the  holy  men  of  the  Turanian  nations  ;  ’ 
Yt  XIII,  143).  _ 

VendIdAd  IV,  I. 

ya<f  ni  kasvikSm^ina. — ‘  The  man  who  [entreated 
by  one  of  the  faithful,]  does  not  [give  him]  anything, 
be  it  ever  so  little,’  [of  the  riches  he  has  treasured 
up]  (quoted  from  Vd.  XVIII,  34). 

yavafl(  vi  aiti  vaia  framrvina  maithemnahi  hv^\ 
pairi  g^rvayiiti. 

‘  While  he  pronounces  these  words :  “  as  long  as 
he  keep  in  his  house  (his  neighbour’s  property),  as 
though  it  were  his  own’”  (Vd.  IV,  i). 


VendIdAd  IV,  10. 
nava  drq^iti  khshathra^ibyd. 

‘  The  Mihir-dnif  (the  man  who  does  not  keep 
his  word)  does  harm ;  nava  dru^iti  khshathra^ibyd 
(khshdithra^ibyd  ?).’ 

That  is  to  say,  the  evil  consequences  of  his  peijury  extend  to 
nine  cities  around;  he  ruins  his  own  city  and  the  neighbouring 
ones  (cf.  Mihir  Yart,  18). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


IV.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


267 


West  proposes  to  translate  khshathra^ibyd  ‘  guardianships,  hold¬ 
ings  of  property,  sarddrih.’  ‘  The  breach  of  promise  subsists  in 
one’s  offspring  (zty&k.  Ml*),  nava  dri^faiti  khshathra6iby6,  “it 
deceives  for  nine  holdings  of  property,’”  that  is  to  say,  for  nine 
generations.  West  observes  this  would  agree  with  Neryosengh’s 
definition  of  nabdnazdirta.  It  agrees  also  with  the  next  quota¬ 
tion  : 

nerebyd  hd  dSdrakhti. — [That  sin]  ‘  takes  root  in 
men.’ 

*  The  sin  of  perjury  subsists  in  the  child  born  after  the 
perjury :  nerebyd  hd  d^drakhti.’ 

pairi  ao^stard  z!  ahmid. — ‘  It  becomes  more 
violent  than  that  (or  thereby).’ 


VendIdAd  V,  2,  4. 

diyata  dAitya  pairirti  (read  pairi^ta). — *  Give  law¬ 
ful,  well-examined  wood^’ 

vltasti-dr^6  frArithni-dr^^d. — ‘  On  a  Vltasti  all 
around  [if  the  wood  be  dry],  on  a  Frirdthni  all 
around  [if  it  be  wetl’ — An  abridcfed  quotation  from 
Vd.  VII,  29. 


VendIdAd  V,  7. 

ydzi  vasen  mazdayasna  zSm  raodhayen. 

‘  If  worshippers  of  Mazda  want  to  till  that  piece 
of  ground  again  ’  (from  Vd.  VI,  6). 


On  the  text :  *  When  a  man  goes  away,  it  is  by  the  will  of  Fate 
he  goes '  (Vd.  V,  9),  the  Commentary  observes : 

‘  The  boon  that  has  not  been  destined  for  a  man  never 
comes  to  him,  as  appears  from  the  passage  : 


^  Wood  perfectly  dry  and  ready  for  the  fire ;  cf.  Vd.  XIV,  2, 
note  4. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


268 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


gairi  mas6  anghd  aStah6. — .  .  .  ? 

‘  The  boon  that  has  been  destined  for  him  comes  to  him 
through  his  own  active  merit ; 

any6  eredvd-za«g6  ^z/aren6. — “Another  man,  of 
a  steady  leg‘,  [conquers]  glory.” 

‘  He  loses  it  by  his  own  fault  * : 

Ava.Ten6  frapiry^iti. — “  He  loses  his  Glory.” 

‘  If  evil  has  been  destined  for  him,  he  can  repel  it  through 
his  own  active  merit : 

‘  [I  see  no  way  to  kill  Spitama  Zarathurtra],  “  so 
great  is  the  glory  of  the  holy  Zarathurtra”  (Vd. 
XIX,  3). 

a6sh4mia  naram. — “  Of  these  men  .  . 


VENdIdAd  V,  19,  21. 

^itihe»ti  urvaranSm  saredha. — ‘  How  many  sorts 

of  plants  are  there  ?  ’ . 

anghvSm  da^nSm. — *His  soul  and  his  religion®.’ 


VendIdAd  V,  34. 

‘Let  no  man  alone  by  himself  carry  a  corpse’ 
(  =  Vd.  Ill,  14). 

‘  [If  the  Nasu]  has  [already]  been  expelled’  ( =  Vd. 
VII,  30).  _ 


VendIdAd  VI,  26. 

bar6  aspd  vaz6  ras6. — bard  applies  to  horse-riding, 
vazd  applies  to  chariot-driving. 


'  A  sign  of  strength  and  agility  (Yasna  LXII,  5 ;  Yt.  X,  61). 

*  Like  Gim  or  Kills ;  see  above,  p.  262. 

*  His  life,  the  whole  of  his  actions,  judged  from  the  religious 
point  of  view. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


IV.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


269 


VENDtDAD  VII,  43. 

bivakay^h^. 

This  seems  to  be  the  name  given  in  the  Rat-dSt4t  Nask  to  two 
passages  in  the  Vendtd&d  on  medical  examinations  and  doctors'  fees 
(Vd.  VII,  36-40 ;  41-43),  or  to  a  passage  in  that  Nask  treating  of 
the  same  subjects. 

stavand  v4  pCliti  pdidhi  davaisn^  vL — ? 


VENDtoAD  VII,  52. 

§§  53~‘54  Vendiddd  Sdda  are  composed  of  quotations 

in  the  Pahlavi  Commentary  in  support  of  §§  51,  52  :  ‘He  who 
should  pull  down  Dakhmas,  even  so  much  thereof  as  the  size  of 
his  own  body,  his  sins  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  are  remitted  as 
they  would  be  by  a  Patet  (paititem) ;  his  sins  in  thought,  word, 
and  deed  are  atoned  for  (uzvarxtem)/ 

paititem  u  va>^6-urvaiti5  u  ya^a  (read  yava^^a). — 

‘  Patet  and  right  of  speech  and  for  ever  and  ever*.' 

^  Wherever  the  Avesta  has  paititem,  or  va^6-urvaitw,  or 
ya6^a(read  yava^>&a),  it  means  that  the  margarzdn  sinner 
has  a  tandfOhr  sin  suppressed  and  a  merit  (karfak)  of 
the  same  value  substituted  for  it/ 

adhcufci  hewti  paretd-tanunam  ^aothnanSm  uzvar- 
^tay6. — ‘  And  these  are  the  ways  of  undoing  deeds 
that  make  one  peshdtanu.' 

yatha^a  dim  ^na^  SpitamaZarathu^tra  yim  viptem 
vi. — ‘And  if  he  kill  the  sodomite,  O  Spitama  Zara- 
thu^ra  ! '  (cf.  p.  1 13,  n.  4). 

‘  From  this  passage  it  appears  that  killing  a  sodomite  is 
equal  to  paititem.’ 


^  Paititem  represents  the  formula,  ‘his  sins  in  thought,  word, 
and  deed  are  remitted  as  they  would  be  by  a  Patet.' — va^6-urvaiti^ 
appears  to  stand  for  some  formula  meaning  that  the  sinner  is 
henceforth  va^6-urvaitir,  that  is  to  say,  his  word  recovers  authority 
(cf.  Afrfngin  G4hanb&r,  VIII  b). — ya6>^  (read  yava6>fei)  means  that 
his  sin  is  cancelled  for  ever. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


270 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


yas^a  dim  gdsidid  Spitama  Zarathurtra  vehrkem 
yim  biza^^grem  da^vayasnem  peshd-tanv6. — ‘And  he 
who  should  kill,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra!  a  two-footed 
wolf,  a  Da^va-worshipper,  for  a  pesh6tanu  deed.* 

‘  From  this  passage  it  appears  that  killing  an  infidel 
(an^r-^)  is  as  much  as  yavafi^a,  that  is  to  say,  his  sin  is 
rooted  out  of  him  [for  ever].' 

va^6-urvaiti^. — ‘  The  right  of  speech.' 

haithlm  ashavana  bavatem. — ‘  Both  become  mani¬ 
festly  holy^* 

vlspem  ta^  paiti  framarezaiti  dumiatem>Sa. 

[The  celebration  of  the  Avesta  office]  ‘cleanses 
the  faithful  from  every  evil  thought,'  [word,  and 
deed]^ .  .  . 

The  following  quotations  refer  to  the  balance  of  deeds,  the  rules 
of  which  are  stated  in  the  Ar^d  Vir&f : 

‘  For  every  one  whose  good  works  are  three  Sr6sh6- 
^aran^m  more  than  his  sin,  goes  to  heaven ;  they  whose  sin 
is  more,  go  to  hell ;  they  in  whom  both  are  equal,  remain 
among  these  Ham^stagAn  till  the  future  existence  V 

‘Gd-gfishnasp  says:  during  the  sitdsh  sin  and  merit 
are  compared : 

yzd  he  ava^  paourum  ub^fiitd. — “  If  it  outweighs 
so  much  .  . ." 

‘  If  sins  outweigh  the  merits  by  three  Sr6sh6->{raran4m,  [he 
shall  stay]  in  hell  till  the  day  of  resurrection  : 

itare  vB,nghaud  vananT. — ? 

‘  If  sins  and  merits  are  equal,  [he  shall  stay]  in  the 
hamdstag4n. 


^  Their  salvation  is  assured, 

*  Cf.  Vd.  Ill,  42. 

*  Ardi  Viraf  VI,  9-1 1. 

*  The  sadis,  or  the  three  nights  that  follow  death. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


IV.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


271 


hSm-ydsaiti. — [The  man  in  whom  falsehood  and 
purity]  “  meet  equally”  (  =  Yasna  XXXIII,  i  c). 

‘  If  the  merits  outweigh  the  sins  by  three  Srdshd-^aranfim, 
[he  shall  go]  to  the  heavens  : 

aiNhtfu  dtare  vani^/. — ? 

‘  If  he  has  offered  up  a  sacrifice,  his  merits  are  above  his 
sins  by  one  tan&ffihr,  and  he  goes  to  the  Gardthm&n  : 

a^tah6  thnasa^  d^ishanguha. — ? 

‘  Afrs^  says :  the  words 

avavafllridf  yatha  hv6  peresahd 

show  that  more  than  one  tan4ffihr  is  needed.  Some  say 
four  tan&fCthrs  are  needed : 

y6  tffiryibij. — “  Qui  quartis.” 

tishrSm  khshapanSm. — [The  tortures]  “of  the 
three  nights  ’ _ 

VendIdAd  VII,  7a. 

y^zi  a^hSm  patard  ishare-Jtfiitya. — Tf  their  fathers 
at  once  .  .  .' 

The  Pahlavi  text  is  too  corrupt  for  the  connection  between  the 
quotation  and  the  Zend  text  to  be  clear. 


VendIdAd  VIII,  aa,  74. 

yatha  makhshyau  perenem  yatha  vfi  aperenahA — 
‘  As  much  as  a  fly’s  wing,  or  of  a  wingless  .  .  .’  (?) 

74.  Burning  a  corpse  is  a  capital  crime.  Is  it  allowable  to  bum 
the  living  P 

<  G6-gfishnasp  said :  If  it  is  for  punishment,  it  must  be 
done 

yat/  ahmi  (or  hama)  ava  (avi)  ntid  aoshem  nadhd 
saosuniayd. — “  In  such  a  way  that  death  should  not 
be  produced  by  burning.”  ’ 

>  Cf.  Yt.  XXII,  19-36;  or  Bundahir  XXX,  16. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


272 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


I 


VendIdAd  VIII,  80. 

The  domestic  fire  smites  the  demons  only  at  midnight;  the 
Bahrim  fire,  if  called  by  its  name  Bahrfim  (Varahrfin,  victorious), 
smites  them  by  thousands  at  every  moment.  That  appears  from  the 
passage : 

ao^iti. — ‘  He  calls  him  .  . 


VendIdAd  VIII,  103. 

fravairi  (r.  frakairi)  frakerenaoa?  v4str6  verezydit/. 

— ‘  He  may  then  sow  and  till  the  pasture  fields  ’  (cf.  < 
below,  Vd.  XIX,  41). 

VendIdAd  IX,  32. 

nava  vlbizva  drAf6. — ‘A  space  of  nine  VibAzus 
square’  (Vd.  IX,  2).  1 

paniadasa  zem6  hankanayen. — ‘  Fifteen  times 
shall  they  take  up  dust  from  the  ground  ’  [for  him 
to  rub  his  body;  Vd.  IX,  30]. 

‘  If  the  man  who  is  being  cleansed  does  not  perform  the 
pa»^ada.sa,  the  whole  of  the  operation  is  null  and  void.’  I 


VendIdAd  XII,  7. 

kainind  Avatd  puthrem. — ‘A  young  woman  [who 
kills]  her  own  child  .  .  .’ 

This  is  very  likely  a  quotation,  similar  to  Vd.  XV,  10,  which  crept 
from  the  old  Commentary  to  Vd.  XII,  now  lost,  into  the  Sida 
text. 

VendIdAd  XIII,  9. 

If  a  man  kill  a  dog,  the  dogs  that  guard  the  ATinvar/ 
bridge  will  not  help  him  against  the  demons  in  his  passage 
from  this  world  to  the  next.  ‘Some  mean  thereby  the 
divine  keepers  of  the  bridge, 

yayau  asti  anyd  Rashnu^  Razijtd. — "  Of  whom 
one  is  Rashnu  Razi.rta  ’ 

»  See  Yart  XII. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


IV.  ZEND  FRAGMENTS. 


273 


VendIdAd  XIII,  34. 

vaSibya  na^ma^ibya. — ‘  By  the  two  sides  ’  [of  the 
collar  they  shall  tie  it;  Vd.  XIII,  30]. 


VendIdAd  XIII,  48. 
spAnah^. — ‘  Of  the  dog-kind.’ 


VendIdAd  XV,  10. 

‘  If  an  unmarried  woman  bear  a  child,  without  fault  of 
her  own,  and  a  relation,  to  save  her  honour,  acknowledges 
the  child,  and  the  members  of  the  family  acquiesce  in  it, 
from  that  time  they  shall  protect  her, 

avavata  ao^ngha  yatha  yaaf  pa«ia  nar6. — “  With 
as  much  energy  as  five  men.”  ’ 


VendIdAd  XVIII,  I. 

‘The  paitidina  or  pad  Am  ^  falls  by  two  fingers  below 
the  mouth.  That  appears  from  the  passage  : 

ba^-erezu-frathansfhem.  .  . — “  On  a  length  of  two 
fingers.’” _ 


VendIdAd  XVIII,  a. 

baA-erezu  Ai  ashAum  Zarathu^tra. — ‘  By  two  fingers, 
O  holy  Zarathurtra!’  (see  preceding  fragment). 

‘The  serpent-killer  (khrafstraghna,  mAr-kfin)  may  be 
made  of  any  substance  ;  leather  is  better,  as  appears  from 
the  passage : 

Vohu  Manangha  ^naiti  apemi^id^  Ang^6  Mainyu^. 
— “  He  repels  Angra  Mainyu  with  Vohu  Man6*.”  ’ 


'  See  above,  p.  172,  note  10. 

*  Vohu  Mand  as  the  Amshaspand  of  cattle;  see  above,  pp. 
215-216,  note  6. 

[4]  T 


Digitized  by 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


274 


VENDfOAD  XVIII,  14. 

bar6ithr6-ta^em. — ‘  His  sharp-pointed  weapon.’ 

Said  of  Sraosha,  ‘who  goes  through  the  bright  Zfvaniratha 
Karshvare,  holding  in  his  hands  his  sharp-pointed  weapon  ’  (Yasna 
LVII,  31). 

hvx^  '  frashusaiti  Sraoshd  ashy6. — ‘  The  pious, 
sovereign  Sraosha  advances  ’  [over  Arezahi  and 
Savahi]. 


VendIdAd  XVIII,  44- 

‘  As  large  as  the  top  joint  of  the  little  finger*  (Vd. 
VI,  10).  _ 


VendIdAd  XVIII,  70. 

The  word  afsmaniv^u  *  is  interpreted  : 
ysid  awtare  veredhka  mar^a  (W.  asma-r^a ;  read 
sparer  (?)  =  Persian  siparz). — ‘  What  is  between 
the  kidneys  and  the  spleen.’ 


VendIdAd  XIX,  41. 

nazdAstkd  danhivd  yao^dfithryAa?  ha-fei  frakair^ 
frakerenaorf  vdstr^  verezydia?  pasur-^t'arethem  gav^ 
^z’arethem. — ‘When  he  has  been  cleansed  in  the 
next  inhabited  place,  he  may  then  sow  and  till  the 
pasture  fields,  as  food  for  the  sheep  and  food  for 
the  ox 


'  hv\&  is  the  Pizand  transcription  of  khfitSi,  translating  dhfiiiya. 

*  afsmanivau,  entrails  (?) ;  see  above,  p.  207,  note  2. 

*  Quoted,  in  an  abridged  form,  in  Farg.  VIII,  103,  with  reference 
to  the  unclean  man  who  finds  himself  in  the  country,  far  from  any 
inhabited  place. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


These  fifty-three  Zend  fragments,  of  which  only  ten  were  already 
known,  are  found  in  a  sort  of  Pahlavi  catechism  of  questions  and 
answers,  contained  in  a  manuscript  belonging  to  the  well-known 
Pahlavi  scholar,  Tahmuras  Dinshawji  Anklesaria,  at  Bombay,  who 
most  kindly  let  me  have  a  copy  of  the  Zend  texts.  These  texts  are 
quotations  introduced  into  the  answers  in  support  of  the  dogmatic 
statements  contained  in  those  replies ;  and  sometimes  they  are  not 
given  in  full,  but  only  announced  by  their  first  or  some  other 
typical  words.  We  had  not  the  whole  of  the  treatise  at  hand, 
so  that  the  circumstances  of  which  the  Zend  quotations  were 
explanatory  are  unknown.  However,  the  Pahlavi  translation  which 
accompanies  the  Zend  text,  and  which,  in  the  cases  when  the 
quotation  is  abridged,  is  more  complete  than  the  fragment  given, 
offers  generally  suflScient  help  for  a  correct  understanding  of  the 
original. 

Tahmuras'  manuscript  is  Irini  (written  in  Persia) :  it  was  finished 
on  the  19th  day  (Farvardtn)  of  the  8th  month  (Avan)  of  the  year 
978  after  the  20th  year  of  Yazdgard,  tljat  is  to  say,  in  1629,  by 
FrSdfin  Marzpdn.  It  was  copied  from  his  father’s  copy  of  a  manu¬ 
script  written  by  Gdpatshdh  Rustam,  who  himself  transcribed  from 
a  manuscript  by  Kai  Khosrav  Sydvakhsh,  who  lived  in  the  last 
quarter  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  text  is  sufficiently  correct 
to  allow  of  the  task  of  translation,  as  most  of  the  barbarous 
forms,  in  which  it  is  not  deficient,  generally  find  their  explanation 
in  the  Pahlavi  translation.  Though  we  have  already  published 
the  text  in  our  French  translation  of  the  Avesta,  yet  as  it  has  not 
been  hitherto  incorporated  in  any  general  edition  of  the  Avesta, 
we  have  thought  it  useful  to  have  it  reprinted  here,  for  the  use  of 
those  who  have  not  access  to  the  editio  pr  in  ceps.  As  to  the 
Pahlavi  translation,  which  was  our  principal  and  best  guide  in  the 
interpretation  of  the  text,  we  beg  to  refer  to  the  Commentary  in 
our  French  Avesta,  where  it  is  given  in  full. 


T  2 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


V. 

1.  Mazd^ru  ava^  od  ol  vakhshaaf  mananghtzu 
(Yasna  XXXI,  6  c). 

VI. 

2.  Fr6tii^  vlsp&i^  ^anvat6  frafri  peretftm  (Yasna 
XLVI,  lo  e). 

VII. 

3.  Vehrkii  hizvSm  adadh&iti  y6  razrazd^i  (read 
azrazd&i)  mSthrem 

VIII. 

4.  M4  ^is  Zid  \e  dregvatd  mSthrgs/^4  s4s- 

nausig  (Yasna  XXXI,  18  a). 

5.  Azt  deminem  vlsem  v4  sh6ithrem  v4  dahyOm 
vi  4d4flf  (ibid.,  b). 

6.  Du^t4i4  mareka^ii  ath4  ir  r4st4k  s4zd4m 
sna4thij4  (ibid.,  c). 


^  The  missing  paragraphs  are  those  which  contain  no  Zend 
quotations. 

*  Mazda  reigns  in  man  when  Good  Thought  (Vohu  Man6)  is 
predominant  in  him ;  that  is  to  say,  he  reigns  in  the  righteous  and 
through  the  righteous. 

®  ‘  All  those  whom  I  shall  impel  to  address  their  prayers  to  you, 
O  Ahura  Mazda  1 "  that  is  to  say,  all  those  whom  1  shall  win  to 
Ahura's  worship. 

*  ‘  The  Aharmdk  (the  heretic) ;  thereby  the  Aharmdk  grows 
more  violent  in  the  world '  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


1.  For  Mazda  reigns  according  as  Vohu  Mand* 
waxeth  (Yasna  XXXI,  6  c). 

VI. 

2.  For  all  of  them  ®  shall  a  path  be  opened  across 
the  Kinwad  bridge  (Yasna  XLVI,  lo  e). 

VII. 

3.  He  gives  a  tongue  to  the  wolf*,  who  imparteth 
the  Holy  Word  to  the  heretic®. 

VIII. 

4.  Hearken  not  to  the  Law  and  the  Doctrine  in 
the  mouth  of  the  unrighteous  *  ,* 

5.  He  would  bring  unto  the  house,  the  borough, 
the  district,  and  the  country 

6.  Misfortune  and  death.  Teach  him  with  the 
thrust  of  the  sword (Yasna  XXXI,  18). 


^  A  quotation  from  the  Nfrangistin,  or  rather  Erpatistin ;  see 
below,  Nirang.  §  17. 

®  ‘  Hear  not  the  Avesta  and  Zand  (tlie  Holy  Scripture  and  its 
interpretation)  from  the  mouth  of  the  heretic '  (Comm.) 

^  The  good  old  principle  of  king  Saint-Louis :  *  Nulz,  se  il 
n’est  trbs  bon  clers,  ne  doit  disputer  k  aus  (the  Jews) ;  mais  li  horn 
lays,  quant  il  ot  mesdire  de  la  loy  crestienne,  ne  doit  pas  d^fendre 
la  loy  crestienne,  ne  mais  de  I’esp^e,  de  quoy  i  doit  donner  parmi 
le  ventre  dedens,  tant  comme  elle  y  peut  entrer '  (Joinville).  The 
word  riistik,  in  the  text,  must  have  been  a  Pahlavi  gloss  to  the 
Avesta  shdithrem  in  §  5. 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


278 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


IX. 

7.  Pa6iry6h^  inith6hitahS  thrl  ma^smS  shamSn 
ashami^/ ; 

8.  Bithy^h6  khshavash  thrity^h^  nava  tftiry^he 
thrl  azaiti  sraoshd^ranaya  a^traya. 

X. 

9.  N6i</  marah^  nbid  ^hikayau  nbid  sfin6  n6iaf 
hukhshathrahd  nbid  da^vayasn6  ndi^  tanuperethah^. 

XI. 

10.  Hishemnd  v4aunghind  v4  dath&n6  vibarem- 
n6  v4  vazemnd  v4  aiwy4st6  atha  ratufrij  (Nlran- 
gist4n,  $  37). 


XII  (Nlrangist4n,  J  109). 

1 1.  Vangharertasiiaf  maghnefitas^id?  srivaydi.?, 

12.  Yezii  isi^  ndid  isii  n6\fl  ashavanem  ainishti^ 
dstfiray^iti. 

XIII-XVI. 

XIII. — 13.  Huvmd  (read  ahumafl?)  ratuma^/  vahw- 
tem  vao^ti  Spetama  Zarathurtra, 

14.  Ketnkid  anghai^  astvatd  adi. 


*  It  is  not  likely  that  a  *  false  word '  means  here  a  ‘  lie ; '  it  means 
more  probably  a  verbal  mistake  in  the  recitation  or  study  of  the 
Avesta  text,  which,  when  accidental,  is  atoned  for  by  g6m6z ;  but 
when  repeated,  through  want  of  attention,  is  punished  with  the 
Sraoshd-^rana. 

*  The  same  as  gdm6z  or  n!rang-dtn. 

*  As  long  as  he  wears  the  Kosti  and  Sadere  (Vd.  XVIII,  54). 

^  §  10  =  Ntrangistdn  37. 

*  ‘Even  if  he  wear  not  the  Kosti  and  Sadere,  even  if  stark 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAs’  FRAGMENTS. 


279 


IX. 

7.  At  the  first  false  word  *  he  shall  drink  three 
sips  of  ma^sma  * ; 

8.  At  the  second,  six ;  at  the  third,  nine ;  at  the 
fourth  he  shall  be  smitten  with  three  strokes  of 
the  Sraosh6->^arana  or  A^tra. 

X. 

9.  Neither  of  a  snake,  nor  of  a  whore,  nor  of 
a  hound,  nor  of  a  wild  boar,  nor  of  a  Dafiva-wor- 
shipper,  nor  of  a  Perdtanu. 

XI. 

10.  Standing,  or  sitting,  or  lying  down,  riding  or 
driving,  so  as  he  wears  the  girdle  ®,  he  has  gratified 
the  Lord  *. 

XII. 

11.  Even  uncovered  and  naked  he  will  chant, 

12.  If  he  have  the  means®.  If  he  have  no  means, 
his  poverty  shall  not  be  counted  for  unrighteousness 
to  the  godly  *. 

XIII-XVI. 

XIII. — 13.  Declare  that  the  most  excellent  of  all 
things,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  !  is  to  have  an  Ahu 
and  a  Ratu 

14.  For  every  man  of  this  world  here  below. 


naked,  he  will  chant  (that  is,  he  will  cdebrate  the  festivity),  if  he  can  ’ 
(Comm.) 

‘  §§  11-12  =  Ntrangistfin  109. 

’’  There  is  no  well-ordered  society  that  does  not  rest  upon  the 
authority  of  the  prince  and  the  priest,  the  temporal  Lord  (ahu  = 
khht&i)  and  the  spiritual  Lord  (ratu  =  magdpat,  dastdbar). — 
Sometimes  the  ratu  is  also  called  ahu. — Cf.  §§  72-74. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


28o 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


15.  Mare»tem  vereza«tem  sikhshe»tem  s4iaya»- 
tem  paiteshe«tem  gaethibyd  astva6tiby6  ashah^. 

XIV.  — 16.  Anaungh6  aratv6  ai^wtem ; 

17.  Du^ranghavb. 

XV.  — 18.  N6idf  zl  asra6shyanlm  tanunSm 

ashahe  urva  vtdfSiti. 

19.  N6idf  kayadhem  ha«darait6. 

XVI.  — 20.  Zad  (read  ya^af?)  da^nayau  mizda- 
yasndi^  srav6. 

2 1 .  Srdvaydij  stadta  yfisnya. 

XVII. 

22.  M4  zt  ahmi  ntnin6  mi  anh^  vlsd  mi  ahmi 
za»tav6  mi  aNh^  daNhvd  frim  vadiata  mSm  yim 
Ahurem  MazdSm, 

23.  Yatha  m^  n6\d  itar^  Ahurahd  Mazdau  fryd 
angha^if  niia  ashava  friyd-humatd  friy6-hikhtd 
friy6-hvar^t6. 

XVIII. 

24.  Tanu-maz6  ashayiiti  yd  tanu-mazd  biraosha^ 
(read  draosha<jf). 

25.  Tanu-mazd  zl  adtyam^iflf  ashaySm  pfrd  (read 
pafrd). 

26.  Yau  n6\d  yava  mithd  mamnd  nbid  mithd 
vavaj^a  ndiaf  vavareza. 


XIX. 

27.  Adibyd  yd  id  atha  verezySn  yathi  id  astl 
(Yasna  XXXV,  6;  Sp.  18). 


^  ‘For  the  man  who  has  no  guide,  being  unable  to  do  good 
works  according  to  the  advice  of  his  Dastdbar,  cannot  redeem  his 
soul  with  his  holiness ;  that  is  to  say,  cannot  undo  his  evil  deeds 
with  good  deeds '  (Comm.)  Cf.  §§  24-26. 

*  §§  22-23  =  §§  85-86. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


281 


1 5.  (An  Ahu  and  a  Ratu)  studious  and  communi¬ 
cant,  learning  and  teaching,  loving  with  a  love  for 
ever  renewed,  in  the  bodily  world  of  Righteousness. 

XIV.  — 16.  (Declare)  that  the  worst  of  all  evils  is 
to  have  no  Ahu  and  no  Ratu  ; 

1 7.  Or  to  have  an  evil  Ahu. 

XV.  — 18.  For  the  soul  of  them  who  have  no 
guide  ’  can  never  offer  up  a  merit  to  expiate  a  sin. 

19 . XVI.  20,  21 . ? 

XVII. 

22  ®.  Say  i)Ot  they  treat  me  friendly,  me,  Ahura 
Mazda,  in  the  house,  in  the  borough,  in  the  district, 
in  the  countrj^, 

23.  Where  they  treat  not  friendly  the  Fire  of  me, 
Ahura  Mazda,  and  the  holy  man,  rich  in  good 
thoughts,  rich  in  good  words,  rich  in  good  deeds  ’. 

XVIII. 

24.  He  must  accomplish  an  act  of  merit  of  the 
value  of  a  tanu-mazd\  he  who  hath  committed  a 
falsehood  of  the  value  of  a  tanu-maz6. 

25.  For  he  layeth  up  the  merit  of  a  tanu-maz6, 

26.  While  he  never  sinneth  a  sin  of  a  tanu-maz6, 
in  false  thoughts,  in  false  words,  in  false  deeds. 

XIX. 

27*.^  [That  which  a  man  or  a  woman  knoweth 
clearly  to  be  right,  let  him  or  her  declare  as  he 
knoweth  it,  let  him  enact  it,  let  him  teach  it] 

*  Cf.  Sr6sh  Yajt  14. 

*  Tanu-mazd,  lit.  ‘  of  the  value  of  a  tanu-peretha,’  means  a  deed 
evil  or  good,  which  deserves  or  redeems  a  tanu-peretha  (tan&fflhr) 
penalty  (200  strokes  with  the  Sraoshd-^rana). 

»  §§  27-28=Yasna  XXXV,  6-7. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


282 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


a8.  Ahur4  zl  vi  Mazdau  yasneiriife  vahmem^ 
vahirtem  (ibid.  7  ;  Sp.  19,  20). 

XX. 

29.  I  m4  dfl?  ukhdhi  va^^zu  Ahura  Mazd^ru  ashem 
manyau  vahyau  frivadiAmau  (Yasna  XXXV,  9; 
Sp.  24). 

30.  ThwSm  zd  aSshSm  paitydstdremiA  fradahjtd- 
rem^  dademaidS  (ibid.  9  ;  Sp.  25). 

31.  [Ash4]  ashd  2idkk  [read  ashAaa'/^]  haiS,  vang- 

mananghd  vanghai^>^  khshathri^;^  (ibid.  10 ; 

Sp.  26). 

XXI. 

32.  Niwy^iti  zi  SpetamaZarathu.ftra  dtarj  AhurahS 
MazcUzu  ha>^a  yashtibyd  aiwyd. 

33.  Manayen  ah6  yatha  nd  snaithi^  asn^  nigh- 
matem  paiti-vadndi^/, 

34.  Ishdm  vd  arshtim  vd  fradakhshtanSm  vd  ava/Z 
paiti  pdpayamn6, 

35.  Viafvd  avaaf  hava  khrathwa  ydzi  md  hdu  nd 
ava  snaithir  a6i  ava  aisnav&d  vl  mSm  urvadsayJu/ 
astaia  u^tdna>^a. 

XXII. 

36.  Yas^  in6  tdyau&fei  hazaht^-^a  vlvdpau&fe  viva* 
rauska.  draq^n6-baretau&^a  zadthrou  frabard^, 


*  §§  29-3i=Yasna  XXXV,  9-10. 

*  The  whole  of  the  sacred  words,  ‘  the  Religion  of  Auhnnazd ' 
(Comm.) 

*  ‘  From  thee  of  all  the  Amshaspands  we  receive  most’  (know¬ 
ledge  and  truth)  (Comm.) 

*  Ahura  is  the  best  and  most  demonstrative  teacher ;  (cf.  Yasna 

LI.  3  4 

*  The  first  three  Amesha  Spe«tas. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


283 


To  others  who  shall  perform  it  in  their  turn,  even 
as  he  or  she  hath  declared  it 

28.  Now,  that  which  we  consider  as  the  best  of 
all  things,  O  Ahura  Mazda  !  is  prayer  and  sacrifice 
offered  to  Ahura  Mazda. 

XX. 

29*.  And  these  words  *,  O  Ahura  Mazda !  we  utter 
with  the  perfect  intention  of  holiness. 

30.  And  amongst  them  (the  Amesha  Spe«tas), 
we  look  chiefly  unto  thee,  to  grant  unto  us  *  and  to 
instruct  US'*; 

31.  For  more  than  Asha,  more  than  Vohu  Man6, 
more  than  the  righteous  Khshathra  *  [thy  glorifica¬ 
tion  is  above  all  glorification  .  .]. 

XXI. 

32.  For,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra!  the  fire  of  Ahura 
Mazda  trembles  in  front  of  boiling  water  * ; 

33.  Like  a  man  who  seeth  a  weapon  which  comes 
nigh  him, 

34.  Or  an  arrow  or  lance,  or  a  stone  from  a  sling, 
and  who  avoideth  the  blow, 

35.  Saying  to  himself ;  ‘  If  that  man  strike  me  with 
his  weapon,  my  body  and  soul  will  part  asunder.’ 

XXII. 

36.  And  he  who  offers  me  the  libations  of  a  thief', 
or  a  robber,  or  a  ravisher,  ...  or  libations  offered 
by  a  liar. 


*  For  fear  of  its  boiling  over.  If  it  does  so  and  extinguishes 
the  fire,  the  person  in  charge  is  guilty  of  a  tanu-peretha  sin 
(Saddar  XLVIII). 

'  The  priest  who  offers  me  libations  for  a  thief. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


284 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


'  37.  Y^'xzad  zl  mSm  avavata  dakhsha  y  tha  ana 
mashy&kS^  ang^ah6  mainyoiJ  astuia. 

XXIII. 

38.  Sterenditi  ana  avava  starem  aina  yatha  narem 
ashavanem  du^/^4  zaretem  upar^  na^mcU/  nasu5  adi 
ava  thravidf. 

39.  Nad>^a  pas^dta  had  ni  ahmad  ha/^a  gdtao<^ 
isadta  frashdtdi^/  ndid  apashdtdi//  thraySm  kina  gd- 
manSm. 

XXIV. 

40.  Ktvayakid  adsmd-bereitd  atvayakid  baresmd- 
stereiti, 

41.  Barezyd  ashava  zarahd  hw  dru^em. 

42.  Fridhiiti  ashem 

43.  Vlspem  ashavanem  vahi^tem  i  ahdm  & 
baraiti 

44.  (cf,  ^  74)  Shitem  dada\X\  urvdnem  ashaond 
iriritdnahd. 

XXV,  XXVI. 

XXV. — 45.  Hiu^  ithra  Spitama  Zarathurtra 
takhmanSim  tankisXJb  paiti-^si^J^  yd  adta  hi^kydta  hij- 
kydnadtemem  paiti-^sd^, 

46.  Arem  maiti  mata  mamnd  arem  mdkhti  (read 
dkhti)  khdkhti  (read  hdkhti)  arem  var^ti  hvare^ta. 


'  *  A  man  burning  with  fever '  (which  is  a  fire  sent  by  Ahriman). 

*  This  fragment,  which  refers  to  the  same  subject  as  fragment 
XXI,  is  quoted  in  an  abridged  form  in  the  Pahlavi  Vendtddd  III, 
14  (see  Fragments  to  the  Vendtddd),  to  show  that  throwi^^g  h6hr 
(water  soiled)  into  water  or  fire  is  as  bad  as  casting  nasd  (dead 
matter)  on  one  of  the  faithful. 

*  The  old  man  defiled  with  the  Nasu. 

*  As  he  cannot  venture  into  contact  with  the  faithful  till  he  has 
been  purified  (cf.  Vd.  VIII,  35  sq.) 

"  It  looks  as  if  the  five  quotations  of  which  this  fragment  is 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


285 


37.  He  bumeth  me  with  the  same  burning  that 
bumeth  a  man  possessed  by  Angra  Mainyu 

XXIII  *. 

38.  And  he  sins  towards  the  Fire  the  same  sin  as 
if  he  cast  the  Nasu  upon  a  righteous  man  bowed 
down  with  age ; 

39.  And  thenceforth  from  that  place,  such  a  one  * 
shall  not  go  three  steps  forwards  nor  three  steps 
backwards 

XXIV*. 

40.  For  a  single  gift  of  wood,  for  a  single  offering 
of  Baresman, 

41.  The  Righteous  is  exalted  and  the  Dru^  is 
weakened. 

42.  For  by  such  things  waxeth  the  Asha  *, 

43.  And  every  Righteous  man  is  borne  up  to 
Paradise, 

44.  And  joy  is  given  to  the  soul  of  the  Righteous 
man  who  has  departed 

XXV,  XXVI  *. 

XXV. — 45.  Such  a  one,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra  ! 
shall  arrive  there  as  the  strongest  of  the  strong, 
who  here  below  most  powerfully  impelleth  the 
righteous  unto  good  works, 

46.  To  think  perfect  thoughts,  speak  perfect 
words,  and  do  perfect  deeds. 


composed  did  not  form  a  continuous  sentence.  Only  the  last  three 
seem  to  form  a  coherent  whole. 

•  The  Pahlavi  translation  adds  here :  ‘  waxeih  the  flock,  waxeth 
the  fire/  as  if  the  Zend  text  were  incomplete.  Cf.  Vd.  Ill,  3. 

^  Cf.  §  74. 

®  The  general  meaning  of  these  two  fragments  is  that  the  man 
who  impels  his  brethren  to  do  good  will  enter  Paradise. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


286 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


XXVI. — ^47.  H4u  aithra  (read  ithra)  Spetama 
Zarathurtra  ukhdh6-va/^am  ukhdhd-va^stemd  paiti* 
gasSid  drughinii^a  drivlm>^a  arathwyd-beretfi  baremnS 

48.  HvSm  ahmi  hvSm  ^  khshathrS  avaaf 

^di.fta. 

49.  Y6Nh6  va^nghd  nemanghd  spndthrem  (read 
khshnaothrem). 

50.  Ahishti  (read  dkhshti)  sahethrem  (read  sakh- 
ethrem). 

51.  Armait^  daretlirem. 

52.  Fr^lriiti  vlidlm. 

53.  Ainiti^  ady6  vdh^  (read  v&kh^). 

XXVII. 

54.  asti  Ahunah6  vairyfihfi  haithlm  ? 

55.  Paiti-^6  ukhtA  Ahur6  Mazdau  man6  b&  vohu 
Zarathu^tra  ad  adyemnem  ad  atyarax^  khrataod^ ; 

56.  Zazuju  vtspadm  vanghoyd  zazuyu  vlspadm 
ashd-<^ithradju. 


^  There  above,  in  the  heavens. 

*  ‘  That  is  to  say,  he  has  made  much  ^&takg6bth  (^dangdi) 
for  the  sake  of  the  poor,  men  and  women'  (Comm.)  Making 
^ddangdi  is  collecting  money  for  the  poor,  or  for  any  pious  work. 
If  a  man  come  to  me  and  say,  ‘  I  have  no  work  to  do,  give  me 
work,'  and  I  apply  to  somebody  else  who  gives  him  work,  I  have 
done^dangdi,  and  the  merit  is  the  same  as  if  I  had  given  it  myself 
(Saddar  XXII). 

*  In  his  sphere  of  inOuence. 

*  The  celebrated  Dastiir  under  Shdhpdhr  II,  the  last  editor  of  th^ 
Avesta :  cf.  General  Introduction. 

^  A  treatise  lost,  in  Pahlavi. 

®  The  five  following  disconnected  lines  are  abridged  Zend  quota¬ 
tions,  answering  to  the  five  terms  of  Atfirpat's  phrase,  and  refer 
each  to  one  of  the  five  virtues  that  are  recommended. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS, 


287 


XXVI. — 47.  Such  a  one,  O  Spitama  Zarathu,ftra  I 
shall  arrive  there  *  as  the  best  of  intercessors,  who 
here  below  intercedeth  for  the  poor  man  and  the 
poor  woman  in  their  distress  * ; 

48.  Who  doeth  it  himself  and  teaches  it  to  others 
in  his  kingdom  ®. 

The  blessed  Athrp&t,  son  of  Mahraspand  *,  in  his  I  n- 
struction  to  a  disciple\  says:  ‘Be  a  man  of  prayer;  a 
man  of  peace,  a  man  of  perfect  piety,  a  man  of  liberality, 
and  without  rancour.  These  are  the  virtues  one  must 
acquire,  as  it  is  said  in  the  Scriptures : 

49*.  .  . .  whose  words  of  prayer  rejoice  [the  gods] 

50.  Teaching  in  peace  *. 

51.  In  perfect  piety  keeping  (Religion)®. 

52.  Science  in  giving^®. 

53.  His  word  is  without  rancour 

XXVII. 

54.  In  what  fashion  is  manifest  thy  Ahuna 
Vairya  **  ? 

55.  Ahura  Mazda  made  answer :  By  Good 
Thought  in  perfect  unity  with  Reason,  O  Zara- 
thujtra ! 

56.  Taking  all  good  things,  taking  all  that  is  the 
offspring  of  the  Good  Principle 


^  Answering  to  the  words,  ‘  man  of  prayer,’  in  Atflrpit’s  sentence. 

•  Answering  to  the  words,  ‘  man  of  peace.’ 

*  Answering  to  the  words,  ‘  man  of  perfect  piety.’  Cf.  Vp.  II,  5 
(Sp.  10). 

**  Answering  to  the  words,  ‘  roan  of  liberality.’ 

**  Answering  to  the  words,  ‘  and  without  rancour.’ 

**  The  Zoroastrian  prayer  kot  (Vd.  VIII,  19,  note  2).  The 
question  amounts  to :  ‘  How  does  it  become  clear  that  a  man  is 
devoted  to  religion  ?  ’  (Comm.) 

>•  Doubtful. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


288 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


XXVIII. 

57.  Mananghas/fa  ahumaiti  (readhumaiti)  hizvas>fci 
hi^khta  zastayasia  varrti  arathwy6-var,yti  (read  rath- 
wyd-varrti). 

58.  Nazdy6  ahmi  Zarathurtra  azem  y6  Ahur6 
Mazdau  vlspah6  anghm^  astvatd  tnamanaus^ 
va>^asia  shdthna^, 

59.  Yatha  aungha  (read  naungha)  hahi  gaora^ibyd 
yatha  v4  gao^a  haia  thranghiby6. 

XXIX. 

60.  (7aradij  habnem  (read  haoraetn)  Zarathurtra 
bisarem^kt  thresaremia  yatha  thresarem  nitemem. 

XXX,  XXXI. 

XXX.  — 61.  Vlspa^a  a«tare  ashem  upa  haush- 
tuayau, 

62.  Fraore<^  frakhni  (read  frakhshni)  a6i  man6 
zarazdit6i</  anghuya</  ha^. 

XXXI.  — 63.  Vispau  a»tare  vydnl^. 

XXXII. 

64.  Y^iti  <^atl^a  Spetama  Zarathu^tra  dahmd  ash- 
ava  haurvi  ratft^  dathaa?, 

65.  Ad  k\d  dim  aiwyditi  yS.  dahma  vanghi  dfriti^ 
urtrah^  kehrpa  aghry^h^  aghryd  madhi-mastemahfi. 


‘  This  fragment  belonged  to  the  Rat-d&t-ft  Nask,  which  treated 
of  ‘  the  proximity  of  A&hrmazd  to  the  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds 
of  the  material  world  ’  (Dtnkart  VIII,  viii,  4). 

’  The  Qur’&n(4,  15)  has  a  formula  which  strangely  reminds  one 
of  this  sentence :  ‘  But  we  created  man,  and  we  know  what  his 
soul  whispers ;  for  we  are  nigher  to  him  than  his  jugular  vein.’ 

’  ‘  At  the  third  time,  take  least.  The  Dastfirs  have  said :  each 
time  take  three-fifths  ’  (of  what  there  is).  This  refers  very  likely  to 
the  tasting  of  Haoma  in  the  Haoma  sacrifice  (Yasna  XI,  ii). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


289 


XXVIII. 

57.  Of  the  mind,  good  thoughts ;  of  the  tongue, 
good  words ;  of  the  hand,  good  works,  make  the 
virtuous  life. 

58  *.  I,  Ahura  Mazda,  am  closer, O  Zarathurtra !  to 
that  which  all  the  bodily  world  thinketh,  speaketh, 
and  worketh, 

59.  Than  the  nose  is  to  the  ears,  or  than  the  ears 
are  to  the  mouth  K 

XXIX. 

60.  Take  of  the  Haoma,  O  Zarathu^tra !  twice  or 
thrice ;  but  the  third  time  be  sparing  ®. 


XXX,  XXXI  < 

XXX.  — 61.  In  the  interval®,  nothing  but  fair 
recitations  of  the  Ashem  Vohh  *, 

62.  Done  with  a  fervent  conviction  and  a  devoted 
soul ; 

XXXI.  — 63.  And  in  the  interval  do  nothing  but 
look  on’. 

XXXII,  XXXIII. 

XXXI  I. — 64.  Each  time,  O Spitama  Zarathu^tra ! 
that  the  righteous,  the  godly  man  offers  the  sacrifice 
complete ; 

65.  Then  cometh  unto  him  the  good,  godly 
Afriti*,  in  the  shape  of  a  camel  of  price,  in  full  heat*. 


*  These  two  fragments  seem  to  refer  to  the  plucking  of  the 
Baresma  twigs. 

*  While  the  different  twigs  are  plucked.  Cf.  Vd.  XIX,  18. 

*  A  prayer,  next  in  holiness  to  the  Ahuna  Vairya.  See  its  trans¬ 
lation,  Vd.  XIX,  aa.  ’  Cf.  Vd.  XIX,  19;  Ntr.  97  seq. 

*  The  Afrtn  Dahmdn,  a  prayer  of  blessing  on  the  house  of  the 
faithful  (cf.  Yasna  LX). 

*  The  camel  in  heat  is  strongest  (Yt.  XIV,  12  seq.)  and  therefore 
the  best  symbol  of  the  strength  that  the  Afrtn  Dahmin  brings  with 
it.  Cf.  Dinkart  IX,  2  a,  2. 

[4]  U 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


290 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


XXXIII. — 66.  N6i^/ 16  ahm^  dr^6y6itlm  fram- 
ra6mi  Spetama  Zarathu.ftra  ySm  dahmSm  vanghtm 
ifrttim, 

67.  YCtna//  ha/h.  hahi  humanangha^  hva^ngha^ 
hushyauthna^  huda6na</, 

68.  Yatha  pa6urv6  a6v6  sav6  a6v6  armd  ranghSm 
ava  n^iy6i«tlin  savav^zu  ded  (or  be</)  /ds  4it6. 

XXXIV. 

69.  Ka^/ r4zar6  kad  zl  Mazda  (Yasna  XXXIV, 
12  a). 

70.  Ad  mdi  ad  ritSm  ukhdhahyiii  sradshem 
khshathremii  (Yasna  XXXIII,  14). 

71.  Para  ga6spau«ta  gadhudau  baddhas^  urv4- 
nemia  fradshydmahd  nazdi.fta  upa  thware^ta  raoi^^u 
nar.f  ^shmanau  sdkem. 

XXXV. 

72.  Ashdi  vahutcli  yad  huferethwem  ddJtd-ratd, 

73.  Bereza</-varezi  hadmananghem, 

74.  Yad  iririthind  ashaond  sh&tem  dathditi  urvi- 
nem. 

XXXVI. 

75.  Avi^-da  nau  a«tare  hentCi  nema^»adttf  ^ithr<j:u 
rdtayd  (Yasna  XXXIII,  7  c)! 

76.  T^ru  dvij  yau  rdtayd  a^tare  amesh^  spe»t^ 
saoshya»taa^a ; 


’  Yasna  XXXIV,  i  a  a,  ‘  A  query  of  Zartusht,  asking  for  wisdom  ’ 
(Comm.) 

*  Ahura  is  supposed  to  speak  of  Zarathurtra.  The  quotation  is 
altered  from  Yasna  XXXIII,  14. 

*  The  primeval  Bull.  Gaush  aSvddata  (Vd.  XXI,  i). 

*  His  soul,  after  his  death,  was  sent  to  Heaven  as  G^ush  urvan 
(GoshUrdn),  the  deity  that  takes  care  of  domesuc  animals. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


291 


XXXIII. — 66.  I  declare  unto  thee,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu.ftra !  the  holy  Benediction  of  the  Righteous 
shall  not  fail  (?)  thee  more, 

67.  O  youth  of  good  thoughts,  of  good  words,  of 
good  works,  and  the  good  Religion, 

68,  Than . ? 


XXXIV. 

69.  How  hast  thou  ordained  things?  How,  O 
Mazda  * ! 

70.  To  me  he  gives  obedience  to  and  ruling 
through  the  holy  Word  *. 

71.  Thy  sense  and  thy  soul,  O  Bull  beneficent®! 
giver  of  good  things,  we  send  towards  the  heavenly 
luminaries  *  and  thy  sight  within  the  eyes  of  man  ®. 


XXXV. 

72.  Asha  Vahiita  giveth  a  good  passage  to 
whoso  hath  a  spiritual  Master*, 

73.  For  his  noble  deeds  and  for  his  virtuous 
thoughts, 

74.  And  he  giveth  joy  to  the  soul  of  the  righteous 
man  that  has  departed 

XXXVI. 

75.  Grant  that  the  gifts  we  pray  for  appear  be¬ 
fore  us  *  I 

76.  The  gifts  manifest  between  the  Amesha 
Spe«tas  and  the  Saoshya«ts  • ; 


•  Doubtful.  ‘  Cf.  §§  13-19. 

’  Cf.  §  44.  •  Yasna  XXXIII,  7  c. 

*  This  seems  to  mean :  the  gifts  which  the  Amesha  Spentas 
reserve  for  the  Saoshyants  (the  great  saints). 

U  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


292 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


77.  FrSraitly^a  vldflshaus^a  a«tare  hvkAa.tna\i 
ashaont^. 

XXXVII,  XXXVIII, 

XXXVII. — 78.  had  yd  a^tahmi  anghv6  yaa^  as- 
tava»ti  Spetama  Zarathu^tra  upairi  hunarem  mand 
har^id, 

79.  Vlspem  astern  paiti  zrvinem  astarem  urva 
kdsay&d. 

XXXVIII. — 80.  had  yad  h6  manahS  paiti  barid, 

81.  had  yadhd  manahi  paiti  avabaraitS, 

82.  Pas^aSta  azem  yd  Ahurd  Mazdau  adi  urund 
urv&sma  dadsaydni, 

83.  Vahixtem^  ahdm  anaghra^’a  rad/fau  afrasang- 
hSn^  ^z4thra, 

84.  Vispd  ydmia  urtatds  yi  naw  sddra  dregvatd, 

85.  86  =  22,  23. 

XXXIX. 

87.  Para  md  adtahmi  anghvd  yad  astvai»ti  Speta¬ 
ma  Zarathuxtra  thris^id  vahijta  anghd  astvaitd  vlsata : 

88.  Manama  yasnem  yad  Ahurahd  Mazdau  ithra- 
sia  Ahurahd  Mazdau  yasnenvfci  vahmem-ta  huberei- 
ttm^  u^ta-bereitlm^  va«ta-bereitlm^a ; 

89.  Nar.f;^a  ashaond  khshnditlm>^a  &  reitim^a  vyS- 
da&^a  paiti  paitizai»tyas^a  frdyd-humatahd  fr&yd- 
hdkhtahd  frfiyd-hvareshtahd. 


*  Mutual  Charity  due  from  and  to  Mazdeans. 

’  Literally,  ‘  his  soul  carries  sin.’  ’  I  will  give  bliss  to  his  soul. 

*  No  man  absolutely  deserves  bliss.  Cf.  Yasna  LX  II,  6 :  ‘  O 
Fire,  son  of  Ahura  Mazda !  give  me,  however  unworthy  1  am,  now 
and  for  ever,  the  bright,  all-happy  Paradise  of  the  righteous.’ 

*  ‘  The  righteous  are  rewarded,  while  the  wicked  are  punished  ’ 
(Comm,  ad  Visparad  XVIII,  2).  The  line  is  from  Yasna  XLV,  7. 

*  The  three  best  things  in  the  world  are  respect  shown  to  Ahura, 
respect  shown  to  the  fire,  and  respect  shown  to  the  righteous. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAs’  FRAGMENTS. 


293 


77.  The  holy  liberality  and  bounteousness  that 
reign  between  brethren  in  the  Faith 

XXXVII,  XXXVIII. 

XXXVII. — 78.  He  who  in  this  bodily  world, 
O  Spitama  Zarathu.ftra  !  deemeth  overweening  well 
of  his  own  merit, 

79.  All  the  time  that  he  doeth  this,  his  soul  be¬ 
comes  burdened  with  sin  *. 

XXXVIII. — 80.  But  if  he  deemeth  justly  of  his 
own  merit, 

81.  Or  if  he  rate  it  lower  than  the  truth, 

82.  Then  I,  the  Maker  Ahura  Mazda,  will  make 
his  soul  see  J  oy  ®, 

83.  And  Paradise,  boundless  Light,  undeserved 
felicity  *, 

84.  And  Happiness  eternal,  while  the  wicked  is 
in  pain 

85.  86  =  22,  23. 

XXXIX. 

87.  As  for  me  in  this  bodily  world,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu^tra !  the  three  best  things  of  the  world  are  • : 

88.  The  sacrifice  offered  to  me,  Ahura  Mazda ; 
the  sacrifice  and  prayer,  the  bounteous  free  offering, 
the  free  offering  of  pleasure’,  the  free  offering  of 
assistance  *  made  unto  the  fire  of  Ahura  Mazda ; 

89.  And  the  pleasure,  the  graciousness,  the  gifts, 
the  deference  shown  unto  the  righteous,  rich  in  good 
thoughts,  rich  in  good  words,  rich  in  good  works. 


’’  The  offering  that  rejoices  the  fire  (that  increases  the  brightness 
and  gaiety  of  its  light  and  its  sound). 

'  The  offering  that  feeds  him  and  makes  him  stronger. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


294 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


XL,  XLI. 

XL. — 90.  M4ia  t6  ithra  Spetama  Zarathujtra  ast- 
vatah^  angh^.f  didrezv6  ptsa  manahtm  paid  ra€kh.fda. 

XLI. — 91,  Y6zt  Spetatna  Zarathu.rtra  astvah^an- 
didrezvd  ptsa  mananghtm  ahttm  paid  eren&i.fti, 

92.  Ndi</  giu.f  bva</  n6\d  ashem  n6i<]^ 
raoi6  n6i4^  vahiitd  anghuj  y6  mana  ya<^  Ahurah6 
Mazd^zu. 

93.  Bvad  vtspanSm  asha-iithranSm  padisheftem^ 
y&d  eregha<^  dao.3anghuin. 

XLI  I. 

94.  Ya.vad  nil  asha  va^id  (read  va»daiti  ?)  Spe- 
tama  Zarathu^rtra  vtspa  tar.m^  khshudra^  vnaiti 
(read  vandaiti)  anamasna>^  vanghunai§a  thrayana^. 

XLIIL 

95.  N6iaf  nmfind-bakhtem  n6i</  vlsp^-bakhtem  noid 
zaxtu-bakhtem  n6\d  daNhu-bakhtem ; 

96.  Ndi<^  framanlm  br&thranSm  iztzurt^ ; 

97.  Ndi</  astd  hta^tim  (read  hutartlm)  ndi<^  tanvd 
huradim  (read  huraoidhtm). 

98.  Ta^  zt  ashava  Zarathu.ftra  >dnnia  kahy4ii</ 
anghai;  astvatd  y6  ashahd  /^inma  vastemd  angha^/. 

XLIV. 

99.  N6ia?  nil  adtahmi  anghvd  yzd  astva»ti  Spe«- 


‘  ‘  To  get  treasures  of  gold  and  silver  ’  (Comm.) 

*  The  other  world,  Paradise. 

'  He  will  not  see  GoshilrQn,  who  sits  in  the  sphere  of  the  sun 
(Bundahir  IV). 

*  He  will  not  see  Asha  Vahishla  (Ardibahisht),  who  is  both  the 
second  Amshaspand  and  the  impersonation  of  holiness  and  subse¬ 
quent  bliss. 

‘  Asha,  righteousness,  obtains  everything ;  that  is  to  say,  that 
all  the  good  things  of  the  world  are  a  reward  that  attends  piety. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


295 


XL,  XLI. 

XL. — 90.  To  obtain  the  treasures  of  the  material 
world’,  O  Spitama  Zarathoftra !  forego  not  the  world 
of  the  Spirit  *. 

XLI. — 91.  For  he  who,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.rtra ! 
to  obtain  the  treasures  of  the  material  world  de¬ 
stroyed!  the  world  of  the  Spirit, 

92.  Such  a  one  shall  possess  neither  the  BulP, 
nor  Asha*,  neither  the  Celestial  Light,  nor  the 
Paradise  of  me,  Ahura  Mazda. 

93.  But  he  shall  possess  the  filthiest  of  all  things, 
horrible  Hell. 

XLIl. 

94.  All  these  things  Asha  obtaineth  *,  O  Spitama 
Zarathu.ftra !  it  obtaineth  everything  good,  com  and 
drinks,  ever  so  great,  so  good,  so  goodly. 

XLIIL 

95.  One  cannot  have  for  the  wishing  the  power  of 
head  of  the  house,  head  of  the  borough,  head  of  the 
district,  head  of  the  province  • ; 

96.  Neither  authority  over  brethren  ’ ; 

97.  Neither  a  well  set  up  frame  and  a  lofty  stature  *. 

98.  But  there  is  one  thing  that  every  man  in  this 
world  below  may  love,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.rtra !  he 
may  love  Virtue. 

XLIV. 

99.  [But]  *  at  present  in  this  world  below,  O  Spi- 


*  This  is  a  privilege  the  possession  of  which  does  not  depend  on 
our  free  will,  as  it  depends  on  heredity  or  the  will  of  the  prince. 

’  This  depends  on  age. 

*  This  depends  on  nature's  caprice. 

*  We  add  ^ but’  on  the  assumption  that  this  fragment  is  the con<* 
tinuation  of  the  preceding. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


296 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


tama  Zarathu^tra  a6v6  ntHd  dva  n6\d  thriy6  ntid 
fr4yangh6  ashahd. 

100.  N6i</  ashaytfu  frlye«ti  y6  ndia?  drighdj  ash6- 
^iHca^ah^.  avangha&Sa  thr&thrahs^  (read  thrdthran- 
gha&fe)  pesau«td  (read  peres<j:u«t^). 

XLV. 

1 01.  Paduruj  darena  (read  karena)  apaaJlta  afra- 
h6i  urun6  afravadilj  hava  hizva, 

102.  Y6  ndifl?  mSthrii]?  spe«tau. 

XLVI-XLIX. 

XLVI, — 103.  N6iaf  hiu  sftr6  Zarathu^tra  noid 
asha  s0r6. 

XLVII. — 104.  N6i</  hdu  tahm6  yd  n6\d  ash- 
tahmd. 

XLVI  1 1. — 105.  N6ifl?  hdu  ds  vaozd  Zarathu^tra 
ndi^  ahmi^  vash&ta, 

106.  Y6  n6i<if  ashahd  vahijtahd  ber^  framare- 
tahd  mayau  vaozd. 

XLIX. — 107.  Y6  ndiaf  narem  ashavanem  ^«4hva 
athclhva  jase»tem  khj'nad^ta  vi  khjnivayditd  vd. 

108.  Tad^  Spitama  Zarathu^tra  angh^  vahi^- 
tahd  >^ithrd  paityauwtd, 

109.  Y6i  anghd  nerebyd  ashavabyd  ayaptd-dite- 
mas>fe  asperezd-ddtemas^a. 

L. 

110.  H6  dadhd  ashem  upa  raodhayditd  yd  drvaitd 
dadhditd. 

111.  Gdthwdw  xzs^d  vana : 


'  There  are  many  truths  which  can  be  conceived  or  expressed 
only  through  Revelation. 

*  ‘  He  has  promoted  nothing  good  ’  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V,  TAIIMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


297 


tama  Zarathujtra !  there  is  not  one  just  man,  not 
two,  nor  three,  nor  several. 

100.  They  seek  not  after  righteousness,  they  seek 
not  to  succour  and  maintain  the  poor  follower  of  the 
Holy  Law. 

^  XLV. 

101.  There  be  many  works  of  wisdom  which  the 
soul  may  not  conceive  nor  the  tongue  declare, 

102.  Without  the  Holy  Word*. 

XLVI-XLIX. 

XLVI. — 103.  He  is  not  mighty,  O  Zarathu^tra! 
who  is  not  mighty  in  righteousness. 

XLVI  I. — 104.  He  is  not  strong,  who  is  not 
strong  in  righteousness. 

XLVIII. — 105.  He  has  promoted  nought*,  O 
Zarathuj'tra !  and  he  shall  promote  nought, 

106.  Who  does  not  promote  ‘the  laws  of  perfect 
holiness,  pondered  in  his  heart  ® ; 

XLIX. — 107.  Who  hath  not  rejoiced,  who  re- 
joiceth  not  the  righteous  man  who  cometh  within 
his  gates  *. 

108.  For  they,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra !  shall  be¬ 
hold  the  Paradise, 

109.  Who  are  most  bounteous  to  the  righteous 
and  least  vex  their  souls. 

L. 

no.  He  who  giveth  to  the  Ungodly  harmeth 
Asha  ®. 

Ill.  Even  as  it  is  written  in  the  Githa  : 

*  ‘  Who  does  not  undertake  to  promote  religion  and  good  deeds 
as  he  ought'  (Comm.) 

*  Lit.  *  on  his  property.’ 

‘  He  does  harm  to  virtue,  or  to  the  Genius  of  virtue. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


298 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


112.  Hv6  zt  drvau  ye  drvaitS  vahirt6  (Yasna 
XLVI,  6c). 

LI. 

113.  Ashem  vohd  vahLytem  astl. 

LI  I. 

1 14.  Ashd^/  kid  \iakk  vanghm^  dazd^ 

LIII. 

1 1 5.  Apas^4  d4d?  urvamus^  vanghty  (Yasna 
XXXVII,  i). 

LIV. 

1 16.  Yi-d  Und  dim  dava  ditdiy  uzritiy, 

1 1 7.  N6u/  aStahS  uzaren6  na^a  vard  avav4it6. 

LVI. 

1 18.  N6id^  h4  tahmd  anavahtm  g9.y^d 

1 19.  N6i<^  adhilti  fr4r4ithyanSm  urvi^ySiti 

120.  Taunghrd  daregha  dita  ashaond  Zarathuy- 
trah^. 

LVII. 

121.  Vlsaiti  ainyd  usy6  ntid  ainy6  evlsemnd 
Astrya4it6. 

122.  Ava  vaSsaAt^  naAta  kid  AstryAitA. 

LVIII. 

123.  124.  Daresa  nA  pairyaokhta^  uzuytanau 
AdareyAitA  nyAtA  uytanavaitly  (124)  vlspau  frayu- 
maitty. 

'  Yasna  XLVI,  6  c  (Giiha  lutavaiti). 

•  First  line  of  the  Ashem  vohd. 

*  From  the  Ahuna  vairya  (see  the  whole  of  the  prayer,  Vd. 
VIII,  19). 

*  Yasna  XXXVII,  i. 

•  The  var,  the  ordeal,  of  which  there  were  thirty- three.  The 
most  usual  was  the  one  which  Adarb&d  Mahraspand  underwent 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


V.  TAHMURAS’  FRAGMENTS. 


299 


1 1 2.  ‘  He  is  unrighteous  who  is  good  to  the  un¬ 
righteous 

113.  Holiness  is  the  best  of  all  good 

LII. 

114.  [The  wish  of  the  Lord  is  the  rule]  of  Holi¬ 
ness. 

The  g^fts  of  Vohu  Mand  . . .  ®. 

LIII. 

1 15.  He  has  made  the  good  waters  and  the  good 
plants  *. 

LIV. 

116.  And  though  he  may  bribe  the  judge  with 
presents, 

1 17.  He  cannot  bribe  the  ordeal*  and  escape  it. 

LVI. 

118-120 . ? 

LVI  I ». 

1 2 1.  If  the  one  accept  and  not  the  other,  he  who 
refuseth  is  in  fault. 

122.  If  both  accept,  there  is  no  fault. 

LVI  1 1. 

123.  124.  With  glance  and  with  speech,  a  man 
superintendeth  his  worldly  wealth,  inanimate  and 
animate,  goods  and  chattels 


successfiilly,  when  he  confounded  the  heretics  and  manifested  the 
orthodox  doctrine  by  having  molten  metal  poured  upon  his  breast 
*  This  fragment  seems  to  refer  to  the  proposal  made  by  one  of 
the  litigants  to  have  recourse  to  an  ordeal  (cf.  Fragments  in  the 
Farhang,  15). 

.  ^  He  superintends  his  inanimate  property  with  his  look,  and  his 
animate  property  with  speech. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI. 

THE  ERPATISTAn  AND  NIRANGISTAN. 


Of  all  the  lost  Nasks,  the  one  of  which  the  largest  fragments 
have  been  preserved  is  the  seventeenth  one  called  the  Hfispiram. 
It  was  composed  of  sixty-four  Fargards,  of  which  two  of  the  first 
thirty  were  called  Erpatistfin,  ‘the  Sacerdotal  Code/ and  Ntran- 
gist^n,  ‘  the  Ritual  Code;’  the  former  dealing  chiefly  with  clerical 
organisation,  and  the  latter  with  a  portion  of  the  ritual.  Their 
general  contents  are  known  from  the  analysis  of  the  Nasks  given  in 
the  Dinkart  (VIII,  ch.  28,  29;  West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  IV,  92-97). 

These  two  Zend  treatises  were  treated  like  the  Vendtddd,  that  is 
to  say,  were  translated  and  commented  on  in  Pahlavi,  at  least  par¬ 
tially.  They  have  not  come  to  us  in  any  Sfida  manuscript,  but  are 
to  be  recovered  from  their  Pahlavi  expansion,  the  so-called  Pahlavi 
Ntrangisdn  ^  which  presents  nearly  the  same  aspect  as  the  Pahlavi 
Vendtdfid,  that  is  to  say,  it  contains  the  Zend  original  text  with 
a  Pahlavi  translation,  and  a  lengthy  commentary,  in  which  latter 
many  connected  questions  are  treated  and  a  consideiable  number  of 
Zend  quotations  from  other  Nasks  are  adduced.  The  first  thing  to 
do  is  to  distinguish  what  belongs  to  the  principal  text,  which  is  the 
object  of  the  commentary,  and  what  are  the  Zend  quotations  adduced 
from  elsewhere  by  the  commentator.  The  distinction  of  the  two  com¬ 
ponents  is  easily  seen,  as  the  principal  text  is  always  accompanied 
by  a  translation,  whereas  the  quotations  are  not.  They  are  either 
formulas  recited  during  the  performance  of  the  ceremonies,  or  texts 
adduced  as  demonstrative  or  explanatory  of  such  or  such  state¬ 
ment*.  These  quotations  once  removed,  there  remains  a  con¬ 
tinuous  text  which  answers  closely  to  the  analysis  in  the  Dinkart 
But  a  comparison  with  that  analysis,  as  well  as  internal  evidence, 
shows  that  only  a  part  of  the  original  text  is  preserved,  and  that 


^  It  has  been  long  known  under  that  title,  but  ought  to  be  called 
‘  Erpatistfin  and  Nirangistdn/ 

•  They  are  adduced  with  the  uniform  words  .  .  .  min  .  .  . 
padtfik  yahvfin^t,  ‘  it  appears  from  the  passage :  .  . .' 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGISrAN. 


301 


the  Pahlavi  manuscript,  as  it  has  come  to  us,  is  the  juxtaposition  of 
portions  of  two  independent  books,  the  Erpatistin  and  the  Niran- 
gistSn  proper,  the  beginning  and  end  of  both  being  lost.  In  other 
terms,  it  contains  a  part  in  the  middle  of  the  Erpatistan '  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  Ntrangistdn,  the  end  of  the  latter  being  lost  as 
well  as  a  short  passage  at  its  beginning  \  All  the  manuscripts  of 
the  Ntrangistdn,  known  to  be  in  existence,  present  the  same  juxta> 
position,  as  they  are  descended  from  one  and  the  same  manuscript, 
of  which  the  copyist,  having  in  his  hands  a  fragment  of  the  Erpa- 
tistin  and  a  more  complete  Ntrangisidn,  copied  the  two  as  one  and 
the  same  book,  which  took  the  name  of  the  larger  fragment.  This 
leaves  room  to  hope  for  the  further  discovery  of  older  independent 
manuscripts  of  either  book. 

Here  is  a  summary  of  the  matter  treated  of,  with  references  to 
the  analysis  in  the  Dinkart ; — 

Fargard  I. 

First  Part  (Fragment  of  the  ErpatistAn). 

I*  §§  1-9.  The  priest  on  duty  out  (Dinkart  VIII,  ch.  28,  §  2  ?). 

II.  §§  10-18.  The  student  priest  (Dk.  ibid.  §  3?). 

Second  Part  (Nirangistan  proper). 

I.  §§  19-27.  The  Z6t  and  the  R^pt  (Dk.  VIII,  ch.  29,  §  i). 

II.  §  28.  The  Dardn  (Dk.  ibid.  §  2). 

III.  §§29,  30.  Strong  drink  forbidden  during  the  sacrifice 
(Dk.  §  3). 

IV.  §§  31-37.  The  recitation  of  the  Gdthas  (Dk.  §  4). 

V.  §§  38-40.  The  sacrifice  performed  by  a  Z6t,  or  a  Rdspt,  in 
a  state  of  sin  (Dk.  §§  5,  6). 

Fargard  II. 

I.  §§  41-45.  The  celebration  of  the  G&h&nb^  (Dk.  §§  7, 8). 

II.  §§  46-51.  The  limits  of  the  several  Gihs  (§  46,  Gdh 


*  §§  1-18  belong  to  the  Erpatistdn. 

*  Of  the  twenty-five  paragraphs  in  the  Dhikart  analysis,  part 
of  §  I,  the  whole  of  §§  2-16,  and  part  of  §  17  are  represented  in  the 
extant  Nfrangistin.  But  one  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  analysis  in 
the  Dfnkart  was  not  based  on  the  Zend  Nasks,  but  on  their  Pahlavi 
commentaries,  so  that  it  refers  occasionally  to  matter  not  treated  of 
in  the  Sdda  text. 


Digitized  by 


302 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Ushahin. — §§  47,  48,  Gdh  Hdvan. — §  49,  Gah  Rapithwin. — §  50, 
G4h  Uztrin. — §  51,  Gih  Aiwisrfithrem. — Dk.  §  9). 

III.  §§  52-64.  The  offerings  for  the  Gihdnbdrs  (Dk.  §  10). 

IV.  §§  65-71.  The  libations  (Dk.  §  ii). 

V.  §§  72-84.  The  functions  and  place  of  the  Z6t  and  Rd^fs  at 
the  sacrifice  (Dk.  §§  13,  14). 

Fargard  III.  . 

F  §§  85-87,  91-96.  The  K6sit  and  Sadara  (Dk.  §  15). 

II.  §§  88-90,  97-104.  The  preparation  of  the  Baresman  (Dk. 

§  1 6)- 

III.  §§  105-109.  The  firewood  and  the  implements  for  the 
sacrifice  (Dk.  §17). 

The  interpretation  of  these  texts  is  beset  with  no  ordinary  diflS- 
culties,  the  first  being  the  technical  character  of  the  matter  treated  of, 
which  no  amount  of  philological  ingenuity,  left  to  its  own  devices, 
can  elucidate,  then  the  corrupt  state  of  the  text.  No  standard 
translation  of  the  Zend  can  be  expected  till  the  whole  of  the  Pahlavi 
Ntrangistin  has  been  deciphered  and  translated.  However,  with 
the  help  of  the  Dinkart  analysis  and  of  the  Pahlavi  Ntrangistin,  as 
far  as  I  could  make  it  out,  I  believe  I  have  succeeded  in  presenting 
a  rough  partial  translation,  which  may  give  a  correct  general  idea  of 
the  whole,  and  may  help  to  some  extent  to  clear  the  ground  and 
be  useful  even  in  a  further  exploration  of  the  Pahlavi  Nirangistdn. 

All  known  copies  of  the  Nirangist^n — which  are  indeed  few  in 
number — are  descended  from  two  manuscripts.  One,  belonging 
to  Dr.  Hoshangji  of  Poona  (MS.  H),  was  copied  in  India,  in  the 
year  1727,  from  a  manuscript  which  was  brought  from  Iran  in 
1720  by  Dastur  JimSsp  Vilayati  and  seems  to  have  been  written  in 
1471.  The  other,  belonging  to  Tahmuras  D.  Anklesaria  (MS.  T), 
was  written  in  Iran.  Its  date  is  unknow  n,  though  it  is  certainly 
older  than  Dr.  Hoshangji's  manuscript.  Both  manuscripts  belong 
to  the  same  family,  as  they  both  present  the  same  juxtaposition  o( 
the  Erpatisian  and  NirangistSn.  Tahmuras’  copy  has  lost  several 
pages  at  the  end ;  from  §  91  onwards,  we  are  dependent  only  on 
Hoshangji’s  copy.  But  Tahmuras'  manuscript,  besides  being  more 
complete  in  the  rest  of  the  text,  is  by  far  more  correct ;  and  how 
far  this  is  the  case  the  reader  may  judge  for  himself  by  a  glance  at 
the  translation;  from  §  91  onwards  we  have  been  obliged  to  leave 
most  of  the  text  untranslated  as  hopelessly  corrupt 

In  February,  1887,  having  been  asked  by  the  Parsi  community 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


303 


at  Bombay  to  deliver  a  lecture  on  the  Parsi  literature,  I  took  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  approaching  Jubilee  of  the  Queen  to  recommend 
the  creation  of  a  Victoria  Jubilee  Fund  for  the  publication  of  the 
unedited  Pahlavi  literature.  The  appeal  was  readily  answered,  a 
fund  raised,  and  it  was  decided  that  the  publication  should  begin 
with  the  Nirangistdn.  Unfortunately,  in  the  realisation  of  the  plan, 
the  scientific  experience  of  the  young  Parsi  school  did  not  prove 
quite  equal  to  its  good  will.  Instead  of  printing  from  the  better 
manuscript,  with  the  various  readings  of  the  inferior  one  in  foot-notes, 
the  committee  for  publication  had  the  less  good  manuscript  photo- 
zincographed.  We  have  not  yet  in  hand  the  Jubilee  edition,  but 
may  hope  that  at  least  the  variants  of  Tahmuras*  manuscript  have 
been  annexed  to  it.  We  have  thought  it  advisable,  meanwhile,  to 
give  here  for  the  use  of  scholars  the  Zend  text,  of  which  only  a  few 
manuscript  copies  are  extant  in  Europe  \ 


*  We  have  already  published  it  in  our  French  Avesta,  but  that 
edition  is  too  scarce  and  too  expensive  to  be  of  general  use. — The 
text  given  represents  essentially  Tahmuras’  copy,  corrected  here 
and  there  from  Hoshangji's  manuscript.  The  barbarous  forms  are 
many,  and  a  considerable  number  of  them  might  be  easily  cor¬ 
rected  :  however,  whenever  they  did  not  make  the  meaning  more 
obscure,  we  thought  it  better  to  let  them  stand  as  they  were,  because 
in  the  degenerate  stage  in  which  the  Zend  language  presents  itself 
to  us,  there  is  no  uniform  standard  from  which  one  may  view  and 
to  which  one  may  reduce  the  erring  forms. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


Fargard  I,  First  Part. 

ErpatistAn. 

I.  The  priest  officiating  out  of  his  house. 

1.  Knm6  (read  kemd)  nminahg  athaurunem 
piraycu^ 

Yd  ashdi  bere^astemd, 

Hvdijtd  VcL  ydi.vtd ; 

Yim  Vcl  ainim  hapd-gadtha  (read  hadhd-gadtha) ; 

Hazaojyd.  paaungha  (read  paungha)  ^ySn  (read 
/fai)  Sm). 

2.  Para  paoirj'd  diti,  para  bityd  4iti,  para  thrityd 
Siti. 

Adta  pardyaiti  yathd  gadthdbyd  h«i«ti  (read  he»ti), 

Adfd  gadthanSm  irisha/^tinSm  (H. — T.  irishawta- 
nam)  radrd  (read  radrd  >Jikayaflf)  ^ 

3.  Katdrem  dthravana  athaurunem  vd  pdraya^/ 
gadthanSm  vt  asperend  ava</  ? 


•  Karf  d4tahe  Zarathujtrdij. 

Maghnd  mSlthrd. 

Thrikh^aparem  hathrdknem. 
Ga£than3m  v4  asperend  avdi^^  (see  §  3). 
Ydi  avapa  aiwydsti  (see  §  15). 

A  paiti  berettm  ere^iVtem. 

Ndirf  friurusti. 

Mastem  4thrnentem  4st4tha. 

Paiti  beretij  (H. — T.  beretim)  ar.rtLrtim. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


Fargard  I,  First  Part. 

ErpatistAn. 

I.  The  priest  officiating  out  of  his  house. 

1.  Who  is  he  in  the  house  who  shall  officiate  as 
priest  ^  ? 

— He  who  longeth  most  after  holiness  *, 

Be  he  great,  or  small ; 

Or  another,  his  partner  * ; 

By  his  own  will  or  directed  by  the  brethren. 

2.  The  first  goeth  forth,  the  second  goeth  forth, 
the  third  goeth  forth. 

[If]  he  goeth  forth  who  is  in  charge  of  the 
estate*. 

He  shall  pay  for  the  damage  done  to  the  estate. 

3.  Shall  the  priest  officiate  as  a  priest  or  shall  he 
see  to  the  good  management  of  the  estate  ? 


'  Out  of  the  house. 

*  The  most  zealous. 

*  The  sacerdotal  community  forms  a  religious  and  commercial 
association.  The  profits  accruing  from  the  divers  ceremonies  are 
divided  between  the  members.  These  in  Nausiri,  which  is  the 
metropolis  of  Zoroastrianism,  and  whose  Farsi  population  is  all 
of  sacerdotal  origin,  are  called  Bhagarias,  ‘  the  paitners.' 

*  Somebody  must  stay  at  home  to  take  care  of  the  common 
estate ;  he  must  not  go  and  ofiBciate  abroad. 

[4]  X 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


306 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


GadthanStn  asperend  av6i<^*. 

4.  Kvad  n4  ithrava  athaurunem  ha^  gith&bi^ 
(read  gaSthibi^)  parayfi^^? 

\2d  hi^  thrw  yS  hm4  (read  hamS)  aiwij 
Kv^d  aiwwtem  parayad^  ? 

Thrikh^aparem  hathr&kem  kh^vai  khjafnd 
para^  ®. 

Y 6  bady6  a^tahmS^  pariiti 
N6i</  pa&^ita  anaiwi^m  4strya»ti. 

5 .  Katird  athaurunem  parayi/a?  ndirika  v4  nmelnd- 
paitif  v4  ? 

Y  dzUa  vdgadthau  vim4kat4r  (readkatird)  parayAaf^  ? 
Nm4nd-paitix  gadthau  ndirika  paray4</. 

Niirikdi  g^dthau  vix  nmdnd-paiti^  paraydd?®. 

6.  Yd  anyahd  niirika  anahakhtd  athaurunem 
paranghditi  (read  paranghaiiiti), 

Ksd  hd  v4  ashem  verezyfia?  y4  ndirika  nmdnd-paiti 
verezya«ti  ? 

VerezySd  usaiti  tid’d  anusaiti. 

Ahakhtd  paranghaiaiti, 

VerezydU/  usaiti^  anusaitytl^  (read  anusaitiia). 
Frdi</  var^  parangha^ditd  4kau  (H. — T.  idau) 
hazanguha  anikausd  tdyur 

•Ydza^a  .  .  .  adraya  dadnd. 

Ydza^a  vehrkd  gadthan3m  (cf.  Vd.  XIII,  10). 

Ydzi^a  adra  dadnd.  Ydzi^a  adra)ra  dadnd. 

Ydzida  vehrkd  gadthmi  (cf.  Vd.  XIII,  10). 

PaoirySm  him  varem  4derezaydi<f  hd  yihya  hd  hvanem 
Ahdk. 

Athaurunlm^a. 

Thrishdm  dsnSim  khjafnanu^  (Y asna  LX  1 1, 5,  gloss). 

*  Nairyd  ratuf  kara. 

Ndu/  ava^ind  dditlm  vind</. 

Advidina  dditlm  vindntha//. 

Hakhtd  u  anahakhtd.  Pan[/&a]dayasaya  sareide. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  n!rangistAn. 


307 


Let  him  see  to  the  good  management  of  the 
estate  \ 

4.  How  often  shall  the  priest  officiate  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  estate  ? 

— He  may  go  three  times  in  the  year. 

How  far  may  he  go  to  teach  (the  Word)  ? 

— So  far  as  a  three  nights’  journey  * :  six  nights, 
there  and  back. 

Farther  than  that 

If  he  refuse  to  go  and  teach,  he  is  not  guilty. 

5.  Which  of  the  two  shall  officiate  as  priest,  the 
mistress  or  the  master  of  the  house  *  ? 

And  if  either  be  fit  to  take  charge  of  the  estate, 
which  shall  go  forth  ? 

If  the  master  of  the  house  take  charge  of  the 
estate,  the  woman  shall  go  forth. 

If  the  woman  take  charge  of  the  estate,  the  master 
of  the  house  shall  go  forth. 

6.  If  a  man  should  take  with  him  as  priest  *  the 
wife  of  another,  without  (her  husband’s)  leave. 

May  the  woman  fulfil  the  holy  office  ? 

— Yea,  if  she  is  willing  ;  nay,  if  she  is  not  willing. 

If  a  man  take  her  with  him  by  (the  husband’s)  leave. 


*  The  managing  priest  renders  more  service  to  the  community 
by  preserving  and  increasing  the  common  property  than  by  per¬ 
forming  his  ritual  functions.  ‘  Supervising  the  property  is  better 
than  officiating  as  a  priest/  (Comm.) 

*  The  Avesta  counts  by  nights  instead  of  days  :  *  three  nights  ’ 
means  ‘  three  times  twenty-four  hours.'  Three  nights'  distance  is 
valued  at  thirty  farsakhs  or  parasangs  (ninety  miles  or  thirty  leagues). 

*  Women,  in  case  of  need,  were  allowed,  like  men,  to  perfonn  cer¬ 
tain  ritual  ceremonies  (cf.  §  40)  and  to  act  as  Rdspt  (assistant-priest), 
and  even  as  Z6t  (officiating  priest)  (Anquetil,  Zend-Avesta  II,  553). 

*  As  assistant-priest. 

X  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


3o8 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


7.  Y6  any6h6  apereniydkahfi  anakhtd  (read  an4h- 
akhtd)  athaurunem  parangha^i  (read  parangha^iti), 

Pasca  hdra  (read  y4ra  ?)  tan4m  paray^iti. 

adra  y6i  apereniyOkd  srao^i  v4  anutaiaitS, 

Aokhtd  vi  hd  aokhtS  thw4<^  pairi  anguha  (read 
pairi-angha), 

Pa&^  hathra  i  fra-sruiti  (read  afrasruiti)  st  paiti 
tan6m  paray6it6*. 

8.  Ahmi  nmind  anghS  visS  ahmi  za»tv6  angh£ 
danghvd  iv^d  bij  ay<iu  vttayau  (read  vtfeiyrtu) 
anghen  ? 

Yu^yastif  haia  ntnidf  atha  danghdi^  vlsa<^  h4th- 
rem  za»taod^  4  danghao</, 

Yatha  d4ity4  spasanya, 

Yatha  para  vaySd  nm4nemia  vtsem^  zawtm^/fei 
dangh^fia. 

9.  kzd  yaflf  h6  aokht6  afi^a  y^Nhfi  aperen4y4k6 : 

Ha^nguha  niS  hana  (read  ana  ?)  aperen4y4ka, 

Yatha  vashi  atha  hakhsha4t4, 

V ana  pas^aiti  uzdanguhu^i</  patha  hakht6i</, 

K\'ad  an4bd6i^tem  ayanem  paranghaiaitS? 

Y4  frayarena  v4  uzay^irin4  v4  avSn  aiwy4sti^ 
anghau^. 


*  Y^Nhfi  aokhtd  adrd  ydNhd  aperen4y4k4i. 


*  To  have  illicit  intercourse  with  her,  by  force  or  otherwise. 

*  By  force. 

'  Without  leave  from  the  parent  on  whom  the  child  depends. 

*  As  assistant-priest ;  cf.  §  40. 

*  If  the  child  goes  willingly,  not  by  force. 

*  Or  perhaps :  ‘  if  [the  child]  say.' 

^  A  mile. 

*  ‘  Without  singing’  the  G&thas,  that  is  to  say,  without  perform¬ 
ing  the  ceremony  for  which  he  has  taken  the  child  with  him. 
Taking  the  child  farther  would  amount  to  kidnapping. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


309 


Willing  or  unwilling,  she  shall  fulfil  the  holy  office. 

If  the  man  take  her  with  him  to  enjoy  her  body  *, 
if  he  do  this  openly  *,  he  is  a  highwayman ;  if  in 
secret,  he  is  a  thief. 

7.  He  who,  without  leave®,  taketh  away  the 
child  of  another  to  officiate  as  priest*,  he  shall 
become  Peshdtanu  for  a  whole  year  (?). 

If  the  child  obey  and  go  gladly  ®, 

Or  if  [the  man]  say  * :  ‘  I  go  with  thee,’ 

And  he  goeth  a  hithra  ’  without  singing  *,  he 
shall  be  Peshdtanu. 

8.  In  this  house,  in  this  borough,  in  this  district, 
in  this  country,  how  far  afield  may  they  go  •  ? 

— The  length  of  a  yu^dsti  from  the  house  or  the 
borough  ;  the  length  of  a  hithra  from  the  district 
or  the  country  ",  within  a  sphere  of  protection. 

So  that  they  remain  in  sight  of  the  house,  of  the 
borough,  of  the  district,  of  the  country. 

9.  But  if  he  who  owneth  the  child  shall  say  ; 

‘  Go  with  him,  my  child. 

The  child  shall  follow  at  thy  will. 

He  may  follow  along  the  roads  out  of  the 
country,’ 

— How  far  away,  at  most,  may  one  lead  him  ? 

So  far  as  one  can  go  in  a  morning  or  an  after¬ 
noon. 

*  How  far  can  a  man  take  with  him  a  child  without  proper 
authorisation  P 

The  length  of  sixteen  hathras  (sixteen  thousand  steps;  see 
above,  p.  160)  from  the  house  or  the  borough,  within  the  limits  of 
the  same  district. 

At  the  distance  of  one  hdthra  only,  if  on  the  border  of  the 
district;  otherwise  they  would  enter  a  strange  place  where  the 
child  is  not  known,  and  the  danger  of  his  being  lost  or  kidnapped 
would  be  greater. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


lO 


Y6  a^tahmid^  parangha^diti, 

Nabinazdiftem  h6  para  pasiaiti  radraia  adhwa- 
diityas^  istr^Linti. 


II.  The  student  priest. 

loa.  Aa^  hvatSm  aba  a^thrapaitlm 

Y6Nh6  nisritem  frira 
Ahi  anastritim 

Y6zi  %ad  hfi  n(Ad  aighsrittm  frira 

Ndi^jf  ainisritlm  dstry6«ti. 

Yathra  apereyOkd  (read  aperen&yhkd) 

N6i</  anisru 

Atha  aiwyanghem  [yathra  ratu.f  thwayanghem] 
yathra  aperen^ydkd. 

Ah6  aithisritlm  stary^iti. 

Adha  ya^jf  v&  yathra  thwayanghem  vi  thwayan¬ 
ghem  vL 

lo  b.  Da^vayasnah^  v4  tanu-perethah6  vft  aperenS- 
yhka  parangha^it^ 

Nisrita/jf  a6tah6  4stry6iti  v\b\d  asriti ». 

II.  Kvzd  n&  aithra-paititim  (read  a^thrapaitlm) 
upadisi^  ydre  dr^fd  ? 

Thrizaremadm  khratdm  ashavanem  aiwyaungha</**. 

Ydzi  awtard//  nadmda?  adtahd  dren^yditi  (H. — 
dere^yditi  T.)  para  paityiiti  vlraodhayditi  (H. — 
vtraozayditi  T.), 

Hithrd  nuui  (read  hathra  nd  ?)  ainem  adthrapaitim 
updisdiflf  ithra  (atha  H.)  thritim  updisdia?  advatha 
tdirim  updisdiaf; 

Ydzi  ava^  vadtha^  vadnatha  ^ntastd  nabmid 
hithrahd  drer^yia<i^j^  nadm>^  pa&^iti  vtrdidhi 

*  Amat  h§ui  amat  nisrita</. 

Yatha  dahmahd  fraiigharezdi</. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGISrAN. 


31 1 


If  the  man  lead  him  farther, 

He  is  guilty  in  sight  of  the  nearest  kinsman  *  of 
the  sin  of  adhwadAitya  *. 


II.  The  student  priest. 

10  a . 

10  b . . . 

II.  How  many  years  shall  the  student  consult 
the  a^thrapaiti  *  ? 

—  Three  springtides^  shall  he  gird  on  Holy 
Wisdom  *. 

If,  while  he  learns  by  heart,  he  forget  and  miss 
a  part. 

He  shall  try  again  a  second  time,  a  third  time, 
a  fourth  time ; 

And  when  he  knows  his  text,  he  shall  be  able  to 
say  it  all  and  miss  nothing. 

Yavatahd  n4fd  anvathwaiiftd. 

*•  Spayfiiti. 

Vtspa^ibyd  aperen^LyAbyd  ntid  Aahm&i  aperendyunSLm . . . 
bard. 

YdNhdadtadha  mazdayasnanSm  nAirika  avay<ru  khnidrou 
h2m  radthwayditi  mazdayasnanlm^a  dadvayasnanSmAa. 

Thrikhrafarem  dSzhdhrem. 


'  The  nearest  kinsman  of  the  child. 

*  The  adhwad&itya  or  atapd&t,  literally  ‘improper  journey,'  is 
properly  the  sin  of  giving  insufficient  food  to  an  animal  or  to 
a  traveller.  In  this  passage  it  means  enforcing  upon  a  child 
a  journey  beyond  his  strength. 

*  The  adthrapaid,  the  teaching  priest ;  cf.  Vd.  IV,  45. 

*  For  three  years ;  cf.  Vd.  XVIII,  9. 

*  As  a  Kdstt;  cf.  Vd.  XVIII,  i,  note  2.  He  shall  study  for 
three  years. 


Digitized  by 


312 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


12.  Kem  a^ma^  aSthrapaitim  upaya<^  apndtem 
(H. — apdtem  T.)  dahmem  (H.— ditem  T.)  ? 

Yds6  \&d  apaySiti  pirantarem  is6i</. 

Yava<]^  a^tahmya  zru  staotanSm  y^nyanSm  did- 

Yatha  Xad  ^frimari  nemd  hyid  atha  ta^  dfrimnd 
istdray^iti ; 

A^tava^^  SL^sas^ti  istirayditA 

13.  Y6  aperemn4i  (read  dperemnii)  ndi^vtsiiti 
fr4mr4iti, 

Kd  h4  pa6unin4m  a^thrapaitinSm  afradkhtS  (H. — 
4f.  T.)  istry^iti  ?  nabdnazdi^td. 

Aad  havatSm  nana  yahmi  pareiti ; 

[Vtspadru  pare»ti]  vlspa^ni  afrdti  (read  afraokhti) 
4stry4iti. 

14.  Yd  asru</-gao.rd  Vci  afravad>^d  v4  ndio^  dim 
^nem  v4^m  aiwy4ij, 

Ndi</  pas^aiti  anaivi^i  4stryditi. 

Ydzi4ad^dyum  pd  v4>^m  aiwy4ij  anaiwijti  4stryditi». 

15.  Yd  avadha  ndu^  aiwy4sti  ashaond  aradu^ 
havayanghem  akhtem, 

Daretd  v4  anangrd  t4ya  v4, 

Yn4  (read  5n4?)v4  aodra  v4  tarm4  v4  aurvar 
angra  v4  aodra  v4  tarma, 

*  Ith4  &d  yaza.  ashdm  vdhd. 

’  Who  is  the  best  teacher? 

*  Until  you  know  by  heart  the  Staota  Ydsnya,  the  Nask  that 
formed  the  essential  part  of  the  Yasna,  containing  the  G&thas,  the 
Yasna  HaptangbSiti,  and  a  few  other  His  (see  onr  French  Zend- 
Avesta,  I,  Ixzxvii). 

*  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  he  must  teach  at  least  the  nemd 
hydrf  (the  Nydyish  ?). 

*  tW  is  the  minimum  the  master  is  bound  in  duty  to  teach 
him. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NiRANGlSrAN. 


313 


1 2.  Who  is  the  aSthrapaitL  to  whom  he  shall  go 
as  the  highest  *  ? 

— Even  he  who  .  .  . 

Until  thou  hast  by  heart  the  Staota  Y^snya*, 

8 

In  this  measure  is  the  master  guilty  *. 

1 3.  If  one  answer  not  the  student’s  objections  ®, 
Which  of  the  many  aSthrapaitis  is  guilty  ? — He 

who  is  nearest  of  kin  *. 


For  all  objections,  for  all  the  answers  denied  he 
is  guilty. 

14.  If  he  whose  ear  heareth  nor,  or  who  has  no 
voice,  repeat  not  a  word 

He  is  not  guilty  for  not  repeating. 

If  he  can  repeat,  were  it  only  one  word,  for  not 
repeating  it  he  is  guilty. 

15.  If  he  repeat  not  because  he  suffers  from 
a  wound, 

Or  for  any  physical  pain,  or  ...  . 

Or  by  reason  of  drought,  or  cold,  or  thirst,  or  .  .  . 

Or  by  reason  of  the  hard  fare  of  travel. 

If  he  repeat  not,  he  is  not  guilty  *. 


*  The  case  is  when  a  pupil  finding  the  text  obscure  or  con¬ 
tradictory  asks  for  an  explanation. 

*  If  this  is  the  right  translation,  it  would  import  that  not  every 
afithrapaid  is  bound  to  answer  his  pupil’s  objections ;  he  has  only 
to  teach  him  the  text,  not  to  interpret  it ;  but  from  a  next-of-kin 
aSthrapaid  a  pupil  has  a  right  to  exact  an  answer  to  his  doubts. 
One  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  priesthood  is  hereditary,  and  that 
most  priests  of  a  place  belong  to  one,  or  at  least  to  a  very  few 
families.  All  the  Mobeds  in  India  are  supposed  to  be  descendants 
of  one  common  ancestor  (see  the  Guimet  Zend-Avesta,  I,  Ivii). 

^  The  pupils  repeat  the  text,  word  by  word,  after  the  teacher. 

*  Because  he  suffers  from  an  overwhelming  cause. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


3H 

Anguha  tangro-pithwau  (read  <rungha-vi  kA 
tar6-pithw6)  ahm&d  paid  adhwS, 

N6idf  a^vi^t  (a^navirti  H. — read  anaivi^ti)  is 
try^iti. 

Vithtnaini  a^yi  ^vafna  v&  anaivi^ti  SstrySitS. 

16.  Kad  vi  da^vayasn&df  vi  tanu-perethdd^  a£th- 
rapatdidf  pairi  aiwyangha^  ? 

Frasrivayd  ava  ddthra  yem  dim  va^n&d  evisa^uxva 
va»d4nem. 

N6i^/  dva  y4  vistadrva. 

N6i^/  h4  asha6n4  ^yaothananSm  verezy6i</. 

17.  Ni  da4vayasn4i  v4  tanuperethdi  v4  a4thray4i 
^sh4iti  ? 

Dahm6  niuruzdd  adh4ity6-draon6, 

D4itydh4  draonanghd  upa  ^naungha, 

Pairi-gereftay4d?  paid  zman[a]yau,  ntid  api-geref- 
tay4d^  paiti. 

KvaxtX  st  a4fa  zimana  anghad  ?  yatha  gf4u5  fravaiti. 

Vehrk4i  hizvSm  dadh4iti  y6  azrazd4i  •  m4threm 
(read  mSthrem)  kastt. 

18.  Ka^  n4  da4vayasn4i  v4  tanupereth4i  v4  gm; 
adh4itya  4stry4id  ?  ndi</  4stry6iti, 

Any6  ahm4^  y6  h4  gav4  varej  daidhl</  a4tahm4i. 


NtRANGISTAN. 

Fargard  I,  Second  Part. 

I.  The  Z6t  and  the  R4spi. 

1 9.  Dahm6  dahm4i  aokht4 : 

Fr4ma  nereg4  raydij  (read  fr4  m4  nere  g4ray6i.T) 
yad  ratuj  fritdi^  4s4</. 


'  Because  he  might  and  ought  to  have  controlled  his  weariness. 

*  A  Da^vayasna,  a  worshipper  of  the  Daevas,  that  is  to  say, 
a  worshipper  of  false  gods  (a  Br&hman,  a  Buddhist,  a  Greek,  &c.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGlSXAN. 


315 


If  he  repeat  not  by  reason  of  weariness,  sadness, 
or  slumber,  he  is  guilty  \ 

16 . 

1 7.  Shall  he  teach  a  disciple,  if  he  be  a  heathen  * 
or  a  sinner  ®  ? 

—  The  righteous  man  in  his  misery,  if  he  have 
not  wherewithal  to  be  fed. 

And  wants  wherewithal  to  be  fed, 

(May  teach)  for  a  salary, but  not  without  a  salary*. 

—  What  shall  be  the  salary  ?— The  price  of  what 
an  ox  ploughs  ®. 

But  he  gives  a  tongue  to  the  wolf,  who  imparteth 
the  Holy  Word  to  the  heretic  •. 

18.  He  that  refuseth  food  to  the  heathen  and  the 
sinner,  is  he  guilty  ? — He  is  not  guilty, 

Unless  he  refuse  it  to  the  labourer  in  his  service’. 


Fargard  I,  Second  Part. 

Here  begins  the  NirangistAn  proper. 

I.  The  Zdt  and  the  RAspt. 

19.  The  pious  man  warns  the  pious  man  * ; 

‘  Rouse  me,  O  man !  when  the  festival  of  the 
masters  arrives 


’  A  Peshdtanu,  a  Zoroastrian  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin. 

•  He  may  teach  a  Da6vayasna  or  a  Pesh6tanu,  but  only  to  gain 
his  bread,  when  reduced  to  starvation ;  in  no  case,  and  on  no 
account  whatever,  may  he  teach  a  heretic. 

®  ‘  The  price  of  a  day's  work '  (Comm.) ;  just  enough  to  live  on 
the  day  he  teaches. 

•  An  Ashemaogha :  cf.  Tahmuras'  Fragments,  §  3. 

’  His  meed  is  due  to  the  labourer,  even  if  a  heathen  or  a  sinner. 

•  Cf.Vd.  XVIII,  26. 

•  Ratufriti,  literally,  ‘  the  blessing  of  the  Ratus '  or  the  various 
masters  of  the  year,  is  applied  to  the  celebration  of  the  G&h&nt4rs. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


3i6 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Vlsaiti  dem  fraghr4ray6  n6id  fraghrighrfiy^iti, 
Adrd  ratufrij  yd  ^ghdra. 

20.  AVaiti  narSm  akhtd  (read  hakhtd)  zaota  ratu- 
frw 

Ahunem  vairim  frasrad^ydhd  ? 

Vispadibyd  adibyd  ydi  hd  madhemyi  vaJta.  [va^] 
frasrdvayamnahd  vi  upa  surunvanti  ysui  v4  yasnem 
yazetnnahd  ^ 

21.  Suninaditi  zaodha  (read  zaota)  upa  sraotara- 
nStn, 

N6i<jf  upa  sraotard  zaotard, 

Zaota  ratufrer; 

Adtavd  upa  sraotdrd  yzvsui  framarentem. 

Ndi^  zaota  upa  sraotaranSm, 

Upa  sraotird  ratufryd ; 

Adtavatd  zaota  yava^^  framaraitd  *». 

22.  Sraothrana  gdthanSm  ratufre^, 

Paiti-astiia  yasnas-hd  adha  fra^d^d-mSthrabd ; 

Ahd  zt  nd  sravanghem  aframare^ti  dstryditd, 
Yatha  githan9Lm>6i</<’. 

Gdthau  srivayd  yasnem  yaze«tem  paiti^iti, 

*  Frimi  nere  (cf.  §  19,  line  2). 

Haourvd 

Frastuyd. 

Ashem  vdM  3  fravar&nd  mazdayasnd. 

VlspAi. 

Ashaya  nd  paiti  g^mySui  Amesha  Spe»ta. 

Ashem  vdhd  3  aiwi-garedhmahd  apam  vanghinam. 
Ashem  vdhd  3  fravardnd  mazdayasnd  Zarathuftrer. 
Ashaya  dadhSmi. 

Mand  maretanimi&a. 

Va^d  maretanam^a. 


'  Ratufrish,  literally,  ‘  he  has  blessed  the  masters,’  be  has  done  his 
duty ;  he  is  all  right 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  5rpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


317 


If  one  rouse,  and  the  other  rise  not. 

The  one  who  roused  is  accepted 

20.  How  many  assistants  *  can  the  Zaotar  lawfully 
have  in  the  recitation  of  the  Ahuna  Vairya  ? 

As  many  as  repeat  after  him  in  a  hushed  voice 
while  he  sings  aloud  or  recites  the  Yasna. 

21.  If  the  Zaotar  listen  to  the  assistants, 

And  his  assistants  listen  not  to  the  Zaotar, 

The  Zaotar  is  accepted  ; 

And  so  are  his  assistants  for  all  that  they  recite 
themselves  *. 

If  the  Zaotar  listen  not  to  his  assistants, 

The  assistants  are  accepted  ; 

And  so  is  the  Zaotar  for  all  that  he  recites  him¬ 
self*. 

22.  The  assistant*  is  accepted  who  sings  the 
GAthas, 

And  follows  inwardly  the  Yasna*  and  the  Fshhshd- 
mSthra  ’’ ; 

For  the  man  is  gpiilty  who  does  not  follow  the 
(prose)  texts*, 

Even  as  the  Githas. 

If  he  sing  theGithas  and  follow  inwardly  the  Yasna, 


*  ‘How  many  Rdspts?’  (Comm.) — One  of  the  offices  of  the 
R&spt  is  to  make  the  responses  to  the  Zdt,  and  to  answer  atha  ratur 
in  the  Ahuna  Vairya  recited  as  a  dialogue. 

’  Not  for  what  has  been  recited  by  the  Zaotar. 

*  Not  for  what  has  been  recited  by  the  Rtspts. 

*  The  Rdspt  assisting  the  Zdt  in  the  recitation  of  the  Githas. 

For  instance,  at  the  end  of  each  Gathic  Hi,  he  repeats  with  the 

Z6t  the  initial  stanza. 

*  The  Yasna  Haptanghiiti. 

^  The  Ta/f  sdidhif  Hi  (Yasna  LVIII). 

'  Sravanghem ;  the  prose  texts,  what  is  not  Githa.  He  must 
repeat  aloud  the  Githa  texts  and  follow  the  rest  inwardly. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


318 


VlspanSm  g&thanSm  ratufrey. 

Yasnem  yaziiti  githanSm  srSvamnSm  paitlrti  (read 
paitLrtaiti), 

Yasnah6  a6vah6  ratufri^  aratufrij  g&thanSm  ». 

23.  Y&  githau  afsmainya  rayatd  va  ratufrij. 
Vaifeistaytiva</  sr&yamn6  (read  sr4vayamn6)  a^ta- 

vatd  ktardifeii/  ratufrij  yawad  framare»ti  •>. 

24.  Yi  yasnem  yazebenti  afsmainySn  v4  va^astarti- 
vad  v4  va  fratufrya  (read  ratufrya). 

H5m-sru^/  v4iayidhi  y^zietva  (read  v4ifci  y4zi 
y^zySid  va)  aratufrya. 

Kad  hSm-snR/  vdiim^a  ? 

Yad  haka^  4rmut6  (read  4mrut6)  afsmainiivSni^ 
vaiasta  (read  vaia^a^tivat). 

Ava^6  surunvaiwti  n6\d  ainyd, 

A6s6  ratufri^  yd  xxtid  aiwisruniiti  ®. 

25.  Yd  gdthanSlm  anumaiti  vd  anu  mainaiti, 
Ainydhd  v4  sr4vaya«td  paitijta«ti, 

Anyd  vi  hd  dahmd  srutd-githau  dadhditi  aititufrij, 
Asrutau  dadhditi. 

26.  Yd  gdthau  srdvayditi  apd  v4  paiti^  ^z^ind, 
Raodhanghd  vi  keresSm  vi  sadhdtanSm  (read 

gadhdtdnSm), 

GithanSm  vi  vaya»tan3m, 

Ydzi  hvadibyd  mibyd  aiwisrunvaiti  ratufri^. 

Ydzi  iadf  ntad  hvadibya  u^ibya  aiwisurunvaiti 
rapayi//  (read  apayia?) ; 

*  Yi  jyaotheni  yi  va^nghi. 

Humatanim. 

'•  Ahyi  yisi  nemanghi  ustinazastd. 

Ahyi  nemanghi. 

«Haka^. 

^  The  Zdt  and  the  Rispt.  *  Detached  verses  (?). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistan. 


319 


He  is  accepted  for  all  the  Githas. 

If  he  recite  the  Yasna  and  follow  inwardly  the 
GAthas,  he  is  accepted  only  for  the  Yasna,  he  is  not 
accepted  for  the  GSthas. 

23.  If  the  two  priests  ^  sing  together  Githa  verses*, 
both  are  accepted. 

If  they  sing  stanzas,  both  are  accepted  in  the 
proportion  that  they  recite  (?). 

24.  If  two  priests  ®  celebrate  together  the  Yasna 
verse  by  verse,  or  stanza  by  stanza,  both  are 
accepted. 

If  they  hear  the  words  of  one  another,  they  are 
not  accepted  *. 

What  is  hearing  one  another’s  words  ? 

It  is  when  they  recite  together  verses  or  stanzas. 

If  one  listen  and  the  other  listen  not. 

The  one  who  does  not  listen  is  accepted. 

25.  If  he  think  the  G&thas  inwardly  *, 

Or  listen  to  another’s  singing. 

Or  get  another  of  the  faithful  to  sing  them, — he 
is  not  accepted,  as  he  does  not  sing  them  himself. 

26.  If  he  sing  the  G&thas  near  a  water-spring  •, 

Or  near  a  river,  or  among  a  gang  of  rioters. 

Or  during  the  passing  of  a  caravan. 

If  he  can  hear  himself  with  his  own  ears,  he  is 
accepted. 

If  he  cannot  hear  his  own  voice,  let  him  try  to 
raise  (it  above  the  noise) ; 


*  Two  different  Zaotars  perform  at  the  same  time  two  independent 
offices.  The  place  for  the  office,  the  so-called  Izishn-g&h,  is 
arranged  in  such  a  way  that  the  celebration  of  several  offices  can 
take  place  at  the  same  time. 

^  As  they  disturb  one  another,  and  their  attention  is  not  undivided. 

•  Without  singing  them  himself.  •  Which  drowns  his  voice. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


320 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Y^zi  apdi^  kad  ndi^  ap6i  (read  ap6id^  ts, 

A^tadha  mamdhya  (read  madhmya)  va^d  frama- 
remnd  ratufrir*. 

27.  Kvad  n4  netema  vaia  githtfu  srdvayd  ratufri^  ? 
Ydzi  hd  nazdirtd  dahtnd  vi  surunvaiti  javad  v& 

adm  adm  havadibya  ujibya. 

II.  The  Dardn. 

28.  Ga»tumd  yavanSm  ratufre?  *>. 

III.  Strong  drink  forbidden  during  the  sacrifice. 

29.  Ydi  adt^d  (read  adtd)  maidhyanim  pard 
Avairetdd  pithau  (read  githau)  n6d  srivayditi, 

Paoithya  (read  paoirya)  vari.;  ta  ad^m  .f  yaothanemi^a 
aiithdiri^tem. 

30.  Tad  ^&arend  bidha  asti : 

Dahmd  hurSm  Avaraiti  madhd  aspyd  payanghd, 
Diityd  draonau  Avard  madhd  ^z^araiti, 


*  AStadha  madhmya  vaka. 

*’  Ashaya  dadhSmi  ^Tfarethem  myazdem :  haurvata  ame- 
retita. 

AhurahS  mazdmi. 

Ashaya  nd  paiti  ^myAd. 

Hvaxata  nar6. 

Ashaya  nd  paiti  gamySd. 

AdtILm  dyitSmnahd. 

Nemd  Ahur&i  ashem  vohd  3. 

Khmaothra  khmaothra  Amesha  Spe»ta. 

Ithi  Ad  yazamaidd  ^zarethem  myazdem. 

Haurvata  ameretdta  gSur  hudhou  &pd. 

Urvara  haurvata  ameretdta. 

Adsmi  baoidhi  kvaxtthem  myazdem. 

Ama  humatd^d  hdkhtd^d  ith&. 

Ndi</  hlr  bardi</  upa  kashem. 

9  Ashem  vohd  ith&  ashem  vdhd  ashem  ithi. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAN  AND  nJrANGIStAn. 


321 


If  he  can  raise  (it  so,  all  well) ;  if  he  cannot, 

He  shall  recite  with  a  medium  voice  and  will  be 
accepted. 

27.  How  loud  at  the  least  shall  he  sing  the  G4thas 
in  order  to  be  accepted  ? 

Loud  enough  for  the  nearest  of  the  faithful,  for 
this  one  or  that  one,  to  hear  him  with  his  own  ears. 

II.  The  Darhn. 

28.  Amongst  grains,  (the  draond  ’)  made  with  com 
is  accepted  ®. 

III.  Strong  drink  forbidden  during  the  sacrifice®. 

29.  Those  who,  from  drinking  too  much  strong 
drink,  have  not  sung  the  Githas  *, 

On  the  first  time  it  happens  ®,  have  not  to  atone 
for  it. 

30.  This  is  thy  way  of  feeding ; 

When  a  pious  man  drinks  strong  drink,  wine  or 
mare’s  milk,  and  eating  with  moderation  drinks  with 


*  The  draond,  darfin,  is  a  consecrated  round  little  cake  which  is 
tasted  by  the  Zdt  at  the  end  of  the  Srdsh  darftn  (Yasna  VIII,  4) : 
it  is  a  sort  of  Zoroastrian  host. 

*  This  sentence  does  not  really  belong  to  the  Zend  Nirangistin ; 
it  is  a  quotation  from  some  other  Fargard,  inserted  in  the  Pahlavi 
commentary,  though  the  analysis  in  the  Dinkart,  being  based  upon 
the  Pahlavi  text,  mentions  it  among  the  matters  treated  in  the 
NirangistSn  (Dinkart  VIII,  39,  2  :  ‘  concerning  the  darfin,  &c.’). 

*  ‘  About  abstaining  from  drinking  strong  wine  during  the  sacri¬ 
fice  ’  (Dinkart  VIII,  29,  3). 

*  ‘  They  drink  wine,  get  drunk,  and  do  not  celebrate  the  Gfi- 
hfinbir.’  (Comm.) 

*  The  first  time  they  did  not  know  the  consequences  of  their  in¬ 
temperance,  and  are  not  considered  responsible  for  them. 

[4]  Y 


Digitized  by 


Google 


322 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


N6it/  githanSm  asruiti  Astry^ti. 
Fradhrtu-draond  ^z'ard  madhait^, 
NA  gAthanSm  asruiti. 


IV.  The  recitation  of  the  Githas. 

31.  Y6  bb  hastarem  srAvayAiti  ratufry6. 

Thri^  hastrem  srivayenti  (read  srAvaye«ti  ara- 
tufrij'). 

K\ad  nitemem  hastrem  angha^f  ratufry^^  ?  thrw  ». 

32.  Y6  gAthau  pairi  ukhshayAiti  srAvaya«ti 

YAzi  arastrem  pairi  [akhta  (read  aokhta)  pairi] 
Adha 

VA  apaya»ta  aratufrya 

Pasia  vA  par6  vA  pairi  Adha  [a]ratufry6. 

33.  Katha  zaotha  gAthau  frasrAvayAiti  ?  naAmd 
va^stafti  madhimya  va>^a  Zarathu^ri  mana ; 

YAziia  aAt^^  va^6  apayaAiti  y6i  he»ti  gAthAhva 
bi.fAmrAta  thri^AmrAta^a  >^athru.fAmrAta^, 

DaAvanSm  kereta, 

AAtadySm  va^Sm  aratufryd. 

34.  Kaya  pawti  (read  ha«ti)  v^kz.  bijAmrAta? 
AhyA  yAsA — humatanAm — ashahyA  Aaaf — yathA  tA 

i  —  humAim  thwA  l^em  —  thw6i  staotaras^ — u^tA 


*  Ssirf  vAstrahfi  ZarathurtrALr  nemd  : — ‘  Homage  to  Isa</- 
vAstra,  son  of  ZarathuJtra.’ 

Vispau  gafithau. 

AhurahA  Mazdau  raSvatd  ^z/arenanghatd  ashAunSm. 
AhurahA  Mazdau  gAthaubyo  a.shAunAm.  gAthAbyd. 
AhurahA  Mazdmi  ashAunAm  you  visAdha  Avayanti. 
AhurahA  Mazd<iu  MithrahA  vispaAjam  ashaonlm. 
AhurahA  Mazdau  MithrahA  vispa&rAm  gAthAbyd  ashao- 
nAm. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


323 


moderation  too,  if  he  sing  not  the  G&thas  \  he  is  not 
guilty. 

If  he  eat  too  much  and  get  drunk,  for  not  singing 
the  GAthas  [he  is  guilty]. 


IV.  The  recitation  of  the  GAthas*. 

31.  If  the  priest  sing  for  two  assemblies,  he  is 
accepted. 

If  he  sing  for  three  assemblies,  he  is  not 
accepted. 

Which  is  the  smallest  assembly  for  which  singing 
is  accepted  ?  Three  (of  the  faithful). 

32 . . 

33.  How  will  the  Zaotar  sing  the  GAthas?  He 
will  sing  half  a  stanza®  in  a  moderate  voice  with 
Zarathu.rtra’s  rhythm ; 

And  if  he  omit  *  those  words  in  the  GAthas  which 
are  twice,  thrice,  or  four  times  to  be  said  ®, 

Those  words  that  cut  the  demons  to  pieces. 

For  those  words  he  is  not  accepted. 

34.  Which  are  the  words  twice  to  be  said  ? 

AhyA  yAsA ;  YathA  th  i ; 

HumatanSm ;  HumAim  thwA  l^em ; 

AshahyA  Aa</ ;  Thwdi  staotaras/^ ; 


^  *  If  in  spite  of  his  moderation,  the  little  he  drank  makes  him 
tipsy  so  that  he  does  not  celebrate  the  Gdhdnb^,  he  is  not  in  a  state 
of  sin '  (Comm.) 

*  ‘  Concerning  the  quality  (sdmin)  of  the  voice  in  reciting  the 
Avesta  in  a  ceremonial,  and  the  Avesta  which  is  twice  recited  and 
thrice  or  four  times  recited '  (West,  Dinkart,  1. 1.  §  4). 

*  The  first  half  of  the  stanza. 

*  If  he  omit  to  recite  them  the  due  number  of  times. 

®  The  so-called  Blr-dmrfitas,  Thrij-dmrfitas,  JTathruj-dmrfitas ; 
cfVcLX. 

Y  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


324 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


ahm4i — Spe«ti  mainyti — VohCl  khjathrem  vairim — 
Vahwt4  l^tw, 

35.  Kaya  thri^imriita  ? 

Ashem  voh(i — ye  sevijt6 — hukh^athrdtem&i — das- 
varericli^. 

36.  Kaya  zfcithrujAmrAta  ? 

Yathd  ahfi  vairyd — Mazd4  aa?  m6i  vahwtA — 4 
airymi4. 

37.  KanghSm  [H. — T.  sanghSm]  n4  g^thanSm 
srutanSm  aratufrw  ? 

Y4  ya4zd  (read  ma4z6)  v4  fravashiimnd  (read  fra 
v4  shiimnd)  sr4y4iti  (read  sr4vay4iti), 

A4ta4ySm  vay^Sm  aratufrij. 

Adha^a  uiti  yatha  katha>^a  dahmd  staota  y[4]snya 
haurva  dadhaiti, 

Paurv4<J?  v4  na4m4<f  apar4fl?  v4, 

My6  (read  ay6)  v4  taia  v4  hwtanemnd  (read 
hwtemnd)  v4  <zungh4n6  v4  dath4nd  v4  baremnd  v4 
vazemnd  v4  ai^vy4st6  ath4  ratufri^^ 

V.  The  sacrifice  performed  by  a  Zdt  or  a  Rispf 
in  a  state  of  sin. 

38.  Dahmd  zaota  tanuperetha  upasraot4r6, 

Ydzi  dw  tanuperethd  vaddha, 

Advatd  ratufrw  yava</  framaraiti. 

Ydzi  4a</  dw  n6id  tanuperethd  vaddha, 

Vlspanam  githanSm  ratufrij. 

*  Bard  aspd  vaz6  rathd  (Fragment  Vd.  VI,  a6). 

Fravardnd — dtlird  Ahurahd  Mazdmi  puthra  tava  4tarr 
puthra  Ahurahd  Mazdau  khmaothra — ashem  vohfl  3,  fra- 
var4nd — yathi  ahh  vairyd  yd  zaot4,  yathi  ahft  vaiiyd  yd 
4travakhjd  athi  ratu^ — yath4  ahd  vairyd  yd  4travakhrd  yd 
zaotd  ath4  ratuf — yd  bityd  zaot4. 

Ashem  vohd — yath4  ahd  vairyd — fravardnd — ^frastuyd. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


325 


U^t4  ahmii ;  Vohd  kh^athrem  vairim ; 

Spe»t4  mainy{l ;  VahijtA  Irtw  *. 

35.  Which  are  the  words  thrice  to  be  said  ? 

Ashem  vohdl ;  Hukh^athrdtemAi ; 

Y^sevwtd;  DiurvarenAw*. 

36.  Which  are  the  words  four  times  to  be  said  ? 

YathA  ah(i  vairy6 ;  A  airy«n4  ®. 

MazdA  zd  mdi  vahutA ; 

37.  When  is  it  that  the  GAthas  which  a  priest 
sings  are  not  accepted  ? 

The  words  he  sings  while  doing  the  necessities  of 
nature, 

These  words  are  not  accepted. 

Otherwise,  in  whatever  fashion  the  pious  man  may 
offer  the  Staota  y^snya  *, 

In  the  earlier  part  of  the  office  or  in  the  latter  part 
of  it  {?), 

Whether  walking  or  running ;  standing,  sitting,  or 
lying;  riding  or  driving;  as  long  as  he  has  his 
girdle  on  ®,  he  is  accepted. 

V.  The  sacrifice  performed  by  a  Z6t  or  a  Rispl 
in  a  state  of  sin*. 

38.  If  the  Zaotar  be  righteous  and  his  assistants 
be  in  a  state  of  sin. 

If  he  know  that  they  are  in  a  state  of  sin. 

What  he  recites  himself  is  accepted. 

If  he  know  not  that  they  are  in  a  state  of  sin,  the 
whole  of  the  GAthas  is  accepted. 


•  Vd.  X.  4.  *  Vd.  X,  8.  »  Vd.  X,  12. 

•  See  above,  page  312,  note  2. 

•  His  Kdstl;  cf.  Vd.  XVUI,  1  (note  a),  54. 

•  Dlnkart,  1. 1.  §  5. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


326 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


39.  Tanuperetha  zaota  dahma  upasraotfird, 

Ydzi  dim  tanuperethem  vlvare  (read  vldare), 
A6tavat6  ratufrij  yavaflf  framerenti. 

Y^zi  kad  dim  ndid  tanuperethem  vivare, 

Vlspan5m  githanSm  ratufri^. 

Dahmd  zaota  dahmd  upasraot4rd  vlsp^  ratufryd. 
Tanuperethd  zaota  tanuperethd  upasraotSrd  visp^ 
aratufry6. 

40.  Kay^i^  n4  dahmanSm  zaothridha  ratufri^, 
Nctirikaus^fl^  apereniydkah^a, 

Y^zi  vadtha  hdthanSm  (read  hiitinSm  ?)  thware- 
s^a  frataurunaus^, 

A«tare  hditi^  yasnem  friizw*. 


NiRANGISTAN. 

Fargard  II. 

I.  The  celebration  of  the  GAhdnbArs. 

41.  Y6  githau  asrivayd  5sti  vi  tar6maiti  v& 
tandm  pereyditi. 

K6  Ssti  katdr6  maiti  (read  ki  tardmaiti)  ? 

Y cl  ha^  thitmLytd  m4zdayasn6idf  apastAitw'’. 

42.  Y6  githau  asr&vayd  )rire  dr^fd  apa  tandm 
pairy^iti. 


*■  Ndi</ 1&  n&irika  kasu-khrathwa. 

Ashem  vohd  vahi.ftem  astt,  urtS  asti  u.rt4  ahmdi. 
Hyad  ashAi  vahlftAi  ashem. 

*’ Y6  ha^a  da^tiaySd  mAzdayasndi</  apastdu/, 
Thri.r  vaghsibiV  hakara^  vipaiti^iV. 


*  ‘  Concerning  the  functions  of  a  Z6t  performed  by  a  woman  or 
achild’(Dtnkart,I.l.§6). 

*  See  above,  §§  5-9  and  notes. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAN  AND  NtRANGISjAN. 


327 


39.  If  the  Zaotar  be  in  a  state  of  sin  and  the 
assistants  be  righteous, 

If  they  know  that  he  is  in  a  state  of  sin, 

What  they  recite  themselves  is  accepted. 

If  they  know  not  that  he  is  in  a  state  of  sin,  the 
whole  of  the  Gdthas  is  accepted. 

If  the  Zaotar  be  righteous  and  the  assistants  be 
righteous,  the  whole  is  accepted. 

If  the  Zaotar  be  in  a  state  of  sin  and  the  assistants 
be  also  in  a  state  of  sin,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
is  accepted. 

40’.  Any  one  of  the  faithful  is  accepted  as  a 
Zaotar, 

Even  a  woman  *  or  a  child. 

If  he  know  the  ends  and  the  heads  of  the  chapters®, 

And  know  how  to  perform  the  acts  of  ritual 
between  the  chapters. 

NIrangistAn. 

Fargard  II. 

I.  The  celebration  of  the  Gcihinbirs. 

41.  He  who  does  not  sing  the  Githas,  either  out 
of  unbelief,  or  out  of  impiety,  becomes  a  Peshdtanu. 

What  is  unbelief*  ?  What  is  impiety  *  ? 

It  is  renouncing  the  Religion  of  Mazda. 

42  •.  He  who  stays  the  year  through  without 
singing  the  Githas  becomes  a  Peshdtanu. 

*  As  there  are  certain  repetitions  of  stanzas  and  certain  ceremonial 
acts  at  the  end  of  most  of  the  HSs. 

*  Ssta:  ‘negation;  when  he  says,  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
Religion’  (Comm.) 

'  tardmaiti :  ‘  when  he  says,  it  exists,  but  it  is  no  good.’ 

'  ‘  On  the  sin  of  him  who  does  not  celebrate  the  G&hinb&rs,  and 
how  they  are  to  be  celebrated  ’  (Dtnkart,  1. 1.  §  8). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


328 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Y6zi  dsungham  6ySm  p6v4^m  framaraiti, 

Pairi  hd  paretd-tanunSm  staunghaiti  (H. — T. 
sta6nghaiti), 

Yahmaa?  ha^  tern  ava  raodhe»ti*. 

Y6  gdthanSm  6yem  vfiiim  apayiiti  a^vam  vi 
va>^taftlm, 

Thri  v4  aziiti  ayare  dra^6  v4  v4stry4</ ; 

Atha  bityau  atha  thrityau, 

Atha  vlspem  4  ahm4//  yaui  hd  ha»^asa»ta  yatha 
y^thnifem  y<zu  g4thau  asr4vay6  hyad  aradu^  hd 
^yaothanem. 

Thrishdm  tard  hvaxaya  nadmem  tard  b4zufataya 
vlspem  tard  y4re  dr4^d  hd  him  y4tem  4stryditi. 

Yadkid  pas^iti  adv3m  ratufritim  ava  raodhayditi 
tandm  pairyditi. 

43.  Ydg4than5m  advSm  ratufritim  ava  raodhayditi 
thri  v4  4zaiti  ayare  dr^d  v4  v4stry4^j^ ; 

Atha  vlspem  4  ahm4<f  yad  hd  ha»^saiti  yatha 
thrishdm  ya\i  gadthau  asr4vayd  od  tandm  pairyditi. 

44.  Yd  g4thau  asr4vayd  nadmem  y4re  dr^^d, 

Tad  paiti  adnem  dahmem  g4than4m  sraothrau 

pairiitayditi, 

Yadhdi</  nadm  y<zu  gadthau  (read  g4thau)asr4vayd 
hyad  atha  u  4stryditi ; 

*  Sdrahd. 

Pa»^  turd  dasa  u  rathw4m. 

Hazangrem  madranSm  (Afrlngdn  G4h4nb4r,  7). 

Hazangrem  gavaSm  (ibid.  8). 

RathwHm. 

’  According  to  the  commentator  Sdshyans :  ‘  If  he  recite  the 
whole  in  b%  and  only  one  word  aloud.’ 

*  If  he  has  passed  the  fourth  part  of  the  year  without  celebrating 
the  G&hdnb&r,  any  verbal  fault  he  may  afterwards  commit  shall  be 
punished  as  an  Aredur,  that  is  to  say,  with  fifteen  strokes  of  the 
Sraoshd-^rana  (Vd.  IV,  26). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


329 


If  he  recite,  were  it  only  a  word  of  them 
He  escapes  being  in  the  number  of  the  Peshd- 
tanus, — 


He  who  shall  omit  a  word  of  the  Githas  or  a  stanza, 

Shall  pay  with  three  strokes  (of  the  Sraoshd- 
^arana)  or  a  day’s  work ; 

The  same  on  the  second  omission,  the  same  on 
the  third. 

And  so  on  until  he  let  a  fourth  part  of  the  year 
go  without  singing  the  G4thas,  when  it  becomes  an 
aredu^  sin  ^ 

If  he  let  a  third  part  of  the  year  go,  his  g^ilt  is 
a  ^z^ra  ® ;  if  he  let  a  half  go,  his  guilt  is  a  bizu  * ; 
if  he  let  a  whole  year  go,  his  guilt  is  a  ydta  ®. 

If  afterwards  he  miss  a  ratufriti  *,  he  becomes  a 
Peshdtanu. 

43.  If  a  man  miss  a  ratufriti  of  the  Githas,  he 
shall  pay  for  it  with  three  (strokes)  or  a  day’s  work ; 

And  so  on  until  he  let  a  third  part  of  the  year  go 

without  singing  the  Gclthas . ''he 

becomes  a  Pesh6tanu. 

44.  If  a  man  stay  a  half  year  without  singing  the 
Githas  ®, 

And  also  prevents  another  of  the  faithful  from 
singing  the  G&thas, 

For  the  half  year  when  he  did  not  sing  the 
G&thas,  he  shall  be  in  a  state  of  sin; 


’  Punished  with  thirty  strokes. 

^  The  sin  of  breaking  an  arm :  fifty  strokes. 

*  The  sin  of  breaking  a  leg :  seventy  strokes. 

*  One  of  the  formulas  of  glorification  to  any  of  the  ratus  (?). 
^  To  be  filled  up  as  in  §  42. 

*  ‘  Without  celebrating  the  Gdhdnbfirs  ’  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


330 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Paourum  v4  na^mem  y&  aparem  v4  pairyartay^iti 
pi^otanu^  ». 

45.  Y6  gdthdtu  asrivay6  naSmem  yau 

Ta</  paid  adnem  dahmem 

Ardiu  vS  aghryd  [staorem]  vi  bistaorem  yk  yaaf 
mazanghem  vi  Avarem 

Hvar6\d  h6  anghaaf  iithaya^a  upa-beretaya6^. 

II.  The  limits  of  the  several  Gihs. 

1 1  a.  Gih  Ushahin. 

46.  Kahmidf  haia  ushahinanSm  g^thanSm  ratufri.; 
fra^saiti  ? 

Haia  maidhyiyii  kh^apa^^  huvakh^i  pairi-say^iti ; 

Atha  aiwigSmi. 

had  hama  y^zi  para  huvakh^aof  aSannavadka 
gdthSm  srivay^iti, 

Yasnemyfci  haptanghditlm  urtavaitlm  hditim/^, 

An4steret6  pa&Jaita  avau  y«u  anyau  sr&vaydiiJ? 
dma^idhy^Ujf  fr.  y^lraaf  (read  fraydra^  * •*>. 

*  Pair&u  ar.rtou  khe^. 

•*  Ashem  vohft  3,  fravarinfi  Mazdayasn6~Ahurahfi  Mazdau 
raSvatd  ^t^renanghatd  khmaothra  od  frasastaya^^a. — 
ashem  voh(i — kh.maothra  Ahurah^  Mazdmi — humatan3m 
hOkhtanam  hvareftanlim — n&  ya.rta. 

Naratd  kerethen. 

Ashem  vohfl — yathi  ahfl  vairyd — ashem  vohh  3  fravar4n6 
mazdayasnd — haomahS  ashavazanghd  khmaothra  od  fra- 
sastaya^y&a — ashem  vohfl  3  fravar&n^ — Zarathujtrahfi  Spe«- 
tamahS  ashaond  fravash^d  klunaothra  od  frasastayafi^a — 
ahurdi  mazd4i — imem  haomem  yminghSm^a — Y.  A.V. 

— A.  V. — haoma  pairi  hareshyemti — .ryaothananSm — khja- 
thremy&4 — kluathremM — &d4i  kahy4^i</  paiti — Y.  A.  V. — 
A.  V. — A.  V.  3,  Fr. — tava  4tar.r  puthra  Ahurahd  Mazdou 
ktunaothra  (4thrd  Ahurahd  Mazdmi  puthra  tava  Atar.r 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


331 


And  for  the  half  of  the  year,  whether  earlier  or 
later,  when  he  prevents  (their  being  sung)',  he  be¬ 
comes  a  Peshdtanu. 

45 . 


II.  The  limits  of  the  several  Gihs*. 

II  a.  The  Ushahin  Gih. 

46.  At  what  hour  does  the  celebration  of  the 
Ushahina  GAthas  begin  ? 

It  continues  from  midnight  to  sunrise;  thus  in 
winter  time. 

In  summer  time,  if  one  sing  the  Ahunavaiti  GAtha 
before  sunrise, 

As  well  as  the  Yasna  HaptanghAiti  and  the 
U^tavaiti  HA, 

He  may,  without  guilt,  sing  the  rest  of  the 
GAthas  till  the  middle  of  the  forenoon. 


puthra  AhurahS  Mazd<m  khrnaothra) — A.  V. — frastuyfi— 
staomi  ashem — ^staoml — A.V. — staom!  ashem — ^vasasAa  te 
Ahura  Mazda. 

Amesha  Spe»ta  —  imad  Baresma  badhazaothrem  min 


*  On  the  limits  of  the  five  Gihs  of  the  day  and  night,  and  the 
ceremonies  of  the  same  (Dtnkart,  1. 1.  §  9).  The  five  Gihs  (asnya), 
it  will  be  remembered,  are — 

I.  Ushahina  (Ushahin),  from  midnight  to  the  extinction  of  the 
stars,  or  Dawn. 

3.  HAvani  (HAvan),  the  morning  GAh,  beginning  at  dawn. 

3.  Rapithwina  (Rapithwin),  the  midday  GAh. 

4.  UzayAirina  (Uztrin),  the  afternoon  GAh,  from  Rapithwin  to 
the  appearance  of  the  stars. 

g.  Aiwisrfithrima  (Aipisrfisrim),  from  the  appearance  of  the 
stars  to  midnight. 

In  winter  there  are  only  four  GAhs,  HAvani  and  Rapithwina 
being  united. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


332 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


lib.  Gih  Hdvan. 

47.  Kahmiar  havanem  githanSm  ratufri.?  fra^- 
saiti  ? 

Haia  hti-vakh^a^/  maidhy^i  frayarS^i  pairi-sa>fciiti ; 

Hamatha  itha. 

hsd  aiwi-gdmi  maidh)4i  uzayar&i 

Ya^/  v4  yatha  uzarem  yarf  yatha  kh^aparem 

Ahur&i  Mazd&i  od  dathiud  a6ta^/  dim  od  vanghu^ 
vanghmis^a. 

A^thraya  varert3lm — xmad  baresma — frastuyfi — Y.  A.  V. 
— ashaya  n6  paiti  gzmyijd — ^Az/arata  nar6 — nadatum. 

6am. 

Nem6  Haomdi  mazdadh&t&i  vanghuj  Haom6  hudhitd. 

Hdvan&nem  &st4ya — azem  vis4i — y6  n6  a^v6  2ud  tO. 

Pairi  tfi  Haoma  ashem  vohCl — A.  V.  —  vanghu>&a  van- 
ghaus^a — y&nM  m^  ashSd  hakSi — .yyaothananam. 

Sasti^a — Ahurdi  Mazd^i — Ameshi  Spe«t4 — imem  hao- 
mem — ^yaungham^. 

— Khjathrem^ — dthretlm  kh.rathr6  kereta  hfi  gaoj6 
berez6  us  sh4vay6u/. 

Ashem  vohfl — y^Nhfi  m^  asharfha>&4 — haomanamita  hare- 
jyamnanam  —  ar.rukhdhanam>&a  va>&angham  —  athd  zl  nQ 
humdydtara  anghen — ^^^^othananam — iddi  kahya^W  paitt 
— us  m6i  uzarerva  Ahurd  Armaiti  tevishlm  dasvi — ashaya 
dadhami  imam  zaothram  haomavaitim  gaomavaitim  ha- 
dhanadpatavaitim  od  tava  Ahuranfi  Ahurahfi  vahi.rtabyd 
zaothraby6 — tava  Ahurana  adhi. 

•VohO  ukhshya  manangha  im^zu  rao^^mi  barezi.rtem  bare- 
zimanam  yahmi  Spe«ta  thwa  mainyO  urva^s^  ^s6. 

Ravas^a  Az^threm^a  afrinami  vtspaymi  ashaon6  st6Lr 
azas^a  du^athrem^a  afrinami  vispaymi  drvat6  st6lr.  A.  V. 
3  vay6Lr  upardkairy^ha  taradhatd  anyau  daman  a^ta^/  t6 
vay6  ya^jf  tfi  asti  spe«t6  khmaothra — yazai  apem^a  ba- 
ghami&a. 

Haurvatatd  rathwd  y&iryayau  huntdlr  saredhafiibyd 
ashaha  ratubyd  ayaranam^&a  asnyanam>&a  mahyanami&a  ya- 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NfRANGISTAN. 


333 


Ilb.  The  HAvan  GAh. 

47.  At  what  hour  does  the  celebration  of  the 
Hivani  Gcithas  begin  ? 

It  continues  from  sunrise  to  the  middle  of  the 
forenoon  ; 

Thus  in  summer  time. 

In  winter  time  till  the  middle  of  the  afternoon. 


iryanSm^  saredhanJm^a  vtspa&jam  yazatanftm  pun  yaza- 
maid^  ayara  ashah^  rathwd  ratufret!.r  yaz.  asnya  ashahe 
rathwd  ratufretij  yaz.  mihya  ashahe  rathwd  ratufrettr  yaz. 

Ydirya  ashahd  rathwd  ratufreti.f  yaz. 

Saredha  ashava  ashahd  rathwd  ratufreti.?  yaz. 

Az4t-mart  guft  hav&-t :  ayara  ashavana  ashahd  rath<> 
wd  ratufrettf  yaz. 

Athrd  Ahurahd  Mazd^ju  puthra. 

Kluathrd  nafedhrd  Nairyd-sanghahd. 

Marf  vtspadibyd  dterebyd. 

Athrd  Ahurahd  Mazdmi  puthra  amat  dd  dthrd  Ahurahe 
Mazdmi  mad  vtspadibyd  dterebyd. 

Athrd  Ahurahd  Mazdau  puthra. 

Khmdmaind  mminghahd  [gao  od]  khmdmaind  dathujd. 

ApJm  vakhddnijn  aspd  karp  dm  (read  aspd-kehrpSm) 
pun  minion  yakhsdndt. 

Tlr  ydm  khmdmaind  dan4  Tijtrydhd  st4rd  radvatd 
At/arenanghatd  Satavlsahd  frdpahd  sdrahd  mazdadhdtahd. 

Tijtrydhd — Vana//td. 

Tijtrydhd — TLrtrydhd  vAtahd  ash&unSm. 

Athrd  Ahurahd  Mazdau  puthra  mad  vispadibyd  Aierebyd 
TLrtrydhd  Vanawtd  geus  tami  vfspadjSLm. 

Khrndmaind  amahd. 

Pathaymi  kvksty\a\x\  zarenuma«td  sdrahd  Saoka^tahe- 
ka  gardlr  mazdadh3Ltahd  pathSm  kv&stkxtXm  yaz. 

Zarenuma^rtem  sdrem  yaz.  Saoka;item  gairtm  mazda- 
dhAtem  yaz. 

R&mand  AzAstrahd — thwlrahd. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


334 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


48.  Kahmd^  shiht.  (read  haia)  apSm  vanghinSm 
fr^fasaiti  ? 

Haia  hfi-vakh^^U/  i  hu-fi^hm6-dSit6u/  pairi- 
sa^aiti ; 

Tsui  hama  taui  aiw^g^ma. 

Y6  ip6  zaothrStn  frabarait^, 

Pa&^a  hA-fr4shm6-d4im  para  hA-vakhj4</, 

N6i<jf  vanghd  ahm&d  ^yaothanSm  verezy^iti, 

Yatha  yaui  him  asdij  vish&pah^  vastrem  (read 
astrem  ?)  paityipta  karj6i<^*. 

1 1  c.  G4h  Rapithwin. 

49.  KahmS^  ha^  rapithwanSm  (H. — ratufrithwa- 
nSm  T.)  gAthanSm  ratufri^  fra^fasaiti  ? 

Hsika.  rapithwayirf  maidhydi  uzayarii  pairi-saifciiti**. 

I  Id.  G4h  Uzirin. 

50.  Kahmd</  haia  uzayairanSm  githanSm  ratufri^ 
fra^asaiti  ? 

Hahi  maidhydi  uzaryarSaf  hu-fr4shm6-dAit^6  pairi- 
sai^aiti ; 

Hama  itha. 

Aad  aiwigimi  y^zi  para  hh-fr4shm6-d4t6i</  ahu- 
nSs^  vairyS  frasrivay^iti, 


TLrtry^h^ — ^Vana«t6. 

KtunOmainS  ashdlf  vanghuyau  ^ist6b  vanghuymi  ereth^ 
vai^huyou. 

Vispa^rSlm — 2  berezatd,  2  dathu^d. 

•  ApSm  vtspa&(3m. 

VlspafijSm — haomySm. 

A.V.  3,  fravarinfi  :  m4  g4s  yakhsflnfit.  aiwydvanghi- 
byd  vispanlm^a  apSm  MazdadhitanSim  berezatd  Ahurahd 
nafedhrd  apSm  apas^a  mazdadhdtayau  tava  Ahurind 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VI,  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGISxAN. 


335 


48.  From  what  hour  may  the  sacrifice  to  the  Good 
Waters  ^  be  offered  ? 

It  continues  from  sunrise  to  sunset ; 

Thus  both  in  summer  time  and  in  winter  time. 

He  who  offers  libations  to  the  Good  Waters, 

After  sunset  and  before  sunrise, 

Does  no  better  deed 

Than  if  he  should  throw  them  downright  into 
the  jaws  of  a  venomous  snake 

lie.  The  Rapithwin  GAh. 

49.  At  what  hour  does  the  celebration  of  the 
Rapithwina  GAthas  begin  ? 

From  Rapithwa  to  the  middle  of  the  afternoon. 

lid.  The  Uztrin  GAh. 

50.  At  what  hour  does  the  celebration  of  the 
Uzay^irina  GAthas  begin  ? 

From  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  to  sunset ; 

Thus  it  is  in  summer. 

In  winter,  if,  before  sunset,  one  sing  the  Ahuna 
Vairya, 

Ahurahd  khmaothra  [yasnAiAa]  od  frasastaya^Aa  a  pash 
vA^  vakhdflnijn. 

FrA  U  staomaid^  AhurAne  AhurahA  vanghnu  yasnA&&a 
vahmAsAa  huberettr^a  urta-berettr^a  va«ta-beretty>&a  yaza- 
tanAm,  thwA  ashaonAm  kukhmt.ra  us  bi  barAmi,  rathwas>&a 
berezatd,  gAthausi&a  srAvaydi</  frA  U  staomaidi. 

MiA  i  razAgada. 

A.shahA  vahijtahA  Athras>&a  AhurahA  Mazdmi  vfspaAj-Am. 

AshahA  vahijtahA  Athrasy&a  AhurahA  Mazdau  puthra. 

'  The  so-called  Ap-zdhr  (Yasna  LXIII  seq.;  see  the  Guimet 
Zend-Avesta,  I,  392-425). 

>  Cf.  Vd.  VII,  79. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


336 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Apas/fci  frdit^, 

Spe»t4  Mainydm^  va^astaftem  kh^va^  vahi^tem 
srAvayti ; 

An4steret6  pas^ita  avau  (H. —  avarf  T.)  y«u 
anyau  sr4vay6id?  i  maidhy4fl^  kh5apa^/». 

lie.  Gih  Aiwisrdthrem. 

51.  KahmSui  aiwisrdthremananSm  githanSm  ratu- 
fri^  fra^saiti  ? 

Hahi  h(!l-vakh4<j?-frishm6-d4it^  (read  h6-fr4shm6- 
diit^)  maidhydi  kh.fap4  pairi-sa^aiti : 

Tad  hama  tad  aiwi-gdmi  •>. 

III.  The  offerings  for  the  G4h4nbirs. 

52.  Ydi  diitya  yaona  (H. — y6na  T.)  Avarenta 
(read  ^re»ta), 

Gavdstraia  varemau  vereza«td  khrathnvfe  asha- 
vanem  aiwisha«t6, 

Adhiityd-draonanghas^a  he^ta, 

D4itlm  g«i^  draond  upa  isemnd  ava  apangha- 
bde«ti : 

Framarewtem  ad^m, 

Ndiaf  adtadiSm  ratufrij  ratufraitlm  thwere^iiti ; 

Yadhdiflf  adtd  framare«ti  yadhdia?  ratufryd®. 

53.  Aad  adtaya  (read  adta  ya)  fra^re«ti  keresSsia 
g^dhditl^ia, 

Dadvl^^  ha;{daraniana  upa  mraod^a  vispd- 
kh^apd, 


*  Y.  A.V. — ad  t4  vakhryA. 

'*  Addha  aiwyast^iV  paiti  apathrestememj&a^  ptarenta. 

”  Hazangrem  madranSm  ddnunSm  paiti-puthranSlm  narSm 
ashaonUm  ashaya  vanghuya  urund  ^thtm  nisirinuy4^/ 
(Afring.  G4h4n.  7). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistAn. 


337 


And  offer  the  libations  to  the  Waters, 

And  sing  the  six  stanzas  of  the  GAtha  Spe«tA- 
mainyu ; 

He  may,  without  guilt,  sing  the  rest  of  the  GAthas 
after  sunset. 

He.  The  AiwisrAthrim  GAh. 

51.  From  what  hour  does  the  celebration  of  the 
AiwisrAthrima  GAthas  proceed  ? 

It  continues  from  sunset  to  midnight ; 

Thus  both  in  summer  time  and  in  winter  time. 

III.  The  offerings  for  the  GAhAnbArs. 

52.  If  an  honest  man. 

Working  hard  and  teaching  the  Holy  Wisdom 

Have  no  sufficient  living. 

And  dream  of  getting  sufficient  meat  * ; 

If  such  a  one  only®  recite  (the  prayers). 

He  who  celebrates  the  festival®  cannot  charge 
him  with  non-celebration ; 

For  as  far  as  he  recites  (the  prayers),  he  has 
celebrated  the  festival  ®. 

53.  But  men  who  live  like  robbers  and  highway¬ 
men. 

In  knavery,  brigandage,  and  debauchery  every 
night. 


*  A  profession  which  brings  no  great  income  to  those  who  exer* 
cise  it. 

*  ‘  They  have  bread,  they  have  no  meat,’  and  cannot  therefore 
offer  any  meat  for  the  GihinbSr. 

*  Without  making  any  offering. 

*  The  rich  man  who  provides  the  offerings. 

^  *  He  has  as  much  merit  as  if  he  had  presented  pious  people 
with  a  thousand  goats  big  with  kids '  (Comm.),  which  is  the  re¬ 
ward  promised  for  the  celebration  of  the  first  Gflhdnb&r  (Afrtngin 
Gdhdn.  §  7)* 

[4]  '  Z 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


338 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS, 


D&ity6-draonanghas/^  ha»t6, 

Fradh&ittm  d&itlm  draond  updisemnd  adha 
avanghabdemnd ; 

Aframarentem  adsSm, 

AdtadsSm  ratufrij  ratufritlm  thwiresaitl. 

54.  KShya  ig[a]va  ratufrij  ? 

Yau  avangha  av^ru  yau  ndiryau  yd:u  puthrahd 
apereniydij. 

Y«u  tanu-perethahd  aparaothenmahd  aghaurvaya 
ratufrey. 

Yau  haia  dadvayasnadibyd  ava  urvaitya  apa  bara 
aya  ratufriy ; 

Tadha  ya<^  paiti  bare»ti  yi  areduyi</  apaiti  tad 
(read  apaititaa?)  d^ghaurva ; 

Ydhu  varanghana ; 

Yd  adhiiti  fravaityanSm  (read  fraraityanSm)  frapa 

Yd  ndid  vlstem  drvatd 

Yad  paiti  barauwti 

Ndi^  apaita  n6id  paiti  kaya  ratufrey. 

55.  Ratufriy  apaitydnd  kShya  (H. — T.  dShya) 
Ratufriy  havd  yd  nmdnahd  paiti  rl^dihd 
Ydzi  viy  hvdvdiy  dazdd  ratufriy* 

^^aretha  ydzi  aratufriy. 

56.  Ndidf  pasuy>^  bazda  ndu/  iriyta  anazdya  ratufriy. 
Aba«ta  airiyta  anadya  pairiytanghara  ratufriy. 

57.  Ratufriy  pasuyybly  ^z^stdiyia  ahvk&t^ka 
tkyeska  aikytska  (H.  zydiy>fa  azydiyia). 

Ratufriy  patuy  (read  pituy)  ^z^dstdiy  n6id  [anastd- 
iyia  azydiy  ndid]  anazydiy. 

Ratufriy  sndkyniyia  vlzuy^  ^z4stdiyia  n6id  ana- 
A^dstdiy  azydiy  n6id  anazydiy  K 


*Y£zi  !iad  hiy  ndu/  hiy  hvdv6ya  dazd£  [ajratufriy  yd 
adhang[ang]hd — y&zi — Araretha  yazata  ratufriy. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGISTAN. 


339 


Who  have  plentiful  living. 

And  dream  of  a  surplus  of  meat ; 

If  such  men  recite  not  (the  prayers)  \ 

He  who  celebrates  the  festival  can  charge  them 
with  non-celebration. 

54.  Whose  meat-offering  is  accepted  ? 

The  offering  of  a  man,  of  a  woman,  of  a  child. 

The  property  seized  on  a  criminal  is  accepted. 

The  property  seized  on  heathens*  who  have 
broken  a  treaty  is  accepted ; 

Also  the  property  that  is  brought  having  been 
seized  on  the  committer  of  an  uhexpiated  areduj ; 

The  property  seized  in  consequence  of  an  ordeal ; 


55 . 

56.  Sheep  diseased,  wounded,  or  lean,  are  not 

accepted. 

Sheep  not  diseased,  not  wounded,  and  not  lean- 
fleshed,  are  accepted. 

57.  Milk  cooked  or  not  cooked,  from  a  fat  cow  or 
from  a  lean  cow,  is  accepted. 

Meat  is  accepted ;  cooked,  not  uncooked ;  from 
fat  cattle,  not  from  lean  cattle. 

.  .  .  and  .  .  .  are  accepted  ;  cooked,  not  uncooked  ; 
fat,  not  lean  . .  . 


**PaS  aJtnyd^kid  (padmainy&iAi</7)  zaothraya. 

58.  hvd  Lfta^a  pasu.r  hvir. 

Yd  pasdm  av&i  vinaoiti  [pasAa]  hd-frishm6-d&ittm  asao- 
kanXzd  paiti  kthxtd. 

Yatha  vA  azd  sAadnLr  yatha  hur  peresd. 


*  However  rich  may  be  their  offerings. 

*  Foreigners,  non-Zoroastrians. 

z  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


340 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


RatufnV  /^aremanSin>^  pasu-vastranSni>^, 

Upa  radsatnii^  fradiritari^  na^m&df; 

MaritanSin  nt\d  amardtanSm  azayanSm  n6id  ana- 
zayanSm  * 

59.  Ratufrij  n&irikayau  kehrpa  n6id  payanghd, 

Ndii/  sun6  kehrpa  payanghd ; 

Ratufrij  vehrkayau  kehrpayau  payangha^  hadhd 
vtspanSm^ta  dadvayasnanSm  [tanu]-perethanSm  ddm 
hathra  baodhd  angha  fraurvadsyd. 

60.  Yd  advd  hadhd-gadthanSm  yd  baresma^ 
frastare»ti  geus^  paiti-bairaiti, 

Adhddf  ainyd  awtara^  nadmi^  hdthrahd  vaias^ 
framavai»ti  (read  framravaiwti)  gavdstryd/fe  varemau 
Vereze«ti, 

VlspadrSmia  aiwi-surunvaiti  vlspd  ratufryd  *>. 

Ydzi  &ad  n6id  aiwi-srunva»ti  ad^d  [ratufrijd]  rat[u]- 
f[r]iijd  yd  baresma  frastere«ti  geushi  paiti-baraiti 

61.  Kahmd</ haia  mazdayasnanSrh  (read  myazda- 
vanSm)  myazdd  ra[d]thwaiti  ? 

Yd  kh^udru  yad  vd  yaz[a]«ti  yad  vd  hSm-rad- 
thwe«ti, 

Yad  vd  frd  uithdtdtd  perese»ti, 

Yad  vd  adfdm  anyd  adtahmdi  dditi  dadhditi**. 


•  Geus  vd  aspahd  vd  varesahd. 

A.  V.  3,  fravardnd  [mazdayasnd  zarathu^trLr  vidadvd 
Ahurahd  <^adj6]. 

— Ahurahd  Mazdou  radvatd  ^varenanghatd  ktunaothra 
y.  V.  kh.  fr. — A.  V. 

**  Athd  ratuj  ashM  k\d  hakk  frd  ashava  vldhvmi  mraotd. 

®  Hazangrem  madyandm  (Afrlng.  Gdhdn.  §  7). 

Yadrdm  anghen>&a  thwdrd  mazdirta  (read  anghen  ^athwdrd 
nazdirta). 

•*  Ashem  v6hQ  3,  fravardnd.  md gds  yakhsandndt  khrnft- 
man.  Sraorahd  ashydhd  takhmahd  tanu-mdthrahd  dareshi- 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NiRANGlSTAN.  34 1 


58 . .  Leather  is 

accepted  from  the  skin  of  an  animal, 

From  under  the  ra^atna ; 

If  supple,  not  if  not  supple ;  if  from  a  fat  animal, 
not  from  a  lean  one. 

59.  Woman’s  milk  is  not  accepted. 

Nor  bitch’s  milk ; 

A  she-wolf’s  milk  is  accepted ; . 

60.  Of  priests  of  one  partnership  ’  if  one  bind  the 
bundle  of  Baresman  and  bring  the  offering  of  milk, 

And  the  others,  within  a  Hithra  distance,  recite  the 
words  and  perform  the  ritual  acts. 

And  all  make  the  responses  all  are  accepted. 

If  they  make  not  the  responses,  the  one  who  has 
bound  the  Baresman  and  brought  the  offering  of 
milk  is  accepted. 

61 . 


drao.f  ^LhfiirySh6  khmaothra  yasn4i^a  od  frasastayad^&a 
3  dOkdnak  kartak  yd  paoiryo  mazdau  ddtnan  apa.r 
dfrinagcln  pun  ndk  n&par  A.  V.  3,  fravardnd. 

md  g&s :  h&van^d  u  s&vangh^d  rathwSm.  khshndman 
Ahurahd  Mazdmi  radvatd  kartak  i  Ahurem  MazdAm 
ashavanetn  ashahd  ratdm  yaz.  hudhounghem  mazlrtem 
yazatem  yim  sevi^tem  frdda</-gadtheni  od  9d  zaydnd 
(Y.  XVI,  10).  Apaj  dfrinagdn  pun  rdijd:  rathwd 
bereza//  ashem  vdhU  3,  fravar&nd.  Pun  Hdtdkht  hadhao- 
khdh&i.  pun  Vispdrat  hdvan^d.  khrndman  rathwd 
bereza</,  kartak!  d&t4^a  adtd  Mazdayasna.  Apa.f  dfrt na> 
g&n  pun  rdi.f4  pun  m4n-i  .rapir&n  [u]  mffni- 
dtd.rdn:  Ashem  vdhd  3,  fravar&nd,  m&  gds  yakhshndt 
kh.rndman  dahmayau  vanghuymi  4fritdi.r  ughrdi  dclmdlr 


*  Cf.  page  305,  note  3. 

*  Cf.  §  20 ;  in  particular  the  atha  ratur  in  the  recitation  of  the 
Ahuna  Vairya. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


342 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


62.  Kahm&^^haia  myazdavanSm  myazd6  rathwaiti  ? 

Yi  p&pithwa  vas6  aMsUt, 

Ydd  pairi  baresman  hangaisantt  4a</  ratufrit^. 

Yad  yaza«ti  yad  v4  hSm  ra6thway6i«ti». 

Ya<^vi  ad^m  any6  adtahmii  d&iti  dadh&iti. 

63.  Yas«^  tnd  adta&fSm  mazdayasnanSm  myazda¬ 
vanSm  aStangham  yad  myazdanSm  anahakhtd  para- 
baraiti, 

N6i^  tSyu^  n6id  hazangha  hawad; 

Aiwiii^shmnSi  Ska^ithamanSm  stayS//. 

Ainyd  kasiu^  angh^j  astvatd  para-baraiti  Skau 
hazangha  anakaus^  tSyny. 

64.  Yi  nara  himd-^z'aretha  ham6-gaodana  hamSm 
a6ti  khshiudrunem  zaothrSm  baritd  hamSm  piipith- 
wSm  (H. — ^piiptwSm  T. — read  pipithwSm). 

PaitinSm  himd-/^z/aretha  paitiii  gaodana, 

PaitinSm  a^tS  kh.radrem  (read  khshiudrem)  zao¬ 
thrSm  baritd  hamSm  pipithwSm. 

PaitinSm  /^raretha  himd^odana, 

HamSm  adtd  khraudrem  zaothrSm  baritd  paitinSm 
(H.)  pipithwSm. 

PaitinSm  ^z^aretha  paitinSm  [^z'aretha  himd] 
gaodana, 

PaitinSm  (H.)  adtd  kh^udrim  zaothrSm  baritd 
paitinSm  pipithwSm^. 

upamanii  khmaothra  y.  v.  kh.  fr.  dikinak  kartan  apax 
t<ni  ahmi  nmind  [apa^]  ifrtnagin  pun  rdi^i  zag-f 
10  ydm  pun  Farvarttgin  zag-t  pan^  ydm  [fartim] 
A.  V.  3,  fravarin&  mi  gis  yakhsinit  kh^niman. 
Ahurahi  Mazdmi  ashiunim,  kartak-i  ymi  vlsidha  iva- 
yantii  apas  ifrinimi  pun  rdUi  zag-t  pan^  ydm  dar 
gis  ad  A.  V.  3,  fravarind  [mi  gis]  yakhsdndt  khmi- 
maindAhurahd  Mazdou  githibyduas^unim  apa.f  kartaki 
you  visidha  apaj  ifrinagin-t  pun  rdi^i  pun  stdtth 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  n!rangistAn. 


343 


62 . 

63.  If  one  of  the  Mazda-worshippers  who  share  in 
the  Myazda  ^  carry  off  part  of  it  without  due  leave, 

He  is  no  thief,  he  is  no  highwayman  * ; 

He  shall  pay  the  penalty  they  may  exact 

Any  other  man  in  this  world  who  shall  do  that  ®, 
if  he  does  it  openly  is  a  highwayman ;  if  secretly,  he 
is  a  thief  t 

64®.  If  two  men  have  the  same  food  and  the 
same  plates,  they  shall  offer  the  same  libation  of 
wine  and  the  same  meat 

If  they  have  the  same  food  and  separate  plates, 
they  shall  offer  separate  libations  of  wine  and  the 
same  meat 

If  they  have  separate  food  and  the  same  plates, 
they  shall  offer  the  same  libation  of  wine  and  sepa¬ 
rate  meat. 

If  they  have  separate  food  and  separate  plates, 
they  shall  offer  separate  libations  of  wine  and  sepa¬ 
rate  meat. 


A.V.  3,  fravarin£.  m&  g&s  yakhsfinSt  apa.r  kh.fnfiman 
Srao^ahS  ;  kartak  yd  vanand. 

*Ya</  athavatha  veresd  tidid  vereze«ti  ayfip  aiwithweres 
— — ^yaski. 

**  Haurv6  pasd  Fraraortrd  naSmo  paithwa  Zarathuftrd. 

*  The  public  religious  banquet  which  is  one  of  the  characteristics 
of  the  Giihdnb&r  festival.  It  is  given  at  the  expense  of  the  rich, 
and  both  rich  and  poor  take  part  in  it. 

*  As  he  has  a  general  right  to  it,  though  he  ought  not  to  have 
taken  it  without  authority. 

*  A  man  who  does  not  belong  to  that  Myazda. 

*  See  above,  page  35,  note  i. 

*  The  case  foreseen  in  this  obscure  paragraph  seems  to  be  that 
of  two  men,  members  of  the  same  Myazda,  according  as  they  each 
bring  their  separate  fare  or  not. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


344 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


iV.  The  Libations. 

65.  Aaiti  nd.  advah^  pasvd  zaothr&</  (read  zao- 
thrau)  hzxdd}  iatangrd. 

Atha  dvau  atha  thrySm ; 

AaturSm  advSm  kahy4i>&i</  tadha  frayanghSin. 

Kv^  gaonah^  avabard// 

Yd  dvadibya  erezubya  ha»gerefa^  (H. — ha«ge- 
rtitkd  T.), 

Dashenem  d  vd  gaonavatd, 

Baremrd  vd  paiti  vaghdhanahd 

Vispadiam  a»tare  (read  dtarem  ?)  paiti-nardiaf  (read 
paiti-barduj?)*’. 

66.  Kvzd  nd  dpa  (read  apd)  frataa?  /feretd  kh^du- 
drem  payanghSm  paiti-bard^?  yatha  tdrta  zaothrd- 
barana. 

K'ad  tdirinSm  yatha  thri.f  /^z/arethema  radthwi.r 
b*i^n6  (H. — b^nad  T.) ; 

K'ad  paitmy  (read  pitai.y)  yatha  ^thwdrd  aJti  niasd 
ainaidkim  nazau. 

67.  Kvsd  nd  apd  armadrtaya  kh.^udrinSm  pa- 
yanghSm  paiti-bard</ ?  yatha  thrU  ^z/arema  radthwa 
bz^ind. 


•Pouru^ui’  uthahd(H. — uthdhahd  T.)amat  k\  kabad  dth 
ya^  adtsu/  ha>^smintd  paouru-gaonahd  uthahd/da. 

'*Tard  yasnem  haptanghditim  ydze»tem  n6\d  dthrd  frava- 
titn/^a  ysid  nbid  geus  vimatim. 

Yad  franata  bun. 

Younghlm^d  adtmisdtd  dtere  zaothrmi. 

Pasvd  zanghem  dstaya. 

Darina  paiti  aredhangha. 

.^athwaresatem  gaoshem  frdyazdmaidd. 

Tad  ^ithrentda. 

Ithrishdm  aunghd^  uthem  sadayd</. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAN  and  NtRANGISTAN.  345 


IV.  The  Libations 

65.  How  many  Zaothras  shall  a  man  bring  for 
one  head  of  cattle  ? — Four. 

As  many  for  two,  as  many  for  three ; 

For  four,  one  more  for  each  head. 

How  much  gaona^  shall  he  pull  out  ? 

As  much  as  he  can  seize  on  a  space  of  two  hngers, 

Either  on  the  right  hand  of  the  gaona  part  ®, 

Or  on  the  summit  of  the  head. 

Of  all  of  them  he  shall  throw  the  gaona  into  the 
fire. 

66.  Of  liquid  milk  how  much  shall  the  man  bring 
to  a  running  stream  ^  ?  —  As  much  as  a  cup  for 
libation  ®  contains. 

Of  milk  in  cheese  three  times  as  much  as  the  cup 
for  mixing  and  dividing  *  contains  ; 

Of  meat  as  much  as  four  atti  (?) .  .  . 

67.  Of  liquid  milk  how  much  shall  he  bring  to 
the  water  in  a  pond  ?  Three  times  as  much  as  the 
cup  for  mixing  and  dividing  contains. 


Athrd  ahurahS  mazdmi  puthra  mad  vispa^ibyd  ftterebyd 
gardlf  uri-darenah€  mazdadh&tahe  asha-Az4thrah£. 

YmuighamM — yazamaidS — Ahurem  MazdSm — AiUe^^ 
Spe»tS — humatanam — ^srirem  (H. — srim  T.)  aredumem. 
YfiNhfe  hatam — humatanam — 4  Y.  A.  V.  3  A.  V. 


'  ‘  On  the  number  of  zdhrs  [to  be  taken]  from  a  head  of  cattle  ’ 
(Dtnkart,  1. 1.  §  1 1).  The  goat  Amishes  the  milky  element,  the  ^v, 
for  the  z6hr. 

*  Hair?  *  The  hairy  part ? 

*  As  an  &p-z6hr  to  a  running  stream. 

‘  A  zaothr6-barana  (zdhr-bardn ;  Visp.  X,  2). 

*  Cf.Vd.XIV,  8. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


346 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Avi  (H. — ava  T.)  gereftem  paitim  (read  pitum) 
gerebyidf ; 

Fradari.ftaii</  tilirinSm  fradaraydi^/. 

Ndvayay&i  itha  ap6 ; 
had  n4vay4i, 

Ava^zd  adtanghau  frabareta  dSstra  masd  paiti-bard 
(H. — pai-bard  T.) 

Aipi  ^ghaurvatSm  aspayanSmia  payanghSm  g&- 
vayanSmia  madrininStnia  buzInanSmia 

Avadzd  pasdm  hSm  pukhdhem  mananghd  (read 
zemananghd)  n6id  payanghd 
Us^  fipd  shaud  givay^ij 
Khshvar  vagh^ibix  a«tare  bardi</ 

Yatha  ntid  adti  nid&itiia  airi^S 
Azl  dim  adtad^Sm  daond-  (H.— baond-  T. ;  read 
baodhd-)  ^aitij  astdraiti  ®. 

68.  Avatha  frabereta  zaothrau  frabardia?, 

Atha  hdvana  haomSn  hunyd^, 

Yatha  hava^i?  vadtha^  atha  md  zaothrd  ydtd  (read 
zaothrau  ya«td)  raoi^hd  ndia?  a»tare  temahd. 
Vtd4y4</  zi  yatha  hd  ashi.r  anghat^; 

VtspanSm  zil  asrasii»tem  pardia  (H. — ^prSia  T.) 
ad.fayamananSm  dadva  radzadtd  upa  [n]ukhturam 
tuthradru  asr&vayamnd^/  paiti  Ahund/^  vavryid ; 

Athi  yd  dim  fraha»^i»tare  Ataxemka.  baresmaia, 
AnairyanSm  tad  dahyunSm  verethrdi  u^asaiti 


•  Fridhast  izaa. 

Avadzd  pasCtm  hSm  pukhdhem  (cf.  infra). 
ATithrem  kid  (H. ;  T.  ^ilolthrem  kid). 

^  Taurva  paymi  bavd^f  aspayda^f^  Viaay&adka. 
A.V.3,Fr. 

Gmr  tamd  gmr  urund. 

Tava  gmr  hudhminghd  urund. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGISTAN. 


347 


There  he  shall  dip  and  take  up  the  same  quantity 
of  meat  * ; 

There  he  shall  hold  out  cheese. 

The  same  shall  it  be  for  river  water ; 

But  for  river  water, 

The  Frabaretar  *  may  bring,  without  guilt,  for  a  half. 
Boiling  milk  of  mares,  cows,  sheep,  or  goats. 


68.  The  Frabaretar  shall  bring  the  libations, 

The  H&vanan  shall  prepare  the  Haoma, 

In  such  a  way  that  the  libations,  prepared  to  the 
best  ,  of  their  knowledge,  come  to  me  by  daylight, 
not  in  the  darkness  *■ 

For  there  is  no  piety  without  knowledge  * ; 

For  all  libations  poured  out  and  presented,  that 
are  poured  in  the  darkness  of  night,  and  without 
singing  the  Ahuna  Vairya,  flow  to  the  benefit  of  the 
Daevas  * ; 

And  if  one  pour  them  without  looking  at  the  fire 
and  the  Baresman, 

They  accrue  for  the  victory  of  the  Anaryan 
countries  •. 


Yavdkem  g«i^. 

Klunaothra. 

Ashasara  manangha. 

Ashasara  va^ngha  ashasara  .ryaothana. 
•YfiNhfi  mfi  ash^ha^i  vahlrtem — ytenfi — paitt. 
*  Ashem^  dapas^  hA-frdjmd-d&ittm. 


’  As  prescribed  for  a  running  stream.  *  See  §  68. 

•  Cf.  §  48,  and  Vd.  VII,  79. 

•  Offering  up  the  sacrifice  without  a  proper  knowledge  of  its 
rules  and  practice  is  no  piety. 

•  Cf.  VA  VII,  79.  •  The  hostile  countries. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


348 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


69.  Yd  paiti  apd  bariiti  ndi</ baresmaind, 

Ydzi  baresma  a«tard^  natmid  adrd  draOjfydhd 
yav6  frathydhd, 

Paiti  baresmai^i^j?  paiti-bardi// ; 

Y  dzi  n6id  thri  vi  paiti  dziiti  a.ya.re  drd^d  vdvdstrydaf. 

Yd  paiti  baresmaind  ndi<^  apd, 

Ydzi  ^IfdJ  (read  dfy)  antar^  na&m&d  thrigdmahd, 

Paiti  apa^xd  (H. — apadtnd^  T.)  bardia? ; 

Ydzi  ntid  paiti-baraiti  thri  vd  dzditi  ayare  di^d  vd 
vistryd^/  \ 

70.  Yaijf  baresma  adrd  dr^^  yavd  frathd  )sa.vakxd 
adtahd  paiti*bardi</. 

Yafl?  masyd  adtahmdaf  baresma, 

Yatha  adtahd  frastereniiti  atha  adta  hd  paiti-bardid^. 

Yad  zaota  Ahurem  MazdSm  yazditi  madhimdi 
baresmSn  paiti-bardi^/ ; 

Amesh^  Spewte  yaz&iti  frdtemii  baresmSn  paiti- 
baroi^J? ; 

Apd  ad  )razamaidd  haotemSi baresmSn  paiti-bardiaf ; 

AshSunSmia  urunaa^a  fravashi^>^  yazamaidd  ash- 
ndtemSi  baresmSn  paiti-bardio^. 

Vlspadibyd  yasnd-keretadibyd  madhemSi  baresmd 
paiti-bardi<jf*>. 


•  Apd  vyaudau  mStard^tayd.  RStdLr. 

Avava</  tadha  yatha  ^athwSrd  erezvd. 

Surunuy/tu.  Vispaya  SfrtnSmi. 

^  Kudd-z4tan3m^i</,  nar3in^a,  n3irin3in>&a,  yadrSm  vahdhlr, 
dadnmi,  vanai«ti  [thrakhti]  vanghen,  vaonare,  kluathrem^. 

YSij  az&thS  mahmSi  hyStd  avanghd  mzd  vmi  padSi^  ySlr 
frasrdtau  Lsuyau  pairi^sSi. 

*  If  the  libations  are  intended  for  the  water,  not  for  the  Baresman. 

*  The  words  *  a  yava’s  breadth’  seem  to  be  out  of  place  here. 
They  may  have  crept  in  from  the  usual  formula  'an  adra  long, 
a  yava  thick '  (cf.  Vd.  XIX,  19 ;  infra  §§  70,  90). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nJrangistan. 


349 


69.  If  he  bring  the  libations  to  the  water  and  not 
to  the  Baresman  \ 

If  the  Baresman  be  distant  an  a^ja’s  length,  a 
yava’s  breadth 

He  shall  bring  them  over  the  Baresman ; 

If  not,  he  shall  pay  three  strokes  (of  the  Sraoshd- 
/fcirana)  or  a  day’s  work. 

If  he  bring  the  libations  to  the  Baresman  and  not 
to  the  water, 

If  the  water  be  distant  three  steps. 

He  shall  bring  them  over  the  water; 

If  not,  he  shall  pay  three  strokes  (of  the  Sraoshd- 
^rana)  or  a  day’s  work. 

70.  If  the  Baresman  be  an  a^a  long,  a  yava 
thick®,  one  may  bring  them  on  any  part  of  the 
Baresman. 

If  the  Baresman’s  size  be  larger. 

He  shall  bring  them  on  the  point  where  the  bundle 
is  tied. 

While  the  Zaotar  sacrifices  to  Ahura  Mazda  ^  he 
brings  them  on  the  middle  of  the  Baresman  ; 

While  he  sacrifices  to  the  Amesha-Spe»tas  ®,  he 
brings  them  before  the  Baresman ; 

While  he  says  :  *  We  sacrifice  to  the  Waters  he 
brings  them  on  the  left  side  of  the  Baresman ; 

While  he  says :  ‘  We  sacrifice  to  the  souls  and 
Fravashis  of  the  Holy  Ones^’  he  brings  them  on 
the  right  side  of  the  Baresman. 


*  If  it  has  the  normal  dimensions. 

*  When  he  recites  the  formula :  ‘  We  sacrifice  to  Ahura  Mazda ' 
(Ahurem  MazdSm  . . .  yazamaid^;  Yasna  LXIII). 

*  While  he  pronounces  the  words  :  ‘  We  sacrifice  to  the  Amesha- 
Spentas  ’  (Ameshfi  Spenli  yazamaidfi,  ibid.) 

*  Yasna  LXIII.  ’  Ibid. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


350 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Dakh^ama^tim  a.6tad  baresma  yzcl  paiti-dpem 
fr4naya»tema  ^ 

71.  Apa  adh^  frabareta  a^tdibyd  zaothribyd 
ySiti 

YaunghSm  n6id  aiwyd  vanghibyd  frabarava^  (read 
frabara</?) 

Frd  adtau  zaothrau  hartxd 

Zaota  g^.r  p4ity4i  p6i^  (read  paity4p6i</)  paoiryd 
franghardia? 

Mrditi  adta  zaota  imSm  vai6 


Fraja  adhiaf  . .  .  aria?  nadmdfl?  yq^yastdw  pai 
. .  .  ase»ti  adsmSsi^  bare&^ 

V,  Functions  and  places  of  the  Z6t  and  Rdspls 
at  the  Sacrifice. 

72.  Kis  zaotar^  kairim  anghaa^  mazddb  (H. — 
mazdayasndiaf  T. — read  myazddij)  ai»  ? 

Gaus^  (read  gdthausia)  frasrivay&iti  vaiim^ 
anghd  astvditi  paiti  adhayda^ :  athd  ratu^. 

had  hdvandnd  (H. — hivayiaf  ndnd  T.)  [yaaQ 
haomem^  ahunavaaf  anghavanemia  vadmanda^. 

73.  Kad  dtravakhshahd  yaa?  itrem^^a  aiwa-vakh- 
.sayaa?  dthras>^a  tijrd  thrakhti;  yaozdaXhad, 

Zaothras>fci  vd/^im  paiti  adhayda? :  athi  ratuJ. 

74.  Aaa?  fraberetarj  yad  dthras^a  advSm  thrakhtim 
yao^dathaa?, 

BaresmSn^a  frakem  dthradia  yasnd-keretadibyd 
paiti-bardaf. 

75.  Kad  dsnatdra  yaaT  haomemia  dsnayda?  hao- 
memia  paiti-harezda? 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nJrangistAn. 


351 


At  all  the  sacrificial  formulas '  he  brings  them  to 
the  middle  of  the  Baresman  *. 


71 


V.  Functions  and  places  of  the  Zdt  and  Rispts 
at  the  Sacrifice  ® 

72.  What  shall  the  Zaotar  do  on  the  day  of  a 
Myazda  *  ? 

He  shall  sing  the  G4thas  and  shall  give  response 
to  the  people  :  athi  ratuj  *. 

The  HAvanan  .... 

73.  The  Atravakhsha  shall  feed  the  fire  and 
cleanse  the  three  faces  of  the  fire-altar,  and  shall 
give  response  to  the  Zaotar :  athd  ratux. 

74.  The  Frabaretar  shall  cleanse  the  fourth  side 
of  the  fire-altar, 

And  shall  bring  the  transverse  stem  of  Baresman  ® 
and  shall  bring  the  incense  to  the  fire  at  all  the 
sacrificial  formulas  (all  the  y^Nh^  hAtSm). 

75.  The  AsnStar  shall  wash  the  Haoma  and  shall 
strain  the  Haoma. 


•  Yazcli  &pem. 

Tava  &thrd— tava  dthrd  ihurah^ . 

Amesba  Spe»ta  dadna  m&zdayasna. 

®Y4ta  ra&iAm  frflyu  ....  tem  vangha//  adtadha  upa 

gerembayln . 

^VfspausAa  itbrd. 

’  At  all  the  Y^wh^  hftilm. 

*  See,  on  these  ceremonies,  the  Guimet  Zend-Avesta,  1, 395-397. 

*  Dtnkart,  1.  L  §  13.  *  In  a  G&hinbdr  office. 

*  See  above,  p.  341,  note  2. 

*  The  baresmSn  frakem  or  frSkh-g&m,  fr&gim,  a  stem  that 
rests  on  the  feet  of  the  Barsomdin  or  M&hrfk. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


352 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


76,  Aaaf  ra6thwif-karah6  y^d  haomemia  gava 
rathwayS^^  bakhshayia</ia. 

•  77-  Apem  4-beres  4-bai^.  Srao^Svarezd  aiwySkh- 
s'Aykd. 

78.  Zaotara  diityd-gitu^ 

Madhemya  nin&nahS  madhem^U/  ar&thraod^  apa 
sritd. 

79.  Stuiukhti^  hivanind  ddityd-g^tuj 
Dajinem  upa  srakhtim  fratarSm  baresman  aparSm 

Sthrd. 

Haoyiuif  had  nadtnel^  dsnatir^. 

Atravakh^hd  dSityd-gdluj 
Da^anem  upa  thrakhtem  fratarSm  ithrd. 
Fraberetarj  dSityd-gStur 
HaomySm  upa  srakhtim  fratai^n  baresmSn. 
Dasin&d  had  nadmSdf  radthwi^karahd. 
Anaiwi-eretavd  (H. — erezvo  T.)  g^tur  adta  Sbe- 
reta  srao^Svarezahd  vl^arayatem. 

80.  Y dzi/fei  adti  ratavd  anahakhti  pairig^ya»ti, 
Zaota  vispa  ratu  thwiu  rashaya»ti 
Advadha  dsndthraaf  hSvaynSnd  radthwayditi. 

Zaota  anahakhtd  parayd^  dShi.rtdi  ar^aiastemii 

zaothrem  radkh^aiti. 

81.  Yad  advd  zaota  frayaziiti  mayazdahd  ai» 
zaotara  gitava, 

Adtaya  myazdd  aiwi-vaidhayditi  rathwadia  myaz- 
dad>^  rathwadia, 


*  In  the  modem  sacrifice  there  are  only  two  priests  who  divide 
between  them  the  functions  of  the  eight  priests.  The  R&spi,  who 
takes  his  name  from  the  Rathwirkare,  represents  rather  the  Atra- 
vakhsha  whose  place  he  occupies  near  the  fire,  and  who,  of  all  the 
assistants  of  the  Zaotar,  is  the  one  whose  services  can  least  be 
dispensed  with  (see,  however,  §  81). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  n!rangistAn. 


353 


76.  The  Ra^thwijkara  shall  mix  the  Haoma  and 
the  milk,  and  shall  divide  the  mixture. 

77.  The  Aberet  shall  bring  the  water.  The 
Sraoshivarez  shall  superintend. 

78.  The  right  place  of  the  Zaotar 

Is  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  .  .  . 

79.  .  .  .  the  right  place  of  the  Hdvanan 

Is  on  the  right  side,  opposite  the  Baresman, 
behind  the  fire. 

On  his  left-hand  side  shall  the  Asndtar  stand. 

The  right  place  of  the  Atravakhsha 

Is  on  the  right  side,  opposite  the  fire. 

The  right  place  of  the  Frabaretar 

Is  on  the  left  side,  before  the  Baresman. 

On  his  right-hand  side  shall  the  Ra^thwwkara  stand. 

The  places  of  the  Aberet  and  the  Sraoshdvarez 
are  not  fixed ;  they  come  and  go. 

80.  If  these  assistants  ’  go  without  the  leave  of 
the  Ratu, 

The  Zaotar  may  make  all  the  mixtures 

Without  the  Asn4tar  and  the  Hivanan. 

If  the  Zaotar  go  without  leave,  the  preparation  of 
the  Zaothra  shall  fall  to  the  wisest  and  truest of 
the  assistant  priests. 

81.  If  the  Zaotar  sacrifice  alone  ®  on  a  Myazda 
day,  at  the  place  of  the  Zaotar*, 

He  shall  announce  that  Myazda  to  the  Lord  (of 
the  festival)  and  to  the  Lord  of  the  Myazda  ®, 


*  The  most  respectable  of  the  priests  present. 

*  Without  his  seven  assistants.  *  At  his  ordinary  seat. 

*  He  announces  the  banquet  to  the  Ratu  of  the  Gdhdnb&r,  that  is 
to  say,  to  the  Genius  of  the  G&hdnbdr  which  is  being  celebrated,  and 
to  the  Genius  of  the  religious  banquet  itself. 

[4)  A  a 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


354 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Vispayau  sS>^dh^  ashaond  stdi^  yasn&iia  vah- 
miiia  kh^naothrdi^a  frasastaya^^. 

Zaotar^  g&tava  Ahunem  vairlm  frasrivay6i</. 

■Syaothand-tilitya  hivana^ibyd  paiti-^ngh6i</, 

Hivan&n6  gitOm. 

Atravakhiah^  gitava  4trein  aiwi-vakh^aydi^/. 

Fraberetaw  g&tftm  [yasnem  haptanghiitim]  frAya- 
zaiti. 

82.  Yasia  a^ta^Sm  rathwSm  paoiryd  paiti  (4) 
gSiSkd  hivandnem  adtem  dstayditi ; 

Bitim  dtravakh^em ;  thritlm  fraberetdrem ;  tdiiim 
ddnazvdzem  (H. — ddnazvdnem  T.) ; 

Pukhdhem  dsnatdrem ;  kh^tdm  radthwiikarem  ; 
haptathem  Sraoshdvarezetn. 

83.  Adhd</  anyadsdm  rathwSm  paiti  ddhaydifl? 

Adtadfdm  ratavd  azddi 

Thrigdmi  a»tare  anawtare  atha  a»tare  patatha 
a»tare  vd  da</  awtare  vd  paiti  vd  thri  vd  dzditi 
ayare  dr5^6  vd  vdstrydijf* 

Zaothrandm  paimta  sti  mjrazddi^  (H. — paid^ta 
stimyazddly)  ai« 

84.  Avayd  vana«ti  Spitama  Zarathu^tra  y6  fraurva- 
drkhtd  (read  fraurvakh^td  ?)  hava  [hd  vanainti] ! 

Avoya  druya«ti  (read  dru^wti)  Spitama  Zara- 
thu^tra  yd  fraurvaikhti  havahd  urund  druzaitd  (H. — 
druzahd  T.) 

*Yadh6i</gadm  yavarf  erezva. 

Thri-gimi  aiwydstd</  ha^  baresma  parditi. 

Varjtas^i<i 

Vangharjtas>&i</  (cf.  §  109). 

’'Ratiu  rduinindm  ddthrandm  srdvanandm^  pasu  vastra- 
T&mi2i  ahaowd. 

*  One  of  the  words  in  the  second  line  of  the  Ahuna  Vairya. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrakgistan. 


355 


For  sacrifice,  prayer,  gratification,  and  glorification 
to  all  the  creation  of  the  Good  Spirit. 

He  shall  sing  the  Ahuna  Vairya  in  the  place  of 
the  Zaotar. 

At  the  word  shyaothananSm '  he  shall  spring  to 
seize  the  mortar, 

Into  the  place  of  the  HAvanan  *. 

From  the  place  of  the  Atravakhsha  he  shall  feed 
the  fire. 

From  the  place  of  the  Frabaretar  he  shall  cele¬ 
brate  the  Yasna  HaptanghAiti. 

82.  And  of  those  masters  he  who  comes  first 
represents  the  Hivanan  • ; 

Secondly,  the  Atravakhsha ;  thirdly,  the  Fra¬ 
baretar  ;  fourthly,  the  DinazvAza  * ; 

Fifthly,  the  AsnAtar ;  sixthly,  the  RaAthwirkara ; 
seventhly,  the  SraoshAvarez. 

83  . 

84  *.  Woe  to  the  struggler  who  struggles  for  the 
joy  of  his  own  soul  •,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra ! 

Woe  to  the  deceiver  who  deceives  for  the  joy  of 
his  own  soul  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra  ! 


*  The  Hdvanan  being  the  priest  who  holds  the  mortar  and 
pounds  the  Haoma  and  the  UrvarSm. 

*  The  case  here  is  the  most  ordinary  one,  when  besides  the 
Zaotar  there  is  one  RSspt  who  represents,  one  after  the  other,  the 
seven  assistant  priests. 

*  The  DdnazvAza,  ‘  the  water-bearer,’  is  the  same  as  the  Aberet. 

*  ‘  That  the  best  of  sacrifices  is  to  give  presents  to  the  righteous, 
to  teach  and  study  the  Law'  (lit  the  Intelligence  of  the  Righteous), 
Dfnkart,  1.1.  §  14. 

*  ‘  Any  evildoer  who  helps  to  do  evil ;  some  say,  the  warrior 
that  helps  the  evil  deed  and  does  not  repress  it  ’  (Comm.) 

^  ‘  Any  man  who  does  evil  with  his  tongue ;  some  say,  the 
priest  that  teaches  error’  (Comm.) 

A  a  2 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


356 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Avoya  [ddrem  (read  dSthrem)]  dadhiiti  Spitama 
Zarathui'tra  y6N[hd  dfi]thrah6  d4iti  kt>\d  hava  urva 
vi  fclza  (read  urv4za  ?) 

Ddthri  zl  paiti  niv^iti^  vlspah^  anghau  astvat6 
humatadsu^  hftkhta^u/^a  hvare^tadnjia. 

Adya  zaothranSm  mazwta/fea  vahijta^  sradytayfci 
Y4  nairi  ashaon^  dasti  aiwi^  haithi  iishiniiia 
Paitiia  piresmanii  khratfim  ashavanem. 

Ashem  voh4. 


NIrangistAn. 

Fargard  III. 

I.  The  K6stl  and  Sadara. 

85.  Aiwydsta  mazdayasna  githau  sielvaya^  n6id 
anaiwydsta, 

Kva  ithra  aiwyau[ngayau]«ti  ?  adhairi  kaja^ibya. 
Kvzd  aiwyaunghay<a!u«ti  ? 

Yaaf  a^Sm  aredva6  gavastry4  varwtfau  vere- 
za^ytSm  Titid  avangr4say4</  adhairi  harethra^ibyd  \ 

86.  Nanetema  vastrahd  aiwy4st6  ratufri^  ? 

Yatha  4thravan6  biy  paii  (read  paiti)  biy  maidhy6i- 

paitiyt4nd. 

87.  Kva  tSi^d  a€tah€  aiwy4st6  ratufriy. 

Yad  masyd  a^tahm4^  v4streni, 

A6tava[t6]  a^tah^  nistema  (read  nitema)  aiwy4st6 
ratufriy. 

Yd  aiwyd!unghayd4itd  karet^s^a  aratufryd 
Pasia  aiwy4stem  nitaoyayditi  ratufryd. 

88.  Ydzi  thriy  h4thrau  t^d  (read  hathrau»^d) 
y4taye«td  ratufryd. 

Ydzi  Aad  ndid?  hathrauwid  y4taya«ti  aratufryd. 

*  Threuitasti  aspaymi  paourvd  azyou  ar^fd. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI,  ERPATISTAn  and  NtRANGISTAN. 


357 


Woe  to  the  giver  who  gives  for  the  joy  of  his  own 
soul O  Spitama  Zarathurtra ! 

For  the  gift  that  delivers  all  the  bodily  world  con¬ 
sists  in  good  thoughts,  good  words,  and  good  deeds. 
And  the  best  and  finest  of  all  libations 
Is  the  gift  to  the  righteous  man  who  teaches  clear 
truth  and  consults  the  Holy  Wisdom  *, 


NIrangistAn, 

Fargard  III, 

I,  The  Kdstl  and  Sadara*, 

85.  The  Mazda-worshippers  shall  sing  the  GAthas 
with  their  girdle  on,  never  without  their  girdle  *. 

Where  shall  they  gird  it  ? — Under  the  armpits. 

How  much  of  it  shall  they  gird  around  ? 

So  much  that,  while  they  work  standing,  the  ends 
should  not  embarrass  them  below  the  skirts. 

86.  What  is  the  least  garment  he  shall  wear  [in 
order  that  his  offering  should  be]  accepted 

A  pair  of  drawers  reaching  to  mid-leg. 

87.  However  poor  the  garment  be,  he  is  accepted. 

If  the  garment  be  of  higher  value. 

He  is,  however,  accepted  only  if  it  is  that  size  at 
least . 

88  * . 


'  The  Pahlavi  translator  read  ndirf  instead  of  i6\d:  ‘he  gives 
gifts  of  woe,  for  which  he  shall  have  no  joy.’ 

*  Who  studies  the  Law ;  cf.  Vd.  XVIII,  6. 

»  Dtnkart,  1.1.  §  15.  ‘  Cf.  Vd.  XVIII,  1-4,  54-59. 

*  This  paragraph  and  the  two  following,  referring  to  the  pre¬ 
paration  of  the  Baresman,  appear  to  have  been  misplaced,  as 
^  91-96  continue  the  remarks  on  the  Zoroastrian’s  garment,  and 
the  Baresman  is  again  the  subject  of  §§  97  seq.  The  right  order 
therefore  would  be :  87,  91-96,  88-90,  97. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


358 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


89.  Y6  anu  a^iSm  baresma  frastarewti  yatha  ashava 
6^aniclspd  frastarena^ta  ratufri^. 

90.  Kvzd  ndnitima  baresmana  ratufri^  ?  thru 
urvara. 

Kyau  vditi^a  (read  kyan  vaitiv  ?)  a^tayau  urva- 
rayau  anghen  ? 

Tar6  den4r6  varesd  stavanghd, 

Kzd  upema  adro  dr^^ngha  yav6  frathangha. 

91.  Y6  vanghenti  keretlria, 

Paiti  vanghSs^a  khre  uru  baouri^/^a, 

Y^zi  awtarem  asperend  vastrahd  aiwy<zunghayau»ti 
ratufryd ; 

Anasperend  vastrahd  aiwyaunghay<zu»ti  aratufryd. 

92.  Yd  vanghaiti  varenatu&fci  pairi-urusvawti^, 

Kd  y^eskz  (read  atk^sia)  frazu^d  sanghas^  upara- 

smandi, 

Ydzi  azarem  aiwyaunghy«u«ti  ratufryd ; 

Aparem  aiwyaunghyauwti  aratufryd. 

AnySm^a  sutem  vanghinahd  narem  na  aratufryd. 

93.  Yd  vastra  vastrem  aiwyrtuwti, 

U  zbare»ti  aratufryd ; 

Upariflf  nadmd<^  ava-bare«ti  atha  aiwy«ungha- 
yau«ti  ratufryo. 

94.  Ydzi  uzgeresnivayd  (read  uzgeresna-vagh- 
dhand)  niva»ti, 

Ydzi  awtard//  nztmtd 

Yi  hama  aiwyaunghaia  aiwyaunghayauwti, 

Ydzi  a»tare  brewfayditi  (read  derezyiiti)  va 
ratufryd ; 

Ydzi  d.  ntid  a«tare  derezyiiti  va  aratufryd. 

95.  Yd  aiwy<2:unghayau«ti  rus^a  nminii  nmina- 
yzskz, 

Ydzi  taras/^a  aiwy'^unghatia  aipi-vereiai«ti  ratu¬ 
fryd  ; 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  krpatistAn  and  nJrangistAn. 


359 


89.  He  who  binds  the  bundles  of  Baresman  as 
the  holy  (7AmAspa  *  did,  is  accepted. 

90.  How  many  stems  of  Baresman,  at  the  least, 
are  needed  for  the  offering  to  be  accepted  ? — Three  *. 

What  shall  they  be  like  ? 

.  .  .  .  as  thick  as  a  hair, 

At  the  outside  an  a65a  long,  a  yava  broad. 

91.  Those  who  are  clothed  with  rags. 

If  the  inner  garment  be  complete,-  they  are  ac¬ 
cepted  ; 

If  they  wear  not  a  complete  (inner)  garment,  they 
are  not  accepted. 

92 . 

93.  When  they  put  on  the  garment  over  the 
garment  ®, 

If  they  put  it  on  from  below,  they  are  not  ac¬ 
cepted  * ; 

If  they  put  it  on  from  above®,  and  then  gird  it  on 
with  the  girdle,  they  are  accepted. 

94  . 

95  . .  •  • 


According  to  the  proper  orthodox  rite :  GimSspa  was  one  of 
the  first  converts  to  Zarathurtra’s  doctrine. 

*  Cf.  Yasna  LVII,  6;  Yt.  XII,  3. 

*  The  Sadara  on  the  Kdsti. 

*  As  the  garment  has,  passed  by  the  regions  of  the  body  where 
Ahriman  is  supposed  to  reign. 

®  It  slips  from  the  head  on  to  the  shoulders  and  breast. 


Digitized  by 


36o 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Pasia  v4  pairi  bare«ti  aratufryd. 

Yd  vanghaiti  nadh^sia  s&dhayantij^/^  iaremSn^ 
huki, 

MaghanSm  tinSm  (read  tanum)  aiwydstSm  irlr!^ 
ndid  anaiwydsti  astare«ti ; 

Ydzi  &3id  ndi^^  maghnSLm  tanu  aiwyistSm  ririshii 
anaiwydsta  strewti. 

96.  Y6  githd  ratufrw  paiti  paraya«ti, 

Ydzi  aspkere«t6  (read  asperend)  vastrahd  ai- 
wydstem  didarayd  &  anaiwydsti  stre«ti ; 

Ydzi  &ad  ndid  asperend  vastrahd  aiwyistrem  dd- 
darayd  ndid  anaiwySstd. 

II.  The  preparation  of  the  Baresman. 

97.  Yd  baresmSn  frastare«ti  haomSafe  varedh«/§a 
thanvaa^a  a»tare  ddta, 

Ydzi  thrij  hdthra  ke  bu  (read  hdthrakadbii)  ya- 
ydi«ti  (read  ydtaydiwti)  ratufryd ; 

Ydzi  Siad  thri^  (?)  ndi<jf  thrw  hdthrak^bij  ydtaya«ti 
aratufryd 

98.  Yd  urvarSm  baresma  frastare«ti  hamd-vare- 
shefim  paouru-fravikhjem, 

Vl-bard  frav<lkh5d  ratufrw,  ndi</  vi-bard. 

Paoirij  paoiri-fravikh^d  frastare«ti, 

Vl  narasia  (read  vl-baraafci)  avl-bareafe  ratuj. 

99.  Yd  baresma  anahmi^/  nadmd</  hSm  srishiiti 
hSm  vd  darezayditi, 

Vl-bard  ratufrij,  ndi^jf  vi-bard. 

Atha  yatha  yd  hSm  vadjyi  hSm  vadj-^ayditi  va- 
nadma  hSm  sri^aiti  vares^  iverbare&fci  ratufrw. 

100.  Yd  baresma  taoshyditi  draoj  v4  paiti  sdinma, 

UnSm  vd  kadkxd  v^  paiti  sidaranSm, 

Ydzi  ti^rd  dindnd  hdthrd>^i.r  nij-hw  ia«tifratufrii 
(read  ni.f-hii^ta»ti  aratufri^). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NiRANGISTAN. 


361 


96. 


II.  The  preparation  of  the  Baresman’. 
97-10' . 


*Y6  rathfsAa  pasvarezd^Aa  baresmafenfi  ham  varewtayewti. 
Naratd  karaithin. 

Zata  ratu.r  fr^nA. 

Kimiui  va  vakhshUam. 

Zatd  fr«i. 


’  ‘  On  the  way  of  gathering  and  tying  the  Baresman  ’  (Dtnkart, 

1.1.  §  1 6). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


362 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Y6  urvarayau  ava  va^ewti, 

Y6zi  ti^rd  tar6  den4n6  (read  den4r6)  hathra 
(read  hathrav^i.?)  bare«ti  fratufri^  (read  ratufri^) ; 

Y6zi  4a</  n6W  ti^rd  tar6  den4n6  (read  dendrd) 
hathra  (read  hathra^j)  bare«ti  aratufrij. 

101.  Y6  zemo  ti5Td  kareshflu  frak4ray6iti, 

Ava  itha  bare«ti  yavahd  vd  gavanah^  vd, 

Y6zi  ti^rd  dtar6  (read  tar6)  dendnd  (read  dendrd) 
hathrau^k  a»tara  spe»ti  (read  hawdare^a^ti  ?)  ratufri^ ; 

Y6zi  ti^rd  tar6  dedind  (read  dendrd) 

ha«dare2a«ti  aratufri^. 

Y6  anydhd  as-hya  baresma  frastarewti, 

Ydzi  paiti  shau  uravarau  upa  dadhiiti  ratufrir; 

Pard  upa  ddtau  frastare«ti  aratufri^. . 

102.  Hapta  he«ti  hdvana  ratavd  baresma  stere- 
naditi : 

Paoirya  ydNhd  md  ashd^  ha>^ ; 

Bityd  ahunanSm  vairyanSm ; 

ThrityS  ddidl  mdi ; 

Tdiryd  urtavaityau  vi  spe^td  mainyu.r  vd  hdtdi.r 
ha»ddtd ; 

Pukhdha  ydnhd  md  ashd^  ha^d ; 

Kh^tvd  ddidl  moi ; 

Haptatha  urtavaityau  vd  spe»td  mainy^r  vd 
hdtdu  handdtd. 

Asu/  anydhu  ratufrixu  -fetangrd  danghaus^auiaf 
(read  kanghaus/^di^jf)  baresmStn  frastaraityd : 

Paoiryd  ydnhd  md ; 

Bityd  ahundn  vdirdn; 

.  .  ,  ddidi  mdi  ye  gam ; 

Tdiryd  u5tavadtayd!u  gdthay^m  vd  Spe«td  main- 
yeus  vd 

Kvad  adtSm  asmem  (read  adsmem)  paiti-barde/ 
az^tare  ahuna  airyanemna  ? 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  BRPATISTAn  and  NtRANGlSXAN.  363 


102.  There  are  seven  Lords  of  HAvani  for  whom 
one  lays  down  the  Baresman*. 

The  first  is  at  y^Nh^  ashA<f  ha/^  (Yasna 
XV,  2). 

The  second  is  at  the  Ahuna  Vairyas. 

The  third  is  at  dAidl  mdi  (Yasna  XVIII,  i). 

The  fourth  is  at  the  end  of  the  H4  Urtavaiti 
(Yasna  XLIII),  or  of  the  H4  Spe«t4  Mainyu 
(Yasna  XLVII). 

The  fifth  is  at  y6Nh6  m6  ash4//ha^  (Yasna  LI,  22). 

The  sixth  is  at  d4id!  mdi  (Yasna  LX V,  1 5). 

The  seventh  is  at  the  end  of  the  HA  Uxtavaiti,  or 
of  the  HA  SpewtA  Mainyu. 

In  the  other  rites*  the  Baresman  is  laid  down  four 
times. 

The  first  time  at  y6Nh6  m6;  the  second  time  at 
the  Ahuna  Vairyas ;  [the  third  time  at]  *  dAidl  m6i 
ye  g5m ;  the  fourth  time  at  the  GAtha  Urtavaiti,  or 
the  GAtha  Spe«tA  Mainyu. 

103 . 

*  103.  DAityAi  pairutAi  pairlrti. 

FrArathnA  di^^nghd  varlr-stai^has^a 

Klunaothra  yazamaidA  yasnetn^a. 

Barata  beretem  akymisAangha  Atars  aAsmem  dAityd- 
aAsmAn. 

NtvaAdhayAmi  yatha  yim  Ahurem  MazdAm  fradatbAi 
nemd  vlvahua  u  yAsangha  Atar.r  baoidhtm  aAtAm  baoidhtm 
dAityd-baoidhyd. 

*  This  seems  to  mean  that  there  are  seven  passages  of  the  Yasna 
in  the  celebration  at  the  HAvan  GAh,  at  which  the  Zaotar  lays 
down  on  the  MAhrA  the  Baresman  which  he  holds  in  his  hand. 
Cf.  the  Guimet  Zend-Avesta. 

*  In  the  Vtsperad  and  the  DvAzdAhdmAst. 

*  The  words  ahunSn  vAtrAn  are  in  Pahlavi,  and  thrityA  is 
omitted. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


364 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Utnem^u/  (read  ty\imk\d)  ava  Vel^im  g^thanStn 
asrutem  paiti-bar6  aratufrw. 

Pa&fci  vi  pari  v4  pairi  barenti  aratufri^*. 

Od,fraiardt6  a^va  Mazdayasna  baresman  stere«ti, 

Y6  anu  a^m  tzd  ahma  (read  hama)  Xzd  aSvS 
gima. 

had  a^^a  y6  arem6id6  (read  aremdi-jidd)  aiwie- 
ret6  gituj, 

Atvayayahid  atst  baresm6  steraiti  ratufrij. 

Frashcivayd  aiwigimi  ratufrw  paiti  n6\d  afrashi- 
vay6. 

Ki  frashCiiti^  yaui  kva<j?*>  ? 

Frd  vi  apa  vi  shivay^iti, 

Aa^  hama  you  paid  fraya^  tau  paid  ia^  baresman 
upa-baraiti. 

104.  Yd  anydhd  dahmahd  baresma  frastare»ti 
fra^saiti, 

Ydzi  hdi  dahmd  a»tari^  nadmi<i^  hithrahd  ar^tu- 
fri^. 

Ydzi  &ad  n6\d  dahmd  a«tari^  nadmi</  hithrahd 
bard  (read  nard)  hithri</ 

Frathrithvayd  (read  frasrivayd)  ratufri^  n6\d 
athrivayd  (read  asrivayd). 

III.  The  firewood  and  implements  of  Sacrifice. 

105.  Yd  kem^id  dahmanim  apereniyunSm  astern 
dasti, 

Hi :  md  bara  adsmai^  baresma^ ; 

Ydzi  s€  diiti  dadhiiti  aratufri^  (read  ratufrij)®. 

Ydzi  ia^  hd  ndi^  diiti  dadhiiti  aratufru. 

NiirikSm  vi  apereniydkm  (read  apereniydkem 
vi)  artem  dasti, 

Havii  rathwd  pathayditi. 

Dadvayasnem  vi  tanuperethem  vi  astern  dasti, 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VI.  ERPATISTAn  and  NfRANGISTAN.  365 


104.  If  a  man  come  and  tie  the  Baresman  of 
another  of  the  faithful  S 

If  the  latter  be  within  a  hAthra  distance,  the  former 
is  not  accepted  *. 

If  the  latter  be  not  within  a  hAthra  distance®,  the 
former  man  is  accepted  if  he  sing  the  hymns  * ;  if 
not,  he  is  not  accepted. 

III.  The  firewood  and  implements  of  Sacrifice. 

105.  If  a  man  give  a  charge  to  a  child  of  a  pious 
family  ®, 

And  say :  ‘  bring  me  wood  and  Baresman ;  ’ 

If  the  child  bring  wood  already  cut  •,  the  worship 
is  accepted. 

If  the  child  do  not  bring  wood  already  cut,  the 
worship  is  not  accepted. 

If  he  give  the  charge  to  a  woman  or  to  a  child. 

If  he  give  the  charge  to  a  DaAva-worshipper,  or 
to  a  man  in  a  state  of  sin, 

*AthA  ratu.f  mazdayasn6  ahmi  mazdayasnd  Zarathujtri.r, 
od,  AstAitb  nem6  ve  gdthou  ashaonlr  urtA  ahmAi. 

•’Khjvar  vaghsibU  (cf.  §  67,  end). 

Ndt^  thryAm  upamanAm  frAkh.Kishyan3m  (read  fravAkh- 
shayanAm). 


*  A  priest  has  prepared  everything  for  the  sacrifice,  when  another 
priest  comes,  possesses  himself  of  the  apparatus,  and  offers  up  the 
sacrifice. 

'  He  could  easily  have  asked  for  the  permission  of  his  fellow- 
priest  and  had  no  right  to  act  without  it. 

*  So  that  he  could  not  be  easily  asked  for  permission. 

*  If  he  performs  the  whole  of  the  ceremony. 

*  Of  a  good  sacerdotal  family.  The  child  serves  him  as 
a  ratunaya  (a  sacerdotal  servant). 

*  It  is  not  certain  that  the  young  ratunaya  could  do  it  properly. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


366 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS, 


Paoir5rAi  dahmanSm  pam-geremy4i  pathay^iti ». 

106.  Kvsid  ni  nitema  a^smah^  paitibard  ratufrij  ? 

Yatha  vareshnah^  kehrpah^ 

107.  Havana6ibya  ratufrw  ayanghana^ibya  ze- 
ma^naSibya, 

YSzi  anusvau  a»ta. 

N6i</  asta^nadibya  nt\d  draonibya  ratufrij  ntid 
fravikh^na^ibya  ratufri^. 

D4ityd  a6ny6  havand  addityd  (read  d4ity6)  a^ibyd 
(read  a4ny6) 

108.  Kw^dhy^  k4  nitema^ibya  h4vana4ibya  aratu- 
frij  (read  ratufrii)  ? 

Y4thra  ySstuma  (read  y4  thraySstuma)  huitim  hLr 
hvistb. 

Ayiva«t6  (read  a4td)  Ssavd  anghen  ? 

Bashidra^nghd  aogd  (read  a6v6-  ?)  varesd. 

Kju/  hSm  thrisa  vlbarAa^  nbid  ? 

ThraySm  kvz^id  upabard  ratufrw. 

Adtavjujf  ipd  yawid  adtadibyd  upangharert^d. 

Kva  tkkid  gm^  vii^ithra  paiti-bard  (a)ratufrij. 

Asdnadnadibya  (read  asdnadibya)  nd  havadibydi^a 
(read  havanadibyai^a)  nd  vanghavadibjras^  (read  nd 
vd  anghavadibyasi^a) ; 

Atha  haomya  atha  apa  (read  apa  atha  varesa) 
atka  aiwyaunghana ; 

(read  hava  gava)  havahd  adsma  hava  baresmana. 

109.  KvTid  adtad^Sm  ahdrdnd  VkkUd  upa  isde/- 
yavaaf  hdthrem 

Yd  adtad^m  ndi^  \AU\d  upd  isd</  adtava^/  apayadfa 


*  N6wf  thraydm  upamanSlm  fravdktuyandm  upa-thweresdu/. 

Athweresaya  adtahd  tbw3m. 

*•  Yatha  vadhdityd  (read  va  ddityd)  hita. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VI.  erpatistAn  and  nIrangistan.  367 


106.  What  is  the  least  load  of  wood  accepted  ? 

107.  One  may  use  a  mortar  of  [silver],  metal,  or 
earth. 

If  it  let  nothing  through  (?) 

One  of  bone,  wood,  or  lead  is  not  accepted. 

Such  is  the  rule  for  both  parts  of  the  mortar  *. 

1 08.  Of  what  size  at  the  least  must  a  mortar  be 
to  be  accepted  ? 

Large  enough  for  three  stems  of  Haoma  to  be 
prepared  [therein]. 

What  shall  those  stems  be  like  ? 

As  long  as  a  joint  of  a  finger,  as  thin  as  a  hair. 

Shall  he  put  them  in  at  three  times  or  not  ? 

As  long  as  he  puts  in  three  stems®,  he  is  accepted. 

Also  water  enough  to  overflow  them®. 

However  little  milk  he  puts  in®,  he  is  accepted. 

He  may  use  either  his  own  mortar,  or  one  that  is 
not  his  own ; 

And  so  it  is  as  to  the  Haoma,  the  water,  the 
Varesa  *,  and  the  tie  ^ ; 

But  the  milk  must  be  his®,  the  wood  must  be  his, 
the  Bare'sman  must  be  his. 

109.  .  .  . . 


'  ‘  If  it  let  anything  escape,  it  is  good  for  nothing '  (Comm.) 

*  The  mortar  proper  and  the  pestle. 

*  Whether  he  puts  them  all  in  at  once  or  otherwise. 

*  For  the  straining.  •  A  few  drops  of  giv  are  enough. 

'  Supplied  from  the  Pahlavi  translation  (!t(in  vars). 

^  The  vegetable  tie  that  is  bound  around  the  Baresman,  the 
so-called  Aiwyminghana  (Ev&nghin). 

'  Supplied  from  the  Pahlavi  translation  (bard  zag-i  nafshd 
basryd). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


368 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Awtare  hathremiiaf  attet  anya  upa  is6id^ 

Y€zi  n6\d  updisaiti  thri  vA  dziiti  ayare  dr^i6  vi 
vistrycU/ 

Y6  updisdid^  ntid  vanasti 

Ana&^aiti  (read  anistaraiti) 

Vareytaafci  min  aigh  ^^tas^id^  (read  vare^ta&fci 
maghne«ta&ftd^)  srivaydi^/.  (Tahmuras’  Fragments, 
XII,  ir.) 

Ydzi  iskz.  ntid  iskz.  n6id  anashavanem  (read  asha- 
vanem')  adnirtem  dstdraiti ».  (Tahmuras*  Fragments, 
XII,  12.) 


•  Vangharertas^i</. 

Rathi^  upasu  varezi^. 

Ashem  vohCk  vahi.rtem  asti  u.rt&  asti  urti  ahmdi  hyzd  ash&i 
vahi.ft^i  ashem. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VII.  SUNDRY  FRAGMENTS. 


1. 

ATithrem  buyS</. 

Found  in  a  Parsi  prayer  known  as  ^threm  buyS</  from  its  first 
two  words.  It  was  published  by  Tir  Andfiz  in  his  Khorda  Avesta 
(Bombay,  p.  374  seq.)  and  by  Sachau  in  his  Neue  Beitrige 
(Vienna,  1871,  p.  823). 

Aithrem  buy4tj(  ahmya  nmin^ 

Pitum  buyit^  ahmya  nmfin^ 

Thwam  pitdm  hnytd  ahmya  nmcln^. 

May  welfare  appear  in  this  house ! 

May  plenty  of  food  be  in  this  house ! 

May  plenty  of  food  be  in  thy  house ! 

2. 

The  first  of  the  following  three  lines,  and  sometimes  the  first 
two,  are  found  in  many  of  the  Pahlavi  colophons  at  the  end  of 
Zend  manuscripts.  The  complete  formula  is  found  only  in  the 
colophon  of  the  old  Yasna  of  Kopenhagen  (K‘;  see  Geldner,Yasna 
LXXII,  1 1 ;  West,  Dtnkart,  484). 

A6v6  pa«tau  y6  ashahS 

Vlsp^  anyadshSm  apawtSm 

AngrahS  mainym.r  nasi.ftam  dadnSm  daSvayasna- 
nSm  pai^Itlm  mashydnSm  frikereitim. 

[4]  Bb 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


370 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


There  is  only  one  way  of  Righteousness  ^ ; 

All  other  ways  are  no  ways  : 

It  is  Religion,  that  destroyer  of  Angra  Mainyu, 
which  tears  to  pieces  the  Dadva-worshippers,  the 
men  who  live  in  sin. 

3. 

A  formula  found  in  several  colophons. 

N6i<jf  iahmi  zazva  y6  n6\d  urun6  zazva 

N6i</  iahmi  zazusha  [y6  n6ia?  urvSni  ^zush] 

Na^i^ir  adha  Zarathu^tra  sCl^  yathi  [him]  idare 
mashyika  *. 

He  has  gained  nothing  who  has  not  grained  the 
soul, 

He  shall  gain  nothing  who  shall  not  gain  the 
soul  *. 

There  is  no  good  for  man  to  receive  of  him*, 
O  Zarathujtra! 

4. 

This  fragment  from  the  HSdhdkht  Nask  is  quoted  in  the  Sad-dar 
(ch.  xl)  to  impress  on  children  the  respect  due  to  their  parents  and 
masters. 

M&  dzdraydi^  Zarathu^tra  m*L  Pourushaspem  mA 
DughdhdvSm  mA  a^thrapaitij. 


’  ‘  The  way  of  the  Pdrydlk^sh '  (Paoiryd-Aa^sha ;  Aidi  Vir&f, 
Cl,  15),  that  is,  the  pure  orthodox  religion,  as  founded  by  Zara- 
thuAra  and  followed  by  his  first  disciples. 

*  For  various  readings,  see  the  Guimet  Zend-Avesta,  III,  150-151. 

’  The  salvation  of  his  soul,  a  place  in  Paradise.  The  Mind- 

khard  (I,  28-32)  quotes  the  same  passage  with  the  following 
commentary :  ‘  For  the  spiritual  world  and  the  material  one  are 
like  two  fortresses,  of  which  one  can  clearly  take  the  one,  but 
not  the  other  ’  (at  the  same  time). 

*  Of  Ahriman.  ‘  There  is  no  profit  to  expect  from  the  demons 
nor  from  the  wicked ;  for  if  there  be  profit  in  the  beginning,  at  the 
end  there  will  be  ruin  ’  (Comm.) 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VII,  SUNDRY  FRAGMENTS. 


371 


Do  not  afflict,  O  Zarathu^tra!  either  Pourushaspa*, 
or  Dughdhava  or  thy  teachers. 

6. 

Aathriydim  dthraiSm  (Shdyast  14-Sh&yast  XIII, 

17)- 

The  manifestation  by  the  fire  \ 

6. 

Anaomd  manangh^  kya  vlsii  kva  par6  ^  ? 

7. 

This  is  an  Avestd-i  m&r  zadan  (or  text  to  be  recited  while 
killing  a  serpent).  *  If  one  recite  it  while  killing  a  serpent,  one 
gathers  thereby  the  same  merit  as  if  one  had  killed  a  heretic’ 
(Gr.  Ravdyat,  p.  383).  The  text  is  too  corrupt  to  allow  of  any 
translation,  but  it  contains  allusions  to  Varshna,  son  of  Hanghaur- 
vjungh,  son  of  (Jdmdspa,  whose  Fravashi  is  invoked  in  the  Frdhars 
Yart,  §  104,  to  withstand  the  evil  Pairikas,  and  who,  from  the 
present  formula,  appears  to  have  been  a  dragon-destroyer. 

Varshnah^  thwSm  anghrd  Urushndw  Cdm&spa- 
nah€  puthrahS  puthrem  apaitighni  ami  yim  davata 
Ashi^  apathatd  paitlm  ^pem  dSmns^lvy5m  ntid  hv4- 
z4t6  ntid  z^initi  ndid  amau  arenau  Av§ds  yaza 
a^ithd  inem  siyaSti  yva6/fa  yava^titad>§a.  Ashem 
voh(i. 


*  His  father.  ’  His  mother. 

*  The  manifestation  of  the  truth  by  the  fire-ordeal. 

*  A  quotation  in  the  AThn-t  gfisfin  6  (West,  Pahlavi  Texts,  I, 
356,  with  the  various  readings  in  note  i). 


B  b  2 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


VIII.  A0GEMAID6. 


‘The  AogemaidV  says  Dastur  Jamispji,  ‘is  a  treatise  that 
inculcates  a  sort  of  serene  resignation  to  death/  It  is  a  sermon 
on  death,  originally  written  in  Pahlavi,  but  preserved  to  us  in 
a  Parsi  transcription ;  in  which  original  Zend  texts  are  developed 
or  paraphrased.  These  Zend  quotations  amount  to  twenty-nine, 
of  which  twenty-four  are  new.  A  good  edition  of  the  Parsi  text, 
with  a  Sanskrit  translation,  based  upon  a  manuscript  of  a.  d.  1497, 
has  been  published  by  Prof.  Geiger  (Erlangen,  1879).  Dastur 
Jdmdspji  possesses  two  Pahlavi  retranscriptions  of  an  independent 
Parsi  manuscript,  which  contain  useful  corrections  and  additions. 
We  have  thought  it  necessary  to  give  here  a  complete  translation 
of  the  treatise  as  the  Zend  quotations  by  themselves  do  not  present 
either  a  continuous  or  a  complete  text.  Unlike  the  Zend  in  the 
Ntrangistdn,  they  are  not  the  principal,  but  only  the  secondary 
text. 

1.  Aogemaid^y^a  usmahi>^a  vls&mada^a^  (‘We 
come,  rejoice,  and  submit  * '). 

I  come,  I  accept,  I  resign*; 

2.  I  come  into  this  world,  I  accept  evil,  I  resign  myself 
to  death  * ; 


'  Yasna  XLI,  5.  According  to  Dastur  Peshotan,  these  words 
were  uttered  by  the  first  man,  Gay6-Maretan,  before  his  coming 
into  the  world,  as  a  promise  that  he  would  never  resort  to  suicide 
in  order  to  free  himself  from  pain  (Andarze  Atrepdt,  p.  6,  note  i). 
Cf.  §  104. 

*  Direct  translation  of  the  Zend  text. 

*  Parsi  translation  of  the  Zend  text. 

‘  Parsi  gloss  to  the  translation. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VIII.  AOGEMAID&. 


373 


3.  Sh4t6-inan«u  vahijt6-urv4n6  (‘  With  the  mind 
in  joy  and  the  soul  in  bliss  *  ’) : 

In  joy  is  he  who  realises  the  wish  of  his  soul 

4.  May  the  accursed  Gand  Mainyd  ®  be  smitten, 
destroyed,  and  broken,  he  who  has  no  knowledge, 
who  has  evil  knowledge,  who  is  full  of  death, 

5.  Who  destroys  the  body  of  the  immortal  soul ! 

6.  May  the  immortal  soul  have  its  share  in 
Paradise ! 

7.  And  may  the  pleasure  and  comfort  that  will 
dissipate  the  pain  of  the  immortal  soul  come  to  us ! 

8.  At  the  fourth  dawn*,  may  the  holy,  strong 
Sraosha®,  and  Rashn  Rist®,  and  the  good  Va^’', 
and  AshtSd? *  the  victorious,  and  Mihir  ®  of  the  rolling 
country-side,  and  the  Fravashis  of  the  righteous  ®, 
and  the  other  virtuous  spirits  come  to  meet  the  soul 
of  the  blessed  one, 

9.  And  make  the  immortal  soul  pass  over  the 
Kxnvdid  bridge  ”  easily,  happily,  and  fearlessly ! 

10.  And  may  Vahman,  the  Amshaspand  inter¬ 
cede  for  the  soul  of  the  blessed  one. 


*  Direct  translation  of  the  Zend  text. 

*  A  gloss  to  the  Zend  text 

*  For  Zan&  Mainy6,  the  same  as  Ahriman. 

*  Literally  at  the  third  day-break  (the  day-break,  dsbbam, 
belonging  to  the  preceding  day,  the  following  dawn  belongs  to 
the  fourth  day).  On  the  state  of  the  soul  during  the  first  three 
days-and-nights,  or  sadis,  see  Yt.  XXII,  and  above,  pp.  218-220. 

*  See  above,  p.  89,  note  i ;  p.  196,  note  3. 

*  See  Yt.  XII. 

’  See  Yt  XV,  and  above,  p.  52,  note  3.  The  Good  Va6  or  Vfii 
is  the  Good  destiny,  that  takes  the  soul  to  Paradise. 

*  See  Yt  XVIII.  •  See  Yt  X.  '•  See  Yt.  XIII. 

’*  See  above,  p.  219,  note  i.  “  See  above,  p.  220,  note  i. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


.^74 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


11.  And  introduce  it  to  Auhrmazd  and  the  Amsha- 
spands ! 

12.  Usehwtadf  VohO-Mand  ha^a  gS.tv6  zaranyd- 
keretd  (‘Up  rises  Voh<i-Man6  from  his  golden 
throne  *  ’). 

13.  He  will  take  the  blessed  one  by  the  hand, 

14.  And  make  him  rejoice  as  much  as  does  the 
man  who  rejoices  most  when  on  the  pinnacle  of 
nobility  and  glory. 

15.  And  the  Fravashis  of  the  righteous  will  bring 
to  the  soul  of  the  blessed  those  blessed  aliments 
that  are  made  at  the  time  of  Maidyd-zarm  * : 

16.  Af&arethanSm  h^  beretSm  zaremay^h6  rao- 
ghnah^  (‘  Let  them  bring  unto  him  the  butter  of 
Maidhydi-zaremaya  ® !  ’). 

Aliments  of  waters,  wine,  sugar,  and  honey  t 

17.  Yatha  v4  erezatd  paiti,  yatha  v4  zaranyd  paiti, 
yatha  v4  k4^i^f  gaonanSm  (‘  Of  silver,  or  gold,  or  any 
other  kind  *  ’). 

The  Amshaspand  Vahman  will  give  to  the  soul 
of  the  blessed  one  clothes  embroidered  with  gold 
and  a  golden  throne  ; 

18.  And  the  demon  Ahriman  will  be  powerless 
to  inflict  any  harm  or  damage  on  the  soul  of  the 
blessed  one. 

1 9.  Pas^a  parairistlm  da^va  drvawtd  du.s:daunghd 
baodhem  avatha  fraterese«ti,  yatha  ma^shi  vehrka- 
vaiti  vehrk4d?  ha^a  frateresaiti  (‘The  wicked  evil- 


*  Vd.  XIX,  31.  *  See  Yt.  XXII,  p.  318,  note  i. 

*  Yt.  XXII,  18. 

*  This  refers  to  the  following  details :  silver,  gold,  &c.  are  the 
materials  of  which  the  throne  is  made. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Vlir.  AOGEMAIDfe. 


375 


doing  Daevas  tremble  at  his  perfume  after  death,  as 
doth  a  sheep  on  which  a  wolf  is  pouncing  ^  ’). 

As  the  sheep,  on  which  the  wolf  is  pouncing, 
tremble  at  the  odour  of  the  wolf,  so  these  Drupes 
tremble  at  the  perfume  of  the  blessed  one. 

20.  For  whosoever  has  been  born  and  whosoever 
shall  be  born  must  act  in  such  a  way  that,  when  the 
moment  comes  to  leave  this  world,  he  may  have 
Paradise  as  his  portion  and  Gardthm&n  as  his 
reward. 

21.  There  is  a  passage  in  which  H6rmazd  said  to 
Zarathu.ftra :  ‘  I  created,  O  Spitama  Zarathu.rtra ! 
good  renown  and  salvation  of  the  soul ;  ’ 

22.  (That  is  to  say,  good  renown  in  this  world 
and  salvation  of  the  soul  in  the  next  *). 

And  in  case  of  doubt  we  must  consider  as  being 
saved®, 

23.  Him  who,  for  all  we  have  seen  and  known, 
has  been  a  believer  in  body  and  soul,  and  has 
rejoiced  H6rmazd  and  afflicted  Ahriman, 

24.  And  whoever  has  had  this  for  his  main 
object,  or  has  been  the  source  of  this  benefit,  that 
from  him  should  flow  prosperity  and  joy,  and  from 
him  should  flow  no  harm  and  no  pain. 

And  there  is  a  passage  in  which  the  soul  says  to 
the  body  * : 

25.  Aaaf  mSm  tanv6  ithy^^nguhaiti  manya  ma* 
nangha  humatem. 


*  Vd.  XIX,  33,  and  notes  4,  5. 

*  See  above,  p.  253,  §  4,  note  6- 

*  Asho,  ‘holy,  blessed,  saved;'  in  opposition  to  drva»t, 
‘  wicked,  damned.’ 

*  Supplied  from  the  Pahlavi  transcription. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


376  FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 

O  thou,  my  perishable  body,  think  good  thoughts 
with  thjr  mind ! 

26.  Aad  mSm  tanv6  ithy^anguhaiti  hizva  mrhidhi 
hiikhtem. 

O  thou,  my  perishable  body,  speak  good  words 
with  thv  tongue ! 

27.  Aat/  mSm  tanv6  ithy^anguhaiti  zastaSibya 
vareza  hvareytem  shyaothanem. 

O  thou,  my  perishable  body,  do  good  deeds  with 
thy  hands ! 

28.  M4  mSm  tanv6  ithy^^anguhaiti  angrfii  vaird 
fraspaydw  yim  khrva«tem  &ithiva«tem,  yim  da^vim 
afraderesava«tem  frikerewtaaf  angrd  mainyu^  p6uru- 
mahrkd  bunem  angh^u^  temanghah^  yad  ereghatd 
daoaanghah^. 

O  thou,  my  perishable  body,  do  not  throw  me 
down  into  the  Var  of  Angra  Mainyu terrible, 
dreadful,  (frightful),  dark,  undiscemible  (for  the 
darkness  there  is  so  dense  that  it  can  be  grasped 
with  the  hand  *),  which  Gand  Mainyu  fabricated  at 
the  bottom  of  the  dark  world  of  endless  hell. 

29.  There  is  a  passage  in  which  Hdrmazd  says  to 
Zarathu5tra : 

30.  I  created,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^tra !  the  stars, 
the  moon,  the  sun,  and  the  red  burning  fire,  the 
dogs,  the  birds,  and  the  five  kinds  of  animals  ® ;  but, 
better  and  greater  than  all,  I  created  the  righteous 
man  who  has  truly  received  from  me  the  Praise  of 
Asha  *  in  the  good  Religion. 

31.  But  without  any  reason  men  adhere  to  that 


•  Hell.  *  See  above,  p.  66,  note  5.  Cf.  Ar<a  Vtrif  XVIII. 
’  See  Yt.  XIII,  10  and  note. 

*  The  recitation  of  the  Asbem  Vobil,  the  epitome  of  reUgion. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Vni.  AOGEMAIDi. 


377 


evil  guide,  Passion,  created  by  the  demons ;  so  that 
they  do  not  think  of  Fate, 

32.  And  by  the  bent  of  their  nature  they  forget 
death. 

33-  They  do  not  keep  in  mind  the  working  of 
Time  and  the  transientness  of  the  body, 

34.  They  ever  go  wandering  about  on  the  way  of 
desire, 

35.  They  are  tossed  in  doubt  by  evil  Passion, 

36.  They  clothe  themselves  with  spite,  in  the 
course  of  strife,  for  the  sake  of  vanishing  goods ; 

37.  They  are  intoxicated  with  pride  in  their 
youth, 

38.  And  shall  be  full  of  regrets  at  the  end  of 
their  time. 

39.  For  if  one  say :  ‘  On  this  earth  of  the  seven 
Kar^vares  there  is  somebody  going  to  die,’  every¬ 
body  ought  to  think :  ‘  Perhaps  it  is  I,’ 

40.  Had  he  sense  enough  to  know  that  every 
creature  that  has  been  created  and  has  had  existence 
shall  die,  and  that  the  unseen,  deceiving  Astivihid ' 
comes  for  every  one. 

41.  Hamas^iaf*  pard  avanghd  ise«t6  mashyA- 
kaunghd  (‘  All  men  wish  for  supplies  ’). 

(Now)  when  a  man  sets  out  on  a  journey,  he  takes 
provisions  with  him ; 

42.  If  it  be  for  one  day’s  march,  he  takes  provi¬ 
sions  for  two  days ; 

43.  If  it  be  for  two  days’  march,  he  takes  provi¬ 
sions  for  three ; 


*  Astivihdd,  Asti-vahSt,  Astd-vidh6tu ;  see  Vd.  V,  8  and  note  2. 

*  From  the  Pahlavi  transcription.  The  printed  edition  has 
ameshaiit/. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


378 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


44.  If  it  be  for  ten  days’  march,  he  takes  provisions 
for  fifteen ; 

45.  And  he  thinks  that  he  will  come  back  in 
health  to  his  well-beloved  friends,  parents,  and 
brethren. 

46.  How  then  is  it  that  men  take  no  provisions 
for  that  unavoidable  journey, 

47.  On  which  one  must  go  once  for  all,  for  all 
eternity  ? 

48.  A'im  aoshanghau  aoshanguhaiti  Sstem  isaiti 
tanva,  iim  uruna,  ^im  frazai»ti,  ^im  v4  ga^thdhvd 
mahrkathem 

How  is  it  that  a  mortal  can  wish  for  another 
mortal  the  annihilation  of  his  body  (that  his  body 
should  be  no  more '),  or  of  his  soul  (that  his  soul 
should  be  damned  *),  or  death  for  his  children  or  for 
his  cattle  (that  his  cattle  should  perish  ^),  if  he  has 
sense  enough  to  know  that  he  himself  is  mortal  ? 

49.  Andmaresdikd  zl  asti  hav4i  maresdikii. 

For  he  is  pitiless  to  himself  (he  does  not  pity 
himself  ’)  and  none  of  the  others  shall  pity  him. 

50.  Blind  are  all  those  who,  on  this  earth,  do  not 
follow  the  religion,  do  not  benefit  the  living,  and  do 
not  commemorate  the  dead. 

51.  Oiuim  ta^  v4  .  .  .  .  ayare  ^asaiti,  Spitama 
Zarathujtra !  a^va  v4  khshapa  (‘  For  there  comes 
a  day,  O  Spitama  Zarathurtra !  or  a  night  ’). 

There  comes  a  day,  O  Spitama  Zarathu^ra !  or 
a  night,  when  the  master  leaves  the  cattle,  or  the 
cattle  leave  the  master,  or  the  soul  leaves  that  body 
full  of  desires ; 

52.  But  his  virtue,  which  is  of  all  existences  the 


‘  A  gloss. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VIII.  AOGEMAIDfe. 


379 


greatest,  the  best,  the  finest,  never  parts  from 
a  man. 

53.  Ayar^  dmithniiti  tanuj  frayadr^  aySn 

bavaiti  hubadhrd  hupaiti.3ii&td  adha  aparS  a}cin 
du^dthrem  (‘  Every  day  the  living  man  ought  to 
think  that  in  the  forenoon  he  is  happy  and  in  credit ; 
in  the  afternoon  disgrace  may  come  ’). 

Every  day  every  living  body  ought  to  think  (for 
that  may  happen  any  day) :  in  the  forenoon  I  am 
happy,  rich,  in  credit  (that  is  to  say,  well  treated  by 
the  king) ; 

54.  And  every  day  other  people  eagerly  wish  him 
evil ;  that  he  should  be  torn  away  from  his  palace, 
that  he  should  have  his  head  cut  off  and  his  wealth 
seized  upon.  Every  day  the  living  body  is  thrown 
for  food  to  the  birds  that  fly  in  the  empty  sky. 

55.  This  is  the  way  of  things  on  this  earth. 

56.  D^jddtayaiu  fradrta  drva«t6  duadaunghd 
(‘It  is  ignorance  that  ruins  most  people,  those  ill- 
informed  ’). 

It  is  ignorance*  that  ruins  most  people,  those 
ill-informed;  both  amongst  those  who  have  died, 
and  those  who  shall  die. 

57.  Kdid  mxdiod  Ahurd  Mazdau  frikerestd  Ast6- 
vldhdtui'  zxTXgan  (read  zivi^au  ?)  apairiay6  (‘  Ahura 
Mazda  said :  Ast6vldh6tu^  has  been  created  a 
destroyer  of  the  living  and  one  whom  none 
escape’). 

Hdrmazd  said:  Astivihid  has  been  created  for 
the  destruction  of  mortals  (when  the  mortals  see 
him,  they  tremble  so  much  that  they  are  unable  to 


’  Corrected  from  hupaitianitd  (translated  pad!  raft). 
*  Ignorance  of  their  mortal  destiny. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


38o 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


Struggle  with  the  Dru^)  and  no  one  escapes  him  (as 
said  before) 

58.  Y ahmafl^  ha>fei  na^iw  bu«^yS</ aoshanguhatSm 
mashydnim  (‘  From  whom  not  one  of  mortal  men 
can  escape  ’). 

From  whom  not  one  of  mortal  men  can  escape ; 
no  one  has  escaped  to  this  day,  and  no  one  will 
escape  hereafter. 

59.  N6i<)^  a^thrapatayd,  Vi6\d  daNhupatayd,  ntid 
s4s^i5td:u,  ntid  asnrutau  (‘  Neither  a^thrapaitis,  nor 
chiefs  of  countries,  neither  well-doers,  nor  evil¬ 
doers  ’). 

Neither  the  herbed  (the  Mobedin  Mobed*),  nor 
the  chief  of  the  country  (the  King  of  kings*),  neither 
well-doers,  nor  evil-doers. 

60.  Ndidf  usySstaid,  ndid  niyS  (‘  Neither  those  who 
run  up,  nor  those  who  go  down  ’). 

Neither  those  who  run  up  (those  who  fly  in  the 
empty  sky),  like  Kahds  * ;  with  all  his  strength  and 
kingly  glory,  he  could  not  escape  from  Astivihcld. 

61.  Nor  those  who  go  down  deep  (who  hide 
themselves  under  the  earth),  like  AfrSsy4b  the  Turk, 
who  made  himself  an  iron  palace  under  the  earth, 
a  thousand  times  the  height  of  a  man,  with  a  hundred 
columns  ® ; 

62.  In  that  palace  he  made  the  stars,  the  moon, 
and  the  sun  go  round,  making  the  light  of  day. 

63.  In  that  palace  he  did  everything  at  his 
pleasure, 

64.  And  he  lived  the  happiest  life. 


‘  Cf.  §  40.  *  The  chief  of  the  religion,  the  high-priest. 

’  The  Sbihanshdh.  *  Cf.  above,  p.  262,  note  7. 

•  See  Yt,  V,  41  and  notes  i,  2. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VIII.  AOGEMAIDft. 


381 

65.  With  all  his  strength  and  witchcraft,  he  could 
not  escape  from  Astivih&d. 

66.  Na^dha  frakanem  aNhau  zem6  yaaf  pathanayau 
skarenayau  dhra^pS-rayau. 

Nor  he  who  dug  this  wide,  round  earth,  with 
extremities  that  lie  afar,  like  Dahik, 

67.  Who  went  from  the  East  to  the  West, 
searching  for  immortality  and  did  not  find  it 

68.  With  all  his  strength  and  power,  he  could  not 
escape  from  Astivihid. 

69.  Any6  angh^u^  frashd-iarethrau  (‘  Except  the 
producers  of  the  world  of  resurrection  *  ’). 

Thus  until  the  author  of  the  resurrection,  Sao- 
shy6s  ® :  until  Saoshyds  comes,  no  one  shall  escape 
from  Astivihid. 

70.  To  every  one  comes  the  unseen,  deceiving 
Astivih4d, 

71.  Who  accepts  neither  compliments,  nor  bribe, 

72.  Who  is  no  respecter  of  persons, 

73.  And  ruthlessly  makes  men  perish. 

74.  And  this  glorious  One  ®  must  go  the  way  he 
never  went, 

75.  See  what  he  never  saw, 

76.  And  discuss  with  him  whom  no  one  can 
deceive  or  mislead. 

77.  Pairithwd  bavaiti  pa«tau  yim  dfinui'  pditi  fra 
bundd^  ta^i»tij ;  hau  did  a6v6  apairithw6,  yd  vayaoj 
anamaresdikahd ; — 

The  way  may  be  traversed  which  is  barred  by 


*  No  others  will  escape  death; 

*  Thus  shall  it  be  till  the  days  of  Saoshyds  (Saoshya»t ;  Vd. 
XIX,  6,  note  4). 

*  This  King,  this  man  of  power. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


382 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


a  river  springing  from  the  deep;  but  one  way 
cannot  be  traversed,  namely,  the  way  of  the  pitiless 
Va)ru 

78.  Pairithwd  bavaiti  pantau  yim  a^ir  pditi  g«u- 
stav^zu,  aspanghcldhd,  viranghidhd,  viia^,  anama- 
re^dikd ;  haiu  did  a€v6  apairithwd,  yd  vayaor 
anamareadikahd : — 

The  way  may  be  traversed  which  is  barred  by 
a  serpent  as  big  as  an  ox,  horse-devouring,  man- 
devouring,  man-killing,  and  pitiless ;  but  one  way 
cannot  be  traversed,  namely,  the  way  of  the  pitiless 
Vayu. 

79.  Pairithwd  bavaiti  pa«tou  yim  areshd  pditi 
akhshadnd  anamarej^dikd ;  hau  di^  advd  apairithwd, 
yd  vayaoJ  anamare;3rdikahd  : — 

The  way  may  be  traversed  which  is  barred  by 
a  brown  bear,  [with  a  white  forehead,  man-killing, 
and]  pitiless;  but  one  way  cannot  be  traversed, 
namely,  the  way  of  the  pitiless  Vayu. 

80.  Pairithwd  bavaiti  pawtau  yim  mashyd  g^dhd 
paiti  advd^and  anamare^dikd ;  hau  did^  advd  apai¬ 
rithwd,  yd  vayaor  anamare^dikahd ; — The  way  may 
be  traversed  which  is  defended  by  a  highwayman 
who  kills  at  one  stroke,  (who  stops  the  way  and  lets 
no  one  pass  alive) ;  but  one  way  cannot  be  traversed, 
namely,  the  way  of  the  pitiless  Vayu. 

81.  Pairithwd  bavaiti  pawtau  yd  hadnayau  ^akhra- 
vaityau  vydzdayau ;  hau  diid  advd  apairithwd,  yd 
vayaor  anamare^dikahd : — 

The  way  may  be  traversed  which  is  held  by 
a  horde  armed  with  discs,  and  uplifted  spears  (that 
is,  carrying  spears  to  pierce  men) ;  but  one  way 


’  The  way  of  Destiny. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


VIII.  aogemaid£. 


383 


cannot  be  traversed,  namely,  the  way  of  the  pitiless 
Vayu. 

8 1  bis.  Kzd  mnod  Ahurd  Mazdau :  du^khratOm 
apairi  gadthSm  athrdvaya^/  gdthSm 

82.  Yatha  drvau  gaom  isti,  uta  drv<zu  aspem  isti, 
uta  drvau  ma^shinem  yavanghem  isti : — 

The  wicked  acquire  cattle,  the  wicked  acquire 
horses,  the  wicked  acquire  sheep  and  corn ;  but  the 
wicked  tyrant  does  not  acquire  a  store  of  good 
deeds. 

83.  Seek  ye  for  a  store  of  good  deeds,  O  Zara- 
thu^tra,  men  and  women !  for  a  store  of  good  deeds 
is  full  of  salvation,  O  Zarathu,ytra ! 

84.  PSsnu^  gav6,  pSsnu^  aspa,  pSsnuj'  erezatem 
zaranim,  pSsnu.f  nar6  ^iry6  takhmd : — 

(For)  the  ox  turns  to  dust,  the  horse  turns  to  dust, 
silver  and  gold  turn  to  dust,  the  valiant  strong  man 
turns  to  dust ;  [the  bodies  of  all  men  mingle  with 
the  dust  What  do  not  mingle  with  the  dust  are 
the  Ashem-voh6  which  a  man  recites  in  this  world 
and  his  almsgiving  to  the  holy  and  righteous]  *. 

85.  For  if  there  were  or  could  be  any  escape 
from  death,  the  first  of  the  world,  Gaydmard,  king 
of  the  Mountain  ®,  [would  have  escaped]. 


*  This  incomplete  quotation  is  found  only  in  the  Pahlavi  trans- 
scription,  with  a  corrupt  paraphrase  as  follows : — ‘  Hormazd  said, 
“  The  man  without  intelligence  (that  is,  with  a  bad  intelligence) 
.  .  .  who  has  not  sung  the  Gdthas  (that  is,  who  has  not  performed 
the  sacrifice ;  cf.  Nirang.  §  41)  has  no  good  renown  on  this  earth 
nor  bliss  in  heaven  (cf.  §§21,  22)  .  .  ." ' 

*  Cf.  Ar<a  VMfCI,  20. 

’  Gar-sh&h,  king  of  Mount  Damivand  (AlbfrUnf,  Chronology, 
p.  28),  or  Gib&l,  the  mountainous  part  of  Media.  Later  chronicles 
corrupted  Gar-shah  into  Gil-shih,  king  of  clay,  which  was  inter¬ 
preted  as  king  of  the  earth. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


384 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


86.  Who  for  three  thousand  years  kept  the  world 
free  from  death  and  old  age,  from  hunger,  thirst, 
and  evil  * ; 

87.  Yet,  when  death  came  over  him,  he  delivered 
up  his  body  and  could  not  struggle  with  death. 

88.  Or  there  was  H6shang,  the  P6shdddian, 

89.  Who  destroyed  two-thirds  of  all  the  evil 
creatures  of  Ahriman*; 

90.  Yet,  when  death  came  over  him,  he  delivered 
up  his  body  and  could  not  struggle  with  death. 

91.  Or  there  was  Tahmhraf,  the  well-armed,  the 
son  of  Vivanghat, 

92.  Who  made  the  Demon  of  demons,  Gana 
Mainy6,  his  steed®,  and  extorted  from  him  the  seven 
kinds  of  writing  * ; 

93.  Yet,  when  death  came  over  him,  he  delivered 
up  his  body  and  could  not  struggle  with  death. 

94.  Or  there  was  6^im,  the  Sh^d,  the  good  shep¬ 
herd,  the  son  of  Vivanghat;  (he  was  Sh6d,  that  is  to 
say,  shining ;  he  was  a  good  shepherd,  that  is  to  say. 


'  Bundahif  XXXIV,  i,  2.  »  See  Yt.  V,  22,  23. 

’  See  Yt.  XV,  11-13.  In  the  Sanskrit  translation  this  is  inter¬ 
preted  as  an  allegory ;  ‘Tahmfiraf  rode  on  Ahriman ;  that  means 
that  he  subdued  the  bad  Ahriman  in  himself.’  Cf.  Mirkhond,  in 
the  History  of  the  Early  Kings  of  Persia,  tr.  by  Shea,  p.  98. 

*  According  to  Firdausi,  Tahmuras  obliged  the  D^vs  he  had 
conquered  to  teach  him  some  thirty  kinds  of  writing,  the  Rflmt, 
the  TSzt,  the  Pdrst,  the  Sogdht,  the  Chinese,  the  Pahlavi,  &c. 
According  to  the  Mlndkhard  (XXVII,  23)  he  brought  to  light  the 
seven  kinds  of  writing  that  the  demon  kept  hidden.  Hence  is 
derived  the  legend  in  Albtrftnt,  p.  28,  that  when  Tahmuras  was 
warned  about  the  Deluge,  'he  ordered  all  scientific  books  to  be 
preserved  for  posterity,  and  to  be  buried  in  the  least  exposed 
place ;  ’  in  favour  of  which  report,  Albtrfini  mentions  the  discoveiy 
of  many  loads  of  unintelligible  bark-manuscripts  in  buildings  under 
ground,  at  Ispahan,  in  his  own  time. 


Digitized  by  ^ooQle 


VIll.  AOGEMAIDi. 


385 


he  kept  in  good  condition  troops  of  m6n  and  herds 
of  animals)  ^ ; 

95.  Who,  for  616  years,  6  months  and  13  days*, 
kept  this  world  free  from  death  and  old  age,  and 
kept  away  greed  and  need  from  the  creation  of 
Hdrmazd ; 

96.  Yet,  when  death  came  over  him,  he  delivered 
up  his  body  and  could  not  struggle  with  death. 

97.  Or  there  was  Dahik  ®,  he  of  the  evil  religion, 
who  kept  the  world  under  his  tyranny  during  a  tiiou- 
sand  years,  less  one  day, 

98.  And  introduced  into  the  world  many  ways  of 
witchcraft  and  evil-doing ; 

99.  Yet,  when  death  came  over  him,  he  delivered 
up  his  body  and  could  not  struggle  with  death. 

100.  Or  there  was  FrSdAn,  the  Athwyan, 

10 1.  Who  smote  and  bound  A^i  Dahdk,  that  great 
evil-doer  * ;  he  put  in  chains  the  D6vs  of  Mizanda- 
r4n®,  and  introduced  into  the  world  a  number  of 
talismans  ” ; 

102.  Yet,  when  death  came  over  him,  he  delivered 
up  his  body  and  could  not  struggle  with  death. 

103.  I  am  grateful  to  the  Lord  H6rmazd. 

104.  I  think  thus  in  a  grateful  spirit :  the  beast 
of  burden  does  not  throw  off  its  burden :  fate  has 
come,  it  cannot  be  thrown  away. 


*  See  above,  p.  ii,  note  2.  On  G^im  or  Yima,  see  Farg.  II, 
and  Yt.  V,  45,  26 ;  XV,  15-17. 

*  The  Pahlavi  transcription  and  Mtndkhard  XXVII,  35,  have 
sixteen  days. 

*  Asi  I^&ka,  see  Yt.  V,  39-31;  XV,  19-31. 

*  See  Yt  V,  33-35. 

'  See  above,  p.  9,  note  4;  p.  141,  note  i. 

*  See  above,  p.  346. 

[4]  C  C 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


386 


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  NASKS. 


105.  May  the  blessed  one  have  Paradise  as  .  his 
portion ! 

106.  As  to  the  righteous  man  who  has  come  to 
this  banquet  \  who  has  shared  this  banquet,  may  he 
for  each  step  *  get  nearer  to  the  bright  Paradise,  the 
all-happy  Gardthmdn,  by  twelve  hundred  steps  I 

107.  When  he  is  approaching  it,  may  his  merits 
increase ! 

108.  When  he  is  leaving  it,  may  his  sin  be 
uprooted ! 

109.  May  righteousness  and  goodness  prevail®! 

110.  May  his  soul  enter  the  Gar6thm4n  I 

111.  I  am  one  of  the  righteous®. 

Atha  gzmy&d ; — May  it  happen  according  to  this 
wish  of  mine  ®  I 

HumatanSm  *.  All  the  good  thoughts,  good  words, 
and  good  deeds,  done  or  to  be  done,  here  or  else¬ 
where,  we  seize  upon  and  we  transmit  them  that 
we  may  be  in  the  number  of  the  righteous. 


*  To  this  myazd,  or  religious  banquet  The  following  formulas 
are  those  found  at  the  end  of  the  Afrin  GShSnbSr. 

*  For  each  of  his  steps  to  this  banquet. 

'  May  the  good  prevail  over  the  evil  in  his  account,  so  that  he 
may  be  saved  (see  above,  p.  270). 

*  Ashd ;  I  am  one  of  &e  blessed,  I  am  saved. 

»  Yasna  LXVIII,  19.  •  Yasna  LXVIII,  20  {XXXV,  2). 

*  We  teach  them ;  the  good  deeds  of  our  disciples  are  accounted 
ours  (Dlnkart  IX,  57,  i). 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Translations 
OF  THE  Sacred  Books  of  the  East. 


transliteration  of  oriental  alphabets  387 


c  c  2 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


388  TRANSLITERATION  OF  ORIENTAL  ALPHABETS 


I 

1 

X 

•  •  •  ••  • 

.  E  ^  I*  •  •  -.B  D  •-  M  • 

••••  •  •  ••  • 

i 

Penian. 

^  •  •*b  *'^  D  •  0  '*  • -»  3->  ^  ‘A  -3  V’S 

1 

•  •  •  •  rs . 

init.  •  •  • 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

•  •  •  •  •  •  « 

1 

li  ’ 

i 

3 

1 

1 

s 

•  *  •  •  •  •  • 

•  ••••  **s 

•  #•••  ••!« 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

«  a 

•  Q 

•  *  j  •  S  S 

:  :  : .  : «  - 

T 

♦  •  •  ♦ 

•  *$*3  ^  •  •  • 

►.  •  • 

•  • 

•  • 

] 

** 

•  •••  •  •  •••.• 

►*  ••••  ••••«.. 

•  •••  •  •  ••••• 

CONSONANTS 

A 

•  ••••  ••• 

•  ••••  ••• 

‘  ••II  •  •  • 

•  •*.•3  3  •  •  • 

•  *  •  "S  3  .  '  •  • 

•  ••’••goa*** 

•  **Ss^**«t 

•  !.•§  i-3  1  :  || 

1  0 .  j  s 

•1  .1  -i  s 

1  .Ss*s  Css’S 

£  S:  ^  s 

-00  eo^aocfi 

^  *-4^C9C9  09C9C9Cq 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1 1 

.  .1 
*1 

00  a 
C9  C9  es 

••••••♦HC* 

•  «hCQ  •  •  •gB0O 

•  :§  ^  •  •  •  i  I 

•  *3  ?  -H  CSI  •  I  •£ 

1  a  a  J  a  s 

i  1  *  *  . 

3  .5  *  *  *  * 

^  S' 

o<-4C9eo^ioco»^ 

icoeoeoeoeococoeo 

Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


FOR  THE  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST,  389 


•  •  •  •  •  •  . 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

O  ••• 

•  •  •  •  •  • 

dcinn  •  Q  •  •  .«->  •  . 

•  •  •  •  •  • 

•  m  •  •  • 

•  •  ••  ***n  •• 

•  •  ••  ••  •• 

•  •  •  •  •  • 

«A  ^  •  •  • 

•  •  •  •  •  • 

^  •  C-  •  •  *J  •  • 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

:  It,  :  :  :o 

•  •  •  •  CN  •  *  ^ 

5)  1  ^  i  i 

.  1  .  .  .  .  ^  . 

: 

•  •  •  •  • 

*»  In  :  :  ^  : 

•  •  •  •  • 

10  10  M  III  ^  •  -  IT 

•  • 

Inr  1  ’•  If '9  if 

•  •  •  • 

. sa  • 

•  ••••••••A 

^  •  •  • 

•  •••  #•••• 

•  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  *  S 

•  •••  ••••• 

•5  -o 


a  fc  i 


:  I  8 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

• 

:  1 1 

• 

•  • 

:  1 M 

•B  *0 

j 

I’i 

a 

1 

'H. 

1  • 

08 

I 

s  ^ 

• 

!  l3 

a 

3  .1 

5  m 

“  ‘;1  * 
CO* 

^  10  CO 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


390 


TRANSLITERATION  OF  ORIENTAL  ALPHABETS, 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


Cpforb 

PRINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 

Vk  HORACB  KAKT.  PRINTBB  TO  THB  UNIVBRSITY 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


Digitized  by 


Sacred  Books  of  the  East 

TRANSLATED  BY 

VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 

AND  EDITED  BY 

F.  MAX  MULLER. 

This  Series  is  published  with  the  sanction  and  co-operation  of  the  Secretary  of 
State  for  India  in  Council,  • 


BS»0»T  pxWMBtod  t«  tk«  AOASiMIB  DM  I>SOBlD«IO>D,  (Uy  IX, 
1883,  hf  K.  BBnS*  DBVAD. 

*M.  Renan  pr^nte  trois  nonveanx  une  seconde,  dont  TinUr^t  historique  et 
Yolnmes  de  la  grande  collection  des  *  reltgienx  ne  sera  pas  moindre.  M.  Max 
saci^s  de  TOrient”  (Sacred  Muller  a  sn  se  procurer  U  collaboration 
Books  of  the  East),  qne  dirige  k  Oxford,  des  savons  les  pins  ^minens  d^Europe  et 
avec  one  si  vaste  tradition  et  une  critique  d’Asie.  L'Universit^  d’Oxford,  one  cette 
si  s^,  le  savant  associ^  de  TAcad^mie  grnnde  publication  honore  au  plus  haut 
des  Inscriptions,  M.  Max  Muller.  ...  La  degr^,  doit  tenir  k  continuer  dans  les  plus 

premiere  ^rie  de  ce  beau  recueil,  com-  larges  proportions  une  oeuvre  aussi  philo- 

po8<^e  de  24  volumes,  est  presoue  achev^.  sophiquement  con9ue  que  savamment 

M.  Max  MUller  sc  propose  d’cn  publier  ex^cut^* 

mXTMAOT  ttom  the  qVAMTMRUY  SBTXSW. 

*  We  rejoice  to  notice  that  a  second  great  edition  of  the  Rig-Veda,  can  corn- 

series  of  these  translations  has  been  an-  pare  in  importance  or  in  usefulness  with 
nounced  and  has  actually  begun  to  appear,  this  English  translation  of  the  Sacred 
The  stones,  at  least,  out  of  which  a  stately  Books  of  the  East,  which  has  been  devised 
edifice  may  hereafter  arise,  are  here  being  by  bis  foresight,  successfully  brought  so 
brought  together.  Prof.  Max  Muller  has  far  by  his  persuasive  and  organising 
deserved  well  of  scientific  history.  Not  power,  and  will,  we  trust,  by  the  assist- 
a  few  minds  owe  to  his  enticing  words  ance  of  the  distinguished  scholars  he  has 

their  first  attraction  to  this  branch  of  ^thered  round  him,  be  carried  in  due 

study.  But  no  work  of  his,  not  even  the  time  to  a  happy  completion.' 

VrofoMor  B.  BABDT,  iMJkguxed  Xiaotiura  la  tha  UnlTaraitj  of  FralVari^,  X88Y. 

‘Die  allgemeine  vergleichende  Reli-  intemationalen  Orientalistencongress  in 
gionswissenschaft  datirt  von  jenem  gross-  London  der  Grundstein  gel^t  worden 
artigen,  in  seiner  Art  einzig  dastehenden  war,  die  Obersetzung  derheiligen  Bucher 
Untem^men,  zu  welchem  auf  Anregung  des  Ostens'  {the  Sacred  Books  of  the 
Max  Mullers  im  Jahre  1874  auf  dem  East). 

Tha  Hon.  ABBBBT  B.  O.  OABBIBO,  ‘Worda  on  Bziatlng  Ballglona.* 

*  The  recent  publication  of  the  **  Sacred  a  great  event  in  the  annals  of  theological 
Books  of  the  East*’  in  English  is  surely  literature.’ 


O)cfore> 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
LONDON:  HENRY  FROWDE 

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


2 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


FIRST  SERIES. 

VoL.  I.  The  Upanishads. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Part  I.  The  ^iWndogya- 
upanishad,  The  Talavakdra-upanishad,  The  Aitareya-drsuiyaka, 
The  Kaushttjdci-brdhma«a-upanishad,  and  The  VS^asaneyi- 
sa/»hiti-upani^ad.  8vo,  cloth,  lo^.  6^. 

The  Upanishads  contain  the  philosophy  of  the  Veda,  Th^  have 
become  the  foundation  of  the  later  Veddnta  doctrines^  and  indirectly 
of  Buddhism,  Schopenhauer^  speaking  of  the  Upanishads^  says : 

^  In  the  whole  world  there  is  no  study  so  beneficial  and  so  elevating 
as  that  of  the  Upanishads,  It  has  been  the  solace  of  my  Itfe,  it  will 
be  the  solace  of  my  death! 

[Sec  also  Vol.  XV.] 

VOL.  II.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas, 

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  VSsishMa, 
and  Baudh&yana.  Translated  by  Georg  BOhler.  Part  1. 
Apastamba  and  Gautama.  8vo,  cloth,  los,  6d, 

The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas  contain  the  original  treatises  on 
which  the  Laws  of  Manu  and  other  lawgivers  were  founded, 

[See  also  Vol.  XIV.] 

Vol.  III.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge. 
Part  I.  The  Shft  King,  The  Religious  Portions  of  the  Shih 
King,  and  The  Hsido  ]^ng.  8vo,  cloth,  i2s,  6d. 

Confucius  was  a  collector  of  ancient  traditions,  not  the  founder  of 
a  new  religion.  As  he  lived  in  the  sixth  and  fifth  centuries  B,  C, 
his  works  are  of  unique  interest  for  the  study  of  Ethology, 

[See  also  Vols.  XVI,  XXVII,  XXVIII,  XXXIX,  and  XL.] 

Vol.  IV.  The  Zend-Avesta. 

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Part  1.  The  Vendfd&d. 
8vo,  cloth,  los,  6d, 

The  Zend-Avesta  contains  the  relics  of  what  was  the  religion  of 
Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Xerxes,  and,  but  for  the  battle  of  Marathon, 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MULLER. 


3 


might  have  became  the  religion  of  Europe.  It  forms  to  the  present 
day  the  sacred  hook  of  the  Parsis,  the  so-called  fire-worshippers. 
Two  more  volumes  will  complete  the  translation  of  all  that  is  left  us 
of  Zoroaster^ s  religion. 

[See  also  Vols.  XXIII  and  XXXL] 

VoL.  V.  Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  I.  The  Bundahix,  Bahman 
Yart,  and  Shiyast  Id-shdyast.  8vo,  cloth,  12^.  6^. 

The  Pahlavi  Texts  comprise  the  theological  literature  of  the  revived 
of  Zoroaster  s  religion^  beginning  with  the  Sassanian  dynasty.  They 
are  important  for  a  study  of  Gnosticism. 

VoLs.  VI  AND  IX.  The  Qur  4n. 

Parts  I  and  11.  Translated  by  £.  H.  Palmer.  8vo,  cloth,  21s. 

This  translation^  carried  out  according  to  his  own  peculiar  views 
of  the  origin  of  the  QuYdn^  was  the  last  great  work  of  E.  H.  Palmer^ 
before  he  was  murdered  in  Egypt. 

VoL.  VII.  The  Institutes  of  Vishnu. 

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

A  collection  of  legal  aphorisms^  closely  connected  with  one  of  the 
oldest  Vedic  schools,  the  Ka/>^as,  but  considerably  added  to  in  later 
time.  Of  importance  for  a  critical  study  of  the  Laws  of  Manu. 

VoL.  Vin.  The  Bhagavadgltd,with  The  Sanatsu^tlya, 
and  The  AnugltA. 

Translated  by  KAsHiNiTH  Trimbak  Telang.  8vo,  cloth, 
los.  6d. 

The  earliest  philosophical  and  religious  poem  of  India.  It  has  been 
paraphrased  in  Arnold's  ^ Song  Celestial! 

VoL.  X.  The  Dhammapada, 

Translated  from  PdU  by  F.  Max  Muller  ;  and 

The  Sutta-Nipita, 

Translated  from  Pdli  by  V.  Fausb^ll  ;  being  Canonical  Books 
of  the  Buddhists.  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

The  Dhammapada  contains  the  quintessence  of  Buddhtst  moralify. 
The  Sutta-Nipdta  gives  the  authentic  teaching  of  Buddha  on  some 
of  the fundamental  principles  of  religion. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


4 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


VOL.  XI.  Buddhist  Suttas. 

Translated  from  Pdli  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids,  i.  The  Mah4- 
parinibbdna  Suttanta ;  2.  The  Dhamma-^kka-ppavattana 

Sutta.  3.  The  Tevi^^a  Suttanta;  4.  The  Akahkheyya  Sutta ; 
5.  The  A!etokhila  Sutta;  6.  The  Mahi-sudassana  Suttanta; 
7.  The  Sabbdsava  Sutta.  8vo,  cloth,  lox.  6d. 

A  colleciion  of  the  most  important  religious^  morale  and  philosophical 
discourses  tcdun  from  the  sacred  canon  of  the  BiMhists, 

VOL.  XII.  The  .Satapatha-Brfihmawa,  according  to  the 
Text  of  the  Mddhyandina  School. 

Translated  by  Julius  Eggkling.  Part  I.  Books  I  and  11. 
8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d. 

A  minute  account  of  the  sacrificial  ceremonies  of  the  Vedic  age. 
It  contains  the  earliest  account  of  the  Deluge  in  India* 

[See  also  Vols.  XXVI,  XLL] 

VoL.  XIIL  Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pdli  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  I.  The  Pitimokkha.  The  Mahdvagga,  I-IV. 
8  VO,  cloth,  I  ox.  6</. 

The  Vinaya  Texts  give  for  the  first  time  a  translation  of  the  moral 
code  of  the  Buddhist  religion  as  settled  in  the  third  century  B.  C, 
[See  also  VoU.  XVII  and  XX.] 

VOL.  XIV.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas, 

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  V&sish/>^ 
and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  Part  II. 
VdsishMa  and  Baudhdyana.  8vo,  cloth,  lor.  6^/. 

VOL.  XV.  The  Upanishads. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  MCller.  Part  II.  The  KaMa-upanishad, 
The  Miww/aka-upanishad,  The  Taittiriyaka-upanisljad,  The 
Br/liaddra«yaka-upanishad,  The  5vetdxvatara-upanishad,  The 
Prax^a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitrdya^-brfihma/ia-upanishad. 
8vo,  cloth,  I  ox.  (id, 

VoL.  XVI.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge. 
Part  II.  The  Yt  King.  8vo,  cloth,  lox.  (id, 

[See  also  Vols.  XXVII,  XXVIII.] 

VoL.  XVII.  Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  II.  The  Mah&vagga,  V-X.  The  Aullavagga, 
I-III.  8vo,  cloth,  I  ox.  M, 


Digitized  by  C^ooQle 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MULLER, 


5^ 


Voi..  XVIII.  Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  II.  The  Dd</istan-t  Dinik 
and  The  Epistles  of  MdnftjKliar.  8vo,  cloth,  1 2 j.  6^/. 

Voi..  XIX.  The  Fo-shohing-tsan-king. 

A  Life  of  Buddha  by  A^rvaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from 
Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by  Dharmaraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from 
Chinese  into  English  by  Samuel  Beal.  8vo,  cloth,  lor.  6</. 

This  life  of  Buddha  was  translated  from  Sanskrit  into  Chinese, 
A.D.  420.  It  contains  many  legends,  some  of  which  show  a  certain 
similarity  to  the  Evangelium  infantiae, 

Veil.  XX.  Viiiaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pdli  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  JII.  The  JTullavagga,  IV-XII.  8vo,  cloth, 
10^.  (id. 

VoL.  XXI.  The  Saddharma-pu«^3!!arlka ;  or.  The  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law. 

Translated  by  H.  Kern.  8vo,  cloth,  i2x.  (d. 

*  The  Lotus  of  the  true  Law,*  a  canonical  hook  of  the  Northern 
Buddhists,  translated  from  Sanskrit.  There  is  a  Chinese  transla¬ 
tion  of  this  book  which  was  finished  as  early  as  the  year  286  A.D. 

VoL.  xxn.  6^aina-Sfrtras. 

Translated  from  Prfikrit  by  Hermann  Jacobi.  Part  I.  The 
A^rdhga-Sdtra  and  The  Kalpa-Siitra.  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

The  religion  of  the  Cainas  was founded  ly  a  contemporary  of  Buddha. 
It  still  counts  numerous  adherents  in  India,  while  there  are  no 
Buddhists  left  in  India  proper. 

[See  Voi.  XLV.] 

VOL.  XXIII,  The  Zend-Avesta. 

Translated  by  James  Darmestetrr.  Part  II.  The  Sfrdzahs, 
Yswts,  and  Nyiyij.  8vo,  cloth,  lor.  (id. 

VoL.  XXIV.  Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  III.  D!nd-i  Maindg- 
Khira^/,  5ikand-ghmdnfk  V^r,  and  Sad  Dar.  8vo,  cloth, 
lor.  (id. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


'6 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


SECOND  SERIES. 

VOL.  XXV.  Manu. 

Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  8vo,  cloth,  21s. 

This  translation  is  founded  on  that  of  Sir  William  Jones,  which  has  been 
carefully  revised  and  corrected  with  the  help  of  seven  native  Commentaries. 
An  Appendix  contains  all  the  quotations  from  Manu  which  are  found  in  the 
Hindu  Law-books,  translatea  for  the  use  of  the  Law  Courts  in  India. 
Another  Appendix  gives  a  S3mopsis  of  ]^rallel  passages  from  the  six 
Dharma-sdtras,  th;  oSier  Smrftis,  the  Upanishads,  the  Mfm&bh&rata,  &c. 

VOL.  XXVI.  The  6atapatha-Brihma;^a. 

Translated  by  Juuus  Eggeling.  Part  II.  Books  III  and  IV. 
8vo,  cloth,  I2S.  6d, 

VOL8.  XXVII  AND  XXVIII.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 
The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Leggs.  Parts 
III  and  IV.  The  lA  or  Collection  of  Treatises  on  the  Rules 
of  Propriety,  or  Ceremonial  Usages.  8vo,  cloth,  25X. 

VOL.  XXIX.  The  Grehya-SAtras,  Rules  of  Vedic 
Domestic  Ceremonies. 

Part  I.  iSShkhdyana,  Ajvaliyana,  P&raskara,  Khidira.  Trans¬ 
lated  by  Hermann  Oldenberg.  8vo,  cloth,  12s,  6d, 

These  rules  of  Domestic  Ceremonies  describe  the  home  life  of  the  ancient 
Aryas  with  a  completeness  and  accuracy  unmatched  in  any  other  literature. 
Some  of  these  rules  have  been  incorporated  in  the  ancient  Law-books. 

VOL.  XXX.  The  Gr^hya-Shtras,  Rules  of  Vedic 
Domestic  Ceremonies. 

Part  II.  Gobhila,  Hira^akwin,  Apastamba.  Translated  by 
Hermann  Oldenberg.  Apastamba,  Ya^^a-paribhishi-sfltras. 
Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d. 

VOL.  XXXI.  The  Zend-Avesta. 

Part  III.  The  Yasna,  Visparad,  Afrfnagin,  Gihs,  and 
Miscellaneous  Fragments.  Translated  by  L.  H.  Mills.  8vo, 
cloth,  12s.  6d. 

VoL.  XXXII.  Vedic  Hymns. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Part  I.  8vo,  cloth,  iSs,  6d. 


Digitized  by  k^ooQle 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MOLLER. 


7 


VOL.  ZXZIII.  The  Minor  Law-books. 

Translated  by  Juuus  Jolly.  Part  I.  Nirada,  Brtbaspati. 
8  VO,  cloth,  I  or.  ftd. 

VoL.  XXXTV.  The  VedAnta-Shtras,  with  the  Com¬ 
mentary  by  iSahkarAiArya.  Part  I. 

Translated  by  G.  Thibaut.  8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d, 

V0L8.  XXXV  AND  XXXVI.  The  Questions  of  King 
Milinda. 

Translated  from  the  Pdli  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids. 
Part  I.  8vo,  cloth,  lor.  6d.  Part  II.  8vo,  cloth,  lar.  6d. 

VoL.  XXXVII.  The  Contents  of  the  Nasks,  as  stated 
in  the  Eighth  and  Ninth  Books  of  the  Dinkard. 

Part  I.  Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  8vo,  cloth,  i^s. 

VOL.  xxxvm.  The  VedAnta-SAtras.  Part  II.  8vo, 

cloth,  I2S.  6d. 

VOLS.  TCTCTCJTC  AND  XL.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 
The  Texts  of  Tdoism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  8vo, 
cloth,  2ir. 

VOL.  XLI.  The  ^atapatha -  BrAhma^fa.  Part  III. 
Translated  by  Julius  ^geling.  8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d, 

VoL.  XLn.  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda. 

Translated  by  M.  Bloomfield.  [/«  preparation^ 

V0L8.  XLIII  AND  XLIV.  The  >Satapatha-BrAhma»a. 
Parts  IV  and  V.  [/«  preparation^ 

VOL.  XLV.  The  CPaina-SAtras. 

Translated  from  Prakrit,  by  Hermann  Jacobi.  Part  II.  The 
Uttaridhyayana  SAtra,  The  .SAtrakrilAnga  SAtra.  8vo,  cloth, 
i2r.  6d. 

VOL.  XLVI.  The  VedAnta-SAtras.  Part  III. 

[In  preparaHon^ 

VOL.  XL VII.  The  Contents  of  the  Nasks.  Part  II. 

[In  preparation^ 

VOL.  XLVIII.  Vedic  Hymns.  Part  II.  [In preparation^ 

VoL.  XLIX.  Buddhist  Mahdyfina  Texts.  Buddha- 
ifearita,  translated  by  E.  B.  Cowell.  SukhSvatt-vy(iha,Vj^jgTa^Me- 
dikS,  &c.,  translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Amitdyur-Dhydna- 
S(itra,  translated  by  J.  Takakusu.  8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


8 


RECENT  ORIENTAL  WORKS. 


Hnectiota  (!^xoniens(a. 

ARYAN  SERIES. 

Buddhist  Texts  from  fapan.  I.  Va^ravf^^ediki  ;  The 
Diamond-Cutter. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.  Small  4to,  3J.  ftd. 

One  of  the  most  famons  metaphysical  treatises  of  the  Mahiyftna  Buddhists. 

Buddhist  Texts  front  Japan.  II.  Sukhivatl-VyQha  : 
Description  of  Sukkdvatt,  ike  Land  of  Bliss. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio.  Wkh 
two  Appendices :  (i)  Text  and  Translation  of  Sanghavarman’s 
Chinese  Version  of  the  Poetical  Portions  of  the  Sukhdvati- 
Vy(iha ;  (2)  Sanskrit  Text  of  the  Smaller  Sukhdvatl-Vyftha. 
Small  4to,  *is.  6d. 

The  editio  princeps  of  the  Sacred  Book  of  one  of  the  largest  and  most  * 
mdaential  sects  of  Buddhism,  numbering  more  than  ten  millions  of  followenT^ 
in  Japan  alone. 

Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.  III.  The  A  ncient  Palm- 
Leaves  containing  the  Pra^»4-PirantitS-Hr*daya- 
SiJtra  and  the  Ush»!sha-Vi|faya-Dhira«l. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio,  M.A, 
With  an  Appendix  by  G.  Buhler,  C.l.E.  With  many  Plates. 
Small  4to,  lOf. 

Contains  facsimiles  of  the  oldest  Sanskrit  MS.  at  present  known. 

Dharma-Sa»/graha,  an  Ancient  Collection  of  Buddhist 
Technical  Terms. 

Prepared  for  publication  by  Kknjiu  Kasawara,  a  Buddhist 
Priest  from  Japan,  and,  after  his  death,  edited  by  F.  Max 
Muller  and  H.  Wenzel.  Small*  4to,  *is.  6d. 

KAty&yana’s  Sarvinukrama/^1  of  the  ^/gveda. 

With  Extracts  from  Sha</gurujishya's  Commentary  entitled 
VedirthadtpikS.  Edited  by  A.  A.  Macdonell,  M.A.,  Ph.D.  i6f. 


Oxford 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 

LONDON:  HENRY  FROWDE 
OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C. 


Digitized  by  L^ooQle 


1. 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


Digitized  by 


Digitized  by 


Digitized  by  v^ooQle 


The  borrower  must  return  this  item  on  or  before 
the  last  date  stamped  below.  If  another  user 
places  a  recall  for  this  iten^  the  borrower  will 
be  notifi^  of  2ie  n^  for  an  earlier  return. 

Non-receipt  of  overdue  notices  does  not  exempt 
the  borrower  from  overdue  fines. 

Harvard  College  Widener  Library 


Cambridge,  MA  0Z13& - 


i' 

j 

1  T 

W  1  0  E  N  E  ri  V 

1  4  Z006  < 

SEP  1  0  21104  S 

pel  ^FQ  1  / 

Please  handle  with  care. 
Thank  you  for  helping  to  preserve 
library  collections  at  Harvard. 

S _ _  I 


y  Google 

L 


