
133733 



THE 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

LONDON, EDINBURGH 

NEW YORK 



THE 



SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 



TRANSLATED 



BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS 



AND EDITED BY 



F. MAX HOLLER 



VOL. XXIII 



OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1883 
[Att rigkts reserved] 



OXFORD 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

BY HORACE HT, M A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 1 



THE ZEND-AVESTA 



PART II 
THE SIR6ZAHS, YA5TS, AND 



TRANSLATE) BT 



JAMES DARMESTET'ER 



OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1883 
[All rfgte restrvef\ 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

INTRODUCTION ix 



TRANSLATIONS. 

Preliminary Observations to the Yarts and Sirdzahs . . i 

Sir6zah 1 3 

Sfr&zah II 13 

I. Ormazd Yart 21 

(Bahman Yatf) 31 

II. Haptin Ywt .... . 35 

III. Ardibehirt Yajt 41 

IV. Khordad Yart 48 

V. Abdn Yart 52 

VI. Kh&rshfe* Ysurt 85 

VII. M&h Yart 88 

VIIL Tir Yart 92 

IX. Gdj Yart no 

X. MihSr Yajt 119 

XL Srdsh Yajt Hftdhdkht ig9 

XII. Rashn Ya^t 168 

XIII. Farvardin Yajt 179 

XIV. Bahram Yajt ,231 

XV. Rfim Yart 249 

XVL Din Yart 264 



Vlll CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

XVII. Ashi Yart 270 

XVIII. Adid Yart 283 

XIX. ZamyfidYajt 286 

XX. Vana/Yart 310 

XXI. Yart Fragment 311 

XXII. Yart 314 

XXIIL Afrtn Paighambar Zartfot 324 

XXIV. VfotSspYart 328 

Preliminary Observations to the Nyiyir .... 349 

I. Kh6rsh&f Ny&yij 349 

II. Mihir Nyfiyiy 353 

III. M&I Nyiyh 355 

IV. ibln NySyw 356 

V. Atsu Ny^yw 357 

INDEX to the Translations of the Vend!dd, Slr6zahs, 

Yarts, and Nyiyw 363 



Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans- 
lations of the Sacred Books of the East . . .381 



INTRODUCTION. 

THE present volume contains a translation of the 
SIrdzahs and Yarts, and of the Nyiyis. This part of 
the Avesta treats chiefly of the mythical and legendary 
lore of Zoroastrianism. 

For a satisfactory translation of these texts, the etymo- 
logical and comparative method is generally considered as 
the best or as the only possible one, on account of the 
entire absence of any traditional interpretation. I have 
tried, however, to reduce the sphere of etymological guess- 
work to its narrowest limits, with the help of different 
Pahlavi, Persian, and Sanskrit translations, which are as 
yet unpublished, and have been neglected by former trans- 
lators. I found such translations for the SIrdzahs, for 
Yarts I, VI, VII, XI, XXIII, XXIV, and for the Nyiyfc 1 
(besides the already published translations of Yarts XXI 
and XXII). 

Of the remaining Yarts, which are mostly of an epical 
character, there is no direct translation available; but a 
close comparison of the legends in Firdausi's Shih N&mah 
seems to throw some light, even as regards philological 
points, on not a few obscure and important passages. 
This has enabled me, I believe, to restore a few myths to 
their original form, and to frame a more correct idea of 
others 2 . 

In this volume, as in the preceding one, I have to thank 
Mr. West for his kind assistance in making my translation 
more readable, as well as for valuable hints in the inter- 
pretation of several passages. 

JAMES DARMESTETER. 
PARIS, 

13 December, 1882. 



1 These translations have been edited in one Etudes Iraniennes, II, 253 seq. 
(Paris, Vieweg, 1883). 
8 See ibidem, II, 206 seq. 



YASTS AND SIROZAHS. 



YASTS AND SfR6ZAHS. 



THE word yajt, in Zend yfcjti, means properly * the act of wor- 
shipping/ the performance of the yasna; and it is often used 
in Parsi tradition as synonymous with yasna. But it has also 
been particularly applied to a certain number of writings in which 
the several Izeds are praised and magnified. These writings are 
generally of a higher poetical and epical character than the rest of 
the Avesta, and are most valuable records of the old mythology 
and historical legends of Iran. 

The Parsis believe that formerly every Axnshaspand and every 
Ized had his particular Yart, but we now possess only twenty 
Yarts and fragments of another 1 . The writings known as Yart 
fragments, the Afrfci Zarttirt, and Vtrtisp Yart (printed as Yarts 
XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV in Westergaard's edition), are not proper 
Yarts, and have no liturgical character; they are not devoted to the 
praise of any Ized. 

The order in which the Yarts have been arranged by the Parsis 
follows exactly the oider of the Strdzah, which is the proper in- 
troduction to the Yarts. 

S1R6ZAH. 

Strdzah means 'thirty days:' it is the name of a prayer com- 
posed of thirty invocations addressed to the several Izeds who 
preside over the thirty days of the month. 

There are two Sfrdzahs, but the only difference between them is 
that the formulas in the former are shorter 9 , and there is also, 
occasionally, some difference in the epithets, which are fuller in 
the latter. 

1 The Bahman Yajt (see Yt. I, 24 and following). 

* In the greater Strdzah the names of the gods invoked are 
introduced with the word yazamaidS, 'we sacrifice to;' in the 
lesser SJrdzah there is no introductory word, the word khshnao- 
thra, c propitiation/ being understood, as can be seen from the 
introductory formulas to the several Yarts. 

D3] B 



YASTS AND 



In India the Sirdzah is recited in honour of the dead, on the 
thirtieth day after the death, on the thirtieth day of the sixth 
month, on the thirtieth day of the twelfth month, and then every 
year on the thirtieth day from the anniversary day (Anquetil, Zend- 
Avesta, II, 315). 

The correspondence between the formulas of the Sfrdzah and 
the Yarts is as follows : 

Ormazd Yart (1, 1-23). 
Bahman Yart (I, 24-33). 
Ardibehert Yart (III). 



Khorda-d Yart (IV). 



KhorshSd Yart (VI). 
MSh Yajt (VII). 
T!r Yart (VIII). 
Yart (IX). 



1. Ormazd. 

2. Bahman. 

3. Ardibehert. 

4. ShahrSvar. 

5. Sapendftpnad. 

6. Khordid. 

7. Munttd 

8. Dai pa Adar. 

9. Adar. 

10. AbSn. 

11. Khorshfid. 

12. Mill. 

13. Ttr. 

14. Gds. 

15. DaipaMihir. 

16. Mihir. 

17. Sr6sh. 

18. Rashn. 

19. Farvardfa. 

20. Bahrim. 

21. Rim. 

22. Bad. 

23. Dai pa Din. 

24. Din. 

25. Ard. 
26. 

27. 

28. Zemyftd. 

29. Mahraspand. 

30. An6rdn. 

The Yarts that have been lost are^therefore, those of Khsha- 
thra-vairya, Spe^ta-Armaiti, AmeretaV, Atar, V&ta, Asman, Mathra- 
Spenta, and Anaghra rao&zu. The second Yart, or Yart of the 
seven Amshaspands, appears to have been no independent Yart : 
it was common to all the seven Yarts devoted to the several 



Mihir Yart (X . 
Srdsh Yart (XI). 
Rashn Yart (XII). 
Farvardfn Yart (XIII). 
Bahram Yart (XIV). 
RSm Yart (XV). 



Din Yart (XVI). 
Ashi Yart (XVII). 
ArtSd Yart (XVIII). 

Zemyad Yart (XIX), 



SIR6ZAH I. 3 

Amshaspands, and, accordingly, it is recited on the first seven days 
of the month. One might suppose that it was originally a part of the 
Ormazd Yarf, as the Amesha-Sperctas are invoked in company with 
Ahura Mazda (Strdzah i, 8, 15, 23). There may, indeed, have been 
several Yarfs for one and the same formula of the Strdzah, as in 
all of these formulas more than one Ized are invoked : this would 
apply not only to the Yart of the seven Amshaspands, hut also to 
the Vanaw/ Yart (Yart XX), which, in that case, ought to follow 
the Ttr Yart (see Strdzah 13). 

Not every Yart, however, is devoted to the Ized whose name 
it bears : thus the Ardibehejt Yart is mostly devoted to Airyaman; 
the Rim-Yart and the ZemySd-Yart are devoted to Vayu and to the 
JSfoarend : but Airyaman, Vayu, and the 2foarend are invoked in 
the same Strdzah formulas as Ardibehert, Rm, and Zemy&d, and 
a Yart is named from the opening name hi the correspondent Strdzah 
formula. 

The systematic order so apparent in the Strdzah pervades the 
rest of the liturgy to a great extent : the enumeration of Izeds 
in Yasna XVII, 12-42 (XVI, 3-6) follows exactly the order of 
the Strdzah, except that it gives only the first name of each 
formula; and the question may be raised whether this passage in 
the Yasna is taken from the Strdzah, or whether the Strdzah 
is developed from the Yasna. 

The very idea of the Stidzah, that is to say the attribution 
of each of the thirty days of the month to certain gods, seems 
to have been borrowed from the Semites: the tablets found in 
the library of Assurbanipal contain an Assyrian Strdzah, that is, 
a complete list of the Assyrian gods that preside over the thirty 
days of the month 1 . 



S1R6ZAH I. 

i. Ormazd. 

To Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious 2 , and to 
the Amesha-Spe#tas 8 . 

1 J. Hale*vy, Revue des fitudes Juives, 1881, October, p. 188. 
a See Yt. 1, 1-23. 8 See Yt. II. 

B 2 



YASTS AND 



2. Bahman. 

To Vohu-Mand 1 ; to Peace 2 , whose breath is 
friendly 3 , and who is more powerful to destroy than 
all other creatures * ; to the heavenly Wisdom 6 , made 
by Mazda ; and to the Wisdom acquired through the 
ear 5 , made by Mazda. 

3. Ardibehe-rt. 

To Asha-Valmta, the fairest 6 ; to the much- 
desired Airyaman, made by Mazda 7 ; to the instru- 
ment made by Mazda 8 ; and to the good Saoka 9 , 
with eyes of love 10 , made by Mazda and holy. 

* See Yt. I, 24-33- 

3 Akhjti does not so much mean Peace as the power that 
secures peace ; see note 4. 

3 HSm-vaiti, from hm-v (Yt. X, 141); possibly from van, 
to strike : ' Peace that smites/ 

* Taradhtem anydij dmn, interpreted: tarvtnitartflm 
min zakf fin dimin pun anshtth ak&r kartan (Phi. Comm.), 
'more destroying than other creatures, to make Non-peace (And- 
khjti) powerless/ 

8 Asnya khratu, the inborn intellect, intuition, contrasted with 
gaoshfi-srftta khratu, the knowledge acquired by hearing and 
learning. There is between the two nearly the same relation 
as between the parftvidyft and aparftvidyS, in Brahmanism, the 
former reaching Brahma in se (parabrahma), the latter jabda- 
brahma, the word-Brahma (Brahma as taught and revealed). 
The Mobeds of later times interpreted their name Magftj, <j$Jfe-., 
as meaning, 'men without ears/ (ji^u, 'pour insinuer que leur 
Docteur avait pulse* toute sa science dans le del et qu'il ne 1'avait 
pas apprise par Foule comme les autres homines' (Chardin, 
III, 130; ed. Amsterdam). 

6 See Yt III. * See Vend. XXII. 

8 The 'golden instrument' mentioned in NyfiyLr I, 8. 

9 A personification of the Ormazdean weal; cf. Vend. XXII, 
3 [8], and Yt. XIII, 42. 

10 Vouru-ddithra,kamakddisr; she is ' the genius of the good 



4. ShahrSvar. 

To Khshathra-vairya; to the metals 1 ; to Mercy 
and Charity. 

5. Sapendirmad. 

To the good Spe^ta-Armaiti 2 , and to the good 
Rita s , with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy. 

6. Khorddd. 

To Haurvatd* 4 , the master; to the prosperity 
of the seasons and to the years, the masters of 
holiness. 

7. Murdad. 

To Amereti/ 6 , the master ; to fatness and flocks ; 
to the plenty of corn ; and to the powerful Gaoke- 
rena e , made by Mazda. 

(At the gih T Hfivan): to Mithra 8 , the lord of 
wide pastures and to Rlma /jfodstra 9 . 

(At the gSh Rapithwin): to Asha-VahLrta and 
to Atar 10 , the son of Ahura Mazda 11 . 

eye, mhidt hufowmlh ' (Vend. XIX, 36 [123]), the reverse of the 
evil eye (Yasna LXVII, 62 [LXVIII, 22]; cf. Etudes Iraniennes, 
II, 182). 

Vend. Introd. IV, 33 ; Ormazd et Ahriman, 202-206. 

Ibid. 8 Vend. Introd. IV, 30. 

See Yt IV. See Vend. Introd. IV, 34. 

The white Hdm, or plant of immortality; see Vend. Introd. 



IV 



28. 



See G&hs. 8 See Yt X. 

See Yt. XV. Cf. Yasna I, 3 (7-9), where Mithra and Rma 
are invoked in company with the genius of the Hdvani period 
of the day. 

10 The Genius of Fire. 

11 Cf. Yasna I, 4 (10-12), where Asha-Vahirta and Atar are 
invoked in company with the genius of the Rapithwin period 
of the day. 



YASTS AND 



(At the gih Uziren) : to ApSm Nap&f 1 , the tall 
lord, and to the water made by Mazda 2 . 

(At the gfih Aiwisrflthrem) : to the Fravashis 3 
of the faithful, and to the females that bring forth 
flocks of males 4 ; to the prosperity of the seasons ; 
to the well-shapen and tall-formed Strength, to 
Verethraghna 6 , made by Ahura, and to the crushing 
Ascendant 6 . 

(At the gdh Ushahin) : to the holy, devout, fiend- 
smiting Sraosha 7 , who makes the world grow; to 
Rashnu RazLsta 8 , and to Arrtft/'j who makes the 
world grow, who makes the world increase 10 . 

8. Dai pa Adar 11 . 

To the Maker Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, 
and to the Amesha-Spe&tas. 

I Literally 'the Son of the Waters;' he was originally the Fire 
of lightning, as born in the clouds (like the Vedic Ap&m nap&t); 
he still appears in that character, Yt. VIII, 34; he is for that 
reason 'the lord of the females' because the waters were con- 
sidered as females (cf. Yasna XXXVIII, i [2]). But, as napi/ 
means also 'navel' (the same words having often the two meanings 
of 'navel' and ' offspring;' cf. n&bhi in the Vedas and the Zend 
nafyd, 'offspring,' from nSfa ' navel'), ApSim NapS/ was inter- 
preted as 'the spring of the waters, the navel of the waters/ which 
was supposed to be at the source of the Arvand (the Tigris ; 
Neriosengh ad Yasna I, 5 [15]) ; cf. Yt. V, 72. 

* Cf. Yasna I, 5 [13-15]. 8 See Yt. XIII. 

4 Perhaps better: 'to the flocks of Fravashis of the faithful, men 
and women/ 

* The Genius of Victory; see Yt. XIV. 
Cf. Yasna I, 6 [16-19]. 

7 See Yt. XI and Vend. Introd. IV, 31 ; Farg. XVIII, 14 seq. 

8 The Genius of Truth; see Yt. XII. 

9 Truth; see Yt. XVIII. lo Cf. Yasna I, 7 [20-23]. 

II The day before Adar (Dai is the Persian &, 'yesterday,' 
which is the same word as the Sanskrit hyas, Latin heri). The 
eighth, fifteenth, and twenty-third days of the month are under the 



9. Adar. 

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; to the Glory 
and to the Weal, made by Mazda; to the Glory of 
the Aryas 1 , made by Mazda; to the awful Glory 
of the Kavis 2 , made by Mazda. 

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; to king 
Husravah 8 ; to the lake of Husravah 4 ; to Mount 
Asnava^ 5 , made by Mazda; to Lake .ATaS/feista 6 , 
made by Mazda ; to the Glory of the Kavis, made 
by Mazda 7 . 

rule of Ahura and the Amesha-Spewtas, like the first day; they 
have therefore no name of their own and are named from the day 
that follows. The month was divided into four weeks, the first 
two numbering seven days, the last two numbering eight. 

1 Or better 'the Glories of the Aiyas' (Eramderajrfo&m): the 
Glory or JTzrarend (Vend. Introd. IV, n, p. Ixiii, note i) is 
threefold, according as it illuminates the priest, the warrior, or the 
husbandman. Yart XIX is devoted to the praise of the J?zrarend. 
* Or 'the awful kingly glory: 1 Kavi means a king, but it is 
particularly used of the kings belonging to the second and most 
celebrated of the two mythical dynasties of Iran. The Kavis 
succeeded the Paradh&ta or Pgshd&dians, and Darius Codo- 
xnanes was supposed to be the last of them. For an enumeration 
of the principal Kavis, see Yt. XIII, 132 seq. The Zfoaren6 alluded 
to in this clause is the^JSfoarend of the priest; 'it is the fire 
known as Adarapri [Adar FrobS]; or better Adar Farnbag: 
see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 84; its object is the science of the 
priests; by its help priests become learned and clever' (Sanskrit 
transl. to the Atash Nyftyish). 

See Yt. V, 41, note. 

See Yt. XIX, 56. 

A mountain in Adarbaiggn (Bundahir XII, 26), where king 
Husravah settled the fire Gushasp. 

See Yt. V, 49. 

The glory of the warriors, the fire known as Adar Gushasp 
or Gushnasp; with its help king Husravah destroyed the idol- 
temples near Lake & 8/Sast, and he settled it on Mount Asnava*/ 
(Bund. XVH, 7). 



8 YASTS AND 



To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; to Mount 
RaAva*/ 1 , made by Mazda; to the Glory of the 
Kavis, made by Mazda 2 . 

To Atar, the beneficent, the warrior; the God 
who is a full source of Glory, the God who is a full 
source of healing. 

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, with all Atars 3 ; 
to the God Nairy6-Sangha 4 , who dwells in the 
navel of kings 5 . 

10. Ab&n. 

To the good Waters, made by Mazda; to the 
holy water-spring Ardvi Andhita 6 ; to all waters 
made by Mazda ; to all plants made by Mazda. 

n. Khorshfid. 
To the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun 7 . 

12. Mh. 

To the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the 
Bull 8 ; to the only-created Bull 9 ; to the Bull of 
many species 10 . 

1 A mountain in Khor&sftn on which the Burzin fire is settled 
(Bund. XII, 18). 

9 'The fire known as Adarabura^mihira [Adar Burzin Mihir]; 
its object is the science of husbandry.' King Giwtisp established 
it on Mount RaSva/ (Bund. XVII, 8). 

3 All sorts of fires. See another classification, Yasna XVII, 
it [63-67] and Bundahu XVII, i. 

See Vend. XXII, 7. 

The fire Nairy6-sangha, as the messenger of Ahura, burns 
hereditarily in the bosom of his earthly representative, the king. 

See Yt. V. T See Yt. VI. 

See Yt. VII and Vend. XXI, i, text and note. 

A6v6-da*ta gfiuj; see Vend 1. 1. and Bundahw IV. 

10 Pouru-saredha gftuj: the couple born of the seed of the 



stRdZAH I. 9 

13- Tir. 

To Tirtrya 1 , the bright and glorious star; to the 
powerful Satavasa 2 , made by Mazda, who pushes 
waters forward ; to the stars, made by Mazda, that 
have in them the seed of the waters, die seed of the 
earth, the seed of the plants 8 ; to the star Vana^*, 
made by Mazda; to those stars that are seven in 
number, the Haptdirmgas 4 , made by Mazda, glorious 
and healing. 

14. G6s. 

To the body of the Cow, to the soul of the Cow, 
to the powerful Drvispa 6 , made by Mazda and holy. 

15. Dai pa Mihir. 

To the Maker Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, 
and to the Amesha-Spe&tas. 

16. Mihir. 

To Mithra 6 , the lord of wide pastures, who has 
a thousand ears and ten thousand eyes, a God 
invoked by his own name ; to R4ma .flz^stra 7 . 

17. Srdsh. 

To the holy, strong Sraosha 8 , who is the incar- 
nate Word, a mighty-speared and lordly God. 

1 8. Rashn. 

To Rashnu Razirta 9 ; to Arrti/ 10 , who makes the 

only-created Bull, and from which arose two hundred and eighty 
species (Bund. XI, 3), 

1 See Yt VIII. See Yt. VIII, 9. 

8 See Yt XII, 29-31. 4 See Yt. VIII, 12. 

See Yt. IX. See Yt X. 
7 See Yt XV. See Yt XL 

See Yt. XII. 10 See Yt XVIH. 



10 YASTS AND 



world grow, who makes the world increase ; to the 
true-spoken speech, that makes the world grow. 

19. Farvardln. 

To the awful, overpowering Fravashis of the 
holy ones 1 , 

20. Bahrim. 

To the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength ; to 
Verethraghna 2 , made by Ahura; to the crushing 
Ascendant 

21. Rim. 

To Rma ^Tz/dstra 8 ; to Vayu 8 , who works 
highly 4 and is more powerful to destroy than all 
other creatures : to that part of thee, O Vayu, that 
belongs to Speta-Mainyu 5 ; to the sovereign Sky, 
to the Boundless Time fl , to the sovereign Time of 
the long Period 6 . 

22. Bid. 

To the bounteous Wind, that blows below, above, 
before, and behind ; to the manly Courage. 

23. Dai pa Din. 

To the Maker, Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious ; 
to the Amesha-Spe#tas. 

24. Din. 

To the most right #Ista 7 , made by Mazda and 
holy; to the good Law 7 of the worshippers of 
Mazda. 

1 See Yt XIII. 'SeeYtXIV. 

8 See Yt. XV. Powerfully, 

8 See Yt. XV, i. 

6 See Vend. Introd. IV, 39 and Ixxxii, i. 

7 See Yt XVI. 



II 



25. Ard. 

To Ashi Vanguhi 1 ; to the good ATisti 2 ; to 
the good Ereth* 8 ; to the good RasStst^ 4 ; to the 
Weal and Glory, made by Mazda ; to Pre#di fi , of 
the light chariot ; to the Glory of the Aryas made 
by Mazda; to the kingly Glory made by Mazda; 
to that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized e , made 
by Mazda ; to the Glory of Zarathu,stra, made by 
Mazda. 



26. 

To AwtA* 7 , who makes the world grow; to 
Mount Ushi-darena 8 , made by Mazda, the seat of 
holy happiness. 

27. Asm in. 

To the high, powerful Heavens ; to the bright, 
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy ones. 

28. Zemy&d 9 . 

To the bounteous Earth ; to these places, to these 
fields ; to Mount Ushi-darena 8 , made by Mazda, the 
seat of holy happiness ; to all the mountains made 
by Mazda, that are seats of holy happiness, of full 
happiness ; to the kingly Glory made by Mazda ; 

1 See Yt XVII. 

2 Religious knowledge, wisdom (far^-Snak ; nirvdna^T^nam). 

8 Thought (Attain). * Thoughtfulness (flttasthiti). 

B The keeper of treasures ; cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 30. 

8 AAflaretem fearend: 'the >foaren6 of the priests: that it 
cannot be forcibly seized means that one must take possession of 
it through virtue and righteous exertion' (Neriosengh and Pahl. 
Comm. to Yasna I and IV, 14 [42]). 

7 See Yt. XVIIL 8 See Yt. I, 31, text and note. 

See Yt. XIX. 



12 YAtfTS AND 



to that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized \ made 
by Mazda. 

29. Mahraspand. 

To the holy, righteousness-performing M&thra 
Spe^ta 2 ; to the Law opposed to the Dafivas, the 
Law of Zarathturtra ; to the long-traditional teach- 
ing 3 ; to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda ; 
to the Devotion to the MSthra Spe#ta; to the 
understanding that keeps 4 the Law of the worship- 
pers of Mazda; to the knowledge of the MSthra 
Spe#ta ; to the heavenly Wisdom made by Mazda ; 
to the Wisdom acquired through the ear 6 and 
made by Mazda. 



30. 

To the eternal 6 and sovereign luminous space 7 ; 
to the bright Gar6-nmfina 8 ; to the sovereign place 
of eternal Weal 9 ; to the ^Tinva/-bridge 10 , made by 
Mazda ; to the tall lord ApSm NapS,/ 11 and to the 
water made by Mazda; to Haoma 12 , of holy birth ; 
to the pious and good Blessing ; to the awful cursing 
thought of the wise 18 ; to all the holy Gods of the 

See p. ii, note 6. * The Holy Word. 

Daregha upayana : the Genius of Teaching (jixdm adr&ya- 
ifttm; Yasnal, 12 [40]). 

In memory. See above, 2. 

Or boundless (anaghra; the Parsi anfirfin). 
Or Infinite Light; see Vend. Introd. p. kxxii and Bund. I. 2. 
The abode of Ahura Mazda; see Vend. XIX, 32. 
See Vend. XIX, 36, note i. 

10 See Vend. XIX, 29, note 3. 

11 See Sfrdzah II, 7, note. 

12 See Vend. Introd. IV, 28. 

u 'The blessing (ifriti) is twofold: one by thought, one by 
words; the blessing by words is the more powerful; the curse 



SlRdZAH II. 13 

heavenly world and of the material one; to the 
awful, overpowering Fravashis of the faithful, to 
the Fravashis of the first men of the law, to the 
Fravashis of the next-of-kin l ; to every God invoked 
by his own name 2 , 



S1R6ZAH II. 

1. Ormazd. 

We sacrifice unto the bright and glorious Ahura 
Mazda ; we sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spe#tas, the 
all-ruling, the all-beneficent 

2. Bahman. 

We sacrifice unto Vohu-Mand, the Amesha- 
Spe#ta; we sacrifice unto Peace, whose breath is 
friendly, and who is more powerful to destroy than 
all other creatures. We sacrifice unto the heavenly 
Wisdom, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the 
Wisdom acquired through the ear, made by Mazda. 

3. Ardibehe^t 

We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahi^ta, the fairest, the 
Amesha-Spe^ta ; we sacrifice unto the much-desired 
Airyaman ; we sacrifice unto the instrument made 
by Mazda ; we sacrifice unto the good Saoka, with 
eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy. 

(upamana) in thought is the more powerful' (Neriosengh ad 
Yasna I, 15 [44]). Upamana is the same as the Vedic manyu. 

1 See Yt. XIII, o. 

* In contradistinction to general invocations* 



14 YASTS AND siR&ZAHS. 

4. ShahrSvar. 

We sacrifice unto Khshathra-Vairya, the Ame- 
sha-Spe#ta ; we sacrifice unto the metals ; we sacri- 
fice unto Mercy and Charity. 

5. Sapend&rmad. 

We sacrifice unto the good Spewta Armaiti; 
we sacrifice unto the good Rita, with eyes of love, 
made by Mazda and holy. 

6. Khordfid. 

1 We sacrifice unto Haurvat, the Amesha- 
Spe#ta; we sacrifice unto the prosperity of the 
seasons. We sacrifice unto the years, the holy and 
masters of holiness. 

7. Murdfid. 

We sacrifice unto Ameret, the Amesha-Spe^ta ; 
we sacrifice unto fatness and flocks ; we sacrifice unto 
the plenty of corn; we sacrifice unto the powerful 
Gaokerena, made by Mazda. 

(At the gih Hvan) : We sacrifice unto Mithra, 
the lord of wide pastures ; we sacrifice unto 



(At the gih Rapithwin) : We sacrifice unto Asha- 
Vahfota and unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda. 

(At the gfih Uzlren) : We sacrifice unto ApSm 
Napi the swift-horsed, the tall and shining lord, 
the lord of the females ; we sacrifice unto the water 
made by Mazda and holy. 

(At the gih Aiwisrftthrem) : We sacrifice unto the 
good, powerful, beneficent Fravashis of the holy 
ones ; we sacrifice unto the females that bring forth 
flocks of males ; we sacrifice unto the thrift of the 



II. 15 



seasons ; we sacrifice unto the well-shapen and tall- 
formed Strength ; we sacrifice unto Verethraghna, 
made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the crushing 
Ascendant. 

(At the gh Ushahin) : We sacrifice unto the holy, 
tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha, who makes the 
world grow, the holy and master of holiness; we 
sacrifice unto Rashnu Razirta; we sacrifice unto 
Arrti/, who makes the world grow, who makes the 
world increase. 

8. Dai pa Adar. 

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the 
bright and glorious ; we sacrifice unto the Amesha- 
Spe#tas, the all-ruling, the all-beneficent. 

9. Adar. 

We sacrifice unto A tar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto the Glory, made by Mazda; we 
sacrifice unto the Weal, made by Mazda ; we sacri- 
fice unto the Glory of the Aryas, made by Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto the awful Glory of the Kavis, made 
by Mazda. 

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto king Husravah ; we sacrifice unto 
the lake of Husravah ; we sacrifice unto Mount As- 
nava#/, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto Lake 
-XTa&Sasta, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the 
awful Glory of the Kavis, made by Mazda. 

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto Mount Ra6va#, made by Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto the awful Glory of the Kavis, 
made by Mazda. 

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto Atar, the beneficent, the warrior, 



1 6 YAOTS AND siRdZAHS. 

We sacrifice unto that God, who is a full source of 
glory. We sacrifice unto that God, who is a full 
source of healing. 

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto all Fires; we sacrifice unto the 
God, Nairyd-Sangha, who dwells in the navel of 

kings. 

10. Abdn. 

We sacrifice unto the good Waters, made by 
Mazda and holy; we sacrifice unto the holy water- 
spring Ardvi Anihita ; we sacrifice unto all waters, 
made by Mazda and holy; we sacrifice unto all 
plants, made by Mazda and holy. 

ii. Khorsh&d. 

We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, 
swift-horsed Sun. 

12. Mah. 

We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it the 
seed of the Bull. We sacrifice unto the Soul and 
Fravashi of the only-created Bull ; we sacrifice unto 
the Soul and Fravashi of the Bull of many species, 

13- Tlr. 

We sacrifice unto Timya, the bright and glorious 
star ; we sacrifice unto the powerful SatavaSsa, made 
by Mazda, who pushes waters forward ; we sacrifice 
unto all the Stars that have in them the seed of the 
waters ; we sacrifice unto all the Stars that have in 
them the seed of the earth ; we sacrifice unto all the 
Stars that have in them the seeds of the plants ; we 
sacrifice unto the Star Vana#/, made by Mazda; 
we sacrifice unto those stars that are seven in num- 
ber, the Hapt6irigas, made by Mazda, glorious and 
healing ; in order to oppose the Y4tus and Pairikas. 



ir. 17 



14. G6s. 

We sacrifice unto the soul of the bounteous Cow ; 
we sacrifice unto the powerful Drvispa, made by 
Mazda and holy. 

15. Dai pa Mihir. 

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the 
bright and glorious ; we sacrifice unto the Amesha- 
Spetas, the all-ruling, the all-beneficent. 

16. Mihir. 

We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pas- 
tures, who has a thousand ears and ten thousand 
eyes, a God invoked by his own name ; we sacrifice 
unto Rfima -fifz&stra. 

17. Srdsh. 

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend- 
smiting, world-increasing Sraosha, holy and master 
of holiness. 

18. Rashn. 

We sacrifice unto Rashnu Razi^ta; we sacrifice 
unto Arrti/, who makes the world grow, who makes 
the world increase ; we sacrifice unto the true-spoken 
speech that makes the world grow. 

19. Farvardln. 

We sacrifice unto the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the holy ones. 

20. Bahrim. 

We sacrifice unto the well-shapen, tall-formed 
Strength; we sacrifice unto Ver ethraghna, made by 
Ahura ; we sacrifice unto the crushing Ascendant. 



1 8 YASTS AND SlR&ZAHS. 

21. Rdm. 

We sacrifice unto Rima jfiTz/S.stra; we sacrifice 
unto the holy Vayu ; we sacrifice unto Vayu, who 
works highly and is more powerful to destroy than 
all other creatures. Unto that part of thee do we 
sacrifice, O Vayu, that belongs to Spewta-Mainyu. 
We sacrifice unto the sovereign Sky; we sacrifice 
unto the Boundless Time; we sacrifice unto the 
sovereign Time of the long Period. 

22. Bid. 

We sacrifice unto the beneficent, bounteous Wind; 
we sacrifice unto the wind that blows below; we 
sacrifice unto the wind that blows above ; we sacri- 
fice unto the wind that blows before ; we sacrifice 
unto the wind that blows behind. We sacrifice unto 
the manly Courage. 

23. Dai pa Din. 

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the 
bright and glorious ; we sacrifice unto the Amesha- 
Spe#tas. 

24. Dtn. 

We sacrifice unto the most right #ista, made by 
Mazda and holy ; we sacrifice unto the good Law of 
the worshippers of Mazda. 

25. Ard. 

We sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi, the bright, 
high, strong, tall-formed, and merciful; we sacrifice 
unto the Glory made by Mazda ; we sacrifice unto 
the Weal made by Mazda. We sacrifice unto 
Pire#di, of the light chariot; we sacrifice unto the 
Glory of the Aryas, made by Mazda ; we sacrifice 



StR&ZAH II. 19 



unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda; we 
sacrifice unto that awful Glory, that cannot be 
forcibly seized, made by Mazda ; we sacrifice unto 
the Glory of Zarathurtra, made by Mazda. 



26. 

We sacrifice unto Ami/, who makes the world 
grow ; we sacrifice unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by 
Mazda, a God of holy happiness. 

27. Asmin. 

We sacrifice unto the shining H eavens ; we sacri- 
fice unto the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy ones. 

28. Zemyid. 

We sacrifice unto the Earth, a beneficent God; 
we sacrifice unto these places, unto these fields ; we 
sacrifice unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, a 
God of holy happiness; we sacrifice unto all the 
mountains, that are seats of holy happiness, of full 
happiness, made by Mazda, the holy and masters of 
holiness ; we sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, 
made by Mazda ; we sacrifice unto the awful Glory 
that cannot be forcibly seized, made by Mazda. 

29. Mahraspand. 

We sacrifice unto the MSthra Spe^ta, of high 
glory; we sacrifice unto the Law opposed to the 
Da6vas; we sacrifice unto the Law of Zarathurtra; we 
sacrifice unto the long-traditional teaching ; we sacri- 
fice unto the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda ; 
we sacrifice unto the Devotion to the MSthra Spe#ta; 
we sacrifice unto the understanding that keeps the 
Law of the worshippers of Mazda ; we sacrifice unto 

C 2 



20 YASTS AND stR&ZAHS. 

the knowledge of the MSthra Spewta ; we sacrifice 
unto the heavenly Wisdom, made by Mazda; we 
sacrifice unto the Wisdom acquired through the 
ear and made by Mazda. 



30. 

We sacrifice unto the eternal and sovereign lumi- 
nous space; we sacrifice unto the bright Gar6- 
nmdna; we sacrifice unto the sovereign place of 
eternal Weal ; we sacrifice unto the ^Tinva/-bridge, 
made by Mazda ; we sacrifice unto ApSm Napfi/, the 
swift-horsed, the high and shining lord, who has 
many wives ; and we sacrifice unto the water, made 
by Mazda and holy; we sacrifice unto the golden 
and tall Haoma; we sacrifice unto the enlivening 
Haoma, who makes the world grow; we sacrifice 
unto Haoma, who keeps death far away ; we sacri- 
fice unto the pious and good Blessing ; we sacrifice 
unto the awful, powerful, cursing thought of the wise, 
a God ; we sacrifice unto all the holy Gods of the 
heavenly world ; we sacrifice unto all the holy Gods 
of the material world. 

I praise, I invoke, I meditate upon, and we sacri- 
fice unto the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of 
the holy ones \ 

1 Cf.YasnaXXVI,!. 



ORMAZD YAST. 21 



I. ORMAZD VAST. 

The Onnazd Yajt, properly so called, ends with 23. The rest 
of the Ysurt, from 24 to the end, is wanting in several manu- 
scripts, and is supposed by the Parsis to be a fragment of the 
Bahman Yarf. 

The Onnazd Yart is exclusively devoted to an enumeration of 
the names of Ahura and to a laudation of their virtues and efficacy: 
the recitation of these names is the best defence against all dangers. 

1-6. The names of Ahura Mazda are the most powerful 
part of the Holy Word. 

7-8. The twenty names of Ahura Mazda are enumerated. 

9-11. Efficacy of these names. 

12-15. Another list of names. 

16-19. Efficacy of Ahura' s names. 

20-23. Sundry formulas of invocation. 

ALS may be seen from this summary, the subject has been treated 
twice over, first in i-u, and then in 12-19 J 7 et ft does not 
appear that this Yart was formed out of two independent treatises, 
and it is more likely that the vague and indefinite enumeration in 
12-15, which interrupts so clumsily the train of ideas, is due 
either to an interpolation or simply to the literary deficiency of the 
writer himself. 

The Ormazd Yart is recited every day at the HSvan Gh, after 
the morning prayer (Anquetil, Zend-Avesta, II, 143) : it is well 
also to recite it when going to sleep and when changing one's 
residence ( 17). 

Speculations on the mystical powers of God's names have always 
been common among Orientals. The number of these names 
went on increasing: Dastur Ndshfrv&n wrote on the 101 names of 
God; Dastur Marzb&n on his 125 names* With the Musulmans, 
Allah had xooi names. On the names of God among the Jews, 
see Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, 
XXXV, pp. 162, 532. 

We have three native translations of this Yart ; one in Pahlavi 
(East India Office, XII, 39, and St. Petersburg, XCIX, 39 ; edited 
by Carl Salemann), one in Persian (East India Office, XXII, 43), 
and one in Sanskrit (Paris, fonds Bumouf, V, 66) ; the last two 
edited in our tudes Iraniennes, II, 255). 



22 YASTS AND 



The second part of the Yajt, the so-called Bahman Yart frag- 
ment, is in a state of the utmost corruption. It is difficult to trace 
any connection in the ideas, yet 28, 29, 30 seem to point rather 
clearly to the final struggle between Ormazd and Ahriman and to 
the annihilation of the Dagvas, and, thereby, some connection is 
established between this fragment and the Pahlavi Bahman Yart 1 , 
which deals with the same subject. If that correspondence be real, 
26 might refer to the beginning of the Pahlavi Bahman Yart, in 
which Zarathurtra is shown by Ahura the times to come and the 
end of the world. 

Of this fragment we have only a bad Pahlavi translation in the 
St. Petersburg manuscript mentioned above. 



o*. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! May Angra Mainyu be 
destroyed! by those who do truly what is the foremost wish (of 
God 8 ). 

I praise well-thought, well-spoken, and well-done thoughts, words, 
and deeds. I embrace all good thoughts, good words, and good 
deeds; I reject all evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds. 

I give sacrifice and prayer unto you, O Amesha-Spe/rtas 1 even 
with the fulness of my thoughts, of my words, of my deeds, and 
of my heart : I give unto you even my own life 4 . 

I recite the c Praise of Holiness 8 : ' 

' Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good. Well is it for 
it, well is it for that holiness which is perfection of holiness I ' 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thujtra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura 6 ; 

1 Translated by West (Pahlavi Texts, I). 

8 The formulas of this section serve as an introduction to all 
Ysuts. 

8 The last clause of this sentence is imitated from Yasna XL VI 
[XLV], 19 : 'he who does truly in holiness what was the foremost 
wish of Zarathurfra' (that is, what he ordered most earnestly; 
Pahl. Comm.). 

* * If I must give up my life for the sake of my soul, I give it 
up' (Pahl. Comm.). The two sentences, 'I praise . . . / 'I give 
unto you ... / are taken from Yasna XI, 17, 18 [XII]. 

5 The Ashem Vohfi, one of the holiest and most frequently 
recited prayers. 

6 The Fravaidnfi or profession of faith of the Zoroastrian 
(Yasna I, 23 [65-68]). 



ORMAZD VAST. 23 



For sacrifice \ prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto 
vam] a , the holy and master of holiness ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [S&van- 
ghi and Visya] 3 , the holy and masters of holiness; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto the 
Masters of the days, of the periods of the day, of the months, of 
the seasons, and of the years 4 ; 

Unto AHURA MAZDA, bright and glorious, be 
propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and 
glorification. 

Yatht ahft vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness: 
the riches of Vohfc-Man6 shall be given to him who works in this 
world for Mazda, and wields according to the will of Ahura the 
power he gave him to relieve the poor. 

1. Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : ' O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material 
world, thou Holy One! 

1 What of the Holy Word is the strongest ? What 
is the most victorious ? What is the most glorious ? 
What is the most effective ? 

2. * What is the most fiend-smiting ? What is the 
best-healing ? What destroyeth best the malice of 
Da6vas and Men? What maketh the material 
world best come to the fulfilment of its wishes 6 ? 
What freeth the material world best from the 
anxieties of the heart e ? ' 



1 He shows himself a Zoroastrian by offering sacrifice .... 

2 The actual G&h during which the Yarf is being recited must 
be mentioned here. Hvani is the first G&h (see Ghs). 

3 The Genii who co-operate with Hvani, his hamkirs; for 
each Gih the names of its proper hamk&rs should be mentioned 
(see Gdhs). 

* See Vendtdid VIII, 19, text and notes. 

5 Pun mfnishn ft bar mat&rtftm, mandtim frlrun (PhL tr.); 
manasas asti pr&pakatar (Sansk. tr.); xAJjL^ ^ (Pers. tr.). 

6 Pun akhft it bar& znftshft&rtftm : pfcn(t) u mandftm f ap&rftn 



24 YASTS AND 



3. Ahura Mazda answered : ' Our Name, O Spi- 
tama Zarathurtra! who are the Amesha-Spe^tas, 
that is the strongest part of the Holy Word ; that 
is the most victorious ; that is the most glorious ; 
that is the most effective; 

4. * That is the most fiend-smiting; that is the best- 
healing ; that destroyed! best the malice of Dafivas 
and Men; that maketh the material world best come 
to the fulfilment of its wishes; that freeth the material 
world best from the anxieties of the heart/ 

5. Then Zarathurtra said : ' Reveal unto me that 
name of thine, O Ahura Mazda ! that is the greatest, 
the best, the fairest, the most effective, the most 
fiend-smiting, the best-healing, that destroyed! best 
the malice of Dafivas and Men ; 

6. ' That I may afflict all DaSvas and Men ; that 
I may afflict all Yitus and Pairikas l ; that neither 
Dafivas nor Men may be able to afflict me ; neither 
Y&tus nor Pairikas. 1 

7. Ahura Mazda replied unto him : ' My name is 
the One of whom questions are asked 2 , O 
holy Zarathurtra! 

'My second name is the Herd-giver 3 . 
'My third name is the Strong One 4 . 

(Phi. tr.); vitark*m asti mftshakatard (Sansk. tr.); ^ U>. 

c^V <&*r r^- * *^ * ( Pers - *) 

1 See Vendlddd, Introd. IV, 20-21. 

a As the revealer of the law, which is generally expounded by 
a process of questions from Zarathurtra and answers from Ahura. 
The revelation itself is called spet6 frasna, 'the holy questions' 
(VendfdSdXXH,i 9 ). 

8 That is, I give herds of men and cattle ' (Phi. tr.). 

4 'Strong, that is, I have strength for the works of the law' 
(Phi. tr.); the Sanskrit translation has, 'powerful, that is, I have 
power to create/ 



ORMAZD YAtfT. 25 



'My fourth name is Perfect Holiness 1 . 

c My fifth name is All good things created by 
Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle. 

'My sixth name is Understanding 2 ; 

'My seventh name is the One with under- 
standing. 

'My eighth name is Knowledge; 

'My ninth name is the One with Knowledge. 

8. ' My tenth name is Weal ; 

'My eleventh name is He who produces weal. 

' My twelfth name is AHURA (the Lord) 3 . 

'My thirteenth name is the most Beneficent. 

'My fourteenth name is He in whom there 
is no harm 4 . 

' My fifteenth name is the unconquerable One. 

'My sixteenth name is He who makes the true 
account 6 . 

'My seventeenth name is the All-seeing One. 

'My eighteenth name is the healing One. 

1 My nineteenth name is the Creator. 

' My twentieth name is MAZDA (the All-knowing 
One). 

9. 'Worship me, O Zarathurtra, by day and by 



1 Asha-Vahuta, which is the name of the second Amesha- 
Spewta too. The commentary has : 'That is, my own being is all 
holiness.' 

8 Literally: 'My sixth name is that I am Understanding/ 
The same construction is used with regard to the eighth, the tenth, 
and the nineteenth names, 

8 'It follows from this passage that a man is not fit to be a 
king, unless he possesses twelve virtues' (Phi. tr.). 

4 ' Some say : I keep harm from man' (Phi. tr.). 

5 ' That is, I make the account of good works and sins ' (Phi. 
tr.) ; praka/anr gaaan&karas kila puayap&payos sankhyim aham 
karomi (Sansk. tr.). Cf. Yasna XXXII, 6, b. 



26 YAOTS AND 



night, with offerings of libations well accepted 1 . 
I will come unto thee for help and joy, I, Ahura 
Mazda ; the good, holy Sraosha will come unto thee 
for help and joy ; the waters, the plants, and the 
Fravashis of the holy ones will come unto thee for 
help and joy. 

10. 'If thou wantest, O Zarathustra, to destroy the 
malice of Dafevas and Men, of the Yitus and Pai- 
rikas, of the oppressors, of the blind and of the 
deaf 2 , of the two-legged ruffians 8 , of the two-legged 
Ashemaoghas 4 , of the four-legged wolves ; 

u. 'And of the hordes with the wide front, with 
the many spears 6 , with the straight spears, with the 
spears uplifted, bearing the spear of havock ; then, 
recite thou these my names every day and every 
night 



1 Yasd-bereta: priptena d&iena; 

* The Kavis and the Karapans, the blind and the deaf, are 
those ' who cannot see nor hear anything of God/ Those terms 
were current in the theological language of the Sassanian times to 
designate the unbelievers. An edict, promulgated by king Yazd- 
gard III (fifth century A.C.) to make Zoroastnsm the state religion 
in Armenia, had the following words: 'You must know that any 
man who does not follow the religion of Mazda is deaf, blind, 
and deceived by Ahriman's devs' (Elisaeus, The War of Vartan). 

8 Or murderers (mairya); according to the Parsis highway- 
men (^ !,). 

* The heretics. Casuists distinguish three kinds of Ashemaogha : 
the deceiver (frlftfcr), the self-willed (khdt 'dfishak), and the 
deceived (filftak). The first and worst is one who knowingly 
leads people astray, making forbidden what is lawful, and lawful 
what is forbidden ; the second is one who follows his own will and 
reason, instead of applying to a Dastftr (a spiritual guide) for 
direction; the third is one who has been led astray by another. 

B Drafra means also banner: the Persian \jj>> derived from 
draff a, has preserved the two meanings. The Sanskrit translation 
has jastra, the Persian has 



ORMAZD VAST, 2^ 



12. C I am the Keeper 1 ; I am the Creator and 
the Maintainer 2 ; I am the Discerner 3 ; I am 
the most beneficent Spirit. 

' My name is the bestower of health ; my name 
is the best bestower of health. 

'My name is the Athravan 4 ; my name is the 
most Athravan-like of all Athravans. 

' My name is Ahura (the Lord). 

' My name is Mazdor u (the all-knowing). 

'My name is the Holy; my name is the most 
Holy. 

'My name is the Glorious; my name is the 
most Glorious. 

'My name is the Full-seeing; my name is 
the Fullest-seeing. 

'My name is the Far-seeing; my name is the 
Farthest-seeing. 

13. 'My name is the Protector; my name is the 
Well-wisher; my name is the Creator; my name 
is the Keeper ; my name is the Maintainer. 

'My name is the Discerner; my name is the 
Best Discerner. 

'My name is the Prosperity-producer 6 ; my 
name-is the Word of Prosperity 6 . 

'My name is the King who rules at his will; 

'I keep the creation' (Phi. tr.). 

'I created the world and I maintain it' (ibid.). 

' 1 can know what is useful and what is hurtful' (ibid.). 

' The priest/ 

c I impart increase to the righteous ' (Phi. tr.). 

Doubtful Fjuj6-miLthr6 is used in several passages as the 
name of a part of the Avesta, Yasna LVIII [LVII], which appears 
to be called so from the presence in it of the words fruja, 
fjftma/, 'thriving, causing to thrive,' which aptly express its 
contents. 



28 YAOTS AND 



my name is the King who rules most at his 
will. 

c My name is the liberal King 1 ; my name is the 
most liberal King. 

14. 'My name is He who does not deceive; my 
name is He who is not deceived. 

'My name is the good Keeper; my name is He 
who destroys malice; my name is He who con- 
quers at once; my name is He who conquers 
everything; my name is He who has shaped 
everything 2 . 

'My name is All weal; my name is Full weal; 
my name is the Master of weal. 

15. 'My name is He who can benefit at his 
wish ; my name is He who can best benefit at 
his wish. 

'My name is the Beneficent One; my name is 
the Energetic One; my name is the most Bene- 
ficent. 

' My name is Holiness; my name is the Great 
One; my name is the good Sovereign; my name 
is the Best of Sovereigns. 

'My name is the Wise One; my name is the 
Wisest of the Wise; my name is He who does 
good for a long time. 

1 6. ' These are my names. 

'And he who in this material world, O Spitama 
Zarathurtra ! shall recite and pronounce those names 
of mine 8 either by day or by night; 

1 Nfima, translated &p&t, and interpreted Khutii rt. The 
Sanskrit translator has misread &zftt for pAt, and translated 
svatantra, independent. 

2 The commentator observes orthodoxly, 'everything good/ 
8 That is to say, who will recite this Ya^t. 



ORMAZD YAtfT. 29 



17. ' He who shall pronounce them, when he rises 
up or when he lays him down; when he lays him 
down or when he rises up ; when he binds on the 
sacred girdle * or when he unbinds the sacred girdle ; 
when he goes out of his dwelling-place, or when he 
goes out of his town, or when he goes out of his 
country and comes into another country ; 

1 8. 'That man, neither in that day nor in that 
night, shall be wounded by the weapons of the foe 
who rushes A6shma-like 2 and is Druf-minded ; not 
the knife, not the cross-bow, not the arrow, not the 
sword, not the club, not the sling-stone 3 shall reach 
and wound him. 

19. ' But those names shall come in to keep him 
from behind and to keep him in front* from the 
Drii^* unseen, from the female Varenya fiend 6 , from 
the evil-doer 6 bent on mischief 1 , and from that fiend 
who is all death, Angra Mainyu. It will be as if 
there were a thousand men watching over one 
man 8 . 

20. ' " Who is he who will smite the fiend in order 
to maintain thy ordinances ? Teach me clearly thy 



1 The aiwyaonghanem or kdsti (see Vendtddd XVIII, 
p. 191, note 4). 

* Or 'with anger.' 

9 Akavfi, akavd, ishavd, kareta, vazra, translated kartari, 
akra, j-ara, jastrikS, va^ra. 

4 Min akhar u lain (Phi. tr.); pr*shMa[ta]s purata^a 
(Sansk. tr.). 

B Interpreted as the demon of lust and envy. Cf. Vendidid, 
Introd. IV, 23. 

6 Kayadha, translated kftstdr (PhL), 'the impairer;' kadar- 
thaka (Sansk.), 'he who holds for nothing, who makes slight of.' 

7 Doubtful. The Phi. tr. has c who impairs living creatures/ etc. 

Cf. Yt. XIII, 71. 



30 YAtfTS AND S?R6ZAHS. 

rules for this world and for the next, that Sraosha 
may come with Vohu-Man6 and help whomsoever 
thou pleasest V 

21. 'Hail to the Glory of the Kavis 2 ! Hail to the 
Airyanem Va*ah s ! Hail to the Saoka 4 , made by 
Mazda ! Hail to the waters of the Ditya fi ! Hail 
to Ardvi 6 , the undefiled well ! Hail to the whole 
world of the holy Spirit! 

1 Yathd ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord 7 

'Ashem Vohti: Holiness is the best of all 
good . . . . 8 

22. f We worship the Ahuna Vairya 9 . We worship 
Asha-Vahi5ta, most fair, undying, and beneficent 10 . 
We worship Strength and Prosperity and Might and 
Victory and Glory and Vigour n . We worship Ahura 
Mazda, bright and glorious. 

1 Y6ngh6 hatSm 12 : All those beings 13 of whom 
Ahura Mazda knows the goodness 14 for a sacrifice 

From Yasna XLIV, 16; cf. Vendftttd VIII, 20. 

See Sfrdzah I, 9, p. 7, note 2. 

Lin Vfe> ; see Vended, p. 3. 

Saoka; see Sfidzah I, 3. 

See Vendtddd, p 5, note 2. 

Ardvi Sftra Andhita, the great goddess of the waters; see 
Yt V. 

See above, p. 23. 8 See above, p. 22. 

The prayer yathft ahft vairyd, known as Ahuna vairya 
(Honover), from the first words in it: ahd vairyd. See above, 

P-*3- 

10 Or 'the fairest Amesha-Spewta;' cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 7. 

u Impersonated as gods, to obtain from them the benefits of 
which they are the impersonations. 

18 A formuk found at the end of most chapters of the Yasna and 
imitated from Yasna LI [L], 22. 

18 The Amesha-Spetas (Pahl. Comm. ad Yasna XXVII, fin.). 

14 The benefits of which they dispose, and which they impart as 
rewards to the righteous. 



ORMAZD YAtfT. 



[performed] in holiness, all those beings, males 1 and 
females 2 , do we worship. 

23. ' Yatha ahft vairy 6 : The will of the Lord is 
the law of holiness .... 

* I bless the sacrifice and the prayer unto Ahura 
Mazda, bright and glorious, and his strength and 
vigour V 

(Bahman Yart 4 .) 

24. * Zarathortra ! keep thou for ever that man 
who is friendly [to me] from the foe unfriendly [to 
me] ! Do not give up that friend unto the stroke 
(of the foe), unto vexations to be borne ; wish no 
harm unto that man who would offer me a sacrifice, 
be it ever so great or ever so small, if it has reached 
unto us, the Amesha-Spewtas. 

25. ' Here is Vohu-Mand, my creature, O Zara- 
thimra 1 here is Asha-Vahirta, my creature, Zara- 
thustra! here is Klwathra-Vairya, my creature, O 
Zarathurtra ! here is Speta-Armaiti, my creature, 
O Zarathmtra ! here are Haurvat^ and Amereta^, 
who are the reward of the holy ones fi , when freed 
from their bodies, my creatures, O Zarathostra ! 

26. ' Thou knowest this, and how it is, O holy 
Zarathustra ! from my understanding and from my 
knowledge; namely, how the world first began 6 , 
and how it will end T . 

1 The first three. 

2 The last three, whose names are feminine. 

8 Which he will impart in return to his worshippers. 

4 See above, p. ai. 

8 As the Genii who preside over plants and waters, they are 
very likely entrusted with the care of feeding the righteous in 
Paradise. Cf. Yt. XXII, 18. 

From Yasna XXVIII, 12. 7 Cf. Yasna XXX, 4. 



32 VASTS AND 



' A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies 1 1 

1 A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies ! 
* A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies ! 

2 7- *[We worship] the well-shapen, tall-formed 
Strength; Verethraghna, made by Ahura ; the crush- 
ing Ascendant 2 , and Spe#ta-Armaiti. 

28. ' And with the help of Spe^ta-Armaiti, break 
ye 8 asunder their * malice, turn their minds astray, 
bind their hands, make their knees quake against one 
another, bind their tongues B , 

'When, O Mazda I shall the faithful smite the 
wicked 6 ? When shall the faithful smite the Dnig-? 
When shall the faithful smite the wicked ? ' 

29. Then Zarathurtra said: 'I threw you back 
into the earth 7 , and by the eyes of Spercta-Armaiti 8 
the ruffian was made powerless 9 . 

30. * We worship the powerful Gaokerena 10 , made 
by Mazda ; the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda. 

31. ' We worship the memory of Ahura Mazda, to 
keep the Holy Word. 

1 We worship the understanding of Ahura Mazda, 
to study the Holy Word. 

1 We worship the tongue of Ahura Mazda, to speak 
forth the Holy Word. 



1 Yasna LXVIII, 15 (LXVII, 50). See Siidzah I, 20. 

8 Refers probably to the Izeds mentioned in the preceding 
paragraph. 

* Of the foes alluded to 24. Derezvan; see Yt XI, 2. 

6 Cf. Yasna XLVIII [XLVII], a. 

7 I follow the reading zamerena, which is followed by the 
Pahlavi translation too. In the Yasna IX, 15 (46) Zarathiwtra is 
said to have obliged the DaSvas to hide themselves in the earth. 

Cf. Yt XIX, 94. Cf. Vend, IX, 12-13. 
10 See Sir6zah I, 7. 



ORMAZD YAST. 33 



'We worship the mountain that gives under- 
standing, that preserves understanding 1 ; [we worship 
it] by day and by night, with offerings of libations 
well-accepted 2 . 

3 2. * We worship that creation [of Ahura' s], Spewta- 
Armaiti ; and the holy creations of that creature and 
of Asha [Vahirta], that are foremost in holiness 8 . 

* Here I take as lord and master 4 the greatest of 
all, Ahura Mazda ; to smite the fiend Angra Mainyu ; 
to smite A&mia of the wounding spear 6 ; to smite 
the Mizainya fiends a ; to smite all the Dafevas and 
the Varenya fiends 6 ; to increase Ahura Mazda, 



1 That mount is called in later literature Mount jd^t&r (the 
Pahlavi translation of ushi-d arena, the keeper of understanding). 
According to the Bundahk (XII, 15), it stands in Seistan. High 
mountains, being nearer heaven, are apt to become in the spirit of 
mythology the seat of heavenly beings or treasures. It was on the 
top of a mountain that Ahura revealed the law (see Vd. XXII, 19 
[53]); the first man and king, Gayomarth, ruled on a mountain 
and was called Gar-sh&h, the king of the mountain. When the 
Kayanian family failed, the Iranians went to Mount Alborz and 
found there Kai Kobid waiting for his fate. 

9 The order of the text differs in one series of manuscripts, in 
which it begins with 31 ; then comes 29 with the following 
additional words : 

'A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies! (three times; 
cf. above, 26.) 

We worship the Fravashi of the man whose name is Asmd- 
0anva#/; then I will worship the Fravashis of the other 
holy ones who were strong of faith 5 (Yt XXII, 37). 
Asm6-A0anva/ was one of the first followers of Zarathustra, and with 
his name begins the enumeration of the Fravashis (Yt. XIII, 96). 

Then follows 30, and then again 31 with the Ashexn Vohft ; 
and then the additional passage, 'We worship . . . . / is repeated 
twice. 

8 VispSrad XIX, a. 

* As ahu and ratu, that is, as temporal chief and spiritual guide. 

3 See Vend. Introd. IV, 22. e Ibid. 23. 

[23] D 



34 YASTS AND 



bright and glorious ; to increase the Amesha-Spe^tas ; 
to increase the star TLrtrya \ the bright and glorious ; 
to increase the faithful men ; to increase all the holy 
creatures of the Beneficent Spirit 

'Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all 
good . . . . 2 

33. * [Give] unto that man s brightness and glory, 
give him health of body, give him sturdiness of body, 
give him victorious strength of body, give him full 
welfare of wealth, give him a virtuous* offspring, 
give him long, long life, give him the bright, all- 
happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones 5 . 

1 May it come according to my blessing 1 

' A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies 7 1 
(three times.) 

1 Come to me for help, O Mazda ! 

' We worship the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength, 
and Verethraghna, made by Mazda, and the crushing 
Ascendant 8 . 

* We worship Rima ./i&ftstra, and Vayu who works 
highly and is more powerful to destroy than all 
other creatures. That part of thee do we worship, 
O Vayu, that belongs to Spe^ta Mainyu. We wor- 
ship the sovereign Sky, the boundless Time, and 
the sovereign Time of the long Period 9 . 

'Ashem Vohti: Holiness is the best of all 
good . . . / 

1 See Ywt VIII. As above, p. 22. 

9 Who shall offer thee a sacrifice. This paragraph is taken 
from Yasna LXVIII, u (LXVII, 32), where it is addressed to the 
Waters : 'Ye, good waters, give unto that man who will offer you 
a sacrifice . . . / 

* Sujfla (Sansk. tr. ad Yasna LXI, 13). 

5 This clause serves as a conclusion to all Yarts. 

6 From Yasna LXVIII, 20 (LXVII, 52). 

T Cf. above, 26. 8 Cf. Sfrdzah I, ?o 9 Ibid. 21. 



HAPTAN VAST. 35 



II. HAPTAN VAST. 

The Yart of the seven Amshaspands is recited on the first seven 
days of the week, that is to say, on the days consecrated to the 
Amesha-Spewtas. In fact it is nothing more than an extract from 
the Sfrdzahs, being composed of the first seven formulas in their 
two forms: i-g=S!r6zah I, 1-7; 6-io=S?r6zah II, 1-7. 
Then come four sections which are the original part of the Y&rt 
( "-IS)- 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced 1 1 .... 

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good 1 .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the Da&vas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [H&vani], 
the holy and master of holiness * . . . . 

I. 

i 2 . To Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and 
to the Amesha-Spe^tas ; 

To Vohu-Man6 ; to Peace, whose breath is 
friendly, and who is more powerful to destroy than 
all other creatures ; to the heavenly Wisdom, made 
by Mazda, and to the Wisdom acquired through the 
ear, made by Mazda ; 

2 B - To Ash.a-Vahi.sta, the fairest ; to the much- 
desired Airyaman; to the instrument made by 
Mazda ; and to the good Saoka, with eyes of love, 
made by Mazda and holy; 

1 The rest as above, Yt. I, o. * Str8zah 1, 1-2. 

8 Strdzah I, 3-4. 

D2 



36 YAtfTS AND 



To Khshathra-Vairya; to the metals ; to Mercy 
and Charity. 

3 1 . To the good Spe^ta-Armaiti, and to the 
good R&ta, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and 
holy; 

To Haurvata/, the master; to the prosperity 
of the seasons and to the years, the masters of 
holiness ; 

And to Ameretd^, the master; to fatness and 
flocks ; to the plenty of corn ; and to the powerful 
Gaokerena, made by Mazda. 

4 2 . (At the Gih Hdvan) : To Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures and to Rlma //z&stra. 

(At the Gdh Rapithwin) : To Asha-Vahhta and 
to Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda. 

(At the Gfih Uzlren) : To ApSm Nap&f, the tall 
lord, and to water, made by Mazda. 

5 8 . (At the Gfih Aiwisrftthrem) : To the Fravashis 
of the faithful and to the females that bring forth 
flocks of males; to the prosperity of the seasons ; to 
the well-shapen and tall-formed Strength ; to Vere- 
thraghna, made by Ahura, and to the crushing 
Ascendant. 

(At the Gih U^ahin) : To the holy, devout, fiend- 
smiting Sraosha, who makes the world grow; to 
Rashnu-Razuta and to Arstbt, who makes the world 
grow, who makes the world increase s ; 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification ! 

Yathd ahU vairyd : The will of the Lord is the 
law of holiness .... 



Sirdzah I, g-7- * Sfi6zah I, 7. 

9 Sir6zah I, 7. 



HAPTAN YAtfT. 37 



II. 

6 \ We sacrifice unto Ahura Mazda, bright and 
glorious ; we sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spetas, the 
all-ruling, the all-beneficent. 

We sacrifice unto V oh u- Man 6, the Amesha- 
Spewta; we sacrifice unto Peace, whose breath is 
friendly, and who is more powerful to destroy than 
all other creatures ; we sacrifice unto the heavenly 
Wisdom, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the 
wisdom acquired through the ear, made by Mazda. 

7 2 . We sacrifice unto Asha-Valmta, the fairest, 
the Amesha-Spewta ; we sacrifice unto the much- 
desired Airyaman ; we sacrifice unto the instrument 
made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the good Saoka, 
with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy. 

We sacrifice unto Khshathra-Vairya; we sacri- 
fice unto the metals ; we sacrifice unto Mercy and 
Charity. 

8 3 . We sacrifice unto the good Spe^ta-Armaiti ; 
we sacrifice unto the good Rita, with eyes of love, 
made by Mazda and holy. 

We sacrifice unto Haurvatl*, the Amesha- 
Spe^ta; we sacrifice unto the prosperity of the 
seasons; we sacrifice unto the years, the holy and 
masters of holiness. 

We sacrifice unto Ameretd/, the Amesha-Speta ; 
we sacrifice unto fatness and flocks ; we sacrifice unto 
the plenty of corn ; we sacrifice unto the powerful 
Gaokerena, made by Mazda. 

9 4 . (At the G&h Hivan) : We sacrifice unto 

1 Strfizah II, 1-2. a Sfrdzah II, 3-4- 

* Sirdzah II, 5-7. 4 Strdzah II, 7. 



38 VASTS AND slRdZAHS. 

Mithra, the lord of wide pastures ; we sacrifice unto 
Rlma ./ifofistra. 

(At the G&h Rapithwin) : We sacrifice unto Asha- 
Vahista and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda. 

(At the G&h Uzlren) : We sacrifice unto ApSm 
Napi*, the swift-horsed, the tall and shining lord, 
the lord of the females ; we sacrifice unto the holy 
waters, made by Mazda. 

IO 1 . (At the Gih Aiwisrtithrem) : We sacrifice 
unto the good, powerful, beneficent Fravashis of the 
faithful; we sacrifice unto the females who bring 
forth flocks of males ; we sacrifice unto the prosperity 
of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the well-shapen, 
tall-formed Strength; we sacrifice unto Verethraghna, 
made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the crushing 
Ascendant. 

(At the Gfih U^ahin) : We sacrifice unto the holy, 
tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha, who makes the 
world grow, the holy and master of holiness; we 
sacrifice unto Rashnu-Razirta ; we sacrifice unto 
Arstbt, who makes the world grow, who makes the 
world increase. 

III. 

ii. Let the Y&tus be crushed, O Zarathurtra a ! 
both Da&vas and men 8 . 

Who is he in whose house, O Spitama Zara- 
thiwtra ! every Dru^ is destroyed, every 
perishes, when he pronounces these words 4 : 



13. It is he who takes the seven Amesha-Spe^tas, 

1 Str6zahII, 7. a Or: Let Zarathiwtra crush the Yfttus. 

8 The YStus are either demons or men : the man-Tim is the 
sorcerer, the wizard. Cf. Yt. VIII, 44. 
4 Doubtful 6 I am unable to make anything of this section. 



HAPTAN VAST. 39 



the all-ruling, the all-beneficent, as a shield x against 
his enemies. 

We worship the Law of the worshippers of Mazda ; 
we worship the waters coming in the shape of a horse 2 , 
made by Mazda. 

14-15. He has renounced trespasses and faults, 
O Zarathustra ! he has renounced all trespasses and 
faults 3 , O Zarathu^tra! when he throws down 4 the 
destroyer of Vohu-Man6 and his words 6 , with a 
hundred times hundredfold, with a many times 
manifold preaching and smiting, and he takes away 
the Law of Mazda, that was carried away as a pri- 
soner e , from the hands of the [ungodly], who are 
destroyed by his strength. 

Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all 
good .... 

16. Yatha ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord is 
the law of holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and the prayer, the strength 
and vigour 

Of Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and of the 
Amesha-Spewtas ; 

Of Vohu-Man6; of Peace, whose breath is 
friendly 7 . . , . 

1 Doubtful a See Yt. VIII, 5, 4* ; cf. 20. 

* Atare-vltaremaibyd .... vimrao/; cf. taraish . . . . vt sarem 
xnruyg (Yasna XII, 4 [XIII, 16]): dtarexnan seems to be a sin 
by commission, vitareman a sin by omission. 

* Doubtful (frasp&vare j : frasp&is generally translated ram S- 
tftntan). 

5 Doubtful. 

* Cf. Yt. XIII, 100 ; XIX, 86; fravajnam is the reverse of 
uzvazha/(l.l.). 

\ The rest as above, i. 



40 YASTS AND 



Of Asha-VahLrta, the fairest; of the much-desired 
Airyaman l . . . . 

Of Khshathra-Vairya, of the metals l ---- 
Of the good Spe^ta-Armaiti and of the good 



Of Haurvat^, the master 2 .... 

Of Amereti/, the master 2 .... 

(At the Gih Hivan) : Of Mithra 3 ____ 

(At the Gih Rapithwin) : Of Asha-VahLrta 8 ____ 

(At the Gdh Uzlren) : Of the high lord ApSm 
NapA/' .... 

(At the G&h Aiwisrftthrem) : Of the Fravashis of 
the faithful 4 ____ 

(At the G4h U sahin) : Of the holy, devout, fiend- 
smiting Sraosha, who makes the world grow; of 
Rashnu-Razirta and of Ars&t, who makes the world 
grow, who makes the world increase. 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of 
body, give him sturdiness of body, give him victorious strength of 
body, give him full welfare of wealth, give him a virtuous offspring, 
give him long, long life, give him the bright, all-happy, blissful 
abode of the holy Ones. 

1 The rest as above, 2. a The rest as above, 3. 

8 The rest as above, 4. * The rest as above, 5. 

6 Who shall offer a sacrifice to the Amshaspands. 



ARDIBEHICT VAST. 4! 



III. ARDIBEHLST 1 VAST* 

This Yajt is for a great part devoted to the praise of the Air- 
yaman prayer, which is described as driving away all the diseases 
and plagues that have been brought upon the world by Angra 
Mainyu; and when the writer passes from the glorification of 
Airyaman to that of Asha-Vahirta, which is put into the mouth 
of Angra Mainyu himself ( 13 seq.), he makes him speak of Asha- 
Vahirta just in the same way, and ascribe him just the same powers, 
as he himself has done with legard to Airyaman. This is owing 
to the fact of Airyaman being invoked in company with Asha- 
Vahwta in the second formula of the Sir6zah 2 . 

The powers ascribed to Asha-Vahma have their origin in the 
twofold nature of that Amesha-Speta, who being, m his abstract 
character, the impersonation of the highest element in Mazdeism, 
Divine Order and Holiness 8 , and in his concrete character, the 
genius who presides over the mightiest of physical elements, Fire 4 , 
is one of the most powerful and dreaded opponents of Angra 
Mainyu 6 . On the other hand, Airyaman is the genius to whom 
Ahura Mazda applied to heal the nine, and ninety, and nine hundred 
and nine thousand diseases created by Angra Mainyu 6 . 

This Yart is recited every day at the Ghs H&van, Rapithwin, 
and Aiwisrfohrem (Anquetil). 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced X .... 

Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [H&vani], 
the holy and master of holiness 7 .... 

1 Ard-f-behijt is the Parsi form for Asha vahirta, ard being 
derived from arta, the Persian form corresponding to the Zend 
asha. 

2 See Slrdzah I, 3, and below the introductory formula. 
8 See Vend. Introd. IV, 30. * Ibid. 33. 

B See Yt. XVII, 18. 6 Fargaxd XXII and Introd. 

7 As above, Yt. I, o. 



42 YAtfTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

Unto Asha-Vahwta, the fairest; unto the much- 
desired Airyaman, made by Mazda, and unto the 
good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and 
holy 1 ; 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glori- 
fication. 
Yath& ah ft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 



I. 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathtirtra, 
saying: 'That thou mayest increase Asha-VahLrta, 
O Spitama Zarathurtra ! with hymns of praise, with 
performance of the office, with invocations, holy 
words, sacrifice, blessings, and adoration once to 
abide in the shining luminous space, in the beautiful 
abodes 8 for the sacrifice and invocation of us, the 
Amesha-Spe#tas 4 ' .... 

2. Zarathurtra said: 'Say unto me the right 
words, such as they are, O Ahura Mazda! that I 
may increase Asha-Vahfcta, with hymns of praise, 

1 Sir6zaJb I, 3. 

2 Several manuscripts add here the full invocation of the greater 
Sirdzah: 

'We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahwta, the fairest, the Amesha- 

Speta; 

We sacrifice unto the much-desired Airyaman ; 
We sacrifice unto the instrument, made by Mazda ; 
We sacrifice unto the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by 

Mazda and holy/ 

8 The Gard-nmdnem or Paradise; see Yasna XVI, 7 [XVII, 
42], Phi. tr. 

* The principal clause appears to be wanting, unless Zarathurtra 
is supposed to interrupt Ahura. One might also understand the 
sentence in an optative sense : ' Mayest thou increase . . . .' 



ARDIBEHLST VAST. 43 

with performance of the office, with invocations, holy 
words, sacrifice, blessings, and adoration, once to 
abide in the shining luminous space, in the beautiful 
abodes, for the sacrifice and invocation of you, the 
Amesha-Spe#tas. 

3 1 . '. . . . I proclaim Asha-Vahirta : if I pro- 
claim Asha-VahLrta, then easy is the way to the 
abode of the other Amesha-Spetas 2 , which Ahura 
Mazda keeps with Good Thoughts, which Ahura 
Mazda keeps with Good Words, which Ahura Mazda 
keeps with Good Deeds 3 ; 

4. ' (Easy is the way to the Gard-nmlna of Ahura 
Mazda) : the Gar6-nmina is for the holy souls, and 
no one of the wicked can enter the Gar6-nmfina and 
its bright, wide, holy ways ; (no one of them can go) 
to Ahura Mazda. 



II. 

5. 'The Airyaman prayer* smites down the 
strength of all the creatures of Angra Mainyu, of the 
Yatus and Pairikas 5 . It is the greatest of spells, 
the best of spells, the very best of all spells ; the 



1 Here again it seems as if a paragraph had been lost : c Ahura 
Mazda answered : Proclaim thou Asha-Vahuta ; if thou proclaimest 
Asha-Vahtaa . . . .Then Zarathiutra replied : I proclaim Asha- 
Vahirta . . . .' 

9 The Gardthmdn. 

8 An allusion to the three Paradises of Humat, Hukht, Hvarjpt, 
through which the souls of the blessed pass to Gardthman (Yt 
XXII, 15). 

* The prayer known as Airyama-ishyd; see Vendtd&d XXI, 

11-12. 

8 See Vend. Introd. IV, 20-21. 



44 YASTS AND 



fairest of spells, the very fairest of all spells ; the 
fearful one amongst spells, the most fearful of all 
spells ; the firm one amongst spells, the firmest of 
all spells; the victorious one amongst spells, the 
most victorious of all spells; the healing one 
amongst spells, the best-healing of all spells. 

6. ' One may heal with Holiness, one may heal 
with the Law, one may heal with the knife, one may 
heal with herbs, one may heal with the Holy Word : 
amongst all remedies this one is the healing one 
that heals with the Holy Word ; this one it is that 
will best drive away sickness from the body of the 
faithful : for this one is the best-healing of all 
remedies *. 

7. 'Sickness fled away [before it], Death fled 
away; the Dava fled away, the Dafiva's counter- 
work 2 fled away; the unholy Ashemaogha 8 fled 
away, the oppressor of men fled away. 

8. c The brood of the Snake fled away ; the brood 
of the Wolf fled away ; the brood of the Two-legged * 
fled away. Pride fled away ; Scorn fled away ; Hot 
Fever fled away ; Slander fled away ; Discord fled 
away; the Evil Eye fled away. 

9. ' The most lying words of falsehood fled away ; 
the ahi 6 , addicted to the Y&tu, fled away; the 

1 Cf. Vendiddd VII, 44 (118). That Airyainan made use of 
the Holy Word (of spells) to cure diseases appears from Vend. 
XXII, 6 seq. 

2 Paityftra: every work of Ahura was opposed and spoiled by 
a counter-work of Angra Mainyu. Cf. Bundahir I, 23 seq.; 
Ill, 13 seq.; Vend. I; see Ormazd et Ahriman, 195 seq. 

8 See Yt. I, 10 and note 4. 

4 The Ahrimanian creatures belonging to mankind, the Mair- 
yas and Ashemaoghas (Yt. I, 10). 

* The courtezan; cf. Vend XXI, 17 (35), and Introd. IV, 2g. 



ARDIBEHLST VAST. 45 

Gahi, who makes one pine 1 , fled away ; the wind that 
blows from the North 2 fled away; the wind that 
blows from the North vanished away. 

10. 'He it is who smites me that brood of the 
Snake, and who might smite those Da6vas by thou- 
sands of thousands, by ten thousands of ten thou- 
sands ; he smites sickness, he smites death, he smites 
the Davas, he smites the Da6va's counter-work, 
he smites the unholy Ashemaogha, he smites the 
oppressor of men. 

1 1. ' He smites the brood of the Snake ; he smites 
the brood of the Wolf; he smites the brood of the 
Two-legged. He smites Pride ; he smites Scorn ; he 
smites Hot Fever ; he smites Slander ; he smites 
Discord ; he smites the Evil Eye. 

12. * He smites the most lying words of falsehood ; 
he smites the Gahi, addicted to the Y&tu ; he smites 
the Gahi, who makes one pine. He smites the 
wind that blows from the North; the wind that 
blows from the North vanished away. 

13. 'He it is who smites me that brood of the 
Two-legged, and who might smite those Da6vas, by 
thousands of thousands, by ten thousands of ten 
thousands. Angra Mainyu, who is all death, the 
worst-lying of all Dafevas, rushed from before him : 

14. ' He exclaimed, did Angra Mainyu : " Woe is 
me ! Here is the god Asha-Vahista, who will smite 
the sickliest of all sicknesses, who will afflict the 
sickliest of all sicknesses ; 

1 The Zend is Kahvaredhaini, a synonym of which, Kah- 
varedha, Yasna LXI, 2 [LX, 7], is translated impairer of 
Glory, which means very likely : he who makes one c dwindle, 
peak, and pine' (cf. Vend. XVIII, 62-64). 

From the country of hell; cf. Vend. VII, 2; XIX, i; Yt. 
XXII, 25. 



46 YASTS AND stRdZAHS. 

1 " He will smite the deadliest of all deaths, he will 
afflict the deadliest of all deaths ; 

* " He will smite the most fiendish of all fiends, he 
will afflict the most fiendish of all fiends ; 

' " He will smite the most counter-working of all 
counter-works, he will afflict the most counter- 
working of all counter-works ; 

6 " He will smite the unholy Ashemaogha, he will 
afflict the unholy Ashemaogha ; 

e " He will smite the most oppressive of the 
oppressors of men, he will afflict the most oppres- 
sive of the oppressors of men. 

15. '" He will smite the snakiest of the Snake's 
brood, he will afflict the snakiest of the Snake's 
brood ; 

1 " He will smite the most wolfish of the Wolfs 
brood, he will afflict the most wolfish of the Wolfs 
brood ; 

'"He will smite the worst of the two-legged 
brood, he will afflict the worst of the two-legged 
brood ; 

' " He will smite Pride, he will afflict Pride ; 

' " He will smite Scorn, he will afflict Scorn ; 

'"He will smite the hottest of hot fevers, he 
will afflict the hottest of hot fevers ; 

c " He will smite the most sknderous of slanders, 
he will afflict the most slanderous of slanders ; 

' " He will smite the most discordant of discords, 
he will afflict the most discordant of discords ; 

c " He will smite the worst of the Evil Eye, he will 
afflict the worst of the Evil Eye. 

1 6. '"He will smite the most lying words of 
falsehood, he will afflict the most lying words of 
falsehood ; 



ARDIBEHLST VAST. 47 

'" He will smite the ahi, addicted to the Yatu, 
he will afflict the ahi, addicted to the Yitu ; 

c " He will smite the ahi, who makes one pine, 
he will afflict the Gahi, who makes one pine ; 

c "He will smite the wind that blows from the 
North, he will afflict the wind that blows from the 
North." 

17 *. c The Drug- will perish away, the Dru^ 1 will 
perish ; the Dru^ will rush, the Drt^ will vanish. 
Thou perishest away to the regions of the North, 
never more to give unto death the living world of 
the holy spirit 2 . 

1 8. * For his brightness and glory I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard 8 , namely, unto Asha-Vahijta, the fairest, 
the Amesha-Speta. Unto Asha-Vahirta, the fairest, the Amesha- 
Speata, we offer up the libations, the Haoma and meat 4 , the 
baresma 5 , the wisdom of the tongue e , the holy spells 7 , the speech, 
the deeds 8 , the libations, and the rightly-spoken words. 

'Y*h& hdtam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda knows 
the goodness 9 .... 

19. c Yatha ahu vairyd : The will of the Lord is the kw of 
holiness . 

1 One set of manuscripts insert : ' He will smite the wind that 
blows against the North, he will afflict the wind that blows against 
the North; the wind that blows against the North [will perish].' 
This is most likely an interpolation, as the wind that blows against 
the North (if this is the right meaning of apard ap&khtara, as 
opposed to pourv6 ap&khtara) blows against Angra Mainyu. 

a Cf. VendtdSd VIE, 21. 

8 That is to say, worth being accepted : cf. Yt. X, 32 ; the Parsis 
translate, 'a sacrifice heard [from the lips of the Dasturs]' (& JU.JLA u 
^js-^ ^ly jl ^ji ; East India Office, XXV, 42). 

* The Haoma and Myazda. B See Vend. Ill, i, note 2. 

9 Hizvd danghah: huzvftn d&nkfh (Phi. tr.) means ( the 
right formulas.' 

T 'TheAvert4 (PhLtr.). 

8 The several operations of the sacrifice. 

9 As above, Yt. I, 22. 



48 YASTS AND 



1 1 bless the sacrifice and prayer and the strength 
and vigour of Asha-Vahma, the fairest ; of the much- 
desired Airyaman, made by Mazda ; and of the good 
Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and 
holy 1 . 

1 Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good 2 . . . . 

' [Give] unto that man s brightness and glory, give him health 
of body ; .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy Ones/ 



IV. KHORDAD YAST. 

Only the first two sections of this Yart refer to its nominal 
object, HaurvataV, the Genius of Health and Waters (Vend. Introd. 
IV, 7, 33). The rest of the Yart refers to the performance of the 
Bareshnfim ceremony as being the test of the true Zoroastrian. 
As the Bareshnftm purification was performed by Airyaman to 
drive away the myriads of diseases created by Angra Mainyu*, its 
laudation is not quite unaptly inserted in a Yart devoted to the 
Genius of Health. 

The Khord&d Yarf can be recited at any time. It is better to 
recite it during the Gah Ujahin, on the day Khord&d (Anquetil). 

The text is conupt. 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I .... 

Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the Da6vas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani], 
the holy and master of holiness v . . . . 

Unto Haurvati/, the master ; unto the prosperity 

1 Cf. Slrdzah I, a. As above, p. 22. 

8 Who shall offer a sacrifice to Asha-Vahirta; cf. Yt I, 33 
and notes. 

* Vend. XXII, 20 [54]. 
8 As above, p. 22 and notes. 



KHORDAD VAST. 49 



of the seasons and unto the years, the masters of 
holiness \ 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glori- 
fication. 

Yath ahu vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

We sacrifice unto Haurvat&, the Amesha-Spe^ta ; 
we sacrifice unto the prosperity of the seasons ; we 
sacrifice unto the years, the holy and masters of 
holiness 2 . 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathu^tra, 
saying : ' I created for the faithful the help, the 
enjoyments, the comforts, and the pleasures of 
Haurvat& We unite them with him who would 
come up to thee as one of the Amesha-Spewtas, 
as he would come to any of the Amesha-Spe#- 
tas, Vohu-Man6, Asha-VahLrta, Khshathra-Vairya, 
Speflta-Armaiti, Haurvatetf, and Ameret 

2. ' He who against the thousands of thousands 
of those Davas, against their ten thousands of ten 
thousands, against their numberless myriads would 
invoke the name of Haurvati/, as one of the 
Amesha-Spewtas, he would smite the Nasu, he would 
smite Ha$i 3 , he would smite Bad 3 , he would smite 
Safini 3 , he would smite Bft^i 3 . 

3 *. ' I proclaim the faithful man as the first [of 
men] ; if I proclaim the faithful man as the first 



1 Slr6zah I, 6. Sfrdzah II, 6. 

8 Names of DaSvas. According to the Parsi translator of the 
Dlnkart (vol. ii, p. 6g), Haji is 'he who makes sceptical;' Ban is 
1 he who gives rise to the harking disease;' Sa&ni is ' he who causes 
harm ; ' B ftgi is * he who preys upon.' 

4 The translation of this paragraph is quite conjectural. 

[23] E 



50 YASTS AND 



[of men] \ then Rashnu RazLsta 2 , then every heavenly 
Yazata of male nature in company with the Amesha- 
Spewtas will free the faithful man 3 

4. ' From the Nasu, from Hasi, from Ga^i 4 , from 
Sa6ni, from Btigi ; from the hordes with the wide front, 
from the hordes with the many spears uplifted, from 
the evil man who oppresses, from the wilful sinner 6 , 
from the oppressor of men, from the Ydtu, from the 
Pairika, from the straying way. 

5. ' How does the way of the faithful turn and 
part from the way of the wicked 6 ? ' 

Ahura Mazda answered : ' It is when a man pro- 
nouncing my spell, either reading 7 or reciting it by 
heart, draws the furrows 8 and hides 9 there himself, 
[saying]: 

6. "'I will smite thee, O Dru^! whomsoever thou 
art, whomsoever thou art amongst the Druf es that 
come in an open way, whomsoever thou art amongst 
the Drupes that come by hidden ways, whomsoever 
thou art amongst the Drupes that defile by contact ; 
whatsoever Dru^ thou art, I smite thee away from 
the Aryan countries ; whatsoever Dru^ thou art, I 
bind thee; I smite thee down, O Drufl I throw 
thee down below, O Dru^ ! " 



If I am one of the faithful. 

The Genius of Truth, Yt. XII. 

Will free me as one of the faithful. 

Sic; cf. 2. 

Stari; cf. tudes Iramennes, II, 135. 

How is the wicked known from the faithful one ? 

7 Mario: Phi. 6 sm fir it, Sansk. adhyeti; safarftnit, posha- 
yati (pustakayati? Yasna XIX, 6 [9]). 

8 The furrows for the Bareshntim purification (Vend. IX). 

9 Doubtful: gaozaiti; read yaozdiiti (? he cleanses). 



KHORDAD VAST. 51 



7. c He draws [then] three furrows 1 : I proclaim 
him one of the faithful ; he draws six furrows l : I 
proclaim him one of the faithful ; he draws nine 
furrows 1 : I proclaim him one of the faithful. 

8. ' The names of those (Amesha-Spewtas) smite 
the men turned to Nasus 2 by the Drupes ; the seed 
and kin of the deaf 3 are smitten, the scornful 4 are 
dead, as the Zaotar Zarathujtra blows them away to 
woe 5 , however fierce, at his will and wish, as many 
as he wishes. 

9. 'From the time when the sun is down he 
smites them with bruising blows; from the time 
when the sun is no longer up, he deals deadly blows 
on the Nasu with his club struck down, for the 
propitiation and glorification of the heavenly gods. 

10. ' O Zarathurtra ! let not that spell be shown 
to any one, except by the father to his son, or by 
the brother to his brother from the same womb, 
or by the Athravan to his pupil 6 in black hair, 
devoted to the good law, who, devoted to the good 
law, holy 7 and brave, stills all the Drupes 8 . 

ii.' For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard, namely, unto Haurvata/, the Amesha-Spe/zta. 
Unto Haurvata"/, the Amesha-Spewta, we offer up the libations, 
the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the tongue, the 

1 To perform the Bareshnftm ; cf. Vend. XXII, 20 [54]. 

9 Reading nasum kereta; cf. nasu-kereta (Vend. VII, 26 



8 See above, p. 26, note 2. 

* SaoJa; cf. Yt. XXII, 13. 

* Du*av/: both the reading and the meaning are doubtful. 
Mr. West suggests, 'sends to hell' (reading dusanghv/ or 
du sang ha/). 

6 Doubtful. 7 Reading ashava instead of asd ava. 

8 Cf, Yt. XIV, 46. 

E 2 



52 YASTS AND 



holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations, and the rightly- 
spoken words. 

12. 'Yatha ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the stiength and vigour 
of Haurvata7, the master; of the prosperity of the seasons and of 
the years, the masters of holiness. 

( Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good 

'[Give] unto that man * brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones/ 



v. ABAN VAST. 

The Abftn Yart (or Yart of the Waters) is devoted to the great 
goddess of the waters, the celebrated Ardvi Sura An&hita, the 
'AMU of the Greeks. Ardvi Sura Andhita (' the high, powerful, 
undefiled')is the heavenly spring from which all waters on the earth 
flow down ; her fountains are on the top of the mythical mountain, 
the Hukairya, in the star region. Her descent from the heavens 
is described in 85 seq. ; it reminds one of the Indian legend of 
the celestial Gangl 

This Yajt contains much valuable infoimation about the his- 
torical legends of Iran, as it enumerates the several heroes who 
worshipped Ardvi Sftra and asked for her help. First of all is 
Ahura himself ( 16) ; then came Haoshyangha ( 21), Yima ( 25), 
Azi Dahka( 29), Thra&aona ( 33), Keresispa ( 37), Fran- 
ghrasyan ( 41), Kava Usa ( 45), Husravah ( 49), Tusa ( 53), 
VaSsaka's sons ( gf), Vafra Navaza ( 61), ffimispa ( 68), 
Ashavazdah, the son of Pourudh&khrti, and Ashavazdah and Thrita, 
the sons of Sdyu*dii ( 72), Vistauru ( 76), Y6lrta ( 81); the 
Hvfivas and the Naotaras ( 98), Zarathurtra ( 103), Kava Vf^- 
tispa ( 107), Zairivairi ( 112), Are^a/-aspa and Vandaremaini 
("6). 

This enumeration is interrupted by a description of the descent 
of Ardvi Sftra from the heavens ( 83-89), and of certain rules for 
her sacrifice given by herself to Zarathurtra ( 90-97). This in- 
terruption may have been intentional, as it takes place just when 

1 Who shall have sacrificed to HaurvataV. 



ABAN VAST. 53 



the course of the emimeiation brings us to the times of Zarathiutia 
and of the institution of the new religion. 

The Yart is opened with a laudation of the benefits bestowed by 
Ardvi Sura ( 1-16), and it closes with a description of her gar- 
ments and apparel. 

The first record of the worship of Ardvi Sura is in a cuneiform 
inscription by Artaxerxes Mnemon (404-361), in which her name 
is corrupted into Anahata. Artaxerxes Mnemon appears to have 
been an eager promoter of her worship, as he is said ' to have first 
erected the statues of Venus- Anihita ('A^podtnp, 'Ai/atri&v) in 
Babylon, Suza, and Ecbatana, and to have taught her worship to 
the Persians, the Bactrians, and the people of Damas and Sardes 9 
(Clemens Alexandrinus, Protrept. g, on the authority of Berosus ; 
about 260 B c.). My friend M. Hale"vy suggests to me that the 
detailed and circumstantial description of Anahita's appearance and 
costume (in 126-131) shows that the writer must have described 
her from a consecrated type of statuary. 

The principal data of the Greek writers on Anhita will be 
found in Wmdischmann's Essay (Die persische Anahita oder 
Anai'tis, 1856). One must be cautious in the use of the Greek 
sources, as the Greeks, with the eclectic turn of their mind, were 
inclined to confound under the name of Anahita all the great 
female deities of Asia Minor, and her name became a common 
appellation for the Aphrodites as well as for the Artemides of the 
East. 

o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced ! . . . . 

Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thujtra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hftvani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto the good Waters, made by Mazda ; unto the 
holy water-spring ARDVI AN&HITA ; unto all waters, 
made by Mazda ; unto all plants, made by Mazda 1 , 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yathi aha vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 



1 Sirdzah 1, 10. 



54 YASTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

I. 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathurtra, 
saying: ' Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! 
unto this spring of mine, Ardvi Sftra Anihita, the 
wide-expanding 1 and health-giving, who hates the 
Da6vas and obeys the laws of Ahura, who is worthy 
of sacrifice in the material world, worthy of prayer in 
the material world ; the life-increasing 2 and holy, the 
herd-increasing and holy, the fold-increasing and 
holy, the wealth-increasing and holy, the country- 
increasing and holy ; 

2. 'Who makes the seed of all males pure 8 , who 
makes the womb of all females pure for bringing 
forth 4 , who makes all females bring forth in safety, 
who puts milk into the breasts of all females in the 
right measure and the right quality ; 

3. The large river, known afar, that is as large as 
the whole of the waters that run along the earth ; 
that runs powerfully from the height Hukairya 6 
down to the sea Vouru-Kasha 6 . 

4. 'All the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are 

1 ' As she comes down to all places' (Phi. tr. ad Yasna LXV, i 
[LXVI, 2]). 

2 Adhu, translated g$in; 'she makes life longer* (AspendiSrji). 
Perhaps dhu will be better translated springs, rivers (reading 
gby instead of^in; cf. Yt. VIII, 29). 

8 * Pure and sound, without blood and filth f (PhJ. tr.). 

* ' So that it may conceive again ' (Phi. tr.). 

5 'Hftgar the lofty is that from which the water of Arfidvfvstir 
leaps down the height of a thousand men' (Bundahw XII, 5, tr. 
West); cf. infia, 96, 121, 126; Yt. XIII, 24. The Hukairya is 
mentioned again 25 and Yt. IX, 8; Yt. X, 88; Yt. XV, 15; 
Yt. XVII, 28. It appears to be situated in the west (Bundahw 
XXIV, 17; II, 7; Minokhired XLIV, 12). 

fl The earth-surrounding Ocean; cf. Vendlddd V, 15 (49) seq., 
text and notes. 



ABN VAST. 55 



boiling over, all the middle of it is boiling over, when 
she runs down there, when she streams down there, 
she, Ardvi Sftra Anahita, who has a thousand cells 
and a thousand channels I : the extent of each of 
those cells, of each of those channels is as much as a 
man can ride in forty days, riding on a good horse. 

5. 'From this river of mine alone flow all the 
waters that spread all over the seven Karshvares ; 
this river of mine alone goes on bringing waters, 
both in summer and in winter. This river of mine 
purifies the seed in males, the womb in females, the 
milk in females' breasts. 

6. ' I, Ahura Mazda, brought it down with mighty 
vigour, for the increase of the house, of the borough, 
of the town, of the country, to keep them, to main- 
tain them, to look over them, to keep and maintain 
them close. 

7. ' Then Ardvi Sftra Anfihita, O Spitama Zara- 
thujtra! proceeded forth from the Maker Mazda. 
Beautiful were her white arms, thick as a horse's 
shoulder or still thicker ; beautiful was her . . . . 2 , 
and thus came she, strong, with thick arms, thinking 
thus in her heart : 

8. ' "Who will praise me? Who will offer me a 
sacrifice, with libations cleanly prepared and well- 
strained, together with the Haoma and meat ? To 
whom shall I cleave, who cleaves unto me, and 
thinks with me, and bestows gifts upon me, and is 
of good will unto me? 8 " 

9. * For her brightness and glory, I will offer her 

1 See the description 101 seq. 

2 Zaoja or zuja, an &ira \fy6pfvw, seems to designate a part 
of the body; cf. 126. 

3 Cf. 11,124- 



56 VASTS AND siRdZAHS. 

a sacrifice worth being heard ; I will offer up unto 
the holy Ardvi Stira Anfihita a good sacrifice with 
an offering of libations ; thus mayest thou advise 
us when thou art appealed to! Mayest thou be 
most fully worshipped, O Ardvi Sftra Anihita! with 
the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the 
wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the 
words, with the deeds, with the libations, and with 
the rightly-spoken words. 

'Y6#hS h&tSm 1 : All those beings of whom 
Ahura Mazda .... 

II. 

10. ' Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra 1 unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura An&hita, the wide-expanding and health-giving, 
who hates the Da6vas and obeys the laws of Ahura, who is worthy 
of sacrifice in the material world, worthy of prayer in the mate- 
rial world; the life-increasing and holy, the herd-increasing and 
holy, the fold-increasing and holy, the wealth-increasing and holy, 
the country-increasing and holy 8 ; 

1 1. ' Who drives forwards on her chariot, holding 
the reins of the chariot. She goes, driving, on this 
chariot, longing for men 3 and thinking thus in her 
heart : " Who will praise me ? Who will offer me 
a sacrifice, with libations cleanly prepared and well- 
strained, together with the Haoma and meat ? To 
whom shall I cleave, who cleaves unto me, and 
thinks with me, and bestows gifts upon me, and is of 
good will unto me ? " 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice, worth 
being heard 4 .... 

1 As above, p. 30 , 9 is repeated at the end of every chapter. 
8 io= 2. 

8 Viz. for their worshipping ; cf. Yasna XXIII, 2 [5], paitima- 
re#ti=Phl. hfimfttnft, they hope, they expect. Cf. 123. 
* As above, 9. 



ABAN VAST. 57 



III. 

12. c Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathurtral unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sfira Anlhita l . . . . 

13. 'Whom four horses carry, all white, of one 
and the same colour, of the same blood, tall, crush- 
ing down the hates of all haters, of the Davas and 
men, of the Yitus and Pairikas, of the oppressors, 
of the blind and of the deaf 2 . 

c For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

IV. 

14. c Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathiutra! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sftra Anihita .... 

15. Strong and bright, tall and beautiful of form, 
who sends down by day and by night a flow of 
motherly 8 waters as large as the whole of the waters 
that run along the earth, and who runs powerfully*. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

V. 

1 6. ( Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathustra! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sftra Anhita .... 

17. * To her did the Maker Ahura Mazda offer up 
a sacrifice 6 in the Airyana Vafe^h, by the good river 
DSitya 6 ; with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, 
with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, 
with the words, with the deeds, with the libations, 
and with the rightly-spoken words 7 . 

1 As above, 10. 2 Cf. p. 26, note 2. 

8 Doubtful; cf, Yt. VIII, 47. * Cf. above, 3. 

6 Cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 9, 40. This is the heavenly prototype of 
the Mazdean sacrifice as it was later shown to men by Zara- 
thurtra; cf. 101. 

6 Cf. Yt. I, 4 and notes. 7 Cf. Yt. Ill, 18. 



58 YA5TS AND 



1 8. c He begged of her a boon, saying: " Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sflra An&hita ! 
that I may bring the son of Pourushaspa, the holy 
Zarathu-rtra, to think after my law, to speak after my 
law, to do after my law ! " 

19. 'Ardvi Sftra Anihita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and begging that she would grant him that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

VI. 

20. ' Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathurtra! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sftra An&hita .... 

21. 'To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradhita 1 , 
offer up a sacrifice on the enclosure a of the Kara 3 , 
with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, and 
ten thousand lambs. 

22. 'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Stira And- 
hita! that I may become the sovereign lord of 
all countries, of the Da&vas and men, of the 

1 Haoshyangha \*as the first king of the Paradh&a (PSsh- 
ddyan) dynasty (cf. above, p. 7, note 2, and Bundahir XXXI, i). 
It is related in Firdausi's Shh N&mah that he was the grand- 
son of Gayomarth, the first man and king, and the son of Sy&mak ; 
that his father having been killed by the black Dfv, he encountered 
him at the head of an army of lions, tigers, birds, and Paris, and 
destroyed him; he then succeeded his grandfather, and reigned 
supreme over the seven Eeshvars of the earth. 

9 Doubtful: upabda=upabanda,as thribda (Yt. VIII, 55)= 
thribanda; it appears from Yt. XV, 7 that the place meant here 
is the TaSra which is said in theBundahij (V, 7) to be surrounded 
by the Albdrz (the Kara). 

8 The Kara berezaiti or Alb6rz,in MSzandarSn, south of the 
Caspian Sea, was supposed to surround the earth ; cf. Yt. X, 56. 



ABAN YAOT. 59 



Yitus and Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind and 
the deaf ; and that I may smite down two thirds l 
of the Davas of Mfizana 3 and of the fiends of 
Varena 3 ." 

23. ' Ardvi Sftra AnShita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

6 For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

VII. 

24. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathujtra! unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sura Anlhita .... 

25. 'To her did Yima KhshaSta 4 , the good shep- 
herd, offer up a sacrifice from the height Hukairya 5 , 
with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten 
thousand lambs. 

26. * He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Stira An- 
hita ! that 1 may become the sovereign lord of all 
countries, of the Dafivas and men, of the Y&tus 
and Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind and the 
deaf; and that I may take from the Dafevas both 



1 A formula frequently used, not only in the Avesta, but also in 
the Shah N&mah. 

* The DaSvas in Mfizandadn. Mzandarn was held a place 
of resort for demons and sorcerers, and was in the Iranian legend 
nearly the same as Ceylon is in the Rfimftya*a. The Damivand 
mountain, to which Aid Dahka was bound, is the southern 
boundary of Mdzandardn. 
f 8 See Vend. Introd. IV, 23 ; cf. this Yart, 33. 

4 Yima Khsha&a (ffemshtd), as an earthly king, ruled over 
the world for a thousand years, while he made immortality reign 
in it (Yt. IX, 8 ; XV, is ; cf. Vendtted II, Introd.). 

5 See above, 3. 



6O YASTS AND 



riches and welfare, both fatness and flocks, both weal 
and Glory V 

27. * Ardvi Stira Anihita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

VIII. 

28. 'Offer up a saciifice, Spitama Zarathtutra I unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sfira An&hita .... 

29. 'To her did Asi Dahika 2 , the three-mouthed, 
offer up a sacrifice in the land of Bawri 3 , with a 

1 After his brother Takhma Urupa, who reigned before him, had 
been killed and devoured by Angra Mainyu (Yt. IV, u, note), 

8 When Yima began to sin and lost thejE&aiend (Glory), he was 
overthrown by A*i DahSka (ZohSk), who seized the power and 
reigned in his place for a thousand years (cf. Yt. XIX, 33 seq.). 

Azi DahSka, literally ' the fiendish snake/ was first a mythical 
personage ; he was the ( snake ' of the storm-cloud, and a counter- 
part of the Vedic Ahi or Vrztra. He appears still in that 
character in Yart XIX seq., where he is described struggling 
for the jfifoaren6 against Atar (Fire), in the sea Vourukasha 
(Vendfdfid, Introd. IV, 38; cf. this Yswt, 90). His struggle 
with Yima KhshaSta bore at first the same mythological character, 
'the shining Yima' being originally, like the Vedic Yama, a solar 
hero : when Yima was turned into an earthly king, Asi undeiwent 
the same fate. In the ShSJi Nmah he is described as a man 
with two snakes springing from his shoulders : they grew there 
through a kiss of Ahriman's. For the myths referring to A*i, see 
Ormazd et Ahriman, 91-95. 

8 Babylon (cf. Yt. XV, 19). The usurper Ad, being anon- Aryan, 
was identified with the hereditary foe, the Chaldaeans : the name of 
Babylon united in it, at the same time, a dim historical record of 
the old Assyrian oppression, then shaken off and forgotten, and 
an actual expression of the national antipathy of the Iranians 
for their Semitic neighbours in Chaldsea. After the conquest of 
Persia by the Musulmans, Azi was turned at last into an Arab. 
The original seat of the Azi myths was on the southern coast 
of the Caspian Sea (tudes Irardennes, II, 210). 



VAST. 6 1 



hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, and ten 
thousand lambs. 

30. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this boon, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra 
Andhita ! that I may make all the seven Karshvares 
of the earth empty of men." 

31. 'Ardvi Sftra Anihita did not grant him that 
boon, although he was offering libations, giving gifts, 
sacrificing, and entreating her that she would grant 
him that boon. 

* For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice 

IX. 

32. 'Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathortra! unto Ardvi 
Sura Andhita .... 

33. 'To her did Thra&aona 1 , the heir 2 of the 
valiant Athwya clan, offer up a sacrifice in the four- 
cornered Varena 3 , with a hundred male horses, a 
thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs. 

34. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi SAra Ani- 
hita ! that I may overcome A#i Dahdka, the three- 
mouthed, the three-headed, the six-eyed, who has a 
thousand senses 4 , that most powerful, fiendish Dru^ 1 , 

1 ThraStaona (Feitdtin), son of Athwya, conquered Aai and 
bound him to Mount Dam&vand, where he is to stay till the end of 
the world, when he shall be let loose and then killed by Keres&spa 
(Vendid&l, Introd.IV, 12, 18; Bahman Yart III, 55 seq. j Bund. 
XXIX, 8 seq.)- 

* Vfs6-puthra=Pahlavi barbttft (see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 

139)- 

8 Cf. Vend. I, 18 and Introd IV, 12. Modern tradition sup- 
poses Varena to have been the region of Ghilan (very likely on 
account of its proximity to MUzandardn and Mount Damftvand). 

* See Yt, X, 82, note. 



62 YASTS AND 



that demon, baleful to the world, the strongest 
Drug* that Angra Mainyu created against the mate- 
rial world, to destroy the world of the good prin- 
ciple 1 ; and that I may deliver his two wives, 
Savanghav& and Erenav&6 2 , who are the fairest 
of body amongst women, and the most wonderful 
creatures in the world 8 ." 

35. ' Ardvi Sftra Andhita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 



X. 

36. ' Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathiwtra ! unto Ardvi 
Sura An&iita 

37. 'To her did Keresispa 4 , the manly-hearted, 
offer up a sacrifice behind the Vairi Pisanah 5 , with a 

1 Cf. Yt. XIX, 37. 

a The two daughters of Yima, who had been ravished by A*i : 
they are called m the Sh&i N&nah Shahrindz and ArnavSz 
(see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 213, Savanghav et ErenavS^). 
Thragtaona delivered them, and then married them ; he had a son, 
Airyu, fiom Arnav^z, and two sons from ShahrinSz, Tura and 
Sainma ; Airyu, Tura, and Sairima became the kings of Irfin, Turfin, 
and Rum. 

8 Cf. Yt IX, 14; XV, 24; XVII, 34. 

* Kerestepa (Garsh&sp), one of the greatest heroes in the 
Avestean romance, although Firdausi has all but passed him over 
in silence. See his feats, Yt. XIX, 38 seq.; cf. Yt. V, 27 seq.; 
Yasna IX, 10 (29); Vend. I, 10 (36). 

5 The Pirfn valley, south of Cabool. It was in the land of 
Cabool that the Keresispa legend had its rise, or at least it was 
localised there. It is in the plain near the Pfrfn valley that 
Keres&pa lies asleep, till the end of the world comes (see Yt. 
XIII, 6 1, note). 



VAST. 63 



hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs. 

38. 'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me 
this, good, most beneficent Ardvi Stira Anihita ! 
that I may overcome the golden-heeled Ga^darewa 1 , 
though all the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are 
boiling over ; and that I may run up to the strong- 
hold of the fiend on the wide, round earth, whose 
ends lie afar." 

39. ' Ardvi Sura Andhita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon. 

1 For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 



1 A Parsi poem, of a very late date, gives further details about 
Gaadarewa. It was a monster who lived ( in the sea, on the moun- 
tain, and in the valley; ' he was called Pashnah zarah, because the 
sea did not go above his heel (a misinterpretation of his Avestean 
epithet zairi pdshna, golden-heeled, the Zend zairi being mis- 
taken for the Persian zarah tj, sea) ; his head would rise to the 
sun and rub the sky ; he could swallow up twelve men at once. 
Keres&spa fought him for nine days and nine nights together ; he 
drew him at last from the bottom of the sea and smashed his head 
with his club : when he fell on the ground, many countries were 
spoiled by his fall (Spiegel, Die traditionnelle Literatur der Parsen, 
P- 339> and West, Pahlavi Texts, II, pp. 369 seq.). 

In the Vedic mythology the Gandharva is the keeper of Soma, 
and is described now as a god, now as a fiend, according as he 
is a heavenly Soma-priest or a jealous possessor who grudges it 
to man. "What was the original form of the myth in Mazdeism 
is not clear. In the Shh Ndmah he appears as the minister of 
A*i Dahika. Cf. Yt. XV, 2 7 seq., and Ormazd et Ahriman, pp. 99, 
notes; 215, note x. 



64 YASTS AND 



XL 

40. * Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathujtra I unto this spnng 
of mine, Ardvi Sflra Anfihita .... 

41. 'To her did the Turanian murderer, Frangra- 
syan 1 , offer up a sacrifice in his cave under the 
earth 2 , with a hundred male horses, a thousand 
oxen, ten thousand lambs. 

42. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra An- 
hita ! that I may seize hold of that Glory 3 , that is 
waving in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha 3 and 

1 Frangrasyan (AfrSsyib) was king of TMn for two hundred 
years. The perpetual struggle between Lin and TMn, which 
lasts to this day, was represented in the legend by the deadly and 
endless wars between Afr&sy&b and the Iranian kings from Mino- 
ihr down to Kai Khosrav (Kavi Husravah). The chief cause of 
the feud was the murder of Syivakhsh (SydvarsMna) by AfrSsy^b ; 
Sydvakhsh, son of Kai Kaus (Kava Lisa), having been exiled by 
his father, at the instigation of his mother-in-law, took refuge 
with Afr&sya*b, who received him with honour, and gave him his 
daughter in marriage: but the fortune of Syavakhsh raised the 
jealousy of AfrSsyib's brother, Karsivaz (Keresavazda), who by 
means of calumnious accusations extorted from AfrSsySb an 
order for putting him to death (see Yt. XIX, 77). Syivakhsh 
was revenged by his son, Kai Khosrav, the grandson of Afrsyab 
(Yt IX, 22). 

2 Hakan6 : Firdausi speaks of a cave on the top of a moun- 
tain, near Barda (on the frontier of Adarbai^n), where Afrfisydb, 
when defeated, took refuge, and was discovered by Kai Khosrav; 
that cave was called ' the cave of Aftsyb * (hang i Afritsifib ; Shfih 
N&nah, IV, 196). In an older form of the legend, that cave was 
a palace built under-ground, with walls of iron and a hundred 
columns : its height was a thousand times a man's size (Aoge- 
maidl, 61; cf. Bund. XII, 20: see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 225, 
Le Hang d' AMsydb). 

8 Yt. XIX, g6 seq. 



VAST. 65 



that belongs to the Aryan people, to those born and 
to those not yet born, and to the holy Zarathnrtra." 

43. Ardvi Sftra Anihita did not grant him that 
boon. 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XII. 

44. ( Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura An&hita .... 

45. ' To her did the great, most wise Kavi Usa 1 
offer up a sacrifice from Mount Erezifya 2 , with a 
hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs. 

46. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi SAra Ani- 
hita ! that I may become the sovereign lord of all 
countries, of the Da&vas and men, of the Y4tus and 
Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind and the deaf." 

47. ' Ardvi Stira Anihita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XIII. 

48. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra I unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura An&hita .... 

49. l To her did the gallant Husravah 8 , he who 

1 Kavi Usa (Kai Kaus), the son of Kavi Kavlta (Kai Kob&d) 
and the father of Sy&vakhsh (see p. 64, note i), was the second 
king of the Kayanian dynasty. 

8 Mount Erezifya has been supposed to be the same as the 
Sariphi Montes hi Ptolemaeus, which stretch between Margiana 
and Ariana (Burnouf, Commentaire sur le Yasna, p. 436). 

3 Kai Khosrav; cf. p. 64, notes i and 2. 

Ml F 



66 VASTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

united the Aryan nations into one kingdom l , offer 
up a sacrifice behind the .ATa&Sasta lake 2 , the deep 
lake, of salt waters 8 , with a hundred male horses, a 
thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs. 

50. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant me 
this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra Anihita ! 
that I may become the sovereign lord of all coun- 
tries, of DaSvas and men, of the Yitus and Pairikas, 
of the oppressors, the blind and the deaf; and that 
I may have the lead in front of all the teams 4 and 
that he may not pass through 6 the forest 6 , he, the 
murderer 7 , who now is fiercely 8 striving against me 9 
on horseback 10 ." 

51. 'Ardvi Stira AnsLhita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice . . . . 

XIV. 

52. c Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathmtra I unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura AnShita ---- 

53. ' To her did the valiant warrior Tusa u offer 

1 Doubtful. 

9 A lake in AdarbafcSn, with salt water: fish cannot live in it 
(Bundahu XXII, 2). It is the same as Lake Urumiah. Its name 
is miswritten in Firdausi (Khan^ast for JT&^ast, CM.^ for 



3 Doubtful; see fitudes Iraniennes, II, uruyfcpa, p. 179. 

4 In pursuing his adversary. 5 Doubtful (cf. Yt. XV, 32). 
6 The White Forest (ibid.). 7 AurvasSra (ibid.). 

8 Doubtful 9 Trying to flee and escape. 

10 Possibly, 'vieing in horses 1 (for the swiftness of the race): 
cf. Yt. XIX, 77. 

11 Tusa, in the ShSh Nftmah Tus; one of the most celebrated 
Fahlavans of Kai Ehosrav; he was the son of king Naotara 
(N6dar). 



YAST. 67 



worship on the back of his horse \ begging swift- 
ness for his teams, health for his own body, and 
that he might watch with full success 2 those who 
hated him, smite down his foes, and destroy at one 
stroke his adversaries, his enemies, and those who 
hated him 3 . 

54. 'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me 
this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Stira Anihita ! 
that I may overcome the gallant sons of VaSsaka 4 , 
by the castle Khshathrd-saoka, that stands high up 
on the lofty, holy Kangha a ; that I may smite of the 
Turanian people their fifties and their hundreds, 
their hundreds and their thousands, their thousands 
and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands 
and their myriads of myriads." 

55. * Ardvi Sftra Anihita granted him that boon e , 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

I He offers not a full sacrifice, being on horseback. 
8 Not to be taken by surprise. 

Cf.Yt.X,u,94, 114. 

4 Va&saka was the head of the Vis ah family, whose foremost 
member was Pfr&n Vfsah, the clever and upright minister of 
Afrsyb, the Turanian Nestor; but his counsels were despised 
for the common ruin, and himself perished with all his sons in the 
war against Irn. 

II Kangha was a town founded by Sy&varsh&na, during his 
exile, in a part of the land of Khv&izm, which is described as 
an earthly paradise. This city was built on the top of a high 
mountain (Aatare-Kangha, Yt. XIX, 4). The Khshathrd-saoka 
castle is called in the Sh&h N&mah Kang dear, 'the fortress of 
Kangha;' and, possibly, Khshathrd-saoka is a mere epithet of 
dvarexn, ' the castle of kingly welfare/ 

6 According to the Sh&h Nftmah, Kang de* was stormed by 
Kai Khosrav himself. 

F 2 



68 YASTS AND 



XV. 

56. 'Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathurtral unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Stoa Andhita .... 

57. 'To her did the gallant sons of Va&saka offer 
up a sacrifice in the castle Khshathrd-saoka, that 
stands high up on the lofty, holy Kangha, with a 
hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs. 

58. ' They begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
us this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Stira Anfi- 
hita! that we may overcome the valiant warrior 
Tusa, and that we may smite of the Aryan people 
their fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and 
their thousands, their thousands and their tens of 
thousands, their tens of thousands and their myriads 
of myriads V 1 

59. 'Ardvi Stira An&hita did not grant them that 
boon. 

1 For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XVL 

60. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra 1 unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sfkra AnShita .... 

6 1. ' The old 2 Vafra Naviza worshipped her, when 
the strong fiend-smiter, Thra6taona, flung him up in 
the air in the shape of a bird, of a vulture 3 . 

1 Cf. 53-54- 

3 Doubtful (pourvd); perhaps ' the man of the primitive faith' 
(the paoiryd-/ka6sha; cf. Yt. XIII, o, note): the sacrifice he 
offers is quite a Zoroastrian one (cf. 17, 104, and note 2 to the 
latter). 

8 An allusion is made here to a myth, belonging to the 
ThraStaona cyclus, of which no other trace is found in the Avesta 
(except in Yt XXIII, 4). It referred most likely to the time when 



ABAN VAST. 69 



62. ' He went on flying, for three days and three 
nights, towards his own house ; but he could not, he 
could not turn down. At the end of the third night, 
when the beneficent dawn came dawning up, then he 
prayed unto Ardvi Sftra AneLhita, saying : 

63. c " Ardvi Sura Anihita! dothou quickly hasten 
helpfully and bring me assistance at once. I will 
offer thee a thousand libations, cleanly prepared and 
well strained, along with Haomas and meat, by the 
brink of the river Rangha, if I reach alive the earth 
made by Ahura and my own house." 

64. 'Ardvi Sftra AnShita hastened unto him in 
the shape of a maid, fair of body, most strong, tall- 
formed, high-girded, pure, nobly born of a glorious 
race, wearing shoes up to the ankle, wearing a 
golden . . . . 1 9 and radiant *. 

65. 'She seized him by the arm: quickly was it 
done, nor was it long till, speeding, he arrived at the 
earth made by Mazda and at his own house, safe, 
unhurt, unwounded, just as he was before. 

[66. 'Ardvi SAra Anihita granted him that boon, as 
he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
entreating that she would grant him that boon 3 .] 

* For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

ThraStaona, on his march to Bawri, the capital of A*i (cf. 29), 
arrived at the Tigris (the Rangha); an angel then came and taught 
him magic to enable him to baffle the sortileges of A*i (Shfih 
N&mah). We have in this passage an instance of his talents as 
a wizard, and one which helps us to understand why Thra&taona 
is considered as the inventor of magic, and his name is invoked in 
spells and incantations (Hamzah Ispahanensis, p. 101 ; Anquetil, 
II, pp. 135 seq.). Cf. Yt. XTV, 40 and note 

1 Urvtkh $na, a word of doubtful meaning. 

9 Cf.Yt.V,78, 126. 

8 This clause is no doubt spurious here. 



7O YASTS AND 



XVII. 

67. ' Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathortra I unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anihita ---- 

68. ' To her did 6mspa l offer up a sacrifice, with 
a hundred horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs, when he saw the army of the wicked, of the 
worshippers of the Da6vas, coming from afar in 
battle array. 

69. 'He asked of her a boon, saying : " Grant me 
this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra Anihita ! 
that I may be as constantly victorious as any one of 
all the Aryans 2 ." 

70. ' Ardvi Sftra Anfthita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon. 

( For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XVIII. 

71. ' Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathurtra ! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anfihita ---- 

72. 'To her did Ashavazdah, the son of Pouru- 



the prime minister of Vfotaspa (Kai Gftrtsp), 
appears here in the character of a warrior, though generally he is 
described as a sage and a prophet (Yasna XLIX [XLVTII], 9; 
LI [L], 8; ZardOrt N&nah; yet cf. Yt XXIII, 2). The Shdh 
NSmah has an episode which recalls this one, although very 
different in its spirit, and more in accordance with the general 
character of <?4m&spa. At the moment when the two armies meet 
together, Gfat&sp asks <7&msp to reveal to him the issue of the 
encounter : ffm&sp obeys reluctantly, as the issue is to be fatal 
to the Iranians. G&m&sp belonged to the Hvdva family. 
8 Or, f as all the rest of the Aryans together.' 



ABN VAST. 71 



dhikhrti \ and Ashavazdah and Thrita, the sons of 
Siyusdri 2 , offer up a sacrifice, with a hundred horses, 
a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, by ApSm 
Napi/, the tall lord, the lord of the females, the 
bright and swift-horsed 8 . 

73. c They begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
us this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra 
AnShita ! that we may overcome the assemblers of 
the Turanian Ddnus 4 , Kara Asabana 6 , and Vara 
Asabana, and the most mighty Dftra6ka6ta, in the 
battles of this world 6 . 

74. c Ardvi Sftra Anfihita granted them that 
boon, as they were offering up libations, giving gifts, 
sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant 
them that boon. 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XIX. 

75. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sftra Anihita .... 

76. 'Vistauni, the son of Naotara 7 , worshipped 

1 Cf. Yt. XIII, 112. Ashavazdah, the son of PouradMkhrti, 
is one of the immortals who will come forth to help Saoshyaw/ in 
the final struggle (Bundahlr XXIX, 6; Yt. XIX, 95). 

2 Cf. Yt. XIII, 113. 8 Cf. above, p. 6, note x. 
* A Turanian tribe, Yt. XIII, 37-38. 

5 Asabana is very likely an epithet; possibly, 'who kills with 
a stone ' (asan-ban) ; the sling was, as it seems, the favourite weapon 
of the Dfcnu (Yt XIII, 38). 

e This section is the only fragment left of the legend of 
Ashavazdah, which must have been an important one, since 
Ashavazdah is one of the immortals (Yt. XIX, 95). 

T Cf. Yt. XIII, 102. Vistauru, being the son of Naotara, is the 
brother of Tusa, which identifies him with the Gustahm (**;. f) 
in the 8Mb N&rcah: Nddar had two sons, Tus and Gustahm. 



72 YASTS AND siR6ZAHS. 

her by the brink of the river Vltanghuhaiti l , with 
well-spoken words, speaking thus : 

77. '"This is true, this is truly spoken, that I 
have smitten as many of the worshippers of the 
Da6vas as the hairs I bear on my head. Do thou 
then, O Ardvi Sflra Anhita ! leave me a dry pas- 
sage, to pass over the good Vltanghuhaiti." 

78. 'Ardvi Sfira Andhita hastened unto him in 
the shape of a maid, fair of body, most strong, tall- 
formed, high-girded, pure, nobly born of a glorious 
race, wearing shoes up to the ankle, with all sorts of 
ornaments and radiant 2 . A part of the waters she 
made stand still, a part of the waters she made flow 
forward, and she left him a dry passage to pass 
over the good Vltanghuhaiti 3 . 

[79. ' Ardvi Stira Anfihita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon 4 .] 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

xx. 

80. 'Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathujtra 1 unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sfira Andhita .... 

81. 'To her did Y6wta, one of the Fryanas 6 , 

A river not mentioned elsewhere. 

Cf. 64, 126. 

Firdausi has no mention of this episode. 

Spurious. 

This legend is fully told in the Pahlavi tale of Gdrti Fiy&n 
(edited and translated by West) : a sorcerer, named Akht, comes 
with an immense army to the city of the enigma-expounders, 
threatening to make it a beaten track for elephants, if his enigmas 
are not solved. A Mazdayasnian, named Gdrti Fryftn, guesses the 



VAST. 73 



offer up a sacrifice with a hundred horses, a thou- 
sand oxen, ten thousand lambs on the Psdvafepa 1 of 
the Rangha. 

82. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : "Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi SAra Ani- 
hita ! that I may overcome the evil-doing Akhtya, 
the offspring of darkness, and that I may answer the 
ninety-nine hard riddles that he asks me maliciously, 
the evil-doing Akhtya, the offspring of darkness." 

83. * Ardvi Stira Anihita granted him that boon, 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon. 

' For her brightness and gloiy, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XXI. 

84. * Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathur tra ! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sura AnShita .... 

85. 'Whom Ahura Mazda the merciful ordered 
thus, saying : " Come, O Ardvi Stira An4hita, come 
from those stars * down to the earth made by Ahura, 

thirty-three riddles proposed by Akht; then, in his turn, he 
proposes him three riddles which the sorcerer is unable to guess, 
and, in the end, he destroys him by the strength of a Nlrang. 
Cf. Yt. XIII, 120. This tale, which belongs to the same wide- 
spread cycle as the myth of Oedipus and the Germanic legend of 
the Wartburg battle, is found in the Zarathurtra legend too 
(VendidSd XIX, 4). 

1 Perhaps an affluent of the Rangha (cf.Yt.Xm, 19, 19; XV, 27). 

9 Between the earth and the region of infinite light there are 
three intermediate regions, the star region, the moon region, and 
the sun region. The star region is the nearest to the earth, 
and the sun region is the remotest from it Ardvi Sura has 
her seat in the star region (Yasna LXV [LXIV], i ; PhL tr.); 
cf.Yt.V, 132. 



74 YASTS AND 



that the great lords may worship thee, the masters 
of the countries, and their sons. 

86. ' " The men of strength l will beg of thee swift 
horses and supremacy of Glory. 

' " The Athravans who read 2 and the pupils of the 
Athravans will beg of thee knowledge and pros- 
perity, the Victory made by Ahura, and the crushing 
Ascendant. 

87. '" The maids of barren womb 3 , longing for 
a lord 3 , will beg of thee a strong husband ; 

1 "Women, on the point of bringing forth, will beg 
of thee a good delivery. 

' " All this wilt thou grant unto them, as it lies in 
thy power, O Ardvi Sfira Anfihita I" 

88. 'Then Ardvi Sftra Andhita came forth, O 
Zarathoytra ! down from those stars to the earth 
made by Mazda; and Ardvi Stira Anihita spake 
thus: 

89. '"O pure, holy Zarathurtra! Ahura Mazda 
has established thee as the master of the material 
world: Ahura Mazda has established me to keep 
the whole of the holy creation. 

'"Through my brightness and glory flocks and 
herds and two-legged men go on, upon the earth : I, 
forsooth, keep all good things, made by Mazda, the 
offspring of the holy principle, just as a shepherd 
keeps his flock." 

90. ' Zarathortra asked Ardvi Sftra Anfihita : " O 
Ardvi Stira An&hita ! With what manner of sacrifice 
shall I worship thee ? With what manner of sacri- 
fice shall I worship and forward thee? So that 
Mazda may make thee run down (to the earth), that 

1 The warriors. a To teach. 8 Doubtful. 



ABN VAST. 75 



he may not make thee run up into the heavens, 
above the sun 1 ; and that the Serpent 3 may not 
injure thee with . . . , 8 , with . . . . 4 , with". . . . 6 , 
and .... poisons 6 ." 

91. 'Ardvi Sftra AnSliita answered: "O pure, 
holy Spitama ! this is the sacrifice wherewith thou 
shalt worship me, this is the sacrifice wherewith 
thou shalt worship and forward me, from the 
time when the sun is rising to the time when the 
sun is setting. 

1 " Of this libation of mine thou shalt drink, thou 
who art an Athravan, who hast asked and learnt the 
revealed law, who art wise, clever, and the Word 
incarnate. 

92. * " Of this libation of mine let no foe drink, 
no man fever-sick, no liar, no coward, no jealous one, 
no woman, no faithful one who does not sing the 
G&thas, no leper to be confined 7 . 

93. ' " I do not accept those libations that are 
drunk in my honour by the blind, by the deaf, by 
the wicked, by the destroyers, by the niggards, by 
the . . . . 8 , nor any of those stamped with those 
characters which have no strength for the holy 
Word 9 . 

1 When the beds of the rivers are dry, the cause is that Ardvi 
Sura sends up her waters to the higher heavens (to the sun region) 
instead of sending them down to the earth (cf. p. 73, note 2). 

a The serpent, Ari, is here A*i in his original naturalistic 
character, the storm-fiend (cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 38 and this Yart, 
29, note). The uncleanness and unhealthiness of the rivers are 
ascribed to his poison. 

8 Arethna, an &ra Xey<5ftcvov. 4 Vawsaka, idem. 

8 Varenva, idem. 8 Varenva poisons. 
T Cf. Vend. II, 29. 8 ? Rangha*. 

9 Which incapacitate one for religious works. 



76 YASTS AND 



1 " Let no one drink of these my libations who is 
hump-backed or bulged forward; no fiend with 
decayed teeth 1 /' 

94. ' Then Zarathustra asked Ardvi Stira An&hita : 
" O Ardvi Sfira Anihita ! What becomes of those 
libations which the wicked worshippers of the 
Da6vas bring unto thee after the sun has set 2 ?" 

95. 'Ardvi Stira Anfihita answered: "O pure, 
holy Spitama Zarathortra! howling, clapping, hop- 
ping, and shouting 8 , six hundred and a thousand 
Dafevas, who ought not to receive that sacrifice 4 , 
receive those libations 5 that men bring unto me 
after [the sun has set] 6 ." 

96. ' I will worship the height Hukairya, of the 
deep precipices 7 , made of gold, wherefrom this mine 
Ardvi SAra Anihita leaps, from a hundred times the 
height of a man *, while she is possessed of as much 
Glory as the whole of the waters that run along the 
earth, and she runs powerfully 9 . 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XXII. 

97, ' Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathiutra ! unto this spring 
of mine, Ardvi Sftra An&hita .... 

98. 'Before whom the worshippers of Mazda 

Cf. Vend. II, 29. 

Cf. Vend. VII, 79 and note 2 ; cf. above, 91. 

For joy. The translations of those several words are not 
certain. 

Doubtful fl Perhaps, those cups (yam**). 

Filled up from 94. 

The text here has vlspd- vahmem, ' worthy of all prayer ;' the 
reading v! sp6-va6mem from Yt. XII, 24 seems to be better. 

8 Cf. 102, 121. ' Cf. 4, 102, 121. 



ABAN VAST. 77 



stand with baresma in their hands : the Hv&vas did 
worship her, the Naotaras did worship her 1 ; the 
Hvdvas asked for riches, the Naotaras asked for 
swift horses. Quickly was Hv6va blessed with 
riches and full prosperity; quickly became Vfctispa, 
the Naotaride, the lord of the swiftest horses in these 
countries 2 . 

99. [' Ardvi S&ra Anihita granted them that boon, 
as they were offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant them 
that boon 3 .] 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice 

XXIII. 

100. ' Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathu jtra I unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sura Anihita .... 

101. 'Who has a thousand cells and a thousand 
channels : the extent of each of those cells, of each 
of those channels, is as much as a man can ride in 
forty days, riding on a good horse*. In each 
channel there stands a palace, well-founded, shining 
with a hundred windows, with a thousand columns, 
well-built, with ten thousand balconies, and mighty. 

102. ' In each of those palaces there lies a well- 
laid, well-scented bed, covered with pillows, and 

1 The Hvdva or Hvdgva family plays as great a part in the 
religious legend, as the Naotara family in the heroic one. Two 
of the Hvdvas, Frashaortra and <rxnspa, were among the first 
disciples of Zarathurtra and the prophet married Frashaortra's 
daughter, H vdgvi (cf. Yt. XIII, 139). For the Naotaras, see above, 
53i ? According to the Bundahw, Vfrt&spa did not belong to the 
Naotara family (XXXI, 28) : perhaps he was considered a Naotaride 
on account of his wife Hutaosa, who was one (Yt. XV, 35). 

* His very name means ' He who has many horses/ 

8 Spurious. 4 Cf. 4- 



78 YASTS AND 



Ardvi Sftra AnAhita, O ZarathiLrtra! runs down there 
from a thousand times the height of a man, and she 
is possessed of as much Glory as the whole of the 
waters that run along the earth, and she runs 
powerfully \ 

XXIV. 

103. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathiwtra I unto this 
spnng of mine, Ardvi Sura AnShita .... 

104. ' Unto her did the holy Zarathurtra offer up 
a sacrifice in the Airyana Va^ah, by the good river 
DSitya ; with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, 
with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, 
with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations, 
and with the rightly-spoken words 2 . 

105. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Stira An- 
hita ! that I may bring the son of Aurvatf-aspa s , the 
valiant Kavi Vlrtspa, to think according to the law, 
to speak according to the law, to do according to 
the law V 

106. 'Ardvi S6ra An&iita granted him that 
boon, as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, 
sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him 
that boon. 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

1 Cf. 96. 

a Cf. 17. It is to be noticed that only Ahura and Zarathujtra 
(and perhaps Vafra Navftza; see p. 68, note 2) offer the pure 
Zoroastrian sacrifice. 

8 Called L6hrSsp in Parsi tradition. 

* Cf. 18. The conversion of Vfrt&spa by Zarathurtra is the 
turning-point in the earthly history of Mazdeism, as the conversion 
of Zarathurtra by Ahura himself is in its heavenly history. Cf. Yt. 
XXIV and IX, 26. 



ABAN VAST. 79 



XXV. 

107. 'Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathurtral unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sftra Anihita .... 

108. ' Unto her did the tall * Kavi Virtkpa 2 offer 
up a sacrifice behind Lake Frazdinava 3 , with a 
hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs. 

109. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this, good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra Ani- 
hita ! that I may overcome TSthrava^, of the bad 
law, and Peshana, the worshipper of the Davas, 
and the wicked Are^-aspa 4 , in the battles of this 
world!" 

1 10. 'Ardvi Sftra Anihita granted him that 
boon, as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, 
sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him 
that boon. 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

1 Berezaidhi, translated buland (Yasna LVH, n [LVI, g, 2]). 

See Yt, XIII, 99; V, 98, 105. 

8 A lake in Seistan (Bundahw XXII, 5) ; from that lake will rise 
Hfishgdar B^m! (Ukhshya/-ereta), the first of the three sons of 
Zarathiwtra, not yet born (Bahman Yart III, 13 ; cf. Yt. XIII, 98). 

* Of these three, Are^a/-aspa alone is known to Firdausi; he is 
the celebrated Ar^isp, who waged a deadly war against GflrtSsp 
to suppress the new religion: he stormed Balkh, slaughtered 
Ldhrfisp and Zartfirt (Zarathiutra), and was at last defeated and 
killed by Gtotftsp's son, Isfendyftr. He is the Aftesyftb of the 
Zoroastrian period. In the Avesta he is not called a Turanian 
(Tura), but a Zfoyaona; see Yt. IX, 30. 



80 YA5TS AND stR6ZAHS. 

XXVI. 

in. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra I unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sura Andhita .... 

112. 'Unto her did Zairi-vairi l , who fought on 
horseback, offer up a sacrifice behind the river 
Diitya 2 , with a hundred male horses, a thousand 
oxen, ten thousand lambs. 

113. ' He begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant me 
this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra An&hita! that 
I may overcome Peshd-^Tangha the corpse-burier 8 , 
Humiyaka 4 the worshipper of the Davas, and the 
wicked Ar^a^-aspa 5 , in die battles of this world. 

114. 'Ardvi Sftra AnShita granted him that boon 6 , 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon. 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XXVII. 

115. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathttf tra I unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sura An&hita .... 

1 1 6. ' Unto her did Are,^a#-aspa and Vadaremaini 7 

1 Zartr in Firdausi, the brother of Vlrt&pa; cf. Yt. V, 117; 
XIII, 101. 

a TheAraxes(VendtdadI, 3 ). 
8 Doubtful (cf. Vend. Ill, 36 seq.). 

4 This is perhaps an epithet to Peshd-JSTangha, 'the most 
malicious.' 

5 See p. 79, note 4. 

6 If we may trust the Sh&h N&nah, she did not grant her 
favour to the last, as Zartr was killed by one of the generals of 
Aigisp, Bf dirafsh. 

7 A brother of Ar^isp's: his name is slightly altered in Firdausi 
(Andarfonan miswritten for Vandarfman, ^U^jJl for ^U^jJ^; see 
Etudes Iraniennes, p. 228). 



YAST. 8 1 



offer up a sacrifice by the sea Vouru-Kasha, with a 
hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs. 

117.' They 1 begged of her a boon, saying : " Grant 
us this, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra Anihital 
that we may conquer the valiant Kavi Vtrtfispa and 
Zairivairi who fights on horseback, and that we may 
smite of the Aryan people their fifties and their hun- 
dreds, their hundreds and their thousands, their 
thousands and their tens of thousands, their tens of 
thousands and their myriads of myriads." 

1 1 8. * Ardvi Stira An&hita did not grant them 2 that 
favour, though they were offering up libations, giving 
gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she should grant 
them that favour. 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XXVIII. 

119. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathurtra I unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita .... 

1 20. 'For whom Ahura Mazda has made four 
horses the wind, the rain, the cloud, and the sleet 
and thus ever 8 upon the earth it is raining, snowing, 
hailing, and sleeting ; and whose armies are so many 
and numbered by nine-hundreds and thousands. 

121. 'I will worship the height Hukairya, of the 

1 The text has the singular here and in the rest of the sentence : 
the names of the two brothers form a sort of singular dvandva ; 
cf. Franghrasyanem Keresavazdem (Yt XIX, 77); Ashavazdanghd 
Thritahg (Yt. XIII, 113 ; and same Yart, ng), and in the present 
passage Vtrtsp6 Zairivairij (see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 229). 

* Both were killed by Isfendy&r (Shh N&mah). 

8 Mfrti translated ham^ak, sad (Yt. VII, 4). 



82 YASTS AND 



deep precipices, made of gold, wherefrom this mine 
Ardvi Stira Anfihita leaps, from a hundred times the 
height of a man, while she is possessed of as much 
Glory as the whole of the waters that run along the 
earth, and she runs powerfully *. 
' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XXIX. 

122. 'Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathortral unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Sftra Anlhita .... 

123. * She stands, the good Ardvi Stira Andhita, 
wearing a golden mantle 2 , waiting for a man who 
shall offer her libations and prayers, and thinking 
thus in her heart : 

124. ' " Who will praise me ? Who will offer me a 
sacrifice, with libations cleanly prepared and well- 
strained, together with the Haoma and meat ? To 
whom shall I cleave, who cleaves unto me, and 
thinks with me, and bestows gifts upon me, and is 
of good will unto me B ? " 

' For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

XXX. 

125. 'Offer up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathujtral unto this 
spring of mine, Ardvi Stira Anihita .... 

126. 'Ardvi Sftra Anihita, who stands carried 
forth in the shape of a maid, fair of body, most 
strong, tall-formed, high-girded, pure, nobly born of 

1 12I= 96, 102. 

a Paitidina, a mantle, a tunic (Vend. XIV, 9 [28]). 
8 See 8, ii. 



VAST. 83 



a glorious race \ wearing along her .... 2 a mantle 
fully embroidered with gold ; 

127. ' Ever holding the baresma in her hand, ac- 
cording to the rules, she wears square golden ear- 
rings on her ears bored 8 , and a golden necklace 
around her beautiful neck, she, the nobly born Ardvi 
Stira An&hita ; and she girded her waist tightly, so 
that her breasts may be well-shaped, that they may 
be tightly pressed * 

128. ' Upon her head Ardvi Sftra Anihita bound 
a golden crown, with a hundred stars 6 , with eight 
rays, a fine .... 6 , a well-made crown, in the 
shape of a .... 7 , with fillets streaming down. 

129. 'She is clothed with garments of beaver 8 , 
Ardvi Stira Anhita ; with the skin of thirty beavers 
of those that bear four young ones, that are the 
finest kind of beavers ; for the skin of the beaver 
that lives in water is the finest-coloured of all 
skins, and when worked at the right time it shines 
to the eye with full sheen of silver and gold. 

130. ' Here, O good, most beneficent Ardvi SAra 
AnShita ! I beg of thee this favour : that I, fully 
blessed, may conquer large kingdoms, rich in horses 9 , 
with high tributes, with snorting horses, sounding 
chariots, flashing swords, rich in aliments, with stores 
of food, with well-scented beds 10 ; that I may have 



1 Cf. 64, 78. 2 Zacwa; cf. 7, note 2. 

3 Doubtful (sispemna, from sif, ( ^A^)^ 

4 Doubtful. 5 Gems. 

6 ? Anupdithwaithn. 

7 ? Ratha; the usual meaning of rath a is * a chariot ;' perhaps 
the round shape of the chest of a chariot is meant 

8 Possibly otter, Vend. XIV. 9 Doubtful 
10 Cf.YtXVII, 7. 

G 2 



YASTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 



at my wish the fulness of the good things of life 
and whatever makes a kingdom thrive l . 

131. 'Here, good, most beneficent Ardvi Sftra 
Anihita ! I beg of thee two gallant companions, one 
two-legged and one four-legged 2 : one two-legged, 
who is swift, quickly rushing, and clever in turning 
a chariot round in battle ; and one four-legged, who 
can quickly turn towards either wing of the host 
with a wide front, towards the right wing or the left, 
towards the left wing or the right. 

132. 'Through the strength of this sacrifice, of 
this invocation, Ardvi Stira Andhita ! come down 
from those stars 3 , towards the earth made by Ahura, 
towards the sacrificing priest, towards the full 
boiling [milk 4 ]; come to help him who is offering up 
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that 
thou wouldst grant him thy favours ; that all those 
gallant warriors may be strong, like king Virtfispa. 

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

133. Yatha ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness . . . . 

' I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of the holy water-spring Anihita. 

' Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones ! ' 



1 The translation of the last clause is doubtful 

2 A good horse and a good driver. 

* Cf. 85, 88. 4 Aspendi&ji ad Vend. XIX, 40 [133]. 



8 



VI. KH6RSH&Z? VAST. 
(VAST TO THE SUN.) 

This Yart is recited at any time, but particularly on the days 
consecrated to the sun and to Khshathra-Vairya (Shahrfvar), Mithra 
(Mihir), Asman (Ismin), and Anaghra rao&zw (Anir&i 1 ): the last 
three, Mithra, Asman (the Heaven), Anaghra (the infinite Light), 
have a natural connection with the sun, but its connection with 
Khshathra-Vairya is not so clear. 

Of this Yart we have a Pahlavi (East India Office, XII), a 
Persian (ibid. XXIV), and a Sanskrit translation (Fonds Burnouf V ; 
all three edited in fitudes Iraniennes, II). 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I .... 

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [H&vam], 
the holy and master of holiness * .... 

Unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun 3 ; 
Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yath& ahft vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness 2 . 

i. We sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift- 
horsed Sun. 

When the light of the sun waxes warmer 4 , when 
the brightness of the sun waxes warmer, then up 

1 Or the nth, i6th, 27th, and 30th days of the month (Anquetil, 

II, 184)- 

2 As above, Yt I, o. s Sfr6zah 1, 11. 
* * That is to say, rises up ' (Phi. tr.). 



86 YASTS AND siR6ZAHS. 

stand the heavenly Yazatas, by hundreds and thou- 
sands : they gather together its Glory, they make its 
Glory pass down, they pour its Glory upon the earth 
made by Ahura, for the increase of the world of 
holiness, for the increase of the creatures of holi- 
ness \ for the increase of the undying, shining, swift- 
horsed Sun. 

2. And when the sun rises up, then the earth, 
made by Ahura, becomes clean a ; the running waters 
become clean, the waters of the wells become clean, 
the waters of the sea become clean, the standing 
waters become clean ; all the holy creatures, the 
creatures of the Good Spirit, become clean. 

3. Should not the sun rise up, then the Dafivas 
would destroy all the things that are in the seven 
Karshvares, nor would the heavenly Yazatas find 
any way of withstanding or repelling them in the 
material world. 

4. He who offers up a sacrifice unto the undying, 
shining, swift-horsed Sun to withstand darkness, to 
withstand the Dafivas born of darkness, to withstand 
the robbers and bandits, to withstand the Yfitus and 
Pairikas, to withstand death that creeps in unseen 
offers it up to Ahura Mazda, offers it up to the 
Amesha-Spetftas, offers it up to his own soul s . He 
rejoices all the heavenly and worldly Yazatas, who 
offers up a sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift- 
horsed Sun. 

5. I will sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide 

1 Literally ' of the body of holiness/ that is to say, of the bodily 
creatures that incorporate holiness. 

* 'From the uncleanness that the DaSvas mix with the earth 
during the night ' (Phi tr.). 

8 As he benefits them and himself thereby. 



KH6RSH&? VAST. 87 

pastures, who has a thousand ears, ten thousand 
eyes. 

I will sacrifice unto the club of Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, well struck down 1 upon the skulls 
of the Da6vas, 

I will sacrifice unto that friendship, the best of all 
friendships, that reigns between the moon and the 
sun 2 . 

6. For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard, namely, unto the undying, shining, swift- 
horsed Sun. Unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun we offer 
up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom 
of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations, 
and the rightly-spoken words 8 . 

YSfthg Mtam : All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda .... 

7. Yathi ahu vairy 6 : The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and the invocation, and the 
strength and vigour of the undying, shining, swift- 
horsed Sun. 

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of 
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy Ones. 



1 Hunivikhtem: suniyuktam (Sansk. tr.); jul^S ^yi. (Pers.tr.). 

2 As they succeed one another in regular order, 
Cf.Yt.III, 18. 



YASTS AND 



VIL MAH 

This Yajt to the Moon is recited on the day of the Moon, and 
on those of Bahman, G6j, and Rim 1 (Anquetil, II, 185). Bah- 
man and G6s are so far connected with the Moon that all three 
are gaoithra: 'Bahman 8 , the Moon, and G6s s , all three, 
are having in them the seed of the bull; Bahman can neither 
be seen nor seized with the hand; the Moon proceeded from 
Bahman 4 and can be seen, but cannot be seized with the hand ; 
Gdf proceeded from the Moon B and can both be seen and seized 
with the hand 6 .' Rm is referred to here as being z>stra, 'lord 
of good pastures 7 / 

Of this Yart we have translations in Pahlavi, Persian, and San- 
skrit (edited in tudes Iraniennes, II). 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I .... 

Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thnrtra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the 



1 The 1 2th, 2nd, 14th, and 2ist days of the month. 

* The Amshaspand Bahman is entrusted with the care of cattle 
(Vend. XIX, 20, note 8). 

* The Genius of Cattle; see Yt, IX. 

* Bahman is 'good thought, good mind/ Vohu-Mand; 
in the Vedas the moon is said to have been made out of the mind 
(manas) of Puma. For an explanation of that old mystical 
myth, see Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 74, note 3. 

6 See Vend. XXI, 9 [51], note 4. 

6 Pahlavi commentary to this Yajt, I. 

7 Vend. Introd. IV, 16, and ftudes Iraniennes, II, 187 seq. 



VAST. 89 



Bull ; unto the only-created Bull and unto the Bull 1 
of many species ; 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yathi ahft vairyd : The win of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

1. Hail to Ahura Mazda! Hail to the Amesha- 
Spe^tas ! Hail to the Moon that keeps in it the 
seed of the Bull 2 ! Hail to thee when we look at 
thee ! Hail to thee when thou lookest at us 8 ! 

2. How does the moon wax? How does the 
moon wane ? 

For fifteen days does the moon wax 4 ; for fifteen 
days does the moon wane. As long as her waxing, 
so long is the waning 6 ; as long as her waning, so 
long is the waxing. 

'Who is there but thee 6 who makes the moon 
wax and wane 7 ? ' 

1 Sirdzah I, 12. a See Vend XXI, i, text and note. 

8 When the moon allows itself to be perceived. 

* The Pahlavi translation has the following interesting details : 
'For fifteen days they take good deeds from the earthly creatures 
and the rewards for virtue from the heavens ; for fifteen days they 
make the rewards pass to the earth and the good deeds pass to 
the heavens.' The moon is thus a sort of moral clearing-house 
between earth and heaven. 

5 According to the Parsis this waning does not refer to the 
moon, but to the constellations that help it in the struggle against 
the planets, which are supposed to belong to the Ahrimanian 
world (see Ormazd et Ahiiman, 223-226): ' while it waxes 
namely, the moon they wane, namely, those that are opposed to 
the planets, to the bad stars; for instance, Haftdiring, Vanaawf, 
Twtar, Satvfcs; .... while it wanes namely, the moon they wax, 
that is to say, they are strong for doing good.' Thus the moon 
and the stars relieve each other in the battle against Ahriman. 

6 Ahura. 

7 Quoted from Yasna XLIV [XLIII], 3. 



9O YASTS AND 



3. We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it 
the seed of the Bull, the holy and master of 
holiness. 

Here I look at the moon, here I perceive the 
moon ; here I look at the light of the moon, here 
I perceive the light of the moon. The Amesha- 
Spe^tas stand up \ holding its glory ; the Amesha- 
Spe^tas stand up, pouring its glory upon the earth, 
made by Mazda 2 . 

4. And when the light of the moon waxes 
warmer, golden-hued plants grow on 3 from the 
earth during the spring 4 . 

We sacrifice unto the new moons, the full moons, 
and the Vtshaptathas 6 . 

We sacrifice unto the new moon, the holy and 
master of holiness ; 

We sacrifice unto the full moon, the holy and 
master of holiness ; 

We sacrifice unto the Vlshaptatha, the holy and 
master of holiness. 

1 As soon as the moon appears. 8 Cf. Yt. VI, 2. 

8 Misti, meaning sadd, & .:. * A ,* cf. mi-s&L 

4 ZaremaSm, meaning vasantamse, l^. (jl*p.; it has the 
same meaning in Vend. XVIII, 9 [23] ; cf. Yt/XXII, 18. 

New moon and full moon are not used here in the English 
meaning : the month was divided into six parts, of five days each 
(the Norse fimt or five days' week; see Vigfusson, Icelandic 
Dictionary, s. v.): the first five days (panak fartftm) formed the 
new moon or atare-m<z#ngha, literally c the moon within ; ' the next 
five days (pan^ak dattgar) formed the peren6-m0ngha, literally 
' the moon full/ which in fact partly answered to our first quarter ; 
the next five days (panak sitigar), belonging to the full moon, 
were called the Vishaptatha ; no mention is made of the last three 
panak, forming the second half of the month. It may be they 
were not mentioned, as belonging to the waning period, when the 
powers of the moon are suffering an eclipse. C Neriosengh to 
Yasna I, (23.) 



VAST. 91 



5. I will sacrifice unto the Moon, that keeps in it 
the seed of the Bull, the liberal, bright, glorious, 
water-giving l , warmth-giving, wisdom-giving 3 , 
wealth-giving 3 , riches-giving, thoughtfulness-giving 4 , 
weal -giving, freshness -giving 6 , prosperity -giving 6 , 
the liberal, the healing. 

6. For its brightness and glory, I will offer unto it a sacrifice 
worth being heard, namely, unto the Moon that keeps in it the 
seed of the Bull. 

Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull, we offer 
up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom 
of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations, 
and the rightly-spoken words. 

Y#h6 hStam : All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda 

7. Yathi ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of the Moon, that keeps in it the seed of 
the Bull, and of the only-created Bull, and of the 
Bull of many species. 

Ashem Vohfi : Holiness is the best of all good. 

Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of 
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy Ones. 

1 Or possessing: giving may be replaced by possessing 
in this word as in the following. 
a Vare*anghatem: danak(PhL); #anitaram (Sansk). 
8 Khjtivantem: lakshmlvantam (Sansk.). 
* Yaokhftivafltem, ' pondering on what good is to be done' 



Zairimydvaatem: haritavarwavantam, kila pnthivi(m) sSrdra- 
tardm karoti (SansL). 
6 Vohvvafttem : uttamasamnddhitnantam (Sansk.). 



92 YA5TS AND 



VIII. TlR YA.ST. 

Thuya is the leader of the stars against the planets, as stars 
and planets belong, respectively, to the worlds of Ahura Mazda 
and Angra Mainyu (Vend. Introd. IV, 36 ; Bund. II, 5 seq.). 

This Yaj t is a description of the production of the rain through 
the agency of the star Tijtrya. It has to struggle against the DaSva 
of Drought, Apaosha, is first overcome and conquers at last. This 
seems to be a refacimento of the old storm myths, which have 
been in so far renewed as the role of the hero in the original myth 
has been transferred to a star. It is to be noticed, however, that 
Apaosha is not described as a planet. 

Twtrya is Sinus 1 . It presides over the first month of summer 
(21 June-2i July). This Yart appears thus to have been written in 
a part of Iran where the dog-days must have fallen in July, and the 
rainy season began in the last days of July, unless the place of 
Tirtrya in the calendar has been changed at some later period. 

This Yart is recited on the days of Tirtrya, Haurvat&f (as the 
Genius of Waters), Farvardtn (as the Fravashis are his allies in the 
struggle 5 34) and Bd (the wind ; 32). 

The struggle between Tirtrya and Apaosha is described in the 
Bundahlr (VII), but it has there a cosmological character : it has 
not for its object the annual and regular return of the rains after 
the dog-days, but the production of the seas and lakes in the first 
ages of the world. 

o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced 1 . . . . 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the Da&vas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hdvani], 
the holy and master of holiness ---- 

Unto TLrtrya, the bright and glorious star, and 
unto the powerful Satava6sa, made by Mazda, who 
pushes waters forward 2 , 



B 9 &<rrpa,'7rpO7rdvT(j>v 9 otov <vAxuca icat wpo&myv cyfcaTetrn/cre, 

TOV 2eipiov (Plutarchus, de Iside et Osiride, 47 ; cf. infra, 48). 
a Sir6zah 1, 13. 



VAST. 93 



Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yatha* ahu vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

I. 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathu^tra, 
saying: 'We worship the lordship and mastership 
[of Tijtrya], whereby he protects l the Moon, the 
dwelling, the food, when my glorious stars come 
along and impart their gifts 2 to men. I will sacri- 
fice unto the star TLrtrya, that gives the fields their 
share [of waters]. 

2. ' We offer up libations unto TLrtrya, the bright 
and glorious star, that gives happy dwelling and 
good dwelling; the white, shining, seen afar, and 
piercing; the health-bringing, loud-snorting 3 , and 
high, piercing from afar with its shining, undefiled 
rays ; and unto the waters of the wide sea, the Van- 
guhi of wide renown 4 , and the species 5 of the Bull, 
made by Mazda, the awful kingly Glory, and the 
Fravashi of the holy Spitama Zarathurtra. 

3. ' For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto 
him a sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto the 
star TLrtrya. 

' Unto TLrtrya, the bright and glorious star, we 
offer up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the 
baresma, the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, 
the speech, the deeds, the libations, and the rightly- 
spoken words e . 

1 Doubtful. * The rain. 

* In his disguise as a horse ; 18. 

* See Vend., pp. 3, 5, note 2. 

8 N2ma; see fitudes Iraniennes, II, 124. * Cf. p. 47. 



94 YASTS AND 



hatSm: All those beings of whom 
Ahura Mazda .... 

II. 

4. 'We sacrifice unto Tistrya, the bright and 
glorious star, who is the seed of the waters, 
powerful, tall, and strong, whose light goes afar; 
powerful and highly 1 working, through whom the 
brightness and the seed of the waters come from 
the high ApSm Napi^ 2 . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

III. 

5. 'We sacrifice unto Tfotrya, the bright and glo- 
rious star; for whom long 8 flocks and herds and 
men, looking forward for him and deceived in their 
hope 4 : " When shall we see him rise up, the bright 
and glorious star Tistrya ? When will the springs 
run with waves as thick as a horse's size and still 
thicker ? Or will they never come ?" 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

IV. 

6. ' We sacrifice unto TL? trya, the bright and glo- 
rious star ; who flies, towards the sea Vouru-Kasha 6 , 
as swiftly as the arrow darted through the heavenly 

1 Powerfully. 

* Or, 'through whom the beauty of the waters comes from 
Bereza, and their seed from ApSm Napft/. 1 Bereza, the high, the 
tall, an epithet of Apam Nap&f, became one of his names (Ized 
B6r^; cf. 34) ; for ApSm Nap&, see above, p. 6, note i. 

8 Paitijmareti; cf. Yt. V, 123. 

4 Or better, c in their looking.' 

B See above, p. 54, note 6. 



T!R VAST. 95 



space \ which Erekhsha 2 , the swift archer, the Arya 
amongst the Aryas whose arrow was the swiftest, 
shot from Mount Khshaotha to Mount HvanvaLiit*. 

7. ' For Ahura Mazda gave him assistance ; so did 
the waters and the plants ; and Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, opened a wide way unto him. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

V. 

8. 'We sacrifice unto TLrtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, that afflicts the Pairikas, that vexes 
die Pairikas, who, in the shape of worm-stars 4 , fly 

1 Mainivasaa=mainyu-asatt(meaningpunm?nd?fvkih, 
svargasthSnam, Yasna LVII, 27 [LVI, ir, 3]). 

8 Erekhsha khshviwi-ishuj, in Pahlavi Ari$ Shfvltir 
(see tudes Iraniennes, II, 220), or 'Am of the swift arrow/ 
was the best archer in the Iranian army. When Mino&hr and 
AfrSsyab determined to make peace and to fix the boundary 
between Ir&i and Turin, ' it was stipulated that ArLr should ascend 
Mount Damivand, and from thence discharge an arrow towards 
the east; and that the place in which the arrow fell should form 
the boundary between the two kingdoms. ArLr thereupon ascended 
the mountain, and discharged towards the east an arrow, the 
flight of which continued from the dawn of day until noon, when 
it fell on the banks of the ffihun (the Oxus),' (Mirkhond, History 
of the Early Kings of Persia, trans, by David Shea, p. 175 ; cf. 
Noeldeke, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, 

i88i,p.44S-) 

8 Mount Khshaotha seems to be the same as Mount Dam&vand 
(see preceding note) ; Mount Z&anvaw/ may be the same as Mount 
Bmfn, from which the Balkh river springs, as according to 
Tabari (trans, by Noeldeke, 1. L) f Arw' arrow stopped at the Balkh 
river (an affluent of the Ozus). But it may be that the Emits given 
refer to the course of TLrtrya ; cf. 38, text and note. 

4 Doubtful. Shooting stars are alluded to. Mr. Geiger remarks 
that there is a swarm of shooting stars falling every year just at the 
time when Tirtrya, in the European climate, is supposed to be most 
active, on the loth of August. 



96 YASTS AND slRdZAHS. 

between the earth and the heavens, in the sea 
Vouru-Kasha, the powerful sea, the large-sized, deep 
sea of salt 1 waters. He goes to its lake in the shape 
of a horse, in a holy shape ; and down there he 
makes the waters boil over, and the winds flow 
above powerfully all around. 

9. 'Then SatavaSsa 2 makes those waters flow 
down to the seven Karshvares of the earth 8 , and 
when he has arrived down there, he stands, beau- 
tiful, spreading ease and joy on the fertile countries 
(thinking in himself) : "How shall the countries of 
the Aryas grow fertile ? " 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

VI. 

10. 'We sacrifice unto TLrtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, who spake unto Ahura Mazda, saying : 
11 Ahura Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the 
material world, thou Holy One ! 

u. ' " If men would worship me with a sacrifice in 
which I were invoked by my own name, as they 
worship the other Yazatas with sacrifices in which 
they are invoked by their own names, then I should 
have come to the faithful at the appointed time 4 ; 
I should have come in the appointed time of my 

1 See above, p. 66, note 3. 

2 SatavaSsa is said to be the leader of the western stars (to be 
read southern stars, Bund. II, 7), and has in its protection the 
seas of the southern quarter (ibid. XIII, 12); the SatavaSsa sea is 
the Persian gulf. 

8 This seems to be an allusion to the tide in the Arabian sea 
(the sea Vouni-Kasha) and in the gulf of Oman, which, being a 
southern sea, is under the control of Satavasa (cf. preceding note 
and Vend. V, 18, note i). 

* At the right time of the year when rain is expected. 



T!R VAST. 97 

beautiful, immortal life \ should it be one night, or 
two nights, or fifty, or a hundred nights." 

12. 'We sacrifice unto Tirtrya ; 

c We sacrifice unto the rains of Tirtrya 2 . 

'We sacrifice unto the first star 3 ; we sacrifice 
unto the rains of the first star. 

C I will sacrifice unto the stars Hapt6iri#ga 4 , to 
oppose the Yitus and Pairikas. 

'We sacrifice unto Vana^ 5 , the star made by 
Mazda ; for 6 the well-shapen strength, for the Victory, 
made by Ahura, for the crushing Ascendant, for the 
destruction of what distresses us, for the destruction 
of what persecutes us. 

c We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, whose eye-sight is 
sound 7 . 

13. ' For ten nights, O Spitama Zarathurtra! Ti$- 
trya, the bright and glorious star, mingles his shape 

1 Cf. 23-24 and Yt. X, 54-55, 74- 

9 As TLrtrya is the producer of the rain : Tirtry6nyasa==Tistara- 
t&rakasya vrcshrim (Khorshetf Nyayfr 8, Sansk. tr.). 

8 Tirtiya ; cf. p. 105, note 3. 

4 Hapt6iriga (Ursa Major) is the leader of the stars in the 
north (Bund. II, 7). It is 'entrusted -with the gate and passage of hell, 
to keep back those of the nine, and ninety, and nine hundred, and 
nine thousand and nine myriad demons, and demonesses, and fairies 
(Pairikas) and sorcerers (Y&tus) who are in opposition to the celestial 
sphere and constellations ' (Minokhired XLIX, 15 ; tr. by West). 

8 Vajiao/ is the leader of the stars in the south (read west; 
Bund. II, 7). Cf.Yt.XX. 

6 To obtain .... This invocation is brought about by the very 
name of Vanan/, which means ' who smites, who overcomes/ The 
peculiar office of Vana*/ is to keep the passes and gates of Mount 
Albdrz, around which the sun, the moon, and the stars revolve, and 
to prevent the Paris and Dagvas from cutting off and breaking the 
road of the sun (Minokhired XLIX, 12). 

T ' I sacrifice to Tktar for (=to obtain) the soundness of the 
sight ' (Khorshlrf Nytyw 8, PahL tr.)* 



98 YA-STS AND 



with light, moving in the shape of a man of fifteen 
years of age 1 , bright, with clear eyes, tall, full of 
strength, strong, and clever. 

14. * He is active as the first man 2 was; he goes 
on with the strength of the first man ; he has the 
virility 8 of the first man. 

1 5 4 . * Here he calls for people to assemble, here he 
asks, saying: "Who now will offer me the libations 
with the Haoma ajid the holy meat ? To whom 
shall I give wealth of male children, a troop of male 
children, and the purification of his own soul ? N ow 
I ought to receive sacrifice and prayer in the 
material world, by the law of excellent holiness." 

1 6; c The next ten nights, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! 
the bright and glorious Tistrya mingles his shape 
with light, moving in the shape of a golden-horned 
bull 6 . 

17. ' Here he calls for people to assemble, here he 
asks, saying: "Who now will offer me the libations 
with the Haoma and the holy meat? To whom 
shall I give wealth of oxen, a herd of oxen, and the 
purification of his own soul? Now I ought to 
receive sacrifice and prayer in the material world, 
by the law of excellent holiness/' 

1 8. ' The next ten nights, O Spitama Zarathustra ! 
the bright and glorious Tirtrya mingles his shape 
with light, moving in the shape of a white, beautiful 
horse, with golden ears and a golden caparison, 

1 The age of fifteen is the paradisiacal age in the Avesta 
(Yasna IX, g [18]). 

2 Gayd maiatan. But the translation is doubtful; possibly * as 
a first-rate man is.' 

8 Doubtful ; cf. erezi, Yt XIV, 29. * Cf. Yt. V, 8. 

Cf. Vend. XIX, 37(123). 



T1R VAST. 99 

19. ' Here he calls for people to assemble, here he 
tasks, saying : " Who now will offer me the libations 
with the Haoma and the holy meat? To whom 
shall I give wealth of horses, a troop of horses, and 
the purification of his own soul ? Now I ought to 
receive sacrifice and prayer in the material world, by 
the law of excellent holiness/* 

20. 'Then, O Spitama Zarathurtra! the bright 
and glorious Tfctrya goes down to the sea Vouru- 
Kasha in the shape of a white, beautiful horse, with 
golden ears and a golden caparison *. 

21. c But there rushes down to meet him the 
Dafiva Apaosha, in the shape of a dark horse, black 
with black ears, black with a black back, black with 
a black tail, stamped with brands of terror. 

22. c They meet together, hoof against hoof, O 
Spitama Zarathustra! the bright and glorious Tis- 
trya and the Dafiva Apaosha. They fight together, 
O Spitama Zarathustra! for three days and three 
nights. And then the Da6va Apaosha proves 
stronger than the bright and glorious Tirtrya, he 
overcomes him. 

23. ' And Tirtrya flees from the sea Vouru-Kasha, 
as far as a Hdthra's 2 length. He cries out in woe 
and distress, the bright and glorious Tirtrya : " Woe 
is me, O Ahura Mazda ! I am in distress, O Waters 
and Plants ! O Fate and thou, Law of the worship- 
pers of Mazda ! Men do not worship me with a 

1 ( Tirtar was converted into three forms, the form of a man and 
the form of a horse and the form of a bull .... as the astrologers 
say that every constellation has three forms' (Bund. VII, 4; tr. 
West). Tirtrya promises his worshippers children ( 15), oxen 
( x?)> or horses ( 19), according as he appears in the form of a 
man ( 13), of a hull ( 16), or of a horse ( 18). 

2 A mile (Bundahu- XXVI, i ; tr. West, note i). 

H 2 



IOO YAtfTS AND 



sacrifice in which I am invoked by my own name, as 
they worship the other Yazatas with sacrifices in 
which they are invoked by their own names \ 

24. ' " If men had worshipped me with a sacrifice 
in which I had been invoked by my own name, as they 
worship the other Yazatas with sacrifices in which 
they are invoked by their own names, I should have 
taken to me the strength of ten horses, the strength 
often camels, the strength often bulls, the strength 
of ten mountains, the strength of ten rivers V 

25, ' Then I, Ahura Mazda, offer up to the bright 
and glorious Tistrya a sacrifice in which he is in- 
voked by his own name, and I bring him the 
strength of ten horses, the strength of ten camels, 
the strength of ten bulls, the strength of ten 
mountains, the strength of ten rivers. 

26 3 . 'Then, O Spitama Zarathu^tra! the bright 
and glorious Tirtrya goes down to the sea Vouru- 
Kasha in the shape of a white, beautiful horse, with 
golden ears and golden caparison. 

27. 'But there rushes down to meet him the 
DaSva Apaosha in the shape of a dark horse, black 
with bkck ears, black with a black back, black with 
a black tail, stamped with brands of terror. 

28. ' They meet together, hoof against hoof, O 
Spitama Zarathurtra ! the bright and glorious Tfc- 
trya, and the Dafiva Apaosha ; they fight together, 
O Zarathortra! till the time of noon. Then the 
bright and glorious Tirtrya proves stronger than the 
Da6va Apaosha, he overcomes him. 

29. 'Then he goes from the sea Vouru-Kasha 
as far as a H&thra's length: "Hail!" cries the 

1 Cf. 10 and YL X, 54 seq., 74. 

* Cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 27. 8 2<5-27= 20-21. 



T!R VAST. 101 

bright and glorious Tfctrya. " Hail unto me, O Ahura 
Mazda ! Hail unto you, O waters and plants ! Hail, 
O Law of the worshippers of Mazda ! Hail will it 
be unto you, O lands ! The life x of the waters will 
flow down unrestrained to the big-seeded 2 corn- 
fields, to the small-seeded 3 pasture-fields, and to the 
whole of the material world ! " 

30. 'Then the bright and glorious Twtrya goes 
back down to the sea Vouru-Kasha, in the shape 
of a white, beautiful horse, with golden ears and a 
golden caparison 4 . 

31. 'He makes the sea boil up and down; he 
makes the sea stream this and that way ; he makes 
the sea flow this and that way: all the shores 
of the sea Vouru-Kasha are boiling over, all the 
middle of it is boiling over. 

32. ' And the bright and glorious TLrtrya rises up 
from the sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathiurtra ! 
the bright and glorious Satava&sa rises up from the 
sea Vouru-Kasha ; and vapours rise up above Mount 
Us-hindu, that stands in the middle of the sea 
Vouru-Kasha fi . 

1 Adhavd; possibly 'the streams;* cf. Yt. V, i, note 2. A 
month in the ancient Persian calendar, supposed to correspond to 
September-October, was called idukani, which might, on that 
hypothesis, mean ' (the month) that makes streams spring up.' 

* Of which the representative is wheat (Bundabir XXIV, 19). 

3 Of which the representative is the summer vetch (ibid. 21). 

4 Cf. 18. 

8 ' The Afisindfim mountain is that which, being of ruby, of the 
substance of the sky, is hi the midst of the wide-formed ocean 
(the sea Vouru-Kasha)/ (Bund. XII, 6 ; tr. West). Mount Aftsinddm 
receives its waters through a golden channel from the height 
Hukairya (cf. Yt. V, 3) ; from there one portion flows forth to the 
ocean for the purification of the sea, and one portion drizzles in 
moisture upon the whole of this earth, and all the creations of 



IO2 YASTS AND 



33. * Then the vapours push forward, in the regular 
shape of clouds I ; they go following the wind, along 
the ways which Haoma traverses, the increaser of 
the world 2 . Behind him travels the mighty wind, 
made by Mazda, and the rain, and the cloud, and the 
sleet, down to the several places, down to the fields, 
down to the seven Karshvares of the earth. 

34. 'ApSm Nap^U 8 , O Spitama Zaratlmrtra! 
divides the waters amongst the countries in the 
material world, in company with the mighty wind, 
the Glory, made by the waters 4 , and the Fravashis 
of the faithful 6 . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

VII. 

35. 'We sacrifice unto Tistrya, the bright and 
glorious star, who from the shining east, moves 
along his long winding course, along the path made 
by the gods, along the way appointed for him the 

Aftharmazd acquire health from it, and it dispels the dryness of 
the atmosphere' (ibid. XIII, 5). 

1 Doubtful. 

2 Haoma opens the way for the waters from heaven s as being 
the foremost element in sacrifice (cf. 24). For the same reason 
the Bundahw numbers Vohu-Mand, ' Good Mind/ amongst the co- 
operators of Tijtrya. 

8 See p. 6, note i. 

4 Or better, 'seated in the waters;' see Yt. XIX, 56 seq. and 
Yt. XHI, 65. 

8 The Fravashis are active in the world straggle ; cf. Yt. XIII, 
43. ' Co-operators with Tfatar were Vohftman and the angel 
H6m, with the assistance of the angel Bftrg- (the same as Apfcn 
Nap/; see p. 94, note 2) and the righteous guardian spirits in 
orderly arrangement 1 (BundahJj VII, 3, tr. West). 



YAST. IO3 



watery way, at the will of Ahura Mazda, at the will 
of the Amesha-Spe#tas. 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

VIII. 

36. 'We sacrifice unto Twtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, whose rising is watched by men who 
live on the fruits of the year, by the chiefs of deep J 
understanding 2 ; by the wild beasts in the mountains, 
fey the tame beasts that run in the plains; they 
watch him, as he comes up to the country for a 
bad year, or for a good year 3 , (thinking in them- 
selves) : " How shall the Aryan countries be 
fertile?" 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a m sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

IX. 

* 

37*. 'We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, swift-flying and swift-moving, who flies 
towards the sea Vouru-Kasha, as swiftly as the 
arrow darted through the heavenly space, which 
Erekhsha, the swift archer, the Arya amongst the 
Aryas whose arrow was the swiftest, shot from 
Mount Khshaotha to Mount Hvz.rwB.nt. 

38. f Ahura Mazda gave him assistance, and the 
Amesha-Spe#tas and Mithra, the lord of wide pas- 
tures, pointed him the way : behind him went the 

1 Doubtful. The chiefs of the state. 

8 For good or bad harvest. * 3f= 6. 



104 YASTS AND 



tall AshLr Vanguhi 1 and Pire^di 2 on her light 
chariot : always till, in his course, he reached Mount 
ffvan.va.nt on the shining waters 8 . 

1 For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

X. 

39. 'We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, who afflicts the Pairikas, who destroys 
die Pairikas, that Angra Mainyus flung to stop all 
the stars that have in them the seed of the waters * 

40. 'Tistrya afflicts them, he blows them away 
from the sea Vouru-Kasha ; then the wind blows the 
clouds forward, bearing the waters of fertility, so 
that the friendly showers spread wide over, they 
spread helpingly and friendly over the seven 
Karshvares. 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XL 

41. 'We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, for whom long die standing waters, 
and the running spring-waters, the stream-waters, 
and the rain-waters: 

42. " When will the bright and glorious Tistrya 
rise up for us ? When will the springs with a flow 
and overflow of waters, thick as a horse s shoulder, 
run to the beautiful places and fields, and to the 

1 See Yt. XVII. s See above, p. n, note g. 

8 Doubtful Mount j&Tzranva*/, being situated in the sea Vouru- 
Kasha (as appears from Tirtrya travelling towards that sea, 38), 
seems to be the same with Mount Afisinddm ( 32). 

* Cf. above, 8. 



T!R VAST. 105 

pastures, even to the roots of the plants, that they 
may grow with a powerful growth ? " 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 



XII. 

43. 'We sacrifice unto Tistrya, the bright and 
glorious star, who washes away all things of fear 1 , 
who stunts the growth of all .... 2 , and brings health 
to all these creations, being most beneficent, when 
he has been worshipped with a sacrifice and pro- 
pitiated, rejoiced, and satisfied. 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XIII. 

44. ' I will sacrifice unto Tirtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, whom Ahura Mazda has established 
as a lord and overseer above all stars 8 , in the same 
way as he has established Zarathurtra above men ; 
whom neither Angra Mainyu, nor the Ydtus and 
the Pairikas, nor the men Ytus * can deliver unto 
death, nor can all the Da6vas together prevail for 
his death. 

( For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 



meaning sahmgftn, bhayamkara (Yasna IX, 38 

[93])- 

* ? Vasdiw. 

8 In the Bundahw it is especially the leader of the eastern stars; 
but the Minokhired calls it the first star (XLIX, 5 ; cf. above, 1 2). 

* See above, p. 38, note 3. 



106 YASTS AND 



XIV. 

45. 'We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, the bright and 
glorious star, to whom Ahura Mazda -has given a 
thousand senses 1 , and who is the most beneficent 
amongst the stars that have in them the seed of the 
waters : 

46. ' Who moves in light with the stars that have 
in them the seed of the waters : he, from the sea 
Vouru-Kasha, the , powerful sea, the large-sized, 
deep, and salt of waters, goes to all the lakes, and 
to all the beautiful caves, and to all the beautiful 
channels 2 , in the shape of a white, beautiful horse, 
with golden ears and a golden caparison. 

47. 'Then, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! the waters 
flow down from the sea Vouru-Kasha, mother-like 8 , 
friendly, and healing: he divides them amongst 
these countries, being most beneficent, when he has 
been worshipped with a sacrifice and propitiated, 
rejoiced, and satisfied 4 . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XV. 

48. ' We sacrifice unto TLrtrya, the bright and glo- 
rious star, for whom long all the creatures of Spewta- 
Mainyu, those that live under the ground, and those 
that live above the ground ; those that live in the 
waters, and those that live on dry land ; those that 
fly, and those that run in the plains 6 ; and all those 

1 See Yt. X, 82, note. 

a Those of Ardvi Sura Anihita; cf. Yt. V, 4, 101. 
*Cf.YtV, 15. 4 Cf.43- 

5 See Yt. XIII, 10, note; cf. Visp&rad I, i, and Bundahk 
XXIV, tr. West, note i. 



T!R VAST. 107 

that live within this boundless and endless world of 
the holy Spirit. 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 



XVI. 

49. ' We sacrifice unto Tistrya, the bright and glo- 
rious star, the healthful, wise, happy, and powerful, 
who is the lord of a thousand boons, and grants 
many boons to that man who has pleased him, 
whether begging or not begging for them. 

50. 'I, O Spitama Zarathustra! have created 
that star Tirtrya as worthy of sacrifice, as worthy 
of prayer, as worthy of propitiation, as worthy of 
glorification as myself, Ahura Mazda 1 ; 

51. 'In order to withstand, to break asunder, to 
afflict, to drive back the malice of that Pairika Du#- 
y&rya 2 , whom evil-speaking 8 people call Huy&irya 4 . 

52. ' Had I not created that star Tirtrya as worthy 
of sacrifice, as worthy of prayer, as worthy of propi- 
tiation, as worthy of glorification as myself, Ahura 
Mazda; 

53. 'In order to withstand, to break asunder, to 
afflict, to drive back the malice of that Pairika Dus- 
y&irya, whom evil-speaking people call Huy&rya; 

1 Cf. Yt. X, i. 

9 Bad year, that is to say, sterility, drought Darius, the son 
of Hystaspes, also deprecates Du*y&irya in one of his inscriptions : 
'May Ahura Mazda keep this country from the hostile host, from 
sterility (dimyira), from lying (disloyalty): may never the 
foreigner enter this country, nor the hostile host, nor sterility, nor 
lying* (Persepolis, H, ig). 

8 People who object to rain and are fond of fine weather (?). 

4 Good year. 



108 YAOTS AND SIR&ZAHS. 

54. ' Then all day long, all night long, that Pairika 
Dusy&irya would wage war against this material 
world of mine, wanting to extinguish its life \ and 
she goes on, rushing upon and around it. 

55. f But the bright and glorious Tirtrya keeps 
that Pairika in bonds, with twofold bonds, with 
threefold bonds, that cannot be overcome, with 
bonds all over the body : it is as if there were a 
thousand men keeping one man in bonds, a thou- 
sand men of those who are the strongest in 
strength. 

56. 'If the Aryan countries, O Spitama Zara- 
thu,rtra ! would perform in honour of the bright and 
glorious Tirtrya the due sacrifice and invocation, 
just as that sacrifice and invocation ought to be per- 
formed in the perfection of holiness ; never should a 
hostile horde enter these Aryan countries, nor any 
plague, nor leprosy, nor venomous plants 2 , nor the 
chariot of a foe, nor the uplifted spear of a foe/ 

57 8 . Zarathastra asked: 'What is then, O Ahura 
Mazda! the sacrifice and invocation in honour of the 
bright and glorious Tirtrya, as it ought to be per- 
formed in the perfection of holiness ? ' 

58. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let the Aryan 
nations bring libations unto him; let the Aryan 
nations tie bundles of baresma for him; let the 
Aryan nations cook for him a head of cattle, either 
white, or black, or of any other colour, but all of 
one and the same colour. 

1 Reading ava[-derenSm] ; cf. Vend. XVIII, 18 [45]. 
8 Kapasti is properly the colocynthis or bitter-apple : 
' Occidet et serpens, et fallax herba veneni 
Occidet.' (Ed IV, 24, 25.) 

8 57-61 =Yt XIV, 49-53; cf. Yt. V, 89 seq. 



T!R VAST. 109 

59. ' Let not a murderer take of these offerings, 
nor a whore, nor a .... l who does not sing the 
Githds, who spreads death in the world and with- 
stands the law of Mazda, the law of Zaratimrtra. 

60. ' If a murderer take of these offerings, or a 
whore, or a . . . .' who does not sing the G4th4s, 
who spreads death in the world and withstands 
the law of Mazda, the law of Zarathortra, then the 
bright and glorious TLrtrya takes back his healing 
virtues. 

6 1. 'Plagues will ever pour upon the Aryan na- 
tions ; hostile hordes will ever fall upon the Aryan 
nations ; the Aryans will be smitten, by their fifties 
and their hundreds, by their hundreds and their 
thousands, by their thousands and their tens of 
thousands, by their tens of thousands and their 
myriads of myriads. 

62. 'Yathd ahfl vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

1 1 bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of TLrtrya, the bright and glorious star, 
and of the powerful Satavafisa, made by Mazda, who 
pushes waters forward. 

e Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
' [Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy OnesV 

1 ? Ashaovfl. a Cf. Yt. I, 33, 



110 YAtfTS AND 



IX. 



G6j, ' the cow/ KO.T Ifox^ is a personation of the animal king- 
dom which she maintains and protects. She is also called 
Drv&spa and Gos ftrun : Drv^spa means ' she who keeps horses 
in health/ and is nothing more than an epithet of G6s : G6 sftrun 
(from the Zend G*UJ urvan) means 'the Soul of the Bull* (the 
primeval Bull). Although urvan is a masculine noun in Zend, 
jet Gdfurun is considered a female angel, as this name is only 
a substitute for Gfo. 

G6s is the angel of the i4th day (Sfrdzah I, 14), and her Yart 
is recited during the Gh Ujahin, on the days of G&s, Bahman, 
Mih, and Rim (the same days as those on which the Mh Yart 
is recited; see above, p. 88). 

G&s is hardly described in this Yart ( 1-2) ; the greater part of 
it being filled with the several prayers addressed to her by the 
Iranian heroes, Haoshyangha ( 3), Yima ( 8), Thra&aona ( 13), 
Haoma( 17), Husravah ( 21), Zarathurtra, and Vlrtspa. Her 
worshippers and their prayers to her are the same as in the case 
of Ashi Vanguhi (see Yt. XVII). 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! May Angra Mainyu be 
afflicted ! 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the Da&vas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, satisfaction, and glorification unto Hivani, 
the holy and master of holiness. 

Unto the powerful Drvfispa, made by Mazda and 
holy 1 , 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yath ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

1 S!r6zah I, 14. 



G6s VAST. Ill 

I. 

1. We sacrifice unto the powerful Drvispa, made 
by Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health, 
the herds in health, the grown-up 1 (cattle) in health, 
the young ones in health ; who watches well from 
afar, with a wide-spread and long-continued welfare- 
giving friendship ; 

2. Who yokes teams of horses, who makes 
her chariot turn and its wheels sound, fat and 
glistening 2 , strong, tall-formed, weal-possessing, 
health-giving, powerful to stand and powerful to 
turn for assistance to the faithful. 

3. To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradh&ta 3 , offer 
up a sacrifice on the enclosure of the Kara, the 
beautiful height, made by Mazda, with a hundred 
male horses, a thousand oxen, and ten thousand 
lambs, and with an offering of libations : 

4. c Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent 
DrvSspa! that I may overcome all the DaSvas of 
MAzana 4 ; that I may never fear and bow through 
terror before the DaSvas, but that all the Da6vas 
may fear and bow in spite of themselves before me, 
that they may fear and flee down to darkness 6 .' 

5. The powerful Drvspa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drvispa, the maintainer, granted him that boon, 
as he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

6. For her brightness and glory, I will offer her 
a sacrifice worth being heard; I will offer her a 
sacrifice well performed, namely, unto the powerful 

1 Doubtful; possibly ' the friend in health, the child in health.' 

2 Doubtful. 8 Cf. p. g8, note i. 
* Cf. p. 59, note 2. To hell k 



112 YA5TS AND 



Drvtspa, made by Mazda and holy. We offer up 
libations to the powerful Drvspa, made by Mazda 
and holy; we offer her the Haoma and meat, the 
baresma, the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, 
the speech, the deeds, the libations, and the rightly- 
spoken words. 

Y6#h6 hfttSm: All those beings of whom 
Ahura Mazda . . . - 1 



II. 

7. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by 
Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health .... 

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful 9 . 

8. To her did Yima Khsha&a, the good shepherd, 
offer up a sacrifice from the height Hukairya, with a 
hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand 
lambs, and with an offering of libations : 

9. ' Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent 
Drvdspa ! that I may bring fatness and flocks down 
to the world created by Mazda ; that I may bring 
immortality down to the world created by Mazda ; 

10. ' That I may take away both hunger and thirst, 
from the world created by Mazda ; that I may take 
away both old age and death, from the world created 
by Mazda ; that I may take away both hot wind and 
cold wind, from the world created by Mazda, for a 
thousand years V 

11. The powerful Drv&spa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drvdspa, the maintainer, granted him that boon, 



1 As above, p. 30. a y= 1-2. 

8-10= Yt. XVII, 28-30; cf. YasnalX, 4-5 [11-20]; Yt. 
V, 25-27. 



G&S VAST. 113 

as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, 
and entreating that she would grant him that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I nill offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

III. 

12. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvspa, made 
by Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health .... 
Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful. 

I3 1 . To her did Thra&aona, the heir of the 
valiant Athwya clan, offer up a sacrifice in the four- 
cornered Varena, with a hundred male horses, a 
thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and with an 
offering of libations : 

14. ' Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent 
Drvispa ! that I may overcome Azi Dahika, the 
three-mouthed, the three-headed, the six-eyed, who 
has a thousand senses, that most powerful, fiendish 
Dni-, that demon, baleful to the world, the strongest 
Dru- that Angra Mainyu created against the mate- 
rial world, to destroy the world of the good principle ; 
and that I may deliver his two wives, SavanghavS^ 
and Erenav&, who are the fairest of body amongst 
women, and the most wonderful creatures in the 
world V 

15. The powerful Drv&spa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drv&spa, the maintainer, granted him that boon, 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

'YtV, 34; XV, 24; XVII, 34- 
[23] I 



114 YASTS AND stRdZAHS. 



IV. 

r6. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvftspa, made 
by Mazda and holy, who keeps flocks in health 
Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful. 

17*. To her did Haoma 2 offer up a sacrifice, 
Haoma, the enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, 
the lordly, with golden eyes, upon the highest height 
of the Haraiti Bareza. He begged of her a boon, 
saying: 

1 8. ' Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent 
Drvdspa ! that I may bind the Turanian murderer, 
Franghrasyan 8 . that I may drag him bound, that I 
may bring him bound unto king Husravah, that king 
Husravah may kill him, behind the u5Ta&asta lake* 
the deep lake of salt 6 waters, to avenge the murder 
of his father Syivarshdna , a man, 'and of Aghrafr- 
ratha, a semi-man V 

; ' i7-i 9 =Yt. XVII, 37-38. 

8 Cf. Yasna XI, 7 [20-21]. The destruction of the fiends, 
being one of the principal effects of sacrifice, is ascribed to 
Haoma as the most powerful element in the sacrifice. In the 
Sh&h N&mah, the god Haoma has been turned into a hermit who, 
living near the cave in which Afrsyb had taken refuge (siee above, 
Yt. V, 41), overhears his lamentations, takes him, by surprise, 
binds him, and delivers him into the hands of Khosrav (tudes 
Iraniennes, II, 227). 

3 See p. 64, note i. * See above, p. 66, note 2. 

5 See p. 66, note 3. ' See p. 64, note i. 

7 Doubtful (narava, as opposed to nara). Aghra&ratha (Aghrfr- 
rath) was a brother of Afiisyb's; he was a righteous man, and 
AftisySb killed him for his having saved the Iranian king Mino- 
ihr with his army, when captive in the Padashkhvdr mountains 
(Bundahw XXXI, 21). Yet he is still living as an immortal in the 
land of Saukavast&n, under the name of Gdpatsh&h (the king of the 
bulls) ; c from foot to mid-body he is a bull, and from mid-body to 



G6s VAST. 115 

19. The powerful Drvispa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drvdspa, the maintainer, granted him that boon, 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 
ficing, and entreating that she would give him that 
boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

V. 

20. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful DrvSspa, made 
by Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health .... 

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful. 

2 1 1 . To her did the gallant Husravah, he who 
united the Arya nations into one kingdom, offer up 
a sacrifice, behind the jfiTa&fetsta lake, the deep lake 
of salt waters, with a hundred male horses, a thou- 
sand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and an offering of 
libations : 

22. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent 
DrvAspa! that I may kill the Turanian murderer, 
Franghrasyan, behind the -5Ta&asta lake, the deep 
lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder of my 
father SylLvarshina, a man, and of Aghra&ratha, 
a semi-man 2 / 

23. The powerful Drvispa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drvispa, the maintainer, granted him that boon, 
as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacri- 



the top he is a man ; at all times he stays on the sea-shore, and 
always performs the worship of God, and always pours holy-water 
into the sea* (Minokhired LXII, 31 seq., tr. West; Bund. XXIX, 
5); according to Bund XXXI, 20, AghrSrath was not Gdpatsh&h, 
he was his father. C Yt. XIX, 93. 

1 2i-22=Yt. XVII, 41-42. 

8 See p. 114, note 7. 

I 2 



Il6 YASTS AND 



ficing, and entreating that she would grant him that 
boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard 

VI, 

24, We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drv&spa, made 
by Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health .... 
Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful. 

25 l . To her did the holy Zarathurtra offer up a 
sacrifice in the Airyana Va^ah, by the good river 
Ditya, with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, 
with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, 
with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations, 
and with the rightly-spoken words. He begged of 
her a boon, saying: 

26. c O good, most beneficent Drvdspa ! grant me 
this boon, that I may bring the good and noble 
Hutaosa 2 to think according to the law, to speak 
according to the law, to do according to the law, 
that she may spread my Mazdean kw and make it 
known, and that she may bestow beautiful praises 
upon my deeds/ 

27. The strong Drvdspa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drvispa, the maintainer, granted him that 
boon, as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, 
sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him 
that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 



1 2g-a6=XVn, 44-45; <*. Yt. V, 104. 

1 Hutaosa ma the wife of king Vtrtfcpa; cf. Yt XV, 37. 



117 



VII. 

28. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drv&spa, made by 

Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health 

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful. 

29 \ To her did the tall Kavi Vfrtispa offer up 
a sacrifice behind the waters of the river Dditya, 
with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten 
thousand lambs, and with an offering of libations : 

30. * Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent 
Drvispa ! that I may put to flight Arta-aurva#/, the 
son of Vtspa-thaurvd-asti, the all-afflicting, of the 
brazen helmet, of the brazen armour, of the thick 
neck, behind whom seven hundred camels . . . , 2 ; that 
I may put to flight the ZT^yaona murderer, Arqga/- 
aspa 8 ; that I may put to flight Darrinika 4 , the wor- 
shipper of the Davas ; 

31. And that I may smite TSthrava^/ 5 of the 
bad law ; that I may smite Spin^auruska * the wor- 
shipper of the Davas ; and that I may bring unto 
the good law the nations of the Varedhakas and of 
the -ffzyaonas 6 ; and that I may smite of the jfifoyaona 
nations their fifties and their hundreds, their hun- 
dreds and their thousands, their thousands and their 

1 29-31 =Yt. XVII, 49-51. * ? GainySvara/. 

8 See above, p. 79, note 4. * *Aira Acyrfftcpo?. 

5 Mentioned Yt V, 109 and XIX, 87. 

6 The JSfoyaonas seem to have been the Chionitae, a bellicose 
tribe, near the land of Gilan, often at war with the first Sassanides 
(Amm. Marcellinus XVII, g). The name of the Varedhakas re- 
minds one of the Vertae who are mentioned once in company with 
the Chionitae (ibid. XIX, i); but their geographical situation is not 
ascertained. In any case the proximity of the Dfiitya ( 29) shows 
that both people must have inhabited the western coast of the 
Caspian sea. 



Il8 YASTS AND 



tens of thousands, their tens of thousands and their 
myriads of myriads. 

32. The strong Drvdspa, made by Mazda, the 
holy Drvdspa, the maintainer, granted him that 
boon, as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, 
sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him 
that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard ; I will offer her a sacrifice well performed, namely, 
unto the powerful Drv&spa, made by Mazda and holy. We offer 
up libations to the powerful Drv&spa, made by Mazda and holy; 
we offer her the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of 
the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations, and 
the rightly-spoken words. 

Yathft ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of the powerful Drvispa, made by Mazda 
and holy. 

Ashexn Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of 
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy Ones. 



MIHIR VAST. 



X. MIHIR YA*ST. 

This Yart, one of the longest of the Avesta and one of the most 
interesting in a literary point of view, is not very instructive for 
mythology. It consists of long descriptive pieces, sometimes 
rather spirited, and of fervent prayers and invocations for mercy 
or protection. Originally Mithra was the god of the heavenly light 
( I2 > 5o, 67, 104, 124 seq., 136 seq., &c.); and in that character 
he knows the truth, as he sees everything ; he is therefore taken 
as a witness of truth, he is the preserver of oaths and good faith 
( 2, 44 seq., 79 seq., Si seq., &c.); he chastises those who break 
their promises and he to Mithra, destroys their houses and smites 
them in battle ( 17 seq., 28 seq., 35 seq., 47 seq., 99 seq., log seq., 
112 seq., 128 seq., &c.). 

Particularly interesting are 115-118, as giving a sketch of 
moral hierarchy in Iran, and 121-122, as being perhaps the 
source of the trials in the later Roman Mithriacism. Cf, Vend. 
Introd. IV, 8 and Ormazd et Ahriman, 59-61. 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced ! . . . . 

Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thttrtra, one who hates the DaSvas, and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [H&vani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who has a 
thousand ears, ten thousand eyes, a Yazata invoked 
by his own name, and unto Rama Jfv&strB. \ 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yathi ahft vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

I. 

i. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathustra, 
saying: 'Verily, when I created Mithra, the lord of 

1 Sir6zah 1, 16. 



I2O VASTS AND 



wide pastures, O Spitama ! I created him as worthy 
of sacrifice, as worthy of prayer as myself, Ahura 
Mazda 1 . 

2. * The ruffian who lies unto Mithra 2 brings death 
unto the whole country, injuring as much the faithful 
world as a hundred evil-doers 8 could do. Break not 
the contract, O Spitama ! neither the one that thou 
hadst entered into with one of the unfaithful, nor the 
one that thou hadst entered into with one of the 
faithful who is one of thy own faith 4 . For Mithra 
stands for both the faithful and the unfaithful. 

3. * Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, gives swift- 
ness to the horses of those who lie not unto 
Mithra. 

' Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, gives the straight- 
est way to those who lie not unto Mithra. 

* The good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the 
faithful give a virtuous offspring to those who lie 
not unto Mithra. 

4. ' For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto 
him a sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures. 

'We offer up libations unto Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, who gives a happy dwelling and a 
good dwelling to the Aryan nations. 

5. ' May he come to us for help! May he come 
to us for ease ! May he come to us for joy I May 
he come to us for mercy ! May he come to us for 
health ! May he come to us for victory ! May he 



1 Cf. Yt. VIII, 50. 

9 The Mithradru^: one might also translate 'who breaks the 
contract/ as mithra, as a common noun, means ' a contract/ 
8 Kayadhas ; cf. Yt. 1, 19. 4 Cf. Ar<te Viraf, chap. lii. 



MIHIR VAST. 121 



come to us for good conscience 1 1 May he come to 
us for bliss 2 ! he, the awful and overpowering, worthy 
of sacrifice and prayer, not to be deceived anywhere 
in the whole of the material world, Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures. 

6. ' I will offer up libations unto him, the strong 
Yazata, the powerful Mithra, most beneficent to the 
creatures : I will apply unto him with charity 8 and 
prayers : I will offer up a sacrifice worth being heard 
unto him, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, with the 
Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the wis- 
dom of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the 
speech, with the deeds, with the libations, and with 
the rightly-spoken words. 

*Y6#h6 hdtSm: All those beings of whom 
Ahura Mazda 4 .... 

II. 

7. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, who is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies, 
with a thousand ears, well-shapen, with ten thousand 
eyes, high, with full knowledge 6 , strong, sleepless, 
and ever awake 6 ; 

1 Cheerfulness at the head of the JTinva/ bridge (Yasna LXII, 6 

[LXI, 17]; cf. Vend. XVIII, 6). 
* The condition of the blessed in the next world 
8 Va#ta, ' assistance, that is, making ^fidangdi* (Yasna LXII 

[LXI], i ; ^&dang6i is mating a collection for the poor (fitudes 

Iraniennes, II, 155), 

4 As p. 30. 

5 Ferethu-va&dhayana: sampfiraavitt&ram 



6 G aghSurvflfrnghem : this word, strangely enough, is generally 
translated 'who has most strong arms* (balish/^abhu^am); 
is translated in the same way. 



122 YASTS AND 



8. * To whom the chiefs of nations offer up sacri- 
fices, as they go to the field, against havocking hosts, 
against enemies coming in battle array, in the strife 
of conflicting nations. 

9. ' On whichever side he has been worshipped 
first in the fulness of faith of a devoted heart, to that 
side turns Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, with 
the fiend-smiting wind, with the cursing thought 
of the wise 1 . 

c For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

III. 

10. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake. 

11. 'Whom the horsemen worship on the back 
of their horses, begging swiftness for their teams, 
health for their own bodies, and that they may watch 
with full success those who hate them, smite down 
their foes, and destroy at one stroke their adver- 
saries, their enemies, and those who hate them 2 . 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

IV. 

12. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

13. c Who first of the heavenly gods reaches over 
the Kara 3 , before the undying, swift-horsed sun*; 



1 See p. 12, note 13. a Cf. Yt. V, 53; X, 94. 

3 Mount Albdrz, whence the sun rises ; see 50. 

4 Mithia is closely connected with the sun, but not yet identical 
with it, as he became in later times (^., the sun ; Deo invicto 
Soli Mithrae). 



MIHIR YAST. 123 



who, foremost in a golden array, takes hold of the 
beautiful summits, and from thence looks over the 
abode of the Aryans with a beneficent eye. 

14. 'Where the valiant chiefs draw up their many 
troops in array 1 ; where the high mountains, rich in 
pastures and waters, yield plenty to the cattle 2 ; 
where the deep lakes, with salt waters, stand 3 ; 
where wide-flowing rivers swell and hurry towards 
Iskata and Pouruta, Mourti and Hardyu, the Gava- 
Sughdha and Jfvdmzem * ; 

15. 'On Arezahi and Savahi, on Fradadhafshu 
and Vldadhafshu, on Vourubarerti and Vouru/arerti, 
on this bright Karshvare of 77z/aniratha 5 , the abode 
of cattle, the dwelling of cattle, the powerful Mithra 
looks with a health-bringing eye ; 

1 6. 'He who moves along all the Karshvares, a 
Yazata unseen, and brings glory; he who moves 
along all the Karshvares, a Yazata unseen, and 
brings sovereignty; and increases 6 strength for 



1 In the flat countries. 

2 In the mountainous parts of Iran. 

3 In the lake regions (Seistan, Farsistan, Adarba^Sn). 

* In the country of the large rivers in the East Mourn is Marv 
(Margiana), with the Murghib river (the Margus); Hardyu is the 
Herat country, with the HarSrud; Gava-Sughdha and Hvbwn. are 
Sogdiana and Khvclnzm, with the Oxus. The situation of L?kata 
and Pouruta is not dear : one might think of Alexander eschata 
on the laxartes and the Paretacene country between the Oxus 
and the laxartes. 

The earth is divided into seven Karshvares, separated from one 
another by seas 'and mountains impassable to men. Arezahi and 
Savahi are the western and the eastern Karshvare; Fradadhafshu 
fcnd Vldadhafshu are in the south ; Vourubareati and Vourugrarejti 
are in the north ; Zfraniratha is the central Karshvare. jE&aniratha 
is the only Karshvare inhabited by man (Bundahu XI, 3). 

8 Doubtful. 



124 YAtfTS AND 



victory to those who, with a pious intent, holily 
offer him libations. 

1 For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

v. 

17. c We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

' Unto whom nobody must lie, neither the master 
of a house, nor the lord of a borough, nor the lord 
of a town, nor the lord of a province. 

1 8. * If the master of a house lies unto him, or the 
lord of a borough, or the lord of a town, or the lord 
of a province, then comes Mithra, angry and offended, 
and he breaks asunder the house, the borough, the 
town, the province ; and the masters of the houses, 
the lords of the boroughs, the lords of the towns, 
the lords of the provinces, and the foremost men 
of the provinces. 

19. 'On whatever side there is one who has lied 
unto Mithra, on that side Mithra stands forth, angry 
and offended, and his wrath l is slow to relent 2 . 

20. 'Those who lie unto Mithra, however swift 
they may be running, cannot overtake 8 ; riding, 
cannot . . . , 8 ; driving, cannot . . . . 3 . The spear that 
the foe of Mithra flings, darts backwards, for the 

1 Mainyu, in the meaning of the Sanskrit manyu (?). 

a Doubtful; aspa^a/: cf. ^^.m, to be late. 

8 Apayiirtti, frastanvaiati, framanySitfe: these are three 
technical words for the movements of the three classes of soldiers, 
footmen, horsemen, and chariot-men; the last two words are 
probably synonymous with the first, but the exact shades of mean- 
ing are not known. Mr. West suggests, cannot outrun, outride, 
outdrive him. 



MIHIR VAST. 125 



number of the evil spells that the foe of Mithra 
works out 1 . 

21. 'And even though the spear be flung well, 
even though it reach the body, it makes no wound, 
for the number of the evil spells that the foe of 
Mithra works out 1 . The wind drives away the 
spear that the foe of Mithra flings, for the number 
of the evil spells that the foe of Mithra works out 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

VI. 

22. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

' Who takes out of distress the man who has not 
lied unto him, who takes him out of death. 

23. ' Take us out of distress, take us out of dis- 
tresses, O Mithra! as we have not lied unto thee. 
Thou bringest down terror upon the bodies of the 
men who lie unto Mithra; thou takest away the 
strength from their arms, being angry and all-power- 
ful; thou takest the swiftness from their feet, the 
eye-sight from their eyes, the hearing from their 
ears. 

24. ' Not the wound 2 of the well-sharpened spear 
or of the flying arrow reaches that man to whom 
Mithra comes for help with all the strength of his 
soul, he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, 
all-seeing, undeceivable Mithra. 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

1 The sacramental words of the contract, by their not being 
kept, turn to evil spells against the contract-breaker. 

* Doubtful: janamayd, or ranamaoyd; read shanmaoyd (?), 
from shan, Sansk. kshaxu 



126 YASTS AND 



VII. 

2g 'We sacnfice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

'Who is lordly, deep, strong, and weal-giving; 
a chief in assemblies, pleased with prayers \ high, 
holily clever, the incarnate Word, a warrior with 
strong arms ; 

26. ' Who breaks the skulls of the DaSvas, and is 
most cruel in exacting pains ; the punisher of the 
men who lie unto Mithra, the withstander of the 
Pairikas; who, when not deceived, established! 
nations in supreme strength ; who, when not de- 
ceived, established! nations in supreme victory; 

27. 'Who confounds the ways of the nation that 
delights in havoc, who turns away their Glory 2 , takes 
away their strength for victory, blows them away 
helpless 8 , and delivers them unto ten thousand 
strokes ; he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, 
all-seeing, undeceivable Mithra. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

VIII. ; 

28. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

1 Who upholds the columns of the lofty house and 
makes its pillars 4 solid ; who gives herds of oxen 
and male children to that house in which he has 
been satisfied ; he breaks to pieces those in which 
he has bee noffended. 

29. ' Thou, O Mithra ! art both bad and good to 

1 Vahmd-sendah; cf. VispSrad VIII (IX, i), Phi. tr. 
8 Their ^warend. 8 Doubtful ' 

4 Aithya; cf. Lat. antae (Brugmann). 



MIHIR YAST. 127 



nations; thou, O Mithra! art both bad and good 
to men ; thou, O Mithra ! keepest in thy hands both 
peace and trouble for nations. 

30. 'Thou makest houses large, beautiful with 
women, beautiful with chariots, with well-laid found- 
ations 1 , and high above their groundwork 2 ; thou 
makest that house lofty, beautiful with women, 
beautiful with chariots, with well-laid foundations, 
and high above its groundwork, of which the master, 
pious and holding libations in his hand, offers thee 
a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy own 
name and with the proper words. 

31. 'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked 
by thy own name, with the proper words will I offer 
thee libations, O powerful Mithra ! 

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by 
thy own name, with the proper words will I offer 
thfee libations, O most beneficent Mithra ! 

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by 
thy own name, with the proper words will I offer 
thee libations, O thou undeceivable Mithra ! 

32. 'Listen untp our sacrifice 18 , O Mithra! Be 
thou pleased with our sacrifice, O Mithra ! Come 
and sit at our sacrifice ! Accept our libations ! 
Accept them as they have been consecrated*! 
Gather them together with love and lay them in 
the Gar6-nmna! 

33. ' Grant us these boons which we beg of thee, 
,O powerful god ! in accordance 6 with the words of 
revelation, namely, riches, strength, and victory, 
good conscience and bliss , good fame and a good 

1 Doubtful. * Doubtful. 8 Cf. Yt. Ill, 18. 

* By the proper prayers (yajtow). 5 Doubtful 

CEffr 



128 VASTS AND 



soul ; wisdom and the knowledge that gives happi- 
ness l , the victorious strength given by Ahura, the 
crushing Ascendant of Asha Vahwta, and conversa- 
tion (with God) on the Holy Word 2 . 

34. ' Grant that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, 
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all our 
foes ; that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, exalted 
in joy and a good spirit, may smite all our enemies ; 
that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, exalted in 
joy and a good spirit, may smite all the malice of 
DaSvas and Men, of the Yfitus and Pairikas, of the 
oppressors, the blind, and the deaf s . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard . . . , 

IX. 

35. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

Victory-making 4 , army-governing, endowed with 
a thousand senses B ; power-wielding, power-possess- 
ing, and all-knowing ; 

36. 'Who sets the battle a going, who stands 
against (armies) in battle, who, standing against 
(armies) in battle, breaks asunder the lines arrayed. 
The wings of the columns gone to battle shake, and 
he throws terror upon the centre of the havocking 
host. 

37. 'He can bring and does bring down upon 
them distress and fear ; he throws down the heads 
of those who lie unto Mithra, he takes off the 
heads of those who lie unto Mithra. 

1 Spiritual happiness, bliss. * Vend. XVIII, 51 [HI]. 

8 See above, p. 26, note 2. 3O-34= 56-59. 
4 Doubtful (reading arena/-^a6sha?). 
* See 82, note. 



MIHIR VAST. 129 



38. * Sad is the abode, unpeopled with children, 
where abide men who lie unto Mithra, and, verily, 
the fiendish killer of faithful men. The grazing cow 
goes a sad straying way, driven along the vales l of 
the Mithradruf es : they 2 stand on the road, letting 
tears run over their chins 3 . 

39. * Their falcon-feathered arrows, shot from the 
string of the well-bent bow, fly towards the mark, and 
hit it not, as Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, angry, 
offended, and unsatisfied, comes and meets them. 

1 Their spears, well whetted and sharp, their long 
spears fly from their hands towards the mark, and 
hit it not, as Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, angry, 
offended, and unsatisfied, comes and meets them. 

40. ' Their swords, well thrust and striking at the 
heads of men, hit not the mark, as Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, angry, offended, and unsatisfied, 
comes and meets them. 

c Their clubs, well falling and striking at the heads 
of men, hit not the mark, as Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, angry, offended, and unsatisfied, comes and 
meets them. 

41. * Mithra strikes fear into them; Rashnu 4 
strikes a counter-fear into them 5 ; the holy Sraosha 
blows them away from every side towards the two 
Yazatas, the maintainers of the world 6 . They make 
the ranks of the army melt away, as Mithra, the lord 

1 Doubtful. * The cattle. 

9 The meaning is, that the cattle of the Mithradnges do not 
thrive, and that their pasture-fields are waste. 

* See Yt. XII. 

B As they flee from Mithra, they fall into the hands of Rashnu. 

6 Thrftt&ra; one might feel inclined to read thr&stftra, 'the 
fear-striking; 9 cf. 36. 

03] K 



VASTS AND 



of wide pastures, angry, offended, and unsatisfied, 
comes and meets them 1 . 

42. 'They cry unto Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, saying : " O Mithra, thou lord of wide pas- 
tures ! here are our fiery horses taking us away, as 
they flee from Mithra ; here are our sturdy arms cut 
to pieces by the sword, O Mithra ! " 

43. ' And then Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 
throws them to the ground, killing their fifties and 
their hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands, 
their thousands and their tens of thousands, their 
tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads; 
as Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, is angry and 
offended. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

X. 

44. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ____ 
sleepless, and ever awake ; ' 

1 Whose dwelling, wide as the earth, extends over 
the material world, large 2 , unconfined 2 , and bright, 
g a far-and-wide-extending abode. 

45. * Whose eight friends 8 sit as spies for Mithra, 
on all the heights, at all the watching-places, observ- 
ing the man who lies unto Mithra, looking at those, 
remembering those who have lied unto Mithra, but 
guarding the ways of those whose life is sought by 

1 Cf. 99-ior. . 

8 Doubtful. The text is corrupt. 

8 Doubtful/ The numbet eight has probably an astronomical 
'Signification, each of the eight rtis of Mithra occupying one of 
the eight points of the compass. 



MIHIR VAST. 



men who lie unto Mithra, and, verily, by the fiendish 
killers of faithful men. 

46. ' Helping and guarding, guarding behind and 
guarding in front, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 
proves an undeceivable spy and watcher for the man 
to whom he comes to help with all the strength of 
his soul, he of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, 
all-knowing, undeceivable god. 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XI. 

47. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

* A god of high renown and old age \ whom wide- 
hoofed horses carry against havocking hosts, against 
enemies coming in battle array, in the strife of con- 
flicting nations 2 . 

48. ' And when Mithra drives along towards the 
havocking hosts, towards the enemies coming in 
battle array, in the strife of the conflicting nations, 
then he binds the hands of those who have lied unto 
Mithra, he confounds their eye-sight, he takes the 
hearing from their ears ; they can no longer move 
their feet; they can no longer withstand those 
people, those foes, when Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, bears them ill-will. 

1 For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XII. 

49. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

50. 'For whom the Maker, Ahura Mazda, has 

~ l Doubtful. 2 Cf. 8. 

K 2 



132 YASTS AND 



built up a dwelling on the Hara Berezaiti, the bright 
mountain around which the many (stars) revolve 1 , 
where come neither night nor darkness, no cold 
wind and no hot wind, no deathful sickness, no un- 
cleanness made by the Da6vas, and the clouds 
cannot reach up unto the Haraiti Bareza 2 ; 

51. * A dwelling that all the Amesha-Spewtas, in 
one accord with the sun, made for him in the fulness 
of faith of a devoted heart, and he surveys the whole 
of the material world from the Haraiti Bareza. 

52. ' And when there rushes a wicked worker of 
evil, swiftly, with a swift step, Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, goes and yokes his horses to his 
chariot, along with the holy, powerful Sraosha and 
Nairyd-sangha 8 , who strikes a blow that smites the 
army, that smites the strength of the malicious 4 . 

' For his brightness and glory, I \vdll offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XIII. 

53. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

54. ' Who, with hands lifted up, ever cries unto 
Ahura Mazda, saying : " I am the kind keeper of all 
creatures, I am the kind maintainer of all creatures ; 
yet men worship me not with a sacrifice in which 
I am invoked by my own name, as they worship the 
other gods with sacrifices in which they are invoked 
by their own names. 

55 5 . ' " If men would worship me with a sacrifice 

1 Bundahi* V, 3 seq.; cf. Yt XII, 13, and Yt. X, 13. 
3 The Haraiti Bareza is the same as Hara Berezaiti. 
8 Sirdzah I, 9, notes 4 and 5. * 

C Yt VIII, ii, 24, and Yt. X, 74. 



MIHIR VAST. 133 



in which I were invoked by my own name, as they 
worship the other Yazatas with sacrifices in which 
they are invoked by their own names, then I would 
come to the faithful at the appointed time ; I would 
come in the appointed time of my beautiful, immortal 
life." 

56 *. ' But the pious man, holding libations in his 
hands, does worship thee with a sacrifice, in which 
thou art invoked by thy own name, and with the 
proper words. 

' With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy 
own name, with the proper words will I offer thee 
libations, O powerful Mithra ! 

1 With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy 
own name, with the proper words will I offer thee 
libations, O most beneficent Mithra ! 

1 With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy 
own name, with the proper words will I offer thee 
libations, O thou undeceivable Mithra ! 

57. * Listen unto our sacrifice, O Mithra ! Be thou 
pleased with our sacrifice, O Mithra! Come and sit 
at our sacrifice ! Accept our libations ! Accept them 
as they have been consecrated ! Gather them toge- 
ther with love and lay them in the Gar6-nm4na ! 

58* * Grant us these boons which we beg of thee, 
O powerful god ! in accordance with the words of 
revelation, namely, riches, strength, and victory, 
good conscience and bliss, good fame and a good 
soul ; wisdom and the knowledge that gives happi- 
ness, the victorious strength given by Ahura, tie 
crushing Ascendant of Asha-Vahirta, and conver- 
sation (with God) on the Holy Word. 

1 5<>-59= 30-34- 



134 YASTS AND stRdZAHS. 

59. 'Grant that we, in a good spirit and high 
spirit, exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all 
our foes ; that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, 
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all our 
enemies ; that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, 
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all the 
malice of Dafrvas and Men, of the Yitus and 
Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind, and the deaf. 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice woith 
being heard .... 

XIV. 

60. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'Whose renown is good, whose shape is good, 
whose glory is good ; who has boons to give at his 
will, who has pasture-fields to give at his will; 
harmless to the tiller of the ground, ....*, benefi- 
cent; he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, 
all-knowing, undeceivable god. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XV. 

6 z. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

1 Firm-legged 2 , a watcher fully awake ; valiant, a 
chief in assemblies; making the waters flow for- 
ward ; listening to appeals ; making the waters run 
and the plants grow up; ruling over the Karsh- 

1 The text is corrupt (vasd-yaonal inatam ?). 
a Eredhwd-zawgem: sudnafo^anghata*, kila kftiye yad pd$- 
bhytm yu^yate kartum vyavas&yt jaktarfa (Yasna LXII, 5 [LXI, 



MIHIR YAST. 135 



vares 1 ; delivering 2 ; happy 3 ; undeceivable; endowed 
with many senses 4 ; a creature of wisdom ; 

62. ' Who gives neither strength nor vigour to him 
who has lied unto Mithra ; who gives neither glory 
nor any boon to him who has lied unto Mithra. 

63. 'Thou takest away the strength from their 
arms, being angry and all-powerful ; thou takest the 
swiftness from their feet, the eye-sight from their 
eyes, the hearing from their ears. 

' Not the wound of the well-sharpened spear or of 
the flying arrow reaches that man to whom Mithra 
comes for help with all the strength of his soul, he, 
of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, all-knowing, 
undeceivable god 6 . 

c For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XVI. 

64. c We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'Who takes possession 6 of the beautiful, wide- 
expanding law, greatly and powerfully, and whose face 
looks over all the seven Karshvares of the earth ; 

65. 'Who is swift amongst the swift, liberal 
amongst the liberal, strong amongst the strong, a 
chief of assembly amongst the chiefs of assemblies ; 
increase-giving, fatness-giving, cattle-giving, sove- 
reignty-giving, son-giving, cheerfulness 7 -giving, and 
bliss 7 -giving. 

1 K.a6-rizanghem : k&var vfri (Pahl. tr. ibid.). 

* From Ahriinan; cf. YasnaXXIX,6(vyana=vi^arwn,vimddhata.) 
8 Yaokhjtiva#/: kfimakdmand (possessing whatever he wishes 

for, Vend. XX, i [3]). 

* See Yt X, 82, note. 5 From Yt. X, 23-24. 

6 Cf. Yasna XLIII, 7 : vynay: amat vandtoit, yat grz'hn&ti. 
,. 7 Cf. Yt X, g, p, 121, notes i and 2. 



136 VASTS AND 



66, 'With whom proceed Ashi Vanguhi, and Pd- 
redi on her light chariot \ the awful Manly Courage, 
the awful kingly Glory, the awful sovereign Sky, the 
awful cursing thought 2 of the wise, the awful Fra- 
vashis of the faithful, and he who keeps united toge- 
ther the many faithful worshippers of Mazda 8 . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XVII. 

67. * We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastuies, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'Who drives along on his high-wheeled chariot, 
made of a heavenly 4 substance, from the Karshvare 
of Arezahi 5 to the Karshvare of J7z>aniratha, the 
bright one; accompanied by 6 the wheel of sove- 
reignty 7 , the Glory made by Mazda, and the Victory 
made by Ahura; 

68. * Whose chariot is embraced 8 by the great 
Ashi Vanguhi ; to whom the Law of Mazda opens a 
way, that he may go easily; whom four heavenly 
steeds, white, shining, seen afar, beneficent, endowed 
with knowledge, swiftly 9 carry along the heavenly 
space 10 , while the cursing thought of the wise pushes 
it forward ; 

69. ' From whom all the Dafevas unseen and the 
Varenya fiends u flee away in fear. Oh ! may we 

1 Cf. Yt. VIII, 38. * See above, p. 12, note 13. 

8 Mithra himself (?). * Or ' invisible.' 

8 The western Karshvare (see above, p. 123, note 5) j this seems 
to refer to the career of Mithra during the night; cf. 95. 
6 And rolling upon it. 7 Cf. Yt. XHI, 89, note. 

8 And uplifted. 9 Doubtful. 

! See above, p. 93, note i. ll See Vend. Introd. IV, 23., 



MIHIR VAST. 137 



never fall across the rush of the angry lord 1 , who 
goes and rushes from a thousand sides against his 
foe, he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, all- 
knowing, undeceivable god. 

' For his brightness and glory, I \iill offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XVIIL 

70. - We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

' Before whom Verethraghna, made by Ahura, runs 
opposing the foes in the shape of a boar 2 , a sharp- 
toothed he-boar, a sharp-jawed boar, that kills at 
one stroke, pursuing 3 , wrathful, with a dripping face; 
strong, with iron feet, iron fore-paws *, iron weapons, 
an iron tail, and iron jaws ; 

71.' Who, eagerly clinging to the fleeing foe, along 
with Manly Courage, smites the foe in battle, and 
does not think he has smitten him, nor does he 
consider it a blow till he has smitten away the 
marrow 5 and the column of life 6 , the marrow s and 
the spring of existence. 

72. ' He cuts all the limbs to pieces, and mingles, 
together with the earth, the bones, hair, brains, and 
blood of the men who have lied unto Mithra 7 . 

* For his brightness and glory, we offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard 

1 Cf, 98. 

* See Yt. XIV, ig ; cf. Yt. X, 127. 

8 Anup&ithwa; cf.p6ithwa (Vend. XIV [ii4])=r&ninijn. 
4 Literally, hands. B Doubtful 

6 The spine. * Cf. 80. 



138 YA5TS AND 



XIX. 

73. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'Who, with hands lifted up, rejoicing, cries out, 
speaking thus : 

74. <4 'O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent spirit! 
Maker of the material world, thou Holy One ! 

"'If men would worship me 1 with a sacrifice in 
which I were invoked by my own name, as they 
worship the other gods with sacrifices in which they 
are invoked by their own names, then I should 
come to the faithful at the appointed time ; I should 
come in the appointed time of my beautiful, immortal 
life 2 ." 

75. 'May we keep our field; may we never be 
exiles s from our field, exiles from our house, exiles 
from our borough, exiles from our town, exiles from 
our country. 

76. 'Thou dashest in pieces the malice of the 
malicious, the malice of the men of malice : dash 
thou in pieces the killers of faithful men ! 

' Thou hast good horses, thou hast a good chariot : 
thou art bringing help at every appeal, and art 
powerful. 

77. ' I will pray unto thee for help, with many 
consecrations, with good consecrations of libations ; 
with many offerings, with good offerings of libations, 
that we, abiding in thee, may long inhabit a good 
abode, full of all the riches that can be wished for. 

1 They have worshipped him and he has consequently over- 
come the Mithradru^es ;. this accounts for the word rejoicing. 
8 Cf. Yt. X, 55. a Inc ; cf. linquo. 



MIHIR VAST. 139 



78. 'Thou keepest those nations that tender a 
good worship to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures ; 
thou dashest in pieces those that delight in havoc. 
Unto thee will I pray for help : may he come to 
us for help, the awful, most powerful Mithra, the 
worshipful and praiseworthy, the glorious lord of 
nations. 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XX. 

79. c We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

' Who made a dwelling for Rashnu \ and to whom 
Rashnu gave all his soul for long friendship ; 

80. ' Thou art a keeper and protector of the dwell- 
ing of those who lie not : thou art the maintainer of 
those who lie not. With thee hath Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, contracted the best of all friend- 
ships 3 , and thus it is how so many men who have 
lied unto Mithra, even privily 8 , lie smitten down on 
the ground. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXI. 

81. c We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

' Who made a dwelling for Rashnu, and to whom 
Rashnu gave all his soul for long friendship ; 

82. 'To whom Ahura Mazda gave a thousand 

1 The Genius of Truth (Yt. XII); Mithra gives a dwelling to 
the truthful man in the same way as he destroys the dwelling of the 
liar ( 80). 

* Cf. 70. 

8 Aipi vithiji; Vedic api vyathis (VIII, 45, 19). 



140 YASTS AND 



senses l and ten thousand eyes to see. With those 
eyes and those senses, he watches the man who 
injures Mithra, the man who lies unto Mithra. 
Through those eyes and those senses, he is unde- 
ceivable, he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, 
all-knowing, undeceivable god. 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXII. 

83. We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'Whom the lord of the country invokes for help, 
with hands uplifted ; 

'Whom the lord of the town invokes for help, 
with hands uplifted ; 

84. c Whom the lord of the borough invokes for 
help, with hands uplifted ; 

c Whom the master of the house invokes for help, 
with hands uplifted ; 

' Whom the ... . 2 in danger of death s invokes for 
help, with hands uplifted ; 

' Whom the poor man, who follows the good law, 
when wronged and deprived of his rights, invokes 
for help, with hands uplifted. 

85. ' The voice of his wailing reaches up to the 
sky ft g es over the earth all around* it goes over 

1 Yaokhjti, the root of Persian nydjfdan, Pahlavi niy6kh- 
sttan, to hear; one might be inclined to translate 'a thousand 
ears/ or 'a thousand hearings; ' but the meaning of the word must 
have been rather more general, as Nenosengh translates it 
(praidhi, IX, 8 [25]). 



8 Pithfe: mrityu (Yasna LIII [LH], 



MIHIR YAST. 141 



the seven Karshvares, whether he utters his prayer 
in a low tone of voice l or aloud. 

86. ' The cow driven astray invokes him for help 2 , 
longing for the stables : 

'"When will that bull, Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, bring us back, and make us reach the 
stables? when will he turn us back to the right 
way from the den of the Drug where we were 
driven 3 ?" 

87. 'And to him with whom Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, has been satisfied, he comes with 
help; and of him with whom Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, has been offended, he crushes down 
the house, the borough, the town, the province, the 
country. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXIII. 

88. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'To whom the enlivening, healing, fair, lordly, 
golden-eyed Haoma offered up a sacrifice on the 
highest of the heights, on the Haraiti Bareza 4 , he 

1 V4em, the so-called v&g. 

* Most manuscripts have added here, from the preceding 
clauses, ' with hands uplifted I ' 

* An allusion to a myth in which Mithra was described as an 
Indra delivering the cows carried away by a Vrrtra: Firmicus 
Maternus called him abactorem bourn (De Errore Frofan. 
Relig. V) ; Commodianus compares him with Cacus : 

'Vrtebatque boves alienos semper in antris 

Sicut et Cacus Vulcani filius ille/ 
(Apud Windischmann, Mithra, p. 64.) 
4 See above, p. 132, note 2, 



142 YASTS AND 



the undefiled to one undefiled, with undefiled 
baresma, undefiled libations, and undefiled words ; 

89. 'Whom 1 the holy Ahura Mazda has estab- 
lished as a priest, quick in performing the sacrifice 
and loud in song. He performed the sacrifice with 
a loud voice, as a priest quick in sacrifice and loud 
in song, a priest to Ahura Mazda, a priest to the 
Amesha-Spewtas. His voice reached up to the sky, 
went over the earth all around, went over the seven 
Karshvares. 

90. 'Who first lifted up Haomas, in a mortar 
inlaid with stars and made of a heavenly substance. 
Ahura Mazda longed for him, the Amesha-Sperctas 
longed for him, for the well-shapen body of him 
whom the swift-horsed sun awakes for prayer from 
afar 2 . 

91. ' Hail to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who 
has a thousand ears and ten thousand eyes ! Thou 
art worthy of sacrifice and prayer : mayest thou have 
sacrifice and prayer in the houses of men ! Hail to 
the man who shall offer thee a sacrifice, with the 
holy wood in his hand, the baresma in his hand, 
the holy meat in his hand, the holy mortar in his 
hand 8 , with his hands well-washed, with the mortar 
well-washed, with the bundles of baresma tied up, 
the Haoma uplifted, and the Ahuna Vairya sung 
through. 

92. ' The holy Ahura Mazda confessed that reli- 
gion and so did VohuMan6, so did Asha-Vahirta, 
so di'd Khshathra- Vairya, so did Spe#ta-Armaiti, so 

1 Haoma ;.cf. Yasna IX, 26 [81]. 

8 For the morning service in the GSh Ujahln. 

Cf. Vend. Ill, i. 



MIHIR VAST. 143 



did Haurvati/ and Ameretfi* ; and all the Amesha- 
Spewtas longed for and confessed his religion. The 
kind Mazda conferred upon him the mastership of 
the world ; and [so did they *] who saw thee amongst 
all creatures the right lord and master of the world, 
the best cleanser of these creatures. 

93. 'So mayest thou in both worlds, mayest thou 
keep us in both worlds, Mithra, lord of wide pas- 
tures ! both in this material world and in the world 
of the spirit, from the fiend of Death, from the fiend 
Afeshma 2 , from the fiendish hordes, that lift up the 
spear of havoc, and from the onsets of A6shma, 
wherein the evil-doing Afishma rushes along with 
Vlddtu 8 , made by the Da6vas. 

94. ' So mayest thou, O Mithra, lord of wide pas- 
tures ! give swiftness to our teams, strength to our 
own bodies, and that we may watch with full success 
those who hate us, smite down our foes, and destroy 
at one stroke our adversaries, our enemies and those 
who hate us 4 . ' 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXIV. 

9g. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 

sleepless, and ever awake; 

f Who goes over the earth, all her breadth over, 
after the setting of the sun *, touches both ends of 

1 The Amesha-Spetas. 

* See Vend. Introd. IV, 22. ' See ibid. 

* See Yt. V, 53; X, n, 114; V, 53. 

8 It should seem as if Mithra was supposed to retrace his steps 
during the night The Hindus supposed that the sun had a bright 
face and a dark one, and that during the night it returned from 
the west to the east with its dark face turned towards the earth. 



144 YAtfTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

this wide, round earth, whose ends lie afar, and 
surveys everything that is between the earth and 
the heavens, 

96. ' Swinging in his hands a club with a hundred 
knots, a hundred edges, that rushes forwards and 
fells men down; a club cast out of red brass, of 
strong, golden brass ; the strongest of all weapons, 
the most victorious of all weapons * ; 

97. ' From whom Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
flees away in fear; from whom ASshma, the evil- 
doing Peshdtanu 2 , flees away in fear ; from whom 
the long-handed BushySsta 8 flees away in fear; 
from whom all the Da6vas unseen and the Varenya 
fiends flee away in fear 4 . 

98. 'Oh ! may we never fall across the rush of 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, when in anger 8 ! 
May Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, never smite 
us in his anger ; he who stands up upon this earth 
as the strongest of all gods, the most valiant of all 
gods, the most energetic of all gods, the swiftest of 
all gods, the most fiend-smiting of all gods, he, 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures 6 . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXV. 

99. c We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'From whom all the DaSvas unseen and the 
Varenya fiends flee away in fear 7 . 

1 Cf. 132. a See Vend. Introd. V, 19. 

8 See ibid. IV, 24. Cf. 69. 

Cf. Yt. X, 69. ' 9 7- 9 8= 134-135- 

7 Cf. 97 . 



MIHIR VAST. 145 



'The lord of nations, Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, drives forward at the right-hand side of 
this wide, round earth, whose ends lie afar. 

100. c At his right hand drives the good, holy 
Sraosha ; at his left hand drives the tall and strong 
Rashnu ; on all sides around him drive the waters, 
the plants, and the Fravashis of the faithful. 

101. c In his might, he ever brings to them falcon- 
feathered arrows, and, when driving, he himself 
comes there, where are nations, enemy to Mithra, 
he, first and foremost, strikes blows with his club on 
the horse and his rider ; he throws fear and fright 
upon the horse and his rider. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXVL 

102. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

'The warrior of the white horse, of the sharp 
spear, the long spear, the quick arrows ; foreseeing 
and clever; 

103. 'Whom Ahura Mazda has established to 
maintain and look over all this moving * world, and 
who maintains and looks over all this moving world ; 
who, never sleeping, wakefully guards the creation 
of Mazda ; who, never sleeping, wakefully maintains 
the creation of Mazda. 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

1 Fravdij; Parsi tradition translates large: friz (tr. Phi.), 
buland (Asp., Yasna LVII, 15 [LVI, 7, 3]). 



146 YASTS AND 



XXVII. 

104. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

4 Whose long arms, strong with Mithra-strength, 
encompass what he seizes in the easternmost river l 
and what he beats with the westernmost river 8 , 
what is by the Sanaka 3 of the Rangha and what is 
by the boundary of the earth 4 . 

105. ' And thou, O Mithra ! encompassing all this 
around, do thou reach it, all over, with thy arms. 

'The man without glory *, led astray from the 
right way, grieves in his heart; the man without 
glory thinks thus in himself: C That careless Mithra 
does not see all the evil that is done, nor all the lies 
that are told/' 

1 06. ' But I think thus in my heart : 

* " Should the evil thoughts of the earthly man be 
a hundred times worse, they would not rise so high 
as the good thoughts of the heavenly Mithra ; 

* " Should the evil words of the earthly man be a 
hundred times worse, they would not rise so high as 
the good words of the heavenly Mithra ; 

1 The Sind. 

8 The Rangha or Tigris. The words dgfurvaygiti and 
nighnd, 'he seizes, he beats,' are the words used of the priest 
laying the Haoma in the mortar and pounding it with the pestle 
(Yasna, X, 2 [4-5])* The Sind and the Rangha are thus com- 
pared with the two parts of the Havana, the land between is the 
Haoma, and Mithra's arms are the arms of the priest. 

3 Sanakft, an &ra Aeyo/ievov; opposed to the aodhas of the 
Rangha, Yt. XH, 19. 

4 The Arabian sea (?). Cf. Yt. XII, ax. 

8 Who has not a ray of the celestial light : here, the man of 
little faith. 



MIHIR VAST. 147 



' " Should the evil deeds of the earthly man be a 
hundred times worse, they would not rise so high as 
the good deeds of the heavenly Mithra ; 

107. ' "Should the heavenly wisdom 1 in the earthly 
man be a hundred times greater, it would not rise 
so high as the heavenly wisdom in the heavenly 
Mithra ; 

'"And thus, should the ears of the earthly man 
hear a hundred times better, he would not hear so 
well as the heavenly Mithra, whose ear hears well, 
who has a thousand senses, and sees every man that 
tells a lie/' 

'Mithra stands up in his strength, he drives in 
the awfulness of royalty, and sends from his eyes 
beautiful looks that shine from afar, (saying) : 

1 08. ' " Who will offer me a sacrifice ? Who will 
lie unto me? Who thinks me a god worthy of 
a good sacrifice ? Who thinks me worthy only of a 
bad sacrifice ? To whom shall I, in my might, 
impart brightness and glory ? To whom bodily 
health? To whom shall I, in my might, impart 
riches and full weal ? Whom shall I bless by raising 
him a virtuous 2 offspring ? 

109. ' " To whom shall I give in return, without 
his thinking of it, the awful sovereignty,' beautifully 
arrayed, with many armies, and most perfect; the 
sovereignty of an all-powerful tyrant, who fells down 
heads, valiant, smiting, and unsmitten ; who orders 
chastisement to be done and his order is done at 
once, which he has ordered in his anger ? " 

'O Mithra! when thou art offended and not satisfied, 
he 8 soothes thy mind, and makes Mithra satisfied. 

1 See above, p. 4, n. 5. ' Asna : Sansk. su j tla (p. 34, xu 4). 
* He who offers thee a good sacrifice; cf. 108. 

L 2 



YASTS AND siRdZAHS. 



i io. '"To whom shall I, in my might, impart 
sickness and death? To whom shall I impart 
poverty and sterility l ? Of whom shall I at one 
stroke cut off the offspring ? 

in. '"From whom shall I take away, without 
his thinking of it, the awful sovereignty, beautifully 
arrayed, with many armies, and most perfect ; the 
sovereignty of an all-powerful tyrant, who fells down 
heads, valiant, smiting, and unsmitten; who orders 
chastisement to be done and his order is done at 
once, which he has ordered in his anger ? " 

c O Mithra ! while thou art satisfied and not angry, 
he moves thy heart to anger 2 , and makes Mithra 
unsatisfied. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard ... * 

XXVIII. 

112. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

A warrior with a silver helm s , a golden cuirass 8 , 
who kills with the poniard, strong, valiant, lord of 
the borough. Bright are the ways of Mithra, by 
which he goes towards the country, when, wishing 
well, he turns its plains and vales to pasture 
grounds, 

113. 'And then cattle and males come to graze, 
as many as he wants. 

'May Mithra and Ahura*, the high gods, come 
to us for help, when the poniard lifts up its voice 

1 Doubtful. 

* He who offers thee a bad sacrifice. 8 Doubtful. 

* See Vend. Introd. IV, 8. 



MIHIR VAST. 149 



aloud 1 , when the nostrils of the horses quiver, when 
the poniards . . . . a , when the strings of the bows 
whistle and shoot sharp arrows ; then the brood of 
those whose libations are hated fall smitten to the 
ground, with their hair torn off. 

114. * So mayest thou, O Mithra, lord of wide pas- 
tures ! give swiftness to our teams, strength to our 
own bodies, and that we may watch with full success 
those who hate us, smite down our foes, and destroy 
at one stroke our adversaries, our enemies, and 
those who hate us 3 . 

c For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXIX. 

ng. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake. 

O Mithra, lord of wide pastures ! thou master 
of the house, of the borough, of the town, of the 
country, thou Zarathurtrdtema 4 ! 

1 1 6. * Mithra is twentyfold 5 between two friends 
or two relations ; 

'Mithra is thirtyfold between two men of the 
same group 6 ; 
1 * Mithra is fortyfold between two partners T ; 

1 When it clashes with another. a KahvSn. 

'SeeYL V, 53 ; X,n,94. 

4 The chief of the sacerdotal order, the so-called Maubedin- 
maused. 

* Or 'the contract is twentyfold ....,' that is, twenty times 
more strictly binding than between any two strangers. This pas- 
sage is one of the most important of the Avesta, as a short account 
of the social constitution and morals of Zoroastrian Iran. 

6 Of the same gild (svapankti, ap. Neriosengh). 
. 7 Hadha-gafitha, co-proprietors of a ga&tha (a rural estate). 



150 YASTS AND 



' Mithra is fiftyfold between wife and husband l ; 

Mithra is sixtyfold between two pupils (of the 
same master); 

* Mithra is seventyfold between the pupil and his 
master ; 

'Mithra is eightyfold between the son-in-law and 
his father-in-law; 

1 Mithra is ninetyfold between two brothers ; 

117.' Mithra is a hundredfold between the father 
and the son; 

' Mithra is a thousandfold between two nations 2 ; 

1 Mithra is ten thousandfold when connected with 
the Law of Mazda 3 , and then he will be every day * 
of victorious strength 5 . 

1 1 8. 'May I come unto thee with a prayer that 
goes lowly or goes highly! As this sun rises up 
above the Hara Berezaiti and then fulfils its career, 
so may I, O Spitama! with a prayer that goes lowly 
or goes highly, rise up above the will of the fiend 
Angra Mainyu 6 ! 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXX. 

119. * We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake. 

' Offer up a sacrifice unto Mithra, O Spitama ! and 
order thy pupils to do the same. 

1 Doubtful. 

9 A fair recognition of the jus gentium. 

3 The contract between the faithful and the Law, the cove- 
nant (?). 

4 Reading [h]amah& ay an. 

6 The last clause is doubtful; the text is corrupt. 

6 Prayer follows Mithra in his career, rising and setting with him, 



MIHIR VAST. 



* Let the worshipper of Mazda sacrifice unto thee x 
with small cattle, with black cattle, with flying birds, 
gliding forward on wings* 

120. 'To Mithra all the faithful worshippers of 
Mazda must give strength and energy with offered 
and proffered Haomas, which the Zaotar proffers 
unto him and gives in sacrifice \ Let the faithful 
man drink of the libations cleanly prepared, which 
if he does, if he offers them unto Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, Mithra will be pleased with him and 
without anger/ 

121. Zarathurtra asked him: 'O Ahura Mazda! 
how shall the faithful man drink the libations cleanly 
prepared, which if he does and he offers them unto 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, Mithra will be 
pleased with him and without anger ? ' 

122. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let them wash 
their bodies three days and three nights ; let them 
undergo thirty strokes 8 for the sacrifice and prayer 
unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures. Let them 
wash their bodies two days and two nights ; let them 
undergo twenty strokes for the sacrifice and prayer 
unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures. Let no 



1 Mithra. 

2 The translation of this sentence is conjectural. 

8 Thirty strokes with the Sraoshd-arana (up&zana; see Vend. 
Introd. V, 19); it is an expiation (ikayayata) which purges 
them from their sins and makes them fit for offering a sacrifice to 
Mithra. One may find in this passage the origin of the painful 
trials through which the adepts of the Mithriac mysteries had to 
go before being admitted to initiation (OVK &? <&v ck avrdv SwiJ- 
<r(nr6 rts reXccrftywu, d pxj Sid TIVCOV ftaOp&v TrapeXtfwv TW KoXcurccDV 
Selga cavrov <5criov KOL avaOij, Suidas s. v., ap. Windischmann, fiber 
Mithra, 68 seq.)* 



152 YASTS AND 



man drink of these libations who does not know the 
staotay&snya 1 : Vlspfe ratavd*. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXXI. 

123. ' We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake; 

* To whom Ahura Mazda offered up a sacrifice in 
the shining Gard-nmina 8 . 

124. 'With his arms lifted up towards Immor- 
tality 4 , Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, drives 
forward from the shining Gar6-nmna, in a beautiful 
chariot that drives on, ever-swift, adorned with all 
sorts of ornaments, and made of gold. 

125. ' Four stallions draw that chariot, all of the 
same white colour, living on heavenly food 6 and 
undying. The hoofs of their fore-feet are shod with 
gold, the hoofs of their hind-feet are shod with 
silver; all are yoked to the same pole, and wear 
the yoke 6 and the cross-beams of the yoke 6 , 
fastened with hooks 6 of Khshathra vairya 7 to a 
beautiful . . . . 8 

126. 'At his right hand drives Rashnu-RazLsta 9 , 
the most beneficent and most well-shapen. 

1 The sutftd y$st ; the last chapters of the Yasna, from LVIII 
[LVII] to fend, according to Anquetil (Zend-Avesta I, 2, 232). 

The first words of the VispSrad. 

Paradise. 

Towards the abode of the Immortals. 

Fed with ambrosia (a^/fyoVtov ctSap) like Poseidon's steeds 
(II XIII, 35 ; cf. Ovid, Metam. IV, 214). 

Doubtful (simma sim6ithrma). 

Metal. See Vend. Introd. IV, 33. 

Upairispdta. See Yt. XII. 



MIHIR VAST. 153 



1 At his left hand drives the most upright .ATista l , 
the holy one, bearing libations in her hands, clothed 
with white clothes, and white herself; and the cursing 
thought 2 of the Law of Mazda. 

127. 'Close by him drives the strong cursing 
thought 3 of the wise man, opposing foes in the 
shape of a boar, a sharp-toothed he-boar, a sharp- 
jawed boar, that kills at one stroke, pursuing, wrath- 
ful, with a dripping face 8 , strong and swift to run, 
and rushing all around *. 

' Behind him drives Atar 5 , all in a blaze, and the 
awful kingly Glory. 

128. ' On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, stand a thousand bows well-made, 
with a string of cowgut; they go through the 
heavenly space 6 , they fall through the heavenly 
space upon the skulls of the Dafevas. 

129. ' On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, stand a thousand vulture-feathered 
arrows, with a golden mouth 7 , with a horn shaft, 
with a brass tail, and well-made. They go through 
the heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly 
space upon the skulls of the Dafevas. 

130. ' On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, stand a thousand spears well-made 
and sharp-piercing. They go through the heavenly 
space, they fall through the heavenly space upon the 
skulls of tie Dafivas. 

' On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of 

1 See Yt. XVI. See above, p. 12, note 13. 8 Cf. Yt. X, 70. 

* Or better, rushing before (piiri-vftza; cf. the translations of 
pairi-da0yu, Yt. X, 144 and pairi-vfira, Yt I, 19). Cf. Yt 
XIV, ig. 

5 The Genius of Fire. 8 See p. 95, note i. 7 A golden point 



154 YASTS AND 



wide pastures, stand a thousand steel-hammers, two- 
edged, well-made. They go through the heavenly 
space, they fall through the heavenly space upon 
the skulls of the Davas. 

131. ' On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, stand a thousand swords, two- 
edged and well-made. They go through the hea- 
venly space, they fall through the heavenly space 
upon the skulls of the Dafivas. 

' On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures, stand a thousand maces of iron, well- 
made. They go through the heavenly space, they 
fall through the heavenly space upon the skulls of 
the DaSvas. 

132. * On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, stands a beautiful well-falling club, 
with a hundred knots, a hundred edges, that rushes 
forward and fells men down; a club cast out of 
red brass, of strong, golden brass ; the strongest of 
all weapons, the most victorious of all weapons \ It 
goes through the heavenly space 2 , it falls through 
the heavenly space upon the skulls of the Da6vas. 

133. 'After he has smitten the Dafevas, after he 
has smitten down the men who lied unto Mithra, 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, drives forward 
through Arezahd and Savah6, through Fradadhafshu 
and Vldadhafshu, through Vourubarerti and Vouru- 

through this our Karshvare, the bright 



134. ' Angra Mainyu, who is all death, flees away 
in fear; A&shma, the evil-doing Peshotanu, flees 

1 Cf. Yt X, 96. * The text has, they go . . , . 

3 See above, p. 123, note 5. 



MIHIR VAST. 155 



away in fear ; the long-handed BtishySsta flees away 
in fear; all the Da6vas unseen and the Varenya 
fiends flee away in fear. 

135. 'Oh! may we never fall across the rush of 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, when in anger ! 
May Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, never smite 
us in his anger ; he who stands up upon this earth 
as the strongest of all gods, the most valiant of all 
gods, the most energetic of all gods, the swiftest of 
all gods, the most fiend-smiting of all gods, he, 
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures 1 . 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXXII. 

136. c We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake ; 

* For whom white stallions, yoked to his chariot, 
draw it, on one golden wheel, with a full shining 
axle. 

137. 'If Mithra takes his libations to his own 
dwelling 2 , " Happy that man, I think/' said Ahura 
Mazda, " O holy Zarathurtra ! for whom a holy 
priest, as pious as any in the world 8 , who is the 
Word incarnate, offers up a sacrifice unto Mithra with 
bundles of baresma and with the [proper] words. 

1 " Straight to that man, I think, will Mithra come, 
to visit his dwelling, 

138. c " When Mithras boons will come to him, as 
he follows God's teaching, and thinks according to 
God's teaching. 

"'Woe to thatman,! think," said Ahura Mazda, 



1 134-135 = 97-98* a Cf. Yt x 32. 

8 Doubtful Possibly, ' of a pious conscience/ 



156 YAtfTS AND sfRdZAHS. 

" O holy Zarathurtra ! for whom an unholy priest, 
not pious 1 9 who is not the Word incarnate, stands 
behind the baresma, however full may be the 
bundles of baresma he ties, however long may be 
the sacrifice he performs." 

139. ' He does not delight Ahura Mazda, nor the 
other Amesha-Spewtas, nor Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, he who thus scorns Mazda, and the other 
Amesha-Spe/rtas, and Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, and the Law, and Rashnu, and Arstt t 
who makes the world grow, who makes the world 
increase. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXXIII. 

140. * We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, .... 
sleepless, and ever awake. 

1 1 will offer up a sacrifice unto the good Mithra, 
O Spitama ! unto the strong, heavenly god, who is 
foremost, highly merciful, and peerless ; whose house 
is above 2 , a stout and strong warrior ; 

141. "Victorious and armed with a well-fashioned 
weapon, watchful in darkness and undeceivable. He 
is the stoutest of the stoutest, he is the strongest of 
the strongest, he is the most intelligent of the gods, 
he is victorious and endowed with Glory : he, of the 
ten thousand eyes, of the ten thousand spies, the 
powerful, all-knowing, undeceivable god. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

1 An unqualified priest; cf. Vend. IX, 47-57 ; XVIII, i seq. 
8 Or, whose house is great.' 



MIHIR VAST. 157 



XXXIV. 

142. We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 

sleepless, and ever awake ; 

'Who, with his manifold knowledge, powerfully 
increases the creation of Spewrta Mainyu, and is a 
well-created and most great Yazata, self-shining like 
the moon, when he makes his own body shine ; 

143. 'Whose face is flashing with light like the 
face of the star TLrtrya l ; whose chariot is embraced 
by that goddess who is foremost amongst those who 
have no deceit in them 2 , O Spitarna ! who is fairer 
than any creature in the world, and full of light to 
shine. I will worship that chariot, wrought by the 
Maker, Ahura Mazda, inlaid with stars and made of 
a heavenly substance ; (the chariot) of Mithra, who 
has ten thousand spies, the powerful, all-knowing, 
undeceivable god. 

' For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

XXXV. 

144. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, who is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies, 
with a thousand ears, well-shapen, with a thousand 
eyes, high, with full knowledge, strong, sleepless, and 
ever awake. 

' We sacrifice unto the Mithra around countries 8 ; 
1 We sacrifice unto the Mithra within countries; 

1 See Yt YLTL. * Ashi Vanguhi (?) ; cf. 68. 

8 Who watches around countries : aiwidazryum is translated 
( Pers * tt - of Mihir Nyftyw). 



158 YASTS AND sfe6ZAHS. 

1 We sacrifice unto the Mithra in this country l ; 

1 We sacrifice unto the Mithra above countries ; 

' We sacrifice unto the Mithra under countries ; 

' We sacrifice unto the Mithra before countries 2 ; 

' We sacrifice unto the Mithra behind countries. 

145. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra and Ahura, the 
two great, imperishable, holy gods 3 ; and unto the 
stars, and the moon, and the sun, with the trees that 
yield up baresma 4 . We sacrifice unto Mithra, the 
lord of all countries. 

c For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard, namely, unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 

' Yathfc ahft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

' I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who 
has a thousand ears, ten thousand eyes, a Yazata 
invoked by his own name; and that of R&ma 



1 Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
' [Give] unto that man 8 brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones I ' 



rf - Yasna XXVI, 9 [28]. 
2 Pairida^yfim : c*~l .4^ 4 \j^ t IP. 
8 Cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 8. 4 Cf. Vend. p. 22, note 2. 

B Cf. Sfr6zah 1, 16. c Who sacrifices to Mithra. 



SR&SH YAtfT HADH&KHT. 159 



XL SR6SH YA.ST HADH6KHT. 

There are two Ya sis dedicated to Sraosha, the angel of divine wor- 
ship l : one is a part of the Yasna (L VII [LVI]), and this, the other, 
is called the Sr6sh Yart Hidhokht. Whether it belonged to the so- 
called Hadh6kht Nosk 2 , one of the twenty-one Nosks of which 
the original Avesta was formed 3 , or whether it was recited in the 
Hadh6kht sacrifice *, a particular liturgy, is a matter on which we 
have no sufficient information. 

The two Yarts have a few developments in common (see 8- 
9, 10-13): the Hdhdkht is more liturgical, the Yasna Yarf is 
more descriptive, and has to a greater degree the poetical imagery 
ofaYajL 

The Srdsh Ysu t Hadh6kht is recited every day, during any gah 
except the Rapitvin. A Pahkvi translation of this Yast is extant 
(East India Office, XII, 102 ; Paris, Supplement Persan, XXXIII, 
259 ; edited in fitudes Iraniennes, II), and Anquetil mentions 
a Sanskrit translation. 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced 1 . . . . 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thitttra, one who hates the Da&vas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Ha* vani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto the holy, strong Sraosha, who is the incar- 
nate Word, a mighty-speared and lordly god, 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

YathS, ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

1 Cf. Vend. Introd. IV, 31. 9 Ibid. Ill, 3. 

8 See an account of the H&dhdkht Nosk in the Dfakart (West, 
Pahlavi Texts, I, 225, note) ; cf. Introd. to Yt. XXI. 
4 Cf. 18, note. 



160 YAOTS AND 



L 

1. We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend- 
smiting Sraosha, who makes the world increase, the 
holy and master of holiness. 

Good prayer, excellent prayer to the worlds 3 , O 
Zarathurtra ! 

2. This it is that takes away the friendship of 
the fiend and fiends, of the he-fiend and of the she- 
fiend ; it turns away in giddiness their eyes, minds, 
ears 2 , hands, feet, mouths, and tongues * ; as good 
prayer, without deceit and without harm, is Manly 
Courage 4 , and turns away the Dru^ 5 . 

3. The holy Sraosha, the best protector of the poor, 
is fiend-smiting ; he is the best smiter of the Dru^. 

The faithful one who pronounces most words of 
blessing is the most victorious in victory; the 
MSthra Spewta takes best the unseen Dru^ away. 
The Ahuna Vairya 6 is the best fiend-smiter among 
all spells ; the word of truth is the fighter 7 that is 
the best of all fiend-smiters. 

The Law of the worshippers of Mazda is the 
truest giver of all the good things, of all those that 
are the offspring of the good principle; and so is 
the Law of Zarathurtra. 

4. And he who should pronounce that word 8 , 
O Zarathu-rtra! either a man or a woman, with a 
mind all intent on holiness, with words all intent on 

1 'Has been taught to the world, namely, the Law' (Pahl. 
Comm.). 

2 Doubtful. * DerezvS : PahL hftzvdn; cf. Yt I, 2& 
* Is the same with it, is as powerful. 

5 Doubtful (vSrethrem dfirejta . . ..zakdrflif vartf d&tartfixn). 

6 See p. 23. 

7 Or, ' is the best of all fiend-smiters in battle/ 

8 This chapter (Pahl. Comm.). 



SR6SH VAST HADH6KHT. l6l 

holiness, with deeds all intent on holiness, when he 
is in fear either of high waters or of the darkness 
of a rainy night ; 

Or at the fords of a river, or at the branching-off 
of roads ; 

Or in the meeting together of the faithful, or 
the rushing together of the worshippers of the 
DaSvas 1 ; 

5. Whether on the road 2 or in the law * he has 
to fear, not in that day nor in that night shall the 
tormenting fiend, who wants to torment him, prevail 
to throw upon him the look of his evil eye, and the 
malice of the thief 4 who carries off cattle shall not 
reach him. 

6. Pronounce then that word, O Zarathortra ! that 
word to be spoken 6 , when thou fall upon the idola- 
ters 6 and thieves and Davas rushing together. 
Then the malice of the wicked worshippers of the 
Da6vas, of the Yfitus and their followers, of the 
Pairikas and their followers, will be affrighted and 
rush away. Down are the Da&vas I Down are the 
Dafiva-worshippers, and they take back their mouths 
from biting 7 . 

1 Different words are used, as usual, to express the same con- 
flict, according as it refers to the faithful or to the idolaters. 

8 Aipi-ayanSm: madam ris. 

8 Arethyanam: dddistdn (from aretha, meaning dfn&, 
d&distn). 

4 Gadha : nrasuwsa (Neriosengh); the Pahlavi has 4*, a Saka, 
a Scythe. 

* The praise of Sraosha. 

* Keresasa: krastek; cf. Neriosengh ad Yasna IX, 24 [75]; 
that name was in the later periods applied to Christians, as if keresa 
were the name of Christ ; cf. Bahxnan Yart II, 19 ; III, 2. 

7 Doubtful 

[23] M 



1 62 YASTS AND 



7. And therefore we take around us the holy- 
natured Sraosha, the holy, the fiend-smiter, as one 
does with shepherds' dogs; therefore we sacrifice 
unto the holy-natured Sraosha, the holy, the fiend- 
smiter, with good thoughts, good words, and good 
deeds. 

8 *. For his brightness and glory, for his strength 
and victorious power, for his offering sacrifices unto 
the gods 2 , I will offer him a sacrifice worth being 
heard. I will offer up libations unto the holy 
Sraosha, unto the great Ashi Vanguhi* and unto 
Nairyd-sangha 4 , the tall-formed. 

So may the holy Sraosha, the fiend-smiter, come 
to us for help ! 

9. We worship the holy Sraosha ; we worship the 
great master, Ahura Mazda, who is supreme in holi- 
ness, who is the foremost to do deeds of holiness. 

We worship all" the words 5 of Zarathurtra, and 
all the good deeds, those done and those to be 
done. 

YSh6 hdtam : All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda .... 

II. 

zo e . We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting 
Sraosha, who makes the world increase, the holy and master of 
holiness; 

Who strikes the evil-doing 7 man, who strikes 
the evil-doing woman; who smites the fiendish 

8-9=Yasna LVII, 3-4 [LVI, i, 6-12], 

See Vend. Introd. IV, 31. 8 See Yt. XVII. 

See Vend. XXII, 7 [22] and Sfrdzah I, 9. 

The words of the law. 

ro~i3=Yasna LVII, ig-iS [LVI, 7]. 

Cf. Yt I, 19. 



SR6SH VAST HADH&KHT. 163 

Dru-, and is most strong and world-destroying; 
who maintains and looks over all this moving 1 
world ; 

u. Who, never sleeping, wakefully guards the 
creation of Mazda ; who, never sleeping, wakefully 
maintains the creation of Mazda ; who protects all 
the material world with his club uplifted, from the 
hour when the sun is down ; 

12. Who never more did enjoy sleep from the 
time when the two Spirits made the world, namely, 
the good Spirit and the evil One ; who every day, 
every night, fights with the Mizainya Davas. 

13. He bows not for fear and fright before the 
Da&vas: before him all the Da6vas bow for fear 
and fright reluctantly, and rush away to darkness 2 . 

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious 
power . . . /* 



III. 

14- Yathft ahu vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha, 
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness ; 

Who with peace and friendship 4 watches the 
Dru,f and the most beneficent Spirit : so that the 
Amesha-Spetas may go along the seven Karsh- 
vares of the earth 6 ; who is the teacher of the 

1 Cf. above, p. 145, note i. * To hell. 

8 As above, 8-9. * To the creation of Ormazd. 

8 Doubtful. The Yasna has: * Through whose strength, vic- 
torious power, wisdom, and knowledge the Amesha-Spewtas go 
(a van; Phi. sitftnand) along the seven Karshvares of the earth' 
(LVII, 23 [LVI, 10, 2]). 

M 2 



1 64 YASTS AND stRdZAHS. 

Law 1 : he himself was taught it by Ahura Mazda, 
the holy One. 

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious 
power .... 

IV. 

15. Yatha ahft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha, 
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness ; 

Whom the holy Ahura Mazda has created to 
withstand A&shma, the fiend of the wounding spear ; 
we sacrifice unto Peace, whose breath is friendly, 
and unto the two withstanders of sin and guilt 2 , 

1 6. The friends of the holy Sraosha ; 

The friends of Rashnu Razirta 8 ; 

The friends of the good Law of the worshippers 
of Mazda ; 

The friends of ArrtA/ 4 , who makes the world 
grow, who makes the world increase, who makes 
the world prosper ; 

The friends of Ashi Vanguhi 5 ; 

The friends of the good JTisti 6 ; 

The friends of the most right jXista T ; 



1 He teaches the law to the three saviours to come, Osh&dar 
B&nf, OshSdar Mh, and Soshyds (Yasna LVII, 24 [LVI, 10, a]; 
Phl.tr.). 

3 PareJtas>fca mravay^s^a, to be corrected, according to 
various readings, into staretasa mavay4f0sa or something like it; 
the two genii here alluded to are Andstareta and Amuyamna, 
Sinlessness and Innocence, who are invoked in company with 
Aktati hamvai&ti in VispSrad VIII, 4. 

1 See Yt. XII. See Yt. XVII. 

5 See Vend. XIX, 39. See ibid. 

7 See Yt. XVI, i. 



SRdSH YAOT HADHdKHT. 165 

1 7. The friends of all gods ; 
The friends of the 'MSthra Spewta ; 
The friends of the fiend-destroying Law ; 
The friends of the long-traditional teaching ; 
The friends of the Amesha-Spe^tas ; 
The friends of ourselves, the Saoshyawfe 1 , the 
two-footed part of the holy creation ; 

The friends of all the beings of the holy world. 

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious 
power .... 

V. 

1 8. Yath4 ahft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha, 
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness; 

The first [Sraosha], the next, the middle, and the 
highest ; with the first sacrifice, with the next, with 
the middle, and with the highest 2 . We sacrifice 
unto all [the moments] 3 of the holy and strong 
Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word ; 

19. The strong Sraosha, of the manly courage, 
the warrior of the strong arms, who breaks the 
skulls of the Dafevas ; who smites with heavy blows * 
and is strong to smite ; the holy Sraosha, who smites 

1 The faithful, as helping through their good deeds in the work 
of final restoration, to be performed by Saoshya/(cf. Yt. XIII, 17). 

* The first sacrifice is the Yasna sacrifice; the next (literally, 
superior) is the Vispfcrad; the middle sacrifice is the H&dhdkht 
[and] Svak hdm&st ; the highest sacrifice is the Dv&zdah hdm&st 
(Pahl. Comm.). Sraosha is called the first, next, middle, and highest, 
accordingly as he presides over one or the other of those sacrifices. 
For a definition of the fivak hdmst and Dvzdah hdm&st, see 
West, Pahlavi Texts, I, 212, note 5. 

8 Vlspan, translated harvisp zam&n. 

4 Literally, the sroiter who smites with smitings. 



l66 YASTS AND 



with heavy blows; we sacrifice unto the crushing 
Ascendant of both the holy Sraosha and Arrti \ 

20. We sacrifice for all the houses protected by 
Sraosha, where the holy Sraosha is dear and friendly 
treated and satisfied, as well as the faithful man a , 
rich in good thoughts, rich in good words, rich in 
good deeds. 

21. We sacrifice unto the body of the holy 
Sraosha; 

We sacrifice unto the body of Rashnu Razista ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of Mithra, the lord of 
wide pastures ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of the holy wind ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of the good Law of the 
worshippers of Mazda; 

We sacrifice unto the body of Ars&t, who makes 
the world grow, who makes the world increase, who 
makes the world prosper ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of Ashi Vanguhi ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of the good -ffisti ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of the most right 
JTista.; 

We sacrifice unto the bodies of all the gods ; 

22. We sacrifice unto the body of the MSthra 
Spe&ta ; 

We sacrifice unto the body of the fiend-destroying 
Law; 

We sacrifice unto the body of the long-traditional 
teaching ; 

We sacrifice unto the bodies of the Amesha- 
Spe&tas ; 



1 The same as Arrta/. Cf. Yasna LVII, 34-35 [LVI, 13, 3-7]. 

2 He receives alms (the ashd-did). 



SR6SH VAST HADH6KHT. 1 67 

We sacrifice unto the bodies of ourselves, the 
Saoshyaw^s, the two-footed part of the holy crea- 
tion ; 

We sacrifice unto the bodies of all the beings of 
the holy world l . 

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious 
power .... 

23. Yathfi ahu vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, the strength and 
vigour of the holy, strong Sraosha, who is the in- 
carnate Word, a mighty-speared and lordly god. 

[Give] unto that man 2 brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones! 

1 Cf. 16-17. * Who sacrifices to Sraosha. 



1 68 YAOTS AND StRdZAHS. 



XII. RASHN VAST. 

Rashnu Razijta, 'the truest True/ is the Genius of Truth: 
he is one of the three judges of the departed, with Mithra and 
Sraosha: he holds the balance in which the deeds of men are 
weighed after their death : ' he makes no unjust balance . . . . , 
neither for the pious nor yet the wicked, neither for lords nor yet 
rulers ; as much as a hair's breadth he will not vary, and he shows 
no favour 1 .' He is an offshoot either of Mithra, the God of Truth 
and the avenger of lies, or of Ahura Mazda himself, the all-knowing 
lord ( 2 seq.). 

This Yart seems to be an appeal made to Rashnu to come and 
attend the performance of the var nirang or ordeal (see p. 170, 
note 3), of which Rashnu, as the Genius of Truth, was the natural 
witness and arbiter (cf. Vend. IV, 64-55 [154-156]). As a god of 
Truth must know everything and be present everywhere, he is 
called from whatever part of the world he may actually be in. 
This brings about an enumeration of all the parts of the world, 
from this earth ( 9-22) to the highest heaven ( 37), passing 
through the Albdrz ( 23-26), the star region ( 26-32), the moon 
region ( 33), and the sun region ( 34 ; cf. p. 73, note^). 

This Yart is recited on the days of Rashn, Murd&d, Ashtd, and 
Zemyd (the i8th, 7th, 26th, and 28th of the month). 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced 1 .... 

Ashem Vohfi: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
tmutra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [H&vani], 
the holy and master of holiness. 

Unto Rashnu RazLrta; unto ArrrJU, who makes 
the world grow, who makes the world increase ; unto 
the true-spoken speech, that makes the world grow 2 ; 

1 Minokhirad II, 120-121 (tr. West). 
8 Slrdzahl, 18. 



RASHN VAST. 169 



Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorifi- 
cation. 

Yatha* ahu vairyo : The *ffl of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I. 

1. The holy (Zarathurtra) asked him 1 : ' O holy 
Ahura Mazda ! I ask thee ; answer me with words of 
truth, thou who knowest the truth. Thou art unde- 
ceivable, thou hast an undeceivable understanding ; 
thou art undeceivable, as thou knowest everything. 

' What of the Holy Word is created true ? what is 
created progress-making? what is fit to discern? 
what is healthful ? what is wise ? what is happy and 
more powerful to destroy than all other creatures 2 ? * 

2. Ahura Mazda answered : ' I will declare that 
unto thee, O pure, holy Spitama ! 

' The most glorious Holy Word (itself), this is what 
in the Holy Word is created true, what is created 
progress making, what is fit to discern, what is 
healthful, wise, and happy, what is more powerful to 
destroy than all other creatures.' 

3. Ahura Mazda said : * Bind up a three-twigged 
baresma against the way of the sun. [Address] 
unto me, Ahura Mazda, these words : " We invoke, 
we bless [Ahura] 8 ; I invoke the friendship [of Ahura] 
towards this var* prepared, towards the fire and 
the baresma, towards the full boiling [milk 6 ], towards 
the var * of oil and the sap e of the plants." 

1 Ahura Mazda. Ct Yt. I, i seq. 

8 The text is apparently corrupt and has literally, ' We invoke, 
we bless me, Ahura Mazda. 9 

4 See following page, note 3. 

8 Possibly, waters; cf. Yt. V, 132 and Vend. IV, 46 [128], $4 
[154] seq. 

6 Literally, the fat 



170 YASTS AND sflidZAHS. 

4. 'Then I, Ahura Mazda, shall come for help 
unto thee, towards this var prepared, towards 
the fire and the baresma, towards the full boiling 
[milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of the 
plants ; 

1 Along with the fiend-smiting Wind, along with the 
cursing thought of the wise \ along with the kingly 
Glory, along with Saoka 2 , made by Mazda. 

5. ' We invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong ; I 
invoke his friendship towards this var 3 prepared, 
towards the fire and the baresma, towards the full 
boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of 
the plants. 

6. ' Then Rashnu the tall, the strong, will come 
for help unto thee, towards this var prepared, towards 
the fire and the baresma, towards the full boiling 
[milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of the 
plants : 

'Along with the fiend-smiting Wind, along with the 
cursing thought of the wise, along with the kingly 
Glory, along with Saoka, made by Mazda. 

7. ' O thou, holy Rashnu ! O most true Rashnu ! 
most beneficent Rashnu! most knowing Rashnu! 
most discerning Rashnu ! most fore-knowing 
Rashnu! most far-seeing Rashnu! Rashnu, the 



1 See p. 12, note 13. 9 See Vend. XXII, 3. 

8 Var6; this seems to be the Var nirang or ordeal which 
is alluded to in several passages of the Avesta ; cf. Afrigzln I, 9 ; 
Yasna XXXI, 3 b (see Pahl. Comm. ; cf. Comm. ad XXXIV, 4 a) ; 
cf. Vend. IV, 46, 55. According to the Dfnkart, there were thirty- 
three kinds of var ordeals (Haug, Ardi Vhif, p. 145); the most 
common was to pour melted copper upon the breast of the man 
whose truth was to be tested : if he went off uninjured, he was 
considered to have spoken the truth. Cf. Vend. Introd. Ill, 9. 



RASHN VAST. 171 



best doer of justice 1 1 Rashnu, the best smiter of 
thieves ; 

8. c The uninjured, the best killer, smiter, de- 
stroyer of thieves and bandits ! in whatever part of 
the world thou art watching the doings 2 of men and 
making the account . . . . 3 . 

II. 

9. ' Whether thou, O holy Rashnu ! art in the 
Karshvare Arezahi 4 , we invoke, we bless Rashnu, 
the strong. I invoke his friendship towards this 
var prepared 5 .... in whatever part of the world 
thou art 

III. 

10. * Whether thou, O holy Rashnu ! art in the 
Karshvare Savahi 4 , we invoke, we bless Rashnu. 
I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared 
.... in whatever part of the world thou art 

IV. 

n. * Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
Karshvare Fradadhafshu *, we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards 
this var prepared .... in whatever part of the 
world thou art. 

V. 

12. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 

1 Arethama/-bairishta: aretha is dfni, dddist4n (law, 
justice). 

* Keja=kart&rt (PahL Comm. ad Vend. XXI, 3 [14]). 

8 I cannot make anything of the rest of the sentence hadhanS 
tanasuj; cf. 38. 

4 See Yt. X, 15, note 5. * The rest as in fc 5-8. 



172 VASTS AND SIZARS. 

Karshvare Vldadhafshu \ we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards 
this var prepared , ... in whatever part of the 
world thou art. 

VI. 

13. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
Karshvare Vouru-barerti l , we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards 
this var prepared .... in whatever part of the 
world thou art 

VII. 

14. * Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
Karshvare Vouru-giarerti \ we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards 
this var prepared .... in whatever part of the 
world thou art 

VIII. 

15. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in this 
Karshvare, the bright /jfoaniratha l , we invoke, we 
bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship 
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part 
of the world thou art. 

IX. 

1 6. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
sea Vouru-Kasha 2 , we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the 
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var 
prepared .... in whatever part of the world 
thou art. 



x See Yt. X, 15, note 5. a See p. 54, note 6. 



RASHN YAST. 173 



X. 

17. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the 
tree of the eagle *, that stands in the middle of the 
sea Vouru-Kasha, that is called the tree of good 
remedies, the tree of powerful remedies, the tree of 
all remedies, and on which rest the seeds of all 
plants ; we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I 
invoke his friendship towards this var prepared 

XL 

1 8. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the 
Aodhas 2 of the Rangha, we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards 
this var prepared .... 

XII. 

19. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the 
Sanaka 3 of the Rangha, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, 
the strong. I invoke his friendship towards this 
var prepared .... 

1 The Sa&na, in kter mythology the Sfnamrfi or Sfmftrgh ; 
his 'resting-place is on the tree which is Ja^-bfish (opposed to 
harm) of all seeds; and always when he rises aloft, a thousand 
twigs will shoot forth from that tree ; and when he alights, he will 
break off the thousand twigs, and he sheds their seed therefrom. 
And the bird Chafimrdsh for ever sits in that vicinity ; and his work 
is this, that he collects that seed which sheds from the tree of all 
seeds, which is Jswf-bfish, and conveys it there where Tishtar 
seizes the water, so that Tishtar may seize the water with that 
seed of all kinds, and may rain it on the world with the rain' 
(Mmokhirad LXH, 37 ; tr. West). 

2 By the floods (? Vend. I, 26); it has probably a geographical 
meaning; cf. the following paragraph ; perhaps the marshy country 
at the mouth of the Tigris. 

3 Cf. 7t. X } 104 ; aodhas and sanaka may refer to tbe southern 
and northern basin of the Tigris. 



174 YASTS AND 



XIII. 

20. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art at one 
of the angles of this earth, we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards this var 

prepared .... 

XIV. 

21. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art at the 
boundary of this earth, we invoke, we bless Rashnu. 
I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XV. 

22. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in any 
place of this earth, We invoke, we bless Rashnu. I 
invoke his friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XVI. 

23. ' Whether thou, 'O holy Rashnu ! art on the 
Hara Berezaiti, the bright mountain around which 
the many (stars) revolve, where come neither night 
nor darkness, no cold wind and no hot wind, no 
deathful sickness, no uncleanness made by the 
Da6vas, and the clouds cannot reach up unto the 
Haraiti Bareza 1 ; we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I in- 
voke his friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XVII. 

24. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art upon 
the highest Hukairya, of the deep precipices 2 , made 
of gold, wherefrom this river of mine, Ardvi SAra 
An^hita, leaps from a thousand times the height of 
a man, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I 
invoke his friendship towards this var prepared . . .' . 

1 Cf.YtX,5o. 

a Reading vfspd-vafcmem; cf. Yt V, 96, note 7. 



RASHN VAST. 175 



XVIII. 

25. * Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art upon 
the Ta6ra of the height Haraiti, around which the 
stars, the moon, and the sun revolve \ we invoke, 
we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friend- 
ship towards this var prepared .... 

XIX. 

26. ' Whether thou, O holy Rashnu ! art in the 
star Vana#/ 2 , made by Mazda, we invoke, we bless 
Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards 
this var prepared .... 

XX. 

27. * Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
bright and glorious star TLrtrya 3 , we invoke, we 
bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship 
towards the var prepared .... 

XXL 

28. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
group of the Hapt6iriga stars s , we invoke, we 
bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship 
towards this var prepared .... 

. . . . XXII. 

29. ' Whether thou, O holy Rashnu ! art in those 
stars that have the seed of die waters in them 4 , we 

1 See Bund V, 3 seq. ; cf. Yt. X, 13, 50. 

a Cf. Yt XX and Yt VHI, 12. * Cf. Yt VIII, 12. 

* * The star of water essence is for the increase of water; and 
the star of earth essence, for the increase of earth ; and the star of 
tree essence, for the increase of trees ; and the star of cattle essence, 



176 YASTS AND 



invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his 
friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XXIII. 

30. c Whether thou, O holy Rashnu ! art in those 
stars that have the seed of the earth in them J , we 
invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his 
friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XXIV. 

31. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu ! art in those 
stars that have the seed of die plants in them \ we 
invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his 
friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XXV. 

32. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
stars that belong to the Good Spirit 2 , we invoke, 
we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friend- 
ship towards this var prepared .... 

XXVL 

33. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
moon which has the seed of the Bull in it 8 , we in- 
voke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his 
friendship towards this var prepared .... 

for the increase of cattle; and the essence of water, and earth, and 
trees, and cattle is created for the increase of man ' (Minokhirad 
XLIX, 7, tr. West). 

1 See preceding note. 

9 Excluding the planets which belong to Ahriman (Minokhirad 
VIII, 19; Bund. Ill, 2g; V, i). 

9 See above, p. 8, note 8. 



RASHN YA5T. 



77 



XXVII. 

34. * Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
swift-horsed sun, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the 
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var 
prepared .... 

XXVIII. 

35. ' Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
sovereign endless Light, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, 
the strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var 
prepared .... 

XXIX. 

36. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones, we 
invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his 
friendship towards this var prepared .... 

XXX. 

37. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the 
shining Gar6-demna \ we invoke, we bless Rashnu, 
the strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var 
prepared .... 

XXXI. 

38. 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art ... .* 
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke 
his friendship towards this var prepared .... 

39. 'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacri- 
fice worth being heard .... 



1 The highest heaven, the abode of Ormazd. 

9 ? Upa hadhana hadhanft tanastur; cf. 8, p. 171, note 3. 



j;8 YAOTS AND slRdZAHS. 

c YghS hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda 

40. c YathS ahft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 



' I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of Rashnu Razirta; of Arrt&f, who 
makes the world grow, who makes the world in- 
crease ; and of the true-spoken speech that makes 
the world grow. 

* Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

'[Give] unto that man 1 brightness and glory, give him health of 
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy Ones/ 

1 Who shall have worshipped Rashnu. 



VAST. 179 



XIII. FARVARDiN VAST. 



The Fravashi is the inner power in every being that maintains 
it and makes it grow and subsist. Originally the Fravashis were 
the same as the Pitrzs of the Hindus or the Manes of the Latins, 
that is to say, the everlasting and deified souls of the dead (see 
49-52) ; but in course of time they gained a wider domain, and 
not only men, but gods and even physical objects, like the sky and 
the earth, &c, ( 85-86), had each a Fravashi (see Ormazd et 
Ahriman, 111-113). 

This Yart is to be divided into two parts. The former part 
( 1-84) is a glorification of the powers and attributes of the 
Fravashis in general; the latter part ( 85-158) is an enumeration 
of the Fravashis of the most celebrated heroes of Mazdeism, from 
the first man, Gaya Maretan, down to the last, Saoshyaw/. 

This latter part is like a Homer's catalogue of Mazdeism. 
The greatest part of the historical legends of Iran lies here con- 
densed into a register of proper names. This enumeration is 
divided into seven chapters : 

The first (XXIV, 85-95) contains the names of several gods, 
of the first man, Gaya Maretan, the first law-giver, Zarathurtra, and 
his first disciple, Maidhyd-maungha; 

The second part (XXV, 96-110) contains the names of the 
disciples of Zarathurtra, most of them belonging to the epical 
cyclus of Vfot&spa (Gurtisp) ; 

The third part (XXVI, 111-117) is of uncertain character, 
and no name contained in it is found in the epical legends ; 

The fourth part (XXVII, 118-128) seems to be devoted to 
the heroes of the other Karshvares and to mythical beings, born 
or unborn (cf. 121, 122, 127, 128) ; 
The fifth part (XXVIII, 129) is devoted to Saoshyaw/ alone ; 
The sixth part (XXIX, 130-138) is devoted to the heroes 
before the time of Zarathurtra; 

The seventh part (XXX, 139-142) is devoted to the holy 
women of Mazdeism from Hvdvi, Zarathmtra's wife, down to 
Srftta/-fedhri, Vanghu-fedhri, and EredaMedhri, the future mothers 
of his three unborn sons. 

The second, third, and fourth enumerations all end with the 

N 2 



ISO YASTS AND 



name of Astva/-ereta (that is to say, Saoshyaw/), \vhich shows that 
they do not refer to successive generations, but to three inde- 
pendent branches, which are each developed apart down to the 
time of the Saviour. 



0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! . 

Ashem Vohfi : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hdvani], 
the holy and master of holiness. 

Unto the awful, overpowering Fravashis of the 
faithful ; unto the Fravashis of the men of the pri- 
mitive law 1 ; unto the Fravashis of the next-of-kin, 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glori- 
fication. 

Yathft ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of holi- 
ness .... 

I. 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathurtra, 
saying : c Do thou proclaim, O pure Zarathustra ! the 
vigour and strength, the glory, the help and the joy 
that are in the Fravashis of the faithful, the awful 
and overpowering Fravashis ; do thou tell how they 
come to help me, how they bring assistance unto 
me, the awful Fravashis of the faithful 2 . 

2. * Through their brightness and glory, O Zara- 
thustra! I maintain that sky, there above, shining 
and seen afar, and encompassing this earth all 
around. 

3. ' It looks like a palace, that stands built of a 

1 The so-called paoiry6-/kafisha : the primitive law is what * is 
considered as the true Mazdayasnian religion in all ages, both 
before and after the time of Zaraturt' (West, Pahlavi Texts, I, 
242, note i); cf. 150. 

2 C 19. 



FARVARDlN VAST. l8l 

heavenly substance 1 , firmly established, with ends 
that lie afar, shining in its body of ruby over the 
three-thirds (of the earth) 2 ; it is like a garment 
inlaid with stars, made of a heavenly substance, that 
Mazda puts on, along with Mithra and Rashnu and 
Speta-Armaiti, and on no side can the eye perceive 
the end of it. 

4. c Through their brightness and glory, O Zara- 
thortra! I maintain Ardvi Stira AnShita, the wide- 
expanding and health-giving, who hates the Dafevas 
and obeys the laws of Ahura, who is worthy of 
sacrifice in the material world, worthy of prayer in 
the material world ; the life-increasing and holy, the 
flocks-increasing and holy, the fold-increasing and 
holy, the wealth-increasing and holy, the country- 
increasing and holy 3 ; 

5 4 . c Who makes the seed of all males pure, who 
makes the womb of all females pure for bringing 
forth, who makes all females bring forth in safety, 
who puts milk in the breasts of all females in the 
right measure and the right quality ; 

6. ' The large river, known afar, that is as large 
as the whole of all the waters that run along the 
earth ; that runs powerfully from the height Hukairya 
down to the sea Vouru-Kasha. 

7. 'All the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are 
boiling over, all the middle of it is boiling over, 

1 Reading mainyu-Utjt6; cf. Yt X, 90, 143, and in this very 
paragraph vanghanem mainyu-t&Jtem. 

2 A division of the earth different from and older than the 
division into seven Karshvares ; cf. Yasna XI, 7 [21] ; this division 
was derived by analogy from the tripartite division of the universe 
(earth, atmosphere, and heaven). 

8 Yt.V, i. 4 5-8=YL 



1 82 YASTS AND sfR6zAHS. 

when she runs down there, when she streams down 
there, she, Ardvi Sura Anihita, who has a thousand 
cells and a thousand channels ; the extent of each of 
those cells, of each of those channels, is as much 
as a man can ride in forty days, riding on a good 
horse. 

8. 'From this river of mine alone flow all the 
waters that spread all over the seven Karshvares ; 
this river of mine alone goes on bringing waters, 
both in summer and in winter. This river of mine 
purifies the seed in males, the womb in females, the 
milk in females' breasts *. 

9. * Through their brightness and glory, O Zara- 
thustra ! I maintain the wide earth made by Ahura, 
the large and broad earth, that bears so much that 
is fine, that bears all the bodily world, the live and 
the dead, and the high mountains, rich in pastures 
and waters ; 

10. 'Upon which run the many streams and 
rivers ; upon which the many kinds of plants grow 
up from the ground, to nourish animals and men, 
to nourish the Aryan nations, to nourish the five 
kinds of animals 2 , and to help the faithful. 

n. 'Through their brightness and glory, O Zara- 
thurtra ! I maintain in the womb the child that has 
been conceived, so that it does not die from the 



1 4-8=Yt.V,i- 5 . 

* There are five classes of animals: those living in waters 
(upfipa), those living under the ground (upasma=upa-zema), 
the flying ones (fraptar^at), the running ones (ravas/fcarant), the 
grazing ones (angrangh); Visp&ad I, i seq.; Yt. XIII, 74. 
The representatives of those several classes are the kar mdhi 
fish, the ermine, the kanipt, the hare, and the ass-goat (Pahl. 
Comm. ad Visp. 1. 1.). 



FARVARDtN VAST, 183 

assaults of Vid6tu \ and I develop in it 2 the bones, 
the hair, the . . . . 3 , the entrails, the feet, and the 
sexual organs. 

12. 'Had not the awful Fravashis of the faithful 
given help unto me, those animals and men of mine, 
of which there are such excellent kinds, would not 
subsist; strength would belong to the Drug-, the 
dominion would belong to the Dru^, the material 
world would belong to the Drug-. 

1 3. ' Between the earth and the sky the immaterial 
creatures would be harassed by the Dru^ ; between 
the earth and the sky the immaterial creatures would 
be smitten by the Dni^; and never afterwards would 
Angra-Mainyu give way to the blows of Spewta- 
Mainyu. 

14. 'Through their brightness and glory the 
waters run and flow forward from the never-failing 
springs; through their brightness and glory the 
plants grow up from the earth, by the never-failing 
springs; through their brightness and glory the 
winds blow, driving down the clouds towards the 
never-failing springs. 

15. 'Through their brightness and glory the 
females conceive offspring ; through their brightness 
and glory they bring forth in safety; it is through 
their brightness and glory when they become blessed 
with children. 

1 6. 'Through their brightness and glory a man 
is born who is a chief in assemblies and meetings 4 , 
who listens well 6 to the (holy) words, whom Wisdom 



1 See Vend. IV, 40 [137]. * Doubtful. 

8 ? Derewda. * 

5 Who learns well, who has the gaoshd-srdta khratu. 



1 84 YASTS AND stRdZAHS. 

holds dear 1 , and who returns a victor from discus- 
sions with Gaotema, the heretic 2 . 

1 Through their brightness and glory the sun goes 
his way ; through their brightness and glory the 
moon goes her way; through their brightness and 
glory the stars go their way. 

17. 'In fearful battles they are the wisest for 
help, the Fravashis of the faithful. 

'The most powerful amongst the Fravashis of 
the faithful, O Spitama! are those of the men of 
the primitive law 3 or those of the Saoshya/s 4 not 
yet born, who are to restore the world. Of the 
others, the Fravashis of the living faithful are more 
powerful, O Zarathurtra ! than those of the dead, 
O Spitama! 

1 8. 'And the man who in life shall treat the 
Fravashis of the faithful well, will become a ruler 
of the country with full power, and a chief most 
strong ; so shall any man of you become, who shall 
treat Mithra well, the lord of wide pastures, and 
Arstt, who makes the world grow, who makes the 
world increase. 

19. 'Thus do I proclaim unto thee, O pure Spi- 
tama ! the vigour and strength, the glory, the help, 
and the joy that are in the Fravashis of the faithful, 



1 Or, 'who wishes for wisdom* (lore; khratukta=khratu- 



a Yd nSidhyanghd gaotemahg pard ay<m parjtdi/avSiti. 
This seems to be an allusion to controversies with the Buddhists 
or Gotama's disciples, whose religion had obtained a footing in 
the western parts of Iran as early as the second century before 
Christ NSidhyanghd means a heretic, an Ashemaogha 
(see Pahl. Comzn. ad Yasna XXXIV, 8). 

8 See above, p. 180, note i. * See above, p. 165, note i. 



FARVARDiN YAOT. 185 

the awful and overpowering Fravashis; and how 
they come to help me, how they bring assistance 
unto me, the awful Fravashis of the faithful V 

II. 

20. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zara- 
thustra, saying : ' If in this material world, O Spi- 
tama Zarathu-rtra ! thou happenest to come upon 
frightful roads, full of dangers and fears, O Zara- 
thujtra ! and thou fearest for thyself, then do thou 
recite these words, then proclaim these fiend-smiting 
words, O Zarathustra ! 

21. * " I praise, I invoke, I meditate upon, and we 
sacrifice unto the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis 
of the faithful. We worship the Fravashis of the 
masters of the houses, those of the lords of the 
boroughs, those of the lords of the towns, those of 
the lords of the countries, those of the Zarathutfrd- 
temas 2 ; the Fravashis of those that are, the Fra- 
vashis of those that have been, the Fravashis of 
those that will be ; all the Fravashis of all nations 3 , 
and most friendly the Fravashis of the friendly 
nations ; 

22. '"Who maintain the sky, who maintain the 
waters, who maintain the earth, who maintain the 
cattle, who maintain in the womb the child that has 
been conceived, so that it does not die from the 
assaults of Vlddtu, and develop in it the bones, the 

hair, the , the entrails, the feet, and the sexual 

organs 4 ; 

23. '"Who are much -bringing, who move with 

1 Cf. i. 2 See Yt. X, iig, note. 

8 See 143, text and note. 4 See n. 



1 86 YASTS AND 



awfulness, well- moving, swiftly moving, quickly 
moving, who move when invoked ; who are to be 
invoked in the conquest of good, who are to be in- 
voked in fights against foes, who are to be invoked 
in battles ; 

24. ' " Who give victory to their invoker, who give 
boons to their lover, who give health to the sick 
man, who give good Glory to the faithful man that 
brings libations and invokes them with a sacrifice 
and words of propitiation l ; 

25. ' "Who turn to that side where are faithful 
men, most devoted to holiness, and where is the 
greatest piety 2 , where the faithful man is rejoiced 3 , 
and where the faithful man is not ill-treated 4 ." ' 

IIL 

26. We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fra- 
vashis of the faithful, who are the mightiest of drivers, 
the lightest of those driving forwards, the slowest 
of the retiring 5 , the safest 5 of all bridges, the least- 
erring 6 of all weapons and arms 6 , and who never 
turn their backs 7 . 

27. At once, wherever they come, we worship 
them, the good ones, the excellent ones, the good, 
the strong, the beneficent Fravashis of the faithful. 
They are to be invoked when the bundles of 
baresma are tied ; they are to be invoked in fights 
against foes, in battles 8 , and there where gallant 
men strive to conquer foes. 

1 Cf. 40. 

* Fr&itou: cf. fr6reti=farndmijn, ftde^a (YasnaVIII, 2 [4]). 

8 With alms (ashd-dftd). * Cf. 36. 

5 Doubtful 8 Defensive arms. 

7 To flee. a Cf> 3 23 



FARVARD!N YAST. 187 

28. Mazda invoked them for help, when he fixed 
the sky and the waters and the earth and the plants ; 
when Spewta-Mainyu fixed the sky, when he fixed 
the waters, when the earth, when the cattle, when 
the plants, when the child conceived in the womb, 
so that it should not die from the assaults of Viddtu, 
and developed in it the bones, the hair, the . . . . , the 
entrails, the feet, and the sexual organs *. 

29. Spewta-Mainyu maintained the sky, and they 
sustained it from below, they, the strong Fravashis, 
who sit in silence, gazing with sharp looks ; whose 
eyes and ears are powerful, who bring long joy, high 
and high-girded ; well-moving and moving afar, loud- 
snorting 2 , possessing riches and a high renown. 

IV. 

30. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful ; whose friendship is good, 
and who know how to benefit; whose friendship 
lasts long ; who like to stay in the abode where they 
are not harmed by its dwellers; who are good, 
beautiful afar 8 , health-giving, of high renown, con- 
quering in battle, and who never do harm first 

V. 

31. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful; whose will is dreadful 
unto those who vex them ; powerfully working and 
most beneficent; who in battle break the dread 
arms of their foes and haters. 

1 Cf.II,22. 

2 They are compared to horses ; cf. Yt. VIII, 2. 

8 Their beauty is seen afar. One manuscript has 'known afar;' 
another, 'whose eyesight reaches far/ 



'1 88 YASTS AND siR&ZAHS. 

VI. 

32. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful ; liberal, valiant, and full 
of strength, not to be seized by thought, welfare- 
giving, kind, and health-giving, following with Ashi's 
remedies, as far as the earth extends, as the rivers 
stretch, as the sun rises l . 

VII. 

33. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who gallantly and bravely 
fight, causing havoc, wounding 2 , breaking to pieces 
all the malice of the malicious, Davas and men, 
and smiting powerfully in battle, at their wish and 
will 

34. You kindly deliver the Victory made by 
Ahura, and the crushing Ascendant, most bene- 
ficently, to those countries where you, the good ones, 
unharmed and rejoiced, unoppressed and unoffended, 
have been held worthy of sacrifice and prayer, and 
proceed the \vay of your wish. 

VIIL 

35. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, of high renown, smiting 
in battle, most strong, shield-bearing and harmless 
to those who are true, whom both the pursuing and 
the fleeing invoke for help: the pursuer invokes 

1 Afl the beneficent powers hidden in the earth, in the waters, 
and in the sun, and which Ashi Vanguhi (Yt. XVII) imparts to 



man. 
a Doubtful: 



FARVARDIN VAST. " 189 



them for a swift race, and for a swift race does the 
fleer invoke them ; 

36. Who turn to that side where are faithful 
men, most devoted to holiness, and where is the 
greatest piety, where the faithful man is rejoiced, 
and where the faithful man is not ill-treated \ 

IX. 

37. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who form many battalions, 
girded with weapons 2 , lifting up spears, and full of 
sheen; who in fearful battles come rushing along 
where the gallant heroes 3 go and assail the DSnus 4 . 

38. There you destroy the victorious strength of 
the Turanian Dinus ; there you destroy the malice 
of the Turanian D&nus ; through you the chiefs 6 are 
of high intellect 6 and most successful; they, the 
gallant heroes 3 , the gallant Saoshya#/s 7 , the gallant 
conquerors of the offspring of the Dinus chiefs of 
myriads, who wound with stones 8 . 

X. 

39. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who rout the two wings 
of an army standing in battle array, who make the 
centre swerve, and swiftly pursue onwards, to help 
the faithful and to distress the doers of evil deeds. 

XL 

40. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 

1 Cf. 25. * Y4st6-zayau. " Doubtful, 

4 Yt. V, 72. 8 Doubtful. 

e Hvira; see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 183. 

7 Cf. p. 165, note i. * Doubtful (asabana). 



1 90 YASTS AND 



Fravashis of the faithful ; awful, overpowering, and 
victorious, smiting in battle, sorely wounding, blow- 
ing away (the foes), moving along to and fro, of 
good renown, fair of body, godly of soul, and holy ; 
who give victory to their invoker, who give boons to 
their lover, who give health to the sick man 1 ; 

41. Who give good glory to him who worships 
them with a sacrifice, as that man did worship them, 
the holy Zarathurtra, the chief of the material world, 
the head of the two-footed race, in whatever struggle 
he had to enter, in whatever distress he did fear ; 

42. Who, when well invoked, enjoy bliss in the 
heavens; who, when well invoked, come forward 
from the heavens, who are the heads 2 of that sky 
above, possessing the well-shapen Strength, the Vic- 
tory made by Ahura, the crushing Ascendant, and 
Welfare 8 , the wealth-bringing, boon-bringing, holy, 
well fed, worthy of sacrifice and prayer in the per- 
fection of holiness. 

43. They shed Satava&sa 4 between the earth and 
the sky, him to whom the waters belong 6 , who listens 
to appeals and makes the waters flow and the plants 
grow up, to nourish animals and men, to nourish the 
Aryan nations, to nourish the five kinds of animals e , 
and to help the faithful 7 . 

44 SatavaSsa comes down and flows between 
the earth and the sky, he to whom the waters be- 
long, who listens to appeals and makes the waters 
and the plants grow up, fair, radiant, and full of 

1 Cf.2 4 - 

a 'The chief creatures;' cf. G&h II, 8. 

1 Saoka; cf. Sfrdzah I, 3, note. 

4 Cf. Yt. VIII, 9, and 34, note. Ta/-ipem. 

6 See above, p. 182, note 2. 7 Cf. 10. 



FARVARDIN VAST. 



light, to nourish animals and men, to nourish the 
Aryan nations, to nourish the five kinds of animals, 
and to help the faithful. 

XII. 

45. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful ; with helms of brass, with 
weapons of brass, with armour l of brass ; who 
struggle in the fights for victory in garments of 
light, arraying the battles and bringing them for- 
wards, to kill thousands of Davas. 

When the wind blows from behind them 2 and 
brings their breath unto men, 

46. Then men know where blows the breath of 
victory : and they pay pious homage unto the good, 
strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful, with 
their hearts prepared and their arms uplifted. 

47. Whichever side they have been first wor- 
shipped in the fulness of faith of a devoted heart 3 , 
to that side turn the awful Fravashis of the faithful, 
along with Mithra and Rashnu and the awful cursing 
thought 4 of the wise and the victorious wind. 

48. And those nations are smitten at one stroke 
by their fifties and their hundreds, by their hundreds 
and their thousands, by their thousands and their 
tens of thousands, by their tens of thousands and 
their myriads of myriads, against which turn the 
awful Fravashis of the faithful, along with Mithra 
and Rashnu, and the awful cursing thought of the 
wise and the victorious wind. 

1 Doubtful. * Literally, blows them within, 

8 Cf. Yt. X, 9. * See above, p. 12, note 12. 



YASTS AND siR&ZAHS. 



XIII. 

49. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who come and go through 
the borough at the time of the Hamaspathmafidha l ; 
they go along there for ten nights, asking thus a : 

50. 'Who will praise us? Who will offer us a 
sacrifice ? Who will meditate upon us ? Who will 
bless us 3 ? Who will receive us with meat and 
clothes in his hand * and with a prayer worthy of 
bliss 5 ? Of which of us will the name be taken for 
invocation 6 ? Of which of you will the soul be wor- 
shipped by you with a sacrifice 7 ? To whom will 
this gift of ours be given, that he may have never- 
failing food for ever and ever ?' 

51. And the man who offers them up a sacrifice, 

1 The sixth and last GanambSr (see Afrfgdn GahambSr), or the last 
ten days of the year (ioth-20th March), including the last five days 
of the last month, Sapendarmad, and the five complementary days. 
These last ten days should be spent in deeds of charity, religious 
banquets feuran), and ceremonies in memory of the dead. It was 
also at the approach of the spring that the Romans and the 
Athenians used to offer annual sacrifices to the dead ; the Romans 
in February 'qui tune eztremus anni mensis erat' (Cicero, De 
Legibus, II, 21), the Athenians on the third day of the Anthesterion 
feast (in the same month). The souls of the dead were supposed to 
partake of the new life then beginning to circulate through nature, 
that had also been dead during the long months of winter. 

3 Perhaps : asking for help, thus. 

* Frfnfi/: who will pronounce the Aftfn ? 

4 To be given in alms to poor Mazdayasnians (ashd-did). 

5 Asha-nasa : that makes him reach the condition of one of 
the blessed (ahliyfh arzfinfk, Vend. XVIII, 6 [17]): the Sanskrit 
translation has, ' that is to say, that makes him worthy of a great 
reward/ 

6 As in the invocations from 87 to the end. 

7 An allusion to the formula: 6 1 sacrifice to the Fravashi of my 
own soul/ Yasna XXIII, 4 [6]. 



FARVARD!N VAST. 193 



with meat and clothes in his hand, with a prayer 
worthy of bliss, the awful Fravashis of the faithful, 
satisfied, unharmed, and unoffended, bless thus : 

52. May there be in this house flocks of animals 
and men ! May there be a swift horse and a solid 
chariot ! May there be a man who knows how to 
praise God 1 and rule in an assembly, who will offer 
us sacrifices with meat and clothes in his hand, and 
with a prayer worthy of bliss V 

XIV. 

53. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who show beautiful paths 
to the waters, made by Mazda, which had stood 
before for a long time in the same place without 
flowing 3 : 

54. And now they flow along the path made by 
Mazda, along the way made by the gods, the watery 
way appointed to them, at the wish of Ahura Mazda, 
at the wish of the Amesha-Speartas. 

XV. 

55. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who show a beautiful 
growth to the fertile * plants, which had stood before 
for a long time in the same place without growing : 

56. And now they grow up along the path made 

1 Stihy6: stutikaro (Sansk.tr.; cf^tash NySyij, 10). 

* 49 ta 5 a are a part of the so-called Afrfgin Bahrain (a prayer 
recited in honour of the dead); a Sanskrit translation of that 
Afrfgn has been published by Burnouf in his fitudes zendes. 

* In winter. 

4 Doubtful The word is 0awrSra, which Aspendifiiji makes 
synonymous with p&para, bind, merciful (VispSrad XXI 
[XXIV], i). 



194 VASTS AND sfRdZAHS. 

by Mazda, along the \vay made by the gods, in the 
time appointed to them, at the wish of Ahura 
Mazda, at the wish of the Amesha-Spe#tas. 

XVI. 

57. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who showed their paths to 
the stars, the moon, the sun, and the endless lights, 
that had stood before for a long time in the same 
place, without moving forwards, through the oppres- 
sion of the DaSvas and the assaults of the Da&vas l . 

58. And now they move around in their far- 
revolving circle for ever, till they come to the time 
of the good restoration of the world. 

XVII. 

59. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who watch over the bright 
sea Vouru-Kasha 2 , to the number of ninety thou- 
sand, and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and 
ninety-nine. 

XVIIL 

60. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who watch over the stars 
Hapt6iri#ga 3 , to the number of ninety thousand, 
and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and ninety- 
nine. 

XIX. 

61. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who watch over the body 

1 Bundahip VI, 3. 

* To keep the white Hdm there from the evil beings that try 
to destroy it (Minokhirad LXII, 28). 
8 See above, p. 97, note 4. 



FARVARD!N VAST. 195 

of Keresispa, the son of Sima 1 , the club-bearer 
with plaited hair, to the number of ninety thousand, 
and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and ninety- 
nine. 

XX. 

62. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who watch over the seed 
of the holy Zarathurtra 2 , to the number of ninety 
thousand, and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and 
ninety-nine. 

XXI. 

63. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who fight at the right 
hand of the reigning lord, if he rejoices the faithful 3 
and if the awful Fravashis of the faithful are not 
hurt by him, if they are rejoiced by him, unharmed 
and unoffended. 

XXII. 

64. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, who are greater, who are 

1 Keresaspa lies asleep in the plain of PfesytoaU; 'the glory 
(far) of heaven stands over him for the purpose that, when A*-i- 
DaMk becomes unfettered, he may arise and slay him; and a 
myriad guardian spirits of the righteous are as a protection to 
him ' (Bundahh XXIX, 8 ; tr. West). 

a 'Zaratftrt went near unto Hv6v (Hvdgvi, his wife) three 
times, and each time the seed went to the ground; the angel 
NSrydsang received the brilliance and strength of that seed, 
delivered it with care to the angel Anh!<f, and in time will blend 
it with a mother' (Bundahu XXXII, 8). A maid, EredaAfedhri, 
bathing in Lake Kasava, will conceive by that seed and bring forth 
the Saviour Saoshya*/; his two fore-runners, Ukhshya/-ereta and 
Ukhshya/-nemah, will be born in the same way of Sruta/-fedhri and 
Vanghu-fedhri (Yt. XIII, 141-142). 

1 With alms. 

O 2 



196 YASTS AND 



stronger, who are swifter, who are more powerful, 
who are more victorious, who are more healing, who 
are more effective than can be expressed by words ; 
who run by tens of thousands into the midst of the 
Myazdas. 

65. And when the waters come up from the sea 
Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathurtra! along with 
the Glory made by Mazda 1 , then forwards come 
the awful Fravashis of the faithful, many and many 
hundreds, many and many thousands, many and 
many tens of thousands, 

66. Seeking water for their own kindred, for 
their own borough, for their own town, for their 
own country, and saying thus: 'May our own 
country have a good store and full joy!' 

67. They fight in the battles that are fought in 
their own place and land, each according to the 
place and house where he dwelt (of yore) 2 : they 
look like a gallant warrior who, girded up and 
watchful, fights for the hoard he has treasured up. 

68. And those of them who win bring waters to 
their own kindred, to their own borough, to their 
own town, to their own country, saying thus : ' May 
my country grow and increase ! ' 

69. And when the all-powerful sovereign of a 
country has been surprised by his foes and haters, 
he invokes them, the awful Fravashis of the faithful. 

70. And they come to his help, if they have not 
been hurt by him, if they have been rejoiced by him, 
if they have not been harmed nor offended, the 
awful Fravashis of the faithful: they come flying 
unto him, it seems as if they were well-winged birds. 

1 Cf. Yt. XIX, 56 seq.; VIII, 34. * Doubtful. 



FARVARDIN VAST. 



71. They come in as a weapon and as a shield, 
to keep him behind and to keep him in front, from 
the Drug- unseen, from the female Varenya fiend, 
from the evil-doer bent on mischief, and from that 
fiend who is all death, Angra Mainyu. It will be 
as if there were a thousand men watching over 
one man l ; 

72. So that neither the sword well-thrust, neither 
the club well-falling, nor the arrow well-shot, nor the 
spear well-darted, nor the stones flung from the 
arm shall destroy him. 

73. They come on this side, they come on that 
side, never resting, the good, powerful, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, asking for help thus: 
' Who will praise us ? Who will offer us a sacrifice ? 
Who will meditate upon us? Who will bless us? 
Who will receive us with meat and clothes in his 
hand and with a prayer worthy of bliss ? Of which 
of us will the name be taken for invocation? Of 
which of you will die soul be worshipped by you 
with a sacrifice ? To whom will that gift of ours be 
given, that he may have never-failing food for ever 
and ever 2 ? ' 

74. We worship the perception 8 ; we worship the 
intellect; we worship the conscience; we worship 
those of the Saoshya#/s * ; 

We worship the souls ; those of the tame animals ; 
those of the wild animals ; those of the animals that 
live in the waters ; those of the animals that live 
under the ground; those of the flying ones; those 
of the running ones ; those of the grazing ones 6 . 

* Cf. Yt. 1, 19. a Cf. 50. 

3 lsna=dzana (?). * Cf. p. 165, note i. 

5 Cf. Yt XIII, 10. 



198 YA5TS AND 



We worship their Fravashis 1 . 

75. We worship the Fravashis. 
We worship them, the liberal ; 

We worship them, the valiant ; we worship them, 
the most valiant ; 

We worship them, the beneficent; we worship 
them, the most beneficent ; 

We worship them, the powerful ; 

We worship them, the most strong ; 

We worship them, the light; we worship them, 
the most light; 

We worship them, the effective; we worship 
them, the most effective. 

76. They are the most effective amongst the 
creatures of the two Spirits, they the good, strong, 
beneficent Fravashis of the faithful, who stood 
holding fast when the two Spirits created the world, 
the Good Spirit and the Evil One 2 . 

77. When Angra Mainyu broke into the creation 
of the good holiness, then came in across Vohu 
Mand and Atar 3 . 

78. They destroyed the malice of the fiend 
Angra Mainyu, so that the waters did not stop 
flowing nor did the plants stop growing; but at 
once the most beneficent waters of the creator and 

1 There seems to be in this paragraph a distinction of five faculties 
of the soul, sna, man a, dana, urvan, fravashi. The usual 
classification, as given in this Yart, 149, and in later Parsism 
(Spiegel, Die traditionelle Literatur der Parsen, p. 172), is: ahu, 
spirit of life (?); daSna, conscience; baodh 6, perception; urvan, 
the soul; fravashi. 

* The Fravashis, 'on war horses and spear in hand, were 
around the sky ---- and no passage was found by the evil sphit, 
who rushed back 1 (Bund. VI, 3-4 ; tr. West). 

3 Cf. Ormazd et Ahriznan, 107. 



FARVARDlN VAST. 199 



ruler, Ahura Mazda, flowed forward and his plants 
went on growing. 

79. We worship all the waters ; 
We worship all the plants ; 

We worship all the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of die faithful. 

We worship the waters by their names l ; 

We worship the plants by their names 2 ; 

We worship the good, strong, beneficent Frava- 
shis of the faithful by their names. 

80. Of all those ancient Fravashis, we worship 
the Fravashi of Ahura Mazda ; who is the greatest, 
the best, the fairest, the most solid, the wisest, the 
finest of body and supreme in holiness 8 ; 

8 1. Whose soul is the MSthra Spewta, who is 
white, shining, seen afar ; and we worship the beau- 
tiful forms, the active forms wherewith he clothes 
the Amesha-Spe^tas ; we worship the swift-horsed 
sun. 

XXIII. 

82. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the Amesha-Spewtas, the bright ones, 
whose looks perform what they wish, the tall, quickly 
coming to do, strong, and lordly, who are undecaying 
and holy ; 

83. Who are all seven of one thought, who are 
all seven of one speech, who are all seven of one 
deed ; whose thought is the same, whose speech is 
the same, whose deed is the same, whose father and 

1 That is to say, after their different kinds (described in Yasna 
XXXVIII, 3, 5 [7-9, 13-14],- LXVIH, 8 [LXVII, 15]; and 
Bund. XXI). 

9 After their kinds (Bund. XXVII). 8 Cf. Yasna I, i. 



2OO YASTS AND 



commander is the same, namely, the Maker, Ahura 
Mazda ; 

84. Who see one another's soul thinking of good 
thoughts, thinking of good words, thinking of good 
deeds, thinking of Gar6-nm&na, and whose ways l are 
shining as they go down towards the libations 2 . 

XXIV. 

85. We worship the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis: that of the most rejoicing 3 fire, the 
beneficent and assembly-making 4 ; and that of the 
holy, strong Sraosha 6 , who is the incarnate Word, 
a mighty-speared and lordly god; and that of 
Nairyd-sangha 6 . 

86. And that of Rashnu RazLrta 7 ; 

That of Mithra 8 , the lord of wide pastures ; 

That of the M5thra-Speta 9 ; 

That of the sky ; 

That of the waters ; 

That of the earth ; 

That of the plants ; 

That of the Bull 10 ; 

That of the living man " ; 

That of the holy creation 12 . 

87. We worship the Fravashi of Gaya Maretan 18 , 

I The Vedic devaySna. * Cf. Yt XIX, 15, 17. 

8 UrvSzijta. As a proper name Urvizirta is the name of the 
fire in plants (Yasna XVII, u [65], and Bund. XVII, i). 
4 At the hearth and the altar. See Yt. XL 

See Vend. XXII, 7. See Yt XII. 

8 See Yt X. 9 The Holy Word. See Sfr6zah I, 12. 

II Of mankind; possibly, of Gaya (Maretan). 
Doubtful 

18 The first man. On the myths of Gaya Maretan, see Ormazd 
et Ahriman, 129-135. 



FARVARDfN VAST. 2OI 

who first listened unto the thought and teaching of 
Ahura Mazda ; of whom Ahura formed the race of 
the Aryan nations, the seed of the Aryan nations. 

We worship the piety and the Fravashi of the 
holy Zarathurtra ; 

88. Who first thought what is good, who first 
spoke what is good, who first did what is good; who 
was the first Priest, the first Warrior, the first 
Plougher of the ground 1 ; who first knew and first 
taught; who first possessed 2 and first took pos- 
session of the Bull 3 , of Holiness 4 , of the Word, the 
obedience to the Word, and dominion, and all the 
good things made by Mazda, that are the offspring 
of the good Principle ; 

89. Who was the first Priest, the first Warrior, 
the first Plougher of the ground ; who first took the 
turning of the wheel 6 from the hands of the Dafeva 
and of the cold-hearted man; who first in the material 
world pronounced the praise of Asha 6 , thus bringing 
the Da&vas to naught, and confessed himself a 
worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathortra, one 
who hates the Da&vas, and obeys the laws of 
Ahura. 

90. Who first in the material world said the 
word that destroys the Dafrvas, the law of Ahura ; 
who first in the material world proclaimed the word 
that destroys the Da6vas, the law of Ahura ; who. 

1 As having established those three classes. His three earthly 
sons, Isa/-vstra, Urvata/-nara, and JK^e-flthra ( 98), were the 
chiefs of the three classes. Cf. Vend. Introd. Ill, 15, note 3. 

1 Doubtful 8 Cf. Yasna XXIX, 8. 

4 The divine Order, Asha. 

8 The wheel of sovereignty (?); cf. Yt. X, 67; this expression 
smacks of Buddhism. 

6 Who first pronounced the Ashem Vohu; cf. Yt XXI. 



2O2 YASTS AND 



first in the material world declared all the creation 
of the Dadvas unworthy of sacrifice and prayer; 
who was strong, giving all the good things of life, 
the first bearer of the Law amongst the nations ; 

91. In whom was heard the whole MSthra, the 
word of holiness ; who was the lord and master of 
the world *, the praiser of the most great, most good 
and most fair Asha 2 ; who had a revelation of the 
Law, that most excellent of all beings ; 

92. For whom the Amesha-Spewtas longed, in 
one accord with the sun, in the fulness of faith of a 
devoted heart ; they longed for him, as the lord and 
master of the world, as the praiser of the most great, 
most good, and most fair Asha, as having a revela- 
tion of the Law, that most excellent of all beings ; 

93. In whose birth and growth the waters and 
the plants rejoiced ; in whose birth and growth the 
waters and the plants grew; in whose birth and 
growth all the creatures of the good creations cried 
out, Hail 8 ! 

94. *Hail to us! for he is born, the Athravan, 
Spitama Zarathurtra. Zarathurtra will offer us 
sacrifices with libations and bundles of baresma; 
and there will the good Law of the worshippers of 
Mazda come and spread through all the seven 
Karshvares of the earth. 

95. ' There will Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, 
increase all the excellences of our countries, and 
allay their troubles ; there will the powerful ApSm- 
Napi* 4 increase all the excellences of our countries, 
and allay their troubles/ 

1 Material lord and spiritual master. 

2 The reciter of the Ashem Vohu. 

8 Cf. Vend. XIX, 46 [143]. * See Sfrdzah I, 9, note. 



FARVARDIN VAST. 2O3 



We worship the piety and Fravashi of Maidhyd- 
m0ungha, the son of Ar&sti \ who first listened unto 
the word and teaching of Zarathutfra. 

XXV, 

96. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asm6- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asan- 
Aranva*/. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gavayan. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Parsha/- 
gaus z , the son of Fr&ta; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohvasti, 
the son of Snaoya ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Isva^, the 
son of Var&za. 

97. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Sa&ia, 
the son of Ahftm-stu/*, who first appeared upon this 
earth with a hundred pupils 6 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fradhi- 
daya. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usminara, 
the son of Pafishata, 

1 Maidhyd-maungha was the cousin and first disciple of Zara- 
thurtra ; Zarathurtra's father, Pourushaspa, and &r&sti were brothers 
(Bund. XXXII, 3); cf. Yasna LI [L], 19. 

9 Cf. p. 33, note 2 ; Yt XXII, 37. 

8 Another Patta/-g<zu? is mentioned 126. 

4 Possibly, 'the holy falcon, praiser of the lord; 1 thus the Law 
was brought to the Var of Yima by the bird Kampta (Vend. II, 
42), who recites the Avesta in the language of birds (Bund. 
XIX, 16) : the Sa6na-bird (Slmurgh) became in later literature a 
mythical incarnation of Supreme wisdom (see the Mantik uttair 
and Dabist&n I, 55). 

5 Who was the first regular teacher, the first aSthrapaiti. 



2O4 VASTS AND 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
raofeh, the son of Fiinya; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ash6- 
rao/fcih, the son of Frfinya; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varesmd- 
rao^ah, the son of Fr&nya. 

98, We worship the Fravashi of the holy Isa- 
vistra, the son of Zarathurtra ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Urvata*- 
nara, the son of Zarathurtra ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ,fifoare- 
ithra, the son of Zarathustra *. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Da6v&- 
tbis, the son of Takhma. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thrimith- 
waft/, the son of Spitlma 2 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy D0ungha, 
the son of Zairita. 

99. We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Vtetfispa * ; the gallant one, who was the incarnate 

1 "By Zaratftrt were begotten three sons and three daughters; 
one son was Isa^vSstar, one Afirvata^-nar, and one Khfirsh&- 
har; as Issufvfistar was chief of the priests he became the 
M6bad of Mdbads, and passed away in the hundredth year of 
the religion; Aftrvata<?-nar was an agriculturist, and the chief of the 
enclosure formed by Yim, which is below the earth (see Vend. II, 
43 [ I 4i]); Khfirsh&J-#har was a warrior, commander of the army 
of Pfehydtanfl, son of Virtasp (see Yt XXIV, 4), and dwells in 
Kangdes; and of the three daughters the name of one was FrSn, 
of one Srit, and of one Pdiust (see Yt. XIII, 139). Aftrvatsu/-nar 
and Khfireh&/-#har were from a serving (>Sakar) wife, the rest 
were from a privileged (paWakhshah) wife' (Bund. XXXII, 5-6; 
tr. West). 

9 According to Anquetil, 'the threefold seed of Spitama Zaia- 
thurtra;' cf. above, 62. 

3 The king of Bactra, the champion of Zoroastrism; cf. Yt. V, 
98, 108. 



FARVARDftf VAST. 20$ 



Word, the mighty-speared, and lordly one; who, 
driving the Driif 1 before him, sought wide room for 
the holy religion; who, driving the Druf 1 before 
him, made wide room for the holy religion, who 
made himself the arm and support of this law of 
Ahura, of this law of Zarathurtra. 

100. Who took her 2 , standing bound 3 , from the 
hands of the Hunus 4 , and established her to sit in 
the middle [of the world], high ruling, never falling 
back, holy, nourished with plenty of cattle and pas- 
tures, blessed with plenty of cattle and pastures*. 

IOT. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zairi- 
vairi 5 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yukhta- 
vairi ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Sriraokh- 
shan; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Keresaokh- 
shan; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vanira ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy VariLza ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Btigi- 
sravah 8 ; 



paurvafta, possibly, 'with the spear pushed forwards* 
(reading drua). 
2 Dafena, the religion. Cf. Yt. II, ig. 

4 A generic name of the people called elsewhere Varedhakas (Yt 
IX, 31 ; XVII, 51) or JKyaonas (ibid, and XIX, 87). The Hunus 
have been compared with the Hunni ; but it is not certain that this 
is a proper name ; it may be a disparaging denomination, meaning 
the brood (hunu=Sansk. sfinu; cf. Yt. X, 113). 

5 Zarlr, the brother of Vfotdspa and son of Aurva/-aspa (see 
Yt. V, 1 1 a). The ten following seem to be the names of the 
other sons of Aurva/-aspa (Bund. XXXI, 29). 

6 Possibly the same with Pftt-Khosrav, a brother to Vfot&pa 
in the "Y&dkfa-t Zaiirdn, as Mr. West informs me. 



2O6 YAtfTS AND 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Berezy- 
arsti; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Tteyarrti ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Perethu- 
arrti ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vteyarrti. 

102. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Naptya ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy VasAspa ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Habispa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vistauru \ 
the son of Naotara. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fray-hStm- 
vareta 2 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frashd- 
kareta, 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 
vanu; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 
ddta; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 
ithra ; 

1 Gustahm, the son of Nodar ; see Yt. V, 76. Strangely enough, 
Tusa is not mentioned here, unless he is the same with one of the 
preceding names : possibly the words 'the son of Naotara' (Nao- 
tairydna) refer to all the four. 

1 Possibly Frashtdvard -y^juj^l (misspelt from a Pahlavi form 
Frajfinvard ^iKX^ei (?) ; the Y&fcdr-t ZajMn, as Mr. West informs 
me, has ^yHX^fl and pkrHX^e). Frashidvard was a son of Giw- 
t^sp : he was killed by one of Aigfisp's heroes and avenged by 
his brother Isfendy&r (Spet6-dta). The following names would 
belong to his brothers: most of them contain the word Atar, in 
honour of the newly-adopted worship of fire. 



FARVARDJN VAST. 2OJ 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 
^arenah ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 
savah ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare- 
danghu. 

103. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Hurkyaothna ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy PLrik- 
yaothna ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Basta- 
vairi 2 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kavi- 
razem 8 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frasha- 
ortra 4 , the son of Hvdva; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy GSmSspa 5 , 
the son of Hvdva ; 

1 Isfendydr, the heroic son of Gfktisp, killed by Rustem. 

2 In the Y&fldr-l ZarfrSn, according to Mr. West, Bastvar, the 
son of Zairivairi, whose death he avenges on his murderer Vf draft. 
This makes Bastavairi identical with the Nastftr^i-~3 of Firdausi 



8 Kavfirazem is the Gurezm of later tradition (^^S 'the 
jealous brother of IsfendyaT, whom he slandered to his father and 
caused to be thrown into prison' (Burhto qati'h). Firdausi (IV, 432) 
has only that he was a relation to Gfctitsp : ^.uib.t.J J ^J^IA 
*y. LT^-** See fitudes Iraniennes, II, 230. 

4 Who gave his daughter, Hvdvi, in marriage to Zarathurfra 
(Yasna L [XLIX], 4, 17). 

6 See Yt. V, 68. 



208 YASTS AND 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Avfira- 
ostri \ 

104. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Huskyaothna, the son of Frashaostra ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy #z&da6na, 
the son of Frashaostra. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hang- 
haurozungh, the son of G&m&spa 2 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vareshna, 
the son of Hanghaurwungh. 

We worship die Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
nemah, the son of Av4rao.rtri, 

To withstand evil dreams, to withstand evil 
visions, to withstand evil . . . 8 , to withstand the 
evil Pairikas. 

105. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
MSthravSka, the son of Slma&ri, the ASthrapati, 
the Hamidhpati 4 , who was able to smite down 
most of the evil, unfaithful Ashemaoghas, that 
shout, the hymns 5 , and acknowledge no lord and no 
master 6 , the dreadful ones whose Fravashis are 
to be broken 7 ; to withstand the evil done by the 
faithful 8 . 



1 Another brother to Frashaortra (?). 

9 The son of G$msp in the Shh N&mah is called Gir&mf and 
Gaj&nfk-karrf in the Y&ndr-t Zarfca* n. 

8 ? Aoiwra. 

4 AS thrapati, in Parsi hftrbad, a priest, whose special function 
is to teach; his pupils were called agthrya. ASthrapati meant 
literally 'the master of the hearth' (cf. hSrkodah, fire-temple). 
Hamidhpati is literally ' the master of the sacrificial log/ 

6 Doubtful. 

e No temporal lord (ahu) and no spiritual master (ratu). 

7 Doubtful (avasfesta-fravashinSm). 

8 The evil done by Zoroaslrians. This MSthrav&ka (' Proclaimer 



FARVARD!N VAST. 209 



1 06. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha- 
stu, the son of Maidhyo-nuzungha 3 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Avare- 
thrabah, the son of R4stare-vagha# 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Btigra, the 
son of Dazgarispa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zbaurvatf/; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant 
Karesna 2 , the son of Zbaurva#/ ; who was the incar- 
nate Word, mighty-speared and lordly ; 

107. In whose house did walk the good, beau- 
tiful, shining Ashi Vanguhi, in the shape of a maid 
fair of body, most strong, tall-formed, high-up girded, 
pure, nobly bora of a glorious seed 3 ; who, rushing 
to the battle, knew how to make room for himself 
with his own arms ; who, rushing to the battle, knew 
how to fight the foe with his own arms 4 . 

1 08. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Vtrispa, the son of Karesna ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Azita, the 
son of Karesna : 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fr&yaodha, 
the son of Karesna. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and good 
Arshya; Arshya, the chief in assemblies, the most 
energetic of the worshippers of Mazda. 



of the Holy Word ') was apparently a great doctor and confounder 
of heresies. 

1 See above, 95. 

* Possibly the eponym of that great Kiren family, which played 
so great a part in the history of the Sassanian times, and traced its 
origin to the time of Gfcjta*sp (Noddeke, Geschichte der Perser 
zur Zeit der Sasaniden, p. 437) 

Cf. Yt. V, 64. C Yt XIII, 99. 

03] * 



210 YASTS AND siR6ZAHS. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ddraya/- 
ratha; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fr&ya/- 
ratha ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Skiraya/- 
ratha. 

109. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
hrsvant ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vyarrva ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paityar*- 
van/. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Amru l ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ^famru \ 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Dritha ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paiti- 
dratha ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paiti- 
vangha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy FrashS,- 
vakhsha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Nem6- 
vanghu, the son of VaSdhayangha. 

no. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Visadha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ash&- 
vanghu, the son of Biva^dangha 2 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ar6- 
danghu, the son of Pairfrtlra 2 ; 

1 Amru and JSTamiu are apparently the two mythical birds men- 
tioned above under the names of Sta-amru (the Amru-falcon) and 
.ffSmrfo (p. 173, note i). 

a Mr. West compares AshSvanghu, the son of Bivandangha, and 
ffarfidanghu, the son of Pairirtira, with the two high-priests of 
the Karshvares of Arezahi and Savahi, whose names are, in the 



FARVARDfN YAST. 211 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Nere- 
myazdana, the son of Athwyoza. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Berezisnu, 
the son of Ara; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kasupatu, 
the son of Ara. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frya. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ASTVAZ*- 

ERETA \ 



XXVI. 

in. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gaopi- 
vanghu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant 
HSm-baretar vanghvSm 2 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Staotar- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pouru- 
dhSkhrti, the son of Khstiva&iya; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Khshoi- 
wr&spa, the son of Khstiva&iya. 

112. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ay6- 
asti, the son of Pouru-dhfikLrti 4 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohv-asti, 
the son of Pouru-dh&klwti ; 



Bundahir, Ashishagahad'-S JHvanAMn. and Hoazar6dathhri-8 Par- 
rtyard (Bund. XXIX, i, notes 4 and 5). 

1 Saoshya*/; cf. 117, 128. 

2 Possibly, ' the holy Ham-baretar vanghvam, the son of Takhma,' 
His name means, ' the gatherer of good things. 9 

8 This name means, 'the praiser of excellent holiness' (the 
reciter of the Ashem Vohn). 
4 See preceding paragraph. 

F 2 



212 VASTS AND stR6zAHS. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gaya- 
dhfisti, the son of Pouru-dhikhrti ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-vaz- 
dah, the son of Pouni-dh&khjti 1 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Urftdhu, 
the son of Pouru-dhakhrti. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Khshathrd- 
inah, the son of Khshv&iwr&spa 2 . 

113. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Ashahura, the son of Gtsti. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fr&ya- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraiah, 
the son of Friyazawta; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ar6- 
vanghu, the son of Friyaza#ta. 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Asha- 
vazdah and Thrita, the sons of S&yiudri 8 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
rao>ah, the son of Varakasa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Arqgan- 
gha/, the Turanian *. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usinemah. 

114. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Yukht&spa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha- 
skyaothna, the son of Gayadhisti 5 . 

1 One of the seven immortals, rulers in fifcaniratha ; cf. Yt. V, 
72, text and notes, and Yt. XIII, 120, 124. 

* See preceding paragraph. 

8 See Yt V, 72. The text has 'the Fravashi;' cf. Yt. V, 116, 
note, and Yt. XIII, ng. 

4 Cf. Yt XIII, 143. Possibly, the son of Tftra. 

' Cf.II2. 



FARVARDIN VAST. 213 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
nemah, the son of Katu ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
vazdah, the son of Katu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha- 
saredha, the son of Asha-sairy>5 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha- 
saredha, the son of ZairyS& 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy JSfakhshni. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Syavdspi. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pourusti, 
the son of Kavi. 

115. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Varesmapa, the son of Ganara. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Naniristi, 
the son of Pashatah; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zarazd&ti, 
the son of Pafishatah. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gafevani, 
the son of Vohu-nemah \ , 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Arezva 
and Srftta-spdha. 

We worship the Fravashis 2 of the holy Zrayah 
and Spe#t6-khratu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varmi, the 
son of V&gereza. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fr4ya, 
the son of Taurvti. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vahmafi- 
dAta, the son of MStfirav&ka 8 . 

1 There are two men of this name ; one is the son of Katu 
( 114), the other is the son of Av&raortri ( 104). 
8 The text has ' the Fravashi ; * cf. preceding page, note 3. 
3 See 105. 



214 YAflTS AND siRdZAHS. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ustra, the 
son of Sadhanah. 

1 1 6. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Danghu-srtita ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Danghu- 
fradhah. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asp6- 
padhd-makhrti; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Payanghrd- 
makh^ti. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy U<st&za#ta. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha- 
savah; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ashd- 
urvatha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Haomd- 
^arenah. 

117. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Frava. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usnika. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy <foanva*/. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Da6nd- 
vazah, 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ar^aona. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aiwi- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Huyazata. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hare- 
dhaspa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pazinah. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy //z&khsha- 
thra 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ash6- 
paoirya. 



FARVARD!N YA^T. 215 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy ASTVAF- 
ERETA l . 

XXVIL 
1 1 8. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Anghuyu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gduri ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yftsta, the 
son of G&uri. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy MSzdr- 
vanghu ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy SrlrS,- 
vanghu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ayftta. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Stird- 
yazata. 

119. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Eredhwa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kavi. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshan, 
the son of the great Vidi-sravah, known afar 2 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vanghu- 
dhata, the son of /fz>adh&ta ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Uzya, the 
son of Vanghu-dhita ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frya. 

1 20. We worship the Fravashi of the holy one 
whose name is Ashem-yfiNh6-rao&ra ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy one whose 
name is Ashem-y6Nh6-vereza ; 

1 Saoshyaw/; cf. no, 128. 

2 Perhaps, Ukhshan, the conqueror of glory, known afar, son of 
Berezvaw/. 



FARVARD!N YAST. 217 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Visrtita. 
122. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy -fiathwar- 
aspa 2 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Dawri- 
ma6shi. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraora- 
ostra, the son of Kaosha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frlndspa, 
the son of Kafiva. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frdda/- 
nara, the son of Graviratu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
u,stra 3 the son of Akhnangha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vlvare- 
shva?^, the son of Ainyu. 

123. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Fr&rizi, the son of Ttira 8 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Stipi, the 
son of Rava 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Parsha^ta, 
the son of Ga^darewa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Avahya, 
the son of Spe#ta. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy A6ta, the 
son of Myu; 



1 Probably the same with Huvtsp, the high-priest in the Vouru- 
barerti Karshvare (Bund. XXIX, i ; tr. West, note 8). 

a Possibly the same with the high-priest in the Vouru-garerti 
karshvare, ^akhravik (ibid., note 9). JTakhravik is the generic 
name of the bird Karshipta (Pahl. Comm. ad II, 42 [139]) ; it must 
stand here by mistake for JTahr&sp. 

8 Or, 'the Turanian;' cf. 113. 



2l8 YASTS AND SIRdZAHS. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yadtus- 

the son of Vydtana. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Garrta, 
the son of Kavi. 

124. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Pouru-bangha, the son of Zaosha. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
dta, the son of Kita. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy B0ungha, 
the son of S^ungha. 

We worship the Fravashis 1 of the holy Hvareza 
and Awkasa. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aravaortra, 
the son of Erezvatf-danghu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fr&Kthra, 
the son of Berezva# 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu- 
peresa, the son of Ainyu. 

125. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pard- 
dasma, the son of Dirtghni, a Mtea man of the 
Mlsa land. 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Fratlra 
and Bashatastibra.. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and pure 
Avare-g0u, the son of Aoighimatastlra. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gaoma#/, 
the son of Zavan, a Raosdya man of the Raosdya 
land. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thri*, the 
son of A6vo-saredha-fya&rta, a Tanya man of the 
Tanya land. 



1 The text has 'the Fravashi;' cf. 113, 127. 



FARVARD!N VAST. 219 



126. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Tird- 
nakathwa, of the Uspa&ta-Sa&na house 1 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Utayuti 
Vitf-kavi, the son of Zighri, of the Sana house 1 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frdhakafra, 
the son of Merezlshmya, of the Safena house \ 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varesmd- 
rao^ah, the son of Perethu-afzem. 

127. We worship the Fravashis 2 of the holy 
Asha-nemah and Vldag#u, of this country. 

We worship the Fravashis 2 of the holy Par- 
sha/-gau and Dizgara-g<m, of the Apakhshlra 
country. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hufra- 
vkh$, of the Kahrkana house 1 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Akayadha, 
of the Pidha house 1 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy 6&mspa, 
the younger 8 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Maidhyd- 
mmmgha, the younger 4 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Urvata*- 
nara, the younger 6 . 

I2g. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy 

&man ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy 



See Etudes Iraniennes, II, 142. 

The text has 'the Fravashi; 1 cfl 113. 

Different from ffdmdspa, the son of Hvdva ( 103). 

Different from Maidhy6-monngha, the son of Arasti ( 95). 

Different from Urvata/-nara, the son of Zarathurtra ( 98). 



22O YASTS AND SIZARS. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vareda/- 
/z^arenah ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vouru- 
nemah ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vouru- 
savah l ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshya/- 
ereta z ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshya/- 
nemah 3 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ASTVAZ*- 
ERETA 4 ; 

XXVIIL 

129. Whose name will be the victorious SAO- 
SHYA^r and whose name will be Astva/-ereta. He 
will be SAOSHYA^ r (the Beneficent One), because he 
will benefit the whole bodily world; he will be 
ASTVAZHERETA (he who makes the bodily creatures 

1 The six foremost helpers of Saoshyaw/, each in one of the six 
Karshvares: 'It is said that in the fifty-seven years, which are the 
period of the raising of the dead, R6shan6-ashm in Arzdh, Khur- 
ashm in Savh, FidaJ-gadman(Fida/-Jbarend, Increaser of Glory) 
in Frada^fsh, Vdreda^-gadman (Vareda/-^aren6, Multiplier of 
Glory) in Vida^ifsh, K4mak-vakhshi$n ( Voura-nemd, Prayer-loving) 
in Vdrflbarrt, and K&mak-sfof (Vouru-savd, Weal-loving) in V6r&- 
^arjt, while Sdsh^ns in the illustrious and pure Khvaniras is con- 
nected with them, are immortal. The completely good sense, 
perfect hearing, and full glory of those seven producers of the 
renovation are so miraculous that they converse from region unto 
region, every one together with the six others' (D4dist4n XXXVI, 
5-6; tr.West). 

3 The first brother and forerunner to Saoshyan/, the Oshedar m&h 
of later tradition (see above, p. 196, note 2 ; cf. 141, note). 

8 The second brother and forerunner to Saoshya/, the Oshedar 
bSntf of later tradition (ibid. ; cf. 142, note). 

* Saoshyaw/; cf. following paragraph and no, 117. 



FARVARD!N YA^ST. 221 



rise up), because as a bodily creature and as a living 
creature he will stand against the destruction of the 
bodily creatures, to withstand the Dri^ of the two- 
footed brood, to withstand the evil done by the 
faithful 1 . 

XXIX. 

1 30. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yima 2 , 
the son of Vlvangha^; the valiant Yima, who had 
flocks at his wish 3 ; to stand against the oppression 
caused by the Da6vas, against the drought that 
destroys pastures, and against death that creeps 
unseen 4 . 

131. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Thra6taona, of the Athwya house 5 ; to stand against 
itch, hot fever, humours, cold fever, and incon- 
tinency 8 , to stand against the evil done by the 
Serpent 7 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aoshnara, 
the son of Pouru-^ira 8 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Uzava, the 
son of Tftmdspa 9 . 

1 He will suppress both the destructive power of the men of 
the Dug- (idolaters and the like) and the errors of Mazdayas- 
nians (?). 

See above, p. 25, note 4. 

Vouru-vgthwa; cf. Etudes Iraniennes, n, 182. 

As he made waters and trees undrying, cattle and men undying. 

See above, p. 61, note i. 

As the inventor of medicine ; see Vend. XX, Introd. 

7 Disease, being a poison, comes from the Serpent; see ibid. 

8 Or * Aoshnara, full of wisdom;' cf. Yt. XXIII, 2, and West, 
Pahlavi Texts, II, 171, note 3. 

9 Called in the Sh&h N&mah Zab, son of Tahmisp, who appears 
to have been a son of Nodar (Bund. XXXI, 23). 



222 YASTS AND 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy AghraS- 
ratha, the demi-man 1 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Manas 1 - 
ithra, the son of Airyu 2 . 

132. We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Kavita 3 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Aipivanghu 4 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Usadhan 5 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Arshan 6 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Pisanah 5 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
BySrshan * ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Sy&varshan 6 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king 
Husravah 6 ; 

133. For the well-shapened Strength 7 , for the 
Victory made by Ahura, for the crushing Ascendant ; 
for the righteousness of the law, for the innocence of 

1 See above, p. 114, note 7 (Yt IX, 18). 

2 Airyu, the youngest of the three sons of ThraStaona (see p. 61, 
note i), was killed by his brothers and avenged by his son Mamu- 
Jithra, who succeeded Thra&aona. 

8 Kavta, Kai QobSd in the Shfth N&mah, an adoptive son to 
Uzava, according to Bund, XXXI, 24. 
4 Kal-Apfveh in the Bundahw ; he was the son of Kai QobaU 
8 Usadhan, Arshan, Pisanah, and Byfirshan were the four sons 
of Aipivanghu; they are called in Firdausi Kai Kaus, Kai Arish, 
Kai Pashtn, and Kai Armfci. Kai Kaus alone came to the throne. 

6 Syivakhsh and Khosrav; see above, p. 64, note r. 

7 To become possessed of Strength, Victory, &c., as Husravah 
did. 



FARVARD!N VAST. 223 

the law, for the unconquerable power of the law ; for 
the extermination of the enemies at one stroke ; 

134. And for the vigour of health, for the Glory 
made by Mazda, for the health of the body, and for 
a good, virtuous offspring, wise, chief in assemblies, 
bright, and clear-eyed, that frees [their father] from 
the pangs [of hell], of good intellect ; and for that 
part in the blessed world that falls to wisdom and to 
those who do not follow impiety ; 

135. For a dominion full of splendour, for a 
long, long life, and for all boons and remedies; to 
withstand the Yitus and Pairikas, the oppressors, 
the blind, and the deaf; to withstand the evil done 
by oppressors l . 

136. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kere- 
sspa 2 , the Sima 3 a the club-bearer with plaited hair ; 
to withstand the dreadful arm and the hordes with 
the wide battle array, with the many spears, with the 
straight spears, with the spears uplifted, bearing the 
spears of havoc ; to withstand the dreadful brigand 
who works destruction 4 , the man-slayer who has no 
mercy ; to withstand the evil done by the brigand. 

137. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Akhrftra 5 , the son of Husravah; 

To withstand the wicked one that deceives his 
friend and the niggard that causes the destruction 
of the world 6 . 

Like Frangrasyan ; cf. p. 64, note i. 

See Yt. V, 37; XV, 27; XIX, 38. 

Belonging to the Sima family (Yasna IX, 10). 

Like the nine highwaymen killed by Keres&spa, Yt. XIX, 41. 

Not mentioned in the Sh&h N&mah; Khosrav was succeeded 
by a distant relation, Ldhrasp. 

6 An allusion to the lost legend of Akhrura; see, however, 
West, Pahlavi Texts, II, 375. . ' 



224 YASTS AND 



\Ve worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant 
Haoshyangha ; 

To withstand the Mizainya Davas and the Va- 
renya fiends; to withstand the evil done by the 
Daevas l . 

138. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fra- 
dhSkhrti, the son of the jar 2 , 

To withstand ASshma, the fiend of the wounding 
spear, and the Daevas that grow through A6shma ; 
to withstand the evil done by Ashma. 



XXX. 

139. We worship the Fravashi of the holy 
Hv6vi 3 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fmii ; 
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thriti ; 
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pouru- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hutaosa 6 ; 
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Huma 6 . 
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zairi^i, 

1 See Yt. V, 21-23. 

9 Khumbya, one of the immortals in T&aniratha; he resides in 
the P&y&nsai plain : * he is -fifoembya for this reason, because they 
brought him up in a Avemb (jar) for fear of Khashm' (Bund. 
XXIX, 5). He answers pretty well to the Agastya and Vasish/Aa of 
the Vedic legend (see Onnazd et Ahriman, 177), 

3 One of the three wives of Zarathurtra, the daughter of Frasha- 
ojtra; she is the supposed mother of Saoshya*/ and his brothers 
(see p. 196, note 2). 

4 The three daughters of Zarathurtra and sisters to IssuMstar 
(see p. 204, note i). 

VfrtSspa's wife; see Yt IX, 26, and XVII, 46. 
6 Vfrtispa's daughter, Hum&i, in the Shall Nmah. 



FARVARD!N VAST. 225 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vispa- 
taurvashi. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy U Jtavaiti. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Tiwna- 
maiti. 

140. We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraii, 
the wife of Usenemah l ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraii, the 
wife of the son of Friyaza^ta 2 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraii, the 
wife of the son of Khsh6iwr4spa 3 ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraii, the 
wife of Gayadhisti 4 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asabani, 
the wife of Pourudh&khrti 5 . 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhsh- 
yemti, the wife of Staotar-Vahirtah6-Ashy6h6 6 . 

141. We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid 
Gaghrfldh. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid 
Franghidh. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Urft- 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Pa- 
sanghanu. 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ZfoaredhL 
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hu&thra. 
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kanuka. 

1 See 113. Of Frmah or Gard-vanghu, 113. 

8 Of Khshathr6-)Knah, 112. * See 112. 

5 See in. Ibid. 

[23] Q 



226 YASTS AND 



We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid 
Sritta^-fedhri 1 . 

142. We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid 
Vanghu-fedhri * ; 

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid 
Ereda^-fedhri 3 , who is called Vispa-taurvairi. She is 
Vispa-taurvairi (the all-destroying) because she will 
bring him forth, who will destroy the malice of 
Davas and men, to withstand the evil done by 
the Gahi 4 . 

143. We worship the Fravashis of the holy men 
in the Aryan countries ; 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in 
the Aryan countries. 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in 
the Turanian countries 6 ; 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women 
in the Turanian countries. 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in 
the Sairimyan countries 8 ; 

1 Ukhshya/-ereta's mother (see above, 126); the Saddar Bun- 
dahir (fitudes Iraniennes, II, 209) calls her Bad, from the last 
part of her name (fedhri for padhri, and states that, bathing in 
Lake Kasava, she -will become pregnant from the seed of Zara- 
thiutra, that is preserved there (see above, p. 195, note 2), and she 
will bring forth a son, Oshedar bftmi. 

9 TJkhshya/-nemah's mother, called Yah Bad in the Saddar ; she 
will conceive in the same way as Srtita/-fedhri. 

8 Saoshya/s mother. 

4 Cf. Vend. XIX, 5, and Introd. IV, 39-40. 

5 G6g6jasp (a commentator to the Avesta) says, 'There are 
holy men hi all religions, as appears from the words tftiryanam 
da/toyunam [We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the 
Turanian countries],' (Pahl. Comm. ad Vend. Ill, end; and 
Vend. V, 38 [122]); cf. above, 113, 123. 

6 The countries inherited by Sairima (Selm), the third son of 



FARVARDiN YAT. 227 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in 
the Sairimyan countries. 

144. We worship the Fravashis of the holy men 
in the Sfiini countries *; 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in 
the Sini countries. 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in 
the Dihi countries 2 ; 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women 
in the Dihi countries. 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in 
all countries ; 

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in 
all countries. 

145. We worship all the good, awful, beneficent 
Fravashis of the faithful, from Gaya Maretan down 
to the victorious Saoshya^/ 8 * May the Fravashis of 
the faithful come quickly to us ! May they come to 
our help I 

146. They protect us when in distress with 
manifest assistance, with the assistance of Ahura 
Mazda and of the holy, powerful Sraosha, and with 
the MSthra-Spearta, the all-knowing, who hates the 
Da6vas with a mighty hate, a friend of Ahura 
Mazda, whom Zarathustra worshipped so greatly in 
the material world. 

147. May the good waters and the plants and 

Thra&aona, as Turan and Iran were inherited by Ttira and Airyu. 
Selm's heritage was Rtim, that is to say, Europa and Western 
Asia. 

1 China (Bund. XV, 29). 

2 Perhaps the Dahae (Pliny VI, 17; Aeneis VIII, 728) or Aoat 
(Strabo), called Ta-hia by Chinese geographers, on the south of 
the Oxus. 

3 From the first man to the last. 

Q 2 



228 YASTS AND 



the Fravashis of the faithful abide down here ! May 
you be rejoiced and well received in this house! 
Here are the Athravans of the countries \ thinking 
of good holiness. Our hands are lifted up for 
asking help, and for offering a sacrifice unto you, 
O most beneficent Fravashis ! 

148. We worship the Fravashis of all the holy 
men and holy women whose souls are worthy of sa- 
crifice a , whose Fravashis are worthy of invocation. 

We worship the Fravashis of all the holy men 
and holy women, our sacrificing to whom makes us 
good in the eyes of Ahura Mazda : of all of those we 
have heard that Zarathurtra is the first and best, as a 
follower of Ahura and as a performer of the law. 

149. We worship the spirit, conscience, percep- 
tion, soul, and Fravashi 8 of men of the primitive 
law 4 , of the first who listened to the teaching (of 
Ahura), holy men and holy women, who struggled 
for holiness 5 ; we worship the spirit, conscience, per- 
ception, soul, and Fravashi of our next-of-kin, holy 
men and holy women, who struggled for holiness 5 . 

150. We worship the men of the primitive law 
who will be in these houses, boroughs, towns, and 
countries ; 

We worship the men of the primitive law who 
have been in these houses, boroughs, towns, and 
countries ; 

We worship the men of the primitive law who are 
in these houses, boroughs, towns, and countries. 

151. We worship the men of the primitive law 

1 Itinerant priests are received here. 

a Doubtful. Cf. p. 198, note i. 

4 The Paoiry6-/kajas; see p. 180, note i. 

6 For the triumph of the Zoroastrian law. 



FARVARD!N VAST. 229 



in all houses, boroughs, towns, and countries, who 
obtained these houses, who obtained these boroughs, 
who obtained these towns, who obtained these coun- 
tries, who obtained holiness, who obtained the MSthra, 
who obtained the [blessedness of the] soul, who ob- 
tained all the perfections of goodness. 

152. We worship Zarathurtra, the lord and 
master of all the material world, the man of the 
primitive law; the wisest of all beings, the best- 
ruling of all beings, the brightest of all beings, the 
most glorious of all beings, the most worthy of 
sacrifice amongst all beings, the most worthy of 
prayer amongst all beings, the most worthy of pro- 
pitiation amongst all beings, the most worthy of 
glorification amongst all beings, whom we call 
well-desired and worthy of sacrifice and prayer as 
much as any being can be, in the perfection of his 
holiness. 

153. We worship this earth ; 
We worship those heavens ; 

We worship those good things that stand between 
(the earth and the heavens) and that are worthy of 
sacrifice and prayer and are to be worshipped by 
the faithful man. 

154. We worship the souls of the wild beasts 
and of the tame 1 . 

We worship the souls of the holy men and 
women, born at anytime, whose consciences struggle, 
or will struggle, or have struggled, for the good. 

1 Daitika, Persian **; Neriosengh has 'that go by herds,' 
panktirin. Aidyu; the Fahlavi translation has ayy&r, 'that 
are of help' (domesticated?); Neriosengh has misread it as suv&r 
and translated aQvac&rin. The expression daitika aidyu answers 
to the Persian J^ JA, meaning all sorts of animals (see Etudes 
Iraniennes, II, 150). 



230 YASfTS AND SIRdZAHS. 

155. We worship the spirit, conscience, percep- 
tion, soul, and Fravashi of the holy men and holy 
women who struggle, will struggle, or have strug- 
gled, and teach the Law, and who have struggled 
for holiness. 

Y6h8 hat am : All those beings to whom Ahura Mazda .... 
YathS ahfl vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

156. The Fravashis of the faithful, awful and 
overpowering, awful and victorious; the Fravashis 
of the men of the primitive law ; the Fravashis of 
the next-of-kin ; may these Fravashis come satisfied 
into this house ; may they walk satisfied through this 
house! 

157. May they, being satisfied, bless this house 
with the presence of the kind Ashi Vanguhi! May 
they leave this house satisfied! May they carry 
back from here hymns and worship to the Maker, 
Ahura Mazda, and the Amesha-Spe#tas ! May they 
not leave this house of us, the worshippers of Mazda, 
complaining ! 

158. YathS ahft vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness . . . . 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of the awful, overpowering Fravashis of the 
faithful ; of the Fravashis of the men of the primitive 
law ; of the Fravashis of the next-of-kin. 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good 

[Give] unto that man 1 brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 

1 Who shall worship the Fravashis. 



BAHRM VAST. 231 



XIV. BAH RAM VAST. 

Regarding Bahr&m (Verethraghna), the Genius of Victory, see 
Vend. Introd. V, 8. 
This Yajt can be divided into four parts : 

I ( 1-28). An enumeration of the ten incarnations in which 
Verethraghna appeared to Zarathurtra (as a wind, 2 ; as a bull, 
7 ; as a horse, 9; as a camel, n ; as a boar, ig ; as a 
youth, 17 ; as a raven, 19 ; as a ram, 23 ; as a buck, 25 ; 
and as a man, 27). 

II ( 30-33). The powers given by Verethraghna to his wor- 
shipper, Zarathurtra. 

III ( 34-46)- The magical powers, ascribed to the raven's 
feather, of striking terror into an army and dispersing it (the raven 
being the seventh incarnation of Verethraghna). 

IV ( 47-64). The glorification of Verethraghna. 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I .... 

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the Da&vas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hdvani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto Verethraghna, made by Mazda, and unto 
the crushing Ascendant l ; 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorifi- 
cation. 

Yathft ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I. 

i. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : ' Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

1 Sirdzah I, 20. , 



232 VASTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

1 Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama ZarathuJtra ! ' 

2. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
first, running in the shape of a strong, beautiful 
wind, made by Mazda; he bore the good Glory, 
made by Mazda, the Glory made by Mazda, that is 
both health and strength. 

3. Then he, who is the strongest 1 , said unto him 2 : 
* I am the strongest in strength ; I am the most vic- 
torious in victory; I am the most glorious in Glory; 
I am the most favouring in favour ; I am the best 
giver of welfare; I am the best-healing in health- 
giving. 

4. 'And I shall destroy the malice of all the 
malicious, the malice of Davas and men, of the 
Yfitus and Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind, 
and the deaf. 

5. * For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto 
him a sacrifice worth being heard; namely, unto 
Verethraghna, made by Ahura. We worship Vere- 
thraghna, made by Ahura, with an offering of liba- 
tions, according to the primitive ordinances of 
Ahura; with the Haoma and meat, the baresma, 
the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, the 
speech, the deeds, the libations, and the rightly- 
spoken words. 

* Y6hS ht am: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda .... 

II. 

6. 'We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura.' 

1 Verethraghna. a Zarathurtra. 



BAHRAM VAST. 233 



Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : * Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

' Who is the best-armed of the heavenly Gods ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered : * It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathustra ! ' 

7. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the second time, running in the shape of a beautiful 
bull, with yellow ears and golden horns ; upon whose 
horns floated the well-shapen Strength, and Victory, 
beautiful of form, made by Ahura: thus did he 
come, bearing the good Glory, made by Mazda, 
the Glory made by Mazda, that is both health and 
strength. 

Then he, who is the strongest, said unto him : ' I 
am the strongest in strength . . . . \ 

'And I shall destroy the malice of all malicious 2> 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard . . . . s 

III. 

8. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : ( Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

* Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered : * It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathujrtra ! ' 

9. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the third time, running in the shape of a white, beau- 
tiful horse, with yellow ears and a golden caparison ; 
upon whose forehead floated the well-shapen Strength, 

1 As above, 3. a As above, 4. * As above, 5. 



234 YASTS AND 



and Victory, beautiful of form, made by Ahura : thus 
did he come, bearing the good Glory, made by 
Mazda, that is both health and strength. 

Then he, who is the strongest, said unto him : ' I 
am the strongest in strength .... 

'And I shall destroy the malice of all malicious 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

IV. 

10. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathortra asked Ahura Mazda : c Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

' Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! ' 

n. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the fourth time, running in the shape of a burden- 
bearing 1 camel, sharp-toothed 2 , swift . . . . 3 , 
stamping forwards, long-haired, and living in the 
abodes of men 4 ; 

1 2. Who of all males in rut shows greatest strength 
and greatest fire, when he goes to his females. Of 
all females those are best kept whom a burden- 
bearing camel keeps, who has thick forelegs and 
large humps, . . . . 5 , quick-eyed, long-headed, bright, 
tall, and strong ; 

13. Whose piercing look goes afar . . . . e , even 
in the dark of the night ; who throws white foam 

1 Doubtful (vadhar6i*). * Douhtful (dad&sdij). 

8 ? Urvatd ; cf. 19. * Tame, domesticated. 

* ? Smawnd. fl ? HaitahS. 



BAHRA&I VAST. 235 



along his mouth; well-kneed, well-footed, standing 
with the countenance of an all-powerful master : 

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda, the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

V. 

14. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : * Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

( Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zaratlmrtra ! ' 

15. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the fifth time, running in the shape of a boar, oppos- 
ing the foes, a sharp-toothed he-boar, a sharp-jawed 
boar, that kills at one stroke, pursuing, wrathful, 
with a dripping face \ strong, and swift to run, and 
rushing all around 2 . 

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda, the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

VI. 

1 6. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : ' Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

* Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered: c lt is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathu^tra ! ' 

1 Cf. Yt. X, 70. a Or better, rushing before. Cf. Yt. X, 127. 



236 YASTS AND 



1 7. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the sixth time, running in the shape of a beautiful 
youth of fifteen, shining, clear-eyed, thin-heeled. 

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda, the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

VII. 

1 8. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathutfra asked Ahura Mazda : ' Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

1 Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! ' 

19. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the seventh time, running in the shape of a raven 
that . . . . l below and . . . . * above, and that is 
the swiftest of all birds, the lightest of the flying 
creatures. 

20. He alone of living things, he or none, 
overtakes the flight of an arrow, however well it has 
been shot He flies up joyfully at the first break of 
dawn, wishing the night to be no more, wishing the 
dawn, that has not yet come, to come 2 . 

21. He grazes the hidden ways 3 of the mountains, 
he grazes the tops of the mountains, he grazes the 
depths of the vales, he grazes the summits * of the 
trees, listening to the voices of the birds. 

1 ? Urvatd, pishatd. 

* The raven was sacred to Apollo. The priests of the sun in 
Persia are said to have been named ravens (Poiphyrius). Cf. 
Georgica I, 45. 

9 Reading vfgtav6. * Doubtful. 



BAHRAM YAST. 



Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda 1 , the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

VIII. 

22. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathostra asked Ahura Mazda : * Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

c Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? * 
Ahura Mazda answered: c lt is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathustra ! ' 

23. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the eighth time, running in the shape of a wild, 
beautiful ram, with horns bent round 2 . 

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda 3 , the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

IX. 

24. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda : * Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

* Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered : c It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathustra ! ' 

1 The royal Glory is described flying in the shape of a raven, 
Yt. XIX, 35. 

8 Doubtful. 

8 While Ardashir, the founder of the Sasanian dynasty, was flying 
from Ardavn, a beautiful wild ram ran after him and overtook him, 
and Ardavfin understood from this that the kingly Glory had left 
him and had passed over to his rival (Sh&h N&mah, Ardashir; 
KSr NSmaki Aitachshtr, tr. Noeldeke, p. 46)- 



238 YASTS AND stR&ZAHS. 

25. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the ninth time, running in the shape of a beautiful, 
fighting buck, with sharp horns. 

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda, the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

X. 

26. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda : ' Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One! 

' Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods ?' 
Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, 
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! ' 

27. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him 
the tenth time, running in the shape of a man, bright 
and beautiful, made by Mazda : he held a sword with 
a golden blade, inlaid with all sorts of ornaments. 

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good 
Glory made by Mazda, the Glory made by 
Mazda .... 

XL 

28. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura, who makes virility, who makes death, who 
makes resurrection, who possesses peace, who has 
a free way. 

Unto him did the holy Zarathurtra offer up a 
sacrifice, [asking] for victorious thinking, victorious 
speaking, victorious doing, victorious addressing, and 
victorious answering. 

29. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, gave him the 



BAHRM VAST. 239 



fountains of manliness *, the strength of the arms, 
the health of the whole body, the sturdiness of the 
whole body, and the eye-sight of the Kara fish 2 , 
that lives beneath the waters and can measure 3 a 
rippling of the water, not thicker than a hair, in the 
Rangha whose ends lie afar, whose depth is a thou- 
sand times the height of a man *. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XII. 

30. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura, who makes virility, who makes death, who 
makes resurrection, who possesses peace, who has 
a free way. 

Unto him did the holy Zarathurtra offer up a 
sacrifice, [asking] for victorious thinking, victorious 
speaking, victorious doing, victorious addressing, 
and victorious answering. 

31. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, gave him the 
fountains of manliness, the strength of the arms, the 
health of the whole body, the sturdiness of the whole 
body, and the eye-sight of the male horse, that, in 
the dark of the night, in its first half 6 and through 
the rain, can perceive a horse's hair lying on the 
ground and knows whether it is from the head or 
from the tail 6 . 

1 Erezi, Pahl. gond (Old Zand-Pahlavi Dictionary, p. u). 
8 See Vendtdid XIX, 42. Possibly, perceive. 

* Cf. Yt XVI, 7, and Bundahw XVIII, 6 : 'those fish .... 
know the scratch of a needle's point (or better hole) by which the 
water shall increase, or by which it is diminishing' (tr. West). 

Avakhshaityou, the night before hu-vakhsha (before the 
time when the light begins to grow ; midnight). 

Cf. Yt. XVI, 10, and Bundahw XIX, 32 : ' Regarding the Arab 



240 YA5TS AND SIRdZAHS. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XIII. 

32. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura, who makes virility, who makes death, who 
makes resurrection, who possesses peace, who has 
a free way. 

Unto him did the holy Zarathurtra sacrifice, 
[asking] for victorious thinking, victorious speaking, 
victorious doing, victorious addressing, and vic- 
torious answering. 

33. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, gave him the 
fountains of virility, the strength of the arms, the 
health of the whole body, the sturdiness of the 
whole body, and the eye-sight of the vulture with 
a golden collar 1 , that, from as far as nine districts, 
can perceive a piece of flesh not thicker than the 
fist, giving just as much ligfrt as a needle gives, as 
the point of a needle gives *. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XIV. 

34. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

Zarathu^tra asked Ahura Mazda: ' Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One ! 

horse, they say that if, in a dark night, a single hair occurs on the 
ground, he sees it ' (tr. West). 

1 Possibly the Gypaetus, the vautour dor& 

9 ' Even from his highest flight, he (the vulture) sees when flesh 
the size of a fist is on the ground' (Bund. XIX, 31; tr. West). 
Cf. Horapollo (1, 11). 



BAHRAM VAST. 24! 



* If I have a curse thrown upon me, a spell told 
upon me by the many men who hate me, what is the 
remedy for it ? ' 

35. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Take thou a feather 
of that bird with . . . . l feathers, the V&refana, 
O Spitama Zarathurtra ! With that feather thou 
shalt rub thy own body 2 , with that feather thou 
shalt curse back thy enemies, 

36. * If a man holds a bone of that strong bird, 
or a feather of that strong bird, no one can smite 
or turn to flight that fortunate man. The feather 
of that bird of birds brings him help ; it brings unto 
him the homage of men, it maintains in him his 
glory. 

37. 'Then the sovereign, the lord of countries, 
will no longer kill his 8 hundreds, though he is a 
killer of men ; the .... * will not kill at one stroke ; 
he alone smites and goes forwards. 

38. 'All tremble before him who holds the 
feather, they tremble therefore before me; all my 
enemies tremble before me and fear my strength 
and victorious force and the fierceness established 
in my body. 

39. 'He* carries the chariot of the lords; he 
carries the chariots of the lordly ones, the chariots 
of the sovereigns. He carried the chariot of Kavi 

1 Feshd-parena. The Vare^ana is the same bird as the V&ra- 
ghna, the raven. 

a The feather of the V^re^ana plays here the same part as the 
Sfcnurgh's feather in the Shah N&mah. When Rtidabah's flank 
was opened to bring forth Rustem, her wound was healed by 
rubbing it with a Sfmurgh's feather; Rustem, wounded to death 
by Isfendydr, was cured in the same manner. 

8 Of him who holds that feather. 

* ? VafcsaSpa. That bird. 

R 



242 YA5TS AND 



Usa * ; upon his wings runs the male horse 3 , runs the 
burden-bearing camel, runs the water of the river. 

40. * Him rode the gallant Thra&taona, who smote 
Asi Dah&ka, the three-mouthed, the three-headed, 
the six-eyed, who had a thousand senses ; that most 
powerful, fiendish Druf, that demon, baleful to the 
world, the strongest Dru/ that Angra Mainyu 
created against the material world, to destroy the 
world of the good principle 3 . 

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XV. 

41. 'We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura. 

' Verethraghna confounds the glory of this house 
with its wealth in cattle. He is like that great bird, 
the Sa6na * ; he is like the big clouds, full of water, 
that beat the mountains. 

* For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XVI. 

42. 'We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by 
Ahura/ 

Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : ' Ahura Mazda, 
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, 
thou Holy One! 

* Where is it that we must invoke the name of 
Verethraghna, made by Ahura ? Where is it that 

1 Kai Eaus; when he tried to ascend to heaven on a throne 
carried by eagles (Journal Asiatique, 1881, 1, 313). 

* A metaphor to express the swiftness of the wind, of the 
camel, and of the rivers. 

8 Cf. Yt. V, 34. * The Sfonurgh; cf. p. 241, note a. 



BAHR&M VAST. 243 



we must praise him ? That we must humbly praise 
him?' 

43. Ahura Mazda answered : * When armies meet 
together in full array, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! (ask- 
ing) which of the two is the party that conquers l and 
is not crushed, that smites and is not smitten ; 

44. ' Do thou throw l four feathers a in the way. 
Whichever of the two will first worship the well- 
shapen Strength, and Verethraghna, beautiful of form, 
made by Mazda, on his side will victory stand. 

45. 'I will bless Strength and Victory, the two 
keepers, the two good keepers, the two maintainers ; 
the two who . . . . 3 , the two who . . . . 3 , the two 
who . . . . 3 ; the two who forgive, the two who 
strike off, the two who forget*. 

46. ' O Zarathustra ! let not that spell be shown to 
any one, except by the father to his son, or by the 
brother to his brother from the same womb, or by 
the Athravan to his pupil 8 . These are words that 
are awful and powerful, awful and assembly-ruling, 
awful and victorious, jawful and healing; these are 
words that save the head that was lost and chant 
away the uplifted weapon/ 

XVII. 

47. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura : 
who goes along the armies arrayed, and goes here 

1 Doubtful. 

a Or an arrow feathered with four V&reag r ana f s feathers. 
8 A-dhwaosen, vf-dhwao*en, fra-dhwaozen, 
* Amarezen, cf. ^Ju^T; vimarezen, cf. Yt. I, ^ ; fra xnare- 
2 en, cf. Qrf^^i. 
Ct Yt. IV, to. 

R 2 



244 YASTS AND 



and there asking, along with Mithra and Rashnu : 
1 Who is it who lies unto Mithra ? Who is it who 
thrusts [his oath] against Rashnu l ? To whom shall 
I, in my might, impart illness and death 2 ? ' 

48 3 . Ahura Mazda said : ' If men sacrifice unto 
Verethraghna, made by Ahura, if the due sacrifice 
and prayer is offered unto him just as it ought to 
be performed in the perfection of holiness, never 
will a hostile horde enter the Aryan countries, nor 
any plague, nor leprosy, nor venomous plants, 
nor the chariot of a foe, nor the uplifted spear of 
a foe/ 

49 *. Zarathurtra asked : ' What is then, O Ahura 
Mazda! the sacrifice and invocation in honour of 
Verethraghna, made by Ahura, as it ought to be 
performed in the perfection of holiness ? ' 

50. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let the Aryan 
nations bring libations unto him; let the Aryan 
nations tie bundles of baresma for him; let the 
Aryan nations cook for him a head of cattle, either 
white, or black, or of any other colour, but all of 
one and the same colour. 

51. 'Let not a murderer take of those offerings, 
nor a whore, nor a . . . . , who does not sing 
the G4th&s, who spreads death in the world and 
withstands the law of Mazda, the law of Zara- 
thurtra. 

52. ' If a murderer take of those offerings, or a 
whore, or a . . . . , who does not sing the Gath&s, 
then Verethraghna, made by Ahura, takes back his 
healing virtues. 



1 Against truth. * Cfl Yt X, 108 seq. 

8 48 ; cf. Yt VIII, 56. * 49-53=Yt VHI, 57-6!. 



BAHRAM YAST. 245 



53. 'Plagues will ever pour upon the Aryan na- 
tions ; hostile hordes will ever fall upon the Aryan 
nations ; the Aryans will be smitten by their fifties 
and their hundreds, by their hundreds and their 
thousands, by their thousands and their tens of 
thousands, by their tens of thousands and their 
myriads of myriads. 1 

54. There Verethraghna, made by Ahura, pro- 
claimed thus: 'The Soul of the Bull 1 , the wise 
creature, does not receive from man due sacrifice 
and prayer; for now the Da6vas and the wor- 
shippers of the DaSvas make blood flow and spill it 
like water ; 

55. 'For now the . . . . a Da6vas and the wor- 
shippers of the Dafivas bring to the fire the plant 
that is called Haperesi, the wood that is called 
Neme/ka 8 ; 

56. * (Therefore) when the . . . . 2 Da6vas and the 
worshippers of the Da6vas bow their backs, bend 
their waists, and arrange all their limbs 4 , they think 
they will smite and smite not, they think they will 
kill and kill not ; and then the . . . . a Da6vas and the 
worshippers of the Dagvas have their minds con- 
founded and their eyes made giddy 5 .' 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
-worth being heard .... 

1 GdjftrinorDnspa; seeYtlX. The destruction of any living 
being is an injury to Drv&pa. 

* ? Vyimbura. 

8 The Haperesi and the Neme/ka are probably some species 
of green wood; it is forbidden to put green wood in the fire as it 
kills it, and injures the Genius of Water at the same time. 

* In order to strike. 

8 The general meaning of the last four clauses is that the 
impious are defeated. 



246 YASTS AND 



XVIII. 

57. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura. 
I offer up Haoma, who saves one's head l ; I offer 

up the victorious Haoma ; I offer him up, the good 
protector ; I offer up Haoma, who is a protector to 
my body, as a man who shall drink 2 of him shall 
win and prevail 3 over his enemies in battle ; 

58. That I may smite this army, that I may 
smite down this army, that I may cut in pieces this 
army that is coming behind me. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XIX. 

59. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura. 
The prince and his son and his sons who are chiefs 

of myriads* offer him up a bright 6 [saying]: 

1 He is strong, and Victorious is his name ; he is 
victorious, and Strong is his name ; ' 

60. That I may be as constantly victorious as any 
one of all the Aryans fl ; that I may smite this army, 
that I may smite down this army, that I may cut in 
pieces this army that is coming behind me. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

1 ? Sairi-baoghem; c 46. 

8 Nivazaiti; literally, swallow (? fr6t 6 bun burtan, Vend. V, 
8 [26]). 

s Literally, overtake. * Cf. Yt. V, 85. 

6 ? Asdnem sighftirS. 6 Cf. Yt. V, 69. 



BAHR&M VAST. 247 



XX. 

6 1. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura. 

Yathd ahft vairy6 : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

In the ox is our strength, in the ox is our need l ; 
in the ox is our speech, in the ox is our victory ; in 
the ox is our food, in the ox is our clothing ; in the 
ox is tillage, that makes food grow for us. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XXI. 

62. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura; 
Who breaks the columns asunder, who cuts the 

columns to pieces, who wounds the columns, who 
makes the columns shake; who comes and breaks 
the columns asunder, who comes and cuts the columns 
to pieces, who comes and wounds the columns, 
who comes and makes the columns shake, both of 
Dafivas and men, of the Ydtus and Pairikas, of the 
oppressors, the blind, and the deaf. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XXII. 

63. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura. 
When Verethraghna, made by Ahura, binds the 

hands, confounds the eye-sight, takes the hearing 

1 From Yasna X, 20 (62), where, instead of the words, ' in the ox 
is our strength (amem), in the ox is our need/ the text has, ' in the 
ox is his need, in the ox is our need/ meaning, 'when we give 
him his need (water and grass), he gives us our need (milk and 
calves)/ (Pahl. tr.). 



248 YASTS AND 



from the ears of the Mithradru^es 1 marching in 
columns, allied by cities, they can no longer move 
their feet, they can no longer withstand. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard ---- 

64. YathS. ah ft vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of Verethraghna, made by Mazda ; and 
of the crushing Ascendant. 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
[Give] unto that man 3 brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 

1 See p. 120., note 2. 

* Who shall offer a sacrifice to Verethraghna. 



RAM YA5T. 249 



XV. RAM YA6T. 

This Yarf bears the name of Rma ZMstra, the Genius who 
presides over the 2ist day of the month (Strdzah, 21), and is 
devoted to his Hamk&r, Vayu. 

Regarding Bima ZTz/lftra, the Genius that gives good abodes 
and good pastures, and his connection with Vayu, see Vend. Introd. 
IV, and Etudes Iramennes, II, 187. 

This Yart can be divided into two parts. The first part ( 1-140) 
contains an enumeration of worshippers who sacrificed to Vayu : 
Ahura Mazda ( 2), Haoshyangha ( 7), Takhma Urupa ( n), 
Yima ( 15), A*i Dahika ( 19), ThraStaona ( 23), Keresaspa 
( 27), Aurvasara ( 31), Hutaosa ( 35), and Iranian maids ( 39). 
The second part ( 42-58) contains a special enumeration and 
glorification of the many names of Vayu ( 42-50). 



o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! .... 

Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the DaSvas, and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [H&vani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto R4ma Zfofistra, unto Vayu who works 
highly and is more powerful to afflict than all other 
creatures 1 , 

Be propitiation from me, for sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and 
glorification. 

Yath& ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I. 

i. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them 9 . I will sacrifice to Peace, whose breath 
is friendly, and to Weal, both of them. 

1 Cf. Slr6zah I, *i. 

8 ApSm NapaV (Yt. VIII, 34) or Tirtrya (Yt. VIII, i). 



250 VASTS AND slR6ZAHS. 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke, for this house, for the master of this house, 
and for the man here who is offering libations and 
giving gifts. To this excellent God do we sacrifice, 
that he may accept our meat and our prayers, and 
grant us in return to crush our enemies at one 
stroke. 

2 1 . To him did the Maker, Ahura Mazda, offer 
up a sacrifice in the Airyana Vafifah 1 , on a golden 
throne, under golden beams 2 and a golden canopy, 
with bundles of baresma and offerings of full-boiling 
[milk] 8 . 

3. He begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O Vayu! who dost work highly 4 , that I may 
smite the creation of Angra Mainyu, and that nobody 
may smite this creation of the Good Spirit ! ' 

4. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it 

5. We sacrifice to the holy Vayu : we sacrifice to 
Vayu, who works highly. 

To this part of thee do we sacrifice, O Vayu ! that 
belongs to Spe^ta Mainyu 6 . 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him 
a sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto the awful 
Vayu, who works highly. We offer up a sacri- 
fice unto the awful Vayu, who works highly, with 
the libations, with the Haoma and meat, with the 
baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the 



1 Cf. Yt. V, 17. a FraspaV, Persian 

8 Cf. p. 169, note g. * See p. 10, note 4. 

5 As Vayu, the atmosphere, is the place in which the conflict of 

the two principles takes place, one part of him belongs to the Evil 

Spirit (see Vend. Introd. IV, 17). 



VAST. 251 



holy spells, the words, the deeds, the libations, and 
the well-spoken words. 

hatam : All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda .... 



II. 

6. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke . . . . I 

7. To him did Haoshyangha, the Paradhita, offer 
up a sacrifice on the Tara of the Kara, bound with 
iron 2 , on a golden throne, under golden beams and 
a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma and offer- 
ing of full-boiling [milk]. 

8. He begged of him a boon, saying : c Grant me, 
O Vayu ! who dost work highly, that I may smite 
two-thirds of the Davas of M&ana and of the fiends 
of Varena 3 .' 

9. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda 4 , did pursue it 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

III. 

10. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke 



1 The rest as in clause i. 

a Cf. Yt V, 21, p. 58, note 2. Cf. Yt. V, 21-23. 

4 Introduced from 4 into this and all similar clauses, except 
the one relating to A*i DaMka ( 21). 



252 YASTS AND 



ii. To him did Takhma Urupa 1 , the well-armed 2 , 
offer up a sacrifice on a golden throne, under golden 
beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma 
and offerings of full-boiling [milk], 

1 2. He begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O Vayu! who dost work highly, that I may 
conquer all Dadvas and men, all the Y4tus and 
Pairikas, and that I may ride Angra Mainyu, turned 
into the shape of a horse, all around the earth from 
one end to the other, for thirty years/ 

13. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon 3 , as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it. 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

IV. 

14. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

15. Unto him did the bright Yima, the good shep- 

1 Takhma Urupa (in later legend TahmMf) was a brother to 
Yima. He reigned for thirty years and rode Ahriman, turned 
into a horse. But at last his wife, deceived by Ahriman, revealed 
to him the seciet of her husband's power, and TahmMf was 
swallowed up by his horse. But Yima managed to take back his 
brother's body from the body of Ahriman and recovered thereby 
the arts and civilisation which had disappeared along with Tah- 
mMf (see MinokhiredXXVII, 32; Ravfiet apud Spiegel, Einleitung 
in die traditionelie Literatur, pp. 317 seq.j Orxnazd et Ahriman, 
137 seqJ cf. above, p. 60, note i). 

* Azinavaw/ or zaSnahva*/: he kept that epithet in later tra- 
dition: Zfnavend, 'quod cognomen viram significat armis probe 
instructum' (Hamza Ispahensis, p. 20, tr. Gottwaldt). 

8 As told Yt. XIX, 29. 



YAST. 253 



herd, sacrifice from the height Hukairya, the all- 
shining and golden, on a golden throne, under golden 
beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma 
and offerings of full-boiling [milk]. 

1 6. He begged of him a boon, saying : c Grant me 
this, O Vayu ! who dost work highly, that I may 
become the most glorious of the men born to behold 
the sun : that I may make in my reign both animals 
and men undying, waters and plants undrying, and 
the food for eating creatures never-failing V 

In the reign of the valiant Yima there was neither 
cold wind nor hot wind, neither old age nor death, 
nor envy made by the Da&vas \ 

17. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it. 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

V. 

1 8. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

19. Unto him did the three-mouthed A#i DahSka 
offer up a sacrifice in his accursed palace of Kviriwta 3 , 

1 Cf. Yasna IX, 4-5 (11-20) and Yt. XIX, 31 seq. 

* This passage is interpolated from Yasna IX, g (17-19). 

8 Or, ' his accursed palace of the Stork ' (upa kvirwrtem dusitem). 
* AjEfi Dah&ka/ says Hamza (p. 32 in the text, p. 22 in the transla- 
tion), ' used to live in Babylon (cf. Yt. V, 29), where he had built 
a palace in the form of a stork; he called it Kuleng Dis 
( Lr jj gll^)> the fortress of the Stork; the inhabitants called 
it Dis Het (oj* U-JA)/ Kuleng Df s was in Zend Kvirita 
daza and Dis Het is nothing else than Dusita. One may doubt 



254 VASTS AND 



on a golden throne, under golden beams and a golden 
canopy, with bundles of baresma and offerings of 
full-boiling [milk]. 

20. He begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O Vayu! who dost work highly, that I may 
make all the seven Karshvares of the earth empty 
of men V 

21. In vain did he sacrifice, in vain did he beg, in 
vain did he invoke, in vain did he give gifts, in vain 
did he bring libations ; Vayu did not grant him that 
boon. 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

VI. 

22. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

23. Unto him did ThraStaona, the heir of the 
valiant Athwya clan, offer up a sacrifice in the 
four-cornered Varena, on a golden throne, under 
golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of 
baresma and offerings of full-boiling [milk]. 

24. He begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O Vayu! who dost work highly, that I may 
overcome Asi Dahfika, the three-mouthed, the 
threerheaded, the six-eyed, who has a thousand 
senses, that most powerful, fiendish Dru^, that 



whether Kviriwta is the name of a place or the Zend form of 
Kuleng, a stork : in any case it was a palace in Bawri (Babylon). 
In the Sh^h Ndmah it is called Dteukht (dus-ukhta for dus-ita ; 
see tudes Iraniennes, II, 211). 
1 Cf. Yt. V, 30 seq. 



RAM VAST. 255 

demon baleful to the world, the strongest Dru^ that 
Angra Mainyu created against the material world, to 
destroy the world of the good principle ; and that I 
may deliver his two wives, Savanghav& and Erena- 
v&, who are the fairest of body amongst women, and 
the most wonderful creatures in the world V 

25. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

VII. 

26. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

27. To him did the manly-hearted Keres&spa 3 
offer up a sacrifice by the Gudha 3 , a channel of the 
Rangha, made by Mazda, upon a golden throne, under 
golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of 
baresma and offerings of full-boiling [milk]. 

28. He begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O Vayu ! who dost work highly, that I may suc- 
ceed in avenging my brother Urvikhshaya 4 , that I 
may smite Hitispa and yoke him to my chariot/ 

The Gawdarewa, who lives beneath the waters, 

1 Yt.V, 34; IX, 14; XVn, 34. 

8 Cf. Yt. V, 37 seq. 

8 An unknown affluent of the Rangha (Tigris). 

* Sima had two sons, Keres&pa, a warrior, and Urvdkhshaya, 
a judge and law-giver (Yasna IX, TO [29 seq.]). We have no further 
details about Urvikhshaya's legend than that he was killed by 
* Hit&pa, the golden-crowned' (cf. Yt. XIX, 41), and avenged by 
Keres&spa. 



VASTS AND 



is the son of Ahura in the deep, he is the only 
master of the deep *. 

29. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it. 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

VIII. 

30. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

3 1. To him did Aurvas&ra 3 , the lord of the country, 
offer up a sacrifice, towards the White Forest 3 , by the 
White Forest, on the border of the White Forest, on 
a golden throne, under golden beams and a golden 
canopy, with bundles of baresma and offerings of 
full-boiling [milk]. 

32. He begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O Vayu ! who dost work highly, that the gallant 
Husravah, he who unites the Aryan nations into one 
kingdom 4 , may not smite us ; that I may flee from 
king Husravah 6 ; . . . . 



1 A disconnected allusion to the struggle of Keresspa with the 
Gawdarewa (Yt. V, 38, text and notes ; XIX, 41). On the words 
'the son of Ahura ' cf . Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 213, note i. 

8 No other mention is made of Aurvasfira in the Avesta, unless 
he is alluded to in Yt V, 50. He does not appear to have been 
known to FirdausL 

8 Spa6tini,r razura is called 'the chief of forests' (Bund. 
XXIV, 16). According to the Bahrnan Yart (HI, 9), it was the 
seat of the last and decisive battle between Aigsp and Gfctitsp. 

* Cf. Yt V, 49; IX, 21. Cf. Yt V, go. 



RAM VAST. 257 

1 That king Husravah and all the Aryans in the 
Forest may smite him V 

33. Vayu, who works highly, granted him that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it. 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

IX. 

34. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

35. To him did Hutaosa, she of the many 
brothers 2 , of the Naotara house 3 , offer up a sacri- 
fice, on a golden throne, under golden beams and a 
golden canopy, with bundles of baresma and offerings 
of boiling milk. 

36. She begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me 
this, O Vayu! who dost work highly, that I may be 
dear and loved and well-received in the house of 
king Vlrtfispa/ 

37. Vayu, who works highly, granted her that 
boon, as the Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it. 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard . . * . 

X. 

38. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

1 This line looks as if it should belong to a counter-prayer by 
Husravah, which was heard by Vayu, as appears from Yt. V, 50. 
* See Yt. IX, 26. 8 See p. 77, note i. - 

[23] S 



258 VAtfTS AND 



To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

39. To him did 1 the maids, whom no man had 
known, offer up a sacrifice on a golden throne, under 
golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of 
baresma and offerings of boiling milk. 

40. They begged of him a boon, saying : ' Grant 
us this, O Vayu! who dost work highly, that we 
may find a husband, young and beautiful of body, 
who will treat us well, all life long, and give us off- 
spring ; a wise, learned, ready-tongued husband.' 

41. Vayu, who works highly, granted them that 
boon, as die Maker, Ahura Mazda, did pursue it. 

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu .... 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

XI. 

42. I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who 
divides them .... 

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we 
invoke .... 

We sacrifice to that Vayu that belongs to the 
Good Spirit 2 , the bright and glorious Vayu. 

43. My name is Vayu, O holy Zarathu^tra ! My 
name is Vayu, because I go through (vySmi) the 
two worlds 3 , the one which the Good Spirit has 

1 It may be doubted whether the allusion here is to a legend of 
marriage en masse, following the marriage of Hutaosa with Vir- 
tSspa, or whether the aorist is used with an indicative meaning: 
* To him do the maids who have known no man .... They beg 
of him a boon, saying.../ Cf. Yt. XVI, 17. 

* Cf. 5, note 5. 

8 An attempt to an etymological explanation of the name Vayu. 
C 53- 



VAST. 259 



made and the one which the Evil Spirit has 
made. 

My name is the Overtaker (apadta), O holy 
Zarathutfra! My name is the Overtaker, because I 
can overtake the creatures of both worlds, the one 
that the Good Spirit has made and the one that the 
Evil Spirit has made. 

44. My name is the All-smiting, Oholy Zarathortra! 
My name is the All-smiting, because I can smite the 
creatures of both worlds, the one that the Good 
Spirit has made and the one that the Evil Spirit 
has made. 

My name is the Worker of Good, O holy Zara- 
thurtra! My name is the Worker of Good, because 
I work the good of the Maker, Ahura Mazda, and of 
the Amesha-Spe^tas 1 . 

45. My name is He that goes forwards, 
My name is He that goes backwards. 
My name is He that bends backwards. 
My name is He that hurls away. 

My name is He that hurls down. 

My name is He that destroys. 

My name is He that takes away. 

My name is He that finds out. 

My name is He that finds out the Glory (/7aren6). 

46. My name is the Valiant; my name is the Most 
Valiant. 

My name is the Strong ; my name is the Strongest. 
My name is the Firm ; my name is the Firmest. 
My name is the Stout ; my name is the Stoutest. 
My name is He that crosses over easily. 
My name is He that goes along hurling away. 

1 He is their agent and instrument. 
S 2 



26O YASTS AND 



My name is He that crushes at one stroke. 
My name is . . .* 

My name is He that works against the Da6vas. 
My name is ... . 2 

47. My name is He that prevails over malice ; my 
name is He that destroys malice. 

My name is He that unites ; my name is He that 
re-unites ; my name is He that separates. 

My name is the Burning ; my name is the Quick 
of intelligence 3 . 

My name is Deliverance ; my name is Welfare 4 . 

My name is the Burrow 6 ; my name is He who 
destroys the burrows 6 ; my name is He who spits 
upon the burrows 6 . 

48. My name is Sharpness of spear; my name is 
He of the sharp spear. 

My name is Length of spear ; my name is He of 
the long spear. 

My name is Piercingness of spear ; my name is 
He of the piercing spear. 

My name is the Glorious ; my name is the Over- 
glorious. 

49 6 . Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zara- 
thurtra! in the midst of the havocking hordes, in the 
midst of the columns moving forwards, in the strife 
of the conflicting nations. 

1 Ainiva (?). > Keredhama (?). 

8 Doubtful; bao^a, cf.j^.. 
* Reading sudhu. 

5 Geredha is the burrow of an Ahrimanian creature (see Vend. 
HI, 10 [33] ; VII, 24 [61]) : Vayu, in that half of him that belongs 
to the Evil Spirit, is the seat (the burrow) of Ahriman; but with 
his better half, he straggles against the fiend and destroys him. 

6 Cf.Yt.I, u, 16. 



VAST. 26l 



50. Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zara- 
thurtra 1 when the all-powerful tyrant of a country 
falls upon thee, rushes upon thee, deals wounds upon 
thee, or hurls his chariot against thee, to rob thee 1 
of thy wealth, to rob thee of thy health. 

51. Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zara- 
thu^tra! when the unholy Ashemaogha falls upon 
thee, rushes upon thee, deals wounds upon thee, or 
hurls his chariot against thee, to rob thee of thy 
strength, to rob thee of thy wealth, to rob thee of 
thy health. 

52. Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zara- 
thustra ! when a man stands in bonds, when a man 
is being thrown into bonds, or when a man is being 
dragged in bonds : thus the prisoners flee from the 
hands of those who carry them, they flee away out 
of the prison 3 . 

53. O thou Vayu! who strikest fear upon all men 
and horses, who in all creatures workest against the 
Davas, both into the lowest places and into those 
a thousand times deep dost thou enter with equal 
power 8 . 

54. ' With what manner of sacrifice shall I worship 
thee ? With what manner of sacrifice shall I forward 
and worship thee? With what manner of sacrifice 
will be achieved thy adoration, O great Vayu ! thou 
who art high-up girded, firm, swift-moving, high- 
footed, wide-breasted, wide-thighed, with untrembling 
eyes, as powerful in sovereignty as any absolute 
sovereign in the world?' 



1 Literally, coveting. 

9 The translation of this clause is doubtful; the text is corrupt 

*Cf. 4 2. 



262 VASTS AND 



55. 'Take thou a baresma, O holy Zarathurtra ! 
turn it upwards or downwards, according as it is full 
day or dawning; upwards during the day, down- 
wards at the dawn 1 . 

56. ' If thou makest me worshipped with a sacri- 
fice, then I shall say unto thee with my own voice 
things of health, made by Mazda and full of glory, 
so that Angra Mainyu may never do harm unto thee, 
nor the Ydtus, nor those addicted to the works of the 
YaLtu, whether DaSvas or men/ 

57. We sacrifice unto thee, O great Vayu! we 
sacrifice unto thee, O strong Vayu 1 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, the greatest of the great ; 
we sacrifice unto Vayu, the strongest of the strong. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden helm. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden crown. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden necklace. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden chariot. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden wheel. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden weapons. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden garment. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden shoe. 

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden girdle. 

We sacrifice unto the holy Vayu ; we sacrifice unto 
Vayu, who works highly. 

To this part of thee do we sacrifice, O Vayu ! that 
belongs to the Good Spirit 

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice 
worth being heard, namely, unto the awful Vayu, who works 
highly .... 

58. Yatha* ahfi vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and invocation unto, and the 
1 fitudes Iraniennes, II, no. 



RAM VAST. 263 

strength and vigour of Rama #i/dstra, and Vayu, who 
works highly, more powerful to afflict than all the 
other creatures : this part of thee that belongs to 
the Good Spirit. 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 



264 YA5TS AND 



XVI. DlN YAST. 

Din (DaSna) presides over the 24th day of the month (Sfrdzah 24) 
and gives it her name ; she is invoked in company with Jfista, and 
in fact this Yart, though it bears the name of DaSna, is consecrated 
to -ffista ( 2, 7). These two Genii are, however, very closely 
connected in their nature, as Da&na is the impersonation of the 
Zoroastrian Law or Religion, and j&Tista is religious knowledge, 
the knowledge of what leads to bliss (farginak, nin$a#uia ; the 
same as JTisti). 

The description of JSTistais rather pallid, and does not rise above 
abstractions (see, however, Mihir Yart, 126). She was not wor- 
shipped by the old epic heroes as Anihita was, but by Zarathurtra 
and his wife, because she must have been, from her very name and 
nature, a goddess of Zoroastrian origin and growth. 



0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I .... 

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathurtra, 
one who hates the Davas and obeys the laws of Ahura ; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hdvani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

To the most right -Sista, made by Mazda and 
holy, and to the good Law of the worshippers of 
Mazda, 

Be propitiation from me, for sacrifice, prayer, 
propitiation, and glorification. 

Yathft ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

L 

1. We sacrifice to the most right .fiTista, made by 
Mazda and holy: we sacrifice to the good Law of 
the worshippers of Mazda, the supplier of good 



D!N VAST. 265 

stores, who runs quickly to the goal and frees one 
best from dangers 1 , who brings libations, who is 
holy, clever, and renowned, speedy to work and 
quick of work ; who goes quickly and cleanses well ; 
the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda ; 

2. To whom Zarathurtra did sacrifice, saying: 
'Rise up from thy seat, come forward from the 
Abode 2 , thou most right -ffista, made by Mazda and 
holy. If thou art before me, stay for me ; if thou 
art behind me, overtake me. 

3. 'Let everything be as friendly to us as any- 
thing can be : may we go smoothly along the roads, 
find good pathways in the mountains, run easily 
through the forests, and cross happily the rivers!' 

4. For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto 
her a sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto the 
most right JTista., made by Mazda and holy. I will 
offer up a sacrifice unto the most right Aista, made 
by Mazda and holy, with the libations, with the 
Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the wis- 
dom of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the 
words and deeds, with the libations, with the well- 
spoken words. 

Y6h6 hitSm: All those beings of whom 
Ahura Mazda .... 

II. 

5. We sacrifice to the most right ATista, made by 
Mazda and holy: we sacrifice to the good Law of 
the worshippers of Mazda . . . . 8 

1 Reading nimarezijta; cf. vimarezijtem, Yt I, 2. 

2 The heavenly abode, the Gardthm&n. 
8 The rest as in i. 



266 YA5TS AND SiR6ZAHS. 

6. To whom Zarathurtra did sacrifice for right- 
eousness of thought, for righteousness of speech, for 
righteousness of deed, and for this boon, 

7. That the most right .ffista, made by Mazda 
and holy, would give him the swiftness of the feet, 
the quick hearing of the ears, the strength of the 
arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness of 
the whole body, and the eye-sight of the Kara fish, 
that lives beneath the waters, and can measure 
a rippling of the waters not thicker than a hair, in 
the Rangha, whose ends lie afar and whose depth is 
a thousand times the height of a man 1 . 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

III. 

8. We sacrifice to the most right ^Tista, made by 
Mazda and holy: we sacrifice to the good Law of 
the worshippers of Mazda . . . . 

9. To whom Zarathturtra did sacrifice for righteous- 
ness of thought, for righteousness of speech, for 
righteousness of deed, and for this boon, 

10. That the most right ATista, made by Mazda 
and holy, would give him the swiftness of the feet, 
the quick hearing of the ears, the strength of the 
arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness 
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the male 
horse, that, in the dark of the night, through the rain, 
the snow, the hail, or the sleet, from as far as nine 
districts, can perceive a horse's hair, mingled with 
the earth, and knows whether it is from the head or 
from the tail 2 . 

1 CL Yt. XIV, 29. * C Yt XIV, 31. 



D!N Y&ST. 267 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

IV. 

11. We sacrifice to the most right uSTista, made 
by Mazda and holy : we sacrifice to the good Law 
of the worshippers of Mazda .... 

12. To whom Zarathustra did sacrifice for right- 
eousness of thought, for righteousness of speech, for 
righteousness of deed, and for this boon, 

13. That the most right ^Tista, made by Mazda 
and holy, would give him the swiftness of the feet, 
the quick hearing of the ears, the strength of the 
arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness 
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the vulture 
with a golden collar, that, from as far as nine dis- 
tricts, can perceive a piece of flesh, not thicker than 
a fist, giving just as much light as a needle gives, as 
the point of a needle gives 1 . 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

V. 

14. We sacrifice to the most right .Arista, made by 
Mazda and holy : we sacrifice to the good Law of 
the worshippers of Mazda .... 

15. To whom the holy Hv6vi a did sacrifice with 
full knowledge, wishing that the holy Zarathortra 
would give her his good narcotic 3 , that she might 

1 Cf. Yt. XIV, 33. * Zarathurtra's wife. 

9 Bangha; the so-called Bang of Zoroaster (Vend. XV, 14 
[44]; Phi. tr.). What must have been its virtue may be gathered 
from the legends of G&rt&sp and Aid& VlrSf, who are said to have 
been transported in soul to the heavens, and to have had the higher 



268 YASTS AND 



think according to the law, speak according to the 
law, and do according to the law. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 



VI. 

1 6. We sacrifice to the most right ^Tista, made 
by Mazda and holy : we sacrifice to the good Law 
of the worshippers of Mazda .... 

17. To whom the Athravans, sent afar 1 , did sacri- 
fice 2 , wishing a good memory to preach the law, and 
wishing strength for their own body. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

VII. 

1 8. We sacrifice to the most right .ASsta, made by 
Mazda and holy: we sacrifice to the good Law of 
the worshippers of Mazda .... 

19. To whom the king of the country, the lord of 
the country does sacrifice, wishing peace for his 
country, wishing strength for his own body. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice 
worth being heard .... 

20. Yathfi ahft vairyft: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 

mysteries revealed to them, on drinking from a cup prepared by 
the prophet (Zardtwt Nftmah), or from a cup of Gftrt&sp-bang 
(Arda Virff, II, 29). 

1 The itinerant priests, the ancestors of the modern dervishes. 

2 Or better, do sacrifice; cf. Yt. XIV, 39. 



D!N YAOT. 269 

and vigour of the most right Jftsta, made by Mazda 
and holy, and of the good Law of the worshippers 
of Mazda. 

AshemVohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him long, 
long life, give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy 
Ones. 



270 YAOTS AND 



XVII. ASHI VAST. 

Ashi Vanguhi or ' the good Ashi 1 ' is a feminine impersonation 
of piety 2 , and she is, at the same time, the source of all the good 
and riches that are connected with piety s . She is described, there- 
fore, as a goddess of Fortune and Wealth, and is invoked in com- 
pany with Predi, the goddess of Treasures (Stidzah 25). 

She appears in the latter character in the first part of the Yaj t 
( 1-14); she praises and loves Zarathurtra ( 15-21). She is 
*otthipped by Hactfyangha ( 26), Yima ( 28), Thra&aona ( 33), 
Haoma ( 37), Husravah ( 41), Zaiathurtia ( 45), and Vfrt&spa 
( 49) * She rejects the offerings of all sterile people (old men, 
courtezans, and children, 53-61). 

I. 

1. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, 
high, tall-formed, well worthy of sacrifice, with a 
loud-sounding chariot, strong, welfare-giving, healing, 
with fulness of intellect 6 , and powerful ; 

2. The daughter of Ahura Mazda, the sister of 
the Amesha-Spewtas, who endows all the Sao- 

1 In Parsi Ardijvang or Ard (Ardw from Artij, the Persian 
form of Ashw); she presides over the 25th day of the month; cf. 
Sfrdzah 25. 

9 Ashi is not the feminine adjective of Asha, as the i was 
originally short (genitive ashdij, not ashyou); ashi is ar-ti, and 
means bhakti, piety (Neriosengh). 

9 The so-called Ashfs remedies (ash6w ha&haza; cf. Yt. 

xm, 32). 

4 This enumeration is the same as in the G6s Yart ( 3, 8, 14, 
17, 21, 26, 29). 
9 Perethu-vfra; see Etudes Iraniennes, II, 183. 



ASHI YAST. 271 



shyaw/s l with the enlivening intelligence ; she also 
brings heavenly wisdom at her wish, and comes to 
help him who invokes her from near and him who 
invokes her from afar, and worships her with offerings 
of libations. 

3 2 . For her brightness and glory, I will offer her 
a sacrifice worth being heard ; I will offer up unto 
Ashi Vanguhi a good sacrifice with an offering of 
libations. We sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi with 
the libations ; with the Haoma and meat, with the 
baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the 
holy spells, with the words, with the deeds, with 
the libations, and with the rightly-spoken words. 

Y&nh& htSm : All those beings of whom Ahura 
Mazda .... 

II. 

4. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall- 
formed, well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong, 
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect, and powerful. 

5. Homage unto Haoma, and unto the MSthra 3 , 
and unto the holy Zarathu-rtra ! 

Homage unto Haoma, because all other drinks 
are attended with A6shma 4 , the fiend of the wound- 
ing spear : but the drinking of Haoma is attended 
with Asha and with Ashi Vanguhi herself 5 . 

6. Ashi is fair; Ashi is radiant with joy; she is 
far-piercing with her rays. Ashi gives good Glory 



1 The allies of Saoshyaa/, who are to be active in the restoration 
of the world to eternal life (frashd-kereti),' Cf p. 165, note i. 
Ashi gives them the 'intelligence of life 7 (frasha khratu), through 
which they will be enabled to perform their task. 

a Cf. Yt. V, 10. The Holy Word. 

* The Da&va of anger. 

5 As drinking Haoma is an act of religion (cf. Yasna XI, 12 
[31] seq.). 



272 YASTS AND 



unto those men whom thou dost follow, O Ashi ! 
Full of perfumes is the house in which the good, 
powerful Ashi Vanguhi puts her ---- l feet, for long 
friendship. 

7. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi ! 
are kings of kingdoms, that are rich in horses, with 
large tributes, with snorting horses, sounding chariots, 
flashing swords, rich in aliments and in stores of 
food 2 ; well-scented where the beds are spread and 
full of all the other riches that may be wished for. 
Happy the man whom thou dost attend ! do thou 
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things 
and strong! 

8. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Van- 
guhi ! have houses that stand well laid up, rich in 
cattle, foremost in Asha, and long-supported. Happy 
the man whom thou dost attend ! Do thou attend 
me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and 
strong ! 

9. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Van- 
guhi ! have beds that stand well-spread, well-adorned, 
well-made, provided with cushions and with feet 
inlaid with gold, Happy the man whom thou dost 
attend ! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts 
of desirable things and strong ! 

10. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi 
Vanguhi ! have their ladies that sit on their beds, 
waiting for them : they lie on the cushions, adorning 
themselves, . . . . s , with square bored ear-rings and 
a necklace of gold : ' When will our lord come ? 
when shall we enjoy in our bodies the joys of love ? ' 

1 ? Agairimaiti*. * Cf. Yt. V, 130. 

8 PAftkupasmanau. 



ASHI VAST. 273 



Happy the man whom thou dost attend ! Do thou 
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things 
and strong ! 

11. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi 
Vanguhi ! have daughters that sit .... * ; thin is 
their waist, beautiful is their body, long are their 
fingers ; they are as fair of shape as those who look 
on can wish. Happy the man whom thou dost 
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts 
of desirable things and strong ! 

12. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi 
Vanguhi ! have horses swift and loud-neighing ; 
they drive the chariot lightly, they take it to the 
battle 2 , they bear a gallant praiser (of the gods), 
who has many horses, a solid chariot, a sharp spear, 
a long spear, and swift arrows, who hits his aim, 
pursuing after his enemies, and smiting his foes. 
Happy the man whom thou dost attend ! Do thou 
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things 
and strong ! 

13. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi 
Vanguhi! have large-humped, burden-bearing camels, 
flying from the ground or fighting with holy fieri- 
ness 8 . Happy the man whom thou dost attend! 
Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable 
things and strong ! 

14. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi 
Vanguhi ! have hoards of silver and gold brought 
together from far distant regions; and garments of 
splendid make. Happy the man whom thou dost 
attend ! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts 
of desirable things and strong ! 

1 ? igara6-paidhua. Doubtful. 8 Cf. Yt XIV, n. 
[23] T 



274 VASTS AND 



15. Do not turn thy look from me 1 turn thy 
mercy towards me, O great Ashi! thou art well- 
made and of a noble seed 1 ; thou art sovereign at 
thy wish ; thou art Glory in a bodily form. 

16. Thy father is Ahura Mazda, the greatest of 
all gods, the best of all gods ; thy mother is Armaiti 
Spe#ta ; thy brothers are Sraosha 8 , a god of Asha, 
and Rashnu a , tall and strong, and Mithra 4 , the lord 
of wide pastures, who has ten thousand spies and 
a thousand ears ; thy sister is the Law of the wor- 
shippers of Mazda. 

1 7. Praised of the gods, unoffended by the right- 
eous 5 , the great Ashi Vanguhi stood up on her 
chariot, thus speaking : * Who art thou who dost 
invoke me, whose voice is to my ear the sweetest 
of all that invoked me most ? ' 

1 8. And he c said aloud: 'I am Spitama Zara- 
thujtra, who, first of mortals, recited the praise of 
the excellent Asha 7 and offered up sacrifice unto 
Ahura Mazda and the Amesha-Spetas ; in whose 
birth and growth the waters and the plants rejoiced ; 
in whose birth and growth the waters and the plants 
grew ; in whose birth and growth all the creatures 
of the good creation cried out, Hail 8 ! 

19. 'In whose birth and growth Angra Mainyu 
rushed away from this wide, round earth, whose 
ends lie afar, and he, the evil-doing Angra Mainyu, 
who is all death, said: "All the gods together 

1 Born from the gods ; cf. Yt. XXII, 9. 
SeeYt.XI. See Yt. XII. 

See Yt. X. 

Or, e doing no harm to the righteous.' 
Zarathujtra. 7 The Ahuna Vairya. 

Cf. Yt. XIII, 93. 



ASHI VAST. 275 



have not been able to smite me down in spite 
of myself, and Zarathurtra alone can reach me in 
spite of myself. 

20. ' " He smites me with the Ahuna Vairya, as 
strong a weapon as a stone big as a house * ; he 
burns me with Asha-Vahirta, as if it were melting 
brass 2 . He makes it better for me that I should 
leave this earth, he, Spitama Zarathustra, the only 
one who can daunt me." ' 

21. And the great Ashi Vanguhi exclaimed: 
'Come nearer unto me, thou pure, holy Spitama! 
lean against my chariot 1 ' 

Spitama Zarathurtra came nearer unto her, he 
leant against her chariot. 

22. And she caressed him with the left arm and 
the right, with the right arm and the left, thus 
speaking : * Thou art beautiful, O Zarathurtra ! thou 
art well-shapen, O Spitama ! strong are thy legs and 
long are thy arms : Glory is given to thy body and 
long cheerfulness 8 to thy soul, as sure as I proclaim 
it unto thee/ 

III. 

23*. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall- 
formed, well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, 
strong, welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect and 
powerful. 

24*. To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradh&ta, 
offer up a sacrifice, upon the enclosure of the Kara, 
the beautiful height, made by Mazda. 

25. He begged of her a boon, saying: c Grant 

1 Cf. Vend. XIX, 4 (13)- * Cf. Yt-HL 

- * Bliss after death. * As i. 

5 For 24-26, cf. Yt IX, 3-6. 

T 2 



276 YASTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

me this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! that I may over- 
come all the PaSvas of Mizana ; that I may never 
fear and bow through terror before the DaSvas, but 
that all the Davas may fear and bow in spite of 
themselves before me, that they may fear and flee 
down to darkness/ 

26. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side: Haoshyangha, the Paradhdta, obtained that 
boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

IV. 

27. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful 

28 \ To her did Yima KhshaSta, the good 
shepherd, offer up a sacrifice from the height 
Hukairya. 

29. He begged of her a boon, saying : c Grant me 
this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! that I may bring fatness 
and flocks down to the world created by Mazda ; that 
I may bring immortality down to the world created 
by Mazda ; 

30. 'That I may take away both hunger and 
thirst, from the world created by Mazda; that I 
may take away both old age and death, from the 
world created by Mazda ; that I may take away both 
hot wind and cold wind, from the world created by 
Mazda, for a thousand years/ 

31. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side : Yima Khsha&a, the good shepherd, obtained 
that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

1 For 28-31, cf. Yt IX, 8-n. 



ASHI VAST. 277 



V. 

32. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful. 

33 \ To her did Thradtaona, the heir of the 
valiant Athwya clan, offer up a sacrifice in the four- 
cornered Varena. 

34. He begged of her a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! that I may overcome 
Azi Dahika, the three-mouthed, the three-headed, 
the six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that most 
powerful, fiendish Dru/, that demon, baleful to the 
world, the strongest Drug- that Angra Mainyu created 
against the material world, to destroy the world of 
the good principle ; and that I may deliver his two 
wives, Savanghav& and Erenav&6, who are the 
fairest of body amongst women, and the most won- 
derful creatures in the world/ 

35. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side. Thrafetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya 
clan, obtained that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 



VI. 

36. We sacrifice to Ashi Yanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful. 

37 2 . To her did Haoma offer up a sacrifice, 
Haoma, the enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, 
the lordly, with golden eyes, upon the highest 
height of the Haraiti Bareza. 

1 Cf.YtV, 3 4;IX,i 4 ;XV,2 4 . 
* For 37-39, cf. Yt. IX, 17-19. 



278 YASTS AND 



38. He begged of her a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! that I may bind the 
Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan, that I may drag 
him bound, that I may bring him bound unto king 
Husravah, that king Husravah may kill him, behind 
the jfiTa&iasta lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to 
avenge the murder of his father Sy&varshina, a 
man, and of Aghra&ratha, a semi-man/ 

39. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side. Haoma, the enlivening, the healing, the 
beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes, obtained 
that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice .... 

VII. 

40. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful. 

41 l . To her did the gallant Husravah, he who 
united the Aryan nations into one kingdom, offer up 
a sacrifice, behind the A'a&Sasta lake, the deep lake 
of salt waters. 

42. He begged of her a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O great Ashi Vanguhi! that I may kill the 
Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan, behind the -&Ta6- 
asta lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge 
the murder of my father Sy&varshna, a man, and of 
AghraSratha, a semi-man/ 

43. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side. The gallant Husravah, he who united the Aryan 
nations into one kingdom, obtained that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard 

1 For 41-43, cf. Yt. IX, 21-23. ' 



ASHI VAST. 279 



VIII. 

44. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful. 

45 l m To her did the holy Zarathustra offer up a 
sacrifice in the Airyana Va^ah, by the good river 
DSitya, with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, 
with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, 
with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations, 
and with the rightly-spoken words. 

46. He begged of her a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! that I may bring the 
good and noble Hutaosa to think according to the 
law, to speak according to the law, to do according 
to the law, that she may spread my law and make 
it known, that she may bestow beautiful praises 
upon my deeds/ 

47. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side : the holy Zarathustra obtained that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

IX. 

48. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful. 

49. To her did the tall Kavi Vtrt&spa offer up a 
sacrifice behind the waters of the river Diitya. 

50. He begged of her a boon, saying : ' Grant me 
this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! that I may put to flight 
A^ta-aurva/ f the son of Vlsp6-thaurv6-asti, the 
all-afflicting, of the brazen helmet, of the brazen 
armour, of the thick neck, behind whom seven 

1 For 45-47, cf. Yt IX, 25-27. 



28O YASTS AND 



hundred camels ---- ; that I may put to flight the 
./Tz/yaona murderer, Are/a/-aspa; that I may put to 
flight Darcinika, the worshipper of the Da6vas ; 

51. c And that I may smite TSthrava^of the bad 
law; that I may smite Spin/aunwka, the worshipper 
of the Da6vas ; and that I may bring unto the good 
law the nations of the Varedhakas and of the 
//iyaonas ; and that I may smite of the -fifoyaona 
nations their fifties and their hundreds, their hun- 
dreds and their thousands, their thousands and their 
tens of thousands, their tens of thousands and their 
myriads of myriads/ 

52. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his 
side : the tall Kavi Vlrt&spa obtained that boon. 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

x. 

33. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... 
and powerful. 

54. And the great Ashi Vanguhi said : c None of 
those libations will be accepted by me, which are 
sent to me either by a man whose seed is dried out 1 , 
or by the courtezan who produces untimely issues 2 , 
or by young boys, or by girls who have known no 
man 8 . 

1 When the Turanians and the swift-horsed Nao- 
taras 4 , clapping their hands, ran after me, 

1 See Vend. Ill, 20 [63], note. 

* By procuring abortion. 

9 She refuses the offerings of all barren beings, 

4 Cf. Yt. V, 98. The following clauses allude to some myth of 
Ashi Vanguhi connected with the conflict between the Turanians 
and the Naotaras (either Tusa and Vistauru; cf. p. 71, note 7, or 
more likely Vfct&pa himself, to whom the preceding chapter 



ASHI VAST. 28l 



55. ' I hid myself under the foot of a bull walking 
under his burden ; then young boys, and girls who 
had known no man, discovered me, even while the 
Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras, clapping 
their hands, were running after me. 

56. ' Even I hid myself under the throat of a ram 
of hundredfold energy : then again young boys, and 
girls who had known no man, discovered me, even 
while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras, 
clapping their hands, were running after me. 1 

57. The first wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi 
is her wailing about the courtezan who destroys her 
fruit : ' Stand thou not near her, sit thou not on her 
bed ! ' ' What shall I do ? Shall I go back to the 
heavens ? Shall I sink into the earth ? ' 

58. The second wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi 
is her wailing about the courtezan who brings forth 
a child conceived of a stranger and presents it to 
her husband : ' What shall I do ? Shall I go back 
to the heavens ? Shall I sink into the earth ? ' 

59. This is the third wailing of the great Ashi 
Vanguhi : This is the worst deed that men and 
tyrants do, namely, when they deprive maids, that 
have been barren for a long time, of marrying and 
bringing forth children. What shall I do ? Shall 
I go back to the heavens ? Shall I sink into the 
earth? 1 

60. Ahura Mazda answered : ' O fair and wise 
Ashi, go not bade to the heavens, sink not into the 



[ 4^-52] and the last but one clause of the Yart refer). She tried 
to flee in the way practised by Ulysses in the Cyclops' cavern; both 
parties were pursuing the animal that bore her, though they knew 
not what it bore, till children discovered her. 



282 VASTS AND SIZARS. 

i 

earth! Stay here and walk inside the fine kingly 
palace/ 

61. I shall worship thee with such a sacrifice, I 
shall worship and forward thee with such a sacrifice 
as Vfotispa offered unto thee, behind the river 
D&tya 1 . The Zoatar lifted up a loud voice, with 
baresma before him. With that sort of sacrifice 
shall I worship thee ? With that sort of sacrifice 
shall I worship and forward thee, fair and wise 
Ashi? 

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth 
being heard .... 

62. YathS ahfi vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of Ashi Vanguhi ; of the good jffisti ; of 
the good Ereth*; of the good RasSsti/; of the 
Glory and Weal, made by Mazda 8 . 

Ashem Vohfl : Holiness is the best of all good ____ 

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of 

body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 

holy Ones. 



>Cf.Sli6zah,25. 



-VAST. 283 



XVIII. A.STAD YA.ST. 

is Truthfulness: she is invoked in company with the 
Genius of Truth, RashnuRazirta(Sir6zah, 18), on the day Rashn. 
On the day especially dedicated to her, the 26th day of the month, 
she is invoked in company with Mount Ushi-darena, which accounts 
for the singular fact that her Yarf is wholly devoted to the 77z>aren6, 
and thus is hardly distinguishable from the Zamy&d Yart, as Mount 
Ushi-darena is the actual seat of the Zfrarend (Yt. I, 31, text and 
note; cf. Yt. XIX, 66). Whence comes this particular connection 
of ArjtaV with Mount Ushi-darena is uncertain, unless it alludes to 
the fact that the possession of the .foarend can be secured only 
through truthfulness : as soon as Yima ' began to find delight in 
words of falsehood and untruth/ the ^Taren6 flew away from him 
(Yt XIX, 34). 

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced ! . . . . 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confessmyself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathurfra, 
one who hates the DaSvas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto the Glory of the Aryans, made by Mazda, 
Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yathd ahft vairyd; The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathurtra, 
saying : ' I made the Aryan Glory, rich in food, rich 
in flocks, rich in wealth *, rich in Glory ; provided with 
full store of intelligence, with full store of money, to 
withstand Need, and to withstand enemies. 

1 As it gives food, flocks, and wealth to those who get possessed 
of it. 



284 YASTS AND sfRdZAHS. 

2. ' It destroys Angra Mainyu, who is all death : 
it destroys Ashma, the fiend of the wounding spear ] ; 
it destroys the yellow BushySsta 2 ; it destroys the 
contagion 3 of A6kha 4 ; it destroys the fiend of death, 
Apaosha 5 ; it destroys the non-Aryan nations. 

3. ' And I made the great Ashi Vanguhi ; she 
comes in, amid the family ; she comes in, inside the 
fine royal palace 8 . 

4. * Let Ashi, with fulness of welfare, follow the 
man who gladdens the faithful with his gifts 7 ! she 
comes in, inside his family ; she comes in, inside his 
fine royal palace. 

'With all sorts of flocks, with all victory, with all 
intelligence, with all Glory, the great Ashi Vanguhi 
puts one foot 8 inside his family ; she comes in, inside 
his fine royal palace. 

5. ' Horses multiply a thousandfold, flocks multi- 
ply a thousandfold ; and so does his virtuous off- 
spring, (as) the bright, glorious star Tirtrya moves 
on equally 9 , and so does the strong wind made by 
Mazda, and so does the Glory of the Aryas. 

6. c And they bring increase on the tops of all 
mountains, down the depths of all vales ; they bring 
increase to all the growing plants 10 , the fair, the 
golden-hued. And they bring (away) ll the contagion 



See Vendfddd, Introd. IV, 22. 

Ibid. Introd. IV, 24. Doubtful. 

? A daSva or a disease. * See Yt. VIII, 22. 

See Yt. XVII. 

Who gives alms to the poor Mazdayasnians. 

Even one foot (?), when she stays not there 'for long friend- 
ship ' (Yt. XVII, 6). 

9 So that the rain falls in due time (Yt. VIII, n). 
M Cf. Yt VIII, 29. Cf. 2. 



AflTAD YAtfT. 285 



of A6kha, they bring (away) the fiend of death, 
Apaosha. 

7. ' Hail to the bright and glorious star TLrtrya ! 
Hail to the strong wind, made by Mazda ! Hail to 
the Glory of the Aryas ! 

'Yath& ahft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 
'Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

8. c We worship the Ahuna Vairya. 

'We worship Asha-Vahirta, the fairest Amesha 
Spe#ta. 

'We worship the rightly-spoken Words 1 , fiend- 
smiting and healing. 

'We worship the healing, well-spoken Words, the 
fiend-smiting. 

1 We worship the MSthra Spewta and the Law of 
Mazda, and (piety) that delights in Haoma 2 . 

1 We worship the Glory of the Aryas. 

' Ygghg Mtam : All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda .... 

9. 'Yathi ah ft vairyfi: The will of the Lord is the law of 



4 1 bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of the Glory of the Aryas, made by 
Mazda. 

' Ashem Vohfi : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
'[Give] unto that man 3 brightness and glory, .... give him 
the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones/ 

1 Arshukhdha vad, the words conformable to the rites. 
8 Haomainem; see fitudes Iraniennes, II, 148, 
8 Who shall have sacrificed to the Aryan Glory. 



286 YAtfTS AND SIR6ZAHS. 



XIX. ZAMYAD YA6T. 



This Yart, inscribed to the Genius of the Earth, is devoted to 
a description of the mountains and the kingly Glory (kavaSm 
#aren6), which are invoked, together with the Earth, in the 
corresponding formula of the Sfrdzah ( 28) : there is no Yart 
devoted to the Earth itself. 

The mountains are simply enumerated ( 1-8). The rest of 
the Yajt is devoted to the praise of the Zfearen6, or, more pre- 
cisely, to that of those who possessed it, whose powers or feats 
are described. The list begins with Ahura Mazda ( 10), and closes 
with Saoshyaw/ ( 89) ; that is to say, it begins with the beginning 
of the world, and closes with its end It includes the Amesha- 
Spewtas ( 15), Haoshyangha ( 26), Takhma Urupa ( 28), Yima 
( 31), Mithra ( 35), Thragtaona ( 36), Keres&spa ( 38), the 
kings of the Kaianyan dynasty ( 66-72)1 Kavi Husravah ( 74), 
Zarathujtra ( 79), Vfctspa ( 84). The unsuccessful efforts of 
Fianghrasyan to take possession of it are described at length 
( S6-6 4 ). 

This Yaft \i ould serve as a short history of the Iranian monarchy, 
an abridged Shah Nmah. 



o. May Ahuia Mazda be rejoiced ' . . . . 

Ashem Vohti : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thurtra, one who hates the Dafivas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hftvani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, the 
seat of holy happiness; unto the kingly Glory, made 
by Mazda ; unto that Glory that cannot be forcibly 
seized, made by Mazda \ 

1 Sirdzah I, 28. 



ZAMYAD YAOT. 287 



Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 

Yathi ahu vairyS: The Trill of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I. 

1. The first mountain that rose up out of the 
earth, O Spitama Zarathustra ! was the Haraiti 
Barez 1 . That mountain stretches all along the 
shores of the land washed by waters 2 towards 
the east. 

The second mountain was Mount Zeredhd, out- 
side 8 Mount Manusha 4 : this mountain too stretches 
all along the shores of the land washed by waters 
towards the east. 

2. From there grew up Mount Ushi-dh0u 
Ushi-darena 6 , Mount Erezifya 6 , and Mount 
Fraorepa. 

The sixth was Mount Erezura 7 . 
The seventh was Mount Bumya 8 . 
The eighth was Mount Raoidhita 9 . 

1 The same as the Hara Berezaiti, the later Albdrz; see 
p. 58, note 3. 

2 The Caspian sea. 

8 Doubtful: pirewtarem aredhd; possibly beyond. 

* According to the Bundahir, Manusha is another name of 
Mount Zeredhd (XII, 2). It is the mountain on which Minfofhar 
was born (ibid. 10). 

5 ' The mountain that gives understanding, that preserves under- 
standing/ the later Mountdjd&Jt&r; see p. 33, note i. 

6 See p. 65, note 2. 

7 Mount Arzur 'is a summit at the gate of hell' (Bundahfr 
XII, 8; cf. Vend. IE, 7 (23) ; XK, 140). 

8 The Arzur Bum of BundamV XII, 2, which 'is in the direction 
of Arfim' (Asia Minor, Bundahij XII, 16). 

9 The Rdyijn-dmandmountain of Bundahfr XII, 27 ; its name, 



288 YAtfTS AND 



The ninth was Mount Mazisisvau. 
The tenth was Mount A^tare-danghu. 
The eleventh was Mount Erezisha. 
The twelfth was Mount Vaiti-gagsa 1 . 

3. And Mount Adarana, Mount Bayana, Mount 
I^kata Upairi-safina 2 , with the . . . . 8 snows; 
the two Hamawkuna mountains, the eight Vasna 
mountains, the eight powerful Frva#ku, the four 
Vidhvana summits; 

4. Mount Afezakha, Mount Ma6nakha, Mount 
Vakhedraka6, Mount Asaya, Mount TudhaskaS, 
Mount I,?ava6, Mount Draoslmv^u, Mount Si- 
rivau, Mount Nanghu,rm0u, Mount Kakahyu, 
Mount A^tare-Kangha 4 ; 

5. Mount Si^idava 6 , Mount Ahuna, Mount 
Ra6mana, Mount Asha-stembana, Mount Uru- 
ny6-v4idhka6, Mount Asnava^/ 6 , Mount Usha- 
oma, Mount U^ta-^arenah, Mount Sydmaka 7 , 
Mount Vaf ray au, Mount Vourusha; 



means e the mountain on ^which vegetation has grown* (ibid. tr. 
West). 

1 The BSdghgs mountain near Herfit, u-^U 
a Or Mount Irkata ("rugged"), belonging to the Upairi-sa6na 
ridge.' The Upairi-sa6na ridge or AparsSn ridge is e the moun- 
tain of Persia, and its beginning is in Seistin and its end in 
Susiana* (Bund. XII, 9). 

8 ? KSsd-tafedhra ; possibly the name of a mountain; Mount 
KLs6-tafedhra Vafra. 

4 See p. 67, note 4. 

5 *Siidv, a mountain among those which are in Kangde*' 
(Bund. XII, 2, tr. West). 

See p. 7, note 5. 

7 The Mount SiySk-dmand ('the black mountain 1 ) and Mount 
Vafar-6mand ('the snowy mountain') of Bundahij XII, 22, 
which are said to have grown out of the Apirs6n ridge and to 
extend towards China. 



ZAMYAD VAST. 289 



6. Amongst which stand Mount atara, Mount 
Adhutav0u, Mount Spitavarena, Mount Spe^td- 
dita 1 , Mount Kadrva-aspa 2 , Mount Kaoirisa 3 , 
Mount Ta6ra 4 , Mount Bard-srayana, Mount Ba- 
rana, Mount Fr4pay#u, Mount Udrya, and 
Mount Ra6va#/ fl , and all those heights to which 
men have given the name of mount, 

7. To the number of two thousand mountains, 
and two hundred and forty and four 6 , O Spitama 
Zarathurtra ! 

8. For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a 
sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto the awful 
kingly Glory. Unto the awful kingly Glory we offer 
up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, 
the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, 
the deeds, the libations, and the rightly -spoken 
words 7 . 

Y6wh6 hitSm : All those beings of whom Ahura 
Mazda 7 .... 

II. 

9. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made 
by Mazda; most conquering, highly working, that 
possesses health, wisdom, and happiness, and is 
more powerful to destroy than all other creatures ; 

1 The Spendyd mountain, near Mount RSvand (Bundahi? 
XII, 23). 

8 The K6ndrsp mountain, by the town of Tus (in Khorasan, 
Bund. XII, 24). 

3 The K6iras mountain in frftn-V^ (Bund. XII, 25). 

* Cf. Yt. XV, 7, and p. 58, note 2. 

6 See p. 8, notes i and 2. 

8 'The other mountains have grown out of Albur*, in number 
2244 mountains' (Bund. XII, 2). 

T See notes to Yt. Ill, 17 (p. 47). 
[23] U 



YASTS AND 



io. That belongs to Ahura Mazda, as (through it) 
Ahura Mazda made the creatures, many and good, 
many and fair, many and wonderful, many and pros- 
perous, many and bright ; 

it 1 . So that they may restore the world, which 
will (thenceforth) never grow old and never die, 
never decaying and never rotting, ever living and 
ever increasing, and master of its wish, when the 
dead will rise, when life and immortality will come, 
and the world will be restored at its wish ; 

12. When the creation will grow deathless, the 
prosperous creation of the Good Spirit, and the 
Dnjf shall perish, though she may rush on every 
side to kill the holy beings; she and her hundred- 
fold brood shall perish, as it is the will of the 
Lord 2 , 

13. For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

III. 

14. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda . . . . 8 

15*. That belongs to the Amesha-Spe#tas, the 
bright ones, whose looks perform their wish, tall, 
quickly coming to do, strong, lordly, who are un- 
decaying and holy ; 

1 6. Who are all seven of one thought, who are all 
seven of one speech, who are all seven of one deed ; 
whose thought is the same, whose speech is the 
same, whose deed is the same, whose father and 
commander is the same, namely, the Maker, Ahura 
Mazda. 

1 n-i2= 19-20, 23-24, 89-90. a Doubtful. 

8 As above, 9. i5-i7=Yt. XIII, 82-84. 



ZAMY&D YAST. 29! 



1 7. Who see one another's soul thinking of good 
thoughts, thinking of good words, thinking of good 
deeds, thinking of Gard-nmfina, and whose ways are 
shining as they go down to the libations ; 

1 8. Who are the makers and governors, the 
shapers and overseers, the keepers and preservers 
of these creations of Ahura Mazda. 

19 l . It is they who shall restore the world, which 
will (thenceforth) never grow old and never die, 
never decaying and never rotting, ever living and 
ever increasing, and master of its wish, when the 
dead will rise, when life and immortality will come, 
and the world will be restored at its wish ; 

20. When the creation will grow deathless, the 
prosperous creation of the Good Spirit, and the 
Drug" shall perish, though she may rush on. every 
side to kill the holy beings ; she and her hundred- 
fold brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

IV. 

21. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda .... 

22. That belongs to the gods in the heavens and 
to those in the material world, and to the blessed 
ones, born or not yet born, who are to perform the 
restoration of the world 2 . 

23 B . It is they who shall restore the world, which 
will (thenceforth) never grow old and never die, 
never decaying and never rotting, ever living and 

1 lp-20= 11-12. 

* The Saoshyawft; see p. 165, note i. 
8 2'3-24= 19-20. 
U 2 



2Q2 YASTS AND 



ever increasing, and master of its wish, when the 
dead will rise, when life and immortality will come, 
and the world will be restored at its wish ; 

24. When the creation will grow deathless, the 
prosperous creation of the Good Spirit, and the 
Dru- shall perish, though she may rush on every 
side to kill the holy beings ; she and her hundred- 
fold brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord. 
For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ---- 

V. 

23. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 



26. That clave unto Haoshyangha, the Paradhita, 
for a long time 1 , when he ruled over the seven 
Karshvares of the earth, over the DaSvas and men, 
over the YAtus and the Pairikas, over the oppressors, 
the blind, and the deaf; he who smote two-thirds of 
the Dafivas of M4zana and of the Varenya fiends 2 . 
For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice 

VI. 

27. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda 

28. That clave unto Takhma Urupa, the well- 
armed, while he ruled over the seven Karshvares of 
the earth, over the Da&vas and men, the Yatus and 
Pairikas, the oppressors, the blind, and the deaf; 

29. When he conquered all Dafivas and men, all 
the Yitus and Pairikas, and rode Angra Mainyu, 

1 For forty years, according to the Bundahu- (XXXIV, 4); for 
thirty years, according to Firdausi. 
9 See Yt. V, 22. 



ZAMYAD VAST. 293 



turned into the shape of a horse, all around the earth 
from one end to the other, for thirty years l . 
For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

VII. 

30. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda .... 

31. That clave unto the bright Yima, the good 
shepherd, for a long time 2 , while he ruled over the 
seven Karshvares of the earth, over the Dafivas and 
men, the Y&tus and Pairikas, the oppressors, the 
blind, and the deaf ; 

32. He who took from the Dafevas both riches 
and welfare, both fatness and flocks, both weal and 
Glory 8 ; 

In whose reign both aliments 4 were never failing 
for feeding creatures, flocks and men were undying, 
waters and plants were undrying ; 

33. In whose reign there was neither cold wind 
nor hot wind, neither old age nor death, nor envy 
made by the Dadvas 6 , in the times before his lie, 
before he began to have delight in words of false- 
hood and untruth. 

34. But when he began to find delight in words 
of falsehood and untruth 6 , the Glory was seen to 
flee away from him in the shape of a bird. When 
his Glory had disappeared, then the great 7 Yima 

Cf. Yt. XV, 12, and notes. 

For six hundred and sixteen years and six months (Bundahir 
XXXIV, 4). 

See Yt. V, 26, text and note. 

Food and drink. 8 Cf. Yt. XV, 16. 

He pretended to be a god (Firdausi). 

Doubtful: fraSjta. 



294 YAOTS AND stu6ZAHS. 

Khsha6ta, the good shepherd, trembled and was in 
sorrow before his foes 1 ; he was confounded, and 
laid him down on the ground. 

35. The first time 2 when the Glory departed from 
the bright Yima, the Glory went from Yima, the son 
of Vivanghaw/, in the shape of a Viraghna bird 5 . 

Then Mithra seized that Glory, Mithra, the lord 
of wide pastures, whose ear is quick to hear, who 
has a thousand senses. We sacrifice unto Mithra, 
the lord of all countries, whom Ahura Mazda has 
created the most glorious of all the gods in the 
heavens. 

36. The second time when the Glory departed 
from the bright Yima, the Glory went from Yima, 
the son of Vlvanghaw/, in the shape of a Vlraghna 
bird. 

Then Thrataona seized that Glory, he, the heir 
of the valiant Athwya dan, who was the most vic- 
torious of all victorious men next to Zarathujtra ; 

37. Who smote A#i Dahfika, the three-mouthed, 
the three-headed, the six-eyed, who had a thousand 
senses, that most powerful, fiendish Druf, that 
demon baleful to the world, the strongest Dri^* that 
Angra Mainyu created against the material world, 
to destroy the world of the good principle * 

1 Asi Dahika and his followers. 

* The Glory is described as departing three times, because it is 
threefold, according as it belongs to the king considered as a 
priest, a warrior, or a husbandman. In that threefold character 
it is identical with Adar FroM, Adar Gushasp, and JUar Burzhi 
Mihr (p. 7, notes). 

8 A raven, one of the incarnations of the Genius of Victory 
(Yt. XIV, 18-21 ; cf. ibid. 35). 

* Cf. Yt. V, 34. 



ZAMY^D VAST. 295 



38. The third time when the Glory departed from 
the bright Yima, that Glory went from Yima, the son 
of Vtvangha^/, in the shape of a Vdraghna bird. 

Then the manly-hearted Keres^spa 1 seized that 
Glory; he who was the sturdiest of the men of 
strength, next to Zarathurtra, for his manly courage. 

39. For Manly Courage clave unto him. We 
worship Manly Courage, firm of foot, unsleeping, 
quick to rise, and fully awake, that clave unto 
Keresdspa ; 

40. Who killed the snake Srvara, the horse- 
devouring, men-devouring, yellow, poisonous snake, 
over which yellow poison flowed a thumb's breadth 
thick. Upon him Keresispa was cooking his food 
in a brass vessel : at the time of noon, the fiend felt 
the heaLt, and stood upon his feet : he rushed from 
under the brass vessel and upset the boiling water : 
the manly-hearted KeresS-spa fell back affrighted 2 ; 

41. Who killed the golden-heeled Ga^darewa, 
that was rushing with open jaws, eager to destroy 
the living world of the good principle 8 ; 

Who killed the brood of Pathana, all the nine 4 ; 



1 See V, 37 (pp. 62-63, and notes); XIII, 136; XV, 27. 

8 Cf. Yasna IX, n (34-39). This tale belongs to the wide- 
spread cyclus of the island-whale (a whale whose back is mistaken 
by sailors for an island; they land upon it, cook their food there, 
and the monster, awaked by the heat, flies off and carries them 
away : see Arabian Nights, Seventy-first Night; Baba* Baihr, 5). 

8 See Yt. V, 38. 

* Known in the Minokhired (XXVII, 50) as 'the wolf Kap6<T 
(perhaps 'the blue wolf/ as Mr. West suggests), 'which they also call 
Pihan.' Those nine sons of Pathana were nine highwaymen (the 
very word Pathana seems to have that meaning): their defeat is 
told by Keres&spa in a Pahlavi RMyat as follows : ' I have slain 
the highwaymen who were so big in body that, when they were 



296 YAtfTS AND SIR6ZAHS. 

and the brood of Nivika, and the brood of Dlrta- 
yana ; 

Who killed the golden-crowned Hitispa 1 , and 
Vareshava, the son of Dna 2 , and Pitaona, attended 
by many Pairikas 3 ; 

42. Who killed Arezd-shamana, him of the manly 
courage, who was strong, well-beloved 4 , hail, energe- 
tically rushing, fully awake, never falling back 6 ; 

43. Who killed Snividhaka, him who killed with 
his nails, the stone-handed : thus did he exclaim to 
all around : ' I am an infant still, I am not yet of 
age : if I ever grow of age, I shall make the earth a 
wheel, I shall make the heavens a chariot ; 

44. ' I shall bring down the Good Spirit from the 
shining Gar6-nm&na ; I shall make the Evil Spirit 
rush up from the dreary Hell. They will carry my 

walking, people considered in this way, that "below them are the 
stars and moon, and below them moves the sun at dawn, and the 
water of the sea reaches up to their knees/' And I reached up to 
their legs, and they were smitten on the legs by me; they fell, and 
the hills on the earth were shattered by them' (West, Pahlavi 
Texts, II, 376). Keres&spa's Fravashi, accordingly, is invoked 
against thieves (Yt. XIII, 136). Perhaps the assimilation of the 
wolf Kap6tf with Prfian is merely a guess of the author of the 
Minokhired. 

1 The murderer of Keres&pa's brother, Urvakhshaya (Yt. 
XV, 28). 

2 Doubtful: dSnayana. Vfiresha is the Pahlavi name of a 
bird of prey (Bund. XIV, 30), which might induce us to identify 
Vareshava with the gigantic bird Kamak, 'which overshadowed 
the earth and kept off the rain till the rivers dried up' (West, LI. 
378), and whose destruction was one of the feats of KeresSspa, 

3 Like the Pairika KnS thaiti, who clave to KeresSspa (Vend. I, 
10 [36]). * 

4 Doubtful: frSzujtem. 

6 The rest of the sentence is obscure, and the text seems to be 
corrupt. 



ZAMYlD VAST. 297 



chariot, both the Good Spirit and the Evil One, 
unless the manly-hearted Keres&spa kill me.' 

The manly-hearted Keres&spa killed him, his life 
went away, his spirit vanished \ 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

VIII. 

45. We sacrifice unto the awful Glory, that cannot be forcibly 
seized 2 , made by Mazda .... 

46. For which the Good Spirit and the Evil One 
did struggle with one another 3 : for that Glory that 
cannot be forcibly seized 2 they flung each of them 
their darts most swift. 

The Good Spirit flung a dart, and so did Vohu- 
Mand, and Asha-Vahista and Atar, the son of Ahura 
Mazda. 

The Evil Spirit flung a dart, and so did Akem- 
Mand 4 , and A&shma of the wounding spear, and 
A*i Dahdka and Spityura, he who sawed Yima in 
twain 6 . 

1 Sndvidhaka reminds one vividly of the Titanic Otus and 
Ephialtes (Odyssea XI, 308): 

c Such were they youths 1 Had they to manhood grown, 
Almighty Jove had trembled on his throne: 
But ere the harvest of the beard began 
To bristle on the chin, and promise man, 
His shafts Apollo aim'd.' (Pope.) 

2 The sacerdotal Glory; see p. n, note 6, cf. 63. 
8 When it had departed from Yima. 

4 Bad Thought, the demoniac counterpart of Vohu-Man6 (Vend. 
Introd. IV, 34). 

B Spityura was a brother of Yima's (Bund. XXXI, 3 : c Spftur 
was he who, with Dahftk, cut up Yim,' ibid. 5, tr. West). Nothing 
more is known of him, though he appears to have played a great 
part in the original Yima legend, and to have stood to his brother 
in the same relation as Barm&yun and Katdyun to Feridun, or 



298 YASTS AND sia&ZAHS. 

47. Then forward came Atar \ the son of Ahura 
Mazda, thinking thus in his heart : * I want to seize 
that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized/ 

But A-sri Dahaka, the three-mouthed, he of the evil 
law, rushed on his back, thinking of extinguishing it : 

48. * Here give it up to me 2 , O Atar, son of 
Ahura Mazda: if thou seizest that Glory that 
cannot be forcibly seized, I shall rush upon thee, 
so that thou mayest never more blaze on the earth 
made by Ahura and protect the world of the good 
principle.' 

And Atar took back his hands, as the instinct of 
life prevailed, so much had Kz\ affrighted him. 

49. Then Asi, the three-mouthed, he of the evil 
law, rushed forward, thinking thus in his heart : ' I 
want to seize that Glory that cannot be forcibly 
seized. 1 

But Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, advanced 
behind him, speaking in these words : 

50. ' There give it up to me 2 , thou three-mouthed 
Azi Dah&ka. If thou seizest that Glory that cannot 
be forcibly seized, then I will enter thy hinder part, 
I will blaze up in thy jaws, so that thou mayest 
never more rush upon the earth made by Mazda 
and destroy the world of the good principle.' 

Then AsH took back his hands, as the instinct of 
life prevailed, so much had Atar affrighted him. 

51. That Glory swells up and goes to the sea 

Shagad to Rustam. Firdausi does not mention him, and makes 
DahSk himself saw (remshf d. 

1 Adar Frobfi (the Glory of the Priest) is meant here: 'when 
they sawed Yim, Adar Frobfc saved his Glory from the hand of 
Dahdk' (Bund. XVII, 5 ; Etudes Iraniennes, II, 70, 84). 

8 Doubtful 



ZAMYAD VAST. 299 



Vouru-Kasha. The swift-horsed Son of the Waters l 
seizes it at once : this is the wish of the Son of the 
Waters, the swift-horsed : ' I want to seize that 
Glory that cannot be forcibly seized, down to the 
bottom of the sea Vouru-Kasha, in the bottom of 
the deep rivers/ 

52. We sacrifice unto the Son of the Waters, the 
swift-horsed, the tall and shining lord, the lord of 
females ; the male god, who helps one at his appeal ; 
who made man, who shaped man 2 , a god who lives 
beneath waters, and whose ear is the quickest to 
hear when he is worshipped. 

53. 'And whosoever of you, O men/ thus said 
Ahura Mazda, 'O holy Zarathortra! shall seize 
that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized, he has the 
gifts 8 of an Athravan 4 ; whosoever shall long for 
die illumination of knowledge, he has the gifts of 
an Athravan ; whosoever shall long^ for fulness of 
knowledge, he has the gifts of an Athravan ; 

54. ' And Riches will cleave unto him, giving him 
full welfare, holding a shield before him, powerful, 
rich of cattle and garments ; and Victory will cleave 
unto him, day after day; and likewise Strength, 
that smites more than a year. Attended by that 
Victory, he will conquer the havocking hordes; 
attended by that Victory, he will conquer all those 
who hate him/ 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 



1 Apam NapaV; see p. 6, note i. 

8 An allusion to old myths on the igneous origin of life (Orrnazd 
et Ahriman, 78). 
8 Doubtful. 
* As that Glory is the one that belongs to the Athravan. 



300 YA5TS AND 



IX. 

55. We sacrifice unto the awful Glory, that cannot be forcibly 
seized, made by Mazda .... 

56. Which the Turanian ruffian Frangrasyan 
tried to seize in the sea Vouru-Kasha. He stripped 
himself naked, wishing to seize that Glory that 
belongs to the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and 
to the holy Zarathurtra x . But the Glory escaped, 
the Glory fled away, the Glory changed its seat, 
and an arm of the sea Vouru-Kasha was produced, 
namely, that lake that is called Lake Husravah 2 . 

57 s . Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan 
rushed out of the sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama 
Zarathurtra! thinking evil thoughts: c . . . .* I 
have not been able to conquer the Glory that 
belongs to the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and 
to the holy Zarathurtra. 

58. ' Then I will defile all corn and liquors 6 , as to 
greatness, goodness, and fairness/ 

'Ahura Mazda will come against thee, ever 
eager to create new creatures */ 

Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan 
rushed down into the sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama 
Zarathurtra ! 

1 See Etudes Iraniennes, II, 227 ; cf. 82. 
3 'Lake Husru is within fifty leagues (parasang) of Lake 
JST&ast* (Lake Urumiah, Bund. XXII, 8, tr. West). 

* Cf. 60, 63. 

* Itha itha yathana ahm&L 

8 Tarshua A khshudraa, translated dhnyni madhtini/fca 
(SansL tr. to AMgin Gdhambar, 12). AMsyab was charged 
with having laid Iran waste by filling up or conducting away rivers 
(Hamzah Ispahensis, p. 34 ; cf. Bund. XXI, 6). 

* This looks like an answer to Afiisyfib's threats. 



ZAMY^D VAST. 3OI 



59. A second time he stripped himself naked, 
wishing to seize that Glory that belongs to the 
Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the holy 
Zarathurtra. But the Glory escaped, the Glory fled 
away, the Glory changed its seat, and an arm of the 
sea Vouru-Kasha was produced, namely, that lake 
that is called Lake Vanghazd^u 1 . 

60 2 . Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan 
rushed out of the sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama 
Zarathurtra ! thinking evil thoughts : ' . . . . 8 I have 
not been able to conquer the Glory that belongs to 
the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the 
holy Zarathustra. 

6 1. ' Then I will defile all corn and liquors, as to 
greatness, goodness, and fairness/ 

'Ahura Mazda will come against thee, ever 
eager to create new creatures/ 

Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan 
rushed down into the sea Vouru-Kasha. 

62. A third time he stripped himself naked, 
wishing to seize the Glory that belongs to the 
Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the holy 
Zarathurtra. But the Glory escaped, the Glory fled 
away, the Glory changed its seat, and an arm was 
produced in the sea Vouru-Kasha, namely, the water 
that is called Aw#-dfinva. 

63 4 . Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan 
rushed out of the sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama 
Zarathurtra ! thinking evil thoughts : ' .... B I have 

1 The situation of that lake is not stated. a Cf. 57, 63. 
8 Itha itha yathana ahm&i avatha itha yathana ahm&i. 
Cf. S7 ,6o. 

* Itha itha yathana ahm&i avatha itha yathana ahmii dvoya itha 
yathana ahmdi. 



3O2 VASTS AND 



not been able to conquer the Glory that belongs to 
the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the 
holy Zarathustra ! * 

64. He was not able to seize the Glory that 
belongs to the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and 
to the holy Zarathu-rtra. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

X. 

63. We sacrifice unto the awful Glory that cannot be forcibly 
seized, made by Mazda .... 

66. That cleaves unto him 1 who grows up there, 
where lies Lake Kasava 2 , along with the Ha6tu- 
ma#^ 3 river; there where stands Mount Ushidhau 4 , 
surrounded by waters, that run from the mountain. 

67. It 5 runs unto him, it flows and swells unto 
him, bringing good pastures and fine horses, bringing 
plenty, full of glory ; with beauty and weal ; powerful 
and friendly, rich of pastures, prolific and golden. It 
runs unto him, it flows and swells unto him, bright 
and glorious, making the white . . . . 8 grow, smiting 
away all plagues. 

68. And there comes with him a horse's strength, 
there comes with him a camel's strength, there 

1 That is to say, to any one who .... The Kavis or Kings 
of Iran are meant : Lake Kasava was supposed to be 'the home of 
the KaySn race' (Bund. XXI, 7). The Kavis are enumerated in 
the following clauses ( 71 seq.). 

3 The present Zarah or Hamun sea in Seistan. 
9 The Helmend (^Errf/AavSpo?; cf. Vend. I, 14). 

4 The seat of the jfi&arend; see p. 33, note i, p. 287, note 5, 
and Introduction to Yt XVHI. 

B The water of the rivers in which the Glory lies, and in the 
midst of which the Kavi has been nourished. 
6 ? Varemij. 



ZAMYD YAST. 303 



ccmes with him a man's strength, there comes with 
him the kingly Glory : and there is in him, O holy 
Zarathujtra ! so much of kingly Glory as might 
extinguish at once all die non-Aryan nations. 

69. And then (through it) living creatures may 
keep away l hunger and death, living creatures (may 
keep away) cold and heat 1 . Such is the kingly 
Glory, the keeper of the Aryan nations and of the 
five kinds of animals 2 , made to help the faithful and 
the Law of the worshippers of Mazda. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

XL 

70. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda .... 

71. That clave unto Kavi Kav&ta, and unto Kavi 
Aipivdhu, and unto Kavi Usadha, and unto Kavi 
Arshan, and unto Kavi Pisina, and unto Kavi 
Byfirshan, and unto Kavi Syvarshan 3 ; 

72. So that they were all of them brave, all of 
them strong, all of them healthful, all of them 
wise, all of them happy in their wishes, all of them 
powerful kings. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

XII. 

73. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made - by 
Mazda .... 

74 *. That clave unto Kavi Husravah for the well- 
shapen Strength, for the Victory made by Ahura, 
for the crushing Ascendant; for the righteousness 
of the law, for the innocence of the law, for the 

1 Doubtful. * See p. 182, note 2. 8 See Yt XIII, 132. 
* H-76=Yt. XIII, 133-136- 



3O4 YASTS AND sfR6ZAHS. 

unconquerable power of the law ; for the extermina- 
tion of the enemies at one stroke ; 

75. And for the vigour of health, for the Glory 
made by Mazda, for the health of the body, and for 
a good, virtuous offspring, wise, chief in assemblies, 
bright, and clear-eyed, that frees [their father] from 
the pangs [of hell], of good intellect ; and for that 
part in the blessed world that falls to wisdom and 
to those who do not follow impiety ; 

76. And for a dominion full of splendour, for a 
long, long life, and for all boons and remedies ; 

77. So that king Husravah [had the lead] all 
along the long race, and he could not pass through 
the forest, he 1 , the murderer, who was fiercely striving 
against him on horseback ; the lord Kavi Husravah 
prevailed over all; he put in bonds Frangrasyan 
and Keresavazda 2 , to avenge the murder of his 
father Sy&varshina, a man, and of Aghra&ratha, a 
semi-man 3 . 

For its brightness and glory. I will offer it a sacrifice 

XIII. 

78. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 



79. That clave unto the holy Zarathustra, so that 
he thought according to the Law, spake according 

1 AurvasSra; see Yt XV, 32; cf. Yt. V, 50 (where the words 
all along the long race have been omitted in the translation). 
The words have the lead here have been supplied from Yt. V, 
go : the text here has two words, tSm keresem, of which both 
the reading and the meaning are doubtful. 

2 Keresavazda, the Karstvaz of Firdausi, the brother of 
AMsyab and the murderer of SyivarshSna : he was put to death 
by Husravah in company with his brother (Etudes Iraniennes, 
II, 227). 

8 See p. 114, note 7. 



ZAMYAD VAST. 305 



to the Law, and did according to the Law ; so that 
he was the holiest in holiness in all the living world, 
the best-ruling in exercising rule, the brightest in 
brightness, the most glorious in glory, the most 
victorious in victory. 

80. At his sight the Da6vas rushed away ; at his 
sight the (demoniac) malices were extinguished ; at 
his sight the ainis l drew back their ways from the 
mortals and, lamenting 2 and wailing, laid violent 
hands on the Daevas. 

81. And that one prayer, the Ahuna Vairya, which 
the holy Zarathurtra sang and repeated four times, 
with a song that waxed louder and louder, drove 
back all the DaSvas beneath the earth, and took off 
from them sacrifice and prayer 3 . 

82. It was it, the Glory of Zarathustra, that the 
Turanian ruffian Frangrasyan tried to seize to rule 
over all the Karshvares; round about the seven 
Karshvares did that ruffian Frangrasyan rush, trying 
to seize the Glory of Zaratlmrtra *. But that Glory 
escaped to hidden inlets of the sea 5 ; and there those 
two 6 made my will 7 roll on 8 ; they entered my will, 
as it was my wish, Ahura Mazda's, and as it was the 
wish of the Law of Mazda. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 



See Vend. XX, 10. 

Doubtful. Perhaps: and lamenting and wailing the 
Da6vas left off injuring. 
Cf. Yt. XIII, 90. 

See above, 56-64. 8 Cf. g6, 59, 62. 

Zajrathujtai and Vfrt&spa (?); cf. 84-87. 
7 Meaning my law. 8 Cf. Yt. XIII, 89, note 5. 



3O6 YASTS AND 



XIV. 

83. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda .... 

84. That clave unto king Vlrtispa, so that he 
thought according to the Law, spake according to 
the Law, and did according to the Law ; so that he 
professed that Law, destroying his foes and causing 
the DaSvas to retire. 

85 l . Who, driving the Dng* before him 2 , sought 
wide room for the holy religion; who, driving the 
Drug before him, made wide room for the holy 
religion ; who made himself the arm and support of 
this law of Ahura, of this law of ZarathuJtra ; 

86. Who took her, standing bound, from the hands 
of the Hunus, and established her to sit in the middle 
[of the world], high ruling, never falling back, holy, 
nourished with plenty of cattle and pastures, blessed 
with plenty of cattle and pastures. 

87. The valiant king Vlstispa conquered all 
enemies, TSthrava^ of the evil law, Peshana, the 
worshipper of the Da6vas, and the fiendish wicked 
Arega/-aspa and the other wicked ./Tzqraonas 8 . 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

xv. 

88. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda .... 

89*. That will cleave unto the victorious Sao- 
and his helpers 6 , when he shall restore the 

1 85-86=Yt. XIII, 99-100. 

* Or ' with his spear pushed forwards ; ' see p. 205, note i. 

* Cf. Yt. V, 109. * 8 9 - 9 o= 11-12. 

* Seep. 117, note 6. 



ZAMYAD VAST. 307 



world, which will (thenceforth) never grow old and 
never die, never decaying and never rotting, ever 
living and ever increasing, and master of its wish, 
when the dead will rise, when life and immortality 
will come, and the world will be restored at its 
wish ; 

90. When the creation will grow deathless, the 
prosperous creation of the Good Spirit, and the 
Dri^- shall perish, though she may rush on every 
side to kill the holy beings ; she and her hundred- 
fold brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 

XVI. 

91. We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by 
Mazda .... 

92. When Astva/*ereta l shall rise up from Lake 
KSsava 2 , a friend of Ahura Mazda, a son of Vlspa- 
taurvairi *, knowing the victorious knowledge. 

It was that Glory that Thrafitaona bore with him 
when Azi Dahka was killed * ; 

93. That Frangrasyan, the Turanian, bore when 
Dnrau 6 was killed, when the Bull was killed 6 ; 

That king Husravah bore when Frangrasyan, the 
Turanian, was killed 7 ; 

1 Saoshyaa/; cf. Yt. XIII, 129. 

8 Cf. 66 and Vend. XIX, 5 (18). 

1 See Yt. XIII, 142. 4 Cf. 36. 8 Or 'the demon/ 

This line is in contradiction with what we know of the Frangra- 
syan legend, unless the text is corrupt and the name of Frangrasyan 
has been introduced here by mistake (for Keres&spa?). Yet it 
may allude to brighter sides, unknown to us, of the Turanian hero : 
the Bull (gauj) may be his brother Aghrafiratha, the Bull-man 
(Gdpatish&h) ; see p. 114, note 7. 

See 77- 

X 2 



308 YASTS AND 



That king Vtrt&spa bore, when he victoriously 
maintained Holiness against the host of the fiends 
and took off the Drug- from the world of the good 
principle \ 

94. He 2 , with the eye of intelligence 8 , shall look 
down upon all the creatures of the Pa&is 4 , her of 
the evil seed : he shall look upon the whole living 
world with the eye of plenty, and his look shall 
deliver to immortality the whole of the living 
creatures. 

95. And there shall his friends 6 come forward, 
the friends of Astva/-ereta, who are fiend-smiting, 
well-thinking, well-speaking, well-doing, following the 
good law, and whose tongues have never uttered 
a word of falsehood. 

Before them shall A&shma of the wounding spear, 
who has no Glory, bow and flee ; he shall smite the 
most wicked Dm/; her of the evil seed, born of 
darkness. 

96. Akem-Mand 8 smites, but Vohu-Man6 shall 
smite him ; the Word of falsehood smites, but the 
Word of truth shall smite it. Haurvati* and Ame- 
reti^ 7 shall smite both hunger and thirst: Haur- 
vat&? and Amereti^ shall smite the evil hunger and 
the evil thirst The evil-doing Angra Mainyu bows 
and flees, becoming powerless. 

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice .... 
97. Yatha* ahft vairyfi : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

1 Cf. 84. Saoshyaw/. Cf. Yt I, 28. 

* A name of the Dn#. 8 See p. 220, note i. 

6 See p. 297, note 4. 

7 The Genii of the waters and of the plants (cf. Vend. Introd. 
IV, 34> 



ZAMYAD VAST. 309 



I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of Mount Ushi-darena, made by 
Mazda, the seat of holy happiness ; of the kingly 
Glory, made by Mazda ; of the Glory that cannot 
be forcibly seized, made by Mazda 1 . 

As hem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 
[Give] unto that man 9 brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 

1 Cf. o. a Who sacrifices to the kingly Gloiy. 



310 YASTS AND 



XX. VANA-/VT VAST. 

This Yart ought to follow immediately after the Ttr Yart, as it 
is derived from the same Sf rdzah formula ; the one in which Tir- 
trya is invoked along with Vanaw/ and Hapt6iriga (Sfrdzah, 13). 
It is a mere supplement to that Yart. On Vanaw/, see p. 97, note 6. 

o. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I . . . . 

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zara- 
thutfra, one who hates the Dafivas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hivani], 
the holy and master of holiness .... 

Unto the star Vanaw^, made by Mazda, 
Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, 
and glorification. 
Yatha* ahft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 



i. We sacrifice unto the star Vanatf, made by 
Mazda, the holy and master of holiness. 

I will sacrifice unto Vana#, strong, invoked by 
his own name 1 , healing, in order to withstand the 
accursed and most foul Khrafstras 2 of the most 
abominable Angra Mainyu. 

2. Yathft ahfi vairyd : The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of the star Vana^, made by Mazda. 

Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

[Give] unto that man 3 brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 

1 Seep. 13, note 2. 

2 The reptiles and other Ahrimanian creatures (Vend! dftd, Introd. 
V, n) which are destroyed by the rain (Bund. VII, 7). 

8 Who sacrifices to Vana/. 



VAST FRAGMENT. 311 



XXI AND XXII. YAST FRAGMENTS. 

These two Yarts or Yart fragments are known among the Parsis 
as the Hadhdkht Nask, though their context does not correspond 
to any part of the descnption of that Nask as given in the Din- 
kart (West, Pahlavi Texts, I, 224, note 8). A Pahlavi translation 
of these Yajts has been edited by Haug and West (The Book of 
Ard VMf, p. 269 seq.). 

XXI. YAST FRAGMENT. 

Yart XXI is a eulogy of the Ash em Vohft prayer, the value 
of which rises higher and higher, according as the circumstances 
under which it is being recited are of greater importance. 



1. Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the mate- 
rial world, thou Holy One ! 

' What is the only word in which is contained the 
glorification of all good things, of all the things that 
are the offspring of the good principle ? ' 

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the praise of 
Holiness \ O Spitama Zarathurtra ! 

3. ' He who recites the praise of Holiness \ in the 
fulness of faith and with a devoted heart, praises 
me, Ahura Mazda ; he praises the waters, he praises 
the earth, he praises the cattle, he praises the plants, 
he praises all good things made by Mazda, all the 
things that are the offspring of the good principle. 

4. 'For the reciting of that word of truth, O 
Zarathurtra ! the pronouncing of that formula, the 
Ahuna Vairya, increases strength and victory in 
one's soul and piety. 

1 Asha: the Ashem Vohft. 



312 YASTS AND 



5. ' For that only recital of the praise of Holiness 
is worth a hundred khshnaothras of the beings 
of Holiness \ when delivered while going to sleep, a 
thousand when delivered after eating, ten thousand 
when delivered during cohabitation, or any number 
when delivered in departing this life. 1 

6. 'What is the one recital of the praise of 
Holiness that is worth ten others in greatness, good- 
ness, and fairness ? ' 

7. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O 
holy Zarathurtra ! that a man delivers when eating 
the gifts of Haurvatfi/ and AmeretA/ 2 , at the same 
time professing good thoughts, good words, and 
good deeds, and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, 
and evil deeds/ 

8. 'What is the one recital of the praise of 
Holiness that is worth a hundred others in great- 
ness, goodness, and fairness ? ' 

9. Ahura Mazda answered: ' It is that one, O 
holy Zarathustra ! that a man delivers while drinking 
of the Haoma strained for the sacrifice, at the same 
time professing good thoughts, good words, and 
good deeds, and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, 
and evil deeds/ 

10. 'What is the one recital of the praise of 
Holiness that is worth a thousand others in great- 
ness, goodness, and fairness ? ' 

11. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O 
holy Zarathu^tra ! that a man delivers when starting 

1 A hundred times the formula: 'Be propitiation (khshnao- 
thra) unto N ---- , the holy and master of holiness ' (cf. p. i, note 2). 

2 Eating or drinking (see Vendidad, Introd. IV, 33). 



VAST FRAGMENT. 313 



up from his bed or going to sleep again, at the same 
time professing good thoughts, good words, and 
good deeds, and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, 
and evil deeds/ 

12. 'What is the one recital of the praise of 
Holiness that is worth ten thousand others in great- 
ness, goodness, and fairness ? ' 

13. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O 
holy Zarathustra ! that a man delivers when waking 
up and rising from sleep, at the same time professing 
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and 
rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds. 1 

14. 'What is the one recital of the praise of 
Holiness that is worth this Karshvare of ours, 
Zfoaniratha 1 , with its cattle and its chariots, without 
its men, in greatness, goodness, and fairness ? ' 

15. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O 
holy Zarathustra ! that a man delivers in the last 
moments of his life, at the same time professing 
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and 
rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.' 

1 6. 'What is the one recital of the praise of 
Holiness that is worth all that is between the earth 
and the heavens, and this earth, and that luminous 
space, and all the good things made by Mazda, that 
are the offspring of the good principle in greatness, 
goodness, and fairness ? ' 

17. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O 
holy Zarathustra ! that a man delivers to renounce 
evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds V 

1 See p. 123, note g. 

* In a conversion, or in the recital of the penitential prayers. 



314 YASTS AND 



YAvST XXII. 

This Yart is a description of the fate that attends the soul of the 
righteous ( 1-18) and the soul of the wicked ( 19-3?) a^* 
death. They spend the first three nights (the sadis or sidds ; cf. 
Commentaire du Vended, XIII, 55) amongst the highest enjoy- 
ments or pains ; they are then met by their own conscience in the 
shape of a beautiful heavenly maiden (or a fiendish old woman 1 ), 
and are brought in four steps up to heaven or down to hell, through 
the three paradises of Good-Thought, Good- Word, and Good- 
Deed, or the three hells of Evil-Thought, Evil- Word, and Evil- 
Deed : there they are praised and glorified by Ahura, or rebuked 
and insulted by Angra Mainyu, and fed with ambrosia or poison. 

Similar developments are to be found in Yart XXIV, 53-65 ; 
Ard Vfrf XVII ; Minokhired II, 123-194. 



I. 

1. Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda: *O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material 
world, thou Holy One! 

' When one of the faithful departs this life, where 
does his soul abide on that night ? ' 
Ahura Mazda answered : 

2. 'It takes its seat near the head, singing the 
U Jtavaiti G&tha 2 and proclaiming happiness : 
" Happy is he, happy the man, whoever he be, to 
whom Ahura Mazda gives the full accomplishment 
of his wishes ! " On that night his soul tastes 8 as 
much of pleasure as the whole of the living world 
can taste/ 

1 See p. 319, note i. 

a The name of the second Gdtha, which begins with the word 
u s t a : the words in the text, c Happy the man ....,' are its opening 
line (Ysuma XLH, i). 

8 Literally, sees, perceives. 



VAST XXII. 315 



3. 'On the second night where does his soul 
abide?' 

4. Ahura Mazda answered : ' It takes its seat near 
the head, singing the U^tavaiti Gdtha and pro- 
claiming happiness : " Happy is he, happy the man, 
whoever he be, to whom Ahura Mazda gives the full 
accomplishment of his wishes ! " On that night his 
soul tastes as much of pleasure as the whole of the 
living world can taste/ 

5. 'On the third night where does his soul 
abide?' 

6. Ahura Mazda answered : ' It takes its seat 
near the head, singing the Ustavaiti GcLtha and 
proclaiming happiness : " Happy is he, happy the 
man, whoever he be, to whom Ahura Mazda gives 
the full accomplishment of his wishes ! " On that 
night his soul tastes as much of pleasure as the 
whole of the living world can taste.' 

7. At the end l of the third night, when the dawn 
appears, it seems to the soul of the faithful one as 
if it were brought amidst plants and scents: it 
seems as if a wind were blowing from the region of 
the south, from the regions of the south, a sweet- 
scented wind, sweeter-scented than any other wind 
in the world. 

8. And it seems to the soul of the faithful one as 
if he were inhaling that wind with the nostrils, and he 
thinks : ' Whence does that wind blow, the sweetest- 
scented wind I ever inhaled with my nostrils ? ' 

9. And it seems to him as if his own conscience 
were advancing to him in that wind, in the shape 
of a maiden fair, bright, white-armed, strong, tall- 

1 Thraojta: in Pahlavi iQis man. 



316 YA5TS AND 



formed, high-standing, thick-breasted, beautiful of 
body, noble, of a glorious seed 1 , of the size of a 
maid in her fifteenth year, as fair as the fairest 
things in the world. 

10. And the soul of the faithful one addressed 
her, asking: 'What maid art thou, who art the 
fairest maid I have ever seen ? ' 

11. And she, being his own conscience, answers 
him : ' O thou youth of good thoughts, good words, 
and good deeds, of good religion, I am thy own 
conscience ! 

c Everybody did love thee for that greatness, good- 
ness, fairness, sweet-scentedness, victorious strength 
and freedom from sorrow, in which thou dost 
appear to me; 

12. 'And so thou, O youth of good thoughts, 
good words, and good deeds, of good religion ! didst 
love me for that greatness, goodness, fairness, sweet- 
scentedness, victorious strength, and freedom from 
sorrow, in which I appear to thee. 

13. 'When thou wouldst see a man making deri- 
sion 3 and deeds of idolatry, or rejecting 3 (the poor) 
and shutting his door 4 , then thou wouldst sit singing 
the G&thas and worshipping the good waters and 
Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, and rejoicing 6 the 
faithful that would come from near or from afar. 



1 ' That is to say, from the gods ' (Pahl. Comm.). 

* Of holy things. 

8 Doubt&L The Pahkvi commentary has the following gloss : 
< He would not give his friends what they begged for. 1 

4 To the poor: Urvard- stray a: urvar bab&& kart (Pahl. 
Comm.) : iighshin babft bari asrftnast (star, to tie, as in frasta- 
retem baresma). Cf. Yt. XXIV, 37, $9. 

* With alms to the poor Mazdayasnians(ash6-dd). 



VAST XXII. 317 



14. 'I was lovely and thou madest me still 
lovelier ; I was fair and thou madest me still fairer ; 
I was desirable and thou madest me still more 
desirable ; I was sitting in a forward place and thou 
madest me sit in the foremost place, through this 
good thought, through this good speech, through 
this good deed of thine; and so henceforth men 
worship me for my having long sacrificed unto and 
conversed with Ahura Mazda. 

15. 'The first step that the soul of the faithful 
man made, placed him in the Good-Thought 1 
Paradise; 

'The second step that the soul of the faithful 
man made, placed him in the Good-Word 2 
Paradise ; 

1 The third step that the soul of the faithful man 
made, placed him in the Good-Deed 8 Paradise; 

' The fourth step that the soul of the faithful man 
made, placed him in the Endless Lights V 

1 6. Then one of the faithful, who had departed 
before him, asked him, saying : ' How didst thou 
depart this life, thou holy man? How didst thou 
come, thou holy man ! from the abodes full of cattle 
and full of the wishes and enjoyments of love? 
From the material world into the world of the spirit ? 
From the decaying world into the undecaying one ? 
How long did thy felicity last ? ' 

17. And Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ask him not 
what thou askest him, who has just gone the dreary 



1 The so-called Hftmat Paradise (cf. Yt, III, 3). 

The so-called Hftkht Paradise. 

3 The so-called Hvarsht Paradise. 

* The seat of the Gardthmfin. 



318 YASTS AND siR6ZAHS. 

way, full of fear and distress, where the body and the 
soul part from one another. 

1 8. ' [Let him eat] of the food brought to him, of 
the oil of Zaremaya 1 : this is the food for the youth 
of good thoughts, of good words, of good deeds, of 
good religion, after he has departed this life ; this is 
the food for the holy woman, rich in good thoughts, 
good words, and good deeds, well-principled and 
obedient to her husband, after she has departed 
this life/ 

II. 

19. Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda: C O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material 
world, thou Holy One ! 

c When one of the wicked perishes, where does his 
soul abide on that night ? ' 

20. Ahura Mazda answered : ' It rushes and sits 
near the skull, singing the Kima 3 Gdtha, O holy 
Zarathurtra ! 

1 " To what land shall I turn, O Ahura Mazda ? 
To whom shall I go with praying ? " 

c On that night his soul tastes as much of suffering 
as the whole of the living world can taste. 1 

21. 'On the second night, where does his soul 
abide?' 

22. Ahura Mazda answered : c It rushes and sits 
near the skull, singing the Kima Gdtha, O holy 

1 Zaremaya is the spring: the word translated oil (raoghna, 
Persian ^) might perhaps be belter translated 'butter; 1 the 
milk made in the middle of spring was said to be the best (Vis- 
p&ad 1, 2 ; Pahl. Comm. ; cf. D&hstan XXXI, 14). 

8 The Gdtha of lamenting, beginning with the word KSm (KSm 
nem zSm : ' To what land shall I turn ? ') ; Yasna XLVI (XLV). 



VAST XXII. 319 



Zarathurtra ! " To what land shall I turn, O Ahura 
Mazda ? To whom shall I go with praying ? >f 

* On that night his soul tastes as much of suffering 
as the whole of the living world can taste/ 

23. 'On the third night, where does his soul 
abide?' 

24. Ahura Mazda answered : * It rushes and sits 
near the skull, singing the Kima Gtha, O holy 
Zarathustra I " To what land shall I turn, O Ahura 
Mazda ? To whom shall I go with praying ? " 

' On that night his soul tastes as much of suffering 
as the whole of the living world can taste. 7 

25. At the end of the third night, O holy Zara- 
thurtra ! when the dawn appears, it seems to the 
soul of the faithless one as if it were brought amidst 
snow and stench, and as if a wind were blowing 
from the region of the north, from the regions of 
the north, a foul-scented wind, the foulest-scented 
of all the winds in the world. 

26-32. And it seems to the soul of the wicked man 
as if he were inhaling that wind with the nostrils, and 
he thinks : ' Whence does that wind blow, the foulest- 
scented wind that I ever inhaled with my nostrils 1 ? ' 

1 A development similar to that in 9-14 is to be supplied 
here : in the Arda* Vtrf and the Minokhired the soul of the wicked 
is met by a horrid old woman, who is his own conscience: 'And 
in that wind he saw his own religion and deeds, as a profligate 
woman, naked^ decayed, gaping, bandy-legged, lean-hipped, and 
unlimitedly spotted, so that spot was joined to spot, like the most 
hideous noxious creatures (khrafstar), most filthy and most 
stinking '(cf. 9). 

Then that wicked soul spoke thus : ' Who art thou ? than whom 
I never saw any one of the creatures of Aftharmazd and Akhannan 
uglier, or filthier or more stinking' (cf. 10). 

To him she spoke thus : 'I am thy bad actions, youth of 
evil thoughts, of evil words, of evil deeds, of evil religion ! It 



320 YASTS AND sfR&ZAHS. 

33. The first step that the soul of the wicked 
man made laid him in the Evil-Thought Hell ; 

The second step that the soul of the wicked man 
made laid him in the Evil-Word Hell ; 

The third step that the soul of the wicked man 
made laid him in the Evil-Deed Hell ; 

The fourth step that the soul of the wicked man 
made laid him in the Endless Darkness. 

34. Then one of the wicked who departed before 
him addressed him, saying : ' How didst thou perish, 

wicked man ? How didst thou come, O fiend ! 
from the abodes full of cattle and full of the wishes 
and enjoyments of love ? From the material world 
into the world of the Spirit ? From the decaying 

is on account of thy will and actions that I am hideous and vile, 
iniquitous and diseased, rotten and foul-smelling, unfortunate and 
distressed, as appears to thee (cf. 11-12). 

' When thou sawest any one who performed the Yazishn and 
Dr6n ceremonies, and praise and prayer and the service of God, 
and preserved and protected water and fire, cattle and trees, and 
other good creations, thou practisedst the will of Akharman and 
the demons, and improper actions. And when thou sawest one 
who provided hospitable reception, and gave something deservedly 
in gifts and charity, for the advantage of the good and worthy 
who came from far, and who were from near, thou wast avaricious, 
and shuttedst up thy door (cf. 13). 

'And though I have been unholy (that is, I have been considered 
bad), I am made more unholy through thee ; and though I have 
been frightful, I am made more frightful through thee; though 

1 have been tremulous, I am made more tremulous through thee ; 
though I am settled in the northern region of the demons, I am 
settled further north through thee; through these evil thoughts, 
through these evil words, and through these evil deeds, which thou 
practisedst. They curse me, a long time, in the long execration 
and evil communion of the Evil Spirit (cf. 14). 

'Afterwards that soul of the wicked advanced the first footstep 
on Dfish-htimat (the place of evil thoughts), &c.' (The Book 
of Ardi Vtiif, XVII, 12-27, as translated by Haug). 



YAOT XXII. 321 



world into the undecaying one ? How long did thy 
suffering last ? ' 

35. Angra Mainyu, the lying one, said: 'Ask 
him not what thou askest him, who has just gone 
the dreary way, full of fear and distress, where the 
body and the soul part from one another. 

36. ' Let him eat of the food brought unto him, 
of poison and poisonous stench l : this is the food, 
after he has perished, for the youth of evil thoughts, 
evil words, evil deeds, evil religion after he has 
perished ; this is the food for the fiendish woman, 
rich in evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds, 
evil religion, ill-principled, and disobedient to her 
husband. 

37 2 . ' We worship the Fravashi of the holy man, 
whose name is Asm6-Az/anva/ s ; then I will worship 
the Fravashis of the other holy Ones who were 
strong of faith *. 

38 2 . ' We worship the memory of Ahura Mazda, 
to keep the Holy Word. 

1 We worship the understanding of Ahura Mazda, 
to study the Holy Word. 

'We worship the tongue of Ahura Masda, to 
speak forth the Holy Word. 

'We worship the mountain that gives under* 
standing, that preserves understanding ; [we worship 



1 Cf. Yasna XXXI, 20 : 'He who would deceive the holy One, to 
him afterwards (will be) a long weeping in the dark place, bad 
food and words of insult. O wicked ! this is the place down which 
your own conscience will bring you through your own deeds. 9 

2 37^3 9 39-4> 41-42 are separate fragments. 

8 One of the first disciples of Zoroaster; cf. Yt. XIII, 96. 
* Cf. p. 33, note 2. 



322 VASTS AND siR6ZAHS. 

it] by day and by night, with offerings of libations 
well-accepted \ 

39 2 . ' O Maker 1 how do the souls of the dead, the 
Fravashis of the holy Ones, manifest 8 themselves 4 ? 1 

40. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They manifest 
themselves from goodness of spirit and excellence 
of mind V 

41 6 . Then towards the dawning of the dawn 7 , that 
bird Parddar* 8 , that bird Karet6-dSsu hears the 
voice of the Fire. 



8 A Pahlavi translation of the following two fragments is found in 
MS. 33, Pans, Supplement Persan (edited in JJtudes Iraniennes, II). 

8 ^"ithra (Paris MS p. 255). 

* 'How do they manifest their assistance?' (Pahl. tr. ibid.) ; that 
is to say, when do they assist their relations and countrymen? (see 
Yt. XIII, 49 seq.) 

5 When men are instinct with good spirit and good thought. 

9 The Pahlavi translation of this fragment has here 14-16 of 
the Atash Nyfiyw, then 18-19 of Vendldad XVIII. Therefore 
the whole passage is to be restored as follows : 

Atar looks at the hands of all those who pass by : * What does 
the friend bring to his friend ? ' (Atash N. 14.) 

And if that passer-by brings him wood holily brought, or bundles 
of baresma holily tied up . . . . , then Atar .... will bless him 
thus: 

May herds of oxen grow for thee .... (Atash N. 15-16). 

In the first part of the night, Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, calls 
the master of the house for help, saying: 

'Upl arise, thou master of the house . . . .' (Vend. XVIII, 
18-19). 

' Then towards the dawning of the dawn . . . . ' (see the text). 

7 Cf. Vend. XVffl, 23. 

8 'He who has knowledge made/ or 'He who has the know- 
ledge of what is made' (kartak dftnishn); his other name Pard- 
darc is 'He who foresees/ 

9 Here again a large passage is omitted: it can only partly be 



YA-ST XXII. 323 



42. Here the fiendish BftshySsta, the long-handed, 
rushes from the region of the north, from the 
regions of the north, speaking thus, lying thus: 
* Sleep on, O men ! Sleep on, O sinners ! Sleep 
on and live in sin/ 



supplied from the Pahlavi translation; the words in brackets refer 
to Zend texts lost to us : 

'Then he flaps his wings and lifts up his voice, saying: " Arise, 

O men I [and also women, grown-up people, and children, &c 

Put on well your girdle and shirt, wash your hands, put your 
girdle around your body, go and give food to the cattle and recite 
aloud the five holy G&has of Spitama Zarathiutra ."] 

1 Here the fiendish BftshySsta . . . .' (see the text). Then the 
Pahlavi translation has: 'Never care for the three excellent 
things, good thoughts, good words, good deeds' (cf. Vend. 
XVIII, 25). 



v a 



324 YASTS AND 



XXIII-XXIV. AFRlN PAIGHAMBAR ZAR- 
AND VtoASP YAST. 



God taught the Zendivasta to Zartusht a sublime work .... 
God said to Zartusht, "Go and before Sh4h Gushtdsp read this 
book, that he may come into the faith .... keep all my counsel 
and repeat it word by word to Shh Gushtdsp V ' 

Zartusht, in obedience to God, went to the court of Gushtdsp: 'He 
came forward and called down a blessing on the ShdhV Then he 
read to him the Zanddvasta and said : e Learn its statutes and walk 
therein. If your desire is towards its laws, your abode shall be in 
the paradise of heaven. But if you turn away from its command- 
ments, you shall bring down your crowned head to the dust. Your 
God will be displeased with you, and will overthrow your pros- 
perous condition. At the last you shall descend into hell, if you 
hear not the counsel of the Almighty*.' 

These lines of the Zartusht-Namah are a summary of the following 
two YaJts. The first, entitled ' The blessing of the prophet Zartfl rt/ 
contains the words of blessing addressed by Zarathmtra when 
appearing before the king. These words seem to have followed 
a similar blessing pronounced by G&m&spa *, the prime minister of 



Yart XXIV contains the exhortations of the prophet to the 
long to follow and closely adhere to the Law of Mazda. It is a 
counterpart to the XlXth Fargard of the Vendtdftd, as Zarathurtra 
plays here the same part to Virtspa as Ahura does there to Zara- 
ttowtra. It is, therefore, a summary of the Law, of the duties it 

1 The Zartusht-Namah, translated by E. B. Eastwick, in Wilson's 
Parsi Religion, p. 495. 

* Ibid. p. 499- 8 Ibid, p, 501. 

* See Yt XXIII, 2 ; whether AnquetiTs statement to that effect 
(Zend-Avesta II, 623) rests on independent tradition or only on the 
text of our Yart is not dear. 

9 See above, p. 70, note t. 



PAIGHAMBAR ZARTfisT. 325 



enforces and of the rewards it promises. This accounts for the 
strange disconnection apparent in it, which makes it a crux: 
interpretum, as, besides the very corrupt state of the text, the 
chief difficulty of this Yart arises from the fact that many passages 
in it are incomplete quotations from the Vendfdftd, or allusions 
to statements therein 1 , which, when supplied, help a good deal to 
relieve this Yart from its apparent state of utter incoherence. 

For this translation I was able to avail myself of a Pahlavi trans- 
lation, of which a copy was kindly lent to me by Mr. West 
That translation is apparently of late date and often manifestly 
wrong; yet it was very useful to me in several passages, besides its 
giving a Zend text generally more correct and more correctly 
divided than the text in Westergaard's edition *. 

Yart XXIII was originally no independent Yart, being nothing 
more than the beginning of Yaj t XXIV, detached from it, with 
some slight alterations and inversions. 



XXIII. AFRlN PAIGHAMBAR ZARTtOT. 

1. 'I am a pious man, who speaks words of 
blessing. 1 

c Thou appearest unto me full of Glory/ 
And Zarathiwtra spake unto king Vlrt&spa, say- 
ing : 'I bless thee, O man ! O lord of the country ! 
with the living of a good life, of an exalted life, of 
a long life. May thy men live long! May thy 
women live long ! May sons be born unto thee of 
thy own body ! 

2. 'Mayest thou have a son like G&mispa, and 
may he bless thee as (Gimlspa blessed) VttfAspa 
(the lord) of the country 8 ! 

1 For instance, 28, 30, 31, 39, &c. 

2 The various readings in Mr. West's manuscript are indicated 
by the letter W. in the notes. 

8 See the introduction to this Yart and Yt. XXIV, 3, text and note. 



326 YASTS AND 



' Mayest thou be most beneficent, like Mazda ! 
1 Mayest thou be fiend-smiting, like Thra&taona 1 1 

* Mayest thou be strong, like Gmspa. * I 
'Mayest thou be well-armed, like Takhma- 

Urupa 8 ! 

3. * Mayest thou be glorious, like Yima Khsha6ta, 
the good shepherd! 

6 Mayest thou be instructed with a thousand 
senses, like Azi Dahika, of the evil law 4 ! 

'Mayest thou be awful and most strong, like 
Keres&spa 6 ! 

' Mayest thou be a wise chief of assemblies, like 
Urv&khshaya 6 ! 

' Mayest thou be beautiful of body and without 
fault, like Syivarshina 7 ! 

4. ' Mayest thou be rich in catde, like an Athwya- 
nide 8 ! 

'Mayest thou be rich in horses, like Pouror-aspa 9 ! 

' Mayest thou be holy, like Zarathiwtra Spitama ! 

1 Mayest thou be able to reach the Rangha, whose 
shores lie afar, as Vafra Navdza was 10 ! 

' Mayest thou be beloved by the gods and reve- 
renced by men u ! 

1 Cf. Yt. V, 33 . Cf. Yt V, 68* 

Cf.Yt.XV, n. 

* Cf.Yt.V, 29. Cf.Yt.V, 37. 

6 See Yt. XV, 28. ^ 7 See p. 64, note r. 

8 One belonging to the Athwya family, of which Thra&aona was 
a member. All of them bore names that show them to have 
been rich in cattle: Pftr-tdra, S6k-t6r4, B6r-t6r, &c. ( c one with 
abundant oxen, with useful oxen, with the brown ox, &c./ Bundahir, 
tr. West, XXXI, 7, note 8). 

9 Pounu-aspa was the father of Zarathurtra. His name means, 
( He who possesses many horses,' TroAv-wnros. 

10 Cf. Yt. V, 61. n C Yt. XXIV, 4. 



AFR!N PAIGHAMBAR ZARTflsr. 327 

5. 'May ten sons be born of you 1 ! In three of 
them mayest thou be an Athravan! In three of 
them mayest thou be a warrior! In three of them 
mayest thou be a tiller of the ground 2 ! And may 
one be like thyself, O Vistdspa ! 

6. ' Mayest thou be swift-horsed, like the Sun 8 ! 
' Mayest thou be resplendent, like the moon ! 

' Mayest thou be hot-burning, like fire ! 
* Mayest thou have piercing rays, like Mithra ! 
'Mayest thou be tall-formed and victorious, like 
the devout Sraosha*! 

7. 'Mayest thou follow a law of truth, like 
Rashnu 5 ! 

' Mayest thou be a conqueror of thy foes, like 
Verethraghna 6 , made by Ahura ! 

' Mayest thou have fulness of welfare, like RSma 



' Mayest thou be freed from sickness and death, 
like king Husravah 8 ! 

8. 'Then the blessing goes for the bright, all- 
happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones 9 . 

'May it happen unto thee according to my 
blessing ! 

c 10 Let us embrace and propagate the good thoughts, 
good words, and good deeds that have been done 
and that will be done here and elsewhere, that we 
may be in the number of the good. 

Of Vfrtispa and his wife Hutaosa. 
Cf. Yt. XXIV, 4- 8 C Sirdzah, n. 

Cf. Yt XI. ft Cf. Yt. XII, Introduction. 

Cf.Yt. XIV. 7 CYt.XV. 

Kai Khosrav went alive to Paradise (Firdausi). 
He closes his blessing by wishing him bliss in heaven. 
10 Yasna XXXV, 2 (4-5)- 



328 YAtfTS AND 



'YathS ahfi vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 

holiness .... 

'Ash em Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good ---- 

1 [Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 

bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones/ 



XXIV. VlSXASP YAST. 

I. 

T. ' I am a pious man, who speaks words of 
blessing/ thus said Zarathustra to the young king 
Virtftspa 1 . 'She 2 appears to me full of Glory, O 
Zarathitrtra ! ' ' O young king Vlrtispa ! [I bless 
thee 8 ] with the living of a good life, of an exalted 
life, of a long life. May thy men live long ! May 
thy women live long ! May sons be born unto thee 
of thy own body * ! 

2. ' Mayestthou thyself 5 be holy, like Zarathiutra ! 

1 Mayest thou be rich in cattle, like an Athwya- 
nide'! 

c Mayest thou be rich in horses, like Pouru^-aspa 7 ! 

c Mayest thou have a good share of bliss 8 , like 
king Husravah ! 

' Mayest thou have strength to reach the Rangha, 
whose way lies afar, as Vafra Nav&za did 9 . 

1 Literally, O young king V!rt&spa! (or, O my son, king 
Vtaispa!) 

* The law of Mazda (Pahl.). 

8 Understood in &fri-va>60u (who speaks blessing). 
4 Cf. Yt. XXIII, i. 

9 Khay*uj (=naf>man) belongs to 2 (W.). 

See p. 326, note 8. * See p. 326, note 9. 

8 Immortality (cf. Yt. XXIII, 7). W. has ashem merez6= 
ahlftylh patmntk, amargfg (PahlA 

9 Cf. Yt. XXIII, 4. 



VAST. 329 



3. ' May ten sons be born of thy own body l \ three 
as Athravans 2 , three as warriors 8 , three as tillers of 
the ground 4 ! May one of them be like G&mfispa 6 , 
that he may bless thee with great and ever greater 
happiness 6 ! 

4. ' Mayest thou be freed from sickness and death, 
like Pesh6-tanu 7 . 

' Mayest thou have piercing rays, like Mithra ! 
' Mayest thou be warm, like the moon ! 
4 Mayest thou be 8 resplendent, like fire ! 
'Mayest thou be long-lived, as long-lived as an 
old man can be 9 ! 

5. 'And when thou hast fulfilled a duration of a 
thousand years, [mayest thou obtain] the bright, all- 
happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones ! 

' Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 



1 Cf. Yt A XXIII, 5. 

3 'Like Atuzpftt, the son of MShraspand' (Pahl. Comm.). 
8 'Like Spendd&t (Isfendyar), the son of Gfotsp' (ibid.). 

4 ' Like Zav' (Uzava; ' Zav . . . . nrbes et castella, quae Afras- 
siab deleverat, refici jussis, aperuit fluvios, quos ille operuerat, .... 
agros denuo coluit, qui in optimam, qua antehac floruerant, 
conditionem redierunt/ Hamzah Ispahensis, p. 24 of the Gottwaldt 
translation). 

5 Cf. Yt. XXIII, 2. 

6 W. has the same text as Yt. XXIII, a : yatha dangheor Vi^s- 
pal, which is interpreted airin pataj obd^nit ^igiux Gdmdsp kart 
madam matipat Gfot&sp. 

7 Peshdtanu was a son of Vlrt&spa : Zarathurtra made him drink 
of a certain sort of milk, and 'he forgot death.' He is one of the 
seven immortals, and reigns in Eangdez (Zartusht-Namah and 
Bundahu XXIX, 5). 

8 Bavihi (W.). 

9 Doubtful. The Pahlavi translation follows Yt. XXIII, 4, 
though the text is the same as in Westergaard (only bav&i and 
zarnumatd instead of bav&hi, zaranumatd). 



330 YASTS AND siR6ZAHS. 



II. 

6 *. c Give 2 him strength and victory ! Give him 
welfare in cattle and bread 3 ! ' thus said Zarathurtra 
to the young king Vtrtspa ! ' Give him a great 
number* of male children, praisers 5 [of God] and 
chiefs in assemblies, who smite and are not smitten, 
who smite at one stroke their enemies, who smite 
at one stroke their foes, ever in joy and ready to 
help. 

7. ' Ye gods of full Glory, ye gods of full healing, 
let your greatness become manifest ! ' 

8. Zarathustra addressed him, saying : * O young 
king Vlst&spa ! May their greatness become manifest 
as it is called for ! 

c Ye Waters, impart and give your Glory to the 
man who offers you a sacrifice ! 

'This is the boon we beg (for thee) of Ashi 
Vanguhi , of Rita 7 , with eyes of love/ 

9. P4redi 8 , of the light chariot, follows : * Mayest 
thou 9 become manifest unto him, the young king 
Vtrtaspa! 

'May plenty dwell in this house, standing upon 
high columns and rich in food 10 ! Thou wilt never 

1 For 6-7, cf. M&h Nyiyk, xo-ii. 

* The prayer is addressed to Waters. 

8 J?zr&thrd-nahhn: isdnih lahmik. 
4 Paourvat&tem: kebad farzand. 

* StdhyanSm: kebad stdyttdr. 

6 See Yt. XVI. * See Vend. Introd. IV, 30. 

8 See p. u, note 5. 9 Pfire^dL 

10 Plenty will reign in thy house, if thou wilt be liberal to the 
priest. 



VESTAS? VAST. 331 



offer and give bad food to a priest : for a priest 
must be to thee like the brightest l offspring of thy 
own blood/ 

10. Zarathurtra spake unto him : ' O young king 



' He who supports the Law of the worshippers of 
Mazda, as a brother or as a friend, he who treats 
her friendly in any way, looks to keep off want of 
food from her V 

ii. The holy Zarathortra preached that law to 
Frashaortra 8 and Gm4spa : ' May ye practise 
holiness and thrive, O young Frashao^tra (and 



12. Thus said Ahura Mazda unto the holy Zara- 
thurtra, and thus again did Zarathustra say unto the 
young king Vtrtfispa: 'Have no bad priests or 
unfriendly priests; for bad priests or unfriendly 
priests will bring about much harm, and, though 
thou wish to sacrifice, it will be to the Amesha- 
Spe^tas as if no sacrifice had been offered 4 . 

c Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

III. 

13. c When I teach thee, that thou mayest do the 
same to thy son 6 , O Vlst&spa! receive thou well 
that teaching ; that will make thee rich in children 
and rich in milk ; rich in seed, in fat, in milk 6 . 

1 RaSvatam a (not rashvatatn a) belongs to 9 (W.). 

2 W. has,hanairS va&m aiwi vaina/(va6m=Sansk. vayas?). 

3 See Yt. XIII, 103. Frashaojtra and Gdrndspa were brothers. 

* Cf. Vend. XVIII, 1-13. Perhaps, 'Be not bad to the priests ! 
Be not unfriendly to the priest 1 For he who is bad to the priest, 
he who is unfriendly to the priest . . . .' 

B Doubtful 6 Cf. Vend. XXI, 6-7. 



332 YASTS AND 



14. 'Thus do we announce unto thee, Ahura 
Mazda, and Sraosha, and Ashi, and the Law of the 
worshippers of Mazda, with the whole of all her 
hymns, with the whole of all her deeds, with the whole 
of her performances ; the Law of Mazda, who obtains 
her wishes, who makes the world grow, who listens 
to the songs and rejoices the faithful man at his 
wish ; who protects the faithful man, who maintains 
the faithful man ; 

15. 'From whom come the knowledge of holi- 
ness and the increase in holiness of the world of the 
holy Principle, and without whom 1 no faithful man 2 
can know holiness. 

'To thee 8 come every Hivanan, every Atare- 
vakhsha, every Frabaretar, every Abere/, every 
Asn&tar, every RathwLrikar, every SraosM-varez 4 ; 

1 6. ' Every priest, every warrior, every husbandman ; 
every master of a house, every lord of a borough, 
every lord of a town, every lord of a province ; 

1 7. c Every youth of good thoughts, good words, 
good deeds, and good religion ; every youth who 
speaks the right words; every one who performs 
the next-of-kin marriage 5 ; every itinerant priest; 
every mistress of a house ; every wandering priest, 
obedient to the Law. 

1 8. 'To thee come all the performers 6 (of holi- 
ness), all the masters of holiness, who, to the 

1 Doubtful. 

a Saoshyatem. W. has srashyswtem. 8 To the Law. 

* The seven priests engaged in the sacrifice (VendtdSd, p. 64, 
note i). 

8 The 0a6tv6datha (Vend. Introd. p. xlv, note 7 ; see West, 
Pahlavi Texts, II, 389 seq.). 

6 Thdtuj: karkartar(Pahl.). 



VAST. 333 



number of three and thirty \ stand next to Hivani, 
being masters of holiness. 

19* 'May they be fully protected 2 in thee, O 
young king Vtetfispa ! While thou smitest thy ad- 
versaries, thy foes, those who hate thee, a hundred 
times a hundred for a hundred 8 , a thousand times 
a thousand for a thousand, ten thousand times ten 
thousand for ten thousand, myriads of myriads for 
a myriad. 

20. ' Proclaim thou that word, as we did proclaim 
it unto thee ! 

*O Maker of the good world! Ahura Mazda, 
I worship thee with a sacrifice, I worship and for- 
ward thee with a sacrifice, I worship this creation 
of Ahura Mazda.' 

21*. The young king Vlrtdspa asked Zarathurtra : 
* With what manner of sacrifice shall I worship, with 
what manner of sacrifice shall I worship and forward 
this creation of Ahura Mazda ? ' 

22. Zarathurtra answered: 'We will make it 
known unto thee, O young king Vtrt&spa ! 

'Go towards that tree that is beautiful, high- 
growing, and mighty amongst the high-growing trees, 
and say thou these words : <( Hail to thee! O good, 
holy tree, made by Mazda! Ashem Vohti!" 

23. ' Let the faithful man cut off twigs of baresma, 
either one, or two, or three : let him bind them and 



1 Sec Yasna I, 10 (33). 

9 ThrStdtemd belongs to 19 (W.). 

8 He kills a hundred times a hundred of them, while they kill a 
hundred of his people. 

4 For this clause and the following two, cf. Vend. XIX, 17 seq., 
text and notes. 



334 YA5TS AND 



tie them up according to the rites, being bound and 
unbound according to the rites. 

' The smallest twig of Haoma, pounded according 
to the rules, the smallest twig prepared for sacrifice, 
gives royalty to the man (who does it)/ 

Ashem Vohti : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

IV. 

24*. Zarathustra said : ' O young king Vtetispa ! 

' Invoke Ahura Mazda, who is full of Glory, Ahura 
Mazda, and the sovereign Heaven, the boundless 
Time, and Vayu who works highly. 

25. ' Invoke the powerful Wind, made by Mazda, 
and Fate. 

1 Repeat thou those words, that the god invoked 
may give thee the boon wished for; that thou, 
strong, and belonging to the creation of the good 
Spirit, mayest smite and take away the Dru^ and 
watch with full success those who hate thee ; smite 
down thy foes, and destroy at one stroke thy adver- 
saries, thy enemies, and those who hate thee 2 . 

26. ' Proclaim thou those prayers : they will cleanse 
thy body from deeds of lust 3 , O young king Vlrt&spa ! 

C I will worship thee, O Fire, son of Ahura 
Mazda, who art a valiant warrior. He falls upon 
the fiend Ku#da 4 , who is drunken without drinking, 
upon the men of the Druf , the slothful ones 6 , the 
wicked Dafeva-worshippers, who live in sin. 

1 Cf. Vend. XIX, 13. Cf. Yt. V, 63- 

8 Paourvd vasta jaota : read jkyaothna (cf. 40), as in 
Vend. XVI, 14 (paourvd-vasna skynothna). 

* Cf. Vend. XI, 9 and Bundahij XXVIII, 42. 

5 Cf. Vend. XIX, 41 ; better: on the Dn^ask&V (the sons of 
the Dru^ ? see Bund. XXXI, 6). 



VAST. 335 



27. 'He 1 trembles at the way 3 made by Time 
and open both to the wicked and to the righteous. 

' They 8 tremble at the perfume of his soul * as 
a sheep does on which a wolf is falling. 

28. ' Reciting the whole collection of the Staota 
Y6snya 6 prayers brings one up all the way to the 
blessed Gar6-nmna, the palace beautifully made. 
That indeed is the way. 

29. f That man does not follow the way of the Law, 
O Zarathiirtra 6 ! who commits the Baodh6-(varrta) 
crime 7 with a damsel and an old woman 8 / said 
Zarathustra to the young king Vtrtispa. 

1 Let him 9 praise the Law, O Spitama Zarathustra ! 
and long for it and embrace the whole of the Law, 
as an excellent horse turns back from the wrong 
way and goes along the right one, smiting the many 
Drills 10 . 

30. 'Go forward with praises, go forward the 
way of the good Mazdean law and of all those who 
walk in her ways, men and women. 

The dead man. 

The JTinvaAbridge (Vend. XIX, 29). 

The fiends (Vend. XIX, 33). * The soul of the righteous. 

See page 152, note i. 

The Pahlavi has, 'the way of Zarathurtra' (14 Zartfthrtfg 
r&s yakhstinft). 

Wilful murder (Vend. p. 84, note i). 

To procure miscarriage (see Vend. XV, 12-14). 

The sinner. 

10 'As a horseman on the hack of a good horse, when he has 
gone the wrong way, perceiving that he has lost his way, turns 
back his horse from that direction and makes him go the right 
way; so thou, turn back thy horse to the right way ; that is to say, 
turn him to the way of the Law of Mazda ; that is to say, receive 
the Law 9 (Pahl. Comm.). 



336 YA&TS AND stRdZAHS. 

'He who wishes to seize the heavenly reward 1 , 
will seize it by giving gifts to him who holds up 
(the Law) to us 2 in this world here below 8 . . . , 

31. 'Let him* give (the Law) to him who is 
unfriendly to her, that he may become friendly. 

'Wash thy hands with water, not with gdmfez 5 , 
and let thy son, who will be born of thy wife tf , do 
the same. 

* Thus thy thought will be powerful to smite him 7 , 
who is not so 8 ; thy speech will be powerful to smite 
him, who is not so; thy deed will be powerful to 
smite him. 

32. ' " Hear me ! Forgive me 9 ! "We, the Ame- 
sha-Spewtas, will come and show thee, O Zara- 
thurtra! the way to that world 10 , to long glory in 
the spiritual world, to long happiness of the soul in 
Paradise ; 

33. 'To bliss and Paradise, to the Gar6-nmna of 
Ahura Mazda, beautifully made and fully adorned, 

1 Bliss, eternal life. 

2 Yd nd .... nidrd anghg : lanman dhi bar 4 dSshtSr (PahL). 
8 Na6dha vanghS paiti ujta vangh6 buyi/; saoshySs 

dfa verethraga. I cannot make anything of these words, nor 
reconcile them with the Fahlavi translation: 'It is not fair when he 
wishes weal for his own person ; that is to say, when, being satisfied 
himself, he does not satisfy other people and wishes comfort for 
himself. (Make the Law of Mazda current, till the time when) 
the victorious S6shydsh will make it current/ The last three Zend 
words appear to be abridged from a longer passage. 
* The ikithful man. 

8 This is an allusion to the Bareshntim purification (Vend. VIII, 
39). The unclean man washes himself with g6mfez first and with 
water last. 

6 Doubtful 7 The sinner. 8 Friendly to the Law. 

9 He recites the prayer Sraotst m6, mere*dta mS (Yasna 
XXXIII, n). 10 The world above. 



VAST. 337 



when his soul goes out of his body through the will 
of fate, when I, Ahura Mazda, when I, Ahura 
Mazda, gently show him his way as he asks for it. 
' Ashem Voh & : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

V. 

34. ' They I will impart to thee full brightness and 
Glory. 

'They will give him 2 quick 8 and swift horses, 
and good sons. 

'He wishes to go to the Law, the young king 
Vlrtdspa.' 

Zarathustra said : ' Let him who is unfriendly to 
her become a follower of the Law of Mazda, such 
as we proclaim it. 

35. ' Proclaim thou ever (unto the poor) : " Ever 
mayest thou wait here for the refuse that is brought 
unto thee, brought by those who have profusion of 
wealth*!" Thus the Dru^will not fall upon thee 
and throw thee away ; thou wilt wield kingly power 
there 5 . 

36. ' The Law of Mazda will not deliver thee unto 
pain 6 . Thou art entreated (for charity) by the 
whole of the living world, and she 7 is ever standing 
at thy door in the person of thy brethren in the 
faith : beggars are ever standing at the door of the 
stranger, amongst those who beg for bread. 

1 The Amesha-Spetas (see 46). 

a To Virtspa. 8 HathwadhJa: Pahl. tiztt. 

* Cf. Vend. Ill, 29. 

* If he practises charity he will be a king even in Gar6thm&n. 

6 Aspahfi, from a-spa (no comfort, an&sftnfh tangfh, Pahl. 
Comm.}. 

* The Law. 



338 YA5TS AND stRdZAHS. 

1 Ever will that bread be burning coal upon thy 
head 1 . 

4 The good, holy R&ta 2 , made by Mazda, goes and 
nurses thy bright offspring V 

37. ZarathuJtra addressed VirtAspa, saying : ' O 
young king VtrtSspa ! The Law of" Mazda, O my 
son ! will give thy offspring the victorious strength 
that destroys the fiends. 

'Let no thought of Angra Mainyu ever infect 
thee, so that thou shouldst indulge in evil lusts, 
make derision and idolatry, and shut (to the poor) 
the door of thy house 4 . 

38 6 . ' Atar thus blesses the man who brings in- 
cense to him, being pleased with him and not angry, 
and fed as he required : " May herds of oxen grow 
for thee, and increase of sons ! May fate and its 
decrees bring thee the boons thou wishest for! 
Therefore do thou invoke and praise (me) excel- 
lently in this glorious world! That I may have 
unceasing food, full of the glory of Mazda 6 and with 
which I am well pleased." 

39. ' O Mazda! take for thyself the words of our 
praise : of these words I speak and speak again, the 
strength and victorious vigour, the power of health 
and healing, the fulness, increase, and growth. 

1 Bring it together with the words of hymns up 
to the Gard-nmina of Ahura Mazda. He will 7 first 



1 Hvarishni dagh pun rdwmanf lak yahvfinSt (Fahl. Comm.). 
9 Charity. 

* If thou art charitable, thy children will thrive. 

* See Yt. XXH, 13. a Vend. XVHI, 27. 
8 JSTflarnamazdau (W.). 

7 He who will pronounce all prayers and hymns: the full 
formula is found in the Abdn Nyfyir, 8. 



VAST. 339 



enter there. Therefore do thou pronounce these 
prayers. 

'Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

VI. 

40. ' Converse ye with the Amesha-Spe^tas/ said 
Zarathostra unto the young king Vfrtispa, 'and 
with the devout Sraosha, and Nairyd-sangha, the 
tall-formed, and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, and 
the well-desired kingly Glory. 

41. 'Men with lustful deeds address the body 1 ; but 
thou, all the night long, address the heavenly Wis- 
dom 2 ; but thou, all night long, call for the Wisdom 
that will keep thee awake. 

' Three times a day raise thyself up and go to 
take care of the beneficent cattle. 

42. ' Of these men may the lordship 3 belong to the 
wisest of all beings, O Zarathurtra ! May their lord 
belong to the wisest, O Zarathuytra ! Let him show 
them the way of holiness, let him show them at once 
the way thereto, which the Law of the worshippers 
of Mazda enters victoriously. Thus the soul of 
man, in the joy of perfect holiness, walks over the 
bridge, known afar, the powerful -Xinva/- bridge*, 
the well-kept, and kept by virtue. 

43. ' How the worlds were arranged was said to 
thee first, O Zarathurtra ! Zarathurtra said it again, 
to the young king Vtrt&spa; therefore do thou 6 
praise him 8 who keeps and maintains the moon 
and the sun. 

* Cf. 26. * Cf. Vend. IV, 45 ; XVIII, 6. 

8 The supervision and care. 4 See 27. 

5 Thou Vfctftspa. 6 Ahura Mazda. 

Z 2 



340 YAtfTS AND 



1 He who has little friendship for the Law, I have 
placed him down below to suffer/ 

44. Thus said Angra Mainyu, he who has no 
Glory in him, who is full of death: 'This is an 
unbeliever, let us throw him down below ; this is a 
liar, or a traitor to his relatives, and like a mad dog 
who wounds cattle and men ; but the dog who in- 
flicts wounds pays for it as for wilful murder \ 

' The first time he shall smite a faithful man, the 
first time he shall wound a faithful man, he shall pay 
for it as for wilful murder. 

'AshexnVohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

VII. 

45. 'Mayest thou receive 2 , O holy young king 
Vlrtispa ! (a house) with a hundred .... 3 , ten thou- 
sand large windows, ten thousand small windows, 
all the year long 4 , O holy Vlrtispa! never growing 
old, never dying, never decaying, never rotting, 
giving plenty of meat, plenty of food, plenty of 
clothes to the other worshippers of Mazda. 

46. ' May all boons be bestowed upon thee, as I 
proclaim it unto thee! May the Amesha-Spe^tas 
impart to thee their brightness and glory and plenty 6 ! 
May they give him quick and swift horses and good 
sons, strong, great in all things, powerful to sing the 
hymns. 

1 See Vend. XIII, 31. 

2 In Paradise ; see Vend XVIII, 28, text and note. 

8 Sat ay &re: that stands a hundred years (?). The Vend. 
XVIH, 28 has 'with a hundred columns.' 
4 Uninjured by the changes of temperature. 
Cf.34. 



VAST. 341 



47. ' He wields his power according to the wish 
of Ahura Mazda, the Good Spirit, and for the de- 
struction of the Evil Spirit, whichever of two men 
goes quicker to perform a sacrifice (to Ahura) ; but 
if he chooses to perform the sacrifice and prayer to 
us not in the right way, he does not wield the right 
power, he will not reign 1 . 

48. c He will receive bad treatment in the next 
world, though he has been the sovereign of a country, 
with good horses to ride and good chariots to drive. 
Give royalty to that man, O Zarathustra ! who gives 
royalty unto thee with good will 2 . 

49 8 . ' Thou shalt keep away the evil by this holy 
spell: "Of thee [O child!] I will cleanse the birth 
and growth ; of thee [O woman !] I will make the 
body and the strength pure ; I make thee a woman 
rich in children and rich in milk ; a woman rich in 
seed, in milk, and in offspring. For thee I shall 
make springs run and flow towards the pastures that 
will give food to the child/' 

50. ' Do not deliver me 4 into the hands of the 
fiend 5 ; if the fiend take hold of me, then fever with 
loss of all joy will dry up the milk of the good 
Spe#ta-Armaiti 6 . The fiend is powerful to distress, 
and to dry up the milk of the woman who indulges 
in lust and of all females. 

51. 'The perfume of fire, pleasant to the Maker, 

1 In Paradise (PahL Comm.). 

* Doubtful. ' s C Vend. XXI, 6-7. 

* The Law. 

5 That is to say, let not impiety prevail 

6 If impiety prevails, the earth will grow barren (cf. Vend. 
XVIII, 64). 



342 VASTS AND 



Ahura Mazda, takes them 1 away from afar ; ---- 2 ; 
and all those that harm the creation of the Good 
Spirit are destroyed 8 ; 

52. ' Whom Mithra, and Rashnu Razfcta, and the 
Law of the worshippers of Mazda wish to be taken far 
away, longing for a man who is eager to perform and 
does perform the ceremonies he has been taught; . . . .* 

'Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

VIII i. 

53. ' The words of the VahLrtdim 6 Githa are to 
be sung : " Happy is he, O holy Vtrt&spa ! happy the 
man, whoever he be, to whom Ahura Mazda gives 
the full accomplishment of his wishes." 

1 Where does his soul abide on that night 7 ? ' 

54. Ahura Mazda answered : 'O my son, Frashao- 
tfra! It takes its seat near the head, singing the 
Ujtavaiti Githa and proclaiming happiness: "Happy 
is he, happy the man whoever he be! " 

1 On the first night, his soul sits in Good Words 8 ; 

1 The demons (see Vend. VIII, 80). 

2 Ndi/ ta/ paiti vohu man 6 katha sfsraya ayaa. The 
Pahlavi Commentary has : ' That is to say, good will happen to 
thee through the good will of Atar (fire)/ 

8 Te^inashanya (W.; read ta&a nashanya?); 4igh harvaspfn 
bSshltaran min spfn&k mtndi ddm&n Mt apStdk avfn yahvfintt 
(PahL Comm.). 

4 Yatha ya/ tfi fravaoHmi (fravao^ima, W.) puthrd bere- 
thya"/ sairimananSm (sairi mananSm, W.)bakhedhrii (trans- 
lated as hakhedhri: ddstih, friendship). 

6 This chapter is borrowed, though slightly altered, from Yt. XXII. 

6 Read ujtavaiti (? cf. 54 and Yt. XXII, 2): the Vahutfiijti 
G&tha is the fifth and last G&tha. 

7 On the night of his departing. 

8 Not in the Good-Word Paradise, to which he will go later 



VAST. 343 



on the second night, it sits in Good Deeds ; on the 
third night, it goes along the ways (to Gard-nmAna). 

55. 'At the end of the third night, my son, 
Frashaostra ' when the dawn appears, it seems to the 
soul of the faithful one as if it were brought amidst 
plants [and scents : it seems as if a wind were blow- 
ing from the region of the south, from the regions 
of the south] 1 , a sweet-scented wind, sweeter-scented 
than any other wind in the world, and it seems to his 
soul as if he were inhaling that wind with the nose, 
and it asks, saying : " Whence does that wind blow, 
the sweetest-scented wind I ever inhaled with my 
nose ? " 

56. * And it seems to him as if his own conscience 
were advancing to him in that wind, in the shape 
of a maiden fair, bright, white-armed, strong, tall- 
formed, high-standing, thick-breasted, beautiful of 
body, noble, of a glorious seed, of the size of a maid 
in her fifteenth year, as fair as the fairest things in 
the world. 

57. 'And the soul of the faithful one addressed 
her, asking : " What maid art thou, who art the fairest 
maid I have ever seen ?" 

58. ' And she, being his own conscience, answers 
him : " O thou youth, of good thoughts, good words, 
and good deeds, of good religion! I am thy own 
conscience, 

'"Everybody did love thee for that greatness, 
goodness, fairness, sweet-scentedness, victorious 
strength, and freedom from sorrow, in which thou 



( 61), but in the thought and delightful remembrance of his good 
words (cf. Yt XXII, 2). 

1 Supplied from Yt. XXII, 7. 



344 YASTS AND 



dost appear to me ; [and so thou, O youth of good 
thoughts, good words, and good deeds, of good 
religion ! didst love me for that greatness, goodness, 
fairness, sweet-scentedness, victorious strength, and 
freedom from sorrow, in which I appear to thee. 

59. '"When thou wouldst see a man 1 ] making 
derision and deeds of idolatry, or rejecting (the 
poor) and shutting (his door), then, thou wouldst 
sit, singing the Githas, and worshipping the good 
waters, and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, and 
rejoicing the faithful that would come from near or 
from afar, 

60. '"I was lovely, and thou madest me still 
lovelier ; I was fair, and thou madest me still fairer ; 
I was desirable, and thou madest me still more 
desirable ; I was sitting in a forward place, and thou 
madest me sit in the foremost place, through this 
good thought, through this good speech, through 
this good deed of thine; and so henceforth men 
worship me for my having long sacrificed unto and 
conversed with Ahura Mazda." 

61. 'The first step that the soul of the faithful 
man made, placed him in the Good-Thought 
Paradise; the second step that the soul of the 
faithful man made, placed him in the Good-Word 
Paradise ; the third step that the soul of the faithful 
man made, placed him in the Good-Deed Paradise ; 
the fourth step that the soul of the faithful man 
made, placed him in the Endless Light 

62. ' Then one of the faithful, who had departed 
before him, asked, saying: " How didst thou depart 
this life, thou holy man? How didst thou come, 

1 Fiom Yt. XXII, 12-13. 



VAST. 345 



thou holy man ! from the abodes full of cattle and 
full of the wishes and enjoyments of love ? from 
the material world into the world of the spirit? 
from the decaying world into the undecaying one ? 
How long did thy felicity last ? " ' 

63. And Ahura Mazda answered : c Ask him not 
what thou askest him, who has just gone the dreary 
way, full of fear and distress, when the body and the 
soul part from one another. 

64. ' [Let him eat] of the food brought to him, of 
the oil of Zaremaya : this is the food for the youth 
of good thoughts, of good words, of good deeds, of 
good religion, after he has departed this life ; this is 
the food for the holy woman, rich in good thoughts, 
good words, and good deeds, well-principled, and 
obedient to her husband, after she has departed 
this life/ 

65. Spitama Zarathurtra said to the young king 
Vtrt&spa: 'To what land shall I turn, O Ahura 
Mazda ? To whom shall I go with praying l ? ' 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 



1 This clause, taken from Yt. XXII, 20, shows that the second 
part of Yt XXH ( 19-36), describing the fate of the Tricked, 
should be inserted here. 



NYAYIS. 



NY AY IS. 



A Ny&yij is properly a begging prayer, as opposed to Sitiiyij, 
a prayer of praise. It is a term particularly applied to five prayers 
addressed to the Sun, to Mithra, to the Moon, to Waters, and to 
Fire. Every layman over eight years old is bound to recite the 
NyayLf : he recites it standing and girded with his Kdstf. 

The Sun NyiyLr is recited three times a day, at the rising of the 
sun (Gh Hvan), at noon (Gh Rapitvin), and at three o'clock in 
the afternoon (GS,h Uztren). The Mithra Nyayu is recited with 
the Sun Ny&yfc, as Mithra follows the sun in its course (see 
Yt.X, I3 ). 

The Moon Nyyu is recited three times a month : first, at the 
time when it begins to be seen ; second, when it is at the full ; 
third, when it is on the wane. 

The Waters Ny&yir and the Fire Ny&yir are recited every day, 
when one finds oneself in the proximity of those elements. The 
Fire Ny&yij is recited with the Pendm on (see Vend p. 168, y). 

The first four Nyiyw must be recited especially on the days over 
which the Izads invoked preside; that is to say, on the Kh6rsh&/, 
Mihir, Mali, and Abn days (the eleventh, sixteenth, twelfth, and 
tenth days of the month) l . 



I. KH6RSH&0 NYAYI 

i. [Hail unto the Sun, the" swift-horsed J May 
Ahura Mazda be rejoiced 2 !] 

1 Anquetil, Zend-Avesta II, pp. 6, 22, 565-566. 
8 This clause is wanting in most manuscripts. 



350 



Hail unto thee, O Ahura Mazda, in the threefold 
way 1 1 [Hail unto thee] before all other creatures ! 

Hail unto you, O Amesha-Spe#tas, who are all of 
you of one accord with the Sun ! 

May this prayer come unto Ahura Mazda ! May 
it come unto the Amesha-Spe#tas ! May it come 
unto the Fravashis of the holy Ones ! May it come 
unto the Sovereign Vayu of the long Period 2 ! 

2. [Hail unto the Sun, the swift-horsed !] 

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced I May Angra Mainyu be destroyed! 
by those who do truly what is the foremost wish (of God). 
I recite the Praise of Holiness V 

3. I praise well-thought, well-spoken, and well-done thoughts, 
words, and deeds. I embrace all good thoughts, good words, and 
good deeds; I reject all evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds*. 

4. I give sacrifice and prayer unto you, O Amesha- 
Spe#tas ! even with the fulness of my thoughts, of 
my words, of my deeds, and of my heart : I give 
unto you even my own life. 

I recite the ' Praise of Holiness 3 : ' 

'Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good. Well is it for 
it, well is it for that holiness which is perfection of holiness * I ' 

5 s . Hail to Ahura Mazda ! 

Hail to the Amesha-Spetas ! 

Hail to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures ! 

Hail to the Sun, the swift-horsed ! 

Hail to the two eyes of Ahura Mazda ! 

Hail to the Bull! 

HailtoGaya 6 ! 

1 In thought, speech, and deed (Pers. and Sansk. transl.). 
9 Vayu, as being the same with Fate (Vend. Introd. IV, 17), be- 
came identified with Time. 

8 The Ashem Vohu. * See p, 22. 

6 5= Yasna LXVIH (22-23 [LXVII, 58-67]). 
6 Gaya Maretan, the first man. 



351 



Hail to the Fravashi of the holy Spitama Zara- 
thujtra ! 

Hail to the whole of the holy creation that was, 
is, or will be ! 

May I grow in health of body through Vohu-Mand, 
Khshathra, and Asha, and come to that luminous 
space, to that highest of all high things \ when the 
world, O Spe#ta Mainyu ! has come to an end ! 
Ashem Vohfi: Holiness is the best of all good , . . . 

6. We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, 
swift-horsed Sun. 

We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pas- 
tures, who is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies, 
with a thousand ears, well-shapen, with ten thousand 
eyes, high, with full knowledge, strong, sleepless, 
and ever awake 2 . 

7. We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of all coun- 
tries, whom Ahura Mazda made the most glorious 
of all the gods in the world unseen 3 . 

So may Mithra and Ahura, the two great gods, 
come to us for help ! 

We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, 
swift-horsed Sun. 

8. We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, whose sight is 
sound 4 . 

We sacrifice unto Tirtrya ; we sacrifice unto the 
rains of Tirtrya 6 . 

We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, bright and glorious. 

We sacrifice unto the star Vana/^ 8 , made by 
Mazda. 



1 The sun : ' May my soul arrive at the sun-region I ' (Pahl. transl.) 
a Yt. X, 7. In heaven. * See Yt VIII, 12, note 7. 

6 See Yt. VIII, ia, note 2. 6 See Yt. XX. 



352 



We sacrifice unto Tistrya, the bright and glorious 
star. 

We sacrifice unto the sovereign sky. 

We sacrifice unto the boundless Time, 

We sacrifice unto the sovereign Time of the long 
Period. 

We sacrifice unto the beneficent, well-doing Wind. 

We sacrifice unto the most upright JKista. *, made 
by Mazda and holy. 

We sacrifice unto the good Law of the wor- 
shippers of Mazda. 

We sacrifice unto the way of content 2 . 

We sacrifice unto the golden instrument 3 . 

We sacrifice unto Mount Saoka^ta, made by 
Mazda 8 . 

9. We sacrifice unto all the holy gods of the 
world unseen. 

We sacrifice unto all the holy gods of the mate- 
rial world. 

We sacrifice unto our own soul. 

We sacrifice unto our own Fravashi. 

We sacrifice unto the good, strong, beneficent 
Fravashis of the holy Ones. 

We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, 
swift-horsed Sun. 

10. I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of 
Zarathiutra .... 



1 See Yt. XVI. Or, of pleasure. 

8 ' On Mount Saokaata there is a golden tube coming from the 
root of the earth; the water that is on the surface of the earth 
goes up through the hole of that tube to the heavens, and being 
driven by the wind, spreads everywhere, and thus the dew is 
produced' (Sansk. transl.). 



MIHIR NYYIS. 353 



Unto the bright, undying, shining, swift-horsed 
Sun; 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glori- 
fication . . . . l 

Ashem Vohfi : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

[We sacrifice] unto the Ahurian waters 2 , the waters of Ahura, 
with excellent libations, with finest libations, with libations piously 
strained *. 

Ashem Vohfi : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of 
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the 
holy Ones. 

II. MIHIR NYAYLS 1 . 

i*. Hail unto thee, O Ahura Mazda, in the threefold wayl 
[Hail unto thee] before all other creatures I 

Hail unto you, O Amesha-Spetas, who are all of you of one 
accord with the Sunl 

May this prayer come unto Ahura Mazda I May it come unto 
the Amesha-Spewtas I May it come unto the Fravashis of the holy 
Ones ! May it come unto the sovereign Vayu of the long Period 1 

2. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced 1 .... 

3. I praise well-thought, well-spoken, and well-done thoughts, 
words, and deeds .... 

4. I give sacrifice and prayer unto you, O Axnesha-Spewtas I .... 

5. Hail to Ahura Mazda! .... 

May I grow in health of body through Vohu-Man6, Khshathra, 
and Asha, and come to that luminous space, to that highest of all 
high things, when the world, Speta Mainyu, has come to an end 1 

6 6 . We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, who is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies, 
with a thousand ears, well-shapen, with ten thousand 

1 The whole of the Kh6rsh&/ Yart is inserted here. 

8 Rivers considered as Ahura's wives (cf. Ormazd et Ahriman, 

32). 
8 From Yasna LXVIH, 10 (LXVII, 30) ; cf. p. 34. 

* i-S=Kh6rsh&*Nyyk, 1-5. 
6-7=Kh6rsh6<f Nyiyw, 6-7. 

[23] A a 



354 



eyes, high, with full knowledge, strong, sleepless, and 
ever awake. 

7. We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of all 
countries, whom Ahura Mazda made the most 
glorious of all the heavenly gods. 

So may Mithra and Ahura, the two great gods, 
come to us for help! 

We sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift- 
horsed Sun. 

8 *. We sacrifice unto Tirtrya, whose sight is sound .... 
9. We sacrifice unto all the holy gods of the world unseen ---- 
io 9 . I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of 
Zarathiwtra .... 

ii 3 . We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, who is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies, 
with a thousand ears, well-shapen, with a thousand 
eyes, high, with full knowledge, strong, sleepless, and 
ever awake. 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra around countries ; 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra within countries ; 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra in this country ; 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra above countries ; 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra under countries ; 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra before countries ; 

We sacrifice unto the Mithra behind countries. 

12. We sacrifice unto Mithra and Ahura, the two 
great, imperishable, holy gods ; and unto the Stars, 
and the moon, and the sun, with the trees that 
yield baresma. We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord 
of all countries. 

13 * For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacri- 
fice worth being heard .... 

1 8~9=KhdrsheW Nydyij, 8-9. Yt. X, o. 

9 11-12=: Yt X, I44-U5- * i3-i5=Yt X, 4-6- 



MH NYAvis. 355 



We offer up libations unto Mithra .... 

14. May he come to us for helpl May he come to us for easel .... 

15. I will offer up libations unto him, the strong Yazata, the 
powerful Mithra .... 

YSh6 htam : All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda .... 

16*. Yatha- ahu vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour of 
Mithra .... 

Ashem Vohu : Holiness is the best of all good .... 

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 



III. MAH 

I *. Hail to Ahura Mazda I Hail to the Amesha-Speatas I Hail 
to the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull I Hail to thee 
when we look at thee I Hail to thee when thou lookest at us 1 

2 s . Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull; unto 
the only-created Bull and unto the Bull of many species; 

Be propitiation .... 

3. Hail to Ahura Mazda I .... 

4. How does the moon wax ? How does the moon wane ? . . . . 

5. We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the 
Bull . . . . 

6. And when the light of the moon waxes wanner .... 

7. I will sacrifice unto the Moon .... 

8. For its brightness and glory .... 

9. Yatha* ahu vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law 'of 
holiness .... 

io 4 . Give us strength and victory ! Give us wel- 
fare in cattle and in bread ! Give us a great number 
of male children, praisers [of God] and chiefs in 
assemblies, who smite and are not smitten, who 
smite at one stroke their enemies, who smite at one 
stroke their foes, ever in joy and ready to help. 

1 Yt. X, 146. * i=Mdh Yart, i. 2-9=M&h Yart. 
4 lo-n ; cf. Yt. XXIV, 6-8. 
A a 2 



356 



n. Ye gods of full Glory, ye gods of full 
healing, let your greatness become manifest I let 
your assistance become manifest as soon as you are 
called for! and ye, Waters, manifest your Glory, 
and impart it to the man who offers you a sacrifice. 

Ashem Vohft : Holiness is the best of all good .... 
[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones. 



iv. ABAN 

I. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced ! . . - . 

Unto the good Waters, made by Mazda ; unto the 
holy water-spring ARDVI ANAHITA ; unto all waters, 
made by Mazda ; unto all plants, made by Mazda, 

Be propitiation 1 .... 

2 *. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathurtra, saying : ( Offer 
up a sacrifice, Spitama Zarathiwtra ! unto this spring of mine, 
Ardvi Sfira AnShita .... 

3. 'Who makes the seed of all males pure, who makes the womb 
of all females pure for bringing forth .... 

4. 'The large river, known afar, that is as large as the whole of 
the waters that run along the earth .... 

5. c All the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are boiling over, all the 
middle of it is boiling over, when she runs down there .... 

6. 'From this river of mine alone flow all the waters that spread 
all over the seven Karshvares; 

7. * I, Ahura Mazda, brought it down with mighty 
vigour, for the increase of the house, of the borough, 
of the town, of the country 8 . 

8. ' He from whom she will hear the staota 
y6snya 4 ; he from whom she will hear the Ahuna 

1 As Aban Yart, o. 2 -6=Aban Yajt, 1-5. 

8 Cf. AbSn Yart, 6. * See above, p. 152, note i. 



357 



vairya 1 ; he from whom she will hear the Asha- 
vahi^ta 2 ; he by whom the good waters will be 
made pure ; with the words of the holy hymns 3 , he 
will enter first the Gar6-nm4na of Ahura Mazda : 
she will give him the boons asked for *. 

9 6 . * For her brightness and glory, I will offer her 
a sacrifice worth being heard; I will offer her a 
sacrifice well-performed. Thus mayest thou advise 
us when thou art appealed to! Mayest thou be 
most fully worshipped. 

' We sacrifice unto the holy Ardvi Sftra Andhita with libations. 
We sacrifice unto Ardvi Sftra AnShita, the holy and master of holi- 
ness, with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the 
wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the words, with 
the deeds, with the libations, and with the rightly-spoken words. 

'YSfthg hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda 

10. 'YathS, ahft v airy 6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

* I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour of 
the holy water-spring Anihita. 

' [Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the 
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.' 



V. A.TAS 

i 8 . Take me out 7 , O Ahura! give me perfect piety and 
strength . . 
4 8 . May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced ! . . . . 

The Yatha ahii vairyd prayer. 

The Ashem Vohft prayer. 

Cf. Yt. XXII, 2, and Yt. XXIV, 39. 

Cf. Abftn Yarf, 19, 23, 27, 33, 39, 47* &c- 



i- 3 =Yasna XXXIII, 12-14. 

'Deliver me from Ahriman' (Pahl Comm.)* 

As in Ormazd Yarf, o. 



358 



Hail unto thee, O Fire, son of Ahura Mazda, 
thou beneficent and most great Yazata! 

1 Ashem Vohft: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda .... 

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification .... 

Unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; unto thee 
Atar, son of Ahura Mazda ! 

5 2 . Unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; unto the 
Glory and the Weal, made by Mazda ; unto the Glory 
of the Aryas, made by Mazda ; unto the Glory of 
the Kavis, made by Mazda. 

Unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda ; tinto king 
Husravah ; unto the lake of Husravah ; unto Mount 
Asnava#*, made by Mazda; unto Lake ^fa^asta, 
made by Mazda ; unto the Glory of the Kavis, made 
by Mazda. 

6. Unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; unto 
Mount Ra6va/, made by Mazda; unto the Glory 
of the Kavis, made by Mazda. 

Unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda. 

Unto Atar, the beneficent, the warrior; the God 
who is a full source of Glory, the God who is a 
full source of healing. 

Unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, with all 
Atars; unto the God Nairyd-sangha, who dwells in 
the navel of kings ; 

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glori- 
fication. 

YathS ahft vairyd: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

7 8 . I bless the sacrifice and invocation, and the 

1 As in Ormazd Yart, o. Cf. Siidzah, 9. 

8 f-i6=:Yasna LXII, i-io (LXI). See the Sanskrit transla- 
tion in Etudes Iraniennes, II. 



ATAS NYAYI& 359 



good offering, the beneficent offering, the offering of 
assistance offered unto thee, O Atar, son of Ahura 
Mazda ! 

Thou art worthy of sacrifice and invocation; 
mayest thou receive the sacrifice and the invoca- 
tion in the houses of men. 

Well may it be unto the man who ever worships 
thee with a sacrifice, holding the sacred wood in his 
hand, the baresma in his hand, the meat in his hand, 
the mortar x in his hand. 

8. Mayest thou have the right 2 wood! Mayest 
thou have the right incense! Mayest thou have 
the right food ! Mayest thou have the right fuel 8 ! 

Mayest thou be full-grown for protecting (this 
house) ! Mayest thou grow excellent for protecting ! 

9. Mayest thou burn in this house ! Mayest, thou 
ever burn in this house ! Mayest thou blaze in this 
house 1 Mayest thou increase in this house ! Even 
for a long time, till the powerful restoration of the 
world, till the time of the good, powerful restoration 
of the world ! 

10. Give me, O Atar, son of Ahura Mazda! lively 
welfare, lively maintenance, lively living; fulness of 
welfare, fulness of maintenance, fulness of life ; 

Knowledge, sagacity ; quickness of tongue ; (holi- 
ness of) soul ; a good memory ; and then the under- 
standing that goes on growing and the one that is 
not acquired through learning * ; 

1 The mortar for pounding the Haoxna. 

8 In quality and quantity. 

8 UpasaySni: what is added to keep up the fire when lighted 
(Pers. transL). 

* The gaosbd-srfita khratu and the isna khratu (see p. 7, 
note i). 



360 



And then the manly courage, 

11. Firm-footed, unsleeping, (sleeping only) for a 
third part of the day and of the night, quick to rise 
up from bed, ever awake ; 

And a protecting, virtuous offspring, able to rule 
countries and assemblies of men, well growing up, 
good, freeing us from the pangs (of hell), endowed 
with a good intellect, that may increase my house, 
my borough, my town, my country, my empire. 

12. Give me, O Atar, son of Ahura Mazda! how- 
ever unworthy I am *, now and for ever, a seat in 
the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy 
Ones. 

May I obtain the good reward, a good renown 2 , 
and long cheerfulness for my soul a ! 

13. Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, lifts up his 
voice to all those for whom he cooks their evening 
meal and their morning meal 4 . From all those he 
wishes a good offering, a beneficent offering, an 
offering of assistance, O Spitama ! 

14. Atar looks at the hands of all those who pass 
by : ' What does the friend bring to his friend ? 
What does he who comes and goes bring to him 6 
who stays motionless ? * 

We sacrifice unto Atar, the valiant warrior 6 . 

15. And if the passer-by brings him wood holily 
brought, or bundles of baresma holily tied up, or 

1 Y4 mfe afrasflfunghau angha/: y& me abhfit ayogyalfi (Sansk. 
transl.). 
8 Here. Above. 

* Khshafnfm, sflirim (fitudes Iranknnes, II, 161). 
Atar. 

'Bodily he is infirm (armftjt, motionless); spiritually he is a 
warrior* (Pahl. Conim.). 



ATAS NvAyi?. 361 



twigs of Hadhinafepata 1 , then Atar, the son of Ahura 
Mazda, well pleased with him and not angry, and 
fed as required, will thus bless him : 

1 6. ' May herds of oxen grow for thee, and in- 
crease of sons; may thy mind be master of its 
vow, may thy soul be master of its vow, and mayest 
thou live on in the joy of the soul all the nights of 
thy life/ 

This is the blessing which Atar speaks unto him 
who brings him dry wood, well-examined by the 
light of the day, well-cleansed with godly intent 2 . 

17. YathS, ah ft vairy6: The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness .... 

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour of 
Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda s . . . . 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... 

1 8 8 . We gladden by our virtue thy mighty Fire, 
O Ahura ! thy most quick and powerful Fire, who 
shows his assistance 4 to him who has ever com- 
forted him, but delights in taking vengeance with 
his hands on the man who has harmed him. 



1 See Vend. p. 94, note r. 
* Cf. Vend. XVIII, 26-27. 
8 From Yasna XXXIV, 4. 

4 'In the var nfrang 9 (Pahl. Comm.), that is to say, in the fire 
ordeal; see above, p. 170, note 3. 



INDEX TO THE 

VOLUME IV; 



AND TO THE 



StRdZAHS, YASTS, AND 

VOLUME XXIII. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



The references in small Roman numerals are to the Introduction to the 
Vendidad ; those preceded by II are to this volume ; the others are 
to the Vendidad, 



Aal, fairy, page xciii. n 4. 

AblnNyayu, II, 356-357. 

Abln Yait, II, 52-84. 

Abartl, xxx. n i. 

Aberef, priest, 63, 64. n i, 78, 79 ; II, 

Abortion, 175. 

Adar, god, II, 7, 15. See Atar. 

Adarana, II, 288. 

Adaraprl, fire, II, 7. n 2. See Adar 

Froba. 
Adarbld Mahraspanda'n, man, xxxiii, 

xxxvii. 

Adartfe&n, Iand,l. n 2 ; II, 123. n 3. 
Adar Burzin Mihr, fire, II, 8. n 2, 

294. n 2. 

Adar Farnbag, fire, II, 7. n 2. 
Adar Frobl, fire, II, 204. n 2, 298. 

n i. See Adarapri 
Adar Gushasp, fire, 1 1, 294. n 2. See 

Gushasp. 

, mount, II, 289. 
_ t. 

Auurami, month, II, 101. n x. 
ASkha, demon, II, 284, 285. 
A&shma, demon, Ixvii, 136, 141. n 3, 

142, 143, 218 ; II, 33, 143, 154, 

164,224,271,284,297,308. 
A&ta, man, II, 217. 
Aethrapaiti, 45. 

ASvo-saredha-fyaejta, man, II, 218. 
ASzakha, mount, II, 288. 
Afrlsyab, man, II, 64. n 2, 67. n 4, 95. 

n 2, 114. n 2, 300. n 5, 304. n a. 

See Frangrasyan. 
Aftfgin, xxx. 

Afrm Paighambar, II, 324-328. 
Agastya, man, II, 224. n 2. 
Agerepta, 39, 40, 41, 



Aghragiatha, man, Ixxvi ; II, 114, 
115, 222, 278, 304, 307. n 6. 

Agriculture, 28. 

Ahriman, demon, xliv, Ixx, Ixxi, 
lxxvi,xcii, 59.U4, 99. n i ; II, 26. 
n 2, 135. n 2, 176. n 2, 352. n i, 
260. n 5. See Angra Mainyu. 

Ahfim-stfc, man, II, 203. 

Ahuna, man, II, 288. 

Ahuna Vairya, prayer, Ixix, Ixxviii, 
98, no, 139, 206. n 5 J II, 3 J 
serves as a weapon, II, 275. 

Ahura Mazda, god, Iviii, Ixi ; 4 (his 
creations), 207 ; 208 (his Fra- 
vashi):II, 3,6,9,10,13,15.5 
21-34 (Ormazd Yajt) ; 57 (sacri- 
fices to Ardvi SQraAnahita) ; 86, 
116,119,138,142,151,152,154, 
155, 156, 157, 162,164, 169, 180, 
199,201,227,228,230,231,232 
seq. ; 250 (sacrifices to vayu), 

274,317, 351, &C. 

Ahuranis, 140. n 2. 

Ainyava, II, 217, 218. 

Ajpivanghu, II, 222, 303. See Apvh. 

Aipivdhu, II, 303. 

Afrte-rSsp A&pdstnin, II, 216. n 6. 

Airyaxnan, 140, 222, 228, 229, 230- 

235 ; II, 4, 13, 35, 37, 41, 42, 

43-45,48. 
Airyanem vae^-ah, 2, 5, 1 3, 1 5 , 20. n 2, 

30, 57, 78, n6, 279. See Irfin 



Ajryu, II, 62. n 2, 222, 226. n 6. 
Aiwutoarenah, man, II, 214. 
Akatasha, demon, 136, 2x8. 
Akayadha, man, II, 219. 
Akem Mano, demon, Ixxii ; II, 297, 
308. 



366 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



Akhnangha, man, II, 217. 

Akhrfira, man, II, 223. 

Akhjti, genius, II, 4, 13, 35, 37, 39, 

&c. See Peace. 
Akht, sorcerer, II, 72. n 5. 
Akhtya, sorcerer, II, 73. 
Alb6rz, mount, 325 ; II, 97. n 6, 122. 
n 3, 287. n i, 289. n 6. See 
Hara Berezaiti. 
Alexander, man, xxxii. 
Alexander eschata, land, II, 123. n 4. 
Ambrosia, II, 152. n 5. 
Ameretaf, god, lx,lxxi ; II, 5, 31, 36, 

37,40,49*143,308,312. 
Amesha-Spewtas, gods, lix,lxxi, 207, 
209; 11,3,6, 9i ', 13,15,34, 
35-40 (Haftin Yajt), 43, 49, 86, 
90,103, 132, 142, 143- nil 156, 
163, 164,166, 193, 194, 199, 202, 
230, 290, 291, 336, 339? 34o> 350. 
Amru, bird, II, 210. 
Amuyamna, genius, II, 164. n * r 
Anahata, goddess, II, 53. 
AnahW, goddess, II, 195. n 2. 
Ana*hita,goddess,lv. See Ardvi Stira. 
'AwuTOjgoddess,!!, 53. 
Anaperetha, c. 
Anashavan, Ixxiv. 
Anastareta, genius, II, 164. n 2. 
Anlrin, genius, II, 12, 20, 85. 
Anghuyu, 11,215. 

Angra Mainyu, demon, Ivi, Ixii, 4 
(his counter-creations), 2 4, 142- 
143 (expelled), 204-207 (tempts 
Zaratmutra), 217*218 (in des- 
pair), 228, 229, 230 (creates 
diseases) ; II, 29, 33, 44, 105, 
113, 144, 150, 154, 198, 242 5 250 
(a part of Vayu belongs to him) ; 
252, 292 (turned to a horse), 
255 , 274 (dismayed by the birth, 
of Zarathu-rtra), 284, 308, 310 ; 
317 (mocks the souls of the 
wicked in hell), 338, 340. 
Animals, Ixxiii ; five classes of, II, 182. 
Ankata, mount, II, 218. 
Anquetil Duperron, xiv. 
Aiztare-danghu, mount, II, 288. 
Afltare-kangha, mount, II, 67. n 5, 

288. 

Anthesterion, month, II, 192. n i. 
Ants, 167. 
Aodhas, II, 173. 
Aoighimatastira, man, II, 218. 
Aoshnara, man, II, 321. 
Apagadha, 224. 



Apakhshira, land, II, 219. 

ApSm Nap&#, god, II, 6, 12, 14, 20, 

36, 38, 39, 7i, 94, 102, 202. 
Apaosha, demon, Ixiu ; II, 92, 99, 

100, 284, 285. 
Aparavidyi, II, 4. n 5. 
Aparsln, land, II, 288. n 2, n 7. 
Apfvh,king,II,222.n4. SeeAipi- 

vanghu. 

Apollo, II, 236. n 2. 
Ara, man, II, 211. 
Arabian sea, II, 146. n 4. 
*ApaxTos, 7. n 10. 
Aras, river, xlix, 3. 
Arlsti, man, II, 203. n i. 
Aravaojtra, man, II, 218. 
Araxes, river, 3. 
Ard, goddess, II, 270. n i. See Ashi 

Vanguhi. 

Ardashtr, king, xxxv ; II, 237. n 3. 
Ardavan, king, xxxv ; II, 237. n 3. 
Ardi Viraf, man, 166. n 2 ; II, 267. 

Ardibehlrt, god. See Asha Vahijta. 
Ardijvang, goddess, II, 270. n i. 

See Ashi Vanguhi. 
Ardvi Sfira Anabita, goddess, 78 ; 

It,8,i6, 3o,52-84,io6.U2,i74> 

181, 182, 356. 
Aredur, 39, 41. 
Aredvi, measure, 16. 
Are^anghan/, man, II, 212. 
Aregaona, man, II, 214. 
Are^af-aspa, man, II, 79, 80, 117, 

289. See Ar^asp. 
Arezahi, region, 216 ; II, 123, 136, 

154, 171. See Arza*h. 
Arezd-shamana, man, II, 296. 
Arezura, demon, 24. 
Arezva, man, II, 213. 
Ar^isp, man, II, 206. n 2, 256. n 3. 
Arij, king, II, 222. n 5. See Arshan. 
Anr shtvatir, man, II, 95. n 2. 
Anne'sht, 64. n 3. 
Armgsht-gah, xciv, 27. n i, 62. n i, 

64. n 4, 128. 

Armui. king, II, 222. n 5. 
Amaviz, woman, II, 62. n 2. 
Arsacides, xxxiii. 
Arshan, king, II, a 12 a, 303. 
Arshya, man, II, 209. 
Arjtk, genius, II, 6, 9, 15, 17, 19, 36, 

38, 156, 166, 168, 178, 184, 283- 

285 (Akad Yajt), 
Anti, genius, II, 166. 
man, II, 210. 



IM>EX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



367 



Artaxerxes, xliv, Iv ; II, 53. 
Arflm, country, II, 287. n 8. See 

RUm. 

Arvastani Rfim, land, 3, 9. n 7, n 8. 
Aryaman, 229. 
Aryans, II, 68, 70, 81, 108, 109, 120, 

123, 182, 190, 191, 201, 226, 244, 

257. 

Arzah, region, II, 210. n 2, 220. n i. 
Arztir, mount, II, 287. n 7. 
Arzfir Mm, mount, II, 287. n 8. 
Asabana, man. See Kara Asabana, 

Vara Asabana, 
Asabani, woman, II, 225. 
Asan vanvaf, man, II, 203. 
Asaya, man, II, 288. 
Ascendant (Uparataf), genius, II, 6, 

15, 36, 38, "8, 1 33>i88, 189, &c. 
Asha, hue. 

Ashihura, man, II, 212. n 2. 
Ashaneroah, man, II, 219. 
AshasairySs, man, II, 213. 
Ashasaredha, man, II, 213. 
Ashasavdh, man, II, 214. 
Ashlshagaha^-8 JEfoawdaAan, II, 210. 

n 2. 

Asha-rkyaothna, man, II, 212. 
Asha-stembana, mount, II, 288. 
Ashastu, man, II, 209. 
Asha Vahijta, god, Ix, Ixxii, 207 ; II, 

4, 5, 13, 14, 30, 3*1 33. n i, 35, 

3<5, 37, 38> 40, 41-48 (Ardi- 

behLrt Yajt), 49, 128, 133, 142, 

375,285,297,351- 
Ashavanghu, man, II, 210. 
Ashavazdah, son of Fourudhakhjtl, 

II, 70, 71. n i, 212. 
Ashavazdah, son of Sayusdri, II, 71, 

212. 
Ashemaogha, xL n 2, Ixxiv, 47, 60, 

192, 224 ; II, 26, 45, 46, 184. 

n 2, 261. 

Ashem-yahmai-Ufta, man, II, 216. 
Ashem-y#h-raoou, man, II, 215. 
Ashi Vanguhi, goddess, Ixx ; II, xr, 

18,104, 136, 157. n 2, 162, 1*4, 

188, 209, 230, 270-282 (Ashi 

A i.a Yajt )' a84 ' 33 >T 
Ashd-paoirya, man, II, 214. 

Ashd-raoah, man, II, 204. 
Ashd-urvatha, man, II, 214. 
Ashfi-zurta, bird, 188. n 2. 
Asfclepios, 85. n 5, 219. n 6. 
Asmin, 11,85. 

anvaa/, man, II, 33. n 2, 
203, 320. 



Asnatar, priest, 63, 64. n i, 78, 79 ; 

t II. 332. 

Asnavawf, mount, II, 7, 15, 288, 358. 

Aspahe* ajtra, xcvi. n 3. 

Aspendyarji's translation, ci. 

Asp8-padh6-makhjti, man, II, 214. 

Assaults, xcvi, 39-44. 

Assy nan SSrdzah, II, 3. 

Ajta-aurvaftf, man, II, 279. 

Ajtld Yart, II, 283-285. 

Ajti, measure, 159. 

Ast6-vtd6tu, demon, Ixvin, 46, 51, 

87. n 4. 

Astra, 1 68. n 5. 
Ajtra mairya, 190. 
Astvaf-ereta, man, II, 2 n, 215, 220, 

307, 308. 
Asura, Iviii, Ixxv. 
Atare, god, Ixii, kv, 180 ; II, 5, 8, 

'5, i*, 3<5, 38, 153, 198, 297, 

339, 344, 357-36i (AtajNyayij). 

- J ighu, man, II, 207. 

:a, man, II, 206. 
Atare-iwarenah, man, II, 207. 
Atare-^ithra, man, II, 206. 
Atare-pata, man, II, 206. 
Atare-savah, man, II, 207. 
Atare- vakhsha, pnest, 63, 64. n i, 78, 

. 79 ? II, 333. 
Atare-vanu, man, II, 206. 
Atare-zaatu, man, II, 207. 
Athenians, xcviii ; II, 192. n i. 
Athravan, pnest, li, 98 ; II, 74, 228, 

a68, 299. 
Athwya family, II, 6z, 113, 221, 254, 

326, 328. 
opatene, land, xlviii. See Adar- 

" R *n. 

man, II, 329. n 2. See 
irbad. 

Aurvascira, man, II, 256. 
Atirvata*/-nar, man, 1 1, 204. n i. See 

Urvata/-nara. 
Aurva/-aspa, king, II, 78, 205. n 5. 

See Ldhrasp. 
Ausind6m, nver, II, 101. n 5, 104. 

n 3. See Us-hfadu. 
Avahya, man, II, 217. 
Avaoirlrta, 39, 40. 
Aviraojtri, man, II, 208. 
Avaregou, man, II, 218. 
Avarethrabah, man, II, 209. 
Avesta, lii. n 2. Meaning of the 

word, xxx. See AbajtS. and 

Zand Avasta. 
Awz-danva, lake, II, 301. 



368 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



Ayehi, demon, 228. 

Aydasti, man, II, an. 

Ayflta, man, II, 215. 

Azata, man, II, 209. 

Azerekhsh, xlix. 

Azi, demon, Ixv, 194. 

A*i Dahaka, demon, Ixii, Ixv, 2, 9, 

206. n 4 ; II, 60, 61, 68. n 3, 

75. n 2, 113, 195- n i, Ha,25i. 

n 4, 253, 254, 294, 297, 307, 32*. 

See Dahk. 

Babylon, land, II, 60. n 3, 253- n 3* 
Bactra, land, 2, 6. n 4 ; II, 204. n 3. 
Bactria (Zoroaster in), xlvii. 
Bad. woman, II, 226. n i. 
Bid, day, II, 92. 
BadgbeMand, II,288.ni. 
Ba&hatastfra, man, II, 218* 
Bahman, day, II, 88. 
Bahman, god. See Vohu-mand. 
Bahman Yart, II, 22, 31-34. 
Bahrain fire, Ixxxix, 60. n 2, 62. n 2, 

112-116. 

BahrSm, god. See Verethraghna. 
Bahrain Vast, II, 231-248. 
Bakhdhi, land, 2, 6. 
Banrfan, land, II, 95. n 3. 
Bang of Zoroaster and GuVtasp, II, 

267. n 3. 
Banga, 175. 
Baodhd-varjta, 84. n i, 154, 175- n i ; 

H, 335- TT 
Barana, mount, II, 289. 
Barashn(hn,xciv.n 7,26.n i,63.n i, 

119-129, 183, n i, 210. n 4 ; II, 

336. 

Barda, land, II, 64. n 2. 
Baremna, man, II, 217. 
Baresma, 32. n 2, 191. n t, 209. 
Barmayfin, man, II, 297. n 5. 
Bard-srayana, mount, II, 289. 
Bastavairi, man, II, 207. 
Baji, demon, II, 49. 
Bathing forbidden, xc. 
Baongha, man, II, 218. 
Bawri, land, II, 60, 68. n 3. 
Bayana, mount, II, 288. 
Berezimu, man, II, 211. 
Berezvaf, man, II, 215, 218. 
Berezy-arrti, man, II, 206. 
Bfdirafsh. man, II, 80. n 6. 
Bitch (killing a), 173 ; how treated, 

175-180. 

Bivadangha, man, II, 210. 
Bodily punishments, xcix. 



Bohlen (P. de), xxii. 

B6i, genius, II, 94- n *, i 2 - n 5- 

Borrowing, 34. n 2. 

B6r-t6ra, man, II, 326. n 8. 

Brisson, xin. 

Buddhists, H, 184. n 2. 

Btfci, demon, II, 49, 5. 

B%i-sravah, man, II, 205. 

B%ra, man, II, 209. 

BCiidhi, demon, 141, 142. 

Bfiidhisa, demon, 141, 142. 

Bfiiti, demon, 204, 218. 

Bull, 224; 11,8,16,89, 245. 

Burial, xlv. 

Burnouf, xxiii. 

Bfishygsta, demon, Ixvii, 141, 142, 

193 5 II, 154, 284, 287, 323. 
Bylrshan, prince, II, 222. n 5, 303. 

Caboul, land, II, 62. n 5. 
Carrier alone, 26. 
Caspian sea, II, 117. n 6. 
Cerdo, man, xli. n 5. 
Ceylon, land, II, 59- n 2. 
Chafimrdsh, bird, II, 173- n r - 
China, land, II, 227. n i, 288. n 7. 
Chinon (G. Du), xiu, 167. n 1-3. 
Chionitae, people, II, 117* n 6. 
Christianity, xli. 
Christians, II, 161. 
Cleanser, false, 131. 
Cleanser's fees, 129. 
Clothesofthe unclean woman, 63-64 ; 

thrown on the dead, 65 ; defiled 

by the dead, 77 ; how cleansed, 

78-79. 

Clouds destroy diseases, 224. 
Cock. See Parddaw. 
Commodianus quoted, II, 141. n 3. 
Contracts, xcv, 35-39, 45. 
Corpse, eating, 79, 80. 
Corpses exposed, xci, 52. n 5, 74. 
Courage, genius, II, zo, 18. 
Cow, formula to cleanse the, 140. 
Croesus, li. 

Curse, II, 12. n 13, 153. 
Cyclops, II, 280. n 4. 
Cyrus* dream, 13. n i ; introduces 

Magism to Persia, li. 

Dalnd-vazah, man, II, 214. 
DaSvas, Ixxx, 30, 102, 205; II, 32, 
110,126,153,154,161,163,188, 

^ a W If *tV 62 > 292> 

Daivd-/bu, man, II, 204. 
Dahae, people, II, 227. n 2, 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



369 



Dahak, demon, II, 298.111. SeeA*i 
Dahaka. 

D&hi countries. II. 227. 

Dai, II, 6. n n. 

Diitfk river, 5. n 2, n 3. 

Dfcitya river, 15, 204 ; II, 30, 57, 78, 
80, 1 1 6, 117, 279, 282. 

Dftityti-gatu, xc, 113-116. 

Daiwi, demon, 218. 

Dakhmas, xc,24, 26, 52, 73-74, 86-88, 
94- n 3. 

Damlvand, mount, 2 ; 1 1,59,61,95^ 2. 

Dna, man, II, 296. 

Danghu-fridhah, man, II, 214. 

Danghu-srfita, man, II, 214. 

Danus, men, II, 71, 189. 

Dlrayaf-ratha, man, II, 210. 

Dare^a nver, xlix, 205, 207. 

Danus, II, 107. 

Darrinika, man, II, 117, 280. 

Dashtimista'n, xciv. n 3, 180-183. 

DcLrtstghm, man, II, 218. 

Dajtayana, man, II, 296. 

Dltem, Ixxviii. n 3. 

Daungha, man, II, 204. 

Dawiimashi, man, II, 217. 

Dizgaragau, man, II, 219. 

Dazgaraspa, man, II, 209. 

Dead matter, c, 49, 50. 

Deva, Ixxx. 

Din Yajt, II, 264-269. 

Dmkart, xxxii ; II, i59-n 3, 170. n 3. 

Diseases created by Ahriman, xciii, 
230 ; cured by Thrrta, 219-223 ; 
by Airyaman, 233-235. See 
Medicine, Thra&taona. 

Dis Het, place, II, 253. n 3. 

Dijti, measure, 187. 

Dusukht, II, 254. 

Dog, 58, 180; described, 151-172, 
161-163; praised, 163; how 
fed, 173; offences to, 153-155; 
mad, 159-160; yellow-eared, 
Ixxxviii. See Sagdid, Vangh&- 
para, Vohunazga, Zainmyan- 
gura, 

Drafra, II, 26. n 5. 

Draona, 56. See Drdn. 

Draoshijviu, mount, II, 288. 

Dritha, man, II, 210. 

Dregvaaf, demon, Ixvii. 

Dried corpse, 103. 

Diiwi, demon, 218. 

Drdn ceremony, II, 319. n i. 

Drqg, demon, Ixxxvi, 24 ; her para- 
mours, 196-200, 217 ; II, 29, 47, 



03] 



B 



59, 141, 160, 163, 183, 197, 205, 

221, 290, 2 9 I, 292, 306, 307, 

335- 

skln, demon, II, 334. n 5. 
, demon, Ixvii, Ixxii, Ixxiv. 
Drvaspa, genius, II, 9, 17, 110-118, 

245. n i. 
Dram, II, 307. 

Dualism, xliii, xliv. n i, Ivi, Ixxi. 
Dfiraeka&ta, man, II, 71. 
Diish-hdmat Hell, II, 317. n i. 
Duzaka, animal, 152. 
Dusyihrya, II, 107, 108. 
Dvara^/s, Ixvii, 205. 
Dvizdah hSmist, II, 165. n 2. 

Earth, worship of the, xci. n 3 ; genius 
of the, II, n, 19; what pleases 
and what grieves her, 21-33; 
formulas to purify her, 140 ; how 
long unclean from the dead, 
66-67; Yarftothe, 11,286. 

Elements (worship of), liv. 

Ehsaeusonthe Fire-worship, 50. n 3. 

Ephialtes, II, 297. n i. 

Epic (the Persian), Iv. 

EredaMedhn, woman,II,i 95^2,2 2 6. 

Eredhwa, man, II, 215. 

Erekhsha, man, II, 95, 103. 

Erenava^, woman, 11,62, 113, 255,227. 

Erethf, genius, II, u, 18, 282. 

Erezifya, mount, II, 65, 287. 

Erezisha, mount, II, 288. 

Eiezrlspa, man, II, 216. 

Erezura, mount, II, 287. 

Erezvanl-danghu, man, II, 218. 

Erskine, xxii. 

9 ErviMv8pos, 8. n 2. 

Eudemos, liv. 

Evil eye of Ahriman, 230. n 4. 

Evil-Thought Hell, II, 320. 

Word Hell, II, 320. 

Deed Hell, II, 320. 

Farhangi Jehangiri, xxii. 

Farsistan, II, 123. n 3. 

Farvardin Yajt, II, 179. 

FeridQn, II, 297. n 5. 

Fimbul winter, n. 

Firdausi quoted, 167. n 3 ; II, s8.n i, 
60. n 2, 62. n 2, n 4, 63. n i, 
64. n 2, 66. n 2, n IT, 67. n 4, 
n 5, n 6, 68. n 3, 71. n 7, So. n i, 
n 6, n 7, 81. n 2, 114. n 2, 207. 
n 3, 208. n 2, 222. n 5, 223. n 5> 
224. n 6, 237. n 3, 241. n a, 

b 



370 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



253. n 3> 292. n i, 293. n 6, 

297. n 5i 327. n 8. 
Fire, its punty, xx, Ixxxix ; how de- 

filed, 9, 80, no, 168. n 7 ; how 

purified, 135 ; its ranocuity, 51 ; 

son of Ahura Mazda, II, 322. n 5. 
FireNyayw, II, 349, 35^-3 6 i- 
Forest of the holy questions, 234. 
Formulas to cleanse a house, fire, 

water, &c., 133-138, 139-14- 
Frabiretar, pnest, 63, 64. n i, 78, 

79, 332- 

Fiida^-gadman, man, II, 220. n i. 
Fradadhafshu, region, 216 ; II, 123, 

154, 171, 216. n 5, 320. n i. 
Fradaf-jfoarenah, man, II, 219. 
Fiidaf-nara, man, II, 217. 
Fradhakluti, the son of the jar, II, 

224. 

Fradhidhaya, II, 203. 
Fri&thra, II, 218. 
Frifcya, II, 213. 
Franghadh, woman, II, 225. 
Frangrasyan, man, II, 64, 114, 115, 

223. n i, 278, 300-302, 304, 305, 

307. See Afrasyib. 
Fr&nya, man, II, 204. 
Fraoraortra, II, 2x7. 
Fraorepa, mount, II, 287. 
FrSpayau, mount, II, 289. 
Fririzi, man, II, 217. 
Fraser, xiv. 

Fraj-ham-vareta, man, II, 206. 
Frashaortra, man, II, 77. n i, 2071 

208, 224. n 3, 331, 342, 343- 

Frashavakhsha, man, II, 210. 

Frashidvard, man, II, 206. n 2. 

Frashdkareta, man, II, 206. 

Frasptte, 175. 

FrasrGtaYa, man, II, 216. 

Fiita, man, II, 203. 

FratSra, man, II, 218. 

Frava, man, II, 214. 

Frva*ku, mount, II, 288. 

Fravashis, Ixxiv. n i, 2x5 ; II, 6, 10, 
13, 14, 17, 20, 26, 3 3 .n 2, 36, 38, 
102,120,136,145,322,350,352. 

Frayaodha, man, II, 209. 

Frflya^ratha, man, II, 210. 

Frayazaata, man, II, 212, 225. 

Frazdfcaava, lake, II, 79. 

FrSn, woman, II, 204. n i. See 



Frogs, Ahrimanian creatures, 59. n4, 

167. 

Fr6hakafra, man, II, 219. 
Frya, man, II, 211, 215. 
FrySna, family, II, 71, 216. 
FjQja-mathra, II, 27. 
Funerals, 26, 94-97. 
Furrows for purification, 122 ; II, 

50, 51- 

Gadha, 224. 

GaSvani, man, II, 213. 

Ga*h, xxx. 

Gihamblr, II, 192. n i. 

Grodarewa, demon, II, 63, 217, 255, 

256. n x, 293. 
Gaokerena,plant,lxix,2i9,22i; II, 



FrSnah, man, II, 212. 
,Fni, woman, iII,224 ; 2 II, 2 2 5. 
an, 11,217. 



Gaoma^, man, II, 218. 
Gaopi-vanghu, man, II, 211. 
Gaotema, man, II, 184. 
Gar6-demana, II, 177. See Gard- 

nmana and Gardthmln. 
Gard-nmina, 214, 215, 225 ; II, 43, 

127,133,152,200,291,335,33^ 

356. 

Gardthmin, II, 317. n 4, 337. n 5. 
Garshah, II, 33. n i. 
Garjta, man, II, 218. 
Gan, demon, II, 50. 
Gathas, liii, 215. 
Gaumita, man, Iv. n i. 
Gluri, man, II, 215. 
Gavayan, man, II, 203. 
Gayadhlsti, man, II, 212, 225. 
Gaya,man,II,35o. See Gaya Mare- 

tan and Gaydmanf. 
Gaya Maretan, man, Ixxviii; II, 

98. n 3, 200, 227. 
Gaydmar^, man, 20. n 4 ; II, 33. n z, 

58. n i. 

Ghilan, land, II, 61. n 3, 117. n 6. 
Ghnana, 175. 
Ghosel, xcv. 

Giiimi, man, II, 208. n 2. 
Glory (kwgly), II, 7, 8, *i, 15, 18, 

i3 6 , 153,156, 170,232 ; praised, 

280-309. 

(Aryan), 216. 
Gdg&rasp, man, II, 226. n 5. 
G6mlz, IXXX.TI, Ixxxviii. 
Good-Thought Paradise, II, 317. 

Word Paradise, II, 3 1 7) 342. n 8. 

Deed Paradise, II, 317. 
GdpatishUb, man, 20. n 2 ; II, 114. 

n 7, 307. n 6. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



371 



G6j, genius, II, 9, 17, 88, 110-118 

(G8j Yajt). 

G8jti Frysin, II, 72. n 5. 
GSjfirfin, genius, II, 245. n i. 
Gotama, man, II, 184. n 2. 
Gravaratu, man, II, 217. 
Greeks on Magism, xii. 
Gudha, river (?), II, 255. 
Gurezm, man, II, 207. n 3. See 

Kav&razem. 

Gushasp (fire), II, 7. n 5. 
Gushnasp (fire), II, 7. n 5. 
Gustahm, II, 71. n 7, 206. n i. 
Gujtasp, man, II, 8. n 2, 70. n i, 

207. n 3, 256. n 3, 267. n 3. See 



Gad bSsh, II, 173. n i. 

Gaghrfidh, woman, II, 225. 

Gahi, demon, Ixvii, 200, 224, 228 ; 

H, 45, 47, 226. 

Garni, demon, 222, 223, 224, 228. 
Gim$sp, man, xxxviii; II, 70. n i, 

77. n i, 329. n 6. 
Gimaspa,man, II, 70, 207, 208, 219, 

325, a* 6 , 328, 33i- 
GamshSd, man, 10. See Yima. 
Ganara, man, II, 213. 
Gar6-danghu, man, II, 210. 
Gard-vanghu, II, 212. 
Gatara, mount, II, 289. 
GMn, river, II, 95. n 2. 
Glrti, man, II, 212. 

Habaspa, man, II, 206. 
Hadhanalpata, 94. n x, 166 ; II, 361. 
Hldhdkht Svak hdmdst, II, 165. n 2. 
Hadhdkht Nask, xxxi ; II, 159, 311. 
HaStuman*, nver, 2, 8, 216 ; II, 302. 
Haftoiring, II, 89. n 5. See Haptdi- 

ringa. 

Hair, how disposed of, 186. 
Uamankuna, mount, II, 288. 
HamaspaflnaSdha, II, 192. 
Ham-beretar vanghvam, man, II, 

211. 

Hamtin, sea, II, 302. n 2. 
Hana, 27. 

Hanghauryaungh, man, II, 208. 
Haoma, lii. n z, Ixix, 23. n i, 72 ; II, 

12,20,47,102, 114, 141, 146. n 2, 

246, 271, 77, 3". 
Haomd-varenah, man, II, 214. 
Haoshyangha, king, II, 58, 224, 251, 

275, 292. 
Haperesi wood, II, 245. 

sb 



Hapta Hindu, 2. 

Hapt8iriga, II, 9, 16, 97, 175, 194. 

HaraBerezaiti, mount, 213,225,226, 
227,228; 11,58, 122,132,150, 

174, 251, 275- 
Harahvaiti, nver, 2. 
Haraiti Bareza, mount, II, 1x4, 132, 

141, 174, 175, 277, 287. 
Haredhaspa, man, II, 214. 
Hargrfid, river, II, 123. n 4. 
HarSyu, river, 2, 7 ; II, 123. 
Harfit, nver, 7. n 10. 
Haryispotokhm tree, 54. n 2. 
Haji, demon, II, 49, 50. 
Hathra, measure, 156. 
Haurvata^, genius, IxXjIxxi; 11,5, 14, 

3 1, 37, 40, 48-52 (Khordad Yajt), 

93, 143, 308, 312. 
HEvanan, priest, 63, 64. n i, 78, 79 ; 

TT * n .' 332 ' 
Havani. 23. n a. 

Hawk,lxxiii. 

Head, people without a, 9. n 8. 
Heaven, 207, 208; II, n, 19. 
Hell, 24. n x, 75. n 2, 204. n 2, 2x8 ; 

II, 320. 

Hell's dog, Ixxxvii. 
Helmend, nver, 8.n 2 ; II, 302. n 3. 

See Ha&tumafflf. 
Herat, land, II, 123. n 4, 288. 
Heresy, 172. 

Heretics. See Ashemaogha. 
Hermippus, xlii. 
Herodotus, xliv, lix, 169. 
Highwaymen, xix. n x. 
Hitdspa, man, II, 255, 296. 
Hoazarddathhri-@ Par8jtyar6, man. 

II, 2x0. n 2. 

Holy word, 208. SeeMathraSpe*ta. 
H8m, 59. n 4. See Haoma. 
Honover, Ixix, 98. n 2. See Ahuna 

Vairya. 

Horapollo, II, 240. n 2. 
House, formula to purify a, 139. 
Hutravikhs, man, II, 219. 
Hugtfu, man, II, 2x5. 
Hukairya, mount, II, 52, 54, 76, 81, 



xi2, 174, 181, 253. 
Hukht Paradise, II, 3x7. 
Hu^ithra, 11,225. 
Huraa, woman, II, 224. 
Humii, woman, II, 224. n 6. 
Huxnat Paradise, II, 3x7. 
Humlyaka, people, II, 80. 
Hunnj, II, 205. n 4. 

2 



372 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



Hunus, people, II, 205. 

Husravah, king, 11,65, 114, 115,222, 
223, 256, 257,278, 303, 3>7, 37, 
328,338. SeeKhosrav. 

lake, II, 7, 15, 300- * *> 358. 
See Husrfi. 

Husrfi, lake, II, 300. n 2. 
Hujkyaothna, man, II, 207, 208. 
Hutaosa, woman, II, 77- a i, 116, 

224, 257, 258. n i, 279, 327. n i. 
Huvasp, man, II, 217. n i. 
Huytirya, II, 107. 
Huyazata, man, II, 214. 
1-foadhata, man, II, 215. 
foatvadatha, xlv. 
JMinzem, land, II, 123. 
ffoakhshathra, man, 214. 
/foamratha, lix. n 4, 123, 136, 154, 

171, 216. n i, 313. 
Hvanvznt, man, II, 214. 

mount, II, 95, 103, 104. n 3. 
Ifoaredhi, woman, II, 225. 
Hvare-^airman, man, II, 218, 219. 
lfc;are-ithra, man, 21. n 2 ; II, 201. 

n i, 204. 
ffaarend, hui, Ixiii. n i; II, 283, 

286-309. See Glory. 
Jfcrareza, man, II, 218. 
Hvarsht Paradise, II, 317. 
Hvaspa, II, 217. 
Ifoembya, man, II, 224. n 2. 
jEfoogvi, woman, Ixxix. 
JFfoov, woman, II, 195. n 2. 
JiFw6va, family, II, 77, 207. 
Hvdvi, woman, II, 207, 224, 267. 
.ffuyaona, people, II, 79. n i, 117, 

205. a 4, 280. 
Hyde, xiv. 

laxartes, river, II, 123. n 4. 
Indo-Iraman elements inMazdeism, 

Ivii. 
Indra, a demon, Ixxii, Ixxx, 135, 2 18 ; 

II, 141. n 3. 
Indus, river, 3. 
Inexpiable crimes, c. 
Infanticide, II, 335. 
Iran, land, II, 123. n 2. 
Ir&nvg-,land,xlix,5.n4; II, 289^3. 
Isa^ vaster, man, 21. n 2 ; II, 204. n i, 

224. n 4. 

Isa/-vistra, man, II, 201. n i, 204. 
Isfendyir, 220. n 2 ; II, 79. n 4, 8 r, 

206. n 2, 241. n 2, 329. n 3. 
Ishuj^athakhto,lxviiL 

Isvaf, man, II, 203. 



IjavaS, mount, II, 988. 
Lrkata, land, II, 123, 288, 
Ithye^d, demon, Ixviii. 

Joint responsibility, 36. n x. 
ones (William), xv- 

Kadrva-aspa, mount, II, 289. 
KaSva, man, II, 217. 
Kahrkana family, II, 219. 
Kahrkatls, bird, 193. 
Kafoaredha,demon,lxix; II, 45. n i. 
K&fougi, demon, 228. 
Kakahyu, mount, II, 288. 
KalasySk Jii. n i. See Krasiak. 
Kamak, bird, II, 296, n 2. 
Klmak-su^, man, 220. n i. 
Kamak-vakhshLrn, man, II, 220. n i. 
Kang dea, land, II, 67, 68, 204. n i, 

288. n 5, 329. n 7. 
Kanuka, woman, II, 225. 
Kaomsa, mount, II, 289. 
Kapasti, 141. 
Kapdf, wolf, II, 295. n 4. 
Kapul, land, 2. 
Kara, fish, 217; II, 239, 266. See 

Kar mSht. 

Kara Asabana, man, II, 71. 
Karapan, II, 26. n 2. 
Kardftn. See Gerdo. 
Klren, man, II, 209. 
Karesna, man, II, 209. 
Karetd-dasu, II, 322. 
Kar maM, 59. n 4. See Kara. 
Karshiptan, bird, Ixxviii, 21 ; II, 

203. n 4, 217. n 2. 
Karshvares, lix. n 4, 207, 216; II, 

"3, 134, 141, 142, I54> i*3> 

181. n 2, 182, 254, 292, 293. 
Karsivaz, man, II, 64. n x, 305. n 2. 

See Keresavazda. 
Kasava, lake, Ixxix, 206 ; II, 195. n 2, 

226. n i, 302, 307. 
Kasupatu, man, II, 211. 
Kasvi, 218. 
Kata, II, 218. 
Kat3,yim, II, 297. n 5. 
Katu, man, II, 213. 
Kaus, king, II, 222. n 5, 242. n i. 

See lisa, Usadha. 
Kavanda, demon, 141. 
Kavirazem, man, II, 207. See Gu- 

rezin* 
Kavita, king, II, 65. n x, 222, 303. 

See Qpbad. 
Kavis, heretics, II, 26. n 2. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



373 



Kavis, kings, II, 2 1 3, 2 1 5, 218. See 
Aipiv8hu, Apfvfch, AHJ, Arntin, 
Arshan, Byarshan, Husravah, 
Kavata, Kaus, Khosrav, Pashtn, 
Qpbad, Syavakhsh, Sylvar- 
shana, Usa, Usadha. 

Kavadha, Ixix. 

Kayin race, II, 302. n i, 

Keresani, man, In. n i. 

Keresaokhshan, man, II, 205. 

Keresaspa, man, Ixv, Ixxvi, 2, 7, 61. 
ni, 62, 195, 223, 255, 256. n i, 
295-297,307. 

Keresavazda, man, II, 304. See 
KarsSvaz. 

Khashm, demon, II, 224. n 2. See 
Alshma. 

Khnathaiti, demon, Ixvi, 7, 205 ; II, 
296. n 3. 

Khnenta, land, 7. 

Khorda Avasta, xxx. 

Khordld. See Haurvati/. 

Khordad Yart, II, 48-52. 

Kh6rsh&*Yajt, II, 87. 

Khosrav, king, II, 64. n i, 67. n 6, 
114. n 2, 222. n 6, 223. n 5, 
327. n 8. See Husravah. 

Khosrav Andshfrva'n, king, xxxiii. 

Khrafstra,lxxin, 5.113,75,76, 11,310. 

Khrafstraghna, 168. 

Khratu asna, gaoshd-sruta, II, 4, 13, 

_. 35,37- 

Khru, demon, 141, 142. 
Khruighni, demon, 141, 142. 
Khshaotha, mount, II, 95, 103. 
Khshathra vairya, genius, Ix, Ixxii, 
207, 220 ; II, 5, 14, 34, 36, 37, 

^ 4, 49, 95, 103, 14*, 35*- 
Khshathrd-^hnah, man, II, 212. 
KhshathrO-saoka, II, 67, 68. 
Khshvdiwraspa, man, II, 211, 212. 

n 2, 225. 

Kh-rtlvainya, man, II, 211. 
Khumbya, man, Ixxvi ; II, 224. n 2. 

See ffoembya. 
Khfir-ashm, II, 220. n i. 
KhfirsW-$har, II, 204. n i. 
Khvaniras, region, II, 220. n i. See 

JEfoaniratha. 

Khvarizem, land, II, 123. n 4. 
KimaGatha, 11,318. 
Kirman, land, 2. 
Kissahi Sanih, xxxvii. 
Kleuker, xvii. 
Kdirls, river, II, 289. n 3. 
Kdndrlsp, mountain, II, 289. n 2. 



KostJ,i8 9 .n3, 1 9 i.n 4 ; 11,349- 
Krasiik, II, 161. n 6. 
Kr/sinu, man, lii. n i. 
Kuleng Dis, place, II, 253. n 3. 
Kuda, demon, 217 ; II, 334. 
Kundi, demon, 141, 142. 
Kuftdiza, demon, 141, 142. 
Kvirata, place, II, 253. 



lake, II, 7, 15, 66, 114, 

115, 278, 300. n 2. 
Fakhra, land, 2, 9. 
^akhravik, bird, II, 217. n 2. 
.Kakhshni, man, II, 213* 
JTamru, bird, II, 210. 
jfethwamrfita, 134. 
JS^athwaraspa, man, II, 217. 
jmva*-bridge, Ixxxviii, 152, 190, 212- 

213, 215; II, 12., 20, 121. n i, 

335- n 2, 339. 
jEista, genius, II, 10, 18, 153, 164, 

166, 216, 264-269, 352. 
Xisti, genius, 216; II, u, 18, 164, 

1 66, 282. 

Law of Mazda, II, 10, 12, 18, 19, 39, 

153, 160, 164, 274, 35- 
Libations unclean, 93. 
Light (endless), Ixxxii 3 II, 177, 3*7, 

Ldhrasp, man, II, 78. n 3, 223. n 5. 
See Aurvaf-aspa. 

Malnakha, mount, II, 288. 
Magi as a Median tribe, xlvi, xlvii. 
Magism xxxiv. n 3, liv, 
Magophonia, 1. 
MagOr, II, 4. n 5. 
Mah&badian, 102. n 2* 
MahYart, II, 88-91. 
Mahraspand,man,II,329.n a ; genius : 

see Mathra Spewta. 
Maid, at the mva*-bridge. 213. 
biyd-maxmgha, man, i II, 203 



209 ; 2 II, 219. 
Malkojln, rain, 16. n i. 
Man, formulas to purify, 140. 
Manes, II, 179. 
Mani's heresy, xxxviii. 
Manichees, xxxix. xl. 
Manusha, mount, II, 287. 
ManQj->tfhar, man, II, 287. n 4. 
Manuj-Mhra, man, II, 222. 
Marcellmus, xlvi. 
Marcion, xli. n 5. 
Maretan, man. See Gaya. 
Margiana, land, II, 123. n 4. 



374 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



Margus, river, II, 123. n 4. 

Maruts, Ixxvii. 

Maryland, II, 123.114. 

Masan, land, 2. 

Masmoghan, xlviii. 

Materaus, II, 141. n 3. 

MathraSpewta, Ixxviii. n 6, 230, 231 ; 
11,12,19,160,164,166,200,285. 

Mathravaka, man, II, 208, 213, 

Maubedan Maubed, II, 149. n 4. 

Maubeds, xlvii. 

Mayava,man, II, 217. 

Mazana,Dae*vasof,lxvii.n2, 137, 188 ; 
II, 33, no, 163, 224, 251, 276. 

Mazda. See Ahura Mazda. 

Mazdak, man, xxxvi, xli. n 2. 

Mazdeism, evolution of, Ixxxi. 

MSzdravangha, man, II, 215. 

MazifLrvflU, mount, II, 288. 

Measures. See Aredvi. Ajti, Dijti, 
Hathra, Vibazu, Vftara, Vitasti, 
Yqgy&tl 

Media, seat of Magism, xlvi. 

Medicine, 83*86. 

Meiners, xvi. 

Melek Taus, Ixxiii. n 4- 

Menstruation, xciii; caused by Dae*- 
vas,i83.SeeMenstruous woman. 

Menstruous woman, treatment of a, 
181-183 ; intercourse with, 173, 
184, 185, 202. 

Merezfjbmya, man, II, 219. 

Merezu, man, 217. 

Microcosm, 187. n 2. 

Mihir Nyayi/, II, 349, 353-355- 

Mihir Yaxt, II, 119-158. 

Mmo/Khr, man, xlvii ; II, 95. n 2, 
114.117. 

Mithra, genius, created by Ahura, 
Ixi ; his attributes, Ixi ni ; co- 
equal to Ahura, Ix ; praised, II, 
119-158 (Mmir Yajt), 23, 87, 
n 4, 208; II, 5, 9, 14, 17>3*,38, 
39,86,87,95,166,181, 184,191, 
200,202,244,274, 327, 329, 34*i 
35o> 351 J seizes the glory ot 
Yima,II,294; God of contracts, 
48 ; Mihir NyayLr, II, 353-355, 

Mithra and Ahura, II, 148, 158, 351, 

Mitihradruges, 48. n 2 ; II, 120. n 2, 

129, 138. n i, 248. 
Mithnac mysteries, II. 151. n 3. 
Mitra-Varua, Ix. 
Mi*a, land, II, 2x8. 
Moghu-*bu, lii. 



Moon,fl26-227; 11,8, 16, 176, 88-91 
(Mah Yart), 355 (MahNySyij). 

Mountain of the holy questions, 234. 

Mountains, 1 1, n, 19; enumerated, 
287-289. 

Mouru, land, 2, 6; II, 123. 

Mfiidhi, demon, 141, 142. 

Murghab, river, II, 123. n 4. 

Myazda, Ixix. 

Nabinazdirfa, 36. n 3. 

Naglfar, 186. n 3. 

Nails, xcii, 187. 

NairyO-sangha, god, Ixx, 214, 231- 
233; II, 8, 16, 132, 162, 339, 
358. See Neryosengh. 

NSfotik, river, II, 216. n i. 

Nanirlsti, man, II, 213. 

Nanghurnuzu, mount, II, 288. 

Naotara, family, II, 66. n n, 71, 77, 
206 ; Naotaras, II, 257 ; pursue 
Ashi, II, 280-281. See Nodar. 

Naptya, man, II, 206. 

NaraVansa, god, Ixx, 231. n 2. 

Nasa-burner, in. 

Nasatyas, Ixxxi. 

Nastfir, man, II, 207. n 2. 

Nasu, demon, 26 ; contagion of, 75, 
76-77, 57-60, 70, 71, 72, 80, 
103-110, 205; expelled, 122- 
129, 143 ; II, 49, 50, 51. 

Naunghaitya, demon, Ixxii, 135, 218. 

Nemetka wood, II, 245. 

Nemfivanghu, man, II, 210. 

Neo-Platomcians, xiii. 

Neremyazdana, man, II, 211. 

Neryosengh, II, 195. n 2. SeeNairyS- 
sangha. 

Nikolaus, li. 

Nirang, 63. 

Nicra/a, 6. n 6. 

Nis&ya, land, 2, 6. 

Nivika, man, II, 296. 

Nodar, man, II, 206. n i, 221. n 9.,, 
See Naotara. 

Nosks,xxxii; 11,159. SeeHadhdkht. 

Nfi zldt, 119. 

Ny4yir,xxx; 11,349-361, 

Oath, formula of, 48. n i ; false, 46. 

Oedipus, II, 72. n 5. 

Ormazd, II, 177. n i. See Ahura 

Mazda. 
6shdashtar, mount, II, 33. n i, 287. 

n 5. See Ushi-darena. 
UshSdar Blmt, man, II, 79. n 3, 164. 

n i, 220. n 3, 226. n i. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



375 



Oshgdar Mah, II, 164. n i, 220. n 2. 

Otus, II, 297. n i. 

Oxus, nver, 3 ; II, 123. n 4, 227.11 2. 

Fadashkhvargar mountains, 2 ; II, 



PaSsanghanu, man, II, 225. 

PaSshata, man, II, 203. 

Paeshatah, man, II, 213. 

Paeshatah Paitisrira, man, II, 216. 

Paejij, demon, II, 309. 

Painkas, demons, Ixvi, ri2, 142, 222, 
223,228; 11,26,43,50,57,59, 
66, 86, 95, 97, 104, 105, 128,134, 
161, 223, 232, 247, 252, 296. 
See Khnathaiti, Dusyairya. 

Pairirta-khshudra, 27. 

Painjtira, man, II, 210. 

Paitidratha, man, II, 210. 

Paitba, demon, 218. 

Paitivangha, man, II, 210. 

Paityarjvaaf, man, II, 210. 

Paoiry6-*kasha, II, 68. n 2, 180. n i. 

Paradhata, man, 220. n 3 ; II, 7. n 2, 
58, 251. 

Paradise, 213; II, 317, 344- 

Paravidyi, II, 4. n 5. 

PErendi, genius, Ixx ; II, 1 1, 18, 104, 
136, 330. 

Paretacene, land, II, 123. n 4. 

Pari. See Painkas. 

Par6danr, bird, 193, 194; II, 322. 

Parddasma, man, II, 218. 

Parshata, man, II, 217. 

Parshaf-gauj, man, II, 203, 219. 

Parsis, xi. 

Pashfin (Kai), prince, II, 222. n 5. 

Patet, c, 32. n 3, 56. n 2. 

Pathana, man, II, 293. 

Ptt-Khosrav, man, II, 205. n 6. 

Paulo de St. Barthelemy, xxi. 

Pausanias, xlii. 

Payanghr8-makhjti, man, II, 214. 

Pizinah, man, II, 214. 

Peace, II, 164, 249. See Akhrti. 

Peacock, Ixxxiii. n 4. 

Privaepa, II, 73. 

Pihan, man, II, 293. n 4* 

Penalties, in the Vendidad, xcviii ; 
ior a woman unclean dnnking 
water, 91 ; for breach of con- 
tract, 37 ; for burning dead 
matter, in; for burying a 
corpse, 31 ; for defiling fire or 
water, 80-8 1 ; a river or trees, 
n 8; the ground, 67-69; for 



eating of a corpse, 80 ; for giv- 
ing bad food to a dog. 156-158 ; 
for a false oath, 47-48 ; for a 
false cleanser, 131 ; for inter- 
course with a menstruous wo- 
man, 184-185, 202 ; for killing 
a Vanghlpara dog, 153 ; any 
dog, 165-169 ; for smiting a dog, 
I53-I55 ;abitch pregnant,i 80; 
for sodomy, m.n i; for sowing 
or watering the ground un- 
clean, 67 ; ior throwing clothes 
on the dead, 99-100. 

Penitence, c, 32. See Patet. 

Penom, xciii, 168. n 7. 

Perethu-afzem, man, II, 219. 

Perethu-arjti, man, II, 206. 

Persian inscriptions, xxv. 

religion, kv. 
Peshana, man, II, 79. 
Peshdadians, men, II, 58. n i. See 

Paradhata. 

Peshd-angha, man, II, 80. 

Pesh6tanu, Ixxvi, xcvi, 39, 4 o, 41, 42, 
43, 44, 49, 50, *i 67, 68, 74, 
91, 103, 144, 154, 157, 160, 

172-174- 

prince, II, 329. 
PSshyinsii, land, 2 ; II, 195. n i, 

224. n 2. 

Peshydtanfi, prince, II, 204. n i. 
Physicians, 83-86. 
Pidha family, II, 219. 
Phin Vteah, man, II, 67. n 4. 
Pisanah, lake, II, 62. 

prince, II, 222, 303. 
Pijfa, valley, II, 62. n 5. 
Pirkyaothna, man, II, 207. 
Pitaona, man, II, 296. 
Pitr/s, Ixxiv. n i ; II, 179* 
Planets, II, 92, 176. n 2. 
Plmy, 9. n8; II, 227. n i. 
Plutarchus, xlvii ; II, 92. 
Pollution, xoo-ioi, 198. 
Poseidon, II, 152. n 5. 
Pouru-bangha, man, II, 218. 
Pourudh&khjti, II, 70, 211, 212, 225. 
Pouru-^ra, man, II, 221. 
Pouru-lista, man, II, 204. n i, 224. 
Pourushaspa, man, 205, 206, 218 ; 

II, 58, 203. n i, 325, 3*8. 
Pourorti, man, II, 213. 
Pouruta, land, II, 123. 
Priest, wandering, 157. n i, 162. n i ; 

unworthy, 189. 
Priesthood, xlvii. 



376 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



Proclus, sin. 
Prodicus, xm, xlii. n i. 

Pfiitikasea,53, 54- 

Puramdhi, goddess, Ixx. 

Purification, of clothes, 77-79> 209. 
n 8; corpse-bearers, 96; cow, 
92; earth, 86; Haoma, 72; 
house, 93-94 J fi re 110-112; 
man, 103-110, 119-129; sacri- 
ficial implements, 60; water, 
69-72; ways, 97-99; woman 
delivered of a child, 61, 89-91 ; 
wood, 81-83; in the wilder- 
ness, 116-119. SeeBarashnto, 
Ghosel, St-shfi. 

Purity, Ixxxv, 55. 

Pfir-t8ra, man, II, 326. n 8. 

Purusha, II, 88. n 4. 

Qobad, king, II, 222. n 3. See 
Kavata. 

Ra&nana, mount, II, 288. 
Ralva**, mount, II, 8, 15, 289, 356. 
Ragha, land, 2, 8. See Rai. 
Rai, land, xlyii. 
Rama Hvlstra, genius, Ixiv, 23 ; II, 

5,9,14*17,18,34,36,38,119, 

158, 249, 263, 327. 
Ram day, II, 88. 
Ram Tart, II, 249. 
Rangha, river, 3 ; II, 69, 73, 146, 173, 

255, 326, 328. 
Raoidhita, mount, II, 287. 
Raoas->&ajman, man, II, 216, 219. 
Raosdya, country, II, 218. 
Rapitvin, II, 159. 
Rasa, 3. 

Rasastaf, genius, II, n, 18, 282. 
Rashidaddin, xliii. 
Rashn Ya/t, II, 168-178. 
Rashnu, genius,lxi, xcix, 48, 87. n 4 ; 

II, 6, 9, 15, 17, 36, 38, 40, 129, 

139, 145, 152, 156, 1*4, 1*6, 
168-178, 181, 191, 200, 244, 274, 

283, 337, 342. 
Rask, xxii. 

Raspi. See Rathwirkare. 
Rlstare-vaghaatf, man, II, 209. 
Rata, genius, Ixx, 209 ; II, 5, I4 , 36, 

37, 40, 330, 338. 

Rathwukare,priest,64,78,795 n, 33 2. 
Ratu, pnest, 56, 91. 
Rava*/, man, II, 2x7. 
Raven, an incarnation of Victory, II, 

236 ; of Glory, 394. n 3. 



Rlvand, mount, 289. n i. 

Richardson, xvi. 

Rivers, Seven, 9. 

Romans on Manes, II, 192. 

Romer, xxv. n. 

R6shan6-&jm, man, II, 220. n i. 

RoyishnBmand, mount, II, 287. n 9. 

Rfidabah, woman, II, 241. n 2. 

Rum, country, II, 226. n 6. See 

Arfim. 
Rustam, man, II, 241. n 2, 297. n 5. 

Sacrifice, Mazdean, Ixviii ; to Ahura 

Mazda, 209 ; to Ashi Vanguhi, 

II, 275-280 ; its rules, 280-282 ; 

to Ardvi Sfira Anihita. 
Sacnficial implements, how cleansed, 

60. 

Sacy (S. de), xix. 
Sadhanah, man, II, 214. 
Sadis, 87. n 4; II, 314. See Sid8s. 
SaSna, bird, II, 203, 219, 242. 
Salni, demon, II, 49, 50. 
Sagdtd, Ixxxvi, 26. n 2, 75, 97, "7- 

n 2, n 3. 

Siini countries, II, 227. 
Sairima, II, 62. n 2, 226. n 6. 
Sainmyan countries, II, 226, 227. 
SainvflU, mount, II, 288. 
Saka, II, z6i. n 4. 
Slma, man, II, 195, 223, 255. n 4. 
Sanaka, II, 146, 173. 
Saoka, genius, 215, 230, 231 ; II, 4, 

13, 3<>, 35, 37, 48, 1 60. 
Saokanta, mount, II, 352. 
Saoshyarf, man, Ixvii, Ixxix, 205; 

11,165,167,184,189,195^2, 

197, 21 1. n i, 220, 224. n 3, 226. 

n 3, 227, 270, 306. See Sdshyds. 
Srana, 221. n i. 
Sardar, 166. n 5. 
Sariphi, II, 65. n 2. 
Satava&sa, star, II, 9, 16, 92, 96, 190. 
Satve^s, star, II, 89. n 5. 
Saukavastan, land, II, 114. 
Saungha, man, II, 218. 
Sauru, demon, Ixviii, Ixxii, Ixxxi, 

135,218; 11,123,136,154,171. 
Savahi, region, II, 210. n 2, 216. 
SavanghaviU, woman, II, 62, 113, 

355, 277- 

Siyugdri, man, II, 71, 212. 
Scythes, II, 161. n 4. 
Scythian theory of Magism, Ivi. 
Seistan, land, II, 123. n 3, 288. n 2. 
Selm, man. See Sainma. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



377 



Seoses, man, xlv. 

Shadow, xlui. n 2. 

S liaeta. 175* 

Shagad, man, II, 297. n 5. 

Shahrinaz, II, 62. n 2. 

Shahnvar, II, 85. See Khshathra 

vairya. 

Shapur II, xxxiii, xxxvii. 
Shtz, land, xlvii, xlix. 
Sid8s, II, 314. SeeSadis. 
Stfidava, II, 288. 
Si&dav, II, 288. n 5. 
Stmaesi, II, 208. 
Shnfirgh, II, 173. n i, 203. n 4, 241. 

n 2. See Sinamrti and Salna. 
Smamrii,54.n2 ; II, i73.ni,2io.ni. 
Smd, II, 146. n 2. 
Singular dvandva, II, 81. n i. 
Sinus, II, 82. 
Strdzah, xxx ; II, 1-20. 
Si-shti, 117. n 2. 
SkaTayaf-ratha, II, 210. 
Slavonian fire-worship, 168. n 7. 
Smerdis, xlvi. 
Snaoya, man, II, 203. 
Snlvidhaka, man, II, 296-297. 
Sodomy, 101-102. 
S6k-t6ra, II, 326. n 8. 
Solomon, 18. n 3. 
Soma, 221. n 2. 
S8shy6s, II, 164. n i, 220. n i. 
Soul's fate after death, 212; II, 

314-321, 342-345. 
Sozomenos, xlvi. n i. 
Space, luminous, Ixxxii; II, 12, 20. 
Spells, 226; II, 51, 241, 341. 
Spendirmad, genius, II, 192. n i. 
Spend-dit, man, II, 329. n 3. 
Spengaghra, demon, Ixiii, 217. 
Speqgaurujka, man, II, 117, 280. 
Spesta, man, II, 217. 
Spetfta Armaiti, genius, Ix, Ixix, Ixxii, 

13, 15, 20. n 4, 3 1, i TO, 207, 208; 

11,5,14,31,32,33-1*1,36,37, 
40, 49, 142, x8i| 274, 340. 

Spewta Mainyu, II, 10, 18, 34, 157, 
183, 187, 297, 35i. 

Spejgtd-da'ta, man, II, 207, 289. 

Speatd-khratu, man, II, 213. 

Sphinx, 205. n 2. 

Spiritual weapons, 206. 

Spita'ma, man, II, 204. 

Spitavarena, mount, II, 289. 

Spiti, man, II, 216. 

Spitdkf-i AfispdsSnin, II, 216. n 5. 

Spitfir, man, II, 297. n 5. 



Spityura, man, II, 297. 

Sraosha, genius, Ixx, 87. n 4, 194, 

208,216,217; 11,6,15,25,30, 

38, 40, 129, 132, 145, 159-167 

(Sr8sh YajtJ, 200, 227, 274, 327, 

332, 339- 
Sraosha-varez, 56, 64, 78, 79, 91, 

192; 11,332. 
Sraoshfi-jfeirana, xhv. n 3, 56. n 2, 

151. n 3, 169. 
Sravah, 217. 

Srtraokhshan, man, II, 205. 
Sriravanghu, man, II, 215. 
Srit, woman, II, 204. n i. 
Sr6sh, 20. n 2 ; II, 9, 17. See 

Sraosha. 

Sr6sh Yajt Hadh6kht, II, 159-167. 
Si tita?-fedhri,woman, II,i95.n 2,226. 
Srfita/-spadha, man, II, 213. 
Srvara, II, 293. 
Staotar vahutahe ashylhl, II, 211, 

225. 

Staota ysnya, II, 335. 
Star region, II, 73. n 2. 
Stars, Ixxiv, 227; II, 9, 16, 89. n 5, 

92, 176. 

Stipi, man, II, 217. 
Stivaaf, man, II, 216. 
Strabo, xlvi, 22. n 2 ; II, 227. n 2. 
Strength, genius, II, 6, 15, 36, 38, &c. 
Sugdha, land, 2, 5; II, 123. 
Suidas, II, 151. n 3. 
Sun, 225; II, 8, 16, 85-87 (Sun 

Yajt),i 7 7,349(SunN>iyu). 
Sfiroyazata, man, II, 215. 
Susiana, land, II, 288. n 2. 
Sutfid Y&t, II, 152. n i. 
Syik-dmand, mount, II, 288. n 7. 
Syfcnak, man, II, 58. n i. 
Syimaka, mount, fl, 288. 
Syivakhsh, prince, II, 64. n i, 222. 

n 6. See Syavarshna. 
Sylvarsha'na, prince, II, 67. n 5, 1 14, 

115,222,278,303-304,326. See 

Syivakhsh. 
Syavaspi, man, II, 213. 

Sabdabrahma, II, 4. n 5. 

Ta&ra, mount, II, 58, 175, 251, 289. 
Ta-hia, people, II, 227. n 2. 
Tahmihif, prince, II, 252. n i. 
Tahmurath. prince, Ixxxii. 
Takhma-Urupa, prince, II, 60. n i, 

204, 252, 292, 326. 
TantfQhr, xcvi. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIIT. 



"anuperetha, xcvi. 

"anya, land, II, 218. 

fathravawf, man, II, 79, 117, 280. 

fauru, demon, Ixxu, 135,218; 11,213. 

fheopomp, xliii. 

Fhraetaona, kills Azi, xxiv, Ixni, 2, 

9; II,6l,63, 113, 321, 222. n 2, 

226. n 6, 242, 254, 277, 294, 307, 

326 ; as a physician, 219. 
Thrimithvafff, man, II, 204. 
Thrijamrtita, 134. 
Thrfe, man, II, 218. 
Thrita, man, 219-223 ; II, 2 12. See 

Abhavazdah. 
Thnti, woman, II, 224. 
Tigris, river, 3 ; II, 146. n 2, 173. n 2, 

n 3. 
Time, as the first principle, Ixxxh ; 

sovereign, II, 10, 18, 34, 352 ; 

boundless, 207, 208. 
Timotheus, xh. n 6. 
Tiridates, prince, xxxiv. 
Tir6-nakathwa, man, II, 219. 
Ttr Yarf, II, 92-109. 
Tirtrya, star, Ixiii, Ixviii, Ixxiv, 54. 



-si. *"*** c ' ""* " J9 

92-109 (Tfr Yaxt), 157, 173- n i, 

175, 284, 285, 351, 354- 
Tfeyarjti, man, II, 206. 
Tortoise, to be killed, 167. 
Traditional teaching, II, 12, 19, 165, 

1 66. 

Traitana, man, Ixiii. 
Tree of the eagle, II, 173. 
Tnta Aptya, man, Ixiii, 219. 
Tudhaska, mount, II, 288. 
TflmSspa, man, II, 221. 
Tfira, man, II, 62. n 2, 2i2.n 4, 217, 

226. n 6. 
Turanians, II, 67, 71, 189, 226 ; and 

Naotaras, II, 280-281. 
Tus, a city, 7, n 6. 
man, II, 66. n u, 71. n 7. See 

Tusa. 

Tusa,man,II,66,68,2o6.ni,28o.n4. 
Tujnamaiti, woman, IL 225. 
Tychsen, xviii. 

Udrya, mount, II, 289. 
Ukhshan, man, II, 215. 
Ukhsrtyaf-ereta, man, II, 79, 195. n 2, 

220, 226. n i. 
Ukhshya/-nemah, man, II, 195. n 2, 

220, 226. n 2. 

Ukhshy8ti, woman, II, 225. 
Ulysses, II, 280. n 4. 



Unlawful unions, 174-175. 

Upaman, duration of the, 145-151. 

Uriidhayaf, woman, II, 225. 

Urfidhu, man, U, 212. 

Urumiah, lake, II, 66. n 2, 300. n 2. 

Urunyd-vidhka, mount, II, 288. 

Urva, land, 2. 

Urvakhshaya, man, II, 255, 326. 

Urvartn, 190. n i. 

Urvisni, 94. n i. 

Urvata#-nara, man, 21 ; II, 201, 204, 

219. 

Usa, king, II, 65, 242. n i. 
Usadhan, king, II, 216, 222, 303. 

See Kaus. 

Usenemab, man, U, 212, 225. 
Ushaoma, mount, II, 288. 
Ushi-darena, mount, II, n, 19, 33. 

n i, 283, 285, 287, 309- 
Ushi-dhau, mount, II, 287, 302. 
Us-hiffdu, mount, II, 101. See AH- 

smd6m. 

Usminara, man, II, 203, 215. 
Usnaka, man, II, 214. 
Uspaljta-sa&ia family, II, 219. 
Uspasnu, man, U, 216 
Urta-warenah, man, II, 288. 
Ujtavaiti, II, 225, 314. 
Ujta*zata, man, II, 214. 
Ujtra, man, II, 214. 
UjtOnavand, land, xlviii. 
Utayuti-Vi/kavi, man, II, 219. 
Uzava,king, II,22i,222.n 3, 329^4. 
Uzya, man, II, 215. 

Vadhfe, woman, II, 225. 

Vagdhayangha, II, 210. 

Va&ereta, land, 2, 7. 

VaSsaka, man, II, 67, 68. 

Vafra NavSza, man, II, 68, 78. n 2, 

326, 328. 

Vafray/iu, mount, II, 288. 
Vafrdmand, mount, II, 288. n 7. 
Vagereza, man, IL 213. 
Vah Bad, woman, II, 226. n 2. See 

Vanghu-tedhn. 
VahmaSdita, man, II, 213. 
Vai, the two, Ixv, 
Vliti-gaSsa, mount, II, 288. 
VtkhedhrakaS, mount, II, 288. 
Valkash, man, xxxiii, xxxiv, xxxv. 
Vanand,star,II,89.ns. SeeVana#. 
Vanatf, star, II, 9, 16, 97. n 6, 175, 

3io, 351. 



Vanara, man, II, 205. 
Vaadaremaim, man, II, 



80. 



INDEX TO VOLS. IV AND XXIII. 



379 



Vangh&para, 152. 
Vanghazdau, II, 301. 
Vanghu-dhata, man, II, 215. 
Vanghu-fedhri, woman, II, 195. n 2, 

226. 

Vanguhi DSitya, river, xhx, ps.n 3, n 5. 
Var NSrang, II, 169, 170. n 3. 
Vara (Yima's), 16-21. 
Vara Asabana, man, II, 71. 
Varakasa, man, II, 212. 
Varasio, 210. n 2. 
Varaza, man, II, 203, 205. 
Vareda^-gadman, II, 220. n z. 
Varedaf-Avarenah, man, II, 220. 
Varedhakas, people, II, 117, 205. n 4, 

280. 
Varena, land, Ivm, Ixiii, a, 9, 113; 

II, 254. See Varenya. 
Viren^ana, bird, II, 241. 
Varenya Da&vas,lxvii, 136; 11,29,33, 

59,136,144,154,197,234,251. 
Viresha, bird, II, 296. n 2. 
Vareshava, II, 296. 
Vareshnu, II, 208. 
Varesmapa, man, II, 213. 
Varesm6-raoah, man, II, 204, 219. 
Var^emkard, 16. n 4. 
Varjni, man, II, 213. 
Varuna, god, xxix, Iviii. 
Vasishfc&a, II, 224. n 2. 
Vasna, man, II, 188. 
Vaya, 51. 
Vayu, genius, Ixiv, 87. n 4, 207, 208 ; 

II, 10,18,34,334; his names, 

II, 258-260 ; his Yart, II, 249- 

263. See Vai. 
Vlyu, god, Ixiv. 
Vas&spa, man, II, 206. 
Vazuta (fire), Ixni, 216. 
Veh, nver, 3. 
Vehrkina, land, 2, 7. 
Vendidad, contents, IxxxiiL 
Verethraghna, genius, Ixiv, 215 ; II. 

6, 10, 15, !7, 32, 3<$, 38, 137, 

139,327; Y1.XIV (231-248); 

his incarnations, 232-238. 
Vertae, people, II, 117. n 6. 
Vibazu, measure, 120. 
Vidadifsh, region, II, 220. n i. 
Vidadhafebu, region, II, 123, 154, 

171, 216. 

V?da*-gou, man, II, 219. 
Vidhvana, mount, II, 288. 
Vldi-sravab, man, II, 215. 
VSdotu, demon, II, 143, 183. 
YSrlspa, man, II, 209. 



Vtsadha, man, II, 210. 

Visah, man, II, 67. n 4. 

Vishaptatha, II,. 90. 

Vispa-taun r airi, woman, II, 225, 226, 
307. 

Vispa-taurvashi, woman, II, 225. 

VJsperad, xxx; II, 165. n 2. 

Vfep6-dagva, 102. n r. 

Vtsp6-thaurv8-asti, man, II, 279. 

Visrfita, man, 217. 

Visrutara, man, II, 218. 

VlrtSspa, man, II, 70. n i, 77, 78, 79, 
8 r, 117, 204, 205. n 5,224. n 5, 
n 6, 257, 258. n i, 280. n 4, 
306, 308 ; sacrifices to Asm, II, 
279 ; to Ahura, II, 282. 

Vijtasp Yart, II, 328-345. 

Vistauru, man, II, 71, 206. 

Vijve deva, 102. n i. 

VJtanguhaiti, river, II, 72. 

Vitira, measure (?), 171. 

Vitasti, measure, 187. 

Vivanghat,man, 10, n, 13 ; II, 217, 

221, 293, 294, 295. 

Vizare/a,demon,lxvui. n 7, 87. n4,2i 2. 

Viyarjti, man, II, 206. 

Vohu-mand, god, Ix, Ixxii, 46, 207, 
209; II, 4, 13, 30, 31, 35, 37, 
39, 49, 88, 102. n 2, 142, 198, 
218, 297, 308, 351 ; door-keeper 
of Paradise, 213 ; his riches, 204 ; 
righteous man , 209 ; clothes, 210. 

Vohunazga, dog, 153, 156, 157, 161. 

Vohu-nemah, man, II, 208, 213. 

Vohu-peresa, man, II, 218. 

Vohu-raoah, man, II, 204, 212. 

Vohu-iutra, man, II, 217. 

Vohu-vazdah, II, 213. 

Vohv-asti, man, II, 203, 211. 

Vologeses, king. See Valkash. 

Vouru-barejti, region, 216; II, 123, 
154, 171, 217. n i, 220. n i. 

Vouru-barejti, region, 216; II, 123, 
154, 171, 217. n 1,220. n i. 

Vouru-Kasha,sea, Ixiii, 53, 54, 59. n4, 
214,225, 226,227; II, 54, 63, 

<S4, 8r, 94, 9*j 99, "<>, IOI I0 3, 
104, 106, 172, 173, 181, 194, 196. 

Vouru-nemah, man, II, 220. 

Vouru-savah, man, II, 220. 

Vourusha, man, II, 288. 

Vrx'tra, demon, II, 141. n 3. 

Vntrahan, Ixiv. 

VySmbura, demon, II, 245. n 2. 

Vyarjvaf, man, II, 210. 

Vyltana, man, II, 218. 



INDEX TO VOLS. TV AND XXIII. 



Walking without Kostf, 199. 
War implements, 169. 
Wartburg battle, II, 72. n 5. 
Water, 50, 53; II,8,i6. SeeAban 
and Ardvi Sfira, 

formula to cleanse, 140. 

NyayLr, II, 349, 356-357. 
Weasel, 59. n i. 

White Forest, II, 256. 

Wind, II, 18, 19, 353. 

Winter, disposal of the dead in, 52. 

Wisdom, heavenly or acquired, II, 

12, 20. 

Wolf, born of dogs, 161. 
Woman, delivered, xcu, 89-91. 

menstruous, xcii. 

Xanthus, on the Avesta, xii. 

Yldkart Zariran, II, 205, 206. n 2, 
208. 

Ya&ur-gflu, man, II, 218. 

Ya^ata, Ixxx. 

Yama, man, xxiv, Ixxv, 12. n i. 

Yaqfit, xlviii. 

Yasna, II, 165. n 2. 

Yajts,II,2i-345. 

Yatha ami vairyd, 128 ; II, 23, 30, 
39, &c. 

Yatus, demons, Ixvi, 8, 112, 199, 200, 
222,223,228; 11,26,38,43,50, 
57, 59* M, 86, 97, 105, 8, 134, 
161, 223, 232, 247, 253, 262. 

Yazata, Ixxii, Ixxx, 86, 96, 100. 

Yazdgard's edict, xli; II, 26, 2. 

Yazishn, II, 319. n i. 

Yim'svar, II, 204, n i. 

Y ima, man, Ixxv, 7; legends of, 12-21, 
216; II,59,6o.n 2, 112,221,252, 
253, 276, 283 ; his Glory, 293 ; 
lost, 297; his lie, 297; sawed in 
twain, 297. See Gamshgd. 

Yfibta, man, II, 72, 216. 

Yi^gy&ti, measure, 156. 

Yfikhtaspa, man, II, 212. 
Yukhtavairi, man, II, 205. 
YfLrta, man, II, 215. 

Zab, king, II, 22 r . n 9. See Uzava. 
ZSdmarg, 52, 95. n i. 
Zairi, demon, Ixxii, 135, 218. 
ZairiA", woman, II, 224. 
Zammyangura, animal, 153. 
Zamta, man, II, 204, 
Zairivain, pnnce, II, 80, 81, 205. 



Zairyas, man, II, 213. 

Zamyld Yart, II, 286-309. 

Zand Avasta, its authenticity, xv; 
interpretation, xxv; contents, 
xxx ; age, xxxviu ; revealed to 
Zarathujtra, 204-2 18 ; to Vfe- 
tlspa, II, 324. 

language, xxxvi. 

meaning of the word, xxx. n i. 
Zaada, demon, Ixix, 199, 200. 
Zanda ravin, 132. n 4, 165. n i. 
Zaosha, man, II, 218. 

Zaotar, pnest, 63, 64. n i, 78, 79- 

Zaothra, Ixix. 

Zarah sea, II, 302. n 2. 

Zarathurtra's birth, xhx, 218 ; he 
destroys theDalvas,! 1 , 304-305 ; 
founds the Law, II, 201 ; his 
sacrifices, II, 74, 78, 265-267, 
279 (see Zartusht and Zoroas- 
tnan) ; reveals the Law, II, 324 ; 
his Glory, 205; 11,11,19,300; 
Fravashi, II, 351 ; his sons, 21. 
n 2 ; II, 204 ; his seed, II, 195 ; 
tempted, 204-207; leader of 
men, II, 105 ; ratumthe Yima 
Var, 3i ; his narcotic, II, 267 ; 
converseswiLhAshi, 11,274-275 ; 
with Ahura Mazda, II, 31, 32, 
38,58,119,151,155, 162,207. 
n 4, 224. n 3, n 4, 227, 228, 229, 

Zarathortr6tema, II, 149, 185. 
Zarazdata, man, II, 213. 
Zaremaya, month, II, 318. n i. 
Zarfr, prince, II, 80. n i, 205. n i. 

See Zairivairi. 

Zartusht's sacrifice in Iran Ve& xlix. 
Zarvindid, man, xli. n 3. 
Zaurura, 27. 
Zaurva, man, 218. 
Zav, king, II, 329. n 4. See Zab and 

Uzava. 

Zavan, man, II, 218. 
Zbaurvanf, man, II, 209. 
Zeredhd, mount, II, 287* 
Zervan, Ixxxii. n i. 
Zighri, man, II, 219. 
Zohak, demon, Ixv. 
Zoroaster's Aoyt'o, li ; apocrypha, xiii, 

xhi. n i ; legend, Ixxvi. 
Zoroastrian sacrifice, II, 57. n 5, 68. 

n 2, 78. 
Zrayah, II, 213. 



TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS. 



1 



l ? 
< Q 



II 



fk 



s> 

i 



jj 



nn-nnn. 



D 



. . 



\ 4 lOj 



If is r* 



"***' 



i: 2 t 



- ij oj U 



v a^ 
*t T * 



< 



i 



s s 



S s : s 8 s = 

<- S 



fi 

Si- 

* 5 <D N 



TKANSLlThKATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS 



1 


> * 


* t . 


M 


* 


E q F r nj>. . -.9 D - M 


! 




!> - b 


D i * D-3 ! I $ "^ " 


! 


:i*^ 


i a , -. a-, : :A js^-i 


* 


^ 


^ 


i 








IDlt, 












2 r pT? . ? "8 


8* >0 \$/ -K ^ v| ' 




J* W . 










i 


tr I ! ^ ! 


lc^ Iv ? IT |8 |5 (p * 


* .5 






S 8 






i = 






11 

j S 


3-3 - " 




l[l 


>> . . 


^5 >f O! fl rt "M 










" " 






' ' 3 1 




* 


S 




K? 


; : s ? 




11 


18 Semivocalu . 

19 Spiritiui asper 
2O lenis 
21 asper t 
22 lenis a 


S:||:||:| 'lllll 

S g ;=?>. 
1 3 5 <J1 "I & * 

H s fc w r 

WJJipCONOOOOHWM^IOCON 
WNNWCSJNNCSCQCQCQeOCOCOW 



FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. 383 



..!!!!*.'*' ^ .a ' ' 


. . 




f] ^ Cta 









13 . . . r- . . 


























A 4,T\ 

^ ^y i 




f 


" ^ 




s 








^ f 


t 




a- 


:i 




' u> <Q *-fl A rt ' 

. u>v s+ * ^ . 


10 K 1* |U ^ H' 




T 


P- F tr 3 


* 











d J2 


^3 n p(3 Q ' 


^ ^ * 


b. 




& 5* " ja i 


' rf! ** 














S3SSSSSISS2 



384 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS, 







-3 



"' 



..... 



a .13 

en .2 Jj <) 



9* 



f 



Cl)' 



,1 



V .0 



g . v -g . . . 5 



J, ^i VN "'* B -.5 

* 3-5 < S 



f!.,. 





: :i 



on 



] ss 

So 

I 



I 1 * I 

2 CD Q 



r 



*0 





a .S* 
Q Q 

5HlQ(DNODO)O^CQCQ^iQ{D^ 

HiHlHlHHFHCqWWNNNWW 



6 



