This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


-     ^'v-.    ''^ 


r 


*  ■.'*''7- Jj^  *    ■'■ 


V 


THE    THIRTEEN    BOOKS 

OF 

EUCLID'S     ELEMENTS 


CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 

C.  F.  CLAY,  Manager. 

Eonlron:  FETTER  LANE,  E.C. 

OOliittorgt:    x<».  PRINCES  STREET. 


ScTlin:   A.  ASHER  AND  CO. 

Erip^ig:    F.  A.  BROCKHAUS. 

^eiD  lork:  G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS. 

SombiB  inTi  ffilratta:    MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


[A//  Rights  reseroedS\ 


THE    THIRTEEN    BOOKS 

OF 

EUCLID'S    ELEMENTS 

TRANSLATED   FROM   THE  TEXT   OF   HEIBERG 

WITH   INTRODUCTION  AND   COMMENTARY 


BY 
T.    L.    HEATH,    C.B.,   Sc.D., 

SOMETIME   FELLOW   OF   TRINITY   COLLEGE.   CAMBRIDGE 


VOLUME   III 
BOOKS  X— XIII  AND  APPENDIX 


Cambridge  : 
at  the  University  Press 

1908 


CambrDigr : 

PRINTED  BY  JOHN  CLAY,  M.A. 
AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


i6lJ'>^^'^ 


CONTENTS   OF  VOLUME   III 


PAGR 

BcMDK     X.       Introductory  note i 

Definitions lo 

Propositions  i — 47 14-101 

Definitions  ii 101 

Propositions  48 — 84 102-177 

Definitions  hi 177 

Propositions  85 — 115 178-254 

Ancient  extensions  of  theory  of  Book  X          .  255 

Book    XI.      Definitions 260 

Propositions 272 

Book    XII.     Historical  note 365 

Propositions 369 

Book  XIII.     Historical  note 438 

Propositions 44© 

Appendix.        I.     The  so-called  "Book  XIV."  (by  Hypsicles)  512 

II.     Note  on  the  so-called  "Book  XV."     .        .  519 

Addenda  et  Corrigenda 521 

General  Index:  Greek 529 

„           „         English 535 


BOOK   X. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTE. 

The  discovery  of  the  doctrine  of  incommensurables  is  attributed  to 
Pythagoras.  Thus  Proclus  says  {Comm,  on  EucL  i.  p.  65,  19)  that  Pythagoras 
"discovered  the  theory  of  irrationals*";  and,  again,  the  scholium  on  the  ban- 
ning of  Book  X.,  also  attributed  to  Proclus,  states  that  the  Pythagoreans  were 
the  first  to  address  themselves  to  the  investigation  of  commensurability,  having 
discovered  it  by  means  of  their  observation  of  numbers.  They  discovered, 
the  scholium  continues,  that  not  all  magnitudes  have  a  common  measure. 
**  They  called  all  magnitudes  measurable  by  the  same  measure  commensurable, 
but  those  which  are  not  subject  to  the  same  measure  incommensurable, 
and  again  such  of  these  as  are  measured  by  some  other  common  measure 
commensurable  with  one  another,  and  such  as  are  not,  incommensurable  with 
the  others.  And  thus  by  assuming  their  measures  they  referred  everything  to 
different  commensurabilities,  but,  though  they  were  different,  even  so  (they 
proved  that)  not  all  magnitudes  are  commensurable  with  any.  (They  showed 
that)  all  magnitudes  can  be  rational  {prjra)  and  all  irrational  (aAoya)  in  a 
relative  sense  {mirpo^  n);  hence  the  commensurable  and  the  incommensurable 
would  be  for  them  natural  (kinds)  (<^v<rci),  while  the  rational  and  irrational 
would  rest  on  assumption  or  convention  (dco-ct)."  The  scholium  quotes  further 
the  legend  according  to  which  "  the  first  of  the  Pythagoreans  who  made  public 
the  investigation  of  these  matters  perished  in  a  shipwreck,"  conjecturing  that 
the  authors  of  this  story  "  perhaps  spoke  allegorically,  hinting  that  everything 
irrational  and  formless  is  properly  concealed,  and,  if  any  soul  should  rashly 
invade  this  region  of  life  and  lay  it  open,  it  would  be  carried  away  into  the 
sea  of  becoming  and  be  overwhelmed  by  its  unresting  currents."  There 
would  be  a  reason  also  for  keeping  the  discovery  of  irrationals  secret  for  the 
time  in  the  fact  that  it  rendered  unstable  so  much  of  the  groundwork  of 
geometry  as  the  Pythagoreans  had  based  upon  the  imperfect  theory  of 
proportions  which  applied  only  to  numbers.  We  have  already,  after  Tannery, 
referred  to  the  probability  that  the  discovery  of  incommensurability  must 
have  necessitated  a  great  recasting  of  the  whole  fabric  of  elementary  geometry, 
pending  the  discovery  of  the  general  theory  of  proportion  applicable  to 
incommensurable  as  well  as  to  commensurable  magnitudes. 

It  seems  certain  that  it  was  with  reference  to  the  length  of  the  diagonal  of 
a  square  or  the  hypotenuse  of  an  isosceles  right-angled  triangle  that  Pythagoras 
made  his  discovery.  Plato  {Theaetetus,  i47  i>)  tells  us  that  Theodorus  of 
Cyrene  wrote  about  square  roots  (8wa/ici«),  proving  that  the  square  roots  of 

*  I  have  already  noted  (Vol.  1.  p.  351)  that  G.  Junge  (IVann  haben  die  Griechen'das 
IrrationaU  enteUckt?)  disputes  this,  maintaining  that  it  was  the  Pythagoreans,  but  not 
Pvthagoras,  who  made  the  discovery.  Junge  is  obliged  to  alter  the  reading  of  the  passage 
of  Proclus,  on  what  seems  to  be  (^uite  insufficient  evidence ;  and  in  any  case  I  doubt  whether 
the  point  is  worth  so  much  labounng. 


H.  E.  HI. 


1 ' 


»  •  ;  ••  BOOK  X 

three  square'  feet  and  five  square  feet  are  not  commensurable  with  that  of  one 
square  fbbt,  and  so  on,  selecting  each  such  square  root  up  to  that  of  1 7  square 
feet,»4ft  v^ich  for  some  reason  he  stopped.  No  mention  is  here  made  of  J2, 
dqilt^fess  for  the  reason  that  its  incommensurability  had  been  proved  before^ 
i.e., by' Pythagoras.  We  know  that  Pythagoras  invented  a  formula  for  finding 
^  nghl-angled  triangles  in  rational  numbers,  and  in  connexion  with  this  it  was 
vifievitable  that  he  should  investigate  the  relations  between  sides  and  hypotenuse 
**4ri  other  right-angled  triangles.  He  would  naturally  give  special  attention  to 
'  *  the  isosceles  right-angled  triangle  ;  he  would  try  to  measure  the  diagonal,  he 
would  arrive  at  successive  approximations,  in  rational  fractions,  to  the  value 
of  J2 ;  he  would  find  that  successive  efforts  to  obtain  an  exact  expression  for 
it  failed.  It  was  however  an  enormous  step  to  conclude  that  such  exact 
expression  was  impossible^  and  it  was  this  step  which  Pythagoras  (or  the 
Pythagoreans)  made.  We  now  know  that  the  formation  of  the  side-  and 
^/a^^a/-numbers  explained  by  Theon  of  Smyrna  and  others  was  Pythagorean, 
and  also  that  the  theorems  of  Eucl.  11.  9,  10  were  used  by  the  Pythagoreans 
in  direct  connexion  with  this  method  of  approximating  to  the  value  of  ^2, 
The  very  method  by  which  Euclid  proves  these  propositions  is  itself  an  indica- 
tion of  their  connexion  with  the  investigation  of  1^2,  since  he  uses  a  figure 
made  up  of  two  isosceles  right-angled  triangles. 

The  actual  method  by  which  the  Pythagoreans  proved  the  incommensura- 
bility of  ^2  with  unity  was  no  doubt  thiat  referred  to  by  Aristotle  {Anal,  prior, 
1. 23, 4 1  a  26 — 7 ),  a  reductio  adabsurdutn  by  which  it  is  proved  that,  if  the  diagonal 
is  commensurable  with  the  side,  it  will  follow  that  the  same  number  is  both 
odd  and  even.  The  proof  formerly  appeared  in  the  texts  of  Euclid  as  x.  11 7, 
but  it  is  undoubtedly  an  interpolation,  and  August  and  Heiberg  accordingly 
relegate  it  to  an  Appendix.     It  is  in  substance  as  follows. 

Suppose  AC^  the  diagonal  of  a  square,  to  be  commen- 
surable with  AB^  its  side.  Let  a  :  )3  be  their  ratio  expressed 
in  the  smallest  numbers. 

Then  a  >  j8  and  therefore  necessarily  >  i. 

Now  ^C«:^i?»  =  a«:)8«, 

and,  since  AC^=2AB^f  [Eucl.  i.  47] 

a«  =  2)8*, 

Therefore  a'  is  even,  and  therefore  a  is  even. 

Since  a  :  j3  is  in  its  lowest  terms,  it  follows  that  ft  must  be  odd. 

Put  a  =  2y ; 

therefore  4-/  =  2)8*, 

or  )8»  =  2/, 

so  that  )8*,  and  therefore  ft,  must  be  er^en. 

But  P  was  also  odd : 
which  is  impossible. 

This  proof  only  enables  us  to  prove  the  incommensurability  of  the 
diagonal  of  a  square  with  its  side,  or  of  J2  with  unity.  In  order  to  prove 
the  incommensurability  of  the  sides  of  squares,  one  of  which  has  l/tree  times 
the  area  of  another,  an  entirely  different  procedure  is  necessary ;  and  we  find 
in  fact  that,  even  a  century  after  Pythagoras'  time,  it  was  still  necessary  to  use 
separate  proofs  (as  the  passage  of  the  Theaetetus  shows  that  Theodorus  did) 
to  establish  the  incommensurability  with  unity  of  ,^3,  ^5,  ...  up  to  ^17. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTE  3 

This  fact  indicates  clearly  that  the  general  theorem  in  Eucl.  x.  9  that  squares 
which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  of  a  square  number  to  a  square  number 
have  their  sides  incommensurable  in  length  was  not  arrived  at  all  at  once,  but 
was,  in  the  manner  of  the  time,  developed  out  of  the  separate  consideration 
of  special  cases  (Hankel,  p.  103). 

The  proposition  x.  9  of  Euclid  is  definitely  ascribed  by  the  scholiast  to 
Theaetetus,  Theaetetus  was  a  pupil  of  Theodorus,  and  it  would  seem  clear 
that  the  theorem  was  not  known  to  Theodorus.  Moreover  the  Platonic 
passage  itself  (JTteaet  147D  sqq.)  represents  the  young  Theaetetus  as  striving 
after  a  general  conception  of  what  we  call  a  surd,  "The  idea  occurred  to 
me,  seeing  that  square  roots  (3wa/ici«)  appeared  to  be  unlimited  in  multitude, 
to  try  to  arrive  at  one  collective  term  by  which  we  could  designate  all  these 
square  roots. ...I  divided  number  in  general  into  two  classes.  The  number 
which  can  be  expressed  as  equal  multiplied  by  equal  (arov  utoki^)  I  likened 
to  a  square  in  form,  and  I  called  it  square  and  equilateral.... The  intermediate 
number,  such  as  three,  five,  and  any  number  which  cannot  be  expressed  as 
equal  multiplied  by  equal,  but  is  either  less  times  more  or  more  times  less,  so 
that  it  is  always  contained  by  a  greater  and  less  side,  I  likened  to  an  oblong 
figure  and  called  an  oblong  number. . . .  Such  straight  lines  then  as  square  the 
equilateral  and  plane  number  I  defined  as  length  (/i^#co«),  and  such  as  square 
the  oblong  square  roots  (Swofici^),  as  not  being  commensurable  with  the 
others  in  length  but  only  in  the  plane  areas  to  which  their  squares  are 
equal. " 

There  is  further  evidence  of  the  contributions  of  Theaetetus  to  the  theory 
of  incommensurables  in  a  commentary  on  Eucl.  x.  discovered,  in  an  Arabic 
translation,  by  Woepcke  {Memoires  prisentks  i  f  Academic  des  Sciences^  xiv., 
1856,  pp.  658 — 720).  It  is  certain  that  this  commentary  is  of  Greek  origin. 
Woepcke  conjectures  that  it  was  by  Vettius  Valens,  an  astronomer,  apparently 
of  Antioch,  and  a  contemporary  of  Claudius  Ptolemy  (2nd  cent.  A.D.). 
Heiberg,  with  greater  probability,  thinks  that  we  have  here  a  fragment  of  the 
commentary  of  Pappus  (Euklid-studien^  pp.  169 — 71),  and  this  is  rendered 
practically  certain  by  Suter  {Die  Mathematikcr  und  Astronomen  der  Araber 
uttd  ihre  IVerke^  pp.  49  and  211).  This  commentary  states  that  the  theory 
of  irrational  magnitudes  "  had  its  origin  in  the  school  of  Pythagoras.  It  was 
considerably  developed  by  Theaetetus  the  Athenian,  who  gave  proof,  in  this 
part  of  mathematics,  as  in  others,  of  ability  which  has  been  justly  admired. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  happily  endowed  of  men,  and  gave  himself  up,  with  a 
fine  enthusiasm,  to  the  investigation  of  the  truths  contained  in  these  sciences, 
as  Plato  bears  witness  for  him  in  the  work  which  he  called  after  his  name.  As 
for  the  exact  distinctions  of  the  above-named  magnitudes  and  the  rigorous 
demonstrations  of  the  propositions  to  which  this  theory  gives  rise,  I  believe 
that  they  were  chiefly  established  by  this  mathematician;  and,  later,  the 
great  Apollonius,  whose  genius  touched  the  highest  point  of  excellence  in 
mathematics,  added  to  these  discoveries  a  number  of  remarkable  theories 
after  many  efforts  and  much  labour. 

**  For  Theaetetus  had  distinguished  square  roots  [puissances  must  be  the 
h}vdiiMi!i  of  the  Platonic  passage]  commensurable  in  length  from  those  which 
are  incommensurable,  and  had  divided  the  well-known  species  of  irrational 
lines  after  the  different  means,  assigning  the  medial  to  geometry,  the  binomial 
to  arithmetic,  and  the  apotome  to  harmony,  as  is  stated  by  Eudemus  the 
Peripatetic. 

"  As  for  Euclid,  he  set  himself  to  give  rigorous  rules,  which  he  established, 


4  BOOK  X 

relative  to  commensurability  and  incommensurability  in  general;  he  made 
precise  the  definitions  and  the  distinctions  between  rational  and  irrational 
magnitudes,  he  set  out  a  great  number  of  orders  of  irrational  magnitudes,  and 
finally  he  clearly  showed  their  whole  extent." 

The  allusion  in  the  last  words  must  be  apparently  to  x.  115,  where  it  is 
proved  that  from  the  medial  straight  line  an  unlimited  number  of  other 
irrationals  can  be  derived  all  different  from  it  and  from  one  another. 

The  connexion  between  the  medial  straight  line  and  the  geometric  mean 
is  obvious,  because  it  is  in  fact  the  mean  proportional  between  two  rational 
straight  lines  "commensurable  in  square  only."  Since  ^  (^  +>')  is  the  arithmetic 
mean  between  x,  y^  the  reference  to  it  of  the  binomial  can  be  understood. 
The  connexion  between  the  apotome  and  the  harmonic  mean  is  explained  by 
some  propositions   in   the  second  book  of  the  Arabic  commentary.     The 

harmonic  mean  between  x,  y  is  — —  ,  and  propositions  of  which  Woepcke 

quotes  the  enunciations  prove  that,  if  a  rational  or  a  medial  area  has  for  one 
of  its  sides  a  binomial  straight  line,  the  other  side  will  be  an  apotome  of  corre- 
sponding order  (these  propositions  are  generalised  from  Eucl.  x.  in — 4);  the 

fact  is  that  ^^  =  :|^ .  {x  -y). 
x+y     xr—)r    ^       -^ ' 

One  other  predecessor  of  Euclid  appears  to  have  written  on  irrationals, 
though  we  know  no  more  of  the  work  than  its  title  as  handed  down  by 
Diogenes  Laertius*.  According  to  this  tradition,  Democritus  wrote  ircpl 
oAoycov  ypafi/jLutv  koI  vaartuv  j8',  two  Books  on  irrational  straight  lines  and 
solids  (apparently).  Hultsch  {Neue  Jahrbiicher  fUr  Philologie  und  Pddagogik^ 
1 88 1,  pp.  578 — 9)  conjectures  that  the  true  reading  may  be  irtpl  dkoytav 
ypafifitiv  fcXcurrcoK,  "on  irrational  broken  lines."  Hultsch  seems  to  have 
m  mind  straight  lines  divided  into  two  parts  one  of  which  is  rational 
and  the  other  irrational  ("Aus  einer  Art  von  Umkehr  des  Pythagoreischen 
Lehrsatzes  liber  das  rechtwinklige  Dreieck  gieng  zunachst  mit  Leichtigkeit 
hervor,  dass  man  eine  Linie  construiren  konne,  welche  als  irrational  zu 
bezeichnen  ist,  aber  durch  Brechung  sich  darstellen  lasst  als  die  Summe 
einer  rationalen  und  einer  irrationalen  Linie").  But  I  doubt  the  use  of  KXaaro^ 
in  the  sense  of  breaking  one  straight  line  into  parts ;  it  should  properly  mean 
a  bent  line,  i.e.  two  straight  lines  forming  an  angle  or  broken  short  off  2X  their 
point  of  meeting.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  vaa-rov  is  quoted  as  a 
Democritean  word  (opposite  to  iccvok)  in  a  fragment  of  Aristotle  (202).  I  see 
therefore  no  reason  for  questioning  the  correctness  of  the  title  of  Democritus' 
book  as  above  quoted. 

I  will  here  quote  a  valuable  remark  of  Zeuthen's  relating  to  the  classifi- 
cation of  irrationals.  He  says  (Geschichte  der  Mathematik  im  Altertum  und 
Mittelalter,  p.  56)  "Since  such  roots  of  equations  of  the  second  degree  as  are 
incommensurable  with  the  given  magnitudes  cannot  be  expressed  by  means 
of  the  latter  and  of  numbers,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  Greeks,  in  exact 
investigations,  introduced  no  approximate  values  but  worked  on  with  the 
magnitudes  they  had  found,  which  were  represented  by  straight  lines  obtained 
by  the  construction  corresponding  to  the  solution  of  the  equation.  That  is 
exactly  the  same  thing  which  happens  when  we  do  not  evaluate  roots  but  content 
ourselves  with  expressing  them  by  radical  signs  and  other  algebraical  symbols. 
But,  inasmuch  as  one  straight  line  looks  like  another,  the  Greeks  did  not  get 

*  Diog.  Laert.  ix.  47,  p.  239  (ed.  Cobet). 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  5 

the  same  clear  view  of  what  they  denoted  (i.e.  by  simple  inspection)  as  our 
system  of  symbols  assures  to  us.  For  this  reason  it  was  necessary  to  under- 
take a  classification  of  the  irrational  magnitudes  which  had  been  arrived  at  by 
successive  solution  of  equations  of  the  second  degree."  To  much  the  same 
effect  Tannery  wrote  in  1882  {De  la  solution  geotnetrique  des  probfemes  du 
second  degre  avant  Euclide  in  Memoires  de  la  Societe  des  sciences  physiques  et 
naiurelles  de  Bordeaux^  2®  Serie,  iv.  pp.  395 — 416).  Accordingly  Book  x. 
formed  a  repository  of  results  to  which  could  be  referred  problems  which 
depended  on  the  solution  of  certain  types  of  equations,  quadratic  and  biquad- 
ratic but  reducible  to  quadratics. 
Consider  the  quadratic  equations 

o(?^  ±  zax .  p  ±  )8 .  p'  =  o, 

where  p  is  a  rational  straight  line,  and  a,  fi  are  coefficients.  Our  quadratic 
equations  in  algebra  leave  out  the  p ;  but  I  put  it  in,  because  it  has  always  to 
be  remembered  that  Euclid's  jc  is  a  straight  line,  not  an  algebraical  quantity, 
and  is  therefore  to  be  found  in  terms  of,  or  in  relation  to,  a  certain  assumed 
rational  straight  line,  and  also  because  with  Euclid  p  may  be  not  only  of  the 

form  ay  where  a  represents  a  units  of  length,  but  also  of  the  form  ^  —  .  a, 

which  represents  a  length  "commensurable  in  square  only"  with  the  unit  of 
length,  or  J  A  where  A  represents  a  number  (not  square)  of  units  of  area. 
The  use  therefore  of  p  in  our  equations  makes  it  unnecessary  to  multiply 
different  ccues  according  to  the  relation  of  p  to  the  unit  of  length,  and  has  the 
further  advantage  that,  e.g.,  the  expression  p±Jk.pis  just  as  general  as  the 
expression  Jh.p±J\.pj  since  p  covers  the  form  ^/^.p,  both  expressions 
covering  a  length  either  commensurable  in  length,  or  "commensurable  in 
square  only,"  with  the  unit  of  length. 

Now  the  positive  roots  of  the  quadratic  equations 

^  ±  200" ,  p±p.p^  =  o 
can  only  have  the  following  forms 

x,  =  p(a  +  Va^/?),Jc/  =  p(a-v/i^)  | 
.^i  =  P  W^^Tp-^  a),  X,'  =  p  {'Ja^rp  -a)  }' 
The  negative  roots  do  not  come  in,  since  x  must  be  a  straight  line.  The 
omission  however  to  bring  in  negative  roots  constitutes  no  loss  of  generality, 
since  the  Greeks  would  write  the  equation  leading  to  negative  roots  in  another 
form  so  as  to  make  them  positive,  i.e.  they  would  change  the  sign  of  x  in  the 
equation. 

Now  the  positive  roots  jcj,  x^,  jcj,  x^  may  be  classified  according  to  the 
character  of  the  coefficents  a,  /8  and  their  relation  to  one  another. 

I.     Suppose  that  a,  )3  do  not  contain  any  surds,  i.e.  are  either  integers  or 
of  the  form  mln,  where  m,  n  are  integers. 

Now  in  the  expressions  for  x^,  x{  it  may  be  that 

( I )  ^  is  of  the  form  —s  a\ 

Euclid  expresses  this  by  saying  that  the  square  on  op  exceeds  the  square 
on  pJa?  —  P  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  op. 
In  this  case  x^  is,  in  Euclid's  terminology,  Sijirst  binomial  straight  line, 
and  Xi  2l  first  apotome. 


BOOK   X 


i.3 
«2 


(2)     In  general,  fi  not  being  of  the  form  ^a* 

Xy  is  2i  fourth  binomial^ 
Xi  2l  fourth  apotome. 

Next,  in  the  expressions  for  Xj,  x^'  it  may  be  that 

(i)  P  is  equal  to  -3  (a'  +  )3),  where  m,  n  are  integers,  i.e.  P  is  of  the  form 


Euclid  expresses  this  by  saying  that  the  square  on  p>/a'  +  )8  exceeds  the 
square  on  op  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with 
pja^  +  p. 

In  this  case  x^  is,  in  Euclid's  terminology,  a  second  binomial^ 
x^  a  second  apotome. 

(2)     In  general,  P  not  being  of  the  form  -j^— — ^a*, 

X2  is  2i  fifth  binomial^ 
xi  2l  fifth  apotome, 

11.     Now  suppose  that  a  is  of  the  form  fj  — ,  where  m^  n  are  integers,  and 

let  us  denote  it  by  ^>^ 
Then  in  this  case 

x^  =  p{sfxTp+J\\xi  =  p(>J\-\-0-JX). 

Thus  Xi ,  x^  are  of  the  same  form  as  jc^,  x^.  

If  JX-P  in  Xj ,  Xi  is  not  surd  but  of  the  form  m/n,  and  if  J\  +  P  in  x^,  x^ 
is  not  surd  but  of  the  form  m/n,  the  roots  are  comprised  among  the  forms 
already  shown,  the  first,  second,  fourth  and  fifth  binomials  and  apotomes. 
If  JX-  P  in  JCi,  Xi  is  surd,  then 

(i)   we  may  have  P  of  the  form  -,  X,  and  in  this  case 

Xi  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line, 
x(  a  third  apotome-, 

m^ 
(2)   in  general,  P  not  being  of  the  form  — g  X, 

Xi  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line, 
x{  a  sixth  apotome. 

With  the  expressions  for  x^,  x^  the  distinction  between  the  third  and  sixth 
binomials  and  apotomes  is  of  course  the  distinction  between  the  cases 

(i)  in  which  P  = -r  (^ -^  P),  or  P  is  of  the  form  -y- — ,  X, 

and  (2)  in  which  P  is  not  of  this  form. 

If  we  take  the  square  root  of  the  product  of  p  and  each  of  the  six 
binomials  and  six  apotomes  just  classified,  Le. 

p^a±^i?—p),  p^.J^+-p±a), 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTE  7 

in  the  six  different  forms  that  each  may  take,  we  find  six  new  irrationals  with 
a  positive  sign  separating  the  two  terms,  and  six  corresponding  irrationals  with 
a  negative  sign.     These  are  of  course  roots  of  the  equations 

These  irrationals  really  come  before  the  others  in  Euclid's  order  (x.  36 — 
41  for  the  positive  sign  and  x.  73 — 78  for  the  negative  sign).  As  we  shall 
see  in  due  course,  the  straight  lines  actually  found  by  Euclid  are 

1.  p±  Jk .  p,  the  binomial  (1;  Ik  hio  ovopArv^v) 

and  the  apotome  (diroTOfiif), 
which  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  biquadratic  (reducible  to  a  quadratic) 
ai'-'2{i+k)p\x'  +  {i-kyp*  =  o, 

2.  ^p  ±  k*p,  ihejirsf  bimedial  (Ik  hvo  /liawv  wpnomi) 
and  iki't  first  apotome  of  a  medial  (/acVi/s  diroTop.rj  wpwrrf), 

which  are  the  positive  roots  of 

a^-2^k(i+k)prj(^  +  k{i-kYp*  =  o. 

3.  ^^P±    4  P»  ^^^  second  bimedial  (Ik  Svo  fico-cov  Scurcpa) 

and  the  second  apotome  of  a  medial  (fiicrtf^  airorofii;  Scvrcpa), 
which  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

.        it  +  X  ,   ^      (k-\y  , 

pi  k      ^   p       /  k 

the  major  (irrational  straight  line)  (/iciJcuK) 
and  the  minor  (irrational  straight  line)  (Aocrcrwi'), 
which  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

:C*  -  2p'  .  Jl-*  +  rr  p*  =  o. 

the  **side"  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  (area)  (pi/roi^  icai  ilIktov  SwafUvri) 
and  the  "  side  "  of  a  medial  minus  a  rational  area  (in  the  Greek  17  /icra  pi/rov 
pAaov  TO  oko¥  iroiovcra), 

which  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

2  l^ 

.  ^*p  /       J~  ^*p   /       ^— 

the  ^^side*^  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  {rj  hvo  fiiaa  Svi^a/icn;) 
and  the  "  side  **  of  a  medial  minus  a  medial  area  (in  the  Greek  17  /icra  /acVov 
fA€€rov  TO  oA4>i'  irocovcra), 

which  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 


8  BOOK  X 

The  above  facts  and  formulae  admit  of  being  stated  in  a  great  variety  of 
ways  according  to  the  notation  and  the  particular  letters  used.  Consequently 
the  summaries  which  have  been  given  of  Eucl.  x.  by  various  writers  differ 
much  in  appearance  while  expressing  the  same  thing  in  substance.  The  first 
summary  in  algebraical  form  (and  a  very  elaborate  one)  seems  to  have  been 
that  of  Cossali  (Origine^  trasporto  in  Italia^  primi  progressi  in  essa  delC 
Algebra^  Vol.  ii.  pp.  242 — 65)  who  takes  credit  accordingly  (p.  265).  In 
1794  Meier  Hirsch  published  at  Berlin  an  Algebraischer  Commentar  Uber  das 
zehenfe  Buck  der  Elemente  des  Euklides  which  gives  the  contents  in  algebraical 
form  but  fails  to  give  any  indication  of  Euclid's  methods,  using  modern  forms 
of  proof  only.  In  1834  Poselger  wrote  a  paper,  Ueber  das  zehnte  Buck  der 
Elemente  des  Euklides^  in  which  he  pointed  out  the  defects  of  Hirsch's  repro- 
duction and  gave  a  summary  of  his  own,  which  however,  though  nearer  to 
Euclid's  form,  is  difficult  to  follow  in  consequence  of  an  elaborate  system  of 
abbreviations,  and  is  open  to  the  objection  that  it  is  not  algebraical  enough 
to  enable  the  character  of  Euclid's  irrationals  to  be  seen  at  a  glance.  Other 
summaries  will  be  found  (i)  in  Nesselmann,  Die  Algebra  der  Griechen^ 
pp.  165 — 84;  (2)  in  Loria,  II  periodo  aureo  delta  geometria  greca^  Modena, 
1895,  pp.  40 — 9;  (3)  in  Christensen's  article  "Ueber  Gleichungen  vierten 
Grades  im  zehnten  Buch  der  Elemente  Euklids"  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Math,  u. 
Physik  (Historisch'literarische  Abtheilung\  xxxiv.  (1889),  PP-  201 — 17.  The 
only  summary  in  English  that  I  know  is  that  in  the  Penny  Cyclopaedia^  under 
"Irrational  quantity,"  by  De  Morgan,  who  yielded  to  none  in  his  admiration  of 
Book  X.  "Euclid  investigates,"  says  De  Morgan,  "every  pfjssible  variety  of  lines 
which  can  be  represented  by  J{lja±  Jb)j  a  and  b  representing  two  commen- 
surable lines.... This  book  has  a  completeness  which  none  of  the  others  (not 
even  the  fifth)  can  boast  of :  and  we  could  almost  suspect  that  Euclid,  having 
arranged  his  materials  in  his  own  mind,  and  having  completely  elaborated 
the  10th  Book,  wrote  the  preceding  books  after  it  and  did  not  live  to  revise 
them  thoroughly." 

Much  attention  was  given  to  Book  x.  by  the  early  algebraists.  Thus 
Leonardo  of  Pisa  (fl.  about  i20d  a.d.)  wrote  in  the  14th  section  of  his  Liber 
Abaci  on  the  theory  of  irrationalities  (de  tractatu  binomiorum  et  recisorum\ 
without  however  (except  in  treating  of  irrational  trinomials  and  cubic  irra- 
tionalities) adding  much  to  the  substance  of  Book  x.;  and,  in  investigating 
the  equation 

jc'+  2^+  TOJi:=  20, 

propounded  by  Johannes  of  Palermo,  he  proved  that  none  of  the  irrationals 
in  Eucl.  X.  would  satisfy  it  (Hankel,  pp.  344 — 6,  Cantor,  iii,  p.  43).  Luca 
Paciuolo  (about  1445 — 15 14  a.d.)  in  his  algebra  based  himself  largely,  as  he 
himself  expressly  says,  on  Euclid  x.  (Cantor,  11,,  p.  293).  Michael  Stifel 
(1486  or  1487  to  1567)  wrote  on  irrational  numbers  in  the  second  Book  of 
his  Arithmetica  Integra^  which  Book  may  be  regarded,  says  Cantor  (11,,  p.  402), 
as  an  elucidation  of  Eucl.  x.  The  works  of  Cardano  (1501 — 76)  abound  in 
speculations  regarding  the  irrationals  of  Euclid,  as  may  be  seen  by  reference  to 
Cossali  (Vol.  II.,  especially  pp.  268 — 78  and  382 — 99);  the  character  of 
the  various  odd  and  even  powers  of  the  binomials  and  apotomes  is  therein 
investigated,  and  Cardano  considers  in  detail  of  what  particular  forms  of 
equations,  quadratic,  cubic,  and  biquadratic,  each  class  of  Euclidean  irrationals 
can  be  roots.  Simon  Stevin  (1548 — 1620)  wrote  a  Traite  des  incommensurables 
grandeurs  en  laquelle  est  sommairement  declare  le  contenu  du  Dixiesme  Livre 
d'Euclide  {Oeuvres  mathiniatiqueSy  Leyde,  1634,  pp.  219  sqq.);  he  speaks  thus 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTE  9 

of  the  book :  "  La  difficulte  du  dixiesme  Livre  d'Euclide  est  k  plusieurs 
devenue  en  horreur,  voire  j usque  k  I'appeler  la  croix  des  mathematiciens, 
matiere  trop  dure  k  digerer,  et  en  la  quelle  n'aper9oivent  aucune  utilite,"  a 
passage  quoted  by  I^ria  {II periodo  aureo  delta  geometria  greca,  p.  41). 

It  will  naturally  be  asked,  what  use  did  the  Greek  geometers  actually 
make  of  the  theory  of  irrationals  developed  at  such  length  in  Book  x.  ?  The 
answer  is  that  Euclid  himself,  in  Book  xiii.,  makes  considerable  use  of  the 
second  portion  of  Book  x.  dealing  with  the  irrationals  affected  with  a  negative 
sign,  the  apotomes  etc.  One  object  of  Book  xiii.  is  to  investigate  the  relation 
of  the  sides  of  a  pentagon  inscribed  in  a  circle  and  of  an  icosahedron  and 
dodecahedron  inscribed  in  a  sphere  to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  or  sphere 
respectively,  supposed  rational.  The  connexion  with  the  regular  pentagon  of 
a  straight  line  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  is  well  known,  and  Euclid  first 
proves  (xiii.  6)  that,  if  a  rational  straight  line  is  so  divided,  the  parts  are  the 
irrationals  called  apotomes^  the  lesser  part  being  a  first  apotame.  Then,  on 
the  assumption  that  the  diameters  of  a  circle  and  sphere  respectively  are 
rational,  he  proves  (xiii.  11)  that  the  side  of  the  inscribed  regular  pentagon  is 
the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor^  as  is  also  the  side  of  the  inscribed 
icosahedron  (xiii.  16),  while  the  side  of  the  inscribed  dodecahedron  is  the 
irrational  called  an  apotome  (xiii.  17). 

Of  course  the  investigation  in  Book  x.  would  not  have  been  complete  if 
it  had  dealt  only  with  the  irrationals  affected  with  a  negative  sign.  Those 
affected  with  the  positive  sign,  the  binomials  etc.,  had  also  to  be  discussed, 
and  we  find  both  portions  of  Book  x.,  with  its  nomenclature,  made  use  of  by 
Pappus  in  two  propositions,  of  which  it  may  be  of  interest  to  give  the  enun- 
ciations here. 

If,  saj^s  Pappus  (iv.  p.  178),  AB  be  the  rational  diameter  of  a  semicircle,  and 
\i  AB\yQ,  produced  to  C  so  that  BC  is  equal  to  the  radius,  if  CD  be  a  tangent, 


if  E  be  the  middle  point  of  the  arc  BD^  and  if  CE  be  joined,  then  CE  is  the 
irrational  straight  line  called  minor.     As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  p  is  the  radius, 

C^  =  P»(5-2V3)  and  CE=  J 11^^^  _  J^^^- 
If,  again  (p.  182),   CD  be  equal  to  the  radius  of  a  semicircle  supposed 


rational,  and  if  the  tangent  DB  be  drawn  and  the  angle  ADB  be  bisected  by 
DF  meeting  the  circumference  in  F,  then  DF  is  the  excess  by  which  the 
binomial  exceeds  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 


10  BOOK    X  [X.  DEFF.   1—4 

whole  (see  EucL  x.  77).     (In  the  figure  DK  is  the  biftomial  and  KFih^  other 
irrational  straight  line.)    As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  p  be  the  radius, 

Proclus  tells  us  that  Euclid  left  out,  as  alien  to  a  selection  of  elements^  the 
discussion  of  the  more  complicated  irrationals,  "the  unordered  irrationals  which 
Apollonius  worked  out  more  fully"  (Proclus,  p.  74,  23),  while  the  scholiast 
to  Book  X.  remarks  that  Euclid  does  not  deal  with  all  rationals  and  irrationals 
but  only  the  simplest  kinds  by  the  combination  of  which  an  infinite  number 
of  irrationals  are  obtained,  of  which  Apollonius  also  gave  Bome.  The  author 
of  the  commentary  on  Book  x.  found  by  Woepcke  in  an  Arabic  translation, 
and  above  alluded  to,  also  says  that  "it  was  Apollonius  who,  beside  the 
ordered  irrational  magnitudes,  showed  the  existence  of  the  unordered  and  by 
accurate  methods  set  forth  a  great  number  of  them."  It  can  only  be  vaguely 
gathered,  from  such  hints  as  the  commentator  proceeds  to  give,  what  the 
character  of  the  extension  of  the  subject  given  by  Apollonius  may  have  been. 
See  note  at  end  of  Book. 


DEFINITIONS. 

1.  Those  magnitudes  are  said  to  be  commensurable 
which  are  measured  by  the  same  measure,  and  those  incom- 
mensurable which  cannot  have  any  common  measure. 

2.  Straight  lines  are  commensurable  in  square  when 
the  squares  on  them  are  measured  by  the  same  area,  and 
incommensurable  in  square  when  the  squares  on  them 
cannot  possibly  have  any  area  as  a  common  measure. 

3.  With  these  hypotheses,  it  is  proved  that  there  exist 
straight  lines  infinite  in  multitude  which  are  commensurable 
and  incommensurable  respectively,  some  in  length  only,  and 
others  in  square  also,  with  an  assigned  straight  line.  Let 
then  the  assigned  straight  line  be  called  rational,  and  those 
straight  lines  which  are  commensurable  with  it,  whether  in 
length  and  in  square  or  in  square  only,  rational,  but  those 
which  are  incommensurable  with  it  irrational. 

4.  And  let  the  square  on  the  assigned  straight  line  be 
called  rational  and  those  areas  which  are  commensurable 
with  it  rational,  but  those  which  are  incommensurable  with 
it  irrational,  and  the  straight  lines  which  produce  them 
irrational,  that  is,  in  case  the  areas  are  squares,  the  sides 
themselves,  but  in  case  they  are  any  other  rectilineal  figures, 
the  straight  lines  on  which  are  described  squares  equal  to 
them. 


X.  DEFF.  1—3]  DEFINITIONS  AND   NOTES  11 


Definition  i. 

Sv/i/icrpa   fL€y€Orf   Xcycrai  ret  tw  avr^  h^f^  ficrpovfitvaj  axrvfifitrpa  8c,  utv 
jArj^tv  iyS€)(€r ai  Koivov  fierpov  y€V€a'6ai. 


Definition  2. 

Ev^ciai  Swdfi€i  a-vfi/ierpoi  cicrii',  oray  ra  dir*  avroiv  rcrpaycui^a  rt^  avrcp  x^^V 
ficr^rai,  aavfifierpoi  8c,  oTay  rots  dir'  cuvrcoi'  Tcrpaya>Foi$  /iy/3ck  ^ySc^iyTai  \u}piov 
KOIVOV  fiirpov  ycvccr^oi. 

Commensurabie  in  square  is  in  the  Greek  Bwaifiti  (n'fi/i.crpos.  In  earlier 
translations  (e.g.  Williamson's)  hviofitt  has  been  translated  "in  power,"  but, 
as  the  particular  p<nver  represented  by  8i5va/*4s  in  Greek  geometry  is  square^ 
I  have  thought  it  best  to  use  the  latter  word  throughout.  It  will  be  observed 
that  Euclid's  expression  commensurable  in  square  only  (used  in  Def.  3  and 
constantly)  corresponds  to  what  Plato  makes  Theaetetus  call  a  square  root 
(Svvafiis)  in  the  sense  of  a  surd.  If  a  is  any  straight  line,  a  and  a^m^  or 
a^m  and  a^n  (where  /«,  n  are  integers  or  arithmetical  fractions  in  their 
lowest  terms,  proper  or  improper,  but  not  square)  are  commensurable  in  square 
only.  Of  course  (as  explained  in  the  Porism  to  x.  10)  all  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  length  {fiiiK€i),  in  Euclid's  phrase,  are  commensurable  in 
square  also ;  but  not  all  straight  lines  which  are  commensurable  in  square  are 
commensurable  in  length  as  well.  On  the  other  hand,  straight  lines  incom- 
mensurable in  square  are  necessarily  incommensurable  in  length  also ;  but  not 
all  straight  lines  which  are  incommensurable  in  length  are  incommensurable 
in  square.  In  fact,  straight  lines  which  are  commensurable  in  square  only  are 
incommensurable  in  lengthy  but  obviously  not  incommensurable  in  square. 


Definition  3. 

Tovroiy  \nroK€ifkivviv  SciVi^vrac,  ori  rfj  7rf>OT€0€tayf  tvOtuf.  vndp\ov(Tiv  cv^cuii 
ttXi/^ci  aTTCipoi  <rvfi/A€Tpoi  re  koI  aavfificrpoi  ai  fikv  fLtJK€i  fiovov,  ai  Sk  koi  Svi^dftcc 
KaAcurdco  ovv  17  /uicv  Trporc^cicra  cv^cta  prjnj,  Koi  ai  ravry  avfifitrpoi  citc  /xi/kci  kox 
Svvdfi€i  circ  ^vdfiti  fwvov  fnjfrai,  aX  8c  TavTQ  dcrv/x/tCTpot  dXoyoi  KaXcur^oKraK. 

The  first  sentence  of  the  definition  is  decidedly  elliptical.  It  should, 
strictly  speaking,  assert  that  "  with  a  given  straight  line  there  are  an  infinite 
number  of  straight  lines  which  are  (i)  commensurable  either  (a)  in  square 
only  or  {b)  in  square  and  in  length  also,  and  (2)  incommensurable,  either 
{a)  in  length  only  or  (b)  in  length  and  in  square  also." 

The  relativity  of  the  terms  rational  and  irrational  is  well  brought  out  in 
this  definition.  We  may  set  out  any  straight  line  and  call  it  rational,  and  it 
is  then  with  reference  to  this  assumed  rational  straight  line  that  others  are 
called  rational  or  irrational. 

We  should  carefully  note  that  the  signification  of  rational  in  Euclid  is  wider 
than  in  our  terminology.  With  him,  not  only  is  a  straight  line  commensurable  in 
length  with  a  rational  straight  line  rational,  but  a  straight  line  is  rational  which 
is  commensurable  with  a  rational  straight  line  in  square  only.   That  is,  if  p  is  a 

rational  straight  line,  not  only  is  —  p  rational,  where  »i,  n  are  integers  and 

n 


12  BOOK    X  [X.  DEFF.  3,  4 

mjn  in  its  lowest  terms  is  not  square,  but  v/  — .  p  is  rational  also.    We  should 


V  //• 


mation 


in  this  case  call  ^  —  .  p  irrational.  It  would  appear  that  Euclid's  termino- 
logy here  differed  as  much  from  that  of  his  predecessors  as  it  does  from 
ours.  We  are  familiar  with  the  phrase  appiyro?  Suzficrpos  rij^  wc/xTraSos  by 
which  Plato  (evidently  after  the  Pythagoreans)  describes  the  diagonal  of  a 
square  on  a  straight  line  containing  5  units  of  length.  This  "  inexpressible 
diameter  of  five  (squared) "  means  ^50,  in  contrast  to  the  prjrrj  Stoficrpo^,  the 
"  expressible  diameter  "  of  the  same  square,  by  which  is  meant  the  approxi- 

>/5o-i,   or   7.      Thus   for   Euclid's  predecessors   \  ~^-9  would 

apparently  not  have  been  rational  but  dpfyqTo^,  "  inexpressible,"  i.e.  irrational. 

I  shall  throughout  my  notes  on  this  Book  denote  a  rational  straight  line  in 
Euclid's  sense  by  p,  and  by  p  and  a-  when  two  different  rational  straight  lines  are 
required.  Wherever  then  I  use  p  or  o-,  it  must  be  remembered  that  p,  a  may 
have  either  of  the  forms  a,  ^^ .  a,  where  a  represents  a  units  of  length,  a  being 
either  an  integer  or  of  the  form  m/n,  where  w,  n  are  both  integers,  and  k  is  an 
integer  or  of  the  form  m/n  (where  both  m,  n  are  integers)  but  not  square.  In 
other  words,  p,  cr  may  have  either  of  the  forms  a  or  J  A,  where  A  represents 
A  units  of  ar€a  and  A  is  integral  or  of  the  form  mjn^  where  m^  n  are  both 
integers.  It  has  been  the  habit  of  writers  to  give  a  and  J  a  as  the  alternative 
forms  of  p,  but  I  shall  always  use  J  A  for  the  second  in  order  to  keep  the 
dimensions  right,  because  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  throughout  that  p  is  an 
irratioiial  straight  line. 

As  Euclid  extends  the  signification  of  rational  (pviTo^,  literally  expressible)^ 
so  he  limits  the  scope  of  the  terra  oXoyo?  (literally  having  no  ratio)  as  applied 
to  straight  lines.  That  this  limitation  was  started  by  himself  may  perhaps  be 
inferred  from  the  form  of  words  "  let  straight  lines  incommensurable  with  it 
be  called  irrational.''  Irrational  straight  lines  then  are  with  Euclid  straight  lines 
commensurable  neither  in  length  nor  in  square  with  the  assumed  rational 
straight  line,  ^k .  a  where  k  is  not  square  is  not  irrational;  ^k.axs  irrational, 
and  so  (as  we  shall  see  later  on)  is  (^^+  J\)a. 


Definition  4. 

Kai  TO  fiCK  diro  rij^  Trporc^ciai/s  cv^cias  Ttrpdyiavov  prfrov^  kcu  ra  ravna 
€rvfJLfi€Tpa  pifra,  ra  Sc  Tovna  davfifierpa  aAoya  KoAcicrdoi,  Koi  at  Svifofitvai  avrct 
aXoyoi,  ft  fikv  Terpdymva  cii/,  avrai  at  irXtvpaiy  ci  Sc  crcpa  rii'a  tvSvypafifui,  at 
laa  avrois  rcrpayoiva  avaypaKf^ovirai. 

As  applied  to  areas,  the  terms  rational  and  irrational  have,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  same  sense  with  Euclid  as  we  should  attach  to  them.  According 
to  Euclid,  if  p  is  a  rational  straight  line  in  his  sense,  p*  is  rational  and  any 
area  commensurable  with  it,  i.e.  of  the  form  kp^  (where  k  is  an  integer,  or  of 
the  form  mjn,  where  »i,  n  are  integers),  is  rational ;  but  any  area  of  the  form 
»Jk .  p*  is  irrational,  Euclid's  rational  area  thus  contains  A  units  of  area, 
where  A  is  an  integer  or  of  the  form  mln,  where  m,  n  are  integers ;  and  his 
irrational  area  is  of  the  form  Jk,A,  His  irrational  area  is  then  connected 
with  his  irrational  straight  line  by  making  the  latter  the  square  root  of  the 


X.  DEF.  4]  NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  3,  4  13 

former.  This  would  give  us  for  the  irrational  straight  line  ijk.  JA^  which  of 
course  includes  ijk .  a. 

al  Swa^ci  ai  avra  are  the  Straight  lines  the  squares  on  which  are  equal  to 
the  areas,  in  accordance  with  the  regular  meaning  of  hvvafrBau  It  is  scarcely 
possible,  in  a  book  written  in  geometrical  language,  to  translate  Swa/Uytf  as 
the  square  root  (of  an  area)  and  Swao^ai  as  to  be  the  square  root  (of  an  area\ 
although  I  can  use  the  term  "  square  root "  when  in  my  notes  I  am  using  an 
algebraical  expression  to  represent  an  area ;  I  shall  therefore  hereafter  use  the 
word  "side"  for  Sum/Acvi;  and  "to  be  the  side  of"  for  SvVaa^at,  so  that 
"side"  will  in  such  expressions  be  a  short  way  of  expressing  the  *'side  of 
a  square  equal  to  (an  area)y  In  this  particular  passage  it  is  not  quite  practi- 
cable to  use  the  words  "  side  of"  or  "  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal 
to,"  for  these  expressions  occur  just  afterwards  for  two  alternatives  which  the 
word  hjva\Lkvr\  covers.  I  have  therefore  exceptionally  translated  "  the  straight 
lines  which  produce  them  "  (i.e.  if  squares  are  described  upon  them  as  sides). 

ai  lo-a  avrois  Tcrpaycova  ou^aypu^vu-ai,  literally  "  the  (straight  lines)  which 
describe  squares  equal  to  them  *' :  a  peculiar  use  of  the  active  of  dvaypdtfitiv, 
the  meaning  being  of  course  "  the  straight  lines  on  which  are  {/escribed  the 
squares  "  which  are  equal  to  the  rectilineal  figures. 


BOOK  X.     PROPOSITIONS. 


Proposition  i. 


Two  unequal  magnitudes  being  set  out,  if  from  the  greater 
there  be  subtracted  a  magnitude  greater  than  its  half  and  from 
that  which  is  left  a  magnitude  greater  than  its  half  and  if 
this  process  be  repeated  continually,  there  will  be  left  some 
magnitude  which  will  be  less  than  the  lesser  magnitude  set  out. 

Let  AB,  C  be  two  unequal  magnitudes  of  which  AB  is 
the  greater: 

I  say  that,  if  from  AB  there  be     ^ — • — • ^  — ^ — 

subtracted  a  magnitude  greater  d + + e 

than  its  half,  and  from  that  which 

is  left  a  magnitude  greater  than  its  half,  and  if  this  process  be 
repeated  continually,  there  will  be  left  some  magnitude  which 
will  be  less  than  the  magnitude  C 

For  C  if  multiplied  will  sometime  be  greater  than  AB, 

[of.  V.  Def.  4] 

Let  it  be  multiplied,  and  let  DE  be  a  multiple  of  C,  and 
greater  than  AB ; 

let  DE  be  divided  into  the  parts  DF,  FG,  GE  equal  to  C, 
from  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  BH  greater  than  its  half, 
and,  from  AH,  HK  greater  than  its  half, 
and  let  this  process  be  repeated  continually  utjtil  the  divisions 
in  AB  are  equal  in  multitude  with  the  divisions  in  DE. 

Let,  then,  AK,  KH,  HB  be  divisions  which  are  equal  in 
multitude  with  DF,  FG,  GE. 

Now,  since  DE  is  greater  than  AB, 
and  from  DE  there  has  been  subtracted  EG  less  than   its 
half, 

and,  from  AB,  BH  greater  than  its  half, 
therefore  the  remainder  GD  is  greater  than  the  remainder  HA. 


X.  i]  PROPOSITION   I  15 

And,  since  GD  is  greater  than  HA^ 
and  there  has  been  subtracted,  from  GD,  the  half  GF, 
and,  from  HA^  HK  gr^dX^v  than  its  half, 
therefore  the  remainder  DF\s  greater  than  the  remainder  AK. 

But  DF  is  equal  to  C  \ 
therefore  C  is  also  greater  than  AK. 

Therefore  AK  is  less  than  C 

Therefore  there  is  left  of  the  magnitude  AB  the  magnitude 
AK  which  is  less  than  the  lesser  magnitude  set  out,  namely  C. 

Q.  E.  D. 

And  the  theorem  can  be  similarly  proved  even  if  the  parts 
subtracted  be  halves. 

This  proposition  will  be  remembered  because  it  is  the  lemma  required  in 
Euclid's  proof  of  xii.  2  to  the  effect  that  circles  are  to  one  another  as  the 
squares  on  their  diameters.  Some  writers  appear  to  be  under  the  impression 
that  XII.  2  and  the  other  propositions  in  Book  xii.  in  which  the  method  of 
exhaustion  is  used  are  the  only  places  where  Euclid  makes  use  of  x.  i ;  and  it 
is  commonly  remarked  that  x.  i  might  just  as  well  have  been  deferred  till  the 
beginning  of  Book  xii.  Even  Cantor  {Gesch.  d.  Math,  i,,  p.  269)  remarks 
that  "  Euclid  draws  no  inference  from  it  [x.  i  ],  not  even  that  which  we  should 
more  than  anything  else  expect,  namely  that,  if  two  magnitudes  are  incom- 
mensurable, we  can  always  form  a  magnitude  commensurable  with  the  first 
which  shall  differ  from  the  second  magnitude  by  as  little  as  we  please."  But, 
so  far  from  making  no  use  of  x.  i  before  xii.  2,  Euclid  actually  uses  it  in  the 
very  next  proposition,  x.  2.  This  being  so,  as  the  next  note  will  show,  it 
follows  that,  since  x.  2  gives  the  criterion  for  the  incommensurability  of  two 
magnitudes  (a  very  necessary  preliminary  to  the  study  of  incomraensurables), 
x.  I  comes  exactly  where  it  should  be. 

Euclid  uses  x.  i  to  prove  not  only  xii.  2  but  xii.  5  (that  pyramids  with  the 
same  height  and  triangular  bases  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases),  by  means 
of  which  he  proves  (xii.  7  and  Por.)  that  any  pyramid  is  a  third  part  of  the 
prism  which  has  the  same  base  and  equal  height,  and  xii.  10  (that  any  cone 
is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder  which  has  the  same  base  and  equal  height), 
besides  other  similar  propositions.  Now  xii.  7  Por.  and  xii.  10  are  theorems 
specifically  attributed  to  Eudoxus  by  Archimedes  ( On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder, 
Preface),  who  says  in  another  place  {^Quadrature  of  the  Parabola,  Preface)  that 
the  first  of  the  two,  and  the  theorem  that  circles  are  to  one  another  as  the 
squares  on  their  diameters,  were  proved  by  means  of  a  certain  lemma  which 
he  states  as  follows :  ''Of  unequal  lines,  unequal  surfaces,  or  unequal  solids, 
the  greater  exceeds  the  less  by  such  a  magnitude  as  is  capable,  if  added 
[continually]  to  itself,  of  exceeding  any  magnitude  of  those  which  are 
comparable  with  one  another,''  i.e.  of  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
original  magnitudes.  Archimedes  also  says  (loc,  cit.)  that  the  second  of 
the  two  theorems  which  he  attributes  to  Eudoxus  (Eucl.  xii.  10)  was 
proved  by  means  of  ^'a  lemma  similar  to  the  aforesaid."  The  lemma 
stated  thus  by  Archimedes  is  decidedly  different  from  x.  i,  which,  however, 
Archimedes  himself  uses  several  times,  while  he  refers  to  the  use  of  it 


i6  BOOK   X  [x.  I 

in  XII.  2  {On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder^  i.  6).  As  I  have  before  suggested 
( The  Works  of  Archimedes^  p.  xlviii),  the  apparent  difficulty  caused  by  the 
mention  of  tivo  lemmas  in  connexion  with  the  theorem  of  Eucl.  xii.  2  may  be 
explained  by  reference  to  the  proof  of  x.  i.  Euclid  there  takes  the  lesser 
magnitude  and  says  that  it  is  possible,  by  multiplying  it,  to  make  it  some  time 
exceed  the  greater,  and  this  statement  he  clearly  bases  on  the  4th  definition  of 
Book  v.,  to  the  effect  that  "magnitudes  are  said  to  bear  a  ratio  to  one  another 
which  can,  if  multiplied,  exceed  one  another."  Since  then  the  smaller 
magnitude  in  x.  i  may  be  regarded  as  the  difference  between  some  two 
unequal  magnitudes,  it  is  clear  that  the  lemma  stated  by  Archimedes  is  in 
substance  used  to  prove  the  lemma  in  x.  i,  which  appears  to  play  so  much 
larger  a  part  in  the  investigations  of  quadrature  and  cubature  which  have  come 
down  to  us. 

Besides  being  employed  in  Eucl.  x.  i,  the  "Axiom  of  Archimedes"  appears 
in  Aristotle,  who  also  practically  quotes  the  result  of  x.  i  itself.  Thus  he 
says,  Physics  viii.  10,  266  b  2,  "By  continually  adding  to  a  finite  (magnitude) 
I  shall  exceed  any  definite  (magnitude),  and  similarly  by  continually  subtract- 
ing from  it  I  shall  arrive  at  something  less  than  it,"  and  ibid,  iii.  7,  207  b  10 
"For  bisections  of  a  magnitude  are  endless."  It  is  thus  somewhat  misleading 
to  use  the  term  "Archimedes'  Axiom"  for  the  "lemma"  quoted  by  him, 
since  he  makes  no  claim  to  be  the  discoverer  of  it,  and  it  was  obviously  much 
earlier. 

Stolz  (quoted  by  G.  Vitali  in  Questioni  riguardanti  la  geonutria  elementare^ 
pp.  91 — 2)  showed  how  to  prove  the  so-called  Axiom  or  Postulate  of  Archimedes 
by  means  of  the  Postulate  of  Dedekind,  thus.  Suppose  the  two  magnitudes 
to  be  straight  lines.  It  is  required  to  prove  that,  given  two  straight  lims^  there 
ahvays  exists  a  multiple  of  the  smaller  which  is  greater  than  the  other. 

Let  the  straight  lines  be  so  placed  that  they  have  a  common  extremity  and 
the  smaller  lies  along  the  other  on  the  same  side  of  the  common  extremity. 

If  -^C  be  the  greater  and  AB  the  smaller,  we  have  to  prove  that  there 
exists  an  integral  number  //  such  that  n .  AB  >  AC, 

Suppose  that  this  is  not  true  but  that  there  are  some  points,  like  B^  not 
coincident  with  the  extremity  A^  and  such  that,  n  being  any  integer  however 
great,  n ,  AB  <AC;  and  we  have  to  prove  that  this  assumption  leads  to  an 
absurdity. 

H      M  K     , 

A       X       Y  B  C 


The  points  oi  AC  may  be  regarded  as  distributed  into  two  "parts,"  namely 
(i)  points  yy  for  which  there  exists  no  integer  n  such  that  n ,  AH>  ACj 
(2)  points  A' for  which  an  integer  n  does  exist  such  that  n .  AK>  AC 

This  division  into  parts  satisfies  the  conditions  for  the  application  of 
Dedekind's  Postulate,  and  therefore  there  exists  a  point  M  such  that  the 
points  of  AM  belong  to  the  first  part  and  those  of  MC  to  the  second  part 

Take  now  a  point  Kon  MC  such  that  MY<  AM,  The  middle  point  {X) 
oi  AY  will  fall  between  A  and  M  and  will  therefore  belong  to  the  first  part ; 
but,  since  there  exists  an  integer  n  such  that  n  ,AY>  AC^  it  follows  that 
2/1.  AX>  AC:  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 


X.  2]  PROPOSITIONS   I,  2  17 

Proposition  2. 

If^  when  the  less  of  two  unequal  magnitudes  is  continually 
subtracted  in  turn  from  the  greater,  that  which  is  left  never 
measures  the  one  before  ity  the  magnitudes  will  be  incom- 
mensurable. 

For,  there  being  two  unequal  magnitudes  AB^  CDy  and 
AB  being  the  less,  when  the  less  is  continually  subtracted 
in  turn  from  the  greater,  let  that  which  is  left  over  never 
measure  the  one  before  it ; 
I  say  that  the  magnitudes  AB^  CD  are  incommensurable. 


0 ^ D 

For,   if  they  are   commensurable,  some  magnitude  will 
measure  them. 

Let  a  magnitude  measure  them,  if  possible,  and  let  it  be  -£* ; 
let  ABy  measuring  FD^  leave  CF  less  than  itself, 
let  CF  measuring  BG,  leave  A  G  less  than  itself, 
and  let  this  process  be  repeated  continually,  until  there  is  left 
some  magnitude  which  is  less  than  E. 

Suppose  this  done,  and  let  there  be  left  AG  less  than  E. 

Then,  since  E  measures  ABy 
while  AB  measures  DFy 
therefore  E  will  also  measure  FD. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  CD  also  ; 
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CF. 

But  CF  measures  BG ; 
therefore  E  also  measures  BG. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  AB  also ; 
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  AGy  the  greater 
the  less : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  will  measure  the  magnitudes  AB, 
CD'y 

therefore  the  magnitudes  ABy  CD  are  incommensurable. 

[x.  Def.  i] 
Therefore  etc. 

H.  E.  HI.  2 


i8  BOOK  X  [x.  2 

This  proposition  states  the  test  for  incommensurable  magnitudes,  founded 
on  the  usual  operation  for  finding  the  greatest  common  measure.  The  sign 
of  the  incommensurability  of  two  magnitudes  is  that  this  operation  never 
comes  to  an  end,  while  the  successive  remainders  become  smaller  and  smaller 
until  they  are  less  than  any  assigned  magnitude. 

Observe  that  Euclid  says  "  let  this  process  be  repeated  continually  until 
there  is  left  some  magnitude  which  is  less  than  J?."  Here  he  evidently 
assumes  that  the  process  will  some  time  produce  a  remainder  less  than  any 
assigned  magnitude  E,  Now  this  is  by  no  means  self-evident,  and  yet 
Heiberg  (though  so  careful  to  supply  references)  and  Lorenz  do  not  refer  to 
the  basis  of  the  assumption,  which  is  in  reality  x.  i,  as  Billingsley  and 
Williamson  were  shrewd  enough  to  see.  The  fact  is  that,  if  we  set  off  a 
smaller  magnitude  once  or  oftener  along  a  greater  which  it  does  not  exactly 
measure,  until  the  remainder  is  less  than  the  smaller  magnitude,  we  take  away 
from  the  greater  more  than  its  half.  Thus,  in  the  figure,  FD  is  more  than  the 
half  of  CZ),  and  BG  more  than  the  half  of  AB,  If  we  continued  the  process, 
AG  marked  off  along  CF  as  many  times  as  possible  would  cut  off  more  than 
its  half;  next,  more  than  half  AG  would  be  cut  off,  and  so  on.  Hence  along 
CD^  AB  alternately  the  process  would  cut  off  more  than  half,  then  more  than 
half  the  remainder  and  so  on,  so  that  on  both  lines  we  should  ultimately 
arrive  at  a  remainder  less  than  any  assigned  length. 

The  method  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure  exhibited  in  this 
proposition  and  the  next  is  of  course  again  the  same  as  that  which  we  use  and 
which  may  be  shown  thus : 

b)af,p 

P± 
c)b(q 

d)c(r 
rd 


The  proof  too  is  the  same  as  ours,  taking  just  the  same  form,  as  shown  in  the 
notes  to  the  similar  propositions  vii.  i,  2  above.  In  the  present  case  the 
hypothesis  is  that  the  process  never  stops,  and  it  is  required  to  prove  that  a,  b 
cannot  in  that  case  have  any  common  measure,  as/  For  suppose  that/  is  a 
common  measure,  and  suppose  the  process  to  be  continued  until  the  remainder 
^,  say,  is  less  than/ 

Then,  since /measures  «,  ^,  it  measures  a  -pb^  or  c. 

Since  /  measures  ^,  r,  it  measures  b-qc^  ox  d\  and,  since/  measures  r,  </, 
it  measures  c—rdjOxe:  which  is  impossible,  since  e  </ 

Euclid  assumes  as  axiomatic  that,  if/  measures  a,  ^,  it  measures  ma  ±  nb. 

In  practice,  of  course,  it  is  often  unnecessary  to  carry  the  process  far  in 
order  to  see  that  it  will  never  stop,  and  consequently  that  the  magnitudes  are 
incommensurable.  A  good  instance  is  pointed  out  by  Allman  {Greek  Geometry 
from  Thales  to  Euclid^  pp.  42,  137 — 8).  Euclid  proves  in  xiii.  5  that,  if  AB 
be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C,  and  if 

DA  equal  to  ^C  be  added,  then  DB  is  also  cut       D A c      b 

in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  A,     This  is  indeed 

obvious  from  the  proof  of  11.  11.  It  follows  conversely  that,  if  BD  is  cut  into 
extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  A^  and  AC,  equal  to  the  lesser  segment  AD^  be 
subtracted  from  the  greater  ABy  AB  is  similarly  divided  at  C,     We  can  then 


X.  2]  PROPOSITION   2  19 

mark  off  from  AC  a,  portion  equal  to  CB,  and  ^C  will  then  be  similarly  divided, 
and  so  on.  Now  the  greater  segment  in  a  line  thus  divided  is  greater  than 
half  the  line,  but  it  follows  from  xiii.  3  that  it  is  less  than  twice  the  lesser 
segment,  i.e.  the  lesser  segment  can  never  be  marked  off  more  than  oftcg  from 
the  ^eater.  Our  process  of  marking  off  the  lesser  segment  from  the  greater 
contmually  is  thus  exactly  that  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure.  If, 
therefore,  the  segments  were  commensurable,  the  process  would  stop.  But  it 
clearly  does  not ;  therefore  the  segments  are  incommensurable. 

Allman  expresses  the  opinion  that  it  was  rather  in  connexion  with  the  line 
cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  than  with  reference  to  the  diagonal  and  side 
of  a  square  that  Pythagoras  discovered  incommensurable  magnitudes.  But 
the  evidence  seems  to  put  it  beyond  doubt  that  the  Pythagoreans  did  discover 
the  incommensurability  of  J2  and  devoted  much  attention  to  this  particular 
case.  The  view  of  Allman  does  not  therefore  commend  itself  to  me,  though 
it  is  likely  enough  that  the  Pythagoreans  were  aware  of  the  incommensura- 
bility of  the  segments  of  a  line  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio.  At  all  events 
the  Pythagoreans  could  hardly  have  carried  their  investigations  into  the  in- 
commensurability of  the  segments  of  this  line  very  far,  since  Theaetetus  is 
said  to  have  made  the  first  classification  of  irrationals,  and  to  him  is  also, 
with  reasonable  probability,  attributed  the  substance  of  the  first  part  of  Eucl. 
XIII.,  in  the  sixth  proposition  of  which  occurs  the  proof  that  the  segments  of  a 
rational  straight  line  cut  into  extreme  and  mean  ratio  are  apoiomes. 

Again,  the  incommensurability  of  ^2  can  be  proved  by  a  method 
practically  equivalent  to  that  of  x.  2,  and  without  carrying  the  process  very 
far.  This  method  is  given  in  ChrystaFs  Text- 
book  of  Algebra  (i.  p.  270).  Let  ^,  <?  be  the 
diagonal  and  side  respectively  of  a  square 
A  BCD.  Mark  off  ^/^  along  A  C  equal  to  a. 
Draw  FE  at  right  angles  to  AC  meeting  BC 
in  £. 

It  is  easily  proved  that 

BE  =  EF=FC,  g/ 

CF=AC-AB  =  d-a (i). 

CE=CB-  CF=a^{d-a) 

=  2a  -d (2). 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  //,  a  are  commensurable.  If  d^  a  are  both 
commensurably  expressible  in  terms  of  any  finite  unit,  each  must  be  an 
integral  multiple  of  a  certain  finite  unit 

But  from  (i)  it  follows  that  CF^  and  from  (2)  it  follows  that  CE^  is  an 
int^ral  multiple  of  the  same  unit. 

And  CFy  CE  are  the  side  and  diagonal  of  a  square  CFEG^  the  side  of 
which  is  less  than  half  the  side  of  the  original  square.  If  tfj,  d^  are  the  side  and 
diagonal  of  this  square, 

ai  =  d-a     ^ 
di  —  2a  —  d  )  ' 

Similarly  we  can  form  a  square  with  side  a^  and  diagonal  d^  which  are  less 
than  half  <7i,  di  respectively,  and  ^3,  d^  must  be  integral  multiples  of  the  same 
unit,  where 

a^  =  d^  -tfi, 
d^  =  2^1  -  ^1 ; 

2 — 2 


20  BOOK  X  [x.  2,  3 

and  this  process  may  be  continued  indefinitely  until  (x.  i)  we  have  a  square 
as  small  as  we  please,  the  side  and  diagonal  of  which  are  integral  multiples  of 
a  finite  unit :  which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  tf,  d  are  incommensurable. 

It  will  be  observed  that  this  method  is  the  opposite  of  that  shown  in  the 
Pythagorean  series  of  side-  and  diagonal-numbers,  the  squares  being 
successively  smaller  instead  of  larger. 


Proposition  3. 

Given  two  commensurable  magnitudes y  to  find  their  greatest 
common  measure. 

Let  the  two  given  commensurable  magnitudes  be  AB^  CD 
of  which  AB  is  the  less  ; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest  common  measure  of 
AB,  CD. 

Now  the  magnitude  AB  either  measures  CD  or  it  does 
not. 

If  then  it  measures  it — and  it  measures  itself  also — AB  is 
a  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  also  the  greatest  ; 

for  a  greater  magnitude  than  the  magnitude  AB  will  not 
measure  AB. 

Q                       ^   F 
A-H B 


-D 


E 

Next,  let  AB  not  measure  CD. 

Then,  if  the  less  be  continually  subtracted  in  turn  from 
the  greater,  that  which  is  left  over  will  sometime  measure 
the  one  before  it,  because  ^^,  CD  are  not  incommensurable; 

[of.  X.  2] 
let  AB,  measuring  ED,  leave  EC  less  than  itself, 

let  EC,  measuring  FB,  leave  AF  less  than  itself, 
and  let  AF  measure  CE. 

Since,  then,  AF  measures  CE, 
while  CE  measures  FB, 
therefore  AF  will  also  measure  FB. 

But  it  measures  itself  also  ; 
therefore  AF  will  also  measure  the  whole  AB. 


X.  3]  PROPOSITIONS   2,  3  21 

But  AB  measures  DE ; 
therefore  AF  will  also  measure  ED. 

But  it  measures  CE  also  ; 
therefore  it  also  measures  the  whole  CD. 

Therefore  AF  is  a  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  magnitude  greater  than  AF 
which  will  measure  ABy  CD. 

Let  it  be  G. 

Since  then  G  measures  AB, 
while  AB  measures  ED, 
therefore  G  will  also  measure  ED. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  CD  also ; 
therefore  G  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CE. 

But  CE  measures  FB  ; 
therefore  G  will  also  measure  FB. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  AB  also, 
and  it  will  therefore  measure  the  remainder  AF,  the  greater 
the  less : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  greater  than  AF  will  measure 
AB,  CD, 
therefore  AF  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

Therefore  the  greatest  common  measure  of  the  two  given 
commensurable  magnitudes  AB,  CD  has  been  found.  ' 

Q.  E.  D. 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  a  magnitude 
measure  two  magnitudes,  it  will  also  measure  their  greatest 
common  measure. 

This  proposition  for  two  commensurable  magnitudes  is,  mutatis  mutandis^ 
exactly  the  same  as  vii.  2  for  numbers.     We  have  the  process 

b)a(p 

P± 
c)b{q 

^± 

d)c{r 
rd 

where  c  is  equal  to  rd  and  therefore  there  is  no  remainder. 


22  BOOK  X  [x.  3, 4 

It  is  then  proved  that  ^  is  a  common  measure  of  a^d ;  and  next,  by  a 
reductio  ad  absurdum,  that  it  is  the  greatest  common  measure,  since  any 
common  measure  must  measure  //,  and  no  magnitude  greater  than  d  can 
measure  d.     The  reductio  ad  absurdum  is  of  course  one  of  form  only. 

The  Porism  corresponds  exactly  to  the  Porism  to  vii.  2. 

The  process  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure  is  probably  given  in 
this  Book,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  but  because  in  x.  5  a 
common  measure  of  two  magnitudes  A^  B  is  assumed  and  used,  and  therefore 
it  is  important  to  show  that  such  a  measure  can  be  found  if  not  already 
known. 

Proposition  4. 

Given  three  commensurable  magnitudes,  to  find  their  greatest 
common  measure. 

Let  A^  B,  C  be  the  three  given  commensurable  magnitudes; 
thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest 
common  measure  oi  A,  B,  C.  A 

Let  the  greatest  common  measure     b 

of  the  two  magnitudes  ^,  ^  be  taken,      c- 

and  let  it  be  -O  ;  [x.  3]         p ^ p 

then  D  either  measures  C,  or  does 
not  measure  it. 

First,  let  it  measure  it. 

Since  then  D  measures  C, 
while  it  also  measures  A^  B, 
therefore  Z?  is  a  common  measure  oi  A,  B,  C. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  also  the  greatest ; 

for  a  greater  magnitude  than  the  magnitude  D  does  not 
measure  A,  B. 

Next,  let  D  not  measure  C. 

I  say  first  that  C,  D  are  commensurable. 

For,  since  A,  B,  C  are  commensurable, 

some  magnitude  will  measure  them, 

and  this  will  of  course  measure  A,  B  also  ; 

so  that  it  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of 
A,  B,  namely  D.  [x.  3,  Por.] 

But  it  also  measures  C ; 

so  that  the  said  magnitude  will  measure  C,  D  ; 

therefore  C,  D  are  commensurable. 


X.  4]  PROPOSITIONS  3,  4  23 

Now  let  their  greatest  common  measure  be  taken,  and  let 
it  be  iS*.  '  [x.  3] 

Since  then  E  measures  Z?, 
while  D  measures  A^  B, 
therefore  E  will  also  measure  A,  B, 

But  it  measures  C  also  ; 
therefore  E  measures  A,  B,  C  ; 
therefore  iS*  is  a  common  measure  of  Ay  B,  C. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  possible,  let  there  be  some  magnitude  7^  greater  than 
E,  and  let  it  measure  A,  B,  C. 

Now,  since  E  measures  A,  B,  C, 

it  will  also  measure  A,  B, 

and  will  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  o(  A,  B. 

[x.  3,  Por.] 
But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B  is  D; 

therefore  E  measures  D. 

But  it  measures  C  also  ; 

therefore  E  measures  C,  £> ; 

therefore  E  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure 
of  C,  £>.  [x.  3,  Por.] 

But  that  is  E ; 

therefore  E  will  measure  E,  the  greater  the  less  : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  greater  than  the  magnitude  E 
will  measure  A,  B,  C\ 

therefore  E  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  Ay  B,  C  \i  D 
do  not  measure  C, 

and,  if  it  measure  it,  D  is  itself  the  greatest  common  measure. 

Therefore  the  greatest  common  measure  of  the  three  given 
commensurable  magnitudes  has  been  found. 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  a  magnitude 
measure  three  magnitudes,  it  will  also  measure  their  greatest 
common  measure. 

Similarly  too,  with  more  magnitudes,  the  greatest  common 
measure  can  be  found,  and  the  porism  can  be  extended. 

Q.  E.  D. 


24  BOOK  X  [x.  4t  5 

This  proposition  again  corresponds  exactly  to  vii.  3  for  numbers.  As 
there  Euclid  thinks  it  necessary  to  prove  that,  tf,  ^,  c  not  being  prime  to  one 
another,  d  and  c  are  also  not  prime  to  one  another,  so  here  he  thinks  it 
necessary  to  prove  that  d^  c  are  commensurable,  as  they  must  be  since  any 
common  measure  of  a,  b  must  be  a  measure  of  their  greatest  common 
measure  d  (x.  3,  Por.). 

The  argument  in  the  proof  that  ^,  the  greatest  common  measure  of  d^  Cy  is 
the  greatest  common  measure  of  a,  ^,  r,  is  the  same  as  that  in  vii.  3  and  x.  3. 

The  Porism  contains  the  extension  of  the  process  to  the  case  of  four 
or  more  magnitudes,  corresponding  to  Heron^s  remark  with  regard  to  the 
similar  extension  of  vii.  3  to  the  case  of  four  or  more  numbers. 


Proposition  5. 

Commensurable  magnitudes  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  number  has  to  a  number. 

Let  Ay  B  be  commensurable  magnitudes ; 

I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number. 

For,  since  A,  B  2iTe  commensurable,  some  magnitude  will 
measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  C. 


And,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  A,  so  many  units  let 
there  be  in  Z? ; 

and,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  B,  so  many  units  let  there 
be  in  B. 

Since  then  C  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  Z?, 

while  the  unit  also  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  it, 

therefore  the  unit  measures  the  number  D  the  same  number 
of  times  as  the  magnitude  C  measures  A  ; 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  ^,  so  is  the  unit  to  D ;  [vii.  Def.  20] 

therefore,  inversely,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  the  unit. 

[cf.  V.  7,  Por.] 
Again,  since  C  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  B, 
while  the  unit  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  it, 


X.  5]  PROPOSITIONS  4,  5  25 

therefore  the  unit  measures  E  the  same  number  of  times  as  C 
measures  B  \ 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  -5,  so  is  the  unit  to  E. 

But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  the  unit ; 

therefore,  ex  aequali, 

as  -^  is  to  B,  so  is  the  number  D  to  E.  [v.  22] 

Therefore  the  commensurable  magnitudes  A,  B  have  to 
one  another  the  ratio  which  the  number  D  has  to  the  number  E. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  argument  is  as  follows.  If  <i,  b  be  commensurable  magnitudes,  they 
have  some  common  measure  r,  and 

b  ^ncy 
where  »»,  n  are  integers. 

It  follows  that  c\a-\\m (i), 

or,  inversely,  a\c  =  fn\i\ 

and  also  that  c\b  -\\n^ 

so  that,  ex  aequali^  a\b-m\n. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  in  stating  the  proportion  (i),  Euclid  is  merely 
expressing  the  fact  that  a  is  the  same  multiple  of  c  that  m  is  of  i.  In  other 
words,  he  rests  the  statement  on  the  definition  of  proportion  in  vii.  Def.  20. 
This,  however,  is  applicable  only  to  four  numbers^  and  r,  a  are  not  numbers  but 
magnitudes.  Hence  the  statement  of  the  proportion  is  not  legitimate  unless 
it  is  proved  that  it  is  true  in  the  sense  of  v.  Def.  5  with  regard  to  magnitudes 
in  general,  the  numbers  i,  m  being  magnitudes.  Similarly  with  regard  to  the 
other  proportions  in  the  proposition. 

There  is,  therefore,  a  hiatus.  Euclid  ought  to  have  proved  that  magnitudes 
which  are  proportional  in  the  sense  of  vii.  Def.  20  are  also  proportional  in  the 
sense  of  v.  Def.  5,  or  that  the  proportion  of  numbers  is  included  in  the 
proportion  of  magnitudes  as  a  particular  case.  Simson  has  proved  this  in  his 
Proposition  C  inserted  in  Book  v.  (see  Vol.  11.  pp.  126 — 8).  The  portion  of 
that  proposition  which  is  required  here  is  the  proof  that, 
if  a-tnb  \ 

c  =  mdr 
then  a:b  =  c:df  in  the  sense  of  v.  Def.  5. 

Take  any  equimultiples  pa^  pc  of  a,  c  and  any  equimultiples  qb^  qd  of  ^,  d. 

Now  pa  =pmb  \ 

pc  =ptnd  )  ' 

But,  according  as pmb >=:<qbf pmd >  =  <qd. 
Therefore,  according  dispa>  =  <qb^pa>  =  <  qd. 

And  /a,  pc  are  any  equimultiples  of  <i,  r,  and  qb^  qd  any  equimultiples 
of  by  d. 

Therefore  a:b  =  c\d.  [v.  Def.  5.] 


26  BOOK  X  [x-  6 

Proposition  6. 

If  two  magnitudes  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a 
number  has  to  a  number ^  the  magnitudes  will  be  commensurable. 

For  let  the  two  magnitudes  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the 
ratio  which  the  number  D  has  to  the  number  E  ; 
5  I  say  that  the  magnitudes  A,  B  are  commensurable. 
A ' 1 B c 

D 

E F 

F'or  let  A  be  divided  into  as  many  equal  parts  as  there 
arc  units  in  /?, 

and  let  C  be  equal  to  one  of  them  ; 

and  let  F  be  made  up  of  as  many  magnitudes  equal  to  C  as 
10  there  are  units  in  E. 

Since  then  there  are  in  A  as  many  magnitudes  equal  to  C 
as  there  are  units  in  /?, 

whatever  part  the  unit  is  of  Z?,  the  same  part  is  C  of  -^  also  ; 
therefore,  as  C  is  to  /4,  so  is  the  unit  to  D.  [vii.  Def.  20] 

IS        But  the  unit  measures  the  number  D  ; 
therefore  C  also  measures  A. 

And  since,  as  C  is  to  A,  so  is  the  unit  to  /?, 
therefore,  inversely,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  the  number  D  to  the 
unit.  [cf.  V.  7>  Por.] 

ao       Again,  since  there  are  in  F  as  many  magnitudes  equal 
to  C  as  there  are  units  in  E, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  /%  so  is  the  unit  to  E.  [vii.  Def.  20] 

But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  the  unit ; 
25  therefore,  ex  aequaliy  as  y^  is  to  F^  so  is  D  to  E.  [v.  22] 

But,  as  Z>  is  to  E^  so\%  A  \,o  B  \ 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B^  so  is  it  to  /^also.  [v.  n] 

Therefore  A  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes 
A\  F\ 
>>  therefore  />  is  equal  to  F.  [v,  9] 

But  C"  measures  F\ 
therefore  it  measures  B  also. 

Further  it  measures  A  also : 
therefore  C  measures  A^  B. 


X.  6]  PROPOSITION   6  27 

35        Therefore  A  is  commensurable  with  B. 
Therefore  etc. 

PoRiSM.     From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  there  be  two 
numbers,  as  Z?,  E^  and  a  straight  line,  as  ^,  it  is  possible  to 
make  a  straight  line  \F\  such  that  the  given  straight  line  is  to 
40  it  as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  E. 

And,  if  a  mean  proportional  be  also  taken  between  A,  F, 
as  By 

as  A  is  to  F,  so  will  the  square  on  A  be  to  the  square  on  B^ 

that  is,  as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  figure  on  the  first 

45  to  that  which  is  similar  and  similarly  described  on  the  second. 

[VI.  19,  Por.] 

But,  as  A  is  to  F,  so  is  the  number  D  to  the  number  E ; 
therefore  it  has  been  contrived  that,  as  the  number  D  is  to 
the  number  E,  so  also  is  the  figure  on  the  straight  line  A  to 
the  figure  on  the  straight  line  B.  q.  e.  d. 

15.  But  the  unit  measures  the  number  D ;  therefore  C  also  measures  A. 
These  words  are  redundant,  though  they  are  apparently  found  in  all  the  Mss. 

The  same  link  to  connect  the  proportion  of  numbers  with  the  proportion 
of  magnitudes  as  was  necessary  in  the  last  proposition  is  necessary  here.  This 
being  premised,  the  argument  is  as  follows. 

Suppose  a\b^fn\n^ 

where  m,  n  are  (integral)  numbers. 

Divide  a  into  m  parts,  each  equal  to  Cy  say, 
so  that  a  =  mc. 

Now  take  d  such  that  d  =  nc. 

Therefore  we  have  a\c=m\\y 

and  c\d-\  : «, 

so  that, ^jc  (uqualiy  a  :  d=  m  :  n 

=  a  :  ^,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  h  —  d^nc^ 
so  that  c  measures  b  n  times,  and  tf,  b  are  commensurable. 

The  Porism  is  often  used  in  the  later  propositions.  It  follows  (i)  that,  if 
a  be  a  given  straight  line,  and  w,  n  any  numbers,  a  straight  line  x  can  be 
found  such  that 

(2)     We  can  find  a  straight  line>'  such  that 

c^\^-  m  :  n. 
For  we  have  only  to  take  y^  a  mean  proportional  between  a  and  x^  as 

[previously  fpund,  in  which  case  tf,  y^  x  are  in  continued  proportion  and 
v.  Def.  9] 

c?\^=.a  \x 


28  BOOK  X  [x.  7—9 

Proposition  7. 

Incommensurable  magnitudes  have  not  to  one  another  the 
ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number. 

Let  A,  Bh^  incommensurable  magnitudes  ; 
I  say  that  A  has  not  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number. 

For,  if  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number,  A  will  be  commensurable  with  B.  [x.  6] 

But  it  is  not ; 
therefore  A  has  not  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  5 

number  has  to  a  number. 

Therefore  etc. 

Proposition  8. 

If  two  magnitudes  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  which 
a  number  has  to  a  number^  the  magnitudes  will  be  incom- 
mensurable. 

For  let  the  two  magnitudes  A,  B  not  have  to  one  another 
the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number ; 

I  say  that  the  magnitudes  A,  B  are  incom-         — ^ 

mensurable.  

For,  if  they  are  commensurable,  A  will  have  to  B  the 
ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number.  [x.  5] 

But  it  has  not ; 
therefore  the  magnitudes  A^  B  are  incommensurable. 

Therefore  etc. 

Proposition  9. 

The  squares  on  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  have 
to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number :  and  squares  which  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number  will  also  have 
their  sides  commensurable  in  length.  But  the  squares  on 
straight  lines  incommensurable  in  length  have  not  to  one 
another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number ;  and  squares  which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  numher  will  not  have 
their  sides  commensurable  in  length  either. 


X.  9]  PROPOSITIONS   7—9  29 

For  let  Ay  B  be  commensurable  in  length  ; 
I  say  that  the  square  on  A 

has  to  the  square  on  B  the      —       

ratio  which  a  square  number  ~ 

has  to  a  square  number. 

For,  since  A  is  commensurable  in  length  with  By 
therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number.  [x.  5] 

Let  it  have  to  it  the  ratio  which  C  has  to  D. 

Since  then,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?, 
while  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  B  is 
duplicate  of  the  ratio  of  A  to  B, 

for  similar  figures  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  their  corre- 
sponding sides ;  [vi.  20,  Por.] 

and  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D  is  duplicate 
of  the  ratio  of  C  to  /?, 

for  between  two  square  numbers  there  is  one  mean  proportional 
number,  and  the  square  number  has  to  the  square  number  the 
ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  side  has  to  the  side  ;  [vm.  n] 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so 
is  the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D. 

Next,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  let 
the  square  on  C  be  to  the  square  on  D  ; 
I  say  that  A  is  commensurable  in  length  with  B. 

For  since,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  is 
the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  /?, 

while  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  B  is 
duplicate  of  the  ratio  of  A  to  B, 

and  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D  is  duplicate 
of  the  ratio  of  C  to  D, 
therefore  also,  as  ^4  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D. 

Therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  the  number  C  has 
to  the  number  D ; 
therefore  A  is  commensurable  in  length  with  B.  [x.  6] 

Next,  let  A  be  incommensurable  in  length  with  B  ; 
I  say  that  the  square  on  A  has  not  to  the  square  on  B  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

For,  if  the  square  on  A  has  to  the  square  on  B  the  ratio 


30  BOOK   X  [x.  9 

which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number,  A  will  be 
commensurable  with  B. 

But  it  is  not ; 
therefore  the  square  on  A  has  not  to  the  square  on  B  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Again,  let  the  square  on  A  not  have  to  the  square  on  B 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number  ; 
I  say  that  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  B. 

For,  if  A  is  commensurable  with  B,  the  square  on  A  will 
have  to  the  square  on  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number. 

But  it  has  not ; 
therefore  A  is  not  commensurable  in  length  with  B. 

Therefore  etc. 

PoRiSM.  And  it  is  manifest  from  what  has  been  proved 
that  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  are  always  com- 
mensurable in  square  also,  but  those  commensurable  in  square 
are  not  always  commensurable  in  length  also. 

[Lemma.  It  has  been  proved  in  the  arithmetical  books 
that  similar  plane  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number,  [vui.  26] 

and  that,  if  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which 
a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number,  they  are  similar 
plane  numbers.  [Converse  of  viii.  26] 

And  it  is  manifest  from  these  propositions  that  numbers 
which  are  not  similar  plane  numbers,  that  is,  those  which 
have  not  their  sides  proportional,  have  not  to  one  another 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

For,  if  they  have,  they  will  be  similar  plane  numbers : 
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  numbers  which  are  not  similar  plane  numbers 
have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number.] 

A  scholium  to  this  proposition  (Schol.  x.  No.  62)  says  categorically  that 
the  theorem  proved  in  it  was  the  discovery  of  Theaetetus. 

If  a,  ^  be  straight  lines,  and 

a  \b  =  m  ',n^ 
where  w,  n  are  numbers, 

then  (^\b^^m^\n^\ 

and  conversely- 


X.  9,  lo]  PROPOSITIONS  9,  10  31 

This  inference,  which  looks  so  easy  when  thus  symbolically  expressed,  was 
by  no  means  so  easy  for  Euclid  owing  to  the  fact  that  a,  b  are  straight  lines^ 
and  w,  n  numbers.  He  has  to  pass  from  a  :  ^  to  a* :  ^  by  means  of  vi.  20,  Por. 
through  the  duplicate  ratio;  the  square  on  a  is  to  the  square  on  b  in  the 
duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides  a,  b.  On  the  other  hand,  w,  n 
being  numbersy  it  is  viii.  1 1  which  has  to  be  used  to  show  that  n^ :  «*  is  the 
ratio  duplicate  oi  m:n. 

Then,  in  order  to  establish  his  result,  Euclid  assumes  that,  if  two  ratios  are 
equals  the  ratios  which  are  their  duplicates  are  also  equal.  This  is  nowhere 
proved  in  Euclid,  but  it  is  an  easy  inference  from  v.  22,  as  shown  in  my  note 
on  VI.  22. 

The  converse  has  to  be  established  in  the  same  careful  way,  and  Euclid 
(usumes  that  ratios  the  duplicates  of  which  are  equal  are  themselves  equal. 
This  is  much  more  troublesome  to  prove  than  the  converse;  for  proofs  I  refer 
to  the  same  note  on  vi.  22. 

The  second  part  of  the  theorem,  deduced  by  reductio  ad  absurdum  from 
the  first,  requires  no  remark. 

In  the  Greek  text  there  is  an  addition  to  the  Porism  which  Heiberg 
brackets  as  superfluous  and  not  in  Euclid's  manner.  It  consists  ( i )  of  a  sort 
of  proof,  or  rather  explanation,  of  the  Porism  and  (2)  of  a  statement  and 
explanation  to  the  eflect  that  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  length  are 
not  necessarily  incommensurable  in  square  also,  and  that  straight  lines 
incommensurable  in  square  are,  on  the  other  hand,  always  incommensurable 
in  length  also. 

The  Lemma  gives  expressions  for  two  numbers  which  have  to  one  another 
the  ratio  of  a  square  number  to  a  square  number.  Similar  plane  numbers 
are  of  the  form  pm  .  pn  and  qm  .  qn^  or  mnf^  and  mnf^  the  ratio  of  which  is 
of  course  the  ratio  of  /*  to  f. 

The  converse  theorem  that,  if  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
of  a  square  number  to  a  square  number,  the  numbers  are  similar  plane 
numbers  is  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  proved  in  the  arithmetical  Books.  It  is 
the  converse  of  viii.  26  and  is  used  in  ix.  10.  Heron  gave  it  (see  note  on 
VIII.  27  above). 

Heiberg  however  gives  strong  reason  for  supposing  the  Lemma  to  be  an 
interpolation.  It  has  reference  to  the  next  proposition,  x.  10,  and,  as  we  shall 
see,  there  are  so  many  objections  to  x.  10  that  it  can  hardly  be  accepted  as 
genuine.  Moreover  there  is  no  reason  why,  in  the  Lemma  itself,  numbers 
which  are  not  similar  plane  numbers  should  be  brought  in  as  they  are. 


[Proposition  id. 

To  find  two  straight  lines  incomfnensurable^  the  one  in 
length  only,  and  the  other  in  square  also,  with  an  assigned 
straight  line. 

Let  A  be  the  assigned  straight  line ; 
thus  it  is  required  to  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable, 
the  one  in  length  only,  and  the  other  in  square  also,  with  A. 

Let  two  numbers  B^  C  be  set  out  which  have  not  to  one 


32  BOOK  X  [x.  lo 

another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number,  that  is,  which  are  not  similar  plane 

numbers ;  a 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  o 

as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  the  square  on  -^  to 

the  square  on  Z?  2ZIIL__ 

— for  we  have  learnt  how  to  do  this — 

[x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  A  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  D.  [x.  6] 

And,  since  B  has  not  to  C  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  D  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  D.  [x.  9] 

Let  E  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  between  A^  D  \ 

therefore,  as  -^  is  to  /?,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square 
on  E.  [v.  Def.  9] 

But  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  D  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  A  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  ^;  [x-  n] 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  E. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  /?,  E  have  been  found  in- 
commensurable, D  in  length  only,  and  E  in  square  and  of 
course  in  length  also,  with  the  assigned  straight  line  A^ 

It  would  appear  as  though  this  proposition  was  intended  to  supply  a 
justification  for  the  statement  in  x.  Def.  3  that  //  is  proved  that  there  are  an 
infinite  number  of  straight  lines  (a)  incommensurable  in  length  only,  or 
commensurable  in  square  only,  and  (b)  incommensurable  in  square,  with  any 
given  straight  line. 

But  in  truth  the  proposition  could  well  be  dispensed  with;  and  the 
positive  objections  to  its  genuineness  are  considerable. 

In  the  first  place,  it  depends  on  the  following  proposition,  x.  1 1 ;  for  the 
last  step  concludes  that,  since 

a* :  ^  =  a  :  jc, 

and  <i,  X  are  incommensurable  in  length,  therefore  «^  f  are  incommensurable. 
But  Euclid  never  commits  the  irregularity  of  proving  a  theorem  by  means  of 
a  later  one.  Gregory  sought  to  get  over  the  difficulty  by  putting  x.  10  after 
X.  1 1 ;  but  of  course,  if  the  order  were  so  inverted,  the  Lemma  would  still  be 
in  the  wrong  place. 

Further,  the  expression  ^/la^o/icv  yap,  "for  we  have  learnt  (how  to  do  this)," 
is  not  in  Euclid's  manner  and  betrays  the  hand  of  a  learner  (though  the  same 


X.  lo,  ii]  PROPOSITIONS    lo,    ii  33 

expression  is  found  in  the  Sectio  Canonis  of  Euclid,  where  the  reference  is 
to  the  Elements), 

Lastly  the  manuscript  P  has  the  number  10,  in  the  first  hand,  at  the  top 
of  X.  II,  from  which  it  may  perhaps  be  concluded  that  x.  10  had  at  first  no 
number. 

It  seems  best  therefore  to  reject  as  spurious  both  the  Lemma  and  x.  10. 

The  argument  of  x.  10  is  simple.  If  n  be  a  given  straight  line  and  w,  n 
numbers  which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  of  square  to  square,  take  x 
such  that 

a^  :  x^  =  m  :  //,  [x.  6,  Por.] 

whence  <?,  x  are  incommensurable  in  length.  [x.  9] 

Then  take  y  a  mean  proportional  between  <?,  x^  whence 

a}  \y'^-a  \  X  [v.  Def.  9] 

[-  s]m  :  V«], 
and  X  is  incommensurable  in  length  only,  while  y  is  incommensurable  in 
square  as  well  as  in  length,  with  a. 


Proposition   11. 

If  four  magnitudes  be  proportional,  and  tfie  first  be  com- 
mensurable  with  t/ie  second,  the  third  will  also  be  commensurable 
with  the  fourth  ;  and,  if  t lie  first  be  incommensurable  with  the 
second,  the  third  will  also  be  incomrnensurable  with  the  fourth. 

Let  A,  B,  C,  D  h^  four  magnitudes  in  proportion,  so 
that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C 

to  D,  A B 

and  let  A  be  commensurable         ^ d 

with  B  ; 

I  say  that  C  will  also  be  commensurable  with  D. 

For,  since  A  is  commensurable  with  B, 
therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which   a   number  has  to  a 
number.  [x.  5] 

And,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?  ; 
therefore  C  also  has  to  D  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number ; 

therefore  C  is  commensurable  with  D.  [x.  6] 

Next,  let  A  be  incommensurable  with  B ; 
I  say  that  C  will  also  be  incommensurable  with  D. 

For,  since  A  is  incommensurable  with  B, 
therefore  A  has  not  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number.  [x.  7] 

H.  E.  HI.  -i 


34  BOOK   X  [x.  II,  12 

And,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?  ; 
therefore  neither  has  C  X.o  D  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to 
a  number ; 
therefore  C  is  incommensurable  with  D,  [x.  8] 

Therefore  etc. 

I  shall  henceforth,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  use  symbols  for  the  terms 
"commensurable  (with)"  and  "incommensurable  (with)"  according  to  the 
varieties  described  in  x.  Deff.  i — 4.  The  symbols  are  taken  from  Lorenz 
and  seem  convenient. 

Commensurable  and  commensurable  with^  in  relation  to  areas,  and  com- 
mensurable in  length  and  commensurable  in  length  with^  in  relation  to  straight 
lines,  will  be  denoted  by  '^. 

Commensurable  in  square  only  or  commensurable  in  square  only  with  (terms 
applicable  only  to  straight  lines)  will  be  denoted  by  <^- . 

Incomtnensurable  {ivith\  of  areas,  and  incommensurable  {ivit/i),  of  straight 
lines  will  be  denoted  by  ^. 

Ifuommensurable  in  square  (with)  (a  term  applicable  to  straight  lines  only) 
will  be  denoted  by  w-. 

Suppose  a,  ^,  r,  ^  to  be  four  magnitudes  such  that 

a  \  b  =  c  :  d. 

Then  (i),  if  a  ^  ^,  a  -.  b  =  m  :  n^    where  ///,  n  are  integers,  [x.  5] 

whence  c  \  d-m\  n^ 

and  therefore  c  *^  d,  [x.  6] 

(2)     lias^b^  a:b^m:n^  [x.  7] 

so  that  c  :  d-^m  :  n, 

whence  c  sj  d,  [x.  8] 


Proposition  12. 

Magnitudes  commensurable  with  the  same  magnitude  are 
commensurable  with  one  another  also. 

For  let  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  be  commensurable 
with  C; 
I  say  that  A  is  also  commensurable  with  B. 


-D 

—E  H 


-F  K 

-Q  L 


For,  since  A  is  commensurable  with  C, 
therefore  A  has  to  C  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number.  [x.  5] 


X.  12]  PROPOSITIONS    II,  12  3S 

Let  It  have  the  ratio  which  D  has  to  E. 
Again,  since  C  is  commensurable  with  B, 

therefore  C  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number.  [x.  5] 

Let  it  have  the  ratio  which  F  has  to  G. 
And,  given  any  number  of  ratips  we  please,  namely  the 
ratio  which  D  has  to  E  and  that  which  F  has  to  G, 

let  the  numbers  H,  K,  L  be  taken  continuously  in  the  given 
ratios  ;  [of.  vm.  4] 

so  that,  as  Z?  is  to  E,  so  is  H  to  K, 

and,  as  F  is  to  G,  so  is  K  to  Z. 

Since,  then,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E^ 
while,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  H  to  A", 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  H  Xo  K.  [v.  n] 

Again,  since,  as  C  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  G, 
while,  as  F  is  to  Gy  so  is  A'  to  L, 
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  B,  so  is  K  to  Z.  [v.  n] 

But  also,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  //  to  A^; 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  ^  is  to  B,  so  is  //^to  L.  [v.  22] 

Therefore  ^  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number ; 
therefore  ^  is  commensurable  with  B.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  merely  to  go  through  the  process  of  compounding  two  ratios  in 
numbers. 

se  a^b  each  ^  c. 

[X.S] 


Suppose 

a, 

b  each  ^  c. 

Therefore 

a 

\  c=m  '.  n^  say, 

c 

\b  =  p:q,  say. 

Now 

m  \ 

\  n-mp  \  np^ 

and 

P 

\  q  =  np  \  nq. 

Therefore 

a 

\c^mp  \  npy 

c 

\  b  =  np  '.  nq. 

whence,  ex  aequali^ 

a  : 

\  b  =  mp  :  fiq, 

so  that 

a  ^  b. 

[X.6] 
3—* 


36  BOOK   X  [x.  13,  Lemma 

Proposition   13. 

If  two  magnitudes  be  commensurable,  and  tlie  one  of  them 
be  incommensurable  with  any  magnitude,  the  remaining  one 
will  also  be  incommensurable  with  the  same. 

Let  Ay  B  be  two  commensurable  magnitudes,  and  let  one 
of  them,  A,  be  incommensurable  with 

any  other  magnitude  C;  a 

I  say  that  the  remaining  one,  B,  will         c 

also  be  incommensurable  with  C  b 

For,  if  B  is  commensurable  with  C, 
while  A  is  also  commensurable  with  B, 
A  is  also  commensurable  with  C  [x.  12] 

But  it  is  also  incommensurable  with  it : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  B  is  not  commensurable  with  C; 
therefore  it  is  incommensurable  with  it. 

Therefore  etc. 

Lemma. 

Given  two  unequal  straight  lines,  to  find  by  what  square  the 
square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less. 

Let  AB,  C  be  the  given  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and 
let  AB  be  the  greater  of  them  ; 
thus  it  is  required  to  find  by  what 
square  the  square  on  AB  is  greater 
than  the  square  on  C. 

Let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  de- 
scribed on  AB, 

and  let  AD  be  fitted  into  it  equal  to  C ;  [iv.  i] 

let  DB  be  joined. 

It  is  then  manifest  that  the  angle  ADB  is  right,  [iii.  31] 
and  that  the  square  on  AB  \s  greater  than  the  square  on 
AD,  that  is,  C,  by  the  square  on  DB.  [i.  47] 

Similarly  also,  if  two  straight  lines  be  given,  the  straight 
line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  is  found  in  this  manner. 


Lemma,  x.  14]  PROPOSITIONS    13,  14  37 

Let  AD,  DB  be  the  given  two  straight  lines,  and  let  it  be 
required  to  find  the  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them. 

Let  them  be  placed  so  as  to  contain  a  right  angle,  that 
formed  by  AD,  DB ; 
and  let  AB  be  joined. 

It  is  again  manifest  that  the  straight  line  the  square  on 
which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  AB. 

[I.  47] 
Q.   E.  D. 

The  lemma  gives  an  obvious  method  of  finding  a  straight  line  (c)  equal  to 
^/^l*  T  ^,  where  a,  b  are  given  straight  lines  of  which  a  is  the  greater. 

Proposition  14. 

If  four  straight  lines  be  proportional,  and  the  square  on 

the  first  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  second  by  the  square 

on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  first,  the  sqtiare  on 

the  third  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  fourth  by 

5  the  square  on  a  straight  line  com7nensurable  with  the  third. 

And,  if  the  square  on  the  first  be  greater  than  the  square 

on  the  second  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 

with  the  first,  the  square  on  the  third  will  also  be  greater  than 

the  square  on  the  fourth  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  in- 

10  commensurable  with  the  third. 

Let  A,  B,  C.  D  be  four  straight  lines  in  proportion,  so 

that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z> ; 

and  let  the  square  on  A  be  greater  than 

the  square  on  B  by  the  square  on  E,  and 
IS  let  the  square  on  C  be  greater  than  the 

square  on  D  by  the  square  on  F\ 

I  say  that,  if  A  is  commensurable  with  E, 

C  is  also  commensurable  with  F, 

and,  if  A  is  incommensurable  with  E,  C  is 
20  also  incommensurable  \yith  F.  a  o  d 

For  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D, 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  is 

the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D.  [vi.  22] 

But  the  squares  on  E,  B  are  equal  to  the  square  on  A, 
25  and  the  squares  on  D,  F  are  equal  to  the  square  on  C. 


38  BOOK  X  [x.  14 

Therefore,  as  the  squares  on  E,  B  are  to  the  square  on 
B,  so  are  the  squares  on  /?,  F  to  the  square  on  D ; 

therefore,  separandoy  as  the  square  on  E  is  to  the  square  on 
B,  so  is  the  square  on  F  to  the  square  on  D  ;  [v.  17] 

30  therefore  also,  as  E  is  to  B,  so  is  /^  to  Z?  ;  [vi.  22] 

therefore,  inversely,  as  B  is  to  E^  so  is  D  to  F. 

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  also  is  C  to  Z? ; 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  A  is  to  Ey  so  is  C  to  /^  [v.  22] 

Therefore,  if  A  is  commensurable  with  E,  C  is  also  com- 
35  mensurable  with  F, 

and,  if  A  is  incommensurable  with  E,  C  is  also  incommen- 
surable with  F.  [x.  11] 

Therefore  etc. 

3i  5)  8,  10.  Euclid  speaks  of  the  square  on  the  first  (third)  being  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  second  (fourth)  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  (incommensurable) 
**  with  itseif  (ia\ni)j**  and  similarly  in  all  like  phrases  throughout  the  Book.  For  clearness* 
sake  I  substitute  **  the  first,"  **  the  third,"  or  whatever  it  may  be,  for  "  itself**  in  these  cases. 

Suppose  a,  ^,  r,  //  to  be  straight  lines  such  that 

a:b  =  c:d  (i). 

It  follows  [vi.  22]  that  a'  :  ^  =  r*  :  (P    (2). 

In  order  to  prove  that,  convertendo^ 

Euclid  has  to  use  a  somewhat  roundabout  method  owing  to  the  absence  of  a 
cotwertendo  proposition  in  his  Book  v.  (which  omission  Simson  supplied  by 
his  Prop.  E). 

It  follows  from  (2)  that 

{(a»-^)  +  ^}  :^  =  {(^-^)  +  ^}  :^, 

whence,  separando^  {a^-l^)\i^=  (c^  -  d^)  :  d\  [v.  1 7] 

and,  inversely,  ^  :  (a*  -  ^)  =  ^  :  (r*  -  d^). 

From  this  and  (2),  ex  aequali^ 

a"  :  {a"  -^)  =  c^:  {c^  -  d%  [v.  2  2] 

Hence  a  :  Jd*-S^  =  c  :  Jc^  —  d^,  [vi.  22] 

According  therefore  as        «  ^  or  v^  %/«*  -  ^, 

c^oxsjJ(^-iP,  [x.  11] 

If  a  ^  -s/rt*  -  ^,  we  may  put  Jd^  -H^  -ka^  where  k  is  of  the  form  w/« 
and  w,  n  are  integers.     And   if   Jd^-ii^  =ka,  it  follows  in   this  case  that 


X.  15]  PROPOSITIONS    14,  15  39 

Proposition  15. 

If  two  commensurable  magnitudes  be  added  together,  the 
whole  will  also  be  commensurable  with  each  of  them ;  and,  if 
the  whole  be  commensurable  with  one  of  them,  the  original 
magnitudes  will  also  be  commensurable. 

For  let  the  two  commensurable  magnitudes  AB,  BC  be 
added  together ; 

1  say  that  the  whole  ^C  is  also      ^ 1 c 

commensurable  with  each  of  the        

magnitudes  AB,  BC, 

For,  since  AB,  BC  are  commensurable,  some  magnitude 
will  measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  then  D  measures  AB,  BC,  it  will  also  measure  the 
whole  AC 

But  it  measures  AB,  BC  also ; 
therefore  D  measures  AB,  BC,  AC; 

therefore  ^C  is  commensurable  with  each  of  the  magnitudes 
AB,  BC  [x.  Def.  i] 

Next,  let  AC  be  commensurable  with  AB; 
1  say  that  AB,  BC  are  also  commensurable. 

For,  since  AC,  AB  are  commensurable,  some  magnitude 
will  measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  then  D  measures  CA,  AB,  it  will  also  measure  the 
remainder  BC 

But  it  measures  AB  also  ; 

therefore  D  will  measure  AB,  BC ; 

therefore  AB,  BC  are  commensurable.  [x.  Def.  i] 

Therefore  etc. 

(i)  If  <i,  ^  be  any  two  commensurable  magnitudes,  they  are  of  the  form 
mc,  nc,  where  r  is  a  common  measure  of  a,  b  and  m,  n  some  integers. 

It  follows  that  a  +  ^  =  (»i  +  «)  r ; 

therefore  {a  +  b),  being  measured  by  c,  is  commensurable  with  both  a  and  b, 

(2)  If  a  +  ^  is  commensurable  with  either  a  or  b,  say  a,  we  may  put 
a^b-mc,  a-nc,  where  r  is  a  common  measure  of  (a  +  b),  a,  and  m,  n  are 
integers. 

Subtracting,  we  have  b  =  (m-  n)  c, 

whence  ^  ^  a. 


40 


BOOK   X  [x.  i6 


Proposition  i6. 

If  two  incommensurable  magnitudes  be  added  together,  the 
whole  will  also  be  incommensurable  with  each  of  them  ;  and,  if 
the  whole  be  incommensurable  with  one  of  them,  the  original 
magnitudes  will  also  be  incommensurable. 

For  let  the  two  incommensurable  magnitudes  AB,  BC  be 
added  together ; 

1  say  that  the  whole  ^C  is  also  incommensurable 
with  each  of  the  magnitudes  AB,  BC. 

For,  if  CAy  AB  are  not  incommensurable,  some 
magnitude  will  measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  if  possible,  and  let  it  be  D, 

Since  then  D  measures  CAy  AB, 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  BC, 

But  it  measures  AB  also ; 
therefore  D  measures  AB,  BC. 

Therefore  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  ; 
but  they  were  also,  by  hypothesis,  incommensurable  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  will  measure  CA,  AB ; 
therefore  CA,  AB  are  incommensurable.  [x.  Def.  i] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  AC,  CB  are  also  incom- 
mensurable. 

Therefore  ^Cis  incommensurable  with  each  of  the  magni- 
tudes AB,  BC. 

Next,  let  AC  he  incommensurable  with  one  of  the  magni- 
tudes AB,  BC. 

First,  let  it  be  incommensurable  with  AB ; 

I  say  that  AB,  BC  are  also  incommensurable. 

For,  if  they  are  commensurable,  some  magnitude  will 
measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  /?. 
Since  then  D  measures  AB,  BC, 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  whole  AC 

But  it  measures  AB  also  ; 

therefore  D  measures  CA,  AB. 


X.  i6.  17]  PROPOSITIONS    16,  17  41 

Therefore  CA,  AB  are  commensurable  ; 
but  they  were  also,  by  hypothesis,  incommensurable  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  will  measure  AB,  BC\ 
therefore  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable.  [x.  Def.  i] 

Therefore  etc. 

Lemma. 

If  to  any  straight  line  there  be  applied  a  parallelogram 
deficient  by  a  square  figure,  the  applied  parallelogram  is  equal 
to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  straight  line 
resulting  from  the  application. 

For  let  there  be  applied   to  the  straight  line   AB  the 
parallelogram    AD    deficient    by    the 
square  figure  DB ; 

I  say  that  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
contained  by  AC,  CB. 

This  is  indeed  at  once  manifest ; 
for,  since  DB  is  a  square, 
DC  is  equal  to  CB  ; 

and  AD  is  the  rectangle  AC,  CD,  that  is,  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB. 

Therefore  etc. 

If  rt  be  the  given  straight  line,  and  x  the  side  of  the  square  by  which  the 
applied  rectangle  is  to  be  deficient,  the  rectangle  is  equal  to  ax  -  ^,  which  is 
of  course  equal  to  x  {a  -  x).  The  rectangle  rnay  be  written  xy,  where 
x+y  =  a.  Given  the  area  x  {a  -  x),  or  xy  (where  x+y  =  a),  two  different 
applications  will  give  rectangles  equal  to  this  area,  the  sides  of  the  defect 
being  x  ox  a  -  x  {x  ox  y)  respectively ;  but  the  second  mode  of  expression 
shows  that  the  rectangles  do  not  differ  in  form  but  only  in  position. 

Proposition   17. 

If  there  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the  greater 
there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  if 
it  divide  it  into  parts  which  are  commensurable  in  length,  then 
s  the  square  on  the  greater  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on 
the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
the  greater. 

And,  if  the  square  on  the  greater  be  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 


42  BOOK  X  [x.  17 

10  the  greater y  and  if  there  be  applied  to  the  greater  a  parallelogram 
equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient 
by  a  square  figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  parts  which  are  com- 
mensurable  in  length. 

Let  A,  BC  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  of  which  BC  is 
IS  the  greater, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  ^C  a  parallel-  ^ 

ogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the 
square  on  the  less.  A,  that  is,  equal  to 
the  square  on  the  half  of  A,  and  deficient 


20  by  a  square  figure.     Let  this  be  the      g       f      e      d       o 
rectangle  BD,  DC,  [cf.  I^mma] 

and  let  BD  be  commensurable  in  length  with  DC  \ 
I  say  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC. 
25        For  let  BC  be  bisected  at  the  point  Ey 
and  let  EF  be  made  equal  to  DE. 

Therefore  the  remainder  DC  is  equal  to  BF. 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BC  has  been  cut  into  equal 
parts  at  E,  and  into  unequal  parts  at  Z?, 

30  therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  BD,  DC,  together  with 
the  square  on  ED,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EC ;  [n.  5] 

And  the  same  is  true  of  their  quadruples  ; 
therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  BD,  DC,  together  with 
four  times  the  square  on  DE,  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square 
35  on  EC. 

But  the  square  on  A  is  equal  to  four  times  the  rectangle 
BD,  DC\ 

and  the  square  on  DF  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square  on 
DE,  for  DF  is  double  of  DE. 
40        And  the  square  on  BC  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square 
on  EC,  for  again  BC  is  double  of  CE. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  A,  DF  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  BC, 

so  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by 
45  the  square  on  DF. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  with  DF. 
Since  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DC, 
therefore  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  15] 


X.  17]  PROPOSITION    17  43 

But  CD  IS  commensurable  in  length  with  CD,  BF,  for 
so  CD  is  equal  to  BF.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  BF, 
CD,  [x.  12] 

so  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  the  remainder 
FD',  [X.  15] 

55  therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC 

Next,  let  the  square  on  BC  be  greater  than  the  square  on 
A  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC, 
let  a  parallelogram  be  applied  to  BC  equal  to  the  fourth  part 
60  of  the  square  on  A  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let 
it  be  the  rectangle  BD,  DC 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BD  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  DC 

With  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly  that 
65  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the 
square  on  FD, 

But  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC 
Therefore  BC  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FD, 
70  so  that  ^C  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  the  remainder, 
the  sum  o{  BF,  DC  [x.  15] 

But  the  sum  of  BF,  DC  is  commensurable  with  DC,  [x.  6] 
so  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  CD ;    [x.  12] 
and   therefore,  separando,  BD   is  commensurable   in    length 
75  with  DC  [x.  15] 

Therefore  etc. 

45.  After  saying  literallv  that  **the  square  on  BC  Ls  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the 
square  on  Z^/V'  Euclid  adds  the  equivalent  expression  with  3i/rarat  in  its  technical  sense, 
^  BF  c^Mi  lift  A  ftci^or  h<>9a,rfu  rg  AZ.  As  this  is  untranslatable  in  English  except  by  a 
paraphrase  in  practically  the  same  words  as  have  preceded,  I  have  not  attempted  to 
reproduce  it. 

This  proposition  gives  the  condition  that  the  roots  of  the  equation  in  x, 

are  commensurable  with  a,  or  that  x  is  expressible  in  terms  of  a  and  integral 

numbers,  i.e.  is  of  the  form  —  a.     No  better  proof  can  be  found  for  the  fact 

that  Euclid  and  the  Greeks  used  their  solutions  of  quadratic  equations  for 
numerical  problems.  On  no  other  assumption  could  an  elaborate  discussion 
of  the  conditions  of  incommensurability  of  the  roots  with  given  lengths  or 


44  BOOK   X  [x.  17 

with  a  given  number  of  units  of  length  be  explained.  In  a  purely  geometrical 
solution  the  distinction  between  commensurable  and  incommensurable  roots 
has  no  point,  because  each  can  equally  easily  be  represented  by  straight  lines. 
On  the  other  hand,  on  the  assumption  that  the  numerical  so\\i\xox\  of  quadratic 
equations  was  an  important  part  of  the  system  of  the  Greek  geometers, 
the  distinction  between  the  cases  where  the  roots  are  commensurable  and 
incommensurable  respectively  with  a  given  length  or  unit  becomes  of  great 
importance.  Since  the  Greeks  had  no  means  of  expressing  what  we  call  an 
irrational  number,  the  case  of  an  equation  with  incommensurable  roots  could 
only  be  represented  by  them  geometrically;  and  the  geometrical  representations 
had  to  serve  instead  of  what  we  can  express  by  formulae  involving  surds. 

Euclid  proves  in  this  proposition  and  the  next  that,  x  being  determined 
from  the  equation 

x(a-x)  =  -  (i), 

4 

X,  (a  -  x)  are  commensurable  in  length  when  Va*-^,  a  are  so,  and  incom- 
mensurable in  length  when  Ja^  —  l^^a  are  incommensurable ;  and  conversely. 
Observe  the  similarity  of  his  proof  to  our  algebraical  method  of  solving 
the  equation,     a  being  represented  in  the  figure  by  BC^  and  x  by  CZ>, 

EF=^ED^--x 
2 

and  X  {a  -  x)  +  (-  -  x\  =— ,  by  Eucl.  11.  5. 

If  we  multiply  throughout  by  4, 

4JC  (tf  -  jc)  +  4  f  —  x\  =«', 

whence,  by  ( i ),  /^  +  (a  -  2xY  =  a*, 

or  a'^  —  b^  =  {a  —  2j«:)-, 

and  Ja^  -l^  -a-2x. 

We  have  to  prove  in  this  proposition 
(i)  that,  if  A',  {a-x)  are  commensurable  in  length,  so  are  «,  Jd^  —  l^^ 
(2)  that,  if  rt,  \ld^  -  f^  are  commensurable  in  length,  so  are  x^  {a  —  a). 

(i)     To  prove  that  a,  a  -  2x  are  commensurable  in  length  Euclid  employs 
several  successive  steps,  thus. 

[X.  15] 

[X.6] 

[X.  12] 

[X.  15] 


[X.  IS] 

[x.6] 

[X.  ,2] 

[X.  15] 


Since  (a  - 

^) 

/>  X, 

a  ^  X, 

But 

X  ^  2X. 

Therefore 

a  ^  2X 
^  (a-  2x). 

That  is. 

a^  sla"- 1^, 

(2)     Since 

a 

<^  s/a^~ 

-^, 

a  '^  a-  2Xy 

whence 

a  ^  2X, 

But 

2x  '^  X ; 

therefore 

a  '^  X, 

and  hence 

{a-  x)  *^  X, 

X.  17,  1 8]  PROPOSITIONS    17,  1 8  45 

It  is  often  more  convenient  to  use  the  symmetrical  form  of  equation  in 
this  and  similar  cases,  viz. 

X  -^y-a 

The  result  with  this  mode  of  expression  is  that 
(i)  if  X  ^y^  then  a  ^  Ja^-lf^;  and 
(2)  if  a  ^  v^*  -  fi^^  then  x  ^  y. 

The  truth  of  the  proposition  is  even  easier  to  see  in  this  case,  since 


Proposition   18. 

//  there  be  tivo  tmequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the  greater 
there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure^  and 
if  it  divide  it  into  parts  which  are  incommensurable,  the  square 
on  the  greater  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  the  greater. 

And,  if  the  square  on  the  greater  be  greater  t/ian  the  square 
on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  the  greater,  and  if  there  be  applied  to  tlie  greater  a 
parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the 
less  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  it  divides  it  into  parts 
which  are  incommeftsurable. 

Let  A,  BC  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  of  which  BC  is 
the  greater, 

and  to  BC  let  there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  equal 
to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less,  A,  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure.  Let  this  be  the  rect- 
angle BDy  DCy  [cf.  Lemma  before  x.  17]  g.. 
and  let  BD  be  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC\ 
I  say  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the 
square  on  A  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incom- 
mensurable with  BC 

For,  with  the  same  construction  as  before,  we  can  prove 
similarly  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
A  by  the  square  on  FD. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BC  is  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DF. 


46  BOOK   X  [x.  i8 

Since  BD  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC, 

therefore  BC  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD. 

[X.  i6] 

But  DC  is  commensurable  with  the  sum  of  BF,  DC ;  [x.  6] 
therefore  BC  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  BF, 
DC\  [X.  13] 

so  that^C  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  the  remainder 
FD.  [x.  16] 

And  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A 
by  the  square  on  FD  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC 

Again,  let  the  square  on  BC  be  greater  than  the  square  on 
A  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  BC  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  square  on  A  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure. 
Let  this  be  the  rectangle  BD,  DC. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BD  is  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DC. 

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly 
that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by 
the  square  on  FD. 

But  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC\ 
therefore  BC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FD, 
so  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  with  the  remainder,  the 
sum  of  BF,  DC.  [x.  16] 

But  the  sum  of  BF,  DC  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
DC]  [x.  6] 

therefore  BC  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC, 

so  that,  separando,  BD  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with 
DC.  [x.  16] 

Therefore  etc. 

With  the  same  notation  as  before,  we  have  to  prove  in  this  proposition  that 
(i)  if  (a-x\  X  are  incommensurable  in  length,  so  are  a,  Jd^  -  ^,  and 
(2)  if  a,  >J<^  -  ^  are  incommensurable  in  length,  so  are  {a  -  x),  x. 

Or,  with  the  equations 

^) 
xy=-  ^ 

4    ' 

x-\-y  =  a 


X.  1 8,  19]  PROPOSITIONS    i8,    19  47 

(i)  if  X  s^ y^  then  a  ^  n/^^  — ^,  and 
(2)  \{  a^^  sla^  -  ^,  then  x  s^  y. 

The  steps  are  exactly  the  same  as  shown  under  (i)  and  (2)  of  the  last 
note,  with  s^  instead  of  ^^^  except  only  in  the  lines  ".r  '^  2^"  and  "2jc  ^  x^* 
which  are  unaltered,  while,  in  the  references,  x.  13,  16  take  the  place  of  x. 
12,  15  respectively. 

[Lemma. 

Since  It  has  been  proved  that  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  length  are  always  commensurable  in  square  also, 
while  those  commensurable  in  square  are  not  always  com- 
mensurable in  length  also,  but  can  of  course  be  either 
commensurable  or  incommensurable  in  length,  it  is  manifest 
that,  if  any  straight  line  be  commensurable  in  length  with  a 
given  rational  straight  line,  it  is  called  rational  and  commen- 
surable with  the  other  not  only  in  length  but  in  square  also, 
since  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  are  always 
commensurable  in  square  also. 

But,  if  any  straight  line  be  commensurable  in  square  with 
a  given  rational  straight  line,  then,  if  it  is  also  commensurable 
in  length  with  it,  it  is  called  in  this  case  also  rational  and 
commensurable  with  it  both  in  length  and  in  square ;  but,  if 
again  any  straight  line,  being  commensurable  in  square  with  a 
given  rational  straight  line,  be  incommensurable  in  length 
with  it,  it  is  called  in  this  case  also  rational  but  commensurable 
in  square  only.] 

Proposition  19. 

The  rectangle  contained  by  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  length  is  rational. 

For  let  the  rectangle  AC  he  contained  by  the  rational 
straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in 
length ; 
I  say  that  ^C  is  rational. 

For  on  AB  let  the  square  ^Z?  be  de- 
scribed ; 

therefore  AD  is  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And,  since   AB  is   commensurable   in 
length  with  BC, 
while  AB  is  equal  to  BD, 
therefore  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BC 


48  BOOK   X  [x.  19 

And,  as  BD  is  to  BC^  so  is  DA  to  AC.  [vi.  i] 

Therefore  DA  is  commensurable  with  AC.  [x.  n] 

But  DA  is  rational ; 
therefore  y^C  is  also  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

Therefore  etc. 

There  is  a  diflficulty  in  the  text  of  the  enunciation  of  this  proposition. 
The  Greek  runs  to  vtto  pip-iav  fnJK€L   (rvfJLfi€Tpu}u   Kara.  TLva    Twv    irpoiLprjfUviiiv 

rpoTnov  €vO€Lu}v  v€pi€x6fi€vov  opBoywviov  pijTov  ioTLv,  where  the  rectangle  is 
said  to  be  contained  by  "  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  in 
any  of  the  aforesaid  ways^  Now  straight  lines  can  only  be  commensurable 
in  length  in  one  way,  the  degrees  of  commensurability  being  commensurability 
in  length  and  commensurability  in  square  only.  But  a  straight  line  may  be 
rational  in  two  ways  in  relation  to  a  given  rational  straight  line,  since  it  may 
be  either  commensurable  in  length,  or  commensurable  in  square  only,  with  the 
latter.  Hence  Billingsley  takes  Kara,  nva  rtov  irpo€i.p-qp,iviav  TpoTnav  with  prjriav, 
translating  "  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  and  rational  in  any  of  the 
aforesaid  ways,"  and  this  agrees  with  the  expression  in  the  next  proposition 
**a  straight  line  once  more  rational  in  any  of  the  aforesaid  ways";  but  the 
order  of  words  in  the  Greek  seems  to  be  fatal  to  this  way  of  translating 
the  passage. 

The  best  solution  of  the  difficulty  seems  to  be  to  reject  the  words  "in 
any  of  the  aforesaid  ways  "  altogether.  They  have  reference  to  the  I^mma 
which  immediately  precedes  and  which  is  itself  open  to  the  gravest  suspicion. 
It  is  very  prolix,  and  cannot  be  called  necessary ;  it  appears  moreover  in 
connexion  with  an  addition  clearly  spurious  and  therefore  relegated  by 
Heiberg  to  the  Appendix.  The  addition  does  not  even  pretend  to  be^Euclid's, 
for  it  begins  with  the  words  *' for  he  calls  rational  straight  lines  those...." 
Hence  we  should  no  doubt  relegate  the  Lemma  itself  to  the  Appendix. 
August  does  so  and  leaves  out  the  suspected  words  in  the  enunciation,  as  I 
have  done. 

Exactly  the  same  arguments  apply  to  the  Lemma  added  (without  the 
heading  **  Lemma  ")  to  x.  23  and  the  same  words  **  in  any  of  the  aforesaid 
ways"  used  with  "medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length"  in  the 
enunciation  of  x.  24.  The  said  Lemma  must  stand  or  fall  with  that  now  in 
question,  since  it  refers  to  it  in  terms:  "And  in  the  same  way  as  was  explained 
in  the  case  of  rationals...." 

Hence  I  have  bracketed  the  Lemma  added  to  x.  23  and  left  out  the 
objectionable  words  in  the  enunciation  of  x.  24. 

If  p  be  one  of  the  given  rational  straight  lines  (rational  of  course  in  the 
sense  of  x.  Def.  3),  the  other  can  be  denoted  by  ^p,  where  h  is,  as  usual,  of 
the  form  m/n  (where  w,  n  are  integers).  Thus  the  rectangle  is  kp\  which  is 
obviously  rational  since  it  is  commensurable  with  pi      [x.  Def.  4.] 

A  rational  rectangle  may  have  any  of  the  forms  ad,  kd\  kA  or  Ay  where 
a^  b  are  commensurable  with  the  unit  of  length,  and  A  with  the  unit  of  area. 

Since  Euclid  is  not  able  to  use  kp  as  a  symbol  for  a  straight  line 
commensurable  in  length  with  p,  he  has  to  put  his  proof  in  a  form  corre- 
sponding to 

p-  :  kp'  =  p  :  hp, 

whence,  p,  kp  being  commensurable,  p>\  kpr  are  so  also.  [x.  11] 


X.  20,  2i]  PROPOSITIONS   19—21  49 


Proposition  20. 

If  a  rational  area  be  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  it 
produces  as  breadth  a  straight  line  rational  and  com^nensurable 
in  length  with  the  straight  line  to  which  it  is  applied. 

For  let  the  rational  area  AC  be  applied  to  AB,  a  straight 
line  once  more  rational  in  any  of  the  aforesaid 
ways,  producing  BC  as  breadth  ; 

I  say  that  BC  is  rational  and  commensurable  in 
length  with  BA. 

For  on  AB  let  the  square  AD  be  described  ; 
therefore  AD  is  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

But  AC  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  DA  is  commensurable  with  AC 

And,  as  DA  is  to  AC,  so  is  DB  to  BC. 

[VI.    I] 

Therefore  DB  is  also  commensurable  with  BC ;         [x.  n] 
and  DB  is  equal  to  BA  ; 
therefore  AB  is  also  commensurable  with  BC. 

But  AB  is  rational ; 
therefore  BC  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  AB. 

Therefore  etc. 

The  converse  of  the  last.  If  p  is  a  rational  straight  line,  any  rational  area 
is  of  the  form  kp\  If  this  be  "applied"  to  p,  the  breadth  is  ikp  commensurable 
in  length  with  p  and  therefore  rational.  We  should  reach  the  same  result  if 
we  applied  the  area  to  another  rational  straight  line  q.     The  breadth  is  then 

-^=  -^.<T  =  —  k.fTorkfTy  say. 


Proposition  21. 

The  rectangle  contained  by  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only  is  irrational,  and  the  side  of  the  square 
equal  to  it  is  irrational.     Let  the  latter  be  called  medial. 

For  let  the  rectangle  ^C  be  contained  by  the  rational 
straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in  square  only  ; 

H.  E.  III.  4 


50  BOOK  X  [x.  21 

I  say  that  AC  is  irrational,  and  the  side  of  the  square  equal 

to  it  is  irrational ; 

and  let  the  latter  be  called  medial. 

For  on  AB  let  the  square  AD  htt  described  ; 
therefore  AD  is  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length 
with  BC, 

for   by  hypothesis   they   are   commensurable   in 
square  only, 

while  AB  is  equal  to  BD, 
therefore  DB  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC. 

And,  as  DB  is  to  BC,  so  is  AD  to  AC;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  DA  is  incommensurable  with  AC  [x.  n] 

But  DA  is  rational ; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational, 

so  that  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  ^C  is  also  irrational. 

[x.  Def.  4] 
And  let  the  latter  be  called  medial. 

Q.  E.  D. 

A  media/  straight  line,  now  defined  for  the  first  time,  is  so  called  because 
it  is  a  mean  proportional  between  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.     Such  straight  lines  can  l)e  denoted  by  p,  p  Jk,     A  medial 

straight  line  is  therefore  of  the  form  Jf»Jk  or  /rp.  Euclid's  proof  that  this  is 
irrational  is  equivalent  to  the  following.  Take  p,  pjk  commensurable  in 
square  only,  so  that  they  are  incommensurable  in  length. 

Now  p  :  pjk  =  p' :  p^Jk, 

whence  [x.  11]  p^Jk  is  incommensurable  with  p*  and  therefore  irrational 
[x.  Def.  4],  so  that  Jp^Jk  is  also  irrational  \ibid,\ 

A  medial  straight  line  may  evidently  take  either  of  the  forms  JaJB  or 
X! ABy  where  of  course  B  i&  not  of  the  form  )^A. 

Lemma. 

If  there  be  two  straight  lines,  then,  as  the  first  is  to  the 
second,  so  is  the  square  on  the  first       ^         ^  ^ 

to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 
two  straight  lines. 

Let  FE,  EG  be  two   straight 
lines.  ^ 

I  say  that,  as  FE  is  to  EG,  so  is  the  square  on  FE  to 
the  rectangle  FE,  EG. 


X.   21,  22] 


PROPOSITIONS   21,  2  i 


S^ 


For  on  FE  let  the  square  DF  be  described, 
and  let  GD  be  completed. 

Since  then,  as  FE  is  to  EG,  so  is  /^Z?  to  DG,  [vi.  i] 

and  FD  is  the  square  on  FE, 

and  Z?G^  the  rectangle  DE,  EG,  that  is,  the  rectangle  FE^  EG, 
therefore,  as  FE  is  to  EG,  so  is  the  square  on  FE  to  the 
rectangle  FE,  EG. 

Similarly  also,  as  the  rectangle  GE,  EF  is  to  the  square 
on  EF,  that  is,  as  GD  is  to  FD,  so  is  GE  to  EF. 

Q.  E.  D. 


If  <i,  ^  be  two  straight  lines, 


a\b  =  a^\ab. 


Proposition  22. 

The  square  on  a  medial  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a 
rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadtii  a  straight  line 
rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  that  to  which  it 
is  applied. 

Let  A  be  medial  and  CB  rational, 
and  let  a  rectangular  area  BD  equal  to  the  square  on  ^4  be 
applied  to  BC,  producing  CD  as 
breadth ; 

I  say  that  CD  is  rational  and  incom- 
mensurable in  length  witTi  CB. 

For,  since  A  is  medial,  the  square 
on  it  is  equal  to  a  rectangular  area 
contained  by  rational  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  square  only. 

[X  21] 

Let  the  square  on  it  be  equal  to  GF. 

But  the  square  on  it  is  also  equal  to  BD ; 
therefore  BD  is  equal  to  GF. 

But  it  is  also  equiangular  with  it ; 
and  in  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  the  sides  about 
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional ;  [vi.  14] 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  BC  is  to  EG,  so  is  EF  to  CD. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  BC  is  to  the  square  on 
EG^  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  CD.  [vi.  22] 

4—2 


B 

G 

>             1 

( 

5 

i           F 

52  BOOK  X  [x.  22 

But  the  square  on  CB  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  EG,  for  each  of  these  straight  lines  is  rational ; 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  also  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  CD.  [x.  n] 

But  the  square  on  EF  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  rational ;  [x.  Def.  4] 

therefore  CD  is  rational. 

And,  since  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EG, 

for  they  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

and,  as  EF  is  to  EG^  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  rectangle 
FEy  EGy  [Lemma] 

therefore  the  square -on  EF  is  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  FE,  EG.  [x.  n] 

But  the  square  on  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  EF,  for  the  straight  lines  are  rational  in  square ; 
and  the  rectangle  DC,  CB  is  commensurable  with  the  rect- 
angle FE,  EGy  for  they  are  equal  to  the  square  on  A  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  DC,  CB.  [x.  13] 

But,  as  the  square  on  CD  is  to  the  rectangle  DC,  CB,  so 
is  DC  to  CB  ;  [I^emma] 

therefore  Z?C  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB.      [x.  n] 

Therefore  CD  is  rational  and  incpmmensurable  in  length 
with  CB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Our  algebraical  notation  makes  the  result  of  this  proposition  almost  self- 
evident.  We  have  seen  that  the  square  of  a  medial  straight  line  is  of  the  form 
^^.p*.     If  we  "apply'*  this  area  to  another  rational  straight  line  <t,  the 

breadth  is     --  *--  . 

This  is  equal  to  ^    *     .  <r  =  ^^ .  —  cr,  where  ///,  n  are  integers.    The  latter 

straight  line,  which  we  may  express,  if  we  please,  in  the  form  Jk; .  <t,  is  clearly 
commensurable  with  o-  in  square  only,  and  therefore  rational  but  incom- 
mensurable in  length  with  a-. 

Euclid's  proof,  necessarily  longer,  is  in  two  parts. 

Suppose  that  the  rectangle  JA .  p^  =  a ,  x. 

Then  (i)  <r:p=J^,p:x,  [vi.  14] 

whence  <r' :  p'  =  V :  x".  [vi.  2  2] 

But  a'  ^  p%  and  therefore  kp^  ^  x\  [x.  11] 


X.   22,   23] 


PROPOSITIONS   22,  23 


And  kp^  is  rational ; 
therefore  :c*,  and  therefore  x^  is  rational. 

(2)  Since  Jk,  p  '^  p^  Jk,psj  p. 

But  [Lemma]  Jk.p:  p  =  kp^:  Jk. p\ 

whence  kp^  ^  ^k  .  p^. 

But  Jk,p*  =  (Tjc,  and  kp*  ^ x^  (from  above) ; 
therefore  x^^<rx  \ 

and,  since  o(^:gx  =  x:a-y 

X  \j  a. 


53 
[x.  Def.  4] 

[X.   II] 

[^  13] 
[Lemma] 


D     F 


Proposition  23. 

^  straight  line  commensurable  with  a  medial  straight  line 
is  medial. 

Let  A  be  medial,  and  let  B  be  commensurable  with  A  ; 
I  say  that  B  is  also  medial. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  CD 

be  set  out,  — '• 

and  to  CD  let  the  rectangular  area  CE 
equal  to  the  square  on  A  be  applied, 
producing  ED  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  ED  is  rational  and  incommen- 
surable in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 

And  let  the  rectangular  area  CF 
equal  to  the  square  on  B  be  applied  to 
CD,  producing  DF  ?ls  breadth. 

Since  then  A  is  commensurable  with  B, 
the  square  on  A  is  also  commensurable  with  the  square  on  B, 

But  EC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  A, 
and  CF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  i? ; 
therefore  EC  is  commensurable  with  CF. 

And,  as  EC  is  to  CFy  so  is  ED  to  DF\ 
therefore  ED  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DF. 

But  ED  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
DC\ 

therefore  DF  is  also  rational  [x.  Def  3]  and  incommensurable 
in  length  with  DC.  [x.  13] 

Therefore  CD,  DF  are  rational  and  commensurable  in 
square  only. 


[VI.   I] 
[X.   II] 


54  BOOK   X  [x.  23 

But  the  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  contained  by  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  is  medial ;  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD, 
DF  is  medial. 

And  B  is  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  rectangle 
CD,  DF\ 
therefore  B  is  medial. 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  an  area  commen- 
surable with  a  medial  area  is  medial. 

[And  in  the  same  way  as  was  explained  in  the  case  of 
rationals  [Lemma  following  x.  18]  it  follows,  as  regards  medials, 
that  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a  medial 
straight  line  is  called  medial  and  commensurable  with  it  not 
only  in  length  but  in  square  also,  since,  in  general,  straight 
lines  commensurable  in  length  are  always  commensurable  in 
square  also. 

But,  if  any  straight  line  be  commensurable  in  square  with 
a  medial  straight  line,  then,  if  it  is  also  commensurable  in 
length  with  it,  the  straight  lines  are  called,  in  this  case  too, 
medial  and  commensurable  in  length  and  in  square,  but,  if  in 
square  only,  they  are  called  medial  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only.] 

As  explained  in  the  bracketed  passage  following  this  proposition,  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  a  medial  straight  line  in  square  only^  as  well  as  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  it  in  length,  is  medial. 

Algebraical  notation  shows  this  easily. 

If  Irp  be  the  given  straight  line,  \lrp  is  a  straight  line  commensurable 

in  length  with  it  and  ^X .  I^p  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  it  in  square 
only. 

But  Xp  and  V^-P  ^^^  ho^  rational  [x.  Def.  3]  and  therefore  can  be 
expressed  by  p',  and  we  thus  arrive  at  Irp,  which  is  clearly  medial. 

Euclid's  proof  amounts  to  the  following. 

Apply  both  the  areas  Jk,p^  and  k*Jk,p^  (or  XJk,p^)  to  a  rational 
straight  line  cr. 

The  breadths  J^ .  -  and  k^Jk,-  for  \Jk  .^\  are  in  the  ratio  of  the 

areas  ^k .  p*  and  X'^^ .  p'  (or  Xjk .  p*)  themselves  and  are  therefore  com- 
mensurable. 

Now  [x.  22]  ;^^ .  —  is  rational  but  incommensurable  with  o-. 


2    /  2\ 

Therefore   X'^^  .  -  for  XJk .  -  j  is  so  also; 


X.   23,   24] 


PROPOSITIONS    23,  24 


55 


whence  the  area  k*J/i,p^  (or  kj^.p^)  is  contained  by  two  rational  straight 

lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  so  that  X^*p  (or  JX .  ^p)  is  a  medial 
straight  line. 

It  is  in  the  Porism  that  we  have  the  first  mention  of  a  medial  area.  It  is 
the  area  which  is  equal  to  the  square  on  a  medial  straight  line,  an  area,  there- 
fore, of  the  form  ^V>  which  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  arrived  at,  though  not 
named,  before  the  medial  straight  line  itself  (x.  21). 

The  Porism  states  that  X^'p*  is  a  medial  area,  which  is  indeed  obvious. 


Proposition  24. 

The  rectangle  contained  by  medial  straight  lines  comtnen- 
surable  in  length  is  medial. 

For  let  the  rectangle  AC  h^  contained  by  the   medial 
straight  lines  AB,  BC  which  are  commensurable 
in  length ; 
I  say  that  AC  \^  medial. 

For  on  AB  let  the  square  AD  be  described ; 
therefore  AD  is  medial. 

And,  since  AB  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  BCy 
while  AB\s  equal  to  BD, 

therefore  DB  is  also  commensurable  in  length 
with  BC\ 

so  that  DA  is  also  commensurable  with  AC. 

But  DA  is  medial ; 

therefore  AC  is  also  medial. 


[vi.  I,  X.  11] 


[x.  23,  Por.] 
Q.  E.  D. 

There  is  the  same  difficulty  in  the  text  of  this  enunciation  as  in  that  of 
X.  19.  The  Greek  says  "medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  in 
any  of  the  aforesaid  ways  " ;  but  straight  lines  can  only  be  commensurable  in 
length  in  one  way,  though  they  can  be  medial  in  two  ways,  as  explained  in  the 
addition  to  the  preceding  proposition,  i.e.  they  can  be  either  commensurable 
in  length  or  commensurable  in  square  only  with  a  given  medial  straight  line. 
For  the  same  reason  as  that  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  19  I  have  omitted 
"  in  any  of  the  aforesaid  ways ''  in  the  enunciation  and  bracketed  the  addition 
to  X.  23  to  which  it  refers. 

Irp  and  >Jrp  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length.     The 

rectangle  contained  by  them  is  A^V>  which  may  be  written  Ifip^  and  is  there- 
fore clearly  medial. 

Euclid's  proof  proceeds  thus.  Let  x^  \x  be  the  two  medial  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  length. 

Therefore  0^  \x  .\x  =  x\\x. 


56                                                  BOOK   X  [x.  24,  25 

But  :r  ^  X^,  so  that  x^  ^  x .  Kx.  [^-  "] 

Now  jc*  is  medial  [x.  21]  ; 

therefore  jc  .  Xj:  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  Por.] 

We  may  of  course  write  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length 

in  the  forms  mJ^p,  nk^p;  and  these  may  either  be  mJaJB,  nJaJB,  or 
mi/jB,  nXl'AB, 


Proposition  25. 

Tke  rectangle  contained  by  medial  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only  is  either  rational  or  medial. 

Vox  let  the   rectangle  AC  he  contained  by  the   medial 
straight  lines  A  By  BC  which  are 
commensurable  in  square  only  ; 
I  say  that  AC  is  either  rational 
or  medial. 

For  on  AB,  BC  let  the 
squares  AD,  BE  be  described  ; 
therefore  each  of  the  squares 
AD,  BE  is  medial. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line 
FG  be  set  out, 

to  FG  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangular  parallelogram  GH 
equal  to  AD,  producing  FH  as  breadth, 
to  HM  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangular  parallelogram  MK 
equal  to  AC,  producing  HK  diS  breadth, 
and  further  to  KN  let  there  be  similarly  applied  NL  equal  to 
BE,  producing  KL  as  breadth  ; 
therefore  FH,  HK,  KL  are  in  a  straight  line. 

Since  then  each  of  the  squares  AD,  BE  is  medial, 
and  AD  is  equal  to  G//,  and  BE  to  A^L, 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  G/f,  NL  is  also  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FG ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  FH,  KL  is  rational  and 


C 

H 

M 

D 

B 

K 

N 

0          E 

L 

incommensurable  in  length  with  FG. 

And,  since  AD  is  commensurable  with  BE, 
therefore  GH  is  also  commensurable  with  NL. 

And,  as  GH  is  to  NL,  so  is  FH  to  KL  ; 
therefore  FH  is  commensurable  in  length  with  KL. 


[X.22] 


[v..  ,1 
[X.  ixj 


X.  25]  PROPOSITIONS   24,  25  57 

Therefore  FH,  KL  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  length ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  FHy  KL  is  rational.  [x.  19] 

And,  since  DB  is  equal  to  BA,  and  OB  to  BC, 
therefore,  as  DB  is  to  BC,  so  is  AB  to  BO. 

But,  as  DB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DA  to  AC,  [vi.  i] 

and,  as  AB  is  to  BO,  so  is  AC  lo  CO  \  \}d?^ 

therefore,  as  DA  is  to  AC,  ^o\^  AC  to  CO, 

But  AD  is  equal  to  GH,  AC  to  MK  and  C(9  to  NL  ; 

therefore,  as  GH  is  to  J/A',  so  is  MK  to  A^Z  ; 

therefore  also,  as  FH  is  to  HK,  so  is  /^A"  to  KL  ;    [vi.  i,  v.  n] 

therefore  the  rectangle  FH,  KL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  HK. 

[vi.  17] 
But  the  rectangle  FH,  KL  is  rational ; 

therefore  the  square  on  HK  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  HK  is  rational. 

And,  if  it  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

HN  is  rational ;  [x.  19] 

but,  if  it  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

KH,  HM  zr^  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only,  and  therefore  HN  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Therefore  HN  is  either  rational  or  medial. 

But  HN  is  equal  to  ^C ; 

therefore  AC  is  either  rational  or  medial. 

Therefore  etc. 

Two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  are  of  the  form 

The  rectangle  contained  by  them  is  ^A. .  k^p^.     Now  this  is  in  general 
medial',  but,  if  ^\  =  k  Jk,  the  rectangle  is  kk'p\  which  is  rational, 

Euclid's  argument  is  as  follows.    Let  us,  for  convenience,  put  x  for  k*p,  so 
that  the  medial  straight  lines  are  x,  Jk .  x. 

Form  the  areas  a^,  x .  JX ,  x,  \x^, 
and  let  these  be  respectively  equal  to  au,  av,  <tw,  where  <r  is  a  rational 
straight  line. 

Since  x^,  Xx^  are  medial  areas, 
so  are  <n/,  <ruf, 
whence  u,  7v  are  respectively  rational  and  '^-  o-. 


58  BOOK  X  [x.  25,  26 

But  :c*  ^  A^, 
so  that  <ru  ^  trw, 
or  u^w  (i). 

Therefore,  »,  w  being  both  rational,  mtf  is  rational  (2). 

Now  x":  JX.x'=JX.x':Xx' 

or  a-UKTV^irv :  aiify 

so  that  u  :v  =  v:ufj 

and  »w  =  »*. 

Hence,  by  (2),  t^,  and  therefore  t^,  is  rational    (3). 

Now  (a)  if.T'  ^  (T,  ot;  or  ^yx  .  jc*  is  rational-, 

(P)  {(vs^c,  so  that  V  *^  <r J  arv  or  J \  .  x^  is  medial. 


Proposition  26. 

y4  medial  area  does  not  exceed  a  medial  area  by  a  rational 
area. 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  medial  area  AB  exceed  the  medial 
area  AC  by  the  rational  area 
DB, 

and  let  a  rational  straight  line 
£/**  be  set  out ; 

to  £/""  let  there  be  applied  the 
rectangular  parallelogram  J^// 
equal  to  AB,  producing  £//  as 
breadth, 

and  let  the  rectangle  /^G  equal  to  A  Che  subtracted ; 
therefore  the  remainder  BD  is  equal  to  the  remainder  /C//. 

But  DB  is  rational ; 
therefore  /C//  is  also  rational. 

Since,  then,  each  of  the  rectangles  AB,  AC  is  medial, 
and  AB  is  equal  to  B*//,  and  AC  to  FG, 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FH,  FG  is  also  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF\ 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  HE,  EG  is  rational  and 
incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  {DB  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  KH, 
therefore]  KH  is  [also]  rational ; 
and  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF\ 


X.  26]  PROPOSITIONS   25,  26  59 

therefore  GH  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with 
EF.  [x.  20] 

But  EG  is  also  rational,  and  is  incommensurable  in  length 
with  EF\ 

therefore  EG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.     [x.  13] 

And,  as  EG  is  to  GHy  so  is  the  square  on  EG  to  the 
rectangle  EG,  GH ; 

therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  EG,  GH.  [x.  n] 

But  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  are  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  EGs  for  both  are  rational ; 

and  twice  the  rectangle  EG,  GH  is  commensurable  with  the 
rectangle  EG,  GH,  for  it  is  double  of  it ;  [x.  6] 

therefore  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  are  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  EG,  GH  \  [x.  13] 

therefore  also  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  and  twice 
the  rectangle  EG,  GH,  that  is,  the  square  on  EH  [11.  4],  is 
incommensurable  with  the  squares  on  EG,  GH.  [x.  16] 

But  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  are  rational  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  EH  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

Therefore  EH  is  irrational. 

But  it  is  also  rational : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.   E.  D. 

"  Apply  "  the  two  given  medial  areas  to  one  and  the  same  rational  straight 

line  p.     They  can  then  be  written  in  the  form  p .  k^p,  p .  XV 

'rhe  difference  is  then  ( Jk  -  Jk)  p^ ;  and  the  proposition  asserts  that  this 
cannot  be  rational,  i.e.  (Jk—  JX)  cannot  be  equal  to  ^'.  Cf.  the  proposition 
corresponding  to  this  in  algebraical  text-books. 

To  make  Euclid's  proof  clear  we  will  put  x  for  /i^p  and  y  for  X'p. 

Suppose  P  (^  ->')  =  P«> 

and,  if  possible,  let  pz  be  rational,  so  that  z  must  be  rational  and  ^  p  ...(i). 

Since  px,  py  are  medial, 

X  and y  are  respectively  rational  and  s^  p  (2). 

From  (i)  and  (2),  y  sj  z. 

Now  y\z-^\yz, 

so  that  y  v^  yz. 


6o  BOOK   X  [x.  26,  27 

But  >^  +  z*  ^  >^, 

and  2yz  ^  yz. 

Therefore  y^-¥s^  s^  2yZy 

whence  {y  +  zY  v^  (^  +  «'), 

or  ^  v^  (y  +  z% 

And  (y  +  2")  is  rational ; 
therefore  jc*,  and  consequently  x^  is  irrational. 

But,  by  (2),  X  is  rational : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  pz  is  not  rational. 

Proposition  27. 

To  find  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
which  contain  a  rational  rectangle. 

Let  two  rational  straight  lines  A,  B  commensurable  in 
square  only  be  set  out ; 

let  C  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  between 
A,  B,  [VI.  13] 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  D,      [vi.  12] 

Then,  since  A,  B  are  rational  and  com- 
mensurable in  square  only, 
the  rectangle  A,  B,  that  is,  the  square  on  C 
[vi.  17],  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Therefore  C  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D, 
and  Ay  B  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
therefore  C,  D  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  n] 

And  C  is  medial  ; 
therefore  D  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

Therefore  C,  D  are  medial  and  commensurable  in  square 
only. 

I  say  that  they  also  contain  a  rational  rectangle. 

For  since,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  /?, 
therefore,  alternately,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  D.  [v.  16] 

But,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  ^ ; 
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  By  so  is  ^  to  Z> ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B. 


X.  27,  28]  PROPOSITIONS   26—28  61 

But  the  square  on  B  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  have  been  found  which  contain  a  rational  rectangle. 

Q.  E.  D. 
Euclid  takes  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  say 

Find  the  mean  proportional,  i.e.  Ir^, 

Take  x  such  that  p  \k^p  =  frp  :x   (i). 

This  gives  x  =  ^p, 
and  the  lines  required  are  ^p,  ^p. 

For  (a)  JIrp  is  medial. 

And  {P\  by  (i),  since  p  r^  ^V> 

k*p  /^-  ^p, 
whence  [addition  to  x.  23],  since  ^p  is  medial, 

^p  is  also  medial. 
The  medial  straight  lines  thus  found  may  take  either  of  the  forms 

(0    ^^75.     y^^^    or  (a)     i/AB,     J'slf^. 


Proposition  28. 


To  find  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
which  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

Let  the  rational  straight  lines  A,  B,  C  commensurable  in 
square  only  be  set  out ; 

let  D  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  between  A,  B,         [vi.  13] 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E.  [vi.  12] 


B ^- 


C- 


E- 


Since  A,  B  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only, 

therefore  the  rectangle  A,  B,  that  is,  the  square  on  D  [vi.  17], 
is  medial.  [x.  21] 


62  BOOK    X  [x.  28 

Therefore  D  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  since  B^  C  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E, 

therefore  D,  E  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  n] 
But  D  is  medial ; 

therefore  E  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

Therefore  D,  E  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only. 

I  say  next  that  they  also  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

For  since,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E, 
therefore,  alternately,  as  B  is  to  /?,  so  is  C  to  E.  [v.  16] 

But,  as  ^  is  to  D,  so  is  Z?  to  ^4  ; 

therefore  also,  as  Z?  is  to  A^  so  is  C  to  ^ ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  D,  E. 

[vi.  16] 
But  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  medial ;  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  rectangle  /?,  E  is  also  medial. 

Therefore  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  have  been  found  which  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Euclid  takes  three  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  i.e.  of  the 
form  p,  ^V»  ^ V>  ^^^  proceeds  as  follows. 

Take  the  mean  proportional  to  p,  k^pj  i.e.  ^p. 
Then  take  x  such  that 

k^p:\\  =  l^p:x (i), 

so  that  X  =  x4p/>^. 

^p,  k^p/A*  are  the  required  medial  straight  lines. 

For  ^p  is  medial. 

Now,  by  (i),  since  k^p  <^  X'p, 

^p  '^  Xy 

whence  x  is  also  medial  [x.  23,  addition],  while  ^^  J^p. 

Next,  by  (i),  }^p:x  =  k^p  :  J^p 

=  ^p:p, 

whence  x .  ^p  =  X*p'>  which  is  medial. 

The  straight  lines  ^p,  X'p/^  of  course  take  different  forms  according  as 
the  original  straight  lines  are  of  the  forms  (i)  a,  JB,  >/(7,  (2)  JA^  JB,  JC, 
(3)  JA,  b,  JC,  and  (4)  J  A,  JB,  c. 


X.  28,  Lemma  i]  PROPOSITION    28  63 

E.g.  in  case  (i)  they  are  JajB,  a/-/-©* 


in  case  (2)  they  are  sIAB^   \/     IE  * 


and  so  on. 

Lemma  i. 
To  find  two  square  numbers  such  tftat  their  sum  is  also 
square. 

Let  two  numbers  AB,  BC  be  set  out,  and  let  them  be 
either  both  even  or  both  odd. 

Then  since,  whether  an  even       a  6  6       b 

number   is   subtracted    from    an 

even  number,  or  an  odd  number  from  an  odd  number,  the 
remainder  is  even,  .  [ix.  24,  26] 

therefore  the  remainder  AC  is  even. 

Let  AC  he  bisected  at  D. 

Let  AB,  BC  also  be  either  similar  plane  numbers,  or 
square  numbers,  which  are  themselves  also  similar  plane 
numbers. 

Now  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on 
CD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BD.  [11.  6] 

And  the  product  of  AB,  BC  is  square,  inasmuch  as  it 
was  proved  that,  if  two  similar  plane  numbers  by  multiplying 
one  another  make  some  number,  the  product  is  square,    [ix.  i] 

Therefore  two  square  numbers,  the  product  of  AB,  BC, 
and  the  square  on  CD,  have  been  found  which,  when  added 
together,  make  the  square  on  BD. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  two  square  numbers,  the  square 
on  BD  and  the  square  on  CD,  have  again  been  found  such 
that  their  difference,  the  product  of  AB,  BC,  is  a  square, 
whenever  AB,  BC  are  similar  plane  numbers. 

But  when  they  are  not  similar  plane  numbers,  two  square 
numbers,  the  square  on  BD  and  the  square  on  DC,  have  been 
found  such  that  their  difference,  the  product  of  AB,  BC,  is 
not  square. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Euclid's  method  of  forming  right-angled  triangles  in  integral  numbers, 
already  alluded  to  in  the  note  on  i.  47,  is  as  follows. 

Take  two  similar  plane  numbers,  e.g.  mnp*,  mnf,  ivhich  are  either  both  even 
or  both  odd,  so  that  their  difference  is  divisible  by  2. 


64  BOOK   X  [Lemmas  i,  2 

Now  the  product  of  the  two  numbers,  or  tf^n^f^^,  is  square,  [ix.  i] 

and,  by  11.  6, 

x5           9     (mnf-mnf\}     fmnf  ■\-mnf^ 
mnfr .  mnf  +  (  —— —\  =  ( — —\  , 

so  that  the  numbers  mnpq^  \  (mnff^  —  mnq^)  satisfy  the  condition  that  the  sum 
of  their  squares  is  also  a  square  number. 

It  is  also  clear  that  \  (ninff^  +  mnif\  mnpq  are  numbers  such  that  the 
difference  of  their  squares  is  also  square. 


Lemma  2. 

To  find  two  sqtmre  numbers  stick  that  their  sum  is  not 
square. 

For  let  the  product  of  AB,  BC,  as  we  said,  be  square, 
and  CA  even, 
and  let  CA  be  bisected  by  Z?. 

E  

A       S        H  D   '    F  S  B 


It  is  then  manifest  that  the  square  product  of  AB,  BC 
together  with  the  square  on  CD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BD. 

[See  I^mma  i] 

Let  the  unit  DE  be  subtracted  ; 
therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on 
CE  is  less  than  the  square  on  BD. 

I  say  then  that  the  square  product  of  AB,  BC  together 
with  the  square  on  CE  will  not  be  square. 

For,  if  it  is  square,  it  is  either  equal  to  the  square  on  BE, 
or  less  than  the  square  on  BE,  but  cannot  any  more  be 
greater,  lest  the  unit  be  divided. 

First,  if  possible,  let  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together 
with  the  square  on  CE  be  equal  to  the  square  on  BE, 
and  let  GA  be  double  of  the  unit  DE. 

Since  then  the  whole  ^C  is  double  of  the  whole  CD, 
and  in  them  ^G^  is  double  of  DE, 

therefore  the  remainder  GC  is  also  double  of  the  remainder  EC ; 
therefore  GC  is  bisected  by  E. 

Therefore  the  product  of  GB,  BC  together  with  the  square 
on  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BE.  [11.  6] 

But  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on 
CE  is  also,  by  hypothesis,  equal  to  the  square  on  BE ; 


Lemma  2]  LEMMAS  TO   PROPOSITIONS   29,   30  65 

therefore  the  product  of  GB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on 
CE  is  equal  to  the  product  of  ABy  BC  together  with  the 
square  on  CE. 

And,  if  the  common  square  on  CE  be  subtracted, 
it  follows  that  AB  is  equal  to  GB : 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square 
on  CE  is  not  equal  to  the  square  on  BE. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  it  less  than  the  square  on  BE. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  equal  to  the  square  on  BE, 
and  let  //A  be  double  of  DE. 

Now  it  will  again  follow  that  //Cis  double  of  CE; 
so  that  CH  has  also  been  bisected  at  E, 
and  for  this  reason  the  product  of  HB,  BC  together  with  the 
square  on  EC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BE.  [11.  6] 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with 
the  square  on  CE  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  BE. 

Thus  the  product  of  HB,  BC  together  with  the  square 
on  CE  will  also  be  equal  to  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together 
with  the  square  on  CE  : 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square 
on  CE  is  not  less  than  the  square  on  BE. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  equal  to  the  square 
on  BE. 

Therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square 
on  CE  is  not  square. 

Q.   E.  D. 


We  can,  of  course,  write  the  identity  in  the  note  on  Lemma  i  above  (p.  64) 
in  the  simpler  form 

where,  as  before,  w/*,  m^^  are  both  odd  or  both  even. 
Now,  says  Euclid, 

m/^ .  mq^  +  (    — —  -  i  j  is  not  a  square  number. 

This  is  proved  by  reducHo  ad  absurdum, 
H.  E.  III.  5 


66                                                  BOOK  X  [Lemma  2,  x.  29 

The  number  is  clearly  less  than  mp^ .  mf  +  (-^ ^ ) ,  i.e.  less  than 

If  then  the  number  is  square,  its  side  must  be  greater  than,  equal  to,  or 
less  than  (— — — ^-  i  j,  the  number  next  less  than  — — — ^. 

But  (i)  the  side  cannot  be  >  i— ——  \\  without  being  equal  to 

-^ -,  since  they  are  consecutive  numbers. 

(.)  (n.f-  .)  n.f  .  (-^^-  ,y  =  (-^  _  .)•.  [„.  6] 

If  then  mf.mf^  {n£^  _  ^J  -^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^f^m<t  _  ^J^ 

we  must  have  (w/*  -  2)  m^  =  m^ .  m^, 

or  mp^  -  2  =  mp^ : 

which  is  impossible. 

(3)     If       mf.m^^\^        27^(2  V' 

suppose  It  equal  to  (  -^ -  r\ . 

But  [n.  6]  (>«/.-.^)«^+(^^!^-ry=(^5^±^-r)'. 
Therefore 

which  is  impossible. 

Hence  all  three   hypotheses  are   false,   and  the   sum    of    the   squares 

mf.  mf  and  I— -  i\    is  not  square. 


Proposition  29. 

To  find  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  and  such  that  the  square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commen- 
surable in  length  with  the  greater. 

For  let  there  be  set  out  any  rational  straight  line  AB, 
and  two  square  numbers  CD,  DE  such  that  their  difference 
CE  is  not  square  ;  [Lemma  i] 

let  there  be  described  on  AB  the  semicircle  AFB, 


X.  29]  PROPOSITION   29  67 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  DC  is  to  CEy  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square 
on  AF.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Let  FB  be  joined. 

Since,  as  the  square  on  BA  is  to 
the  square  on  AF,  so  is  DC  to  CE, 
therefore   the  square   on    BA   has   to 
the  square  on  AF  the  ratio  which  the 

number  DC  has  to  the  number  CE ;  ^ g p 

therefore  the  square  on   BA  is  com- 
mensurable with  the  square  on  AF.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  rational ;  [x.  Def.  4] 

therefore  the  square  on  AF  is  also  rational ;  [/^.] 

therefore  AF  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  DC  has  not  to  CE  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square  on  AF  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AF.      [x.  9] 

Therefore  BA,  AF  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only. 

And  since,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to 
the  square  on  AF, 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  CD  is  to  DE,  so  is  the  square  on 
AB  to  the  square  on  BF,  [v.  19,  Por.,  m.  31,  i.  47] 

But  CD  has  to  DE  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  also  the  square  on  AB  has  to  the  square  on  BF 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BF.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AF,  FB; 

therefore  the  square  on  A B  is  greater  than  the  square  on  AF 
by  the  square  on  BF  commensurable  with  AB. 

Therefore  there  have  been  found  two  rational  straight 
lines  BA,  ^/^commensurable  in  square  only  and  such  that 
the  square  on  the  greater  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
the  less  AF  by  the  square  on  BF  commensurable  in  length 
with  AB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

5—2 


68  BOOK  X  [x.  29,  30 

Take  a  rational  straight  line  p  and  two  numbers  w',  «*  such  that  (^i*  -  «') 
is  not  a  square. 

Take  a  straight  line  x  such  that 

whence 
and 


m'-n*  =  p'.x'.... 

1 

._m^-n* 

*^-      «»    '"' 

where  k=-  . 
m 

*=pVi-/S', 

Then  p,  pVi  ->^  are  the  straight  lines  required. 

It  follows  from  (i)  that  :x^  "^  p', 

and  X  is  rational,  but  x  ^^  p. 

By  (i),  convertendo,  m*  :n^  =  p^ :  p^  -  x^, 

so  that  Vp*  —  x^  ^  p,  and  in  fact  =  kp. 

According  as  p  is  of  the  form  a  or  JA,  the  straight  lines  are  (i)  a,  n/o*-^ 
or  (2)  V^,  jA-k'A, 

Proposition  30. 

To  find  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  and  such  thai  the  square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incom- 
mensurable in  length  with  the  greater. 

Let  there  be  set  out  a  rational  straight  line  AB, 
and  two  square  numbers  CEy  ED 
such    that    their    sum    CD   is    not 
square  ;  [Lemma  2] 

let  there  be  described  on  AB  the 
semicircle  AFB, 
let  it  be  contrived  that, 
as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square 
on  BA  to  the  square  on  AF,  c       e  b 

[x.  6,  Por.] 
and  let  FB  be  joined. 

Then,  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  preceding,  we  can  prove 
that  BA,  AF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only. 

And  since,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to 
the  square  on  AF, 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  CD  is  to  DE^  so  is  the  square  on 
AB  to  the  square  on  BF.  [v.  19,  Por.,  iii.  31,  i.  47] 

But  CD  has  not  to  DE  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 


X.  30,  3i]  PROPOSITIONS   29—31  69 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on  BF 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BF.       [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  AF 
by  the  square  on  FB  incommensurable  with  AB, 

Therefore  AB,  AF  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only,  and  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  AF  by  the  square  on  FB  incommensurable  in 
length  with  AB. 

Q.  E.  D. 
In  this  case  we  take  m\  «'  such  that  m^  +  «'  is  not  square. 
Find  X  such  that  m^  +  n^ :  m^  =  p^  \  jr*, 

whence  x^  =  -^ =  p^, 

or  X  =    ,        ■ ,  where  ^  =  — . 

Then  p,     .  satisfy  the  condition. 

VI  +>^ 
The  proof  is  after  the  manner  of  the  proof  of  the  preceding  proposition 
and  need  not  be  repeated. 

According  as  p  is  of  the  form  a  or   JA,  the  straight  lines  take  the 

form  (i)  df,  a/«* M»  ^^^  is>  ^>  'sle^  —  By  or  (2)   ^A^  *jA-£  and 

V^,  Ja'^. 

Proposition  31. 

To  find  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only^  containing  a  rational  rectangle,  and  such  that  the  square 
on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
greater. 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  rational  straight  lines  A^  B 
commensurable  in  square  only  and  such  that  the 
square  on  A,  being  the  greater,  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  B  the  less  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  A. 

[x.  29] 

And  let  the  square  on  C  be  equal  to  the 
rectangle  A,  B.  a    b    c    d 

Now  the  rectangle  Ay  B  is  medial ;      [x.  21] 
therefore  the  square  on  C  is  also  medial ; 
therefore  C  is  also  medial,  [x.  21] 


70 


BOOK  X  [x.  31 


Let  the  rectangle  C,  D  be  equal  to  the  square  on  B. 

Now  the  square  on  B  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  also  rational. 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  the  rectangle  A,  B  to  the 
square  on  B, 

while  the  square  on  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  A,  By 
and  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B, 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  the  square  on  C  to  the  rectangle 
CD. 

But,  as  the  square  on  C  is  to  the  rectangle  C,  Z?,  so  is  C 
to/?; 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D. 

But  A  is  commensurable  with  B  in  square  only ; 
therefore  C  is  also  commensurable  with  D  in  square  only.    [x.  1 1] 

And  C  is  medial ; 
therefore  D  is  also  medial.  [x,  23,  addition] 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  Z?, 
and  the  square  on  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  B  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  Ay 
therefore  also  the  square  on  C  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
D  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  C. 

[x.  14] 

Therefore  two  medial  straight  lines  C,  Z?,  commensurable 
in  square  only  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle,  have  been 
found,  and  the  square  on  C  is  greater  than  the  square  on  D 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length 
with  C 

Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  that  the  square  on  C 
exceeds  the  square  on  D  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  C,  when  the  square  on  A  is  greater 
than  the  square  on  B  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incom- 
mensurable with  A.  [x.  30] 

I.     Take  the  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  found 
in  X.  29,  i.e.  p,  p  Vi  -/^. 

Take  the  mean  proportional  p(i  -  >^)*  and  x  such  that 

p(i -/^')*  :  pVr^'  =  p  Vi -^:  a:. 

Then  p  ( i  -  ^)*,  ^,  or  p  ( i  -  M^^y  p  ( i  -  >^)'  are  straight  lines  satisfying  the 
given  conditions. 


X.  31,  32]  PROPOSITIONS  31,  32  71 

For  (a)  p*V^i  -^  is  a  medial  area,  and  therefore  p(i  -J^)*  is  a  medial 

straight  line   (i); 

and  X .  p(i  -  J^)*  =  p' (i  - ^)  and  is  therefore  a  rational  area. 

(P)  p,  p ( I  -  >^)*,  p  Vi  -^^  X  are  straight  lines  in  continued  proportion,  by 
construction. 

Therefore  p  :p  Vi ->^  =  p(i ->^)*  :  Jc (2). 

(This  Euclid  has  to  prove  in  a  somewhat  roundabout  way  by  means  of  the 
lemma  after  x.  2 1  to  the  effect  that  a  :  d  =  ad  :  ^.) 

From  (2)  it  follows  [x.  11]  that  jit  /^  p  (i  - ^)*  ;  whence,  since  p  (i  - ^)*  is 

medial,  jp  or  p  (i  —  >^)*  is  medial  also. 

(y)     From  (2),  since  p,  pVi  -^  satisfy  the  remaining  condition  of  the 

problem,  p(i  -^)*,  p(i  -^)*  do  so  also  [x.   14]. 

According  as  p  is  of  the  form  a  or  ^A^  the  straight  lines  take  the  forms 

(I)  s/a^V^^^    7^^, 

s/aja'-l^ 

or  (2)  i/A(A-Jf^A),         ^"'^^ 


II.  To  find  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  contain- 
ing a  rational  rectangle,  and  such  that  the  square  on  one  exceeds  the  square 
on  the  other  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incomm^nsurabie  with  the  former, 
we  simply  begin  with  the  rational  straight  lines  having  the  corresponding 

property  [x.  30],  viz.  p,     .       _,  and  we  arrive  at  the  straight  lines 

VI  +^ 

p  p 


(i+i^)*'     (1+^)'* 
According  as  p  is  of  the  form  a  or   »JAy  these  (if  we  use  the  same 
transformation  as  at  the  end  of  the  note  on  x.  30)  may  take  any  of  the  forms 

(I)  -JJj^^,     -t£^ 


or  (2)  \lA{A-£), 

or     VA{A~1/'), 


A-  B 
\/A{A-B)' 

A-l>' 
*JA{A-^)' 


Proposition  32. 

To  find  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only,  containing  a  medial  rectangle,  and  such  that  the  square 
on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  greater. 


72  BOOK  X  [x.  32 

Let  there  be  set  out  three  rational  straight  lines  A,  B,  C 
commensurable  in  square  only,  and  such  that  the  square  on  A 
is  greater  than  the  square  on  C  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  A,  [x.  29] 

and  let  the  square  on  D  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  A,  B. 

A 

D 


B 

E 

Q 

Therefore  the  square  on  D  is  medial ; 
therefore  D  is  also  medial.  [x.  21] 

Let  the  rectangle  D,  E  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  C, 

Then  since,  as  the  rectangle  y^,  ^  is  to  the  rectangle  B,  C, 
so  is  A  to  C, 

while  the  square  on  D  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  A,  B, 
and  the  rectangle  /?,  E  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  C, 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  the  square  on  D  to  the  rectangle 
D,E. 

But,  as  the  square  on  D  is  to  the  rectangle  Z?,  E^  so  is  D 
toE; 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  Z?  to  E. 

But  A  is  commensurable  with  C  in  square  only  ; 
therefore  D  is  also  commensurable  with  E  in  square  only.   [x.  1 1] 

But  D  is  medial  ; 
therefore  E  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

And,  since,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  Z?  to  E, 
while  the  square  t)n  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  C  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  A, 
therefore  also  the  square  on  D  will  be  greater  than  the  square 
on  E  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  D. 

[X.  14] 

I  say  next  that  the  rectangle  Z?,  E  is  also  medial. 

For,  since  the  rectangle  B,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  Z?,  E, 
while  the  rectangle  B,  C  is  medial,  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  rectangle  Z?,  E  is  also  medial. 

Therefore  two  medial  straight  lines  Z?,  E,  commensurable 
in  square  only,  and  containing  a  medial  rectangle,  have  been 
found  such  that  the  square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the 


X.  32]  PROPOSITION   32  73 

square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commen- 
surable with  the  greater. 

Similarly  again  it  can  be  proved  that  the  square  on  D 
is  greater  than  the  square  on  E  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  incommensurable  with  Z?,  when  the  square  on  A  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  C  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  A.  [x.  30] 


I.     Euclid  takes  three  straight  lines  of  the  form  p,  p  s]\  pVi-^"*, 

takes  the  mean  proportional  pX*  between  the  first  two   ( i), 

and  then  finds  x  such  that 

pX*:pX*  =  pVi^^:A: (2), 

whence  x  =  pX*  v  i  -  >^, 

and  the  straight  lines  pX*,  pX*  sji  —  k^  satisfy  the  given  conditions. 
Now  (a)  pX*  is  medial. 
{P)     We  have,  from  (i)  and  (2), 

p:ps/i-^  =  pX.^:x  (3), 

whence  x  <^-  pX*  ;  and  x  is  therefore  medial  and  r^  pX*. 

(y)     x,pXi  =  pJk,pJT^l^. 

But  the  latter  is  medial;  [x.  21] 

therefore  x .  pX*,  or  pX*  .  pX*  Ji  -  >&*,  is  medial. 

Lastly  (8)  p,  p  \/i  -  ^  have  the  remaining  property  in  the  enunciation ; 
therefore  pX*,  pX*\/i->^  have  it  also.  [x.  14] 

(Euclid  has  not  the  assistance  of  symbols  to  prove  the  proportion  (3)  above. 
He  therefore  uses  the  lemmas  ad  :dc=a:c  and  iP  :de  =  d:e  to  deduce  from 
the  relations 

and  d\b-c:e  J 

that  a:c  =  d:e,) 

The  straight  lines  pX*,  p\*Ji-k^  may  take  any  of  the  following  forms 
according  as  the  straight  lines  first  taken  are 

(i)  «,  V^,  J^^.    (2)   V^,  JB,  JA^FA,    (3)   V^,  d,  jA^r^. 

,,     rrp       ^B{A-k^A), 
(2)     ^AB,       -     ^^^        , 

, bjA-^A 

<3)  ^^^v^.  -WW' 


74 


BOOK  X 


[x.  32,  Lemma 


II.  If  the  other  conditions  are  the  same,  but  the  square  on  the  first 
medial  straight  line  is  to  exceed  the  square  on  the  second  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  the  first,  we  begin  with  the  three  straight 

lines  p,  p  ^/A,  -_!    .. ,  and  the  medial  straight  lines  are 


n/i+>&^ 


pA 


The  possible  forms  are  even  more  various  in  this  case  owing  to  the  more 
various  forms  that  the  original  lines  may  take,  e.g. 


(I) 
(«) 
(3) 
(4) 

(5) 


•J  A,    b, 
si  A,     ^B, 
JA,     J£, 


-Ja*-C 


■Ja^ 


the  medial  straight  lines  corresponding  to  these  being 

jB(a*-C)_ 


(I) 
(') 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 


Ja^B, 

JbljA, 

-JbljA, 

i/AB, 

H'AB, 


-ITjB 
bjA'-'cl 
'JbjA  ' 

JVJA    ' 
JB(A-(') 

Hab     ' 
JbJa^C) 

'^AB      • 


Lemma. 

Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  A 
right,  and  let  the  perpendicular  AD  be 
drawn ;  a 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  CB,  BD  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  BA, 
the   rectangle  BC,   CD  equal   to  the 
square  on  CA, 

the  rectangle  BD,  DC  equal  to  the  square  on  AD, 

and,  further,  the  rectangle  BC,  AD  equal  to  the  rectangle 
BA,AC.  6  M  s 


Lemma,  x.  33]  PROPOSITIONS   32,  33  75 

And  first  that  the  rectangle  CB,  BD  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  BA. 

For,  since  in  a  right-angled  triangle  AD  has  been  drawn 
from  the  right  angle  perpendicular  to  the  base, 
therefore  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  are  similar  both  to  the 
whole  ABC  and  to  one  another.  [vi.  8] 

And  since  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  ABD, 
therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BAy  so  is  BA  to  BD  ;  [vi.  4] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CB,  BD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 

[vi.  17] 
For  the  same  reason  the  rectangle  BC,  CD  is  also  equal 
to  the  square  on  AC 

And  since,  if  in  a  right-angled  triangle  a  perpendicular 
be  drawn  from  the  right  angle  to  the  base,  the  perpendicular 
so  drawn  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  segments  of  the 
base,  [vi.  8,  Por.] 

therefore,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  AD  to  DC ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  BD,  DC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD. 

[vi.  17] 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  BC,  AD  is  also  equal  to  the  rect- 
angle BA,  AC 

For  since,  as  we  said,  ABC  is  similar  to  ABD, 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CA,  so  is  BA  to  AD.  [vi.  4] 

Therefore  the  rectangle  BC,  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
BA,  AC  [vi.  16] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  33. 

To  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial. 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  rational  straight  lines  AB,  BC 
commensurable  in  square  only 
and  such  that  the  square  on  the 
greater  A  Bis  greater  than  the 
square  on  the  less  BC  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  in- 
commensurable with  AB, 


76  BOOK  X  [x.  33 

let  BC  be  bisected  at  Z?, 

let  there  be  applied  to  AB  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square 
on  either  of  the  straight  lines  BDy  DC  and  deficient  by  a 
square  figure,  and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AEy  EB ;        [vi.  28] 

let  the  semicircle  AFB  be  described  on  AB, 

let  EF  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB, 

and  let  AF,  FB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB,  BC  are  unequal  straight  lines, 

and  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  BC  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  AB, 

while  there  has  been  applied  to  AB  a  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  BC,  that  is,  to  the  square  on 
half  of  it,  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  making  the  rect- 
angle AE,  EBy 

therefore  AE  is  incommensurable  with  EB,  [x.  18] 

And,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  the  rectangle  BA,  AE  to  the 
rectangle  AB,  BE, 

while  the  rectangle  BA,  AE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AF, 

and  the  rectangle  AB,  BE  to  the  square  on  BF; 

therefore  the  square  on  AF  is  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  FB  ; 

therefore  AF,  FB  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

And,  since  AB  is  rational, 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  also  rational ; 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AF,  FB  is  also  rational. 

[I.  47] 

And  since,  again,  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  EF, 

and,  by  hypothesis,  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  equal  to  the 
square  on  BD, 

therefore  FE  is  equal  to  BD ; 

therefore  BC  is  double  of  FE, 

so  that  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  commensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AB,  EF 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial ;  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  EF  is  also  medial.        [x.  23,  Por.] 


X.33]  PROPOSITION   33  77 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  EF  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AF, 
FB ;  [I-,einma] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AFy  FB  is  also  medial. 

But  it  was  also  proved  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  these 
straight  lines  is  rational. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  AF,  FB  incommensurable 
in  square  have  been  found  which  make  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial. 

Q.  E.  D. 
Euclid  takes  the  straight  lines  found  in  x.  30,  viz.  p,  — - — 


He  then  solves  geometrically  the  equations 


P' 


(I). 


If  jc,  y  are  the  values  found,  he  takes  u,  v  such  that 

1^ <* 

and  f/,  V  are  straight  lines  satisfying  the  conditions  of  the  problem. 
Solving  algebraically,  we  get  (if  x>y) 

whence  ^  "^  ~7"  \/ 


I  + 


J2  V         ^/7T^ 


(3). 


Euclid's  proof  that  these  straight  lines  fulfil  the  requirements  is  as  follows. 

(a)    The  constants  in  the  equations  (i)  satisfy  the  conditions  of  x.  18; 
therefore  x  s^y. 

But  X  \y  =  u^  \t^. 

Therefore  «*  ^  zr*, 

and  «,  V  are  thus  incommensurable  in  square, 

(fi)     u^  +  z^-  p',  which  is  rational, 
(y)     By(i),  ^/i;  = 


By  (2),  uv  =  p.Jlcy 


P' 


2s/l+J^ 


78  BOOK   X  [x.  33,  34 

But    ,  is  a  medial  area, 

therefore  uv  is  medial. 

Since  p,     .  may  have  any  of  the  three  forms 

VI  +/^ 

(i)   a,  >/^^^^,     (2)    JA,  n/Z^T^,     (3)    JA,  Ja^, 
Uy  V  may  have  any  of  the  forms 

, ,      IaVTab         I  a  -  Ja'b 
(*)   V — 2 — '     V — 2-    ; 

(3)  y^ip.  y^p. 


Proposition  34. 

To  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  t/ie  squares  on  them  medial  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them,  rational. 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  medial  straight  lines  ABy  BC, 
commensurable  in  square  only,  such  that  the  rectangle  which 
they  contain  is  rational,  and  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  BC  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incom- 
mensurable with  AB  ;  [x.  31,  ad  fin,] 


let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 

let  BC  be  bisected  at  E, 

let  there  be  applied  to  AB  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square 
on  BE  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  namely  the  rectangle 
AF,  FB  ;  [VI.  28] 

therefore  AFis  incommensurable  in  length  with  FB.      [x.  18] 

Let  FD  be  drawn  from  F  at  right  angles  to  AB, 

and  let  AD,  DB  be  joined. 


X.  34]  PROPOSITIONS   33,  34  79 

Since  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FB, 
therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AF  is  also  incommensurable  with 
the  rectangle  AB^  BF.  [x.  n] 

But  the  rectangle  BA,  AFis  equal  to  the  square  on  AD, 
and  the  rectangle  AB,  BF  to  the  square  on  £>B ; 
therefore  the  square  on  AD  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
square.on  DB. 

And,  since  the  square  on  AB  is  medial, 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  ADy  DB  is  also  medial. 

[ill.  31, 1.  47] 
And,  since  BC  is  double  of  DF, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  double  of  the  rectangle 
AB,  FD. 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  FD  is  also  rational.  [x.  6] 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  FD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD, 
DB ;  [Lemma] 

so  that  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  AD,  DB  incommensurable 
in  square  have  been  found  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational. 

Q.  E.  D. 
In  this  case  we  take  [x.  31,  2nd  part]  the  medial  straight  lines 

P  P_ 

Solve  the  equations 

P 


x+y-  , 


xy 


4(i+^)») 


.(I). 


Take  u,  v  such  that,  \{  x,yhe  the  result  of  the  solution. 


(i+>py 


y 


(i-f>^)l 
and  u,  «/  are  straight  lines  satisfying  the  given  conditions. 

Euclid's  proof  is  similar  to  the  preceding, 
(a)     From  (i)  it  follows  [x.  18]  that 

whence  «/« ^  tr*, 

and  u,  V  are  thus  incommensurable  in  square. 


•(«). 


8o  BOOK  X  [X.  34,  35 

(fi)    u^  +  z^=^-^£=.,  which  is  a  medial  area. 
VI +>^ 

(y)  uv  =  — ^— ^  .  ^/^ 

=  - . s ,  which  is  a  rational  area. 

2    I  +>^' 

Therefore  i/t;  is  rational. 

To  find  the  actual  form  of  </,  v,  we  have,  by  solving  the  equations  (i) 

(if  x>y), 

2(1  +>^)* 

2(1  +>^)* 
and  hence  u  =    ,_  ^         n/n/i+/P  +  ^, 

V2(H->P) 

N/2(i+>e) 
Bearing  in  mind  the  forms  which  — ^ — r , ^ — «  may  take  (see  note 

(i  +  >^)^  (i+>^r 

on  X.  31),  we  shall  find  that  w,  v  may  have  any  of  the  forms 

(2)    JUaTj^J^^^       Iua-^b)^a^b^^ 


Proposition  35. 

To  find  two  straight  lines  huommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial  and  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial  and  moreover  incommensurable  with 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them. 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  medial  straight  lines  ABy  BC 
commensurable  in  square  only,  containing  a  medial  rectangle, 
and  such  that  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
BC  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with 
AB  ;  [x.  32,  adfin.'l 


X.  35]  PROPOSITIONS  34,  3S  81 

let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 
and  let  the  rest  of  the  construction  be  as  above. 


Then,  since  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FB, 

[X.  18] 
AD  is  also  incommensurable  in  square  with  DB.  [x.  n] 

And,  since  the  square  on  AB  v^  medial, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  also  medial. 

[m.  31, 1.  47] 
And,  since  the  rectangle  AF,  FB  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  each  of  the  straight  lines  BE,  DF, 

therefore  BE  is  equal  to  DF\ 

therefore  BC  is  double  of  FD, 

so  that  the  rectangle  AB^  BC  is  also  double  of  the  rectangle 
AB,  FD. 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  FD  is  also  medial.         [x.  32,  For.] 

And  it  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  ; 

[Lemma  after  x.  32] 
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  medial. 

And,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC, 
while  CB  is  commensurable  with  BE, 

therefore  AB  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  BE, 

[X.  13] 
so  that  the  square  on  AB  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AB,  BE.  [x.  n] 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  equal  to  the  square  on 
AB,  [1. 47] 

and  the  rectangle  AB,  FD,  that  is,  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  is 
equal  to  the  rectangle  AB,  BE ; 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  incommen- 
surable with  the  rectangle  AD,  DB. 

H.  E.  III.  6 


i2  BOOK  X  [x.  35 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  AD,  DB  incommensurable 
in  square  have,  been  found  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial  and  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial 
and  moreover  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them. 

Q.  E.  D. 
Take  the  medial  straight  lines  found  in  x.  33  (2nd  part),  viz. 

Solve  the  equations 

^     4(i+/i*)j 
and  then  put  «*  =  pX*  .  x 


where  x,  y  are  the  ascertained  values  of  x,  y. 

Then  »,  v  are  straight  lines  satisfying  the  given  conditions. 
Euclid  proves  this  as  follows. 

(a)     From  (i)  it  follows  [x.  18]  that  XKfy, 
Therefore  i/*  s/  »*, 

and  u  KT-v. 

{P)  «'  +  »*  =  p^V^,  which  is  a  medial  area (3). 

(y)  uv  =  f)X* .  ^xy 

1  p'^/^        .... 

=  -    ;  ^     .  which  IS  a  medial  area (4): 

2  VI  +>^  ' 

therefore  uv  is  medial 


(8)  PX*  V,  \ 

whence  p'  J\  s/ 


^* 


2  sHT^' 

That  is,  by  (3)  and  (4), 

(«'  +  »^  w  «». 
The  actual  values  are  found  thus.     Solving  the  equations  (i),  we  have 

pX*  /  k     \ 


whence  u^^^^.^-^. 


X.  35,  36]  PROPOSITIONS  35,  3^  83 

According  SLS,p  is  of  the  form  a  or  JA^  we  have  a  variety  of  forms  for 
Uy  Vf  arrived  at  by  using  the  same  transformations  as  in  the  notes  on  x.  30 
and  X.  32  (second  part),  e.g. 

(,)        AI+S^,  J{a-JC)^B_ 

(3)    JUaIAAI^       Jua-c)^£. 

and  the  expressions  in  (2),  (3)  with  b  in  place  of  JB. 

Proposition  36. 
1/  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  be  added  together,  the  whole  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be 
called  binomial. 

For   let   two   rational  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commen- 
5  surable  in  square   only  be   added 
together ; 

I    say  that   the  whole   .^C  is   ir-       ^  ®  ^ 

rational. 

For,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC — 

10  for  they  are  commensurable  in  square  only — 
and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  to  the 
square  on  BC, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  BC  [x.  iij 

IS  But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with 
the  rectangle  AB,  BC  [x.  6],  and  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are 
commensurable  with  the  square  on  BC — for  AB,  BC  are 
rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only —  [x.  15] 
therefore   twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable 

20  with  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  [x.  13] 

And,  componendo,  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  together 

with  the  squares  on  AB,  BC,  that  is,  the  square  on  -^C  [n.  4], 

is  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB^  BC 

[X.  16] 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  rational ; 
25  therefore  the  square  on  ^  C  is  irrational, 

so  that  AC  is  also  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  binomial.  q.  e.  d. 

6—2 


84  BOOK  X  [x.  36,  37 

Here  begins  the  first  hexad  of  propositions  relating  to  compound  irrational 
straight  lines.  The  six  compound  irrational  straight  lines  are  formed  by 
cuiding  two  parts,  as  the  corresponding  six  in  Props.  73 — 78  are  formed  by 
subtraction.  The  relation  between  the  six  irrational  straight  lines  in  this  and 
the  next  five  propositions  with  those  described  in  Definitions  11.  and  tlie 
Props.  48 — 53  following  thereon  (the  firsts  secotid^  thirds  fourth^  fifth  and 
sixth  binomials)  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to  Props.  54 — 59 ;  but  it  may  be 
stated  here  that  the  six  compound  irrationals  in  Props.  36 — 41  can  be  found 
by  means  of  the  equivalent  of  extracting  the  square  root  of  the  compound 
irrationals  in  x.  48 — 53  (the  process  beings  strictly  speaking,  the  finding  of  the 
sides  of  the  squares  equal  to  the  rectangles  contained  by  the  latter  irrationals 
respectively  and  a  rational  straight  line  as  the  other  side),  and  it  is  therefore 
the  further  removed  compound  irrational,  so  to  speak,  which  is  treated  first. 

In  reproducing  the  proofs  of  the  propositions,  I  shall  for  the  sake  of 
simplicity  call  the  two  parts  of  the  compound  irrational  straight  line  Xy  y^ 
explaining  at  the  outset  the  forms  which  x^  y  really  have  in  each  case ;  x  will 
always  be  supposed  to  be  the  greater  segment. 

In  this  proposition  x^  y  are  of  the  form  p,  »Jk .  p,  and  (x  +  j)  is  proved  to 
be  irrational  thus. 

X  *^yy  so  that  x  sjy. 

Now  X  \  y  =  0^  \  xyy 

so  that  0^  sj  xy. 

But  0^  '^  (p^  +y),  and  xy  ^  2xy ; 
therefore  (jc*  +y)  ^  2xyy 

and  hence  («*  +y  +  2xy)  w  (jc*  +y). 

But  (a^  +y)  is  rational ; 
therefore  (x  +^)",  and  therefore  (x  +^),  is  irrational. 

This  irrational  straight  line,  p+  Jh.p,is  called  a  binomial  straight  line. 

This  and  the  corresponding  apotome  {p-njk,p)  found  in  x.  73  are  the 
positive  roots  of  the  equation 

Jtr*  -  2  (i  +  >^)  p^  :r»  +  (i  -  >^)V'  =  o. 


Proposition  37. 

If  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
and  containing  a  rational  rectangle  be  added  together,  the 
whole  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  a  first  bimedial 
straight  line. 

For  let  two  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable 
in   square   only  and  containing 

a   rational    rectangle    be   added       p^ g q 

together ; 

I  say  that  the  whole  AC  is  irrational. 

For,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BCy 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  also  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC ;  [cf.  x.  36, 11.  9—20] 


x.37.38]  PROPOSITIONS   36—38  8s 

and,  componendOy  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  together  with  twice 
the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  that  is,  the  square  on  -^4C  [11.  4],  is 
incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BC.  [x.  16] 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational,  for,  by  hypothesis, 
ABy  BC  are  straight  lines  containing  a  rational  rectangle  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  -^C  is  irrational ; 
therefore  AC  \%  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Here  x^y  have  the  forms  ^p,  ^*p  respectively,  as  found  in  x.  27. 

Exactly  as  in  the  last  case  we  prove  that 

0^  +^  sj  2xyf 
whence  (x  +  j)'  s^  2xy. 

But  xy  is  rational ; 
therefore  (x  +j)*,  and  consequently  {x  +  j),  is  irrationaL 

The  irrational  straight  line  Irp  +  Irp  is  called  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 

This  and  the  corresponding  first  apotome  of  a  medial  (trp  —  Irp)  found  in 
x.  74  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

x^ ^  2  ^k(\  ^ k) p^ .x" ^ k(\  -Kf  p^ ^o. 


Proposition  38. 

If  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
and  containing  a  medial  rectangle  be  added  together,  the  whole 
is  irrational;  and  let  it  be  called  a  second  bimedial  straight 
line. 

5        For  let  two  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable 

in  square    only  and    containing 

a    medial    rectangle    be    added  a B       o 

together;  o  h  Q 

I  say  that  -^C  is  irrational. 
10        For   let   a   rational    straight 

line  DE  be  set  out,  and  let  the 

parallelogram  DF  equal  to  the 

square  on  -^C  be  applied  to  DE, 

producing  DG  as  breadth.  [i.  44] 

IS        Then,  since  the  square  on  ^C  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 

AB,  BC  and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  [11.  4] 

let  EH,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC,  be  applied  to  DE\ 


E  P 


86  BOOK  X  [x.  38 

therefore  the  remainder  HF  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC. 
20        And,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC  is  medial, 
therefore  the  squares  on  ABy  BC  are  also  medial. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also 
medial. 

And  EH  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 

25  while  FH  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC\ 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  EHy  HF  is  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DH,  HG  is  rational  and 
incommensurable  in  length  with  DE.  [x.  22] 

30        Since  then  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC, 
and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC, 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  incommensurable  with  the  rect- 
angle AB,  BC.  [x.  11] 

35        But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  commensurable 
with  the  square  on  AB,  [x.  15] 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the 
•     rectangle  AB,  BC  [x.  6] 

Therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  incom- 
40  mensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  [x.  13] 

But  EH  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 

and  HF  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC 

Therefore  EH  is  incommensurable  with  HF, 

so  that  DH  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  HG. 

[vi.  I,  x.  11] 

45        Therefore  DH,  HG  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only  ; 

so  that  DG  is  irrational.  [x.  36] 

But  DE  is  rational ; 

and  the  rectangle  contained  by  an  irrational  and  a  rational 
so  straight  line  is  irrational ;  [cf.  x.  20] 

therefore  the  area  DF  is  irrational, 

and  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  it  is  irrational.       [x.  Def.  4] 


X.  38,  39]  PROPOSITIONS  38,  39  87 

But  AC  is  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  DF; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational. 
55       And  let  it  be  called  a  second  bimedial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

After  proving  (1.  21)  that  each  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  medial,  Euclid 
states  (11  24,  26)  that  EH^  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares,  is  a 
medial  area,  but  does  not  explain  why.  It  is  because,  by  hypothesis,  the 
squares  on  AB^  BC  are  commensurable,  so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  is 
commensurable  with  either  [x.  15]  and  is  therefore  a  medial  area  [x.  23,  Por.]. 

In  this  case  [x.  28,  note]  x^  y  are  of  the  forms  >^p,  >^p\lr  respectively. 
Apply  each  of  the  areas  (0^  ^f)  and  23cy  to  a  rational  straight  line  o*,  le. 
suppose 

20cy^  av. 

Now  it  follows  from  the  hypothesis,  x.  15  and  x.  23,  Por.  that  (jc'+y)  is 
a  medial  area ;  and  so  is  2xy^  by  hypothesis ; 
therefore  ov,  w  are  medial  areas. 

Therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  u^v\s  rational  and  s/  o-    ..: (i). 

Again  Xyjy\ 

therefore  :)^  ^j  oiy. 

But                              x^  ^  o(^  -vf  and  ocy  ^  2xy  \ 
therefore                                      jc*  +y  w  2xy, 
or                                                         vu  \0  av, 
whence  u  y^  v     (2). 

Therefore,  by  (i),  (2),  </,  «;  are  rational  and  '^. 

It  follows,  by  x.  36,  that  {«  +  v)  is  irrational. 

Therefore  («  +  «/)  <r  is  an  irrational  area  [this  can  be  deduced  from  x.  20 
by  reductio  ad  absurdum\ 

whence  (x  +>»)*,  and  consequently  (x  +>'),  is  irrational. 

The  irrational  straight  line  J^p-^—^  is  called  a  second  bimedial  straight 
line. 

This  and  the  corresponding  second  apotome  of  a  medial  (>^f)-^p) 
found  in  X.  75  are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

Proposition  39. 

If  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational y  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial,  be  added  together,  the  whole  straight 
line  is  irrational :  and  let  it  be  called  major. 


88  BOOK   X  [x.  39,  40 

For  let  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  incommensurable  in 
square,  and  fulfilling  the  given  con- 
ditions [x.  33],  be  added  together ;        ^  g  c 
I  say  that  .^C  is  irrational. 

For,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial, 
twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  medial.       [x.  6  and  23,  Por.] 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB^  BC  is  rational ; 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable 
with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  ABy  BC, 
so  that  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  together  with  twice  the  rect- 
angle AB,  BC,  that  is,  the  square  on  AC,  is  also  incommen- 
surable with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC ;  [x.  16] 
therefore  the  square  on  AC\s  irrational, 
so  that  AC\s  also  irrational.                                           [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  major. 

Q.  E.  D. 
Here  x^  y  are  of  the  form  found  in  x.  33,  viz. 

9_   I     ~ir~     ^    I        k 

By  hypothesis,  the  rectangle  xy  is  medial ; 
therefore  2^  is  medial. 

Also  {y?  +y)  is  a  rational  area. 

Therefore  0^  +y  w  2xy, 

whence  (x  +  j)'  s^  (jc*  +y), 

so  that  (x  +  j)«,  and  therefore  {x  +jy),  is  irrational. 

The  irrational  straight  line   -?-  a  /  i  +     ,  +  -^  a./  1 1 is 

called  a  ma/or  (irrational)  straight  line. 

This  and  the  corresponding  minor  irrational  found  in  x.   76  are  the 
positive  roots  of  the  equation 

>P 
'^  I  +>P^ 


Proposition  40. 

//  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  rational,  be  added  together,  the  whole  straight 
line  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  a  rational 
plus  a  medial  area. 


X.  40,  4i]  PROPOSITIONS   39—41  89 

For  let  two  straight  lines  ABy  BC  incommensurable  in 
square,   and   fulfilling   the   given   con- 
ditions [x.  34],  be  added  together  ;  a b       o 

I  say  that  -^  C  is  irrational. 

For,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  medial, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  incommen- 
surable with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC ; 
so  that  the  square  on  -^C  is  also  incommensurable  with  twice 
the  rectangle  AB,  BC  [x.  16] 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB^  BC  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  ^C  is  irrational. 

Therefore  AC  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a 
medial  area. 

Q.  E.  D. 
Here  x,  y  have  [x.  34]  the  forms 

In  this  case  {a^  +>^)  is  a  medial,  and  2xy  a  rational,  area ;  thus 

jc*  +^  \j  2xy. 
Therefore  (x  •\-yf  v^  2xyy 

whence,  since  2xy  is  rational, 

{x  ^-yfy  and  consequently  {x  +^),  is  irrational. 
The  irrational  straight  line 


is  called  (for  an  obvious  reason)  the  "  sid^  "  0/  a  rationed  plus  a  medial  (area). 
This  and  the  corresponding  irrational  with  a  minus  sign  found  in  x.  77 
are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

2  J^ 

Proposition  41. 

If  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  and  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial  and  also  incommensurable  with  the 
sum  of  the  squares  on  them,  be  added  together,  the  whole  straight 
line  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  the  sum 
of  two  medial  areas. 


90  BOOK   X  [x.  41 

For  let  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  incommensurable  in 
square  and  satisfying  the  given  conditions 
[x.  35]  be  added  together ; 

I  say  that  AC  is  irrational. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  DB  be  set  out, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  DB  the  rectangle 
£>B  equal  to  the  squares  on  A  By  BC,  and 
the  rectangle  GH  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AByBC] 

therefore  the  whole  D//is  equal  to  the  square 
on  AC.  [11.  4] 

Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 

AB,  BC  is  medial,  _|^ "^ 

and  is  equal  to  BF,  ^  ^~^ 

therefore  DF  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DB ; 
therefore  DG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
DB.  [x.  22] 

For  the  same  reason  GjFC  is  also  rational  and  incommen- 
surable in  length  with  GB,  that  is,  DB. 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC, 
DF  IS  incommensurable  with  GH\ 
so  that  DG  is  also  incommensurable  with  GK.         [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

And  they  are  rational ; 
therefore  DG,  GK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  DK  is  irrational  and  what  is  called  binomial,    [x.  36] 

But  DB  is  rational ; 
therefore  DH  is  irrational,  and  the  side  of  the  square  which 
is  equal  to  it  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

But  AC  IS  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  HD ; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial 
areas. 

Q.  E.  D. 
In  this  case  x,  y  are  of  the  form 

e^    /         ^        e^    /         ^ 


X.  41,  Lemma]  PROPOSITION   41  91 

By  hypothesis,  (a^  +y)  and  2xy  are  medial  areas,  and 

x^+y^j  2xy     (i). 

*  Apply  *  these  areas  respectively  to  a  rational  straight  line  o-,  and  suppose 

=^^y'='^\  (,). 

2xy  =  (rv) 
Since  then  au  and  trv  are  both  medial  areas,  u,  v  are  rational  and  both 

are  w  a (3). 

Now,  by  (i)  and  (2), 

so  that  u  yj  V, 

By  this  and  (3),  w,  v  are  rational  and  '^. 
Therefore  [x.  36]  {u  +  v)  is  irrational. 
Hence  tr{u  +v)  is  irrational  [deduction  from  x.  20]. 
Thus  (x  ■\-yfy  and  therefore  {x  +  j),  is  irrational. 
The  irrational  straight  line 

^2  V  '  ^  VTT^  ""  ^/2  V  '     VTT^ 

is  called  (again  for  an  obvious  reason)  the  "  side  "  of  t)ie  sum  of  two  nudials 
(medial  areas). 

This  and  the  corresponding  irrational  with  a  minus  sign  found  in  x.  78 
are  the  positive  roots  of  the  equation 

X*-2  Jk.x'p^-i-\jj^p*=0, 

Lemma. 

And  that  the  aforesaid  irrational  straight  lines  are  divided 
only  in  one  way  into  the  straight  lines  of  which  they  are  the 
sum  and  which  produce  the  types  in  question,  we  will  now 
prove  after  premising  the  following  lemma. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  cut 
into  unequal  parts  at  each  of 

the  points  C,  D,  . 

and  let^Cbe  supposed  greater       ^  dec  b 

than  DB ; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  the  squares 
on  AD,  DB. 

For  let  AB  be  bisected  at  E. 

Then,  since  -^C  is  greater  than  DB, 
let  DC  be  subtracted  from  each  ; 
therefore  the  remainder  AD  is  greater  than  the  remainder  CB. 

But  AE  is  equal  to  EB ; 
therefore  DE  is  less  than  EC ; 


92  BOOK    X  [Lemma,  x.  42 

therefore  the  points  C,  D  are  not  equidistant  from  the  point 
of  bisection. 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square 
on  EC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EB,  [n.  5] 

and,  further,  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square 
on  DE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EB,  [/V/.] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square  on 
EC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  together  with  the 
square  on  DE. 

And  of  these  the  square  on  DE  is  less  than  the  square 
on  EC\ 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  is  also  less 
than  the  rectangle  AD,  DB, 

so  that  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  also  less  than  twice 
the  rectangle  AD,  DB. 

Therefore  also  the  remainder,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
AC,  CB,  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

3.  and  which  produce  the  types  in  question.  The  Greek  is  jtowvaw  rd  jcpoKdyjiva. 
tiSrif  and  I  have  taken  ddii  to  mean  "types  (of  irrational  straight  lines),"  though  the  expression 
might  perhaps  mean  "  satisfying  the  conditions  in  question.*' 

This  proves  that,  if  x  ■k-y  =  u  ^v,  and  if  u,  v  are  more  nearly  equal  than 
X,  y  (i.e.  if  the  straight  line  is  divided  in  the  second  case  nearer  to  the  point 
of  bisection),  then 

It  is  first  proved  by  means  of  11.  5  that 

20Cy<2UV, 

whence,  since  (x  +  j)*  =  (w  +  vf^  the  required  result  follows. 


Proposition  42. 

A  binomial  straight  line  is  divided  into  its  terms  at  one 
point  only. 

Let  AB  be  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  into  its  terms 
at  C; 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  rational       ^ g 5 b 

straight  lines  commensurable  in 

square  only.  [x.  36] 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  divided  at  another  point  into  two 
rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 


X.  42]  PROPOSITION   42  93 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD, 
DB  are  also  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only. 

It  is  then  manifest  that  -^C  is  not  the  same  with  DB. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so. 

Then  AD  will  also  be  the  same  as  CB, 

and,  as  ^C  is  to  CB,  so  will  BD  be  to  DA ; 

thus  AB  will  be  divided  at  D  also  in  the  same  way  as  by  the 
division  at  C : 

which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  AC  is  not  the  same  with  DB. 

For  this  reason  also  the  points  C,  D  are  not  equidistant 
from  the  point  of  bisection. 

Therefore  that  by  which  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ 
from  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  also  that  by  which  twice 
the   rectangle   AD,    DB  differs   from    twice   the    rectangle 

AC,  CB, 

because  both  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  together  with  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB,  and  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  together 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  AB.  [n.  4] 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ  from  the  squares  on 

AD,  DB  by  a  rational  area, 

for  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  differs  from  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area,  though  they  are 
medial  [x.  21] : 

which  is  absurd,  for  a  medial  area  does  not  exceed  a  medial 
by  a  rational  area.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  a  binomial  straight  line  is  not  divided  at  different 
points ; 

therefore  it  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  proves  the  equivalent  of  the  well-known  theorem  in 
surds  that, 

if  a-k-  Jd  =  x+  ^y, 

then  a  =  x,     b^y, 

and  if  V  +  s/^  =  >/^  +  Vj> 

then  a^x,     b^y    {ox  a^y,     b  =  x\ 


94 


BOOK  X  [x.  42,  43 


The  proposition  states  that  a  binomial  straight  line  cannot  be  split  up  into 
terms  (ovo/mra)  in  two  ways.     For,  if  possible,  let 

x+y  =  x'  4-y, 
where  x,  y,  and  also  x\  y\  are  the  terms  of  a  binomial  straight  line,  x\  y 
being  different  from  a:,  y  (or  y^  x). 

One  pair  is  necessarily  more  nearly  equal  than  the  other.     Let  x\y'  be 
more  nearly  equal  than  a:,  y. 

Then  (^  +/)  -  (pd^  ^y"^)  =  2x'y'  -  2xy. 

Now  by  hypothesis  (jc*+y),  (x'^-^y*^)  are  rational  areas,  being  of  the  form 

but  2Ji;y,  2:!i^  are  medial  areas,  being  of  the  form  Jk.  p^; 
therefore  the  difference  of  two  medial  areas  is  rational : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  y,  y'  cannot  be  different  from  Xy  y  (or  y,  x). 


Proposition  43. 

A  first  bimedial  straight  line  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Let  AB  be  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  divided  at  C  so 
that  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight 

lines  commensurable  in   square s — 

only  and  containing  a  rational 

rectangle ;  [x.  37] 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD, 
DB  are  also  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle. 

Since,  then,  that  by  which  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB 
differs  from  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  that  by  which  the 
squares  on  AC,  CB  differ  from  the  squares  on  AD,  DB, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  differs  from  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area — for  both  are  rational — 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  also  differ  from  the  squares 
on  AD,  DB  by  a  rational  area,  though  they  are  medial : 

which  is  absurd.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  is  not  divided  into 
its  terms  at  different  points  ; 

therefore  it  is  so  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Q.  E.  D. 


43»  44] 


PROPOSITIONS  42—44 


95 


In  this  case,  with  the  same  hypothesis,  viz.  that 

and  x\  y  are  more  nearly  equal  than  x,  y, 

we  have  as  before  (jc"  +y)  -  (^'*  +y*)  =  ix'y'  -  2xy. 

But,  from  the  given  properties  of  x,  y^  and  x\  y',  it  follows  that  2xy,  2x'y 
are  ratwnaJ^  and  (jc'+y),  {x^-^y'^)  medial^  areas. 

Therefore  the  difference  between  two  medial  areas  is  rational : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 


Proposition  44. 
A  second  bimedial  straight  line  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  bimedial  straight  line  divided  at  C, 
so  that  ACy  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only  and  containing  a  medial  rectangle  ;  [x.  38] 

it  is  then  manifest  that  C  is  not  at  the  point  of  bisection, 
because  the  segments  are  not  commensurable  in  length. 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

A  DOB 


D 

-H- 


0 


M 


F  L        Q  K 


For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  -^C  is 
,  not  the  same  with  DB,  but  ^C  is  supposed  greater  ; 
it  is  then  clear  that  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  also,  as  we 
proved  above  [Lemma],  less  than  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  ; 
and  suppose  that  AD,  DB  are  medial  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only  and  containing  a  medial  rectangle. 

Now  let  a  rational  straight  line  EFht,  set  out, 
let  there  be  applied  to  EF  the  rectangular  parallelogram  EK 
equal  to  the  square  on  AB,  ^ 

and  let  EG  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  be  subtracted ; 
therefore  the  remainder  HK  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AC,  CB.  [II.  4] 

Again,  let  there  be  subtracted  EL,  equal  to  the  squares 
on  AD,  DB,  which  were  proved  less  than  the  squares  on 
AC,  CB  [Lemma]; 


96  BOOK   X  [x.  44 

therefore  the  remainder  MK  is  also  equal  to  twice  the  rect- 
angle AD,  DB. 

Now,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  medial, 
therefore  EG  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF  ; 
therefore  EH  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
EF.  [x.  22] 

For  the  same  reason 
HN  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF. 

And,  since  AC,  CB  are  medial   straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only, 
therefore  ^C  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB, 

But,  as  ^C  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  square  on  ^C  to  the  rect- 
angle ^C,  CB\ 

therefore  the  square  on  -^C  is  incommensurable  with  the  rect- 
angle AC,  CB.  [x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  AC\  for  AC,  CB  are  commensurable  in  square. 

[X.15] 

And  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  commensurable  with 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  also  incommen- 
surable with  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB.  [x.  13] 

But  EG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  A  C,  CB, 

and  HK  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB ; 

therefore  EG  is  incommensurable  with  HK, 

so  that  EH  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  HN. 

[vi.  I,  X.  11] 
And  they  are  rational ; 

therefore  EH,  HN  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only. 

But,  if  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  be  added  together,  the  whole  is  the  irrational  which  is 
called  binomial.  [x.  36] 

Therefore  EN  is  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  at  H. 

In  the  same  way  EM,  MN  will  also  be  proved  to  be 
rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  ; 
and  EN  will  be  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  at  different 
points,  H  and  M. 


X.  44]  PROPOSITION  44  97 

And  EH  is  not  the  same  with  MN. 

For  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  the  squares 
on  AD,  DB. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  greater  than  twice  the 
rectangle  AD,  DB ; 

therefore  also  the  squares  on  AC,  CB,  that  is,  EG,  are  much 
greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  that  is,  MK, 
so  that  EH  is  also  greater  than  MN. 

Therefore  EH  is  not  the  same  with  MN. 

Q.  E.  D. 

As  the  irrationality  of  the  second  bimedtal  straight  line  [x.  38]  is  proved  by 
means  of  the  irrationality  of  the  binomial  straight  line  [x.  36^  so  the  present 
theorem  is  reduced  to  that  of  x.  42. 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  the  second  bimedial  straight  line  can  be  divided 
into  its  terms  as  such  in  two  ways,  i.e.  that 

where  re',  y'  are  nearer  equality  than  x,  y. 

Apply  jc"  +y,  2xy  to  a  rational  straight  line  <r,  i.e.  let 

jc*  +y  =  mi, 
2xy  =  <rv. 
Then,  as  in  x.  38,  the  areas  x'+y,  2xy  are  medial,  so  that  au,  <rv  are 
medial ; 
therefore  u,  v  are  both  rational  and  v/  <r  (i). 

Again,  by  hypothesis,  x,  y  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only; 
therefore  x^ty. 

Hence  sf^^fxy. 

And  jc*  '^  (jc"  +y),  while  xy  ^  2xy  \ 
therefore                                     (jc*  +y)  v/  2jcy, 
or                                                            truKf  crv, 
and  hence  u^jv     (2). 

Therefore,  by  (i)  and  (2),  u,  v  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  w  +  »  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

Similarly,  if  y^  ^y*^  =  tm  and  2x*y'  =  tru', 
u'  +  v'  will  be  proved  to  be  a  binomial  straight  line. 

And,  since  (^  -vyY  =  (x  +y'y,  and  therefore  («  +  v)  =  (u'  +  v'),  it  follows  that 
a  binomial  straight  line  is  divided  as  such  in  two  ways : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  42] 

Therefore  x  +y,  the  given  second  bimedial  straight  line,  can  only  be  so 
divided  in  one  way. 

In  order  to  prove  that  u-^-v,  u  +f/  represent  a  different  division  of  the 
same  straight  line,  Euclid  assumes  that  jc*  +y  >  2xy.  This  is  of  course  an 
easy  inference  from  n.  7 ;  but  the  assumption  of  it  here  renders  it  probable 
that  the  Lemma  after  x.  59  is  interpolated. 

H.  E.  III.  7 


98  BOOK  X  [x.  45 


Proposition  45. 

A  major  straight  line  is  divided  at  one  and  the  same  point 
only. 

Let  AB  be  a  major  straight  line  divided  at  C,  so  that 
AC,    CB  are   incommensurable   in  do 

square  and  make  the  sum   of  the       ^ 1 « 3 

squares  on  AC,  CB  rational,  but  the 

rectangle  AC,  CB  medial ;  [x.  39] 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD, 
DB  are  also  incommensurable  in  square  and  make  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  rational,  but  the  rectangle  con- 
tained by  them  medial. 

Then,  since  that  by  which  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ 
from  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  also  that  by  which  twice  the 
rectangle  AD,  DB  differs  from  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

while  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  exceed  the  squares  on  AD, 
DB  by  a  rational  area — for  both  are  rational — 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  exceeds  twice  the 
rectangle  A  C,  CB  by  a  rational  area,  though  they  are  medial : 

which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  a  major  straight  line  is  not  divided  at  different 
points ; 

therefore  it  is  only  divided  at  one  and  the  same  point. 

Q.  E.  D. 

If  possible,  let  the  major  irrational  straight  line  be  divided  into  terms  in 
two  ways,  viz.  as  (p^-^y)  and  {x  -vy),  where  x',  y'  are  supposed  to  be  nearer 
equality  than  x,  y. 

We  have  then,  as  in  x.  42,  43, 

(pi?  +y)  -  (pc""  ^y'^)  =  2xy  -  2xy. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  (x^-^y^),  (pc^-^-y'^)  are  both  rational,  so  that  their 
difference  is  rational. 

Also,  by  hypothesis,  2x'y,  2xy  are  both  medial  areas ; 
therefore  the  difference  of  two  medial  areas  is  a  rational  area : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  etc. 


X.  46,  47]  PROPOSITIONS  45—47  99 

Proposition  46. 

The  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  is  divided  at  one 
point  only. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area 
divided  at  C,  so  that  AC,  CB  are 

incommensurable  in  square  and  make       a        &~c  b 

the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB 

medial,  but  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  rational ;  [x.  40] 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD, 
DB  are  also  incommensurable  in  square  and  make  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  medial,  but  twice  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB  rational. 

Since  then  that  by  which  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB 
differs  from  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  that  by 
which  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  differ  from  the  squares  on 

AC,  CB, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle 

AD,  DB  by  a  rational  area, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  also  exceed  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area,  though  they  are  medial : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  is  not 
divided  at  different  points  ; 
therefore  it  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Here,  as  before,  if  we  use  the  same  notation, 

(jc"  +y)  -  (x^  +>''')  =  2x'y'  -  2xy, 
and  the  areas  on  the  left  side  are,  by  hypothesis,  both  medial,  while  the  areas 
on  the  right  side  are  both  rational. 

Thus  the  result  of  x.  26  is  contradicted,  as  before. 

Therefore  etc. 

Proposition  47. 

The  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  is  divided  at  one 
point  only. 

Let  AB  be  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC,  CB  are  incommen- 
surable in  square  and  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC, 

7—2 


lOO 


BOOK  X 


[x.  47 


CB  medial,  and  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  medial  and  also  in- 
commensurable with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  ; 
I  say  that  AB  is  not  divided  at  another  point  so  as  to  fulfil 
the  given  conditions. 

M    H 


For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D,  so  that  again  AC 
is  of  course  not  the  same  as  BD,  but  ^C  is  supposed  greater; 
let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  EF  the  rectangle  EG  equal  to  the 
squares  on  AC,  CB, 

and  the  rectangle  HK  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB ; 
therefore  the  whole  EK  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB.    [ii.  4] 

Again,  let  EL,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB,  be  applied 
X.oEF\ 

therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AD^  DB,  is  equal 
to  the  remainder  MK. 

And  since,  by  hypothesis,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC, 
CB  is  medial, 
therefore  EG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF-, 
therefore  HE  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
EF.  [x.  22] 

For  the  same  reason 
HN  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF. 

And,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  incom- 
mensurable with  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
therefore  EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  GN, 
so  that  EH  is  also  incommensurable  with  HN.       [vi.  i,  x.  u] 

And  they  are  rational ; 


X.  47]  PROPOSITION  47,   DEFINITIONS   II  loi 

therefore  EH,  HN  are  rational  straight  lines  commeitsurable 
in  square  only;  *.    *.. 

therefore  EN  is  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  at  H.  tx>36] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  it  is  also  divided  at  M. 

And  EH  is  not  the  same  with  MN ;  V 

therefore  a  binomial  has  been  divided  at  different  points : 
which  is  absurd.  [x.  42] 

Therefore  a  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  is  not 
divided  at  different  points ; 
therefore  it  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Using  the  same  notation  as  in  the  note  on  x.  44,  we  suppose  that,  if 
possible, 

and  we  put 

^^y^---\  and  *"y:=*":i. 

2xy  =  av  )  2xy  =irv  ) 

Then,  since  x*  +^,  2xy  are  medial  areas,  and  or  rational, 

u,  V  are  both  rational  and  s^  <r   (i). 

Also,  by  hypothesis,               jc"  +y  s^  2xy, 
whence  u^fV (2). 

Therefore,  by  (i)  and  (2),  «,  v  are  rational  and  '>-. 

Hence  u-\-v\s2i  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  36] 

Similarly  f/'  + 1/  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

But  u-^v  =  u  -^v' \ 

therefore  a  binomial  straight  line  is  divided  into  terms  in  two  ways : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  42] 

Therefore  etc. 


DEFINITIONS   II. 

1.  Given  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  binomial,  divided 
into  its  terms,  such  that  the  square  on  the  greater  term  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  the  lesser  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  the  greater,  then, 
if  the  greater  term  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called  a  first 
binomial  straight  line; 

2.  but  if  the  lesser  term  be  commensurable  in  length 
with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called 
a  second  binomial ; 


I02        .{  •••*  BOOK  X  [Deff.  II.  3-6,  X.  48 

3/'yand  if  neither  of  the  terms  be  commensurable  in  length 
witlj;jth*e  rational  straight  line  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called 
a.fhifd  binomial. 

;•.  *:4.  Again,  if  the  square  on  the  greater  term  be  greater 
.'•than  the  square  on  the  lesser  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
•,! incommensurable   in   length  with   the  greater,  then,   if  the 

greater  term  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
/    straight    line    set   out,    let   the   whole   be  called   a   fourth 

binomial ; 

5.  if  the  lesser,  a  fifth  binomial ; 

6.  and  if  neither,  a  sixth  binomial. 


Proposition  48. 
To  find  the  first  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  the  sum 
of  them  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a      ^  " 

square  number,  but  has  not  to  CA         + \ 

the  ratio  which  a  square  number         ^  ^ 

has  to  a  square  number ;  A  c      b 

[Lemma  i  after  x.  28] 
let  any  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out,  and  let  EF  be 
commensurable  in  length  with  D. 

Therefore  EF  is  also  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that, 
as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the 
square  on  FG.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  .^C  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number ; 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  also  has  to  the  square  on  FG 
the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number, 
so  that  the  square  on  EF  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FG.  [x.  6] 

And  EF  is  rational  ; 
therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  BA  has  not  to  ^C  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 


X.  48]  DEFINITIONS   II.,   PROPOSITION   48  103 

neither,  therefore,  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number  ; 
therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.        [x.  9] 
Therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only; 
therefore  EG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  that  it  is  also  a  first  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square 
on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG, 
while  BA  is  greater  than  AC, 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  also  greater  than  the  square 
on  FG. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  FGy  H  be  equal  to  the  square  on 
EF. 

Now  since,  as  BA  is  to  ^  C,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the 
square  on  FG, 
therefore,  convertendo, 

as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  EFto  the  square  on  H. 

[v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  also  has  to  the  square  on  H  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H-,  [x.  9] 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FG 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  EF. 

And  EF,  FG  are  rational,  and  EF  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  D. 

Therefore  EF  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.   E.  D. 

Let  ^p  be  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  p,  a  given  rational 
straight  line. 

The  two  numbers  taken  may  be  written  /  («'  —  «'),  //i',  where  {m^  -  /i')  is 
not  a  square. 

Take  x  such  that 

//w«:/>(w»-/f«)  =  >^p«:jc'  (i). 


whence  x  =  kp 


slm'-n^ 


m 
Then  ^p  +  a;,  or  kp-^kp      ,  is  a yfry/^/Vi^^a/ straight  line (2). 


m 


I04  BOOK   X  [x.  48,  49 

To  prove  this  we  have,  from  (i), 

and  X  is  rational,  but  x\j  kp\ 

that  is,  X  is  rational  and  '^^  kp, 

so  that  ^p  +  X  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

Also,  J^p*  being  greater  than  jc*,  suppose  k*p^  -  jc*  =y. 

Then,  from  (i),  pm* :  pt^  =  >^p'  :  /, 

whence  y  is  rational  and  ^  kp. 

Therefore  ^p  +  re  is  d^  first  binomial  straight  line  [x.  Deff.  11.  i]. 

This  binomial  straight  line  may  be  written  thus, 

kp  +  >^p  n/i  -  X*. 

When  we  come  to  x.  85,  we  shall  find  that  the  corresponding  straight  line 
with  a  negative  sign  is  the^rj/  apotome^ 

kp^kpJT^^. 

Consider  now  the  equation  of  which  these  two  expressions  are  the  roots. 
The  equation  is 

S(^'-2kp,X  +  k^J^p^  =  o. 

In  other  words,  the  first  binomial  and  the  first  apotome  correspond  to  the 
roots  of  the  equation 

jc*  —  2eur  +  XV  =  o, 
where  o  =  kp. 


Proposition  49. 
To  find  the  second  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  the  sum 
of  them  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which 
a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number, 
but   has   not   to  -^C  the  ratio  which  a       ^  ^ 

square  number  has  to  a  square  number ;  o 

let  a  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out,  f- 

and  let  EF  be  commensurable  in  length       ^' 
with  D ;  g 

therefore  EF  is  rational.  q 

Let  it  be  contrived  then  that, 
as  the  number  CA  is  to  AB,  so  also  is  the  square  on  EF  to 
the  square  on  FG ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FG.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

Now,  since  the  number  CA  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which 
a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number,  neither  has  the 


X.  49]  PROPOSITIONS   48,  49  loS 

square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG ; 

[X.  9] 
therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  EG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  second  binomial 
straight  line. 

For  since,  inversely,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  ^C,  so  is 
the  square  on  GF  to  the  square  on  FE, 

while  BA  is  greater  than  AC, 

therefore  the  square  on  GF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE. 

Let  the  squares  on  EF,  H  be  equal  to  the  square  on  GF\ 

therefore,  convert endo,  ^s  AB  \s  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on 
FG  to  the  square  on  H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  also  has  to  the  square  on  H  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H  \  [x.  9] 
so  that  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FG. 

And  FGy  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only,  and  EF,  the  lesser  term,  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  D  set  out. 

Therefore  EG  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Taking  a  rational  straight  line  kp  commensurable  in  length  with  p,  and 
selecting  numbers  of  the  same  form  as  before,  viz.  /  {m^  -  n^),  pt^,  we  put 

p{m^-n^)\ptn^  =  l^i?,3^  (i), 

so  that  x  =  kp    , 


I 


Just  as  before,  x  is  rational  and  '^  kp, 
whence  ^p  +  re  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 
By(i),  3^>^p\ 


=  kp-==^,  say    (2). 


io6  BOOK  X  [x.  49,  50 

Let  jc>->^p«=/, 

whence,  from  (i),  pn^  :  pn^  =  x^ :  y, 

and  J'  is  therefore  rational  and  "^  x. 

The  greater  term  of  the  binomial  straight  line  is  x  and  the  lesser  kp,  and 

satisfies  the  definition  of  the  second  binomial  straight  line. 
The  corresponding  second  apotome  [x.  86]  is 

The  equation  of  which  the  two  expressions  are  the  roots  is 
or  JC*  —  2ax  +  XV  =  o. 


where 


V7^«* 


Proposition  50. 
To  find  the  third  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  the  sum 
of  them  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number,  but  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 


F 1 H 


Let  any  other  number  /?,  not  square,  be  set  out  also,  and 
let  it  not  have  to  either  of  the  numbers  BA,  AC  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  any  rational  straight  line  E  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  D  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square 
on  E  to  the  square  on  FG  ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  E  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FG.    ,  [x.  6] 

And  E  is  rational ; 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 


X.  5o]  PROPOSITIONS  49,  50  107 

And,  since  D  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG,  [x.  9] 

Next  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC, 
so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH  \  [x.  6,  For.] 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  GH.  [x.  6] 

But  FG  is  rational ; 
therefore  GH  is  also  rational 

And,  since  BA  has  not  to  ^  C  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  HG  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH,      [x.  9] 

Therefore  FGy  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
therefore  FH  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  D  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the 
square  on  FG, 

and,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  GH, 

therefore,  ex  aeqtiali,  as  D  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to 
the  square  on  GH,  [v.  22] 

But  D  has  not  to  -^C  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  GH 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH,         [x.  9] 

And  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 
the  square  on  GH, 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH, 

Let  then  the  squares  on  GH,  K  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  FG\ 


io8  BOOK  X  [x.  50 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  AB  is  to  BC^  so  is  the  square  on  FG 
to  the  square  on  K.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  also  has  to  the  square  on  K  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  K.  [x.  9] 

Therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
GH  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FG, 

And  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only,  and  neither  of  them  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  E, 

Therefore  FH  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Let  p  be  a  rational  straight  line. 

Take  the  numbers  q  {m^  ^  r^\  qn^, 
and  let  /  be  a  third  number  which  is  not  a  square  and  which  has  not  to  qrn^ 
or  q  (»»'  -  f^)  the  ratio  of  square  to  square. 

Take  x  such  that  /  :  qn^  =  ^  :  jc"    (i). 

Thus  X  is  rational  and  s^  p   (2). 

Next  suppose  that        qm^  i  q(nf^-n^)  =  x?  ij^    (3). 

It  follows  that  J'  is  rational  and  "^  x (4). 

Thus  {x  +^)  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

Again,  from  (i)  and  (3),  ex  aequali, 

p:q{m^-n^)  =  f?:f (5), 

whence  y^P   (6). 

Suppose  that  ^  -f  =  z\ 

Then,  from  (3),  convertendoy 

qm^  :  qn^  =  x*  :  a", 
whence  2;  ^  x. 

Thus  n/jp"  -f  ^  X, 

and  X,  y  are  both  s^  p ; 
therefore  a:  +  j'  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

Now,  from  (i),  J?  =  p .     ^  , 

and,  by  (5),  ^  =  p. -^ . 

Thus  the  third  binomial  is 


A- 


^|.p(iw+n/w«-««), 

which  we  may  write  in  the  form 

m ^k,p-^m  Jk.p  Vi  -X». 


X.  so,  si]  propositions  s©,  51  '09 

The  corresponding  third  apotome  [x.  87]  is 

The  two  expressions  are  accordingly  the  roots  of  the  equation 
o(^  -  2m  Jk  .px  +  >?m^kp^  =  o, 
or  re*  —  2ax  +  XV  =  o, 

where  a  =  m  ^A .  p. 

See  also  note  on  x.  S3  (ad fin.). 


Proposition  51. 

To  find  the  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let   two  numbers  AC,   CB  be  set  out  such   that  AB 
neither  has  to  BC,   nor  yet  to  AC,   the   ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out, 
and  let  EFh^  commensurable  in  length  with  D\ 
therefore  EF  is  also  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  the  number  BA 
is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square 
on  FG ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  commensurable 
with  the  square  on  FG ;  [x.  6] 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

Now,  since  BA  has  not  to  .^C  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio 
which  a  square. number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.       [x.  9] 

Therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
so  that  EG  is  binomial. 


F  • 


I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the 
square  on  FG, 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FG. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  FG,  H  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  EF\ 


no  BOOK  X  [x.  51,  52 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  the  number  AB  is  to  BCy  so  is  the 
square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  H,  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  H 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  //^;  [x.  9] 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GF 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  EF. 

And  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only,  and  EF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  /?. 

Therefore  EG  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.   E.  D. 

Take  numbers  m,  n  such  that  (/»  +  n)  has  not  to  either  m  ox  n  the  ratio  of 
square  to  square. 

Take  x  such  that  (»i  +  «)  :  »i  =  f^fi  :  x^, 


whence 


_      kp 


fT+k' 


say. 


kp 
Then  kp  +  x,  or  kp  +    .         ,  is  2l  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 
VI +X 

For  >Jf^^-3^  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  kp,  and  kp  is  com- 
mensurable in  length  with  p. 

The  corresponding  y2?«rM  apotome  [x.  88]  is 

k.        ^^ 

Vi  +  X 

The  equation  of  which  the  two  expressions  are  the  roots  is 


or 


0^  —  2ax  +  - 


where  a  =  kp. 

Proposition  52. 
To  find  the  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  AB  has 
not  to  either  of  them  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number  ; 
let  any  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out. 


X.  52]  PROPOSITIONS   51,  52  in 

and  let  EF  be  commensurable  with  D  ; 
therefore  EF  is  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as   CA   is  to  AB,  so  is  the 
square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG,     [x.  6,  Por.] 

But  CA  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a      a  e 

square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the 
square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight 
lines  commensurable  in  square  only  ;  [x.  9] 
therefore  EG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 


D 

F- 

H    Q 


I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 
For  since,  as  CA  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to 
the  square  on  FG, 

inversely,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the 
square  on  FE ; 

therefore  the  square  on  GF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  EF,  H  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  GF\ 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  the  number  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the 
square  on  GF  to  the  square  on  H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  H 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H\  [x.  9] 

so  that  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  FG. 

And  GF,  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only,  and  the  lesser  term  EF  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  D  set  out. 

Therefore  EG  is  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

If  /»,  ;i  be  numbers  of  the  kind  taken  in  the  last  proposition,  take  x  such 
that 


112  BOOK  X  [x.  52,  S3 

In  this  case  x  =  kp  ^J 

=  kp  s/i  +  A,  say, 

and  X  >  kp. 

Then  >^p  n/i  +  X  +  >&p  is  di  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  Vx*  -  ^V>  or  ^\ .  ^p,  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  kp  vi+X, 
or  x\ 

and  ^p,  but  not  kp  n/i  +  A,  is  commensurable  in  length  with  p. 

The  corresponding  y^M  apotome  [x.  89]  is 

kp  VI  +  k-^Ap. 

The  equation  of  which  the  fifth  binomial  and  the  fifth  apotome  are  the 
roots  is 


a^-ikp'Ji+k.X'h  Xi^p*  =  o, 


or 
where 


a:"—  2<u:  + 


i+X 
a  =  ^p  >/i  +  A. 


a'  =  o, 


C 


Proposition  53. 
To  find  the  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  AB  has 
not  to  either  of  them  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
and  let  there  also  be  another  number  D 
which  is  not  square  and  which  has  not  to 
either  of  the  numbers  BA,  AC  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number. 

Let  any  rational  straight  line  E  be  set 
out, 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  Z?  is  to  AB, 
so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  E  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FG.  [x.  6] 

And  E  is  rational ; 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

Now,  since  D  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 


X.  53]  PROPOSITIONS   52,  53  113 

neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio 

which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.  [x.  9] 

Again,  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  BA  is  to  AC^  so  is  the 
square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  HG.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  the  square  on  HG  is  rational ; 
therefore  HG  is  rational. 

And,  since  BA  has  not  to  ^C  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.       [x.  9] 

Therefore  FGy  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
therefore  FH  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  binomial 
straight  line. 

For  since,  as  D  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the 
square  on  FGy 

and  also,  as  BA  is  to  ACy  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the 
square  on  GH^ 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  D  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  E 
to  the  square  on  GH.  [v.  22] 

But  D  has  not  to  .^C  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  GH 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

But  it  was  also  proved  incommensurable  with  FG ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  incommen- 
surable in  length  with  E. 

And,  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 
the  square  on  GH, 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  GH,  K  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  FG\ 

H.  E.  HI.  8 


114  BOOK  X  [x.  53 

therefore,  convertendo^  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG 
to  the  square  on  K.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number  ; 

so  that  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  K  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  K\  [x.  9] 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  FG. 

KnAFG^  GH^xt,  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only,  and  neither  of  them  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  the  rational  straight  line  E  set  out. 

Therefore  FH  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Take  numbers  »i,  n  such  that  (m  +  n)  has  not  to  either  of  the  numbers 
»»,  n  the  ratio  of  square  to  square ;  take  also  a  third  number  /,  which  is  not 
square,  and  which  has  not  to  either  of  the  numbers  (m  +  n\  m  the  ratio  of 
square  to  square. 

Let  p  :  {m  +  n)  =  p^:x^ (i) 

and  (m-\-n)  :  fn  =  o^\f (2). 

Then  shall  (x  +  j')  be  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

For,  by  (i),  ;c  is  rational  and  v/  p. 
By  (2),  since  x  is  rational, 

y  is  rational  and  v/  x. 

Hence  x^  y  are  rational  and  commensurable  in  square  only,  so  that  (x  +  j') 
is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

Again,  ex  aequali,  from  (i)  and  (2), 

P'^m^p^iy' (3), 

whence  y  ^j  p. 

Thus  X,  y  are  both  incommensurable  in  length  with  p. 

Lastly,  from  (2),  convertendOy 

(/«  +  «):«  =  jp*  :  (jp*  -y), 
so  that  ^3^  — y  sj  X. 

Therefore  {x  +_y)  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

Now,  from  (i)  and  (3),  

/m-¥n         ,, 
•^  =  P  .  y  —p-  =  PV^>  say, 

y  =  P'  f^^  =  P'JK  say, 

and  the  sixth  binomial  straight  line  may  be  written 

Jk,p+  Jk.p. 
The  corresponding  sixth  apotome  is  [x.  90] 

^k.p-J\,p\ 


X.  S3i  Lemma]  PROPOSITION   53  115 

and  the  equation  of  which  the  two  expressions  are  the  roots  is 
0^  -  2  Jk ,  px  +  {k  -  k)  p^  ^  o, 

or  or  -  2CLX  +  — J—  a'  =  o, 

where  a=  Jk ,  p. 

Tannery  remarks  ("De  la  solution  g^om^trique  des  problimes  du  second 
degr^  avant  Euclide"  in  Mimoires  de  la  Sociktt  des  sciences  physiques  et  naturetUs 
de  Bordeaux^  2^  S^rie,  T.  iv.)  that  Euclid  admits  as  binomials  and  apotomes 
the  third  and  sixth  binomials  and  apotomes  which  are  the  square  roots  of  first 
binomials  and  apotomes  respectively.  Hence  the  third  and  sixth  binomials 
and  apotomes  are  the  positive  roots  of  biquadratic  equations  of  the  same  form 
as  the  quadratics  which  give  as  roots  the  first  and  fourth  binomials  and 
apotomes.  But  this  remark  seems  to  be  of  no  value  because  (as  was  pointed 
out  a  hundred  years  ago  by  Cossali,  11.  p.  260)  the  squares  of  cUl  the  six 
binomials  and  apotomes  (including  the  first  and  fourth)  give  first  binomials 
and  apotomes  respectively.  Hence  we  may  equally  well  regard  them  all  as 
roots  of  biquadratics  reducible  to  quadratics,  or  generally  as  roots  of  equations 
of  the  form 

3^  ±20,,  ^"  ±  ^  =  o ; 
and  nothing  is  gained  by  raising  the  degree  of  the  equations  in  this  way. 

It  is,  of  course,  easy  to  see  that  the  most  general  form  of  binomial  and 
apotome,  viz. 

P-  Jh±p.  ^A, 
^ve  first  binomials  and  apotomes  when  squared. 

For  the  square  is  p{{k  +  \)p±2  JkX . p\ ;  and  the  expression  within  the 
bracket  is  a  first  binomial  or  apotome,  because 

(1)  k^\>2slkk, 

(2)  V(>^+"A)»-4>tA.  =  k-\,  which  is  ^  (^  +  X), 

(3)  (>^  +  ^)p^P- 

Lemma. 

Let  there  be  two  squares  ABy  BC,  and  let  them  be  placed 
so  that  DB  is  in  a  straight  line  with  BE ; 
therefore  FB  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with 
BG. 

Let  the  parallelogram  A  Che,  completed; 
I  say  that  ^C  is  a  square,  that  DG  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  AB,  BC,  and 
further  that  DC  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  AC,  CB. 

For,  since  DB  is  equal  to  BF,  and  BE  to  BG, 
therefore  the  whole  DE  is  equal  to  the  whole  FG. 

But  DE  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  AH,  KC, 
and  FG  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  AK,  HC ;  [i.  34] 

8—2 


B 

ii6  BOOK  X  [Lemma,  X.  54 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AH^  KC  is  also  equal  to 
each  of  the  straight  lines  AK,  HC, 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  ^C  is  equilateral. 

And  it  is  also  rectangular  ; 
therefore  ^C  is  a  square. 

And  since,  as  FB  is  to  BGy  so  is  DB  to  BE, 
while,  as  FB  is  to  BG,  so  is  AB  to  DO, 
and,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  DO  to  BCy  [vi.  i] 

therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  DO,  so  is  DO  to  BC.  [v.  n] 

Therefore  DG  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AB,  BC. 

I  say  next  that  DC  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between 
AC,  CB. 

For  since,  2is  AD  is  to  D/^,  so  is  J^G  to  GC — 
for  they  are  equal  respectively — 

and,  componendo,  as  .^ /f  is  to  KD,  so  is  KC  to  CG,        [v.  i8] 
while,  as  AK  is  to  KD,  so  is  y4C  to  CD, 
and,  as  KC  is  to  CG^,  so  is  Z?C  to  CB,  [vi.  i] 

therefore  also,  as  -^C  is  to  DC,  so  is  DC  to  -5C  [v.  n] 

Therefore  DC  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AC,  CB. 
Being  what  it  was  proposed  to  prove. 

It  is  here  proved  that 

0^  \xy-xy  :y, 

and  {x  -^ryf  :  (x  ■\-y)y  =  (x  •\'y)y  :  /. 

The  first  of  the  two  results  is  proved  in  the  course  of  x.  25  (lines  6 — 8  on 
p.  57  above).  This  fact  may,  I  think,  suggest  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness 
of  this  Lemma. 

Proposition  54. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
first  binomial,  the  ''side''  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  which  is  called  binomial. 

For  let  the  area  AC  he,  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AB  and  the  first  binomial  AD ; 

I  say  that  the  **side"  of  the  area  ^C  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  which  is  called  binomial. 

For,  since  AD  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line,  let  it  be 
divided  into  its  terms  at  E, 
and  let  ^^  be  the  greater  term. 


X.  54] 


PROPOSITION   54 


117 


It  is  then  manifest  that  AE,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  square  only, 

the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE^ 
and  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  AB  set  out.  [x.  Deff.  n.  i] 

Let  ED  be  bisected  at  the  point  F. 

A  G  E        F       o  R     Q 


M 
8 

N 

P 

B                       1^ 

\K         L        C 

Then,  since  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  ED  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
AE, 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  the  greater  AE  a  parallelogram 
equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less,  that  is,  to 
the  square  on  EF,  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  it  divides 
it  into  commensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 

Let  then  the  rectangle  AG,  GE  equal  to  the  square  on 
EF  be  applied  to  AE ; 
therefore  ^4  G^  is  commensurable  in  length  with  EG. 

Let  GH,  EK,  FL  be  drawn  from  G,  E,  F  parallel  to 
either  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD ; 

let  the  square  SN  be  constructed  equal  to  the  parallelogram 
AH,  and  the  square  NQ  equal  to  GK,  [n.  14] 

and  let  them  be  placed  so  that  MN  is  in  a  straight  line  with 
N0\ 
therefore  RN  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  NP. 

And  let  the  parallelogram  SQ  be  completed ; 
therefore  SQ  is  a  square.  [Lemma] 

Now,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GE  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  EF, 

therefore,  as  ^(7  is  to  EF,  so  is  FE  to  EG ;  [vi.  17] 

therefore  also,  as  AH  is  to  EL,  so  is  EL  to  KG  \  [vi.  i] 

therefore  EL  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AH,  GK. 

But  AH  is  equal  to  SN,  and  GK  to  NQ  ; 
therefore  EL  is  a  mean  proportional  between  SN,  NQ. 


ii8  BOOK  X  [x.  54 

But  MR  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  same 
SN,  NQ ;  [Lemma] 

therefore  BL  is  equal  to  MR, 
so  that  it  is  also  equal  to  PO. 

But  A//,  GK  are  also  equal  to  SN,  NQ ; 
therefore  the  whole  AC  is  equal  to  the  whole  SQ,  that  is,  to 
the  square  on  MO ; 
therefore  MO  is  the  '*side"  of  ^C 

I  say  next  that  MO  is  binomial. 

For,  since  ^G^  is  commensurable  with  GB, 
therefore  A  JS  is  also  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight 
lines  AG,  GE.  [x.  15] 

But  AE  is  also,  by  hypothesis,  commensurable  with  AB  ; 
therefore  AG,  GE  are  also  commensurable  with  AB,     [x.  12] 

And  AB  is  rational ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AG,  GE  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  AH,  GK  is  rational,       [x.  19] 
and  AH  is  commensurable  with  GK, 

But  AH  is  equal  to  SN,  and  GK  to  NQ  ; 
therefore  SN,  NQ,  that  is,  the  squares  on  MN,  NO,  are 
rational  and  commensurable. 

And,  since  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  ED, 
while  AE  is  commensurable  with  AG,  and  DE  is  commen- 
surable with  EF, 

therefore  ^G^  is  also  incommensurable  with  EF,  [x.  13] 

so  that  AH  is  also  incommensurable  with  EL.         [vi.  i,  x.  n] 
•     But  AH  is  equal  to  SN,  and  EL  to  MR  \ 
therefore  SN  is  also  incommensurable  with  MR. 

But,  as  SN  is  to  MR,  so  is  PN  to  NR  ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  PN  is  incommensurable  with  NR.  [x.  n] 

But  PN  is  equal  to  MN,  and  NR  to  NO  ; 
therefore  MN  is  incommensurable  with  NO. 

And  the  square  on  MN  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  NO, 
and  each  is  rational ; 

therefore  MN,  NO  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only. 


':% } w^ 


X.  54]  PROPOSITION   54  119 

Therefore  MO  is  binomial  [x.  36]  and  the  **side"  of  AC. 

Q.  E.  D. 

2.  "side."  I  use  the  word  **side"  in  the  sense  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  Def.  4 
(p.  13  above),  i.e.  as  short  for  "side  of  a  square  equal  to."    The  Greek  is  ^  rd  x^P^ 

h  first  binomial  straight  line  being,  as  we  have  seen  in  x.  48,  of  the  form 

kp  +  kpji  -  X*, 

the  problem  solved  in  this  proposition  is  the  equivalent  of  finding  the  square 
root  of  this  expression  multiplied  by  p,  or  of 

p(kp^kpjr:r\% 

and  of  proving  that  the  said  square  root  represents  a  binomial  straight  line 
as  defined  in  x.  36. 

The  geometrical  method  corresponds  sufficiently  closely  to  the  algebraical 
one  which  we  should  use. 
First  solve  the  equations 

u^v^kp  \ 

uv  =  \ky{i-\^)  J  ^'^• 

Then,  if  «,  v  represent  the  straight  lines  so  found,  put 

0^  =  pu 
f 

and  the  straight  line  {x  +_y)  is  the  square  root  required. 
The  actual  algebraical  solution  of  (i)  gives 
wv^hp.\ 
so  that  u^\hp(\  +  X), 

v^\kp(\  -X), 

and  therefore  x^p  fj - (i  +  X), 

and  x^y^p  ^-  ( i  +  ^)  +  P  ^y/  -  ( i  -  ^)  • 

This  is  clearly  a  binomial  straight  line  as  defined  in  x.  36. 

Since  Euclid  has  to  express  his  results  by  straight  lines  in  his  figure,  and 
has  no  symbols  to  make  the  result  obvious  by  inspection,  he  is  obliged  to 
prove  (i)  that  (x-^y)  is  the  square  root  of  p  {hp ■¥ hp  J i  - k*),  and  (2)  that 
(;c  +^)  is  a  binomial  straight  line,  in  the  following  manner. 

First,  he  proves,  by  means  of  the  preceding  Lemma,  that 

xy  =  ^^P^s/T:rx:^ (3); 

therefore  {x-^yy=x^-¥y+  2xy 

=  p  («  +  T')  +  2xy 
=  V  +  V  Vrrx«,  by  (i)  and  (3), 

so  that  X  +y  =  Jp  {kp  +  kp^i  -  X'). 


I20  BOOK   X  [x.  54,  55 

Secondly,  it  results  from  (i),  [by  x.  17],  that 

so  that  «,  V  are  both  ^  («  +  f),  and  therefore  ^  p  (4)  > 

thus  Uj  V  are  rational, 

whence  pUy  pfv  are  both  rational,  and 

pu  ^  pv. 

Therefore  x',  y  are  rational  and  commensurable (5). 

Next,  kp  yj  kp  Vi  -X*, 
and  kp  ^  u,  while  kp  Ji-k*  ^  ^kp  n/i  -  X* ; 
therefore  u  v/  ^kp  »Ji  -  X', 

whence  p«  v/  |^^p*  Vi  -X', 

or  :c^  w  A^, 

so  that  ;c  v/  ^'s 

By  this  and  (5),  x,  y  are  rational  and  '^,  so  that  (x-^t-y)  is  a  binomial 

straight  line.  [x.  36] 

X.  91  will  prove  in  like  manner  that  a  like  theorem  holds  for  apotomes^ 

viz.  that  

p  -v/i  ('  +  ^)  -p  J\  (» -  ^) = ^/p('*p  -  */>  -J^-'^)- 

Since  the  yiirx/  binomial  straight  line  and  the  first  apotome  are  the  roots  of 
the  equation 

3^  -  2kp  .  X  +  X'/fc'p'  =  o, 
this  proposition  and  x.  91  give  us  the  solution  of  the  biquadratic  equation 

Proposition  55. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
second  binomial^  the  ''side''  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  which  is  called  a  first  bimedial. 

For  let  the  area  ABCD  be  contained  by  the    rational 
5  straight  line  AB  and  the  second  binomial  AD ; 

I  say  that  the  **side"  of  the  area  ^C  is  a  first  bimedial  straight 

line. 

For,  since  AD  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line,  let  it  be 

divided  into  its  terms  at  E,  so  that  AE  is  the  greater  term  ; 
10  therefore  AE,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 

in  square  only, 

the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the 

square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE, 

and  the  lesser  term  ED  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB. 

[x.  Deff.  II.  2] 
15        Let  ED  be  bisected  at  F, 


X.  55] 


PROPOSITIONS   54,  55 


121 


and  let  there  be  applied  to  AE  the  rectangle  AG,  GE  equal 

to  the  square  on  EF  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure ; 

therefore  AG\%  commensurable  in  length  with  GE.        [x.  17] 
Through  G,  E,  F\^t  GH,  EK,  FL  be  drawn  parallel  to 
20  AB,  CD, 

let  the  square  SN  be  constructed  equal  to  the  parallelogram 

AH,  and  the  square  NQ  equal  to  GK, 

and  let  them  be  placed  so  that  MN  is  in  a  straight  line  with 

N0\ 
25  therefore  RN  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  NP. 

R      Q 


M 


A  G    E        F         O 


N 

H   K 


Let  the  square  SQ  be  completed. 

It  is  then  manifest  from  what  was  proved  before  that  MR 
is  a  mean  proportional  between  SN,  NQ  and  is  equal  to  EL, 
and  that  MO  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AC, 

30        It  is  now  to  be  proved  ih3iiM0  is  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 
Since  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  ED, 
while  ED  is  commensurable  with  AB, 

therefore  AE  is  incommensurable  with  AB.  [x.  13] 

And,  since  AG  is  commensurable  with  EG, 
35  A E  is  also  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight  lines 
AG,  GE.  [x.  15] 

But  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB ; 
therefore  AG,  GE  are  also  incommensurable  with  AB.  [x.  13] 
Therefore  BA,  AG  and  BA,  GE  are  pairs  of  rational 
40  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  ; 
so  that  each  of  the  rectangles  A//,  GK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Hence  each  of  the  squares  SN,  NQ  is  medial. 
Therefore  MN,  NO  are  also  medial. 
And,  since  ^6^  is  commensurable  in  length  with  GE, 
45  AH  is  also  commensurable  with  GK,  [vi.  i,  x.  11] 

that  is,  SN  is  commensurable  with  NQ, 
that  is,  the  square  on  MN  with  the  square  on  NO. 


122  BOOK   X  [x.  55 

And,  since  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  ED, 

while  AE  is  commensurable  with  AG, 
so  and  ED  is  commensurable  with  EF, 

therefore  ^G^  is  incommensurable  with  EF\  [x.  13] 

so  that  AHxs  also  incommensurable  with  jfi'Z, 

that  is,  SN  is  incommensurable  with  MR, 

that  is,  PN  with  NR,  [vi.  i,  x.  11] 

SS  that  is,  MN  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  NO. 

But  MNy  NO  were  proved  to  be  both  medial  and  com- 
mensurable in  square ; 

therefore  MN,  NO  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only. 

60        I  say  next  that  they  also  contain  a  rational  rectangle. 

For,  since  DE  is,  by  hypothesis,  commensurable  with  each 
of  the  straight  lines  ABy  EF, 

therefore  EF  is  also  commensurable  with  EK.  [x.  12] 

And  each  of  them  is  rational  ; 

65  therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR  is  rational,  [x.  19] 

and  MR  is  the  rectangle  MN,  NO. 

But,  if  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 

only  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle  be  added  together,  the 

whole  is  irrational  and  is  called  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 

[x.  37] 
70        Therefore  MO  is  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

39.  Therefore  BA,  AG  and  BA,  GE  are  pairs  of  rational  straight  lines  com- 
mensurable in  square  only.  The  text  has  "Therefore  BA,  AG,  GE  are  rational  straight 
lines  commensurable  in  square  only,*'  which  I  have  altered  because  it  would  naturally  convey 
the  impression  that  any  two  of  the  three  straight  lines  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
whereas  AG^  GE  are  commensurable  in  lengm  (1.  i8),  and  it  is  only  the  other  two  pairs 
which  are  commensurable  in  square  only. 

A  second  binomial  straight  line  being  [x.  49]  of  the  form 
the  present  proposition  is  equivalent  to  finding  the  square  root  of  the  expression 


X.  5S]  PROPOSITION   55  123 

As  in  the  last  proposition,  Euclid  finds  u^  if  from  the  equations 

u  +  v  =  —=L=^\ 

sTi^^'} (i), 

uv  =  i>^p«      J 
then  finds  x,  y  from  the  equations 

%".] « 

and  then  proves  (a)  that  

and  (^)  that  (.r  +>>)  is  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  [x.  37]. 

The  steps  in  the  proof  are  as  follows. 

For  (a)  reference  to  the  corresponding  part  of  the  previous  proposition 
suffices. 

{fi)  By(i)andx.  17, 

therefore  «,  v  are  both  rational  and  ^  («+»),  and  therefore  v/  p  [by  (i)]...(3). 

Hence  p«,  pr,  or  ^,  y,  are  medial  areas, 
so  that  x^y  are  also  medial    (4). 

But,  since  w^v^ 

^-/  (5)- 


Again 

(u^v\ 

or 

vr 

r 

v/^p, 

so  that 

u 

^\kp. 

whence 

pu 

-  i  V, 

or 

x" 

v/^. 

and 

X 

sjy    ... 

.(6). 


Thus  [(4),  (5),  (6)]  X,  y  are  medial  and  ^^. 
Lastly,  :c>'  =  \kp\  which  is  rational. 
Therefore  {x-^y)  is  ay^rx/  bimedial  straight  line. 
The  actual  straight  lines  obtained  from  (i)  are 

,     I  -  X    , 

sothat  ,+^  =  ,^^(i±^)   +p^f(i^). 

The  corresponding  yfr^/  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  found  in  x.  92 
being  the  same  thing  with  a  minus  sign  between  the  terms,  the  two  expressions 
are  the  roots  of  the  biquadratic 

being  the  equation  in  x^  corresponding  to  that  in  x  in  x.  49. 


124 


BOOK  X 


[X.56 


Proposition  56. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
third  binomial,  the  ''side''  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  a  second  bimedial. 

For  let  the  area  ABCD  be  contained  by  the  rational 
straight  line  AB  and  the  third  binomial  AD  divided  into  its 
terms  at  E,  of  which  terms  ^^  is  the  greater ; 
I  say  that  the  *'side'*  of  the  area  AC  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  a  second  bimedial. 

For  let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 


R     Q 
o 


A 

Q  E        F        C 

) 

M 

N 

B 

1 

A  » 

C 

.      c 

Now,  since  AD  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line, 
therefore  A£,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 

the  square  on  -^4^  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE, 
and  neither  of  the  terms  AE,  ED  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  AB.  [x.  Deff.  11.  3] 

Then,  in  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing,  we  shall  prove 
that  MO  is  the  *'side"  of  the  area  AC^ 

and  MN,  NO  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only  ; 
so  that  MO  is  bimedial. 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  second  bimedial 
straight  line. 

Since  DE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB,  that  is, 
with  EK, 

and  DE  is  commensurable  with  EF, 
therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EK.     [x.  13] 

And  they  are  rational ; 


X.  56,  57]  PROPOSITIONS   56,  57  125 

therefore  FEy  EK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only. 

Therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR,  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  it  is  contained  by  MN,  NO ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  MN,  NO  is  medial. 

Therefore  MO  is  a  second  bimedial  straight  line.       [x.  38] 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  in  like  manner  is  the  equivalent  of  finding  the  square 
root  of  the  product  of  p  and  the  third  binomial  [x.  50],  le.  of  the  expression 

As  before,  put 

«z/  =  iV(i-^')  J 

*  Next,  Uy  V  being  found,  let 

0^  =  pu, 

then  (x  +y)  is  the  square  root  required  and  is  a  secofid  bimedial  straight  line. 

[x.  38] 
For,  as  in  the  last  proposition,  it  is  proved  that  (x  -^y)  is  the  square  root, 
and  Xy  y  are  medial  and  '^. 

Again,  xy  =  \Jk,p^ <y i  -  A',  which  is  medial. 
Hence  (x  +^)  is  a  second  bimedial  straight  line. 
By  solving  equations  (i),  we  find 

V  =  \Uk.p^  \  Jk .  p\ 

and  x^y  =  p  J^  (i  +  X)  +  p  ^^  (i  -  X). 

The  corresponding  second  apotome  of  a  medial  found  in  x.  93  is  the  same 
thing  with  a  minus  sign  between  the  terms,  and  the  two  are  the  roots  (cf.  note 
on  x.  50)  of  the  biquadratic  equation 


Proposition  57. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
fourth  binomial,  the  ''side''  of  t lie  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  major. 

For  let  the  area  AC  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AB  and  the  fourth  binomial  AD  divided  into  its  terms 
at  E,  of  which  terms  let  -^-ff  be  the  greater ; 
I  say  that  the  "side"  of  the  area  AC  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  major. 


126 


BOOK   X 


[x.  57 


For,  since  AD  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line, 
therefore  AE,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 

the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  AE, 
and  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB.       [x.  Deff.  ii.  4] 

Let  DE  be  bisected  at  F, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  AE  a  parallelogram,  the  rectangle 
AG,  GEy  equal  to  the  square  on  EF\ 
therefore  AG\^  incommensurable  in  length  with  GE.     [x.  18] 

Let  GH,  EK,  FL  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB, 
and  let  the  rest  of  the  construction  be  as  before  ; 
it  is  then  manifest  that  MO  is  the  "side"  of  the  area  AC. 

R Q 

o 


Q  E         F 

D 

M 

N 

i                y 

n 

c 

c 

> 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  MO  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  major. 

Since  -^6^  is  incommensurable  with  EG, 
AH  is  also  incommensurable  with  GK,  that  is,  SN  with  NQ  ; 

[vi.  I,  X.  11] 

therefore  MN,  NO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

And,  since  AE  is  commensurable  with  AB, 
AK  is  rational ;  [x.  19] 

and  it  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  MN,  NO ; 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  DE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB, 
that  is,  with  EK, 

while  DE  is  commensurable  with  EF, 
therefore  EF\s  incommensurable  in  length  with  EK.     [x.  13] 

Therefore  EK,  EF  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
therefore  LE,  that  is,  MR,  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  it  is  contained  by  MN,  NO ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  MN,  NO  is  medial. 


X.  57]  PROPOSITION   S7  "7 

And  the  [sum]  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO  is  rational, 
and  MN,  NO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

But,  if  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  and 
making  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the 
rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  be  added  together,  the 
whole  is  irrational  and  is  called  major.  [x.  39] 

Therefore  MO  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  major 
and  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AC,  Q.  e.  d. 

The  problem  here  is  to  find  the  square  root  of  the  expression  [of.  x.  51] 

The  procedure  is  the  same. 
Find  w,  V  from  the  equations 

u-\-v  =  kp         1 

«.=i^  <'>• 

*  I  +X  J 
and,  if  x^  =  pu)  ,  . 

y=^} (*)• 

(x  -^y)  is  the  required  square  root. 

To  prove  that  (x  +y)  is  the  ma/or  irrational  straight  line  Euclid  argues 
thus. 

By  x.  18,                                      u  sj  Vf 
therefore                                           pu  yj  pv, 
or                                                      x'  yjy, 
so  that  x  s^y  (3). 

Now,  since  (u-\^v)^  p, 

(«  +  »)p,  or  (^+y),  is  a  rational  area (4). 

Lastly,  ocy  =  \—p^ — ,  which  is  a  medial  zxez,    (5). 

Vi  +  X 

Thus  [(3),  (4),  (5)]  (x-^-y)  is  a  major  irrational  straight  line.  [x.  39] 

Actual  solution  gives  

''  =  ^*''0-'\/rS)' 

and    *+j,=py^(,+y-A_)+,Yf(,_y_A_). 

The  corresponding  square  root  found  in  x.  94  is  the  minor  irrational 
straight  line,  the  terms  being  separated  by  a  minus  sign,  and  the  two  straight 
lines  are  the  roots  (cf.  note  on  x.  51)  of  the  biquadratic  equation 

x^  -  2kp*  .  X*  + r  ^V  =  O' 


128 


BOOK  X 


[x.58 


Proposition  58. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
fifth  binomialy  the  ''side''  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

For  let  the  area  A  Che  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AB  and  the  fifth  binomial  AD  divided  into  its  terms  at 
£,  so  that  AB  IS  the  greater  term ; 

I  say  that  the  **side*'  of  the  area  AC  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

For  let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown ; 
it  is  then  manifest  that  MO  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AC. 


Q   E 


Q 


M 


N 

S                P 

H  K 


It  is  then  to  be  proved  that  MO  is  the  side  of  a  rational 
plus  a  medial  area. 

For,  since  AG  is  incommensurable  with  GB,  [x.  18] 

therefore  AN  is  also  commensurable  with  HB,        [vi.  i,  x.  n] 
that  is,  the  square  on  MJV  with  the  square  on  JVO ; 
therefore  MN,  JVO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

And,  since  AD  is  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line,  and  BD 
the  lesser  segment, 

therefore  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB. 

[x.  Detf.  n.  5] 
But  AB  is  incommensurable  with  BD  ; 

therefore  AB  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB. 

[X.  13] 

Therefore  AK,  that  is,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MJV, 
NOy  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And,  since  DB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB,  that 
is,  with  BK, 

while  DB  is  commensurable  with  BFy 
therefore  BF  is  also  commensurable  with  BK.  [x.  12] 


} <■)• 


X.  58]  PROPOSITION   58  129 

And  EK  is  rational ; 
therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR,  that  is,  the  rectangle  MN,  NO,  is 
also  rational,  [x.  19] 

Therefore  MN,  NO  are  straight  lines  incommensurable 
in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial, 
but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational. 

Therefore  MO  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area 
[x.  40]  and  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AC, 

Q.  E.  D. 
We  have  here  to  find  the  square  root;  of  the  expression  [of.  x.  52] 

As  usual,  we  put 

U  +  V  =  kpJl+\ 

uv  =  \k'p^ 
Then,  u,  v  being  found,  we  take 

?::: } <'^ 

and  {x  +7),  so  found,  is  our  required  square  root. 

Euclid's  proof  of  the  class  of  {x  +^)  is  as  follows : 

By  X.  18,  Usjv; 
therefore  pu  sj  pv, 
so  that  ^^y> 
and  X  sy-^  y (3). 

Next  u^-v  sj  kp 

^  (h 

whence  p(«  +  z/),  or  (^ +>'*),  isa  medial ^xeai (4). 

Lastly,  xy  =  i^p^,  which  is  a  rational  area    (5). 

Hence  [(3),  (4),  (5)]  (x+y)  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

[x.  40] 
If  we  solve  algebraically,  we  obtain 

«  =  ^(VrTX+vx), 


2 


and  ^  +>'  =  p  sj  -  (>/i  +X  +  7^)  -^psj  -  {Ji  +  A  -  Jk). 

The  corresponding  **  side  "  found  in  x.  95  is  a  straight  line  which  produces 
with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole,  being  of  the  form  (x  -y),  where  x,  y 
have  the  same  values  as  above. 

The  two  square  roots  are  (cf.  note  on  x.  52)  the  roots  of  the  biquadratic 
equation 

;t^  -  2 V  >/ 1"+^ .  ^  +  ^P*  =  o. 

H.  E.  HI.  9 


I3<5 


BOOK  X 


[x.  59 


Proposition  59. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
sixth  binomialy  the  ''side''  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

For  let  the  area  ABCD  be  contained  by  the  rational 
straight  line  AB  and  the  sixth  binomial  AD,  divided  into  its 
terms  at  E,  so  that  AE  is  the  greater  term  ; 
I  say  that  the  *'side*'  of  -^C  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two 
medial  areas. 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown. 

A  Q  E         F         O  R       Q 


H  K 


M 


N 

It  is  then  manifest  that  MO  is  the  "side"  of  AC,  and 
that  MN  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  NO. 

Now,  since  EA  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB, 
therefore  EA,  AB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  AK,  that  is,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO, 
is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  ED  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB, 
therefore  FE  is  also  incommensurable  with  EK\  [x.  13] 

therefore  FE,  EK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR,  that  is,  the  rectangle  MN,  NO,  is 
medial.  [x.  21] 

And,  since  AE  is  incommensurable  with  EF, 
AK  is  also  incommensurable  with  EL.  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

But  AK  is  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO, 
and  EL  is  the  rectangle  MN,  NO ; 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO  is  incommen- 
surable with  the  rectangle  MN,  NO. 

And  each  of  them  is  medial,  and  MN,  NO  are  incom- 
mensurable in  square. 


X.  59^  Lemma]  PROPOSITION   59  131 

Therefore  MO  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas 
[x.  41],  and  is  the  **side"  of  ^C 

Q.  E.  D. 
Euclid  here  finds  the  square  root  of  the  expression  [cf.  x.  53] 

pUk.p-¥^\.  p). 

As  usual,  we  solve  the  equations 

uv  =  \\p*    J  ^^'' 

then,  «,  V  being  found,  we  put 

y-:; } w. 

and  (x  +7)  is  the  square  root  required. 

Euclid  proves  that  (x  +y)  is  the  stWe  of  (the  sum  of)  two  medial  areaSy  as 
follows. 

As  in  the  last  two  propositions,  Xy  y  are  proved  to  be  incommensurable 
in  square. 

Now  Jk ,  py  p  are  commensurable  in  square  only ; 
therefore  p  (w  +  v)^  or  {x^  +y),  is  a  medial  area (3). 

Next,  xy^\  JK'  P^  which  is  again  a  medial  area (4). 

Lastly,                                  ^k  .p^\J\.py 
so  that                                      njk,^  sj\]j\,^\ 
that  is,  {:^^f)sjxy  (S). 

Hence  [(3),  (4),  (5)]  (x  +>»)  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

Solving  the  equations  algebraically,  we  have 

u=^^^Uk^Jk^k\ 

and  X  -^y  =  pJl{Jh+y/r^)-\-pJi{Jh-Jh^). 

The  corresponding  square  root  found  in  x.  96  is  x  -y,  where  jc,  y  are  the 
same  as  here. 

The  two  square  roots  are  (cf.  note  on  x.  53)  the  roots  of  the  biquadratic 
equation 

x*-2^k.p^x'-i-(h-k)p'  =  o. 

[Lemma. 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  into  unequal  parts,  the  squares 
on  the  unequal  parts  are  greater 

than    twice   the   rectangle  con-         ^ ? — $ P 

tained  by  the  unequal  parts. 

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line,  and  let  it  be  cut  into  unequal 
parts  at  C,  and  let  -^C  be  the  greater ; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB. 

9—2 


132 


BOOK   X 


[Lemma,  x.  60 


For  let  AB  be  bisected  at  D. 

Since  then  a  straight  line  has  been  cut  into  equal  parts 
at  /?,  and  into  unequal  parts  at  C, 

therefore  the  rectangle  ACy  CB  together  with  the  square  on 
CD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD,  '  [11.  5] 

so  that  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  less  than  the  square  on  AD\ 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  less  than  double  of 
the  square  on  AD. 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  double  of  the  squares  on 
AD,  DC\  [II.  9] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB. 

Q.  E.  D.] 

We  have  already  remarked  (note  on  x.  44)  that  the  Lemma  here  proving 
that 

.r'+y  >  2xy 

can  hardly  be  genuine,  since  the  result  is  used  in  x.  44. 


K    M 


E  H    L        O        F 


Proposition  60. 

The  square  on   the   binomial  straight  line  applied  to  a 
rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  the  first  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  into  its  terms 
at  C,  so  that  AC  is  the  greater  term ; 
let  a  rational   straight   line  DE  be 
set  out, 

and  let  DEFG  equal  to  the  square 
on  AB  be  applied  to  DE  producing 
DG  as  its  breadth  ; 

I   say  that   DG  is  a  first  binomial  ^ g ^ 

straight  line. 

For  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the  rectangle  DH  equal 
to  the  square  on  AC,  and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BC\ 
therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  is  equal 
\.o  MF. 

Let  MG  be  bisected  at  N,  and  let  NO  be  drawn  parallel 
[to  ML  or  GF\ 

Therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  MO,  NF  is  equal  to 
once  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

Now,  since  AB  is  a  binomial  divided  into  its  terms  at  C, 


X.  6o]  PROPOSITION   60  133 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ;  [x.  36] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  rational  and  commen- 
surable with  one  another, 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  ACy  CB  is  also  rational. 

[X.  IS] 
And  it  is  equal  to  DL  ; 

therefore  DL  is  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 
therefore  DM  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with 
DE.  [x.  20] 

Again,  since  AC,  CB  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only, 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  that  is  MF,  is  medial. 

[x.  21] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  ML  ; 

therefore  MG  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  ML,  that  is,  DE.  [x.  22] 

But  MD  is  also  rational  and  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  DE ; 
therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MG.    [x.  13] 

And  they  are  rational ; 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 

in  square  only ; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  first  binomial 
straight  line. 

Since  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  a  mean  proportional  between 
the  squares  on  AC,  CB,  [of.  Lemma  after  x.  53] 

therefore  MO  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  DH,  KL. 

Therefore,  as  DH  is  to  MO,  so  is  MO  to  KL, 
that  is,  as  DK  is  to  MN,  so  is  MN  to  MK\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  the  rectangle   DK,  KM  is   equal   to   the  square 
on  MN.  [vi.  17] 

And,  since  the  square  on  ^C  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  CB, 

DH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL, 
so  that  DK  is  also  commensurable  with  KM,  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 


134  BOOK   X  [x.  60 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  [Lemma] 

therefore  DL  is  also  greater  than  MF, 
so  that  DM  is  also  greater  than  MG,  [vi.  i] 

And  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
MN,  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  MG, 
and  DK  is  commensurable  with  KM. 

But,  if  there  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the  greater 
there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and 
if  it  divide  it  into  commensurable  parts,  the  square  on  the 
greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  greater ;  [x.  17] 

therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DM. 

And  DM,  MG  are  rational, 
and  DM,  which  is  the  greater  term,  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  the  rational  straight  line  DE  set  out. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  DeflF.  11.  i] 

Q.  E.  D. 

In  the  hexad  of  propositions  begimiing  with  this  we  have  the  solution  of 
the  converse  problem  to  that  of  x.  54 — 59.  We  find  the  squares  of  the 
irrational  straight  lines  of  x.  36 — 41  and  prove  that  they  are  respectively  equal 
to  the  rectangles  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  first,  second, 
third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  binomials. 

In  X.  60  we  prove  that,  p-\-  Jk  ,p  being  a  binomial  straight  line  [x.  36], 

<r 
is  a  first  binomial  straight  line,  and  we  find  it  geometrically. 
The  procedure  may  be  represented  thus. 
Take  x,  y,  z  such  that 

ax  =  p«, 
ay  =  kp^ 
a- ,  2Z  =  2  Jk  .  p\ 
p\  k^  being  of  course  the  squares  on  the  terms  of  the  original  binomial, 
and  2  Jk.p^  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them. 

Then  (.^+^)  +  2^=iMVilfI*. 

and  we  have  to  prove  that  {x+y)-¥  2z\s  2l  first  binomial  straight  line  of  which 
(x+y),  20  are  the  terms  and  (x-^-y)  the  greater. 

Euclid  divides  the  proof  into  two  parts,  showing  first  that  {x  -^y)  -^  2Z  is 
some  binomial,  and  secondly  that  it  is  the  first  binomial. 


X.  6o,  6i]  PROPOSITIONS   60,  61  135 

(a)    p  ^>^  ^k .  Pf  SO  that  p\  kp^  are  rational  and  commensurable ; 

therefore  p'  +  kp\  or  <r  {x  +>>),  is  a  rational  area, 

whence  (^ +>>)  is  rational  and '^  cr  (i). 

Next,  2p .  Jk .  p  is  SL  medial  area^ 
so  that  or .  22;  is  a  medial  area, 
whence  2a;  is  rational  but  s^  <r  (2). 

Hence  [(i),  (2)]  (^+^),  2Z  are  rational  and  commensurable  in  square 

only (3); 

thus  (jp  +>')  +  2Z  is  a  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  36] 

(fi)  p':Jk,p'=Jk.p':kp\ 

so  that  crx  :fTZ  =  <TZ  :  cry, 

and  X  :  z  =  z  ly^ 

or  xy  =  z^  =  \{2zY (4). 

Now  p\  kp^  are  commensurable,  so  that  era:,  <ry  are  commensurable,  and 
therefore 

x^y (5)- 

And,  since  [Lemma]  f?  +  ^p'  >  2  Jk ,  p\ 

X  -¥  y  >  2Z, 

But  {x-\'y)  is  given,  being  equal  to (6). 

Therefore  [(4),.(5)>  (6),  and  x.  17]  J(x+y)'^(2zy  -  (x  +>'). 
And  {x  +^),  2Z  are  rational  and  /^  [(3)! 
while  (x+y)  ^  a-  [(i)]. 

Hence  {x  +^)  +  22  is  Sijirs/  binomial. 

The  actual  value  of  (^  +>')  +  2Z  is,  of  course, 

^l(rTk^2^k). 


Proposition  61. 

The  sqnare  on  the  first  bimedial  straight  line  applied  to  a 
rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  the  second  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  divided  into  its 
medials  at  C,  of  which  medials  AC 
is  the  greater;  ^  ^  ^ 

let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set 
out, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the 
parallelogram  Z?/^  equal  to  the  square 
on  A  By  producing  DG  as  its  breadth ; 
I  say  that  DG  is  a  second  binomial  a  c 

straight  line. 

For  let  the  same  construction  as  before  be  made. 


E                  \ 

\ 

{ 

3         F 

136  BOOK   X  [x.  6i 

Then,  since  AB  is  a  first  bimedial  divided  at  C, 
therefore  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only,  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle,  [x.  37] 

so  that  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  also  medial.  [x.  21] 

Therefore  DL  is  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 
therefore   MD   is   rational   and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DE.  [x.  22] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  rational,  MF  is 
also  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  ML  ; 
therefore  MG  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  ML,  that  is,  DE ;  [x.  20] 

therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MG,    [x.  13] 

And  they  are  rational ; 
therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  second  binomial 
straight  line. 

For,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
therefore  DL  is  also  greater  than  MF, 
so  that  DM  is  also  greater  than  MG.  [vi.  i] 

And,  since  the  square  on  y^C  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  CB, 

DH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL, 
so  that  DK  is  also  commensurable  with  KM.  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

And  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN; 
therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DM. 

[x.  17] 

And  MG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DE. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  Deff.  n.  2] 

In  this  case  we  have  to  prove  that,  (^p  +  k^p)  being  a  Jint  bimedial 
straight  line,  as  found  in  x.  37, 

{H^p  +  ^pY 
tr 
is  a  s€C(md  binomial  stra^ht  line. 


X.  6i,  62] 


PROPOSITIONS   61,  62 


137 


The  form  of  the  proposition  and  the  figure  being  similar  to  those  of  x.  60, 
I  can  somewhat  abbreviate  the  reproduction  of  the  proof. 
Take  x^  y^  z  such  that 

ux  =  k^p\ 

tr,  2Z  =  2kp\ 

Then  shall  (jt  +^)  +  22;  be  a  second  binomial. 

(a)     ^*p,  l^p  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
containing  a  rational  rectangle.  [x.  37] 

The  squares  ^ V>  ^  p'  are  medial ; 
thus  the  sum,  or  <r  {x  +^),  is  medial.  [x.  23,  Por.] 

Therefore  (x  •¥y)  is  rational  and  w  <r. 

And  fT  ,  2z'\s  rational ; 
therefore  2Z  is  rational  and  ^  <t (i). 

Therefore  {x+y\  2Z  are  rational  and  *^  (2), 

so  that  ("^  +>')  +  2«  is  a  binomial, 

(fi)    As  before,  (x+y)  >  2Z. 

Now,  ^V>  ^V  being  commensurable, 

X  ^y. 


And 


while  x+y=  —^ — . 


xy  =  2;», 


Hence[x.  17]  J{x  +yy  -  {2z)^  ^  {x  +y)  

But  2Z  ^  <r,  by  (i). 

Therefore  [(i),  (2),  (3)]  {x+y)-¥  2Z  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line. 

Of  course  {x  +y)  +  2z=-  {Jk(i  +k)  +  2k]. 


(3). 


K    M 


Proposition  62. 

TAe  square  on  the  second  bimedial  straight  line  applied  to 
a  rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  the  third  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  bimedial  straight  line  divided  into 
its  medials  at  C,  so  that  AC  is  the 
greater  segment ; 

let  DB  be  any  rational  straight  line, 
and  to  DB  let  there  be  applied  the 
parallelogram  Z?/^  equal  to  the  square 
on  AB  and  producing  B>G  as   its 

breadth  ;  ^ g — 

I   say  that  DG  is  a  third  binomial 
straight  line. 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown. 


H    L 


138  BOOK   X  [x.  62 

Then,  since  AB  is  a  second  bimedial  divided  at  C, 
therefore  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only  and  containing  a  medial  rectangle,  [x.  38] 

so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  also  medial. 

[x.  15  and  23  Por.] 

And  it  is  equal  to  DL  ; 

therefore  DL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 
therefore  MD  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DE.  [x.  22] 

For  the  same  reason, 
MG  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  ML, 
that  is,  with  DE ; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  rational  and 
incommensurable  in  length  with  DE. 

And,  since  ^C  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB, 
and,  as  ^C  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  square  on  AC  to  the  rectangle 
AC  CB, 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB.  [x.  n] 

Hence  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  incommen- 
surable with  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  [x.  12,  13] 
that  is,  DL  is  incommensurable  with  ME, 
so  that  DM  is  also  incommensurable  with  MG.       [vi.  i,  x.  11] 

And  they  are  rational ; 
therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

In  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing  we  may  conclude  that 
DM  is  greater  than  MG, 
and  that  DIC  is  commensurable  with  KM. 

And  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
MN\ 

therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
DM. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  commen- 
surable in  length  with  DE. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line.    [x.  Deff.  11.  3] 

Q.  E.  D. 


X.  62,  63]  PROPOSITIONS   62,  63  139 

We  have  to  prove  that  [cf.  x.  38] 

is  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 
Take  x,  y^  z  such  that 

trx  =  k^p\ 

cr .  2«  =  2  <yX .  p*. 
(a)     Now  /^p,  —J  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 

and  containing  a  medial  rectangle.  [x.  38] 

The  sum  of  the  squares  on  them,  or  cr  (x  +  j'),  is  medial] 

therefore  (x  ^-^y)  is  rational  and  v/ <r  (i). 

And  cr .  2Z  being  medial  also, 

2Z  is  rational  and  sj  a (2). 


Now  ^ip:^=(^p).:^p.^ 


But  (^pY  '^  U^pY  +  (— r)  [  >  o**  <^'^  '^ o" (^  +  J'),  and  (rz^a'.2z; 


=  ax  :  aZf 
whence  <rx  s^  az, 

^X*p\^ 

therefore  o-  (jc  +  _>»)  v/  o- .  25, 

or  (X'hy)sj  2Z    (3). 

Hence  [(i),  (2),  (3)]  (jc +_>')  + 25  is  a  binomial  straight  line (4). 

(fi)    As  before,  {x  +y)  >  2«, 

and  X  ^  y. 

Also  xy  =  s^. 

Therefore  [x.  17]  J(x  +yy  -  (2s)'  <>  (jc  -{-y). 

And  [(i),  (2)]  neither  {x'¥y)  nor  2«  is  ^  <r. 

Therefore  (a*  +  j^)  +  25  is  a  lAird  binomial  straight  line. 


Obviously  (x-^y)  -\-  2z  =  -  {-jr-  +  ^  >/^[ 


Proposition  63. 

TAe  square  on  the  major  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line  produces  as  breadth  the  fourth  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  major  straight  line  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC 
is  greater  than  CB  ; 

let  DE  be  a  rational  straight  line, 


E                   H     L         O         F 

140  BOOK   X   ^  [x.  63 

and  to  DE  let  there  be  applied  the  parallelogram  DF  equal 
to  the  square  on  AB  and  producing  DG  as  its  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  DG  is  a  fourth  binomial 
straight  line.  d k  m 

Let   the   same    construction    be 
made  as  before  shown. 

Then,    since    AB    is    a    major 
straight  line  divided  at  C, 
AC,  CB  are  straight  lines  incom- 
mensurable in  square  which    make  '^  u       b 
the   sum   of  the   squares   on    them 
rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial.       [x.  39] 

Since  then  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  rational, 
therefore  DL  is  rational ; 

therefore  DM  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  DE.  •  [x.  20] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  that  is,  MF,  is 
medial, 

and  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  ML, 
therefore  MG  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DE ;  [x.  22] 

therefore  DM  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  MG, 

[x.  13] 

Therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

In  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing  we  can  prove  that 
DM  is  greater  than  MG, 
and  that  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN, 

Since  then  the  square  on  AC  is  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  CB, 

therefore  DH  is  also  incommensurable  with  KL, 
so  that  DK  is  also  incommensurable  with  KM.        [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

But,  if  there  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the 
greater  there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth 
part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  and  if  it  divide  it  into  incommensurable  parts,  then  the 


X.  63]  PROPOSITION   63  141 

square  on  the  greater  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the 
less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in 
length  with  the  greater ;  [x.  18] 

therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with 
DM. 

And  DM^  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 

and  DM  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  DE 
set  out. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  Deflf.  11.  4] 

Q.  E.  D. 
We  have  to  prove  that  [cf.  x.  39] 

crl>/2V  Vi+>^'      V2V  Vi+^/ 

is  2i  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  brevity  we  must  call  this  expression 

-  («  +  v)^. 
Take  jc,  y^  z  such  that 

CTJC  =  «'       ] 

cry  =  e^      [  , 

wherein  it  has  to  be  remembered  [x.  39]  that  1/,  v  are  incommensurable  in 
square,  (t^  +  z^)  is  rational,  and  uv  is  medial. 

(a)     (w'  +  t^),  and  therefore  <t  (x  +y),  is  rational ; 

therefore  (j: +j)  is  rational  and '^  cr  (i). 

21/7',  and  therefore  cr .  20,  is  medial ; 
therefore  2Z  is  rational  and  w  o-  (2). 

Thus  (^+J')>  20  are  rational  and '^ (3), 

so  that  {x-¥y)  +  2z  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 
(P)     As  before,  x+y>  2Z, 

and  xy  =  z\ 

Now,  since  //*  v>  z'*, 
ax  yj  ay,  or  x  >uy. 

Hence  [x.  18]  'J (x  ^ yf  -  {2zY  sj  (x -^ y) (4). 

And  {x+y)'^a,  by  (i). 

Therefore  [(3),  (4)]  {x  +  j)  +  2Z  is  2.  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

.2 


It  is  of  course  -  1 1  +    ,  \ 


H    L 


142  BOOK  X  [x.  64 

Proposition  64. 

The  square  on  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  the  fifth 
binomial. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area, 
divided  into  its  straight  lines  at  C, 

so  that  AC  \s  the  greater ;  d k  m 

let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set 

out, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the 

parallelogram  Z?^'"  equal  to  the  square 

on  AB,  producing  DG  as  its  breadth ; 

I    say  that  DG  is  a  fifth  binomial 

straight  line. 

Let  the  same  construction  as  before  be  made. 

Since  then  AB  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial 
area,  divided  at  C, 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square 
which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  but  the 
rectangle  contained  by  them  rational.  [x.  40] 

Since  then  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  medial, 
therefore  DL  is  medial, 

so  that  DM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
DE.  [x.  22] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  that  is  MF,  is 
rational, 
therefore  MG  is  rational  and  commensurable  with  DE.  [x.  20] 

Therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  with  MG ;  [x.  13] 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  it  can  be  proved  similarly  that  the  rectangle  DK,  KM 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN, 

and  that  DK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM; 
therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  DM. 

[x.  18] 


X.  64,  65]  PROPOSITIONS   64,  65  143 

And  DMy  MG  are  commensurable  in  square  only,  and  the 
less,  MG,  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DE. 
Therefore  DG  is  a  fifth  binomial. 

Q.  E.  D. 
To  prove  that  [cf.  x.  40] 

is  2l  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  brevity  denote  it  by  -  («  +  vf,  and  put 

cr  .  25  =  2«W. 

Remembering  that  [x.  40]  w"  s>  «;*,  («"  +  r;*)  is  medial,  and  2uv  is  rational, 
we  proceed  thus. 

(o)     cr  (x  +_>>)  is  medial ; 

therefore  (jc  +_>>)  is  rational  and  v/  cr (i). 

Next,  <r .  2£;  is  rational ; 
therefore  2Z  is  rational  and  ^  cr (2). 

Thus  (x  +j),  25  are  rational  and  ^^ (3), 

so  that  (jc  +^)  +  2z  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 
(fi)    As  before,  ^  +  j  >  25, 

and  xsjy. 

Therefore  [x.  18]  n/(a:  ^yf  -  (2s)«  v/  (jc  -k-y)   (4). 

Hence  [(2),  (3),  (4)]  (^  +  j)  +  2Z  is  a.  fifth  dinomia/ stmight  line. 


It  is  of  course  -  ]  -7 + ^A  . 


Proposition  65. 

TAe  square  an  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  the 
sixth  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas, 
divided  at  C, 

let  DE  be  a  rational  straight  line, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the  parallelogram  DF  equal 
to  the  square  on  AB,  producing  DG  as  its  breadth  ; 


144 


BOOK   X 


[x.6s 


K   M 


E                 H    1 

O         F 

I  say  that  DG  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

Then,  since  AB  is  the  side  of 
the  sum  of  two  medial  areas,  divided 
at  C, 

therefore  AC,  CB  dcce,  straight  lines 
incommensurable  in  square  which 
make   the   sum   of  the   squares  on 

them  medial,  the  rectangle  contained  ,____ 

by  them  medial,  and  moreover  the  a  5       B 

sum  of  the  squares  on  them  incom- 
mensurable with  the  rectangle  contained  by  them,         [x.  41] 

so  that,  in  accordance  with  what  was  before  proved,  each  of 
the  rectangles  Z?Z,  MF  is  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  rational  and 
incommensurable  in  length  with  DE.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  incom- 
mensurable with  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB^ 

therefore  DL  is  incommensurable  with  MF. 

Therefore  DM  is  also  incommensurable  with  MG ; 

[vi.  I,  X.  11] 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 


I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 
Similarly  again  we  can  prove  that  the  rectangle  DK,  KM 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN, 

and  that  DK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM\ 

and,  for  the  same  reason,  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  MG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incom- 
mensurable in  length  with  DM. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  commen- 
surable in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  DE  set  out. 
Therefore  DG  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 


X.  6s,  66]  PROPOSITIONS  65,  66  145 

To  prove  that  [cf.  x.  41] 

o-lV^V       'Ji+k^    V2V       >/i+^/ 

is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 
Denote  it  by  -  («  +  v)\  and  put 

a,  2Z=  2UV, 

Now,    by    X.    41,    tt'  sr- 1^^   («'  + 1/*)   is    medial,    2uv   is   medial,   and 

(«'  ^lF)yj  2UV, 

(a)     In  this  case  cr  (jc  +>')  is  medial ; 

therefore  (•*+>')  is  rational  and  sj  a  (i). 

In  like  manner,  2Z  is  rational  and  v/  cr  (2). 

And,  since  <r  (x  ^  y)  \j  a ,  2z, 

(^+j)v/  2z  (3). 

Therefore  (x-\-y)-¥  2Z  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 
(fi)    As  before,  x+y>  2Z, 

xy  =  z\ 

x^yi 

therefore  [x.  18]  J{x +yy  -  (2zyyj(x +y)  (4). 

Hence  [(i),  (2),  (3),  (4)]  {x+y)-¥  22  is  a  six/ A  binomial  straight  line. 


It  is  obviously  ^'  pX  +    J^^-  I . 


Proposition  66. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a  binomial 
straight  line  is  itself  also  binomial  and  the  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  binomial,  and  let  CD  be  commensurable  in 
length  with  AB ; 

A f B 

C 1 D 

I  say  that  CD  is  binomial  and  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

For,  since  AB  is  binomial, 
let  it  be  divided  into  its  terms  at  E, 
and  let  AE  be  the  greater  term  ; 

H.  E.  III.  10 


146  BOOK  X  [x.  66 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.  [x.  36] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  CF\  [vi.  12] 

therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  to  the  remainder  FD  as 

AB  is  to  CD.  [v.  19] 

But  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD ; 

therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  CF,  and  EB  with 
FD.  [x.  11] 

And  AE,  EB  are  rational ; 
therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  rational. 

And,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  EB  to  FD.  [v.  n] 

Therefore,  alternately,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD. 

[v.  16] 
But  AE,  EB  are  commensurable  in  square  only  ; 

therefore  C/%  FD  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[X.   II] 

And  they  are  rational ; 
therefore  CD  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

For  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB 
either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
AE  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  -^^  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
EB  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE, 

the  square  on  CF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  CF. 

[x.  14] 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 

line  set  out,  C/^will  also  be  commensurable  with  it,         [x.  12] 

and  for  this  reason  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB^  CD  is  a 
first  binomial,  that  is,  the  same  in  order.  [x.  Deff.  11.  1] 

But,  if  EB  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line 
set  out,  FD  is  also  commensurable  with  it,  [x.  12] 

and  for  this  reason  again  CD  will  be  the  same  in  order  with 
AB, 

for  each  of  them  will  be  a  second  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  11.  2] 


X.  66,  67]  PROPOSITIONS   66,  67  147 

But,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB  is  commen- 
surable with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  neither  of  the 
straight  lines  CF,  FD  will  be  commensurable  with  it,      [x.  13] 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  a  third  binomial. 

[x.  Deff.  II.  3] 

But,  if  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
EB  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with 
AE, 

the  square  on  CF  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  FD  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 
line  set  out,  CF  is  also  commensurable  with  it, 
and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  a  fourth  binomial. 

[x.  Deff.  II.  4] 

But,  if  EB  is  so  commensurable,  so  is  FD  also, 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  will  be  a  fifth  binomial. 

[x.  Deff.  II.  5] 
But,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB  is  so  com- 
mensurable, neither  of  the  straight  lines  CF,  FD  is  commen- 
surable with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  will  be  a  sixth  binomial. 

[x.  Deff.  II.  6] 
Hence  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a 
binomial  straight  line  is  binomial  and  the  same  in  order. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  proofs  of  this  and  the  following  propositions  up  to  x.  70  inclusive  are 
easy  and  require  no  elucidation.    They  are  equivalent  to  saying  that,  if  in  each 

of  the  preceding  irrational  straight  lines  —  p  is  substituted  for  p,  the  resulting 

irrational  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  from  which  it  is  altered. 

Proposition  67. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a  bimedial 
straight  line  is  itself  also  bimedial  and  the  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  bimedial,  and  let  CD  be  commensurable  in 
length  with  AB\ 

I  say  that  CD  is  bimedial  and  the  same         ^! l_? 

in  order  with  AB,  c f     0 

For,  since  AB  is  bimedial, 
let  it  be  divided  into  its  medials  at  E ; 

10 — 2 


148  BOOK  X  [x.  67 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.  [x.  37,  38] 

And  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  CF\ 

therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  to  the  remainder  FD  as 
AB  is  to  CD.  [v.  19] 

But  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD ; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  also  commensurable  with   C/%  FD 
respectively.  [x.  n] 

But  AE,  EB  are  medial  ; 
therefore  C/%  FD  are  also  medial.  [x.  23] 

And  since,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD,  [v.  n] 

and  AE,  EB  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
CF,  FD  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 

But  they  were  also  proved  medial ; 
therefore  CD  is  bimedial. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 
For  since,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD, 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  rectangle  AE, 
EB,  so  is  the  square  on  CF  to  the*  rectangle  CF,  FD ; 

therefore,  alternately, 

as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  square  on  CF,  so  is  the  rect- 
angle AE,  EB  to  the  rectangle  CF,  FD.  [v.  16] 

But  the  square  on  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  CF', 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD. 

If  therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  rational, 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  rational, 

[and  for  this  reason  CD  is  a  first  bimedial] ;  [x.  37] 

but  if  medial,  medial,  [x.  23,  Por.] 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  a  second  bimedial. 

[x.38] 
And  for  this  reason  CD  will  be  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

Q.  E.  D. 


F 


X.  68]  PROPOSITIONS  67,  68  149 

Proposition  68. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  a  major  straight 
line  is  itself  also  major. 

Let  AB  be  major,  and  let  CD  be  commensurable  with  AB\ 
I  say  that  CD  is  major. 

Let  AB  be  divided  at  E ; 
therefore  AB,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensur- 
able in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by 
them  medial.  [x.  39] 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 
Then  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  C/%  and  EB 
to  FD, 

therefore  also,  as  y^^  is  to  CF,  so  is  EB  to  FD.  [v.  n] 

But  AB  is  commensurable  with  CD ; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  also  commensurable  with  CF,  FD 

respectively.  [x.  n] 

And  since,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  EB  to  FD, 
alternately  also, 

as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD  ;  [v.  16] 
therefore  also,  componendo, 

as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  DF\  [v.  18] 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  y^^  is  to  the  square  on  BE, 

so  is  the  square  on  CD  to  the  square  on  DF.  [vi.  20] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  as  the  square  on  y^-^  is  to 
the  square  on  AE^  so  also  is  the  square  on  CD  to  the  square 
on  CF. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AB  is  to  the  squares  on 
AE,  EB,  so  is  the  square  on  CD  to  the  squares  on  CF,  FD ; 
therefore  also,  alternately, 

as  the  square  on  ^5  is  to  the  square  on  CD,  so  are  the 
squares  on  AE,  EB  to  the  squares  on  C/%  FD.  [v.  16] 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  CD\ 

therefore  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  are  also  commensurable 
with  the  squares  on  CF,  FD. 


ISO  BOOK  X  [x.  68, 69 

And  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  together  are  rational ; 
therefore  the  squares  on  C/%  FD  together  are  rational. 

Similarly  also  twice  the  rectangle  AE^  EB  is  commen- 
surable with  twice  the  rectangle  CF,  FD, 

And  twice  the  rectangle  AE^  EB  is  medial ; 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  medial. 

[x.  23.  Por.] 

Therefore  CF,  FD  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make,  at  the  same  time,  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial ; 
therefore  the  whole  CD  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called 
major.  [x.  39] 

Therefore  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  major 
straight  line  is  major. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  69. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  side  of  a  rational 
plus  a  medial  area  is  itself  also  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a 
medial  area. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area, 
and  let  CD  be  commensurable  with  AB ; 
it  is  to  be  proved  that   CD  is  also  the  side  of  a 
rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

Let  AB  be  divided  into  its  straight  lines  at  E ; 
therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensur- 
able in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares      £ 
on  them  medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
rational.  [x.  40] 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

We  can  then  prove  similarly  that 
CF,  FD  are  incommensurable  in  square, 
and  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  commensurable 
with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD, 
and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD ; 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  C/%  FD  is  also  medial,  and 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD  rational. 

Therefore  CD  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

Q.  E.  D. 


F 


F 


X.  70,  71]  PROPOSITIONS  68—71  151 

Proposition  70. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  side  of  the  sum 
of  two  medial  areas  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas,  and 
CD  commensurable  with  AB ; 
it  is  to  be  proved  that  CD  is  also  the  side  of  the 
sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

For,  since  AB  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two 
medial  areas, 

let  It  be  divided  into  its  straight  lines  at  E  ; 
therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensur- 
able in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial,  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial,  and  furthermore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE^  EB 
incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AE,  EB.  [x.  41] 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

We  can  then  prove  similarly  that 
CFy  FD  are  also  incommensurable  in  square, 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD, 
and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CFy  FD ; 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  also  medial, 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  medial, 

and  moreover  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  incom- 
mensurable with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD. 

Therefore  CD  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  71. 

If  a  rational  and  a  medial  area  be  added  together,  four 
irrational  straight  lines  arise,  namely  a  binomial  or  a  first 
bimedial  or  a  major  or  a  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial 
area. 

Let  AB  be  rational,  and  CD  medial ; 
I  say  that  the  **side"  of  the  area  AD  is  a  binomial  or  a  first 
bimedial  or  a  major  or  a  side  of  a  rational  plus   a  medial 
area. 


iS« 


BOOK  X 


[x.  71 


For  AB  is  either  greater  or  less  than  CD. 
First,  let  it  be  greater ; 
let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 

let  there  be  applied  to  EF  the  rectangle  EG  equal  to  AB, 
producing  EH  as  breadth, 

and  let  HI^  equal  to  DC,  be  applied  to  EF^  producing  HK 
as  breadth. 


1 

I                     H            K 

f                   Q            1 

[ 

3        ( 

Then,  since  AB  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  EG, 
therefore  EG  is  also  rational. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  EF,  producing  EH^s  breadth; 
therefore  EH  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with 
EF.  [x.  20] 

Again,  since  CD  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  HI, 
therefore  HI  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  pro- 
ducing HK  as  breadth ; 

therefore  HK  is   rational    and    incommensurable   in  length 
with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  CD  is  medial, 
while  AB  is  rational, 

therefore  AB  is  incommensurable  with  CD, 
so  that  EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  HI. 

But,  as  EG  is  to  HI,  so  is  EH  to  HK\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  EH  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  HK. 

[x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  EH,  HK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  EK  is  a  binomial  straight  line,  divided  at  H.    [x.  36] 


X.  7i]  PROPOSITION   71  153 

And,  since  AB  is  greater  than  CD, 
while  AB  is  equal  to  EG  and  CD  to  HI, 
therefore  EG  is  also  greater  than  HI ; 
therefore  EH  is  also  greater  than  HK. 

The  square,  then,  on  EH  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
HK  either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable 
in  length  with  EH  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  in- 
commensurable with  it. 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  itself. 

Now  the  greater  straight  line  HE  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  EE  set  out  ; 
therefore  EK  is  a  first  binomial.  [x.  Deflf.  11.  i] 

But  EE  is  rational ; 
and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
first  binomial,  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  area  is 
binomial.  [x.  54] 

Therefore  the  **side"  of  EI  is  binomial ; 
so  that  the  '*side''  of  AD  is  also  binomial. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  EH  be  greater  than  the  square 
on  HK  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  EH. 

Now  the  greater  straight  line  EH  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  EE  set  out ; 
therefore  EK  is  a  fourth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  4] 

But  EE  is  rational ; 
and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
fourth  binomial,  the  "side"  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  major.  [x.  57] 

Therefore  the  "side"  of  the  area  EI  is  major  ; 
so  that  the  "side"  of  the  area  AD  is  also  major. 

Next,  let  AB  be  less  than  CD  ; 
therefore  EG  is  also  less  than  ///, 
so  that  EH  is  also  less  than  HK. 

Now  the  square  on  HK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EH 
either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
HK  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  it. 


154  BOOK  X  [x-  71 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  itself. 

Now  the  lesser  straight  line  EH  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  EF  set  out ; 
therefore  EK  is  a  second  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  11.  2] 

But  EF  is  rational  ; 
and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and 
the  second  binomial,  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  it  is  a 
first  bimedial ;  [x.  55] 

therefore  the  "side"  of  the  area  EI  is  a  first  bimedial, 
so  that  the  "side"  of  AD  is  also  a  first  bimedial. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  HK  be  greater  than  the  square 
on  HE  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  HK. 

Now  the  lesser  straight  line  EH  is  commensurable  with 
the  rational  straight  line  EF  set  out ; 
therefore  EK  is  a  fifth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  5] 

But  EF  is  rational ; 
and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
fifth  binomial,  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  area  is  a 
side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area.  [x.  58] 

Therefore  the  "side"  of  the  area  EI  is  a  side  of  a  rational 
plus  a  medial  area, 

so  that  the  "side"  of  the  area  AD  is  also  a  side  of  a  rational 
plus  a  medial  area. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

A  rational  area  being  of  the  form  k^y  and  a  medial  area  of  the  form 
'jX.p^,  the  problem  is  to  classify 

according  to  the  different  possible  relations  between  k,  X. 
Put  <ru  =  kf^j 

Then,  since  the  former  rectangle  is  rational,  the  latter  medial, 
u  is  rational  and  ^  o-, 
7^  is  rational  and  x^  o-. 
Also  the  rectangles  are  incommensurable ; 
so  that  u  ^v. 

Hence  «,  v  are  rational  and  ^^ ; 
whence  (u  +  z/)  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 


X.  71,  72] 


PROPOSITIONS   71,  72 


iSS 


The  possibilities  now  are  as  follows : 

I.  u  >  V, 
Then  either 

(i)  n/»*  -  z/*  ^  w, 
or  (2)  Vw^-z^  w»  », 
while  in  both  cases  u  '^  a. 

In  case  (i)  (w  +  f)  is  ayfry/  binomial  straight  line, 
and  in  case  (2)  (1/  +  v)  is  b,  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

Thus  vcr(«  +  v)  is  either  (i)  at  ^//i^m/iti/ straight  line  [x.  54]  or  (2)  a  major 

irrational  straight  line  [x.  57]. 

« 

II.  V  >  u. 
Then  either 

( I )  Jt^  -u^  ^  V, 
or  (2)  slv^  —  i^  w  t/, 
while  in  both  cases  v  ^  tr^  but  1/  ^  or. 

Hence,  in  case  (i),  (i;  +  »)  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line, 
and,  in  case  (2),  (v  +  u)  is  di  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

Thus  J  a-  {if  +  u)  is  either  (i)  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  [x.  55],  or  (2)  a 
side  of  a  rational  plus  a  fnedial  area  [x.  58]. 


Proposition  72. 

ff  two  medial  areas  incommensurable  with  one  another  be 
added  together,  t/ie  remaining  two  irrational  straight  lines 
arise,  namely  either  a  second  bimedial  or  a  side  of  the  sum  of 
two  medial  areas. 

For  let  two  medial  areas  AB,  CD  incommensurable  with 
one  another  be  added  together ; 

I   say  that  the   **side"  of  the  area  AD  is  either  a  second 
bimedial  or  a  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 


For  AB  is  either  greater  or  less  than  CD. 
First,  if  it  so  chance,  let  AB  be  greater  than  CD. 
Let  the  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
and  to  EF  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangle  EG  equal  to 


156  BOOK  X  [x.  72 

AB  and  producing  EH  as  breadth,  and  the  rectangle  HI 
equal  to  CD  and  producing  HK  as  breadth. 

Now,  since  each  of  the  areas  AB,  CD  is  medial, 

therefore  each  of  the  areas  EG,  HI  is  also  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE, 
producing  EH,  HK  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  EH,  HK  is  rational  and 
incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  with  CD, 
and  AB  is  equal  to  EG,  and  CD  to  HI, 
therefore  EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  HI. 

But,  as  EG  is  to  HI,  so  is  EH  to  HK ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  EH  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  HK.    [x.  n] 

Therefore  EH,  HK  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 

therefore  EK  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

But  the  square  on  EH  is  greater  than  the  square  on  HK 
either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
EH  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  it 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  itself. 

Now  neither  of  the  straight  lines  EH,  HK  is  commen- 
surable in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  EF  set  out ; 

therefore  EK  is  a  third  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  11.  3] 

But  EF  is  rational  ; 

and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the 
third  binomial,  the  "side"  of  the  area  is  a  second  bimedial ; 

[x.56] 
therefore  the  **side"  of  EI,  that  is,  of  AD,  is  a  second  bimedial. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  EH  be  greater  than  the  square 
on  HK  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in 
length  with  EH. 

Now  each  of  the  straight  lines  EH,  HK  is  incommen- 
surable in  length  with  EF; 

therefore  EK  is  a  sixth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  11.  6] 

But,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and 


X.  72]  PROPOSITION   72  157 

the  sixth  binomial,  the  *'side"  of  the  area  is  the  side  of  the 
sum  of  two  medial  areas ;  [x.  59] 

so  that  the  "side"  of  the  area  AD  is  also  the  side  of  the 
sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  to  classify,  according  to  the  different  possible  relations  between 
k,  X,  the  straight  line 

where  ^k .  p-  and  ,Jk ,  pr  are  incommensurable. 

Suppose  that  au=  Jk,  p\ 

<rv  =  ij\ ,  pK 

It  is  immaterial  whether  ^k.p^  or  ^/^.p^  is  the  greater.     Suppose,  e.g., 
that  the  former  is. 

Now,  Jk .  p\  J\ .  p^  being  both  medial  areas,  and  <r  rational, 

«,  V  are  both  rational  and  w  <r  (i). 

Again,  by  hypothesis,  vu  sj  ot^, 

or  u^v    (2). 

Hence  [(i),  (2)]  (u  +  z/)  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

Next,  slt^-v^  is  either  commensurable  or  incommensurable  in  length 
with  «. 

(a)    Suppose  slt^  "V^  *>  u. 

In  this  case  {u  +  z/)  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line, 
and  therefore,  [x.  56] 

vo-  {u  +  v)  is  a  second bimedial  straight  line. 

(u  +  %))  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line, 
and  therefore  [x.  59] 

n/ot  («  + 1;)  is  a  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 


The  binomial  straight  line  and  the  irrational  straight  lines 
after  it  are  neither  the  same  with  the  medial  nor  with  one 
another. 

For  the  square  on  a  medial,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line,  produces  as  breadth  a  straight  line  rational  and  incom- 
mensurable in  length  with  that  to  which  it  is  applied.      [x.  22] 

But  the  square  on  the  binomial,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the  first  binomial.         [x.  60] 

The  square  on  the  first  bimedial,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the  second  binomial    [x.  61] 


158  BOOK  X  [x.  72,  73 

The  square  on  the  second  bimedial,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the  third  binomial.       [x.  62] 

The  square  on  the  major,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line,  produces  as  breadth  the  fourth  binomial.  [x.  63] 

The  square  on  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area,  if 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the  fifth 
binomial.  [x.  64] 

The  square  on  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas,  if 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the 
sixth  binomial.  [x.  65] 

And  the  said  breadths  differ  both  from  the  first  and  from 
one  another :  from  the  first  because  it  is  rational,  and  from 
one  another  because  they  are  not  the  same  in  order ; 
so  that  the  irrational  straight  lines  themselves  also  differ  from 
one  another. 

The  explanation  after  x.  72  is  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  all  the 
irrational  straight  lines  treated  hitherto  are  different  from  one  another,  viz.  the 
medial,  the  six  irrational  straight  lines  beginning  with  the  binomial,  and  the 
six  consisting  of  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  binomials. 

Proposition  73. 

If  from  a  rational  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a 
rational  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square 
only,  the  remainder  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  an 
apotome. 

For  from  the  rational  straight  line  AB  let  the  rational 
straight  line  BC^  commensurable  with 

the  whole   in   square   only,  be   sub-        a        c  b 

tracted  ; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  \s  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  apotome. 

For,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC, 
and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC, 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC.  [x.  n] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  AB,  [x.  15] 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC  [x.  6] 


X.  73»  74]  PROPOSITIONS   72—74  159 

And,  inasmuch  as  the  squares  on  ABy  BC  are  equal  to 
twice  the  rectangle  AB^  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CA, 

[".  7] 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  also  incommensurable 
with  the  remainder,  the  square  on  AC  [x.  13,  16J 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  rational  ; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  an  apotome. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Euclid  now  passes  to  the  irrational  straight  lines  which  are  the  dijferaice 
and  not,  as  before,  the  sum  of  two  straight  lines.  Apotome  (**portion  cut  off") 
accordingly  takes  the  place  of  binomial  and  the  other  terms  follow  mutatis 
mutandis.  The  first  hexad  of  propositions  (73  to  78)  exhibit  the  six  irrational 
straight  lines  which  are  really  the  result  of  extracting  the  square  root  of  the  six 
irrationals  in  the  later  propositions  85  to  90  (or,  strictly  speaking,  of  finding 
the  sides  of  squares  equal  to  the  rectangles  formed  by  each  of  those  six 
irrational  straight  lines  respectively  with  a  rational  straight  line).  Thus,  just 
as  in  the  corresponding  propositions  about  the  irrational  straight  lines  formed 
by  addition,  the  further  removed  irrationals,  so  to  speak,  come  first. 

We  shall  denote  the  apotome  etc.  by  {x  —y\  which  is  formed  by  subtracting 
a  certain  lesser  straight  line  y  from  a  greater  x.  In  x.  79  and  later  propositions 
y  is  called  by  Euclid  the  annex  (rj  vpoaapfioCovaa),  being  the  straight  line  which, 
when  added  to  the  apotome  or  other  irrational  formed  by  subtraction,  makes 
up  the  greater  x. 

The  methods  of  proof  are  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  propositions 
about  the  irrational  straight  lines  formed  by  addition. 

In  this  proposition  x,  y  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only,  and  we  have  to  prove  that  {x  -y),  the  apotome,  is  irrational. 

X  '•^  y,  so  that  x  ^  y\ 
therefore,  since  x  \  y  =  x^  \  xy, 

x^  w  xy. 

But  AT  ^  (x'  +>^),  and  xy  ^  ixy  \ 
therefore  jr  +^'  s/  2xy, 

whence  (x  -yY  w  {xr  -^y). 

But  (x^  +y)  is  rational , 
therefore  {x  -yf,  and  consequently  {x  -y),  is  irrational 

The  apotome  (x  -y)  is  of  the  form  p-^  Jk  .p^  just  as  the  binomial  straight 
line  is  of  the  form  p+  Jk.p. 

Proposition  74, 

If  from  a  medial  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  medial 
straight  line  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square 
only,  and  which  contains  with  the  whole  a  rational  rectangle, 
the  remainder  is  irrational.  And  let  it  be  called  a  first 
apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 


i6o  BOOK   X  [x.  74 

For  from  the  medial  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  sub- 
tracted the  medial  straight  line  BC 

which  is  commensurable  with  AB  in      ^  9 ? 

square  only  and  with  AB  makes  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC  rational ; 

I   say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  irrational;   and  let  it  be 
called  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For,  since  AB^  BC  are  medial, 

the  squares  on  AB^  BC  are  also  medial. 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC ; 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  incommensurable 
with  the  remainder,  the  square  on  AC,  [cf.  ii.  7] 

since,  if  the  whole  is  incommensurable  with  one  of  the  magni- 
tudes, the  original  magnitudes  will  also  be  incommensurable. 

[x.  16] 
But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational ; 

therefore  the  square  on  -^C  is  irrational ; 

therefore  -^C  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line. 

Theory/  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  is  the  difference  between  straight 

lines  of  the  form  frp,  k*p,  which  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only  and  forming  a  rational  rectangle. 

By  hypothesis,  a^,  y  are  medial  areas. 

And,  since  xy  is  rational,      (^r*  +^)  w  ^ 

w  2xy, 
whence  {x  -yf  sj  ixy. 

But  2xy  is  rational ; 
therefore  {x—yfy  and  consequently  (x—y),  is  irrational. 

This  irrational,  which  is  of  the  form  (^p  ~  Irp),  is  the  first  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line ;  the  term  corresponding  of  course  to  first  bimedial,  which 
applies  where  the  sign  is  positive. 


X.  75]  PROPOSITIONS   74,  75  161 

Proposition  75. 

If  from  a  medial  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  medial 
straight  line  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square 
only,  and  which  contains  with  the  whole  a  medial  rectangle, 
the  remainder  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  a  second 
apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For  from  the  medial  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  sub- 
tracted the  medial  straight  line  CB  which  is  commensurable 
with  the  whole  AB  in  square  only  and  such  that  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC,  which  it  contains  with  the  whole  AB,  is  medial;  [x.  28] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called 
a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 


For  let  a  rational  straight  line  DI  \^  set  out, 

let  DB  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  be  applied  to  /?/, 
producing  DG  sls  breadth, 

and  let  D//  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  be  applied 
to  D/,  producing  DB*  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  the  remainder  B£  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC. 

[".  7] 
Now,   since  the  squares  on   AB,  BC  are   medial   and 
commensurable, 

therefore  D£  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  /?/,  producing 
DG  as  breadth ; 

therefore  DG   is   rational   and   incommensurable  in  length 
with  DI.  [x.  22] 

Again,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial, 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  medial. 

[x.  23,  Por.] 

H.  E.  III.  II 


i62  BOOK  X  [x.  75 

And  it  is  equal  to  DH  \ 
therefore  DH  is  also  medial. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DI, 
producing  DF  as  breadth  ; 

therefore   DF  is   rational   and   incommensurable   in   length 
with  DL  [x.  22] 

And,  since  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
therefore  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC\ 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC.  [x.  n] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  AB,  [x.  15] 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC ;  [x.  6] 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with 
the  squares  on  AB,  BC  [x.  13] 

But  DF  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 
and  D//  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC\ 
therefore  DF  is  incommensurable  with  DH. 

But,  as  DF  is  to  DH,  so  is  GD  to  DF\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  GD  is  incommensurable  with  DF.  [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  GD,  DF^x^  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  FG  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

But  DI  is  rational, 
and  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  and  an  irrational 
straight  line  is  irrational,  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

and  its  **side"  is  irrational. 

And  AC  is  the  "side"  of  FF ; 
therefore  ^  C  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial 
straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  here  the  difference  between  /rp,  J\ .  pflr,  two  medial  straight 
lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  containing  a  medial  rectangle. 

Apply  each  of  the  areas  {x^+y^),  2xy  to  a  rational  straight  line  or,  i.e. 
suppose  that 

c^  +y  =  iru, 
2xy  =  av. 


X.  7Si  76]  PROPOSITIONS   75,  76  163 

Then  ori/,  (w  are  medial  areas, 
so  that  Uf  V  are  both  rational  and  sj  a (i). 

Again,                                          x  ^^ y; 
therefore                                           a^  ^^  xy^ 
and  consequently                       ^  +y  w  2xy, 
or                                                       au  SJ  aVf 
and  u  SJ  V   (2). 

Thus  [(i),  (2)]  «,  V  are  rational  and  ^^-; 
therefore  [x.  73]  (u  —  v)  is  an  apotome^ 
and,  (1/  —  v)  being  thus  irrational, 

(»-t^)or  is  an  irrational  area. 

Hence  (x  -yf^  and  consequently  (x  -_y),  is  irrational 

The  irrational  straight  line  ^p  -        '^  is  called  a  J^rt?«^  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line. 


Proposition  76. 

If  from  a  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  straight  line 
which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which 
with  the  whole  makes  the  squares  on  them  added  together 
rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  the 
remainder  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  minor. 

For  from  the  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the 

straight  line  BC  which  is  incom- 

mensurable  in  square  with  the  whole        a  c  b 

and  fulfils  the  given  conditions.  [x.  33] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  minor. 

For,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  rational, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial, 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC; 

and,  convertendo,  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable 
with  the  remainder,  the  square  on  AC  [11.  7,  x.  16] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  .^C  is  irrational ; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  minor. 

Q.  E.  D. 

II — 2 


i64  BOOK    X  '       [x.  76,  77 

Xy  y  are  here  of  the  form  found  in  x.  33,  viz. 

By  hypothesis  {a^  +y)  is  a  rational^  xy  a  medial^  area. 
Therefore  {x^+y)  sj  ixy^ 

whence  {x  —yY  w  {x^  +>'*)• 

Therefore  {x  —y)\  and  consequently  (x  —  j^),  is  irrational. 
The  minor  (irrational)  straight  line  is  thus  of  the  form 
_P_     /  k  p       I  k 

Observe  the  use  of  convertendo  (dvacrrpiil/avTi)  for  the  inference  that,  since 
{^+y)  w  2xy,  (x*+y)  w  (^-j^)*.  The  use  of  the  word  corresponds  exactly 
to  its  use  in  proportions. 

Proposition  yy. 

If  from  a  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  straight  line 
which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole y  and  which 
with  the  whole  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medialy 
but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rationaly  the  remainder 
is  irrational:  and  let  it  be  called  thai  which  produces  with 
a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  from  the  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the 
straight  line  BC  which  is  incommensurable  in  square 
with  AB  and  fulfils  the  given  conditions  ;  [x.  34] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  ^C  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  aforesaid. 

For,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  ABy  BC  is 
medial,  ^ 

while  twice  the  rectangle  ABy  BC  is  rational, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC^re  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  ABy  BC ; 

therefore  the  remainder  also,  the  square  on  ACy  is  incom- 
mensurable with  twice  the  rectangle  ABy  BC.  [n.  7,  x.  16] 

And  twice  the  rectangle  ABy  BC  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  ^C  is  irrational ; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  that  which  produces  with  a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.   D. 


X.  77,  78]  PROPOSITIONS   76—78  165 

Here  x,  y  are  of  the  form  [cf.  x.  34] 


V277  +  k")  '       sl2{l+k') 

By  hypothesis,  {x^  +y)  is  a  medial^  xy  a  rational^  area ; 
thus  (jt'  +y)  w  2:cy, 

and  therefore  (x  -yY  w  2jcy, 

whence  (x-yY^  and  consequently  (^->'),  is  irrational. 

The  irrational  straight  line 

is  called  Ma/  a/^/M  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole  or  more 
literally  that  which  with  a  rational  area  makes  the  whole  medial  (17  /xcra  pi/rov 
/Acorov  TO  l\ov  iroiovora).  Here  "  produces  **  means  "  produces  when  a  square 
is  described  on  it"  A  clearer  way  of  expressing  the  meaning  would  be  to  call 
this  straight  line  the  ^^ side'*  of  a  medial  minus  a  rational  area  corresponding 
to  the  ^^  side'*  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  [x.  40]. 


Proposition  78. 

If  from  a  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  straight  line 
which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which 
with  the  whole  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial^ 
twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial^  and  further  the 
squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them,  the  remainder  is  irrational;  and  let  it  be 
called  that  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a 
medial  whole. 

For  from  the  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the 
straight  line  BC  incommensurable  in 
square   with   AB  and   fulfilling    the 
given  conditions  ;  [x.  35] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  the 
irrational  straight  line  called  that 
which  produces  with  a  medial 
area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  Df 
be  set  out, 

to  DI  let  there  be  applied  D£  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB, 
BC,  producing  DG  as  breadth, 

and   let  DH  equal   to  twice    the    rectangle  AB,   BC   be 
subtracted. 


)_ 

1 

■    Q 

\ 

\\\ 

A 

6- 

B 

i66  BOOK  X  [x.  78 

Therefore    the   remainder  FE  is  equal   to  the   square 
on  AC,  [11-  7] 

so  that  AC  is  the  "  side  "  of  FE. 

Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB^  BC  is  medial 
and  is  equal  to  DE, 

therefore  DE  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DI,  producing 
DG  as  breadth ; 

therefore  DG  is   rational   and   incommensurable  in    length 
with  DL  [x.  22] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial  and  is 
equal  to  DH^ 

therefore  DH  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  /?/,  producing 
DF  as  breadth ; 

therefore  DF  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DI.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC, 

therefore  DE  is  also  incommensurable  with  DH. 

But,  as  DE  is  to  DH,  so  also  is  DG  to  DF\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  DG  is  incommensurable  with  DF.  [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  GD,  DF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only. 

Therefore  FG  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

And  FH  is  rational ; 

but  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  an 
apotome  is  irrational,  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

and  its  **side"  is  irrational. 

And  AC  is  the  "side"  of  FE ; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  that  which  produces   with   a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.  D. 


X.  78,  79]  PROPOSITIONS   78,  79  167 

In  this  case  x,  y  have  respectively  the  forms  [cf.  x.  35] 

Suppose  that  j;^  +y  =  or«, 

2Ji;y  =  fjv. 

By  hypothesis,  the  areas  or«,  o-e;  are  medial ; 
therefore  «,  z'  are  both  rational  and  w  <r  (i). 

Further                                       cr«  w  ot^, 
so  that  u^v    (2). 

Hence  [(i),  (2)]  «,  e;  are  rational  and  ^^ , 
so  that  (u-v)  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  apotome  [x.  73]. 

Thus  €r(u-v)  is  an  irrational  area, 
so  that  (x-yY^  and  consequently  {x-y),  is  irrational. 

The  irrational  straight  line 

pX*      /       _k       _^pX*      /  >^ 

is  called  Ma/  7c;^/V>6  produces  [i.e.  when  a  square  is  described  on  it]  ze//M  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole,  more  literally  that  which  with  a  medial  area  makes 
the  whole  medial  (rj  fiera  fiicrov  fiia-ov  to  oKov  voiowra).  A  clearer  phrase  (to 
us)  would  be  the  '^side"  of  the  difference  between  two  medial  areas^  correspond- 
ing to  the  **  side  "  of{th€  sum  of)  tivo  medial  areas  [x.  41]. 


Proposition  79. 

To  an   apotome  only  one   rational  straight  line  can   be 
annexed  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome,  and  BC  an  annex  to  it ; 
therefore  AC,  CB  are  rational 

straight  lines  commensurable  in  ^     q 

square  only.  [x.  73] 

I  say  that  no  other  rational 


straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB  which  is  commensurable 
with  the  whole  in  square  only. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed  ; 
therefore  AD,  DB  are  also  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

Now,  since  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over 
twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  the  excess  of  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
for  both  exceed  by  the  same,  the  square  on  AB,  [n.  7] 


i68  BOOK  X  [x.  79.  ^o 

therefore,  alternately,  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB 
over  the  squares  on  ACy  CB  is  the  excess  of  twice  the  rect- 
angle AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

But  the  squares  on  ADy  DB  exceed  the  squares  on  AC, 
CB  by  a  rational  area, 
for  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  exceeds  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area : 
which  is  impossible, 

for  both  are  medial  [x.  21],  and  a  medial  area  does  not  exceed 
a  medial  by  a  rational  area.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  no  other  rational  straight  line  can  be  annexed 
to  AB  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only. 

Therefore  only  one  rational  straight  line  can  be  annexed 
to  an  apotome  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in 
square  only. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  proves  the  equivalent  of  the  well-known  theorem  of  surds 
that, 

if  tf-/v/^  =  ^-^,  then  a^x,  d=y; 

and,  i(  Ja-  Jd=  Jx  -  Jy,  then  a  =  x,  b^y. 

The  method  of  proof  corresponds  to  that  of  x.  42  for  positive  signs. 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  an  apotome  can  be  expressed  as  {x  -y)  and  also 
as  (x-y),  where  x,  y  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and  y,  y  are  so  also. 

Of  X,  x',  let  X  be  the  greater. 

Now,  since  x-y  =  x  -y', 

^  +y  -  (x*^  +y' )  =  2xy  -  2xy. 

But  (^+y),  (x'^+y^)  are  both  rational,  so  that  their  difference  is  a 
rational  area. 

On  the  other  hand,  2xy,  ix'y*  are  both  medial  areas,  being  of  the  form 

therefore  the  difference  between  two  medial  areas  is  rational : 
which  is  impossible  [x.  26]. 
Therefore  etc. 

Proposition  80. 

To  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  only  one 
medial  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is  commensurable 
with  the  whole  in  square  only  and  which  contains  with  the 
whole  a  rational  rectangle. 


X.  8o]  PROPOSITIONS   79,  80  169 

For  let  AB  be  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 
and  let  BC  be  an  annex  to  AB ; 

therefore   AC,    CB  are   medial         ? £ — ? 

straight  lines  commensurable  in 

square  only  and  such  that  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  which  they 
contain  is  rational ;  [x.  74] 

I  say  that  no  other  medial  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to 
AB  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only 
and  which  contains  with  the  whole  a  rational  area. 

For,  if  possible,  let  DB  also  be  so  annexed  ; 
therefore  AD,  DB  are  mediaK  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  and  such  that  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  which 
they  contain  is  rational.  [x.  74] 

Now,  since  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over 
twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  the  excess  of  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

for  they  exceed  by  the  same,  the  square  on  AB,  [11.  7] 

therefore,  alternately,  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB 
over  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  also  the  excess  of  twice  the 
rectangle  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  exceeds  twice  the  rect- 
angle AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area, 

for  both  are  rational. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  also  exceed  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area : 

which  is  impossible, 

for  both  are  medial  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.],  and  a  medial  area  does 
not  exceed  a  medial  by  a  rational  area.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D, 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  the  same  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line 
can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  required  duu-acter  in  two  ways,  so  that 

x-y  =  x'''y, 
and  suppose  that  x  >  x\ 

In  this  case  o^  \f,  (x'^  +>''*)  are  both  medial  areas,  and  2xy,  2xfy  are  both 
rational  areas ; 
and  x^  +y  -  (x*^  +/')  =  2xy  -  ix'y'. 

Hence  x.  26  is  contradicted  again ; 
therefore  etc. 


1 7© 


BOOK  X 


[x.  8 1 


c   o 


Proposition  8i. 

7!?  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  only  one 
medial  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is  commensurable 
with  the  whole  in  sqtiare  only  and  which  contains  with  the 
whole  a  medial  rectangle. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line 
and  BC  an  annex  to  AB ; 
therefore   AC,    CB  are    medial    straight 
lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
such   that   the  rectangle  AC,  CB  which 
they  contain  is  medial.  [x.  75] 

I  say  that  no  other  medial  straight  line 
can  be  annexed  to  AB  which  is  commen- 
surable with  the  whole  in  square  only  and 
which  contains  with  the  whole  a  medial 
rectangle. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  also  be  so 
annexed ; 

therefore  AD,  DB  are  also  medial  straight 
lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
such  that  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  which 
they  contain  is  medial.  [x.  75] 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 

let  EG  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  be  applied  to  EF, 
producing  EM  as  breadth, 

and  let  HG  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  be  sub- 
tracted, producing  HM  ^s  breadth  ; 

therefore  the  remainder  EL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 

[".  7] 
so  that  AB  is  the  ''side"  of  EL. 

Again,  let  EI  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  be  applied 
to  EF,  producing  EN  as  breadth. 

But  EL  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  AB ; 

therefore  the  remainder  HI  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB.  [II.  7] 

Now,  since  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines, 
therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  also  medial. 


X.  8i]  PROPOSITION   8i  171 

And  they  are  equal  to  EG ; 

therefore  EG  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  IS  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing 
EM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  EM  is   rational   and   incommensurable   in  length 
with  EF.  [x.  22] 

Again,  since  the  rectangle  ACy  CB  is  medial, 
twice  the  rectangle  AC^  CB  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  equal  to  HG ; 

therefore  HG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing 
HM  as  breadth ; 

therefore  HM  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  ACy  CB  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  ^C  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB. 

But,  as  ^C  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  square  on  ^C  to  the  rect- 
angle ACy  CB\ 

therefore   the  square  on  ^C  is  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB.  [x.  n] 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  AC, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  commensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB ;  [x.  6] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB.  •   [x.  13] 

And  EG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB, 
while  GH  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB ; 
therefore  EG  is  incommensurable  with  HG. 

But,  as  EG  is  to  HG,  so  is  EM  to  HM',  [vi.  i] 

therefore  EM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MH.  [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational  ; 

therefore  EM,  MH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ; 

therefore  EH  is  an  apotome,  and  HM  an  annex  to  it     [x.  73] 


172  BOOK  X  [x.  8i,  82 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  HN  is  also  an  annex  to  it ; 
therefore  to  an  apotome  different  straight  lines  are  annexed 
which  are  commensurable  with  the  wholes  in  square  only : 
which  is  impossible.  [x.  79] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

-  As  the  irrationality  of  the  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  was 
deduced  [x.  75]  from  the  irrationality  of  an  apotome,  so  the  present  theorem 
is  reduced  to  x.  79. 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  (.x-y\  (^'-y)  are  the  same  second  apotome  of 
a  medial  straight  line ; 
and  let  (say)  x  be  greater  than  x\ 

Apply  (^+y),  2xy  and  also  (jc'*+y*),  2^y  to  a  rational  straight  line  o-, 
i.e.  put 

'^'^^-'^x  and  ""-^r: ='''': I. 

2xy-frv  )  2xy  =av   ) 

Dealing  with  (x  -y)  first,  we  have : 
(j^  +y)  is  a  medial  area,  and  2xy  is  also  a  medial  area. 

Therefore  u,  v  axe  both  rational  and  ^  o-  (i). 

Also,  since  x  r^y,                     x  s^y, 
so  that                                               x^  sj  xy, 
whence,  as  usual,                       jc*  +y  ^  2xy, 
that  is,                                             <ru  w  <rVj 
and  therefore  u  sj  7f    (2). 

Thus  [(i)  and  (2)]  «,  v  are  rational  and  '^, 
so  that  («  -  v)  is  an  apotome. 

Similarly  («'  -  v')  is  proved  to  be  the  same  apotome. 

Hence  this  apotome  is  formed  in  two  ways : 
which  contradicts  x.  79. 

Therefore  the  original  hypothesis  is  false,  and  a  second  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line  is  uniquely  formed. 


Proposition  82. 

To  a  minor  straight  line  only  one  straight  line  can  be 
annexed  which  is  incommensurable  in  sqtiare  with  the  whole 
and  which  makes^  with  the  whole,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
them  rational  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial. 

Let  AB  be  the  minor  straight  line,  and  let  BC  be  an 
annex  to  AB ; 

therefore   AC,    CB   are    straight         h ? S_P 

lines  incommensurable  in  square 


X.  82,  83]  PROPOSITIONS  81—83  173 

which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but 
twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial.  [x.  76] 

I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB 
fulfilling  the  same  conditions. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed  ; 
therefore  ADy  DB  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable 
in  square  which  fulfil  the  aforesaid  conditions.  [x.  76] 

Now,  since  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  ADy  DB  over 
the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  also  the  excess  of  twice  the  rect- 
angle AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
while  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  exceed  the  squares  on  AC, 
CB  by  a  rational  area, 
for  both  are  rational, 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  exceeds  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area : 
which  is  impossible,  for  both  are  medial.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  to  a  minor  straight  line  only  one  straight 
line  can  be  annexed  which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with 
the  whole  and  which  makes  the  squares  on  them  added 
together  rational,  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial. 


Q.  E.  D. 


Suppose,  if  possible,  that,  with  the  usual  notation, 

and  let  x  (say)  be  greater  than  x. 

In  this  case  (x^  +y),  {x'^  +y*)  are  both  rational  areas, 
and  2xy,  2xy  are  both  medial  areas. 

But,  as  before,        (^  +7*)  -  (jc''  +/*)  =  2xy  -  2x'y', 
so  that  the  difference  between  two  medial  areas  is  rational : 
which  is  impossible  [x.  26]. 

Therefore  etc. 


Proposition  83. 

To  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a 
medial  whole  only  one  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is 
incommensurable  in  square  Tvith  the  whole  straight  line  and 
which  with  the  whole  straight  line  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial,  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
rational. 


174  BOOK  X  [x.  83,  84 

Let  AB  be  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational 
area  a  medial  whole, 

and  let  BC  be  an  annex  to  AB  ;  ^         p c_o 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  lines 

incommensurable  in  square  which  fulfil  the  given  conditions. 

[X.  77] 

I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB 
which  fulfils  the  same  conditions. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed  ; 
therefore  AD,  DB  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  fulfil  the  given  conditions.  [x.  77] 

Since  then,  as  in  the  preceding  cases, 
the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  the  squares  on 
AC,  CB  is  also  the  excess  of  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB 
over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DR  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle 
AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area, 
for  both  are  rational, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  also  exceed  the  squares 
on  A  C,  CB  by  a  rational  area : 
which  is  impossible,  for  both  are  medial.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  no  other  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB 
which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which 
with  the  whole  fulfils  the  aforesaid  conditions ; 
therefore  only  one  straight  line  can  be  so  annexed. 

Q.   E.  D. 

Suppose,  with  the  same  notation,  that 

x—y^x'  -y.  (x  >  x) 

Here,  (^+y),  (^'*+y*)  being  both  medial  areas,  and  2xy,  2xy'  both 
rational  areas, 

while  {x^  +y)  -  (x'^  ^-y"^)  =  2xy  -  2xy', 

x.  26  is  contradicted  again.  * 

Therefore  etc. 


Proposition  84. 

To  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a 
medial  whole  only  one  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is 
incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole  straight  line  and 
which  with  the  whole  straight  line  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares 


84] 


PROPOSITIONS  83,  84 


17s 


on  them  fnedtal  and  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  both 
medial  and  also  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  thefn. 

Let  AB  be  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial 
area  a  medial  whole, 

and  BC  an  annex  to  it ; 

therefore  AC,  CBsive  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square 
which  fulfil  the  aforesaid  conditions.  [x.  78] 


J- 


0    D 


£  H 


F    L 


I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB 
which  fulfils  the  aforesaid  conditions. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed, 

so  that  AD,  DB  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  added  together 
medial,  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  medial,  and  also  the 
squares  on  AD,  DB  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB.  [x.  78] 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 

let  EG  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  be  applied  to  EF, 
producing  EM  as  breadth, 

and  let  HG  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  A  C,  CB  be  applied 
to  EF,  producing  //M  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  square  on  AB  [11.  7],  is  equal 
to  EL ; 

therefore  AB  is  the  "side"  of  EL, 


Again,  let  EI  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  be  applied 
to  EF,  producing  EJV  as  breadth. 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  also  equal  to  EL  ; 

therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  [11.  7], 
is  equal  to  HL 


176  BOOK  X  [x.  84 

Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  medial 
and  is  equal  to  EG, 
therefore  EG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  pro- 
ducing EM  as  breadth ; 

therefore   EM  is   rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  EF,  [x.  22] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  medial  and  is 
equal  to  HG, 

therefore  HG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  pro- 
ducing HM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore   HM  is   rational  and  incommensurable  in   length 
with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  HG ; 

therefore  EM  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  MH. 

[vi.  I,  X.  11] 

And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  EM,  MH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ; 

therefore  EH  is  an  apotome,  and  HM  an  annex  to  it.     [x.  73] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  EH  is  again  an  apotome  and 
HN  an  annex  to  it. 

Therefore  to  an  apotome  different  rational  straight  lines 
are  annexed  which  are  commensurable  with  the  wholes  in 
square  only : 

which  was  proved  impossible.  [x.  79] 

Therefore  no  other  straight  line  can  be  so  annexed  to  AB, 
Therefore  to  AB  only  one  straight  line  can  be  annexed 
which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which 
with  the  whole  makes  the  squares  on  them  added  together 
medial,  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  and 
also  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  them. 

Q.  E.  D. 


X.  84]  PROPOSITION  84,   DEFINITIONS   III.  177 


With  the  usual  notation,  suppose  that 

x-y^^x  -y'.  (jc  >  xf) 

Let  ^+y*  =  or«  1  x'^^y'^^tTu'  \ 

2xy  =  (rv  )  2x'y'  =  <rt/  ) 

Consider  {x  ~y)  first ; 
it  follows,  since  (^  +y),  2xy  are  both  medial  areas,  that 

u,  V  are  both  rational  and  v^  cr  (i). 

But  X^  -trf  ^j  2xy^ 

that  is,  (TU  yj  <TVf 

and  therefore  u  y^  v (2). 

Therefore  [(i)  and  {2)]  u,  v  are  rational  and  '^ ; 
hence  (u  -  if)  is  an  apotome. 

Similarly  («'  - 1^)  is  proved  to  be  the  same  apotome. 

Thus  the  same  apotome  is  formed  as  such  in  two  ways : 
which  is  impossible  [x.  79]. 

Therefore,  etc. 

DEFINITIONS   III. 

1.  Given  a  rational  straight  line  and  an  apotome,  if  the 
square  on  the  whole  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  whole,  and  the  whole  be  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  let  the  apotome  be  called  a 
first  apotome. 

2.  But  if  the  annex  be  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  and  the  square  on  the  whole 
be  greater  than  that  on  the  annex  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with*  the  whole,  let  the  apotome  be  called 
a  second  apotome. 

3.  But  if  neither  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  set  out,  and  the  square  on  the  whole  be 
greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  the  whole,  let  the  apotome 
be  called  a  third  apotome. 

4.  Again,  if  the  square  on  the  whole  be  greater  than 
the  square  on  the  annex  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  the  whole,  then,  if  the  whole  be  com- 
mensurable in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 
let  the  apotome  be  called  a  fourth  apotome ; 

5.  if  the  annex  be  so  commensurable,  a  fifth ; 

6.  and,  if  neither,  a  sixth. 

H.  E.  HI.  12 


178  BOOK  X  [x.  85 

Proposition  85. 

To  find  the  first  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out, 
and  let  BG  be  commensurable  in  length  with  A  ; 
therefore  BG  is  also  rational. 


E  F  D 

Let  two  square  numbers  DE,  EF  be  set  out,  and  let  their 
difference  FD  not  be  square  ; 

therefore  neither  has  ED  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC\ 

[x.  6,  Por.] 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  GC.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  BG  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  GC  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  GC  is  also  rational 

And,  since  ED  has  not  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GC.       [x.  9] 
And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  BG^  GC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 

in  square  only ; 

therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  first  apotome. 

For  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on 
BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 

Now  since,  as  ED  is  to  FD,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to 
the  square  on  GC, 

therefore  also,  convertendo,  [v.  19,  Por.] 

as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  the  square  on  GB  to  the  square  on  H. 


X.  85]  PROPOSITION   85  179 

But  DE  has  to  EF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number, 

for  each  is  square  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  GB  also  has  to  the  square  on  H  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  H\ 

therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length 
with  BG. 

And  the  whole  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  A  set  out. 

Therefore  BC  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  i] 

Therefore  the  first  apotome  BC  has  been  found. 

(Being)  that  which  it  was  required  to  find. 

Take  kp  commensurable  in  length  with  /j,  the  given  rational  straight  line. 

Let  w*,  «'  be  square  numbers  such  that  (n^  -  «')  is  not  square. 

Take  x  such  that  m^ :  (««-«»)  =  >^p« :  01?    (i), 

,,    ,                                               -    »Jtf^  -  «' 
so  that  x  =  ko 

'^       m 

=  kp  Vi-A*,     say. 
Then  shall  ^p-^,  or  kp-kp  Vi  -X*,  be  2i first  apotome. 
For  (a)  it  follows  from  (i)  that  x  is  rational  but  incommensurable  with  kp^ 
whence  kp^  x  are  rational  and  f^y 
so  that  {kp  --x)  is  an  apotome. 
(fi)     If  y  =  >^p*  -  x^y  then,  by  (i),  convertendo^ 

m'.n^^l^p^.f, 
whence  >/,  that  is,  V^p'  -  o^y  is  commensurable  in  length  with  kp. 

And  kp  *-^  p\ 
therefore  ^p  -  ^  is  2l  first  apotome. 

As  explained  in  the  note  to  x.  48,  the  first  apotome 

kp  —  kpiji—)^ 
is  one  of  the  roots  of  the  equation 

o^-zkp .  X  +  X'>^p'  =  o. 


12 — 2 


i8o  BOOK  X  [x.  86 

Proposition  86. 
To  find  the  second  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out,  and  GC  com- 
mensurable in  length  with  A  ; 
therefore  GC  is  rational.  

Let  two  square  numbers  DE,       ? — S ? 

EF  be   set   out,    and    let    their  h 

difference  DF  not  be  square. 

Now  let  it  be  contrived  that,  e f ^d 

as  FD  is  to  DE,  so  is  the  square 

on  CG  to  the  square  on  GB.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Therefore  the  square  on  CG  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  GB.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  CG  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  GB  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  BG  is  rational. 

And,  since  the  square  on  GC  has  not  to  the  square  on  GB 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number, 
CG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GB.  [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  CG,  GB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ; 
therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  second  apotome. 

For  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on 
BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC. 

Since  then,  as  the  square  on  BG  is  to  the  square  on  GC^ 
so  is  the  number  ED  to  the  number  DF, 
therefore,  convertendo, 

as  the  square  on  BG  is  to  the  square  on  H,  so  is  DE  to  EF, 

[v.  19,  Por.] 

And  each  of  the  numbers  DE,  EF  is  square  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  has  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number  ; 
therefore  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  H  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 


X.  86,  87]  PROPOSITIONS  86,  87  181 

by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length 

with  BG, 

And  CG,  the  annex,  is  commensurable  with  the  rational 

straight  line  A  set  out. 

Therefore  BC  is  a  second  apotome,  [x.  Deff.  in.  2] 

Therefore  the  second  apotome  BC  has  been  found. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Take,  as  before,  kp  commensurable  in  length  with  p. 

Let  tn^y  n^  be  again  square  numbers,  but  {m^  —  «*)  not  square. 

Take  :t:  such  that  {m^ -  n^) :  m"  =  k'p^ .  x" (i), 

whence  x  =  kp 


kp 


^JT^-' 


say. 


Thus  X  is  greater  than  kp, 

kp 
Then  x  -  kp^  or    .  -  kp^  is  a  second  apotome, 

VI  -X' 

For  (a),  as  before,  x  is  rational  and  '^  kp. 

{P)     If  Ar*  -  >^p»  =  /,  we  have,  from  ( i ), 

m^ :  n^-a^'.y. 

Thus  y,  or  Jx'  -  k^p\  is  commensurable  in  length  with  x. 

And  kp  is  ^  p. 

Therefore  x-kpis  a,  second  apotome. 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  49,  the  second  apotome 

is  the  lesser  root  of  the  equation 

Proposition  87. 

To  find  ike  third  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out, 
let  three  numbers  E,  BC,  CD  be 
set   out  which   have  not  to  one        


another  the  ratio  which  a  square      ? tj 

number  has  to  a  square  number,  ^ 
but  let  CB  have  to  BD  the  ratio 

which  a  square  number  has  to  a  

square  number.  ; 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  ^  b        d 

is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG, 


i82  BOOK  X  [x.  87 

and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  GH.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Since  then,  as  ^  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the 
square  on  FG, 

therefore  the  square  on  A  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FG.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  A  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  also  rational  ; 
therefore  FG  is  rational. 

And,  since  E  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG\  [x.  9] 

Again,  since,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 
the  square  on  GH, 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  GH.       •  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  FG  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  GH  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  GH  is  rational. 

And,  since  BC  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.       [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  FH  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  third  apotome. 
For  since,  as  -£*  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the 
square  on  FG, 

and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  HG, 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  E  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  A 
to  the  square  on  HG.  [v.  22] 


X.  87]  PROPOSITION  87  183 

But  E  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  GH 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.        [x.  9] 

Therefore  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is 
commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  A 
set  out. 

Now  let  the  square  on  A^be  that  by  which  the  square  on 
FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH. 

Since  then,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 
the  square  on  GH, 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  BC  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  square  on 
FG  to  the  square  on  K.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  BC  has  to  BD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  also  has  to  the  square  on  K  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  K,     [x.  9] 

and  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FG. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  commen- 
surable in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  A  set  out ; 

therefore  FH  is  a  third  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  3] 

Therefore  the  third  apotome  FH  has  been  found. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Let  p  be  a  rational  straight  line. 

Take  numbers  /,  qm^,  q  (w*  -  «')  which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio 
of  square  to  square. 

Now  let  X,  y  be  such  that 

/  :  qm^  =  p^  :  x^  (i) 

and  qm^ :  q(m^-n^)  =  a^  .y (2). 

Then  shall  {x  —y)  be  a  f/urd  apotome. 
For  (a),  from  (i), 

X  is  rational  but  ^j  p  (3). 

And,  from  (2),  y  is  rational  but  w  x. 
Therefore  x,  y  are  rational  and  ^^y 
so  that  {x  —y)  is  an  apotome. 


i84  BOOK  X  [x.  87, 88 

(P)    By  (i),  (2),  ex  aequali, 

whence  y  ^  p^ 

Thus,  by  this  and  (3),  x,y  zx^  both  ^  p    (4). 

Lastly,  let  0'  =  jc'-y,  so  that,  from  (2),  convertendo, 

therefore  «,  or  slx^-y^^  ^  jp  (s)- 

Thus  [(4)  and  (5)]  {x-y)  is  a  third  apotome. 
To  find  its  form,  we  have,  from  (i)  and  (2), 

mjq 


x  =  p. 


7/  • 


-Jn^-n^.Jg 


so  that  x-y=  ^^.p(m-  ^fr^~n^). 

This  may  be  written  in  the  form 

m^k.p  —  Pi/Jk .  p'Ji  —  X*. 
As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  50,  this  is  the  lesser  root  of  the  equation 
^  -  2fnjk .  px  +  k^m^kp^  =  o. 


Proposition  88. 
To  find  the  fourth  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out,  and  BG  com- 
mensurable in  length  with  it  ; 
therefore  BG  is  also  rational. 

A                                                      B          c              Q 
A 1 


H- 


Let  two  numbers  DF,  FE  be  set  out  such  that  the  whole 
DE  has  not  to  either  of  the  numbers  DF,  EF  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  the  square 
on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  GC.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  BG  is  rational  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  GC  is  also  rational  ; 
therefore  GC  is  rational. 


X.  88]  PROPOSITIONS  87,  88  185 

Now,  since  DE  has  not  to  EF  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GC.       [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  BG,  GC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

Now  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on 
BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 

Since  then,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to 
the  square  on  GC, 

therefore  also,  convertendo,  as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  the  square 
on  GB  to  the  square  on  H,  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  ED  has  not  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  GB  to  the  square  on  H 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H.         [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  H ; 

therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BG. 

And  the  whole  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  A  set  out 

Therefore  BC  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deflf.  ni.  4] 

Therefore  the  fourth  apotome  has  been  found. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Beginning  with  p,  kp,  as  in  x.  85,  86,  we  take  numbers  w,  n  such  that 
(m  -I-  n)  has  not  to  either  of  the  numbers  m,  n  the  ratio  of  a  square  number  to 
a  square  number. 

Take  x  such  that  (w  +  «)  :  «  =  >^p»  :  jc*  (i), 

whence  x  =  kpf.  I 

kp 
=  -7==,  say. 
VI  +X 

Then  shall  {kp  - x),  or  (kp j--     ) ,  be  di  fourth  apotome, 

\  VI  +  A/ 


i86 


BOOK  X 


[x.  88,  89 


For,  by  (i),  :r  is  rational  and  ^^  kp. 

Also  \/^p«  -  a^  is  incommensurable  with  kp^  since 

and  the  ratio  (m  +  n):m  is  not  that  of  a  square  number  to  a  square  number. 
And  kp  o  p. 
As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  51,  the /(mrtA  apoiome 

kp-  -7== 
is  the  lesser  root  of  the  quadratic  equation 


JC*  -  2kp  .  X  + 


i+X 


>fc»p«  =  o. 


Proposition  89. 
To  find  the  fifth  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out, 

and  let  CG  be  commensurable  in  length 
with  A  ; 

therefore  CG  is  rational. 

Let  two  numbers  DF,  FE  be  set  out  c 

such  that  DE  again  has  not  to  either  of  the 
numbers  DF,  FE  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number ;  o     jF 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  FE  is  to  ED, 
so  is  the  square  on  CG  to  the  square  on  GB. 

Therefore   the   square    on    GB    is    also 
rational ;  [x.  6] 

therefore  BG  is  also  rational. 

Now  since,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to 
the  square  on  GC, 

while  DE  has  not  to  EF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GC       [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  BG,  GC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 


X.  89]  PROPOSITIONS  88,  89  187 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  apotome. 

For  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on 
BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC. 

Since  then,  as  the  square  on  BG  is  to  the  square  on  GCy 
so  is  DE  to  EF, 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  the  square  on 
BG  to  the  square  on  H,  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  ED  has  not  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  H 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H.         [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  H ; 

therefore  the  square  on  GB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length 
with  GB. 

And  the  annex  CG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  A  set  out ; 

therefore  BC  is  a  fifth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  5] 

Therefore  the  fifth  apotome  BC  has  been  found. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Let  p,  kp  and  the  numbers  m,  ft  of  the  last  proposition  be  taken. 
Take  ^  such  that  n  :  {m  +  n)  =  J^p^ :  x*    (i). 


In  this  case  x  >  kp,  and      x  =  >^Pa/ 


=  ^pv  I  +  X,  say. 

Then  shall  (x  -  kp)y  or  (Jipji  +  X  -  kp),  be  SL^ftA  apotome. 

For,  by  (i),  jc  is  rational  and  '>-  kp. 

And  since,  by  (i),  (iw  +  «)  :  w  =  jc* :  (jc*  -  ^p*), 

\/jc*-^p*  is  incommensurable  with  x. 

Also  kp  f^  p. 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  52,  th^  fifth  apotome 

kpji  +  X  -  kp 

is  the  lesser  root  of  the  quadratic 

x^  -  2kpjl  +  X .  x  +  X^p"  =  o. 


i88  BOOK  X  [x.  90 

Proposition  90. 
To  find  the  sixth  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A    be   set   out,    and   three 
numbers  E,  BC,  CD  not  having 

to  one  another  the  ratio  which  ^ 

a  square  number  has  to  a  square        ^ ^ 3 

number ;  

and  further  let  CB  also  not  have        

to  BD  the  ratio  which  a  square      ^ 

number  has  to  a  square  number.  b 6 c 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as 
E  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG, 

and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  GH.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Now  since,  as  ^  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the 
square  on  FG, 

therefore  the  square  on  A  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FG.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  A  is  rational  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  also  rational ; 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  E  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG,  [x.  9] 

Again,  since,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 
the  square  on  GH, 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  GH,  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  FG  is  rational  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  GH  is  also  rational ; 

therefore  GH  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  BC  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number, 


X.  9o]  PROPOSITION   90  189 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 
therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.       [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  FH  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  apotome. 

For  since,  as  E  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the 
square  on  FG, 

and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  GH, 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  E  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to 
the  square  on  GH.  [v.  2a] 

But  E  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  GH 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH  \        [x.  9] 

therefore  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  commen- 
surable in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  A. 

Now  let  the  square  on  K  be  that  by  which  the  square  on 
FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH. 

Since  then,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 
the  square  on  GH, 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  square  on 
FG  to  the  square  on  K.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  CB  has  not  to  BD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  K 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  K.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH 
by  the  square  on  K ; 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length 
with  FG. 


190  BOOK  X  [x.  90,  91 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG^  GH  is  commen- 
surable with  the  rational  straight  line  A  set  out. 

Therefore  FH  is  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  6] 

Therefore  the  sixth  apotome  FH  has  been  found. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Let  p  be  the  given  rational  straight  line. 

Take  numbers  /,  (w  +  «),  «  which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  of  a 
square  number  to  a  square  number,  w,  n  being  also  chosen  such  that  the 
ratio  {m->tn)\fn\^  not  that  of  square  to  square. 

Takex,j^  such  that  p  \  {m -¥  n)  ^  p^ :  :)^ (i), 

(m-¥n)  :  n  =  3^\f (2). 

Then  shall  (x  -y)  be  a  sixth  apotome. 

For,  by  (i),  x  is  rational  and  w  p    (3). 

By  (2),  since  x  is  rational, 

y  is  rational  and  sj  x  (4). 

Thus  [(3),  (4)]  {x  -y)  is  an  apotome. 

Again,  ex  aequali^  /  :  «  =  p'  ^  J^i 

whence  y  ^  p* 

Thus  X,  y  are  both  w  p. 

Lastly,  convertendo  from  (2), 

(w  +  «)  :  w  =  :c*  :  (:c*  -y),  - 
whence  >/:c*  -y  \j  x. 

Therefore  {x  -y)  is  a  sixth  apotome. 

From  (i)  and  (2)  we  have  

-7-' 


so  that  the  sixth  apotome  may  be  written 

/m-¥n  In 

or,  more  simply,  »Jk,p-  J\.p, 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  53,  the  sixth  apotome  is  the  lesser  root  of 
the  equation 

x^  -  2jk.px  +  {k  —  \)p*  =  o. 

Proposition  91. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
first  apotome,  the  ''side'*  of  the  area  is  an  apotome. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  and  the  first  apotome  AD  ; 

I  say  that  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB  is  an  apotome. 


X.  9i] 


PROPOSITIONS  90,  91 


191 


For,  since  AD  is  a  first  apotome,  let  DG  be  its  annex  ; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

And  the  whole  AG  is  commensurable  with  the  rational 
straight  line  AC  set  out, 

and  the  square  on  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length 
with  AG  ;  [x.  Deff.  ni.  i] 

if  therefore  there  be  applied  to  ^G^  a  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  it  divides  it  into  commensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 


Let  DG  be  bisected  at  E, 

let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a,  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square 
on  £G  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure, 

and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AjF,  FG  ; 

therefore  AF  is  commensurable  with  FG. 

And  through  the  points  E,  F,  G  let  EH,  FI,  GKh^  drawn 
parallel  to  AC. 

Now,  since  AF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

therefore  -^G^  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of 
the  straight  lines  AF,  FG.  [x.  15] 

But  AG  is  commensurable  with  AC\ 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AF,  FG  is  commensurable 
in  length  with  AC.  [x.  12] 


192  BOOK  X  [x.  91 

And  AC  is  rational ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AJF*,  FG  is  also  rational, 
so  that  each  of  the  rectangles  AI,  FK  is  also  rational,    [x.  19] 

Now,  since  DE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  EG, 

therefore  DG  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of 
the  straight  lines  DE,  EG.  [x.  15] 

But  DG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  AC\ 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  EG  is  also  rational 
and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC\  [x.  13] 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  DH,  EK  is  medial.       [x.  21] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  made  equal  to  AI,  and  let 
there  be  subtracted  the  square  NO  having  a  common  angle 
with  it,  the  angle  LPM,  and  equal  to  FK\ 

therefore  the  squares  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter. 

[vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 
Since  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  AF,  FG  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  EG, 

therefore,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG.  [vi.  17] 

But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  ^/  to  EK, 

and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  KF\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  ^A^is  a  mean  proportional  between  AI,  KF,  [v.  1 1] 

But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  LM,  NO, 
as  was  before  proved,  [Lemma  after  x.  53] 

and  AI  is  equal  to  the  square  LM,  and  KF  to  NO ; 

therefore  MN  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

But  EK  is  equal  to  DH,  and  MN  to  LO  ; 
therefore  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  NO. 

But  AK  is  also  equal  to  the  squares  LM,  NO ; 
therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  ST. 

But  57"  is  the  square  on  LN ; 
therefore  the  square  on  LN  is  equal  to  AB ; 
therefore  LN  is  the  *'side"  of  AB. 


X.  9i]  PROPOSITION  91  193 

I  say  next  that  LN  is  an  apotome. 

For,  since  each  of  the  rectangles  AI,  FK  is  rational, 
and  they  are  equal  to  LM,  NO, 

therefore  each  of  the  squares  LM,  NO,  that  is,  the  squares  on 
LP,  PN  respectively,  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  LP,  PN  is  also  rational. 

Again,  since  DH  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  LO, 
therefore  LO  \s  also  medial. 

Since  then  LO  \s  medial, 
while  NO  is  rational, 
therefore  LO  is  incommensurable  with  NO. 

But,  as  LO  is  to  NO,  so  is  LP  to  PN \  [vi.  i] 

therefore  LP  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  PN.     [x.  1 1] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  LP,  PN  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  LN  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

And  it  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB\ 
therefore  the  "side"  of  the  area  AB  is  an  apotome. 

Therefore  etc. 

This  proposition  corresponds  to  x.  54,  and  the  problem  solved  in  it  is  to 
find  and  to  classify  the  side  of  a  square  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  a 
first  apotome  and  p,  or  (algebraically)  to  find 

First  find  u,  v  from  the  equations 

P«(i-x')/   ^^' 


'iz) <-^ 


If  u,  V  represent  the  values  so  found,  put 

y  =  p«; 
and  (x  -y)  shall  be  the  square  root  required. 

To  prove  this  Euclid  argues  thus. 

By  (i),  u:  \kp  V73a«  =  \kp  n/T^^  :  v, 

whence  pu  :  J^p* >s/i  -A*  =  \kf?  Ji  -\*  :  pv, 

or  x"  :  J  V  Vr^=  i  V  ^A^^•  :y. 

But  [Lemma  after  x.  53] 

ji^  :  xy  =^  xy  :  y, 
so  that  xy  =  \kp^JT^ (3). 

H.  E.  HI.  13 


194  'BOOK  X  [x.  91,  92 

Therefore  {x  -yf  =  ^  +  y  -  ixy 

=  p(u  +  v)-  kp^  Ji  -  A* 

Thus  {x -y)  is  equal  to  Jp(kp  -kpji—  X*). 

It  has  next  to  be  proved  that  {x  -y)  is  an  apotome. 

From  (i)  it  follows,  by  x.  17,  that 

u  '^V\ 

thus  Uy  V  are  both  commensurable  with  (u-^v)  and  therefore  with  p (4). 

Hence  u^  v  are  both  rational, 
so  that  pi/,  pv  are  rational  areas ; 

therefore,  by  (2),  o^^  y  are  rational  and  commensurable    (5), 

whence  also  ^,>'  are  rational  straight  lines  (6). 

Next,  kpJi-X?  is  rational  and  vy  p ; 
therefore  J^p'  Vi  —  A*  is  a  medial  area. 

That  is,  by  (3),  xy  is  a  medial  area. 

But  [(5)]  y  is  a  rational  area ; 
therefore  xy  s^  y, 

or  X  y^  y. 

But  [(6)]  X,  y  are  both  rational. 

Therefore  jc,  y  are  rational  and  />-  ; 
so  that  (x  -y)  is  an  apotome. 

To  find  the  form  of  (x-y)  algebraically,  we  have,  by  solving  (i), 
u  ^  \kp{^i  +X), 

whence,  from  (2),  x-p  ^ -  (i  +  X), 

and  x-y  =  p  ^ ^  (i  +X)-p  ^/-(i  -X). 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  54,  (x  -y)  is  the  lesser  positive  root  of  the 
biquadratic  equation 


Proposition  92. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
second  apotome,  the  ''side'  of  the  area  is  a  first  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  and  the  second  apotome  AD  ; 


X.  92] 


PROPOSITIONS  91,  92 


t9S 


I  say  that  the  "side"  of  the  area  AB  is  a  first  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line. 


F      Q 


N 

c 

'               N     " 

1        K 

L 
S 

W/'' 

■/ 

P 

y/u 

Qt' 

J 

I 

1 

" 

A 

H 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD ; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only,  [x.  73] 

and  the  annex  DG  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  set  out, 

while  the  square  on  the  whole  -^G^  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  annex  GD  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commen- 
surable in  length  with  AG.  [x.  Deflf.  iii.  2] 

Since  then  the  square  on  ^G^  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  GD  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable 
with  AG, 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  AG  a,  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  GD  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  it  divides  it  into  commensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  £, 

let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square 
on  £G  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure, 

and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AI^,  FG  \ 

therefore  AF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FG. 

Therefore  AG\s  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each 
of  the  straight  lines  AF^  FG.  [x.  15] 

But  AG  \s  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  AC\ 

13—2 


196  BOOK  X  [x.  92 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AF,  FG  is  also  rational 
and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC\  [x.  13] 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  A  I,  FK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  DE  is  commensurable  with  EG, 

therefore  DG  is  also  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight 
lines  DE,  EG.  [x.  15] 

But  DG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AC. 
Therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  DH,  EK  is  rational. 

[x.  19] 

Let  then  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  AI, 
and  let  there  be  subtracted  NO  equal  to  FK  and  being  about 
the  same  angle  with  LM,  namely  the  angle  LPM\ 

therefore  the  squares  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter. 

[vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 
Since  then  AI,  FKzx^  medial  and  are  equal  to  the  squares 
on  LP,  PN, 

the  squares  on  LP,  PN  are  also  medial  ; 

therefore  LP,  PN  are  also  medial  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only. 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  EG, 

therefore,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG,  [vi.  17] 

while,  as  AF  is  to  EG^  so  is  AI  to  EK, 

and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  FK  \  [vi.  i] 

therefore  ^A'is  a  mean  proportional  between  A  I,  FK.  [v.  n] 

But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
LM,  NO, 

and  A I  is  equal  to  LM,  and  FK  to  NO  ; 

therefore  MN  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

But  DH  is  equal  to  EK,  and  LO  equal  to  MN \ 

therefore  the  whole  DK  is  equal   to   the   gnomon    UVW 
and  NO. 

Since  then  the  whole  AK  is  equal  to  LM,  NO, 

and,  in  these,  DK  \s  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVIV  diud  NO, 

therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  TS. 


X.  92]  PROPOSITION   92  197 

But  TS  is  the  square  on  LJV ; 
therefore  the  square  on  LJV  is  equal  to  the  area  AB ; 
therefore  LN  is  the  "side"  of  the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LJV  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 
For,  since  JE^/^  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  LO, 

therefore  LO,  that  is,  the  rectangle  LP,  PN,  is  rational. 

But  NO  was  proved  medial ; 
therefore  1^0  is  incommensurable  with  NO. 

But,  as  Z  (9  is  to  NO,  so  is  LP  to  PN;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  LP,  PN  are  incommensurable  in  length.  [x.  11] 

Therefore  LP,  PN  are  medial  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only  which  contain  a  rational  rectangle ; 

therefore  LN  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

[x.  74] 

And  it  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB  is  a  first  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

There  is  an  evident  flaw  in  the  text  in  the  place  (Heiberg,  p.  282, 
11. 17 — 20:  translation  p.  196  above)  where  it  is  said  that  "since  then  A/,  FK 
are  medial  and  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  LP,  PN,  the  squares  on  LP,  PN 
are  also  medial ;  therefore  LP,  PN  are  also  medial  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only'^  It  is  not  till  the  last  lines  of  the  proposition  (Heiberg,  p.  284, 
11.  17,  18)  that  it  is  proved  that  LP,  PNdj^  incommensurable  in  length.  What 
should  have  been  proved  in  the  former  passage  is  that  the  squares  on  LP,  PN 
are  commensurable,  so  that  LP,  PN  are  commensurable  in  square  (not 
commensurable  in  square  only).  I  have  supplied  the  step  in  the  note  below : 
"  Also  x^'^y^,  since  u  ^  v."  Theon  seems  to  have  observed  the  omission  and 
to  have  put  **  and  commensurable  with  one  another "  after  **  medial "  in  the 
passage  quoted,  though  even  this  does  not  show  why  the  squares  on  LP,  PN 
are  commensurable.  One  ms.  (V)  also  has  "only"  (jwvov)  erased  after 
"  commensurable  in  square." 


This  proposition  amounts  to  finding  and  classifying 


The  method  is  that  of  the  last  proposition.      Euclid  solves,  first,  the 
equations 


U  +  7f  = 


n/7^»[ («)• 


198  BOOK  X  [x.  92 

Then,  using  the  values  of  w,  z^  so  found,  he  puts 

J  =  '^M     (2), 

and  (x  -y)  is  the  square  root  required. 


That  i.-y)  =  ^,{-jt=^r^) 


is  proved  in  the  same  way  as  is  the  corresponding  fact  in  x.  91. 

From  (i)  u  :  ^kp  =  ^kp  :  v, 

so  that  pu  :^kp^  =  ^kp^ :  pv. 

But                                       x^ixy^xyiy^j 
whence,  by  (2),  xy  =  \kp^    (3)- 

Therefore  {x  ~yy  =  js^  -^y  -  2xy 

=  p  (w  +  z/)  -  kp* 

Next,  we  have  to  prove  that  (x  ->')  is  a  ^rsf  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line. 

From  (i)  it  follows,  by  x.  17,  that 

ur^v    (4), 

therefore  1/,  v  are  both  ^  («  +  v). 

But  [(i)]  («  +  »)  is  rational  and  sj  p ; 

therefore  1/,  v  are  both  rational  and  s/  p   (5). 

Therefore  p«,  pv^  or  0^^  y,  are  both  medial  areas,  and  x^  y  are  medial 
straight  lines (6). 

Also  jc*  ^y,  since  u*^v  [(4)] (7). 

Now  xy^  or  J^p*,  is  a  rational  area  ; 

therefore  ^  ^  y> 

and  X  sj  y. 

Hence  [(6),  (7),  (3)]  jc,  ^  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle ; 

therefore  {x-y)  is  2i  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

Algebraical  solution  of  the  equations  gives 

,     I +A    , 


1        I   ~^       JL 


and  x-y^ps/\  (f^)*-  P  V  \  (^)*. 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  55,  this  is  the  lesser  positive  root  of  the 
equation 


x-93] 


PROPOSITIONS   92,  93 


199 


Proposition  93. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
third  apotome,  the  ''side"  of  the  area  is  a  second  apotonte  of  a 
medial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  and  the  third  apotome  AD  \ 

I  say  that  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB  is  a  second  apotome  of 
a  medial  straight  line. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD  ; 
therefore  AG^  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 

and  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AG,  GD  is  commensurable 
in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  AC  set  out, 
while  the  square  on  the  whole  ^G^  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  annex  DG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commen- 
surable with  AG.  [x.  Deflf.  ni.  3] 


Since  then  the  square  on  AG  \^  greater  than  the  square 
on  GD  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable 
with  AG, 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  -^G^  a  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  commensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  E, 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  3.  parallelogram   equal  to  the 
square  on  £G  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AF,  FG. 


200  BOOK   X  [x.  93 

Let  EHy  FI,  GK  be  drawn  through  the  points  E,  F,  G 
parallel  to  A  C. 

Therefore  AF^  FG  are  commensurable  ; 

therefore  A I  is  also  commensurable  with  FK.  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

And,  since  AFy  FG  are  commensurable  in  length, 

therefore  AG  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of 
the  straight  lines  AF,  FG.  [x.  15] 

But  AG    is    rational    and    incommensurable    in   length 
with  AC; 

so  that  AF,  FG  are  so  also.  [x.  13] 

Therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  A/,  FK  is  medial,  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  DE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  EG, 

therefore  DG  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of 
the  straight  lines  DE,  EG.  [x.  15] 

But    GD    is    rational    and   incommensurable   in   length 
with  AC\ 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  EG  is  also  rational 
and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC\  [x.  13] 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  DH,  EK  is  medial.        [x.  21] 

And,  since  AG,  GD  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  -^G^  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GD, 

But  -^G^  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AF,  and  DG 
with  EG\ 

therefore  AFis  incommensurable  in  length  with  EG,     [x.  13] 

But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  A I  to  E/C;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  A/  is  incommensurable  with  E/C.  [x.  u] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  A/, 

and  let  there  be  subtracted  JVO  equal  to  F/C  and  being  about 
the  same  angle  with  LAf; 

therefore  LAf,  JVO  are  about  the  same  diameter.  [vi.  26] 

Let  P/i  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Now,  since  the  rectangle  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  EG, 
therefore,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG.  [vi.  17] 


X.  93]  PROPOSITION   93  201 

But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  AI  to  EK, 
and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  FK ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  also,  as  A I  is  to  EK,  so  is  EK  to  FK ;  [v.  n] 

therefore  EK  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AI,  FK. 

But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
LM,  NO, 

and  A I  is  equal  to  LM,  and  /^A!'  to  NO ; 
therefore  ^fi'A'  is  also  equal  to  MN. 

But  MN  is  equal  to  Z(7,  and  EK  equal  to  /?//'; 
therefore  the  whole  DK  is  also  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW 
and  NO. 

But  ^ /f  is  also  equal  to  LM,  NO ; 
therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  ST,  that  is,  to  the 
square  on  LN  \ 
therefore  LN  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line. 

For,  since  AI.FKvf^Y^  proved  medial,  and  are  equal  to  the 
squares  on  LP,  PN, 

therefore  each  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  also  medial ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

And,  since  A I  is  commensurable  with  FK,        [vi.  i,  x.  u] 

therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  PN. 

Again,  since  AI  was  proved  incommensurable  with  EK, 
therefore  LM  is  also  incommensurable  with  MN, 
that  is,  the  square  on  LP  with  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  ; 

so  that  LP  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  PN\ 

[vi.  I,  X.  11] 
therefore  LP,  PN  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only. 

I  say  next  that  they  also  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 
For,  since  EK  was  proved   medial,  and  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  LP,  PN, 

therefore  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  is  also  medial, 

so  that  LP,  PN  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 

square  only  which  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 


202  BOOK   X  [x.  93 

Therefore  LN  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line ;  [x.  75] 

and  it  is  the  "side"  of  the  area  AB, 

Therefore  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB  is  a  second  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 
Here  we  are  to  find  and  classify  the  irrational  straight  line 

Following  the  same  method,  we  put 

p  =  iV(i-^0  /  ^  ^* 


'::} «^ 


Next,  Uy  V  being  found,  let 

0^  =  pu 

then  {x  -y)  is  the  square  root  required  and  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial 
straight  line. 

That  {x  —y)  is  the  square  root  required  and  that  ^,  y^  are  medial  areas,  so 
that  X,  y  are  medial  straight  lines,  is  proved  exactly  as  in  the  last  proposition. 

The  rectangle  xy^  being  equal  to  J  ^^ . p*  \/i  -  A*,  is  also  medial. 

Now,  from  (i),  by  X.  17,  i/  ^  z/, 

whence  u-k-v  ^  u. 

But  {u  +  v)y  ox  Jk.pyy^\Jk.p  n/i-A* ; 

therefore  u  sj  \  Jk.  p  Ji-X^ 

and  consiequently  pu  s^  ^  Jk ,  p^  sfi  -  A*, 

or  jtr*  w  ^, 

whence  x  sjy. 

And,  since  «  ^  f ,  p«  ^  pv, 

or  jr*  ^  ^. 

Thus  jr,  J'  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
And  xy  is  a  medial  area. 

Therefore  (x  -  j)  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 
'    Its  actual  form  is  found  by  solving  equations  (i),  (2); 

thus  «  =  J  (V^.  p  +  A  ^^ .  p), 

v^\{^k,p-\^k,p\ 

and  ^-JF  =  P>y^(i+A).py^(i-A). 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  56,  this  is  the  lesser  positive  root  of  the 
equation 

:«^-2  V>&.pV  +  A«V  =  o. 


94] 


PROPOSITIONS   93,  94 


203 


Proposition  94. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
fourth  apotomey  the  ''side''  of  the  area  is  minor. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  and  the  fourth  apotome  AD  ; 
I  say  that  the  "side"  of  the  area  AB  is  minor. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD ; 
therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 

AG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
^Cset  out, 

and  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  annex  DG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommen- 
surable in  length  with  AG,  [x.  Deff.  in.  4] 

A  D  E  F       Q 


c 

3                     H             1        K 

L 

N 

p 

y 

.'"■ 

V 

8 

/ 

/\ 

0 

U  / 

q; 

/w 

M 


Since  then  the  square  on  ^G^  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  GD  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
in  length  with  AG, 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  ^6^  a  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  incommensurable  parts.  [x.  18] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  £, 
let  there  be  applied  to  ^G^  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square 
on  £G  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AF,  FG ; 
therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG. 


204  BOOK   X  [x.  94 

Let  EH,  FI,  GK  be  drawn  through  E,  F,  G  parallel  to 
AC,  BD. 

Since  then  AG  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  AC, 
therefore  the  whole  AK  is  rational.  [x.  19] 

Again,  since  DG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC, 
and  both  are  rational, 
therefore  DK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  AFis  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG, 
therefore  AI  is  also  incommensurable  with  FK.       [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  A  I, 
and  let  there  be  subtracted  NO  equal  to  FK  and  about  the 
same  angle,  the  angle  LPM, 

Therefore   the   squares  LM,  NO  are   about  the  same 
diameter.  [vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Since  then  the  rectangle  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  EG, 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG. 

[vi.  17] 

But,  ^.s  AFis  to  EG,  so  is  A I  to  EK, 
and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  FK,  [vi.  i] 

therefore  EK  is  a  mean  proportional  between  A  I,  FK.  [v.  n] 

But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
LM,  NO, 

and  AI  is  equal  to  LM,  and  FK  to  NO  ; 
therefore  EK  is  also  equal  to  MN. 

But  DH  is  equal  to  EK,  and  LO  is  equal  to  MN  -, 
therefore  the  whole  DK  is  equal    to   the   gnomon    UVW 
and  NO. 

Since,    then,    the   whole   AK  is   equal    to    the    squares 
LM,  NO, 

and,  in  these,  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  the 
square  NO, 

therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  57",  that  is,  to  the 
square  on  LN  \ 
therefore  LN  is  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB. 


X.  94]  PROPOSITION   94  205 

I  say  that  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 
For,  since  AK  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
LP,  PN, 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LP^  PN  is  rational. 

Again,  since  DK  is  medial, 
and  DK  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN, 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

And,  since  AI  was  proved  incommensurable  with  FK, 

therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  PN. 

Therefore  LP,  PN  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  whicl^fnake  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational, 
but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial. 

Therefore  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor; 

.  [x.  76] 
and  it  is  the  ''side"  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB  is  minor. 

Q.  E.  D. 
We  have  here  to  find  and  classify  the  straight  line 


As  usual,  we  find  u,  v  from  the  equations 


equations 


-(I), 


and  then,  giving  u,  v  their  values,  we  put 

f^^pv]    (^>- 

Then  {x  -y)  is  the  required  square  root 

This  is  proved  in  the  same  way  as  before,  and,  as  before,  it  is  proved  that 

Now,  from  (i),  by  x.  18,  u  y^  v; 

therefore  pu  s^  pv, 

or  -^^^1 

so  that  X,  y  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

And  ^  +y,  or  p  (//  +  v),  is  a  rational  area  (>tp*). 

But  2xy  =    .J—-  ,  which  is  a  medsa/  area. 

Vi  +  A 

Hence  [x.  76]  {x  -y)  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  msnor. 


2o6 


BOOK  X 


[x.  94,  95 


Algebraical  solution  gives  

whence     ^-^  =  p,^^  (,  +  ^-A^) -p^^  (,  -  y.-^-). 

As  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  57,  this  is  the  lesser  positive  root  of  the 
equation 

'^  I  +  A    '^ 


Proposition  95. 

1/  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
fifth  apotome,  the  **  side  "  of  the  area  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  and  the  fifth  apotome  AD ; 

I  say  that  the  "  side  "  of  the  area  AB  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD ; 
therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 


C                          D 

H            1         K 

N 

L 

/'' 

y 

r 

S 

/  \ 

0 

U  / 

a  / 

/ 

y  W 

M 


the  annex  GD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 

straight  line  AC  set  out, 

and  the  square  on  the  whole  -^6^  is  greater  than  the  square 


X.  95]  PROPOSITIONS   94,  95  207 

on  the  annex  DG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommen- 
surable with  AG.  [x.  Deff.  iii.  5] 

Therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  -^G^  a  parallelogram 
equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient 
by  a  square  figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  incommensurable 
parts.  [x.  18] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  the  point  Ey 

let  there  be  applied  to  -^G^  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the 
square  on  EG  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let  it  be 
the  rectangle  AF,  FG ; 

therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG. 

Now,  since  -^6^  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CA, 
and  both  are  rational, 

therefore  AK\s  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  DG  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  AC, 

DK  is  rational.  [x.  19] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  AI,  and 
let  the  square  NO  equal  to  FK  and  about  the  same  angle,  the 
angle  LPM^  be  subtracted  ; 

therefore  the  squares  LMy  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter. 

[vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 
Similarly  then  we  can  prove  that  LN  is  the  "side"  of  the 
area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For,  since  AK  was  proved  medial  and  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  LP,  PN, 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

Again,  since  DK  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  twice  the 
rectangle  LP,  PN, 

the  latter  is  itself  also  rational. 

And,  since  AI  is  incommensurable  with  FK, 

therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  PN ; 

therefore  LP,  PN  are  straight   lines   incommensurable  in 


2o8  BOOK  X  [x.  95 

square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial 
but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational. 

Therefore  the  remainder  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  that  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 
whole ;  [x.  77] 

and  it  is  the  "  side  "  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  **side"  of  the  area  AB  is  a  straight  line 
which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Here  the  problem  is  to  find  and  classify 

V  p  (fip  n/i  +  A  —  kp ). 
As  usual,  we  put 

U'^V  =  kp^l\^\■\\  .    . 

uv^\1^f?  ]     ^'^' 

and,  I/,  V  being  found,  we  take 

";=^M (2). 

Then  (x  -y)  so  found  is  our  required  square  root. 
This  fact  is  proved  as  before,  and,  as  before,  we  see  that 

xy  =  \kp\ 
Now  from  (i),  by  x.  18,  u  s^  7/, 

whence  pu  w  pv^ 

or  ^^^1 

and  x^  y  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

Next  (p^  -^  ^)  =  p(u  -^  v)  =  kp^  Ji  +\,  which  is  a  medial  area. 

And  2xy  =  ^p*,  which  is  a  rational  area. 

Hence  (x-y)  is  the  ^^  side''  of  a  medial^  minus  a  rational^  area,      [x.  77] 

Algebraical  solution  gives 

i/  =  ^(x/FTa  +  V^), 

and  therefore 

x-y  =  p  \/-(Vi+x+^X)-p  ^y -(sfTTk-Jk), 

which  is,  as  explained  in  the  note  to  x.  58,  the  lesser  positive  root  of  the 
equation 

X*  -  2  V  V7+A .  x^  +  XJ^p*  =  o. 


96] 


PROPOSITIONS  95,  96 


209 


Proposition  96. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
sixth  apotomey  the  '*  side'^  of  the  area  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight 
line  AC  and  the  sixth  apotome  AD ; 

I  say  that  the  **  side  "  of  the  area  AB  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 


--.y/ 


w 


— M 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  \.o  AD\ 

therefore  AG^  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 

neither  of  them  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  AC  set  out, 

and  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  annex  DG  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommen- 
surable in  length  with  AG.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  6] 

Since  then  the  square  on  ^G^  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  GD  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in 
length  with  AG, 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  ^6^  a  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  incommensurable  parts.  [x.  18] 

Let  then  Z?G^  be  bisected  at  £, 

let  there  be  applied  to  AG  sl  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square 


H.  £.  HI. 


14 


2IO  BOOK  X  [x.  96 

on  EG  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let  it  be  the 

rectangle  AF^  FG\ 

therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

But,  as  AF  is  to  FG,  so  is  A I  to  FK\  [vi  .1] 

therefore  AI  is  incommensurable  with  FK.  [x.  u] 

And,  since  AG,  AC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensur- 
able in  square  only, 
AKis  medial.  [x-  21] 

Again,  since  AC,  DG  are   rational   straight   lines   and 
incommensurable  in  length, 
DK  is  also  medial.  [x.  21] 

Now,  since  AG,  GD  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
therefore  -^G^  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GD, 

But,  as  ^G^  is  to  GD,  so  is  AK  to  KD  ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  AK  is  incommensurable  with  KD.  [x.  n] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  h^  constructed  equal  to  A  I, 
and  let  NO  equal   to  FK,  and  about   the  same  angle,  be 
subtracted ; 

therefore  the  squares  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter. 

[vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Then  in  manner  similar  to  the  above  we  can  prove  that 
LN  is  the  "  side  "  of  the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

For,  since  AK  was  proved  medial  and  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  LP,  PN, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

Again,  since  DK  was  proved  medial  and  is  equal  to  twice 
the  rectangle  LP,  PN, 
twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  is  also  medial. 

And,  since  AK  was  proved  incommensurable  with  DK, 
the  squares  on  LP,  PN  are  also  incommensurable  with  twice 
the  rectangle  LP,  PN. 

And,  since  A I  is  incommensurable  with  FK, 

therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  PN ; 


X.  96]  PROPOSITION   96  211 

therefore  LP,  PN  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial, 
twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  and  further  the 
squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them. 

Therefore  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  that 
which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole;     [x.  78] 

and  it  is  the  "side"  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  **side"  of  the  area  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.  D. 
We  have  to  find  and  classify 

Put,  as  usual, 

uv  =  \\(?    J    ^  '' 

and,  u,  V  being  thus  found,  let 

J^^M (2). 

/=pf  J  ^ 

Then,  as  before,  (x  -y)  is  the  square  root  required. 

For,  from  (i),  by  x.  18,  u  sj  v, 

whence  pu  w  p/v^ 

or  ^^y, 

and  X,  y  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

Next,  ^  +y  =  p  («  4-  7')  =  V>^  •  p',  which  is  a  medial  area. 

Also  2xy  =  JX. .  p',  which  is  again  a  media/  area. 

Lastly,  Jk.p,  V^ •  P  are  by  hypothesis  ^-^^  so  that 

Jk.p^  J\,p, 

whence  Jk,p^  ^^  J\. p', 

or  (p(^+y)  sj  2xy, 

Thus  {x  -y)  is  the  ^^side"  of  a  medial,  minus  a  medialy  area  [x.  78]. 
Algebraical  solution  gives 

whence  x^y^p  J\(Jk+  >Jk^)  -  p  JlUk-Jk^), 

This,  as  explained  in  the  note  on  x.  59,  is  the  lesser  positive  root  of  the 
equation 

Ar*-2V>t.pV  +  (>t-X)p*  =  o. 


14—2 


212 


BOOK  X 


[x.  97 


Proposition  97. 

The  square  on  an  apotome  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line  produces  as  breadth  a  first  apotome. 

Let  -^^  be  an  apotome,  and  CD  rational, 
and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CE  equal  to  the  square  on 
AB  and  producing  CF  as  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  CF  is  a  first  apotome. 


B 


M 


3                            E                          DHL 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB ; 
therefore  AG,  GB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied  C/f  equal  to  the  square  on 
AG,  and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG. 

Therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
and,  in  these,  CF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB; 
therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AG,  GB.  [11.  7] 

Let  FM  be  bisected  at  the  point  JV, 
and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  JV  parallel  to  CD ; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  LN  is  equal   to  the 
rectangle  AG,  GB. 

Now,  since  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  rational, 
and  DM  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
therefore  DM  is  rational. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD, 
producing  CM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with 
CD.  [x.  20] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial,  and 
FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
therefore  FL  is  medial. 


X.  97]  PROPOSITION   97  213 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing 
FM  as  breadth ; 

therefore  FM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
CD.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  rational, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 

And  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GBy 
and  FL  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  ; 
therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  DM  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  FM-,  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FM.    [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  first  apotome. 
For,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG, 

and  NL  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 

therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL  ; 

therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  CK  to  NM, 

and,  as  NL  is  to  KL,  so  is  NM  to  KM\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
NM  [vi.  17],  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

And,  since  the  square  on  AG  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  GB, 

CH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CK  is  commensurable  with  KM.  [x.  1 1] 

Since  then  CM,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines. 


214  BOOK  X  [x.  97 

and  to  CM  there  has  been  applied  the  rectangle  CK,  KM 

equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM  and  deficient  by 

a  square  figure, 

while  CK  is  commensurable  with  KM, 

therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF 

by  the  square  on  a  straight   line  commensurable   in   length 

with  CM,  [x.  17] 

And  CM  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  CD  set  out ; 
therefore  CF  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ui.  i] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Here  begins  the  hexad  of  propositions  solving  the  problems  which  are  the 
converse  of  those  in  the  hexad  just  concluded.  Props.  97  to  102  correspond 
of  course  to  Props.  60  to  65  relating  to  the  binomials  etc. 

We  have  in  x.  97  to  prove  that,  (p—  Jk.  p)  being  an  apotome, 

c 
is  2i  first  apotome,  and  we  have  to  find  it  geometrically. 

Euclid's  procedure  may  be  represented  thus. 
Take  Xy  y,  z  such  that 

ax  =  p'  \ 

^y-h'       \ (i). 

tr  ,2Z-2  Jk .  p'  / 

Thus  {x+y)-2zJ''-'J''-'''^\ 

and  we  have  to  prove  that  (X'\-y)  -  20  is  sl  first  apotome. 

(a)     Now  p^  +  kp\  or  <r  {x  -^-y),  is  rational ; 

therefore  (x  ^-y)  is  rational  and  '^o- (2). 

And  2  Jk .  p\  or  <r .  2«,  is  medial : 
therefore  2Z  is  rational  and  w  <r (3). 

But,  <r  {x  ^-y)  being  rational,  and  <r  .  22  medial, 

<T  {X  ■{■  y)  yj  <T  ,  2Z, 

whence  (x-^y)  ^^  2z, 

Therefore,  since  (x+y),  2Z  are  both  rational  [(2),  (3)], 
(x+y),  25  are  rational  and  *^  (4). 

Hence  (x  +y)  -  2Z  is  an  apotome, 

(P)     Since  Jk .  p"  is  a  mean  proportional  between  p\  kp\ 
<TZ  is  a  mean  proportional  between  frx,  €ry  [by  (i)]. 

That  is,                                 o-jc  ;  <r«  =  cs  :  try, 
or                                                     X  :  z  =  z  :  y, 
and  xy  =  z\  or  \{2zy (5). 


X.  97,  98]  PROPOSITIONS   97,  98 

And,  since  p^  '^  kp^,  ax  ^  try, 

or  X  '^  y    

Hence  [(5),  (6)],  by  x.  17, 

And  [(4)]  {x  +  y),  2z  are  rational  and  '^j 
while  [(2)]  {x-\-y)  '^  <T'y 
therefore  (x  +y)  -  2Z  is  sijirs/  apotame. 

The  actual  value  of  {x-^-y)-  2Z  is  of  course 


215 


.(6). 


Proposition  98. 

Tke  square  on  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  a  second 
apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  and 
CD  a  rational  straight  line, 

and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CE  equal  to  the  square  on 
AB,  producing  CF  as  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  CF  is  a  second  apotome. 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB ; 
therefore  AG,  GB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only  which  contain  a  rational  rectangle.  [x.  74] 


B 

-I — 


M 


To  CD  let  there  be  applied  CH  equal  to  the  square  on 
AG,  producing  CK  as  breadth,  and  KL  equal  to  the  square 
on  GB,  producing  KM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB ; 
therefore  CL  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  pro- 
ducing CM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
CD.  [x.  22] 


2i6  BOOK  X  [x.  98 

Now,  since  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
and,  in  these,  the  square  on  y^^  is  equal  to  CE, 
therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GBy  is  equal 
to  FL.  [11.  7] 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  rational ;        • 
therefore  FL  is  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE,  producing 
FM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  FM  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  CD.  [x.  20] 

Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB,  that  is, 
CL,  is  medial,  while  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB,  that  is,  FL, 
is  rational, 
therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  FM  \  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CM  \s  incommensurable  in  length  with  FM,    [x-  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ; 
therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  second  apotome. 

For  let  FM  be  bisected  at  N, 
and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  CD ; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL   is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  y^6\  GB. 

Now,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
and  the  square  on  y^  6^  is  equal  to  CH, 
the  rectangle  AG,  GB  to  NL, 
and  the  square  on  BG  to  KL, 

therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL ; 
therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  CK  to  NM, 
and,  as  NL  is  to  KL,  so  is  NM  to  MK ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore,  as  CK  is  to  NM,  so  is  NM  to  KM  \  [v.  n] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
NM  [vi.  17],  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 


X.  98]  PROPOSITION   98  217 

Since  then  CM,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and 
the  rectangle  CK,  KM  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square 
on  MF  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure  has  been  applied  to 
the  greater,  CM,  and  divides  it  into  commensurable  parts, 
therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with 
CM.  [x.  17] 

And  the  annex  FM  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  CD  set  out ; 
therefore  CF  is  a  second  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  2] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

In  this  case  we  have  to  find  and  classify 

Take  x^  y,  z  such  that 

<ry  =  >fcV    \ (')• 

<r  .  20  =  2k^ 

(a)     Now  Jrp^y  k^p^  are  medial  areas ; 

therefore  <r  (a:  +  j^)  is  medial, 

whence  {x-{-y)  is  rational  and  w  <r    (2). 

But  2kp\  and  therefore  <r .  22;,  is  rational, 
whence  22  is  rational  and  '^  <r   (3). 

And,  (r{x-\-y)  being  medial,  and  c .  2z  rational, 
<r  {x  -^y)  w  <r .  2S, 
or  {x  -^y)  w  2Z. 

Hence  {x-\-y\  22  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and  therefore  {x-\-y)'-2z  is  an  apotome, 

(fi)     We  prove,  as  before,  that 

xy^\{2zf   (4). 

Also  i^V  '^  ^  P'>  or  fTX  ^  <ry, 
so  that  X  ^y  (5). 

[This  step  is  omitted  in  P,  and  Heiberg  accordingly  brackets  it.     The 
result  is,  however,  assumed.] 
Therefore  [(4),  (5)],  by  x.  17, 

J{x  +yy  -  (22;)*  ^  {x  +yy 
And  2Z  ^  <r. 
Therefore  (x  -{■  y)  -  2Z  is  a,  second  apotome. 

Obviously  {x  +_>»)  —  22?  =  —  \»Jk  (i  +  ^)  -  2^}. 


2l8 


BOOK  X 


[x.  99 


Proposition  99. 

The  square  on  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  a  third 
apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 
and  CD  rational, 

and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CE  equal  to  the  square  on 
AB,  producing  CF  as  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  CF  is  a  third  apotome. 


K        M 


D                            E                           DHL 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB ; 
therefore  AG,  GB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  which  contain  a  medial  rectangle.  [x.  75] 

Let  CH  equal  to  the  square  on  -^6^  be  applied  to  CD, 
producing  CK  as  breadth, 

and  let  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG  be  applied  to  KH, 
producing  KM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB\ 
therefore  CL  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing 
CM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
CD.  [x.  22] 

Now,  since  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG, 
GB,  and,  in  these,  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 
therefore  the  remainder  LF  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AG,GB.  [II.  7] 

Let  then  FM  be  bisected  at  the  point  N, 
and  let  NO  be  drawn  parallel  to  CD  ^ 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rect- 
angle AG,  GB. 


X.  99]  PROPOSITION   99  219 

But  the  rectangle  AG,   GB  is  medial ; 
therefore  FL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing 
FM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  FM  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  CD.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  AG,  GB  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
therefore  AG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GB; 
therefore  the  square  on  y^G^  is  also  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  AG,  GB.  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

But  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  AG, 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  with  the  rectangle  AG,  GB; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB.  [x.  13] 

But  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  A  G,  GB, 
and  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB ; 
therefore  CL  is  also  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  FM;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FM.    [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  third  apotome. 
For,  since  the  square  on  AG  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  GB, 

therefore  C//  is  also  commensurable  with  KL, 
so  that  CK  is  also  commensurable  with  /CM.  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and  C//  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB, 

and  NL  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 

therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL  ; 

therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 


220  BOOK   X  [x.  99 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  CK  to  NM, 
and,  as  NL  is  to  KLy  so  is  NM  to  KM \  [vi.  i] 

therefore,  as  CK  is  to  J/^,  so  is  MN  to  A'il/;  [v.  ii] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  [the  square  on 
MNy  that  is,  to]  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM, 

Since  then  CM,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and 
a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM 
and  deficient  by  a  square  figure  has  been  applied  to  CM,  and 
divides  it  into  commensurable  parts, 

therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MF  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
CM.  [x.  17] 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CM,  MF  is  commensur- 
able in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  CD  set  out ; 
therefore  CF  is  a  third  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ui.  3] 

Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


We  have  to  find  and  classify 


Take  x,  y,  z  such  that 


<r  .  22  =  2  ^X  .  p^ 

(a)     Then  (r(x+y)  is  a  medial  area, 

whence  (x+y)  is  rational  and  ^^  <r    (i). 

Also  <r  .  22  is  medial, 
whence  22  is  rational  and  ^^  <r   (2). 

Again  ^p  w  ^^^-j^ , 

whence  Jk .  p^  ^  ^X .  p*. 

And  Jk,p'rs(^jk,p'  +  ^^p'y 

while  VX .  p«  ^  2  V^  .  p* ; 

therefore  fjk.p^+-^pA^2^\,  p«, 

or  (r{x  +y)  y^  <r ,  2Z, 

and  i^  +  y)  ^  20 (3). 


X.  99>  'o<>] 


PROPOSITIONS   99,  loo 


221 


Thus  [(i),  (2),  (3)]  (x  +y),  2z  are  rational  and  '^-j 
so  that  {x+y)  —  2Z  is  an  apotome, 

(P)     <rx  ^  cry,  so  that  x  ^  y. 

And,  as  before,  -^  =  i  (2^)'. 

Therefore  [x.  17]         V(a: +>')*-( 2s)'  '^  (^  +j^). 
And  neither  {x  -^y)  nor  25  is  ^  <r. 
Therefore  (jc  +  j')  -  2Z  is  a  M/r</  apotome. 
It  is  of  course  equal  to 


Proposition   100. 

714^  square  on  a  minor  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line  produces  as  breadth  a  fourth  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  minor  and  CD  a  rational  straight  line,  and 
to  the  rational  straight  line  CD  let  CE  be  applied  equal  to  the 
square  on  AB  and  producing  CF  as  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  CF  is  a  fourth  apotome. 


X- 


M 


For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB ; 
therefore  AGy    GB  are   straight    lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which   make  the  sum  of  the  squares   on  AG^   GB 
rational,  but  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  medial.        [x.  76] 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied  CH  equal  to  the  square  on 
AG  and  producing  CA'as  breadth, 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG,  producing  KM^s  breadth ; 
therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB. 

And  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  is  rational ; 
therefore  CL  is  also  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing 
CM  as  breadth ; 

therefore  CM  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  CD.  [x.  20] 


222  BOOK    X  [x.  lOO 

And,  since  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG, 
GBy  and,  in  these,  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 

therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AG,  GB.  [ii.  7] 

Let  then  FM  be  bisected  at  the  point  iV, 

and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  either  of  the 
straight  lines  CD,  ML  ; 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rect- 
angle AG^  GB. 

And,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial  and  is 
equal  to  FL, 

therefore  FL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE,  producing 
FM  as  breadth ; 

therefore  FM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
CD.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  is  rational, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial, 
the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  AG^  GB. 

But  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
and  FL  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB ; 
therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  MF\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MF.    [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 
therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 
therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  that  it  is  also  a  fourth  apotome. 

For,  since  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  in  square, 

therefore  the  square  onAGxs,  also  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  GB. 

And  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB ; 

therefore  CH  is  incommensurable  with  KL. 


X.  loo]  PROPOSITION    loo  223 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CK\%  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM,    [x.  n] 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  squares  on  AG,  GB^ 

and  the  square  on  -^G^  is  equal  to  CH, 

the  square  on  GB  to  AX, 

and  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  to  NL, 

therefore  NL  is  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL  ; 

therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL, 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  CK  to  NM, 

and,  as  NL  is  to  KL,  so  is  NM  to  KM\  [vi.  i] 

therefore,  as  CK  is  to  J/iV,  so  is  MN  to  ATAf ;  [v.  n] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
MN  [vi.  17],  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

Since  then  O/,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and 
the  rectangle  CK,  KM  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square 
on  MF  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure  has  been  applied  to 
CM  and  divides  it  into  incommensurable  parts, 

therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MF  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with 
CM.  [x.  18] 

And  the  whole  CM  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  CD  set  out ; 

therefore  CF  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  iii.  4] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 
We  have  to  find  and  classify 


M^y- 

P 

J2 

/ 

We  will  call  this,  for  brevity, 

> 

-Vf. 

Take  x,  y,  z  such  that 

(TX  = 

<Ty  = 
<r.  22  = 

=  2m> 

'. 

where  it  has  to  be  remembered  that 
rational,  and  2uv  medial. 

u\v' 

are  i 

incom  mensurable, 

(«> 

+  J'*)  is 

224  BOOK  X  [x.  loo,  loi 

It  follows  that  a^(x+y)  is  rational  and  o- .  2Z  medial, 

so  that  (x+y)  is  rational  and  *^  <r (i), 

while  22  is  rational  and  ^^  <r  (2), 

and  <r  (x  +y)  \j  <t  .  iz, 

so  that  {x-^y)  ^  25    (3). 

Thus  [(i),  (2),  (3)]  {x-{^y\  2Z  are  rational  and  *^y 
so  that  {x  +_y)  —  2Z  is  an  apotome. 

Next,  since  «'  ^  7^^ 

ax  s/  ory, 
or  X  K^y, 

And  it  is  proved,  as  usual,  that 

xy  =  z^  =  {(2zy. 

Therefore  [x.  18]         J{x'\-yf-(2zf  s/  {x  -¥yy 

But  (x  +y)  ^  c, 
therefore  x+y—2Z  is  k  fourth  apotome. 

Its  value  is  of  course  -  ( i  — ,  ) . 


Proposition  101. 

The  sqtmre  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line,  produces  as  breadth  a  fifth  apotome. 

Let   AB   be   the   straight   line   which   produces  with   a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole,  and  CD  a  rational  straight  line, 
and  to  CD  let  CE  be  applied  equal  to  the  square  on  AB  and 
producing  CF  as  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  CF  is  a  fifth  apotome. 

A B         G 

C  F  N  K        M 


D  E  DHL 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB ; 
therefore  AG,   GB  are   straight   lines    incommensurable   in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial 
but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational.  [x.  77] 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied  CH  equal  to  the  square  on 
AG,  and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB ; 
therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 


X.  loi]  PROPOSITIONS    loo,  loi  225 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  together  is 
medial ; 

therefore  CL  is  medial. 

And  it  is  apph'ed  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing 
CM  as  breadth ; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  with  CD.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and,  in  these,  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 

therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AG,  GB.  [n.  7] 

Let  then  FM  be  bisected  at  N, 

and  through  N  let  NO  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  of  the 
straight  lines  CD,  ML  ; 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rect- 
angle AG,  GB. 

And,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  rational  and 
equal  to  FL, 

therefore  FL  is  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing 
FM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  FM  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with 
CD.  [x.  20] 

Now,  since  CL  is  medial,  and  FL  rational, 
therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  MF\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MF.     [x.  n] 

And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  apotome. 

For  we  can  prove  similarly  that  the  rectangle  CK,  KM 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  NM,  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the 
square  on  FM. 

And,  since  the  square  on  -^6^  is  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  GB, 

H.  E.  III.  15 


226  BOOK  X  [x.  loi 

while  the  square  on  y^G^  is  equal  to  CH^ 

and  the  square  on  GB  to  KL, 

therefore  CH  is  incommensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM.     [x.  ii] 

Since  then  CM,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines, 
and  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square 
on  FM  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure  has  been  applied  to 
CM,  and  divides  it  into  incommensurable  parts, 
therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
MF  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with 
CM,  [x.  1 8] 

And  the  annex  FM  is  commensurable  with  the  rational 
straight  line  CD  set  out ; 

therefore  CF  is  a  fifth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  s] 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  to  find  and  classify 

Call  this  -  (w  —  v)\  and  take  x,  y,  z  such  that 

<rx  =  u^     \ 
ay  =  7^      r  . 
<r  .  2S  =  2UV  f 

In  this  case  w',  z^  are  incommensurable,  (i^  +  «r^)  is  a  medial  area  and  luv 
a  rational  area. 

Since  <T(x-\-y)  is  medial  and  o- .  22:  rational, 
(x  +y)  is  rational  and  ^^  <r, 
22  is  rational  and  '^  a, 
while  (•^+>')  ^  22. 

It  follows  that  {x  +y),  2z  are  rational  and  f^, 
so  that  (a:  +  j)  -  2z  is  an  apotome. 

Again,  as  before,  xy  =  z^  =  \  (22)^, 

and,  since  u^  ^  v^,  ktx  ^  ay, 

or  X  sj  y. 

Hence  [x.  18]  V(jc +>')*- (22)'  s^  (^  +>')• 

And  22;  ^  (T. 

Therefore  (a:  +^)  -  2Z  is  a,^^  apotome. 

It  is  of  course  equal  to 


X.    I02] 


PROPOSITIONS    loi,  I02 


227 


Proposition  102. 

The  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line,  produces  as  breadth  a  sixth  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial 
area  a  medial  whole,  and  CD  a  rational  straight  line, 

and  to  CD  let  CE  be  applied  equal  to  the  square  on  AB  and 
producing  CF  as  breadth ; 

I  say  that  CF  is  a  sixth  apotome. 


M 


For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB  \ 

therefore  AG,  GB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial, 
twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  medial,  and  the  squares  on  AG, 
GB  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle -^C?,  GB.  [x.  78] 

Now  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CH  equal  to  the  square 
on  AG  and  producing  CK  as  breadth, 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG ; 

therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB\ 

therefore  CL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  produc- 
ing CM  as  breadth ; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  CD.  [x.  22] 

Since  now  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG^  GB, 

and,  in  these,  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 

therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AG,  GB.  [u.  7] 

And  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial ; 

therefore  FL  is  also  medial. 

15—2 


228  BOOK  X  [x.  I02 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FEy  pro- 
ducing FM  as  breadth  ; 

therefore  FM  is   rational  and    incommensurable   in   length 
with  CD.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
and  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG^  GB, 
and  FL  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL, 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  MF\  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CJ/is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MF,    [x.  11] 

And  both  are  rational. 

Therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  apotome. 

For,  since  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
let  FM  be  bisected  at  N, 

and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  CD ; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rect- 
angle AG,  GB, 

And,  since  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  in  square, 

therefore  the  square  on  AG  \%  incommensurable  with  the 
square  on  GB. 

But  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 
and  KL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GB ; 
therefore  CH  is  incommensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM  \  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CK\s,  incommensurable  with  KM.  [x.  n] 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB, 

and  NL  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 

therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL  ; 

therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 


X.  I02,  I03]  PROPOSITIONS    102,  103  229 

And  for  the  same  reason  as  before  the  square  on  CM  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  MF  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  incommensurable  with  CM.  [x.  18] 

And  neither  of  them  is  commensurable  with  the  rational 
straight  line  CD  set  out ; 
therefore  CF  is  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  6] 

Q.   E.   D. 
We  have  to  find  and  classify 

Call  this  -  (u-vf^  and  put 

ux  —  u\ 

a  ,  2Z=  2UV. 

Here  w^  z/*  are  incommensurable, 
(//^  +  zf^),  2UV  are  both  medial  areas, 
and  (w'  +  z/^)  v^  2uv, 

Since  o-(a'  + j/),  a  .  2z  are  medial  and  incommensurable, 
{x  +  y)  is  rational  and  v^  a, 
2Z  is  rational  and  v^  cr, 
and  {x+y)  yj  2Z, 

Hence  {x-\-y\  2z  are  rational  and  ^-^^ 
so  that  {x-\-y)-'  2Z  is  an  apotome. 

Again,  since  «S  z/*,  or  ax,  ay,  are  incommensurable, 

X  s^  y. 

And,  as  before,  xy  =  z^  =  i  {2zy. 

Therefore  [x.  18]  V(^+^)'~  (22)'  v.  (x  -^y). 

And  neither  {x  +y)  nor  2Z  is  ^  z; 
therefore  (x+y)-  2Z  is  a  5/lr//4  apotome. 


It  is  of  course  -  ( J^ r'       1 . 


Proposition  103. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  an  apotome 
is  an  apotome  andthe  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome, 

and   let    CD    be   commensurable    in  a b       e 

length  with  AB ;  c  0         f 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  an  apotome  and 
the  same  in  order  with  AB. 


2y,  BOOK  X  [x.  103 

For,  since  AB  is  an  apotome,  let  BE  be  the  annex  to  it ; 

therefore  AE^  EB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that  the  ratio  ol  BE  to  DF  is  the  same 
as  the  ratio  of  AB  to  CD ;  [vi.  12] 

thercrfore  also,  as  one  is  to  one,  so  are  all  to  all ;  [v.  12] 

thcrtfore  also,  as  the  whole  A E  is  to  the  whole  C/s  so  is  AB 
to  CD. 

But  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD. 

Therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  C/%  and  BE 
with  Z?/^  [x.  11] 

And  AE,  EB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only ; 

therefore  C/%  FD  are  also  rational  straight  lines  commensur- 
able in  square  only.  [x.  13] 

Now  since,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  BE  to  DF, 
alternately  therefore,  as  y^^  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.    [v.  16] 

And  the  square  on  y^^  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB 
either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
AE  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
EB  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE, 
the  square  on  CF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  CF. 

[x.  14] 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out, 

CF  is  so  also,  [x.  12] 

if  BE,  then  DF  also,  [id.] 

and,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB,  then  neither  of 
the  straight  lines  CF,  FD.  [x.  13] 

But,  if  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  AE, 

the  square  on  CF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CF. 

[x.  14] 


X.  I03,  I04]  PROPOSITIONS    103,  104  231 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out, 
CF  is  so  also, 

\{  BE,  then  Z?/^also,  [x.  12] 

and,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB,  then  neither  of 
the  straight  lines  CF,  FD.  [x.  13] 

Therefore   CD  is   an   apotome   and    the    same    in   order 
with  AB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  and  the  following  propositions  to  107  inclusive  (like  the  correspond- 
ing theorems  x.  66  to  70)  are  easy  and  require  no  elucidation.  They  are 
equivalent  to  saying  that,  if  in  any  of  the  preceding  irrational  straight  lines 

-  p  is  substituted  for  /a,  the  resulting  irrational  is  of  the  same  kind  and  order 

as  that  from  which  it  is  altered. 


Proposition  104. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  an  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line 
and  the  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 
and    let    CD    be    commensurable    in 

length  with  AB ;  hi | ? 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  an  apotome  of  a        c p         f 

medial  straight  line  and  the  same  in 
order  with  AB. 

For,  since  AB  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line,  let 
EB  be  the  annex  to  it. 

Therefore  AE,  EB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensur- 
able in  square  only.  [x.  74,  75] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD^  so  is  BE  to  DF\ 

[vi.  12] 
therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  CF,  and  BE 
with  DF.  [v.  12,  X.  11] 

But  AE,  EB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only ; 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  medial  straight  lines  [x.  23]  com- 
mensurable in  square  only  ;  [x.  13] 
therefore  CD  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line.  [x.  74,  75] 


232  BOOK   X  [x.  104,  105 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

Since,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD, 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  rectangle  AE, 
EB,  so  is  the  square  on  CF  to  the  rectangle  CF,  FD, 

But  the  square  on  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  CF\ 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD.  [v.  16,  x.  n] 

Therefore,  if  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  rational,  the  rect- 
angle CF,  FD  will  also  be  rational,  [x.  Def.  4] 
and  if  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  medial,  the  rectangle  CF,  FD 
is  also  medial.                                                                    [x.  23,  Por.] 

Therefore  CD  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  and 
the  same  in  order  with  AB.  [x.  74,  75] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  105. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  a  minor  straight  line 
is  minor. 

Let  ^^  be  a  minor  straight  line,  and  CD  commensurable 
with  AB ; 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  minor. 

;        ,  11  ^ B       E 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  ' 

as  before  ;  ? S F 

then,  since  AE,  EB  are  incommensur- 
able in  square,  [x.  76] 
therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  incommensurable  in  square,   [x.  13] 

Now  since,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD,  [v.  12,  v.  16] 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  square  on  EB, 
so  is  the  square  on  CF  to  the  square  on  FD.  [vi.  22] 

Therefore,  componendo,  as  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  are  to 
the  square  on  EB,  so  are  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  to  the 
square  on  FD.  [v.  18] 

But  the  square  on  BE  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
oviDF\ 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  also  commen- 
surable with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD.     [v.  16,  x.  n] 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  rational;  [x.  76] 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  also  rational. 

[x.  Def.  4] 


X.  I05,  io6]  PROPOSITIONS    104—106  233 

Again,  since,  as  the  square  on  y^^  is  to  the  rectangle  AE, 
EBy  so  is  the  square  on  CF  to  the  rectangle  CF,  FD, 

while  the  square  on  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  CF, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD, 

But  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  medial ;  [x.  76] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  medial ;  [x.  23,  Por.] 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square 
which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the 
rectangle  contained  by  them  medial. 

Therefore  CD  is  minor.  [x.  76] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition   106. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  that  which  prodtues 
with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational 
area  a  medial  whole, 

and  CD  commensurable  with  AB ;  a  b      e 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  a  straight  line 

which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a         ' 

medial  whole. 

For  let  BE  be  the  annex  to  AB ; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB 
medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational.       [x.  77] 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made. 

Then  we  can  prove,  in  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing, 
that  CF,  FD  are  in  the  same  ratio  as  AE,  EB, 

the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD, 

and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD ; 

so  that  CF,  FD  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  medial, 
but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational. 


234  BOOK   X  [x.  io6,  107 

Therefore  CD  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole.  [x.  77] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  107. 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  that  which  produces 
with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole  is  itself  also  a  straight  line 
which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial 
area  a  medial  whole, 

and  let  CD  be  commensurable  with  AB\ 

A B         E 

I   say  that  CD  is  also  a  straight  line 

which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a       • 

medial  whole. 

For  let  BE  be  the  annex  to  AB, 

and  let  the  same  construction  be  made ; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial, 
the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  and  further  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them.  '  [x.  78] 

Now,  as  was  proved,  AE,  EB  are  commensurable  with 
CF,  FD, 

the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  with  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  CF,  FD, 

and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD ; 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial, 
the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  and  further  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them. 

Therefore  CD  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole.  [x.  78] 

Q.  E.  D. 


X.  io8] 


PROPOSITIONS    106—108 


235 


A                  E 

3 

C                    D 

L 

Q 

H 

K 

F 

Proposition  108. 

If  from  a  rational  area  a  medial  area  be  subtracted,  the 
''side''  of  the  remaining  area  becomes  one  of  two  irrational 
straight  lines,  either  an  apotome  or  a  minor  straight  line. 

For  from  the  rational  area  BC  let  the  medial  area  BD  be 
subtracted ; 

I  say  that  the  **  side  "  of  the 
remainder  EC  becomes  one 
of  two  irrational  straight  lines, 
either  an  apotome  or  a  minor 
straight  line. 

For  let  a  rational  straight 
line  FG  be  set  out, 
to  FG  let  there  be  applied  the 
rectangular  parallelogram  GH 
equal  to  BC, 
and  let  GK  equal  to  DB  be  subtracted  ; 
therefore  the  remainder  EC  is  equal  to  LH. 

Since  then  BC  is  rational,  and  BD  medial, 
while  BC  is  equal  to  GH,  and  BD  to  GK^ 
therefore  GH  is  rational,  and  GK  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FG ; 

therefore  FH  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with 
FG,  [x.  20] 

while /^A'  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with/^G^; 

[x.  22] 
therefore  FH  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FK.     [x.  13] 

Therefore  FH^  FK  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 
therefore  KH  is  an  apotome  [x.  73],  and  KF  the  annex  to  it. 

Now  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  either  commensurable  with 
HF  or  not  commensurable. 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  it. 

Now  the  whole  HF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  FG  set  out ; 
therefore  KH  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  i] 


236  BOOK  X  [x.  108,  109 

But  the  "side"  of  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational 
straight  line  and  a  first  apotome  is  an  apotome.  [x.  91] 

Therefore  the  **  side  "  oi LH,  that  is,  o{ EC,  is  an  apotome. 

But,  if  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
FK  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  HF, 

while  the  whole  FH  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  FG  set  out, 
KH  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  4] 

But  the  "side"  of  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational 
straight  line  and  a  fourth  apotome  is  minor.  [x.  94] 

Q.  E.  D. 

A  rational  area  being  of  the  form  ^p',  and  a  medial  area  of  the  form 
^A .  p',  the  problem  is  to  classify 

according  to  the  different  possible  relations  between  k,  X. 
Suppose  that  tru  =  kp^, 

<w=  J\.  p\ 
Since  tru  is  rational  and  irv  medial, 
u  is  rational  and  ^  cr, 
while  V  is  rational  and  w  <r. 

Therefore  u  sj  v\ 

thus  «,  V  are  rational  and  />-, 
whence  {u  -  v)  is  an  apotome. 

The  possibilities  are  now  as  follows, 
(i)     Ju^-v^  ^  u, 
(2)     \/«'  -v^  sj  u. 
In  both  cases  u  ^  cr, 
so  that  (u  —  v)  is  either  (i)  z.  first  apotome, 
or  (2)  a  fourth  apotome. 
In  case  (i)  ^<t(u  —  v)  is  an  apotome  [x.  91], 
but  in  case  (2)  \/o-(«  -  ?/)  is  a  minor  irrational  straight  line  [x.  94]. 

Proposition  109. 

If  from  a  medial  area  a  rational  area  be  subtracted,  there 
arise  two  other  irrational  straight  lines,  either  a  first  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line  or  a  straight  line  which  produces  with 
a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  from  the  medial  area  BC  let  the  rational  area  BD  be 
subtracted. 


X.  io9l 


PROPOSITIONS    io8,  109 


237 


I  say  that  the  **side"  of  the  remainder  ^C  becomes  one 
of  two  irrational  straight  lines,  either  a  first  apotome  of  a 
medial  straight  line  or  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole. 


K    H 


A  D 


G        L 


For  let  a  rational  straight  line  FG  be  set  out, 
and  let  the  areas  be  similarly  applied. 

It  follows  then  that  FH  is  rational  and  incommensurable 
in  length  with  FG, 

while  KF  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  FG  ; 
therefore  FH,  FK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only  ;  [x.  13] 

therefore  KH  is  an  apotome,  and  FK  the  annex  to  it.     [x.  73] 

Now  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK 
either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
HF  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
FK  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  HF, 
while  the  annex  FK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  FG  set  out, 
KH  is  a  second  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ni.  2] 

But  FG  is  rational ; 
so  that  the  ''  side  '*  of  LH,  that  is,  of  EC,  is  a  first  apotome  of 
a  medial  straight  line.  [x.  92] 

But,  if  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
FK  hy  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  HF, 
while  the  annex  FK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  FG  set  out, 

KH  is  a  fifth  apotome  ;  [x.  Deff.  ni.  5] 

so  that  the  **side"  of  EC  is  a  straight  line  which  produces 
with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole.  [x.  95] 

Q.   E.   D. 


238 


BOOK  X 


[x.  109, 


In  this  case  we  have  to  classify 

Suppose  that  aii=i  Jk,  p\ 

<rv  =  \p\ 
Thus,  tru  being  medial  and  trv  rational, 
u  is  rational  and  w  o-, 
while  V  is  rational  and  ^  <r. 

Thus,  as  before,  «,  v  are  rational  and  />-, 
so  that  (u  —  z/)  is  an  apotome. 
Now  either 

(i)     Ju*  —  z^^u, 
or       (2)     »Ju^-^  sj  «, 
while  in  both  cases  v  is  commensurable  with  o*. 
Therefore  {u  -  «;)  is  either  (i)  a  second  apotome, 
or  (2)  a  fifth  apotome, 
and  hence  in  case  (i)  v  a  (1^  -  v)  is  the  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 

[x.  92] 
and  in  case  (2)  >/<r  («  -  v)  is  the  ^^side*^  of  a  medial^  minus  a  rational^  area, 

[x.  95] 


Proposition  iio. 

If  from  a  medial  area  there  be  subtracted  a  medial  area 
incommensurable  with  the  whole,  the  two  remaining  irrational 
straight  lines  arise,  either  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line  or  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a 
medial  whole. 

For,  as  in  the  foregoing  figures,  let  there  be  subtracted 
from  the  medial  area  BC  the  medial  area  BD  incommensur- 
able with  the  whole ; 

K   H 


D        C 


I  say  that  the  "  side  '*  of  EC  is  one  of  two  irrational  straight 
lines,  either  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  or  a 
straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 


X.  no]  PROPOSITIONS    109,  no  239 

For,  since  each  of  the  rectangles  BC^  BD  is  medial, 
and  BC  is  incommensurable  with  BD, 

it  follows  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  FH,  FK  will  be 
rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG,  [x.  22] 

And,  since  BC  is  incommensurable  with  BDy 
that  is,  GH  with  GK, 
HF\s  also  incommensurable  with  FK\  [vi.  i,  x.  n] 

therefore  FH,  FK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  KH  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

If  then  the  square  on  FH  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
FK  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FH, 

while  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FHy  FK  is  commensurable 
in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  FG  set  out, 

KH  is  a  third  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  3] 

But  KL  is  rational, 

and  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
third  apotome  is  irrational, 

and  the  **side"  of  it  is  irrational,  and  is  called  a  second 
apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  ;  [x.  93] 

so  that  the  **  side  "  of  LH,  that  is,  o{  EC,  is  a  second  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line. 

But,  if  the  square  on  FH  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
FK  hy  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  FH, 

while  neither  of  the  straight  lines  HF,  FK  is  commensurable 
in  length  with  FG, 

KH  is  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  ui.  6] 

But  the  **side"  of  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational 
straight  line  and  a  sixth  apotome  is  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole.  [x.  96] 

Therefore  the  **side"  oi  LH,  that  is,  oi  EC,  is  a  straight 
line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  to  classify  J Jk,  p^-  JX  .  p\ 

where  Jk ,  p^  is  incommensurable  with  ^A .  p*. 

Put  iTU=  Jk.  p\ 

iT7'=  J\.  p\ 


240 


BOOK   X 


["X.   no,   III 


Then  u  is  rational  and  w  a, 
V  is  rational  and  v^  <r, 
and  u  s^  V, 

Therefore  //,  v  are  rational  and  ^^^ 
so  that  (u  -  v)  is  an  apotome. 

Now  either 

(l)  ^U^-t^    ^     Uy 

or       (2)     Ju^  -t^  s^  u, 
while  in  both  cases  both  u  and  v  are  v^  <r. 
In  case  (i)  (u-v)  is  a,  third  apotome^ 
and  in  case  (2)  («  -  »)  is  a  sixth  apotome^ 

so  that  Vo"  (//  - 1/)  is  either  (i)  a  second  apoionuof  a  medial  straight  line  [x.  93], 
or  (2)  a  ^^  side^^  of  the  difference  between  two  medial  areas  [x.  96]. 


Proposition  hi. 
The  apotome  is  not  the  same  with  tfie  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome ; 
I  say  that  AB  is  not  the  same  with  the 
binomial  straight  line.  ^ 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so  ; 
let  a  rational  straight  line  DC  be  set  out, 
and   to  CD  let  there  be  applied   the 
rectangle  CE  ecfual   to  the  square  on 
AB  and  producing  DE  as  breadth. 

Then,  since  AB  is  an  apotome, 
DE  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  97] 

Let  EF  be  the  annex  to  it ; 
therefore  DF,  FE  are  rational  straight 
lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 

the  square  on  DF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  /?/% 
and  DF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  DC  set  out.  [x.  Deff.  in.  i] 

Again,  since  AB  is  binomial, 
therefore  DE  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  60] 

Let  it  be  divided  into  its  terms  at  G^ 
and  let  DG  be  the  greater  term  ; 

therefore  DG,  GE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 


X.  Ill]  PROPOSITIONS    no,  in  241 

the  square  on  DG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GE  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DG,  and  the 
greater  term  DG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  DC  set  out.  [x.  Deff.  11.  i] 

Therefore  DF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  DG ; 

[x.  12] 

therefore  the  remainder  GF  is  also  commensurable  in  length 
with  DF.  [x.  15] 

But  DF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF\ 
therefore  FG  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF,  [x.  13] 

Therefore  GF,  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensur- 
able in  square  only  ; 
therefore  EG  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

But  it  is  also  rational : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  apotome  is  not  the  same  with  the  binomial 
straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  proves  the  equivalent  of  the  fact  that 
^x  +  ^y  cannot  be  equal  to  .Jx'  -  Jy\  and 
x+  ^y  cannot  be  equal  to  x  -  J/. 

We  should  prove  these  results  by  squaring  the  respective  expressions;  and 
Euclid's  procedure  corresponds  to  this  exactly. 

He  has  to  prove  that 

p-¥  Jk  ,p  cannot  be  equal  to  p  -  J\ .  p\ 

For,  if  possible,  let  this  be  so. 

Take  the  straight  lines  ^P^^^'^^' ,    ^^-  "  'J^-^T- ; 

<r  <r 

these  must  be  equal,  and  therefore 

J' (I  +  >i  +  2  V>i)  =  ^  (,  +  \- 2  ^x) (I). 

Now  -  (1  +  ^),  ~  (i  +  X)  are  rational  and  ^; 


therefore  (^  (i  +  X)  -  ^  (i  +k)\-^^(i  +  \) 


<r 


And,  since  both  sides  are  rational,  it  follows  that 

—  (i  +  \)  -  — (1+  ^)|  -  —  .  2  ^\  is  an  apotome, 

H.  E.  III.  16 


242  BOOK  X  [x.  Ill 


/»2 


But,  by  (i),  this  expression  is  equal  to  —  .  2  ^k^  which  is  rational. 

Hence  an  apotome^  which  is  irrational^  is  also  rational : 
which  is  impossible. 

This  proposition  is  the  connecting  link  which  enables  Euclid  to  prove  that 
all  the  compound  irrationals  with  positive  signs  above  discussed  are  different 
from  all  the  corresponding  compound  irrationals  with  negative  signs,  while  the 
two  sets  are  all  different  from  one  another  and  from  the  medial  straight  line. 
The  recapitulation  following  makes  this  clear. 


The  apotome  and  the  irrational  straight  lines  following  it 
are  neither  the  same  with  the  medial  straight  line  nor  with  one 
another. 

For  the  square  on  a  medial  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a 
rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  straight  line 
rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  that  to  which  it 
is  applied,  [x.  22] 

while  the  square  on  an  apotome,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  first  apotome,  [x.  97] 

the  square  on  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line,  if 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a 
second  apotome,  [x.  98] 

the  square  on  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line,  if 
applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  third 
apotome,  [x.  99] 

the  square  on  a  minor  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  fourth  apotome,  [x.  100] 
the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational 
area  a  medial  whole,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line, 
produces  as  breadth  a  fifth  apotome,  [x.  loi] 

and  the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line,  produces  as  breadth  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  102] 

Since  then  the  said  breadths  differ  from  the  first  and  from 
one  another,  from  the  first  because  it  is  rational,  and  from  one 
another  since  they  are  not  the  same  in  order, 
it  is  clear  that  the  irrational  straight  lines  themselves  also 
differ  from  one  another. 

And,  since  the  apotome  has  been  proved  not  to  be  the 
same  as  the  binomial  straight  line,  [x.  m] 

but,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  the  straight  lines 


X.  Ill,  112]  PROPOSITIONS    III,  112  243 

following  the  apotome  produce,  as  breadths,  each  according 
to  its  own  order,  apotomes,  and  those  following  the  binomial 
straight  line  themselves  also,  according  to  their  order,  produce 
the  binomials  as  breadths, 

therefore  those  following  the  apotome  are  different,  and  those 
following  the  binomial  straight  line  are  different,  so  that  there 
are,  in  order,  thirteen  irrational  straight  lines  in  all, 

Medial, 

Binomial, 

First  bimedial, 

Second  bimedial. 

Major, 

*'Side"  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area, 

**  Side  "  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas, 

Apotome, 

First  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 

Second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 

Minor, 

Producing  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

Producing  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

Proposition  112. 

The  square  on  a  rational  straight  line  applied  to  the 
binomial  straight  line  produces  as  breadth  an  apotome  the 
terms  of  which  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  of  the  bi- 
nomial and  moreover  in  the  same  ratio ;  and  further  the 
apotome  so  arising  will  have  the  same  order  as  the  binomial 
straight  line. 

Let  A  he  a,  rational  straight  line, 
let  BC  be  a  binomial,  and  let  DC  be  its  greater  term  ; 
let  the  rectangle  BC,  EF  be  equal  to  the  square  on  A  ; 

A 

P  c  G 


K 1 f H 

I  say  that  EF  is  an  apotome  the  terms  of  which  are  commen- 
surable with  CD,  DBy  and  in  the  same  ratio,  and  further  EF 
will  have  the  same  order  as  BC. 

16 — 2 


244  BOOK  X  [x.  112 

For  again  let  the  rectangle  BD,  G  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  A. 

Since  then  the  rectangle  BC,  EF  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
BD,  G, 
therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  G  to  EF.  [vi.  i6] 

But  CB  is  greater  than  BD  ; 
therefore  G  is  also  greater  than  EF.  [v.  i6,  v.  14] 

Let  EH  be  equal  to  G ; 
therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  HE  to  EF ; 
therefore,  separando,  as  CD  is  to  BD,  so  is  HF  to  FE.  [v.  17] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  HF  is  to  FE,  so  is  FK 
to  KE\ 

therefore  also  the  whole  HK  is  to  the  whole  KF  as  FK 
is  to  KE ; 

for,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so 
are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents.  [v.  12] 

But,  as  FK  is  to  KE,  so  is  CD  to  DB ;  [v.  n] 

therefore  also,  as  HK  is  to  KF,  so  is  CD  to  DB.  [/V/.] 

But  the  square  on  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  DB ;       *  [x.  36] 

therefore  the  square  on  HK  is  also  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  KF.  [vi.  22,  x.  n] 

And,  as  the  square  on  HK  is  to  the  square  on  KF,  so  is 
HK  to  KE,  since  the  three  straight  lines  HK,  KF,  KE  are 
proportional.  [v.  Def.  9] 

Therefore  HK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  KE, 

so  that  HE  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  EK.  [x.  15] 

Now,  since  the  square  on  A  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
EH,  BD, 

while  the  square  on  A  is  rational, 

therefore  the  rectangle  EH,  BD  is  also  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  BD  ; 

therefore    EH   is    rational    and    commensurable    in    length 
with  BD  ;  [x.  20] 

so  that  EK,  being  commensurable  with  it,  is  also  rational  and 
commensurable  in  length  with  BD. 


X.  112]  PROPOSITION    112  245 

Since,  then,  as  CD  is  to  DB,  so  is  FK  to  KE, 

while  CD,  DB  are  straight  lines  commensurable   in  square 
only, 

therefore  FK,  KB  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[X.   Il] 

But  KB  is  rational ; 

therefore  FK  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  FK,  KB  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only ; 

therefore  BF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

Now  the  square  on  CD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  DB 
either  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
CD  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  CD  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
DB  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  CD, 
the  square  on  FK  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  KB  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FK.    [x.  14] 

And,  if  CD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out, 

so  also  is  FK\  [x.  n,  12] 

if  BD  is  so  commensurable, 
so  also  is  KB  ;  [x.  12] 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CD,  DB  is  so  commensur- 
able, 

neither  of  the  straight  lines  FK,  KB  is  so. 

But,  if  the  square  on  CD  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
DB  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable 
with  CD, 

the  square  on  FK  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  KB  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  FK,  [x.  14] 

And,  if  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 
line  set  out, 

so  also  is  FK\ 

if  BD  is  so  commensurable, 

so  also  is  KB ; 


246  BOOK  X  [x.  112 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CD,  DB  is  so  commensur- 
able, 

neither  of  the  straight  lines  FK,  KE  is  so  ; 
so  that  FE  is  an  apotome,  the  terms  of  which  FK,  KE  are 
commensurable  with    the   terms   CD,   DB  of  the   binomial 
straight  line  and  in  the  same  ratio,  and  it  has  the  same  order 
as^C 

Q.   K.  D. 

Heiberg  considers  that  this  proposition  and  the  succeeding  ones  are  inter- 
polated, though  the  interpolation  must  have  taken  place  before  Theon's  time. 
His  argument  is  that  x.  112 — 115  are  nowhere  used,  but  that  x.  iii  rounds 
off  the  complete  discussion  of  the  13  irrationals  (as  indicated  in  the  recapitu- 
lation), thereby  giving  what  was  necessary  for  use  in  connexion  with  the 
investigation  of  the  five  regular  solids.  For  liesides  x.  73  (used  in  xiii.  6,  11) 
X.  94  and  97  are  used  in  xiii.  11,  6  respectively;  and  Euclid  could  not  have 
stopped  at  x.  97  without  leaving  the  discussion  of  irrationals  imperfect,  for 
x.  98 — 102  are  closely  connected  with  x.  97,  and  x.  103 — 11 1  add,  as  it  were, 
the  coping-stone  to  the  whole  doctrine.  On  the  other  hand,  x.  112 — 115  are 
not  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  treatise  on  the  13  irrationals  and  are  not 
used  in  the  stereometric  books.  They  are  rather  the  germ  of  a  new  study  and 
a  more  abstruse  investigation  of  irrationals  in  tJumseh'cs,  Prop.  115  in 
particular  extends  the  number  of  the  different  kinds  of  irrationals.  As 
however  x.  112 — 115  are  old  and  serviceable  theorems,  Heiberg  thinks  that, 
though  Euclid  did  not  give  them,  they  may  have  been  taken  from  Apollonius. 

I  will  only  point  out  what  seems  to  me  open  to  doubt  in  the  above,  namely 
that  X.  112 — 114  (excluding  115)  are  not  connected  with  the  rest  of  the 
exposition  of  the  13  irrationals.  It  seems  to  me  that  they  arc  so  connected. 
X.  1 1 1  has  shown  us  that  a  binomial  straight  line  cannot  also  be  an  apotome. 
But  X.  112 — 114  show  us  ho7v  either  of  them  can  be  used  to  rationalise  the  other, 
thus  giving  what  is  surely  an  important  relation  between  them. 

X.  1 1 2  is  the  equivalent  of  rationalising  the  denominators  of  the  fractions 
^ _^  _ 

by   multiplying   numerator  and   denominator   by    J  A  —  JB  and   a  —  JB 
respectively. 

Euclid  proves  that    rr~  =\p-  Jk,\p{k  <i),  and  his  method  enables 

us  to  see  that  X  =  cr=/(p^  -  hp% 

The  proof  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  dexterity  of  the  Greeks  in  using 
geometry  as  the  equivalent  of  our  algebra.  Like  so  many  proofs  in  Archimedes 
and  Apollonius,  it  leaves  us  completely  in  the  dark  as  to  how  it  was  evolved. 
That  the  Greeks  must  have  had  some  analytical  method  which  suggested  the 
steps  of  such  proofs  seems  certain ;  but  what  it  was  must  remain  apparently 
an  insoluble  mystery. 

I  will  reproduce  by  means  of  algebraical  symbols  the  exact  course  of 
Euclid's  proof. 

He  has  to  prove  that n —  is  an  apotome  related  in  a  certain  way  to 

^  P  +  Jh.p 


X.  112]  PROPOSITION    112  247 

the  binomial  straight  line  p  +  Jk.p.  If  1/  be  the  straight  line  required, 
(//  +  w)-w  is  shown  to  be  an  apotome  of  the  kind  described,  where  w  is 
determined  in  the  following  manner. 

We  have               (p  +  Jk.  p)  u  =  a^=  Jk,  p  ,  x,  say,  ^ 
whence  x>u,  ■ (i). 

Let  X  =  u  -\-v. 

Then                        {p  +  J^ .  p)  :  Jk .  p  =  (u  +  v)  :  «/, 
and  hence  p  .  Jk.  p  =  v  \  u (2). 

I^t  w  be  taken  such  that 

V  \  u  =  {u-it-w)  :  w (3). 

Thus  V  '.  u=^{u-\-V'^w)  \{u  +  7v) (4), 

and  therefore  p  :  Jk .  p  =  (u  +  v  +  w)  :  (1/  +  7£f). 

From  the  last  proportion, 

{u  +  V  +  Tvy.  '^  («  +  wy, 

and,  from  the  two  preceding,  (//  +  7£f)  is  a  mean  proportional  between 
(«  +  t/  +  7C')y  TV,  so  that 

{u-^v  +  wy  :  {u  +  7vy  =  (//  +  z;  +  7v)  :  w. 

Therefore  {u  ■¥  v  +  w)  ''^  w, 

whence  (//  +  v)  ^  7V, 

Now                     Jk ,  p  (u  +  v)  =  a^,  which  is  rational ; 
therefore                         {u  +  v)  is  rational  and  ^  Jk  .p] 
hence  tv  is  also  rational  amd  "^  Jk ,  p (5). 

Next,  by  (2),  (3),  since  p,  Jk .  p  are  <^, 

(U  +  Ti/)  <^  TV, 

and  w  is  rational ; 

therefore  {u  +  iv)  is  rational, 

and  (u  +  «/),  TV  are  rational  and  '^ . 
Hence  {u  +  tv)-tv  is  an  apotome. 

Now  either  (I)       Jp^  —  kp^^^p, 

or  (II)      V^^^^*  w  p. 

In  case  (I)  n/(i^  +  «/)'-«/*  '^  («  +  w),  [(2),  (3)  and  x.  14] 

and  in  case  (II)  \/(«  +  zc;)'  -  «/"  w  («  +  w).  [ii/.] 

Then,  since  [(5)]                     w  ^  Jk  .  p, 
by  X.  II  and  (2),  (3),  (u  +  Tv)^p    (6). 

[This  step  is  omitted  in  Euclid,  but  the  result  is  assumed.] 

If  therefore  p  ^  cr,     («  +  «/)  ^  <r ; 

if  ^^  .  p  ^  cr,     TV^<r;  [{$)] 

and,  if  neither  p  nor  Jk  ,  p  is  "^  a-,  neither  {u  +  zv)  nor  zv  will  be  ^  <r. 

Thus  the  order  of  the  apotome  {u  +  Tv)'-tv  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
binomial  straight  line  p+  Jk  ,p',  while  [(2),  (3)]  the  terms  are  proportional 
and  [(5),  (6)]  commensurable  respectively. 


248  BOOK   X  [x.  112,  113 

We  find  (//  +  w),  w  algebraically  thus. 

By(i), 

and,  by  (2),  (3), 
whence 


Thus 


"-  p*Jk.p' 

U  ■>fW             p 

ui     "  Jk.p' 

p-sJfiP 

o'.Jk.p 

-  p'-kp- 

I 

7//  =   lit  .  — T-  =  - 

a'.p 

V 


/k~  p-'-kp^' 


Therefore  (//  +  «»)  -  ?e/  =  cr' .  -  ,  ^-*/ . 


Proposition  113. 


tF 


The  square  on  a  rational  straight  litie,  if  applied  to  an 
apotome,  produces  as  breadth  the  binomial  straight  •  line  the 
terms  of  which  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  of  the 
apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio;  and  further  the  binomial 
so  arising  /las  the  same  order  as  the  apotome. 

Let  A  he  3.  rational  straight  line  and  BD  an  apotome, 
and  let  the  rectangle  BVy  KH  be  equal  to 
the  square  on  ^,  so  that  the  square  on  the 
rational  straight  line  A  when  applied  to  the 
apotome  BD  produces  KH  as  breadth  ; 
I  say  that  KH  is  a  binomial  straight  line  the 
terms  of  which  are  commensurable  with  the 
terms  of  BD  and  in  the  same  ratio ;  and 
further  KH  has  the  same  order  as  BD.  \       h 

For  let  DC  be  the  annex  to  BD  ;  ^ 

therefore  BC^  CD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

Let  the  rectangle  BC^  G  be  also  equal  to  the  square  on  A. 
But  the  square  on  A  is  rational ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  BC  G  is  also  rational. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  BC : 

therefore  G  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BC. 

•  X.  20] 


X.  113]  PROPOSITIONS    112,  113  249 

Since  now  the  rectangle  BC^  G  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
BD,  KH, 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  KH  to  G. 

[vi.  16] 
But  BC  is  greater  than  BD  ; 

therefore  KH  is  also  greater  than  G.  [v.  16,  v.  14] 

Let  KE  be  made  equal  to  G ; 
therefore  KE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BC. 

And  since,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  HK  to  KE, 

therefore,  cotwertendo,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  KH  to  HE. 

[v.  19,  Por.] 
Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  KH  is   to  HE,  so  is  HF 
to  FE ; 

therefore  also  the  remainder  KF  is  to  FH  as  A^Z^  is  to  HE, 
that  is,  as  BC  is  to  CZ).  [v.  19] 

But  BC,  CD  are  commensurable  in  square  only  ; 
therefore  KF,  FH  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[X.  ,1] 

And  since,  as  KHxs  to  HE,  so  is  KF  to  FH, 
while,  as  KH  is  to  HE,  so  is  HF  to  /^£', 
therefore  also,  as  KF  is  to  FH,  so  is  Z^/^  to  FE,  [v.  11] 

so  that  also,  as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  square  on  the 
first  to  the  square  on  the  second ;  [v.  Def.  9] 

therefore  also,  as  KF  is  to  FE,  so  is  the  square  on  KF  to  the 
square  on  FH. 

But  the  square  on  KF  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  FH, 

for  KF,  FH  are  commensurable  in  square  ; 

therefore  KF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  FE,  [x.  n] 

so  that  KF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  KE.    [x.  15] 

But  KE  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BC', 

therefore  KF  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length 
with  BC.  [x.  12] 

And,  since,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  KF  to  FH, 
alternately,  as  BC  is  to  KF,  so  is  DC  to  FH.  [v.  16] 

But  BC  is  commensurable  with  KF ; 
therefore  FH  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  n] 


2SO  BOOK    X  [x.  113 

But  BC^  CD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only  ; 

therefore  KF,  FH  are  also  rational  straight  lines  [x.  Def.  3] 
commensurable  in  square  only  ; 
therefore  KH  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

If  now  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  CD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC, 
the  square  on  KF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FH 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  KF,  [x.  14] 

And,  if  BC  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out, 
so  also  is  KF ; 

if  CD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  set  out, 
so  also  is  FH, 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  CD, 
then  neither  of  the  straight  lines  KF,  FH. 

But,  if  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  CD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC^ 
the  square  on  KF  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  FH  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  KF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 
line  set  out, 
so  also  is  KF\ 
if  CD  is  so  commensurable, 
so  also  is  FH  ; 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  CD, 
then  neither  of  the  straight  lines  KF,  FH. 

Therefore  KH  is  a  binomial  straight  line,  the  terms  of 
which  KF,  FH  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  BC,  CD  of 
the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio, 
and  further  KH  has  the  same  order  as  BD. 

Q.   E.  D. 

This  proposition,  which  is  companion  to  the  preceding,  gives  us  the  equiva- 
lent of  the  rationalisation  of  the  denominator  of 


X.  113]  PROPOSITION    113  251 

Euclid  (or  the  writer)  proves  that 

and  his  method  enables  us  to  see  that  X  =  <r*/(p^  -  kfp). 

Let  -jj—  =  u ; 

and  it  is  proved  that  u  is  the  binomial  straight  line  {u  -  u*)  +  w^  where  w  is 
determined  as  shown  below. 

u(p-'  Jk.p)=^<T'^  =  px,  say, 

whence  p  :  {p-  Jk .  p)  =  u  :x (i), 

so  that  X  <  u. 

Let  then  x  =  u  -v. 

Since  (u  -  z/)  p  =  o^,  a  rational  area, 

(«-z^)  is  rational  and  ^  p (2). 

And  [( I )]  p:(p-Jk.p)^u:{u- v), 

so  that,  convertendo,  p.  Jk.p  =  u,v. 

Suppose  that  «  :  t;  =  7£/ :  (z^  -  w), 

so  that  [v.  19]  {u-w)\w^u\v-w\  (v-w). 

Thus,  w  being  a  mean  proportional  between  (u  -  a/),  («/  -  a/), 
(«  -  wy  iur^  =  (u-w):(v-  w). 

But  (u-wf\w^^u'M^ 

-P^:V  (3), 

so  that  (u  -  ivf  *^  7£'^. 

Therefore  (u-w)  ^^  {^-  w) 

^  {{u  —  ««;)  —  (z/  -  w)} 
^  (u-  v). 

Therefore  [(2)]  («- a/)  is  rational  and '^  p    (4). 

And,  since  p  :  Jk ,  p  =  (u-w)  :  a', 

w  is  rational  smd^  Jk.p    (5). 

Hence  [(4),  (5)]  (w-w),  tv  are  rational  and  '^, 
so  that  (u  —  w)  +  w  is  a  binomial  straight  line. 

Now  either         (I)  Vp'  -  kp^  ^  p, 

or  (II)  Jp^^^^Kjp, 

In  case  (I)  \l{u  -  7£/)*  -ti^  ^  {u-  w), 

and  in  case  (II)  n/(i/ -  wf  -  «/*  w  («-  z«/).  [(3)  and  x.  14] 

And,  if  p  '^  0-,  (u-w)  "^  <r\  [(4)] 

if  7^  .  p  ^  <r,  «/  ^  <r ;  [5] 

while,  if  neither  p  nor  Jk.pis  ^  a-,  neither  (u - «')  nor  w  is  ^  c. 

Hence  {u  -  7<;)  +  /e/  is  a  binomial  straight  line  of  the  same  order  as  the 
apotome  p—  Jk.p,  its  terms  are  proportional  to  those  of  the  apotome  [(3)], 
and  commensurable  with  them  respectively  [(4),  (5)]. 


252  BOOK   X  [x.  113,  114 

To  find  (u  -  w),  w  algebraically  we  have 

P-  sjk.p 
u-w  _      p 


W           sjk,p' 

From  the  latter 

p+  ^A,p 

a-,Jk,p 

p-^kp'    ' 

Thus 

I             or^p 

Therefore 

/              \                    9     P  +  J^ '  P 

•  Proposition   114. 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  an  apotome  and  the  binomial 
straight  line  the  terms  of  which  are  comfnensurable  with  the 
terms  of  the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio,  the  **  side  "  of  the 
area  is  rational. 

For  let  an  area,  the  rectangle  AB,  CD,  be  contained  by 
the  apotome  AB  and  the  binomial 
straight  line  CD, 

and  let  CE  be  the  greater  term  of  ■ 

the  latter ;  c |_P 

let    the   terms    CE,   ED    of   the  g 

binomial  straight  line  be  commen-  ^ 

surable  with  the  terms  AF,  FB  of  '• 

the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio ;  *^ V ^ 

and  let  the  **side"  of  the  rectangle 
AB,  CD  be  G ; 

I  say  that  G  is  rational. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  //  be  set  out, 
and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  a  rectangle  equal  to  the  square 
on  //  and  producing  KL  as  breadth. 

Therefore  KL  is  an  apotome. 

Let  its  terms  be  KM,  ML  commensurable  with  the  terms 
CE^  ED  of  the  binomial  straight  line  and  in  the  same  ratio. 

[x.  112] 


X.  114]  PROPOSITIONS    113,  114  253 

But  CE,  ED  are  also  commensurable  with  AF,  FB  and  In 
the  same  ratio ; 

therefore,  as  ^/^  is  to  FB,  so  is  KM  to  ML. 

Therefore,  alternately,  as  AF  is  to  KM,  so  is  BF  to  LM  \ 
therefore  also  the  remainder  AB  is  to  the  remainder  KL  as 
AF\s  io  KM.  [v.  19] 

But  AF  is  commensurable  with  KM  \  [x.  12] 

therefore  AB  is  also  commensurable  with  KL.  [x.  n] 

And,  as  AB  is  to  KL,  so  is  the  rectangle  CD,  AB  to  the 
rectangle  CD,  KL  ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CD,  AB  is  also  commensurable  with 
the  rectangle  CD,  KL.  [x.  11] 

But  the  rectangle  CD,  KL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  H \ 
therefore  the  rectangle  CD,  AB  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  H. 

But  the  square  on  G  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD,  AB ; 
therefore  the  square  on  G  is  commensurable  with  the  square 

But  the  square  on  H  is  rational ; 

therefore  the  square  on  G  is  also  rational ; 

therefore  G  is  rational. 

And  it  is  the  **side"  of  the  rectangle  CD,  AB. 
Therefore  etc. 

PoRiSM.  And  it  is  made  manifest  to  us  by  this  also  that 
it  is  possible  for  a  rational  area  to  be  contained  by  irrational 
straight  lines. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  theorem  is  equivalent  to  the  proof  of  the  fact  that 

and  J  (a  >-  JB)  (\a  +  X  JB)  =  Jk{a''-B). 

The  result  of  the  theorem  x.  1 1 2  is  used  for  the  purpose  thus. 
We  have  to  prove  that 

is  rational. 

By  X.  1 1 2  we  have,  if  o-  is  a  rational  straight  line, 

VTX^,  =  ^>-^V*.P   (1). 


254  BOOK   X  [x.  114,  115 

Now       p:yp  =  Jk,p:X'Jk,p=={p-Jk.p):{yp-X'Jk.p\ 
so  that  (p"  Jk  ,p)  ^  (X>  -y  Jk.  p). 

Multiplying  each  by  (Ap  +  \Jk.  p),  we  have 

(p-Jk.p)(\p^Xjk.p)r>{\p^\Jk.p){yp-k'Jk,p)  . 

^  a*,  by  (i). 

That  is,         (p-  J^'P)(Xp  +  kJ^'p)  is  a  rational  area, 
and  therefore  J(p -  Jk.p){kp-^X  Jk ,  p)  is  rational. 


Proposition    115. 

jFrom  a  medial  straight  line  there  arise  irrational  straight 
lines  infinite  in  number,  and  none  of  them  is  the  same  as  any 
of  the  preceding. 

Let  ^  be  a  medial  straight  line ; 
I   say  that  from  A  there  arise 

irrational  straight  lines  infinite  in      ^ 

number,  and  none  of  them  is  the 
same  as  any  of  the  preceding. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  B     ^ 

be  set  out,  d 

and  let  the  square  on  C  be  equal 

to  the  rectangle  B,  A  ; 

therefore  C  is  irrational ;  [x.  Def.  4] 

for  that  which  is  contained  by  an  irrational  and  a  rational 

straight  line  is  irrational.  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

And  it  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  preceding ; 
for  the  square  on  none  of  the  preceding,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line  produces  as  breadth  a  medial  straight  line. 

Again,  let  the  square  on  D  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  C\ 
therefore  the  square  oil  D  is  irrational.         [deduction  from  x.  20] 

Therefore  D  is  irrational ;  [x.  Def.  4] 

and  it  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  preceding,  for  the 
square  on  none  of  the  preceding,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  C  as  breadth. 

Similarly,  if  this  arrangement  proceeds  ad  infinitum,  it 
is  manifest  that  from  the  medial  straight  line  there  arise 
irrational  straight  lines  infinite  in  number,  and  none  is  the 
same  with  any  of  the  preceding. 

Q.  E.  D. 


X.  115]  PROPOSITIONS    114,  1 15  ^55 

Heiberg  is  clearly  right  in  holding  that  this  proposition,  at  all  events,  is 
alien  to  the  general  scope  of  Book  x,  and  is  therefore  probably  an  interpola- 
tion, made  however  before  Theon's  time.  It  is  of  the  same  character  as  a 
scholium  at  the  end  of  the  Book,  which  is  (along  with  the  interpolated  proposi- 
tion proving,  in  two  ways,  the  incommensurability  of  the  diagonal  of  a  square 
with  its  side)  relegated  by  August  as  well  as  Heiberg  to  an  Appendix. 

The  proposition  amounts  to  this. 

The  straight  line  Irp  being  medial,  if  a  be  a  rational  straight  line,  *J Irpa 
is  a  new  irrational  straight  line.  So  is  the  mean  proportional  between  this 
and  another  rational  straight  line  <r',  and  so  on  indefinitely. 

Ancient  Extensions  of  the  Theory  of  Book  X. 

From  the  hints  given  by  the  author  of  the  commentary  found  in  Arabic 
by  Woepcke  (cf.  pp.  3 — 4  above)  it  would  seem  probable  that  Apollonius' 
extensions  of  the  theory  of  irrationals  took  two  directions  :  (i)  generalising 
the  medial  straight  line  of  Euclid,  and  (2)  forming  compound  irrationals  by  the 
addition  and  subtraction  of  more  than  two  terms  of  the  sort  composing  the 
binomials,  apotomes,  eta  The  commentator  writes  (Woepcke's  article,  pp.  694 
sqq.)  : 

"  It  is  also  necessary  that  we  should  know  that,  not  only  when  we  join 
together  two  straight  lines  rational  and  commensurable  in  square  do  we  obtain 
the  binomial  straight  line,  but  three  or  four  lines  produce  in  an  analogous 
manner  the  same  thing.  In  the  first  case,  we  obtain  the  trinomial  straight 
line,  since  the  whole  line  is  irrational ;  and  in  the  second  case  we  obtain  the 
quadrinomial,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  The  proof  of  the  (irrationality  of  the) 
line  composed  of  three  lines  rational  and  commensurable  in  square  is  exactly 
the  same  as  the  proof  relating  to  the  combination  of  two  lines. 

**  But  we  must  start  afresh  and  remark  that  not  only  can  we  take  one  sole 
medial  line  between  two  lines  commensurable  in  square,  but  we  can  take  three 
or  four  of  them  and  so  on  ad  infinitum^  since  we  can  take,  between  any  two 
given  straight  lines,  as  many  lines  as  we  wish  in  continued  proportion. 

"  Likewise,  in  the  lines  formed  by  addition  not  only  can  we  construct  the 
binomial  straight  line,  but  we  can  also  construct  the  trinomial,  as  well  as  the 
first  and  second  trimedial ;  and,  further,  the  line  composed  of  three  straight 
lines  incommensurable  in  square  and  such  that  the  one  of  them  gives  with 
each  of  the  two  others  a  sum  of  squares  (which  is)  rational,  while  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  two  lines  is  medial,  so  that  there  results  a  major  (irrational) 
composed  of  three  lines. 

"And,  in  an  analogous  manner,  we  obtain  the  straight  line  which  is  the 
*  side '  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area,  composed  of  three  straight  lines,  and, 
likewise,  that  which  is  the  *  side '  of  (the  sum  of)  two  medials." 

The  generalisation  of  the  medial  is  apparently  after  the  following  manner. 
Let  a-,  y  be  two  straight  lines  rational  and  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
suppose  that  m  means  are  interposed,  so  that 

X  \  x.~  x^  :  A'a  =  :ir«  :  ^3  =  . . .  =  jc^«-.i :  x^  =  at-,  :  y. 


X      /  xX*" 
We  easily  derive  herefrom      ~  =  (  ~  )  1 

Xr        \-^i/ 

X  _ /a:\"*  + 


2s6  BOOK   X 

and  hence  x{ ^Xr,:}^" \ 

x^^^=y,x^^ 

so  that  (^r.-^"T'^^  =  (^-^)'*i 

and  therefore  x^^ + ^  =  a;**  ~  ** + ^ .  Xi 

1 


or  a:^  =  (x'"-'■+^y)«+^ 

which  is  the  generalised  medial. 

We  now  pass  to  the  trinomial  etc.,  with  the  commentator^s  further  remarks 
about  them. 

(i)  The  trinomial,  "  Suppose  three  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only.  The  line  composed  of  two  of  these  lines,  that  is,  the  bipomial 
straight  line,  is  irrational,  and,  in  consequence,  the  area  contained  by  this  line 
and  the  remaining  line  is  irrational,  and,  likewise,  the  double  of  the  area 
contained  by  these  two  lines  will  be  irrational.  Thus  the  square  on  the 
whole  line  composed  of  three  lines  is  irrational  and  consequently  the  line  is 
irrational,  and  it  is  called  a  trinomial  straight  line.'' 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  **  proof"  is  not  conclusive  as  stated.  Nor  does 
Woepcke  seem  to  show  how  the  proposition  can  be  proved  on  Euclidean 
lines.     But  I  think  it  would  be  somewhat  as  follows. 

Suppose  Xy  yy  zioht  rational  and  *^ . 

Then  ^,  y,  s^  are  rational,  and  lyz^  2zXy  2xy  are  all  medial. 

First,  {2yz  +  2zx  +  2xy)  cannot  be  rational. 

For  suppose  this  sum  equal  to  a  rational  area,  say  a'. 

Since  2yz  +  2zx  +  2xy  =  a*, 

2ZX  +  2xy  =  (r*  -  2yZy 

or  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  incommensurable  with  one  another  is  equal  to 
the  difference  between  a  rational  area  and  a  medial  area. 

But  the  "  side  "  of  the  sum  of  the  two  medial  areas  must  [x.  72]  be  one  of 
two  irrationals  with  a  positive  sign ;  and  the  "  side  "  of  the  difference  between  a 
rational  area  and  a  medial  area  must  [x.  108]  be  one  of  two  irrationals  with  a 
negative  sign. 

And  the  first  "  side  "  cannot  be  the  same  as  the  second  [x.  1 1 1  and  ex- 
planation following]. 

Therefore  2zx  +  2xy  ^a^-  2yz, 

and  2yz  +  2zx  +  2xy  is  consequently  irrational. 

Therefore  (^  +y  +  z^)  w  (2yz  +  2zx  +  2xy\ 

whence  {x -v  y  ■\- zf  yu  (jc*  +y  +  z% 

so  that  {x  -{-y  -^^  z)\  and  therefore  also  (x  -vy  +  s),  is  irrational. 

The  commentator  goes  on : 

"  And,  if  we  have  four  lines  commensurable  in  square,  as  we  have  said,  the 
procedure  will  be  exactly  the  same ;  and  we  shall  treat  the  succeeding  lines  in 
an  analogous  manner." 

Without  speculating  further  as  to  how  the  extension  was  made  to  the 
quadrinomial  etc.,  we  may  suppose  with  Woepcke  that  Apollonius  probably 
investigated  the  multinomial 


ANCIENT   EXTENSIONS  257 

(2)  The  Jirst  trimedial  straight  line. 

The  commentator  here  says :  "  Suppose  we  have  three  medial  lines  com- 
mensurable in  square  [only],  one  of  which  contains  with  each  of  the  two  others 
a  rational  rectangle;  then  the  straight  line  composed  of  the  two  lines  is 
irrational  and  is  called  the  first  bimedial ;  the  remaining  line  is  medial,  and 
the  area  contained  by  these  two  lines  is  irrational.  Consequently  the  square 
on  the  whole  line  is  irrational.*' 

To  begin  with,  the  conditions  here  given  are  incompatible.  If  x^  y,  z  be 
medial  straight  lines  such  that  xy^  xz  are  both  rational, 

y\z  =  xyixz  =  m',n^ 

and  y,  z  are  commensurable  in  length  and  not  in  square  only. 

Hence  it  seems  that  we  must,  with  Woepcke,  understand  "three  medial 

straight  lines  such  that  one  is  commensurable  with  each  of  the  other  two  in 

square  only  and  makes  with  it  a  rational  rectangle." 
If  ^,  y,  z  be  the  three  medial  straight  lines, 

so  that  (jc^  +y  +  z^)  is  medial. 

Also  we  have  2xyy  ixz  both  rational  and  2yz  medial. 

Now  (jc*  +  J'*  +  0^)  +  2yz  +  20cy  +  2xz  cannot  be  rational,  for,  if  it  were,  the 
sum  of  two  medial  areas,  (^+^  +  2*),  2yZy  would  be  rational:  which  is  im- 
possible.    [Cf.  X.  72.] 

Hence  (^ +>'  +  ;?)  is  irrational. 

(3)  The  second  trinudial  straight  line. 

Suppose  ^,  y^  z  to  be  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
and  containing  with  each  other  medial  rectangles. 

Then  (x* +>'' +  ar*)  ^  x*,  and  is  medial. 

Also  2yzy  2ZXy  2xy  are  all  medial  areas. 

To  prove  the  irrationality  in  this  case  I  presume  that  the  method  would 
be  like  that  of  x.  38  about  the  second  bimedial 

Suppose  <r  to  be  a  rational  straight  line  and  let   • 

2yz  -  a-u 
2ZX  -  <nf 
2xy  -  <nv 

Here,  since,  e.g.,  xz\xy  =  v:Wy 

or  z:y  =  v:Wj 

and  similarly  x-.z^w.u^ 

//,  Vy  w  are  commensurable  in  square  only. 

Also,  since  (at*  +  >>'  +  0*)  -^  ^c* 

yj  xy, 
t  is  incommensurable  with  w. 

H.  E.  III.  17 


258  BOOK   X 

Similarly  /  is  incommensurable  with  1/,  v. 

But  /,  «,  Vy  w  are  all  rational  and  ^^  <r. 

Therefore  (/+«  +  »+ zc;)isa  quadrinomial  and  therefore  irrational. 
Therefore  <r  (/  +  «  +  z;  +  «/),  or  (^  +  j'  +  «)",  is  irrational, 
whence  {x-vy-vz)  is  irrational. 

(4)     The  major  made  up  of  three  straight  lines. 

The  commentator  describes  this  as  "  the  line  composed  of  three  straight 
lines  incommensurable  in  square  and  such  that  one  of  them  gives  with  each 
of  the  other  two  a  sum  of  squares  (which  is)  rational,  while  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  two  lines  is  medial." 

If  jc,  J/,  z  are  the  three  straight  lines,  this  would  indicate 

(^+y)  rational, 

(^  +  5*)  rational, 

2yz  medial. 

Woepcke  points  out  (pp.  696 — 8,  note)  the  difficulties  connected  with  this 
supposition  or  the  supposition  of 

(^+y)  rational, 
(^  +  «")  rational, 
2xy  (or  2XZ)  medial, 
and  concludes  that  what  is  meant  is  the  supposition 

(p^  +^)  rational 
ocy  medial 
xz  medial 
(though  the  text  is  against  this). 

The  assumption  of  {pi?  +>>')  and  (p^  +  «*)  being  concurrently  rational  is 
certainly  further  removed  from  Euclid,  for  x.  33  only  enables  us  to  find  one 
pair  of  lines  having  the  property,  as  x^  y. 

But  we  will  not  pursue  these  speculations  further. 

As  regards  further  irrationals  formed  by  subtraction  the  commentator 
writes  as  follows. 

"  Again,  it  is  not  necessary  that,  in  the  irrational  straight  lines  formed  by 
means  of  subtraction,  we  should  confine  ourselves  to  making  one  subtraction 
only,  so  as  to  obtain  the  apotome,  or  the  first  apotome  of  the  medial,  or  the 
second  apotome  of  the  medial,  or  the  minor,  or  the  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole,  or  that  which  produces  with  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole ;  but  we  shall  be  able  here  to  make  two  or  three 
or  four  subtractions. 

"  When  we  do  that,  we  show  in  manner  analogous  to  the  foregoing  that 
the  lines  which  remain  are  irrational  and  that  each  of  them  is  one  of  the  lines 
formed  by  subtraction.  That  is  to  say  that,  if  from  a  rational  line  we  cut  off 
another  rational  line  commensurable  with  the  whole  line  in  square,  we  obtain, 
for  remainder,  an  apotome;  and,  if  we  subtract  from  this  line  (which  is) 
cut  off  and  rational — that  which  Euclid  calls  the  annex  {irpoaapfwiijvaa) — 
another  rational  line  which  is  commensurable  with  it  in  square,  we  obtain,  as 
the  remainder,  an  apotome ;  likewise,  if  we  cut  off  from  the  rational  line  cut 


ANCIENT   EXTENSIONS  259 

off  from  this  line  (i.e.  the  annex  of  the  apotome  last  arrived  at)  another  line 
which  is  commensurable  with  it  in  square,  the  remainder  is  an  apotome.  The 
same  thing  occurs  in  the  subtraction  of  the  other  lines." 

As  Woepcke  remarks,  the  idea  is  the  formation  of  the  successive  apotomes 
ija  —  ^b^  Jb  —  Jcj  Jc  -  y/iif  etc.  We  should  naturally  have  expected  to  see 
the  writer  form  and  discuss  the  following  expressions 

{(J<*-Jl>)-Jc\-^d,  etc. 


17 — 2 


BOOK   XL 

DEFINITIONS. 

1.  A  solid  is  that  which  has  length,  breadth,  and  depth. 

2.  An  extremity  of  a  solid  is  a  surface. 

3.  A  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane, 

when  it  makes  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which 
meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane. 

4.  A  plane  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane  when  the 
straight  lines  drawn,  in  one  of  the  planes,  at  right  angles  to 
the  common  section  of  the  planes  are  at  right  angles  to  the 
remaining  plane. 

5.  The  inclination  of  a  straight  line  to  a  plane 
is,  assuming  a  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  extremity  of 
the  straight  line  which  is  elevated  above  the  plane  to  the 
plane,  and  a  straight  line  joined  from  the  point  thus  arising 
to  the  extremity  of  the  straight  line  which  is  in  the  plane, 
the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  so  drawn  and  the 
straight  line  standing  up. 

6.  The  inclination  of  a  plane  to  a  plane  is  the  acute 
angle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  drawn  at  right  angles 
to  the  common  section  at  the  same  point,  one  in  each  of  the 
planes. 

7.  A  plane  is  said  to  be  similarly  inclined  to  a  plane 
as  another  is  to  another  when  the  said  angles  of  the  inclina- 
tions are  equal  to  one  another. 

8.  Parallel  planes  are  those  which  do  not  meet. 


XI.  Deff.  9—19]  DEFINITIONS    i— 19  261 

9.  Similar  solid  figures  are  those  contained  by  similar 
planes  equal  in  multitude. 

10.  Equal  and  similar  solid  figures  are  those  con- 
tained by  similar  planes  equal  in  multitude  and  in  magnitude. 

11.  A  solid  angle  is  the  inclination  constituted  by  more 
than  two  lines  which  meet  one  another  and  are  not  in  the 
same  surface,  towards  all  the  lines. 

Otherwise :  A  solid  angle  is  that  which  is  contained  by 
more  than  two  plane  angles  which  are  not  in  the  same  plane 
and  are  constructed  to  one  point. 

12.  A  pyramid  is  a  solid  figure,  contained  by  planes, 
which  is  constructed  from  one  plane  to  one  point. 

13.  A  prism  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  planes  two 
of  which,  namely  those  which  are  opposite,  are  equal,  similar 
and  parallel,  while  the  rest  are  parallelograms. 

14.  When,  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle  remaining  fixed, 
the  semicircle  is  carried  round  and  restored  again  to  the  same 
position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved,  the  figure  so 
comprehended  is  a  sphere. 

15.  The  axis  of  the  sphere  is  the  straight  line  which 
remains  fixed  and  about  which  the  semicircle  is  turned. 

16.  The  centre  of  the  sphere  is  the  same  as  that 
of  the  semicircle. 

17.  A  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  any  straight  line 
drawn  through  the  centre  and  terminated  in  both  directions 
by  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

18.  When,  one  side  of  those  about  the  right  angle  in  a 
right-angled  triangle  remaining  fixed,  the  triangle  is  carried 
round  and  restored  again  to  the  same  position  from  which  it 
began  to  be  moved,  the  figure  so  comprehended  is  a  cone. 

And,  if  the  straight  line  which  remains  fixed  be  equal  to 
the  remaining  side  about  the  right  angle  which  is  carried 
round,  the  cone  will  be  right-angled ;  if  less,  obtuse-angled ; 
and  if  greater,  acute-angled. 

19.  The  axis  of  the  cone  is  the  straight  line  which 
remains  fixed  and  about  which  the  triangle  is  turned. 


262  BOOK  XI  [xi.  Deff. 

20.  And  the  base  is  the  circle  described  by  the  straight 
line  which  is  carried  round. 

21.  When,  one  side  of  those  about  the  right  angle  in  a 
rectangular  parallelogram  remaining  fixed,  the  parallelogram 
is  carried  round  and  restored  again  to  the  same  position  from 
which  it  began  to  be  moved,  the  figure  so  comprehended  is  a 
cylinder. 

22.  The  axis  of  the  cylinder  is  the  straight  line  which 
remains  fixed  and  about  which  the  parallelogram  is  turned. 

23.  And  the  bases  are  the  circles  described  by  the  two 
sides  opposite  to  one  another  which  are  carried  round. 

24.  Similar  cones  and  cylinders  are  those  in  which 
the  axes  and  the  diameters  of  the  bases  are  proportional. 

25.  A  cube  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  six  equal 
squares. 

26.  An  octahedron  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  eight 
equal  and  equilateral  triangles. 

27.  An  icosahedron  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by 
twenty  equal  and  equilateral  triangles. 

28.  A  dodecahedron  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by 
twelve  equal,  equilateral,  and  equiangular  pentagons. 

Definition  1. 

Srcpcov  can  ro  /liJKoq  koI  irXdro^  koi  paBoi^  hc^' 

This  definition  was  evidently  traditional,  as  may  be  inferred  from  a  number 
of  passages  in  Plato  and  Aristotle.  Thus  Plato  speaks  (Sophisfy  235  d)  of 
making  an  imitation  of  a  model  (iropaSciy/ia)  ''in  length  and  breadth  and 
depth  "  and  (LawSy  817  e)  of  "the  art  of  measuring  length,  surface  and  depth" 
as  one  of  three  fuiBijfiara.  Depths  the  third  dimension,  is  used  alone  as  a 
description  of  "  body  "  by  Aristotle,  the  term  being  regarded  as  connoting  the 
other  two  dimensions ;  thus  (Afetaph.  1020  a  13, 1 1 )  "length  is  a  line,  breadth  a 
surface,  and  depth  body" ;  "  that  which  is  continuous  in  one  direction  is  length, 
in  two  directions  breadth,  and  in  three  depth."  Similarly  Plato  {Rep.  528  b,  d), 
when  reconsidering  his  classification  of  astronomy  as  next  to  (plane)  geometry : 
"although  the  science  dealing  with  the  additional  dimension  of  depth  is  next  in 
order,  yet,  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  studied  absurdly,  I  passed  it  over  and 
put  next  to  geometry  astronomy,  the  motion  of  (bodies  ha\'ing)  depth."  In 
Aristotle  (Topics  vi.  5,  142  b  24)  we  find  "the  definition  of  body,  that  which 
has  three  dimensions  (Siairrcurcis) " ;  elsewhere  he  speaks  of  it  as  "  that  which 
has  all  the  dimensions"  (De  cado  i.  i,  268  b  6X  **that  which  has  dimension 
every  way  "  (ro  nrn|  haxmaw  c^or,  Afeiaph.  1066  b  32)  etc     In  the  Pkystcs 


XI.  Deff.  i^s]  definitions   AND   NOTES  263 

(iv.  I,  208  b  i3sqq.)  he  speaks  of  the  "dimensions"  as  six^  dividing  each  of 
the  three  into  two  opposites,  "  up  and  down,  before  and  behind,  right  and  left," 
though  of  course,  as  he  explains,  these  terms  are  relative. 

Heron,  as  might  be  expected,  combines  the  two  forms  of  the  definition. 
'*  A  solid  body  is  that  which  has  length,  breadth,  and  depth :  or  that  which 
possesses  the  three  dimensions."    (Def.  13.) 

Similarly  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  1 1 1,  19,  ed.  Hiller) :  "  that  which  is  extended 
(huurrarov)  and  divisible  in  three  directions  is  solid,  having  length,  breadth 
and  depth." 

Definition  2. 

Srcpcov  Si  irifHK  iiri<l>dv€ia. 

In  like  manner  Aristotle  says  (AfetqpA.  1066  b  23)  that  the  notion  (Aoyos) 
of  body  is  "  that  which  is  bounded  by  surfaces  "  (^iwrcSoi?  in  this  case)  and 
i^Metaph,  1060  b  15)  "surfaces  (^irt^vciat)  are  divisions  of  bodies." 

So  Heron  (Def.  13):  "  Every  solid  is  bounded  (ircpaTovrai)  by  surfaces,  and 
is  produced  when  a  surface  is  moved  from  a  forward  position  in  a  backward 
direction." 

Definition  3. 

Electa  irpof  hclitthov  opOij  iartv,  orav  irpos  ircuras  ras  dirro/uicyas  avr^^  tvBtia^ 

This  definition  and  the  next  are  given  almost  word  for  word  by  Heron 
(Def.  IIS). 

That  a  straight  line  can  be  so  related  to  a  plane  as  described  in  Def.  3  is 
established  in  xi.  4.  The  fact  has  been  made  the  basis  of  a  definition  of  a 
plane  which  is  attributed  by  Crelle  to  Fourier,  and  is  as  follows.  "  A  plane  is 
formed  by  the  totality  of  all  the  straight  lines  which,  passing  through  one  and 
the  same  point  of  a  straight  line  in  space,  stand  perpendicular  to  it."  Stated 
in  this  form,  the  definition  is  open  to  the  objection  that  the  conception  of  a 
right  angle,  involving  the  measurement  of  angles,  presupposes  a  plane,  inasmuch 
as  the  measurement  of  angles  depends  ultimately  upon  the  superposition  of  two 
planes  and  their  coincidence  throughout  when  two  lines  in  one  coincide  with 
two  lines  in  the  other  respectively.    Cf.  my  note  on  i.  Def.  7,  Vol.  i.  pp.  173 — 5. 

Definition  4. 

*£Trtirc8ov  irpos  ^iircSov  6p$6v  ^ortv,  orav  at  rg  koiv^  TOfi'j  rtov  cTriircSoiv  wpo^ 
opBas  dy6fi€vai  €v0€ifu  Iv  Ivl  rcSv  ^irtircSciM'  r<p  Xoi7r<p  ciriircScp  irpos  6p$ai  wriv. 

Both  this  definition  and  Def.  6  use  the  common  section  of  two  planes, 
though  it  is  not  till  xi.  3  that  this  common  section  is  proved  to  be  a  straight 
line.  The  definition  however,  just  like  Def.  3,  is  legitimate,  because  the  object 
is  to  explain  the  meaning  of  terms,  not  to  prove  anything. 

The  definition  of  perpendicular  planes  is  made  by  Legendre  a  particular 
case  of  Def.  6,  the  limiting  case,  namely,  where  the  angle  representing  the 
"  inclination  of  a  plane  to  a  plane  "  is  a  right  angle. 

Definition  5. 

Ev^cuis  irpos  ^tircSov  KXurts  ^crriv,  Srav  diro  rov  /jLcrtiapov  Wparos  rrj^ 
cv^cias  ivl  TO  ^iTTcSov  #ca0€TOS  i}(Oif  fcoi  diro  rov  y€yofiivov  ayjfitiov  M  ro  iv  rf 
CTTiTTC&p  wipaq  r^  cvtf cuis*  €V$€ia  ^irc^cvx^'  V  irtpicxoficn;  yiovCa,  tnro  r^  Ax0€urrf9 


364 


BOOK  XI 


[xi.  Deff<  5,  6 


In  other  words,  the  incUnation  of  a  straight  line  to  a  plane  is  the  angle 
between  the  straight  line  and  its  projection  on  the  plane.  This  angle  is  of 
course  less  than  the  angle  between  the  straight  line  and  any  other  straight  line 
in  the  plane  through  the  intersection  of  the  straight  line  and  plane ;  and  the 
fact  is  sometimes  made  the  subject  of  a  proposition  in  modern  text-books.  It 
is  easily  proved  by  means  of  the  propositions  xi.  4,  i.  19  and  18. 

Definition  6. 

*EiriTrc8ov  Trpos  cTTiircSov  kXicis  ccrriv  rj  ir€pi€\ofA€vrj  o^cux  ytavia  viro  riav  irpoi 
opOas  rj  Koiv^  TOfJL'Q  dyofi€v<DV  wpo^  rep  avria  ayifitu^  iv  kKaripif  rwi/  hnrrihiav. 

When  two  planes  meet  in  a  straight  line,  they  form  what  is  called  in 
modern  text-books  a  dihedral  angle,  which  is  defined  as  the  opening  or  angular 
opening  between  the  two  planes.  This  dihedral  angle  is  an  "  angle  "  altogether 
different  in  kind  from  a  plane  angle,  as  again  it  is  different  from  a  solid  angle 
as  defined  by  Euclid  (i.e.  a  trihedral,  tetrahedral,  etc.  angle).  Adopting  for 
the  moment  Apollonius' conception  of  an  angle  as  the  "bringing  together  of  a 
surface  or  solid  towards  one  point  under  a  broken  line  or  surface  "  (Proclus, 
p.  123,  16),  we  may  regard  a  dihedral  angle  as  the  bringing  together  of  the 
broken  surface  formed  by  two  intersecting  planes  not  to  a  point  but  to  a  straight 
line,  namely  the  intersection  of  the  planes.  Legendre,  in  a  proposition  on  the 
subject,  applied  provisionally  the  term  comer  to  describe  the  dihedral  angle 
between  two  planes ;  and  this  would  be  a  better  word,  I  think,  than  opening 
to  use  in  the  definition. 

The  distinct  species  of  "angle"  which  we  call  dihedral  is,  however, 
measured  by  a  certain  plane  angle,  namely  that  which  Euclid  describes  in  the 
present  definition  and  calls  the  inclincUion  of  a  plane  to  a  plane,  and  which  in 
some  modem  text-books  is  called  the  plane  angle  of  the  dihedral  angle. 

It  is  necessary  to  show  that  this  plane  angle  is  a  proper  measure  of  the 
dihedral  angle,  and  accordingly  Legendre  has  a  proposition  to  this  effect.  In 
order  to  prove  it,  it  is  necessary  to  show  that,  given  two  planes  meeting  in  a 
straight  line, 

(i)  the  plane  angle  in  question  is  the  same  at  all  points  of  the  straight  line 
forming  the  common  section ; 

(2)  if  the  dihedral  angle  between  two  planes  increases  or  diminishes  in  a 
certain  ratio,  the  plane  angle  in  question  will  increase  or  diminish  in  the  same 
ratio. 

(i)     If  MAN,  MAP  be  two  planes  intersecting  in  MA,  and  if  AN,  AP 
be  drawn  in  the  planes  respectively  and  at  right  angles  to 
MA,  the  angle  NAP  is  the  inclination  of  the  plane  to  the 
plane  or  the  plane  angle  of  the  dihedral  angle. 

Let  MC,  MB  be  also  drawn  in  the  respective  planes 
at  right  angles  to  MA. 

Then  since,  in  the  plane  MAN,  MC  and  AN  are 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  same  straight  line  MA, 
MC,  AN  are  parallel. 

For  the  same  reason,  MB,  AP  are  parallel. 

Therefore  [xi.  10]  the  angle  BMC  is  equal  to  the 
angle  PAN 

And  M  may  be  any  point  on  MA»  Therefore  the 
plane  angle  described  in  the  definition  is  the  same  at  all 
points  of  AM, 


M 


\ 

-^ 

/ 

> 

V 

D 

XI.  Deff.  6— io]     notes  ON  DEFINITIONS  5—10  265 

(2)  In  the  plane  NAP  draw  the  arc  NDP  oi  any  circle  with  centre  A^ 
and  draw  the  radius  AD, 

Now  the  planes  NAP^  CMB^  being  both  at  right  angles  to  the  straight 
line  MAy  are  parallel ;  [xi.  14] 

therefore  the  intersections  AD^  ME  of  these  planes  with  the  plane  MAD  are 
parallel,  [xi.  16] 

and  consequently  the  angles  BME^  PAD  are  equal.  [xi.  10] 

If  now  the  plane  angle  NAD  were  equal  to  the  plane  angle  DAPy  the 
dihedral  angle  NAMD  would  be  equal  to  the  dihedral  angle  DAMP\ 
for,  if  the  angle  'PAD  were  applied  to  the  angle  DAN,  AM  remaining  the 
same,  the  corresponding  dihedral  angles  would  coincide. 

Successive  applications  of  this  result  show  that,  if  the  angles  NAD,  DAP 
each  contain  a  certain  angle  a  certain  number  of  times,  the  dihedral  angles 
NAMD,  DAMP  will  contain  the  corresponding  dihedral  angle  the  same 
number  of  times  respectively. 

Hence,  where  the  angles  NAD,  DAP  are  commensurable,  the  dihedral 
angles  corresponding  to  them  are  in  the  same  ratio. 

Legendre  then  extends  the  proof  to  the  case  where  the  plane  angles  are 
incommensurable  by  reference  to  an  exactly  similar  extension  in  his  proposition 
corresponding  to  Euclid  vi.  i,  for  which  see  the  note  on  that  proposition. 

Modern  text-books  make  the  extension  by  an  appeal  to  limits. 

Definition  7. 

'EttiVcSov  7rp09  hrtwf.hov  ofAoiut^  KtKXiaOai  Xcycrat  koX  mpov  irpoi  €T€pov,  orav 
al  itprjfxivai  twv  kXiVccdv  ycDviiai  urai  dW-qXats  wnv. 

Definition  8. 

IlapaXXiyXa  cTTiircSa   coTi  to.  davfXTrroyra, 

Heron  has  the  same  definition  of  parallel  planes  (Def.  115).  The  Greek 
word  which  is  translated  "  which  do  not  meet "  is  Aav/unrrtuTa,  the  term  which 
has  been  adopted  for  the  asymptotes  of  a  curve. 

Definition  9. 

"OfAoia  (rrcpca  (r\riftjard  iari,  ra  vno  ofJLoitav  €iriirc8(i>i/  w€pi€XPfJL€va  lawv  to 
7rXi7^os. 

Definition  id. 

''lo'a  8c  Koi  ofioid  orcpea  axT^fJuiTd  icm  to.  vtto  ofJLouav  hniriBiav  ir€pi€)(6fJL€va 
icitiv  TQ>  7rXi/^ci  Koi  T<p  ficyeOtL 

These  definitions,  the  second  of  which  practically  only  substitutes  the 
words  "  equal  and  similar  "  for  the  word  **  similar  "  in  the  first,  have  been  the 
mark  of  much  criticism. 

Simson  holds  that  the  equality  of  solid  figures  is  a  thing  which  ought  to  be 
proved,  by  the  method  of  superposition,  or  otherwise,  and  hence  that  Def.  10 
is  not  a  definition  but  a  theorem  which  ought  not  to  have  been  placed  among 
the  definitions.  Secondly,  he  gives  an  example  to  show  that  the  definition  or 
theorem  is  not  universally  true.  He  takes  a  pyramid  and  then  erects  on  the 
base,  on  opposite  sides  of  it,  two  equal  pyramids  smaller  than  the  first.  The 
addition  and  subtraction  of  these  pyramids  respectively  from  the  first  give  two 


266  BOOK   XI  [xi.  Def.  io 

solid  figures  which  satisfy  the  definition  but  are  clearly  not  equal  (the  smaller 
having  a  re-entrant  angle);  whence  it  also  appears  that  two  unequal  solid 
angles  may  be  contained  by  the  same  number  of  equal  plane  angles. 

Maintaining  then  that  Def.  lo  is  an  interpolation  by  "an  unskilful  hand," 
Simson  transfers  to  a  place  before  Def.  9  the  definition  of  a  solid  angle,  and 
then  defines  similar  solid  figures  as  follows : 

Similar  solid  figures  are  stuh  as  have  all  their  solid  angles  eguaf^  each  to  each^ 
and  which  are  contained  by  the  same  number  of  similar  planes. 

Legendre  has  an  invaluable  discussion  of  the  whole  subject  of  these 
definitions  (Note  xii.,  pp.  323 — 336,  of  the  14th  edition  of  his  AUments  de 
Ghmktrie),  He  remarks  in  the  first  place  that,  as  Simson  said,  Def.  10  is  not 
properly  a  definition,  but  a  theorem  which  it  is  necessary  to  prove ;  for  it  is 
not  evident  that  two  solids  are  equal  for  the  sole  reason  that  they  have  an 
equal  number  of  equal  faces,  and,  if  true,  the  fact  should  be  proved  by  super- 
position or  otherwise.  The  fault  of  Def.  10  is  also  common  to  Def.  9.  For, 
if  Def.  10  is  not  proved,  one  might  suppose  that  there  exist  two  unequal  and 
dissimilar  solids  with  equal  faces ;  but,  in  that  case,  according  to  Definition  9, 
a  solid  having  faces  similar  to  those  of  the  two  first  would  be  similar  to  both 
of  them,  i.e.  to  two  solids  of  different  form :  a  conclusion  implying  a  con- 
tradiction or  at  least  not  according  with  the  natural  meaning  of  the  word 
"similar." 

What  then  is  to  be  said  in  defence  of  the  two  definitions  as  given  by 
Euclid  ?  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  figures  which  Euclid  actually  proves 
equal  or  similar  by  reference  to  Deff.  9,  10  are  such  that  their  solid  angles  do 
not  consist  of  more  than  three  plane  angles  ;  and  he  proves  sufficiently  clearly 
that,  if  three  plane  angles  forming  one  solid  angle  be  respectively  equal  to 
three  plane  angles  forming  another  solid  angle,  the  two  solid  angles  are  equal. 
If  now  two  polyhedra  have  their  faces  equal  respectively,  the  corresponding 
solid  angles  will  be  made  up  of  the  same  number  of  plane  angles,  and  the 
plane  angles  forming  each  solid  angle  in  one  polyhedron  will  be  respectively 
equal  to  the  plane  angles  forming  the  corresponding  solid  angle  in  the  other. 
Therefore,  if  the  plane  angles  in  each  solid  angle  are  not  more  than  three  in 
number,  the  corresponding  solid  angles  will  be  equal.  But  if  the  correspond- 
ing faces  are  equal,  and  the  corresponding  solid  angles  equal,  the  solids  must 
be  equal ;  for  they  can  be  superposed,  or  at  least  they  will  be  symmetrical 
with  one  another.  Hence  the  statement  of  Deff.  9,  10  is  true  and  admissible 
at  all  events  in  the  case  of  figures  with  trihedral  angles,  which  is  the  only  case 
taken  by  Euclid. 

Again,  the  example  given  by  Simson  to  prove  the  incorrectness  of  Def.  10 
introduces  a  solid  with  a  re-entrant  angle.  But  it  is  more  than  probable  that 
Euclid  deliberately  intended  to  exclude  such  solids  and  to  take  cognizance  of 
conmx  polyhedra  only ;  hence  Simson's  example  is  not  conclusive  against  the 
definition. 

Legendre  observes  that  Simson's  own  definition,  though  true,  has  the 
disadvantage  that  it  contains  a  number  of  superfluous  conditions.  To  get 
over  the  difficulties,  Legendre  himself  divides  the  definition  of  similar  solids 
into  two,  the  first  of  which  defines  similar  triangular  pyramids  only,  and  the 
second  (which  defines  similar  polyhedra  in  general)  is  based  on  the  first. 

Two  triangular  pyramids  are  similar  vihen  they  have  pairs  of  faces  respectively 
similar^  similarly  placed  and  equally  inclined  to  one  another. 

Then,  having  formed  a  triangle  with  the  vertices  of  three  angles  taken  on 
the  same  face  or  base  of  a  polyhedron,  we  may  imagine  the  vertices  of  the 


XI.  Deff.  lo,  ii]     NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  lo,  ii  267 

different  solid  angles  of  the  polyhedron  situated  outside  of  the  plane  of  this 
base  to  be  the  vertices  of  as  many  triangular  pyramids  which  have  the  triangle 
for  common  base,  and  each  of  these  pyramids  will  determine  the  position  of 
one  solid  angle  of  the  polyhedron.     This  being  so, 

Two  polyhedra  are  similar  when  they  have  similar  bases,  and  the  vertices  of 
their  corresponding  solid  angles  outside  the  bases  are  determined  by  triangular 
Pyramids  similar  each  to  ecuh. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Cauchy  proved  that  two  convex  solid  figures  are  equal 
if  they  are  contained  by  equal  plane  figures  similarly  arranged.  Legendre 
gives  a  proof  which,  he  says,  is  nearly  the  same  as  Cauchy's,  depending  on  two 
lemmas  which  lead  to  the  theorem  that.  Given  a  convex  polyhedron  in  which  all 
the  solid  angles  are  made  up  of  more  than  three  plane  angles,  it  is  impossible  to 
vary  the  inclinations  of  t/ie  planes  of  this  solid  so  as  to  produce  a  second  polyhe- 
dron formed  by  the  same  planes  arranged  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  given 
polyhedron.  The  convex  polyhedron  in  which  all  the  solid  angles  are  made  up 
of  more  than  three  plane  angles  is  obtained  by  cutting  off  from  any  given 
polyhedron  all  the  triangular  pyramids  forming  trihedral  angles  (if  one  and  the 
same  edge  is  common  to  two  trihedral  angles,  only  one  of  these  angles  is 
suppressed  in  the  first  operation).  This  is  legitimate  because  trihedral  angles 
are  invariable  from  their  nature. 

Hence  it  would  appear  that  Heron's  definition  of  equal  solid  figures,  which 
adds  "  similarly  situated  "  to  Euclid's  "  similar  "  is  correct,  if  it  be  understood  to 
apply  to  convex  polyhedra  only :  Equal  solid  figures  are  those  which  are 
contained  by  equal  and  similarly  situated plcMes,  equal  in  number  and  magnitude: 
where,  however,  the  words  **  equal  and  "  before  "  similarly  situated  "  might  be 
dispensed  with. 

Heron  (Def  118)  defines  similar  solid  figures  as  those  which  are  contained 
by  planes  similar  and  similarly  situated.  If  understood  of  convex  polyhedra, 
there  would  not  appear  to  be  any  objection  to  this,  in  view  of  the  truth  of 
Cauchy's  proposition  about  equal  solid  figures. 


Definition  11. 

'%'Tf.p^a.  yuivia  iarlv  17  xmb  irXetdvcov  rj  8vo  ypafiftMV  airrofiivtDV  dXXrjXxDV  koX  fiij 
€v  ry  avrg  €iriif>av€i(jL  owr^v  irpo9  wcurot?  rat?  ypa/xfiais  KXurvi,  ^AAAcos  •  arcpca 
yuiVLa  ia-Tiv  rj  viro  irXctovcov  rj  hvo  yoivtcov  ^iircSoiv  ir€pi€)(Ofi€vrj  firi  owruiv  iv  rtp 
avrtS  CTTiTTcSip  irpo^  cvi  (nifi€Uf  awiarafxeviav, 

Heiberg  conjectures  that  the  first  of  these  two  definitions,  which  is  not  in 
Euclid's  manner,  was  perhaps  taken  by  him  from  some  earlier  Elements, 

The  phraseology  of  the  second  definition  is  exactly  that  of  Plato  when  he 
is  speaking  of  solid  angles  in  the  Timaeus  (p.  55).  Thus  he  speaks  (i)  of  four 
equilateral  triangles  so  put  together  (^wMrra/icva)  that  each  set  of  three  plane 
angles  makes  one  solid  angle,  (2)  of  eight  equilateral  triangles  put  together  so 
that  each  set  of  four  plane  angles  makes  one  solid  angle,  and  (3)  of  six  squares 
making  eight  solid  angles,  each  composed  of  three  plane  right  angles. 

As  we  know,  Apollonius  defined  an  angle  as  the  "  bringing  together  of  a 
surface  or  solid  to  one  point  under  a  broken  line  or  surface."  Heron  (Def.  24) 
even  omits  the  word  "  broken  "  and  says  that  A  solid  angle  is  in  general  (koi^iSs) 
the  bringing  together  of  a  surface  which  has  its  concavity  in  one  and  the  same 
direction  to  one  point.  It  is  clear  from  an  allusion  in  Proclus  (p.  123,  i — 6)  to 
the  half  of  a  cone  cut  off  by  a  triangle  through  the  axis,  and  from  a  scholium  to 


268  BOOK   XI  [xi.  Deff.  ii— 13 

this  definition,  that  there  was  controversy  as  to  the  correctness  of  describing  as  a 
solid  angle  the  "angle  "  enclosed  by  fewer  than  three  surfaces  (including  curved 
surfaces).  Thus  the  scholiast  says  that  Euclid's  definition  of  a  solid  angle  as 
made  up  of  three  or  more  plane  angles  is  deficient  because  it  does  not  e.g.  cover 
the  case  of  the  angle  of  a  "  fourth  part  of  a  sphere,"  which  is  contained  by  more 
than  two  surfaces,  though  not  all  plane.  But  he  declines  to  admit  that  the 
half-cone  forms  a  solid  angle  at  the  vertex,  for  in  that  case  the  vertex  of  the 
cone  would  itself  be  an  angle,  and  a  solid  angle  would  then  be  formed  both 
by  two  surfaces  and  by  one  surface:  "which  is  not  true."  Heron  on  the 
other  hand  (Def.  24)  distinctly  speaks  of  solid  angles  which  are  not  contained 
by  plane  rectilineal  angles,  "e.g.  the  angles  of  cones."  The  conception  of  the 
latter  "  angles  "  as  the  limit  of  solid  angles  with  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely 
small  constituent  plane  angles  does  not  appear  in  the  Greek  geometers  so  far 
as  I  know. 

In  modern  text-books  a  polyhedral  angle  is  usually  spoken  of  as  formed 
(or  bounded)  by  three  or  more  planes  meeting  at  a  pointy  or  it  is  the  angular 
opening  between  such  planes  at  the  point  where  they  meet. 


Definition  12. 

Ilvpa/xts  €*aTt  a-x^/jua  orcpcov  ciriircSots  ir€pi,€x6fAOfOV  airo  cvos  cVtircSov  irpo?  €vi 

This  definition  is  by  no  means  too  clear,  nor  is  the  slightly  amplified 
definition  added  to  it  by  Heron  (Def.  100).  A  pyramid  is  the  figure  brought 
together  to  one  pointy  by  putting  together  triangles^  from  a  triangular^  quadri- 
lateral or  polygonal^  that  is,  any  rectilineal,  base. 

As  we  might  expect,  there  is  great  variety  in  the  definitions  given  in 
modem  text-books.  I^egendre  says  a  pyramid  is  the  solid  formed  when  several 
triangular  planes  start  from  one  point  and  are  terminated  at  the  different  sides 
of  one  polygonal  plane. 

Mr  H.  M.  Taylor  and  Smith  and  Bryant  call  it  a  polyhedron  all  but  one  of 
whose  faces  meet  in  a  point. 

Mehler  reverses  Legendre's  form  and  gives  the  content  of  Euclid's  in 
clearer  language.  ^^An  n-sided pyramid  is  bounded  by  an  n-sided  polygon  as  base 
and  n  triangles  which  connect  its  sides  with  one  and  the  same  point  outside  it.^^ 

Rausenberger  points  out  that  a  pyramid  is  the  figure  cut  off  from  a  solid 
angle  formed  of  any  number  of  plane  angles  by  a  plane  which  intersects  the 
solid  angle.  * 

Definition  13. 

npuTfuz  €crTt  a)(ijfj.a  oTcpcov  cttittcSois  ir€pu\6fi€V0Vf  wv  8uo  ra  d'jr€vavTiOV  laa 
T€  Kol  ofAoid  coTi  Kol  TTapoiXXi^Xa,  ra  Sc  Xoiira  iraftaWrjXoypa/xfia. 

Mr  H.  M.  Taylor,  followed  by  Smith  and  Bryant,  defines  a  prism  as  a 
polyhedron  all  but  two  of  the  faces  of  which  are  parallel  to  one  straight  line. 

Mehler  calls  an  «-sided  prism  a  body  contained  betiveen  two  parallel  plams 
and  enclosed  by  n  other  planes  with  parallel  lines  of  intersection. 

Heron's  definition  of  a  prism  is  much  wider  (Def.  105).  Prisms  are  those 
figures  which  are  connected  {avvdirrovTa)  from  a  rectilimal  base  to  a  rectilineal 
area  by  rectilineal  collocation  (icar  €v&vYpafjLfiov  avvBtaw).    By  this  Heron  must 


XI.  Deff.  13— 15]  NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  11—15 


269 


apparently  mean  any  convex  solid  formed  by  connecting  the  sides  and  angles 

of  two  polygons  in  different  planes,  and 

each  having  any  number  of  sides,  by 

straight  lines   forming   triangular   faces 

(where  of  course  two  adjacent  triangles 

may  be  in  one  plane  and  so  form  one 

quadrilateral  face)  in  the  manner  shown 

in  the  annexed  figure,  where  ABCD^ 

EFG    represent     the     base     and    its 

opposite. 

Heron  goes  on  to  explain  that,  if 
the  face  opposite  to  the  base  reduces  to 
a  straight  line,  and  a  solid  is  formed  by 
connecting  the  base  to  its  extremities  by 
straight  lines,  as  in  the  other  case,  the 
resulting  figure  is  neither  a  pyramid  nor 
a  prism. 

Further,  he  defines  paralUlogrammic  (in  the  body  of  the  definition  parallel- 
sided)  prisms  as  being  those  prisms  which  have  six  faces  and  have  their 
opposite  planes  parallel. 

Definition  14. 

2<^aipa  ccTTiv,  orav  y^/uicvkXiov  fA€vov<rrf^  T179  Sia^icrpov  ircpicvcx^ci'  to 
T^fiiicvKkLov  €19  TO  avTO  vdkiv  iLTTOKaTOO'TaOy^  oO€v  ijpiaTO  tl>€p€aOaiy  TO  ir€piXrjtf>$h^ 

The  scholiast  observes  that  this  definition  is  not  properly  a  definition  of  a 
sphere  but  a  description  of  the  mode  of  generating  it.  But  it  will  be  seen,  in 
the  last  propositions  of  Book  xiii.,  why  Euclid  put  the  definition  in  this  form. 
It  is  because  it  is  this  particular  view  of  a  sphere  which  he  uses  to  prove  that 
the  vertices  of  the  regular  solids  which  he  wishes  to  ** comprehend"  in  certain 
spheres  do  lie  on  the  surfaces  of  those  spheres.  He  proves  in  fact  that  the 
said  vertices  lie  on  semicircles  described  on  certain  diameters  of  the  spheres.  For 
the  real  definition  the  scholiast  refers  to  Theodosius'  Sphaerica.  But  of  course 
the  proper  definition  was  given  much  earlier.  In  Aristotle  the  characteristic 
of  a  sphere  is  that  its  extremity  is  equally  distant  from  its  centre  (to  Ixtov  dir^ctv 
Tov  fi€aov  TO  iaxorovj  De  caelo  ii.  14,  297  a  24).  Heron  (Def.  77)  uses  the 
same  form  as  that  in  which  Euclid  defines  the  circle:  A  sphere  is  a  solid 
figure  bounded  by  one  surface^  such  that  all  the  straight  lines  falling  on  it  from 
one  point  of  those  which  lie  within  the  figure  are  equal  to  one  another.  So  the 
usual  definition  in  the  text-books :  A  sphere  is  a  closed  surface  \uch  that  all 
points  of  it  are  equidistant  from  a  fixed  point  within  it. 


Definition  15. 

*Af<iiv  8e  T^9  a<l>aipa^  ia-rlv  1;  fievovcra  cv^cia,  ircpi  lyv  to  iffUKVKXiov  orpc^cTai. 

That  any  diameter  of  a  sphere  may  be  called  an  axis  is  made  clear  by 
Heron  (Def.  79).  The  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  called  an  axis^  and  is  any 
straight  line  drawn  through  the  centre  and  bounded  in  both  directions  by  the 
sphere^  immovable^  about  which  the  sphere  is  moved  and  turned,  Cf.  Euclid's 
Def.  17. 


27©  BOOK  XI  [xi.  Dkff.  16—18 

Definition  16. 

Kfvrpov  8c  r^s  aifxufHK  ccrrl  to  avro,  S  koI  tov  rjfiiKVKkiov. 

Heron,  Def.  78.  TAe  middle  {point)  of  the  sphere  is  called  its  centre  ;  and 
this  same  point  is  also  the  centre  of  the  hemisphere. 

Definition  17. 

AiaMcrpo?  3c  t^%  aff^aipa^  iarlv  cvtfcta  ris  Sia  rov  Ktvrpov  ify/mcn;  koX  irepa- 
TOVfJLtirq  €if>^  cfcarcpa  ra  fiipvj  xnro  rrjs  hn,if>av€Cai  rij^  aif>aipas. 

Definition  18. 

K<iivo9  ioTiVf  OToy  opOoytDviov  rpiyvivov  iktvowrtf^  fua^  irXcvpas  twv  ircpt  t^ 
opOrfV  ycDvtav  ircpicvc;(0cv  ro  Tpiymvov  cis  to  avro  iraKiv  &7roKaTaaTa&Q,  oOcv  rjp^aTo 
^Up€avaif  TO  wtpiXriifiOkv  ax^fjui.  kAi^  /tcv  17  /jLtvovaa  €v$€Ui  layj  f  tq  koiirg  [rg] 
ircpt  rrp'  opOriv  ircpi^cpo/uicia;,  opOoy^vio^  larai  b  KtDvo^,  iav  8c  iXdmav,  SLfifiXv- 
y(tfVi09,  cav  8c  /ict^cov,  o^vycJvios. 

This  definition,  or  rather  description  of  the  genesis,  of  a  (right)  cone  is 
interesting  on  account  of  the  second  sentence  distinguishing  between  right- 
angled,  obtuse-angled  and  acute-angled  cones.  This  distinction  is  quite 
unnecessary  for  Euclid's  purpose  and  is  not  used  by  him  in  Book  xii. ;  it  is  no 
doubt  a  relic  of  the  method,  still  in  use  in  Euclid's  time,  by  which  the  earlier 
Greek  geometers  produced  conic  sections,  namely,  by  cutting  right  cones  only 
by  sections  always  perpendicular  to  an  edge.  With  this  system  the  parabola 
was  a  section  of  a  right-angled  cone,  the  hyperbola  a  section  of  an  obtuse-angled 
cone,  and  the  ellipse  a  section  of  an  aatte-angled  cone.  The  conic  sections  were 
so  called  by  Archimedes,  and  generally  until  Apollonius,  who  was  the  first  to 
give  the  complete  theory  of  their  generation  by  me^ns  of  sections  not  perpen- 
dicular to  an  edge,  and  from  cones  which  are  in  general  oblique  circular  cones. 
Thus  Apollonius  begins  his  Conies  with  the  more  scientific  definition  of  a  cone. 
If,  he  says,  a  straight  line  infinite  in  length,  and  passing  always  through  a  fixed 
point,  be  made  to  move  round  the  circumference  of  a  circle  which  is  not  in  the 
same  plane  with  the  point,  so  as  to  pass  successively  through  every  point  of 
that  circumference,  the  moving  straight  line  will  trace  out  the  surface  of  a  dotible 
cone,  or  two  similar  cones  lying  in  opposite  directions  and  meeting  in  the  fixed 
point,  which  is  the  apex  of  each  cone.  The  circle  about  which  the  straight  line 
moves  is  called  the  base  of  the  cone  lying  between  the  said  circle  and  the  fixed 
point,  and  the  axis  is  defined  as  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  fixed  point, 
or  the  apex,  to  the  centre  of  the  circle  forming  the  base.  Apollonius  goes  on 
to  say  that  the  cone  is  a  sccUene  or  oblique  cone  except  in  the  particular  case 
where  the  axis  is  perpendicular  to  the  base.  In  this  latter  case  it  is  a  right 
cone. 

Archimedes  called  the  right  cone  an  isosceles  cone.  This  fact,  coupled 
with  the  appearance  in  his  treatise  On  Conoids  and  Spheroids  (7,  8,  9)  of 
sections  of  acute-angled  cones  (ellipses)  as  sections  of  conical  surfaces  which  are 
proved  to  be  oblique  circular  cones  by  finding  their  circular  sections,  makes  it 
sufficiently  clear  that  Archimedes,  if  he  had  defined  a  cone,  would  have 
defined  it  in  the  same  way  as  Apollonius  does. 


XI.  Deff.  19—28]  NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  16—28  271 

Definition  19. 

"A^tDV  8c  Tov  Kwvov  coTiK  ij  fi€vov(ra  cv0€ia,  ircpt  iyv  to  rplyinvov  crrpc^crai. 

Definition  20. 

Bcuris  8c  6  kvkXo?  6  viro  r^s  v€ptif>€pofUvrj^  cv^cias  ypa^/uicvo9. 

Definition  21. 

KvAxvSpo^  co-Tiv,  orav  opOorfaviov  irapaXkrjXoypaififiov  /icvoixn^  /uiia?  irXcvpa? 
T<3v  TTcpi  r^v  dp^v  ycovtav  'ir€puv€X$€V  to  irofiaXXrjXoypa/jLfjLov  ct?  to  avro  iraXiv 
<&7rofcaTa(rra^,  o^ck  ijp(aTO  ^pco-^ai,  t^  ircpiXi/^Mv  ax^fia. 

Definition  22. 

*A^v  8c  TOV  KvXcV8pov  ioTiv  rj  fiivovaa  cv^cta,  ifcpl  "^v  to  iropoXXi/Xoypa/Afiov 

O'TpC^CTOt. 

Definition  23. 

Bcurcis  8c  ot  icvfcXoi  01  vtto  tcSv  dircvavrcW  wtptayofiiviiiv  8uo  irXcvpur 
ypa^/[£cvoi. 

Definition  24. 

*Ofiotoi  fccSvot  Kai  KvXivSpoi  cio-iv,  (Sv  01  TC  d$ov€^  KoX  at  Bid/A€Tpoi  Tiav  paxr€iav 
dvaXoyov  curiv. 

Definition  25. 

Kv)3o9  COT4  oyrjpa  frr€p€0¥  xmh  t(  TCrpaycuvcDV  urcoF  ir€pi€x6fi€vov. 

Definition  26. 

*0icTdc8pdv  coTi  (rxyipja.  <n'€p€oy  vtto  okto)  Tpiycovcov  taraiv  Kai  uroirXcvp<i>v 
ircpicxd/Acvov. 

Definition  27. 

EiKoaac8pdv  co-ri  a-xrjpa  a'T€p€ov  vtto  cucoo-t  rpiyiovtay  ia'(iiv  koI  uroirXcvpoiv 
Trcpcc;(d/ici'OK. 

Definition  28. 

A(i>8cfcac8pdv  coTi  (ryrjfjLa  orcpcov  viro  8a>8cfca  ircvTayuiFoiv  l!orci>v  ical  tO'oirXcvpaiK 
KoX  uroytavimv  ir€pw)^op.€voy. 


BOOK  XL     PROPOSITIONS. 

Proposition  i. 

A  part  of  a  straight  line  cannot  be  in  the  plane  of  reference 
and  a  part  in  a  plane  more  elevated. 

For,  if  possible,  let  a  part  AB  of  the  straight  line  ABC 
be  in   the  plane   of  reference,  and  a  part 
BC  in  a  plane  more  elevated. 

There  will  then  be  in  the  plane  of 
reference  some  straight  line  continuous 
with  AB  in  a  straight  line. 

Let  it  be  BD  ; 
therefore  AB  is  3,  common  segment  of  the 
two  straight  lines  ABC,  ABD : 
which    is    impossible,    inasmuch   as,    if  we 
describe  a  circle  with  centre  B  and  distance 
AB,  the  diameters  will  cut  off  unequal  circumferences  of  the 
circle. 

Therefore  a  part  of  a  straight  line  cannot  be  in  the  plane 
of  reference,  and  a  part  in  a  plane  more  elevated. 

Q.  E.  D. 

1.  the  plane  of  reference,  to  vroKclfiepop  itrlrcSoPf  the  plane  laid  down  or  assumed. 

2,  more  elevated,  fierewpoT^pt^. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  proofs  of  the  first  three  propositions  are 
unsatisfactory  owing  to  the  fact  that  Euclid  is  not  able  to  make  any  use  of  his 
definition  of  a  plane  for  the  purpose  of  these  proofs,  and  they  really  depend 
upon  truths  which  can  only  be  assumed  as  axiomatic.  The  definition  of  a  plane 
as  M«/  surface  which  lies  evenly  with  the  straight  lines  on  itself,  whatever  its 
exact  meaning  may  be,  is  nowhere  appealed  to  as  a  criterion  to  show  whether 
a  particular  surface  is  or  is  not  a  plane.  If  the  meaning  of  it  is  what  I  conjec- 
ture in  the  note  on  Book  i.,  Def.  7  (Vol.  i.  p.  171),  if,  namely,  it  only  tries  to 
express  without  an  appeal  to  sight  what  Plato  meant  by  the  "  middle  covering 
the  extremities  *'  (i.e.  apparently,  in  the  case  of  a  plane,  the  fact  that  a  plane 
looked  at  edgewise  takes  the  form  of  a  straight  line),  then  it  is  perhaps 
possible  to  connect  the  definition  with  a  method  of  generating  a  plane  which 


XI.  i]  PROPOSITION    I  273 

has  commended  itself  to  many  writers  as  giving  a  better  definition.  Thus,  if 
we  conceive  a  straight  line  in  space  and  a  point  outside  it  placed  so  that,  in 
Plato's  words,  the  line  "covers"  the  point  as  we  look  at  them,  the  line  will 
also  "cover"  every  straight  line  which  passes  through  the  given  point  and 
some  one  point  on  the  given  straight  line.  Hence,  if  a  straight  line  passing 
always  through  a  fixed  point  moves  in  such  a  way  as  to  pass  successively 
through  every  point  of  a  given  straight  line  which  does  not  contain  the  given 
point,  the  moving  straight  line  describes  a  surface  which  satisfies  the  Euclidean 
definition  of  a  plane  as  I  have  interpreted  it.  But  if  we  adopt  the  definition 
of  a  plane  as  th£  surface  described  by  a  strai^^ht  line  which,  passing  through  a 
given  paint,  turns  about  it  in  such  a  way  as  always  to  intersect  a  given  straight 
line  not  passing  through  the  given  point,  this  definition,  though  it  would  help  us 
to  prove  Eucl.  xi.  2,  does  not  give  us  the  fundamental  properties  of  a  plane ; 
some  postulate  is  necessary  in  addition.  The  same  is  true  even  if  we  take  a 
definition  which  gives  more  than  is  required  to  determine  a  plane,  the  defini- 
tion known  as  Simson's,  though  it  is  at  least  as  early  as  the  time  of  Theon  of 
Smyrna,  who  says  (p.  1 1 2,  5)  that  a  plane  is  a  surface  such  that,  if  a  straight  line 
meet  it  in  two  points,  the  straight  line  lies  wholly  in  it  (oAiy  avrw  lifrnpfiol^^raL). 
This  is  also  called  the  axiom  of  the  plane,  (For  some  attempts  to  prove  this  on 
the  basis  of  other  definitions  of  a  plane  see  my  note  on  the  definition  of  a  plane 
surface,  i.  Def.  7.)  If  this  definition  or  axiom  be  assumed,  Prop,  i  becomes 
evident,  for,  as  Legendre  says,  "  In  accordance  with  the  definition  of  the  plane, 
when  a  straight  line  has  two  points  common  with  a  plane,  it  lies  wholly  in  the 
plane." 

Euclid  practically  assumes  the  axiom  when  he  says  in  this  proposition 
"there  will  be  in  the  plane  of  reference  some  straight  line  continuous  with 
ABy  Clavius  tries,  unsuccessfully,  to  deduce  this  from  Euclid's  own 
definition  of  a  plane;  and  he  seems  to  admit  his 
failure,  because  he  proceeds  to  try  another  tack. 
Draw,  he  says,  in  the  plane  DE,  the  straight  line 
CG  at  right  angles  to  A  C,  and,  again  in  the  plane 
DE,  CF  at  right  angles  to  CG  [i.  1 1].  Then  AC, 
CF  make  right  angles  with  CG  in  the  same  plane ; 
therefore  (i.  14)  ACF\%  a  straight  line.  But  this 
does  not  really  help,  because  Euclid  assumes  tacitly, 
in  Book  i.  as  well  as  Book  xi.,  that  a  straight  line  joining  two  points  in  a 
plane  lies  wholly  in  that  plane. 

A  curious  point  in  Euclid's  proof  is  the  reason  given  why  two  straight  lines 
cannot  have  a  common  segment.  The  argument  is  precisely  that  of  the 
"  proof "  of  the  same  thing  given  by  Proclus  on  i.  i  (see  note  on  Book  i. 
Post.  2,  Vol.  I.  p.  197)  and  is  of  course  inconclusive.  The  fact  that  two 
straight  lines  cannot  have  a  common  segment  must  be  taken  to  be  involved 
in  the  definition  of,  and  the  postulates  relating  to,  the  straight  line ;  and  the 
"proof"  given  here  can  hardly,  I  should  say,  be  Euclid's,  though  the  interpo- 
lation, if  it  be  such,  must  have  been  made  very  early. 

The  proof  assumes  too  that  a  circle  can  be  described  so  as  to  cut  BA,  BC 
and  BD,  or,  in  other  words,  it  assumes  that  AD,  BC  are  in  one  plane ;  that 
is,  Prop.  I  as  we  have  it  really  assumes  the  result  of  Prop.  2.  There  is  there- 
fore ground  for  Simson's  alteration  of  the  proof  (after  the  point  where  BD  has 
been  taken  in  the  given  plane  in  a  straight  line  with  AB)  to  the  following : 

"  Let  any  plane  pass  through  the  straight  line  AD  and  be  turned  about  it 
until  it  pass  through  the  point  C. 

H.  £.  III.  18 


^74  BOOK  XI  [xi.  I,  2 

And,  because  the  points  B^  C  are  in  this  plane,  the  straight  line  BC  is 
in  it.  [Simson*s  def.] 

Therefore  there  are  two  straight  lines  ABQ  ABD  in  the  same  plane  that 
have  a  common  segment  AB  : 
which  is  impossible." 

Simson,  of  course,  justifies  the  last  inference  by  reference  to  his  Corollary 
to  I.  II,  which,  however,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  a  valid  proof  of  the  assump- 
tion, which  is  really  implied  in  i.  Post.  2. 

An  alternative  reading,  perhaps  due  to  Theon,  says,  after  the  words 
"which  is  impossible"  in  the  Greek  text,  "for  a  straight  line  does  not  meet  a 
straight  line  in  more  points  than  one;  otherwise  the  straight  lines  will 
coincide."  Simson  (who  however  does  not  seem  to  have  had  the  second 
clause  beginning  "  otherwise  "  in  the  text  which  he  used)  attacks  this  alterna- 
tive reading  in  a  rather  confused  note  chiefly  directed  against  a  criticism  by 
Thomas  Simpson,  without  (as  it  seems  to  me)  sufficient  reason.  It  contains 
surely  a  legitimate  argument.  The  supposed  straight  lines  ABC^  ABD  meet 
in  more  than  two  points,  namely  in  all  the  points  between  A  and  B,  But  two 
straight  lines  cannot  have  two  points  common  without  coinciding  altogether ; 
therefore  ABC  must  coincide  with  ABD, 

Proposition  2. 

If  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another,  they  are  in  one  plane, 
and  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane. 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  cut  one  another  at 
the  point  E ; 

I  say  that  AB,  CD  are  in  one  plane, 
and  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane. 

For  let  points  F,  G  be  taken  at 
random  on  EC,  EB, 
let  CB,  FG  be  joined, 
and  let  FH,  GK  be  drawn  across  ; 
I  say  first  that  the  triangle  ECB  is 
in  one  plane. 

For,  if  part  of  the  triangle  ECB, 
either  FHC  or  GBK,  is  in  the  plane  of  reference,  and  the  rest 
in  another, 

a  part  also  of  one  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB  will  be  in  the 
plane  of  reference,  and  a  part  in  another. 

But,  if  the  part  FCBG  of  the  triangle  ECB  be  in  the 
plane  of  reference,  and  the  rest  in  another, 
a  part  also  of  both  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB  will  be  in  the 
plane  of  reference  and  a  part  in  another  : 
which  was  proved  absurd.  [xi.  i] 


XI.  2]  PROPOSITIONS    I,  2  275 

Therefore  the  triangle  ECB  is  in  one  plane. 
But,  in  whatever  plane  the  triangle  ECB  is,  in  that  plane 
also  is  each  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB, 

and,  in  whatever  plane  each  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB  is, 
in  that  plane  are  AB,  CD  also.  [xi.  i] 

Therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  are  in  one  plane, 

and  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane. 

Q.  E.  D. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  "  proof  ^'  of  this  proposition  is  not  of  any 
valua  For  one  thing,  Euclid  only  takes  certain  triangles  and  a  certain 
quadrilateral  respectively  forming  part  of  the  original  triangle,  and  argues 
about  these.  But,  for  anything  we  are  supposed  to  know,  there  may  be  some 
part  of  the  triangle  bounded  (let  us  say)  by  some  curve  which  is  not  in  the 
same  plane  with  the  triangle. 

We  may  agree  with  Simson  that  it  would  be  preferable  to  enunciate  the 
proposition  as  follows. 

Two  straight  lines  which  intersect  are  in  one  plane,  and  three  straight  lines 
which  intersect  two  and  two  are  in  one  plane. 

Adopting  Smith  and  Bryant's  figure  in  preference  to  Simson's,  we  suppose 
three  straight  lines  PQ,  RS,  XYx.o  intersect 
two  and  two  \n  A,  B,  C, 

Then  Simson's  proof  (adopted  by  Legen- 
dre  also)  proceeds  thus. 

Let  any  plane  pass  through  the  straight 
line  PQ,  and  let  this  plane  be  turned  about 
PQ  (produced  indefinitely)  as  axis  until  it 
passes  through  the  point  C, 

Then,  since  the  points  A,  C  are  in  this 
plane,  the  straight  line  AC  (and  therefore 
the  straight  line  RS  produced  indefinitely) 
lies  wholly  in  the  plane.  [Simson*s  def.] 

For  the  same  reason,  since  the  points  B,  C  are  in  the  plane,  the  straight 
line  AT  K  lies  wholly  in  the  plane. 

Hence  all  three  straight  lines  PQ,  RS,  XY  (and  of  course  any  pair  of 
them)  lie  in  one  plane. 

But  it  has  still  to  be  proved  that  there  is  only  one  plane  passing  through 
the  three  straight  lines. 

This  may  be  done,  as  in  Mr  Taylor's  Euclid,  thus. 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  there  are  two  different  planes  through  A,  B,  C 

The  straight  lines  BC,  CA,  AB  then  lie  wholly  in  each  of  the  two  planes. 

Now  any  straight  line  in  one  of  the  two  planes  must  intersect  at  least  two 
of  the  straight  lines  (produced  if  necessary) ; 

let  it  intersect  two  of  them  in  K,  L, 

Then,  since  K,  L  are  also  in  the  second  plane,  the  line  KL  lies  wholly  in 
that  plane. 

Hence  every  straight  line  in  either  of  the  planes  lies  wholly  in  the  other 
also ;  and  therefore  the  planes  are  coincident  throughout  their  whole  surface. 

18—2 


276  BOOK   XI  [xi.  2,  3 

It  follows  from  the  above  that 

A  platu  is  determined  (i.e.  uniquely  determined)  by  any  of  the  following  data: 
(\)  by  three  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  two  and  two, 
{2)  by  three  points  not  in  a  straight  line, 

(3)  by  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another, 

(4)  by  a  straigJit  line  and  a  point  without  it. 

Proposition  3. 

If  two  planes  cut  one  another,  their  common  section  is  a 
straight  line. 

For  let  the  two  planes  AB,  BC  cut  one  another, 
and   let   the   line   DB   be   their   common 
section  ; 
I  say  that  the  line  DB  is  a  straight  line. 

For,  if  not,  from  Dx.o  B  let  the  straight 
line  DEB  be  joined  in  the  plane  AB,  and 
in  the  plane  BC  the  straight  line  DFB, 

Then  the  two  straight  lines  DEB,  DFB 
will  have  the  same  extremities,  and  will 
clearly  enclose  an  area : 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  DEB,  DFB  are  not  straight  lines. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  there  be  any 
other  straight  line  joined  from  D  to  B  except  DB  the  common 
section  of  the  planes  AB,  BC, 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.   D. 

I  think  Simson  is  right  in  objecting  to  the  words  after  "  which  is  absurd," 
to  the  effect  that  DEB,  DFB  are  not  straight  lines,  and  that  neither  can  there 
be  any  other  straight  line  joined  from  D  \,o  B  except  DB,  as  being  unneces- 
sary. It  is  right  to  conclude  at  once  from  the  absurdity  that  BD  cannot  but 
be  a  straight  line. 

Legendre  makes  his  proof  depend  on  Prop.  2.  "  For,  if,  among  the  points 
common  to  the  two  planes,  three  should  be  found  which  are  not  in  a  straight 
line,  the  two  planes  in  question,  each  passing  through  three  points,  would  only 
amount  to  one  and  the  same  plane."  [This  of  course  assumes  that  three 
points  determine  one  and  only  one  plane,  which,  strictly  speaking,  involves 
more  than  Prop.  2  itself,  as  shown  in  the  last  note.] 

A  favourite  proposition  in  modern  text-books  is  the  following.  The  proof 
seems  to  be  due  to  von  Staudt  (Killing,  Grundlagen  der  Geometrie,  Vol.  11. 
P-  43)- 


XI.  3»  4] 


PROPOSITIONS   2—4 


277 


If  two  planes  meet  in  a  pointy  they  meet  in  a  straight  line. 

Let  ABCy  ADE  be  two  given  planes  meeting 
at  A, 

Take  any  points  B^  C  lying  on  the  plane  ABC^ 
and  not  on  the  plane  ADE  but  on  the  same  side 
of  it. 

Join  AB^  ACy  and  produce  BA  to  F. 

Join  CF, 

Then,  since  B^  Fsltg  on  opposite  sides  of  the 
plane  ADE, 
C,  /^are  also  on  opposite  sides  of  it. 

Therefore  CF  must  meet  the  plane  ADE  in 
some  point,  say  G, 

Then,  since  Ay  G  are  both  in  each  of  the  planes  ABC,  ADE,  the  straight 
line  -^G^  is  in  both  planes.  [Simson*s  def.] 

This  is  also  the  place  to  insert  the  proposition  that,  If  three  planes  intersect 
two  and  two,  their  lines  of  intersection  either  meet  in  a  point  or  are  parallel  two 
and  tzvo. 

Let  there  be  three  planes  intersecting  in  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  EF. 


B 


Now  AB,  EF  are  in  a  plane ;  therefore  they  either  meet  in  a  point  or  are 
parallel, 
(i)     Let  them  meet  in  O, 

Then  O,  being  a  point  in  AB,  lies  in  the  plane  AD,  and,  being  also  a 
point  in  EF,  lies  also  in  the  plane  ED, 

Therefore  O,  being  common  to  the  planes  AD,  DE,  must  lie  on  CD,  the 
line  of  their  intersection  ; 
i.e.  CD,  if  produced,  passes  through  O* 

(2)     Let  AB,  EF  not  meet,  but  let  them  be  parallel. 

Then  CD  cannot  meet  AB ;  for,  if  it  did,  it  must  necessarily  meet  EF, 
by  the  first  case. 

Therefore  CD,  AB,  being  in  one  plane,  are  parallel. 

Similarly  CD,  EFaje  parallel. 


Proposition  4. 

//  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  two  straight 
lines  which  cut  one  another,  at  their  common  point  of  section, 
it  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  them. 


4^ 

=  / 

/  °^ 

H  / 

r  -^ 

278  BOOK  XI  [XI.  4 

For  let  a  straight  line  EF  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the 
two  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  which 
cut  one  another  at  the  point   E, 
from  E  ; 

I  say  that  EF  is  also  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  through  AB, 
CD. 

For  let  AE,  EB,  CE,  ED  be 
cut  off  equal  to  one  another, 
and  let  any  straight  line  GEH  be  drawn  across  through  E, 
at  random  ; 
let  AD,  CB  be  joined, 

and  further  let  FA,  FG,  FD,  FC,  FH,  FB  be  joined  from 
the  point  F  taken  at  random    <  on  EF> . 

Now,  since  the  two  straight  lines  AE,  ED  are  equal  to 
the  two  straight  lines  CE,  EB,  and  contain  equal  angles,  [i.  15) 
therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  CB, 
and  the  triangle  ^^Z?  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  CEB\  [1.4] 
so  that  the  angle  DAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBC 

But  the  angle  AEG  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BEH \[\.  15] 
therefore  AGE,  BEH  are  two  triangles  which  have  two 
angles  equal  to  two  angles  respectively,  and  one  side  equal 
to  one  side,  namely  that  adjacent  to  the  equal  angles,  that 
is  to  say,  AE  to  EB\ 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the 
remaining  sides.  [i.  26] 

Therefore  GE  is  equal  to  EH,  and  -^6^  to  BH, 

And,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EB, 
while  FE  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  FA  is  equal  to  the  base  FB,  [i.  4] 

For  the  same  reason 
FC  is  also  equal  to  FD. 

And,  since  AD  is  equal  to  CB, 
and  FA  is  also  equal  to  FB, 

the  two  sides  FA,  AD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FB,  BC 
respectively ; 

and  the  base  FD  was  proved  equal  to  the  base  FC ; 
therefore  the  angle  FAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FBC  [i.  8] 


XI.  4]  PROPOSITION   4  279 

And  since,  again,  AG  was  proved  equal  to  BHy 
and  further  FA  also  equal  to  FB, 
the  two  sides  FA,  AG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FB,  BH. 

And  the  angle  FAG  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  FBH\ 
therefore  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  base  FH.  [i.  4] 

Now  since,  again,  GE  was  proved  equal  to  EH, 
and  EF  is  common, 

the  two  sides  GE,  EF  ds^  equal  to  the  two  sides  HE,  EF\ 
and  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  base  FH ; 
therefore  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  HEF.        [i.  8] 

Therefore  each  of  the  angles  GEF,  HEF  is  right. 

Therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  GH  drawn  at  random 
through  E. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  FE  will  also  make  right 
angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the 
plane  of  referencp. 

But  a  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane  when  it 
makes  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it 
and  are  in  that  same  plane ;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

But  the  plane  of  reference  is  the  plane  through  the  straight 
lines  AB,  CD. 

Therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
AB,  CD. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  steps  to  be  successively  proved  in  order  to  establish  this  proposition 
by  Euclid's  method  are 

(i)  triangles  A  ED,  ^^C  equal  in  all  respects,  [by  i.  4] 

(2)  triangles  AEG,  BE/f  equal  in  all  respects,  [by  i.  26] 
so  that  AG  is  equal  to  BH,  and  GE  to  Elf, 

(3)  triangles  AEF,  BEE  equal  in  all  respects,  [i.  4] 
so  that  AE  is  equal  to  BE, 

(4)  likewise  triangles  CEE,  DEE, 
so  that  CT^is  equal  to  DE, 

(5)  triangles  EAD,  EBC  equal  in  all  respects,  [i.  8] 
so  that  the  angles  EAG,  EBHaxe  equal, 

(6)  triangles  EAG,  EBH  equal  in  all  respects,  [by  (2),  (3),  (5)  and  i.  4] 
so  that  EG  is  equal  to  EH, 


28o 


BOOK  XI 


[xi.  4 


(7)  triangles  FEG^  FEHt(\\\d\  in  all  respects,  [by  (2),  (6)  and  i.  8] 

so  that  the  angles  FEGy  FEHsccq  equal, 
and  therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  GH, 

In  consequence  of  the  length  of  the  above  proof  others  have  been 
suggested,  and  the  proof  which  now  finds  most  general  acceptance  is  that  of 
Cauchy,  which  is  as  follows. 

Let  AB  be  perpendicular  to  two  straight  lines  BCy  BD  in  the  plane  MN 
at  their  point  of  intersection  B, 

In  the  plane  MN6x2i^  BE^  any  straight  line 
through  B, 

Join  CDy  and  let  CD  meet  BE  in  E. 

Produce  AB  to  F so  that  BF is  equal  to  AB. 

Join  AC,  AE,  AD,  CF,  EF,  DR 

Since   BC  is  perpendicular  to   AF  at  its 
middle  point  B, 
^C  is  equal  to  CF, 

Similarly  AD  is  equal  to  DF, 

Since  in  the  triangles  A  CD,  FCD  the  two 
sides  AC,  CD  are  respectively  equal  to  the  two 
sides  FC,  CD,  and  the  third  sides  AD,  FD  are 
also  equal, 

the  angles  ACD,  FCD  are  equal.^  [i.  8] 

The  triangles  ACE,  FCE  thus  have  two  sides  and  the  included  angle 
equal,  whence 

EA  is  equal  to  EF  [i.  4] 

The  triangles  ABE,  FBE  have  now  all  their  sides  equal  respectively ; 

therefore  the  angles  ABE,  FBE  are  equal,  [i.  8] 

and  AB  is  perpendicular  to  BE, 

And  BE  is  in  any  straight  line  through  B  in  the  plane  MN, 

Legendre's  proof  is  not  so  easy,  but  it  is  interesting.    We  are  first  required 
to  draw  through  any  point  E  within  the  angle 
CBD  a  straight  line  CD  bisected  at  E, 

To  do  this  we  draw  EK  parallel  to  DB 
meeting  BC  in  K,  and  then  mark  off  KC  equal 
to  BK, 

CE  is  then  joined  and  produced  to  D\  and 
CD  is  the  straight  line  required. 

Now,  joining  AC,  AE,  AD  in  the  figure 
above,  we  have,  since  CD  is  bisected  at  E, 
(i)  in  the  triangle  ACD, 

AC \  AL^  =  2AE?  ^  2ED', 
and  also  (2)  in  the  triangle  BCD, 

BC^  +  BL^  =  2BB  +  2ED^, 

Subtracting,  and  remembering  that  the  triangles  ABC,  ABD  are  right- 
angled,  so  that 

AC^'-^BC^'^AB', 
and  AD^-BD'^AB^, 

we  have  2AB^  =  2AE?^  -  2BE^, 

or  AE^^AB'-^BE?, 


XI.  4,  5]  PROPOSITIONS  4,  5  281 

whence  [i.  48]  the  angle  ABE  is  a  right  angle,  and  AB  is  perpendicular 
to  BE, 

It  follows  of  course  from  this  proposition  that  the  perpendicular  AB  is  the 
shortest  distance  from  A  to  the  plane  MN. 

And  it  can  readily  be  proved  that, 

If  from  a  point  without  a  plane  oblique  straight  lines  be  drawn  to  the  plane ^ 
(1)  those  meeting  the  plane  at  equal  distances  from  the  foot  of  the  perpendicular 
are  equals  and 

{2)  of  two  straight  lines  meeting  the  plane  at  unequal  distances  from  the  foot  of 
the  perpendicular^  the  more  remote  is  the  greater. 

Lastly,  it  is  easily  seen  that 

From  a  point  outside  a  plane  only  one  perpendicular  can  be  drawn  to  that 
plane. 

For,  if  possible,  let  there  be  two  perpendiculars.  Then  a  plane  can  be 
drawn  through  them,  and  this  will  cut  the  original  plane  in  a  straight  line. 

This  straight  line  and  the  two  perpendiculars  will  form  a  plane  triangle 
which  has  two  right  angles :  which  is  impossible. 


Proposition  5. 

If  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  three  straight 
lines  which  meet  one  another,  at  their  common  point  of  section^ 
the  three  straight  lines  are  in  one  plane. 

For  let  a  straight  line  AB  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the 
three   straight    lines   BC,    BD,   BE,    at 
their  point  of  meeting  at  B ; 
I  say  that  BC,  BD,  BE  are  in  one  plane. 

For    suppose    they   are   hot,    but,    if 
possible,  let  BD,  BE  be  in  the  plane  of 
reference  and  BC  in  one  more  elevated  ; 
let    the    plane    through    AB,    BC    be 
produced ; 

it  will  thus  make,  as  common  section  in  the  plane  of  reference, 
a  straight  line.  [xi.  3] 

Let  it  make  BF. 

Therefore  the  three  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  BF  2Sit  in  one 
plane,  namely  that  drawn  through  AB,  BC 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  BD,  BE, 

therefore   AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
BD,  BE.  [XI.  4] 


282 


BOOK   XI 


[XI.  5 


But  the  plane  through  BD^  BE  is  the  plane  of  reference  ; 
therefore  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Thus  AB  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight 
lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference. 

[xi.  Def.  3] 

But  BF  which  is  in  the  plane  of  reference  meets  it ; 

therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  right. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  ABC  is  also  right ; 
therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC. 

And  they  are  in  one  plane  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  BC  is  not  in  a  more  elevated 
plane  ; 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  BCy  BD,  BE  are  in  one 
plane. 

Therefore,  if  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to 
three  straight  lines,  at  their  point  of  meeting,  the  three  straight 
lines  are  in  one  plane.  Q.  e.  d. 

It  follows  that,  if  a  right  angle  be  turned  about  one  of  the  straight  lines 
containing  it  the  other  will  describe  a  plane. 

At  any  point  in  a  straight  line  it  is  possible  to  draw  only  otie  plane  which 
is  at  right  angles  to  the  straight  line. 

One  such  plane  can  be  found  by  taking  any  two  planes  through  the  given 
straight  line,  drawing  perpendiculars  to  the  straight 
line  in  the  respective  planes,  e.g.  BO^  CO  in  the  A 

planes  AOBy  AOQ  each  perpendicular  to  AO, 
and  then  drawing  a  plane  (JBOC)  through  the 
perpendiculars. 

If  there  were  another  plane  through  O  per- 
pendicular to  A  Of  it  must  meet  the  plane  through 
AO  and  some  perpendicular  to  it  as  OC  m  a 
straight  line  OC  different  from  OC, 

Then,  by  xi.  4,  A  OC  is  a.  right  angle,  and  in 
the  same  plane  with  the  right  angle  AOC:  which  is  impossible. 

Next,  one  plane  and  only  ofu  can  be  drawn  through  a  point  outside  a  straight 
line  at  right  angles  to  that  line. 

Let  P  be  the  given  point,  AB  the  given  straight 
line. 

In  the  plane  through  P  and  AB^  draw  PO  per- 
pendicular to  AB,  and  through  O  draw  another  straight 
line  OQ  at  right  angles  to  AB, 

Then  the  plane  through  OPy  OQ'xs  perpendicular 
to^^. 

If  there  were  another  plane  through  P  perpendicular 
to  ABy  either 


XI.  5,  6]  PROPOSITIONS   5,  6  283 

(i)  it  would  intersect  AB  at  O  but  not  pass  through  OQ^  or 
(2)  it  would  intersect  AB  at  a  point  different  from  O, 
In  either  case,  an  absurdity  would  result. 

Proposition  6. 

If  two  straight  lines  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane, 
the  straight  lines  will  be  parallel. 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  at  right  angles 
to  the  plane  of  reference  ; 
I  say  that  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

For  let  them   meet  the  plane   of 
reference  at  the  points  B,  D, 
let  the  straight  line  BD  be  joined, 
let  DE  be   drawn,    in    the   plane   of 
reference,  at  right  angles  to  BD, 
let  DE  be  made  equal  to  AB, 
and  let  BE,  AE,  AD  be  joined. 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which 
meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  BD^  BE  is  in  the  plane  of 
reference  and  meets  A  B  \ 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  ABDy  ABE  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 
each  of  the  angles  CDB,  CDE  is  also  right. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 
and  BD  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DB ; 
and  they  include  right  angles ; 
therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  BE.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 
while  AD  is  also  equal  to  BE, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DA  ; 
and  AE  is  their  common  base ; 
therefore  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDA.       [i.  8] 


284 


BOOK  XI 


[xi.  6 


But  the  angle  ABE  is  right ; 
therefore  the  angle  EDA  is  also  right ; 
therefore  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  DA, 

But  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
BD,DC\ 

therefore  ED  is  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  three  straight 
lines  BD,  DA,  DC  at  their  point  of  meeting  ; 
therefore  the  three  straight  lines  BD,  DA,  DC  are  in  one 
plane.  [xi.  5] 

But,  in  whatever  plane  DB,  DA  are,  in  that  plane  is  AB 
also, 

for  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane  ;  [xi.  2] 

therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  BD^  DC  are  in  one  plane. 

And  each  of  the  angles  ABD,  BDC  is  right ; 
therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD,  [i.  28] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


If  anyone  wishes  to  convince  himself  of  the  real  necessity  for  some 
general  agreement  as  to  the  order  in  which  propositions  in  elementary 
geometry  should  be  taken,  let  him  contemplate  the  hopeless  result  of  too 
much  independence  on  the  part  of  editors  in  the  matter  of  this  proposition 
and  its  converse,  xi.  8. 

Legendre  adopts  a  different,  and  elegant,  method  of  proof;  but  he  applies 
it  to  XI.  8,  which  he  gives  first,  and  then  deduces  xi.  6  from  it  by  redtutio  ad 
absurdum,  Dr  Mehler  uses  I^gendre's  method  of  proof  but  applies  it  to 
XI.  6,  and  then  gives  xi.  8  as  a  deduction  from  it.  Lardner  follows  Legendre. 
Holgate,  the  editor  of  a  recent  American  book,  gives  Euclid's  proof  of  xi.  6 
and  deduces  xi.  8  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.  His  countrymen,  Schultze  and 
Sevenoak,  give  xi.  8  first,  but  put  it  after,  and  deduce  it  from,  Eucl.  xi.  10; 
they  then  give  xi.  6,  practically  as  a  deduction  from  xi.  8  by  reductio  ad 
absurdum,  after  a  proposition  corresponding  to  Eucl.  xi.  11  and  12,  and  a 
corollary  to  the  effect  that  through  a  given  point  one  and  only  one  perpen- 
dicular can  be  drawn  to  a  given  plane. 

We  will  now  give  the  proof  of  xi.  6  by  Legendre's  method  (adopted  by 
Smith  and  Bryant  as  well  as  by  Mehler). 

Let  AB,  CD  be  both  perpendicular  to  the 
same  plane  MN, 

Join  BD, 

Now,  since  BD  meets  AB,  CD,  both  of 
which  are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN  in 
which  BD  is, 
the  angles  ABD,  CDB  are  right  angles. 

AB,  CD  will  therefore  be  parallel  provided 
that  they  are  in  the  same  plane. 

Through  D  draw  EDF,  in  the  plane  MN, 
at  right  angles  to  BD,  and  make  ED  equal  to  DF, 


XI.  6,  7j  PROPOSITIONS   6,  7  285 

Join  BE,  BF,  AE,  AD,  AR 

Then  the  triangles  BDE,  BDF  are  equal  in  all  respects  (by  i.  4),  so  that 

BE  is  equal  to  BF, 
It  follows,  since  the  angles  ABE,  ABF2lvq  right,  that  the  triangles  ABE, 
A BF  arc  equal  in  all  respects,  and 

AE  is  equal  to  AF 
[Mehler  now  argues  elegantly  thus.     If  CE,  CF  be  also  joined,  it  is  clear 
that 

CE  is  equal  to  CF 

Hence  each  of  the  four  points  A,  B,  C,  Z>  is  equidistant  from  the  two 
points  E,  F, 

Therefore  t/ie  points  A,  B,  C,  D  are  in  one  plane,  so  that  AB,  CD  are 
parallel. 

If,  however,  we  do  not  use  the  locus  of  points  equidistant  from  two  fixed 
points,  we  proceed  as  follows.] 

The  triangles  AED,  AFD  have  their  sides  equal  respectively ; 
hence  [i.  8]  the  angles  ADE,  ADFzxc  equal, 
so  that  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  AD, 

Thus  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  BD,  AD,  CD  \ 
therefore  CD  is  in  the  plane  through  AD,  BD,  [xi.  5] 

But  AB  is  in  that  same  plane ;  [xi.  2] 

therefore  AB,  CD  are  in  the  same  plane. 

And  the  angles  ABD,  CDB  are  right ; 
therefore  AB,  CD  are  parallel. 


Proposition  7. 

If  two  straight  lines  be  parallel  and  points  be  taken  at 
random  on  each  of  them^  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  is 
in  the  same  plane  with  the  parallel  straight  lines. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  two  parallel  straight  lines, 
and  let  points  E,  F  be  taken  at  random 

on  them  respectively  ;  

1  say  that  the  straight  line  joining  the 
points  E,  F  is  in  the  same  plane  with 
the  parallel  straight  lines. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,      ^  f  d 

let  it  be  in  a  more  elevated  plane  as 
EGF, 

and  let  a  plane  be  drawn  through  EGF\ 
it  will  then  make,  as   section  in  the   plane   of  reference,  a 
straight  line.  [xi.  3] 


286  BOOK  XI  [xi.  7 

Let  it  make  it,  as  EF\ 
therefore  the  two  straight  lines  EGFy  EF  will  enclose  an 
area  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  E  x.o  F  \^  not  in  a 
plane  more  elevated ; 

therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  ^  to  /^  is  in  the  plane 
through  the  parallel  straight  lines  AB,  CD. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

It  is  true  that  this  proposition,  in  the  form  in  which  Euclid  enunciates  it, 
is  hardly  necessary  if  the  plane  is  defined  as  a  surface  such  that,  if  any  two 
points  be  taken  in  it,  the  straight  line  joining  them  lies  wholly  in  the  surface. 
But  Euclid  did  not  give  this  definition;  and,  moreover,  Prop.  2  would  be 
usefully  supplemented  by  a  proposition  which  should  prove  that  fwo  parallel 
straight  lines  determine  a  plane  (i.e.  one  plane  and  one  only)  which  also 
contains  all  the  straight  lines  which  join  a  point  on  ofie  of  the  parallels  to  a  point 
on  the  other.  That  there  cannot  be  two  planes  through  a  pair  of  parallels 
would  be  proved  in  the  same  way  as  we  prove  that  two  or  three  intersecting 
straight  lines  cannot  be  in  two  different  planes,  inasmuch  as  each  transversal 
lying  in  one  of  the  two  supposed  planes  through  the  parallels  would  lie  wholly 
in  the  other  also,  so  that  the  two  supposed  planes  must  coincide  throughout 
(cf.  note  on  Prop.  2  above). 

But,  whatever  be  the  value  of  the  proposition  as  it  is,  Simson  seems  to 
have  spoilt  it  completely.  He  leaves  out  the  construction  of  a  plane  through 
EGFy  which,  as  Euclid  says,  must  cut  the  plane  containing  the  parallels  in 
a  straight  line;  and,  instead,  he  says,  "In  the  plane  A  BCD  in  which  the 
parallels  are  draw  the  straight  line  EHF  from  E  to  J^"  Now,  although  we 
can  easily  draw  a  straight  line  from  ^  to  7^  to  claim  that  we  can  draw  it  in 
the  plane  in  which  the  parallels  are  is  surely  to  assume  the  very  result  which  is 
to  be  proved.  All  that  we  could  properly  say  is  that  the  straight  line  joining 
E  to  /^  is  in  some  plane  which  contains  the  parallels ;  we  do  not  know  that 
there  is  no  more  than  one  such  plane,  or  that  the  parallels  determine  a  plane 
uniquely^  without  some  such  argument  as  that  which  Euclid  gives. 

Nor  can  I  subscribe  to  the  remarks  in  Simson*s  note  on  the  proposition. 
He  says  (i)  "This  proposition  has  been  put  into  this  book  by  some  unskilful 
editor,  as  is  evident  from  this,  that  straight  lines  which  are  drawn  from  one 
point  to  another  in  a  plane  are,  in  the  preceding  books,  supposed  to  be  in  that 
plane ;  and  if  they  were  not,  some  demonstrations  in  which  one  straight  line 
is  supposed  to  meet  another  would  not  be  conclusive.  For  instance,  in 
Prop.  30,  Book  I,  the  straight  line  GK  would  not  meet  EF^  if  GK  were  not  in 
the  plane  in  which  are  the  parallels  AB^  CD^  and  in  which,  by  hypothesis,  the 
straight  line  EF isJ"  But  the  subject-matter  of  Book  i.  and  Book  xi.  is  quite 
different ;  in  Book  i.  everything  is  in  one  plane,  and  when  Euclid,  in  defining 
parallels,  says  they  are  straight  lines  in  the  same  plane  etc.,  he  only  does  so 
because  he  must,  in  order  to  exclude  non-intersecting  straight  lines  which  are 
not  parallel.  Thus  in  i.  30  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  assuming  that  there  may 
be  three  parallels  in  one  plane,  and  that  the  straight  line  GHK  cuts  all  three. 


XL  7,  8]  PROPOSITIONS   7,  8  287 

But  in  Book  xi.  it  becomes  a  question  whether  there  can  be  more  than  one 
plane  through  parallel  straight  lines. 

Simson  goes  on  to  say  (2)  "  Besides,  this  7th  Proposition  is  demonstrated 
by  the  preceding  3rd ;  in  which  the  very  same  thing  which  is  proposed  to  be 
demonstrated  in  the  7th  is  twice  assumed,  viz.,  that  the  straight  line  drawn 
from  one  point  to  another  in  a  plane  is  in  that  plane."  But  there  is  nothing 
in  Prop.  3  about  a  plane  in  which  two  parallel  straight  lines  are ;  therefore 
there  is  no  assumption  of  the  result  of  Prop.  7.  What  is  assumed  is  that, 
given  two  points  in  a  plane^  they  can  be  joined  by  a  straight  line  in  the  plane : 
a  legitimate  assumption. 

Lastly,  says  Simson,  "And  the  same  thing  is  assumed  in  the  preceding 
6th  Prop,  in  which  the  straight  line  which  joins  the  points  B^  D  that  are  in 
the  plane  to  which  AB  and  CD  are  at  right  angles  is  supposed  to  be  in  that 
plane.**  Here  again  there  is  no  question  o{  biplane  in  which  two  parallels  are  \ 
so  that  the  criticism  here,  as  with  reference  to  Prop.  3,  appears  to  rest  on  a 
misapprehension. 


Proposition  8. 

If  two  straight  lines  be  parallel,  and  one  of  them  be  at 
right  angles  to  any  plane,  the  remaining  one  will  also  be  at 
right  angles  to  the  same  plane. 

Let  A  By  CD  be  two  parallel  straight  lines, 
and  let  one  of  them,  -^j9,  be  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  reference  ; 
I  say  that  the  remaining  one,  CD,  will 
also  be  at  right  angles   to  the  same 
plane. 

For  let  AB,  CD  meet  the  plane  of 
reference  at  the  points  B,  D, 
and  let  BD  be  joined  ; 
therefore  AB,  CD,  BD  are  in  one  plane.  [xi.  7] 

Let  DE  be  drawn,  in  the  plane  of  reference,  at  right  angles 
ioBD, 

let  DE  be  made  equal  to  AB, 
and  let  BE,  AE,  AD  be  joined. 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines 
which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference ;  [xi.  Def.  3] 
therefore  each  of  the  angles  ABD,  ABE  is  right. 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BD  has  fallen  on  the  parallels 
AB,  CD, 


288  BOOK   XI  [xi.  8 

therefore   the   angles   ABDy   CDB  are  equal  to  two   right 
angles.  [i.  29] 

But  the  angle  ABD  is  right ; 
therefore  the  angle  CDB  is  also  right ; 
therefore  CD  is  at  right  angles  to  BD. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 
and  BD  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED^  DB ; 
and  the  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDB, 
for  each  is  right ; 
therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  BE. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 
and  BE  to  AD, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DA 
respectively, 

and  -^^  is  their  common  base  ; 
therefore  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDA, 

But  the  angle  ABE  is  right ; 
therefore  the  angle  EDA  is  also  right ; 
therefore  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  AD. 

But  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  DB ; 
therefore  ED  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
BD,  DA.  [XI.  4] 

Therefore  ED  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the 
straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  through 
BD,  DA. 

But  DC  is  in  the  plane  through  BD,  DA,  inasmuch  as 
AB,  BD  are  in  the  plane  through  BD,  DA,  [xi.  2] 

and  DC  is  also  in  the  plane  in  which  AB,  BD  are. 

Therefore  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  DC, 
so  that  CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  DE. 

But  CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  BD. 

Therefore  CD  is  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  two  straight 
lines  DE,  DB  which  cut  one  another,  from  the  point  of  section 
at/?; 


XI.  8] 


PROPOSITION   8 


289 


so    that    CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
DE,  DB.  [XI.  4] 

But  the  plane  through  DE,  DB  is  the  plane  of  reference ; 

therefore  CD  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Simson  objects  to  the  words  which  explain  why  DC  is  in  the  plane  through 
BD^  DAy  viz.  "inasmuch  as  AB^  BD  are  in  the  plane  through  BD^  DA,  and 
DC  is  also  in  the  plane  in  which  AB,  BD  are,"  as  being  too  roundabout. 
He  concludes  that  they  are  corrupt  or  interpolated,  and  that  we  ought  only  to 
have  the  words  "  because  all  three  are  in  the  plane  in  which  are  the  parallels 
AB^  CD^^  (by  Prop.  7  preceding).  But  I  think  Euclid's  words  can  be 
defended.  Prop.  7  says  nothing  of  a  plane  determined  by  two  transversals  as 
BD,  DA  are.  Hence  it  is  natural  to  say  that  DC  is  in  the  same  plane  in 
which  AB,  BD  are  [Prop.  7],  and  AB,  BD  are  in  the  same  plane  as  BD, 
DA  [Prop.  2],  so  that  DC  is  m  the  plane  through  BD,  DA, 

Legendre's  alternative  proof  is  split  by  him  into  two  propositions. 

y    (i)     Let  AB  be  a  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN  and  EF  a  line  situated  in  that 
/      plane  ;  if  from  B,  the  foot  of  the  perpendicular^  BD  be  drawn  perpendicular  to 
EF,  and  AD  be  joined,  I  say  that  AD  will  be  perpendicular  to  EF. 

(2)     If  AB  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN,  every  straight  line  CD  parallel  to 
AB  7vill  be  perpendicular  to  the  same  plane. 

To  prove  both  propositions  together  we  suppose   CD  given,  join  BDy 
and   draw  EF  perpendicular  to   BD  in   the 
plane  MN, 

(i)     As  before,  we  make  DE  equal  to  DFznd 
join  BE,  BF,  AE,  AF, 

Then,  since  the  angles  BDE,  BDF  are 
right,  and  DE,  DF  equal, 

BE  is  equal  to  BF,  [i.  4] 

And,   since  AB  is    perpendicular  to  the 
plane, 

the  angles  ABE,  ABFbxq  both  right. 

Therefore,  in  the  triangles  ABE,  ABF, 

AE  is  equal  to  AF,  [i.  4] 

Lastly,  in  the  triangles  ADE,  ADF,  since  AE  is  equal  to  AF,  and  DE 
to  DF,  while  AD  is  common, 

the  angle  ADE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADF,  [i.  8] 

so  that  AD  is  perpendicular  to  EF. 

(2)    ED  being  thus    perpendicular   to    DA,   and  also   (by  construction) 
perpendicular  to  DB, 

ED  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  ADB. 
But  CD,  being  parallel  to  AB,  is  in  the  plane  ABD ; 
therefore  ED  is  perpendicular  to  CD. 


[xi.  4] 


H.  K.  III. 


[XI.  Def.  3] 
19 


290 


BOOK   XI  [XI.  8,  9 


Also,  since  AB^  CD  are  parallel, 
and  ABD  is  a  right  angle, 
CDB  is  also  a  right  angle. 

Thus  CD  is  perpendicular  to  both  DE  and  DB,  and  therefore  to  the 
plane  J/iV  through  DE,  DB. 


Proposition  9. 

Straight  lines  which  are  parallel  to  the  same  straight  line 
and  are  not  in  the  same  plane  with  it  are  also  parallel  to  one 
another. 

For  let  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  parallel  to 
EF,  not  being  in  the  same  plane 
with  it ;  B H A 

I  say  that  AB  is  parallel  to  CD, 

For  let  a  point  G  be  taken  at      f 9/ § 

random  on  EF, 

and  from  it  let  there  be  drawn 

GH,  in  the  plane  through  EF, 

AB,  at  right  angles  to  EF,  and  GK  in  the  plane  through 

FEy  CD  again  at  right  angles  to  EF. 

Now,  since  EF  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  GHy  GK^ 

therefore  EF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 

GH,  GK.  [XI.  4] 

And  EF  is  parallel  to  AB ; 

therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 

HG,  GK.  [XI.  8] 

For  the  same  reason 
CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  HG,  GK ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  at  right  angles 
to  the  plane  through  HG,  GK. 

But,  if  two  straight  lines  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same 
plane,  the  straight  lines  are  parallel ;  [xi.  6] 

therefore  AB\^  parallel  to  CD. 

Q.  E.  D. 


XI.  lo]  PROPOSITIONS   8— lo  291 

Proposition  id. 

If  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  be  parallel  to 
two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  not  in  the  same  plane^ 
tfiey  will  contain  equal  angles. 

For   let   the   two   straight    lines  AB^  BC  meeting  one 
another  be  parallel  to  the  two  straight  lines  DEy  EF  meeting 
one  another,  not  in  the  same  plane  ; 
I  say  that  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF. 


For  let  BA,  BC,  ED,  EF  be  cut  off  equal  to  one  another, 
and  let  AD,  CF,  BE,  AC,  Z?/^  be  joined. 

Now,  since  BA  is  equal  and  parallel  to  ED, 
therefore  AD  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  BE.  [i.  33] 

For  the  same  reason 
CF  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  BE. 

Therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AD,  CF  is  equal  and 
parallel  to  BE. 

But  straight  lines  which  are  parallel  to  the  same  straight 
line  and  are  not  in  the  same  plane  with  it  are  parallel  to  one 
another ;  [xi.  9] 

therefore  AD  is  parallel  and  equal  to  CF. 

And  AC,  DF join  them  ; 
therefore  -^C  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  DF.  [i.  33] 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  DE,  EF, 

and  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.         [i.  8] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

19 — 2 


292  BOOK    XI  [xi.  lo,  II 

The  result  of  this  proposition  does  not  appear  to  be  quoted  in  Euclid  until 
XII.  3;  but  Euclid  no  doubt  inserted  it  here  advisedly,  because  it  has  the 
eflfect  of  incidentally  proving  that  the  "inclination  of  two  planes  to  one 
another/*  as  defined  in  xi.  l5ef.  6,  is  one  and  the  same  angle  at  whatever 
point  of  the  common  section  the  plane  angle  measuring  it  is  drawn. 


Proposition  ii. 

From  a  given  elevated  point  to  draw  a  straight  line  perpen- 
dicular to  a  given  plane. 

Let  A  be  the  given   elevated   point,  and   the   plane  of 
reference  the  given  plane ; 
thus  it  is  required  to  draw  from  the 
point  A  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  reference. 

Let  any  straight  line  BC  be  drawn, 
at  random,  in  the  plane  of  reference, 
and  let  AD  be  drawn  from  the  point  A 
perpendicular  to  BC.  [i.  12] 

If  then  AD  is  also  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  reference,  that  which  was 
enjoined  will  have  been  done. 

But,  if  not,  let  DE  be  drawn  from  the  point  D  at  right 
angles  to  BC  and  in  the  plane  of  reference,  [i.  n] 

let  AF\i^  drawn  from  A  perpendicular  to  DE^  [i.  12] 

and  let  GH  be  drawn  through  the  point  F  parallel  to  BC 

[I.  31] 

Now,  since  BC  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  DA,  DE, 

therefore  BC  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
ED,  DA.  [XI.  4] 

And  GH  is  parallel  to  it  ; 
but,  if  two  straight  lines  be  parallel,  and  one  of  them  be  at 
right  angles  to  any  plane,  the  remaining  one  will  also  be  at 
right  angles  to  the  same  plane ;  [xi.  8] 

therefore  GH  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
ED,  DA. 


XI.   Il] 


PROPOSITIONS    lo,  I.I 


293 


Therefore  GH  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight 
lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  through  ED,  DA. 

[XI.  Def.  3] 

But  AF  meets  it  and  is  in  the  plane  through  ED,  DA  ; 
therefore  GH  is  at  right  angles  to  FA, 
so  that  FA  is  also  at  right  angles  to  GH. 

But  AF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  DE  ; 
therefore  AF  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
GH,  DE. 

But,  if  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  two 
straight  lines  which  cut  one  another,  at  the  point  of  section, 
it  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  them  ;  [xi.  4] 
therefore  FA  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  ED,  GH. 

But  the  plane  through  ED,  GH  is  the  plane  of  reference ; 
therefore  AF  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  from  the  given  elevated  point  A  the  straight 
line  AF  has  been  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of 
reference. 

Q.  E.  F. 

The  text-books  differ  in  the/?/w  which  they  give  to  this  proposition  rather 
than  in  substance.  They  commonly  assume  the  construction  of  a  plane 
through  the  point  A  at  right  angles  to  any  straight  line  BC  in  the  given  plane 
(the  construction  being  effected  in  the  manner  shown  at  the  end  of  the  note 
on  XI.  5  above).  The  advantage  of  this  method  is  that  it  enables  a 
perpendicular  to  be  drawn  from  a  point  in  the  plane  also,  by  the  same 
construction.  (Where  the  letters  for  the  two  figures  differ,  those  referring  to 
the  second  figure  are  put  in  brackets.) 

A 


We  can  include  the  construction  of  the  plane  through  A  perpendicular  to 
BCy  and  make  the  whole  into  one  proposition,  thus. 

BC  being  any  straight  line  in  the  given  plane  MN,  draw  AD  perpendicu- 
lar to  BC. 

In  any  plane  passing  through  BC  but  not  through  A  draw  DE  at  right 
angles  to  BC 

Through  DA,  DE  draw  a  plane ;  this  will  intersect  the  given  plane  MN 
in  a  straight  line,  as  FD  (AD). 

In  the  plane  AG  draw  v4/r perpendicular  to  FG  (AD). 

Then  AH  is  the  perpendicular  required. 


294  BOOK  XI  [xi.  II,  12 

In  the  plane  MN^  through  H  in  the  first  figure  and  A  in  the  second,  draw 
^Z  parallel  to  ^C 

Now,  since  BC  is  perpendicular  to  both  DA  and  DE^  BC  is  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  AG.  [xi.  4] 

Therefore  KL,  being  parallel  to  BQ  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
AG  [xi.  8],  and  therefore  to  A  If  vfhich  meets  it  and  is  in  that  plane. 

Therefore  Alf  is  perpendicular  to  both  FD  (AD)  and  I^L  at  their  point 
of  intersection. 

Therefore  Alf  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  AfJV, 

Thus  we  have  solved  the  problem  in  xi.  1 2  as  well  as  that  in  xi.  11;  and 
this  direct  method  of  drawing  a  perpendicular  to  a  plane  from  a  point  in  it  is 
obviously  preferable  to  Euclid's  method  by  which  the  construction  of  a 
perpendicular  to  a  plane  from  a  point  without  it  is  assumed,  and  a  line  is 
merely  drawn  from  a  point  in  the  plane  parallel  to  the  perpendicular  obtained 
in  XI.  II. 


Proposition  12. 

To  set  up  a  straight  line  at  right  angles  to  a  given  plane 
from  a  given  point  in  it. 

Let  the  plane  of  reference  be  the  given  plane, 

and  A  the  point  in  it ; 

thus  it  is  required  to  set  up  from  the  point 
A  a  straight  line  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  reference. 

Let  any  elevated  point  B  be  conceived, 

from  D  let  BC  be  drawn  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  reference,  [xi.  n] 

and  through  the  point  A  let  AD  be  drawn 
parallel  to  BC.  V-  lA 

Then,  since  ADy  CB  are  two  parallel  straight  lines, 
while  one  of  them,  BC,  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
reference, 

therefore  the  remaining  one,  AD,  is  also  at  right  angles  to 
the  plane  of  reference.  [xi.  8] 

Therefore  AD  has  been  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  given 
plane  from  the  point  A  in  it. 

Q.  E.  F. 


XI.  13]  PROPOSITIONS   11—13  295 


Proposition  13. 

From  the  same  point  two  straight  lines  cannot  be  set  up  at 
right  angles  to  the  same  plane  on  the  same  side. 

For,  if  possible,  from  the  same  point  A  let  the  two  straight 
lines   AB^    AC    be   set    up   at   right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  reference  and  on 
the  same  side, 

and  let  a  plane  be  drawn  through  BA^ 
AC\ 

it  will  then  make,  as  section  through  A 
in  the  plane  of  reference,  a  straight  line. 

[XI.  3] 
Let  it  make  DAE ; 
therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  AC,  DAE  are  in  one  plane. 

And,  since  CA  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which 
meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  DAE  meets  it  and  is  in  the  plane  of  reference ; 

therefore  the  angle  CAE  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  BAE  is  also  right ; 
therefore  the  angle  CAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAE. 

And  they  are  in  one  plane : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Simson  added  words  to  this  as  follows : 

"  Also,  from  a  point  above  a  plane  there  can  be  but  one  perpendicular  to 
that  plane ;  for,  if  there  could  be  two,  they  would  be  parallel  to  one  another 
[xi.  6],  which  is  absurd." 

Euclid  does  not  give  this  result,  but  we  have  already  had  it  in  the  note 
above  to  xi.  4  (ad fin,). 


296  BOOK   XI  [xi.  14 


Proposition  14. 

Planes  to  which  the  same  straight  line  is  at  right  angles 
will  be  parallel. 

For  let  any  straight  line  AB  be  at  right  angles  to  each  of 
the  planes  CD,  EF\ 

I    say    that    the    planes    are 

parallel.  /  Ar 

For,  if  not,  they  will  meet 
when  produced.  r 

Let  them  meet ;  /_ 

they     will     then     make,     as 

common  section,  a  straight  line.  [xi.  3] 

Let  them  make  GH  \ 
let  a  point  K  be  taken  at  random  on  GH^ 
and  let  AK,  BK  be  joined. 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  EF, 

therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  BK  which  is  a  straight 
line  in  the  plane  EF  produced  ;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  the  angle  ABK  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  BAK  is  also  right. 

Thus,  in  the  triangle  ABK,  the  two  angles  ABK,  BAK 
are  equal  to  two  right  angles  : 

which  is  impossible.  [i.  17] 

Therefore    the    planes    CD,    EF  will    not    meet    when 
produced ; 

therefore  the  planes  CD,  EF  are  parallel.  [xl  Def.  8] 

Therefore  planes  to  which  the  same  straight  line  is  at  right 
angles  are  parallel. 

Q.  E.  D. 


XI.  is]  propositions    14,  15  297 

Proposition  15. 

If  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  be  parallel  to  two 
straight  lines  meeting  one  another,  not  being  in  the  same  plane, 
the  planes  through  them  are  parallel. 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  meeting  one  another 
be  parallel  to  the  two  straight  lines 
DE,  EF  meeting  one  another,  not 
being  in  the  same  plane ; 
I  say  that  the  planes  produced 
through  AB,  BC  and  DE,  EF^xW 
not  meet  one  another. 

For  let  BG  be  drawn  from  the 
point  B  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
through  DE,  EF\yi\,  n],  and  let  it 
meet  the  plane  at  the  point  G ; 
through  G  let  GH  be  drawn 
parallel  to  ED,  and  GK  parallel  to  EF.  [i-  31] 

Now,  since  BG  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
DE,  EF, 

therefore  it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight 
lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  through  DE,  EF. 

[XI.  Def.  3] 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  GH,  GK  meets  it  and  is  in 
the  plane  through  DE,  EF\ 
therefore  each  of  the  angles  BGH,  BGK  is  right. 

And,  since  BA  is  parallel  to  GH,  [xi.  9] 

therefore  the  angles  GBA,  BGH  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

[i.  29] 
But  the  angle  BGH  is  right ; 

therefore  the  angle  GBA  is  also  right ; 
therefore  GB  is  at  right  angles  to  BA. 

For  the  same  reason 
GB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  BC. 

Since  then  the  straight  line  GB  is  set  up  at  right  angles 
to  the  two  straight  lines  BA,  BC  which  cut  one  another, 
therefore  GB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
BA,  BC.  [XI.  4] 


298  BOOK  XI  [xi.  15 

But  planes  to  which  the  same  straight  line  is  at  right 
angles  are  parallel ;  [xi.  14] 

therefore  the  plane  through  AB,  BC  is  parallel  to  the  plane 
through  DE,  EF, 

Therefore,  if  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  be 
parallel  to  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another,  not  in  the 
same  plane,  the  planes  through  them  are  parallel. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  result  is  arrived  at  in  the  American  text-books  already  quoted  by 
starting  from  the  relation  between  a  plane  and  a  straight  line  parallel  to  it. 
The  series  of  propositions  is  worth  giving.  A  straight  line  and  a  plane  being 
parallel  if  they  do  not  meet  however  far  they  may  be  produced,  we  have  the 
following  propositions. 

1.  Any  plane  containing  one^  and  only  one^  of  two  parallel  straight  lines  is 
parallel  to  the  other. 

For  suppose  AB^  CD  to  be  parallel  and  CD  to  lie  in  the  plane  MN, 

Then  A  By  CD  determine  a  plane  intersecting  MN  in  the  straight  line  CD. 

Thus,  if  AB  meets  MN^  it  must  meet 
it  at  some  point  in  CD. 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  AB  is 
parallel  to  CD. 

Therefore  AB  will  not  meet  the  plane 
MNy  and  is  therefore  parallel  to  it. 

[This  proposition  and  the  proof  are  in 
Legendre.J 

The  following  theorems  follow  as  corollaries. 

2.  Through  a  given  straight  line  a  plane  can  be  draion  parallel  to  any  other 
given  straight  line;  and^  if  the  lines  are  not  parallel ^  only  one  such  plane  can  be 
drawn. 

We  have  simply  to  draw  through  any  point  on  the  first  line  a  straight  line 
parallel  to  the  second  line  and  then  pass  a  plane  through  these  two  intersecting 
lines.  This  plane  is  then,  by  the  above  proposition,  parallel  to  the  second 
given  straight  line. 

3.  Through  a  given  point  a  plane  can  be  drawn  parallel  to  any  two  straight 
lines  in  space ;  and,  if  the  latter  are  not  parallely  only  one  such  plane  can  be 
drawn. 

Here  we  draw  through  the  point  straight  lines  parallel  respectively  to  the 
given  straight  lines  and  then  draw  a  plane  through  the  lines  so  drawn. 
Next  we  have  the  partial  converse  of  the  first  proposition  above. 

4.  If  a  straight  line  is  parallel  to  a  plane,  it  is  also  parallel  to  the  inter- 
section of  any  plane  through  it  with  the  given  plane.  q^ 

Let  AB  be  parallel  to  the  plane  MN^  and  let 
any  plane  through  AB  intersect  MN  in  CD. 

Now  AB  and  CD  cannot  meet,  because,  if      A^ 
they  did,  AB  would  meet  the  plane  MN. 

And  AB,  CD  are  in  one  plane. 

Therefore  AB,  CD  are  parallel.  /  "^ 

From  this  follows  as  a  corollary : 


XI.  15] 


PROPOSITION   15 


299 


5.  If  each  of  two  intersecting  straight  lines  is  parallel  to  a  given  plane, 
the  plane  containing  them  is  parallel  to  the  ^n 
plafie. 

Let    ABy   AC  hQ  parallel  to  the  plane 

MN,  ^ 

Then,  if  the  plane  ABC  were  to  meet  the  /                                       / 

plane  MN,  the  intersection  would  be  parallel  /                                      / 

both  to  AB  and  to  AC:  which  is  impossible.  /                   .1 

Lastly,  we  have  Euclid's  proposition.  ^ 

6.  If  two  straight  lines  forming  an  angle  are  respectively  parallel  to  two 
other  straight  lines  forming  an  angle,  the  plane  of 

the  first  angle  is  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  second. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  the  angles  formed  by 
straight  lines  parallel  to  one  another  respectively. 

Then,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  DE, 
the  plane  of  DEF  is  parallel  to  AB  [(i)  above]. 

Similarly  the  plane  of  DEF  is  parallel  to 
BC 

Hence  the  plane  of  DEF  is  parallel  to  the 
plane  of -^^C  [(5)]. 

Legendre  arrives  at  the  result  by  yet  another  method.  He  first  proves 
Eucl.  XI.  16  to  the  effect  that,  if  ttvo  parallel  planes  are  cut  by  a  thirds  the  lines 
of  intersection  are  parallel,  and  then  deduces  from  this  that,  if  two  parallel 
straight  lines  are  terminated  by  ttvo  parallel  planes,  the  straight  lines  are  equal 
in  length, 

(The  latter  inference  is  obvious  because  the  plane  through  the  parallels 
cuts  the  parallel  planes  in  parallel  lines,  which 
therefore,  with  the  given  parallel  lines,  form  a 
parallelogram.) 

Legendre  is  now  in  a  position  to  prove 
Euclid's  proposition  xi.  15. 

If  ABC,  DEF  be  the  angles,  make  AB 
equal  to  DE,  and  BC  equal  to  EF,  and  join 
CA,  FD,  BE,  CF,  AD, 

Then,  as  in  Eucl.  xi.  10,  the  triangles 
ABC^  DEF^XQ  equal  in  all  respects ; 
and  AD,  BE,  CF^xe  all  equal. 

It  is  now  proved  that  the  planes  are 
parallel  by  reductio  ad  absurdum  from  the 
last  preceding  result.    For,  if  the  plane  ABC 

is  not  parallel  to  the  plane  DEF,  let  the  plane  drawn  through  B  parallel  to  the 
plane  DEFmeei  CF,  ADva  H,  G  respectively. 

Then,  by  the  last  result  BE,  HF,  GD  will  all  be  equal. 

But  BE,  CF,  AD  are  all  equal : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  etc. 


300  BOOK   XI  [xi.  1 6 

Proposition  i6. 

If  two  parallel  planes  be  cut  by  any  plane,  their  common 
sections  are  parallel. 

For  let  the  two  parallel  planes  AB,  CD  be  cut  by  the 
plane  EFGH, 

and  let  EF,  GH  be  their  common  sections  ; 
I  say  that  EF  is  parallel  to  GH, 

-7B 


For,  if  not,  EF,  GH  will,  when  produced,  meet  either  in 
the  direction  of /%  H  ox  of  E^  G. 

Let  them  be  produced,  as  in  the  direction  of  F,  H,  and 
let  them,  first,  meet  at  K. 

Now,  since  EFK  is  in  the  plane  AB, 
therefore  all  the  points  on  EFK  are  also  in  the  plane  AB, 

[XI.    I] 

But  K  is  one  of  the  points  on  the  straight  line  EFK  \ 
therefore  K  is  in  the  plane  AB. 

For  the  same  reason 
K  is  also  in  the  plane  CD  ; 
therefore  the  planes  AB,  CD  will  meet  when  produced. 

But  they  do  not  meet,  because  they  are,  by  hypothesis, 
parallel ; 

therefore  the  straight  lines   EF,    GH  will   not  meet  when 
produced  in  the  direction  of  F,  H. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  the  straight  lines 
EF,  GH  meet  when  produced  in  the  direction  of  E,  G. 

But  straight  lines  which  do  not  meet  in  either  direction 
are  parallel.  [i.  Def.  23] 

Therefore  EF  is  parallel  to  GH. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


XI.  i6,  17J 


PROPOSITIONS    16,  17 


301 


Sinison  points  out  that,  in  here  quoting  i.  Def.  23,  Euclid  should  have 
said  "  But  straight  lines  in  one  plane  which  do  not  meet  in  either  direction  are 
parallel." 

From  this  proposition  is  deduced  the  converse  of  xi.  14. 

If  a  straight  line  is  perpendicular  to  one  of  two  parallel  planes,  it  is 
perpendicular  to  the  other  also. 

For  suppose  that  MN,  PQ  are  two  parallel  planes,  and  that  A£  is  perpen- 
dicular to  MN, 

Through  AB  draw  any  plane,  and  let  it  intersect 
the  planes  MN,  FQ  in  AC,  BD  respectively. 

Therefore  AC,  BD  are  parallel.  [xi.  16] 

But  AC\^  perpendicular  to  AB ; 
therefore  AB  is  also  perpendicular  to  BD, 

That  is,  AB  is  perpendicular  to  any  line  in  PQ 
passing  through  B ; 
therefore  AB  is  perpendicular  to  PQ, 

It  follows  as  a  corollary  that 

Through  a  given  point  one  platte,  and  only  one,  can  be  drawn  parallel  to  a 
given  plane. 

In  the  above  figure  let  A  be  the  given  point  and  PQ  the  given  plane. 

Draw  AB  perpendicular  to  PQ, 

Through  A  draw  a  plane  MN  at  right  angles  to  AB  (see  note  on  xi.  5 
above). 

Then  MN'is  parallel  to  PQ,  [xi.  14] 

If  there  could  pass  through  A  a  second  plane  parallel  to  PQ,  AB  would 
also  be  perpendicular  to  it. 

That  is,  AB  would  be  perpendicular  to  two  different  planes  through  A  : 
which  is  impossible  (see  the  same  note). 

Also  it  is  readily  proved  that, 

If  two  planes  are  parallel  to  a  third  plane,  they  are  parallel  to  one  another. 


Proposition  17. 

If  two  straight  lines  be  cut  by  parallel  planes,  they  will  be 
cut  in  the  same  ratios. 

For  let  the  two  straight 
lines  AB,  CD  be  cut  by  the 
parallel  planes  GH,  KL,  MN 
at  the  points  A,  E,  B  and  C, 
F,D, 

I  say  that,  as  the  straight  line 
AE  is  to^^,  so  is  CF  to  FD. 
For  let  AC,  BD,  AD  be 
joined, 

let  AD  meet  the  plane  KL 
at  the  point  O, 
and  let  EO,  OF  be  joined. 


302 


BOOK   XI 


[XI.  17,  18 


Now,  since  the  two  parallel  planes  KL,  MN  are  cut  by 
the  plane  EBDO, 
their  common  sections  EO^  BD  are  parallel.  [xi.  16] 

For  the  same  reason,  since  the  two  parallel  planes  GH^ 
KL  are  cut  by  the  plane  AOFC, 
their  common  sections  AC^  OF  2S^  parallel.  \id.'\ 

And,  since  the  straight  line  EO  has  been  drawn  parallel  to 
BDy  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABD, 
therefore,  proportionally,  ^s  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  AO  to  OD. 

[VI.  2] 

Again,  since  the  straight  line  OF  has  been  drawn  parallel 
to  AC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ADC, 
proportionally,  as  ^(9  is  to  OD,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [*r/.] 

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  2ls  AO  is  to  OD,  so  is  AE 
to  EB; 
therefore  also,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [v.  u] 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  18. 

//  a  straight  line  be  at  right  angles  to  any  plane,  all  the 
planes  through  it  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane. 

For  let  any  straight  line  AB  be  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  reference ; 

I  say  that  all   the  planes  through  n        n      a 

AB  are  also  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  reference. 

For  let  the  plane  DE  be  drawn 
through  AB, 

let  CE  be  the  common  section  of      i 
the   plane  DE  and   the  plane  of 
reference, 

let  a  point  F  be  taken  at  random  on  CE, 

and   from   F  let  FG  be   drawn  in  the  plane  DE  at  right 

angles  to  CE.  [i-  "] 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 


XI.  i8J  PROPOSITIONS    17,  18  303 

AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet 
it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference  ;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

so  that  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  CE ; 

therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  right. 

But  the  angle  GFB  is  also  right ; 
therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  FG.  [i.  28] 

But  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference ; 

therefore  FG  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

[XI.  8] 

Now  a  plane  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane,  when  the 
straight  lines  drawn,  in  one  of  the  planes,  at  right  angles  to 
the  common  section  of  the  planes  are  at  right  angles  to  the 
remaining  plane.  [xi.  Def.  4] 

And  FGy  drawn  in  one  of  the  planes  DE  at  right  angles 
to  CE,  the  common  section  of  the  planes,  was  proved  to  be 
at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference ; 

therefore  the  plane  DE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
reference. 

Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  that  all  the  planes  through 
AB  are  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Starting  as  Euclid  does  from  the  definition  of  perpendicular  planes  as 
planes  such  that  all  straight  lines  drawn  in  one  of  the  planes  at  right  angles  to 
the  common  section  are  at  right  angles  to  the  other  plane,  it  is  necessary  for 
him  to  show  that,  if  7^  be  any  point  in  CE,  and  FG  be  drawn  in  the  plane 
DE  at  right  angles  to  CEy  FG  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  to  which 
AB  is  perpendicular. 

It  is  perhaps  more  scientific  to  make  the  definition,  as  Legendre  makes  it, 
a  particular  case  of  the  definition  of  the  inclination  of  planes.  Perpendicular 
planes  would  thus  be  planes  such  that  the  angle  which  (when  it  is  acute) 
Euclid  calls  the  inclination  of  a  plane  to  a  plane  is  a  right  angle.  When  to  this 
is  added  the  fact  incidentally  proved  in  xi.  10  that  the  "  inclination  of  a  plane  to 
a  plane  "  is  the  same  at  whatever  point  in  their  common  section  it  is  drawn,  it 
is  sufficient  to  prove  the  perpendicularity  of  two  planes  if  one  straight  line 
drawn,  in  one  of  them,  perpendicular  to  their  common  section  is  perpendicular 
to  the  other. 

If  this  point  of  view  is  taken.  Props.  18,  19  are  much  simplified  (cf. 
Legendre,  H.  M.  Taylor,  Smith  and  Bryant,  Rausenberger,  Schultze  and 
Sevenoak,  Holgate).     The  alternative  proof  is  as  follows. 

Let  AB  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN,  and  CE  any  plane  through 
AB,  meeting  the  plane  MN'm  the  straight  line  CD. 

In  the  plane  AfJVdiayf  BFzX  right  angles  to  CD. 


304 


BOOK    XI 


[xi.  i8,  19 


Then  ABF\s  the  angle  which  Euclid  calls  (in  the  case  where  it  is  acute) 
the  "  inclination  of  the  plane  to  the  plane." 


But,  since  AB  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MJV,  it  is  perpendicular  to 
BF  in  it. 

Therefore  the  angle  ABFis  a  right  angle  ; 
whence  the  plane  CE  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN, 


Proposition  19. 

If  two  planes  which  cut  one  another  be  at  right  angles  to 
any  plane,  their  common  section  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to 
the  same  plane. 

For  let  the  two  planes  AB,  BC  be  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  reference, 

and  let  BD  be  their  common  section  ; 
I  say  that  BD  is  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  reference. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  and  from  the 
point  D  let  DE  be  drawn  in  the  plane 
AB  at  right  angles  to  the  straight  line 
AD,  and  DF  in  the  plane  BC  at  right 
angles  to  CD. 

Now,  since  the  plane  AB  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 

and  DE  has  been  drawn  in  the  plane  AB  at  right  angles  to 
ADy  their  common  section, 

therefore  DE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane   of  reference. 

[xi.  Def.  4] 


XI.  19]  PROPOSITIONS    i8,  19  305 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 
DF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  from  the  same  point  D  two  straight  lines  have 
been  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference  on  the 
same  side : 


which  is  impossible. 


[XI.  13] 


Therefore  no  straight  line  except  the  common  section  DB 
of  the  planes  AB,  BC  can  be  set  up  from  the  point  D  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Legendre,  followed  by  other  writers  already  quoted,  uses  a  preliminary 
proposition  equivalent  to  Euclid's  definition  of  planes  at  right  angles  to  one 
another. 

If  two  planes  are  perpendicular  to  one  anoth^r^  a  straight  line  drawn  in  one 
of  them  perpendicular  to  their  common  section  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  other. 

Let  the  perpendicular  planes  CE^  MN  (figure  of  last  note)  intersect  in 
CDy  and  let  AB  be  drawn  in  CE  perpendicular  to  CD. 

In  the  plane  MNdvzyr  BFdX  right  angles  to  CD. 

Then,  since  the  planes  are  perpendicular,  the  angle  ABF{^^\x  inclination) 
is  a  right  angle. 

Therefore  AB  is  perpendicular  to  both  CD  and  BF^  and  therefore  to  the 
plane  MN. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  prove  xi.  19,  viz.  If  two  planes  be  perpendicular 
to  a  thirds  their  intersection  is  also  perpen- 
dicular to  that  third  plane. 

Let  each  of  the  two  planes  AC^  AD 
intersecting  in  AB  be  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  MN. 

Let  AC,  AD  intersect  MNm  BC,  BD 
respectively. 

In  the  plane  MN  draw  BE  at  right 
angles  to  BC  and  BF  at  right  angles  to 
BD. 

Now,  since  the  planes  AC,  MN  axe  at 
right  angles,  and  BE  is  drawn  in  the  latter  perpendicular  to  BCy  BE  is 
perpendicular  to  the  plane  AC. 

Hence  AB  is  perpendicular  to  BE.  [xi.  4] 

Similarly  AB  is  perpendicular  to  BF. 

Therefore  AB  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  BE,  BF,  i.e.  to  the 
plane  MN. 

An  useful  problem  is  that  of  drawing  a  common  perpendicular  to  two 
straight  lines  not  in  one  plane,  and  in  connexion  with  this  the  following 
proposition  may  be  given. 


H.  E.  III. 


20 


3o6 


BOOK   XI 


[XI.  19 


Given  a  plane  and  a  straight  line  not  perpendicular  to  ity  one  plane^  and  only 
oney  can  be  drawn  through  the  straight  line  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  MN  the 
given  plane. 

From  any  point  C  in  AB  draw  CD  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane  MN, 

Through  AB  and  CD  draw  a  plane  AE, 

Then  the  plane  AE  is  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  MN.  [xi.  18] 

If  any  other  plane  could  be  drawn  through 
AB  perpendicular  to  MN^  the  intersection  AB  oi 
the  two  planes  perpendicular  to  MN  would  itself 
be  perpendicular  to  MN\ 
which  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 

To  draw  a  common  perpendicular  to  two  straight  lines  not  in  the  same  plane. 

Let  ABy  CD  be  the  given  straight  lines. 

Through   CD  draw  the  plane  MN  parallel  to  AB  (Prop.    2   in   note 
to  XI.  15). 

Through  AB  draw  the  plane  AF  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN{^q^  the 
last  preceding  proposition). 


A 

""^^>.^c 

B 

/ 

/ 

/ 

D 

/ 

M 

E 

[xi.  19] 


Let  the  planes  AF^  ^^  intersect  in  EF,  and  let  EF  meQi  CD  in  G, 

From  Gy  in  the  plane  AF,  draw  GH2X  right  angles  to  EF^  meeting  AB  in  H. 

GH  is  then  the  required  perpendicular. 

For  AB  is  parallel  to  -ST^  (Prop.  4  in  note  to  xi.  15);  therefore  GH^ 
being  perpendicular  to  EF^  is  also  perpendicular  to  AB. 

But,  the  plane  AF  being  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN^  and  GH  being 
perpendicular  to  EFy  their  intersection, 

GH\^  perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN^  and  therefore  to  CD, 

Therefore  GH  is  perpendicular  to  both  AB  and  CD, 

Only  one  common  perpendicular  can  be  drawn  to  two  straight  lines  not  in 
one  plane. 

For,  if  possible,  let  KL  also  be  perpendicular  to  both  AB  and  CD. 

Let  the  plane  through  KL^  AB  meet  the  plane  MN'm  LQ, 

Then  AB  is  parallel  to  LQ  (Prop.  4  in  note  to  xi.  15),  so  that  /TZ,  being 
perpendicular  to  AB^  is  also  perpendicular  to  LQ. 

Therefore  KL  is  perpendicular  to  both  CL  and  LQ,  and  consequently  to 
the  plane  MN, 

But,  if  KF  be  drawn  in  the  plane  AF  perpendicular  to  EF,  KP  is  also 
perpendicular  to  the  plane  MN. 


XI.  i9>  20] 


PROPOSITIONS    19,  20 


307 


Thus  there  are  two  perpendiculars  from  the  point  K  to  the  plane  MN : 
which  is  impossible. 


Rausenberger's  construction  for  the  same  problem  is  more  elegant 
he  says,  through  each  straight  line  a  plane  parallel 
to  the  other.  Then  draw  through  each  straight  line 
a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  the 
other.  The  two  planes  last  drawn  will  intersect 
in  a  straight  line,  and  this  straight  line  is  the 
common  perpendicular  required. 


Draw, 


r 


C£>F, 


The  form  of  the  construction  best  suited  for 
examination  purposes,  because  the  ntost  self- 
contained,  is  doubtless  that  given  by  Smith  and 
Bryant. 

I^t  AB,  CD  be  the  two  given  straight  lines. 

Through  any  point  E  in  CD  draw  ^^  parallel  to  AB, 

From  any  point  G  in  AB  draw  GH  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
meeting  the  plane  in  H, 

Through  H  in  the  plane  CDF  draw 
HK  parallel  to  FE  or  AB,  to  cut  CD 
in  K. 

Then,  since  AB,  HK  are  parallel, 
AG  UK  is  a  plane. 

Complete  the  parallelogram  GHKL, 

Now,  since  LK,  GH  are  parallel,  and 
GH  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  CDF, 

LK  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
CDF 

Therefore  LK  is  perpendicular  to  CD  and  KH,  and  therefore  to  AB  which 
is  parallel  to  KH 

Proposition  20. 

If  a  solid  angle  be  contained  by  three  plane  angles,  any  two, 
taken  together  in  any  manner,  are  greater  than  the  remaining 
one. 

For  let  the  solid  angle  at  A  be  contained  by  the  three 
plane  angles  BAC,  CAD,  DAB ; 
I  say  that  any  two  of  the  angles 
BAC,    CAD,   DAB,    taken    to- 
gether in  any  manner,  are  greater  y^        t<i 
than  the  remaining  one. 

If  now  the  angles  BAC,  CAD, 
DAB  are  equal  to  one  another, 
it  is  manifest  that  any  two  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one. 

But,  if  not,  let  BAC  be  greater, 
and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let  the 

20 — 2 


3o8  BOOK  XI  [xi.  20 

angle  BAE  be  constructed,  in  the  plane  through  BA,  AC^ 

equal  to  the  angle  DAB ; 

let  AE  be  made  equal  to  ADy 

and  let  BECy  drawn  across   through  the  point  E,  cut  the 

straight  lines  AB,  AC  2X  the  points  B,  C\ 

let  DB,  DC  be  joined. 

Now,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AE, 
and  AB  is  common, 
two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides ; 
and  the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAE ; 
therefore  the  base  DB  is  equal  to  the  base  BE.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  two  sides  BD,  DC  are  greater  than  BCy 

[i.  20] 
and  of  these  DB  was  proved  equal  to  BE, 

therefore  the  remainder  DC  is  greater  than  the  remainder  EC. 

Now,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AE, 
and  -^  C  is  common, 

and  the  base  DC  is  greater  than  the  base  EC, 
therefore  the  angle  DAC  is  greater  than  the  angle  EAC. 

[I.  25] 

But  the  angle  DAB  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle 
BAE\ 

therefore  the  angles  DAB,  DAC  are  greater  than  the  angle 
BAC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  remaining  angles  also, 
taken  together  two  and  two,  are  greater  than  the  remaining 
one. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

After  excluding  the  obvious  case  in  which  all  three  angles  are  equal, 
Euclid  goes  on  to  say  **  If  not,  let  the  angle  BA  C  be  greater,"  without  adding 
greater  than  what  Heiberg  is  clearly  right  in  saying  that  he  means  greater 
than  BADy  i.e.  greater  than  one  of  the  adjacent  angles.  This  is  proved  by 
the  words  at  the  end  "Similarly  we  can  prove,"  etc.  Euclid  thus  excludes 
as  obvious  the  case  where  one  of  the  three  angles  is  not  greater  than  either  of 
the  other  two,  but  proves  the  remaining  cases.  This  is  scientific,  but  he  might 
further  have  excluded  as  obvious  the  case  in  which  one  angle  is  greater  than 
one  of  the  others  but  equal  to  or  less  than  the  remaining  one. 


XI.  20,  2i]  PROPOSITIONS   20,  21  309 

Simson  remarks  that  the  angle  BAC  may  happen  to  be  equal  to  one  of 
the  other  two  and  writes  accordingly  "  If  they  [all  three  angles]  are  not  [equal], 
let  BAC  be  that  angle  which  is  not  less  than  either  of  the  other  two,  and  is 
greater  than  one  of  them  DAB.^^  He  then  proves,  in  the  same  way  as  Euclid 
does,  that  the  angles  DAB,  DAC  are  greater  than  the  angle  BAC,  adding 
finally  :  **  But  BAC  is  not  less  than  either  of  the  angles  DAB,  DAC\  there- 
fore BAC,  with  either  of  them,  is  greater  than  the  other." 

It  would  be  better,  as  indicated  by  Legendre  and  Rausenberger,  to  begin 
by  saying  that,  *'  If  one  of  the  three  angles  is  either  equal  to  or  less  than  either 
of  the  other  two,  it  is  evident  that  the  sum  of  those  two  is  greater  than  the 
first.  It  is  therefore  only  necessary  to  prove,  y^r  the  case  in  which  one  angle  is 
greater  than  each  of  the  others,  that  the  sum  of  the  two  latter  is  greater  than 
the  former. 

Accordingly  let  BA  C  be  greater  than  each  of  the  other  angles."  We  then 
proceed  as  in  Euclid. 

Proposition  21. 

Any  solid  angle  is  contained  by  plane  angles  less  than  four 
right  angles. 

Let  the  angle  at  -^  be  a  solid  angle  contained  by  the  plane 
angles  BAC,  CAD,  DAB  ; 
I  say  that  the  angles  BAC,  CAD, 
DAB  are  less  than  four  right  angles. 

For  let  points  B,  C,  D  be  taken 
at  random  on  the  straight  lines  AB, 
AC,  AD  respectively, 
and  let  BC,  CD,  DB  be  joined.  ^ 

Now,  since  the  solid  angle  at  B  is  contained  by  the  three 
plane  angles  CBA,  ABD,  CBD, 

any  two  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one ;  [xi.  20] 

therefore  the  angles  CBA,  ABD  are  greater  than  the  angle 
CBD. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angles  BCA,  A  CD  are  also  greater  than  the  angle  BCD, 
and  the  angles  CD  A,  ADB  are  greater  than  the  angle  CDB  ; 
therefore  the  six  angles  CBA,  ABD,  BCA,  A  CD,  CD  A, 
ADB  are  greater  than  the  three  angles  CBD,  BCD,  CDB. 

But  the  three  angles  CBD,  BDCj  BCD  are  equal  to  two 
right  angles  ;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  six  angles  CBA,  ABD,  BCA,  ACD,  CDA, 
ADB  are  greater  than  two  right  angles. 


3IO  BOOK   XI  [xi.  21 

And,  since  the  three  angles  of  each  of  the  triangles  ABC, 
A  CD,  ADB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles, 
therefore  the  nine  angles  of  the  three  triangles,  the  angles 
CBA,  ACB,  BAC,  A  CD,  CD  A,  CAD,  ADB,  DBA,  BAD 
are  equal  to  six  right  angles ; 

and  of  them  the  six  angles  ABC,  BCA,  ACD,  CD  A,  ADB, 
DBA  are  greater  than  two  right  angles ; 
therefore   the   remaining  three  angles  BAC,   CAD,  DAB 
containing  the  solid  angle  are  less  than  four  right  angles. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  although  Euclid  enunciates  this  proposition  for 
any  solid  angle,  he  only  proves  it  for  the  particular  case  of  a  trihedral  angle. 
This  is  in  accordance  with  his  manner  of  proving  one  case  and  leaving  the 
others  to  the  reader.  The  omission  of  the  convex  polyhedral  angle  here 
corresponds  to  the  omission,  after  i.  32,  of  the  proposition  about  the  interior 
angles  of  a  convex  polygon  given  by  Proclus  and  in  most  books.  The  proof 
of  the  present  proposition  for  any  convex  polyhedral  angle  can  of  course  be 
arranged  so  as  not  to  assume  the  proposition  that  the  interior  angles  of  a 
convex  polygon  together  with  four  right  angles  are  equal  to  twice  as  many 
right  angles  as  the  figure  has  sides. 

Let  there  be  any  convex  polyhedral  angle  with   V  as  vertex,  and  let  it  be 
cut  by  any  plane  meeting  its  faces  in,  say,  the 
polygon  ABCDE,  y 

Take  O  any  point  within  the  polygon,  and  ^v 

in  its  plane,  and  join  OA,  OB,  OC,  OD,  OE,  /  i  \ 

Then  all  the  angles  of  the  triangles  with  /  /   \       \. 

vertex  O  are  equal  to  twice  as  many  right  angles  /    /     \e         n. 

as  the  polygon  has  sides ;  [i.  32]  /^^x^7^/\^""'"^~""^^ 

therefore  the  interior  angles  of  the  polygon  to-         ^^^-i'-'^'"\ / 

gether  with  all  the  angles  round  O  are  equal  to       An^   A^    \  \     / 
twice  as  many  right  angles  as  the  polygon  has  ^ff~--^----jM/^^ 

sides.  C 

Also  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  the  triangles 
VAB,  VBC,  etc,  with  vertex  F'are  equal  to  twice  as  many  right  angles  as  the 
polygon  has  sides ; 

and  all  the  said  angles  are  equal  to  the  sum  of  (i)  the  plane  angles  at  V 
forming  the  polyhedral  angle  and  (2)  the  base  angles  of  the  triangles  with 
vertex  V, 

This  latter  sum  is  therefore  equal  to  the  sum  of  (3)  all  the  angles 
round  O  and  (4)  all  the  interior  angles  of  the  polygon. 

Now,  by  Euclid's  proposition,  of  the  three  angles  forming  the  solid  angle  at 
A,  the  angles  VAE,  VAB  are  together  greater  than  the  angle  EAB. 

Similarly,  at  B,  the  angles  VBA,  VBC  are  together  greater  than  the  angle 
ABC. 

And  so  on. 

Therefore,  by  addition,  the  base  angles  of  the  triangles  with  vertex    V 


XI.  2i]  PROPOSITION    21  311 

[(2)  above]  are  together  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  the  polygon 
(4)  above  J. 

Hence,  by  way  of  compensation,  the  sum  of  the  plane  angles  at  ^[(i) 
above]  is  less  than  the  sum  of  the  angles  round  O  [(3)  above]. 

But  the  latter  sum  is  equal  to  four  right  angles;  therefore  the  plane  angles 
forming  the  polyhedral  angle  are  together  less  than  four  right  angles. 

The  proposition  is  only  true  of  convex  polyhedral  angles,  i.e.  those  in 
which  the  plane  of  any  face  cannot,  if  produced,  ever  cut  the  solid  angle. 

There  are  certain  propositions  relating  to  equal  (and  symmetrical)  trihe- 
dral angles  which  are  necessary  to  the  consideration  of  the  polyhedra  dealt 
with  by  Euclid,  all  of  which  (as  before  remarked)  have  trihedral  angles  only. 

1.  7\vo  trihedral  angles  are  equal  if  two  face  angles  and  the  included 
dihedral  angle  of  the  one  are  respectively  equal  to  two  face  angles  and  the  included 
dihedral  angle  of  the  other,  the  equal  parts  being  arranged  in  the  same  order, 

2.  7\vo  trihedral  angles  are  equal  if  two  dihedral  angles  and  the  included 
face  angle  of  the  one  are  respectively  equal  to  two  dihedral  angles  and  the  iticluded 
face  angle  of  the  other,  all  equal  parts  being  arranged  in  the  same  order. 

These  propositions  are  proved  immediately  by  superposition. 

3.  Two  trihedral  angles  are  equal  if  the  three  face  angles  of  the  one  are 
respectively  equcU  to  the  three  face  angles  of  the  other,  and  all  are  arranged  in  the 
same  order. 

Let  V—ABCzxi^  V'^A'B'C  be  two  trihedral  angles  such  that  the  angle 
A  VB  is  equal  to  the  angle  A'  V'B,  the  angle  BVC  to  the  angle  E  V'C\  and 
the  angle  CVA  to  the  angle  C  V'A', 


We  first  prove  that  corresponding  pairs  of  face  angles  include  equal  dihedral 
angles. 

E.g.,  the  dihedral  angle  formed  by  the  plane  angles  CVA,  AVB  is  equal 
to  that  formed  by  the  plane  angles  C  V'A\  A'  V'ff, 

Take  points  A,  B,  C  on  VA,  VB,  VC  and  points  A',  B,  C  on  V'A', 
VB',  F'C,  such  that  VA,  VB,  VC,  V'A',  VB',  FT  are  all  equal. 

Join  BC,  CA,  AB,  B'C,  C'A',  A'B'. 

Take  any  point  D  on  AV,  and  measure  A'D'  along  A'  V  equal  to  AD, 

From  D  draw  DE  in  the  plane  AVB,  and  DF  in  the  plane  CVA, 
perpendicular  to  A  V,  Then  DE,  DF  will  meet  AB,  A  C  respectively,  the 
angles  VAB,  VAC,  the  base  angles  of  two  isosceles  triangles,  being  less  than 
right  angles. 

Join  EF, 

Draw  the  triangle  DEF  in  the  same  way. 


312  BOOK     XI  [XI.   21,   22 

Now,  by  means  of  the  hypothesis  and  construction,  it  appears  that  the 
triangles  VAB^  V'A'B'  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

So  are  the  triangles  VACy  VA'C,  and  the  triangles  VBCy  V'B'C. 

Thus  BC,  CA,  AB  are  respectively  equal  to  BC\  CA\  A'B'y  and  the 
triangles  ABQ  A'SC  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Now,  in  the  triangles  ADE,  ADEy 
the  angles  ADEy  DAE  are  equal  to  the  angles  A'DE^  DA'E  respectively, 
and  AD  is  equal  to  A'D, 

Therefore  the  triangles  ADE^  A'DE  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Similarly  the  triangles  ADF^  A' DE  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Thus,  in  the  triangles  AEFy  A'EfF, 
EAy  AF^t^  respectively  equal  to  E!A\  A'F\ 
and  the  angle  EAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  E'A'E  (from  above)  ; 
therefore  the  triangles  AEE,  A'EF*  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Lastly,  in  the  triangles  DEF^  DEFy  the  three  sides  are  respectively 
equal  to  the  three  sides; 
therefore  the  triangles  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Therefore  the  angles  EDF,  EDF  are  equal. 

But  these  angles  are  the  measures  of  the  dihedral  angles  formed  by  the 
planes  CVA,  A  VB  and  by  the  planes  C  V*A\  A'  V'B  respectively. 
Therefore  these  dihedral  angles  are  equal. 

Similarly  for  the  other  two  dihedral  angles. 

Hence  the  trihedral  angles  coincide  if  one  is  applied  to  the  other ; 
that  is,  they  are  equal. 

To  understand  what  is  implied  by  "taken  in  the  same  order"  we  may 
suppose  ourselves  to  be  placed  at  the  vertices,  and  to  take  the  faces  in  clock- 
wise direction,  or  the  reverse,  for  both  angle$. 

If  the  face  angles  and  dihedral  angles  are  taken  in  reverse  directions^  i.e. 
in  clockwise  direction  in  one  and  in  counterclockwise  direction  in  the  other, 
then,  if  the  other  conditions  in  the  above  three  propositions  are  fulfilled,  the 
trihedral  angles  are  not  equal  but  symmetrical. 

If  the  faces  of  a  trihedral  angle  be  produced  beyond  the  vertex,  they  form 
another  trihedral  angle.  It  is  easily  seen  that  these  vertical  trihedral  angles 
are  symmetrical. 


Proposition  22. 

If  there  be  three  plane  angles  of  which  two,  taken  together 
in  any  manner,  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one,  and  they 
are  contained  by  equal  straight  lines,  it  is  possible  to  construct 
a  triangle  out  of  the  straight  lines  joining  the  extremities  of 
the  equal  straight  lines. 

Let  there  be  three  plane  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK,  of 


XI.   2  2] 


PROPOSITIONS   21,  22 


313 


which  two,  taken  together  in  any  manner,  are  greater  than 
the  remaining  one,  namely 

the  angles  ABC,  DEF  greater  than  the  angle  GHK, 
the  angles  DEF,  GHK  greater  than  the  angle  ABC, 

and,  further,  the  angles  GHK,  ABC  greater  than  the  angle 

DEF, 

let  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH,  HK  be  equal, 

and  let  AC,  DF,  GK  be  joined  ; 

I  say  that  it  is  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight 
lines  equal  to  AC,  DF,  GK,  that  is,  that  any  two  of  the 
straight  lines  AC,  DF,  GK  are  greater  than  the  remaining 
one. 


Now,  if  the  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  are  equal  to  one 
another,  it  is  manifest  that,  AC,  DF,  GK  being  equal  also, 
it  is  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight  lines  equal 
to  AC,  DF,  GK 

But,  if  not,  let  them  be  unequal, 
and  on  the  straight  line  HK,  and  at  the  point  H  on  it,  let 
the  angle  KHL  be   constructed  equal 
to  the  angle  ABC', 
let  HL  be  made  equal  to  one  of  the 
straight  lines  AB,  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH, 
HK, 
and  let  KL,  GL  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  AB,  BC 
are  equal  to  the  two  sides  KH,  HL, 

and  the  angle  at  B  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHL, 

therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  KL.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  angles  ABC,  GHK  are  greater  than  the 
angle  DEF, 


314  BOOK  XI  [xi.  22,  23 

while  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHL, 
therefore  the  angle  GHL  is  greater  than  the  angle  DEF. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  GH,  HL  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  DE,  EF, 

and  the  angle  GHL  is  greater  than  the  angle  DEF, 

therefore  the  base  GL  is  greater  than  the  base  DF,         [i.  24] 

But  GK,  KL  are  greater  than  GL. 

Therefore  GK,  KL  are  much  greater  than  DF, 

But  KL  is  equal  to  ^C; 
therefore  AC,  GK  are  greater  than  the  remaining  straight 
line  DF. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 
AC,  DF  2s^  greater  than  GK, 
and  further  DF,  GK  are  greater  than  AC 

Therefore  it  is  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of 
straight  lines  equal  to  AC,  DF,  GK, 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  Greek  text  gives  an  alternative  proof,  which  is  relegated  by  Heiberg 
to  the  Appendix.  Simson  selected  the  alternative  proof  in  preference  to  that 
given  above ;  he  objected  however  to  words  near  the  beginning,  "  If  not,  let 
the  angles  at  the  points  B,  E,  H  be  unequal  and  that  at  B  greater  than  either 
of  the  angles  at  E,  H,^'  and  altered  the  words  so  as  to  take  account  of  the 
possibility  that  the  angle  at  B  might  be  equal  to  one  of  the  other  two. 

As  will  be  seen,  Euclid  takes  no  account  of  the  relative  magnitude  of  the 
angles  except  as  regards  the  case  when  all  three  are  equal.  Having  proved 
that  one  base  is  less  than  the  sum  of  the  two  others,  he  says  that  "  similarly 
we  can  prove  "  the  same  thing  for  the  other  two  bases. 

If  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  according  to  the  relative  magnitude  of  the 
three  angles,  we  may  say,  as  in  the  corresponding  place  in  xi.  21,  that,  if  one 
of  the  three  angles  is  either  equal  to  or  less  than  either  of  the  other  two,  the 
bases  subtending  those  two  angles  must  obviously  be  together  greater  than  the 
base  subtending  the  first.  Thus  it  is  only  necessary  to  prove,  for  the  case  in 
which  one  angle  is  greater  than  either  of  the  others,  that  the  sum  of  the  bases 
subtending  those  others  is  greater  than  that  subtending  the  first.  This  is 
practically  the  course  taken  in  the  interpolated  alternative  proof. 

Proposition  23. 

To  constrtut  a  solid  angle  out  of  three  plane  angles  two  of 
which,  taken  togetlier  in  any  manner,  are  greater  than  the 
remaining  one:  thus  the  three  angles  must  be  less  than  four 
right  angles. 


XI.   23] 


PROPOSITIONS   22,  23 


315 


Let  the  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  be  the  three  given 
plane  angles,  and  let  two  of  these,  taken  together  in  any 
manner,  be  greater  than  the  remaining  one,  while,  further, 
the  three  are  less  than  four  right  angles ; 

thus  it  is  required  to  construct  a  solid  angle  out  of  angles 
equal  to  the  angles  ABC,  DBF,  GHK. 


Let  AB,  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH,  HK  be  cut  off  equal  to  one 
another, 

and  let  AC,  DF,  GK  be  joined  ; 

it  is  therefore  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight 
lines  equal  to  AC,  DF,  GK.      [xi.  22] 
Let  LMN  be  so  constructed  that 
^C  is  equal  to  LM,  DF  to  MN,  and 
further  GK  to  NL, 

let  the  circle  LMNh^  described  about 

the  triangle  LMN, 

let  its  centre  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  (9; 

let  LO,  MO,  NO  be  joined  ; 

I  say  that  AB  is  greater  than  LO. 

For,  if  not,  AB  is  either  equal  to  LO,  or  less. 

First,  let  it  be  equal. 

Then,  since  AB  is  equal  to  LO, 

while  AB  is  equal  to  BC,  and  OL  to  OM, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  LO,  OM 
respectively  ; 

and,  by  hypothesis,  the  base  .^C  is  equal  to  the  base  LM ; 

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  LOM.        [i.  8] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  DEF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  MON, 

and  further  the  angle  GHK  to  the  angle  NOL  ; 


3i6  BOOK   XI  [XI.  23 

therefore  the  three  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  are  equal  to 
the  three  angles  LOM,  MON,  NOL. 

But  the  three  angles  LOM,  MON,  NOL  are  equal  to 
four  right  angles ; 

therefore  the  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  are  equal  to  four 
right  angles. 

But  they  are  also,  by  hypothesis,  less  than  four  right  angles : 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  equal  to  LO. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  AB  less  than  LO. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so, 
and  let  OP  be  made  equal  to  AB^  and  OQ  equal  to  BCy 
and  let  PQ  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB  is  equal  to  BC, 
OP  is  also  equal  to  OQ, 
so  that  the  remainder  LP  is  equal  to  QM. 

Therefore  LM  is  parallel  to  PQ,  [vi.  2] 

and  LMO  is  equiangular  with  PQO ;  [i.  29] 

therefore,  as  OL  is  to  LM,  so  is  OP  to  PQ  ;  [vi.  4] 

and  alternately,  as  Z  (9  is  to  OP,  so  is  LM  to  PQ.  [v.  16] 

But  Z6>  is  greater  than  OP  \ 
therefore  LM  is  also  greater  than  PQ. 

But  LM  was  made  equal  to  AC\ 
therefore  ACis  also  greater  than  PQ. 

Since,  then,  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  PO,  OQ, 

and  the  base  AC  is  greater  than  the  base  PQ, 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  greater  than  the  angle  POQ. 

[i.  25] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 
the  angle  DEF  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  MON, 
and  the  angle  GHK  greater  than  the  angle  NOL. 

Therefore  the  three  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  are  greater 
than  the  three  angles  LOM,  MON,  NOL. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  are 
less  than  four  right  angles; 

therefore  the  angles  LOM,  MON,  NOL  are  much  less  than 
four  right  angles. 


XI.  23]  PROPOSITION    23  317 

But  they  are  also  equal  to  four  right  angles : 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  less  than  LO. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  equal  ; 

therefore  AB  is  greater  than  LO. 

Let  then  OR  be  set  up  from  the  point  O  at  right  angles 
to  the  plane  of  the  circle  LMN,  [xi.  12] 

and  let  the  square  on  OR  be  equal  to  that  area  by  which 
the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  Z(9 ;  [Lemma] 

let  RL,  RM,  RN  be  joined. 

Then,  since  RO  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle 
LMN, 

therefore  RO  is  also  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  LO,  MO,  NO. 

And,  since  LO  is  equal  to  OM, 

while  OR  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 

therefore  the  base  RL  is  equal  to  the  base  RM.  [i.  4] 

For  the  same  reason 

RN  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  RL,  RM ; 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  RL,  RM,  RN  are  equal  to 
one  another. 

Next,  since  by  hypothesis  the  square  on  OR  is  equal  to 
that  area  by  which  the  square  on  A B  is  greater  than  the 
square  on  LO, 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LO,  OR. 

But  the  square  on  LR  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LO,  OR, 

for  the  angle  LOR  is  right ;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  ^ iff  is  equal  to  the  square  on  RL  ; 

therefore  AB  is  equal  to  RL. 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH,  HK  is 
equal  to  AB, 
while  each  of  the  straight  lines  RM,  RN  is  equal  to  RL  ; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH, 
HK  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  RL,  RM,  RN. 


3i8  BOOK  XI  [xi.  23 

And,  since  the  two  sides  LR,  RM  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  AB,  BC, 

and  the  base  LM  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  the  base  AC^ 
therefore  the  angle  LRM  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC.        [i.  8] 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  MRN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DEF, 
and  the  angle  LRN  to  the  angle  GHK. 

Therefore,  out  of  the  three  plane  angles  LRM,  MRN, 
LRN,  which  are  equal  to  the  three  given  angles  ABC,  DEF, 
GHK,  the  solid  angle  at  R  has  been  constructed,  which  is 
contained  by  the  angles  LRM,  MRN,  LRN. 

Q.   E.  F. 

Lemma. 

But  how  it  is  possible  to  take  the  square  on  OR  equal  to 
that  area  by  which  the  square  on  AB  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  LO,  we  can  show  c 

as  follows. 

Let    the    straight    lines   AB,   LO    be 
set  out, 
and  let  AB  he  the  greater ; 
let  the  semicircle  ABC  be  described  on  AB, 
and  into  the  semicircle  ABC  let  AC  he  fitted  equal  to  the 
straight  line  L  O,  not  being  greater  than  the  diameter  AB;  [iv.  i] 
let  CB  be  joined. 

Since  then  the  angle  ACB  is  an  angle  in  the  semicircle 
ACB, 

therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  right.  [in.  31] 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
AC,CB.  [1.47] 

Hence  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
AChy  the  square  on  CB. 

But  ^C  is  equal  to  LO. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on 
LO  by  the  square  on  CB. 

If  then  we  cut  off  OR  equal  to  BC,  the  square  on  AB  will 
be  greater  than  the  square  on  LO  by  the  square  on  OR. 

Q.  E.   F. 

The  whole  difficulty  in  this  proposition  is  the  proof  of  a  fact  which  makes 
the  construction  possible,  viz.  the  fact  that,  if  LMN  be  a  triangle  with  sides 


XI.  23]  PROPOSITION   23  319 

respectively  equal  to  the  bases  of  the  isosceles  triangles  which  have  the 
given  angles  as  vertical  angles  and  the  equal  sides  all  of  the  same  length,  then 
one  of  these  equal  sides,  as  AB^  is  greater  than  the  radius  LO  oi  the  circle 
circumscribing  the  triangle  LMN. 

Assuming  that  AB  is  greater  than  LO^  we  have  only  to  draw  from  O  a 
perpendicular  OR  to  the  plane  of  the  triangle  LMN',  to  make  OR  of  such  a 
length  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LO,  OR  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 
and  to  join  RL,  RMy  RN,  (The  manner  of  finding  OR  such  that  the  square 
on  it  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  squares  on  AB  and  Z^  is  shown 
in  the  Lemma  at  the  end  of  the  text  of  the  proposition.  We  have  already 
had  the  same  construction  in  the  Lemma  after  x.  13.) 

Then  clearly  RL,  RM,  RN  are  equal  to  AB  and  to  one  another  [i.  4 
and  I.  47]. 

Therefore  the  triangles  LRM,  MRN,  NRL  have  their  three  sides 
respectively  equal  to  those  of  the  triangles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  respectively. 

Hence  their  vertical  angles  are  equal  to  the  three  given  angles  respectively; 
and  the  required  solid  angle  is  constructed. 

We  return  now  to  the  proposition  to  be  proved  as  a  preliminary  to  the 
construction,  viz.  that,  in  the  figures,  AB  is  greater  than  LO. 

It  will  be  observed  that  Euclid,  as  his  manner  is,  proves  it  for  one  case 
only,  that,  namely,  in  which  O,  the  centre  of  the  circle  circumscribing  the 
triangle  LMN,  falls  within  the  triangle,  leaving  the  other  cases  for  the  reader 
to  prove.  As  usual,  however,  the  two  other  cases  are  found  in  the  Greek  text, 
after  the  formal  conclusion  of  the  proposition,  as  above,  ending  with  the  words 
oTTcp  cSct  irot^o-at.  This  position  for  the  proofs  itself  suggests  that  they  are  not 
Euclid's  but  are  interpolated;  and  this  is  rendered  certain  by  the  fact  that 
words  distinguishing  three  cases  at  the  point  where  the  centre  O  of  the 
circumscribing  circle  is  found,  "  It  [the  centre]  will  then  be  either  within  the 
triangle  LMN  or  on  one  of  its  sides  or  without.  First  let  it  be  within,"  are 
found  in  the  mss.  B  and  V  only  and  are  manifestly  interpolated.  Nevertheless 
the  additional  two  cases  must  have  been  inserted  very  early,  as  they  are  found 
in  all  the  best  mss. 

In  order  to  give  a  clear  view  of  the  proof  of  all  three  cases  as  given  in  the 
text,  we  will  reproduce  all  three  (Euclid's  as  well  as  the  others)  with  abbrevia- 
tions to  make  them  catch  the  eye  better. 

In  all  three  cases  the  proof  is  by  reductio  ad  absurdum,  and  it  is  proved 
first  that  AB  cannot  be  equal  to  LO,  and  secondly  that  AB  cannot  be  less 
than  LO, 

Case  I. 

( I )     Suppose,  if  possible,  that  AB  =  LO. 

Then  AB,  ^Care  respectively  equal  to  LO,  0M\ 
and  AC  ^  LM (by  construction). 

Therefore  l  ABC  =  l  LOM. 

Similariy  l  DEF=  l  MON, 

lGHK^lNOL. 
Adding,  we  have 

lABC+l  DEF+  L  GHK=  lLOM-\'  lMON  +  lNOL 

=  four  right  angles  : 
which  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 
Therefore  AB^LO. 


320 


BOOK  XI 


[XL  23 


(2)    Suppose  that  AB  <L0, 

Make  OP^  OQ  (measured  along  OL,  OM)  each  equal  to  AB, 

Thus,  OLf  OM  being  equal  also,  it  follows  that 

FQ  is  II  to  LM, 

Hence  LM :  PQ  =  LO  i  OP) 

and,  since  LO  >  OPy 
LM,  i.e.  AC,  >  PQ, 

Thus,  in   As  POQ,  ABC,  two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides,  and  base 
AC>hasQPQ', 

therefore  lABC>lPOQ,      he.LL  OM, 

Similarly  l  DEF  >  l  MON, 

lGHK>lNOL, 
and  it  follows  by  addition  that 

L  ABC  +  L  DEF+  L  GHK  >  (four  right  angles) : 
which  again  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 


Case  II. 

(i)     Suppose,  if  possible,  that  AB  =  LO, 

Then  (AB  +  BC),  or  (L>F  +  £F)  =  MO-^OL 

=  MN 
=  DF: 
which  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 
(2)    The  supposition  that  AB  <  LO  is  even  more 
impossible ;  for  in  this  case  it  would  result  that 
DE  +  EF<  DF, 


Case  III. 

(i)    Suppose,  if  possible,  that  AB  ~  LO, 

Then,  in  the  triangles  ABC,  LOM,  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  respectively 
equal  to  two  sides  LO,  OM,  and  the  bases 
A  C,  LM  are  equal ; 
therefore  l  ABC  =  l  LOM, 

Similarly    l^GHK^lNOL, 
Therefore,  by  addition, 

L  MON=  L  ABC+  L  GHK 

>  L  DEF(^y  hypothesis). 
But,  in  the  triangles  DEF,  MON,  which 
are  equal  in  all  respects, 

/.  MON=  L  DEF, 
But  it  was  proved  that  u  MON>  l  DEF\ 
which  is  impossible. 

(2)    Suppose,  if  possible,  that  AB  <  LO, 

Along  OL,  OM  measure  OP,  OQ  each  equal  to  AB, 


XI.  23] 


PROPOSITION   23 


321 


Then  LM,  FQ  are  parallel,  and 

LM'.FQ^LO:  OF, 
whence,  since  L0>  OF, 

LM,  ox  AC,  >  FQ. 

Thus,  in  the  triangles  ABQ  FOQ, 

L  ABC  >lFOQ,  i.e.  l  LOM, 
Similarly,  by  taking  OR  along  (9 A^  equal  to  AB,  we  prove  that 

LGHK>i.LON. 
Now,   at    O,   make   lFOS  equal    to   lABC,   and  lFOT  equal    to 
lGHK. 

Make  OS,  (^^each  equal  to  OF,  and  join  ST,  SF,  TF, 
Then,  in  the  equal  triangles  ABC,  FOS, 

AC=FS, 

so  that  LM=FS, 

Similarly  LN  =  FT, 

Therefore  in  the  triangles  MLJ^,  SFT,  since  lMLN>  lSFT  [this  is 
assumed,  but  should  have  been  explained], 

MN>  ST, 
or  DF>  ST. 

Lastly,  in  As  DEF,  SOT,  which  have  two  sides  equal  to  two  sides,  since 
Z?i^>  ST, 

L  def>  l  sot 

>  L  ABC  +  L  GHK  (by  construction) : 
which  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 

Simson  gives  rather  different  proofs  for  all  three  cases ;  but  the  essence  of 
them  can  be  put,  I  think,  a  little  more  shortly  than  in  his  text,  as  well  as  more 
clearly. 

Case  I.     {O  within  t.LMN,) 
(i)     Let  AB  be,  if  possible,  equal  to  LO, 

Then  the  As  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  must  be  identically  equal  to  the  As 
LOM,  MON,  NOL  respectively. 


A  CD  F 

Therefore  the  vertical  angles  at  O  in  the 
latter  triangles  are  equal  respectively  to  the  angles 
^B,E,H, 

The  latter  are  therefore  together  equal  to  four 
right  angles : 
which  is  impossible. 

(2)  If  AB  be  less  than  LO,  construct  on  the 
bases  LM,  MN,  NL  triangles  with  vertices 
F,  Q,  R  and  identically  equal  to  the  As  ABC, 
DEF,  C^ZTA"  respectively. 

H.  E.  III. 


322  BOOK  XI  [xi.  23 

Then  P,  Q,  R  will  fall  within  the  respective  angles  at  O,  since  PL  =  PM 
and  <LOy  and  similarly  in  the  other  cases. 

Thus  [i.  21]  the  angles  at  P,  Q,  R  are  respectively  greater  than  the  angles 
at  O  in  which  they  lie. 

Therefore  the  sum  of  the  angles  at  Py  Q,  R,  i.e.  the  sum  of  the  angles  at 
By  Ey  Hy  is  greater  than  four  right  angles : 
which  again  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 

Case  II.     {O  lying  on  MN,) 

In  this  case,  whether  (i)  AB  =  Z(9,  or  (2)  AB  <  LO,  a  triangle  cannot 
be  formed  with  MN  as  base  and  each  of  the  other  sides  equal  toAB.  In  other 
words,  the  triangle  D£F  aither  reduces, to  a  straight  line  or  is  impossible. 


Case  III.    (O  lying  outside  the  t\LMN,) 

(i)     Suppose,  if  possible,  that  AB  =  L0, 

Then  the  triangles  LOM^  MON^  NOL  are  identically  equal  to  the 
triangles  ABC,  DBF,  GHK. 

Since  l  LOM+  l  LON^  l  MON, 

L.  ABC  +  L  GHK  =  L  DEF: 

which  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 

(2)     Suppose  that  AB  <  OL, 

Draw,  as  before,  on  LM,  MN,  NL  as  bases  triangles  with  vertices  /*,  Q,  R 
and  identically  equal  to  the  As  ABC,  DEF,  GHK, 

Next,  at  N  on  the  straight  line  NR,  make  l  RNS  equal  to  the  angle 
PLM,  cut  off  NS  equal  to  Zil/and  join  RS,  LS, 

Then  A  NRS  is  identically  equal  to  A  LPM  ox  A  ABC 

Now  (  L  LNR  +  LRJVS)  <  {lNLO  +  l.  0LM\ 

that  is,  z.  LNS  <  l  NLM, 

Thus,  in  A  s  LNS,  NLM,  two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides,  and  the  included 
angle  in  the  former  is  less  than  the  included  angle  in  the  other. 

Therefore  LS  <  MN 


XI.   23,   24] 


PROPOSITIONS   23,  24 


323 


Hence,  in  the  triangles  MQN^  LRS,  two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides,  and 
MN>  LS. 

Therefore  l  MQN  >  u  LRS 

>{lLRN-\-lSRN) 
>(lLRN-\-lLFM), 
That  is,  L  DEF>  (  l  GHK^  l  ABC) : 

which  is  impossible. 


Proposition  24. 

If  a  solid  be  contained  by  parallel  planes,  the  opposite  planes, 
in  it  are  equal  and parallelogrammic. 

For  let  the  solid  CDHG  be  contained  by  the  parallel  planes 
AC,  GF,  AH,  DF,  BF,  AE ; 
I  say  that  the  opposite  planes 
in    it   are   equal   and   parallelo- 
grammic. 

For,  since  the  two  parallel 
planes  BG,  CE  are  cut  by  the 
plane  AC, 

their     common      sections     are 
parallel.  [xi.  16] 


21 — 2 


324  BOOK  XI  [xi.  24 

Therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  DC. 

Again,  since  the  two  parallel  planes  BF,  AE  are  cut  by 
the  plane  AC, 
their  common  sections  are  parallel.  [xi.  16] 

Therefore  BC  is  parallel  to  AD. 

But  AB  was  also  proved  parallel  to  DC ; 
therefore  ^C  is  a  parallelogram. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  planes  DF,  FG, 
GBy  BF,  A£  is  3.  parallelogram. 

Let  AN,  DF  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  DC,  and  B//  to  CF, 
the  two  straight  lines  AB,  BH  which  meet  one  another  are 
parallel  to  the  two  straight  lines  DC,  CF  which  meet  one 
another,  not  in  the  same  plane  ; 

therefore  they  will  contain  equal  angles  ;  [xi.  10] 

therefore  the  angle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCF, 

And,  since  the  two  sides  AB,  BH  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  DC,  CF,  [i.  34] 

and  the  angle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCF, 
therefore  the  base  AH  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
and  the  triangle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCF.         [1.  4] 

And  the  parallelogram  BG  is  double  of  the  triangle  ABH, 
and  the  parallelogram  CE  double  of  the  triangle  DCF\  [i.  34] 
therefore  the  parallelogram  BG  is  equal  to  the  parallelo- 
gram CE. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 
AC  is  also  equal  to  GF, 
and  AE  to  BF. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.   D. 

As  Heiberg  says,  this  proposition  is  carelessly  enunciated.  Euclid  means 
a  solid  contained  by  six  planes  and  not  more,  the  planes  are  parallel  two  and 
tuto,  and  the  opposite  faces  are  equal  in  the  sense  of  identically  equal,  or,  as 
Simson  puts  it,  equal  and  similar.  The  similarity  is  necessary  in  order  to 
enable  the  equality  of  the  parallelepipeds  in  the  next  proposition  to  be  inferred 
from  the  loth  definition  of  Book  xi.     Hence  a  better  enunciation  would  be: 

If  a  solid  be  contained  by  six  planes  parallel  two  and  two,  the  opposite  Jaces 
respectively  are  equal  and  similar  parallelograms. 

The  proof  is  simple  and  requires  no  elucidation. 


XI.  25]  PROPOSITIONS   24,  25  325 


Proposition  25. 

If  a  parallelepipedal  solid  be  cut  by  a  plane  which  is 
parallel  to  the  opposite  planes,  then,  as  the  base  is  to  the  base,  so 
will  the  solid  be  to  the  solid. 

For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  ABCD  be  cut  by  the 
plane  FG  which  is  parallel  to  the  opposite  planes  RA,  DH\ 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  AEFV  is  to  the  base  EHCF,  so  is  the 
solid  ABFU  to  the  solid  EGCD. 


For  let  AH  be  produced  in  each  direction, 

let  any  number  of  straight  lines  whatever,  AK,  KL,  be  made 
equal  to  AE, 

and  any  number  whatever,  HM,  MN,  equal  to  EH ; 

and  let  the  parallelograms  LP,  KV,  HW,  MS  and  the  solids 
LQ,  KR,  DM,  MThe  completed. 

Then,  since  the  straight  lines  LK,  KA,  AE  are  equal  to 
one  another, 

the  parallelograms  LP,  KV,  AF^re  also  equal  to  one  another, 
KO,  KB,  A  G  are  equal  to  one  another, 

and  further  LX,  KQ,  AR  are  equal  to  one  another,  for  they 
are  opposite.  [xi.  24] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  parallelograms  EC,  HW,  MS  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 

HG,  HI,  IN  are  equal  to  one  another, 

and  further  DH,  MY,  NT  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  in  the  solids  LQ^  KR,  AU  three  planes  are 
equal  to  three  planes. 


326  BOOK  XI  [XI.  25 

But  the  three  planes  are  equal  to  the  three  opposite ; 
therefore  the  three  solids  LQ,  KR,  AU  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  three  solids  ED,  DM,  MT  are  also  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  base  LF  is  of  the  base 
AF,  the  same  multiple  also  is  the  solid  LU  q{  the  solid  A  U. 

For  the  same  reason, 
whatever  multiple  the  base  NF  is  of  the  base  FH,  the  same 
multiple  also  is  the  solid  NU  of  the  solid  HU. 

And,  if  the  base  LF  is  equal  to  the  base  NF,  the  solid  L  U 
is  also  equal  to  the  solid  NU ; 

if  the  base  LF  exceeds  the  base  NF,  the  solid  LU  also 
exceeds  the  solid  NU\ 
and,  if  one  falls  short,  the  other  falls  short. 

Therefore,  there  being  four  magnitudes,  the  two  bases 
AF,  FH,  and  the  two  solids  A  U,  UH, 

equimultiples  have  been  taken  of  the  base  AF  and  the  solid 
A  U,  namely  the  base  LF  and  the  solid  L  U, 
and  equimultiples  of  the  base  HF  and  the  solid  HU,  namely 
the  base  NF  and  the  solid  NU, 

and  it  has  been  proved  that,  if  the  base  LF  exceeds  the  base 
FN^  the  solid  L  U  also  exceeds  the  solid  NU, 
if  the  bases  are  equal,  the  solids  are  equal, 
and  if  the  base  falls  short,  the  solid  falls  short. 

Therefore,  as  the  base  AF  \%  to  the  base  FH,  so  is  the 
solid  AUto  the  solid  UH.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Q.  E.  D. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  as  the  word  parallelogrammic  was  used  in  Book  i. 
without  any  definition  of  its  meaning,  so  TrapaXAiyAcirtTrcSo?,  parallelepipedal,  is 
here  used  without  explanation.  While  it  means  simply  "with  parallel  planes,*' 
i.e.  "faces,"  the  term  is  appropriated  to  the  particular  solid  which  has  six 
plane  faces  parallel  two  and  two.  The  proper  translation  of  o-rcpcw 
xopoXXi/AciriircSoi'  is  paralleUpipedal  solid,  not  solid  parallelepiped,  as  it  is 
usually  translated.  Still  less  is  the  solid  a  parallel^iped,  as  the  word  is  not 
uncommonly  written. 

The  opposite  faces  in  each  set  of  parallelepipedal  solids  in  this  proposition 
are  not  only  equal  but  equal  and  similar,  Euclid  infers  that  the  solids  in  each 
set  are  equal  from  Def.  10;  but,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  note  on  Deff.  9,  10, 


XI.  25,  26] 


PROPOSITIONS   25,  26 


327 


though  it  is  true,  where  no  solid  angle  in  the  figures  is  contained  by  more 
than  three  plane  angles,  that  two  solid  figures  are  equal  and  similar  which  are 
contained  by  the  same  number  of  equal  and  similar  faces,  similarly  arranged, 
the  fact  should  have  been  proved.  To  do  this,  we  have  only  to  prove  the 
proposition,  given  above  in  the  note  on  xi.  21,  that  two  trihedral  angles  are 
equal  if  the  three  face  angles  of  the  one  are  respectively  equal  to  the  three  face 
angles  in  the  other,  and  all  are  arranged  in  the  same  order^  and  then  to  prove 
equality  by  applying  one  figure  to  the  other  as  is  done  by  Simson  in  his 
proposition  C. 

Application  will  also,  of  course,  establish  what  is  assumed  by  Euclid  of 
the  solids  formed  by  the  multiples  of  the  original  solids,  namely  that,  if 

Zi^>  NF,  the  solid  Z^^^  the  solid  NU, 


Proposition  26. 

On  a  given  straight  linCy  and  at  a  given  point  on  it,  to 
construct  a  solid  angle  equal  to  a  given  solid  angle. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  A  the  given  point  on 
it,  and  the  angle  at  /?,  contained  by  the  angles  EDC,  EDF, 
FDCy  the  given  solid  angle  ; 

thus  it  is  required  to  construct  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at 
the  point  A  on  it,  a  solid  angle  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  /?. 


For  let  a  point  F  be  taken  at  random  on  DF, 
let  FG  be  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through 
EDy  DC,  and  let  it  meet  the  plane  at  G,  [xi.  11] 

let  DG  be  joined, 

let  there  be  constructed  on  the  straight  line  AB  and  at  the 
point  A  on  it  the  angle  BAL  equal  to  the  angle  EDC,  and 
the  angle  BAK  equal  to  the  angle  EDG,  [i.  23] 

let  AK  be  made  equal  to  DG, 


328  BOOK  XI  [xi.  26 

let  KH  be  set  up  from  the  point  K  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  through  BA,  AL,  [xi.  12J 

let  KH  be  made  equal  to  GF, 

and  let  HA  be  joined  ; 

I  say  that  the  solid  angle  at^,  contained  by  the  angles  BAL, 
BAHi  HAL  is  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  D  contained  by 
the  angles  EDC,  EDF,  FDC. 

For  let  AB,  DE  be  cut  off"  equal  to  one  another, 

and  let  HB,  KB,  FE,  GE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  FG  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which 
meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference  ;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  FGD,  FGE  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  HKA,  HKB  is  also  right. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  KA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  GDy  DE  respectively, 

and  they  contain  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  base  KB  is  equal  to  the  base  GE.  [i.  4] 

But  KH  is  also  equal  to  GF, 

and  they  contain  right  angles  ; 

therefore  HB  is  also  equal  to  FE.  [i.  4] 

Again,  since  the  two  sides  AK,  KH  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  DG,  GF, 

and  they  contain  right  angles, 

therefore  the  base  AH  is  equal  to  the  base  FD,  [i.  4] 

But  AB  is  also  equal  to  DE  ; 

therefore  the  two  sides  HA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
DF,  DE. 

And  the  base  HB  is  equal  to  the  base  FE  ; 

therefore  the  angle  BAH  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDF.       [i.  8] 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  HAL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FDC. 

And  the  angle  BAL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EDC. 


XI.  26,  27]  PROPOSITIONS   26,  27  329 

Therefore  on  the  straight  h'ne  AB,  and  at  the  point  A  on 
it,  a  solid  angle  has  been  constructed  equal  to  the  given  solid 
angle  at  D. 

Q.  E.  F. 

This  proposition  again  assumes  the  equality  of  two  trihedral  angles  which 
have  the  three  plane  angles  of  the  one  respectively  equal  to  the  three  plane 
angles  of  the  other  taken  in  the  same  order. 


Proposition  27. 

On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  parallelepipedal  solid 
similar  and  similarly  sittiated  to  a  given  parallelepipedal  solid. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line  and  CD  the  given 
parallelepipedal  solid ; 

thus  it  is  required  to  describe  on  the  given  straight  line  AB 
a  parallelepipedal  solid  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the 
given  parallelepipedal  solid  CD. 


M\ 


For  on  the  straight  line  AB  and  at  the  point  A  on  it  let 
the  solid  angle,  contained  by  the  angles  BAH,  HAK,  KAB, 
be  constructed  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  C,  so  that  the  angle 
BAH  is  equal  to  the  angle  ECF,  the  angle  BAK  equal  to 
the  angle  ECG,  and  the  angle  KAH  to  the  angle  GCF\ 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 
as  EC  is  to  CG,  so  is  BA  to  AK, 
and,  as  GC  is  to  CF,  so  is  KA  to  AH.  [vi.  12] 

Therefore  also,  ex  aequali, 
as  EC  is  to  CF,  so  is  BA  to  AH.  [v.  22] 

Let  the  parallelogram  HB  and  the  solid  AL  be  completed. 

Now  since,  as  EC  is  to  CG,  so  is  BA  to  AK, 
and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  ECG,  BAK  are  thus 
proportional, 


33©  BOOK  XI  [xi.  27,  28 

therefore  the  parallelogram  GE  is  similar  to  the  parallelo- 
gram KB. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  parallelogram  KH  is  also  similar  to  the  parallelogram  GF^ 
and  further  FE  to  HB ; 

therefore  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  CD  are  similar  to 
three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  AL. 

But  the  former  three  are  both  equal  and  similar  to  the 
three  opposite  parallelograms, 

and  the  latter  three  are  both  equal  and  similar  to  the  three 
opposite  parallelograms ; 

therefore  the  whole  solid  CD  is  similar  to  the  whole  solid  AL. 

[xi.  Def.  9] 

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  there  has  been 
described  AL  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  given 
parallelepipedal  solid  CD. 

Q.  E.  F. 


Proposition  28. 

If  a  parallelepipedal  solid  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the 
diagonals  of  the  opposite  planes,  the  solid  will  be  bisected  by  the 
plane. 

For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  AB  be  cut  by  the  plane 
CDEF  through  the  diagonals  CFy  DE  of 
opposite  planes  ; 

I  say  that  the  solid  AB  will  be  bisected  by 
the  plane  CDEF. 

For,  since  the  triangle  CGF  is  equal 
to  the  triangle  CFBy  [i.  34] 

and  ADE  to  DEH, 
while  the  parallelogram  CA  is  also  equal 
to  the  parallelogram  EB,  for  they  are  opposite, 
and  GE  to  CH, 

therefore  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  CGF, 
ADE  and  the  three  parallelograms  GE,  AC,  CE  is  also  equal 
to  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  CFB,  DEH  and 
the  three  parallelograms  CH,  BE,  CE ; 


XI.  28]  PROPOSITIONS   27,  28  331 

for  they  are  contained  by  planes  equal  both  in  multitude  and 

in  magnitude.  [xi.  Def.  10] 

Hence  the  whole  solid  AB  is  bisected  by  the  plane  CDEF. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Simson  properly  observes  that  it  ought  to  be  proved  that  the  diagonals  of 
two  opposite  faces  are  in  one  plane,  before  we  speak  of  drawing  a  plane 
through  them.    Clavius  supplied  the  proof,  which  is  of  course  simple  enough. 

Since  EF^  CD  are  both  parallel  io  AG  or  BH,  they  are  parallel  to  one 
another. 

Consequently  a  plane  can  be  drawn  through  CD^  EF  and  the  diagonals 
DE^  CF  are  in  that  plane  [xi.  7].  Moreover  CZ?,  EF  are  equal  as  well  as 
parallel ;  so  that  CF^  DE  are  also  equal  and  parallel. 

Simson  does  not,  however,  seem  to  have  noticed  a  more  serious  difficulty. 
The  two  prisms  are  shown  by  Euclid  to  be  contained  by  equal  faces — the  faces 
are  in  fact  equal  and  similar — and  Euclid  then  infers  at  once  that  the  prisms 
are  equal.  But  they  are  not  equal  in  the  only  sense  in  which  we  have,  at 
present,  a  right  to  speak  of  solids  being  equal,  namely  in  the  sense  that  they 
can  be  applied^  the  one  to  the  other.  They  cannot  be  so  applied  because  the 
faces,  though  equal  respectively,  are  not  similarly  arranged ;  consequently  the 
prisms  are  symmetricaly  and  it  ought  to  be  proved  that  they  are,  though  not 
equal  and  similary^  equal  in  content,  or  equivalent^  as  Legendre  has  it. 

Legendre  addressed  himself  to  proving  that  the  two  prisms  are  equivalent, 
and  his  method  has  been  adopted,  though  his 
name  is  not  mentioned,  by  Schultze  and  Seven- 
oak  and  by  Holgate.     Certain  preliminary  pro- 
positions are  necessary. 

1.  The  sections  of  a  prism  made  by  parallel 
planes  cutting  all  the  lateral  edges  are  equal 
polygons. 

Suppose  a  prism  MNcwK  by  parallel  planes 
which  make  sections  ABCDE,  ABODE, 

^o^AB^BC^  CD^,..  are  respectively  parallel 
ioA'B.BC,  CD,..,,  [xi.  16] 

Therefore  the  angles  ABC,  BCD, ...  are 
equal  to  the  angles  A'BC\  BCD, ...  respec- 
tively, [xi.  10] 

Also  AB,  BC,  CD, ...  are  respectively  equal 
io  A' B,BC\  CD,...,  [i.  34] 

Thus  the  polygons  ABCDE,  A'BCDE'  are  equilateral  and  equiangular 
to  one  another. 

2.  Two  prisms  are  equal  when  they  have  a  solid  angle  in  each  contained  by 
three  faces  equal  each  to  each  and  similarly  arranged. 

Let  the  faces  ABCDE,  AG,  AL  be  equal  and  similarly  placed  to  the 
idLCQsA'BCDE:,  A'G',  A'L', 

Since  the  three  plane  angles  at  A,  A'  are  equal  respectively  and  are 
similarly  placed,  the  trihedral  angle  at  A  is  equal  to  t*he  trihedral  angle  at  A\ 

[(3)  in  note  to  xi.  21] 


332 


BOOK  XI 


[xi.  28 


Place  the  trihedral  angle  at  A  on  that  at  A', 

Then  the  face  ABCDE  coincides  with  the  face  A'B'CDE,  the  face  AG 
with  the  face  A'G\  and  the  face  AL  with  the  face  A'L\ 
The  point  C  falls  on  C  and  D  on  jy. 


A  B 

Since  the  lateral  edges  of  a  prism  are  parallel,  CJy  will  fall  an  CZT,  and 
DK  on  jyK\ 

And  the  points  F^  G^  L  coincide  respectively  with  F^  G\  L\  so  that 
the  planes  GK,  GK'  coincide. 

Hence  H^  K  coincide  with  H\  K'  respectively. 

Thus  the  prisms  coincide  throughout  and  are  equal. 

In  the  same  way  we  can  prove  that  two  truncated  prisms  with  three  faces 
forming  a  solid  angle  related  to  one  another  as  in  the  above  proposition  are 
identically  equal. 

In  particular, 

Cor.     T\vo  right  prisms  having  equal  bases  and  equal  heights  are  equal 

3.     An  oblique  prism  is  equivalent  to  a  right  prism  whose  base  is  a  right 
section  of  the  oblique  prism  and  whose 
height  is  equal  to  a  lateral  edge  of  the 
oblique  prism. 

Suppose  GL  to  be  a  right  section  of 
the  oblique  prism  AD^  and  let  GL'  be 
a  right  prism  on  GL  as  base  and  with 
height  equal  to  a  lateral  edge  of  AD, 

Now  the  lateral  edges  of  GL  are 
equal  to  the  lateral  edges  of  AD', 

Therefore  AG  =  A'G\  BH=BH\ 
CK=  C'JC,  etc. 

Thus  the  faces  AH,  BK,  CL  are 
equal  respectively  to  the  faces  A' IT, 
BJC,  CL', 

Therefore  [by  the  proposition 
above] 

(truncated  prism  AL)  =  (truncated 

prism  A'L'), 
Subtracting  each  from  the  whole  solid  AL',  we  see  that 
the  prisms  AD,  GL'  are  equivalent. 


XL  28,  29] 


PROPOSITIONS   28,  29 


333 


Now  suppose  the  parallelepiped  of  Euclid's  proposition  to  be  cut  by  the 
plane  through  AG,  DF, 

Let  KLMNhQ  a  right  section  of  the  parallelepiped 
cutting  the  edges  AD,  BC,  GF,  HE, 

Then  KLMN  is  a  parallelogram;  and,  if  the 
diagonal  KM  be  drawn, 

tiKLM^t^MNK. 

Now  the  prism  of  which  the  As  ABG,  DCF  axe 
the  bases  is  equal  to  the  right  prism  on  A  KLM  as 
base  and  of  height  AD, 

Similarly  the  prism  of  which  the  As  AGH,  DFE 
are  the  bases  is  equal  to  the  right  prism  on  t^MNK 
as  base  and  with  height  AD.  [(3)  above] 

And  the  right  prisms  on  As  KLM,  MNK  as  bases  and  of  equal  height 
AD  are  equal.  [(2),  Cor.  above] 

Consequently  the  two  prisms  into  which  the  parallelepiped  is  divided  are 
equivalmt. 


Proposition  29. 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  the  same  base  and  of 
the  same  height,  and  in  which  the  extremities  of  the  sides  which 
stand  up  are  on  the  same  straight  lines,  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

Let  CM,  CN  be  parallelepipedal  solids  on  the  same  base 
AB  and  of  the  same  height, 
and  let  the  extremities  of  their 
sides  which  stand  up,  namely 
AG,  AF,  LM,  LN,  CD,  CE, 
BH,BK,h^  on  the  same  straight 
\m^sFN,DK', 

I  say  that  the  solid  CM  is  equal 
to  the  solid  CN. 

For,  since  each  of  the  figures 
CH,  CK  is  a  parallelogram,  CB 
is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  DH,  EK ; 

hence  DH  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

Let  EH  be  subtracted  from  each  ; 

therefore  the  remainder  DE  is  equal  to  the  remainder  HK. 

Hence  the  triangle  DCE  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle 
HBK,  [I.  8,  4] 

and  the  parallelogram  DG  to  the  parallelogram  HN.       [i.  36] 


[I.  34] 


334  BOOK   XI  [XL  29,  30 

For  the  same  reason 
the  triangle  AFG  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  MLN. 

But  the  parallelogram  CF\%  equal  to  the  parallelogram  BM^ 
and  CG  to  BN,  for  they  are  opposite ; 

therefore  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  AFG,  DCE 
and  the  three  parallelograms  AD^  DG,  CG  is  equal  to  the 
prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  MLN,  HBK  and  the 
three  parallelograms  BM,  HN,  BN. 

Let    there   be   added    to   each   the   solid  of  which   the 
parallelogram  AB  is  the  base  and  GEHM  its  opposite ; 
therefore  the  whole  parallelepipedal  solid  CM  is  equal  to  the 
whole  parallelepipedal  solid  CN, 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

As  usual,  Euclid  takes  one  case  only  and  leaves  the  reader  to  prove  for 
himse]/  the  two  other  possible  cases  shown  in  the  subjoined  figures.  Euclid's 
proof  holds  with  a  very  slight  change  in  each  case.     With  the  first  figure,  the 


only  difference  is  that  the  prism  of  which  the  As  GAL,  ECB  are  the  bases 
takes  the  place  of  "  the  solid  of  which  the  parallelogram  AB  is  the  base  and 
GEHM  its  opposite";  while  with  the  second  figure  we  have  to  subtract  the 
prisms  which  are  proved  equal  successively  from  the  solid  of  which  the 
parallelogram  AB  is  the  base  and  FDKN  its  opposite. 

Simson,  as  usual,  suspects  mutilation  by  "  some  unskilful  editor,"  but  gives 
a  curious  reason  why  the  case  in  which  the  two  parallelograms  opposite  to 
AB  have  a  side  common  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted,  namely  that  this 
case  "is  immediately  deduced  from  the  preceding  28th  Prop,  which  seems  for 
this  purpose  to  have  been  premised  to  the  29th."  But,  apart  from  the  fact  that 
Euclid's  Prop.  28  does  not  prove  the  theorem  which  it  enunciates  (as  we  have 
seen),  that  theorem  is  not  in  the  least  necessary  for  the  proof  of  this  case  of 
Prop.  29,  as  Euclid's  proof  applies  to  it  perfectly  well. 

Proposition  30. 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  the  same  base  and  of 
the  same  height,  and  in  which  the  extre^nities  of  the  sides  which 
stand  up  are  not  on  the  same  straight  lines,  are  equal  to  one 
another. 


XI.  3o] 


PROPOSITIONS   29,  30 


335 


Let  CM,  CN  be  parallelepipedal  solids  on  the  same  base 
AB  and  of  the  same  height, 
and  let  the  extremities  of  their 
sides  which  stand  up,  namely 
AF,  AG,  LM,  LN,  CD,  CE, 
BH,  BK,  not  be  on  the  same 
straight  lines  ; 

I   say  that  the  solid  CM  is 
equal  to  the  solid  CN. 

For  let  NK,  DH  be  pro- 
duced and  meet  one  another 
at  7?, 

and  further  let  FM,  GE  be 
produced  \.o  P,  Q\ 
let  AO,  LP,  CQ,  BR  be  joined. 

Then  the  solid  CM,  of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is 
the  base,  and  FDHM  its  opposite,  is  equal  to  the  solid  CP, 
of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is  the  base,  and  OQRP  its 
opposite ; 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  ACBL  and  of  the  same  height, 
and  the  extremities  of  their  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  AF, 
AO,  LM,  LP,  CD,  CQ,  BH,  BR,  are  on  the  same  straight 
lines  FP,  DR.  [xi.  29] 

But  the  solid  CP,  of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is 
the  base,  and  OQRP  its  opposite,  is  equal  to  the  solid  CN^ 
of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is  the  base  and  GEKN  its 
opposite  ; 

for  they  are  again  on  the  same  base  ACBL  and  of  the  same 
height,  and  the  extremities  of  their  sides  which  stand  up, 
namely  AG,  AO,  CE,  CQ,  LN,  LP,  BK,  BR,  are  on  the 
same  straight  lines  GQ,  NR. 

Hence  the  solid  CM  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CN. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  completes  the  proof  of  the  theorem  that 

l}wo  parallelepipeds  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height  are  equivalent. 

Legendre  deduced  the  useful  theorem  that 

Every  parallelepiped  can  be  changed  into  an  equivalent  rectangular  parallele- 
piped having  the  same  height  and  an  equivalent  base. 

For  suppose  we  have  a  parallelepiped  on  the  base  ABCD  with  EFGH  for 
the  opposite  face. 


336 


BOOK  XI 


[xi.  30 


Draw  AI^  BK^  CL^  DM  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  EFGH  and 
all  equal  to  the  height  of  the  parallelepiped  AG,  Then,  on  joining  IK^  KL^ 
LAfj  MI^  we  have  a  parallelepiped  equivalent  to  the  original  one  and  having 
its  lateral  faces  AK^  BL^  CMy  DI  rectangles. 


If  A  BCD  is  not  a  rectangle,  draw  AO^  DN\n  the  plane  AC  perpendicu- 
lar to  BCy  and  /P,  MQ  in  the  plane  IL  perpendicular  to  KL, 

Joining  OP^  NQy  we  have  a  rectangular  parallelepiped  on  AOND  as  base 
which  is  equivalent  to  the  parallelepiped  with  ABCD  as  base  and  IKLM  as 
opposite  face,  since  we  may  regard  these  parallelepipeds  as  being  on  the  same 
base  ADM/ and  of  the  same  height  {AO), 

That  is,  a  rectangular  parallelepiped  has  been  constructed  which  is 
equivalent  to  the  given  parallelepiped  and  has  (i)  the  same  height,  (2)  an 
equivalent  base. 

The  American  text-books  which  I  have  quoted  adopt  a  somewhat  different 
construction  shown  in  the  subjoined  figure. 


K;^-^ 


■a-/ 


tLM- 


/D'-'- 


The  edges  AB,  DC,  EF,  HG  of  the  original  parallelepiped  are  produced 
and  cut  at  right  angles  by  two  parallel  planes  at  a  distance  apart  A'ff  equal 
to  AB. 

Thus  a  parallelepiped  is  formed  in  which  all  the  faces  are  rectangles  except 
AH\  BG. 


XI.  3o>  3^] 


PROPOSITIONS   30,  31 


337 


Next  produce  LfA,  CB\  G'F,  H'E  and  cut  them  perpendicularly  by  two 
parallel  planes  at  a  distance  apart  B" C"  equal  to  BC\ 

The  points  of  section  determine  a  rectangular  parallelepiped. 

The  equivalence  of  the  three  parallelepipeds  is  proved,  not  by  Eucl.  xi. 
29,  30,  but  by  the  proposition  about  a  right  section  of  a  prism  given  above  in 
the  note  to  xi.  28  (3  in  that  note). 


Proposition  31. 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  equal  bases  and  of  the 
same  height  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AE,  CF,  of  the  same  height, 
be  on  equal  bases  AB,  CD. 

I  say  that  the  solid  AE  is  equal  to  the  solid  CF, 


First,  let  the  sides  which  stand  up,  HK,  BE,  AG,  LM, 
PQ,  DF,  CO,  RS,  be  at  right  angles  to  the  bases  AB,  CD ; 
let   the   straight   line  ^7"  be    produced    in    a   straight   line 
with  CR\ 

on  the  straight  line  RT,  and  at  the  point  R  on  it,  let  the 
angle  TRl7he  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  ALB,       [i.  23] 
let  RTho.  made  equal  to  AL,  and  /? 6^  equal  to  LB, 
and  let  the  base  RJV  diVid  the  solid  XUh^  completed. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  TR,  RU  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  AL,  LB, 
and  they  contain  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  parallelogram  RW  v&  equal  and  similar  to  the 
parallelogram  HL, 

Since  again  AL  is  equal  to  RT,  and  LM  to  RS, 

and  they  contain  right  angles, 

H.  E.  HI.  22 


338  BOOK  XI  [XI.  31 

therefore  the  parallelogram  RX  is  equal  and  similar  to  the 
parallelogram  AM, 

For  the  same  reason 
LE  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  SU  \ 

therefore  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  AE  are  equal  and 
similar  to  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  XU, 

But  the  former  three  are  equal  and  similar  to  the  three 
opposite,  and  the  latter  three  to  the  three  opposite ;  [xi.  24] 
therefore  the  whole  parallelepipedal  solid  AE  is  equal  to  the 
whole  parallelepipedal  solid  XU.  [xi.  Def.  10] 

Let  DR,  WU  be  drawn  through  and  meet  one  another 
at  F, 

let  aTb  be  drawn  through  /^parallel  to  DY, 

let  PD  be  produced  to  a^ 

and  let  the  solids  YX,  RI  be  completed. 

Then  the  solid  XY,  of  which  the  parallelogram  RX  is  the 
base  and  Yc  its  opposite,  is  equal  to  the  solid  XU  oi  which 
the  parallelogram  RX  is  the  base  and  UV  its  opposite, 
for  they  are  on  the  same  base  RX  and  of  the  same  height,  and 
the  extremities  of  their  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  RY,  RU, 
Tby  TW,  Scy  Sd,  Xc,  XV,  are  on  the  same  straight  lines 
YW,  eV.  [XI.  29] 

But  the  solid  XU  is  equal  to  AE  ; 
therefore  the  solid  XY  \^  also  equal  to  the  solid  AE, 

And,  since  the  parallelogram  RUWT  is  equal  to  the 
parallelogram  YT, 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  RT  and  in  the  same  parallels 
RT^YW,  [1.35] 

while  RUWTx^  equal  to  CD,  since  it  is  also  equal  to  AB, 
therefore  the  parallelogram  YT  is  also  equal  to  CD, 

But  DT\s  another  parallelogram  ; 
therefore,  as  the  base  CD  is  to  DT,  so  is  YT  to  DT.       [v.  7] 

And,  since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  CI  has  been  cut  by 
the  plane  RF  which  is  parallel  to  opposite  planes, 

as  the  base 'CZ?  is  to  the  base  DT,  so  is  the  solid  CF  to  the 
solid  RI,  [xi.  25] 


XI.  3i] 


PROPOSITION   31 


339 


For  the  same  reason, 

since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  YI  has  been  cut  by  the  plane 
RX  which  is  parallel  to  opposite  planes, 

as  the  base  YT  is  to  the  base  TD,  so  is  the  solid  YX  to  the 
solid  RL  [xi.  25] 

But,  as  the  base  CD  is  to  DT,  so  is  YT  to  DT\ 

therefore  also,  as  the  solid  CF  is  to  the  solid  RI,  so  is  the 
solid  YX  to  RI.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  each  of  the  solids  CF,  YX  has  to  RI  the  same 
ratio  ; 
therefore  the  solid  CF  is  equal  to  the  solid  YX.  [v.  9] 

But  YX  was  proved  equal  to  AE ; 
therefore  AE  is  also  equal  to  CF. 

Next,  let  the  sides  standing  up,  AG,  HK,  BE,  LM,  CN, 
PQ,  DF,  RS,  not  be  at  right  angles  to  the  bases  A£,  CD  ; 

I  say  again  that  the  solid  AE  is  equal  to  the  solid  CF. 

Q        F 


For  from  the  points  K,  E,  G,  M,  Q,  F,  N,  S  let  KO,  ET, 
GU,MV,QW,  FX,  NY,  SI  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  reference,  and  let  them  meet  the  plane  at  the  points 
O,  T,  U,  V,  W,  X,  F,  /, 
andlet  6?r,'6>f/,  Uv]  TV,  WX,  WY,  F/, /AT  be  joined. 

Then  the  solid  KVxs,  equal  to  the  solid  QI, 

for  they  are  on  the  equal  bases  KM,  QS  and  of  the  same 
height,  and  their  sides  which  stand  up  are  at  right  angles  to 
their  bases.  [First  part  of  this  Prop.] 

But  the  solid  KVxs  equal  to  the  solid  AE, 

and  (2/ to  CF\ 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height,  while 
the  extremities  of  their  sides  which  stand  up  are  not  on  the 
same  straight  lines.  [xi.  30] 


22- 


340  BOOK   XI  [xi.  31 

Therefore  the  solid  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CF, 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that,  in  the  figure  of  this  proposition,  the  bases 
are  represented  as  lying  "  in  the  plane  of  the  paper,"  as  it  were,  and  the  third 
dimension  as  "standing  up"  from  that  plane.  The  figure  is  that  of  the 
manuscript  P  slightly  corrected  as  regards  the  solid  AE. 

Nothing  could  well  be  more  ingenious  than  the  proof  of  this  proposition, 
which  recalls  the  brilliant  proposition  i.  44  and  the  proofs  of  vi.  14  and  23. 

As  the  proof  occupies  considerable  space  in  the  text,  it  will  no  cjoubt  be 
well  to  give  a  summary. 

I.  First,  suppose  that  the  edges  terminating  at  the  angular  points  of  the 
bases  are  perpendicular  to  the  bases. 

AB^  CD  being  the  bases,  Euclid  constructs  a  solid  identically  equal  to 
AE  (he  might  simply  have  nunfed  AE  itself),  placing  it  so  that  RS  is  the  edge 
corresponding  to  HK  {RS=  HK  because  the  heights  are  equal),  and  the  face 
RX  corresponding  to  HE  is  in  the  plane  of  CS. 

The  faces  CD^  R  W  are  in  one  plane  because  both  are  perpendicular  to 
RS.     Thus  DR,  WUmotX,,  if  produced,  in  Ksay. 

Complete  the  parallelograms  YT,  Z^^and  the  solids  KAT,  FT. 

Then  (solid  YX)  =  (solid  UX\ 

because  they  are  on  the  same  base  .S'T'and  of  the  same  height.  [xi.  29] 

Also,  C/,  YI  being  parallelepipeds  cut  by  planes  RF^  RX  parallel  to  pairs 
of  opposite  faces  respectively, 

(solid  CF)  :  (solid  RI)=CJCD:CJ DT,  [xi.  25] 

and  (solid  YX)  :  (solid  RI)=CJ  YT.CJ  DT. 

But  [1.35]  EJYT^EJUT 

^EJAB 

=  0  CZ>,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  (solid  CF)  =  (solid  YX) 

=  (solid  C/X) 

=  (solid  AE). 

II.  If  the  edges  terminating  at  the  base  are  not  perpendicular  to  it,  turn 
each  solid  into  an  equivalent  one  on  the  same  base  with  edges  perpendicular 
to  it  (by  drawing  four  perpendiculars  from  the  angular  points  of  the  base  to 
the  plane  of  the  opposite  face),     (xi.  29,  30  prove  the  equivalence.) 

Then  the  equivalent  solids  are  equal,  by  Part  i. ;  so  that  the  original  solids 
are  also  equal. 

Simson  observes  that  Euclid  has  made  no  mention  of  the  case  in  which 
the  bases  of  the  two  solids  are  equiangular^  and  he  prefixes  this  case  to  Part  i. 
in  the  text.  This  is  surely  unnecessary,  as  Part  i.  covers  it  well  enough  :  the 
only  difference  in  the  figure  is  that  UIV  would  coincide  with  Yd  and  dV 
with  ec. 

Simson  further  remarks  that  in  the  demonstration  of  Part  11.  it  is  not 
proved  that  the  new  solids  constructed  in  the  manner  described  are  parallele- 
pipeds.    The  proof  is,  however,  so  simple  that  it  scarcely  needed  insertion 


XI.  31,  32]  PROPOSITIONS   31,  32  341 

into  the  text  He  is  correct  in  his  remark  that  the  words  "while  the 
extremities  of  their  sides  which  stand  up  are  not  on  the  same  straight  lines  " 
just  before  the  end  of  the  proposition  would  be  better  absent,  since  they  may 
be  "  on  the  same  straight  lines." 

Proposition  32. 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  of  the  same  height  are  to 
one  another  as  their  bases. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  parallelepipedal  solids  of  the  same  height; 
I  say  that  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  are  to  one 
another  as  their  bases,  that  is,  that,  as  the  base  AE  is  to  the 
base  CF,  so  is  the  solid  AB  to  the  solid  CD. 


For  let  FH  equal  \.o  AEh^  applied  to  FG,  [i.  45] 

and  on  FH  as  base,  and  with  the  same  height  as  that  of  CD, 
let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  GK  be  completed. 

Then  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  GK ; 
for  they  are  on  equal  bases  AE,  FH  and  of  the  same  height. 

[xi.  31I 

And,  since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  CK  is  cut  by  the  plane 
DG  which  is  parallel  to  opposite  planes, 
therefore,  as  the  base  CF  is  to  the  base  FH,  so  is  the  solid 
CD  to  the  solid  DH.  [xi.  25] 

But  the  base  FH  is  equal  to  the  base  AE, 
and  the  solid  GK  to  the  solid  AB ; 

therefore  also,  as  the  base  AE  is  to  the  base  CF,  so  is  the 
solid  AB  to  the  solid  CD. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

As  Clavius  observed,  Euclid  should  have  said,  in  applying  the  parallelo- 
gram FH  to  FG,  that  it  should  be  applied  "  in  the  angle  FGH  equal  to  the 
angle  LCG."  Simson  is  however,  I  think,  hypercritical  when  he  states  as 
regards  the  completion  of  the  solid  GK  that  it  ought  to  be  said,  "  complete 


342 


BOOK  XI 


[xi.  32,  33 


the  solid  of  which  the  base  is  FH^  and  one  of  Us  insisting  straight  lines  is  FD,^' 
Surely,  when  we  have  two  faces  DG^  /rZT meeting  in  an  edge,  to  say  ''^complete 
the  solid "  is  quite  sufficient,  though  the  words  "  on  FH  as  base "  might 
perhaps  as  well  be  left  out.  The  same  "  completion "  of  a  parallelepipedal 
solid  occurs  in  xi.  31  and  33. 


Proposition  33. 

Similar  parallelepipedal  solids  are  to  one  another  in  the 
triplicate  ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  similar  parallelepipedal  solids, 
and  let  AE  be  the  side  corresponding  to  CF\ 
I  say  that  the  solid  AB  has  to  the  solid  CD  the  ratio  triplicate 
of  that  which  AE  has  to  CF, 


For  let  EK,  EL,  EM  be  produced  in  a  straight  line  with 
AE,  GE,  HE, 

let  EK  be  made  equal  to  CF,  EL  equal  to  FN,  and  further 
EM  equal  to  FR, 
and  let  the  parallelogram  A^Z  and  the  solid  A7^  be  completed. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  KE,  EL  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  CF,  FN, 

while  the  angle  KEL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CFN, 
inasmuch  as  the  angle  AEG  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CFN 
because  of  the  similarity  of  the  solids  AB,  CD, 


XI.  33]  PROPOSITIONS   32,  33  343 

therefore  the  parallelogram  KL  is  equal  <  and  similar  >  to  the 
parallelogram  CN. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  parallelogram  KM  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  CR, 
and  further  EP  to  DF\ 

therefore  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  KP  are  equal  and 
similar  to  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  CD, 

But  the  former  three  parallelograms  are  equal  and  similar 
to  their  opposites,  and  the  latter  three  to  their  opposites ;  [xi.  24] 

therefore  the  whole  solid  KP  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  whole 
solid  CD,  [xi.  Def.  10] 

Let  the  parallelogram  GK  be  completed, 
and  on  the  parallelograms  GK^  KL  as  bases,  and  with  the 
same  height   as   that   of  AB,    let   the   solids  EO,   LQ   be 
completed. 

Then  since,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  solids  AB,  CD, 
sis  AE  is  to  C/%  so  is  EG  to  EN,  and  Elf  to  EP, 
while  CE  is  equal  to  EK,  EN  to  EL,  and  ER  to  EM, 
therefore,  as  AE  is  to  EK,  so  is  GE  to  EL,  and  HE  to  EM. 

But,  as  AE  is  to  EK,  so  \s  AG  to  the  parallelogram  GK, 
as  GE  is  to  EL,  so  is  GK  to  KL, 

and,  as  HE  is  to  EM,  so  is  QE  to  KM ;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  also,  as  the  parallelogram  ^G^  is  to  GK,  so  is  GK 
to  KL,  and  QE  to  KM. 

But,  as  ^G^  is  to  GK,  so  is  the  solid  AB  to  the  solid  EO, 
as  GK  is  to  AX,  so  is  the  solid  OE  to  the  solid  QL, 
and,  as  QE  is  to  A'i?/,  so  is  the  solid  QL  to  the  solid  KP  ; 

[XI.  32] 
therefore  also,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  EO,  so  is  EO  to  ^Z,  and 
QL  to  yr/^. 

But,  if  four  magnitudes  be  continuously  proportional,  the 
first  has  to  the  fourth  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  it  has 
to  the  second  ;  [v.  Def.  10] 

therefore  the  solid  AB  has  to  KP  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  AB  has  to  EO. 

But,  as  AB  is  to  EO,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AG  to  GK, 
and  the  straight  line  AE  to  EK  [vi.  i] ; 


344  BOOK   XI  [XL  33 

hence  the  solid  AB  has  also  to  KP  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  AE  has  to  EK. 

But  the  solid  KP  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 
and  the  straight  line  EK  to  CF\ 

therefore  the  solid  AB  has  also  to  the  solid  CD  th^  ratio 
triplicate  of  ^hat  which  the  corresponding  side  of  it,  AE,  has 
to  the  corresponding  side  CF. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

PoRisM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  four  straight 
lines  be  <  continuously  >  proportional,  as  the  first  is  to  the 
fourth,  so  will  a  parallelepipedal  solid  on  the  first  be  to  the 
similar  and  similarly  described  parallelepipedal  solid  on  the 
second,  inasmuch  as  the  first  has  to  the  fourth  the  ratio 
triplicate  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second. 

The  proof  may  be  summarised  as  follows. 

The  three  edges  AE,  GE^  HE  of  the  parallelepiped  AB  which  meet  at 
iP,  the  vertex  corresponding  to  R  in  the  other  parallelepiped,  are  produced, 
and  lengths  /? A'  eL^  EM  are  marked  off  equal  respectively  to  the  edges  CF, 
FN.FRoiCD. 

The  parallelograms  and  solids  are  then  completed  as  shown  in  the  figure. 
Euclid  first  shows  that  the  solid  CD  and  the  new  solid  PK  are  equal  and 
similar  according  to  the  criterion  in  xi.  Def.  lo,  viz.  that  they  are  contained 
by  the  same  number  of  equal  and  similar  planes.  (They  are  arranged  in  the 
same  onler,  and  it  would  l>e  easy  to  prove  equality  by  proving  the  equality  of 
a  jviir  of  solid  angles  and  then  applying  one  solid  to  the  other.) 
We  have  now,  by  hyix>thesis, 

AE  :  CF=^  EG  :  Fy=  EH :  FR  \ 
that  is,  AE  :  EK=  EGiEL^EH:  EM, 

But  AE  :  EK    CJAG  :CJGA%  [vi.  i] 

EG:  EL^CJGK  OJKL, 
EH  lEM^C  HK  CJ  KM. 
Again,  by  xi.  25  or  32, 

0  AG  :C7GE=  (solid  AB) :  (solid  E0\ 
CjGKiCT  KL  =  (solid  EO) :  (solid  QL\ 
Cj  HK  :  £7  KM  -  (solid  QL) :  (solid  AV^ 
Thereliw 
($iak!  AB)  I  (solid  EO)r.  (solid  EO) : (solid  QL)  =  (solid  QL) :  v>olid  KFK 
or  the  s^>lia  AB  is  to  the  solid  AY*  (that  is,  CD)  in  the  ratio  tnpLioite  or  that 
which  the  s\>Kd  AB  has  to  the  solid  El\  i.e.  the  ratio  triplicute  ot  that  which 
vlJK'hastoAA'(^>cC/^V 

HeiU^r^  doubis  whether  the   Forism  appeoded  to  chts   prv  tv^rlon  i:> 


XI.  33»  34]  PROPOSITIONS   33,  34  345 

Simson  adds,  as  Prop.  D,  a  useful  theorem  which  we  should  have  expected 
to  find  here,  on  the  analogy  of  vi.  23  following  vi.  19,  20,  viz.  that  Solid 
parallelepipeds  contained  by  parallelograms  equiangular  to  one  another^  each  to 
each^  that  is^  of  which  the  solid  angles  are  equals  each  to  each,  have  to  one  another 
the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  sides. 

The  proof  follows  the  method  of  the  proposition  xi.  33,  and  we  can  use 
the  same  figure.  In  order  to  obtain  one  ratio  between  lines  to  represent  the 
ratio  compounded  of  the  fatios  of  the  sides,  after  the  manner  of  vi.  23,  we 
take  any  straight  line  a,  and  then  determine  three  other  straight  lines  ^,  c^  d^ 
such  that 

AE:  CF=a:b, 
EG  :  FN=  b  :  c, 
EH\FR  =  c'.d, 
whence  a  :  d  represents  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides. 
We  obtain,  in  the  same  manner  as  above, 

(solid  AB) :  (solid  EO)  =CJ  AG  :0  GK=  AE  :  EK=-  AE  :  CF 

=  a\b^ 
(solid  EO)  :  (solid  QL)  =[0  GK  .EJ  KL^GE  \EL  =  GE\FN 

=  bic^ 
(solid  QL) :  (solid  KF)  =  O  HK-. EJ  KM=  EH:  EM^  EH-.  FR 

=  c:d, 
whence,  by  composition  [v.  22], 

(solid  AB) :  (solid  KF)  =  a.d, 
or  (solid  AB) :  (solid  C£>)  =a:d. 

Proposition  34. 

In  equal  parallelepipedal  solids  the  bases  are  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights;  and  those  parallelepipedal  solids  in 
which  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights  are 
equal. 

Let  ABy  CD  be  equal  parallelepipedal  solids  ; 
I  say  that  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  the  bases  are 
reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  solid  CD  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

First,  let  the  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  AG,  EF,  LB, 
HK,  CM,  NO,  PD,  QR,  be  at  right  angles  to  their  bases ; 
I  say  that,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  CM 
to  AG, 

If  now  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 
while  the  solid  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 
CM  will  also  be  equal  to  AG. 


346 


BOOK  XI 


[XI.  34 


For   parallelepipedal   solids  of  the   same   height  are   to 
one  another  as  the  bases  ;  [xi.  32] 

and,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  NQ,  so  will  CM  be  to  AG, 
and  it  is  manifest  that  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD 
the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights. 

Next,  let  the  base  EH  not  be  equal'to  the  base  NQ, 
but  let  EH  be  greater. 


/ 

/ 

M 

h 

/ 

/ 

R 

D 

\     ' 

\ 

\ 

M 

\ 

T 

\ 

P 

\ 

C 

N 

Now  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD ; 
therefore  CM  is  also  greater  than  AG. 

Let  then  CT'be  made  equal  to  AG, 
and  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  VC  be  completed  on  NQ  as 
base  and  with  CT"  as  height. 

Now,  since  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 
^and  CV\s  outside  them, 

while  equals  have  to  the  same  the  same  ratio,  [v.  7] 

therefore,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  solid 
CD  to  the  solid  CV. 

But,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  base 
EH  to  the  base  NQ, 

for  the  solids  AB,  CF  are  of  equal  height ;  [xi.  32] 

and,  as  the  solid  CD  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  base  MQ  to 
the  base  TQ  [xi.  25]  and  CM  to  CT  [vi.  i] ; 
therefore  also,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  MC 
to  CT. 

But  CT  is  equal  to  AG  \ 
therefore  also,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  MC 
to  AG. 


XI.  34]  PROPOSITION   34  347 

Therefore  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  ABy  CD  the  bases 
are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights. 

Again,  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB^  CD  let  the  bases 
be  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights,  that  is,  as  the  base 
EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  let  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  be 
to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB  ; 
I  say  that  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

Let  the  sides  which  stand  up  be  again  at  right  angles  to 
the  bases. 

Now,  if  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 
and,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height  of 
the  solid  CD  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB, 
therefore  the  height  of  the  solid   CD  is  also  equal  to  the 
height  of  the  solid  AB. 

But  parallelepipedal  solids  on  equal  bases  and  of  the  same 
height  are  equal  to  one  another  ;  [xi.  31] 

therefore  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

Next,  let  the  base  EH  not  be  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 
but  let  EH  be  greater  ; 

therefore  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  is  also  greater  than  the 

height  of  the  solid  AB, 

that  is,  CM  is  greater  than  AG. 

Let  C7"be  again  made  equal  to  AG, 
and  let  the  solid  CF  be  similarly  completed. 

Since,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so   is  MC 
to  AG, 

while  AG  is  equal  to  CT, 

therefore,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  JVQ,  so  is   CM 
to  CT. 

But,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  JVQ,  so  is  the  solid 
AB  to  the  solid  CF, 

for  the  solids  AB,  CFare  of  equal  height ;  [xi.  32] 

and,  as  CM  is  to  CT,  so  is  the  base  MQ  to  the  base  QT  [vi.  i] 
and  the  solid  CD  to  the  solid  CF.  [xi.  25] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  the  solid  CF,  so  is. 
the  solid  CD  to  the  solid  CF; 

therefore  each  of  the  solids  AB,  CD  has  to  Cy  the  same 
ratio. 


348  BOOK   XI  [XI.  34 

Therefore  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD.        [v.  9] 

Now  let  the  sides  which  stand  up,  I^E,  BL,   GA,  HK, 
ONy  DP,  MC,  RQ,  not  be  at  right  angles  to  their  bases  ; 
let  perpendiculars  be  drawn  from  the  points  F,  G,  By  K\  O, 
My  Dy  R  to  the  planes  through  EHy  NQy  and  let  them  meet 
the  planes  at  5,  Ty  Uy  F,  Wy  Xy  F,  a, 
and  let  the  solids  FVy  Oa  be  completed  ; 
I  say  that,  in  this  case  too,  if  the  solids  ABy  CD  are  equal, 
the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights,  that  is, 
as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQy  so  is  the  height  of  the 
solid  CD  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 


Since  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CDy 
while  AB  is  equal  to  BTy 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  FK  and  of  the  same  height ; 

[xi.  29,  30] 
and  the  solid  CD  is  equal  to  DXy 

for  they  are  again  on  the  same  base  RO  and  of  the  same 
height ;  [id,] 

therefore  the  solid  BT  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  DX. 

Therefore,  as  the  base  FK  is  to  the  base  ORy  so  is  the 
height  of  the  solid  DX  to  the  height  of  the  solid  BT. 

[Part  I.] 

But  the  base  FK  is  equal  to  the  base  E//y 

and  the  base  OR  to  the  base  NQ  ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  JVQ,  so  is  the  height 

of  the  solid  DX  to  the  height  of  the  solid  BT. 


XI.  34]  PROPOSITION   34  349 

But  the  solids  DX,  BTsmd  the  solids  DC,  BA  have  the 
same  heights  respectively ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  solid  DC  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

Therefore  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  ABy  CD  the  bases 
are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights. 

Again,  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  ABy  CD  let  the  bases 
be  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights, 
that  is,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  let  the  height 
of  the  solid  CD  be  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB ; 
I  say  that  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 
since,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height  of 
the  solid  CD  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB, 
while  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  FK, 
and  NQ  to  OR, 

therefore,  as  the  base  FK  is  to  the  base  OR,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  solid  CD  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

But  the  solids  AB,  CD  and  BT,  DX  have  the  same 
heights  respectively ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  FK  is  to  the  base  OR,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  solid  DX  to  the  height  of  the  solid  BT. 

Therefore  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  BT,  DX  the  bases 
are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights ; 
therefore  the  solid  BT  is  equal  to  the  solid  DX.  [Part  i.] 

But  ^r  is  equal  to  ^^, 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  FK  and  of  the  same  height  ; 

[XI.  29,  30] 
and  the  solid  DX  is  equal  to  the  solid  DC.  [id.] 

Therefore  the  solid  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

Q.  E.  D. 

In  this  proposition  Euclid  makes  two  assumptions  which  require  notice, 
(i)  that,  if  two  parallelepipeds  are  equal,  and  have  equal  bases,  their  heights 
are  equal,  and  (2)  that,  if  the  bases  of  two  equal  parallelepipeds  are  unequal, 
that  which  has  the  lesser  base  has  the  greater  height.  In  justification  of  the 
former  statement  Euclid  says,  according  to  what  Heiberg  holds  to  be  the 
genuine  reading,  "for  parallelepipedal  solids  of  the  same  height  are  to  one 
another  as  their  bases"  [xi.  32].  This  apparently  struck  some  very  early 
editor  as  not  being  sufficient,  and  he  added  the  explanation  appearing  in 
Simson's  text,  "  For  if,  the  bases  £ff,  NQ  being  equal,  the  heights  AG,  CM 


350  BOOK  XI  [XI.  34 

were  not  equal,  neither  would  the  solid  AB  be  equal  to  CD.  But  it  is  by 
hypothesis  equal.  Therefore  the  height  CM\s  not  unequal  to  the  height -^6^; 
therefore  it  is  equal."  Then,  it  being  perceived  that  there  ought  not  to  be  two 
explanations,  the  genuine  one  was  erased  from  the  inferior  mss.  While  the 
interpolated  explanation  does  not  take  us  very  far,  the  truth  of  the  statement 
may  be  deduced  with  perhaps  greater  ease  from  xi.  31  than  from  xi.  32 
quoted  by  Euclid.  For,  assuming  one  height  greater  than  the  other,  while  the 
bases  are  equal,  we  have  only  to  cut  from  the  higher  solid  so  much  as  will 
make  its  height  equal  to  that  of  the  other.  Then  this  part  of  the  higher  solid 
is  equal  to  the  whole  of  the  other  solid  which  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  the 
higher  solid  itself.    That  is,  the  whole  is  equal  to  its  part :  which  is  impossible. 

The  genuine  text  contains  no  explanation  of  the  second  assumption  that, 
if  the  base  EH  be  greater  than  the  base  NQ,  while  the  solids  are  equal,  the 
height  CM  is  greater  than  the  height  AG',  for  the  added  words  **  for,  if  not, 
neither  again  will  the  solids  AB,  CD  be  equal ;  but  they  are  equal  by 
hypothesis  "  are  no  doubt  interpolated.  In  this  case  the  truth  of  the  assump- 
tion is  easily  deduced  from  xi.  32  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.  If  the  height  CM 
were  equal  to  the  height  A  G,  the  solid  AB  would  be  to  the  solid  CD  as  the 
base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  i.e.  as  a  greater  to  a  less,  so  that  the  solids  would 
not  be  equal,  as  they  are  by  hypothesis.  Again,  if  the  height  CM  were  less 
than  the  height  AG,  we  could  increase  the  height  of  CD  till  it  was  equal  to 
that  of  AB,  and  it  would  then  appear  that  AB\^  greater  than  the  heightened 
solid  and  a  fortiori  greater  than  CD :  which  contradicts  the  hypothesis. 

Clavius  rather  ingeniously  puts  the  first  assumption  the  other  way,  saying 
that,  if  the  heights  are  equal  in  the  equal  parallelepipeds,  the  bases  must  be 
equal.  This  follows  directly  from  xi.  32,  which  proves  that  the  parallelepipeds 
are  to  one  another  as  their  bases ;  though  Clavius  deduces  it  indirectly  from 
XI.  31.  The  advantage  of  Clavius'  alternative  is  that  it  makes  the  second 
assumption  unnecessary.  He  merely  says,  if  the  hnghts  be  not  equal,  let  CM 
be  the  greater,  and  then  proceeds  with  Euclid's  construction. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that,  when  Euclid  comes  to  the  corresponding 
proposition  for  cones  and  cylinders  [xii.  15],  he  begins  by  supposing  the 
heights  equal,  inferring  by  xii.  11  (corresponding  to  xi.  32)  that,  the  solids 
being  equal,  the  bases  are  also  equal,  and  then  proceeds  to  the  case  where  the 
heights  are  unequal  without  making  any  preliminary  inference  about  the 
bases.  The  analogy  then  of  xii.  15,  and  the  fact  that  he  (Quotes  xi.  32  here 
(which  directly  proves  that,  if  the  solids  are  equal,  and  also  their  heights,  their 
bases  are  also  equal),  make  Clavius'  form  the  more  convenient  to  adopt. 

The  two  assumptions  being  proved  as  above,  the  proposition  can  be  put 
shortly  as  follows. 

I.  Suppose  the  edges  terminating  at  the  corners  of  the  base  to  be  per- 
pendicular to  it. 

Then  (a\  if  the  base  EH  be  equal  to  the  base  NQ,  the  parallelepipeds 
being  also  equal,  the  heights  must  be  equal  (converse  of  xi.  31),  so  that  the 
bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights,  the  ratio  of  the  bases  and 
the  ratio  of  the  heights  being  both  ratios  of  equality. 

(b)  If  the  base  EH  be  greater  than  the  base  NQ,  and  consequently  (by 
deduction  from  xi.  32)  the  height  CM  greater  than  the  height  AG,  cut  off 
CT'from  CJ/ equal  to  AG,  and  draw  the  plane  TV  through  7' parallel  to  the 
base  NQ,  making  the  parallelepiped  CV,  with  CT  (=  AG)  for  its  height. 

Then,  since  the  solids  AB,  CD  are  equal, 

(solid  AB) :  (solid  CV)  =  (solid  CD) :  (solid  CV).  [v.  7] 


XI.  34]  PROPOSITION   34  351 

But  (solid  AB) :  (solid  CV)=EJHE'.CJ  NQ,  [xi.  32] 

and  (solid  CD)  :  (solid  CV)  =njMQ  :CJ  TQ  [xi.  25] 

=  CAf:CT.  [vi.  ij 

Therefore  CJ  HE.EJ  NQ=  CMxCT 

=  CM\AG, 
Conversely  (a),  if  the  bases  EH^  NQ  be  equal  and  reciprocally  proportional 
to  the  heights,  the  heights  must  be  equal. 

Consequently  (solid  AB)  =  (solid  CD),  [xi.  31] 

{b)     If  the  bases  EH,  NQ  be  unequal,  if,  e.g.  CJ  EH>CJNQ, 
then,  since  O  EH :  CJ  NQ  =  CM :  A  G, 

CM>AG. 
Make  the  same  construction  as  before. 

Then  O EH: CJNQ  =  (solid  AB)  :  (solid  CF),  [xi.  32] 

and  CM:AG=CM:CT 

=  CJMQ:CJ  TQ  [vi.  i] 

=  (solid  CD) :  (soUd  CK).  [xi.  25] 

Therefore 

(solid  AB) :  (solid  CF)  =  (solid  CD) :  (solid  CV), 
whence  (solid  AB)  =  solid  CD.  [v.  9] 

II.     Suppose  that  the  edges  terminating  at  the  corners  of  the  bases  are  nof 
perpendicular  to  it. 

Drop  perpendiculars  on  the  bases  from  the  corners  of  the  faces  opposite 
to  the  bases. 

We  thus  have  two  parallelepipeds  equal  to  ABy  CD  respectively,  since 
they  are  on  the  same  bases  EK,  RO  and  of  the  same  height  respectively. 

[XI.  29,  30] 
If  then  (i)  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 
(solid  i9r)  =  (solid  Z^A'), 
and,  by  the  first  part  of  this  proposition, 

OJ KE,EJOR^ MX :  G T, 

or  EJHE'.CJNQ^MXiGT. 

(2)     If  CJHE:CJNQ  =  MX:GT, 

then  CJKF:  EJ  OR  =  MX :  GT, 

so  that,  by  the  first  half  of  the  proposition,  the  solids  BT,  DX  are  equal,  and 
consequently 

(solid  AB)  =  (solid  CD). 


The  text  of  the  second  part  of  the  proposition  four  times  contains,  after 
the  words  "  of  the  same  height,"  the  words  "  in  which  the  sides  which  stand 
up  are  not  on  the  same  straight  lines."  As  Simson  observed,  they  are  inept, 
as  the  extremities  of  the  edges  may  or  may  not  be  "on  the  same  straight 
lines";  cf.  the  similar  words  incorrectly  inserted  at  the  end  of  xi.  31. 

Words  purporting  to  quote  the  result  of  the  first  part  of  the  proposition 
are  also  twice  inserted ;  but  they  are  rejected  as  unnecessary  and  as  containing 
an  absurd  expression — "(solids)  in  which  the  heights  2Jt  at  right  angles  to  their 
bases,"  as  if  the  heights  could  be  otherwise  than  perpendicular  to  the  bases. 


352 


BOOK  XI 


[XI.  35 


Proposition  35. 

If  there  be  two  equal  plane  angles,  and  on  their  vertices 
there  be  set  up  elevated  straight  lines  containing  equal  angles 
with  the  original  straight  lines  respectively ,  if  on  the  elevated 
straight  lines  points  be  taken  at  random  and  perpendiculars  be 
drawn  from  them  to  the  planes  in  which  the  original  angles 
are,  and  if  from  the  points  so  arising  in  the  planes  straight 
lines  be  joined  to  the  vertices  of  the  original  angles,  they  will 
contain^  with  the  elevated  straight  lines,  equal  angles. 

Let  the  angles  BAC,  EDF  be  two  equal  rectilineal  angles, 
and  from  the  points  A,  D  let  the  elevated  straight  lines  AG, 
DM  be  set  up  containing,  with  the  original  straight  lines, 
equal  angles  respectively,  namely,   the  angle  MDE  to  the 
iangle  GAB  and  the  angle  MDF  to  the  angle  GAC, 
let  points  G,  M  be  taken  at  random  on  AG,  DM, 
let  GL,  MN  be  drawn  from  the  points  G,  M  perpendicular  to 
the  planes  through  BA,  AC  and  ED,  DF,  and  let  them  meet 
the  planes  at  L,  N, 
and  let  LA,  ND  be  joined  ; 
I  say  that  the  angle  GAL  is  equal  to  the  angle  MDN, 


Let  AH  be  made  equal  to  DM, 
and  let  HK  be  drawn  through  the  point  H  parallel  to  GL. 

But  GL  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  BA,  AC ; 
therefore  HK  is  also   perpendicular  to  the   plane  through 
BA,  AC  [XI.  8] 

From  the  points  K,  N  let  KC,  NF,  KB,  NE  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  the  straight  lines  AC,  DF,  AB,  DE, 
and  let  HC,  CB,  MF,  FE  be  joined. 


XI.  35]  PROPOSITION  35  353 

Since  the  square  on  HA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  HK, 
KA, 

and  the  squares  on  KC,  CA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  KA, 

[I-  47] 
therefore  the  square  on  HA  is  also  equal  to  the  squares  on 
HK,  KC,  CA. 

But  the  square  on  HC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
HK  KC;  [1.47] 

therefore  the  square  on  HA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
HC,  CA. 

Therefore  the  angle  HCA  is  right  [i.  48J 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  DFM  is  also  right. 

Therefore  the  angle  ACH  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFM, 

But  the  angle  HAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  MDF. 

Therefore  MDF,  HAC  diVt.  two  triangles  which  have  two 
angles  equal  to  two  angles  respectively,  and  one  side  equal  to 
one  side,  namely,  that  subtending  one  of  the  equal  angles, 
that  is,  HA  equal  to  MD ; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the 
remaining  sides  respectively.  [i.  26] 

Therefore  AC  is  equal  to  DF. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  AB  is  also  equal  to  DE. 

Since  then  AC  is  equal  to  DF,  and  AB  to  D£, 
the  two  sides  CA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FD,  DE. 

But  the  angle  CAB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FDE  ; 
therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EF,  the  triangle  to 
the   triangle,   and    the    remaining   angles    to   the   remaining 
angles  ;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFE. 

But  the  right  angle  ACK  is  also  equal  to  the  right  angle 
DFN\ 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  BCK  is  also  equal  to  the 
remaining  angle  EFN, 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  CBK  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FEN. 

H.  E.  ni.  23 


354  BOOK  XI  [XI.  35 

Therefore  BCKy  EFN  are  two  triangles  which  have  two 
angles  equal  to  two  angles  respectively,  and  one  side  equal  to 
one  side,  namely,  that  adjacent  to  the  equal  angles,  that  is, 
BC  equal  to  EF\ 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the 
remaining  sides.  [i.  26] 

Therefore  CK  is  equal  to  FN. 
But  AC  is  also  equal  to  DF; 

therefore  the  two  sides  AC,  CK  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
DF,FN\ 

and  they  contain  right  angles. 

Therefore  the  base  AK\s  equal  to  the  base  DN.         [i.  4] 

And,  since  AH  is  equal  to  DM^ 
the  square  on  AH  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  DM, 

But  the  squares  on  AK,  KH  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  AH, 

for  the  angle  AKH  is  right ;  [i.  47] 

and   the   squares   on   DN,    NM  are    equal   to   the   square 
on  DM, 
for  the  angle  DNM  is  right ;  [i.  47J 

therefore  the  squares  on  AK,  KH  are  equal  to  the  squares 
oviDN,NM', 

and  of  these  the  square  on  AK  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DN\ 
therefore  the  remaining  square  on  KH  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  NM ; 
therefore  HK  is  equal  to  MN. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  HA,  AK  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  MD,  DN  respectively, 

and  the  base  HK  was  proved  equal  to  the  base  MN, 
therefore  the  angle  HAK  is  tfqual  to  the  angle  MDN,     [i.  8] 

Therefore  etc. 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  there  be  two 
equal  plane  angles,  and  if  there  be  set  up  on  them  elevated 
straight  lines  which  are  equal  and  contain  equal  angles  with 
the  original  straight  lines  respectively,  the  perpendiculars 
drawn  from  their  extremities  to  the  planes  in  which  are 
the  original  angles  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Q.  E.  D. 


XI.  35]  PROPOSITION  35  355 

This  proposition  is  required  for  the  next,  where  it  is  necessary  to  know 
that,  if  in  two  equiangular  parallelepipeds  equal  angles,  one  in  each,  be 
contained  by  three  plane  angles  respectively,  one  of  which  is  an  angle  of  the 
parallelogram  forming  the  base  in  one  parallelepiped,  while  its  equal  is  likewise 
in  the  base  of  the  other,  and  the  edges  in  which  the  two  remaining  angles 
forming  the  solid  angles  meet  are  equals  the  parallelepipeds  are  of  the  same 
height. 

Bearing  in  mind  the  definition  of  the  inclination  of  a  straight  line  to  a 
planey  we  might  enunciate  the  proposition  more  shortly  thus. 

If  there  be  two  trihedral  angles  identically  equal  to  one  another^  corresponding 
edges  in  each  are  equally  inclined  to  the  planes  through  the  other  t%vo  edges 
respectively. 

The  proof,  which  is  necessarily  somewhat  long,  may  be  summarised  thus. 

It  is  required  to  prove  that  the  angles  GAL^  MDN  in  the  figure  are  equal, 
G^  M  being  any  points  on  AGy  DAf^  and  GL,  MN  perpendicular  to  the 
planes  BAC^  EDFxt,'s^QQ,\\s€i:^, 

If  AH  is  made  equal  to  DM^  and  HK  is  drawn  in  the  plane  GAL  parallel 
to  GL, 

HK  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  plane  BA  C  [xi.  8] 

Draw  KBy  KC  perpendicujar  to  ABy  AC  respectively  and  NE^  NF 
perpendicular  to  DE^  DF  respectively,  and  complete  the  figures. 

Now(i)  HA''  =  HK^  +  KA^  \ 

=  HJP  +  Ka  +CA^    • .  [i.  47] 

=  HC  +  CA^  ) 

Therefore  l  HCA  =  a  right  angle. 

Similarly  l  MFD  =  a  right  angle. 

(2)  As  HACf  AfDFhsLVQ  therefore  two  angles  equal  and  one  side. 
Therefore  ^HAC=A MDF,  and  AC=  DF  [i.  26] 

(3)  Similarly      A  HAB  =  A  AfDE,  and  AB  =  DE, 

(4)  Hence  As  ABC^  DEF  2iXQ  equal  in  all  respects,  so  that  BC-EF^ 
and  lABC^lDEF, 

uACB^uDFE, 

(5)  Therefore  the  complements  of  these  angles  are  equal, 
i.e.  lKBC=lNEF, 

and  lKCB  =  lNFE. 

(6)  The  A  s  KBC^  NEF  have  two  angles  equal  and  one  side,  and  are 
therefore  equal  in  all  respects,  so  that 

KB^NE, 
KC=NF 

(7)  The  right-angled  triangles  KAC,  NDFdLXQ  equal  in  all  respects,  since 
A  C=  DF[{2)  above],  KC^NF 

Consequently  AK=DN, 

(8)  In  £^s  HAK,  MDN, 

HK''  +  KA^  =  HA^ 

=  ME^y  by  hypothesis, 
^MN^-^ND".- 

23—2 


356  BOOK  XI  [XI.  35,  36 

Subtracting  the  equals  KA\  NL^^ 
we  have  HK^^MN\ 

or  HK^MN, 

(9)  As  HAK^  MDN^xQ  now  equal  in  all  respects,  by  i.  8  and  i.  4,  and 
therefore 

lHAK=lMDN. 

The  Porism  is  merely  a  statement  of  the  result  arrived  at  in  (8). 

Legendre  uses,  practically,  the  construction  and  argument  of  this  propo- 
sition to  prove  the  theorem  given  under  (3)  of  the  note  on  xi.  21  above  that 
In  two  equal  trihedral  angles  y  corresponding  fairs  of  face  angles  include  equal 
dihedral  angles.     This  fact  is  readily  deduced  from  the  above  proposition. 

Since  [(i)]  HC,  KC  are  both  perpendicular  to  ACy  and  MF,  iV^  both 
perpendicular  to  DF^  the  angles  BCK,  MFN  are  the  measures  of  the 
dihedral  angles  between  the  planes  HAC^  BAC^  and  MDF,  EDF  respec- 
tively, [xi.  Def.  6] 

By  (6),  KC=NF, 

and,  by  (8),  HK^  MN, 

while  the  angles  HKC^  MNF^  both  being  right,  are  equal. 

Consequently  the  As  HCA\  MFNdjQ  equal  in  all  respects,  [i.  4] 

so  that  L  HCK  =  l  MFN. 

Simson  substituted  a  different  proof  of  (i)  in  the  above  summary,  as 
follows. 

Since  HK  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  BAC^  the  plane  HBKy  passing 
through  HKy  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  plane  BAC,  [xi.  18J 

And  A  By  being  drawn  in  the  plane  BAC  perpendicular  to  BKy  the 
common  section  of  the  planes  HBKy  BACy  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
HBK  [xi.  Def.  4],  and  is  therefore  perpendicular  to  every  straight  line 
meeting  it  in  that  plane  [xi.  Def  3]. 

Hence  the  angle  ABH  is  a  right  angle. 

I  think  Euclid's  proof  much  preferable  to  this  with  its  references  to 
definitions  which  are  more  of  the  nature  of  theorems. 

Proposition  36. 

If  three  straight  lines  be  proportionaly  the  parallelepipedal 
solid  formed  out  of  the  three  is  equal  to  the  parallelepipedal 
solid  on  the  mean  which  is  equilateraly  but  equiangular  with 
the  aforesaid  solid. 

Let  Ay  By  C  be  three  straight  h'nes  in  proportion,  so  that, 
as  A  is  to  By  so  is  i9  to  C ; 

I  say  that  the  solid  formed  out  of  Ay  By  C  is  equal  to  the 
solid  on  B  which  is  equilateral,  but  equiangular  with  the 
aforesaid  solid. 

Let  there  be  set  out  the  solid  angle  at  E  contained  by  the 
angles  DEGy  GEFy  FEDy 


XI. 


36] 


PROPOSITIONS   35,  36 


357 


let  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  GE,  EF  be  made  equal  to 

B,  and  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  EK  be  completed, 

let  LMhti  made  equal  to  Ay 

and  on  the  straight  line  LM,  and  at  the  point  L  on  it,  let  there 

be  constructed  a  solid  angle  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  Ej 

namely  that  contained  by  NLO,  OLM,  MLN  \ 

let  Z(9  be  made  equal  to  B,  and  LN  equal  to  C 


Now,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C, 
while  A  is  equal  to  ZJ/,  B  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  LO, 
ED,  and  C  to  LN , 

therefore,  as  LM  is  to  EF^  so  is  DE  to  LN. 

Thus  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  NLM,  DEF  are 
reciprocally  proportional  ; 

therefore  the  parallelogram  MN  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram 
DF.  [VI.  14] 

And,  since  the  angles  DEF,  NLM  are  two  plane  recti- 
lineal angles,  and  on  them  the  elevated  straight  lines  LO,  EG 
are  set  up  which  are  equal  to  one  another  and  contain  equal 
angles  with  the  original  straight  lines  respectively, 
therefore  the  perpendiculars  drawn  from  the  points  G,  O  to 
the  planes  through  NL,  LM  and  DE,  EF  are  equal  to  one 
another  ;  [xi.  35,  Pon] 

hence  the  solids  LH,  EK  are  of  the  same  height. 

But  parallelepipedal  solids  on  equal  bases  and  of  the  same 
height  are  equal  to  one  another  ;  [xi.  31] 

therefore  the  solid  HL  is  equal  to  the  solid  EK. 

And  LH  is  the  solid  formed  out  of  A,  B,  C,  and  EK  the 
solid  on  B ; 


358 


BOOK    XI 


[xi.  36,  37 


therefore  the  parallelepipedal  soHd  formed  out  of  A,  B,  C  is 
equal  to  the  solid  on  B  which  is  equilateral,  but  equiangular 
with  the  aforesaid  solid. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  edges  of  the  parallelepiped  HL  being  respectively  equal  to  A^  B,  C, 
and  those  of  the  equiangular  parallelepiped  KE  being  all  equal  to  B^  we 
regard  MN  {not  containing  the  edge  OL  equal  to  B)  as  the  base  of  the  first 
parallelepiped,  and  consequently  FD^  equiangular  to  MN^  as  the  base  of  KE, 

Then  the  solids  have  the  same  height  [xi.  35,  Por.] 

Hence  (solid  HL) :  (solid  KE)  =  O  MNx  O FD,  [xi.  32] 

But,  since  A^  B^  C  are  in  continued  proportion, 

A\B^B\C, 
or  LM',EF=DE:LN, 

Thus  the  sides  of  the  equiangular  Os  MN,  FD  are  reciprocally  pro- 
portional, whence 

CJ  MN^CJFD,  [vi.  14] 

and  therefore  (solid  HL)  =  (solid  KE), 

Proposition  37. 

If  four  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  parallelepipedal 
solids  on  t/tent  which  are  similar  and  similarly  described  will 
also  be  proportional ;  and,  if  the  parallelepipedal  solids  on  them 
which  are  similar  and  similarly  described  be  proportional,  the 
straight  lines  will  themselves  also  be  proportional. 

Let  AB,  CD,  EF,  GH  be  four  straight  lines  in  proportion, 
so  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH ; 
and  let  there  be  described  on  AB,  CD,  EF,  GH  the  similar 
and  similarly  situated  parallelepipedal  solids  KA,  LC,  ME, 
NG', 
I  say  that,  as  KA  is  to  LC,  so  is  ME  to  NG, 


For,  since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  KA  is  similar  to  LC, 

therefore  KA  has  to  LC  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB 
has  to  CD.  [xi.  33] 


XI.  37]  PROPOSITIONS  36,  37  359 

For  the  same  reason 

ME  also  has  to  NG  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF  has 
to  GH.  [/^.] 

And,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH. 
Therefore  also,  as  AK  is  to  LC,  so  is  ME  to  NG. 

Next,  as  the  solid  AK  is  to  the  solid  LC,  so  let  the  solid 
ME  be  to  the  solid  NG  ; 
I  say  that,  as  the  straight  line  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH. 

For  since,  again,  KA  has  to  ZC  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  AB  has  to  CD,  [xi.  33] 

and  ME  also  has  to  NG  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF 
has  to  GH,  [id,] 

and,  as  KA  is  to  LC,  so  is  ME  to  NG, 

therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  G^//^ 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

In  this  proposition  it  is  assumed  that,  if  two  ratios  be  equal,  the  ratio 
triplicate  of  one  is  equal  to  the  ratio  triplicate  of  the  other  and,  conversely, 
that,  if  ratios  which  are  the  triplicate  of  two  other  ratios  are  equal,  those  other 
ratios  are  themselves  equal. 

To  avoid  the  necessity  for  these  assumptions  Simson  adopts  the  alternative 
proof  found  in  the  MS.  which  Heiberg  calls  b,  and  also  adopted  by  Clavius, 
who,  however,  gives  Euclid's  proof  as  well,  attributing  it  to  Theon.  The 
alternative  proof  proceeds  after  the  manner  of  vi.  22,  thus. 

Make  AB,  CD,  O,  P  continuous  proportionals,  and  also  EF,  GH,  Q,  R. 


I,     Then,  since 

AB\CD^EF,GH, 
we  have,  ex  aequali, 

AB:P=EF\R.  [v.  22] 

But         (solid  AK) :  (solid  CZ)  =  AB  :  P, 

[xi.  33  and  Por.]        S 
and  (solid  EM) :  (solid  GN)  =  EF:R, 

Therefore 

(solid  AIT) :  (solid  C£)  =  (soUd  £A£) :  (soUd  GJ\r). 


36o  BOOK   XI  [xi.  37,  38 

II.     If  the  solids  are  proportional,  take  ^T'such  that 
AB\CD  =  EF'.ST, 
and  on  .ST"  describe  the  parallelepiped  5  F  similar  and  similarly  situated  to 
either  of  the  parallelepipeds  EMy  GN, 

Then,  by  the  first  part, 

(solid  AK) :  (solid  CZ)  =  (solid  EM) :  (solid  SF), 
whence  it  follows  that 

(solid  GN)={soMSFy 

But  these  solids  are  similar  and  similarly  situated ; 
therefore  their  faces  are  similar  and  equal;  [xi.  Def.  10] 

therefore  the  corresponding  sides  GH,  ST  a.re  equal. 

[For  this  inference  cf.  note  on  vi.  22.  The  equality  of  GIfy  ST  may 
readily  be  proved  by  application  of  the  two  parallelepipeds  to  one  another, 
since,  being  similar,  they  are  equiangular.] 

Hence  AB:CD  =  EE:  GH. 

The  text  of  the  mss.  has  here  a  proposition  which  is  as  badly  placed  as  it 
is  unnecessary.  If  a  plane  be  at  right  angles  to  a  plane  ^  and  from  any  one  of  the 
points  in  one  of  the  planes  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  to  the  other  plane^  the 
perpendicular  so  drawn  will  fed  I  on  the  common  section  of  the  planes.  It  is  of 
the  nature  of  a  lemma  to  xii.  17,  where 
alone  the  fact  is  made  use  of.  Heiberg 
observes  that  it  is  omitted  in  b  and  that  the 
copyist  of  P  knew  other  texts  which  did  not 
contain  it.  From  these  facts  it  is  fairly  con- 
cluded that  the  proposition  was  interpolated. 
The   truth  of  it  is  of  course   immediately 

obvious  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.  Let  the  plane  CAD  be  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  A  By  and  let  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  to  the  latter  from  any  point 
E  in  the  former. 

If  it  does  not  fall  on  ADy  the  common  section,  let  it  meet  the  plane  AB 
in  F. 

Draw  EG  in  AB  perpendicular  to  ADy  and  join  EG. 

Then  EG  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  CAD  [xi.  Def.  4],  and  therefore 
to  GE  [xi.  Def.  3].     Therefore  lEGE'xs  right 

Also,  since  EE  is  perpendicular  to  A  By 
the  angle  EEG  is  right 

That  is,  the  triangle  EGE  has  two  right  angles  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Proposition  38. 

If  the  sides  of  the  opposite  planes  of  a  cube  be  bisect edy  and 
planes  be  carried  through  the  points  of  sectiony  the  common 
section  of  the  planes  and  the  diameter  of  the  cube  bisect  one 
another. 

For  let  the  sides  of  the  opposite  planes  CFy  AH  of  the 
cube  AF  be  bisected  at  the  points  Ky  Z,  My  N,  (9,  Qy  Py  Ry 


XI.  38] 


PROPOSITIONS   37,  38 


361 


and  through  the  points  of  section  let  the  planes  KN,  OR  be 
carried  ; 

let   US  be  the  common  section  of  the  planes,  and  DG  the 
diameter  of  the  cube  AF. 

I  say  that  6^7"  is  equal  to  TS,  and  DTto  TG, 

For  let  DU,  UE,  BS,  SG  be  joined. 

Then,  since  DO  is  parallel  to  PE, 

the  alternate  angles  DOC/,  UPE  are  equal  to  one  another. 

[i.  29] 
And,  since  DO  is  equal  to  PE,  and  OU  \.o  UP, 

and  they  contain  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  base  DU  \s  equal  to  the  base  UE, 

the  triangle  DOU  is  equal  to  the  triangle  PUE, 

and  the  remaining  angles  are  equal  to  the  remaining  angles ; 

['•  4] 
therefore  the  angle  OUD  is  equal  to  the  angle  PUE. 


For  this  reason  DUE  is  a  straight  line.  [i-  14] 

For  the  same  reason,  BSG  is  also  a  straight  line, 
and  BS  is  equal  to  SG. 

Now,  since  CA  is  equal  and  parallel  to  DB, 
while  CA  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  EG, 
therefore  DB  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  EG.  [xi.  9] 


362  BOOK   XI  [XL  38 

And  the  straight  lines  DE,  BG  join  their  extremities  ; 
therefore  DE  is  parallel  to  BG.  [i.  33] 

Therefore  the  angle  EDT'xs  equal  to  the  angle  BGT, 
for  they  are  alternate  ;  [i.  29] 

and  the  angle  DTU  is  equal  to  the  angle  GTS.  [i.  15] 

Therefore  DTU,  GTS  are  two  triangles  which  have  two 
angles  equal  to  two  angles,  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side, 
namely  that  subtending  one  of  the  equal  angles,  that  is,  DU 
equal  to  GS^ 

for  they  are  the  halves  of  DE,  BG ; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the 
remaining  sides.  [i.  26] 

Therefore  DT  is  equal  to  TG,  and  UTto  TS. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.   D. 

Euclid  enunciates  this  proposition  of  a  cude  only,  though  it  is  true  of  any 
parallelepiped,  no  doubt  because  its  truth  for  a  cube  is  all  that  was  wanted  for 
the  only  proposition  where  it  is  needed,  viz.  xni.  17. 

Simson  remarks  that  it  should  be  proved  that  the  straight  lines  bisecting 
the  corresponding  opposite  sides  of  opposite  planes  are  in  one  plane.  This  is, 
however,  clear  because  e.g.  since  DK,  CL  are  equal  and  parallel,  KL  is  equal 
and  parallel  to  CD,  And,  since  KL,  AB  are  both  parallel  to  DC,  KL  is 
parallel  to  AB,  And  lastly,  since  KL,  MN2x^  both  parallel  to  AB,  KL  is 
parallel  to  il/iVand  therefore  in  one  plane  with  it. 

The  essential  thing  to  be  proved  is  that  the  plane  passing  through  the 
opposite  edges  DB,  EG  passes  through  the  straight  line  US,  since,  only  if 
this  be  the  case,  can  US,  DG  intersect  one  another. 

To  prove  this  we  have  only  to  prove  that,  if  DU,  UE  and  BS,  SG  be 
joined,  DUE  and  BSG  are  both  straight  lines. 

Now,  since  DO  is  parallel  to  PE, 

lDOU=lEPU 

Thus,  in  the  As  DUO,  EUP,  two  sides  DO,  OU  are  equal  to  two  sides 
EP,  PU,  and  the  included  angles  are  equal. 

Therefore  L.DUO^t\EUP, 

DU^  UE, 

and  L.  DUO  ^L  EUP, 

so  that  DUE  is  a  straight  line,  bisected  at  U,  Similarly  BSG  is  a  straight 
line,  bisected  at  S, 

Thus  the  plane  through  DB,  EG  {DB,  EG  being  equal  and  parallel) 
contains  the  straight  lines  DUE,  BSG  (which  are  therefore  equal  and  parallel 
also)  and  also  [xi.  7]  the  straight  lines  t/S,  DG  (which  accordingly  intersect). 

In  A  s  DTU,  GTS,  the  angles  UDT,  SGT  are  equal  (being  alternate), 
and  the  angles  UTD,  STG  are  also  equal  (being  vertically  opposite),  while 
D  U  (half  of  DE)  is  equal  to  GS  (half  of  BG). 


XI.  38>  39] 


PROPOSITIONS   38,  39 


363 


Therefore  [i.  26]  the  triangles  DTUy  GTS  ^xe  equal  in  all  respects,  so  that 

DT=  TG, 
UT^  TS. 

Proposition  39. 

//  there  be  two  prisms  of  equal  fieight,  and  one  have  a 
parallelogram  as  base  and  the  other  a  triangle,  and  if  the 
parallelogram  be  double  of  the  triangle,  the  prisms  will  be 
equal. 

Let  ABCDEF,  GHKLMN  be  two  prisms  of  equal 
height, 

let  one  have  the  parallelogram  AF  as  base,  and  the  other  the 
triangle  GHK, 

and  let  the  parallelogram  AF  be  double  of  the  triangle  GHK\ 
I  say  that  the  prism  ABCDEF  is  equal  to  the  prism 
GHKLMN. 


\^ 

c 

\ 

SJ^ 

M 


L 


For  let  the  solids  AO,  GP  be  completed. 

Since  the  parallelogram  AF\^  double  of  the  triangle  GHK, 
while  the  parallelogram  HK  is  also  double  of  the  triangle 
GHK,  [1. 34] 

therefore  the  parallelogram  AF  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram 
BK. 

But  parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  equal  bases  and 


of  the  same  height  are  equal  to  one  another ; 
therefore  the  solid  AO  is  equal  to  the  solid  GP. 

And  the  prism  ABCDEF  is  half  of  the  solid  AO, 
and  the  prism  GHKLMN  is  half  of  the  solid  GP ; 
therefore    the    prism    ABCDEF   is    equal    to    the 
GHKLMN. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E. 


[XI.  31] 

[xi.  28] 
prism 

D. 


364  BOOK   XI  [xi.  39 

This  proposition  is  made  use  of  in  xii.  3,  4.  The  phraseology  is  interest- 
ing because  we  find  one  of  the  paralUlogrammic  faces  of  one  of  the  triangular 
prisms  called  its  base^  and  the  perpendicular  on  this  plane  from  that  vertex  of 
either  triangular  face  which  is  not  in  this  plane  the  height. 

The  proof  is  simple  because  we  have  only  to  complete  parallelepipeds 
which  are  double  the  prisms  respectively  and  then  use  xi.  31.  It  has  to  be 
borne  in  mind,  however,  that,  if  the  parallelepipeds  are  not  rectangular,  the 
proof  in  xi.  28  is  not  sufficient  ,to  establish  the  fact  that  the  parallelepipeds 
are  double  of  the  prisms,  but  has  to  be  supplemented  as  shown  in  the  note  on 
that  proposition,  xii.  4  does,  however,  require  the  theorem  in  its  general 
form. 


BOOK   XII. 


HISTORICAL  NOTE. 

•  The  predominant  feature  of  Book  xii.  is  the  use  of  the  method  of 
exhaustion^  which  is  applied  in  Propositions  2,  3 — 5,  10,  11,  12,  and  (in  a 
slightly  different  form)  in  Propositions  16 — 18.  We  conclude  therefore  that 
for  the  content  of  this  Book  Euclid  was  greatly  indebted  to  Eudoxus,  to  whom 
the  discovery  of  the  method  of  exhaustion  is  attributed.  The  evidence  for 
this  attribution  comes  mainly  from  Archimedes,  (i)  In  the  preface  to  On 
the  Sphere  and  Cylinder  i.,  after  stating  the  main  results  obtained  by  himself 
regarding  the  surface  of  a  sphere  or  a  segment  thereof,  and  the  volume  and 
surface  of  a  right  cylinder  with  height  equal  to  its  diameter  as  compared  with 
those  of  a  sphere  with  the  same  diameter,  Archimedes  adds :  "  Having  now 
discovered  that  the  properties  mentioned  are  true  of  these  figures,  I  cannot 
feel  any  hesitation  in  setting  them  side  by  side  both  with  my  former  investiga- 
tions and  with  those  of  the  theorems  of  Eudoxus  on  solids  which  are  held  to  be 
most  irrefragably  established,  namely  that  any  pyramid  is  one  third  part  of  the 
prism  which  has  the  same  base  with  the  pyramid  and  equal  height  [i.e.  Eucl. 
XII.  7],  and  that  any  cone  is  one  third  part  of  the  cylinder  which  has  the  same 
base  with  the  cone  and  equal  height  [i.e.  Eucl.  xii.  10].  Por,  though  these 
properties  also  were  naturally  inherent  in  the  figures  all  along,  yet  they  were 
in  fact  unknown  to  all  the  many  able  geometers  who  lived  before  Eudoxus 
and  had  not  been  observed  by  any  one."  (2)  In  the  preface  to  the  treatise 
known  as  the  Quadrature  of  the  Parabola  Archimedes  states  the  "  lemma " 
assumed  by  him  and  known  as  the  ** Axiom  of  Archimedes"  (see  note  on  x.  i 
above)  and  proceeds  :  "  Earlier  geometers  (ot  irporcpov  ycwftcrfKu)  have  also 
used  this  lemma;  for  it  is  by  the  use  of  this  same  lemma  that  they  have 
shown  that  circles  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  their  diameters 
[Eucl.  XII.  2],  and  that  spheres  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their 
diameters  [Eucl.  xii.  18],  and  further  that  every  pyramid  is  one  third  part  of  the 
prism  which  has  the  same  base  7vith  the  pyramid  and  equal  height  [Eucl.  xil.  7]; 
also,  that  n^ery  cone  is  one  third  part  of  the  cylinder  which  has  the  same  base 
with  the  cone  and  equal  height  [Eucl.  xii.  10]  they  proved  by  assuming  a  certain 
lemma  similar  to  that  aforesaid,^'  Thus  in  the  first  passage  two  theorems  of 
Eucl.  XII.  are  definitely  attributed  to  Eudoxus ;  and,  when  Archimedes  says, 
in  the  second  passage,  that  "earlier  geometers"  proved  these  two  theorems 
by  means  of  the  lemma  known  as  the  "  Axiom  of  Archimedes "  and  of  a 
lemma  similar  to  it  respectively,  we  can  hardly  suppose  him  to  be  alluding  to 


366  BOOK   XII 

any  other  proof  than  that  given  by  Eudoxus.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  lemma 
used  by  Euclid  to  prove  both  propositions  (xii.  3 — 5  and  7,  and  xii.  10)  is  the 
theorem  of  Eucl.  x.  i.  As  regards  the  connexion  between  the  two  "lemmas" 
see  note  on  x.  i. 

We  are  not,  however,  to  suppose  that  none  of  the  results  obtained  by 
the  method  of  exhaustion  had  been  discovered  before  the  time  of  Eudoxus 
(fl.  about  368 — 5  B.C.).  Two  at  least  are  of  earlier  date,  those  of  Eucl.  xii.  2 
and  XII.  7. 

(a)  Simplicius  {Comment  in  Aristot,  Phys.  p.  61,  ed.  Diels)  quotes 
Eudemus  as  saying,  in  his  History  of  Geometry^  that  Hippocrates  of  Chios 
(fl.  say  430  B.C.)  first  laid  it  down  (I^cto)  that  similar  segments  of  circles  are 
in  the  ratio  of  the  squares  on  their  bases  and  that  he  proved  this  (l^tUwtv)  by 
proving  (Ik  tov  Scifat)  that  the  squares  on  the  diameters  have  the  same  ratio 
as  the  (whole)  circles.  We  know  nothing  of  the  method  by  which  Hippo- 
crates proved  this  proposition;  but,  having  regard  to  the  evidence  from 
Archimedes  quoted  above',  it  is  not  permissible  to  suppose  that  the  method 
was  the  fully  developed  method  of  exhaustion  as  we  know  it. 

(b)  As  regards  the  two  theorems  about  the  volume  of  a  pyramid  and  of  a 
cone  respectively,  which  Eudoxus  was  the  first  to  prove,  a  new  piece  of 
evidence  is  now  forthcoming  in  the  fragment  of  Archimedes  recently  brought 
to  light  at  Constantinople  and  published  by  Heiberg  (for  the  Greek  text  see 
Hermes  xlii.,  1907,  pp.  235 — 303;  for  Heiberg's  translation  and  Zeuthen's 
notes  see  Bibliotheca  Mathematica  viij,  1907,  pp.  321 — 363).  This  is  nothing 
less  than  a  considerable  portion  of  a  work  under  the  title  'Apx^W^^s  wcpl  tQiv 
^r\ypi.v\,K<m^  0€fapnrffjLaTiav  irpos  ^^paroaBivrjv  l^8o9,  which  "Method,"  addressed 
to  Eratosthenes,  is  the  l^hov  on  which,  according  to  Suidas,  Theodosius 
wrote  a  commentary,  and  which  is  several  times  cited  by  Heron  in  his 
Aietrica-y  and  it  adds  a  new  and  important  chapter  to  the  history  of  the 
integral  calculus.  In  the  preface  to  this  work  (Hermes  I.e.  p.  245,  Bibliotheca 
Mathematica  I.e.  p.  323)  Archimedes  alludes  to  the  theorems  which  he  first 
discovered  by  means  of  mechanical  considerations,  but  proved  afterwards  by 
geometry  because  the  investigation  by  means  of  mechanics  did  not  constitute 
a  rigid  proof;  he  observes,  however,  that  the  mechanical  method  is  of  great 
use  for  the  discovery  of  theorems,  and  it  is  much  easier  to  provide  the  rigid 
proof  when  the  fact  to  be  proved  has  once  been  discovered  than  it  would  be 
if  nothing  were  known  to  begin  with.  He  goes  on  :  "  Hence  too,  in  the  case 
of  those  theorems  the  proof  of  which  was  first  discovered  by  Eudoxus,  namely 
those  relating  to  the  cone  and  the  pyramid,  that  the  cone  is  one  third  part  of 
the  cylinder,  and  the  pyramid  one  third  part  of  the  prism,  having  the  same  base 
and  equal  height,  no  small  part  of  the  credit  will  naturally  be  assigned  to 
Democritus,  who  was  the  first  to  make  the  statement  (of  the  fact)  regarding 
the  said  figure  [i.e.  property],  though  without  proving  it."  Hence  the  discoi'ery 
of  the  two  theorems  must  now  be  attributed  to  Democritus  (fl.  towards  the 
end  of  5th  cent.  ac).  The  words  "without  proving  it"  (x^pU  dwoS€i(€m)  do 
not  mean  that  Democritus  gave  no  sort  of  proof,  but  only  that  he  did  not  give 
a  proof  on  the  rigorous  lines  required  later ;  for  the  same  words  are  used  by 
Archimedes  of  his  own  investigations  by  means  of  mechanics,  which,  however, 
do  constitute  a  reasoned  argument.  The  character  of  Archimedes*  mechanical 
arguments  combined  with  a  passage  of  Plutarch  about  a  particular  question  in 
infinitesimals  said  to  have  been  raised  by  Democritus  may  perhaps  give  a  clue 
to  the  line  of  Democritus*  argument  as  regards  the  prism.     The  essential 


HISTORICAL   NOTE  367 

feature  of  Archimedes'  mechanical  arguments  in  this  tract  is  that  he  regards 
an  area  as  the  sum  of  an  infinite  number  of  straight  lines  parallel  to  one 
another  and  terminated  by  the  boundary  or  boundaries  of  the  closed  figure 
the  area  of  which  is  to  be  found,  and  a  volume  as  the  sum  of  an  infinite 
number  of  plane  sections  parallel  to  one  another :  which  is  of  course  the  same 
thing  as  taking  (as  we  do  in  the  integral  calculus)  the  sum  of  an  infinite 
number  of  strips  of  breadth  dx  (say),  when  dx  becomes  indefinitely  small,  or 
the  sum  of  an  infinite  number  of  parallel  laminae  of  depth  dz  (say),  when  dz 
becomes  indefinitely  small.  To  give  only  one  instance,  we  may  take  the 
case  of  the  area  of  a  segment  of  a  parabola  cut  off  by  a  chord. 

Let  CBA  be  the  parabolic  segment,  CE  the  tangent  at  C  meeting  the 


T    Q 


diameter  EBD  through  the  middle  point  of  the  chord  CA  in  E^  so  that 

EB^BD, 

Draw  AF  parallel  to  ED  meeting  CE  produced  in  F.  Produce  CB  to 
ZT  so  that  CK-KH^  where  K  is  the  point  in  which  CH  meets  AF\  and 
suppose  CHX.0  be  a  lever. 

Let  any  diameter  MNPO  be  drawn  meeting  the  curve  in  P  and  CF^  CK^ 
CA  \n  M^  N^  O  respectively. 

Archimedes  then  observes  that 

CA\AO  =  MO\OP 
("  for  this  is  proved  in  a  lemma  "), 
whence  HK :  KN=  MO  :  OP, 

so  that,  if  a  straight  line  TG  equal  to  PO  be  placed  with  its  middle  point  at 
H^  the  straight  line  MO  with  centre  of  gravity  at  Ny  and  the  straight  line  TG 
with  centre  of  gravity  at  ZT,  will  balance  about  AT. 

Taking  all  other  parts  of  diameters  like  PO  intercepted  between  the  curve 
and  CAy  and  placing  equal  straight  lines  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  ZT, 
these  straight  lines  collected  at  ZT  will  balance  (about  K)  all  the  lines  like 
MO  parallel  to  FA  intercepted  within  the  triangle  CFA  in  the  positions  in 
which  they  severally  lie  in  the  figure. 

Hence  Archimedes  infers  that  an  area  equal  to  that  of  the  parabolic 
segment  hung  at  H  will  balance  (about  K)  the  triangle  CFA  hung  at  its 
centre  of  gravity,  the  point  X  (a  point  on  CK  such  that  CK=^XK\  and 
therefore  that 

(area  of  triangle  CFA) :  (area  of  segment)  =  HK :  KX 

=  3:1. 


368  BOOK  XII 

from  which  it  follows  that 

area  of  parabolic  segment  =  ^AABC, 

The  same  sort  of  argument  is  used  for  solids,  p/ane  sections  taking  the 
place  of  straight  lines, 

Archimedes  is  careful  to  state  once  more  that  this  method  of  argument 
does  not  constitute  a  proof.  Thus,  at  the  end  of  the  above  proposition  about 
the  parabolic  segment,  he  adds :  "  This  property  is  of  course  not  proved  by 
what  has  just  been  said ;  but  it  has  furnished  a  sort  of  indication  {l/i^criv  tlvo) 
that  the  conclusion  is  true." 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  passage  of  Plutarch  (De  Comm.  Not,  adv,  Stoicos 
XXXIX.  3)  about  Democritus  above  referred  to.  Plutarch  speaks  of  Democritus 
as  having  raised  the  question  in  natural  philosophy  (^uo-ucws) :  "  if  a  cone 
were  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base  [by  which  is  clearly  meant  a  plane 
indefinitely  near  to  the  base],  what  must  we  think  of  the  surfaces  of  the 
sections,  that  they  are  equal  or  unequal  ?  For,  if  they  are  unequal,  they  will 
make  the  cone  irregular,  as  having  many  indentations,  like  steps,  and  uneven- 
nesses ;  but,  if  they  are  equal,  the  sections  will  be  equal,  and  the  cone  will 
appear  to  have  the  property  of  the  cylinder  and  to  be  made  up  of  equal,  not 
unequal  circles,  which  is  very  absurd.''  The  phrase  *  *  made  up  of  equal . . .  circles  " 
(cf  tfftok  mr/fC€i/Aevos...«cvKXu>v)  shows  that  Democritus  already  had  the  idea  of 
a  solid  being  the  sum  of  an  infinite  number  of  parallel  planes,  or  indefinitely 
thin  laminae,  indefinitely  near  together :  a  most  important  anticipation  of  the 
same  thought  which  led  to  such  fruitful  results  in  Archimedes.  If  then  one 
may  hazard  a  conjecture  as  to  Democritus'  argument  with  regard  to  a  pyramid, 
it  seems  probable  that  he  would  notice  that,  if  two  pyramids  of  the  same 
height  and  equal  triangular  bases  are  respectively  cut  by  planes  parallel  to  the 
base  and  dividing  the  heights  in  the  same  ratio,  the  corresponding  sections  of 
the  two  pyramids  are  equal,  whence  he  would  infer  that  the  pyramids  are 
equal  as  being  the  sum  of  the  same  infinite  number  of  equal  plane  sections 
or  indefinitely  thin  laminae.  (This  would  be  a  particular  anticipation  of 
Cavalieri's  proposition  that  the  areal  or  solid  content  of  two  figures  are  equal 
if  two  sections  of  them  taken  at  the  same  height,  whatever  the  height  may  be, 
always  give  equal  straight  lines  or  equal  surfaces  respectively.)  And 
Democritus  would  of  course  see  that  the  three  pyramids  into  which  a  prism 
on  the  same  base  and  of  equal  height  with  the  original  pyramid  is  divided  (as 
in  Eucl.  XII.  7)  satisfy  this  test  of  equality,  so  that  the  pyramid  would  be  one 
third  part  of  the  prism.  The  extension  to  a  pyramid  with  a  polygonal  base 
would  be  easy.  And  Democritus  may  have  stated  the  proposition  for  the 
cone  (of  course  without  an  absolute  proof)  as  a  natural  inference  from  the 
result  of  increasing  indefinitely  the  number  of  sides  in  a  regular  polygon 
forming  the  base  of  a  pyramid. 


BOOK  XII.     PROPOSITIONS. 

Proposition  i. 

Similar  polygons  inscribed  in  circles  are  to  one  another  as 
the  squares  on  the  diameters. 

Let  ABCy  FGH  be  circles, 
let  ABCDE,  FGHKL  be  similar  polygons  inscribed  in  them, 
and  let  BM,  GN  be  diameters  of  the  circles  ; 
I  say  that,  as  the  square  on  BM  is  to  the  square  on  GN^  so 
is  the  polygon  ABCDE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL. 

A 


For  let  BF,  AM,  GL,  FN  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  polygon  ABCDF  is  similar  to  the  polygon 
FGHKL, 

the  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFL, 
and,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  GF  to  FL.  [vi.  Def.  i] 

Thus  BAE,  GFL  are  two  triangles  which  have  one  angle 
equal  to  one  angle,  namely  the  angle  BAE  to   the  angle 
GFL,  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional ; 
therefore  the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 
FGL.  [VI.  6] 

Therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  FLG. 

H.  E.  III.  24 


370  BOOK   XII  [XII.  I 

But  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  AMB, 

for  they  stand  on  the  same  circumference  ;  [ui.  27] 

and  the  angle  FL  G  to  the  angle  FNG  ; 

therefore  the  angle  AMB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FNG. 

But  the  right  angle  BAM  is  also  equal  to  the  right  angle 
GFN;  [m.  31] 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle. 

[i-  32] 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABM  is  equiangular  with  the 
triangle  FGN. 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  BM  is  to  GN,  so  is  BA 
to  GF,  [vi.  4] 

But  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  BM  to  the  square  on  GN 
is  duplicate  of  the  ratio  of  BM  to  GN, 

and  the  ratio  of  the  polygon  ABCDE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL 
is  duplicate  of  the  ratio  of  BA  to  GF ;  [vi.  20] 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  BM  is  to  the  square  on  GN, 
so  is  the  polygon  ABCDE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  u. 

As,  from  this  point  onward,  the  text  of  each  proposition  usually  occupies 
considerable  space,  I  shall  generally  give  in  the  notes  a  summary  of  the 
argument,  to  enable  it  to  be  followed  more  easily. 

Here  we  have  to  prove  that  a  pair  of  corresponding  sides  are  in  the  ratio 
of  the  corresponding  diameters. 

Since  z_s  BAE,  GFL  are  equal,  and  the  sides  about  those  angles 
proportional, 

A  s  ABEy  FGL  are  equiangular, 

so  that  lAEB  =  lFLG. 

Hence  their  equals  in  the  same  segments,  z_  s  AMB,  FNG,  are  equal. 
And  the  right  angles  BAM,  G FN  aire  equal. 
Therefore  As  ABM,  FGN  aire  equiangular,  so  that 

BM :  GN=  BA  :  GF 

The  duplicates  of  these  ratios  are  therefore  equal, 

whence  (polygon  ABCDE) :  (polygon  FGHKL) 

=  duplicate  ratio  of  BA  to  GF 

=  duplicate  ratio  of  BM  to  GN 

=  BM'  :  GN'. 


XII.  2] 


PROPOSITIONS   I,  2 


371 


Proposition  2. 
Circles  are  to  one  another  as  the  squares  on  the  diameters. 

Let   ABCD,    EFGH  be   circles,    and   BD,   FH   theii 
diameters ; 

I  say  that,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is 
the  square  on  BD  to  the  square  on  FH. 

A 

o> 


8 

T 

For,  if  the  square  on  BD  is  not  to  the  square  on  FH  as 
the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH, 
then,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  will 
the  circle  ABCD  be  either  to  some  less  area  than  the  circle 
EFGH,  or  to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  area  S. 

Let  the  square  EFGH  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH  \ 
then  the  inscribed  square  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle 
EFGH,  inasmuch  as,  if  through  the  points  E,  F,  G,  H  we 
draw  tangents  to  the  circle,  the  square  EFGH  is  half  the 
square  circumscribed  about  the  circle,  and  the  circle  is  less 
than  the  circumscribed  square ; 

hence  the  inscribed  square  EFGH  is  greater  than  the  half  of 
the  circle  EFGH. 

Let  the  circumferences  EF,  FG,  GH,  HE  be  bisected  at 
the  points  K,  L,  M,  N, 

and  let  EK,  KF,  FL,  LG,  GM,  MH,  HN,  NE  be  joined  ; 
therefore  each  of  the  triangles  EKF,  FLG,  GMH,  HNE  is 
also  greater  than  the  half  of  the  segment  of  the  circle  about 
it,  inasmuch  as,  if  through  the  points  K,  Z,  M,  N  we  draw 
tangents  to  the  circle  and  complete  the  parallelograms  on  the 
straight  lines  EF,  FG,  GH,  HE,  each  of  the  triangles  EKF, 


372  BOOK  XII  [XII.  2 

FLG,    GMH,    HNE    will    be   half   of    the    parallelogram 
about  it, 

while  the  segment  about  it  is  less  than  the  parallelogram  ; 
hence   each   of  the   triangles    EKF,   FLG,    GMH,   HNE 
is    greater    than    the    half    of  the   segment    of   the    circle 
about  it. 

Thus,  by  bisecting  the  remaining  circumferences  and 
joining  straight  lines,  and  by  doing  this  continually,  we  shall 
leave  some  segments  of  the  circle  which  will  be  less  than  the 
excess  by  which  the  circle  EFGH  exceeds  the  area  S. 

For  it  was  proved  in  the  first  theorem  of  the  tetith  book 
that,  if  two  unequal  magnitudes  be  set  out,  and  if  from  the 
greater  there  be  subtracted  a  magnitude  greater  than  the  half, 
and  from  that  which  is  left  a  greater  than  the  half,  and  if  this 
be  done  continually,  there  will  be  left  some  magnitude  which 
will  be  less  than  the  lesser  magnitude  set  out. 

Let  segments  be  left  such  as  described,  and  let  the 
segments  of  the  circle  EFGH  on  EK,  KF,  FL,  LG,  GM, 
MH,  HN,  NE  be  less  than  the  excess  by  which  the  circle 
EFGH  exceeds  the  area  S. 

Therefore  the  remainder,  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN,  is 
greater  than  the  area  S. 

Let  there  be  inscribed,  also,  in  the  circle  ABCD  the  poly- 
gon AODPCQDR  similar  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN] 
therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  is 
the  polygon  AOBPCQDR  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN. 

[XII.  i] 

But,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  also 
is  the  circle  ABCD  to  the  area  S  ; 

therefore  also,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  area  5,  so  is  the 
polygon  AOBPCQDR  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN ; 

[V.   II] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  polygon 
inscribed  in  it,  so  is  the  area  5  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN, 

[V-  i6] 
But  the  circle  ABCD  is  greater  than  the  polygon  inscribed 
in  it ; 

therefore   the   area   S   is    also    greater    than    the    polygon 
EKFLGMHN. 


XII.  2]  PROPOSITION   2  373 

But  it  is  also  less  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH, 
so  is  not  the  circle  ABCD  to  any  area  less  than  the  circle 
EFGH, 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  the  circle  EFGH 
to  any  area  less  than  the  circle  ABCD  as  the  square  on  FH 
is  to  the  square  on  BD. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  circle  ABCD  to  any  area 
greater  than  the  circle  EFGH  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the 
square  on  FH. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater  area  S. 

Therefore,  inversely,  as  the  square  on  FH  is  to  the  square 
on  DB,  so  is  the  area  5"  to  the  circle  ABCD. 

But,  as  the  area  5  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the  circle 
EFGH  to  some  area  less  than  the  circle  ABCD ; 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  FH  is  to  the  square  on  BD, 
so   is  the  circle  EFGH  to  some  area  less  than  the  circle 
ABCD:  [v.  ii] 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH, 
so  is  not  the  circle  ABCD  to  any  area  greater  than  the  circle 
EFGH. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  in  that  ratio  to  any 
area  less  than  the  circle  EFGH ; 

therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  is 
the  circle  ABCD  to  the  circle  EFGH. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma. 

I  say  that,  the  area  S  being  greater  than  the  circle 
EFGH,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the  circle 
EFGH  to  some  area  less  than  the  circle  ABCD. 

For  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  the  area  5"  is  to  the  circle 
ABCD,  so  is  the  circle  EFGH  to  the  area  T. 

I  say  that  the  area  T  is  less  than  the  circle  ABCD. 

For  since,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the 
circle  EFGH  to  the  area  7*, 


374  BOOK  XII  [xii.  2 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so 
is  the  circle  A  BCD  to  the  area  T.  [v.  16] 

But  the  area  S  is  greater  than  the  circle  EFGH ; 
therefore  the  circle  ABCD  is  also  greater  than  the  area  T. 

Hence,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the 
circle  EFGH  to  some  area  less  than  the  circle  ABCD. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Though  this  theorem  is  said  to  have  been  proved  by  Hippocrates,  we  may 
with  tolerable  certainty  attribute  the  proof  of  it  given  by  Euclid  to  Eudoxus, 
to  whom  XH.  7  Por.  and  xii.  10  (which  Euclid  proves  in  exactly  the  same 
manner)  are  specifically  attributed  by  Archimedes.  As  regards  the  lemma 
used  herein  (Eucl.  x.  i)  and  the  somewhat  different  lemma  by  means  of  which 
Archimedes  says  that  the  theorems  of  xn.  2,  xn.  7  Por.  and  xii.  18  were 
proved,  see  my  note  on  x.  i  above. 

The  first  essential  in  this  proposition  is  to  prove  that  we  can  exhaust  a 
circle,  in  the  sense  of  x.  i,  by  successively  inscribing  in  it  regular  polygons, 
each  of  which  has  twice  as  many  sides  as  the  preceding  one.  We  take  first 
an  inscribed  square,  then  bisect  the  arcs  subtended  by  the  sides  and  so  form 
an  equilateral  polygon  of  eight  sides,  then  do  the  same  with  the  latter,  forming 
a  polygon  of  16  sides^  and  so  on.  And  we  have  to  prove  that  what  is  left 
over  when  any  one  of  these  polygons  is  taken  away  from  the  circle  is  more 
than  half  exhausted  yih^n  the  next  polygon  is  made  and  subtracted  from  the 
circle. 

Euclid  proves  that  the  inscribed  square  is  greater  than  half  the  circle  and 
that  the  regular  octagon  when  subtracted  takes  away  more  than  half  of  what 
was  left  by  the  square.  He  then  infers  that  the  same 
thing  will  happen  whenever  the  numoer  of  sides  is 
doubled. 

This  can  be  seen  generally  by  taking  any  arc  of  a 
circle  cut  off  by  a  chord  AB,  Bisect  the  arc  in  C. 
Draw  a  tangent  to  the  circle  at  C,  and  let  AD,  BE 
be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  tangent.   Join  AC^  CB. 

Then  DE  is  parallel  to  AB,  since 
lECB  =  L  CAB,  in  alternate  segment,    [in.  32] 
=  L  CBA,  [ni.  29,  I.  5] 

Thus  ABED  is  a  O ; 
and  it  is  greater  than  the  segment  ACB. 

Therefore  its  half,  the  ^  A  CB,  is  greater  than  half  the  segment. 

Thus,  by  X.  i,  Euclid's  construction  of  successive  regular  polygons  in 
a  circle,  if  continued  far  enough,  will  at  length  leave  segments  which  are 
together  less  than  any  given  area. 

Now  let  X,  X'  be  the  areas  of  the  circles,  d,  d'  their  diameters,  respectively. 

Then,  if  X:X'^d^:d'\ 

d^:d'^  =  X:  S, 
where  S  is  some  area  either  greater  or  less  than  X', 

I.     Suppose  S  <  X\ 

Continue  the  construction  of  polygons  in  X'  until  we  arrive  at  one  which 


xii.  2]  PROPOSITION   2  375 

leaves  over  segments  together  less  than  the  excess  of  X'  over  5,  i.e.  a  polygon 
such  that 

X'  >  (polygon  in  X')  >  S, 

Inscribe  in  the  circle  X  a  polygon  similar  to  that  in  X'. 

Then  (polygon  in  X) :  (polygon  in  X')  =  d^ :  d'^  [xii.  i] 

=  X  :  S,by  hypothesis ; 
and,  alternately, 

(polygon  in  A") :  AT  =  (polygon  in  X') :  S. 

But  (polygon  in  A')  <  AT; 

therefore  (polygon  in  X')  <  S. 

But,  by  construction,       (polygon  in  X')  >  5 : 
which  is  impossible. 

Hence  S  cannot  be  /ess  than  X'  as  supposed. 

II.     Suppose  S>  X', 

Since  d^:d"'  =  X'.  S, 

we  have,  inversely,  d"^ :  d^  =  S:  X. 

Suppose  that  S:X=X' :  T, 

whence,  since  S>  X\  X  >  T,  [v.  14] 

Consequently  d'""  :  d^' =  X'  :  T, 

where  T  <  X. 

This  can  be  proved  impossible  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  shown  in  Part  I. 

Hence  S  cannot  be  greater  than  X'  as  supposed. 

Since  then  S  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  X\ 

S^X\ 
and  therefore  d'  :  d"'  =  X  ,  X\ 

With  reference  to  the  assumption  that  there  is  some  space  S  such  that 
d^  :  d"'-=X  :  5, 
i.e.  that  there  is  a  fourth  proportional  to  the  areas  d\  d"\  X,  Simson  observes 
that  it  is  sufficient,  in  this  and  the  like  cases,  that  a  thing  made  use  of  in  the 
reasoning  can  possibly  exist,  though  it  cannot  be  exhibited  by  a  geometrical 
construction.     As  regards  the  assumption  see  note  on  v.  18  above. 

There  is  grave  reason  for  suspecting  the  genuineness  of  the  Lemma  at  the 
end  of  the  proposition  ;  though,  if  it  be  rejected,  it  will  be  necessary  to  delete 
the  words  **as  was  before  proved"  in  corresponding  places  in  xii.  5,  18. 

It  will  be  observed  that  Euclid  proves  the  impossibility  in  the  second  case 
by  reducing  it  to  the  first  If  it  is  desired  to  prove  the  second  case  indepen- 
dently, we  must  circumscribe  successive  polygons  to  the  circles  instead  of 
inscribing  them,  in  the  way  shown  by  Archimedes  in  his  first  proposition  on 
the  Measurement  of  a  circle.  Of  course  we  require,  as  a  preliminary,  the 
proposition  corresponding  to  xii.  i,  that 
Similar  polygons  circumscribed  about 
circles  are  to  one  another  as  the  squares 
on  the  diameters. 

Let  AB,  A'B  be  corresponding  sides 
of  the  two  similar  polygons.  Then  l  s 
OAB,  GAB'  are  equal, since  AO,  A'O 
bisect  equal  angles. 


376  BOOK  XII  [xii.  2 

Similarly    lABO^lABO, 

Therefore  As  AOB^  AOB  are  similar,  so  that  their  areas  are  in  the 
duplicate  ratio  of  AB  to  AB, 

The  radii  ^C,  O  C  drawn  to  the  points  of  contact  are  perpendicular  to 
AB^  A'B^  and  it  follows  that 

AB  :  A'B  =  CO  :  Ca. 

Thus  the  polygons  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  radii, 
and  therefore  of  the  diameters. 

Now  suppose  a  square  ABCD  described  about 
a  circle. 

Make  an  octagon  described  about  the  circle  by 
drawing  tangents  at  the  points  E  etc.,  where  OA  etc. 
meet  the  circle. 

Then  shall  the  tangent  at  E  cut  off  more  than 
half  of  the  area  between  AK^  AH  and  the  arc 
HEK, 

For  the  angle  AEG  is  right,  and  is  therefore 
>  lEAG, 

Therefore  AG>EG 

>GK, 

Therefore  t.AGE>C^  EGK, 

Similarly  A  AFE  >  A  EEIT. 

Hence  A  A  EG  >  J  (re-entrant  quadrilateral  AHEK), 

and  afortioriy       t^AFG  >  ^  (area  between  AH,  AJCa.nd  the  arc). 

Thus  the  octagon  takes  from  the  square  more  than  half  the  space  between 
the  square  and  the  circle. 

Similarly,  if  a  figure  of  16  equal  sides  be  circumscribed  by  cutting  off 
symmetrically  the  corners  of  the  octagon,  it  will  take  away  more  than  half  of 
the  space  between  the  octagon  and  circle. 

Suppose  now,  with  the  original  notation,  that 

where  S  is  greater  than  X', 

Continue  the  construction  of  circumscribed  polygons  about  X'  until  the 
total  area  between  the  polygon  and  the  circle  is  less  than  the  difference 
between  S  and  X\  i.e.  till 

S  >  (polygon  about  X')  >  X. 
Circumscribe  a  similar  polygon  about  X, 
Then         (polygon  about  X) :  (polygon  about  X')  =  //* :  d"^ 

=  X:  Sf  by  hypothesis, 
and,  alternately, 

(polygon  about  X) :  X=  (polygon  about  X') :  S. 

But  (polygon  about  X)  >  X, 

Therefore  (polygon  about  X)  >  S. 

But  S  >  (polygon  about  X') :  [above] 

which  is  impossible. 

Hence  S  cannot  be  greater  than  A". 


XII.  2] 


PROPOSITION   2 


377 


Legendre  proves  this  proposition  by  a  method  equally  rigorous  but  not,  I 
think,  possessing  any  advantages  over  Euclid's.  It  depends  on  a  lemma 
corresponding  to  Eucl.  xii.  i6,  but  with  another  part  added  to  it. 

Two  concentric  circles  being  givefi,  we  can  always  inscribe  in  the  greater  a 
regular  polygon  such  that  its  sides  do  not  meet  the  circumference  of  the  lesser,  and 
we  can  also  circumscribe  about  the  lesser  a  regular 
polygon  such  that  its  sides  do  not  meet  the  circum-  ^^      B 

ference  of  the  greater. 

Let  CAy  CB  be  the  radii  of  the  circles. 

I.  At  A  on  the  inner  circle  draw  the  tangent 
DE  meeting  the  outer  circle  in  Z>,  E. 

Inscribe  in  the  outer  circle  any  of  the  regular 
polygons  which  we  can  inscribe,  e.g.  a  square. 

Bisect  the  arc  subtended  by  a  side,  bisect 
the  half,  bisect  that  again,  and  so  on,  until  we 
arrive  at  an  arc  less  than  the  arc  DBE. 

Let  this  arc  be  MN,  and  suppose  it  so  placed 
that  B  is  its  middle  point. 

Then  the  chord  MN  is  clearly  more  distant  from  the  centre  C  than  DE 
is ;  and  the  regular  polygon,  of  which  MN  is  a  side,  does  not  anywhere  meet 
the  circumference  of  the  inner  circle. 

II.  Join  CM,  CN,  meeting  DE  in  P,  Q. 

Then  PQ  will  be  the  side  of  a  polygon  circumscribed  about  the  inner 
circle  and  similar  to  the  polygon  inscribed  in  the  outer ; 
and  the  circumscribed  polygon  of  which  PQ  is  a  side  will  not  anywhere  meet 
the  outer  circle.  ^ 

Legendre  now  proves  xii.  2  after  the  following  manner. 
For   brevity,  let  us  denote   the  area  of  the  circle  with  radius   CA   by 
(circ.  CA), 

Then  it  is  required  to  prove  that,  if  OB  be  the  radius  of  a  second  circle, 
(circ.  CA) :  (circ.  OB)  =  CA^ :  OB", 


w 


Suppose,  if  possible,  that  this  relation  is  not  true.     Then  CA^  will  be  to 
OB^  as  (circ.  CA)  is  to  an  area  greater  or  less  than  (circ.  OB), 

I.     Suppose,  first,  that 

CA^ :  OB"  =  (circ.  CA) :  (circ  0D\ 
where  OD  is  less  than  OB, 


378  BOOK   XII  [xii.  2,  3 

Inscribe  in  the  circle  with  radius  OB  a  regular  polygon  such  that  its  sides 
do  not  anywhere  meet  the  circumference  of  the  circle  with  centre  OD ; 

[Lemma] 
and  inscribe  a  similar  polygon  in  the  other  circle. 

The  areas  of  the  polygons  will  then  be  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  CA  to  OBy 
or  [xii.  i] 

(polygon  in  circ.  CA) :  (polygon  in  circ.  OB) 
=  CA^ :  OB^ 

-  (circ.  CA) :  (circ.  0D\  by  hypothesis. 
But  this  is  impossible,  because  the  polygon  in  (circ.  CA)  is  less  than  (circ. 
CA\  but  the  polygon  in  (circ.  OB)  is  greater  than  (circ.  01)). 

Therefore  CA^  cannot  be  to  OB^  as  (circ.  CA)  is  to  a  less  circle  than 
(circ.  0B\ 

II.     Suppose,  if  possible,  that 

CA^  :  OB^  =  (circ.  CA) :  (some  circle  >  circ.  OB), 
Then  inversely 

OB^  :  CA"^  -  (circ.  OB) :  (some  circle  <  circ.  CA\ 
and  this  is  proved  impossible  exactly  as  in  Part  I. 

Therefore  CA^  :  OB"  =  (circ.  CA) :  (circ.  OB), 


Proposition  3. 

Any  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  is  divided  into 
tzvo  pyramids  equal  and  similar  to  one  another,  similar  to  the 
whole  and  /laving  triangular  bases,  and  into  two  equal  prisms  ; 
and  the  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  whole 
pyramid. 

Let  there  be  a  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the 
base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex  ; 
I  say  that  the  pyramid  ABCD  is 
divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to 
one  another,  having  triangular  bases 
and  similar  to  the  whole  pyramid, 
and  into  two  equal  prisms  ;  and  the 
two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half 
of  the  whole  pyramid. 

For  let  AB,  BC,  CA,  AD,  DB, 
DC  be  bisected  at  the  points  E,  F, 
G,  H,  K,  L,  and  let  HE,  EG,  GH,  HK,  KL,  LH,  KF,  FG 
be  joined. 

Since  AE  is  equal  to  EB,  and  AH  to  DH, 
therefore  EH  is  parallel  to  DI).  [vi.  2] 


XII.  3]  PROPOSITIONS   2,  3  379 

For  the  same  reason 
HK  is  also  parallel  to  AB. 

Therefore  HEBK  is  a  parallelogram  ; 
therefore  HK  is  equal  to  EB.  [i.  34] 

But  EB  is  equal  to  EA  ; 
therefore  AE  is  also  equal  to  //K. 

But  A//  is  also  equal  to  //D  ; 
therefore  the  two  sides  EA,  AH  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
KH,  HD  respectively  ; 

and  the  angle  EAH  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHD ; 
therefore  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  KD.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  triangle  AEH  is  equal  and  similar  to  the 
triangle  HKD. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  triangle  AHG  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle 
HLD. 

Now,  since  two  straight  lines  EH,  HG  meeting  one 
another  are  parallel  to  two  straight  lines  KD,  DL  meeting 
one  another,  and  are  not  in  the  same  plane,  they  will  contain 
equal  angles.  [xi.  10] 

Therefore  the  angle  EHG  is  equal  to  the  angle  KDL, 
And,  since  the  two  straight  lines  EH^  HG  are  equal  to  the 
two  KD,  DL  respectively, 

and  the  angle  EHG  is  equal  to  the  angle  KDL, 
therefore  the  base  EG  is  equal  to  the  base  KL  ;  [i.  4] 

.therefore   the   triangle   EHG   is   equal   and   similar   to  the 
triangle  KDL. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  AEG  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle 
HKL, 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the 
base  and  the  point  H  the  vertex  is  equal  and  similar  to  the 
pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is  the  base  and  the  point 
D  the  vertex.  [xi.  Def.  10] 

And,  since  HK  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  AB,  one  of  the 
sides  of  the  triangle  ADB, 


38o  BOOK  XII  [xii.  3 

the  triangle  ADB  is  equiangular  to  the  triangle  DHK,  [i.  29] 

and  they  have  their  sides  proportional ; 

therefore  the  triangle  ADB  is  similar  to  the  triangle  DHK. 

[vi.  Def.  i] 
For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  DEC  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  DKL,  and 
the  triangle  ADC  to  the  triangle  DLH. 

Now,  since  the  two  straight  lines  BAy  AC  meeting  one 
another  are  parallel  to  the  two  straight  lines  AT/,  HL  meeting 
one  another,  not  in  the  same  plane,  they  will  contain  equal 
angles.  [xi.  10] 

Therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHL, 

And,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  KH  to  HL  ; 
therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  HKL, 

Therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is 
the  base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex  is  similar  to  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex. 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is  the  base 
and  the  point  D  the  vertex  was  proved  similar  to  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and  the  point  H  the 
vertex. 

Therefore  each  of  the  pyramids  AEGH,  HKLD  is 
similar  to  the  whole  pyramid  ABCD. 

Next,  since  BF  is  equal  to  FCy 
the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  double  of  the  triangle  GFC 

And  since,  if  there  be  two  prisms  of  equal  height,  and  one 
have  a  parallelogram  as  base,  and  the  other  a  triangle,  and  if 
the  parallelogram  be  double  of  the  triangle,  the  prisms  are 
equal,  .  [xi.  39] 

therefore  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  BKF, 
EHG,  and  the  three  parallelograms  EBFG,  EBKH,  HKFG 
is  equal  to  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  GFC, 
HKL  and  the  three  parallelograms  KFCL,  LCGH,  HKFG. 
And  it  is  manifest  that  each  of  the  prisms,  namely  that  in 
which  the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  the  base  and  the  straight 
line  HK  is  its  opposite,  and  that  in  which  the  triangle  GFC  is 
the  base  and  the  triangle  HKL  its  opposite,  is  greater  than 
each  of  the  pyramids  of  which  the  triangles  AEG,  HKL  are 
the  bases  and  the  points  //,  D  the  vertices, 


XII.  3]  PROPOSITION   3  381 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  join  the  straight  lines  EF,  EK,  the  prism 
in  which  the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  the  base  and  the  straight 
line  HKits  opposite  is  greater  than  the  pyramid  of  which  the 
triangle  EBF  is  the  base  and  the  point  K  the  vertex. 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  EBF  is  the  base 
and  the  point  K  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which 
the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and  the  point  H  the  vertex  ; 
for  they  are  contained  by  equal  and  similar  planes. 

Hence  also  the  prism  in  which  the  parallelogram  EBFG 
is  the  base  and  the  straight  line  HK  its  opposite  is  greater 
than  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and 
the  point  H  the  vertex. 

But  the  prism  in  which  the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  the 
base  and  the  straight  line  HK  its  opposite  is  equal  to  the 
prism  in  which  the  triangle  GFC  is  the  base  and  the  triangle 
HKL  its  opposite, 

and  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and 
the  point  H  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the 
triangle  HKL  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex. 

Therefore  the  said  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  said 
two  pyramids  of  which  the  triangles  AEG,  HKL  are  the 
bases  and  the  points  H,  D  the  vertices. 

Therefore  the  whole  pyramid,  of  which  the  triangle  ABC 
is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex,  has  been  divided  into 
two  pyramids  equal  to  one  another  and  into  two  equal  prisms, 
and  the  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  whole 
pyramid. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  will  denote  a  pyramid  with  vertex  D  and  base  ABC  by  D  (ABC)  or 
D-ABC  and  the  triangular  prism  with  triangles  GCF,  HLK  for  bases  by 
(GCF,  HLK\ 

The  following  are  the  steps  of  the  proof. 

I.     To  prove  pyramid  H{AEG)  equal  and  similar  to  pyramid  D(HKL\ 
Since  sides  of  A  DAB  are  bisected  at  H,  E^  K, 

HE  II  DB,  and  HK  ||  AB, 
Hence  HK^EB  =  EA, 

HE  =  KB^DK. 
Therefore  (1)  As  HAE,  DHK slxq  equal  and  similar. 
Similarly  (2)  As  HAG,  DHL  are  equal  and  similar. 
Again,  LH,  HK  are  respectively  ||  to  GA,  AE  in  a  different  plane ; 
therefore  l  GAE  =  l.  LHK. 


382  BCX)K  XII  [xii.  3,  4 

And  LHy  HK  are  respectively  equal  to  GAy  AE, 
Therefore  (3)  As  GAE,  LHK 2ltq  equal  and  similar. 
Similarly  (4)  A  s  HGE^  DLK  are  equal  and  similar. 
Therefore  [xi.  Def.  10]  the  pyramids  H{AEG)  and  D{HKL)  are  equal 
and  similar. 

II.  To  prove  the  pyramid  D  {HKL)  similar  to  the  pyramid  D  {ABC), 
(i)     The  As  DHK,  DAB  are  equiangular  and  therefore  similar. 
Similarly  (2)  As  DLH^  DC  A  are  similar,  as  also  (3)  the  As  DLK^  DCB, 
Again,  BA^  AC  are  respectively  parallel  to  K/f,  HL  in  a  different  plane  ; 

therefore  lBAC=^l  KHL, 

And  BA:AC=KH:BL. 

Therefore  (4)  As  BAC^  KHL  are  similar. 

Consequently  the  pyramid  D  (ABC)  is  similar  to  the  pyramid  D  {JiKL\ 
and  therefore  also  to  the  pyramid  H{AEG), 

III.  To  prove  prism  {GCF,  HLK)  equal  to  prism  {HGE,  KFB), 

The  prisms  may  be  regarded  as  having  the  same  height  (the  distance 
between  the  planes  HKL^  ABC)  and  having  for  bases  (i)  the  AC6?/^and 
(2)  the  O  EBFGy  which  is  the  double  of  the  A  CGF, 

Therefore,  by  xi.  39,  the  prisms  are  equal. 

IV.  To  prove  the  prisms  greater  than  the  small  pyramids. 

Prism  (HGEy  KFB)  is  clearly  greater  than  pyramid  K{EFB)  and  there- 
fore greater  than  pyramid  H(AEG), 

Therefore  each  of  the  prisms  is  greater  than  each  of  the  small  pyramids ; 
and  the  sum  of  the  two  prisms  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  two  small 
pyramids,  which,  with  the  two  prisms,  make  up  the  whole  pyramid. 

Proposition  4. 

1/  there  be  two  pyramids  of  the  same  height  which  have 
triangtilar  bases,  and  each  of  them  be  divided  into  two  pyramids 
equal  to  one  anot/ter  and  similar  to  the  whole,  and  into  two 
equal  prisms,  then,  as  the  base  of  the  one  pyra7Jtid  is  to  the 
base  of  the  other  pyramid,  so  will  all  the  prisms  in  the  one 
pyramid  be  to  all  the  prisms,  being  equal  in  multitude,  in  the 
other  pyramid. 

Let  there  be  two  pyramids  of  the  same  height  which 
.have  the  triangular  bases  ABC,  DEF,  and  vertices  the 
points  G,  H, 

and  let  each  of  them  be  divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to 
one  another  and  similar  to  the  whole  and  into  two  equal 
prisms  ;  [xii.  3] 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  are 
all  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  ABCG  to  all  the  prisms,  being 
equal  in  multitude,  in  the  pyramid  DEFH, 


XII.  4] 


PROPOSITIONS   3,  4 


383 


For,  since  BO  is  equal  to  OC,  and  AL  to  LCy 
therefore  Z(9  is  parallel  to  A  By 
and  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  LOC. 


For  the  same  reason 
the  triangle  DEFxs  also  similar  to  the  triangle  RVF. 

And,  since  BC  is  double  of  CO,  and  EF  of  FV^ 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CO,  so  is  EF  to  FV, 

And  on  i9C,  CO  are  described  the  similar  and  similarly 
situated  rectilineal  figures  ABCj  LOC, 

and  on  EF,  FV  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  figures 
DEF,  RVF\ 

therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  LOC^  so  is 
the  triangle  DEF to  the  triangle  RVF\  [vi.  22] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle 
DEF,  so  is  the  triangle  LOC  to  the  triangle  RVF,         [v.  16] 

But,  as  the  triangle  LOC  is  to  the  triangle  RVF,  so  is 
the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and  PMN  its 
opposite  to  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  RVF  is  the  base 
and  STU  its  opposite  ;  [Lemma  following] 

therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
so  is  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and 
PMN  its  opposite  to  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  RVF 
is  the  base  and  STU  its  opposite. 

But,  as  the  said  prisms  are  to  one  another,  so  is  the  prism 
in  which  the  parallelogram  KBOL  is  the  base  and  the  straight 
line  PM  its  opposite  to  the  prism  in  which  the  parallelogram 
QEVR  is  the  base  and  the  straight  line  57"  its  opposite. 

[XI.  39 ;  of.  XII.  3] 


384  BOOK  XII  [xii.  4 

« 

Therefore  also  the  two  prisms,  that  in  which  the  parallelo- 
gram KBOL  is  the  base  and  PM  its  opposite,  and  that  in 
which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and  PMN  its  opposite, 
are  to  the  prisms  in  which  QEVR  is  the  base  and  the  straight 
line  ST  its  opposite  and  in  which  the  triangle  RVF  is  the 
base  and  57^6^  its  opposite  in  the  same  ratio,  [v.  12] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so 
are  the  said  two  prisms  to  the  said  two  prisms. 

And  similarly,  if  the  pyramids  PMNG,  STUHh^  divided 
into  two  prisms  and  two  pyramids, 

as  the  base  PMN  is  to  the  base  ST  (J,  so  will  the  two  prisms 
in  the  pyramid  PMNG  be  to  the  two  prisms  in  the  pyramid 
STUH. 

But,  as  the  base  PMN  is  to  the  base  STUy  so  is  the  base 
ABC  to  the  base  DEF\ 

for  the  triangles  PMN,  STU  are  equal  to  the  triangles  Z (9C, 
R  VF  respectively. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so 
are  the  four  prisms  to  the  four  prisms. 

And  similarly  also,  if  we  divide  the  remaining  pyramids 
into  two  pyramids  and  into  two  prisms,  then,  as  the  base 
ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  will  all  the  prisms  in  the 
pyramid  ABCG  be  to  all  the  prisms,  being  equal  in  multitude, 
in  the  pyramid  DEFH. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma. 

But  that,  as  the  triangle  LOC  is  to  the  triangle  RVF, 
so  is  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and 
PMN  its  opposite  to  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  RVF  is 
the  base  and  57^6^  its  opposite,  we  must  prove  as  follows. 

For  in  the  same  figure  let  perpendiculars  be  conceived 
drawn  from  G,  H  to  the  planes  ABC,  DEF\  these  are  of 
course  equal  because,  by  hypothesis,  the  pyramids  are  of  equal 
height. 

Now,  since  the  two  straight  lines  6^C and  the  perpendicular 
from  G  are  cut  by  the  parallel  planes  ABC,  PMN, 

they  will  be  cut  in  the  same  ratios.  [xi.  17] 


XII.  4]  PROPOSITION  4  385 

And  GC  IS  bisected  by  the  plane  PMN  at  N\ 

therefore  the  perpendicular  from  G  to  the  plane  ABC  will 
also  be  bisected  by  the  plane  PMN. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  perpendicular  from  H  to  the  plane  DEF  will  also  be 
bisected  by  the  plane  STU. 

And  the  perpendiculars  from  G,  H  to  the  planes  ABCy 
DEF  are  equal ; 

therefore  the  perpendiculars  from  the  triangles  PMN,  STU 
to  the  planes  ABC,  DEF  are  also  equal. 

Therefore  the  prisms  in  which  the  triangles  LOC,  RVF 
are  bases,  and  PMN,  STU  their  opposites,  are  of  equal 
height 

Hence  also  the  parallelepipedal  solids  described  from  the 
said  prisms  are  of  equal  height  and  are  to  one  another  as  their 
bases ;  [xi.  32] 

therefore  their  halves,  namely  the  said  prisms,  are  to  one  another 
as  the  base  LOC  is  to  the  base  RVF. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  can  incorporate  the  lemma  at  the  end  of  the  proposition  and  sum- 
marise the  proof  thus. 

Since  LO'v^  parallel  to  AB, 

As  ABC,  LOC dJQ  similar. 

In  like  manner  As  DEF,  RVFzxq  similar. 

And,  since  BC  :  CO  =  EF :  FV, 

d^ABC \  mOC ^  t^DEF\  t.RVF,  [vi.  22] 

and,  alternately, 

^ABC:£^DEF=  t^LOC\C^RVF. 

Now  the  prisms  (LOC,  PMN)  and  {RVF,  STU)  are  equal  in  height : 
for  the  perpendiculars  from  G,  H  on  the  bases  ABC,  DEF  are  divided  by 
the  planes  PMN,  STU  (parallel  to  the  bases)  in  the  same  proportion  as  GC, 
HF^XQ  divided  by  those  planes  [xi.  17],  i.e.  they  are  bisected; 
hence  the  heights  of  the  prisms,  being  half  the  equal  heights  of  the  pyramids, 
are  equal. 

And  the  prisms  are  the  halves  respectively  of  parallelepipeds  of  the  same 
height  on  parallelogrammic  bases  double  of  the  As  LOC,  J? ^V respectively ; 

[xi.  28  and  note] 
hence  they  are  in  the  same  ratio  as  those  parallelepipeds,  and  therefore  as 
their  bases  [xi.  32]. 
Therefore 

(prism  LOC,  iWAO  :  (prism  RVF,  STU)-^ t^LOC.t^RVF 

=  t.ABC\t^DEF, 

H.  E.  III.  25 


386 


BOOK  XII 


[xii.  4,  5 


And  since  the  other  prisms  in  the  pyramids  are  equal  to  these  prisms 
respectively, 
(sum  of  prisms  in  GABC) :  (sum  of  prisms  in  HDEF)  =t^ABC  \t^DEK 

Similarly,  if  the  pyramids  GPMNy  HSTU  be  divided  in  like  manner,  and 
also  the  pyramids  PAKL^  SDQR^  we  shall  have  e.g. 

(sum  of  prisms  in  GPMN) :  (sum  of  prisms  in  HSTU)  =  A  PMN\  A  STU 

=  C^ABC\t>,DEr^ 
and  similarly  for  the  second  pair  of  p3rramids. 

The  process  may  be  continued  indefinitely,  and  we  shall  always  have 

(sum  of  prisms  in  GABC) :  (sum  of  prisms  in  HDEF)  ^t^ABC\t^DEK 


Proposition  5. 

Pyramids  which  are  of  the  same  height  and  have  triangular 
bases  are  to  one  another  as  the  bases. 

Let  there  be  pyramids  of  the  same  height,  of  which  the 
triangles  ABCy  DEF  2iX^  the  bases  and  the  points  G,  H  the 
vertices ; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ABCG  to  the  pyramid  DEFH. 


For,  if  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  not  to  the  pyramid  DEFH 
as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF, 

then,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  will  the 
pyramid  ABCG  be  either  to  some  solid  less  than  the  pyramid 
DEFH  or  to  a  greater. 

Let  it,  first,  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  solid  Wy  and  let  the 
pyramid  DEFH  be  divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to  one 
another  and  similar  to  the  whole  and  into  two  equal  prisms  ; 

then  the  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  whole 
pyramid.  [xn.  3] 


XII.  5]  PROPOSITIONS  4,  5  3^7 

Again,  let  the  pyramids  arising  from  the  division  be 
similarly  divided, 

and  let  this  be  done  continually  until  there  are  left  over  from 
the  pyramid  DEFH  some  pyramids  which  are  less  than  the 
excess  by  which  the  pyramid  DEFH  exceeds  the  solid  W. 

[X.I] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be,  for  the  sake  of  argument, 
DQRS,  SrUH\ 

therefore  the  remainders,  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH^ 
are  greater  than  the  solid  W. 

Let  the  pyramid  ABCG  also  be  divided  similarly,  and  a 
similar  number  of  times,  with  the  pyramid  DEFH\ 
therefore,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  are  the 
prisms  in  the  pyramid  ABCG  to  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid 
DEFH,  [XII.  4] 

But,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  also  is  the 
pyramid  ABCG  to  the  solid  W\ 

therefore  also,  as  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  to  the  solid  Wy  so 
are  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  ABCG  to  the  prisms  in  the 
pyramid  Z?^/^^,•  •  [v- "] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  to  the  prisms 
in  it,  so  is  the  solid  W  to  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH. 

[V.16] 

But  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  greater  than  the  prisms  in  it ; 
therefore  the  solid  W  is  also  greater  than  the  prisms  in  the 
pyramid  DEFH. 

But  it  is  also  less  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  prism  ABCG  is  not  to  any  solid  less  than 
the  pyramid  DEFH  diS  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  neither  is  the  pyramid 
DEFH  to  any  solid  less  than  the  pyramid  ABCG  as  the  base 
DEF  is  to  the  base  ABC. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  pyramid  ABCG  to  any 
solid  greater  than  the  pyramid  DEFH  as  the  base  ABC  is 
to  the  base  DEF. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater  solid  W\ 
therefore,  inversely,  as  the  base  DEF  is  to  the  base  ABC, 
so  is  the  solid  W  to  the  pyramid  ABCG. 

25—2 


388  BOOK  XII  [xii.  5 

But,  as  the  solid  W  is  to  the  solid  ABCG,  so  is  the 
pyramid  DEFH  to  some  solid  less  than  the  pyramid  ABCG, 
as  was  before  proved  ;  [xii.  2,  Lemma] 

therefore  also,  as  the  base  DEF  is  to  the  base  ABC,  so  is 
the  pyramid  DEFH  to  some  solid  less  than  the  pyramid 
ABCG:  [v.  II] 

which  was  proved  absurd. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  not  to  any  solid  greater 
than  the  pyramid  DEFH  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base 
DEF. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  in  that  ratio  to  a  less 
solid. 

Therefore,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is 
the  pyramid  ABCG  to  the  pyramid  DEFH. 

Q.  E.  D. 

In  the  two  preceding  propositions  it  has  been  shown  how  we  can  divide  a 
pyramid  with  a  triangular  base  into  (i)  two  equal  prisms  which  are  together 
greater  than  half  the  pyramid  and  (2)  two  equal  pyramids  similar  to  the 
original  one,  and  that,  if  this  process  be  continued  with  the  two  pyramids, 
then  with  the  four  resulting  pyramids,  and  so  on,  and  if,  further,  another 
pyramid  of  the  same  height  as  the  original  one  be  similarly  divided,  the  sub- 
division being  made  the  same  number  of  times,  the  sum  of  all  the  prisms  in 
one  pyramid  is  to  the  sum  of  all  the  prisms  in  the  other  as  the  base  of  the 
first  is  to  the  base  of  the  second. 

We  can  now  prove  in  the  manner  of  xii.  2  that  the  volumes  of  the 
pyramids  themselves  are  as  the  bases. 

Let  us  call  the  pyramids  /*,  P'  and  their  respective  bases  B,  B. 

If  PiP'^BiB', 

suppose  that  B.B  =  F:  JV. 

L     Let  lVbe<P\ 

Divide  B  into  two  prisms  and  two  pyramids,  subdivide  the  latter  similarly, 
and  so  on,  until  the  sum  of  the  pyramids  remaining  is  less  than  the  difference 
between  P'  and  ^[x.  i],  so  that 

F  >  (prisms  in  B')  >  JV, 

Then  divide  B  similarly,  the  same  number  of  times. 

Now  (prisms  in  B) :  (prisms  in  B')  =  B  \B  [xii.  4] 

=  B:  IV,  by  hypothesis, 
and,  alternately, 

(prisms  \n  B):B=  (prisms  in  F)  :  IV. 

But  (prisms  in  B)  <  B; 

therefore  (prisms  in  B')  <  IV, 

But,  by  construction,        (prisms  in  F)  >  JV, 

Hence  JV  cannot  be  less  than  F\ 


XII.  5] 


PROPOSITION   s 


389 


II.     Suppose,  if  possible,  that    IV >  P** 
Then,  inversely,  S  \B=  W\P. 

where  V  is  some  solid  less  than  P.  [Cf.  xii.  2,  Lemma,  and  note.] 

But  this  can  be  proved  impossible  exactly  as  in  Part  L 

Therefore  W\%  neither  less  nor  greater  than  /^, 

so  that  B.B^P.F, 

Legendre,  followed  by  the  American  editors  already  mentioned,  and  by 
others,  approaches  the  subject  by  a  different  route,  proving  the  following 
propositions. 

I.  If  a  pyramid  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base^  (a)  the  lateral  edges 
and  the  height  will  be  cut  in  the  same  proportion^  {f>)  the  section  by  the  plane 
tvill  be  a  polygon  similar  to  the  base. 


(a)  Since  a  lateral  face  VAB  of  the  pyramid  V{ABCDE)  is  cut  by  two 
parallel  planes  in  ABy  ab^ 

AB\\ab\ 
Similarly  BC^ bc^  and  so  on. 

Therefore  VA:  Fa=FB:Fb=  FC:  Fc=.... 

And,  if  FO  the  height  be  cut  in  O,  0, 

BO  II  bo ;  and  each  of  the  above  ratios  is  equal  to  FO  :  Fo. 

(b)  Since  BA  \\  ba,  and  BC  \\  be, 

L  ABC=  L  abc,  [xi.  10] 

Similarly  for  all  the  other  angles  of  the  polygons,  which  are  therefore 
equiangular. 

Also,  by  similar  triangles, 

FA:Fa^AB:  ad, 
and  so  on. 

Therefore,  by  the  ratios  above, 

AB'.ab  =  BC:bc=^.... 
Therefore  the  polygons  are  similar. 

2.  If  two  pyramids  of  the  same  height  be  cut  by  planes  which  are  at  the 
same  perpendicular  distance  from  the  vertices,  the  sections  are  as  the  respective 
bases. 


390 


BOOK  XII 


[xii.  5 


For,  if  we  place  the  pyramids  sq  that  the  vertices  coincide  and  the  bases 
are  in  one  plane,  the  planes  of  the  sections  will  coincide. 

If,  e.g.,  the  base  of  the  second  pyramid  be  XYZ  and  the  section  xyz^  we 
shall  have,  by  the  argument  of  the  last  proposition, 

VXiVx^,VYiVy=VZ.Vz=VOiVo^VA'.  ra  = ..., 
and  XYZ^  xyz  will  be  similar. 

Now  (polygon  ABODE) :  (polygon  adcde)  =  AB* :  afi 

=  r^« :  W, 
and  AXYZ  :  Axyz  =  XY^ :  x/ 

=  VX^ :  Fx" 
=  VA^ :  Va\ 
Therefore 

(polygon  ABCDE) :  (polygon  abc(k)=i\XYZ\t.xyz, 
As  a  particular  case,  if  the  bases  of  the  two  pyramids  are  equivalent^  the 
sections  are  also  equivalent. 

3.  Two  triangular  pyramids  which  have  equivalent  bases  and  equal  hdghis 
are  equivalent. 

Let  VABQ  vabc  be  pyramids  with  equivalent  bases  ABC^  abc^  which  for 
convenience  we  will  suppose  placed  in  one  plane,  and  let  TA  be  the  common 
height 


Then,  if  the  pyramids  are  not  equivalent,  one  must  be  greater  than  the  other. 

Let  VABC  be  the  greater ;  and  let  AX  be  the  height  of  a  prism  on  ABC 
as  base  which  is  equal  in  volume  to  the  difference  of  the  pyramids. 

Divide  the  height  -4  T' into  equal  parts  such  that  each  is  less  than  AXy  and 
let  each  part  be  equal  to  z. 

Through  the  points  of  division  draw  planes  parallel  to  the  bases  cutting 
both  pyramids  in  the  sections  DEF^  GUI,.,,  and  def  ghi, .... 

The  sections  DEF,  ^will  then  be  equivalent;  so  will  the  sections  GUI, 
ghi,  and  so  on.  [(2)  above] 

On  the  triangles  ABC,  DEF,  GHI,  ...  as  bases  draw  exterior  prisms 
having  for  edges  the  parts  AD,  DG,  GK, ...  of  the  edge  A  V\ 


XII.  5]  PROPOSITION  5  391 

and  on  the  triangles  defy  ghi^ ...  as  bases  draw  interior  prisms  having  for  edges 
the  parts  ad^  dg^  ...  of  av. 

All  the  partial  prisms  will  then  have  the  same  height  z. 

Now  the  sum  of  the  exterior  prisms  of  the  pyramid  VABC  is  greater  than 
that  pyramid ; 

and  the  sum  of  the  interior  prisms  in  the  pyramid  vabc  is  less  than  that 
pyramid. 

Consequently  the  difference  between  the  sum  of  the  first  set  of  prisms  and 
the  sum  of  the  second  set  of  prisms  is  greater  than  the  difference  between  the 
two  pyramids. 

Again,  if  we  start  from  the  bases  ABC^  abc^  the  second  exterior  prism 
DEFG  is  equivalent  to  the  first  interior  prism  defa^  since  their  bases  are 
equivalent  and  they  have  the  same  height  z,  [xi.  28  and  note ;  xi.  32] 

Similarly  the  third  exterior  prism  is  equivalent  to  the  second  interior 
prism,  and  so  on,  until  we  arrive  at  the  last  of  each. 

Therefore  the  prism  ABCD^  the  first  exterior  prism,  is  the  difference 
between  the  sums  of  the  exterior  and  interior  prisms  respectively. 

Therefore  the  difference  between  the  two  pyramids  is  less  than  the  prism 
ABCDy  which  should  therefore  be  greater  than  the  prism  with  base  ABC 
and  height  AX, 

But  the  prism  ABCD  is,  by  hypothesis,  less  than  the  latter  prism  : 
which  is  impossible. 

Consequently  the  pyramid  VABC  cannot  be  greater  than  the  pyramid 
vabc. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  vabc  cannot  be  greater  than  VABC, 

Therefore  the  pyramids  are  equivalent, 

Legendre  next  establishes  a  proposition  corresponding  to  Eucl.  xii.  7,  viz. 

4.  Any  triangular  pyramid  is  one  third  of  the  triangular  prism  on  the  same 
base  and  of  the  same  height ^ 

and  from  this  he  deduces  that 

Cor.  The  volume  of  a  triangular  pyramid  is  equal  to  a  third  of  the  product 
of  its  base  by  its  height. 

He  has  previously  proved  that  the  volume  of  a  triangular  prism  is  equal  to 
the  product  of  its  base  and  height,  since  (i)  the  prism  is  half  of  a  parallele- 
piped of  the  same  height  and  with  a  parallelogram  for  base  which  is  double  of 
the  base  of  the  prism,  and  (2)  this  parallelepiped  can  be  transformed  into  an 
equivalent  rectangular  parallelepiped  with  the  same  height  and  an  equivalent 
base. 

The  theorem  (4)  is  then  extended  to  any  pyramid  in  the  proposition 

5.  Any  pyramid  has  for  its  measure  the  third  part  of  the  product  of  its  base 
and  its  height^  from  which  follow 

Cor.  I.  Any  pyramid  is  the  third  part  of  the  prism  on  the  same  base  and 
of  the  same  height, 

CoR.  II.  Two  pyramids  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as  their 
bases  J  and  two  pyramids  on  the  same  base  are  to  one  another  as  their  heights. 

The  first  part  of  the  second  corollary  corresponds  to  the  present 
proposition  as  extended  by  the  next,  xii.  6. 


392  BOOK  XII  [xii.  6 


Proposition  6. 

Pyramids  which  are  of  the  same  height  and  have  polygonal 
bases  are  to  one  another  as  the  bases. 

Let  there  be  pyramids  of  the  same  height  of  which  the 
polygons  ABCDE,  FGHKL  are  the  bases  and  the  points 
M,  N  the  vertices; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  ABODE  is  to  the  base  FGHKL, 
so  is  the  pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid  FGHKLN. 


For  let  AC,  AD,  FH,  FK  be  joined. 

Since  then  ABCM,  ACDM  are  two  pyramids  which  have 
triangular  bases  and  equal  height, 

they  are  to  one  another  as  the  bases  ;  [xii.  5] 

therefore,  as  the  base  -^^C  is  to  the  base  A  CD,  so  is  the 
pyramid  A  B CM  to  the  pyramid  ACDM. 

And,  componendo,  as  the  base  A  BCD  is  to  the  base  A  CD, 
so  is  the  pyramid  ABCDM  to  the  pyramid  ACDM.      [v.  18] 

But  also,  as  the  base  ACD  is  to  the  base  ADE,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ACDM  to  the  pyramid  ADEM.  [xii.  5] 

Therefore,  ex  aequali^  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base 
ADE,  so  is  the  pyramid  ABCDM  to  the  pyramid  A  DEM. 

[v.  22] 

And,  again  componendo,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the 
base  ADE,  so  is  the  pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid 
AD  EM.  [v.  18] 

Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  that,  as  the  base  FGHKL 
is  to  the  base  FGH,  so  is  the  pyramid  FGHKLN  to  the 
pyramid  FGHN. 


XII.  6]  PROPOSITION  6  393 

And,  since  AD  EM,  FGHN  are  two  pyramids  which  have 
triangular  bases  and  equal  height, 

therefore,  as  the  base  ADE  is  to  the  base  FGH,  so  is  the 
pyramid  A  DEM  to  the  pyramid  FGHN.  [xit.  5] 

But,  as  the  base  ADE  is  to  the  base  ABCDE,  so  was 
the  pyramid  A  DEM  to  the  pyramid  A  BCD  EM. 

Therefore  also,  ex  aequali,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the 
base  FGH,  so  is  the  pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid 
FGHN.  [v.  22] 

But  further,  as  the  base  FGH  \s  to  the  base  FGHKL,  so 
also  was  the  pyramid  FGHN  to  the  pyramid  FGHKLN. 

Therefore  also,  ex  aeqiiali,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the 
base  FGHKLy  so  is  the  pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid 
FGHKLN.  [v.  22] 

Q.   E.  D. 

It  will  be  seen  that,  in  order  to  obtain  the  proportion 

(base  ABCDE)  :  t^ADE  =  (pyramid  M ABCDE)  :  (pyramid  MADE), 

Euclid  employs  v.  18  (compotundo)  twice  over,  with  an  ex  aequali%\jt^  [v.  22] 
intervening. 

We  might  arrive  at  it  more  concisely  by  using  v.  24  extended  to  any 
number  of  antecedents. 

Thus 

i\ABC  \C^ADE  =  (pyramid  AfABC) :  (pyramid  MADE), 

A  A  CD:  A  ADE  =  (pyramid  MA  CD) :  (pyramid  MADE), 

and  lastly 

'  A  ADE :  A  ADE  =  (pyramid  MADE) :  (pyramid  MADE). 

Therefore,  adding  the  antecedents  [v.  24],  we  have 

(polygon  ABCDE) :  A  ADE  =  (pyramid  MABCDE) :  (pyramid  MADE). 

Again,  since  the  pyramids  MADE,  NFGH  are  of  the  same  height, 

A  ADE :  AFGH^  (pyramid  MADE) :  (pyramid  NFGH). 

Lastly,  using  the  same  argument  for  the  pyramid  NFGHKL  as  for 
MABCDE,  and  inverting,  we  have 

A  FGH:  (polygon  FGHKL)  =  (pyramid  NFGH) :  (pyramid  NFGHKL), 

Thus  from  the  three  proportions,  ex  aequali, 

(polygon  ABCDE) :  (polygon  FGHKL) 

=  (pyramid  MABCDE) :  (pyramid  NFGHKL). 


394  BOOK   XII  [xii.  7 

Proposition  7. 

.  Any  prism  which  has  a  triangular  base  is  divided  into  three 
pyramids  equal  to  one  another  which  have  triangular  bases. 

Let  there  be  a  prism  in  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the 
base  and  DEF  its  opposite ; 
I    say  that  the  prism  ABCDEF  is 
divided  into  three  pyramids  equal  to 
one  another,  which   have    triangular 
bases. 

For  let  BDy  EC,  CD  be  joined. 

Since  ABED  is  a  parallelogram, 
and  BD  is  its  diameter, 
therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  equal 
to  the  triangle  EBD  ;  [i.  34] 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the 
base  and  the  point  C  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of 
which  the  triangle  DEB  is  the  base  and  the  point  C  the 
vertex.  [xii.  5] 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  DEB  is  the  base 
and  the  point  C  the  vertex  is  the  same  with  the  pyramid  of 
which  the  triangle  EBC  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex ; 
for  they  are  contained  by  the  same  planes. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the 
base  and  the  point  C  the  vertex  is  also  equal  to  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  EBC  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex. 

Again,  since  FCBE  is  a  parallelogram, 
and  CE  is  its  diameter, 
the  triangle  CEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CBE.  [i.  34] 

Therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  BCE  is 
the  base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  ECF  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex.  [xii.  5] 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  BCE  is  the  base 
and  the  point  D  the  vertex  was  proved  equal  to  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and  the  point  C  the 
vertex  : 


XII.  7,  8]  PROPOSITIONS   7,  8  395 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  CEF  is  the 
base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of 
which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and  the  point  C  the 
vertex ; 

therefore  the  prism  ABCDEF  has  been  divided  into  three 
pyramids  equal  to  one  another  which  have  triangular  bases. 

And,  since  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the 
base  and  the  point  C  the  vertex  is  the  same  with  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  CAB  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex, 

for  they  are  contained  by  the  same  planes, 
while  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and 
the  point  C  the  vertex  was  proved  to  be  a  third  of  the  prism 
in  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the  base  and  DEF  its  opposite, 
therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the 
base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex  is  a  third  of  the  prism  which 
has  the  same  base,  the  triangle  ABC,  and  DEF  as  its 
opposite, 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  any  pyramid  is  a 
third  part  of  the  prism  which  has  the  same  base  with  it  and 
equal  height 

Q.  E.  D. 

If  we  denote  by  C-ABD  a  pyramid  with  vertex  C  and  base  ABD,  Euclid's 
argument  is  easily  followed  thus. 

The  CJABED  being  bisected  by  BD, 

(pyramid  C-ABD)  =  (pyramid  C-DEB)  [xii.  5] 

=  (pyramid  DEBC), 
And,  the  O^^C/^  being  bisected  by  EC, 

(pyramid  DEBC)  =  (pyramid  DECF), 
Thus  (pyramid  CABD)  =  (pyramid  DEBC)  =  (pyramid  DECF),  and 
these  three  pyramids  make  up  the  whole  prism,  so  that  each  is  one-third  of  the 
prism. 

And,  since        (pyramid  C-ABD)  =  (pyramid  D-ABC), 

(pyramid  DABC)  =  \ (prism  ABC,  DEF). 

Proposition  8. 

Similar  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  are  in  the 
triplicate  rcUio  of  their  corresponding  sides. 

Let  there  be  similar  and  similarly  situated  pyramids  of 


396  BOOK  XII  [xiL  8 

which  the  triangles  ABC^  DEF  are  the  bases  and  the  points 
Gy  H  the  vertices  ; 

I  say  that  the  pyramid  ABCG  has  to  the  pyramid  DEFH 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 


For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solids  BGML,  EHQP  be 
completed. 

Now,  since  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  similar  to  the  pyramid 
DEFH, 

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF, 

the  angle  GBC  to  the  angle  HEF, 

and  the  angle  ABG  to  the  angle  DEH ; 

and,  as  AB  is  to  DE,  so  is  BC  to  EF,  and  BG  to  EH. 

And  since,  as  AB  is  to  DE,  so  is  BC  to  EF, 

and  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  parallelogram  BM  is  similar  to  the  parallelo- 
gram EQ. 

For  the  same  reason 

BN  is  also  similar  to  ER,  and  BK  to  EO  ; 

therefore  the  three  parallelograms  MB,  BK,  BN  are  similar 
to  the  three  EQ,  EO,  ER. 

But  the  three  parallelograms  MB,  BK,  BN  are  equal  and 
similar  to  their  three  opposites, 

and  the  three  EQ,  EO,  ER  are  equal  and  similar  to  their 
three  opposites.  [xi.  24] 

Therefore  the  solids  BGML^  EHQP  are  contained  by 

similar  planes  equal  in  multitude. 

Therefore  the  solid  BGML  is  similar  to  the  solid  EHQP, 
But  similar  parallelepipedal  solids  are  in  the  triplicate  ratio 

of  their  corresponding  sides.  [xi.  33] 


XII.  8]  PROPOSITION   8  397 

Therefore  the  solid  BGML  has  to  the  solid  EHQP  the 
ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  BC  has  to 
the  corresponding  side  EF. 

But,  as  the  solid  BGML  is  to  the  solid  EHQP,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ABCG  to  the  pyramid  DEFH, 
inasmuch  as  the  pyramid  is  a  sixth  part  of  the  solid,  because 
the  prism  which  is  half  of  the  parallelepipedal  solid  [xi.  28]  is 
also  triple  of  the  pyramid.  [xil  7]  - 

Therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  also  has  to  the  pyramid 
DEFH  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

Q.  E.  D. 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  similar  pyramids 
which  have  polygonal  bases  are  also  to  one  another  in  the 
triplicate  ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides. 

For,  if  they  are  divided  into  the  pyramids  contained  in 
them  which  have  triangular  bases,  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that 
the  similar  polygons  forming  their  bases  are  also  divided  into 
similar  triangles  equal  in  multitude  and  corresponding  to  the 
wholes  [vi.  20], 

then,  as  the  one  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  in  the 
one  complete  pyramid  is  to  the  one  pyramid  which  has  a 
triangular  base  in  the  other  complete  pyramid,  so  also  will  all 
the  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  contained  in  the 
one  pyramid  be  to  all  the  pyramids  which  have  triangular 
bases  contained  in  the  other  pyramid  [v.  12],  that  is,  the 
pyramid  itself  which  has  a  polygonal  base  to  the  pyramid 
which  has  a  polygonal  base. 

But  the  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  is  to  the 
pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of 
the  corresponding  sides  ; 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  which  has  a  polygonal  base  has  to 
the  pyramid  which  has  a  similar  base  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  the  side  has  to  the  side. 

It  is  at  once  proved  that,  the  pyramids  being  similar,  the  parallelepipeds 
constructed  as  shown  in  the  figure  are  also  similar. 

Consequently,  as  these  latter  are  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  corre- 
sponding sides  [xi.  33],  so  are  the  pyramids  which  are  their  sixth  parts 
respectively  (being  one  third  of  the  respective  prisms  on  the  same  bases,  i.e. 
of  the  halves  of  the  respective  parallelepipeds,  xi.  28). 

As  the  Porism  is  not  used  where  Euclid  might  have  been  expected  to  use 
it  (see  note  on  xii.  12,  p.  416),  there  is  some  reason  to  doubt  its  genuineness. 
P  only  has  it  in  the  margin,  though  in  the  first  hand. 


398 


BOOK   XII 


[xii.  9 


Proposition  9. 

In  equal  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  the  bases 
are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights;  and  those  pyramids 
in  which  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights 
are  equal. 

For  let  there  be  equal  pyramids  which  have  the  triangular 
bases  ABC,  DEF  and  vertices  the  points  G,  H ; 

I  say  that  in  the  pyramids  ABCGy  DEFH  the  bases  are 
reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights,  that  is,  as  the  base 
ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG. 


For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solids  BGML,  EHQP  be 
completed. 

Now,  since  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid 
DEFH, 

and  the  solid  BGML  is  six  times  the  pyramid  ABCG, 
and  the  solid  EHQP  six  times  the  pyramid  DEFH, 
therefore  the  solid  BGML  is  equal  to  the  solid  EHQP. 

But  in  equal  parallelepipedal  solids  the  bases  are  recipro- 
cally proportional  to  the  heights  ;  [xi.  34] 

therefore,  as  the  base  BM  is  to  the  base  EQ,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  solid  EHQP  to  the  height  of  the  solid  BGML. 

But,  as  the  base  BM  is  to  EQ,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to 
the  triangle  DEF,  [i.  34] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle 
DEF,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  EHQP  to  the  height  of 
the  solid  BGML.  [v.  n] 


XII.  9]  PROPOSITION   9  399 

But  the  height  of  the  solid  EHQP  is  the  same  with  the 
height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH, 

and  the  height  of  the  solid  BGML  is  the  same  with  the 
height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG, 

therefore,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF^  so  is  the 
height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
ABCG. 

Therefore  in  the  pyramids  ABCG,  DEFH  the  bases  are 
reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights. 

Next,  in  the  pyramids  ABCG,  DEFH  let  the  bases  be 
reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights  ; 

that  is,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  let  the  height 
of  the  pyramid  DEFH  be  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
ABCG\ 

I  say  that  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid 
DEFH. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 
since,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABlG, 

while,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the 
parallelogram  BM  to  the  parallelogram  EQ, 

therefore  also,  as  the  parallelogram  BM  is  to  the  parallelogram 
EQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  the  height  of 
the  pyramid  ABCG,  [v.  n] 

But  the  height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH  is  the  same  with 
the  height  of  the  parallelepiped  EHQP, 

and  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  the  same  with  the 
height  of  the  parallelepiped  BGML  ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  BM  is  to  the  base  EQ,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  parallelepiped  EHQP  to  the  height  of  the  parallelepi- 
ped BGML. 

But  those  parallelepipedal  solids  in  which  the  bases  are 
reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights  are  equal ;  [xi.  34] 

therefore  the  parallelepipedal  solid  BGML  is  equal  to  the 
parallelepipedal  solid  EHQP. 

And  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  a  sixth  part  of  BGML,  and 
the  pyramid  DEFH  a  sixth  part  of  the  parallelepiped 
EHQP\ 


400  BOOK   XII  [xii.  9,  lo 

therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  DEFH. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  volumes  of  the  pyramids  are  respectively  one  sixth  part  of  the  volumes 
of  the  parallelepipeds  described,  as  in  the  figure,  on  double  the  bases  and  with 
the  same  heights  as  the  pyramids. 

I.  Thus  the  parallelepipeds  are  equal  if  the  pyramids  are  equal. 

And,  the  parallelepipeds  being  equal,  their  bases  are  reciprocally  propor- 
tional to  their  heights ;  [xi.  34] 
hence  the  bases  of  the  equal  pyramids  (which  are  the  halves  of  the  bases  of 
the  parallelepipeds)  are  proportional  to  their  heights. 

II.  If  the  bases  of  the  pyramids  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  their 
heights,  so  are  the  bases  of  the  parallelepipeds  to  their  heights  (since  the  bases 
of  the  parallelepipeds  are  double  of  the  bases  of  the  pyramids  respectively). 

Consequently  the  parallelepipeds  are  equal.  [xi.  34] 

Therefore  their  sixth  parts,  the  pyramids,  are  also  equal. 


Proposition  to. 

Any  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder  which  has  the  same 
base  with  it  and  equal  height. 

For  let  a  cone  have  the  same  base,  namely  the  circle 
A  BCD,  with  a  cylinder  and  equal 
height ; 

I  say  that  the  cone  is  a  third  part 
of  the  cylinder,  that  is,  that  the 
cylinder  is  triple  of  the  cone. 

For  if  the  cylinder  is  not  triple 
of  the  cone,  the  cylinder  will  be 
either  greater  than  triple  or  less 
than  triple  of  the  cone. 

First  let  it  be  greater  than 
triple, 

and  let  the  square  ABCD  be 
inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  ;  [iv.  6] 

then  the  square  ABCD  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle 
ABCD. 

From  the  square  ABCD  let  there  be  set  up  a  prism  of 
equal  height  with  the  cylinder. 

Then  the  prism  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
cylinder, 


XII.  lo]  PROPOSITIONS   9,  lo  401 

.inasmuch  as,  if  we  also  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle 
A  BCD  [iv.  7],  the  square  inscribed  in  the  circle  A  BCD  is  half 
of  that  circumscribed  about  it, 

and  the  solids  set  up  from  them  are  parallelepipedal  prisms  of 
equal  height, 

while  parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  of  the  same  height  are 
to  one  another  as  their  bases ;  [xi.  32] 

therefore  also  the  prism  set  up  on  the  square  ABCD  is  half 
of  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square  circumscribed  about  the 
circle  ABCD  ;  [of.  xi.  28,  or  xii.  6  and  7,  Por.] 

and  the  cylinder  is  less  than  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square 
circumscribed  about  the  circle  ABCD\ 

therefore  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD  and  of 
equal  height  with  the  cylinder  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
cylinder. 

Let  the  circumferences  AB,  BCy  CD,  DA  be  bisected  at 
the  points  E,  F,  G,  H, 

and  let  AE,  EB,  BF,  FC,  CG,  GD,  DH,  HA  be  joined ; 

then  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DMA  is  greater 
than  the  half  of  that  segment  of  the  circle  ABCD  which  is 
about  it,  as  we  proved  before.  [xii.  2] 

On  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA  let 
prisms  be  set  up  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder ; 

then  each  of  the  prisms  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part 
of  that  segment  of  the  cylinder  which  is  about  it, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  draw  through  the  points  E,  F,  G,  H 
parallels  to  ABy  BC,  CD,  DAy  complete  the  parallelograms 
on  A  By  BCy  CDy  DAy  and  set  up  from  them  parallelepipedal 
solids  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder,  the  prisms  on  the 
triangles  AEBy  BFCy  CGD,  DHA  are  halves  of  the  several 
solids  set  up ; 

and  the  segments  of  the  cylinder  are  less  than  the  parallelepi- 
pedal solids  set  up ; 

hence  also  the  prisms  on  the  triangles  AEB,  BFCy  CGD^ 
DHA  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  segments  of  the 
cylinder  about  them. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  that  are  left,  joining 

H.  E.  III.  26 


400  BOOK   XII  [xii.  9,  lo 

therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  DEFH. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  volumes  of  the  pyramids  are  respectively  one  sixth  part  of  the  volumes 
of  the  parallelepipeds  described,  as  in  the  figure,  on  double  the  bases  and  with 
the  same  heights  as  the  pyramids. 

I.  Thus  the  parallelepipeds  are  equal  if  the  pyramids  are  equal. 

And,  the  parallelepipeds  being  equal,  their  biases  are  reciprocally  propor- 
tional to  their  heights ;  [xi.  34] 
hence  the  bases  of  the  equal  pyramids  (which  are  the  halves  of  the  bases  of 
the  parallelepipeds)  are  proportional  to  their  heights. 

II.  If  the  bases  of  the  pyramids  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  their 
heights,  so  are  the  bases  of  the  parallelepipeds  to  their  heights  (since  the  bases 
of  the  parallelepipeds  are  double  of  the  bases  of  the  pyramids  respectively). 

Consequently  the  parallelepipeds  are  equal.  [xi.  34] 

Therefore  their  sixth  parts,  the  pyramids,  are  also  equal. 


Proposition  to. 

Any  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder  which  has  the  same 
base  with  it  and  equal  height. 

For  let  a  cone  have  the   same  base,  namely  the  circle 
ABCDy  with  a  cylinder  and  equal 
height ; 

I  say  that  the  cone  is  a  third  part 
of  the  cylinder,  that  is,  that  the 
cylinder  is  triple  of  the  cone. 

For  if  the  cylinder  is  not  triple 
of  the  cone,  the  cylinder  will  be 
either  greater  than  triple  or  less 
than  triple  of  the  cone. 

First  let  it  be  greater  than 
triple, 

and  let  the  square  ABCD  be 
inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  ;  [iv.  6] 

then  the  square  ABCD  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle 
ABCD. 

From  the  square  ABCD  let  there  be  set  up  a  prism  of 
equal  height  with  the  cylinder. 

Then  the  prism  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
cylinder. 


XII.  lo]  PROPOSITIONS   9,  lo  401 

.inasmuch  as,  if  we  also  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle 
ABCD[\y,  7],  the  square  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  is  half 
of  that  circumscribed  about  it, 

and  the  solids  set  up  from  them  are  parallelepipedal  prisms  of 
equal  height, 

while  parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  of  the  same  height  are 
to  one  another  as  their  bases ;  [xi.  32] 

therefore  also  the  prism  set  up  on  the  square  ABCD  is  half 
of  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square  circumscribed  about  the 
circle  ABCD  ;  [of.  xi.  28,  or  xii.  6  and  7,  Por.] 

and  the  cylinder  is  less  than  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square 
circumscribed  about  the  circle  ABCD\ 

therefore  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD  and  of 
equal  height  with  the  cylinder  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
cylinder. 

Let  the  circumferences  AB,  BCy  CD,  DA  be  bisected  at 
the  points  E,  /%  Gy  H, 

and  let  AE,  EB,  BF,  EC,  CG,  GD,  DH,  HA  be  joined ; 

then  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DMA  is  greater 
than  the  half  of  that  segment  of  the  circle  ABCD  which  is 
about  it,  as  we  proved  before.  [xii.  2] 

On  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA  let 
prisms  be  set  up  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder  ; 

then  each  of  the  prisms  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part 
of  that  segment  of  the  cylinder  which  is  about  it, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  draw  through  the  points  E,  F,  G,  H 
parallels  to  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,  complete  the  parallelograms 
on  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,  and  set  up  from  them  parallelepipedal 
solids  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder,  the  prisms  on  the 
triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA  are  halves  of  the  several 
solids  set  up ; 

and  the  segments  of  the  cylinder  are  less  than  the  parallelepi- 
pedal solids  set  up ; 

hence  also  the  prisms  on  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD^ 
DHA  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  segments  of  the 
cylinder  about  them. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  that  are  left,  joining 

H.  E.  III.  26 


4oa  BOOK   XII  [xii.  lo 

Straight  lines,  setting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  prisms  of. 
equal  height  with  the  cylinder, 

and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cylinder  which  will  be 
less  than  the  excess  by  which  the  cylinder  exceeds  the  triple 
of  the  cone.  .  [x.  i] 

Let  such  segments  be  left,  and  let  them  be  AE,  EBy  BF^ 
FC,  CG,  GD,  DH,  HA  ; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon 
AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the  height  is  the  same  as  that 
of  the  cylinder,  is  greater  than  triple  of  the  cone. 

But  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the 
base  and  the  height  the  same  as  that  of  the  cylinder  is  triple 
of  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the 
base  and  the  vertex  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  cone  ;  [xii.  7,  Por.] 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH 
is  the  base  and  the  vertex  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  cone  is 
greater  than  the  cone  which  has  the  circle  A  BCD  as  base. 

But  it  is  also  less,  for  it  is  enclosed  by  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cylinder  is  not  greater  than  triple  of  the  cone. 

1  say  next  that  neither  is  the  cylinder  less  than  triple  of 
the  cone. 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  cylinder  be  less  than  triple  of  the 
cone ; 

therefore,  inversely,  the  cone  is  greater  than  a  third  part  of 
the  cylinder. 

Let  the  square  ABCD  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  ; 

therefore  the  square  ABCD  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
circle  ABCD. 

Now  let  there  be  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD  a  pyramid 
having  the  same  vertex  with  the  cone  ; 

therefore  the  pyramid  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part 

of  the  cone, 

seeing  that,  as  we  proved  before,  if  we  circumscribe  a  square 


XII.  lo]  PROPOSITION    lo  403 

about  the  circle,  the  square  ABCD  will  be  half  of  the  square 
circumscribed  about  the  circle, 

and  if  we  set  up  from  the  squares  parallelepipedal  solids  of 
equal  height  with  the  cone,  which  are  also  called  prisms,  the 
solid  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD  will  be  half  of  that  set  up 
from  the  square  circumscribed  about  the  circle; 

for  they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.  [xi.  32] 

Hence  also  the  thirds  of  them  are  in  that  ratio ; 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  square  ABCD  is  the 
base  is  half  of  the  pyramid  set  up  from  the  square  circum- 
scribed about  the  circle. 

And  the  pyramid  set  up  from  the  square  about  the  circle 
is  greater  than  the  cone, 

for  it  encloses  it. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  square  ABCD  is  the 
base  and  the  vertex  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  cone  is 
greater  than  the  half  of  the  cone. 

Let  the  circumferences  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA  be  bisected  at 
the  points  E^  Fy  G,  //, 

and  let  AE,  EB,  BF,  FC,  CG,  GD,  DH,  HA  be  joined ; 

therefore  also  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DMA 
is  greater  than  the  half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  circle 
ABCD  which  is  about  it. 

Now,  on  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA 
let  pyramids  be  set  up  which  have  the  same  vertex  as  the 
cone  ; 

therefore  also  each  of  the  pyramids  so  set  up  is,  in  the  same 
manner,  greater  than  the  half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  cone 
which  is  about  it. 

Thus,  by  bisecting  the  circumferences  that  are  left,  joining 
straight  lines,  setting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  a  pyramid 
which    has   the   same   vertex   as   the   cone, 

and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cone  which  will  be  less 
than  the  excess  by  which  the  cone  exceeds  the  third  part  of 
the  cylinder.  [x.  i] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be  the  segments  on  AE, 
EB,  BF,  FC,  CG,  GD,  DH,  HA  ; 

26 — 2 


404  BOOK  XII  [xii.  lo 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the  vertex  the  same  with  that 
of  the  cone,  is  greater  than  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder. 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is 
the  base  and  the  vertex  the  same  with  that  of  the  cone  is  a 
third  part  of  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH 
is  the  base  and  the  height  is  the  same  with  that  of  the 
cylinder ; 

therefore  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is 
the  base  and  the  height  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  cylinder 
is  greater  than  the  cylinder  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the 
base. 

But  it  is  also  less,  for  it  is  enclosed  by  it : 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cylinder  is  not  less  than  triple  of  the  cone. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  greater  than  triple ; 
therefore  the  cylinder  is  triple  of  the  cone ; 
hence  the  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 


We  observe  the  use  in  this  proposition  of  the  term  "  parallelepipedal 
prism,"  which  recalls  Heron's  " parallelogram mic "  or  "parallel-sided  prism." 

The  course  of  the  proof  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  xii.  2,  except  that  an 
arithmetical  fraction  takes  the  place  of  a  ratio  which,  being  incommensurable, 
could  only  be  expressed  as  a  ratio.  Consequently  we  do  not  need  proportions 
in  this  proposition,  as  we  did  in  xn.  2,  and  shall  again  in  xii.  11,  etc. 

Euclid  exhausts  the  cylinder  and  cone  respectively  by  setting  up  prisms 
and  pyramids  of  the  same  height  on  the  successive  regular  polygons  inscribed 
in  the  circle  which  is  the  common  base,  viz.  the  square,  the  regular  polygon 
of  8  sides,  that  of  16  sides,  etc. 

\i  AB  ht,  the  side  of  one  polygon,  we  obtain  two  sides  of  the  next  by 
bisecting  the  arc  ACB  and  joining  AC^  CB.    Draw  the 
tangent  DE  at    C  and  complete  the  parallelogram 
ABED. 

Now  suppose  a  prism  erected  on  the  polygon  of 
which  AB  is  a  side,  and  of  the  same  height  as  that  of 
the  cylinder. 

To  obtain  the  prism  of  the  same  height  on  the  next 
polygon  we  add  all  the  triangular  prisms  of  the  same 
height  on  the  bases  A  CB  and  the  rest. 

Now  the  prism  on  ACB  is  half  the  prism  of  the 
same  height  on  the  O  ABED  as  base. 

[cf.  XI.  28] 


XII.  lo]  PROPOSITION    lo  405 

And  the  prism  on  O  ABED  includes,  and  is  greater  than,  the  portion  of 
the  cylinder  standing  on  the  segment  A  CB  of  the  circle. 

The  same  thing  is  true  in  regard  to  the  other  sides  of  the  polygon  of 
which  AB  is  one  side. 

Thus  the  process  begins  with  a  prism  on  the  square  inscribed  in  the  circle, 
which  is  more  than  half  the  cylinder,  the  next  prism  (with  eight  lateral  faces) 
takes  away  more  than  half  the  remainder^  and  so  on  ; 

hence  [x.  i],  if  we  proceed  far  enough,  we  shall  ultimately  arrive  at  a  prism 
leaving  over  portions  of  the  cylinder  together  less  than  any  assigned  volume. 

The  construction  of  pyramids  on  the  successive  polygons  exhausts  the  cone 
in  exactly  the  same  way. 

Now,  if  the  cone  is  not  equal  to  one-third  of  the  cylinder,  it  must  be  either 
greater  or  less. 

I.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that,  F,  O  being  their  volumes  respectively. 

Construct  successive  inscribed  polygons  in  the  bases  and  prisms  on  them 
until  we  arrive  at  a  prism  P  leaving  over  portions  of  the  cylinder  together  less 
than  (O-  3F),  i.e.  such  that 

0>P>zV. 

But  F  is  triple  of  the  pyramid  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height ; 
and  this  pyramid  is  included  by,  and  is  therefore  less  than,  V\ 
therefore  P<^V, 

But,  by  construction,  P>  ^V\ 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  *     ^  >  3  ^. 

II.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that  6?  <  3  F. 
Therefore  V>  \0, 

Construct  successive  pyramids  in  the  cone  in  the  manner  described  until 
we  arrive  at  a  pyramid  11  leaving  over  portions  of  the  cone  together  less  than 
{V-\0\  i.e.  such  that 

V>TL>\0, 

Now  n  is  one-third  of  the  prism  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height; 
and  this  prism  is  included  by,  and  is  therefore  less  than,  the  cylinder ; 
therefore  li<\0. 

But,  by  construction,  TL>\0: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  O  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  3  F,  so  that 

0  =  3^ 

It  will  be  observed  that  here,  as  in  xii.  2,  Euclid  always  exhausts  the  solid 
by  (as  it  were)  building  up  to  it  from  inside.  Hence  the  solid  to  be  exhausted 
must,  with  him,  be  supposed  greater  than  the  solid  to  which  it  is  to  be  proved 
equal ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why,  in  the  second  part,  the  initial  supposition 
is  turned  round. 

In  this  case  too  Euclid  might  have  approximated  to  the  cone  and  cylinder 
by  circumscribing  successive  pyramids  and  prisms  in  the  way  shown,  after 
Archimedes,  in  the  note  on  xii.  2. 


4o6 


BOOK   XII 


[XII.   II 


Proposition  ii. 

Cones  and  cylinders  which  are  of  the  same  height  are  to 
one  another  as  their  bases. 

Let  there  be  cones  and  cylinders  of  the  same  height, 

let  the  circles  ABCD,  EFGH  be  their  bases,  KL,  MN  their 
axes  and  ACy  EG  the  diameters  of  their  bases  ; 

I  say' that,  as  the  circle  A  BCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is 
the  cone  AL  to  the  cone  EN. 


/ 

"/ 

X 

/ 

/ 

y 

/^ 

o 

/ 

/ 

For,  if  not,  then,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle 
EFGH,  so  will  the  cone  -^Z  be  either  to  some  solid  less 
than  the  cone  EN  or  to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  solid  O,  and  let  the 
solid  X  be  equal  to  that  by  which  the  solid  O  is  less  than  the 
cone  EN  \ 

therefore  the  cone  EN  is  equal  to  the  solids  O,  X. 

Let  the  square  EFGH  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH ; 

therefore  the  square  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle. 

Let  there  be  set  up  from  the  square  EFGH  a  pyramid  of 
equal  height  with  the  cone ; 

therefore  the  pyramid  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
cone, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle,  and 
set  up  from  it  a  pyramid  of  equal  height  with  the  cone,  the 
inscribed  pyramid  is  half  of  the  circumscribed  pyramid, 

for  they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases,  [xii.  6] 

while  the  cone  is  less  than  the  circumscribed  pyramid. 


XII.  I ij  PROPOSITION    II  407 

Let  the  circumferences  EF,  FG,  GHy  HE  be  bisected  at 
the  points  P,  Q,  R^  5, 
and  let  HP,  PE,  EQ,  QF,  FR,  RG,  GS,  SHhe  joined. 

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  HPE,  EQF,  FRG,  GSH 
is  greater  than  the  half  of  that  segment  of  the  circle  which  is 
about  it. 

On  each  of  the  triangles  HPE,  EQF,  FRG,  GSH  Jet 
there  be  set  up  a  pyramid  of  equal  height  with  the  cone  ; 
therefore,  also,  each  of  the  pyramids  so  set  up  is  greater  than 
the  half  of  that  segment  of  the  cone  which  is  about  it. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  which  are  left,  joining 
straight  lines,  setting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  pyramids  of 
equal  height  with  the  cone, 
and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cone  which  will  be  less 
than  the  solid  X.  [x.  i] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be  the  segments  on  HPE, 
EQF.FRG,  GSH', 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
HPEQFRGS  is  the  base  and  the  height  the  same  with  that 
of  the  cone,  is  greater  than  the  solid  O, 

Let  there  also  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  the 
polygon  DTAUBVCW ^\vcv\2X  and  similarly  situated  to  the 
polygon  HPEQFRGS, 

and  on  it  let  a  pyramid  be  set  up  of  equal  height  with  the  cone 
AL. 

Since  then,  as  the  square  oxiAC\^  to  the  square  on  EG,  so 
is  the  polygon  DTA  UBVCWx.o  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS, 

[xu.  l] 
while,  as  the  square  on  ^C  is  to  the  square  on  EG,  so  is  the 
circle  ABCD  to  the  circle  EFGH,  [xii.  2] 

therefore  also,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so 
is  the  polygon  DTA  UBVCW  to  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS. 

But,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is  the 
cone  AL  to  the  solid  O, 

and,  as  the  polygon  DTA  UBVCW  is  to  the  polygon 
HPEQFRGS,  so  is  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
DTAUBVCWis  the  base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  to  the 
pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS  is  the  base  and 
the  point  N  the  vertex.  [xii.  6] 


4o8  BOOK   XII  [xii.  II 

Therefore  also,  as  the  cone  AL  is  to  the  solid  (9,  so  is  the 
pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  DTA  UBVCW  is  the  base  and 
the  point  L  the  vertex  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
HPEQFRGS  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex  ;    [v.  n] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  cone  AL  is  to  the  pyramid  in  it, 
so  is  the  solid  O  to  the  pyramid  in  the  cone  EN.  [v.  i6J 

But  the  cone  AL  is  greater  than  the  pyramid  in  it ; 

therefore  the  solid  O  is  also  greater  than  the  pyramid  in  the 
cone  EN. 

But  it  is  also  less : 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  cone  AL  is  not  to  any  solid  less  than  the 
cone  EN  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  the  cone  EN  to 
any  solid  less  than  the  cone  AL  as  the  circle  EFGH  is  to  the 
circle  ABCD. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  cone  AL  to  any  solid  greater 
than  the  cone  EN  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle 
EFGH. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater  solid  0\ 

therefore,   inversely,  as   the   circle   EFGH  is  to  the  circle 
ABCD,  so  is  the  solid  O  to  the  cone  AL. 

But,  as  the  solid  O  is  to  the  cone  AL,  so  is  the  cone  EN 
to  some  solid  less  than  the  cone  AL  ; 

therefore  also,  as  the  circle  EFGH  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so 
is  the  cone  EN  to  some  solid  less  than  the  cone  AL  : 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cone  AL  is  not  to  any  solid  greater  than 
the  cone  EN  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  in  this  ratio  to  a  less 
solid ; 

therefore,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is 
the  cone  AL  to  the  cone  EN, 

But,  as  the  cone  is  to  the  cone,  so  is  the  cylinder  to  the 
cylinder, 

for  each  is  triple  of  each  ;  [xii.  lo] 


XII.  If]  PROPOSITION    II  409 

Therefore  also,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle 
EFGHy  so  are  the  cylinders  on  them  which  are  of  equal 
height. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We   need   not  again  repeat  the  preliminary  construction  of  successive 
pyramids  and  prisms  exhausting  the  cones  and  cylinders. 

Let  Zy  Z'  be  the  volumes  of  the  two  cones,  j8,  P  their  respective  bases. 

If  P:P^Z:Z\ 

then  must  p.^^ZiO, 

where  O  is  either  less  or  greater  than  Z'. 

I.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that  O  is  /fss  than  Z', 

Inscribe  in  Z'  a  pyramid  (11')  leaving  over  portions  of  it  together  less  than 
{Z'  -  O)^  i.e.  such  that 

z'  >  n'  >  a 

Inscribe  in  Z  a  pyramid  11  on  a  polygon  inscribed  in  the  circular  base  of 
Z  similar  to  the  polygon  which  is  the  base  of  11'. 
Now,  if  dy  d'  be  the  diameters  of  the  bases, 

PiP^d^id'^  [xii.  2] 

=  (polygon  in  P) :  (polygon  in  P)  .  [xii.  i] 

=  n:n'.  [xii.  6] 

Therefore  Z:0  =  U:U\ 

and,  alternately,  Z:U=^  O.W, 

But  Z  >  n,  since  it  includes  it ; 

therefore  0>U'. 

But,  by  construction,  ^  <  11' : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  O^^Z. 

II.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that 

p:P=^Z:0, 
where  O  is  greater  than  Z'. 

Therefore  ^5 :  )3' =  (7  :  Z', 

where  O  is  some  solid  less  than  Z 

That  is,  P:p  =  Z':0\ 

where  (7  <  Z, 

This  is  proved  impossible  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the  assumption  in 
Part  I.  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore  Z  has  not  either  to  a  less  solid  than  Z'  or  to  a  greater  solid  than 
Z'  the  ratio  of  P  to  P'  \ 

therefore  P\P  =  Z\Z', 

The  same  is  true  of  the  cylinders  which  are  equal  to  3^  3Z'  respectively. 


4IO 


BOOK  XII 


[XII.   12 


PkOPOSITION    12. 

Similar  cones  and  cylinders  are  to  one  another  in   the 
triplicate  ratio  of  the  diameters  in  their  bases. 

Let  there  be  similar  cones  and  cylinders, 

let  the  circles  ABCD,  EFGH  be  their  bases,  BD,  FH  the 
diameters  of  the  bases,  and  KL,  MN  the  axes  of  the  cones 
and  cylinders ; 

f  say  that  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  A  BCD  is  the  base  and 
the  point  L  the  vertex  has  to  the  cone  of  which  the  circle 
EFGH  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex  the  ratio 
triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH, 


/       / 

0 

/       / 

For,  if  the  cone  ABCDL  has  not  to  the  cone  EFGHN 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH^ 

the  cone  ABCDL  will  have  that  triplicate  ratio  either  to 
some  solid  less  than  the  cone  EFGHN  or  to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  have  that  triplicate  ratio  to  a  less  solid  O. 

Let  the  square  EFGH  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH  \ 

[IV.  6] 

therefore  the  square  EFGH  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
circle  EFGH. 

Now  let  there  be  set  up  on  the  square  EFGH  a  pyramid 
having  the  same  vertex  with  the  cone ; 

therefore  the  pyramid  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part 
of  the  cone. 


XII.  12]  PROPOSITION    12  411 

Let  the  circumferences  EF,  FGy  GH,  HE  be  bisected  at 
the  points  P,  Q,  R,  5, 
and  let  EP,  PF,  FQ,  QG,  GR,  RH,  HS,  SE  be  joined. 

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  EPF,  FQG,  GRH,  HSE 
is  also  greater  than  the  half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  circle 
EFGH  which  is  about  it. 

Now  on  each  of  the  triangles  EPF,  FQG,  GRH,  HSE 
let  a  pyramid  be  set  up  having  the  same  vertex  with  the  cone; 
therefore  each  of  the  pyramids  so  set  up  is  also  greater  than 
the  half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  cone  which  is  about  it. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  so  left,  joining  straight 
lines,  setting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  pyramids  having  the 
same  vertex  with  the  cone, 
and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cone  which  will  be  less 
than  the  excess  by  which  the  cone  EFGHN  exceeds  the 
solid  O.  [x.  i] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be  the  segments  on  EP^ 
PF,  FQ,  QG,  GR,  RH,  HS,  SE ; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex,  is 
greater  than  the  solid  O. 

Let  there  be  also  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  the 
polygon  ATBUCVDW ^xmAzx  and  similarly  situated  to  the 
polygon  EPFQGRHS, 

and  let  there  be  set  up  on  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW  ^ 
pyramid  having  the  same  vertex  with  the  cone ; 

of  the  triangles  containing  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
ATBUCVDW  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  let 
LBTh^  one, 

and  of  the  triangles  containing  the  pyramid  of  which  the 
polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  the. point  N  the  vertex 
let  NFP  be  one  ; 

and  let  KT,  MP  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  cone  ABCDL  is  similar  to  the  cone 
EFGHN, 

therefore,  as  BD  is  to  FH,  so  is  the  axis  KL  to  the  axis  MN. 

[xi.  Def.  24] 


412  BOOK   XII  [xii.  12 

But,  as  BD  is  to  FH,  so  is  BK  to  FM  \ 
therefore  also,  as  BK  is  to  FM,  so  is  KL  to  MN, 

And,  alternately,  as  BK  is  to  KL,  so  is  FM  to  il/A^. 

[v.  i6] 
And  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles,  namely 
the  angles  BKL,  FMN  \ 

therefore  the  triangle  BKL  is  similar  to  the  triangle  FMN, 

[VI.  6] 

Again,  since,  as  BK  is  to  KT,  so  is  FM  to  MP, 
and  they  are  about  equal  angles,  namely  the  angles  BKT, 
FMP, 

inasmuch  as,  whatever  part  the  angle  BKT  is  of  the  four 
right  angles  at  the  centre  K,  the  same  part  also  is  the  angle 
FMP  of  the  four  right  angles  at  the  centre  M\ 
since  then  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  triangle  BKT  is  similar  to  the  triangle  FMP. 

[VI.  6] 

Again,  since  it  was  proved  that,  as  BK  is  to  KL,  so  is  FM 
to  MN, 

while  BK  is  equal  to  KT,  and  FM  to  PM, 

therefore,  as  TK  is  to  KL,  so  is  PM  to  MN ; 

and   the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles,  namely 

the  angles   TKL,  PMN,  for  they  are  right ; 

therefore  the  triangle  LKTxs  similar. to  the  triangle  NMP. 

[VI.  6] 

And  since,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  LKB, 
NMF, 

as  LB  is  to  BK,  so  is  NF  to  FM, 

and,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  BKT,  FMP, 
as  KB  is  to  BT,  so  is  MF  to  FP, 
therefore,  ex  aequali^  as  LB  is  to  BT,  so  is  NF  to  FP,  [v.  22] 

Again  since,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  L  TK, 
NPM, 

Rs  LT is  to  TK,  so  is  NP  to  PM, 

and,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  7KB,  PMF, 
as  KT  is  to  TB,  so  is  MP  to  PF; 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  Z  7"  is  to  TB,  so  is  NP  to  PF.  [v.  22] 


XII.  12]  PROPOSITION    12  413 

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  TB  is  to  BL,  so  is  PF 
to  FN. 

Therefore,  ex  aequaliy  as  TL  is  to  LB,  so  is  PN  to  NF. 

[v.  22] 

Therefore  in  the  triangles  LTB,  NPF  the  sides  are 
proportional ; 

therefore  the  triangles  L  TB,  NPF  are  equiangular ;  [vi.  5] 
hence  they  are  also  similar.  [vi.  Def.  i] 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  BKT  is  the 
base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  is  also  similar  to  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  triangle  FMP  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the 
vertex, 

for  they  are  contained  by  similar  planes  equal  in  multitude. 

[xi.  Def.  9] 

But  similar  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  are  to 
one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides. 

[xii.  8] 

Therefore  the  pyramid  BKTL  has  to  the  pyramid  FMPN 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BK  has  to  FM. 

Similarly,  by  joining  straight  lines  from  A,  W,  D,  V,  C,  U 
to  K,  and  from  E,  5,  H,  R,  G,  Q  to  My  and  setting  up  on 
each  of  the  triangles  pyramids  which  have  the  same  vertex 
with  the  cones, 

we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  similarly  arranged  pyramids 
will  also  have  to  each  similarly  arranged  pyramid  the  ratio 
triplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  BK  has  to  the 
corresponding  side  FMy  that  is,  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

And,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  conse- 
quents, so  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents ; 

[v.  12] 

therefore  also,  as  the  pyramid  BKTL  is  to  the  pyramid 
FMPN,  so  is  the  whole  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
ATBUCVDWis  the  base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  to  the 
whole  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the 
base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex ; 

hence  also  the  pyramid  of  which  ATBUCVDW  is  the  base 
and  the  point  L  the  vertex  has  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the 
polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the 
vertex  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD 


414  BOOK   XII  [xii.  12 

is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  has  also  to  the  solid 
O  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH\ 

therefore,  as  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base 
and  the  point  L  the  vertex  is  to  the  solid  O,  so  is  the  pyramid 
of  which  the  polygon  A  TBUCVDW  is  the  base  and  L  the 
vertex  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS  is 
the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex ; 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD 
is  the  base  and  L  the  vertex  is  to  the  pyramid  contained  in 
it  of  which  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW  is  the  base  and  L 
the  vertex,  so  is  the  solid  O  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the 
polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  N  the  vertex,      [v.  i6] 

But  the  said  cone  is  greater  than  the  pyramid  in  it ; 

for  it  encloses  it. 

Therefore  the  solid  O  is  also  greater  than  the  pyramid  of 
which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  N  the 
vertex. 

But  it  is  also  less  : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base 
and  L  the  vertex  has  not  to  any  solid  less  than  the  cone  of 
which  the  circle  EFGH  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the 
vertex  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  has  the  cone  EFGHN 
to  any  solid  less  than  the  cone  ABCDL  the  ratio  triplicate 
of  that  which  FH  has  to  BD. 

I  say  next  that  neither  has  the  cone  ABCDL  to  any 
solid  greater  than  the  cone  EFGHN  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  have  that  ratio  to  a  greater  solid  O. 

Therefore,  inversely,  the  solid  O  has  to  the  cone  ABCDL 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  FH  has  to  BD, 

But,  as  the  solid  O  is  to  the  cone  ABCDL,  so  is  the 
cone  EFGHN  to  some  solid  less  than  the  cone  ABCDL. 

Therefore  the  cone  EFGHN  also  has  to  some  solid  less 
than  the  cone  ABCDL  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  FH 
has  to  BD : 

which  was  proved  impossible. 


XII.  12]  PROPOSITION    12  415 

Therefore  the  cone  ABCDL  has  not  to  any  solid  greater 
than  the  cone  EFGHN  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD 
has  to  FH, 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  has  it  this  ratio  to  a  less 
solid  than  the  cone  EFGHN. 

Therefore  the  cone  ABCDL  has  to  the  cone  EFGHN 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

But,  as  the  cone  is  to  the  cone,  so  is  the  cylinder  to  the 
cylinder, 

for  the  cylinder  which  is  on  the  same  base  as  the  cone  and 
of  equal  height  with  it  is  triple  of  the  cone;  [xii.  10] 

therefore    the   cylinder   also   has   to   the   cylinder  the  ratio 
triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  method  of  proof  is  precisely  that  of  the  previous  proposition.  The 
only  addition  is  caused  by  the  necessity  of  proving  that,  if  similar  equilateral 
polygons  be  inscribed  in  the  bases  of  two  similar  cones,  and  pyramids  be 
erected  on  them  with  the  same  vertices  as  those  of  the  cones,  the  pyramids 
(are  similar  and)  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  corresponding 
edges. 

Let  AZ,  MN  be  the  axes  of  the  cones,  Z,  N  the  vertices,  and  let  BT^  FP 
be  sides  of  similar  polygons  inscribed  in  the  bases.  Join  BK^  TK^  BL^  TLy 
FM,  FM,  FN,  FN. 


Now  BKLf  FMN  are  right-angled  triangles,  and,  since  the  cones  are 
similar, 

BK:KL  =  FM:  MN.  [xi.  Def.  24] 

Therefore     (i)  As  BKL,  FMNbxq  similar.  [vi.  6] 

Similarly      (2)  As  TKL,  FMNbxq  similar. 

Next,  in  As  BKT,  FMF,  the  angles  BKT,  FMF bxq  equal,  since  each  is 
the  same  fraction  of  four  right  angles ;  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are 
proportional ; 

therefore  (3)  A  s  BKT,  FMF  are  similar. 


4i6  BOOK   XII  [xii.  12 

Again,  since  from  the  similar  As  BKLy  FMN^  and  the  similar  As  BKTy 
FMP  respectively, 

LBiBK=NF:FM, 

BK'.BT=^MF:FP, 

ex  aequali,  LB\BT=  NF :  FP. 

Similarly  ZT:TB  =  NP:  PF 

Inverting  the  latter  ratio  and  compounding  it  with  the  preceding  one,  we 
have,  fx  aeguali, 

LB:LT=^NF:NP. 

Thus  in  As  LTB^  NPF tht  sides  are  proportional  in  pairs; 
therefore  (4)  As  LTBy  ATV^are  similar. 

Thus  the  partial  pyramids  L-BKTy  N-FMP  are  similar. 

In  exactly  the  same  way  it  is  proved  that  all  the  other  partial  pyramids  are 
similar. 

Now 
(pyramid  L-BKT)  :  (pyramid  N-FMP)  =  ratio  triplicate  of  {BK\  FM), 

The  other  partial  pyramids  are  to  one  another  in  the  same  triplicate  ratio. 

The  sum  of  the  antecedents  is  therefore  to  the  sum  of  the  consequents  in 
the  same  triplicate  ratio, 
i.e.  (pyramid  L-A TBU...)  \  (pyramid  N-EPFQ. . . ) 

=  ratio  triplicate  of  ratio  {BK :  FM) 
=  ratio  triplicate  of  ratio  {BD :  FH\ 

[The  fact  that  Euclid  makes  this  transition  from  the  partial  pyramids  to 
the  whole  pyramids  in  the  body  of  this  proposition  seems  to  me  to  suggest 
grave  doubts  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  Porism  to  xii.  8,  which  contains  a 
similar  but  rather  more  general  extension  from  the  case  of  triangular  pyramids 
to  pyramids  with  polygonal  bases.  Were  that  Porism  genuine,  Euclid  would 
have  been  more  likely  to  refer  to  it  than  to  repeat  here  the  same  arguments 
which  it  contains.] 

Now  we  are  in  a  position  to  apply  the  method  of  exhaustion. 

If  Xy  X'  be  the  volumes  of  the  cones,  d^  d'  the  diameters  of  their  bases,  and  if 
(ratio  triplicate  of  d  :  d')=¥X :  X', 
then  must  (ratio  triplicate  o(  d:d')  =  X:  O, 

where  O  is  either  less  or  greater  than  X'. 

I.     Suppose  that  O  is  /ess  than  X'. 

Construct  in  the  way  described  a  pyramid  (11')  in  A"  leaving  over  portions 
of  X'  together  less  than  {X'  -  O),  so  that  X'  >U'  >  Oy 

and  construct  in  A^  a  pyramid  (n),  with  the  same  vertex  as  X  has,  on  a 
polygon  inscribed  in  its  base  similar  to  the  base  of  n'. 

Then,  by  what  has  just  been  proved,  . 

11:11'  =  (ratio  triplicate  of  d :  d') 
=  X:  0,by  hypothesis, 
and,  alternately,  U  :X=11' :  O, 

But  X  includes,  and  is  therefore  greater  than,  11 ; 
therefore  0>U\ 

But,  by  construction,  O  <Tl' : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  O  cannot  be  less  than  X', 


XII.  12,  13]  PROPOSITIONS   12,  13  417 

II.     Suppose,  if  possible,  that 

(ratio  triplicate  oi  d\d')  =  Xi  O, 
where  O  is  greater  than  A" ; 

then  (ratio  triplicate  oi d:d')  =  Z\  X\ 

or,  inversely,  (ratio  triplicate  oi  d'  \d)  =  X'  \Zy 

where  Z  is  some  solid  less  than  X, 

This  is  proved  impossible  by  the  exact  method  of  Part  I. 

Hence  O  cannot  be  either  greater  or  less  than  X\ 
and  AT :  A"  =  (ratio  triplicate  of  ratio  d :  d'). 


Proposition  13. 

If  a  cylinder  be  cut  by  a  plane  which  is  parallel  to  its 
opposite  planesy  then,  as  the  cylinder  is  to  the  cy Under ,  so  will 
the  axis  be  to  the  axis. 

For  let  the  cylinder  AD  be  cut  by  the  plane  GH  which 
is  parallel  to  the  opposite  planes  AB^  CD, 
and  let  the  plane  GH  meet  the  axis  at  the  point  K\ 
I  say  that,  as  the  cylinder  BG  is  to  the  cylinder  GD,  so  is 
the  axis  EK  to  the  axis  KF. 


u    w 


For  let  the  axis  EF  be  produced  in  both  directions  to  the 
points  Z,  M, 

and  let  there  be  set  out  any  number  whatever  of  axes  EN,  NL 
equal  to  the  axis  EK, 

and  any  number  whatever  FO,  (9il/ equal  to  FK\ 
and  let  the  cylinder  PW  on  the  axis  LM  be  conceived  of 
which  the  circles  PQ,  VPVsire  the  bases. 

Let  planes  be  carried  through  the  points  N,  O  parallel  to 
AB,  CD  and  to  the  bases  of  the  cylinder  PW, 
and  let  them  produce  the  circles  RS,  TU  about  the  centres 

N,  a 

Then,  since  the  axes  LN,  NE,  EK  are  equal  to  one 
another, 

H.  E.  ni.  27 


4i8  BOOK  XII  [xii.  13 

therefore  the  cylinders  QRy  RB,  BG  are  to  one  another  as 
their  bases.  [xii.  n] 

But  the  bases  are  equal ; 
therefore  the  cylinders  QR,  RB,  BG  are  also  equal  to  one 
another. 

Since  then  the  axes  LN,  NE,  EK  are  equal  to  one 
another, 

and  the  cylinders  QR,  RB,  BG  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 
and  the  multitude  of  the  former  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of 
the  latter, 

therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  axis  KL  is  of  the  axis  EK^ 
the  same  multiple  also  will  the  cylinder  QG  be  of  the 
cylinder  GB. 

For  the  same  reason,  whatever  multiple  the  axis  MK  is 
of  the  axis  A7^  the  same  multiple  also  is  the  cylinder  WG 
of  the  cylinder  GD. 

And,  if  the  axis  KL  is  equal  to  the  axis  KM,  the  cylinder 
QG  will  also  be  equal  to  the  cylinder  GW, 
if  the  axis  is  greater  than  the  axis,  the  cylinder  will  also  be 
greater  than  the  cylinder, 
and  if  less,  less. 

Thus,  there  being  four  magnitudes,  the  axes  EK,  KF 
and  the  cylinders  BG,  GD, 

there  have  been  taken  equimultiples  of  the  axis  EK  and  of 
the  cylinder  BG,  namely  the  axis  LK  and  the  cylinder  QG, 
and  equimultiples  of  the  axis  KF  and  of  the  cylinder  GD, 
namely  the  axis  AT^and  the  cylinder  GW\ 
and  it  has  been  proved  that, 

if  the  axis  KL  is  in  excess  of  the  axis  KM,  the  cylinder  QG 
is  also  in  excess  of  the  cylinder  G  W, 
if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

Therefore,  as  the  axis  EK  is  to  the  axis  KF,  so  is  the 
cylinder  BG  to  the  cylinder  GD.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Q.   E.  D. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  reproduce  the  proof,  as  it  follows  exactly  the  method 
of  VI.  I  and  xi.  25. 

The  fact  that  cylinders  described  about  axes  of  equal  length  and  having 


XII.  I 


3»  14] 


PROPOSITIONS    13,  14 


419 


equal  bases  are  equal  is  inferred  from  xii.  1 1  to  the  effect  that  cylinders  of 
equal  height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases. 

That,  of  two  cylinders  with  unequal  axes  but  equal  bases,  the  greater  is 
that  which  has  the  longer  axis  is  of  course  obvious  either  by  application  or  by 
cutting  off  from  the  cylinder  with  the  longer  axis  a  cylinder  with  an  axis  of  the 
same  length  as  that  of  the  other  given  cylinder. 


t3^M 


Proposition  14. 

Cones  and  cylinders  which  are  on  equal  bases  are  to  one 
another  as  their  heights. 

For  let  EB,  FD  be  cylinders  on  equal  bases,  the  circles 
AB,  CD ; 

I  say  that,  as  the  cylinder  EB  is 
to  the  cylinder  FD^  so  is  the  axis 
GH  to  the  axis  KL. 

For  let  the  axis  KL  be  pro- 
duced to  the  point  N, 

let  LN  be  made  equal  to  the  axis 
GH, 

and  let  the  cylinder  CM  be  conceived  about  LN  as  axis. 

Since  then  the  cylinders  EB,  CM  are  of  the  same  height, 
they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.  .  [xii.  u] 

But  the  bases  are  equal  to  one  another ; 
therefore  the  cylinders  EB,  CM  are  also  equal. 

And,  since  the  cylinder  FM  has  been  cut  by  the  plane 
CD  which  is  parallel  to  its  opposite  planes, 
therefore,  as  the  cylinder  CM  is  to  the  cylinder  FD,  so  is  the 
axis  LN  to  the  axis  KL.  [xii.  13] 

But  the  cylinder  CM  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  EB, 
and  the  axis  LN  to  the  axis  GH  -, 

therefore,  as  the  cylinder  EB  is  to  the  cylinder  FD,  so  is  the 
axis  GH  to  the  axis  KL. 

But,  as  the  cylinder  EB  is  to  the  cylinder  FD,  so  is  the 
cone  ABG  to  the  cone  CDK.  [xii.  10] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  axis  GH  is  to  the  axis  KL,  so  is 
the  cone  ABG  to  the  cone  CDK  and  the  cylinder  EB  to  the 
cylinder  FD.  q.  e.  d. 

No  separate  proposition  corresponding  to  this  is  necessary  in  the  case  of 
parallelepipeds,  for  xi.  25  really  contains  the  property  corresponding  to  that  in 
this  proposition  as  well  as  the  property  corresponding  to  that  in  xii.  13. 

27 — 2 


420 


BOOK  XII 


[xii.  15 


Proposition  15. 

In  equal  cones  and  cylinders  the  bases  are  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights ;  and  those  cones  and  cylinders  in 
which  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights  are 
equal. 

Let  there  be  equal  cones  and  cylinders  of  which  the  circles 
A  BCD,  EFGH  are  the  bases ; 
let  AC,  EG  be  the  diameters  of  the  bases, 
and  KL,  MN  the  axes,  which  are  also  the  heights  of  the 
cones  or  cylinders ; 
let  the  cylinders  AO,  EP  be  completed. 

I  say  that  in  the  cylinders  AO,  EP  the  bases  are  re- 
ciprocally proportional  to  the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the 
height  MN  to  the  height  KL. 


For  the  height  LK  is  either  equal  to  the  height  MN  or 
not  equal. 

First,  let  it  be  equal. 

Now  the  cylinder  AO  is  also  equal  to  the  cylinder  EP. 

But  cones  and  cylinders  which  are  of  the  same  height  are 
to  one  another  as  their  bases  ;  [xii.  n] 

therefore  the  base  ABCD  is  also  equal  to  the  base  EFGH. 

Hence  also,  reciprocally,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base 
EFGH,  so  is  the  height  MN  to  the  height  KL. 

Next,  let  the  height  LK  not  be  equal  to  MN, 
but  let  MN  be  greater  ; 

from  the  height  MN  let  QN  be  cut  off  equal  to  KL, 
through  the  point  Q  let  the  cylinder  EP  be  cut  by  the  plane 
TUS  parallel  to  the  planes  of  the  circles  EFGH,  RP, 


XII.  is]  proposition    is  421 

and  let  the  cylinder  £S  be  conceived  erected  from  the  circle 
EFGH  as  base  and  with  height  NQ. 

Now,  since  the  cylinder  AO  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  £P, 
therefore,  as  the  cylinder  A  O  is  to  the  cylinder  BSy  so  is  the 
cylinder  £P  to  the  cylinder  £S.  [v.  7] 

But,  as  the  cylinder  A  O  is  to  the  cylinder  BS,  so  is  the 
base  ABCD  to  the  base  BFGH, 
for  the  cylinders  AO,  BS  are  of  the  same  height ;         [xii.  n] 

and,  as  the  cylinder  BP  is  to  the  cylinder  BS,  so  is  the  height 
MN  to  the  height  QN, 

for  the  cylinder  BP  has  been  cut  by  a  plane  which  is  parallel 
to  its  opposite  planes.  [xii.  13] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  BFGH, 
so  is  the  height  MN  to  the  height  QN.  [v.  n] 

But  the  height  QN  is  equal  to  the  height  KL  ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  BFGH,  so  is  the 
height  MN  to  the  height  KL. 

Therefore  in  the  cylinders  AO,  BP  the  bases  are  re- 
ciprocally proportional  to  the  heights. 

Next,  in  the  cylinders  AO,  BP  let  the  bases  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  BFGHy  so  let  the 
height  MN  be  to  the  height  KL  ; 

I  say  that  the  cylinder  AO  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  BP. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  BFGH,  so  is  the 
height  MN  to  the  height  KL, 

while  the  height  KL  is  equal  to  the  height  QN, 

therefore,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  BFGHj  so  is  the 
height  MN  to  the  height  QN. 

But,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  BFGH,  so  is  the 
cylinder  AO  to  the  cylinder  BS, 

for  they  are  of  the  same  height ;  [xii.  1 1] 

and,  as  the  height  MN  is  to  QN,  so  is  the  cylinder  BP  to  the 
cylinder  ^5^5 ;  [xii.  13] 

therefore,  as  the  cylinder  A  O  is  to  the  cylinder  BS,  so  is  the 
cylinder  BP  to  the  cylinder  BS.  [v.  n] 


422  BOOK  XII  [xii.  15 

Therefore  the  cylinder  AO  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  EP. 

[V.9] 
And  the  same  is  true  for  the  cones  also. 

Q.  E.  D. 

I.  If  the  heights  of  the  two  cylinders  are  equal,  and  their  volumes  are 
equal,  the  bases  are  equal,  since  the  latter  are  proportional  to  the  volumes. 

[xii.  ii] 
If  the  heights  are  not  equal,  cut  off  from  the  higher  cylinder  a  cylinder  of 
the  same  height  as  the  lower. 

Then,  if  ZA",  QNhe  the  equal  heights, 
we  have,  by  xii.  1 1, 

(base  A  BCD)  :  (base  EFGH)  =  (cylinder  AO) :  (cylinder  ES) 

=  (cylinder  £P)  :  (cylinder  ES), 

by  hypothesis, 
=  AfN:  QN  [xii.  13] 

II.  In  the  converse  part  of  the  proposition,  Euclid  omits  the  case  where 
the  cylinders  have  equal  heights.  In  this  case  of  course  the  reciprocal  ratios 
are  both  ratios  of  equality;  the  bases  are  therefore  equal,  and  consequently  the 
cylinders. 

If  the  heights  are  not  equal,  we  have,  with  the  same  construction  as  before, 

(base  A  BCD) :  (base  EFGH)  =  MNi  KL. 
But  [xii.  ii] 

(base  ABCD) :  (base  EFGH)  =  (cylinder  AO) :  (cylinder  ES)y 
and  MN\  KL  =  MN  \  QN 

=  (cylinder  EP) :  (cylinder  ES).      [xii.  13] 
Therefore 

(cylinder  AO) :  (cylinder  ES)  =  (cylinder  EP) :  (cylinder  ES), 
and  consequently  (cylinder  A0)  =  (cylinder  EP), 

Similarly  for  the  cones,  which  are  equal  to  one-third  of  the  cylinders 
respectively. 

Legendre  deduces  these  propositions  about  cones  and  cylinders  from  two 
others  which  he  establishes  by  a  method  similar 
to  that  adopted  by  him  for  the  theorem  of  xii.  2 
(see  note  on  that  proposition). 

The  first  (for  the  cylinder)  is  as  follows. 

TAe  volume  of  a  cylinder  is  equal  to  the 
product  of  its  base  by  its  height. 

Suppose  CA  to  be  the  radius  of  the  base  of 
the  given  cylinder,  h  its  height. 

For  brevity  let  us  denote  by  (surf.  CA)  the 
area  of  the  circle  of  which  CA  is  the  radius. 

If  (surf.  CA)  X  A  is  not  the  measure  of  the 
given  cylinder,  it  will  be  the  measure  of  a 
cylinder  greater  or  less  than  it. 

I.     First  let  it  be  the  measure  of  a  less 
cylinder,  that,  for  example,  of  which  the  circle  with  radius  CD  is  the  base,  and 
h  is  the  height 


XII.  15,  i6]  PROPOSITIONS    15,  16  423 

Circumscribe  about  the  circle  with  radius  CD  a  regular  polygon  GHI,., 
such  that  its  sides  do  not  anywhere  meet  the  circle  with  radius  CA.  [See  note 
on  XII.  2,  p.  393  above,  for  Legendre's  lemma  relating  to  this  construction.] 

Imagine  a  prism  erected  on  the  polygon  as  base  and  with  height  h. 

Then  (volume  of  prism)  =  (polygon  GHI,..)  x  h. 

[Legendre  has  previously  proved  this  proposition,  first  for  a  parallelepiped 
(by  transforming  it  into  a  rectangular  one),  then  for  a  triangular  prism  (half  of 
a  parallelepiped  of  the  same  height),  and  lastly  for  a  prism  with  a  polygonal 
base.] 

But  (polygon  GZT/...)  <(surf.  CA). 

Therefore  (volume  of  prism)  <  (surf.  CA)  x  h 

<  (cylinder  on  circle  of  rad.  CD), 

by  hypothesis. 

But  the  prism  is  greater  than  the  latter  cylinder,  since  it  includes  it : 
which  is  impossible. 

II.  In  order  not  to  multiply  figures  let  us,  in  this  second  case,  suppose 
that  CD  is  the  radius  of  the  base  of  the  given  cylinder,  and  that  (surf.  CD)  x  h 
is  the  measure  of  a  cylinder  greater  than  it,  e.g.  a  cylinder  on  the  circle  with 
radius  CA  as  base  and  of  height  h. 

Then,  with  the  same  construction, 

(volume  of  prism)  =  (polygon  GUI...)  x  A. 

And  (polygon  GHI.,})  >  (surf.  CD). 

Therefore        (volume  of  prism)  >  (surf.  CD)  x  h 

>  (cylinder  on  surf.  CA\  by  hypothesis. 

But  the  volume  of  the  prism  is  also  less  than  that  cylinder,  being  included 
by  it: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore       (volume  of  cylinder)  =  (its  base)  x  (its  height). 

It  follows  as  a  corollary  that 

Cylinders  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases  [xii.  13],  and 
cylinders  on  the  same  base  are  to  one  another  as  their  heights  [xii.  14]. 

Also 

Similar  cylinders  are  as  the  cubes  of  their  heights,  or  as  the  cubes  of  the 
diameters  of  their  bases  [Eucl.  xii.  12]. 

For  the  bases  are  as  the  squares  on  their  diameters;  and,  since  the 
cylinders  are  similar,  the  diameters  of  the  bases  are  as  their  heights. 

Therefore  the  bases  are  as  the  squares  on  the  heights,  and  the  bases 
multiplied  by  the  heights,  or  the  cylinders  themselves,  are  as  the  cubes  of  the 
heights. 

I  need  not  reproduce  Legendre*s  proofs  of  the  corresponding  propositions 
for  the  cone. 

Proposition  16. 

Given  two  circles  about  the  same  centre,  to  inscribe  in  the 
greater  circle  an  equilateral  polygon  with  an  even  number  of 
sides  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  circle. 


424  BOOK  XII  [xii.  1 6 

Let  ABCD,  EFGH  be  the  two  given  circles  about  the 
same  centre  K\ 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the 
greater  circle  ABCD  an  equilateral 
polygon  with  an  even  number  of 
sides  which  does  not  touch  the  circle 
EFGH. 

For  let  the  straight  line  BKD 
be  drawn  through  the  centre  Ky 

and  from  the  point  G  let  GA  be 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  straight 
line  ED  and  carried  through  to  C ; 

therefore  AC  touches  the  circle  EFGH.  [ni.  i6,  Por.] 

Then,  bisecting  the  circumference  BAD,  bisecting  the 
half  of  it,  and  doing  this  continually,  we  shall  leave  a  circum- 
ference less  than  AD.  [^  '] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  it  be  LD  ; 

from  L  let  LM  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  ED  and  carried 
through  to  N, 

and  let  LD,  DN  be  joined  ; 

therefore  LD  is  equal  to  DN.  [m.  3.  i-  4] 

Now,  since  LN  is  parallel  to  AC, 

and  AC  touches  the  circle  EFGH, 

therefore  LN  does  not  touch  the  circle  EFGH ; 

therefore  LD,  DN  are  far  from  touching  the  circle  EFGH. 

If  then  we  fit  into  the  circle  ABCD  straight  lines  equal 
to  the  straight  line  LD  and  placed  continuously,  there  will 
be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  an  equilateral  polygon  with 
an  even  number  of  sides  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser 
circle  EFGH.  q.  e.  f. 

It  must  be  carefully  observed  that  the  polygon  inscribed  in  the  outer  circle 
in  this  proposition  is  such  that  not  only  do  its  own  sides  not  touch  the  inner 
circle,  but  also  the  chords,  as  LN,  joining  angular  points  next  but  one  to  each 
other  do  twt  touch  the  inner  circle  either.  In  other  words,  the  polygon  is  the 
second  in  order,  not  the  first,  which  satisfies  the  condition  of  the  enunciation. 
This  is  important,  because  such  a  polygon  is  wanted  in  the  next  proposition ; 
hence  in  that  proposition  the  exact  construction  here  given  must  be  followed. 


XII.  17] 


PROPOSITIONS   i6,  17 


425 


Proposition  17. 

Given  two  spheres  about  the  same  centre,  to  inscribe  in  the 
greater  sphere  a  polyhedral  solid  which  does  not  touch  the 
lesser  sphere  at  its  surface. 

Let  two  spheres  be  conceived  about  the  same  centre  A  ; 
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  greater  sphere  a  poly- 
hedral solid  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  at  its 
surface. 


Let  the  spheres  be  cut  by  any  plane  through  the  centre ; 
then  the  sections  will  be  circles, 

inasmuch   as    the    sphere    was    produced    by   the    diameter 
remaining  fixed  and  the  semicircle  being  carried  round  it ; 

[xi.  Def.  14] 
hence,  in  whatever  position  we  conceive  the  semicircle  to  be, 
the  plane  carried  through  it  will  produce  a  circle  on  the 
circumference  of  the  sphere. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  this  circle  is  the  greatest  possible, 


mtmam 


426  BOOK  XII  [xii.  17 

inasmuch  as  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  which  is  of  course 
the  diameter  both  of  the  semicircle  and  of  the  circle,  is  greater 
than  all  the  straight  lines  drawn  across  in  the  circle  or  the 
sphere. 

Let  then  BCDE  be  the  circle  in  the  greater  sphere, 
and  FGH  the  circle  in  the  lesser  sphere  ; 
let  two  diameters  in  them,  BD,  CE,  be  drawn  at  right  angles 
to  one  another ; 

then,  given  the  two  circles  BCDE,  FGH  about  the  same 
centre,  let  there  be  inscribed  in  the  greater  circle  BCDE  an 
equilateral  polygon  with  an  even  number  of  sides  which  does 
not  touch  the  lesser  circle  FGH, 

let  BK,  KL,  LMy  ME  be  its  sides  in  the  quadrant  BE, 
let  KA  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  A^. 
let  AO  ht.  set  up  from  the  point  A  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  the  circle  BCDE,  and  let  it  meet  the  surface  of  the 
sphere  at  O, 

and  through  AO  and  each  of  the  straight  lines  BD,  KN  let 
planes  be  carried ; 

they  will  then  make  greatest  circles  on  the  surface  of  the 
sphere,  for  the  reason  stated. 

Let  them  make  such, 
and  in  them  let  BOD,  KON  be  the  semicircles  on  BD,  KN, 

Now,  since  OA  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle 
BCDE, 

therefore  all  the  planes  through  OA  are  also  at  right  angles 
to  the  plane  of  the  circle  BCDE ;  [xi.  18] 

hence  the  semicircles  BOD,  KON  are  also  at  right  angles  to 
the  plane  of  the  circle  BCDE, 

And,  since  the  semicircles  BED,  BOD,  KON  are  equal, 
for  they  are  on  the  equal  diameters  BD,  KN, 
therefore  the  quadrants  BE,  BO,  KO  are  also  equal  to  one 
another. 

Therefore  there  are  as  many  straight  lines  in  the  quadrants 
BO,  KO  equal  to  the  straight  lines  BK,  KL,  LM,  ME  as 
there  are  sides  of  the  polygon  in  the  quadrant  BE. 

Let  them  be  inscribed,  and  let  them  be  BP,  PQ,  QR,  RO 
and  KS,  ST,  TU,  UO, 
let  SP,  TQ,  UR  be  joined, 


XII.  17]  PROPOSITION    17  427 

and  from  P,  S  let  perpendiculars  be  drawn  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle  BCDE ;  [xi.  11] 

these  will  fall  on  BD^  KN^  the  common  sections  of  the  planes, 
inasmuch  as  the  planes  oi  BOD,  KON^rt,  also  at  right  angles 
to  the  plane  of  the  circle  BCDE.  [cf.  xi.  Def.  4] 

Let  them  so  fall,  and  let  them  be  PV,  SW, 
and  let  WV  be  joined. 

Now  since,  in  the  equal  semicircles  BOD,  KON,  equal 
straight  lines  BP,  KS  have  been  cut  off, 
and  the  perpendiculars  PV,  5WP^have  been  drawn, 
therefore  PV  is  equal  to  SW,  and  BV  to  KW.      [iii.  27,  i.  26] 

But  the  whole  BA  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  KA  ; 
therefore  the  remainder  VA  is  also  equal  to  the  remainder  WA ; 
therefore,  as  ^F  is  to  VA,  so  is  KW  X.o  WA  ; 
therefore  WV  is  parallel  to  KB.  [vi.  2] 

And,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  PV^  5^  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  BCDE, 
therefore  PV\%  parallel  to  SW.  [xi.  6] 

But  it  was  also  proved  equal  to  it ; 
therefore  WV,  SP  are  also  equal  and  parallel.  [1.  33] 

And,  since  WV  is  parallel  to  SP, 
while  WV  is  parallel  to  KB, 
therefore  SP  is  also  parallel  to  KB.  [xi.  9] 

And  BP,  KS  join  their  extremities ; 
therefore  the  quadrilateral  KB  PS  is  in  one  plane, 
inasmuch  as,  if  two  straight  lines  be  parallel,  and  points  be 
taken  at  random  on  each  of  them,  the  straight  line  joining  the 
points  is  in  the  same  plane  with  the  parallels.  [xi.  7] 

For  the  same  reason 
each  of  the  quadrilaterals  SPQT,  TQRU  is  also  in  one  plane. 
But  the  triangle  URO  is  also  in  one  plane.  [xi.  2] 

If  then  we  conceive  straight  lines  joined  from  the  points 
P^  S,  Q,  T,  R,  U  X.O  A,  there  will  be  constructed  a  certain 
polyhedral  solid  figure  between  the  circumferences  BO,  KO, 
consisting  of  pyramids  of  which  the  quadrilaterals  KBPS, 
SPQT,  TQRU^nd  the  triangle  URO  are  the  bases  and  the 
point  A  the  vertex. 


428  BOOK  XII  [xii.  17 

And,  if  we  make  the  same  construction  in  the  case  of  each 
of  the  sides  KL,  LM,  ME  as  in  the  case  of  BK,  and  further 
in  the  case  of  the  remaining  three  quadrants, 

there  will  be  constructed  a  certain  polyhedral  figure  in- 
scribed in  the  sphere  and  contained  by  pyramids,  of  which 
the  said  quadrilaterals  and  the  triangle  UROy  and  the  others 
corresponding  to  them,  are  the  bases  and  the  point  A  the 
vertex. 

I  say  that  the  said  polyhedron  will  not  touch  the  lesser 
sphere  at  the  surface  on  which  the  circle  FGH  is. 

Let  AX  be  drawn  from  the  point  A  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  quadrilateral  KB  PS,  and  let  it  meet  the  plane  at 
the  point  X\  [xi.  11] 

let  XB,  XK  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AX  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
quadrilateral  KBPSy 

therefore  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines 
which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  the  quadrilateral. 

[xi.  Def.  3] 

Therefore  AX  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  BX,  XK. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  AK, 

the  square  on  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  AK. 

And  the  squares  on  AX,  XB  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  ABy 

for  the  angle  at  X  is  right ;  [i.  47] 

and  the  squares  on  AX,  XK  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AK. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AX,  XB  are  equal  to  the  squares 
on  AX,  XK, 

Let  the  square  on  AX  be  subtracted  from  each  ; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  square  on  BX,  is  equal  to  the 
remainder,  the  square  on  XK\ 

therefore  BX  is  equal  to  XK, 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  straight  lines  joined 
from  X  X.O  P,  S  are  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BX, 
XK. 


xii.  17]  PROPOSITION    17  4*9 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  X  and  distance 
one  of  the  straight  lines  XB,  A'A' will  pass  through  P,  6*  also, 
and  KBPS  will  be  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle. 

Now,  since  KB  is  greater  than  WV, 
while  WV  is  equal  to  SPy 
therefore  KB  is  greater  than  SP. 

But  KB  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  KS,  BP ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  A'^',  BP  is  greater  than  SP. 

And,  since  KBPS  is  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle, 
and  KB,  BP,  KS  are  equal,  and  PS  less, 
and  BX  is  the  radius  of  the  circle, 

therefore  the  square  on  KB  is  greater  than  double  of  the 
square  on  BX. 

Let  KZ  be  drawn  from  K  perpendicular  to  BV. 

Then,  since  BD  is  less  than  double  of  DZ, 
and,  as  BD  is  to  DZ,  so  is  the  rectangle  DB,  BZ  to  the 
rectangle  DZ,  ZB, 

if  a  square  be  described  upon  BZ  and  the  parallelogram  on 
ZD  be  completed, 

then  the  rectangle  DB,  BZ  is  also  less  than  double  of  the 
rectangle  DZ,  ZB. 

And,  if  KD  be  joined, 

the  rectangle  DB,  BZ  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BK^ 

and  the  rectangle  DZ,  ZB  equal  to  the  square  on  KZ ; 

[ni.  31,  VI.  8  and  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  KB  is  less  than  double  of  the  square 
on  A'Z. 

But  the  square  on  KB  is  greater  than  double  of  the  square 
on  BX ; 
therefore  the  square  on  KZ  is  greater  than  the  square  on  BX. 

And,  since  BA  is  equal  to  KA, 
the  square  on  BA  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AK. 

And  the  squares  on  BX,  XA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  BA, 
and  the  squares  on  KZ,  ZA  equal  to  the  square  on  KA  ; 

[I.  47] 
therefore  the  squares  on  BX,  XA  are  equal  to  the  squares  on 
KZ,  ZA, 


430  BOOK  XII  [xii.  17 

and  of  these  the  square  on  KZ  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  BX\ 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  square  on  ZA,  is  less  than  the 
square  on  XA, 

Therefore  AX  is  greater  than  AZ  ; 

therefore  AX  is  much  greater  than  AG. 

And  AX  is  the  perpendicular  on  one  base  of  the  poly- 
hedron, 

and  ^G^  on  the  surface  of  the  lesser  sphere  ; 

hence  the  polyhedron  will  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  on  its 
surface. 

Therefore,  given  two  spheres  about  the  same  centre,  a 
polyhedral  solid  has  been  inscribed  in  the  greater  sphere 
which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  at  its  surface. 

Q.  E.  F. 

PoRiSM.  But  if  in  another  sphere  also  a  polyhedral  solid 
be  inscribed  similar  to  the  solid  in  the  sphere  BCDE, 

the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  BCDE  has  to  the  poly- 
hedral solid  in  the  other  sphere  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  BCDE  has  to  the  diameter 
of  the  other  sphere. 

For,  the  solids  being  divided  into  their  pyramids  similar 
in  multitude  and  arrangement,  the  pyramids  will  be  similar. 

But  similar  pyramids  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate 
ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides  ;  [xii.  8,  Por.] 

therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  quadrilateral  KBPS  is 
the  base,  and  the  point  A  the  vertex,  has  to  the  similarly 
arranged  pyramid  in  the  other  sphere  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding 
side,  that  is,  of  that  which  the  radius  AB  of  the  sphere  about 
A  as  centre  has  to  the  radius  of  the  other  sphere. 

Similarly  also  each  pyramid  of  those  in  the  sphere  about 
A  as  centre  has  to  each  similarly  arranged  pyramid  of  those 
in  the  other  sphere  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB  has 
to  the  radius  of  the  other  sphere. 

And,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  conse- 
quents, so  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents  ; 

[V.  12] 


XII.  17] 


PROPOSITION    17 


431 


hence  the  whole  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  about  A  as 
centre  has  to  the  whole  polyhedral  solid  in  the  other  sphere 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB  has  to  the  radius  of  the 
other  sphere,  that  is,  of  that  which  the  diameter  BD  has  to 
the  diameter  of  the  other  sphere. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  is  of  great  length  and  therefore  requires  summarising  in 
order  to  make  it  easier  to  grasp.  Moreover  there  are  some  assumptions  in  it 
which  require  to  be  proved,  and  some  omissions  to  be  supplied.  The  figure 
also  is  one  of  some  complexity,  and,  in  addition,  the  text  and  the  figure  treat 
two  points  Z  and  K,  which  are  really  one  and  the  same,  as  different. 

The  first  thing  needed  is  to  know  that  all  sections  of  a  sphere  by  planes 
through  the  centre  are  circles  and  equal  to  one  another  (great  circles  or 
"  greatest  circles  "  as  Euclid  calls  them,  more  appropriately).  Euclid  uses  his 
definition  of  a  sphere  as  the  figure  described  by  a  semicircle  revolving  about 
its  diameter.  This  of  course  establishes  that  all  planes  through  the  particular 
diameter  make  equal  circular  sections ;  but  it  is  also  assumed  that  the  same 
sphere  is  generated  by  any  other  semicircle  of  the  same  size  and  with  its 
centre  at  the  same  point 


The  construction  and  argument  of  the  proposition  may  be  shortly  given 
as  follows. 

A  plane  through  the  centre  of  two  concentric  spheres  cuts  them  in  great 
circles  of  which  BEy  GFzxe,  quadrants. 

A  regular  polygon  with  an  even  number  of  sides  is  inscribed  (exactly  as  in 
Prop.  16)  to  the  outer  circle  such  that  its  sides  do  not  touch  the  inner  circle. 
BKy  KLy  LMy  ME  are  the  sides  in  the  quadrant  BE, 


432  BOOK   XII  [xii.  17 

AO  is  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  ABE,  and  through  AO  are 
drawn  planes  passing  through  £,  K,  Z,  M,  £,  etc.,  cutting  the  sphere  in  great 
circles. 

0£,  OKdiXQ  quadrants  of  two  of  these  great  circles. 

As  these  quadrants  are  equal  to  the  quadrant  BE,  they  will  be  divisible 
into  arcs  equal  in  number  and  magnitude  to  the  arcs  BK,  KL,  LM,  ME. 

Dividing  the  other  quadrants  of  these  circles,  and  also  all  the  quadrants  of 
the  other  circles  through  OA,  in  this  way  we  shall  have  in  all  the  circles  a 
polygon  equal  to  that  in  the  circle  of  which  BE  is  a  quadrant 

BPy  PQy  QR,  RO  and  KS,  ST,  TU,  UO  are  the  sides  of  these  polygons 
in  the  quadrants  BO,  KO. 

Joining  PS,  QT,  RU,  and  making  the  same  construction  all  round  the 
circles  through  AO,  we  have  a  certain  polyhedron  inscribed  in  the  outer 
sphere. 

Draw  PV  perpendicular  to  AB  and  therefore  (since  the  planes  OAB, 
BAE  are  at  right  angles)  perpendicular  to  the  plane  BAE ;  [xi.  Def.  4] 

draw  5  fF  perpendicular  to  ^ AT  and  therefore  (for  a  like  reason)  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  BAE, 

Draw  KZ  perpendicular  to  BA.  (Since  BX  =  BP,  and  DB.BF=  BP*, 
DB . ^Z=  BK^,  it  follows  that  BV^BZ,  and  Z,  V coincide.) 

Now,  since  l  s  PA  V,  SA  W,  being  angles  subtended  at  the  centre  by 
equal  arcs  of  equal  circles,  are  equal, 
and  since  l  s  PVA,  SWA  are  right, 

while  AS=AP, 

A  s  PA  Ff  SA  W  are  equal  in  all  respects,  [i.  26] 

and  AV=AW, 

Consequently  AB\AV=  AK :  A IV; 

and  FIV,  BXsite  parallel. 

But  PVy  5^  are  parallel  (being  both  perpendicular  to  one  plane)  and 
equal  (by  the  equal  As  PA  F,  SA  fV), 
therefore  FfV,  PS  are  equal  and  parallel. 

Therefore  ^^  (being  parallel  to  FfV)  is  parallel  to  PS. 

Consequently  (i)  BPSK'is  a  quadrilateral  in  one  plane. 

Similarly  the  other  quadrilaterals  PQTS,  QRUT site  in  one  plane;  and 
the  triangle  OR  U  is  in  one  plane. 

In  order  now  to  prove  that  the  plane  BPSK  does  not  anywhere  touch  the 
inner  sphere  we  have  to  prove  that  the  shortest  distance  from  A  to  the  plane 
is  greater  than  AZ,  which  by  the  construction  in  ya\.  16  is  greater  than  AG. 

Draw  AX  perpendicular  to  the  plane  BPSK, 

Then     AX^^XB^^AX^^XK^^AX^^XS'^^AX^^XP'^AB', 
whence  XB  =  XK  =XS^  XP, 

or  (2)  the  quadrilateral  BPSK  is  inscribable  in  a  circle  with  X  as  centre  and 
radius  XB. 

Now  BK>  VW 

>  PS; 
therefore  in  the  quadrilateral  BPSK  three  sides  BK,  BP^  KS  are  equal,  but 
PS  is  less. 

Consequently  the  angles  about  X  are  three  equal  angles  and  one  smaller 
angle; 


XII.  17]  PROPOSITION    17  433 

therefore  any  one  of  the  equal  angles  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  i.e.  l  BXK 
is  obtuse. 

Therefore  (3)  BK^  >  iBX^.  [11.  12] 

Next,  consider  the  semicircle  BKD  with  KZ  drawn  perpendicular  to  BD. 

We  have  BD  <  2DZ, 

so  that  DB  .BZ<2DZ,  ZB, 

or  BK^  <  2^Z«; 

therefore,  a  fortiori^  [by  (3)  above] 

(4)  BX^kKZ". 

Now  AK^^AB'] 

therefore  AZ^  +  ZK^  =  AX^  +  XB^. 

And  BX^<KZ^) 

therefore  AX^  >  AZ\ 

or  (5)  AX>AZ, 

But,  by  the  construction  in  xii.  16,  AZ>AG\  therefore,  a  fortiori^ 
AX>AG, 

And,  since  the  perpendicular  AX  is  the  shortest  distance  from  A  to  the 
plane  BPSK, 
(6)  the  plane  BPSK  does  not  anywhere  meet  the  inner  sphere. 

Euclid  omits  to  prove  that,  a  fortiori^  the  other  quadrilaterals  PQTS^ 
QRUT^  and  the  triangle  ROU^  do  not  anywhere  meet  the  inner  sphere. 

For  this  purpose  it  is  only  necessary  to  show  that  the  radii  of  the  circles 
circumscribing  BFSK,  PQTS,  QRUT  and  ROU  ^t,  in  descending  order  of 
magnitude. 


We  have  therefore  to  prove  that,  if  A  BCD,  A'B'CD  are  two  quadrilaterals 
inscribable  in  circles,  and 

while  AB  is  not  greater  than  AD,  A'B  =  CD,  and  AB>CD>  CD, 

then  the  radius  OA  of  the  circle  circumscribing  the  first  quadrilateral  is  greater 

than  the  radius  OA'  of  the  circle  circumscribing  the  second. 

Clavius,  and  Simson  after  him,  prove  this  by  reductio  ad  absurdum, 

(i)     liOA^OA', 
it  follows  that  l  s  AOD,  BOC,  A'OD,  SOC  are  all  equal. 

Also  lA0B>lAOB, 

L  COD  >  L  COD, 
whence  the  four  angles  about  O  are  together  greater  than  the  four  angles 
about  O',  i.e.  greater  than  four  right  angles  ; 
which  is  impossible. 

H.  E.  in.  28 


434  BOOK  XII  [xii.  17,  18 

(2)     l(aA'>OA, 
cut  off  from  ffA',  OB>^  OCy  O'D  lengths  equal  to  OA^  and  draw  the  inner 
quadrilateral  as  shown  in  the  figure  (XYZW), 

Then  AB>A'B':>XY, 

CD>CD>ZW, 
AD  =  A'jy>  WX, 
BC^BC>YZ. 

Consequently  the  same  absurdity  as  in  (i)  follows  a  fortiori. 

Therefore,  since  OA  is  neither  equal  to  nor  less  than  OA\ 

OA  >  0A\ 

The  fact  is  also  sufficiently  clear  if  we  draw  MOy  NO  bisecting  DA^  DC 
perpendicularly  and  therefore  meeting  in  O,  the  centre  of  the  circumscribed 
circle,  and  then  suppose  the  side  DA  with  the  perpendicular  MO  to  turn 
inwards  about  D  as  centre.  Then  the  intersection  of  MO  and  NO^  as  /*,  will 
gradually  move  towards  N, 

Simson  gives  his  proof  as  "Lemma  11."  immediately  before  xii.  17. 
He  adds  to  the  Porism  some  words  explaining  how  we  may  construct  a 
similar  polyhedron  in  another  sphere  and  how  we  may  prove  that  the 
polyhedni  are  similar. 

The  Porism  is  of  course  of  the  essence  of  the  matter  because  it  is  the 
porism  which  as  much  as  the  construction  is  wanted  in  the  next  proposition. 
It  would  therefore  not  have  been  amiss  to  include  the  Porism  in  the  enuncia- 
tion of  XII.  17  so  as  to  call  attention  to  it 


Proposition  18. 

Spheres  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their 
respective  diameters. 

Let  the  spheres  ABC,  DEF  be  conceived, 
and  let  BC,  EF  be  their  diameters  ; 

I  say  that  the  sphere  ABC  has  to  the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio 
triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

For,  if  the  sphere  ABC  has  not  to  the  sphere  DEF  the, 
ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF, 
then  the  sphere  ABC  will  have  either  to  some  less  sphere 
than  the  sphere  DEF,  or  to  a  greater,  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

First,  let  it  have  that  ratio  to  a  less  sphere  GHK, 
let  DEF  be  conceived  about  the  same  centre  with  GHK, 
let  there  be  inscribed  in  the  greater  sphere  DEF  a  poly- 
hedral solid  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  GHK  at 
its  surface,  [xii.  17] 


XII.  i8] 


PROPOSITIONS  17,  i& 


435 


and  let  there  also  be  inscribed  in  the  sphere  ABC  a  poly- 
hedral solid  similar  to  the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  DEF\ 

therefore  the  polyhedral  solid  in  ABC  has  to  the  polyhedral 
solid  in  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  ^Chas  to  EF. 

[xii.  17,  Por.] 


But  the  sphere  ABC  also  has  to  the  sphere  GHK  the 
ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF\ 

therefore,  as  the  sphere  ABC  is  to  the  sphere  GHK,  so  is 
the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  ABC  to  the  polyhedral 
solid  in  the  sphere  DEF\ 

and,  alternately,  as  the  sphere  ABC  is  to  the  polyhedron  in 
it,  so  is  the  sphere  GHK  to  the  polyhedral  solid  in  the 
sphere  DEF.  [v.  16] 

But  the  sphere  ABC  is  greater  than  the  polyhedron  in  it ; 

therefore  the  sphere  GHK  is  also  greater  than  the  polyhedron 
in  the  sphere  DEF. 

But  it  is  also  less, 

for  it  is  enclosed  by  it. 

Therefore  the  sphere  ABC  has  not  to  a  less  sphere  than 
the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  diameter 
BC  has  to  EF. 

28—2 


436  BOOK    XII  •  [XII.  1 8 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  has  the  sphere  DEF 
to  a  less  sphere  than  the  sphere  ABC  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  EF  has  to  BC. 

I  say  next  that  neither  has  the  sphere  ABC  to  any  greater 
sphere  than  the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which 
BC  has  to  EF. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  have  that  ratio  to  a  greater,  LMN  \ 

therefore,  inversely,  the  sphere  LMN  has  to  the  sphere  ABC 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  diameter  EF  has  to  the 
diameter  BC 

But,  inasmuch  as  LMN  is  greater  than  DEF^ 

therefore,  as  the  sphere  LMN  is  to  the  sphere  ABC,  so  is  the 
sphere  DEF  to  some  less  sphere  than  the  sphere  ABC,  as 
was  before  proved.  [xii.  2,  Lemma] 

Therefore  the  sphere  DEF  also  has  to  some  less  sphere 
than  the  sphere  ABC  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF 
has  to  BC: 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore  the  sphere  ABC  has  not  to  any  sphere  greater 
than  the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC 
has  to  EF. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  has  it  that  ratio  to  a  less 
sphere. 

Therefore  the  sphere  ABC  has  to  the  sphere  DEF  the 
ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

Q.   E.  D. 

It  is  the  method  of  this  proposition  which  Legendre  adopted  for  his  proof 
of  XII.  2  (see  note  on  that  proposition). 

The  argument  can  be  put  very  shortly.  We  will  suppose  S,  S'  to  be  the 
volumes  of  the  spheres,  and  d,  d'  to  be  their  diameters;  and  we  will  for  brevity 
express  the  triplicate  ratio  of  d  to  d'  by  d^ :  d'^. 

If  d':d'':^S:S\ 

then  d'^id'^^S'.T, 

where  7^  is  the  volume  of  some  sphere  either  greater  or  less  than  S', 

I.     Suppose,  if  possible,  that  T<S\ 

Let  7'be  supposed  concentric  with  S\ 

As  in  XII.  1 7,  inscribe  a  polyhedron  in  S'  such  that  its  faces  do  not  any- 
where touch  T', 

and  inscribe  in  5  a  polyhedron  similar  to  that  in  S\ 


XII.  i8]  PROPOSITION    i8  437 

Then  .S:T=iP:d'^ 

=  (polyhedron  in  S)  :  (polyhedron  in  S') ; 
or,  alternately, 

5 :  (polyhedron  in  S)=  T:  (polyhedron  in  S'), 
And  S>  (polyhedron  in  5) ; 

therefore  T>  (polyhedron  in  S'). 

But,  by  construction,    T<  (polyhedron  in  S') :    . 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  T^t  -5". 

11.     Suppose,  if  possible,  that   T  >  S\ 

Now  (P:d'^  =  S:T 

=  X:S\ 
where  X  is  the  volume  of  some  sphere  less  than  S,  [xii.  2,  Lemma] 

or,  inversely,  d'^ :  iP  =  S* :  X, 

where  X  <S. 

This  is  proved  impossible  exactly  as  in  Part  I. 

Therefore  r>5'. 

Hence  7]  not  being  greater  or  less  than  5',  is  equal  to  it,  and 

d^:d'^  =  S:  S'. 


BOOK   XIII. 


HISTORICAL  NOTE. 

I  have  already  given,  in  the  note  to  iv.  lo,  the  evidence  upon  which  the 
construction  of  the  five  regular  solids  is  attributed  to  the  Pythagoreans.  Some 
of  them,  the  cube,  the  tetrahedron  (which  is  nothing  but  a  pyramid),  and  the 
octahedron  (which  is  only  a  double  pyramid  with  a  square  base),  cannot  but 
have  been  known  to  the  Egyptians.  And  it  appears  that  dodecahedra  have 
been  found,  of  bronze  or  other  material,  which  may  belong  to  periods  earlier 
than  Pythagoras*  time  by  some  centuries  (for  references  see  Cantor's  Geschichte 
der  Mathematik  ij,  pp.  175 — 6). 

It  is  true  that  the  author  of  the  scholium  No.  i  to  Eucl.  xiii.  says  that  the 
Book  is  about  "the  five  so-called  Platonic  figures,  which  however  do  not 
belong  to  Plato,  three  of  the  aforesaid  five  figures  being  due  to  the  Pythagoreans, 
namely  the  cube,  the  pyramid  and  the  dodecahedron,  while  the  octahedron 
and  the  icosahedron  are  due  to  Theaetetus."  This  statement  (taken  probably 
from  Geminus)  may  perhaps  rest  on  the  fact  that  Theaetetus  was  the  first  to 
write  at  any  length  about  the  two  last-mentioned  solids.  We  are  told  indeed 
by  Suidas  (s.  v.  ©catTr/ro?)  that  Theaetetus  "  first  wrote  on  the  *  five  solids '  as 
they  are  called.'*  This  no  doubt  means  that  Theaetetus  was  the  first  to  write 
a  complete  and  systematic  treatise  on  all  the  regular  solids ;  it  does  not 
exclude  the  possibility  that  Hippasus  or  others  had  already  written  on  the 
dodecahedron.  The  fact  that  Theaetetus  wrote  upon  the  regular  solids  agrees 
very  well  with  the  evidence  which  we  possess  of  his  contributions  to  the 
theory  of  irrationals,  the  connexion  between  which  and  the  investigation  of 
the  regular  solids  is  seen  in  Euclid's  Book  xiii. 

Theaetetus  flourished  about  380  B.C.,  and  his  work  on  the  regular  solids 
was  soon  followed  by  another,  that  of  Aristaeus,  an  elder  contemporary  of 
Euclid,  who  also  wrote  an  important  book  on  Solid  Lod^  i.e.  on  conies  treated 
as  loci.  This  Aristaeus  (known  as  "the  elder")  wrote  in  the  period  about 
320  B.C.  We  hear  of  his  Comparison  of  the  five  regular  solids  from  Hypsicles 
(2nd  cent  B.C.),  the  writer  of  the  short  book  commonly  included  in  the  editions 
of  the  Elements  as  Book  xiv.  Hypsicles  gives  in  this  Book  some  six  proposi- 
tions supplementing  Eucl.  xiii. ;  and  he  introduces  the  second  of  the 
propositions  (Heiberg's  Euclid,  Vol.  v.  p.  6)  as  follows: 

"  The  same  circle  circumscribes  both  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron  and  the 
triangle  of  the  icosahedron  when  both  are  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere.  This  is 
proved  by  Aristaeus  in  the  book  entitled  Comparison  of  the  five  figures.^' 


HISTORICAL  NOTE  439 

Hypsicles  proceeds  (pp.  7  sqq.)  to  give  a. proof  of  this  theorem.  Allman 
pointed  out  {Greek  Geometry  from  Thales  to  Euclid^  1889,  PP-  201 — 2)  that  this 
proof  depends  on  eight  theorems,  six  of  which  appear  in  Euclid^s  Book  xin. 
(in  Propositions  8,  10,  12,  15,  16  with  Por.,  17);  two  other  propositions  not 
mentioned  by  Allman  are  also  used,  namely  xiii.  4  and  9.  This  seems,  as 
Allman  says,  to  confirm  the  inference  of  Bretschneider  (p.  171)  that,  as 
Aristaeus*  work  was  the  newest  and  latest  in  which,  before  Euclid's  time,  this 
subject  was  treated,  we  have  in  Eucl.  xiii.  at  least  a  partial  recapitulation  of 
the  contents  of  the  treatise  of  Aristaeus. 

After  Euclid,  Apollonius  wrote  on  the  comparison  of  the  dodecahedron 
and  the  icosahedron  inscribed  in  one  and  the  same  sphere.  This  we  also 
learn  from  Hypsicles,  who  says  in  the  next  words  following  those  about 
Aristaeus  above  quoted:  "But  it  is  proved  by  Apollonius  in  the  second 
edition  of  his  Comparison  of  the  dodecahedron  with  the  icosahedron  that,  as  the 
surface  of  the  dodecahedron  is  to  the  surface  of  the  icosahedron  [inscribed 
in  the  same  sphere],  so  is  the  dodecahedron  itself  [i.e.  its  volume]  to  the 
icosahedron,  because  the  perpendicular  is  the  same  from  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  to  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron  and  to  the  triangle  of  the 
icosahedron." 


BOOK  XIII.     PROPOSITIONS. 


Proposition  i. 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the 
square  on  the  greater  segment  added  to  the  half  of  the  whole 
is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half 

For  let  the  straight  line  AB  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio  at  the  point  C, 
and  let  A  Che  the  greater  segment  ; 
let  the  straight  line  AD  be  pro- 
duced in  a  straight  line  with  CA, 
and  let  AB  be  made  half  of  AB; 
I   say  that  the  square  on  CD  is 
five  times  the  square  on  AD. 

For  let  the  squares  AE,  DF 
be  described  on  AB,  DC, 
and  let  the  figure  in  DF  be  drawn  ; 
let  FC  be  carried  through  to  G. 

Now,  since  AB  has  been  cut  in 
extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C, 
therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  AC  -        =. 

[vi.  Def.  3,  VI.  17] 

And  C£  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  and  F/f  the  square 
on  AC; 

therefore  CE  is  equal  to  F//. 

And,  since  BA  is  double  of  AD, 
while  BA  is  equal  to  A' A,  and  AD  to  A//, 
therefore  /CA  is  also  double  of  A//. 

But,  as  ICA  is  to  A//,  so  is  CA:  to  C//;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  C/C  is  double  of  C//. 

But  LH,  HC  are  also  double  of  CH, 

Therefore  KC  is  equal  to  LH,  HC. 


M/' 

^  » 

Xo 

H  / 

C 

B 

D             A 

XIII.   l] 


PROPOSITION    I 


441 


But  CE  was  also  proved  equal  to  HF\ 
therefore  the  whole  square  AE  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  MNO. 

And,  since  BA  is  double  of  AD, 
the  square  on  BA  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  AD^ 
that  is,  AE  is  quadruple  of  DH. 

But  AE  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  MNO ; 
therefore  the  gnomon  MNO  is  also  quadruple  oi  AP\ 
therefore  the  whole  DF  is  five  times  A  P. 

And  DF  is  the  square  on  DC,  and  AP  the  square  on  DA  \ 
therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  five  times  the  square  on  DA, 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  first  five  propositions  are  in  the  nature  of  lemmas,  which  are  required 
for  later  propositions  but  are  not  in  themselves  of  much  importance. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  while  the  method  of  the  propositions  is  that  of 
Book  II.,  being  strictly  geometrical  and  not  algebraical,  none  of  the  results  of 
that  Book  are  made  use  of  (except  indeed  in  the  Lemma  to  xiii.  2,  which  is 
probably  not  genuine).  It  would  therefore  appear  as  though  these  propositions 
were  taken  from  an  earlier  treatise  without  being  revised  or  rewritten  in  the 
light  of  Book  II.  It  will  be  remembered  that,  according  to  Proclus  (p.  67,  6), 
Eudoxus  "  greatly  added  to  the  number  of  the  theorems  which  originated  with 
Plato  regarding  the  section ^^  (i.e.  presumably  the  ^^ golden  section");  and  it  is 
therefore  probable  that  the  five  theorems  are  due  to  Eudoxus. 

That,  if  AB  is  divided  at  C  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC  is  inferred  from  vi.  17. 
AD  is  made  equal  to  half  AB,  and  we  have  to  prove  that 

(sq.  on  CD)  =  5  (sq.  on  AD). 
The  figure  shows  at  once  that 

CJCH^CJHL,  ^r 

so  that      O  CH^OJHL  =  2(0  CH) 

^EJAG. 
Also  sq.  HF=  (sq.  on  AC) 

=  rect  AB^  BC 
=  CE. 
By  addition, 

(gnomon  MNO)  =  sq.  on  AB 

=  4  (sq.  on  AD) ; 
whence,  adding  the  sq.  on  AD  to  each,  we  have 
(sq.  on  CD)  =  5  (sq.  on  AD). 
The  result  here,  and  in  the  next  propositions, 
is  really  seen  more  readily  by  means  of  the  figure 

of  II.   II. 

In  this  figure  S/i^AC+^AB,  by  construction; 
and  we  have  therefore  to  prove  that 

(sq.  on  S/^)  =  s  (sQ*  on  A/i). 


C 

B 

K                    C 

I           E 

442  BOOK   XIII  [xiii.  I 

This  is  obvious,  for 

(sq.  on  S/^)  =  (sq.  on  I^B) 

=  sum  of  sqs.  on  ABy  AR 
=  5  (sq.  on  AR). 

The  Mss.  contain  a  curious  addition  to  xiii.  i — 5  in  the  shape  of  analyses 
and  syntheses  for  each  proposition  prefaced  by  the  heading : 

**  What  is  analysis  and  what  is  synthesis. 

"  Analysis  is  the  assumption  of  that  which  is  sought  as  if  it  were  admitted 
<  and  the  arrival  >  by  means  of  its  consequences  at  something  admitted  to 
be  true. 

"  Synthesis  is  an  assumption  of  that  which  is  admitted  <  and  the  arrival  > 
by  means  of  its  consequences  at  something  admitted  to  be  true." 

There  must  apparently  be  some  corruption  in  the  text ;  it  does  not,  in  the 
case  of  synthesis,  give  what  is  wanted.  B  and  V  have,  instead  of  "  something 
admitted  to  be  true,"  the  words  "  the  end  or  attainment  of  what  is  sought" 

The  whole  of  this  addition  is  evidently  interpolated.  To  begin  with,  the 
analyses  and  syntheses  of  the  five  propositions  are  placed  all  together  in  four 
MSS. ;  in  P,  q  they  come  after  an  alternative  proof  of  xiii.  5  (which  alternative 
proof  P  gives  after  xiii.  6,  while  q  gives  it  instead  of  xiii.  6),  in  B  (which  has 
not  the  alternative  proof  of  xiii.  5)  after  xiii.  6,  and  in  b  (in  which  xiii.  6  is 
wanting,  and  the  alternative  proof  of  xiii.  5  is  in  the  margin,  in  the  first  hand) 
after  xiii.  5,  while  V  has  the  analyses  of  i — 3  in  the  text  after  xiii.  6  and 
those  of  4 — 5  in  the  same  place  in  the  margin,  by  the  second  hand.  Further, 
the  addition  is  altogether  alien  from  the  plan  and  manner  of  the  Elements, 
The  interpolation  took  place  before  Theon  s  time,  and  the  probability  is  that 
it  was  originally  in  the  margin,  whence  it  crept  into  the  text  of  P  after  xiii.  5. 
Heiberg  (after  Bretschneider)  suggested  in  his  edition  (Vol.  v.  p.  Ixxxiv.)  that 
it  might  be  a  relic  of  analytical  investigations  by  Theaetetus  or  Eudoxus,  and 
he  cited  the  remark  of  Pappus  (v.  p.  410)  at  the  beginning  of  his 
"comparisons  of  the  five  [regular  solid]  figures  which  have  an  equal  surface," 
to  the  effect  that  he  will  not  use  **  the  so-called  analytical  investigation  by 
means  of  which  some  of  the  ancients  effected  their  demonstrations.'*  More 
recently  {Paralipomena  zu  Euklid  in  Hermes  xxxviii.,  1903)  Heiberg  con- 
jectures that  the  author  is  Heron,  on  the  ground  that  the  sort  of  analysis  and 
synthesis  recalls  Heron's  remarks  on  analysis  and  synthesis  in  his  commentary 
on  the  beginning  of  Book  11.  (quoted  by  an-NairizT,  ed.  Curtze,  p.  89)  and  his 
quasi-algebraical  alternative  proofs  of  propositions  in  that  Book. 

To  show  the  character  of  the  interpolated  matter  I  need  only  give  the 
analysis  and  synthesis  of  one  proposition.     In  the  case  of  xiii.  i  it  is  in 
substance  as  follows.     The  figure  is  a  mere 
straight  line.  DA  C         B 

Let  AB  be  divided  in  extreme  and  mean        • ' • » 

ratio  dX  Cy  AC  being  the  greater  segment ; 
and  let  AD  =  iAB, 

I  say  that  (sq.  on  CD)  =  5  (sq.  on  AD), 

(Analysis.) 

"  For,  since  (sq.  on  CD)  =  5  (sq.  on  AD),*^ 

and        (sq.  on  CD)  =  (sq.  on  CA)  +  (sq.  on  AD)  +  2  (rect.  CAj  AD), 
therefore  (sq.  on  CA)  +  2  (rect.  CAj  AD)  =  4  (sq.  on  AD). 

But  rect.  BA.AC=2  (rect.  CA .  AD), 

and  (sq.  on  CA)  =  (rect.  AB,  BC). 


XIII.  I,  2] 


PROPOSITIONS   I,  2 


443 


Therefore 

(rect  BAy  AC)  +  (rect  AB,  BC)  =  4(sq.  on  AD), 
or  (sq.  on  AB)  =  4  (sq.  on  AD) : 

and  this  is  true,  since  AD  =  \AB, 

(Synthesis.) 

Since  (sq.  on  AB)  =  4  (sq.  on  AD\ 

and  (sq.  on  AB)  =Xrect.  BA,  AC)  +  (rect.  ^-5,  -^Q, 

therefore  4 (sq.  on  ^/?)  =  2 (rect.  Z>-4,  -^C)  +  sq.  on  AC, 

Adding  to  each  the  square  on  AD,  we  have 

(sq.  on  CD)  =  5  (sq.  on  AD). 

Proposition  2. 

//  the  square  on  a  straight  line  be  five  times  the  square  on 
a  segment  of  it,  then,  w/ien  the  double  of  the  said  segment  is  cut 
in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment  is  the  remaining 
part  of  the  original  straight  line. 

For  let  the  square  on  the  straight  line  AB  be  five  times 
the    square   on    the   segment   AC 
of  it, 

and  let  CD  be  double  oi  AC\ 
I  say  that,  when  CD  is  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment 
is  CB, 

Let  the  squares  AF,  CG  be  de- 
scribed on  AB,  CD  respectively, 
let  the  figure  in  AF  be  drawn, 
and  let  BE  be  drawn  through. 

Now,  since  the  square  on  BA  is 
five  times  the  square  on  AC^ 
AFis  five  times  A//. 

Therefore  the  gnomon  MNO  is 
quadruple  of  AH.  '^  "" .       "* 

And,  since  DC  is  double  of  CA, 
therefore  the  square  on  DC  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  CA, 
that  is,  CG  is  quadruple  of  AH. 

But  the  gnomon  MNO  was  also  proved  quadruple  of  AH\ 
therefore  the  gnomon  MNO  is  equal  to  CG. 

And,  since  DC  is  double  of  CA, 
while  DC  is  equal  to  CK,  and  ^C  to  CH, 
therefore  KB  is  also  double  of  BH.  [vi.  i] 


fAf 

,H/ 

H   / 

B          D 

A            C 

444  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  2 

But  LH,  HB  are  also  double  of  HB ; 
therefore  KB  is  equal  to  LH^  HB. 

But  the  whole  gnomon  MNO  was  also  proved  equal  to 
the  whole  CG  ; 
therefore  the  remainder  HF  is  equal  to  BG. 

And  BG  is  the  rectangle  CD,  DB, 
for  CD  is  equal  to  DG ; 
and  HF  is  the  square  on  CB ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  CD,  DB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CB. 

Therefore,  as  DC  is  to  CB,  so  is  CB  to  BD. 

But  Z?C  is  greater  than  CB ; 
therefore  CB  is  also  greater  than  BD. 

Therefore,  when  the  straight  line  CD  is  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio,  CB  is  the  greater  segment. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma. 

That  the  double  of  ^C  is  greater  than  BC  is  to  be  proved 
thus. 

If  not,  let  BC  be,  if  possible,  double  of  CA. 

Therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  quadruple  of  the  square 
on  CA  ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  BC,  CA  are  five  times  the  square 
on  CA. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  square  on  BA  is  also  five  times 
the  square  on  CA  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BC,  CA : 
which  is  impossible.  [n.  4] 

Therefore  CB  is  not  double  of  AC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  a  straight  line  less 
than  CB  double  of  CA  ; 
for  the  absurdity  is  much  greater. 

Therefore  the  double  of  ^C  is  greater  than  CB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

This  proposition  is  the  converse  of  Prop.  i.     We  have  to  prove  that,  if 
AB  be  so  divided  at  C  that 

(sq.  on  AB)  =  5  (sq.  on  AC), 
dindif  CD=2AC, 
then  (rect.  CD,  DB)  =  (sq.  on  CB). 


XIII.   2,  3] 


PROPOSITIONS   2,  3 


445 


Subtract  from  each  side  the  sq.  on  AC; 

then  (gnomon  MNO)  =  4  (sq.  on  A  C) 

=  (sq.  on  CD). 

Now,  as  in  the  last  proposition, 

CJCE^2{CJBH) 

^EJBH^-CJHL. 

Subtracting  these  equals  from  the  equals,  the  square  on   CD  and  the 
gnomon  MNO  respectively,  we  have 

i.e.  (rect.  CD,  DB)  =  (sq.  on  CB), 

Here  again  the  proposition  can  readily  be  proved  by  means  of  a  figure 
similar  to  that  of  11.  11. 

Draw  CA  through  C  at  right  angles  to  CB  and  of  length  equal  to  CA  in 
the  original   figure ;    make    CD  double  of   CA ; 
produce  ^C  to  ^  so  that  CR=  CB. 

Complete  the  squares  on   CB  and  CD,  and 
join  AD. 

Now  we  are  given  the  fact  that 

(sq.  on  AR)  =  5  (sq.  on  CA). 
But 
5  (sq.  on  -^C)  =  (sq.  on  AC)-^-  (sq.  on  CD) 
=  (sq.  on  AD). 
Therefore 

(sq.  on  AR)  =  (sq.  on  AD), 
or  AR  =  AD. 

Now 

(rect  A:R,  RC) ■{•(sq.  on  -r4C)  =  (sq.  on  AR) 

=  (sq.  on  AD) 

=  (sq.  on  ^C)  +  (sq.  on  CD). 
Therefore  (rect.  R:R  .  RC)  =  (sq.  on  CD). 

That  is,  (rectangle  RE)  =  (square  CG). 

Subtract  the  common  part  CE, 
and  (rect.  BG)  =  (sq.  RB), 

or  rect.  CD,  DB  =  (sq.  on  CB). 

Heiberg,  with  reason,  doubts  the  genuineness  of  the  Lemma  following  this 
proposition. 


R 

B          0 

C 
A 

^ 

( 

i           Q 

Proposition  3. 

//  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the 
square  on  the  lesser  segment  added  to  the  half  of  the  greater 
segment  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  greater 
segment. 


446 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  i 


B 


G_aL'2J 
7k  f 


M 


For  let  any  straight  line  AB  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio  at  the  point  C, 
let  A  Che  the  greater  segment, 
and  let  AC  he  bisected  at  D ; 
I  say  that  the  square  on  BZ?  is 
five  times  the  square  on  Z)C 

For  let  the  square  A£  he 
described. on  AB, 
and    let    the    figure    be    drawn 
double. 

Since  ^C  is  double  of  Z)C, 
therefore  the  square  on  ^C  is 

quadruple  of  the  square  on  Z?C,  "  ^  " 

that  is,  RS  is  quadruple  of  J^G. 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  AC, 

and  C£  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC, 
therefore  CE  is  equal  to  jRS. 

But  RS  is  quadruple  of  JFG ; 
therefore  C£  is  also  quadruple  of  £G. 

Again,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DC, 
HK  is  also  equal  to  KF, 

Hence  the  square  GF  is  also  equal  to  the  square  HL. 

Therefore  GK  is  equal  to  KL,  that  is,  MN  to  NE ; 
hence  MF  is  also  equal  to  FE. 

But  MF  is  equal  to  CG  ; 
therefore  CG  is  also  equal  to  FE, 

Let  CN  be  added  to  each  ; 
therefore  the  gnomon  OPQ  is  equal  to  CE. 

But  CE  was  proved  quadruple  of  GF\ 
therefore  the  gnomon  OPQ  is  also  quadruple  of  the  square  FG, 

Therefore    the   gnomon    OPQ   and  the  square  FG  are 
five  times  FG, 

But    the    gnomon    OPQ    and   the   square   FG   are   the 
square  DN. 

And  DN  is  the  square  on  DB,  and  6^/^  the  square  on  DC, 

Therefore  the  square  on  DB   is  five  times    the   square 
on  DC  Q.  E.  D. 


XIII.  3,  4] 


PROPOSITIONS   3,  4 


447 


In  this  case  we  have 

(sq.  on  BD)  =  (sq.  FG)  +  (rect  CG)  +  (rect.  CN) 
=  (sq.  FG)  +  (rect.  FFi)  +  (rect.  CN) 
=  (sq.  FG)  +  (rect.  CE) 
=  (sq.  FG)  +  (rect.  AB,  BC) 
=  (sq.  FG)  +  (sq.  on  AC),  by  hypothesis, 
=  5  (sq.  on  Z?C).  ^ 

The  theorem  is  still  more  obvious  if  the  figure 
of  II.  II  be  used.     Let  CFbe  divided  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  £,  by  the  method  of  ii.  ii. 
Then,  since 

(rect.  AB,  BC)  +  (sq.  on  C£>) 
=  sq.  on  BD 
=  sqs.  on  CD,  CF, 
(rect.  AB,  BC)  =  (sq.  on  CF) 
=  (sq.  on  CA)y 
and  AB  is  divided  at  C  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio. 
And       (sq.  on  BD)  =  (sq.  on  DF) 
=  5  (sq.  on  CD). 


c ^ 

A  Q 


Proposition  4. 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the 
square  on  the  whole  and  the  square  on  the  lesser  segment  together 
are  triple  of  the  square  on  the  greater  segment. 

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line, 
let  it  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C, 
and  let  A  Che  the  greater  segment ; 
I  say  that  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are 
triple  of  the  square  on  CA. 

For  let  the  square   ADEB   be   de- 
scribed on  AB, 
and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Since  then  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  C, 
and  ^C  is  the  greater  segment, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC. 

[vi.  Def.  3,  VI.  17] 

And  AK  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  and  HG  the  square 
on  -^C; 
therefore  AK  is  equal  to  I/G. 


448 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  4,  5 


And,  since  AF  is  equal  to  FE, 
let  CK  be  added  to  each  ; 

therefore  the  whole  AK  is  equal  to  the  whole  CE ; 
therefore  AK,  CE  are  double  of  AK. 

But  AK,  CE  are  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  square  CK\ 
therefore  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  square  CK  are  double 
of  AK. 

But,  further,  AK  was  also  proved  equal  to  HG ; 
therefore  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  squares  CK,  HG  are 
triple  of  the  square  HG. 

And  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  squares  CK,  HG  are 
the  whole  square  AE  and  CK,  which  are  the  squares  on 
AB,  BC, 
while  HG  is  the  square  on  AC 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  AC. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Here,  as  in  the  preceding  propositions,  the  results  are  proved  de  novo  by 
the  method  of  Book  ii.,  without  reference  to  that  Book.     Otherwise  the  proof 
might  have  been  shorter. 
For,  by  ii.  7, 

(sq.  on  AB)  +  (sq.  on  BC)  =  2  (rect.  AB,  BC)  +  (sq.  on  AC) 

=  3(sq.  on  AC), 

Proposition  5. 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and 
there  be  added  to  it  a  straight  line  equal  to  the  greater  segment, 
the  whole  straight  line  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
and  the  original  straight  line  is  the  greater  segment. 

For  let  the  straight  line  AB  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio  at  the  point  C,  ^ 

let  AC  he  the  greater  segment, 
and  let  AD  be  equal  to  AC. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line 
L>B  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio  at  A,  and  the  original 
straight  line  AB  is  the  greater 
segment. 

For   let   the  square  ^^  be  described  on  AB, 
and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 


L  H 


XIII.  5, 6]  PROPOSITIONS  4—6  449 

Since  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC. 

[vi.  Def.  3,  VI.  17] 

And  CE  is  the  rectangle  ABy  BC,  and  CH  the  square 
on  ^C; 
therefore  CE  is  equal  to  HC 

But  HE  is  equal  to  CE, 
and  DH  is  equal  to  HC  ; 
therefore  DH  is  also  equal  to  HE. 

Therefore  the  whole  DK  is  equal  to  the  whole  AE. 

And  DK  is  the  rectangle  BD,  DA, 
for  AD  is  equal  to  DL  ; 
and  AE  is  the  square  on  AB ; 

therefore   the    rectangle  BD,   DA    is   equal   to  the  square 
on  AB. 

Therefore,  as  DB  is  to  BA,  so  is  BA  to  AD.  [vi.  17] 

And  DB  is  greater  than  BA  ; 
therefore  BA  is  also  greater  than  AD.  [v.  14] 

Therefore  DB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 
Ay  and  AB  is  the  greater  segment. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  (sq.  DH)  =  (sq.  HC) 

=  (reel.  CE),  by  hypothesis, 
=  (reel.  HE). 
Add  to  each  side  the  rectangle  AK,  and 

(rect  DK)  =  (sq.  AE), 
or  (rect.  BD,  DA)  =  (sq.  on  AB). 

The  result  is  of  course  obvious  from  11.  11. 

There  is  an  alternative  proof  given  in  P  after  xiii.  6,  which  depends  on 
Book  V. 

By  hypothesis,  BA  :AC=AC:  CB, 

or,  inversely,  AC  :  AB  =  CB  :  AC. 

Cotnponetido,  (AB  +  AC):  AB  =  AB  :  A C, 

or  DB  :BA=BA  :  AD. 

Proposition  6. 

//a  rational  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
each  of  the  segments  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called 
apotome. 

H.  E.  III.  29 


450  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  6 

Let  AB  be  a  rational  straight  line, 
let  it  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio  at  C,  9 ^ o b 

and  let  -^C  be  the  greater  segment  ; 

I  say  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  AC,  CB  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  apotome. 

For  let  BA  be  produced,  and  let  AD  be  made  half  of  BA. 
Since  then  the  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio, 

and  to  the  greater  segment  AC  is  added  AZ)  which  is  half 
o(AB, 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  five  times  the  square  on  DA. 

[xiii.  i] 

Therefore  the  square  on  CD  has  to  the  square  on  DA  the 
ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number ; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  square 
on  DA.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  DA  is  rational, 

for  DA  is  rational,  being  half  of  AB  which  is  rational  ; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  rational ;  [x.  Def.  4] 

therefore  CD  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  the  square  on  CD  has  not  to  the  square  on 
DA  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  CD  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  DA  ;      [x.  9] 

therefore  CD,  DA  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only ; 

therefore  ^C  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

Again,  since  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 

and  ^C  is  the  greater  segment, 

therefore  the  rectangle  A  By  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC. 

[vi.  Def.  3,  VI.  17] 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  apotome  AC,  if  applied  to 
the  rational  straight  line  AB,  produces  BC  as  breadth. 

But  the  square  on  an  apotome,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  first  apotome  ;  [x.  97] 

therefore  CB  is  a  first  apotome. 


XIII.  6,  7]  PROPOSITIONS  6,  7  45  f 

And  CA  was  also  proved  to  be  an  apotome. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

It  seems  certain  that  this  proposition  is  an  interpolation.  P  has  it,  but  the 
copyist  (or  rather  the  copyist  of  its  archetype)  says  that  "  this  theorem  is  not 
found  in  most  copies  of  the  new  recension,  but  is  found  in  those  of  the  old/' 
In  the  first  place,  there  is  a  scholium  to  xiii.  17  in  P  itself  which  proves  the 
same  thing  as  xiii.  6,  and  which  would  therefore  have  been  useless  if  xiii.  6 
had  preceded.  Hence,  when  the  scholium  was  written,  this  proposition  had 
not  yet  been  interpolated.  Secondly,  P  has  it  before  the  alternative  proof  of 
xiii.  5  j  this  proof  is  considered,  on  general  grounds,  to  be  interpolated,  and 
it  would  appear  that  it  must  have  been  a  iatrr  interpolation  (xiii.  6)  which 
divorced  it  from  the  proposition  to  which  it  belonged.  Thirdly,  there  is  cause 
for  suspicion  in  the  proposition  itself,  for,  while  the  enunciation  states  that 
each  segment  of  the  straight  line  is  an  apotome^  the  proposition  adds  that  the 
lesser  segment  is  2i  first  apotome.  The  scholium  in  P  referred  to  has  not  this 
blot  What  is  actually  wanted  in  xiii.  1 7  is  the  fact  that  the  greater  segment 
is  an  apotome.  It  is  probable  that  Euclid  assumed  this  fact  as  evident  enough 
from  xiii.  I  without  further  proof,  and  that  he  neither  wrote  xiii.  6  nor  the 
quotation  of  its  enunciation  in  xiii.  17. 

Proposition  7. 

If  three  angles  of  an  equilateral  pentagon,  taken  either  in 
order  or  not  in  order,  be  equal,  the  pentagon  will  be  equiangular. 

For  in  the  equilateral  pentagon  ABCDE  let,  first,  three 
angles  taken  in  order,  those  at  A,  B,  C, 
be  equal  to  one  another ; 
I   say  that  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is 
equiangular. 

For  let  AC,  BE,  FD  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  CB,  BA 
are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BA,  AE 
respectively, 

and  the  angle  CBA   is  equal   to  the 
angle  BAE, 
therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  BE, 
the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ABE, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles, 
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend,  [i.  4] 

that  is,  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  BEA,  and  the  angle 
ABE  to  the  angle  CAB; 

hence  the  side  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  side  BE.  [i.  6] 

29—2 


452  BOOK   XIII  [xiii.  7 

But  the  whole  AC  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  whole  B£; 
therefore  the  remainder  J^C  is  also  equal  to  the  remainder  J^B. 

But  CD  is  also  equal  to  D£. 

Therefore  the  two  sides  BC,  CD  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  FE,  ED\ 

and  the  base  FD  is  common  to  them ; 
therefore  the  angle  FCD  is  equal  to  the  angle  FED.         [i.  8] 

But  the  angle  BCA  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle 
AEB\ 

therefore  the  whole  angle  BCD  is  also  equal  to  the  whole 
angle  AED. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angles 
2X  A,  B\ 
therefore  the  angle  AED  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  A,  B. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angle  CDE  is  also  equal 
to  the  angles  at  ^4,  B,  C  \ 
therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular. 

Next,  let  the  given  equal  angles  not  be  angles  taken  in 
order,  but  let  the  angles  at  the  points  A,  C,  D  h^  equal ; 
I  say  that  in  this  case  too  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular. 

For  let  BD  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  two  sides  BA,  AE  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  BCy  CD, 

and  they  contain  equal  angles, 
therefore  the  base  BE  is  equal  to  the  base  BDy 
the  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  BCD, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles, 
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend  ;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDB. 

But  the  angle  BED  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BDE, 
since  the  side  BE  is  also  equal  to  the  side  BD.  [i.  5] 

Therefore  the  whole  angle  AED  is  equal  to  the  whole 
angle  CDE. 

But  the  angle  CDE  is,  by  hypothesis,  equal  to  the  angles 
at  ^,  C\ 
therefore  the  angle  AED  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  -r4,  C 


XIII.  7,  8]  PROPOSITIONS   7,  8  453 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  Ay  C,  D. 
Therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular. 

Q.  E.   D. 

This  proposition  is  required  in  xiii.  1 7. 
The  steps  of  the  proof  may  be  shown  thus. 

I.  Suppose  that  the  angles  at  A^  By  C  are  all  equal. 

Then  the  isosceles  triangles  BAEy  ABC  are  equal  in  all  respects ; 
thus  BE  =  ACy      LBCA^LBEAy     lCAB^lEBA. 

By  the  last  equality,  FA  =  FBy 

so  that,  since  BE^ACy  FC=  FE. 

The  A  s  FEDy  FCD  are  now  equal  in  all  respects,  [i.  8,  4] 

and  L  FCD  =  l.  FED, 

But  lACB  =  l  AEBy  from  above, 

whence,  by  addition,  l  BCD  =  l.  AED, 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  l  CDE  is  also  equal  to  any  one  of  the 
angles  at  Ay  By  C 

II.  Suppose  the  angles  at  Ay  C,  D  to  be  equal. 

Then  the  isosceles  triangles  ABEy  CBD  are  equal  in  all  respects,  and 
hence  BE  =  BD  (so  that  l  BDE  =  l.  BED)y 
and  L  CDB  =  l  AEB, 

By  addition  of  the  equal  angles, 

lCDE^^^lDEA, 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  l  ABC  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  angles 
at  Ay  Cy  D, 

Proposition  8. 

If  in  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  straight 
lines  subtend  two  angles  taken  in  ordery  they  cut  one  another 
in  extreme  and  mean  ratioy  and  their  greater  segments  are  equal 
to  the  side  of  the  pentagon. 

For  in  the  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  ABCDE 
let  the  straight  lines  ACy  BEy  cutting 
one  another  at  the  point  Hy  subtend 
two  angles  taken  in  order,  the  angles 

^\  Ay   B\ 

I  say  that  each  of  them  has  been 
cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 
the  point  Hy  and  their  greater  seg- 
ments are  equal  to  the  side  of  the 
pentagon. 

For  let  the   circle  ABCDE  be 
circumscribed  about  the  pentagon  ABCDE.  [iv.  14] 


454  BOOK   XIII  [xiii.  8 

Then,  since  the  two  straight  lines  EA,  AB  are  equal  to 
the  two  AB,  BC, 
and  they  contain  equal  anglies, 
therefore  the  base  BE  is  equal  to  the  base  AC, 
the  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ABC, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles 
respectively,  namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend,  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABE ; 
therefore  the  angle  A  HE  is  double  of  the  angle  BAH.  [i.  32] 

But  the  angle  EAC  is  also  double  of  the  angle  BAC, 
inasmuch  as  the  circumference  EDC  is  also  double  of  the 
circumference  CB  ;  [ni.  28,  vi.  33] 

therefore  the  angle  HAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  A  HE ; 
hence  the  straight  line  HE  is  also  equal  to  EA,  that  is,  to  AB. 

ti.6] 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BA  is  equal  to  AE, 

the  angle  ABE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEB,  [i.  5] 

But  the  angle  ABE  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  BAH\ 

therefore  the  angle  BE  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BAH. 
And  the  angle  ABE  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ABE 

dindABH] 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  remaining 

angle  AHB ;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 

ABH; 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  EB  is  to  BA,  so  is  A B  to  BH. 

[VI.  4] 

But  BA  is  equal  to  EH  ; 
therefore,  as  BE  is  to  EH,  so  is  EH  to  HB. 

And  BE  is  greater  than  EH; 
therefore  EH  is  also  greater  than  HB,  [v.  14] 

Therefore  BE  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 
H,  and  the  greater  segment  HE  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the 
pentagon. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  AC  has  also  been  cut  in 
extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  H,  and  its  greater  segment  CH 
is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon, 

Q.  E,  D. 


XIII.  8,  9]  PROPOSITIONS   8,  9  455 

In  order  to  prove  this  theorem  we  have  to  show  (i)  that  the  As  AEB^ 
HAB  are  similar,  and  (2)  that  EH^  EA  (=  AB), 
To  prove  (2)  we  have 

As  AEB^  BAC  equal  in  all  respects, 
whence  EB  =  AC^ 

and  lBAC  =  lABE. 

Therefore  l  A  HE  =2lBAC 

^lEAC, 
so  that  EH=EA 

=  AB, 
To  prove  (i)  we  have,  in  the  As  AEB^  HAB^ 
lBAB  =  lEBA 
=  L  AEB, 
and  L  ABE  is  common  ; 

therefore  the  third  l.  s  AHB^  EAB  are  equal, 
and  As  AEBy  HAB  are  similar. 

Now,  since  these  triangles  are  similar, 

EB:BA  =  BA:  BH, 
or  (rect.  EB,  BH)  =  (sq.  on  BA) 

=  (sq.  on  EH), 
so  that  EB  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  H 

Similarly  its  equal,  CA,  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  H 

Proposition  9. 

If  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  that  of  the  decagon  inscribed 
in  the  same  circle  be  added  together,  the  whole  straight  line 
has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and  its  greater  segment 
is  the  side  of  the  hexagon. 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle  ; 

of  the  figures  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABC  let  BC  be  the  side 
of  a  decagon,  CD  that  of  a  hexagon, 

and  let  them  be  in  a  straight  line  ; 

I  say  that  the  whole  straight  line 
BD  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio,  and  CD  is  its  greater 
segment. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle, 
the  point  E,  be  taken, 

let  EB,  EC,  ED  be  joined, 

and  let  BE  be  carried  through  Xo  A.  6 

Since  BC  is  the  side  of  an  equilateral  decagon, 


456  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  9 

therefore  the  circumference  ACB  is  five  times  the  circum- 
ference BC\ 
therefore  the  circumference  AC  is  quadruple  of  CB. 

But,  as  the  circumference  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  angle 
ABC  to  the  angle  CBB ;  [vi.  33] 

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  quadruple  of  the  angle  CBB. 

And,  since  the  angle  BBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCB,  [i.  5] 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  double  of  the  angle  BCB.     [i.  32] 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BC  is  equal  to  CD, 
for  each  of  them  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  hexagon  inscribed 
in  the  circle  ABC,  [iv.  15,  Por.] 

the  angle  CBD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CDB ;  [i.  5] 

therefore  the  angle  BCB  is  double  of  the  angle  BDC.     [i.  32] 

But  the  angle  ABC  was  proved  double  of  the  angle  BCB ; 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  quadruple  of  the  angle  BDC. 

But  the  angle  ABC  was  also  proved  quadruple  of   the 
angle  BBC] 
therefore  the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BBC. 

But  the  angle  BBD  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  BBC 
and  BBD ; 

therefore   the    remaining  angle  BBD  is  also  equal   to  the 
remaining  angle  BCB  ;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  BBD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 
BBC 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  DB  is  to  BB,  so  is  BB  to  BC. 

[VI.  4] 

But  BB  is  equal  to  CD. 

Therefore,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  DC  to  CB. 

And  BD  is  greater  than  DC ; 

therefore  DC  is  also  greater  than  CB. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  BD  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio,  and  DC  is  its  greater  segment. 

Q.   E.  D. 

BC  is  the  side  of  a  regular  decagon  inscribed  in  the  circle ;  CD  is  the 
side  of  the  inscribed  regular  hexagon,  and  is  therefore  equal  to  the  radius  BE 
ox  EC 

Therefore,  in  order  to  prove  our  theorem,  we  have  only  to  show  that  the 
triangles  EBC,  DBE  are  similar. 


XIII.  9,  lo]  PROPOSITIONS   9,  10  457 

Since  BC  is  the  side  of  a  regular  decagon, 

(arc  BCA)  =  5  (arc  BC\ 
so  that  (arc  CFA)  =  4  (arc  BC\ 

whence  l  CEA  =  /^l  BEC, 

But  lCEA^2lECB, 

Therefore  lECB=2lBEC  (i). 

But,  since  CD  =  CE, 

lCDE^lCED, 
so  that  L  ECB  =  2  z.  CDE. 

It  follows  from  (i)  that  lBEC=lCDE. 
Now,  in  the  As  EBC,  DBE, 

lBEC=lBDE, 
and  lEBC  is  common, 

so  that  lECB^lDEB, 

and  As  EBC^  DBE  are  similar. 

Hence  DB  :  BE  =  ^^  :  BQ 

or  (rect.  Z>^,  BC)  =  (sq.  on  i?^) 

=  (sq.  on  CZ>), 
and  DB  is  divided  at  C  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio. 

To  find  the  side  of  the  decagon  algebraically  in  terms  of  the  radius  we 
have,  if  ^  be  the  side  required, 

(r  +  x)x  =  f^, 

whence  x  =  -  (^5  -  i). 


Proposition  id. 

//  an  equilateral  pentagon  be  inscribed  in  a  circle,  the 
square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  on  that  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in 
the  same  circle. 

Let  ABCDE  be  a  circle, 
and  let  the  equilateral  pentagon  ABCDE  be  inscribed  in  the 
circle  ABCDE. 

I  say  that  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  ABCDE 
is  equal  to  the  squares  on  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  on 
that  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCDE. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  F,  be  taken, 
let  AF  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  the  point  G, 
let  FB  be  joined, 

let  FH  be  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to  AB  and  be  carried 
through  to  K, 


458 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  lO 


let  AK,  KB  be  joined, 

let  FL  be  again  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to  AK,  and  be 
carried  through  to  M, 
and  let  KN  be  joined. 

Since     the     circumference 
ABCG  is  equal  to  the  circum- 
ference AEDG, 
and  in  them  ABC  is  equal  to 
AED, 

therefore  the  remainder,  the 
circumference  CG,  is  equal  to 
the  remainder  GD. 

But  CD  belongs  to  a  pen- 
tagon ; 

therefore  CG  'belongs  to  a 
decagon. 

And,  since  FA  is  equal  to  FB, 
and  FH  is  perpendicular, 

therefore  the  angle  AFK  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  KFB. 

[i.  5, 1.  26] 
Hence  the  circumference  ^A'  is  also  equal  to  KB  ;  [ni.  26] 

therefore  the  circumference  AB  is  double  of  the  circumference 
BK\ 

therefore  the  straight  line  AK  is  a  side  of  a  decagon. 

For  the  same  reason 
AKis  also  double  of  KM. 

Now,  since  the  circumference  AB  is  double  of  the  circum- 
ference BK, 

while  the  circumference  CD  is  equal  to  the  circumference  AB^ 

therefore  the  circumference  CD  is  also  double  of  the  circum- 
ference BK. 

But  the  circumference  CD  is  also  double  of  CG ; 

therefore  the  circumference  CG  is  equal  to  the  circumference 
BK 

But  BK  is  double  of  KM,  since  KA  is  so  also ; 

therefore  CG  is  also  double  of  KM. 


xiii.  lo]  PROPOSITION    lo  459 

But,  further,  the  circumference  CB  is  also  double  of  the 
circumference  BK, 

for  the  circumference  CB  is  equal  to  BA. 

Therefore  the  whole  circumference  GB  is  also  double 
o{  BM, 

hence  the  angle  GFB  is  also  double  of  the  angle  BFM.  [vi.  33] 

But  the  angle  GFB  is  also  double  of  the  angle  FAB, 

for  the  angle  FAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABF. 

Therefore  the  angle  BFN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FAB. 
But  the  angle  ABF  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ABF 
^ndBFN', 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  AFB  is  equal  to  the  remaining 
angle  ^A7^;  [i- 32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABF  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 
BFN. 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  the  straight  line  AB  is  to  BF, 
so  is  FB  to  BN ;  [vi.  4] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BN  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BF. 

[VI.  17I 

Again,  since  AL  is  equal  to  LK, 
while  LN  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  KN  is  equal  to  the  base  AN  \  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  LKN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  LAN. 

But  the  angle  LAN  is  equal  to  the  angle  KBN  \ 
therefore  the  angle  LKN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  KBN. 

And  the  angle  at  A  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  AKB 
and  AKN. 

Therefore  the  remaining  angle  AKB  is  equal  to  the 
remaining  angle  KNA  ;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  KB  A  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 
KNA. 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  the  straight  line  BA  is  to 
AK,  so  is  KA  to  AN\  [vi.  4] 

therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AN  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AK. 

[vi.  17] 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BN  was  also  proved  equal  to  the 
square  on  BF', 


46o  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  lo 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BN  together  with  the  rectangle 
BA,  AN,  that  is,  the  square  on  BA  [n.  2],  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  BF  together  with-  the  square  on  AK. 

And  BA  is  a  side  of  the  pentagon,  BF  of  the  hexagon 
[iv.  15,  Por.],  and  AK  of  the  decagon. 

Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D, 

ABCDE  being  a  regular  pentagon  inscribed  in  a  circle,  and  AG  the 
diameter  through  A,  it  follows  that 

(arc  CG)  =  (arc  GD), 
and  CG,  GD  are  sides  of  an  inscribed  regular  decagon. 

FHK  being  drawn   perpendicular   to  AB,   it  follows,   by   i.    26,    that 
L  s  AFK,  BFK  are  equal,  and  BK,  KA  are  sides  of  the  regular  decagon. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that,  FLM  being  perpendicular  to  AK, 

AL  =  LK, 
and  (arc  AM)  =  (arc  MK). 

The  main  facts  to  prove  are  that 
(i)  the  triangles  ABF,  FBN  are  similar,  and  (2)  the  triangles  ABK,  AKN 
are  similar. 

(i)  2  (arc  CC)  =  (arc  CZ>) 

=  (arc  AB) 
=  2  (arc  BK\ 
or  (arc  CG)  =  (arc  BK)  =  (arc  AK) 

=  2  (arc  KM), 
And  (arc  CB)  =  2  (arc  BK). 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

(arc  BCG)  =  2  (arc  BKM), 
Therefore  l  BFG  =  2L  BFN. 

But  L  BFG  =2L  FAB, 

so  that  L  FAB  =  l  BFK 

Hence,  in  the  As  ABF,  FBN, 

uFAB=^lBFN, 
and  ^  ABF  is  common ; 

therefore  l  AFB  =  l  BNF, 

and  A  s  ABF,  FBN  are  similar. 

(2)     Since  AL  =  LK,  and  the  angles  at  L  are  right, 

AN=NK, 
and  L  NKA  =  z.  NAK 

^lKBA. 
Hence,  in  the  As  ABK,  AKN, 

l.ABK^lAKN, 
and  L  KAN  is  common, 

whence  the  third  angles  are  equal ; 
therefore  the  triangles  ABK,  AKNdJ^  similar. 


xiii.  lo,  ii]  PROPOSITIONS   lo,  ii  461 

Now  from  the  similarity  of  As  ABF^  FBNxt  follows  that 
AB:BF=BF:BN, 
or  (rect.  AB,  BN)  =  (sq.  on  BF), 

And,  from  the  similarity  of  ABK^  AKN^ 

BA  .AK=AK:AN, 
or  (rect  BA^  AN)  =  (sq.  on  A/C). 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

(rect.  ABy  BN)  +  (rect.  BA,  AN)  =  (sq.  on  BF)  +  (sq.  on  AK), 
that  is,  (sq.  on  AB)  =  (sq.  on  BF)  +  (sq.  on  AK). 

If  r  be  the  radius  of  the  circle,  we  have  seen  (xiii.  9,  note)  that 

^A'=^(Vs-i). 

Therefore  (side  of  pentagon)'  =  /-'  +  -  (6  -  2  ^5) 

4 

=  -(io-2V5)» 
4 

so  that  (side  of  pentagon)  =  -  Vio  -  2  ^5. 


Proposition  ii. 

I/in  a  circle  which  has  its  diameter  rational  an  equilateral 
pentagon  be  inscribed,  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  minor. 

For  in  the  circle  ABCDE  which  has  its  diameter  rational 
let  the  equilateral  pentagon  ABCDE  be  inscribed ; 
I  say  that  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational  straight 
line  called  minor. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  F,  be  taken, 
let  AFy  FB  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  the  points,  G,  H, 
let  AC  he  joined, 
and  let  FK  be  made  a  fourth  part  of  AF. 

Now  AF  is  rational ; 
therefore  FIC  is  also  rational. 

But  BF  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  the  whole  BIC  is  rational. 

And,  since  the  circumference  ACG  is  equal  to  the  circum- 
ference ADG, 

and  in  them  ABC  is  equal  to  A  ED, 
therefore  the  remainder  CG  is  equal  to  the  remainder  GD. 


462 


BOOK   XIII 


[xiii.  It 


And,  if  we  join  AD,  we  conclude  that  the  angles  at  L 
are  right, 
and  CD  is  double  of  CL. 

For  the  same  reason 
the  angles  at  M  are  also  right, 
and  AC  \s  double  of  CM. 


Since  then  the  angle  ALC  is  equal  to  the  angle  AMF, 

and  the  angle  LAC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ACL 
and  AMF, 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  ACL  is  equal  to  the  remaining 
angle  MFA  ;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ACL  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 
AMF\ 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  LC  is  to  CA,  so  is  MF  to  FA. 

And  the  doubles  of  the  antecedents  may  be  taken  ; 

therefore,  as  the  double  of  Z,C  is  to  CA^  so  is  the  double  of 
MF  to  FA. 

But,  as  the  double  of  MF\s  to  FA,  so  is  MF  to  the  half 
oiFA) 

therefore  also,  as  the  double  of  Z,C  is  to  CA,  so  is  MF  to  the 
halfof/^^. 

And  the  halves  of  the  consequents  may  be  taken  ; 

therefore,  as  the  double  of  ZC  is  to  the  half  of  CA,  so  is  MF 
to  the  fourth  of  FA. 


XIII.  ii]  PROPOSITION   II  463 

And  DC  is  double  of  LC,  CM\%  half  of  CA,  and  FK  7i 
fourth  part  of  FA  ; 

therefore,  as  DC  is  to  CM,  so  is  MF  to  FK. 

Componendo  also,  as  the  sum  of  DC,  CM  is  to  CM,  so  is 
MK  to  A7^;  [v.  18] 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  the  sum  of  DC,  CM  is  to  the 
square  on  CM,  so  is  the  square  on  MK  to  the  square  on  KF. 
And  since,  when  the  straight  line  subtending  two  sides  of 
the  pentagon,  as  AC,  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the 
greater  segment  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon,  that  is, 
to  DC,  [xiii.  8] 

while  the  square  on  the  greater  segment  added  to  the  half 
of  the  whole  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half  of  the 
^whole,  [xiii.  i] 

and  CM  is  half  of  the  whole  AC, 

therefore  the  square  on  DC,  CM  taken  as  one  straight  line  is 

five  times  the  square  on  CM. 

But  it  was  proved  that,  as  the  square  on  DC,  CM  taken 
as  one  straight  line  is  to  the  square  on  CM,  so  is  the  square 
on  MK  to  the  square  on  KF\ 
therefore  the  square  on  MK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KF. 

But  the  square  on  KF  is  rational, 
for  the  diameter  is  rational ; 
therefore  the  square  on  MK  is  also  rational ; 
therefore  MK  is  rational. 

And,  since  BF  is  quadruple  of  FK, 

therefore  BK  is  five  times  KF\ 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  twenty-five  times  the  square 
oxiKF. 

But  the  square  on  MK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KF\ 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KM\ 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  has  not  to  the  square  on  KM 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number  ; 

therefore  BK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM.      [x.  9] 

And  each  of  them  is  rational. 

Therefore  BK,  KM  are  rational  straight  lines  commen- 
surable in  square  only. 


464  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  II 

But,  if  from  a  rational  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a 
rational  straight  line  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole 
in  square  only,  the  remainder  is  irrational,  namely  an  apotome ; 

therefore  MB  is  an  apotome  and  MK  the  annex  to  it.    [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  MB  is  also  a  fourth  apotome. 
Let  the  square  on  N  be  equal  to  that  by  which  the  square 
on  BK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  KM  \ 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  KM 
by  the  square  on  N. 

And,  since  KF  is  commensurable  with  FB^ 
componendo  also,  KB  is  commensurable  with  FB.  [x.  15] 

But  BF  is  commensurable  with  BH ; 

therefore  BK  is  also  commensurable  with  BH.  [x.  12] 

And,  since  the  square  on  BK  is  five  times  the  square 
oxiKM, 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  has  to  the  square  on  KM  the 
ratio  which  5  has  to  i. 

Therefore,  convertendo,  the  square  on  BK  has  to  the  square 
on  N  the  ratio  which  5  has  to  4  [v.  19,  Por.],  and  this  is  not  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number ; 

therefore  BK  is  incommensurable  with  N  \  [x.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  KM 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BK. 

Since  then  the  square  on  the  whole  BK  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  the  annex  KM  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  BK, 

and  the  whole  BK  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 
line,  BH,  set  out, 

therefore  MB  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  4] 

But  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and 
a  fourth  apotome  is  irrational, 

and  its  square  root  is  irrational,  and  is  called  minor.        [x.  94] 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  HB^  BM, 

because,  when  A  His  joined,  the  triangle  ABH  is  equiangular 
with  the  triangle  ABM,  and,  as  HB  is  to  BA,  so  is  AB 
10  BM. 


XIII.  ii]  PROPOSITION    II  465 

Therefore  the  side  AB  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  minor. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Here  we  require  certain  definitions  and  propositions  of  Book  x. 

First  we  require  the  definition  of  an  apotome  [see  x.  73],  which  is  a  straight 
line  of  the  form  (p ^  \lk.p\  where  p  is  a  " rational ''  straight  line  and  k  is  any 
integer  or  numerical  fraction,  the  square  root  of  which  is  not  integral  or 
expressible  in  integers.     The  lesser  of  the  straight  lines  p,  Jk,p  is  the  annex. 

Next  we  require  the  definition  of  the  fourth  apotome  [x.  Deff.  in.  (af^er 
X.  84)],  which  is  a  straight  line  of  the  form  (x  -y\  where  jc,  y  (being  both 
rational  and  commensurable  in  square  only)  are  also  such  that  >/:r*-y  is 
incommensurable  with  a:,  while  x  is  commensurable  with  a  given  rational 
straight  line  p.     As  shown  on  x.  88  (note),  iht /ourtA  apotome  is  of  the  form 


(''-T^x). 


Lastly  the  minor  (straight  line)  is  the  irrational  straight  line  defined  in 
X.  76.  It  is  of  the  form  (x  -y),  where  Xy  y  are  incommensurable  in  square, 
and  (x^+y)  is  *  rational,*  while  xy  is  *  medial.'  As  shown  in  the  note  on 
X.  76,  the  minor  irrational  straight  line  is  of  the  form 

The  proposition  may  be  put  as  follows.  ABCDE  being  a  regular 
pentagon  inscribed  in  a  circle,  AG^  BHiht  diameters  through  A^  B  meeting 
CD  in  L  and  ACvaM  respectively,  FK  is  made  equal  to  \AF, 

Now,  the  radius  AF(r)  being  rational,  so  are  FK^  BK. 

The  arcs  CG^  GD  are  equal ; 
hence  .l  s  at  Z  are  right,  and  CD  =  2CZ. 

Similarly  z.  s  at  i^are  right,  and  AC- 2 CM, 

We  have  to  prove 

(i)  that  BMis  an  apotome, 

(2)  that  BMis  a  fourth  apotome, 

(3)  that  BA  is  a  minor  irrational  straight  line. 

Remembering  that,  if  CA  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the 
greater  segment  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon  [xiii.  8],  and  that  accord 
ingly  [xiii.  1]  {CD  +  ^CA)*  =  s  (^CAy^  we  work  towards  a  proportion  con- 
taining the  ratio  (CD  +  CM^ :  CAP,  thus. 

The  A  s  -^  CLy  AFM  are  equiangular  and  therefore  similar. 

Therefore  LC.CA=^ MF :  FA, 

and  accordingly  iLCiCA-  MF :  ^FA  ; 

thus  2LC:iCA  =  MF:  \fA, 

or  DC\CM^MF.FK\ 

whence,  componendo,  and  squaring, 

(Z>C+  CMY  :  CAi^^MIP  :  KF". 

But  (DC^CMy^sCM^\ 

therefore  MK^  =  5  A7^. 

H.  E.  III.  30 

■   Mili 


466  BOOK  XITI  [xiii.  ii,  12 

[This  means  that  MK^  =  A  ^1 

or  il/^=^r.] 

It  follows  that,  KF  being  rational,  il/A?,  and  therefore  MK^  is  rational. 

( I )     To  prove  that  BM  is  an  apotome  and  MK  its  annex. 

We  have  BF=  ^FK\ 

therefore  BK^^^K, 

BIP  =  2sFK^ 

=  sMK\  from  above ; 
therefore  BJP  has  not  to  MJP  the  ratio  of  a  square  number  to  a  square 
number ; 
therefore  BK,  MK  are  incommensurable  in  length. 

They  are  therefore  rational  and  commensurable  in  square  only ; 
accordingly  BM  is  an  apotome. 

[B/P  =  sMK'  =  f  Jr»,  and  BK=  \r. 


Consequently  BK-  MK^  (-  ^  -  —  ^)  •] 


(2)  To  prove  that  BM  is  a  fourth  apotome. 
First,  since  KF^  FB  are  commensurable, 

BK^  BF  are  commensurable,  i.e.  BK  is  commensurable  with  BH^  a  given 
rational  straight  line. 

Secondly,  if  N^  =  BK^  -  KM\ 

since  BK^ :  KM^  =  5  :  ii 

it  follows  that  BK^  :  uY*  =  5  :  4, 

whence  BK^  N  are  incommensurable. 

Therefore  BM\s  2^  fourth  apotome. 

(3)  To  prove  that  BA  is  a  minor  irrational  straight  line. 

If  a  fourth  apotome  form  a  rectangle  with  a  rational  straight  line,  the  side 
of  the  square  equivalent  to  the  rectangle  is  minor  [x.  94]. 

Now  BA^^^HB.BM, 

HB  is  rational,  and  BM  is  a  fourth  apotome ; 
therefore  BA  is  a  minor  irrational  straight  line. 

[^^  =  rV2.y^-^=^Vio-2VS. 

If  this  is  separated  into  the  difference  between  two  straight  lines,  we  have 

^^  =  ^  Vs  +  2  v/5  -^  n/s  "  2  ^5.'] 


Proposition  12. 

If  an  equilateral  triangle  be  inscribed  in  a  circle,  the  square 
on  the  side  of  the  triangle  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  radius 
of  the  circle. 


XIII.  12,  13]  PROPOSITIONS   ii— 13  467 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle, 
and  let  the  equilateral  triangle  ABC  be  inscribed  in  it ; 
I  say  that  the  square  on  one  side  of 
the  triangle  ABC  is  triple  of  the  square 
on  the  radius  of  the  circle. 

For  let  the  centre  D  of  the  circle 
ABC  be  taken, 

let  AD  be  joined  and  carried  through 
to  E, 
and  let  BE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  triangle  ABC  is 
equilateral, 

therefore  the  circumference  BEC  is  a  third  part  of  the  circum- 
ference of  the  circle  ABC 

Therefore  the  circumference  BE  is  a  sixth  part  of  the 
circumference  of  the  circle ; 

therefore  the  straight  line  BE  belongs  to  a  hexagon  ; 

therefore  it  is  equal  to  the  radius  DE.  [iv.  15,  Por.] 

And,  since  -^^^  is  double  of  DE, 

the  square  on  AE  \s  quadruple  of  the  square  on  EDy  that  is, 
of  the  square  on  BE. 

But  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BE\ 

[m.  31,  I.  47] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BE  are  quadruple  of  the  square 
on^^. 

Therefore,  separando,  the  square  on  AB  is  triple  of  the 
square  on  BE. 

But  BE  is  equal  to  DE ; 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  DE. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  triangle  is  triple 
of  the  square  on  the  radius. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  13. 

To  construct  a  pyramid^  to  comprehend,  it  in  a  given  sphere, 
and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is 
one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

30—2 


468 


BOOK   XIII 


[xiii.  13 


Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  cut  at  the  point  C  so  that  AC  is  double  of  CB  ; 

let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 

let  CD  be  drawn  from  the  point  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 

and  let  DA  be  joined  ; 

let  the  circle  EFG  which  has  its  radius  equal  to  DC  be 
set  out, 

let  the  equilateral  triangle  EFG  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFG, 

[IV.  2] 

let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  H,  be  taken,  [ni.  i] 

let  EH,  HF,  HG  be  joined  ; 

from  the  point  H  let  HK  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  circle  EFG,  [xi.  12] 

let  HK  equal  to  the  straight  line  A  Che  cut  off  from  HK, 

and  let  KE,  KF,  KG  be  joined. 


Now,  since  KH  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle  EFG, 

therefore  it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight 
lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  the  circle  EFG. 

[XI.  Def.  3] 
But  each  of  the  straight  lines  HE,  HF,  HG  meets  it : 

therefore  HK  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
HE,  HF,  HG. 


And,  since  AC  is  equal  to  HK,  and  CD  to  HE, 
and  they  contain  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  DA  is  equal  to  the  base  KE. 


[1.4] 


XIII.  13]  PROPOSITION   13  469 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  straight  lines  KFy  KG  is  also  equal  to  DA  ; 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  KE,  KF,  KG  are  equal  to 
one  another. 

And,  since  -^C  is  double  of  CBy 
therefore  AB  is  triple  of  EC. 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC^  so  is  the  square  on  AD  to  the  square 
on  DC,  as  will  be  proved  afterwards. 

Therefore  the  square  onADxs  triple  of  the  square  on  DC. 

But  the  square  on  FE  is  also  triple  of  the  square  on  EH, 

[xiii.  12] 
and  DC  is  equal  to  EH ; 

therefore  DA  is  also  equal  to  EF. 

But  DA  was  proved  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
KE,KF,KG\ 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  EF,  FG,  GE  is  also  equal 
to  each  of  the  straight  lines  KE,  KF,  KG ; 

therefore  the  four  triangles  EFG,  KEF,  KFG,  KEG  are 
equilateral. 

Therefore  a  pynimid  has  been  constructed  out  of  four 
equilateral  triangles,  the  triangle  EFG  being  its  base  and  the 
point  K  its  vertex. 

It  is  next  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere 
and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere 
is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

For  let  the  straight  line  HL  be  produced  in  a  straight 
line  with  KH, 

and  let  HL  be  made  equal  to  CB. 

Now,  since,  as  AC\^  to  CD,  so  is  CD  to  CB^     [vi.  8,  Por.] 

while  ^C  is  equal  to  KH,  CD  to  HE,  and  CB  to  HL, 

therefore,  as  KH  is  to  HE,  so  is  EH  to  HL  ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  KH,  HL  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
EH.  [VI.  17] 

And  each  of  the  angles  KHE,  EHL  is  right ; 

therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  KL  will  pass  through 
E  also.  [cf.  VI.  8,  III.  31] 


470 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  13 


If  then,  KL  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried  round 
and  restored  to  the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be 
moved,  it  will  also  pass  through  the  points  F,  G, 

since,  if  FLy  LG  be  joined,  the  angles  at  F,  G  similarly  become 

right  angles  ; 

and  the  pyramid  will  be  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

For  KL,  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  is  equal  to  the 
diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere,  inasmuch  as  KH  was 
made  equal  to  AC,  and  HL  to  CB. 

I  say  next  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere 
is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the 
pyramid. 

For,  since  AC  is  double  of  CB, 

therefore  AB  is  triple  of  BC ; 

and,  convertendOy  BA  is  one  and  a  half  times  AC. 

But,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square 
on  AD. 

Therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  also  one  and  a  half  times 
the  square  on  AD. 

And  BA  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere,  and  AD  is 
equal  to  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is 
one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square 
on  AD  to  the  square  on  DC. 

For  let  the  figure  of  the  semi- 
circle be  set  out, 
let  DB  be  joined, 
let  the  square  FC  be   described 
on  AC, 

and  let  the  parallelogram  FB  be 
completed. 

Since  then,  because  the  tri- 
angle DAB  is  equiangular  with 
the  triangle  DAC, 

as  BA  is  to  AD,  so  is  DA  to  AC, 

[VI.  8,  VI.  4] 


XIII.  13]  PROPOSITION    13  471 

therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AC\s  equal  to  the  square  on  AD. 

[vi.  17] 
And  since,  2iS  AB  \s  to  BCy  so  is  EB  to  BF,  [vi.  i] 

and  EB  is  the  rectangle  BA,  AC,  for  EA  is  equal  to  AC, 
and  BE  is  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  to  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB. 

And  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD, 
and  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  to  the  square  on  DC, 

for  the  perpendicular  DC  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the 
segments  AC,  CB  of  the  base,  because  the  angle  ADB  is 
right.  [vi.  8,  Por.] 

Therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AD  to 
the  square  on  DC 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  Lemma  is  with  reason  suspected.  Euclid  commonly  takes  more 
difficult  theorems  for  granted  in  the  stereometrical  Books.  It  is  also  clumsy 
in  itself,  while,  from  a  gloss  in  the  proposition  rejected  as  an  interpolation,  it 
is  clear  that  the  interpolator  of  the  gloss  had  not  the  Lemma.  With  the 
Lemma  should  disappear  the  words  "as  will  be  proved  afterwards  "  (p.  469). 

In  the  figure  of  the  proposition,  the  semicircle  really  represents  half  of 
a  section  of  the  sphere  through  its  centre  and  one  edge  of  the  inscribed 
tetrahedron  (AD  being  the  length  of  that  edge). 

The  proof  is  in  three  parts,  the  object  of  which  is  to  prove 
(i)  that  KEFG  is  a  tetrahedron  with  all  its  edges  equal  to  AD, 

(2)  that  it  is  inscribable  in  a  sphere  of  diameter  equal  to  AB, 

(3)  that  AB^^\AD\ 
To  prove  (i)  we  have  to  show 

(a)  that  KE  =  KF^  KG  =  AD, 

(b)  that  AD  =  EF. 

{a)    Since  HE  =  HF=ffG=CD, 

KH=AC, 
and  L.^A  CD,  KHE,  KHF,  KHG  are  right, 

As  ACD,  KHE,  KHF,  KHG  are  equal  in  all  respects ; 


therefore 

KE=KF=KG  =  AD. 

(p)    Since 

AB=iBC, 

and 

AB :  BC=  AB.AC:  AC.  CB 

=  AD* :  CD\ 

it  follows  that 

AD^  =  lCD*. 

But  [xiii.  12] 

EF'=2,EIP, 

and  EH=  CD,  by  construction. 


472  BOOK  XIII  [xni.  13 

Therefore  AD  =  EF. 

Thus  EFGK  is  a  regular  tetrahedron. 

(2)  We  now  observe  the  usefulness  of  Euclid's  description  of  a  sphere 
[in  XI.  Def.  14]. 

Producing  KH{=  AC)  to  L  so  that  IIL=  CB, 
we  have  KL  equal  to  AB  \ 

thus  KL  is  a  diameter  of  the  sphere  which  should  circumscribe  our  tetra- 
hedron, 

and  we  have  only  to  prove  that  E^  F^  G  lie  on  semicircles  described  on  KL 
as  diameter. 

E.g.  for  the  point  E^ 
since  AC\CD=^CD\  CB, 

while  AC^KH,  CD^HE,  CB^HL, 

we  have  KH :  HE  =  HE :  HL, 

or  KH.HL  =  HE\ 

whence,  the  angles  KHE^  EHL  being  right, 
EKL  is  a  triangle  right-angled  at  E  [cf.  vi.  8]. 

Hence  E  lies  on  a  semicircle  on  KL  as  diameter. 

Similarly  for  F^  G, 

Thus  a  semicircle  on  KL  as  diameter  revolving  round  KL  passes 
successively  through  E^  F^  G, 

(3)  AB=zBC', 

therefore  BA  =  ^AC. 

And  BA  :AC=  BA^  iBA.AC 

=  BA^:AD\ 

Therefore  BA^  =  \AD\ 

If  r  be  the  radius  of  the  circumscribed  sphere, 

2  1 2 
(edge  of  tetrahedron)  =  — y-  .  r  =  ^j6,r. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  although  in  these  cases  Euclid's  construction  is 
equivalent  to  inscribing  the  particular  regular  solid  in  a  given  sphere,  he  does 
not  actually  construct  the  solid  in  the  sphere  but  constructs  a  solid  which  a 
sphere  e^ua/  to  the  given  sphere  will  circumscribe.  Pappus,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  dealing  with  the  same  problems,  actually  constructs  the  respective 
solids  in  the  given  spheres.  His  method  is  to  find  circular  sections  in  the 
given  spheres  containing  a  certain  number  of  the  angular  points  of  the  given 
solids.  His  solutions  are  interesting,  although  they  require  a  knowledge  of 
some  properties  of  a  sphere  which  are  of  course  not  found  in  the  Elements 
but  belonged  to  treatises  such  as  the  Sphaerica  of  Theodosius. 

Pappus*  solution  of  the  problem  of  Eucl.  XIII.  13. 

In  order  to  inscribe  a  regular  pyramid  or  tetrahedron  in  a  given  sphere, 
Pappus  (hi.  pp.  142 — 144)  finds  two  circular  sections  equal  and  parallel  to  one 
another,  each  of  which  contains  one  of  two  opposite  edges  as  its  diameter.  In 
this  and  the  other  similar  problems  he  proceeds  in  the  orthodox  manner  by 


xiii.  13] 


PROPOSITION    13 


473 


analysis  and  synthesis.     The  following  is  a  reproduction  of  his  solution  of 
this  case. 

Analysis, 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  Ay  B,  C,  D  being  the  angular  points  of  the 
required  pyramid. 

Through  A  draw  EF  parallel  to  CD ;  this  will  make  equal  angles  with 
AQ  AD;  and,  since  AB  does  so  too,  £F 
is  perpendicular  to  AB  [Pappus  has  a  lemma 
for  this,  p.  140,  12 — 24],  and  is  therefore  a 
tangent  to  the  sphere  (for  £F  is  parallel  to 
CDf  the  base  of  the  triangle  ACD,  and 
therefore  touches  the  circle  circumscribing 
it,  while  it  also  touches  the  circular  section 
AB  made  by  the  plane  passing  through  AB 
and  i?/^  perpendicular  to  it). 

Similarly  GI/  drawn  through  D  parallel 
to  AB  touches  the  sphere. 

And  the  plane  through  GN^  CD  makes 
a  circular  section  equal  and  parallel  to  AB. 

Through  the  centre  IC  of  that  circular 
section,  and  in  the  plane  of  the  section,  draw  LAf  perpendicular  to  CD  and 
therefore  parallel  to  AB.     Join  BL,  BM. 

BM'xs  then  perpendicular  to  AB^  LM^  and  LB  is  a  diameter  of  the  sphere. 

Join  MC. 

Then  LAP^  2MC^, 

and  BC^AB  =  LM, 

so  that  BC^=2MC\ 

And  BMy  being  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  LAf^  is  perpen- 
dicular to  CAf^ 

whence  BC^  =  BAP  +  AfC^, 

so  that  BAf=-  MC. 

But  BC^LM\ 

therefore  LAP  =  iBM''. 

And,  since  the  angle  LMB  is  right, 

BD=  LM^  +  MB^  =  ^LAP. 

Syntlusis. 

Draw  two  parallel  circular  sections  of  the  sphere  with  diameter  d\ 
such  that 

where  d  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere. 

[This  is  easily  done  by  dividing  BLy  any  diameter  of  the  sphere,  at  P^  so 
that  LP=  iPBy  and  then  drawing  PM  at  right  angles  to  LB  meeting  the 
great  circle  LMB  of  the  sphere  in  M.     Then  LM^ :  LB^  ^LP:LB=2\  3.] 

Draw  sections  through  My  B  perpendicular  to  MB,  and  in  these  sections 
respectively  draw  the  parallel  diameters  LMy  AB. 

Lastly,  in  the  section  LM  draw  CD  through  the  centre  K  perpendicular 
ioLAi. 

ABCP  is  then  the  required  regular  pjfiBmid  or  tetrahedron. 


474 


BOOK   XIII 


[xiii.  14 


Proposition  14. 

To  construct  an  octahedron  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere^ 
as  in  the  preceding  case  ;  and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the 
diameter  of  the  sphere  is  double  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the 
octahedron. 

Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  bisected  at  C ; 

let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 

let  CD  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 

let  DB  be  joined  ; 

let  the  square  EFGH,  having  each  of  its  sides  equal  to  DB, 
be  set  out, 

let  HF,  EG  be  joined, 

from  the  point  K  let  the  straight  line  KL  be  set  up  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  the  square  EFGH  [xi.  12],  and  let  it  be 
carried  through  to  the  other  side  of  the  plane,  as  KM  \ 

from  the  straight  lines  KL,  KM  let  KL,  KM  be  respectively 
cut  off  equal  to  one  of  the  straight  lines  EK,  FK,  GK,  HK, 

and  let  LE,  LF,  LG,  LH,  ME,  MF,  MG,  MH  be  joined. 


Then,  since  KE  is  equal  to  KH, 
and  the  angle  EKH  is  right, 
therefore  the  square  on  HE  is  double  of  the  square  on  EK. 

[I.  47] 
Again,  since  LK  is  equal  to  KE, 

and  the  angle  LKE  is  right, 

therefore  the  square  on  EL  is  double  of  the  square  on  EK. 

{id.-\ 


XIII.  14]  PROPOSITION    14  475 

But  the  square  on  HE  was  also  proved  double  of  the 
square  on  EK\ 

therefore  the  square  on  LE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EH  \ 
therefore  LE  is  equal  to  EH. 

For  the  same  reason 
LH  is  also  equal  to  HE ; 
therefore  the  triangle  LEH  is  equilateral. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  remaining  tri- 
angles of  which  the  sides  of  the  square  EFGH  are  the  bases, 
and  the  points  Z,  M  the  vertices,  is  equilateral ; 
therefore  an  octahedron  has  been  constructed  which  is  con- 
tained by  eight  equilateral  triangles. 

It  is  next  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere, 
and  to  prove  that  the'  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is 
double  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron. 

For,  since  the  three  straight  lines  LKy  KM,  KE  are  equal 
to  one  another, 

therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  LM  will  also  pass 
through  E. 

And  for  the  same  reason, 

if,  LM  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried  round  and 
restored  to  the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be 
moved, 

it  will  also  pass  through  the  points  /%  Gy  H, 

and  the  octahedron  will  have  been  comprehended  in  a  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 
For,  since  LK  \^  equal  to  KM, 

while  KE  is  common, 

and  they  contain  right  angles, 

therefore  the  base  LE  is  equal  to  the  base  EM.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  angle  LEM  is  right,  for  it  is  in  a  semicircle, 

K  31] 

therefore  the  square  on  LM  is  double  of  the  square  on  LE. 

[I.  47] 
Again,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CB, 
AB  is  double  of  BC. 


476 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  14 


But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square 
onBD\ 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  double  of  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  LM  was  also  proved  double  of  the 
square  on  LE. 

And  the  square  on  DB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  LE^  for 
EH  was  made  equal  to  DB. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  \s  also  equal  to  the  square 
on  LM\ 
therefore  AB  is  equal  to  LM. 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere ; 
therefore  LM  \s  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere. 

Therefore  the  octahedron  has  been  comprehended  in  the 
given  sphere,  and  it  has  been  demonstrated  at  the  same  time 
that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  double  of  the 
square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron. 

Q.  E.  D. 

I  think  the  accompanying  figure  will  perhaps  be  clearer  than  that  in 
Euclid's  text. 

EFGH  being  a  square  with  side  equal  to  BD^  it  follows  that  KE^  KF^ 
KG,  KH  are  all  equal  to  CB. 


So  are  ATZ,  KM^  by  construction ; 
hence  LE,  LF,  LG,  LH  and  ME,  MF,  MG,  MH 2.x^  all  equal  to  EFox  BD. 

Thus  (i)  the  figure  is  made  up  of  eight  equilateral  triangles  and  is  therefore 
a  regular  octahedron. 

(2)  Since  KE  =  KL  =  KM, 

the  semicircle  on  LM  in  the  plane  LKE  passes  through  E, 
Similarly  F^  G,  H\\g  on  semicircles  on  LM  2^  diameter. 
Thus  all  the  vertices  of  the  tetrahedron  lie  on  the  sphere  of  which  LM  is 

a  diameter. 

(3)  LE  =  EM=BD) 
therefore                               LM""  =  lEB  =  2BD^ 

=  AB\ 
or  LM^AB. 


XIII.  h]  proposition    14  477 

(4)  AB^  =  2BDy 

If  r  be  the  radius  of  the  circumscribed  sphere, 

(edge  of  octahedron)  =  J2  .r. 

Pappus'  method. 

Pappus  (ill.  pp.  148 — 150)  finds  the  two  equal  and  parallel  sections  of  the 
sphere  which  circumscribe  two  opposite  faces  of  the  octahedron  thus. 

Analysis, 

Suppose  the  octahedron  inscribed,  A^  B^  C;  Z),  E,  /^  being  the  vertices. 

Through  ABQ  DEF  describe  planes 
making  the  circular  sections  ABC^  DEF, 

Since  the  straight  lines  DA,  DB,  DE,  DF 
are  equal,  the  points  A,  E,  F,  B  lie  on  a  circle 
of  which  D  is  the  pole. 

Again,  since  AB,  BF,  FE,  EA  are  equal, 
ABFE  is  a  square  inscribed  in  the  said  circle, 
and  AB,  EF^st,  parallel. 

Similarly  DE  is  parallel  to  BC,  and  DF 
to  AC, 

Therefore  the  circles  through  Z),  E,  Fsind 
A,  B,  C  are  parallel ;  and  they  are  also  equal 
because  the  equilateral  triangles  inscribed  in 
them  are  equal. 

Now,  ABC,  DEF  being  equal  and  parallel  circular  sections,  and  AB,  EF 
equal  and  parallel  chords  "  not  on  the  same  side  of  the  centres," 

-^^is  a  diameter  of  the  sphere. 
[Pappus  has  a  lemma  for  this,  pp.  136 — 138]. 
And  AE  =  EF,  so  that  AF^  =  2FE\ 
But,  if  d'  be  the  diameter  of  the  circle  DEF, 

d'^^^EF*.  [cf.  XIII.  12] 

Therefore,  if  d  be  the  diameter  of  the  sphere, 

^^:^'«  =  3:2. 

Now  d  is  given,  and  therefore  d'  is  given ;  hence  the  circles  DEF,  ABC 
are  given. 

Synthesis. 

Draw  two  equal  and  parallel  circular  sections  with  diameter  d\  such  that 

where  d  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere. 

Inscribe  an  equilateral  triangle  ABC  in  either  circle  {ABC), 

In  the  other  circle  draw  ^^ equal  and  parallel  to  AB  but  on  the  opposite 

side  of  the  centre,  and  complete  the  inscribed  equilateral  triangle  DEF, 
ABCDEF'vs  the  octahedron  required. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  whereas  in  the  problem  of  xiii.  13  Euclid  first 
finds  the  circle  circumscribing  a  face  and  Pappus  first  finds  an  edge,  in  this 
problem  Euclid  finds  the  edge  first  and  Pappus  the  circle  circumscribing 
a  face. 


478 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  15 


Proposition  15. 

To  construct  a  cube  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere^  like  the 
pyramid ;  and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the 
sphere  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  th^  cube. 

Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 
and  let  it  be  cut  at  C  so  that  -^C  is  double  of  CB  ; 
let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 
let  CD  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  DB  be  joined  ; 

let  the  square  EFGH  having  its  side  equal  to  DB  be  set  out, 
from  E,  F,  G,  H  let  EK,  FL,  GM,  HN  be  drawn  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  the  square  EFGH, 
from  EK,  FL,  GM,  HN  let  EK,  FL,  GM,  HN  respectively 
be  cut  off  equal  to  one  of  the  straight  lines  EF,  FG, 
GH,  HE, 

and  let  KL,  LM,  MN,  NK  be  joined  ; 

therefore  the  cube  FN  has  been  constructed  which  is  contained 
by  six  equal  squares. 

E  H 


/ 

\          N/1 

\ 

•^ 

s. 

y 

F 

7" 

M 


It  IS  then  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere, 
and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is 
triple  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube. 

For  let  KG,  EG  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  angle  KEG  is  right,  because  KE  is  also 
at  right  angles  to  the  plane  EG  and  of  course  to  the  straight 
line  EG  also,  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  KG  will  also  pass  through 
the  point  E. 

Again,  since  GF  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  FL,  FE, 

GF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  FK ; 
hence  also,  if  we  join  FK^  GF  will  be  at  right  angles  to  FK ; 


XIII.  15]  PROPOSITION    15  479 

and  for  this  reason  again  the  semicircle  described  on  GK  will 
also  pass  through  F. 

Similarly  it  will  also  pass  through  the  remaining  angular 
points  of  the  cube. 

If  then,  KG  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried 
round  and  restored  to  the  same  position  from  which  it  began 
to  be  moved, 
the  cube  will  be  comprehended  in  a  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  comprehended  in  the  given 
sphere. 

For,  since  GF  is  equal  to  FE^ 
and  the  angle  at  F  is  right, 
therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  EF. 

But  EF  is  equal  to  EK ; 
therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  EK ; 
hence  the  squares  on  GE,  EK,  that  is  the  square  on  GK\\.  47], 
is  triple  of  the  square  on  EK. 

And,  since  AB  is  triple  of  BC, 
while,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  ovi  AB  to  the  square 
onBD, 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  GK^w^ls  also  proved  triple  of  the  square 
on  KE. 

And  KE  was  made  equal  to  DB ; 
therefore  KG  is  also  equal  to  AB. 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere  ; 
therefore  KG  is  also  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  given 
sphere. 

Therefore  the  cube  has  been  comprehended  in  the  given 
sphere ;  and  it  has  been  demonstrated  at  the  same  time  that 
the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  triple  of  the  square 
on  the  side  of  the  cube. 

Q.  E.  D. 

AB  is  divided  so  that  AC=  iCB;  CD  is  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB^ 
and  BD  is  joined. 

KG  is,  by  construction,  a  cube  of  side  equal  to  BD. 

To  prove  (i)  that  it  is  inscribable  in  a  sphere. 

Since  KE  is  perpendicular  to  EH,  EF, 
KE  is  perpendicular  to  EG.  ' 


48o 


BOOK  XIII 


[xiii.  IS 


Thus,  KEG  being  a  right  angle,  E  lies  on  a  semicircle  with  diameter  KG* 
The  same  thing  is  proved   in   the   same    way   of   the   other   vertices 

Thus  the  cube  is  inscribed  in  the  sphere  of  which  KG  is  a  diameter. 

(2)  KG^=^KE^  +  EG^ 

=  KE^  +  2EF^ 
-ZEK'. 
Also  AB^iBC, 

while  AB:BC=  AB^  :AB.BC 

=  AB^:BD^) 
therefore  AB^  =  z^D\ 

But  BD  =  EK] 

therefore  KG  =  AB, 

(3)  AB^^iBD^ 

=  ZKE\ 
If  /-  be  the  radius  of  the  circumscribed  sphere, 

(edge  of  cube)  =  -1-  .  r  =  f  ^3 .  r. 

Pappus'  solution. 

In  this  case  too  Pappus  (iii.  pp.  144 — 148)  gives  the  full  analysis  and 
synthesis. 

Analysis. 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  and    let  the    vertices    of   the  cube    be 
A,  B,  C,  A  ^;  ^,  G,  H, 

Draw  planes  through  A,  By  C,  D  and 
Ey  Fy  Gy  H  respectively ;  these  will  produce 
parallel  circular  sections,  which  are  also  equal 
since  the  inscribed  squares  are  equal. 

And  CE  will  be  a  diameter  of  the  sphere. 

Join  EG, 

Now,  since  EG^  =  2EH^  -  2GC\ 
and  the  angle  CGE  is  right, 

CR'=^GC^^EG^^\EG\ 

But  CE^  is  given  ; 
therefore  EG^  is  given,  so  that  the  circles 
EFGHy  ABCDy  and  the  squares  inscribed  in  them,  are  given. 

Synthesis, 

Draw  two  parallel  circular  sections  with  equal  diameters  d\  such  that 

where  d  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere. 

Inscribe  a  square  in  one  of  the  circles,  as  A  BCD, 

In  the  other  circle  draw  FG  equal  and  parallel  to  BCy  and  complete  the 
square  on  FG  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH, 

The  eight  vertices  of  the  required  cube  are  thus  determined. 


XIII.  i6] 


PROPOSITIONS    15,  16 


481 


Proposition  16. 

To  construct  an  icosahedron  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere^ 
like  the  aforesaid  figures ;  and  to  prove  that  the  side  of  the 
icosahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 

Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  cut  at  C  so  that  AC\^  quadruple  of  CB, 

let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 

let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles 
to  ^^, 

and  let  DB  be  joined  ; 


let  the  circle  EFGHK  be  set  out  and  let  its  radius  be  equal 
toDB, 

let  the  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  EFGHK  be 
inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGHK, 

let  the  circumferences  EF,  FG,  GH,  HK,  KE  be  bisected  at 
the  points  L,  M,  N,  O,  P, 

and  let  LM,  MN,  NO,  OP,  PL,  EP  be  joined. 

H.  £.  UI.  31 


482  BOOK   XIII  [xiii.  16 

Therefore  the  pentagon  LMNOP  is  also  equilateral, 
and  the  straight  line  EP  belongs  to  a  decagon. 

Now  from  the  points  Ey  F,  Gy  H,  K  let  the  straight  lines 
EQ,  FR,  GS,  HT,  KU  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  circle,  and  let  them  be  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle 
EFGHKy 

let  QR,  RS,  ST,  TU,  UQ,  QL,  LR,  RM,  MS,  SN,  NT, 
TO,  OU,  UP,  PQ  be  joined. 

Now,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  EQ,  KU  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  same  plane, 
therefore  EQ  is  parallel  to  KU.  [xi.  6] 

But  it  is  also  equal  to  it ; 
and  the  straight  lines  joining  those  extremities  of  equal  and 
parallel  straight  lines  which  are  in  the  same  direction  are  equal 
and  parallel.  [1.  33] 

Therefore  QU  is  equal  and  parallel  to  EK. 

But  EK  belongs  to  an  equilateral  pentagon  ; 
therefore  QU  also  belongs  to  the  equilateral  pentagon  inscribed 
in  the  circle  EFGHK. 

For  the  same  reason 
each  of  the  straight  lines  QR,  RS,  ST,  TU  also  belongs  to 
the  equilateral  pentagon  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGHK ; 
therefore  the  pentagon  QRSTU  is  equilateral. 

And,  since  QE  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 
and  EP  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  QEP  is  right, 
therefore  QP  belongs  to  a  pentagon  ; 

for  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  the  square  on  the  side 
of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle.  [xiii.  10] 

For  the  same  reason 
PU  is  also  a  side  of  a  pentagon. 

But  QU  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon  ; 
therefore  the  triangle  QPU  is  equilateral. 

For  the  same  reason 
each  of  the  triangles  QLR,  RMS,  SNT,  TO  U  is  also  equi- 
lateral. 


XIII.  1 6]  PROPOSITION    1 6  483 

And,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  QL,  QP  was  proved 
to  belong  to  a  pentagon, 
and  LP  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon, 
therefore  the  triangle  QLP  is  equilateral. 

For  the  same  reason 
each  of  the  triangles  LRM,  MSNy  NTO,  OUP  is  also  equi- 
lateral. 

Let  the  centre  of  the  circle  EFGHK,  the  point  V,  be 
taken ; 

from  V  let  VZ  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle, 

let  it  be  produced  in  the  other  direction,  as  VX, 
let  there  be  cut  off  VW,  the  side  of  a  hexagon,  and  each  of 
the  straight  lines  VX,  WZ,  being  sides  of  a  decagon, 
and  let  QZ,  QW,  UZ,  EV,  LV,  LX,  XM  be  joined. 

Now,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  VWy  QE  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle, 
therefore  VW\^  parallel  to  QE.  [xi.  6] 

But  they  are  also  equal ; 
therefore  EV,  QW  2X^  also  qqual  and  parallel.  [i.  33] 

But  -fi'F  belongs  to  a  hexagon  ; 
therefore  Q  W  also  belongs  to  a  hexagon. 

And,  since  Q  W  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 
and  WZ  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  Q  WZ  is  right, 
therefore  QZ  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xiii.  10] 

For  the  same  reason 
UZ  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  join    VK,    WU,  they  will  be  equal  and 
opposite,  and  VK,  being  a  radius,  belongs  to  a  hexagon  ; 

[iv.  15,  Por.] 
therefore  WU  also  belongs  to  a  hexagon. 

But  WZ  belongs  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  UWZ  is  right ; 
therefore  UZ  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xm.  10] 

But  QU  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon  ; 
therefore  the  triangle  QUZ  is  equilateral. 

31—2 


484  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  16 

For  the  same  reason 
each  of  the  remaining  triangles  of  which  the  straight  lines 
QR,  RS,  ST,  TC/sLte  the  bases,  and  the  point  Z  the  vertex, 
is  also  equilateral. 

Again,  since  FL  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 
and  VX  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  L  VX  is  right, 
therefore  LX  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xni.  10] 

For  the  same  reason, 
if  we  join  MVy  which  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 
MX  is  also  inferred  to  belong  to  a  pentagon. 

But  LM  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon ; 
therefore  the  triangle  LMX  is  equilateral. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  each  of  the  remaining 
triangles  of  which  MN,  NO,  OP,  PL  are  the  bases,  and  the 
point  X  the  vertex,  is  also  equilateral. 

Therefore  an  icosahedron  has  been  constructed  which  is 
contained  by  twenty  equilateral  triangles. 

It  is  next  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere, 
and  to  prove  that  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  minor. 

For,  since  VW  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 
and  WZ  to  a  decagon, 

therefore  VZ  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  W, 
and  VW\%  its  greater  segment ;  [xiii.  9] 

therefore,  as  ZFis  to  VW,  so  is  VW  \.o  WZ. 

But  VWxs  equal  to  VE,  and  WZ  to  VX\ 
therefore,  as  ZVis  to  V£,  so  is  BVio  VX. 

And  the  angles  ZVE,  EVX  are  right ; 
therefore,  if  we  join  the  straight  line  EZ,  the  angle  XEZ 
will  be  right  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  XEZ, 
VEZ. 

For  the  same  reason, 
since,  ^s  ZV  is  to  VW,  so  is  VW  to  WZ, 
and  ZF  is  equal  to  XW,  and  VWto  WQ, 
therefore,  ^s  XW\s  to  WQ,  so  is  QW to  WZ. 


XIII.  i6]  PROPOSITION    i6  485 

And  for  this  reason  again, 

if  we  join  QX,  the  angle  at  Q  will  be  right ;  [vi.  8] 

therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  XZ  will  also  pass 
through  Q.  [m.  31] 

And  if,  XZ  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried 
round  and  restored  to  the  same  position  from  which  it  began 
to  be  moved,  it  will  also  pass  through  Q  and  the  remaining 
angular  points  of  the  icosahedron, 

and  the  icosahedron  will  have  been  comprehended  in  a 
sphere. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 
For  let  VJVhe  bisected  at  A\ 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  yZ  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  PV, 

and  ZtV  is  its  lesser  segment, 

therefore  the  square  on  Zi^  added  to  the  half  of  the  greater 
segment,  that  is  IVA\  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half 
of  the  greater  segment ;  [xm.  3] 

therefore  the  square  on  ZA'  is  five  times  the  square  on 
A'W. 

And  ZX  is  double  of  ZA\  and  FIV  double  of  A'  W\ 

therefore  the  square  on  ZX  is  five  times  the  square  on 
WV. 

And,  since  AC  is  quadruple  of  CBy 

therefore  AB  is  five  times  BC. 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square 
on  BD  ;  [vi.  8,  v.  Def.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  five  times  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  ZX  was  also  proved  to  be  five  times 
the  square  on  I^IV. 

And  DB  is  equal  to  FW, 

for  each  of  them  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK\ 
therefore  AB  is  also  equal  to  XZ. 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere ; 
therefore  XZ  is  also  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere. 

Therefore  the  icosahedron  has  been  comprehended  in  the 
given  sphere. 


486  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  i6 

I  say  next  that  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  minor. 

For,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  rational, 
and  the  square  on  it  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  radius 
of  the  circle  ^/^G^^ii:, 

therefore  the  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK  is  also  rational ; 
hence  its  diameter  is  also  rational. 

But,  if  an  equilateral  pentagon  be  inscribed  in  a  circle 
which  has  its  diameter  rational,  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is 
the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor.  [xni.  ii] 

And  the  side  of  the  pentagon  EFGHK  is  the  side  of  the 
icosahedron. 

Therefore  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  minor. 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  square  on  the 
diameter  of  the  sphere  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  radius 
of  the  circle  from  which  the  icosahedron  has  been  described, 
and  that  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  composed  of  the  side 
of  the  hexagon  and  two  of  the  sides  of  the  decagon  inscribed 
in  the  same  circle. 

Q.  E.  O. 

Euclid's  method  is 

(i)  to  find  the  pentagons  in  the  two  parallel  circular  sections  of  the  sphere, 
the  sides  of  which  form  ten  (five  in  each  circle)  of  the  edges  of  the  icosahedron, 

(2)  to  find  the  two  points  which  are  the  poles  of  the  two  circular  sections, 

(3)  to  prove  that  the  triangles  formed  by  joining  the  angular  points  of  the 
pentagons  which  are  nearest  to  one  another  two  and  two  are  equilateral, 

(4)  to  prove  that  the  triangles  of  which  the  poles  are  the  vertices  and  the 
sides  of  the  pentagons  the  bases  are  also  equilateral, 

(5)  that  all  the  angular  points  other  than  the   poles  lie  on  a  sphere  the 
diameter  of  which  is  the  straight  line  joining  the  poles, 

(6)  that  this  sphere  is  of  the  same  size  as  the  given  sphere, 

(7)  that,  if  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  rational,  the  edge  of  the  icosahedron 
is  the  minor  irrational  straight  line. 

I  have  drawn  another  figure  which  will  perhaps  show  the  pentagons,  and 
the  position  of  the  poles  with  regard  to  them,  more  clearly  than  does  Euclid's 
figure. 

(i)     If  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere,  divide  AB  at  C  so  that 

AC=\CB\ 
draw  CD  at  right  angles  to  AB  meeting  the  semicircle  on  AB  in  D, 
Join  BD, 


XIII.  i6] 


PROPOSITION    i6 


487 


BD  is  the  radius  of  the  circular  sections  containing  the  pentagons. 

[If  r  is  the  radius  of  the  sphere, 
since  AB  :  BC=AB^ :  AB  .,BC 

=  AB^iBD\ 
while  AB  =  ^BCy 

it  follows  that  AB^  =  sBD\ 

or  (radius  of  section)'  =  \r^. 

Thus  [xiii.  10,  note]     (side  of  pentagon)'  =  -  (10  -  2^5).] 


Inscribe  the  regular  pentagon  EFGHK  in  the  circle  EFGHK  of  radius 
equal  to  BD, 

Bisect  the  arcs  EF^  FG, ...,  so  forming  a  decagon  in  the  circle. 

Joining  successive  points  of  bisection,  we  obtain  another  regular  pentagon 
LMNOP. 

LMNOP  is  one  of  the  pentagons  containing  five  edges  of  the  icosahedron. 

The  other  circle  and  inscribed  pentagon  are  obtained  by  drawing  perpen- 
diculars from  E,  F,  G,  H,  K  to  the  plane  of  the  circle,  as  EQ,  FR,  GS, 
HTy  KUy  and  making  each  of  these  perpendiculars  equal  to  the  radius  of  the 
circle,  or,  as  Euclid  says,  the  side  of  the  regular  hexagon  in  it. 

QRSTU  is  the  second  pentagon  (of  course  equal  to  the  first)  containing  five 
edges  of  the  icosahedron. 

Joining  each  angular  point  of  one  of  the  two  pentagons  to  the  two  nearest 
angular  points  in  the  other  pentagon,  we  complete  ten  triangles  each  of  which 
has  for  one  side  a  side  of  one  or  other  of  the  two  pentagons. 

Vy  W  are  the  centres  of  the  two  circles,  and  VW  is  of  course  perpen- 
dicular to  the  planes  of  both. 

(2)  Produce   VW  in  both  directions,  making    VX  and    WZ  both  equal  to 
a  side  of  the  regular  decagon  in  the  circle  (as  EL), 

Joining  Xy  Z  to  the  angular  points  of  the  corresponding  pentagons,  we 


488  BOOK    XIII  [xiii.  i6 

have  five  more  triangles  formed  with  the  sides  of  each  pentagon  as  bases,  ten 
more  triangles  in  all. 

Now  we  come  to  the  proof. 

(3)  Taking  two  adjacent  perpendiculars,  EQ,  KU,  to  the  plane  of  the  circle 
EFGHKy  we  see  that  they  are  parallel  as  well  as  equal; 

therefore  QU^  EK^xt,  equal  and  parallel. 
Similarly  for  QR,  EFqXq, 
Thus  the  pentagons  have  their  sides  equal. 

To  prove  that  the  triangles  QPL  etc.,  are  equilateral,  we  have,  e.g. 
QD^LE^  +  EQ" 

=  (side  of  decagon)'  +  (side  of  hexagon)* 
=  (side  of  pentagon)',  [xiii.  10] 

i.e.  QL  =  (side  of  pentagon  in  circle) 

Similarly  QP=LP, 

and  A  QPL  is  equilateral. 

So  for  the  other  triangles  between  the  two  pentagons. 

(4)  Since  VW^  EQ  are  equal  and  parallel, 

VEy  WQ  are  equal  and  parallel. 
Thus  WQ  is  equal  to  the  side  of  a  regular  hexagon  in  the  circles. 
Now  the  angle  ZWQ  is  right ; 
therefore  ZQ=ZW^^  W(^ 

=  (side  of  decagon)'  +  (side  of  hexagon)' 
=  (side  of  pentagon)'.  [xiii.  10] 

Thus  ZQ,  ZR,  ZS,  ZT,  ZU  are  all  equal  to  QRy  RS  etc. ;   and  the 
triangles  with  Z  as  vertex  and  bases  QRy  RS  etc.  are  equilateral. 

Similarly  for  the  triangles  with  X  as  vertex  and  LM^  MN  tXc,  as  bases. 
Hence  the  figure  is  an  icosahedron,  being  contained  by  twenty  equal 
equilateral  triangles. 

(5)  To  prove  that  all  the  vertices  of  the  icosahedron  lie  on  the  sphere 
which  has  XZ  for  diameter. 

VIV  being  equal  to  the  side  of  a  regular  hexagon,  and  WZ  to  the  side  of 
a  regular  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle, 
VZ\s  divided  at  ^in  extreme  and  mean  ratio.  [xiii.  9] 

Therefore  ZV :  VW  =  VW :  WZ, 

or,  since  VW=  VE,    WZ  =  VX, 

ZV'.  VE=  VE  :  VX, 

Thus  E  lies  on  the  semicircle  on  ZX  as  diameter.  [vi.  8] 

Similarly  for  all  the  other  vertices  of  the  icosahedron. 

Hence  the  sphere  with  diameter  XZ  circumscribes  it. 

(6)  To  prove  A:Z=^^. 

Since    VZ  is  divided  in  extreme   and  mean  ratio   at    W,  and    VW  is 
bisected  at  A\ 

A'Z^  =  SA'W\  [xiii.  3] 

Taking  the  doubles  of  A'Z,  A'  W,  we  have 

XZ^  =  5  VW' 

=  AB^,  [see  under  (i)  above] 


^is'^fs"^^'-'^ 


XIII.  i6]  PROPOSITION   i6  489 

That  is,  XZ=AB. 

("If  r  is  the  radius  of  the  sphere, 

VX^  (side  of  decagon  in  circle  of  radius  BD) 

BD 
=  -— (75-i)  [xiii.  9,  note] 

Consequently  XZ  =  VW  +  2  FA" 

2 

7s' 

2 

(6)    The  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK  is  equal  to  -r-  r,  and  is  therefore 

**  rational "  in  Euclid's  sense. 

Hence  the  side  of  the  inscribed  pentagon  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  minor,  [xiii.  11] 

[The  side  of  this  pentagon  is  the  edge  of  the  icosahedron,  and  its  value  is 
(note  on  xiii.  10) 

BD    I j- 

=  ;5^>/io-2V5     . 

=  ^n/io(5-V5).] 
Pappus'  solution. 

This  solution  (Pappus,  in.  pp.  150 — 6)  differs  considerably  from  that  of 
Euclid.  Whereas  Euclid  uses  two  circular  sections  of  the  sphere  (those 
circumscribing  the  pentagons  of  his  construction),  Pappus  finds y2?i/r  parallel 
circular  sections  each  passing  through  three  of  the  vertices  of  the  icosahedron ; 
two  of  the  circles  are  small'  circles  circumscribing  two  opposite  triangular 
faces  respectively,  and  the  other  two  circles  are  between  these  two  circles, 
parallel  to  them  and  equal  to  one  another. 

Analysis, 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  the  vertices  of  the  icosahedron  being  A^  B,  C; 
A  ^,  ^;  G,  H,  K\  Z,  M,  N. 

Since  the  straight  lines  BA,  BC,  BF,  BG,  BE  drawn  from  B  to  the 
surface  of  the  sphere  are  equal, 

A,  Cy  F,  G,  E  are  in  one  plane. 

And  AC,  CF,  FG,  GE,  EA  are  equal; 

therefore  A  CFGE  is  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon. 

So  are  the  figures  KEBCD,  DHFBA,  AKLGB,  AKNHC,  and 
CHMGB. 

Join  EF,  KH, 


490 


BOOK   XIII 


[xiii.  i6 


Now  ^C  will  be  parallel  to  EF  (in  the  pentagon  ACFGE)  and  to  KH 
(in  the  pentagon  AKNHC)^  so  that  EF^  Klf^xe  also  parallel ; 

and  further  KHis  parallel  to  LM  (m  the  pentagon  LKDHM). 


Similarly  BC,  ED,  GH,  LNax^  all  parallel ; 
and  likewise  BA,  FD,  GK,  MNds^  all  parallel. 

Since  BC  is  equal  and  parallel  to  LN,  and  BA  to  MN,  the  circles  ABC^ 
LMN2JQ  equal  and  parallel. 

Similarly  the  circles  DEF,  KGHds^  equal  and  parallel;  for  the  triangles 
inscribed  in  them  are  equal  (since  each  of  the  sides  in  both  is  the  chord 
subtending  an  angle  of  equal  pentagons),  and  their  sides  are  parallel  re- 
spectively. 

Now  in  the  equal  and  parallel  circles  DEF,  KGH  the  chords  EF,  KH 
are  equal  and  parallel,  and  on  opposite  sides  of  the  centres ; 

therefore  FK  is  a  diameter  of  the  sphere  [Pappus'  lemma,  pp.  136 — 8],  and  the 
angle  FEK'is  right  [Pappus*  lemma,  p.  138,  20 — 26]. 

[The  diameter  FK  is  not  actually  drawn  in  the  figure.] 

In  the  pentagon  GEA  CF,  if  EF  be  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 

the  greater  segment  is  equal  to  AC.  [Eucl.  xiii.  8] 

Therefore  EF ,  AC  -  (side  of  hexagon)  :  (side  of  decagon  in  same  circle). 

[xiii.  9] 
And  EF'^AC'^EF^^EIP^d^ 

where  d  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere. 

Thus  FK,  EF,  A  C  are  as  the  sides  of  the  pentagon,  hexagon  and  decagon 
respectively  inscribed  in  the  same  circle.  [xiii.  10] 

But  FK,  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  is  given  ; 

therefore  EF,  AC  are  given  respectively ; 

thus  the  radii  of  the  circles  EFD,  A  CB  are  given  (if  r,  r'  are  their  radii. 


XIII.  i6]  PROPOSITION   1 6  491 

Hence  the  circles  are  given ; 
and  so  are  the  circles  KHGj  LMN  which  are  equal  and  parallel  to  them 
respectively. 

Synthesis, 

If  d  be  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  set  out  two  straight  lines  x^  y,  such 
that  d^  x^y  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  sides  of  the  pentagon,  hexagon  and  decagon 
respectively  inscribed  in  one  and  the  same  circle. 

Draw  (i)  two  equal  and  parallel  circular  sections  in  the  sphere,  with  radii 
equal  to  r,  where  ^  =  J  Jt^,  as  DEF^  KGH^ 

and  (2)  two  equal  and  parallel  circular  sections  as  ABC^  LMN^  with  radius  / 
such  that  /« =  \f. 

In  the  circles  (i)  draw  EF,  KH 2s  sides  of  inscribed  equilateral  triangles, 
parallel  to  one  another,  and  on  opposite  sides  of  the  centres ; 
and  in  the  circles  (2)  draw  AC^  LM  2&  sides  of  inscribed  equilateral  triangles 
parallel  to  one  another  and  to  EF^  KHy  and  so  that  ACy  EF^x^  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  centres,  and  likewise  KH^  LM, 

Complete  the  figure. 

The  correctness  of  the  construction  is  proved  as  in  the  analysis. 

It  follows  also  (says  Pappus)  that 

(diam.  of  sphere)'  =  3  (side  of  pentagon  in  DEF)\ 

For,  by  construction,  KF\  FE^p  :  ^, 

where  /,  h  are  the  sides  of  the  pentagon  and  hexagon  inscribed  in  the  same 
circle  DEF, 

And  FE  :  ^  =  the  ratio  of  the  side  of  an  equilateral  triangle  to  that  of  a 
hexagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle ; 

that  is,  FE:h^  Jz'^t 

whence  KF : /  =  ^3  :  i, 

or  KF^  =  3^. 

Another  construction. 

Mr  H.  M.  Taylor  has  a  neat  construction  for  an  icosahedron  of  edge  a. 
Let  /  be  the  length  of  the  diagonal  of  a  regular  pentagon  with  side  equal 
to  a. 

Then  (figure  of  xiii.  8),  by  Ptolemy's  theorem. 

Construct  a  cube  with  edge  equal  to  /. 

Let  O  be  the  centre  of  the  cube. 

From  O  draw  OLy  OMy  ON  perpendicular  to  three  adjacent  faces,  and  in 
these  draw  PP^  QQy  RR  parallel  to  ABy  ADy  AE  respectively. 

Make  LPy  LP\  MQy  MQy  NRy  NR!  all  equal  to  J  a. 

Let/,/',  qy  q'y  r,  /  be  the  reflexes  of/',  P'y  Qy  Qy  Ry  R'  respectively. 

Then  will  Py  P\  Qy  Qy  Ry  Ry  /,  /,  ^,  q'y  r,  r  be  the  vertices  of  a  regular 
icosahedron. 

The  projections  of  PQ  on  ABy  AD,  AE  are  equal  to  i (/-«),  i^,  \l 
respectively. 

Therefore  J'(?=^\  (J-  «)'  +  i«'  +  i^* 

=  i(^-«/+«') 


492 


BOOK   XIII 


[xiii.  i6 


Therefore  PQ  =  a. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  every  other  edge  is  equal  to  a. 

All  the  angular  points  lie  on  a  sphere  with  radius  OP^  and 


Each  solid  pentahedral  angle  is  composed  of  fiwe  equal  plane  angles,  each 
of  which  is  the  angle  of  an  equilateral  triangle. 
Therefore  the  icosahedron  is  regular. 

[a'  =  ^OP''-i\ 

And,  from  the  equation  P  =  ia-\-  a*,  we  derive 


/=^(Vs  +  i). 


Therefore,  if  r  be  the  radius  of  the  sphere, 

whence  a  =  ^rjsl  lo  +  2  J^ 

=  4r  \/io-2^5/n/8o 


a'  ii  + 


•}  =  4^. 


=  7^\/io-2V5 


as  above.] 


-  Vio(5-V5), 


XIII.  i7j 


PROPOSITIONS   1 6,  17 


493 


Proposition  17. 

To  construct  a  dodecahedron  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere^ 
like  the  aforesaid  figures^  and  to  prove  that  the  side  of  the 
dodecahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  apotome. 

Let  ABCDy  CBEF,  two  planes  of  the  aforesaid  cube  at 
right  angles  to  one  another,  be  set  out, 

let  the  sides  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,  EF,  EB,  FC  be  bisected  at 
G,  H,  K,  Z,  M,  N,  O  respectively, 
let  GK,  HL,  MH,  NO  be  joined, 

let  the  straight  lines  NP,  PO,  HQ  be  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio  at  the  points  R,  5,  T  respectively, 
and  let  RP,  PS,  TQ  be  their  greater  segments  ; 
from  the  points  R,  S,  7"  let  RC/,  SV,  TWhit  set  up  at  right 
angles  to  the  planes  of  the  cube  towards  the  outside  of  the 
cube, 

let  them  be  made  equal  to  RP,  PS,  TQ, 
and  let  UB,  BW,  WC,  CV,  F^  be  joined. 


I  say  that  the  pentagon   UBWCV  is  equilateral,  and  in 
one  plane,  and  is  further  equiangular. 
For  let  RB,  SB,  VB  be  joined. 


494  BOOK   XIII  [xiik  17 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  NP  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  -^, , 
and  RP  is  the  greater  segment, 

therefore  the  squares  on  PNy  NR  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  RP.  [xiii.  4] 

But  PN  is  equal  to  NB,  and  PR  toRU\ 
therefore  the  squares  on  BN^  NR  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  RU. 

But  the  square  on  BR  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BN^  NR; 

[1.47] 
therefore  the  square  on  BR  is  triple  of  the  square  on  R[/; 

hence  the  squares  on  BR,  RU  are  quadruple  of  the  square 
oxiRU. 

But  the  square  on  ^6''  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BR,  RU\ 
therefore  the  square  on  BU\s,  quadruple  of  the  square  on  RU\ 
therefore  Bl/is  double  of  RU. 

But  yU  is  also  double  of  67?, 
inasmuch  as  SR  is  also  double  of  PR,  that  is,  of  RU; 
therefore  BU  is  equal  to  UV. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  each  of  the  straight  lines 
BPV,  WC,  CV  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
BU,   UV. 

Therefore  the  pentagon  BUVCWxs  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  in  one  plane. 

For  let  PX  be  drawn  from  P  parallel   to  each  of  the 
straight  lines  RU,  SV  and  towards  the  outside  of  the  cube, 
and  let  XH,  /flVhe  joined  ; 
I  say  that  XHWis  a  straight  line. 

For,  since  HQ  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 
T,  and  ^7"  is  its  greater  segment, 
therefore,  as  HQ  is  to  QT,  so  is  QTio  TH. 

But  HQ  is  equal  to  HP,  and  QT  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  TPV,  PX ; 
therefore,  as  HP  is  to  PX,  so  is  WT  to  TH. 

And  HP  is  parallel  to  TIV, 
for  each  of  them  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  BD  ;        [xi.  6] 
and  TH  is  parallel  to  PX, 
for  each  of  them  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  BP.  [f'^-] 


XIII.  17]  PROPOSITION    17  495 

But  if  two  triangles,  as  XPH,  HTW,  which  have  two 
sides  proportional  to  two  sides  be  placed  together  at  one 
angle  so  that  their  corresponding  sides  are  also  parallel, 
the  remaining  straight  lines  will  be  in  a  straight  line ;     [vi.  32] 
therefore  XH  is  in  a  straight  line  with  HW. 

But  every  straight  line  is  in  one  plane  ;  [xi.  i] 

therefore  the  pentagon  UBWCV v&  in  one  plane. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  NP  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  Ry  and  PR  is  the  greater  segment, 
while  PR  is  equal  to  PSy 
therefore  NS  has  also  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio 

at       Py 

and  NP  is  the  greater  segment ;  [xm.  5] 

therefore  the  squares  on  NSy  SP  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  JVP.  [xiii.  4] 

But  NP  is  equal  to  NB,  and  PS  to  SF; 

therefore  the  squares  on  NSy  SV  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  NB\ 

hence  the  squares  on  VSy  SN,  NB  are  quadruple  of  the  square 
on  NB. 

But  the  square  on  SB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  SN,  NB; 

therefore  the  squares  on  BS,  SVy  that  is,  the  square  on  BV 
— for  the  angle  VSB  is  right — is  quadruple  of  the  square 
on  NB'y 

therefore  VB  is  double  of  BN. 

But  BC  is  also  double  of  BN\ 

therefore  BV  \s  equal  to  BC. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  BUy  UV  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  BW,   WCy 

and  the  base  BVis  equal  to  the  base  BCy 

therefore  the  angle  BUV  \s  equal  to  the  angle  BWC.       [i.  8] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angle  UVC  is  also  equal 
to  the  angle  BWC\ 

therefore  the  three  angles  BWCy  BUVy  UVC  are  equal  to 
one  another. 


496  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  17 

But  if  in  an  equilateral  pentagon  three  angles  are  equal  to 
one  another,  the  pentagon  will  be  equiangular,  [xiii.  7] 

therefore  the  pentagon  BUVClVxs  equiangular. 

And  it  was  also  proved  equilateral ; 
therefore   the  pentagon  BUVCW  is  equilateral  and  equi- 
angular, and  it  is  on  one  side  BC  of  the  cube. 

Therefore,  if  we  make  the  same  construction  in  the  case 
of  each  of  the  twelve  sides  of  the  cube, 

a  solid  figure  will  have  been  constructed  which  is  contained 
by  twelve  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagons,  and  which  is 
called  a  dodecahedron. 

It  is  then  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere, 
and  to  prove  that  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  apotome. 

For  let  XP  be  produced,  and  let  the  produced  straight 
line  be  XZ  \ 

therefore  PZ  meets  the  diameter  of  the  cube,  and  they  bisect 
one  another, 

for  this  has  been  proved  in  the  last  theorem  but  one  of  the 
eleventh  book.  [xi.  38] 

Let  them  cut  at  Z ; 
therefore  Z  is  the  centre  of  the  sphere  which  comprehends 
the  cube, 
and  ZP  is  half  of  the  side  of  the  cube. 

Let  UZ  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  straight  line  NS  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  P, 
and  NP  is  its  greater  segment, 

therefore  the  squares  on  NS,  SP  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  NP.  [xiii.  4] 

But  NS  is  equal  to  XZ, 
inasmuch  as  NP  is  also  equal  to  PZ,  and  XP  to  PS. 

But  further  PS  is  also  equal  to  XU, 
since  it  is  also  equal  to  RP ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  ZX,  XU  are  triple  of  the  square 
on  NP. 

But  the  square  on  UZ  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  ZX,  XU\ 
therefore  the  square  on  UZ  is  triple  of  the  square  on  NP. 


XIII.  17]  PROPOSITION    17  497 

But  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  sphere  which  compre- 
hends the  cube  is  also  triple  of  the  square  on  the  half  of  the 
side  of  the  cube, 

for  it  has  previously  been  shown  how  to  construct  a  cube  and 
comprehend  it  in  a  sphere,  and  to  prove  that  the  square  on 
the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  side 
of  the  cube.  [xiii.  15] 

But,  if  whole  is  so  related  to  whole,  so  is  half  to  half  also  ; 
and  NP  is  half  of  the  side  of  the  cube  ; 

therefore  UZ  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere  which  com- 
prehends the  cube. 

And  Z  is  the  centre  of  the  sphere  which  comprehends  the 
cube  ; 
therefore  the  point  U  is  on  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  remaining  angles 
of  the  dodecahedron  is  also  on  the  surface  of  the  sphere  ; 
therefore  the  dodecahedron  has  been  comprehended  in  the 
given  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  apotome. 

For  since,  when  NP  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio,  RP  is  the  greater  segment, 

and,  when  PO  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  PS 
is  the  greater  segment, 

therefore,  when  the  whole  NO  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio,  RS  is  the  greater  segment. 

[Thus,  since,  as  NP  is  to  PR^  so  is  PR  to  RN, 
the  same  is  true  of  the  doubles  also, 

for  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  equimultiples  ;  [v.  15] 
therefore  as  NO  is  to  RS,  so  is  RS  to  the  sum  of  NR^  SO. 

But  NO  is  greater  than  RS ; 
therefore  RS  is  also  greater  than  the  sum  of  NRy  SO ; 
therefore  NO  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
and  RS  is  its  greater  segment.] 

But  7?5  is  equal  to  UV  \ 
therefore,  when  NO  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  UV  is 
the  greater  segment. 

H.  £.  III.  32 


498  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  17 

And,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  rational, 
and  the  square  on  it  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the 
cube, 
therefore  NO,  being  a  side  of  the  cube,  is  rational. 

[But  if  a  rational  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
each  of  the  segments  is  an  irrational  apotome.] 

Therefore  UV,  being  a  side  of  the  dodecahedron,  is  an 
irrational  apotome.  [xni.  6] 

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  when  the  side  of 
the  cube  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment 
is  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron. 

Q.  E.  D. 

In  this  proposition  we  find  Euclid  using  two  propositions  which  precede 
but  are  used  nowhere  else,  notably  vi.  32,  which  some  authors,  in  consequence 
of  their  having  overlooked  its  use  here,  have  been  hard  put  to  it  to  explain. 

Euclid's  construction  in  this  case  is  really  identical  with  that  given  by 
Mr  H.  M.  Taylor,  and  also  referred  to  by  Henrici  and  Treutlein  under  "crystal- 
formation." 

Euclid  starts  from  the  cube  inscribed  in  a  sphere,  as  in  xni.  15,  and  then 
finds  the  side  of  the  regular  pentagon  in  which  the  side  of  the  cube  is  a 
diagonal. 

Mr  Taylor  takes  /  to  be  the  diagonal  of  a  regular  pentagon  of  side  tf, 
so  that,  by  Ptolemy's  theorem, 

P  =  al^a\ 
constructs  a  cube  of  which  /  is  the  edge,  and  gets  the  side  of  the  pentagon 
by  drawing  ZX  from  Z,  the  centre  of  the  cube,  perpendicular  to  the  face  BF 
and  equal  to  J  (/  +  a)y  then  drawing    UV  through  X  parallel  to  BC,  and 
making   UX,  XV  both  equal  to  \a, 

Euclid  finds  C^rthus. 

Draw  NO,  MH  bisecting  pairs  of  opposite  sides  in  the  square  BF  and 
meeting  in  P, 

Draw  GKy  HL  bisecting  pairs  of  opposite  sides  in  the  square  BD  and 
meeting  in  Q. 

Divide  PN,  PO,  QH  respectively  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  R,  S,  T 
{PR,  PS,  QT  being  the  greater  segments);  draw  RC/,  SV,  TW  outwards 
perpendicular  to  the  respective  faces  of  the  cube,  and  all  equal  in  length 
to  PR,  PS,  TQ, 

]om  BU,  UV,  VC,  CW,  WB. 

Then  BC/VCfV  is  one  of  the  pentagonal  faces  of  the  dodecahedron ; 
and  the  others  can  be  constructed  in  the  same  way. 

Euclid  now  proves 

(i)  that  the  pentagon  BUVCWxs  equilateral, 

(2)  that  it  is  in  one  plane, 

(3)  that  it  is  equiangular. 


XIII.  1 7] 


PROPOSITION   17 


499 


(4)  that  the  vertex  U  is  on  the  sphere  which  circumscribes  the  cube,  and 
hence 

(5)  that  all  the  other  vertices  lie  on  the  same  sphere, 
and  (6)  that  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron  is  an  apotome, 

(i)     To  prove  that  the  pentagon  BUVCW  is  equilateral. 
We  have  •   BV^BR"  +  RV 

=  i^BN^  +  NR)  +  RF^ 

=  {FN^  +  NR)-vRP^ 

=  7,EP^  +  RP^  [xiii.  4] 

=  ^RP^ 

=  UV\ 
Therefore  BU--UV. 


Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  BWy   WC,  CV  are  all  equal  to  UV 
or  BU. 

[Mr  Taylor  proceeds  in  this  way.     With  his  notation,  the  projections  of 
BU  on  BA^  BCy  BE  are  respectively  \ay  \{l-  a),  \L 
Therefore  BIP  ^\a^  ^\{l-af  ^\P 

=.^(P-aUa') 
=  a« 
Similarly  for  ^^,  WC  etc.] 

(2)     To  prove  that  the  pentagon  BUVCW  is  in  one  plane. 
Draw  PX  parallel  to  ^^or  6' F  meeting  6^rin  X. 
Join  Xff,  HW. 

3« — « 


Soo  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  17 

Then  we  have  to  prove  that  XH^  HW  zxt,  in  one  straight  line. 

Now  HPy  fVT,  being  both  perpendicular  to  the  face  BD,  are  parallel. 

For  the  same  reason  XP,  HT  are  parallel. 

Also,  since  QH\^  divided  at  T'in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
QH\  QT=QT:  TH. 

And  QH^HP,  QT=WT=PX. 

Therefore  HP  i  PX  =^  WT :  Tff. 

Consequently  the  triangles  HPX^  WTH  satisfy  the  conditions  of  v\.  32  ; 
hence  XHW  is  a  straight  line. 

[Mr  Taylor  proves  this  as  follows  : 

The  projections  of  WH,  WX  on  BE  are  \a  and  |(a  +  /), 
and  the  projections  of  WH^  WX  on  BA  are  \(l-'a)  and  \ly 
and  a  :  (a  +  /)  =  (/  -  fl)  :  /, 

since  al-P  -  a\ 

Therefore  WHX  is  a  straight  line.] 

(3)  To  prove  that  the  pentagon  BUVCW'i^  equiangular. 
We  have  BV'^BS^^SV^ 

=  {BN^  +  NS")  +  SP^ 
=  PN^  +  {NS*  +  SP^) 
=^PN^-\-zPN\ 
since  NS  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  P  [xiii.  5],  so  that 

NS^  +  SP*  =  3PN\  [xiii.  4] 

Consequently  BV^  =  ^PN^ 

=  B(P, 
or  BV^BC 

The  As  UBVy  WBC mq  therefore  equal  in  all  respects, 
and  lBUV=  lBWC. 

Similarly  ^CVU=  lBWC. 

Therefore  the  pentagon  is  equiangular.  [xiii.  7] 

(4)  To  prove  that  the  sphere  which  circumscribes  the  cube  also  circum- 
scribes the  dodecahedron  we  have  only  to  prove  that,  if  Z  be  the  centre  of 
the  sphere,  ZU  =  ZB,  for  example. 

Now,  by  XI.  38,  XP  produced  meets  the  diagonal  of  the  cube,  and  the 
portion  of  XP  produced  which  is  within  the  cube  and  the  diagonal  bisect 
one  another. 

And  ZU^^ZX^'^XV 

=  iVlS^  +  PS^ 

as  before. 

Also  (cf.  XIII.  15) 

ZB^  =  ZF'^  PB" 

=  ZP^  +  PN^  +  NB" 
^lPN\ 
Hence  ZU=^  ZB. 

(5)  Similarly  for  ZV,  Z IV etc. 


XIII.  17]  PROPOSITION   17  501 

(6)     Since  PN  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  R^ 
NP:PR  =  FR:  RN, 

Doubling  the  terms,  we  have 

NO  :  RS^  RS  :  (NR  +  SO), 
so  that,  if  NO  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment 
is  equal  to  RS. 

Now,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  rational, 
and  (diam.  of  sphere)'  =  3  (edge  of  cube)', 

the  edge  of  the  cube  (i.e.  NO)  is  rational. 

Consequently  RS  is  an  apotome. 

[This  is  proved  in  the  spurious  xiii.  6  above;  Euclid  assumes  it,  and  tfie 
words  purporting  to  quote  the  theorem  are  probably  interpolated,  like  xiii.  6 
itself.] 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  with  Mr  Taylor's  notation, 

/'  =  /a  +  a\ 

and  «=^5-i/. 

2 

Since,  if  r  is  the  radius  of  the  circumscribing  sphere,  ^=  ^3  .  -> 

«=^(Vs- 0=3(715-73). 

Pappus'  solution. 

Here  too  Pappus  (111.  pp.  156 — 162)  finds  four  circular  sections  of  the 
sphere  all  parallel  to  one  another  and  all  passing  through  five  of  the  vertices 
of  the  dodecahedron. 

Analysis, 

Suppose  (he  says)  the  problem  solved,  and  let  the  vertices  of  the 
dodecahedron  be  A,  B,  C,  A  E\  F,  G,  H,  AT,  Z;  M,  N,  O,  P,  Q; 
R,  5,  r,  [/,  V. 

Then,  as  before,  ED  is  parallel  to  FLy  and  AE  to  FG ;  therefore  the 
planes  ABODE,  FGHKL  are  parallel. 

But,  since  PA  is  parallel  to  BH,  and  BH  to  OC,  PA  is  parallel  to  OC  \ 
and  they  are  equal ;  therefore  PO,  A  C  are  parallel,  so  that  ST,  ED  are  also 
parallel. 

Similarly  RS,  DC  are  parallel,  and  likewise  the  pairs  (TU,  EA\ 
{UV,AB),  (VR,BC). 

Therefore  the  planes  ABODE,  RSTUV  are  parallel ;  and  the  circles 
ABODE,  RSTUV  dse  equal,  since  the  inscribed  pentagons  are  equal. 

Similarly  the  circles  FGHKL,  MNOPQ  are  equal,  since  the  pentagons 
inscribed  in  them  are  equal. 

Now  OL,  ^6^  are  parallel  because  each  is  parallel  to  KN\ 
therefore  Z,  0,  O,  U  are  in  one  plane. 

And  LC,  00,  OU,  UL  are  all  equal,  since  they  subtend  angles  of  equal 
pentagons. 

Also  Z,  O,  O,  6^  are  on  a  plane  section,  i.e.  a  circle ; 
therefore  LOOUis  a  square. 

Therefore  OL^  =  2ZC'  =  iLF^ 

(for  LO,  Z/^ subtend  angles  of  equal  pentagons). 


502  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  17 

And  the  angle  OLF  is  right ;  for  POy  LF  are  equal  and  parallel  chords 
in  two  equal  and  parallel  circular  sections  of  a  sphere  [Pappus*  lemma,  p.  138, 
20 — 26]. 

Therefore  OF""  =  OD  +  FD  =  zFL\  [from  above] 

And  OF  is  a  diameter  of  the  sphere ;  for  PO^  FL  are  on  opposite  sides 
of  the  centres  of  the  circles  in  which  they  are  [Pappus*  lemma,  pp.  136 — 8]. 


Now  suppose  /,  /,  h  to  be  the  sides  of  an  equilateral  pentagon,  triangle 
and  hexagon  in  the  circle  FGHKLy  d  the  diameter  of  the  sphere. 

Then  d  :  FL  =  ^3:1  [from  above] 

=  t :  h'y  [Eucl.  XIII.  12] 

and  it  follows  alternando  (since  FL  =p)  that 

d:t=p  '.h. 

Now  let  d\  p\  h  be  the  sides  of  a  regular  decagon,  pentagon  and  hexagon 
respectively  inscribed  in  any  one  circle. 

Since,  if  FL  be  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment  is 
equal  to  ED^  [xm.  8] 

FL  :  ED  =  h'  '.d*,  [vi.  Def.  3,  xiii.  9] 

And  FL  :  ED  is  the  ratio  of  the  sides  of  the  regular  pentagons  inscribed 
in  the  circles  FGHKL^  ABCDE,  and  is  therefore  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the 
sides  of  the  equilateral  triangles  inscribed  in  the  same  circles. 

Therefore  /  :  (side  of  A  in  ABCDE)  =  K  :  d'. 

But  d\t=p\h 

therefore,  ex  aequaiiy  d  :  (side  of  A  in  ABCDE)  =  p'  :  d\ 

Now  d  is  given ; 
therefore  the  sides  of  the  equilateral  triangles  inscribed  in  the  circles  ABCDEy 
FGHKL  respectively  are  given,  whence  the  radii  of  those  circles  are  also 
given. 


XIII.  17,  1 8] 


PROPOSITIONS   17,  1 8 


503 


Thus  the  two  circles  are  given,  and  so  accordingly  are  the  equal  and 
parallel  circular  sections. 

Synthesis. 

Set  out  two  straight  lines  x^  y  such  that  //,  x^  y  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  sides 
of  a  regular  pentagon,  hexagon  and  decagon  respectively  inscribed  in  one  and 
the  same  circle. 

Find  two  circular  sections  of  the  sphere  with  radii  r,  /,  where 

Let  these  be  the  circles  FGHKL^  ABCDE  respectively,  and  draw  the 
equal  and  parallel  circles  on  the  other  side  of  the  centre,  namely  MNOPQ^ 
RSTUV. 

In  the  first  two  circles  inscribe  regular  pentagons  with  their  sides  respec- 
tively parallel,  ED  being  parallel  to  FL, 

l)Tdi^  equal  and  parallel  chords  (on  the  other  sides  of  the  centres)  in  the 
other  two  circles,  namely  ST  equal  and  parallel  to  ED^  and  PO  equal  and 
parallel  to  FL ;  and  complete  the  regular  pentagons  on  •S'7',  PO  inscribed  in 
the  circles. 

Thus  all  the  vertices  of  the  dodecahedron  are  determined. 

The  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  construction  is  clear  from  the  analysis. 

Pappus  adds  that  the  construction  shows  that  the  circles  containing  five 
vertices  of  the  dodecahedron  are  the  same  respectively  as  those  containing 
three  vertices  of  the  icosahedron,  and  that  the  same  circle  circumscribes  the 
triangle  of  the  icosahedron  and  the  pentagonal  face  of  the  dodecahedron  in 
the  same  sphere. 


Proposition  18. 

To  set  out  the  sides  of  the  five  figures  and  to  compare  them 
with  one  another. 

Let  A  By  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere,  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  cut  at  C  so  that 
AC  \%  equal  to  CB,  and  at  D 
so  that  AD  is  double  of  DB  ; 

let  the  semicircle  AEB  be  de- 
scribed on  ABy 

from  C,  D  let  CE.DFh^  drawn 
at  right  angles  to  AB, 

and  let  AF,  FB,  EB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AD  is  double 
oiDB, 

therefore  AB  is  triple  of  BD. 

Convertendo,  therefore,  BA  is  one  and  a  half  times  AD, 


504  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  i8 

But,  as  BA  is  to  AD,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the 
square  on  AF,  [v.  Def.  9,  vi.  8] 

for  the  triangle  AFB  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  AFD ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square 
oxiAF. 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  one 
and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

[xni.  13] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  ; 

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

Again,  since  AD  is  double  of  DB, 
therefore  AB  is  triple  of  BD, 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square 
on  BF\  [VI.  8,  V.  Def.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BF, 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  triple 
of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube.  [xiii.  15] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  ; 
therefore  BF  is  the  side  of  the  cube. 

And,  since  y4C  is  equal  to  CB, 
therefore  AB  is  double  of  BC, 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square 
on  BE ; 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  double  of  the  square  on  BE, 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  double 
of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron.  [xiii.  14] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere ; 
therefore  BE  is  the  side  of  the  octahedron. 

Next,  let  ^G^  be  drawn  from  the  point  A  at  right  angles 
to  the  straight  line  AB, 
let  AG  he  made  equal  to  AB, 
let  GC  be  joined, 
and  from  //  let  I/K  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AB. 

Then,  since  GA  is  double  of  AC, 
for  GA  is  equal  to  AB, 
and,  as  GA  is  to  AC,  so  is  //K  to  KC, 
therefore  I/K  is  also  double  of  KC 


XIII.  1 8]  PROPOSITION    1 8  505 

Therefore  the  square  on  HK  is  quadruple  of  the  square 
on  KC\ 

therefore  the  squares  on  HK^  KC,  that  is,  the  square  on  HC, 
is  five  times  the  square  on  KC. 

But  HC  is  equal  to  CB ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  five  times  the  square  on  CK. 

And,  since  AB  is  double  of  CB, 
and,  in  them,  AD  is  double  of  DB, 
therefore  the  remainder  BD  is  double  of  the  remainder  DC, 

Therefore  BC  is  triple  of  CD  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  nine  times  the  square  on  CD. 

But  the  square  on  BC  is  five  times  the  square  on  CK\ 
therefore  the  square  on  CK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  CD ; 
therefore  CK  is  greater  than  CD. 

Let  CL  be  made  equal  to  CK, 
from  L  let  LM  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  MB  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  square  on  BC  is  five  times  the  square 
on  CK, 

and  AB  is  double  of  BC,  and  KL  double  of  CK, 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  five  times  the  square  on  KL. 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  five 
times  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  circle  from  which  the 
icosahedron  has  been  described.  [xm.  16,  Por.] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  ; 
therefore  KL  is  the  radius  of  the  circle  from  which  the  icosa- 
hedron has  been  described ; 

therefore  KL  is  a  side  of  the  hexagon  in  the  said  circle. 

[IV.  15,  Por.] 
And,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  made  up  of  the 
side  of  the  hexagon  and  two  of  the  sides  of  the  decagon 
inscribed  in  the  same  circle,  [xm.  16,  Por.] 

and  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere, 
while  KL  is  a  side  of  the  hexagon, 
and  AK  is  equal  to  LB, 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AK,  LB  is  a  side  of  the 
decagon  inscribed  in  the  circle  from  which  the  icosahedron 
has  been  described. 


5o6  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.  i8 

And,  since  LB  belongs  to  a  decagon,  and  ML  to  a 
hexagon, 

for  ML  is  equal  to  KL,  since  it  is  also  equal  to  HK,  being 
the  same  distance  from  the  centre,  and  each  of  the  straight 
lines  HK,  KL  is  double  of  KC, 
therefore  MB  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xui.  lo] 

But  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  side  of  the  icosa- 
hedron ;  [xiii.  i6] 

therefore  MB  belongs  to  the  icosahedron. 

Now,  since  FB  is  a  side  of  the  cube, 
let  it  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  N, 
and  let  NB  be  the  greater  segment ; 
therefore  NB  is  a  side  of  the  dodecahedron.  [xui.  17,  Por.] 

And,  since  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  was 
proved  to  be  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  AF 
of  the  pyramid,  double  of  the  square  on  the  side  BE  of  the 
octahedron  and  triple  of  the  side  FB  of  the  cube, 
therefore,  of  parts  of  which  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the 
sphere  contains  six,  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid 
contains  four,  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron  three, 
and  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube  two. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid  is  four- 
thirds  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron,  and  double 
of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube  ; 

and  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron  is  one  and  a  half 
times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube. 

The  said  sides,  therefore,  of  the  three  figures,  I  mean  the 
pyramid,  the  octahedron  and  the  cube,  are  to  one  another  in 
rational  ratios. 

But  the   remaining  two,   I    mean  the  side  of  the    icosa- 
hedron and  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron,  are  not  in  rational 
ratios  either  to  one  another  or  to  the  aforesaid  sides ; 
for  they  are  irrational,  the  one  being  minor  [xni.  16]  and  the 
other  an  apotome  [xiii.  17]. 

That  the  side  MB  of  the  icosahedron  is  greater  than  the 
side  NB  of  the  dodecahedron  we  can  prove  thus. 

For,  since  the  triangle  FDB  is  equiangular  with  the 
triangle  FAB,  [vi.  8] 

proportionally,  as  DB  is  to  BF,  so  is  BF  to  BA.  [vi.  4] 


XIII.  i8]  PROPOSITION    i8  507 

And,  since  the  three  straight  lines  are  proportional, 
as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  square  on  the  first  to  the 
square  on  the  second  ;  [v.  Def.  9,  vi.  20,  For.] 

therefore,  as  DB  is  to  BA,  so  is  the  square  on  DB  to  the 
square  on  BF\ 

therefore,  inversely,  as  AB  is  to  BDy  so  is  the  square  on  FB 
to  the  square  on  BD. 

But  AB  is  triple  of  BD  ; 
therefore  the  square  on  FB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  AD  is  also  quadruple  of  the  square 
on  DB, 

for  AD  is  double  of  DB ; 

therefore  the  square  on  AD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FB; 
therefore  AD  is  greater  than  FB ; 
therefore  AL  is  by  far  greater  than  FB. 

And,  when  AL  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
J^L  is  the  greater  segment, 

inasmuch  as  LK  belongs  to  a  hexagon,  and  KA  to  a  decagon; 

[xm.  9] 
and,  when  FB  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  JVB  is  the 
greater  segment ; 
therefore  KL  is  greater  than  JVB. 

But  /CL  is  equal  to  LM; 
therefore  LM  is  greater  than  NB. 

Therefore  MB,  which  is  a  side  of  the  icosahedron,  is  by 
far  greater  than  JVB  which  is  a  side  of  the  dodecahedron. 

Q.  E.  D. 


I  say  next  that  no  other  figure,  besides  the  said  five  figures, 
can  be  constructed  which  is  contained  by  equilateral  and  equi- 
angular figures  equal  to  one  another. 

For  a  solid  angle  cannot  be  constructed  with  two  triangles, 
or  indeed  planes. 

With  three  triangles  the  angle  of  the  pyramid  is  constructed, 
with  four  the  angle  of  the  octahedron,  and  with  five  the  angle 
of  the  icosahedron  ; 

but  a  solid  angle  cannot  be  formed  by  six  equilateral  and  equi- 
angular triangles  placed  together  at  one  point, 


5o8  BOOK  XIII  [xiii.18 

for,  the  angle  of  the  equilateral  triangle  being  two-thirds  of  a 
right  angle,  the  six  will  be  equal  to  four  right  angles : 
which  is  impossible,  for  any  solid  angle  is  contained  by  angles 
less  than  four  right  angles.  [xi.  21] 

For  the  same  reason,  neither  can  a  solid  angle  be  con- 
structed by  more  than*  six  plane  angles. 

By  three  squares  the  angle  of  the  cube  is  contained,  but 
by  four  it  is  impossible  for  a  solid  angle  to  be  contained, 
for  they  will  again  be  four  right  angles. 

By  three  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagons  the  angle 
of  the  dodecahedron  is  contained  ; 

but  by  four  such  it  is  impossible  for  any  solid  angle  to  be 

contained, 

for,  the  angle  of  the  equilateral  pentagon  being  a  right  angle 

and  a  fifth,  the  four  angles  will  be  greater  than  four  right 

angles : 

which  is  impossible. 

Neither  again  will  a  solid  angle  be  contained  by  other 
polygonal  figures  by  reason  of  the  same  absurdity. 
Therefore  etc. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma. 

But    that   the  angle  of  the  equilateral  and  equiangular 
pentagon  is  a  right  angle  and  a  fifth  we  must  prove  thus. 

Let     ABCDE     be     an     equilateral      and     equiangular 
pentagon, 

let  the  circle  ABCDE  be  cir- 
cumscribed about  it, 
let  its  centre  F  be  taken, 
and  let  FA,  FB,  FC,  FD,  FE 
be  joined. 

Therefore  they  bisect  the 
angles  of  the  pentagon  at  Ay 
B,  C,  D,  E, 

And,  since  the  angles  at  F 
are  equal  to  four  right  angles 
and  are  equal, 


XIII.  i8]  PROPOSITION    i8  509 

therefore  one  of  them,  as  the  angle  AFB,  is  one  right  angle 
less  a  fifth ; 

therefore  the  remaining  angles  FAB,  ABF  consist  of  one 
right  angle  and  a  fifth. 

But  the  angle  FAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  FBC ; 
therefore  the  whole  angle  ABC  of  the  pentagon  consists  of 
one  right  angle  and  a  fifth. 

Q.  E.  D. 

We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  notes  that,  if  r  be  the  radius  of  the  sphere 
circumscribing  the  five  solid  figures, 

(edge  of  tetrahedron)  =  f  V^ .  /•, 
(edge  of  octahedron)  =  ^2 .  r, 
(edge  of  cube)  =  |  ^3  •  ^ 

(edge  of  icosahedron)  =  -  /s/io  (5  -  ^5), 

(edge  of  dodecahedron)  =  -  (n/i5  -  ^3). 
Euclid  here  exhibits  the  edges  of  all  the  five  regular  solids  in  one  figure, 
(i)     Make  AD  equal  to  2DB, 


Thus 

BA^\AD, 

and 

BA:AD^BA^',AF^', 

therefore 

BA^^^AF^. 

Thus 

AF-  >/§ .  2r  =  1^6 .  r  =  (edge  of  tetrahedron). 

(*) 

AB"  :  BF"  =  AB  :  BD 

Therefore 

BF^^lAB', 

or 

BF^  -lZ'^^\'Jl  '^={^^g^  ofaibe). 

(3) 

AB'^2BE\ 

Therefore 

BE  =  J2,r  =  (edge  of  octahedron). 

(4)     Draw  AG  perpendicular  and  equal  to  AB,     Join  GCy  meeting  the 
semicircle  in  Z^  and  draw  HK  perpendicular  to  AB, 

Then  GA  =  2AC\ 

therefore,  by  similar  triangles,     HK~  2KC, 

Hence  HK^  =  ^KC\ 

and  therefore  5  ATC  =  HK^  +  KC 

=  HC^ 
^CB". 

Again,  since  AB  =  2CB,  and  AD  =  2DB, 
by  subtraction,  BD  =  2DC, 

or  BC=sDC. 


5IO  BOOK  XIII  [xiiL  i8 

Therefore  ^D(?  =  BC^ 

Hence  KC>  CD. 

Make  CL  equal  to  KC^  draw  LM  at  right  angles  to  AB^  and  join 
AM,  MB. 

Since  CB^-=t^KC^, 

AB'^t.KD, 

It  follows  that  KL  (=  J^.r)  is  the  radius  of,  or  the  side  of  the  regular 
hexagon  in,  the  circle  containing  the  pentagonal  sections  of  the  icosahedron. 

[xiii.  1 6] 
And,  since 

2r  =  (side  of  hexagon)  +  2  (side  of  decagon  in  same  circle) 

[xiii.  16,  Por.] 

AK^  LB  =  (side  of  decagon  in  the  said  circle). 

But  LM=  HK-  KL  -  (side  of  hexagon  in  circle). 

Therefore  LM^  +  LB^  (=  BM^)  =  (side  of  pentagon  in  circle)*       [xiii.  10] 

=  (edge  of  icosahedron)", 

and  BM  =  (edge  of  icosahedron), 

[More  shortly,  HK-  2KC, 

whence  HK^  =  4K(P, 

and  K.KC^^^Ha^r'. 

Also  AK^  r-CK=r(i^  -y-Y 

Thus  BM^^HK^  +  AK^ 

-(t-7s) 

=   -(10-275), 

and  BM=  -  Vio  (5  —  ^5)  =  {edge  of  icosahedron),'] 

(5)     Cut  BF{\\\t  edge  of  the  cube)  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  iV. 
Then,  if  BN  be  the  greater  segment, 

BN  =  {edge  of  dodecahedron) .  [x  1 1 1 .  1 7  ] 

[Solving,  we  obtain 

BN^  >^^^^ .  BF 

2 

=  (^^«f  of  dodecahedron).] 


XIII.  i8]  PROPOSITION    i8  511 

(6)  If  /,  o^  c  are  the  edges  of  the  tetrahedron,  octahedron  and  cube 
respectively, 

If  each  of  these  equals  is  put  equal  to  X^ 

whence  4^^  :  /' :  ^  :  ^  =  6  :  4  :  3  :  2, 

and  the  ratios  between  2r,  /,  /?,  c  are  all  rational  (in  Euclid's  sense). 

The  ratios  between  these  and  the  edges  of  the  icosahedron   and   the 
dodecahedron  are  irratianaL 

(7)  To  prove  that 

(edge  of  icosahedron)  >  (edge  of  dodecahedron), 
Le.  that  MB>NB, 

By  similar  As  FDB,  AFB, 

DB  '.BF^BF\BA, 
or  DB'.BA^  DB"  :  BF^, 

But  sDB  =  BA ; 

therefore  BF^  =  sDB'. 

By  hypothesis,  AD^  =  4/?^ ; 

therefore  AD  >  BF, 

and,  a  fortiori^  AL  >  BF. 

Now  ZJC  is  the  side  of  a  hexagon,  and  AJ^  the  side  of  a  decagon  in  the 
same  circle ; 

therefore,  when  AL  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  KZ  is  the  greater 
segment. 

And,  when  BF  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  BN  is  the  greater 
segment 

Therefore,  since  AL  >  BF, 

KL  >  BN, 
or  LM>  BN. 

And  therefore,  a  fortiori,         MB  >  BN 


APPENDIX. 

I.     THE   CONTENTS   OF  THE  SOCALLED  BOOK  XIV. 
BY  HYPSICLES. 

This  supplement  to  Euclid's  Book  xiii.  is  worth  reproducing  for  the  sake 
not  only  of  the  additional  theorems  proved  in  it  but  of  the  historical  notices 
contained  in  the  preface  and  in  one  or  two  later  passages.  Where  I  translate 
literally  from  the  Greek  text,  I  shall  use  inverted  commas;  except  in  such 
passages  I  reproduce  the  contents  in  briefer  form. 

I  have  already  quoted  from  the  Preface  (Vol.  i.  pp.  5 — 6),  but  I  will 
repeat  it  here. 

"  Basilides  of  Tyre,  O  Protarchus,  when  he  came  to  Alexandria  and  met 
my  father,  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  sojourn  with  him  on  account  of  the 
bond  between  them  due  to  their  common  interest  in  mathematics.  And  on 
one  occasion,  when  looking  into  the  tract  written  by  Apollonius  about  the 
comparison  of  the  dodecahedron  and  icosahedron  inscribed  in  one  and  the 
same  sphere,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  question  what  ratio  they  bear  to  one 
another,  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Apollonius*  treatment  of  it  in  this 
book  was  not  correct;  accordingly,  as  I  understood  from  my  father,  they 
proceeded  to  amend  and  rewrite  it.  But  I  myself  afterwards  came  across 
another  book  published  by  Apollonius,  containing  a  demonstration  of  the 
matter  in  question,  and  I  was  greatly  attracted  by  his  investigation  of  the 
problem.  Now  the  book  published  by  Apollonius  is  accessible  to  all ;  for  it 
has  a  large  circulation  in  a  form  which  seems  to  have  been  the  result  of  later 
careful  elaboration. 

"  For  my  part,  I  determined  to  dedicate  to  you  what  I  deem  to  be 
necessary  by  way  of  commentary,  partly  because  you  will  be  able,  by  reason 
of  your  proficiency  in  all  mathematics  and  particularly  in  geometry,  to  pass  an 
expert  judgment  upon  what  I  am  about  to  write,  and  partly  because,  on 
account  of  your  intimacy  with  my  father  and  your  friendly  feeling  towards 
myself,  you  will  lend  a  kindly  ear  to  my  disquisition.  But  it  is  time  to  have 
done  with  the  preamble  and  to  begin  my  treatise  itself. 

[Prop.  I.]  "  The  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  centre  of  any  circle  to  the 
side  of  the  pentagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle  is  half  the  sum  of  the  side  of  the 
hexagon  and  of  the  side  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle,  ^^ 


I.     THE  SO-CALLED   "BOOK  XIV"  513 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  BC  the  side  of  the  inscribed  regular  pentagon. 

Take  D  the  centre  of  the  circle,  draw  DE  from  D  perpendicular  to  BC^ 
and  produce  DE  both  ways  to  meet  the  circle  in  F^  A. 

I  say  that  DE  is  half  the  sum  of  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  of  the  side 
of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle. 

Let  DC,  C7^ be  joined;  make  GE  equal  to  EF,  and  join  GC 

Since  the  circumference  of  the  circle  is  five 
times  the  arc  BFC^ 

and  half  the  circumference  of  the  circle  is  the  arc 
ACF, 

while  the  arc  FC  is  half  the  arc  BFC, 

therefore        (arc  ACF)  =  5  (arc  FC) 

or  (arc  AC)  =  4  (arc  CF). 

Hence  jl ADC  =4  l  CDF, 

and  therefore        z. AFC  =2  l  CDF, 

Thus     L  CGF=  L  AFC=  2  l  CDF-, 
therefore  [i.  32]   l  CDG  =  l  DCG, 
so  that  DG-^GC^CF 

And  GE  =  EF'y 
therefore  DE  =  EF  +  FC 

Add  DE  to  each ; 

therefore  2DE  =  DF+  FC 

And  DF  is  the  side  of  the  regular  hexagon,  and  FC  the  side  of  the  regular 
decagon,  inscribed  in  the  same  circle. 
Therefore  etc. 


"Next  it  is  manifest  from  the  theorem  [12]  in  Book  xiii.  that  fAe  perpen- 
dicular drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  circle  to  the  side  of  the  equilateral  triangle 
[inscribed  in  it]  is  half  of  the  radius  of  the  circle, 

[Prop.  2.]  "  The  same  circle  circumscribes  both  the  pentagon  of  the  dodeca- 
hedron and  the  triangle  of  the  icosahedron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere, 

"  This  is  proved  by  Aristaeus  in  his  work  entitled  Comparison  of  the  five 
figures.  But  ApoUonius  proves  in  the  second  edition  of  his  comparison  of  the 
dodecahedron  with  the  icosahedron  that,  as  the  surface  of  the  dodecahedron 
is  to  the  surface  of  the  icosahedron,  so  also  is  the  dodecahedron  itself  to  the 
icosahedron,  because  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere  to  the 
pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron  and  to  the  triangle  of  the  icosahedron  is  the 
same. 

**  But  it  is  right  that  I  too  should  prove  that 

[Prop.  2]  The  same  circle  circumscribes  both  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron 
and  the  triangle  of  the  icosahedron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere. 

"  For  this  I  need  the  following 

Lemma. 

"  Jf  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  be  inscribed  in  a  circle,  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  the  straight  line  subtending  two  sides  and  on  the  side  of  the 
pentagon  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  radius,^^ 

H.  E.  III.  33 


SM 


APPENDIX 


Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  AC  the  side  of  the  pentagon,  D  the  centre ; 
draw  DF perpendicular  to  AC  and  produce  it  to 
^9  ^;  B 

join  ABy  AE. 
I  say  that 

BA'^AC^^SJ^E'. 
For,  since  BE  =  2  ED, 

BB^^^Eiy. 
And  BB?  =  BA^^AE^\ 

therefore    BA^  +  AE?  +  ELf  =  5  J5:Z>". 
But  AC^  =  DE?^EA'') 

[Eucl.  XIII.  10] 
therefore  BA^  ^AC'=^  5/?^. 


"  This  being  proved,  it  is  required  to  prove  that  the  same  circle  circum- 
scribes both  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron  and  the  triangle  of  the 
icosahedron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere." 

Let  AB  be  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  and  let  a  dodecahedron  and  an 
icosahedron  be  inscribed. 


M 


Let   CDEFG  be  one  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron,  and  KLH  one 
triangle  of  the  icosahedron. 

I  say  that  the  radii  of  the  circles  circumscribing  them  are  equal. 

Join  DG  \  then  DG  is  the  side  of  a  cube  inscribed  in  the  sphere. 

[Eucl.  XIII.  17] 

Take  a  straight  line  J/iV'such  that  AB^=^s^N\ 

Now  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  five  times  the  square  on 
the  radius  of  the  circle  from  which  the  icosahedron  is  described. 

[xiii.  16,  For.] 

Therefore  MJV  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle  passing  through  the  five 
vertices  of  the  icosahedron  which  form  a  pentagon. 

Cut  MN'in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  O,  MO  being  the  greater  segment 

Therefore  MO  is  the  side  of  the  decagon  in  the  cir<;le  with  radius  MI^, 

[xiii.  9  and  5,  converse] 

Now  ^M]Sr'r=.AB'^zDG^.  '    [xiii.  15] 

But  zDG'' :  zCG'  =  <,MN^  :  sMO" 

(since,  if  DG  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment  is  equal 
to  CG,  and,  if  two  straight  lines  are  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  their 
segments  are  in  the  same  ratio  :  see  lemma  later,  pp.  518 — 9). 


I.     THE  SO-CALLED   "BOOK   XIV" 


515 


And  s^O"  +  sMN^  =  ^KD. 

[This  follows  from  xiii.  10,  since  KL  is,  by  the  construction  of  xiii.  16,  the 
side  of  the  regular  pentagon  in  the  circle  with  radius  equal  to  MN^  that  is,  the 
circle  in  which  MN  is  the  side  of  the  inscribed  hexagon  and  MO  the  side  of 
the  inscribed  decagon.] 

Therefore  s^D  =  iCG^  +  t^DCP, 

But  ^KD  =  15  (radius  of  circle  about  KLH)\  [xiii.  12] 

and  3Z>6^  +  3  CG"  =  1 5  (radius  of  circle  about  CDEFGf. 

[I-,emma  above] 
Therefore  the  radii  of  the  two  circles  are  equal. 

Q.  E.  D. 


[Prop.  3.]  "  If  there  be  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  and  a 
circle  circumscribed  about  it^  and  if  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  from  the  centre  to 
one  side^  then 

30  times  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  side  and  the  perpendiadar  is  equal  to 
the  surface  of  the  dodecahedron.^^ 

Let  ABCDE  be   the   pentagon,  F  the   centre  of  the  circle,  FG  the 
perpendicular  on  a  side  CD. 
I  say  that 

y>CD .  FG  -  12  (area  of  pentagon). 
Let  CF,  FD  be  joined. 
Then,  since 

CD.FG=2{^tsCDF), 
lCD.FG=io{t^CDF\ 
whence        3oC*Z> .  FG  =12  (area  of  pentagon). 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that, 

[Prop.  4]  If  ABC   be  an  equilateral  triangle  in  a 
circle^  D  the  centre^  and  DE  perpendicular  to  BC, 
30BC  .  DE  =  {^surface  of  icosahedron). 
For  DE.BC^2{C^DBC)\ 

therefore         iDE.BC=b\t.  DBC) 
=  2(A^i9C), 
whence         y^DE .  ^  C  =  20  ( A  ABC). 

It  follows  that  [Prop.  5] 

(surface  of  dodecahedron)  :  (surface  of  icosahedron) 

=  (side  of  pentagon) .  (its  perpendicular)  :  (side  of  triangle) .  (its  perp.). 


"  This  being  clear,  we  have  next  to  prove  that, 

[Prop.  6]  As  the  surface  of  the  dodecahedron  is  to  the  surface  of  the  icosahedron^ 
so  is  the  side  of  the  cube  to  the  side  of  the  icosahedron^ 

33-2 


5t6 


APPENDIX 


H 


Let  ABC  be  the  circle  circumscribing  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron 
and  the  triangle  of  the  icosahedron,  and  let  CD 
be  the  side  of   the   triangle,   AC  that  of   the 
pentagon. 

Let  E  be  the  centre,  and  EF,  EG  perpen- 
diculars to  CD,  AC 

Produce  EG  io   meet  the  circle  in  B  and 
join  BC. 

Set  out  If  equal  to  the  side  of  the  cube  in- 
scribed in  the  same  sphere. 

I  say  that 

(surface  of  dodecahedron)  :  (surface  of  icosahedron) 

=  II\CD. 

For,  since  the  sum  of  EB,  BC  is  divided  at  B  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
and  BE  is  the  greater  segment,  [xiii.  9] 

and  EG  =  \  {EB  +  BC),  [Prop,  i] 

while  EF=  \BE,  [see  p.  513  above] 

therefore,  if  EG  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment  is 
equal  to  EF  [that  is  to  say,  since  EB  is  the  greater  segment  of  EB  -{■  BC 
divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  \EB  is  the  greater  segment  of 
^(EB  +  BC)  similarly  divided]. 

But,  if  If  is  also  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment 


is  equal  to  CA, 
Therefore 

or 

And,  since 

and 

therefore 


IT 


H 


H:  CA^EGiEF, 

FE  ,H=CA.  EG. 
CD  =  FE,H:FE,CD, 

FE.H=CA,EG, 
CD=CA.EG:FE.  CD 

-  (surface  of  dodecahedron) 


[xiii.  17,  Por.] 


(surf,  of  icos,). 
[Prop.  5] 


to 


Another  proof  of  the  same  theorem. 
Preliminary, 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle  and  AB,  AC  sides  of  an  inscribed  regular  pentagon. 
Join  BC'y  take  D  the  centre  of  the  circle,  join  AD  and  produce  it  to 
meet  the  circle  at  E,     Join  BD, 

Let  DF  be  made  equal  to  hAD,  and  CH  equal 
\CG. 
I  say  that 

rect  AF,  BH-  (area  of  pentagon). 
For,  since  AD  =  2DF, 

AF=  IAD, 
And,  since  GC=  '^^HC, 

GC=\GH. 
Therefore  "fA  :  AD=CG:  GH, 

so  that  AF.  GH=  AD .  CG 

=  AD.BG 
=  2{AABD). 


I.     THE  SO-CALLED   "BOOK  XIV"  517 

Therefore 

^AF,  GH=  10 {^ABD)  -  2  (area  of  pentagon). 

And  GH=  2HC', 

therefore  S^^'  ^^  =  (^^  ^^  pentagon), 

or  AF,  BH-  (area  of  pentagon). 

Proof  of  theorem. 

This  being  clear,  let  the  circle  be  set  out  which  circumscribes  the  pentagon 
of  the  dodecahedron  and  the  triangle  of  the  icosahe- 
dron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere. 

Let  ABC  be  the  circle,  and  AB^  A  C  two  sides  of 
the  pentagon ;  join  BC. 

Take  E  the  centre  of  the  circle,  join  AE  and 
produce  it  to  F, 

Let  AE=2EG,  KC^^^CH, 

Through  G  draw  DM  at  right  angles   to  AF 
meeting  the  circle  2X  D^  M\ 

DM  is  then  the  side  of  the   inscribed   equilateral 
triangle. 

Join  AD^  AM^  which  are  equal  to  DM. 

Now,  since  AG .  BH  =  (area  of  pentagon), 

and  AG .  GD  =  (area  of  triangle), 

therefore         BH :  GD  =  (area  of  pentagon)  :  (area  of  triangle), 
and  1 2BH :  20GD  =  (surface  of  dod.)  :  (surface  of  icos.). 

But  i2Bff=^ioBC,  since  BH=s^Q  and  BC=6ffC) 
and  2oGD=  \oDM\ 
therefore        (surface  of  dodecahedron)  :  (surface  of  icosahedron) 

=  (side  of  cube)  :  (side  of  icosahedron). 


"  Next  we  have  to  prove  that, 

[Prop.  7]  If  any  straight  line  whatever  be  cut  in  extreme  aud  mean  ratio^  then^ 
as  is  {i)  the  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  the  whole  line  and  on  the  greater  segment  to  {2)  the  straight  line  the  square  on 
which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  whole  and  on  the  lesser  segment^ 
so  is  (3)  the  side  of  the  cube  to  (4)  the  side  of  the  icosahedron,^^ 

Let  AHB  be  the  circle  circumscribing  both  the  pentagon  of  the  dodeca- 
hedron and  the  triangle  of  the  icosahedron  inscribed 
in  the  same  sphere,  C  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and 
CB  any  radius  divided  at  D  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio,  CD  being  the  greater  segment. 

CD  is  then  the  side  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in 
the  circle.  [xiii.  9  and  5,  converse] 

Let  E  be  the  side  of  the  icosahedron,  F  that  of 
the  dodecahedron,  and  G  that  of  the  cube,  inscribed 
in  the  sphere. 

Then  E^  -^are  the  sides  of  the  equilateral  triangle 
and  pentagon  inscribed  in  the  circle,  and,  if  6^  is 
divided  in   extreme   and    mean    ratio,    the  greater      ^" 
segment  is  equal  to  F,  [xiii.  17,  Por.]      G- 


5i8  APPENDIX 

Thus  B?^iBC\  [xiii.  12] 

and  C^  +  BL^  =  iCD".  [xiii.  4] 

Therefore  B?  ,  CB"  ^  {CB" ^  BLP)  :  CD", 

or  B?  :  (CB^^BBP)  =  CB  :  CJD^ 

=  G':B^. 

Therefore,  alternately  and  inversely, 

C  :  £"  =  B^  :  (CB"  +  B£^). 

But  B^  =  BC^  +  CB^ ;  for  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  sides  of  the  hexagon  and  decagon  inscribed 
in  the  same  circle.  [xiii.  10] 

Therefore  C?» :  ^  =  {BC^  +  CZ^)  :  (CB  +  BD"), 

which  is  the  result  required. 


It  has  now  to  be  proved  that 
[Prop.  8]  {Side  of  cube)  :  (side  of  icosahedron) 

=  (content  of  dodecahedron)  :  (content  of  icosahedron). 

Since  equal  circles  circumscribe  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron  and 
the  triangle  of  the  icosahedron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere, 
and  in  a  sphere  equal  circular  sections  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre, 
the  perpendiculars  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere  to  the  faces  of  the  two  solids 
are  equal ; 

in  other  words,  the  pyramids  with  the  centre  as  vertex  and  the  pentagons  of 
the  dodecahedron  and  the  triangles  of  the  icosahedron  respectively  as  bases 
are  of  equal  height. 

.Therefore  the  pyramids  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases. 
Thus        (12  pentagons)  :  (20  triangles) 

=  (12  pyramids  on  pentagons)  :  (20  pyramids  on  triangles), 
or  (surface  of  dodecahedron)  :  (surface  of  icosahedron) 

=  (content  of  dod.)  :  (content  of  icos.). 
Therefore 

(content  of  dodecahedron)  :  (content  of  icosahedron) 

=  (side  of  cube)  :  (side  of  icosahedron).    [Prop.  6] 

Lemma. 

Jf  two  straight  lines  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio^  the  segments  of  both 
are  in  one  and  the  sanu  ratio. 

I^t  AB  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C,  AC  being  the  greater 
segment ; 

and  let  DE  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  F^  DFhtva^  the  greater 

segment. 

I  say  that     AB  :  AC  =  BE  :  DR  A C  B 

Since  AB,BC=AC,  T      . 

and  DE .  EF=  DF^,  f 

AB,BC'.AC^  =  DE.EF:  DF\ 

and  /^AB .BC\  AC'  =  a,DE  .  EF :  DFK 


II.     THE  SO-CALLED   "BOOK  XV"  519 

Componendo^ 

(4AB  .BC+AC^):Aa  =  {^DE .  EF^  DF")  :  DF\ 
or  (AB  +  BCf  '.AC^^{DE  +  EFf  :  DF' ;  [11.  8] 

therefore  (AB  +  BC)  iAC=  \dE  +  EF)  :  DF 

Comporundo^ 

{AB-¥BC  +  AC):AC={DE-¥EF^nF)  \  DF, 
or  2AB  :  AC=  2DE  :  DF\ 

that  is,  AB  :  AC^  DE  :  DF, 


Summary  of  results. 

If  AB  be  any  straight  h'ne  divided  at  C  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  AC 
being  the  greater  segment,  and  if  we  have  a  cube,  a  dodecahedron  and  an 
icosahedron  inscribed  in  one  and  the  same  sphere,  then : 
(i)  (side  of  cube)  :  (side  of  icosahedron)  =  ^  {AB'  +  A(P):J  {AB'  +  BC)  j 

(2)  (surface  of  dod.)  :  (surface  of  icos.) 

=  (side  of  cube)  :  (side  of  icosahedron) ; 

(3)  (content  of  dod.) :  (content  of  icos.) 

=  (surface  of  dod.)  :  (surface  of  icos.)  ; 
and  (4)      (content  of  dodecahedron)  :  (content  of  icos.) 

=  J{AB'  +  ACP)  :  J{AB'-^BC^), 


IL     NOTE  ON  THE  SO-CALLED   "BOOK  XV." 

The  second  of  the  two  Books  added  to  the  genuine  thirteen  is  also 
supplementary  to  the  discussion  of  the  regular  solids,  but  is  much  inferior 
to  the  first,  "  Book  xiv."  Its  contents  are  of  less  interest  and  the  exposition 
leaves  much  to  be  desired,  being  in  some  places  obscure  and  in  others 
actually  inaccurate.  It  consists  of  three  portions  unequal  in  length.  The 
first  (Heiberg,  Vol.  v.  pp.  40 — 48)  shows  how  to  inscribe  certain  of  the 
regular  solids  in  certain  others,  {a)  a  tetrahedron  ("pyramid")  in  a  cube, 
{b)  an  octahedron  in  a  tetrahedron  ("pyramid"),  {c)  an  octahedron  in  a  cube, 
{d)  a  cube  in  an  octahedron  and  {e)  a  dodecahedron  in  an  icosahedron. 
The  second  portion  (pp.  48 — 50)  explains  how  to  calculate  the  number  of 
edges  and  the  number  of  solid  angles  in  the  ?i\Q  solids  respectively.  The 
third  (pp.  50 — 66)  shows  how  to  determine  the  angle  of  inclination  between 
faces  meeting  in  an  edge  of  any  one  of  the  solids.  The  method  is  to  con- 
struct an  isosceles  triangle  with  vertical  angle  equal  to  the  said  angle  of 
inclination ;  from  the  middle  point  of  any  edge  two  perpendiculars  are  drawn 
to  it,  one  in  each  of  the  two  faces  intersecting  in  that  edge ;  these  perpen- 
diculars (forming  an  angle  which  is  the  inclination  of  the  two  faces  to  one 
another)  are  used  to  determine  the  two  equal  sides  of  an  isosceles  triangle, 
and  the  base  of  the  triangle  is  easily  found  from  the  known  properties  of  the 
particular  solid.  The  rules  for  drawing  the  respective  isosceles  triangles  are 
first  given  all  together  in  general  terms  (pp.  50—52) ;  and  the  special  interest 
of  the  passage  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  rules  are  attributed  to  "  Isidorus 


520 


APPENDIX 


our  great  teacher."  This  Isidorus  is  no  doubt  Isidorus  of  Miletus,  the 
architect  of  the  Church  of  St  Sophia  at  Constantinople  (about  532  a.d.), 
whose  pupil  Eutocius  also  was;  he  is  often  referred  to  by  Eutocius  {Comm, 
on  Archimedes)  as  6  MiXi/o-tos  fii^xaviKo^  'IcrtScupos  i^/icrcpos  &8curicaXos.  Thus 
the  third  portion  of  the  Book  at  all  events  was  written  by  a  pupil  of  Isidorus 
in  the  sixth  century.  Kluge  (De  Euclidis  elementorum  Hbris  quiferuntur  XIV 
et  XVy  Leipzig,  1891)  has  closely  examined  the  language  and  style  of  the 
three  portions  and  conjectures  that  they  may  be  the  work  of  different  authors; 
the  first  portion  may,  he  thinks,  date  from  the  end  of  the  third  century  (the 
time  of  Pappus),  and  the  second  portion  too  may  be  older  than  the  third. 
Hultsch  however  (art.  "  Eukleides  "  in  Pauly-Wissowa's  Real-EncyclopdcUe  der 
dassischen  Altertumswissenschaft^  1907)  does  not  think  his  arguments  con- 
vincing. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  set  out  the  particulars  of  Isidorus'  rules  for 
constructing  isosceles  triangles  with  vertical  angles  equal  respectively  to 
the  angles  of  inclination  between  faces  meeting  in  an  edge  of  the  several 
regular  solids.  A  certain  base  is  taken,  and  then  with  its  extremities  as 
centres  and  a  certain  other  straight  line  as  radius  two  circles  are  drawn ; 
their  point  of  intersection  determines  the  vertex  of  the  particular  isosceles 
triangle.  In  the  case  of  the  cube  the  triangle  is  of  course  right-angled ;  in 
the  other  cases  the  bases  and  the  equal  sides  are  as  shown  below. 


For  the  tetrahedron 
For  the  octahedron 
For  the  icosahcdron 

For  the  dodecahedron 


Base  of  isosceles  triangle 
the  side  of  a  triangular  face 


the  diagonal  of  the  square 
on  one  side  of  a  triangular 
face 

the  chord  joining  two  non- 
consecutive  angular  points 
of  the  regular  pentagon  on 
an  edge  (the  "pentagon  of 
the  icosahcdron  *') 

the  chord  joining  two  non- 
consecutive  angular  points 
of  a  pentagonal  face  [BC 
in  the  figure  of  Eucl.  xiii. 
•7] 


Equal  sides  of 
isosceles  triangle 

the  perpendicular  from  the 
vertex  of  a  triangular  face 
to  its  base 

ditto 


ditto 


the  perpendicular  from  the 
middle  point  of  the  chord 
joining  two  non-consecu- 
tive angular  points  of  a 
face  to  the  parallel  side  of 
that  face  \HX  in  the  figure 
of  Eucl.  XIII.  17] 


ADDENDA   ET   CORRIGENDA. 

Frontispiece,  This  is  a  facsimile  of  a  page  (fol.  45  verso)  of  the  famous 
Bodleian  ms.  of  the  Elements^  D'Orville  301  (formerly  x.  i  inf.  2,  30),  written 
in  the  year  888.  The  scholium  in  the  margin,  not  very  difficult  to  decipher, 
though  some  letters  are  almost  rubbed  out,  is  one  of  the  scholia  Vaticana 
given  by  Heiberg  (Vol.  v.  p.  263)  as  iii.  No.  15 :  Atd  rov  Mvrpov  owrwv  ovk  ^v 
j^i/n^cois  a(tov,  ct  8i;(a  rifivovaiv  &\\ijka^  to  yap  Kivrpov  avrtJV  rj  Si\OT0fiia. 
Ofiouoi  KoX  rj  €1  T^s  crcpas  Sia  rov  Kiyrpov  ovot/s  tJ  iripa  fii^  Sta  rov  Kivrpov  cny, 
on  ov  8i;(a  rcftvcrcu  17  8ia  rov  Kivrpov,  The  17  before  ei  in  the  last  sentence 
should  be  omitted.  PFVat.  read  17  without  ci.  The  marginal  references  lower 
down  are  of  course  to  propositions  quoted,  (i)  8ta  to  a  rov  y\  "by  in.  i,"  and 
(2)  8ia  TO  y  rov  avrov,  "by  3  of  the  same." 

Vol.  I.  p.  20.  I  am  aware  that  the  assumption  that  the  reference  in  the 
Mechanics  (i.  24,  p.  62,  ed.  Nix  and  Schmidt)  is  to  Posidonius  of  Rhodes  is  dis- 
puted. It  is  pointed  out  that  the  context  seems  to  show  that  the  Posidonius 
referred  to  lived  before  Archimedes.  Hoppe  considers  that  the  reference  is 
to  Posidonius  of  Alexandria^  who  was  a  pupil  of  2^no  the  Stoic  in  the  third 
century  B.C.  (cf.  Meier,  De  Heronis  aetate^  pp.  19 — 21).  The  passage  of  the 
Mechanics  in  the  German  translation  is  as  follows :  "  Posidonius,  ein  Stoiker, 
hat  den  Schwer-  und  Neigungspunkt  in  einer  natiirlichen  (physikalischen  ?) 
Definition  bestimmt  und  gesagt:  der  Schwer-  oder  Neigungspunkt  ist  ein 
solcher  Punkt,  dass,  wenn  die  Last  in  demselben  aufgehangt  wird,  sie  in  zwei 
gleiche  Teile  geteilt  wird.  Deshalb  haben  Archimedes  und  seine  Anhanger 
in  der  Mechanik  diesen  Satz  spezialisiert  und  einen  Unterschied  gemacht 
zwischen  dem  Aufhangepunkt  und  dem  Schwerpunkt.'*  This  passage  may 
certainly  indicate  that  Posidonius'  definition  "represents  a  more  imperfect 
standpoint  than  that  of  Archimedes  "  (Enestrom  in  Bibliotheca  Mathematica 
VIII,,  p.  177).  But  I  do  not  feel  certain  that  "deshalb"  necessarily  means  so 
much  as  that  it  was  the  particular  definition  given  by  Posidonius  personally 
which  suggested  to  Archimedes  the  necessity  for  a  distinction  between  the 
"Aufhangepunkt"  and  the  "Schwerpunkt."  I  agree  however  with  Meier 
(p.  21)  that  the  doubt  as  to  the  reference  makes  it  impossible  to  build  upon 
the  passage  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  date  of  Heron. 

Vol.  I.  pp.  32 — 33.  As  bearing  on  the  question  whether  Proclus  continued 
his  commentary  beyond  Book  i.,  I  should  have  referred  to  the  scholium  pub- 
lished by  Heiberg  in  Hermes  xxxviii.,  1903,  p.  341,  No.  17.  It  begins  with 
the  heading  "Scholium  on  the  scholium  of  Proclus  on  the  9th  proposition 


522  ADDENDA   ET   CORRIGENDA 

where  he  says...*'  the  words  then  quoted  being  taken  from  the  last  five  lines 
of  the  long  scholium  x.  No.  62  (Heiberg,  Vol.  v.  pp.  450 — 2),  one  of  the 
scholia  Vaticana;  and  similar  words  lower  down  are  accompanied  by  the 
parenthetical  remark,  **as  the  scholium  of  the  divine  Proclus  says."  If  Proclus 
was  really  the  author  of  the  scholium,  this  is  a  point  in  favour  of  those  who 
maintain  that  Proclus  did  write  commentaries  on  the  other  Books  (cf.  Meier, 
De  Heronis  aetate^  pp.  27 — 28).  Heiberg  however  pK)ints  out  that,  while  the 
scholium  shows  that  a  Byzantine  scholar  took  the  collection  of  scholia 
Vaticana  to  be  the  work  of  Proclus,  it  does  not  prove  more  than  this,  and 
certainly  it  is  not  conclusive  evidence  that  Proclus*  commentaries  covered  all 
the  Books.  That  this  is  possible  cannot  be  denied ;  the  scholia  Vaticana  to 
the  other  Books  may^  like  those  to  Book  i.,  have  been  extracted  from  Proclus, 
as  also  may  the  fragments  which  they  contain  of  the  commentary  of  Pappus, 
though  it  is  not  easy  to  explain  why  Proclus  should  have  included  extracts 
from  Pappus  which  had  already  been  put  into  the  text  by  Theon.  But  it  is 
much  more  probable,  Heiberg  thinks,  that  a  Byzantine  mathematician  who 
had  in  his  ms.  of  Euclid  the  collection  of  scholia  Vaticana,  and  knew  that 
those  on  Book  i.  came  from  Proclus,  himself  attached  the  name  of  Proclus  to 
the  rest  of  the  collection ;  and  this  hypothesis  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
fact  that  none  of  the  other,  older,  sources  of  the  scholia  Vaticana  have 
Proclus'  name  in  x.  No.  62. 

Vol.  I.  pp.  64 — 66.  Hultsch  has  some  valuable  remarks  on  the  origin  of 
the  scholia  \Bibliotheca  Mathematica  viiij,  pp.  225  sqq.  and  art.  "Eukleides" 
in  Pauly-Wissowa*s  Real-Encydopddie  der  dassischen  Altertumswissenschaft^ 
1907).  Theodorus,  Plato's  teacher,  is  quoted  in  Plato's  Theaetetus  147  d  as 
having  proved  the  irrationality  of  ^3,  ^^  etc.  up  to  V17;  and  the  expres- 
sions used  to  describe  such  square  roots,  evidently  Theodorus'  own,  are 
3vKa/At9  TToStaia,  8wa/Ais  Tptrrovs,  8wa/i4s  ircKraTrovs  etc.,  the  "  square  root "  or 
**side"  of  "one,  three,  five  etc.  square  feet."  The  same  phraseology  sur- 
vives in  the  scholia  x.  Nos.  52,  94,  149,  where  we  have  the  expressions 
17  TpiVov?,  rj  TcrpaTTOv?,  1;  TrciraTrovs,  1;  lidtrovSj  17  Iwrajrov^,  y  oxrairovs,  17 
eVvcaVovs  etc.  Hultsch  concludes  that  the  sources  go  back  as  far  as 
Theodorus.  As  regards  the  extracts  from  Geminus,  Hultsch  observes 
that  the  scholia  to  Book  i.  contain  a  considerable  portion  of  Geminus' 
commentary  on  the  definitions.  They  are  specially  valuable  because  they 
contain  extracts  from  Geminus  on/y,  whereas  Proclus,  though  drawing  mainly 
upon  him,  quotes  from  others  as  well.  On  the  postulates  and  axioms  the 
scholia  give  more  than  is  found  in  Proclus.  Hultsch  considers  it  probable 
that  the  scholium  at  the  beginning  of  Book  v.  (No.  3)  attributing  the  discovery 
of  the  theorems  to  Eudoxus  but  their  arrangement  to  Euclid  represents  the 
tradition  going  back  to  Geminus ;  similarly  he  regards  scholium  xiii.  No.  i 
as  having  the  same  origin. 

Vol.  I.  p.  71.  The  scholium  numbered  17  on  page  341  in  Hermes 
XXXVIII.  is  taken  from  a  ms.  which  was  written  in  the  nth  cent.  Since  the 
Arabic  figures  in  it  are  in  the  first  hand,  it  follows  that  the  acquaintance  of 
the  Byzantines  with  these  figures  dates  100  years  further  back  than  the  date 
given  (i2th  cent). 

Vol.  I.  p.  71.  In  the  numerical  illustrations  of  Euclid's  propositions 
sexagesimal  fractions  are  often  used ;   e.g.  approximations  to  the  values  of 


ADDENDA  ET  CORRIGENDA  523 

surds  are  expressed  as  so  many  units,  so  many  of  the  fractions  1/60,  so 
many  of  the  fractions  1/60*  etc.,  going  as  far  as  "fourth-sixtieths"  or  the 
fractions  i/6ol  Hultsch  wrote  a  short  paper  on  the  sexagesimal  fractions 
in  the  scholia  to  Book  x  {Bibliotheca  Mathematica  v,,  pp.  225 — 233).  He 
shows  that  numbers  expressed  in  these  fractions  are  handled  with  skill  and 
sometimes  include  results  of  surprising  accuracy,  as  when  Jt]  is  given 
(allowing  a  slight  correction  of  the  last  fraction  by  means  of  the  context) 
as  5**  11'  46"  10'",  where  **  represents  units  and  dashes  the  successive 
sexagesimal  fractions,  which  gives  for  ,^3  the  approximation  i**  43'  55"  23"', 
being  the  same  result  as  that  given  by  Hipparchus  in  his  tables  of  chords 
reproduced  by  Ptolemy  and  correct  to  the  seventh  decimal  place.  Similarly 
^ys  is  given  as  2*  49'  42"  20'"  \o'\  which  is  equivalent  to  ^2  =  1*4142135. 
Hultsch  gives  instances  of  the  various  operations,  addition,  subtraction, 
multiplication  and  division,  carried  out  in  these  fractions,  and  shows  how  the 
extraction  of  the  square  roots  was  effected,  after  the  method  which  Theon  of 
Alexandria  in  his  commentary  on  Ptolemy's  owto^is  applies  to  the  evaluation 
of  n/45oo,  and  which  evidently  goes  back  to  Hipparchus. 

Vol.  I.  p.  10 1.  In  the  Bibliotheca  Mathematica  1X3, 1908,  p.  76,  A.  Sturm 
notes  that  the  preface  to  Camerarius'  Euclid  was  not  by  Rhaeticus  but  by 
Camerarius  himself,  since  the  printer  of  the  Steinmetz  edition,  Johann  Stein- 
mann,  says,  in  a  short  preliminary  notice,  that  Camerarius  had  written  the 
preface  28  years  before  "  sub  alieno  nomine." 

•  Vol.  I.  p.  116.  The  date  given  for  Eudoxus  is  that  arrived  at  by  Susemihl, 
"  Die  Lebenszeit  des  Eudoxos  von  Knidos "  in  Rheinisches  Museum  fiir 
Philologie,  Liii.,  1898,  pp.  626 — 8.  Hultsch  however  shows  cause  for  rejecting 
this  conjecture  and  for  adhering  to  the  earlier  determination  of  the  date  as 
408—355  ac. 

Vol.  I.  pp.  249,  370.  The  statement  that  Euclid  does  not  use  the 
expression  at  BAP,  "  the  straight  lines  BAC,''  for  "  the  straight  lines  BA,  AC" 
is  not  accurate.  Although  I  have  not  found  it  in  the  early  Books,  it  is  some- 
what common  in  Books  x,  xi  and  xiii.  Thus,  e.g.,  in  Book  x  "  the  rectangle 
(contained)  by  BD,  DC*'  is  often  written  to  xmb  t^v  BAP  or  to  viro  BAP,  and 
in  one  place  (x.  59)  we  find  to  ovyKeCfievov  Ik  twv  avo  ruiy  MNH  for  "  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  MN^  NO,"  In  Book  xi  the  contracted  form  is  used  in 
expressions  for  the  plane  through  two  straight  lines,  e.g.  to  8ia  rtav  BAA 
iwiirthov^  " the  plane  through  BD^  DA"  In  xiii.  1 1  we  have  frvvati^rtpo^ 
rj  APM  for  " the  sum  of  the  two  straight  lines  DC,  CM,'  where  DC,  CM 
form  an  angle. 

Vol.  I.  pp.  343—4,  351;  Vol.  II.  p.  97;  Vol.  III.  pp.  I — 3,  etc.  Heinrich 
Vogt's  paper  ''Die  Geometrie  des  Pythagoras"  in  the  Bibliotheca  Mathematica 
iXj  (September,  1908),  pp.  14 — 54,  unfortunately  appeared  too  late  to  be 
noticed  in  the  proper  places.  I  do  not  think  it  would  have  enabled  me  to 
modify  greatly  what  I  have  written  regarding  the  supposed  discoveries  of 
Pythagoras  and  the  early  Pythagoreans,  because  I  have  throughout  endeavoured 
to  give  the  traditions  on  the  subject  for  what  they  are  worth  and  no  more,  and 
not  to  build  too  much  upon  them.  Vogt's  paper  is  however  a  valuable  piece  of 
criticism,  deserving  of  careful  study;  and  it  requires  notice  here  so  far  as  con- 
siderations of  space  allow.  G.  Junge  had  in  his  paper  Wann  haben  die  Griechen 
das  Irrationale  entdeckt?  mentioned  above  (Vol.  i.  p.  351,  Vol.  in.  p.  i  it.) 


524  ADDENDA   ET  CORRIGENDA 

tried  to  prove  that  Pythagoras  himself  could  not  have  discovered  the  irrational; 
and  the  object  of  Vogt*s  paper  is  to  go  further  on  the  same  lines  and  to 
maintain  (i)  that  the  theory  of  the  irrational  was  first  discovered  by  Theodorus, 
to  whom  Plato  refers,  and  (2)  that  neither  could  Pythagoras  himself  have  been 
the  discoverer  (a)  of  the  theorem  of  Eucl.  i.  47,  or  (d)  of  the  construction  of 
the  five  regular  solids  in  the  sense  in  which  they  are  respectively  constructed 
in  Eucl.  XIII.,  or  (c)  of  the  application  of  areas  in  its  widest  sense,  equivalent 
to  the  solution  of  a  quadratic  equation  in  its  most  general  form.  Vogt's  main 
argument  as  regards  (a)  the  theorem  of  i.  47  is  based  on  a  new  translation 
which  he  gives  of  the  well-known  passage  of  Proclus'  note  on  the  proposition 
(p.  426,  6 — 9),  TQv  fi€v  icrropciv  ra  dp)(ata  fiovXo/iiywv  aKovovras  to  0€wpri/ia 
Tovro  C19  Uv$ay6pav  dva'n'€fi'n'6vTU}v  cotIv  cvpctv  Kal  jSovOvrriv  XcyoKTcov  avrov  ciri 
rg  cvpcVcL  Vogt  translates  this  as  follows:  **Unter  denen,  welche  das 
Altertum  erforschen  wollen,  kann  man  einige  finden,  welche  denen  Gehor 
geben,  die  dieses  Theorem  auf  Pythagoras  zuriickfuhren  und  ihn  als  Stier- 
opferer  bei  dieser  Gelegenheit  bezeichnen,"  "  Among  those  who  have  a  taste 
for  research  into  antiquity,  we  can  find  some  who  give  ear  to  those  who  refer 
this  theorem  to  Pythagoras  and  describe  him  as  sacrificing  an  ox  on  the 
strength  of  the  discovery."  According  to  this  version  the  words  rm^... 
fiovX.ofi€Viov  and  the  words  tti'a7rcft7roi^u>i'...KaL..X€yoi^<ui'  refer  respectively  to 
two  different  sets  of  persons,  in  fact  two  different  generations ;  the  latter  are 
older  authorities  who  are  supposed  to  be  cited  by  the  former ;  the  former  are 
a  later  generation,  perhaps  contemporaries  of  Proclus,  some  of  whom  accepted 
the  view  of  the  older  authorities  while  others  did  not.  But  this  would  have 
required  the  article  twv  before  dvawtfnrovTwv,  or  some  such  expression  as 
aXXoii'  Tivwi'  ot  dvatrifAirovcri  instead  of  dvaTrtfnrovTiitv.  Vogt*s  interpretation  is 
therefore  quite  inadmissible.  The  persons  denoted  by  dpaw€fi.v6vTtov  are  siwu 
of  the  persons  denoted  by  toJi'  povkofiiviav ;  hence  Tannery's  translation,  to 
which  mine  (Vol.  1.  p.  350)  is  equivalent,  is  the  only  possible  one,  namely 
"Si  Ton  dcoute  ceux  qui  veulent  raconter  I'histoire  des  anciens  temps,  on 
peut  en  trouver  qui  attribuent  ce  theoreme  k  Pythagore  et  lui  font  sacrifier  un 
boeuf  apres  sa  decouverte"  (La  Geometrie  grecque^  p.  103).  aKovovras  agrees 
with  the  assumed  subject  of  cvpciv ;  aVawc/iATrovTajv  and  \v^o\rrtav  should,  strictly 
speaking,  have  been  aVaTrc/xTrovTa?  and  Xcyovra?  agreeing  with  nva?  (the  direct 
object  of  cvpctr)  understood,  but  are  simply  attracted  into  the  case  of  )8ov- 
Xo/AcVfov;  the  construction  is  quite  intelligible.  I  agree  with  Vogt  that 
Eudemus'  history  contained  nothing  attributing  the  theorem  to  Pythagoras. 
The  words  of  Proclus  imply  this;  but  I  do  not  think  that  they  imply  (as 
Vogt  maintains)  any  pronouncement  by  Proclus  himself  a^a/Vfi^/  such  attribution. 
In  my  opinion,  Proclus  is  simply  determined  not  to  commit  himself  to  any 
view ;  his  way  of  evading  a  decision  is  the  sentence  following,  fyw  8c  Oavfid^a} 
fji€v  KOL  TOV9  TrpojTOvs  cTTio-ToWas  Ty  rovSc  Tov  0€O)pTJfxaro^  aXry^ctlgi,  /aci^ovcds  8c  dyafiai 
Toy  a-Toi^tuoTTjv . . .  ;  the  plural  tovs  Trpoirou?  cVio-Tavra?  is,  I  hold,  used  for  the 
very  purpose  of  making  the  statement  as  vague  as  possible ;  he  will  not  even 
allow  it  to  be  inferred  that  he  attributed  the  discovery  to  any  single  person. 
Returning  to  17  tJJv  dkoywv  Trpay/uiaTcta  (Proclus,  p.  65,  19),  we  may  concede 
that  the  imperfect  (arithmetical)  theory  of  proportion  would  probably  be 
discovered  eariier  than  the  theory  of  the  irrational ;  but  we  can  hardly  accept 
the  reading  dvaXoytov  or  aVaXoytwv  (instead  of  dXoyuiv)  until  it  is  confirmed  by 
further  investigation  of  the  Mss.  I  do  not  agree  in  Vogt's  contention  that 
the  theory  of  the  irrational  was  first  discovered  by  Theodorus.  It  seems  to 
me  that  we  have  evidence  to  the  contrary  in  the  very  passage  of  Plato  referred 


ADDENDA   ET  CORRIGENDA  525 

to.  Plato  {Theaetetus  147  d)  mentions  ,^73,  ^5,  ...  up  to  V 17  as  dealt  with  by 
Theodorus,  but  omits  J 2,  This  fact,  along  with  Plato's  allusions  elsewhere 
to  the  irrationality  of  ^2,  and  to  approximations  to  it,  in  the  expressions  apptiroq 
and  ptfT^  Sidfitrpo^  1^9  7rc/iira8(K,  as  if  those  expressions  had  a  well-known 
signification,  implies  that  the  discovery  of  the  irrationality  of  J2  had  been 
made  before  the  time  of  Theodorus.  The  words  1;  twv  aXoyiav  Trpayfiartia 
might  well  be  used  even  if  the  reference  is  only  to  J2y  because  the  first  step 
would  be  the  most  diflScult,  and  vpayfrnr^ia  need  not  mean  the  establishment  of 
a  complete  theory  or  anything  more  than  "investigation "  of  a  subject.  Coming 
now  to  (fi)  the  construction  of  the  cosmic  figures,  17  r^v  Koa-fUK^v  frxtpjoiriav 
awrraa-i^  (Proclus,  p.  65,  20),  I  agree  with  Vogt  to  the  following  extent  It  is 
unlikely  that  Pythagoras  or  even  the  early  Pythagoreans  "constructed"  the  five 
regular  solids  in  the  sense  of  a  complete  theoretical  construction  such  as  we 
find,  say,  in  Eucl.  xiii. ;  and  it  is  possible  that  Theaetetus  was  the  first  to 
give  these  constructions,  whether  cypa^c  in  Suidas'  notice,  Trp&roq  Sc  ra  vcktc 
Ka\ovfi€va  crrcpca  cypa^c,  means  "constructed"  or  "wrote  upon."  But 
owraoris  in  the  above  phrase  of  Proclus  may  well  mean  something  less  than 
the  theoretical  constructions  and  proofs  of  Eucl.  xiii. ;  it  may  mean,  as  Vogt 
says,  simply  the  "  putting  together  "  of  the  figures  in  the  same  way  as  Plato 
puts  them  together  in  the  TimMus,  i.e.  by  bringing  a  certain  number  of  angles 
of  equilateral  triangles  and  of  regular  pentagons  together  at  one  point.  There 
is  no  reason  why  the  early  Pythagoreans  should  not  have  "  constructed  "  the 
five  regular  solids  in  this  sense;  in  fact  the  supposition  that  they  did  so 
agrees  well  with  what  we  know  of  their  having  put  angles  of  certain  regular 
figures  together  round  a  point  (in  connexion  with  the  theorem  of  Eucl.  i.  32)  and 
shown  that  only  three  kmds  of  such  angles  would  fill  up  the  space  in  one  plane 
round  the  point.  But  I  do  not  agree  in  the  apparent  refusal  of  Vogt  to  credit 
the  Pythagoreans  with  the  knowledge  of  the  theoretical  construction  of  the 
regular  pentagon  as  we  find  it  in  Eucl.  i v.  10,  11.  I  do  not  know  of  any 
reason  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  Scholia  iv.  Nos.  2  and  4  which  say 
categorically  that  "  this  Book  "  (Book  iv)  and  "  the  whole  of  the  theorems  " 
in  it  (including  therefore  Props.  10,  11)  are  discoveries  of  the  Pythagoreans. 
And  the  division  of  a  straight  line  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  on  which  the 
construction  of  the  regular  pentagon  depends,  comes  in  Eucl.  Book  11. 
(Prop.  11),  while  we  have  sufficient  grounds  for  regarding  the  whole  of  the 
substance  of  Book  11.  as  Pythagorean.  I  am  sorry  that,  when  I  was  writing  on 
the  subject  of  the  "  five  bodies  of  the  sphere  "  in  the  fragment  of  Philolaus 
(Vol.  II.  p.  97),  my  attention  had  not  been  called  to  the  version  of  the 
passage  in  Diels'  Fragmente  der  Vorsokratiker  (Berlin  1903,  p.  254,  and 
2nd  ed.  Berlin  1906,  p.  244) :  Kal  rh.  pXv  ras  <T^aipa%  awfJLara  ireWc  ivrCy  Tot  iv 
Toi  o-^oupat  TTvp  <Kal>  vSwp  Koi  ya  xal  aijp,  Kat  o  ra?  aiftaipa^  oXfca?,  vc/iittof, 
"  Und  zwar  gibt  es  fiinf  Elemente  der  Weltkugel :  die  in  der  Kugel  befind- 
lichen,  Feuer,  Wasser,  Erde  und  Luft,  und  was  der  Kugel  Lastschiff  ist,  das 
fiinfte."  If  this  version  is  right,  there  is  (as  Vogt  points  out)  no  allusion  here 
to  the  five  regular  solids,  and  the  fragment  ceases  to  have  any  bearing  on  the 
present  question.  I  will  permit  myself  one  more  criticism  out  of  many  which 
Vogt's  paper  is  sure  to  evoke.  I  think  he  bases  too  much  on  the  fact  that  it 
was  left  for  Oenopides  (in  the  period  from,  say,  470  to  45°  ^-c.)  to  discover 
two  elementary  constructions  (with  ruler  and  compass  only),  namely  that  of  a 
perpendicular  to  a  straight  line  from  an  external  point  (Eucl.  i.  12),  and 
that  of  an  angle  equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  angle  (Eucl.  i.  23).  Vogt 
infers  that  geometry  must  have  been  in  a  very  rudimentary  condition  at 


526  ADDENDA   ET  CORRIGENDA 

the  time.  I  do  not  think  this  follows;  the  explanation  would  seem  to  be 
rather  that,  the  restriction  of  the  instruments  used  in  constructions  to  the 
ruler  and  compass  not  having  been  definitely  established  before  the  time 
when  Oenopides  wrote,  it  had  not  previously  occurred  to  anyone  to  substitute 
new  constructions  based  on  that  principle  for  others  previously  in  vogue.  In 
the  case  of  the  perpendicular,  for  example,  the  construction  would  no  doubt, 
in  earlier  days,  have  been  made  by  means  of  a  set  square. 

Vol.  I.  p.  411,  column  2,  line  12,  for  iKaripq.  Uaripa  read  Uarifia  cKarcp^ 

Vol.  II.  pp.  189 — 190.  Hultsch  (art.  "Eukleides"  in  Pauly-Wissowa's 
Real'Encyclopddie  der  classiscJun  Altertumswissenschafi)  thinks  that  the  defini- 
tion of  compound  ratio  (vi.  Def.  5)  is  genuine.  His  grounds  are  (i)  that  it  stood 
in  the  vaXaia  ckSoctis  represented  by  P  (though  P  only  has  it  in  the  margin) 
and  (2)  that  some  explanation  on  the  subject  must  have  been  given  by  way  of 
preparation  for  vi.  23,  while  there  is  nothing  in  the  definition  which  is  in- 
consistmt  with  the  mode  of  statement  of  vi.  23.  If  however  the  definition  is 
after  all  genuine,  I  should  be  inclined  to  regard  it  as  a  mere  survival  from 
earlier  text-books,  like  the  first  of  the  two  alternative  definitions  of  a  solid 
angle  (xi.  Def.  11);  for  its  form  seems  to  suit  the  old  theory  of  proportion 
applicable  to  commensurable  quantities  only  better  than  the  generalised 
theory  due  to  Eudoxus. 

Vol.  II.  pp.  424 — 5.  I  should  have  added  to  the  note  on  "perfect 
numbers"  the  following  references.  Nicomachus  (i.  16,  2 — 7)  observes  that 
perfect  numbers  are  rare,  there  being  only  one  among  the  units  (6),  one 
among  the  tens  (28),  one  among  the  hundreds  (496)  and  one  among  the 
thousands  (8128),  and  that  they  end  alternately  in  6  and  8.     Cf.  lamblichus, 

P-  33»  15—25- 

Nesselmann  {Die  Algebra  der  Griechen^  p.  164,  note)  gives  a  reference  to  a 
letter  from  Fermat  to  Mersenne  ( Varia  opera  mathematica  Petri  dc  Fermaty 
Tolosae,  1679,  P*  ^77)  ^^  which  P'ermat  enunciates  three  propositions  which 
much  facilitate  the  investigation  whether  a  number  of  the  form  2*  -  i  is  prime 
or  not.  If  we  write  in  one  line  the  successive  exponents  i,  2,  3,  4  etc.  of 
the  successive  powers  of  2  and  underneath  them  respectively,  in  another  line, 
the  numbers  representing  the  corresponding  powers  of  2  diminished  by  i, 
thus, 

1234567         8         9         10         II    n 

I  3  7  15  31  63  127  255  511   1023  2047 2*-r 

the  following  relations  are  found  to  subsist  between  the  numbers  in  the  first 
line  and  those  directly  below  them  in  the  second  line. 

1.  If  the  exponent  is  not  a  prime  number,  the  corresponding  number  is 
not  a  prime  number  either  (since  a^  -  i  is  always  divisible  by  a^-  i  as  well 
as  by  a''-  i). 

2.  If   the   exponent   is   a  prime   number,    the   corresponding   number 

(2**—  2        2**"* I 
= ;  so  that 

this  is  a  special  case  of  "  Fermat's  theorem  "  that,  if  /  is  a  prime  number  and 

a  is  prime  to/,  then  a^'-^-i  is  divisible  by/,  j 


ADDENDA   ET   CORRIGENDA  527 

3.  If  the  exponent  »  is  a  prime  number,  the  corresponding  number  is 
only  divisible  by  numbers  of  the  form  {2mn+  i). .  If  therefore  the  corre- 
sponding number  in  the  second  line  has  no  factor  of  this  form,  it  has  no 
integral  factor. 

The  first  and  third  of  these  propositions  are  those  which  are  specially  useful 
for  the  purpose  in  question.  As  usual,  Fermat  does  not  give  his  proofs  but 
merely  adds:  **VoiIh  trois  fort  belles  propositions  que  j'ay  trouvtes  et 
prouv^es  non  sans  peine.  Je  les  puis  appeller  les  fondements  de  Tinvention 
des  nombres  parfaits." 

The  first  four  perfect  numbers,  those  mentioned  above  as  given  by 
Nicomachus,  are 

2(2«-i)=6,     2^(23- 0  =  28,     2*  (2»- 0  =  496,     2«  (2^-1)  =  8128. 

Hultsch  investigated  the  next  four,  the  fifth  to  the  eighth  {Nachr,  d,  Geseli- 
schaft  d.  IVissensch,  zu  Gottingen,  1895,  pp.  246  sqq.);  the  fifth  is 
2"  (2"  -  i)=  33,550,336,  the  sixth  2^" (2"  -  i),  the  seventh  2^^(2**- i),  and  the 
eighth  2*(2^*-i),  which  is  greater  than  2  trillions.  The  ninth,  2~(2"-i), 
was  discovered  by  P.  Seelhoff  {Zeitschrift  fiir  Math,  u,  Physik  xxxi.,  1886, 
pp.  174 — 8)  and  verified  by  Lucas  (Mathksis  vii.  pp.  45 — 46);  Hultsch  also 
wrote  upon  it  (Abhandiungen  der  Gesellschaft  d,  Wissensch,  zu  Gottingcn^  1897, 
pp.  47  .sq.);  it  has  37  digits. 

Loria  (II  periodo  aureo  dcHa  geometria  greca^  p.  39)  gives  further  references. 
He  observes  that  the  question  of  the  existence  of  further  prime  numbers  of 
the  form  2*-  i  where  /i>6i  is  not  yet  solved;  it  would  be,  however,  if  it 
were  found  possible  to  prove  the  etnpirical  theorem  of  Catalan  that,  if  2*  -  i 

is  a  prime  number  (=/),  the  numbers /'=  2^-  i,  /"  =  2^  —  i  etc.  will  also  be 
prime  numbers  ("  Melanges  mathdmatiques  '*  in  Mkmoircs  de  la  Sacietk  de  LUge^ 
2*  S^rie,  XII.  p.  376).  There  have  also  been  attempts,  so  far  unsuccessful,  to 
solve  the  question  whether  there  exist  other  "  perfect  numbers  "  than  those  of 
Euclid  and,  in  particular,  perfect  numbers  which  are  odd  (cf.  several  notes  by 
Sylvester  in  Comptes  rendus  cvi.,  1888 ;  Catalan,  "  Mdanges  math^matiques  "  in 
Mem,  de  la  Soc,  de  LUgc^  2®  S^rie,  xv.,  1888,  pp.  205 — 7  ;  C.  Servais,  in 
Mathesis  vii.  pp.  228—230  and  viii.  pp.  92 — 93,  135  ;  E.  Ces^o  in  Maihksis 
vii.  pp.  245 — 6 ;  E.  Lucas  in  Mathesis  x.  pp.  74—76). 


GENERAL   INDEX   OF   GREEK   WORDS 
AND    FORMS. 


[The  references  are  to  volumes  and  pages.] 


d7(^vtor,  angU'less  (figure)  I.    187 
ddOifarw :  ii  els  t6  dd.  draywy^,  ij  did  toG  dd, 

dtt^iSt  ij  e/s  t6  dd.  Ayovaa  dr6d€i(is  I.  156 
dxidotidi/tt,  barb- like  I.  188 
djcpos,  extreme  (of  numl^rs  in  a  series)  ii. 
3^8,    367:    (e/f)    dKpw    Koi    fUffov    \biyo» 
TtTfirjffBai,    "to    be    cut   in   extreme   and 
mean  ratio"  1 1.   189 
dXayos,  having  no  ratio,  irrationai  1 1.  1 17-8 : 
a  relative  term,  resting  on  assumption  or 
convention  (Pythagoreans)  ill.   i,  11:  use 
of  term  restricted  in  Euclid  iii.  12 
dfiffXeia  (ytopla),  obtuse  (angle)  I.  181 
dfifi\vy<»)pioSf  obtuse-angled  I.   187 
dfi€pi/lSf  indivisible  I.  41,  268 
dfi4>lKoi\ot  (of  curvilineal  angles)  I.  178 
dfXiplKvpTos  (of  curvilineal  angles)  I.  178 
iifaypd^of  dr6y   to  describe  on^  contrasted 
with   to  const  met  {avffHiffaffdai)  I.   348  : 
peculiar  use  of  active  participle,  aX  lea 
T€Tpdyufva  di'a7pd0ou<rac  =  straight  lines  on 
which  equal  squares  are  described  III.  13 
dyaXoY^a,  proportion:    definitions  of,  inter- 
polated II.  119 
d»dXoyiiv=.dvd  \brfw,  proportional  or  in  pro- 
portion: used  as  indeclinable  adj.  and  as 
adv.  II.   129,   165:  fUcri  dydXoToy,   mean 
proportional    (of  straight    line)    ii.    129, 
similarly  fUaoi  djtdXcfyov  of  numbers  II. 
^95i    3"3   etc. :    rpLTii    (rpiroi)   dydXcyov^ 
third  proportional  II.  214,  407-8:  Terdpni 
(rirapTos)   dvdXoyop^    fourth    proportional 
II.  215,  409:  i^tft  dpd\oyovt  in  continued 
proportion  ii.  346 
difaXvifiePos  {r&iros)t   Treasury  of  Analysis^ 

I.  8,   10,   II,  138 
dydiroXtv  (X^tos),  inverse  (ratio),  inversely  il. 

134 

dyotf-rp^^oyrt,  convertendo,  in  proportions  II. 

135:    analogous    use    otherwise    than    in 

proportions  ill.  164 
djHurrpo^  X670U,  *' conversion**  of  a  ratio  1 1. 

135 
dpaoTpo^Kbs  (speaes  of  locus)  I.  330 

H.  E.  III. 


dviadxis  dyurdxis  (aos,  unequal  by  unequal 
by  equal  (of  solid  numbers)  =  scaUtu^ 
ff^pla-KOit  ff^KlffKos  or  ^fdaxos  II.  290 

dvofiMOfupifiSf  non-uniform  I.  40,   161-2 

dvo/xo/o^f  T€TayfUv<a¥  tOp  \6y<ap  (of  perturbed 
proportion)  in  Archimedes  II.  136 

dvToifcUpeffiSf  if  aMi,  definition  of  same  ratio 
in  Aristotle  (dp$v4Kilp€<ris  Alexander)  II. 
120:   terms  explained  Ii.   121 

dvrcireirov^6Ta  <rxi^/Aara,  reciprocal  (= recipro- 
cally related)  figures,  interpolated  def;  of, 
II.  189 

dyrtoTfXHpf^f  conversion  I.  256-7 :  leading 
variety,  1^  rpoiryoufiiprj  or  ^  icvpltas,  ibid. 

dM&irapKToSt  non-existent  I.  129 

d^wv^  axis  III.  269 

d6/K0TOf,  indeterminate:  (of  lines  or  curves) 
I.   160:   (of  problems)  I.  129 

dwayioyfif  reduction  I.  135 :  e/s  r6  db^arop 
I.   136 

dir6(/>M,  infinite:  ^  ^ir*  dr.  iK^oKKofihri  of 
line  or  curve  extending  without  limit  and 
not  "forming  a  figure**  I.  160-1 :  ^r'dir.  or 
e/f  dr.  adverbial  1. 190:  ir*  dr.  diaifmcdax 
I.  268  :  Aristotle  on  rh  drtipop  I.  232-4 

dirXar^T,  breadthless :  in  definition  of  a  line, 
fiiJKOf  dirXaWs,  breadthless  length  I.  158: 
(of  prime  numbers)  ii.  285 

dirXoOs,  simple :  (of  lines  or  curves)  i.  161-2 : 
(of  surfaces)  I.  170 

drbdci^tSf  proof  (one  of  necessary  divisions  of 
a  proposition)  I.   129,   130 

diroKara0'rartJc6s,  recurrent  (=spAerical),  of 
numbers  II.  291 

diroro/ii^,  apotome^  a  compound  irrational, 
difference  of  two  terms  ill.  7 :  defined  ill. 
158-p:  yjk9J\%  dwoTOfi^  wpiSmi  {devripa), 
first  (second)  apotome  of  a  medial  (straight 
line)  III.  7,  denned  III.  159-60 

dirre<r^ac,  to  meett  occasionally  to  touch 
(instead  of  ^0dirre<r^ai)  I.  57,  II.  2 :  also 
=  to  pass  through f  to  lie  on  II.  79 

dpiOfi6st  number,  definitions  of,  1 1.  280 

Apprp-os,  inexpressible,  irrational:   of  X^yof 

34 


530      GENERAL  INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS  AND  FORMS 


I.  137:  dppriTOS  iidfUTpos  Trjs  wcfiradot, 
**  irrational  diameter  of  5"  (Plato)  =  x/50, 
I.  399,  III.  12,  525 

dpTtoKii  dpriodOvafuw  (Nicomachus)  II.  282 

dfynoKii  AprtoSt  even-times  even  ii.  281-2 

dpTtoKis  T€pia'a'6Sf  even-times  odd  1 1.  282-4 

dprioTT^piTTos  even-odd  (Nicomachus  etc.)  ii. 
282 

Aprcos  (dpiOfiSs),  even  (number)  il.  281 

dadfjL^Tos,  incompatible  I.   129 

da^fjifi€TpoSt  incommensurable :  d.  ftijirct  (^^r) 
incommensurable  in  length  (only),  ivpofici 
**in  square"  ill.  11 

da^fiTTunos,  not-meeting,  non-secant,  asym- 
ptotic I.  40,  161,  203:  (of  parallel  planes) 
III.  265 

dadpBerotj  incomposite :  (of  lines)  I.  160,  161  : 
(of  surfaces)  I.  170:  (prime  and)  incom- 
posite (of  numbers)  11.  284 

draxTos,  unordered',  (of  problems)  I.  128: 
(of  irrationals)  I.    115,  iii.    10 

Arofiot  yfMfifial,   ** indivisible  lines"  I.  268 

PoJdos,  depth  I.   158-9 

/Scurct,  base  I.   248-0 

^fiyKivai,   to  stand  (of  angle  standing  on 

circumference)  ii.  4 
PtofilffKos,  altar-shaped  (of   "scalene"   solid 

numbers)  ii.   290 

7€7oi'^w  (in  constructions),  "  let  it  be  (have 
been)  made"  li.  248 

7C7oi'As  Kv  efi7  rh  iwiraxO^v,  *'  what  was 
enjoined  will  have  been  done"  ii.  80,  261 

y€ypd(p0u,  •'  let  it  be  (lit.  have  been)  drawn  " 
I.   242 

7cy6Mf»'os,  6  i^  aiirdv,  '*  their  product"  ll. 
316,  326  etc.  :  6  ^K  Tov  ivoi  ytpSfievos 
=  "thc  square  of  the  one"  II.  327 

yvwtiuv,  gnomon  q.v.-.  DemocritusTcpi  5io- 
0O/M7S  yvuifiovo%  {yvufjLTjs  or  ycjyirfs  ?)  ^  vepl 
xJ/aOaios  k^kXov  xal  trtpalprji  11.  40:  (of 
numbers)  Ii.  289 

ypafifi-fi,  line  (or  curve)  (/.v, 

ypafxfiiKdiy  linear  (of  numljers  in  one  dimen- 
sion) II.  287:  (of  prime  numbers)  II.  285: 
ypa/jL^iKwi,  graphically  i.  400 

ypdtpeaSai,  **to  he  proved"  (Aristotle)  II.  120 

dedofi^voij  given,  different  senses  I.  132-3  : 
Euclid's  hihoyukvQ.  or  Data  q.v, 

delyfiara,  illustrations,  of  Stoics  I.  329 

5et  3iJ,  ''thus  il  is  required"  (or  ''is  neces- 
sary"), introducinij  diopia/iSi  I.  203 

devTcpos,  secondary  (of  numbers):  m  Nico- 
machus and  lamblichus  a  subdivision  of 
odd  II.   1286,  287 

dex6fi€vovt  **  admitting  "  (of  segment  of  circle 
admitting  or  containing  an  angle)  ii.  5 

5to7/xi/z;ia  =  proposition  (Aristotle)  i.  252 

dicupetffdai  (used  of  "separation"  of  ratios): 
dicupedivra,  separando,  opp.  to  avyKelfxeva, 
componencb  II.  168 

dtalp€(Tii,  point  of  division  (Aristotle)  I.  165, 
170,  171 :  method  of  division  (exhaustion) 


I.  285 :  Euclid's  v€pl  dtcup^ewr,  On  dtvi- 

sions  {of  figures)  I.  8,  9,  18,  87,  no:  hud- 

pearis  \&yov,  separcUion^  literally  dtvision^ 

of  ratio  11.  135 
BuLfierpos,  diameter :  of  a  circle,  parallelogram 

etc.  I.  185,  325:  of  sphere  in.  270 
dicurrdff€is,  almost  ='*  dimensions      I.    157, 

158,  III.  262 :  Aristotle  speaks  of  xijr  in.  265 
dia0Tar6r,  extended^  k^  H  one  way,  iwi  h6^ 

two  roays,  iwl  rpla  three  ways  (of  lines, 

surfaces  and   solids  respectively)   I.   158, 

170,  III.  263 
iuurnifui,  distance  I.  166,  167,  207 :  (of  radius 

of  circle)  1. 199:  (of  an  angle)  ^diveiigence 

I.  176-7 
8t€^€vyfiini    (droXoT^a),    disjoined  =  discrete 

(proportion)  11.  293 
8teX6rrt,   separando^    literally   dividendo    (of 

proportions)  ii.  135 
dte|odt«r6f  (of  a  class  of  loci)  I.  330 
hiXIprqtiiini  (difaXoyla),  discrete  (proportion),  i.e. 

in  four  terms,  as  distinct  from  continuous 

(ffwexijj,  avmjfifihii)  in  three  terms  1 1.  131, 

8iiJx^«,  "let  it  be  drawn  through"  (= pro- 
duced) or  "across"  I.  280,  ii.  7 

8i*  taoVf  ex  aequali  (of  ratios)  II.  136:  hi 
(aov  i¥  rrrapayiiipji  ipaKoytq.^  *•«•  aequaii 
in  perturbed  proportion  "  ii.  136 

6iK6\ovpoi^  twtce-trunccUed  (of  pyramidal 
numbers)  11.  291 

diop{<r/40$  =  (i)  particular  statement  or  defini- 
tion, one  of  the  formal  divisions  of  a  pro- 
position I.  129:  (2)  statement  of  condition 
of  possibility  I.  128,  129,  130,  131,  234, 

^43.  293 

8tr\d<rtof  Xh/ytn,  double  ratio :  hkxKoaUoff  X^yot, 
duplicate  ratio,  contrasted  with,  1 1.  133 

di^pafus,  power:  =  actual  value  of  a  sub- 
multiple  in  units  (Nicomachus)  11.  282 : 
=  side  of  number  not  a  complete  square 
(i.e.  root  or  surd)  in  Plato  II.  288,  290, 
III.  I,  2,  3:  =square  in  Plato  Ii.  294-5 

d{>ya(T0ai,  "to  be  side  of  square  equal  to" 
III.  13  :  ad  dv¥dfi€Pai  airrd,  sides  of  squares 
equal  to  them  III.  13 :  1^  BF  r^t  A  fuT^op 
dvparat  rj  AZ,  "the  square  on  BC  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square 
on  DFf"  literally  "  BC  is  in  power  greater 
than  A  by  DF"  in.  43 

<Wos,  figure  ii.  234:   =form  II.  254 
dcaytayi)  dpnovLicri,  Jfitroduclion  to  Harmony , 

by  Cleonides  i.  17 
l«fourros,  each  :   curious  use  of,  ii.  79 
iKar^pa  iKaripq.,  meaning  respectively  I.  248, 

350 
iK^i^X-flcSiaffav^  use  of,  I.  244 
^#f ciyo J  =  Euclid  I.  400 
iKdtfftSj  setting-out^  one  of  formal  divisions 

of  proposition  I.  129:  may  sometimes  be 

omitted  I.  130 
^«t6s,  Kard  to  (of  an  exterior  angle  in  sense 

of  re-entrant)  i.  263:   17  ixroi  yiavla^  the 

exterior  angle  I.   280 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS  AND  FORMS      531 


iXouraioif,  miner  (irrational)  straight  line  III. 

7  etc. 
iXiKoet^t,  spiral-shaped  I.   159 
AXet/i/ta,  defect  (in  application  of  areas)  u.262 
iWelwtuf,    **fall    short"    (in   application   of 

areas)  ii.  762 
(KKxi^iiy  falling-short  (in  application  of  areas) 

I-  3<5,  343-5»  383-4 
AXcWj  wp6p\riftaf  a  deficient  (= indetermi- 
nate) problem  I.  129 
ifirlirrtiifj/allin  (  =  be  interpolated)  II.  358 
^roXXd^,  alternately  or  (adjectivally)  alternate 

I.  308:  ^yaXXol  X070S,  alternate  ratio, 
altemando  II.  134 

ipa  irXe/w,  *  *  several  opus  **  (def.  of  number) 

II.  aSo 

ipapfjLo^etPf  io  Jit  in  (active)  Book  IV.  Def.  7 

and  Prop,  i,  11.  79,  80,  81 
ivpoia,  notion f  use  of,  I.  221 
(pffTOffiSy  objection  I.   135 
A»t6»,  within  :  (of  internal  contact  of  circles) 

II.  13 :  Kcrh.  t6  ivrbs  or  if  ivrbs  {ytopla)^  of 

an  interior  angle  I.  263,  280:  1^  ivrbi  koX 

dvepoprlop  yowla^  the  interior  and  opposite 

angle  i.  180 
i^s  ApoXoyoPf  in  continued  proportion   (of 

terms  in  geometrical  progression)  11.  346 
ixt^ei^dunrap  {(hri^€&Yvv^,  join)  I.   242 
irifuSpios  \6yos,  superparticularis  ratio =rsii\o 

(«+!):«,  11.  295 
ItrlveBop,  plane  in  Euclid,  used  for  surface 

also  in  Plato  and  Aristotle  I.  169,  ill.  263 

heiitf.^0%  {dpiOfMt),  plane  (number)  11.  287-8 

iwiirpoirOtiVf    ivlwpoodev   tlpaLy    to  stand  in 

front  of  (hiding  from   view),   in   Plato's 

definitions  of  straight  line  and  plane  I. 

16^,  166 
ivi^euL,   surface :    in    Euclid   I.    169 :    in 

Aristotle  in.  263 
4v6fi€pat  consequents  ( =  "  following  *'  terms) 

in  a  proportion  ii.  134,  238 
fre/)o/ui^ici7f, oblong:  ^ep^/ii^jces,  oblong  (figure) 

I.  151,  188:  (of  numbers)  in  Plato  =  ir/)o- 
/bii^icijf ,  which  however  is  distinguished  from 
htpoft-tficrft  by  Nicomachus  etc.  II.  289-90, 

^93 

€Mu^  r6,  the  straight  I.  159:  ciOcta  iypafifii/f), 

straight  line  I.  165-9 
tMvypafifwcos,   rectilinear    (term    for    prime 

numbers)  ii.  285 
eifOiiypafifios,    rectilineal   I.    187:    neuter  as 

substantive  i.  346 
cMvfUTpiKSs,  euthymetric  (of  prime  numbers) 

II.  185 

i^wT€ff0aif  to  tottcA  I.  57 

iipapiioj^€iPy  to  coincide t  i^pfibj^aOaij  to  be 

applied  to  i.   168,  224-5,  ^49 
i^KTiKbs  (of  a  class  of  loci)  i.  330 
i^^rjs,  *'  in  order  "  I.  181 :  of  adjacent  angles 

I.  181,  278 

i/yo^fiepa,  antecedents  (** leading"  terms)  in 

a  proportion  1 1.   134 
^ep,  than :  construction  after  divXaolutp  etc. 

"•  133 


Bedpftifjuit  theorem,  ^.v. 
Bvpebi  (shield) = ellipse  I.  165 

ISiofi'^JKriSt  of  square  number  (lamblichus)  II. 

^93 
firirov  Wdi;,  kippopede  (horse- fetter),   name 

for  a  certain  curve  I.   162-3,  *7^ 
Urwii  lodxii  toost  equal  multiplied  by  equal 

and  again  by  equal  (of  a  cuoe  number)  II. 

290,  291 
IffdKis  toot,  equal  multiplied  by  equal  (of  a 

square  number)  ii.  291 
loaKit  toot  iXaTTOpdKis  {fiei^op6jus),  species  of 

solid  numbers,  =TXij'^/f  (doKls  or  tmiTdt) 

II.  291 

loofiirpiap  oxq^ruPt  ireplf  On  isometric 
figures  (Zenodorus)  I.  26,  27,  333 

jcd^eros  {cbBua  ypaiiii'fi)y  perpendicular  I. 
181-2,  271:  "plane"  and  "solid"  per- 
pendicular I.  272 

KokeioOia,  'Met  it  be  called,"  indicating 
originality  of  a  definition  II.  129 

Kauxi)Xof,  curved  (of  lines)  I.  159 

KarafierpeiPf  measure  II.  115:  without  re- 
mainder," completely  *'  {vXffpoOPTtos)  II.  280 

KaTaoK€vd{ta,  construct:  tup  a&r&p  Kara- 
oKevao04pT(aPt  "with  the  same  construc- 
tion" II.  If 

KaraoKevi/i,  construction,  or  machinery,  one 
of  the  divisions  of  a  proposition  I.  129: 
sometimes  unnecessary  I.   130 

KaraTOfAri  xapbpos,  Sectio  canonis  of  Euclid  I. 
17,  II.  295 

KeUrOia,  "let  it  be  made"  I.  269 

KCKafifiivri,  bent  (of  lines)  I.   159,   176 

KiPTpoPf  centre  I.  183,  184,  199:  of  sphere 

III.  270:  ^  iK  rov  jc^^r/wvs radius  I.  199, 
II.  2 

K€paTO€Lb^i  (ytapia),  horn-like  (angle)  I.  177, 
178,  182,  II.  4,  39,  40 

kXo*',  to  break  off f  deflect,  or  inflect :  K€K\AirOax, 
def.  of,  alluded  to  by  Aristotle  I.  118,  150, 
176,  178,  II.  47:  KeK\a<rfUpTi  ypafifn/j, 
defined  by  Heron  I.  150,  159:  K€K\do$v 
^  TdXiP  II.  47 

KXdoit^  breaking  (of  lines)  I.   176 

kXIois,  inclination:  (of  line  to  line)  I.  176: 
(of  straight  line  to  plane  or  of  plane  to 
plane)  III.  263-4:  oiuUun  K€KXlo0ai,  to  be 
similarly  inclined  III.  265 

KoiXoyiifPtop^  hollow-angled  (figure),  in  Zeno- 
dorus I.  27,  188 

KoipcU  ippoiai.  Common  Notions  (= axioms) 
I.  221-2 :  called  also  rd  jcoc^d,  Kou^al  d6i(a( 
(Aristotle)  I.  120,  221 

Koip^  vpoffKeloOuf,  d^pyoBto,  **let  there  be 
added  to,  subtracted  from,  each"  I.  276 

Kouf^  TOfii/f,  common  section  (of  planes)  ill. 
263 

KbXovpos,  truncated  (of  pyramidal  number 
minus  vertex)  II.  291 

Kopwfrfi^  vertex :  jcard  Kopv^p^  vertical  (angles) 
1.278 

KplKotf  ring  (Heron)  i.  163 


34—2 


532      GENERAL  INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS-  AND  FORMS 


KvkXiK^,  cyclic^  a  particular  species  of  square 

number  ii.  291 
Kiiyxpbpost  cylinder  ill.  271 
Kiapos^  cone  III.  270 

X^M/Lta,  lemma  (= something  assumed,  Xa/t- 

^fkvbiuvw)  I.  133-4 
X670S,  ratio:  meaning  II.  117:  definition  of, 

II.  116-9:  original  meaning  (of  something 
expressed)  accounts  for  use  of  dXo70f, 
having  no  ratio ^  irrational  1 1.   117 

Xoct6s,  remaining:  Xoiiri7  1^  A  A  \w.t%  rj  BH 
tfffj  itrriv  I.  245 

/leliiav,  major  (irrational  straight  line)  ill.  7, 

87-8  etc. 
fufjMpQ<r$€Uf   to   be  isolated,   of  /nords,   unit 

(Theon  of  Smyrna)  ii.  279 
fUpos,  part:  two  meanings  ii.  115:  generally 

=submultiple  II.  280:  iiiprri,  parts  (  =  proper 

fraction)  11.   115,  280:  lUprt)  (  =  direction) 

I.  190,  308,  323:  (  =  side)  I.  271 

lUffri  aifdXoyov  (ei>^eta),  fUao^  drdXoyoi^  (dpc^- 
Ii6s)y  mean  proportional  (straight  line  or 
number)  ii.  129,  205,  363  etc. 

fUaoit  *' medial"  (of  a  certain  irrational 
straight  line  or  area)  in.  49,  50 :  i)  iK  di/o 
liiaiop  wfxtrrrf  (deuripa),  **  the  first  (second) 
bimedial  (straight  line)"  ill.  7,  84-6: 
fidffTis  dvorofii]  vpcbrrj  (d^vripa),  **  first 
(second)  apotome  of  a  medial  (straight 
line)"  III.  7,  159-62:  fnrrbv  xal  fUirop 
8vpafi4vTI,  "side  of  (square  equal  to)  the 
sum   of  a  rational   and  a  medial   area" 

III.  7,  88-9:  d6o  fjJffa  bvpafidvrjj  **side  of 
the  sum  of  two  medial  areas"  ill.  7, 
89-90  :  ij  fi€TiL  /tfjToO  (fi^ffov)  /x^op  t6  S\op 
Toiovffa,  **side  of  (square  equal  to)  the 
difference  between  a  medial  and  a  rational 
(medial)  area  in.  7,  164-7 

fier^upos,  elevated  (above  a  plane)  in.  272 

fiil  ydp,  *' suppose  it  is  not  "11.  7 

firiKos,  length  I.  158-9:  in  Plato  =  side  of 
complete  square  or  length  commensurable 
with  unit  of  length  11.  288,  in.  3  :  more 
generally,   of   number    in  one  dimension 

II.  287-8 

firivo€idifli,  twie-iike  (of  angle)  I.  26,  201 :  to 

fiwocibis  (<rx^Mo),  lune  I.  187 
fitKTbi,  *' mixed"  (of  lines  or  curves)  I.  161, 

162  :  (of  surfaces)  i.  170 
fiopas,  unit,  monad  :   supposed  etymological 

connexion  with  fibvoSj  solitary,  fiovri,  rest 

II.  279 :  fjuopdi  rpoa\apov<ra  Oiaip,  definition 

ot  Si  point  I.  155 
fMPdarpofpos  fXi^f  *'  single-turn  spiral "  i.  122- 

3  «.,   164-5  :  in  Pappus = cylindrical  helix 

I.  165 

pevffciSj  inclinations,  a  class  of  problems 
I.    1 50-1 :  yciJeti',  to  verge  I.    118,    150 

(virrpoeid^s,  scraper-like  (of  angle)  I.  178 

i)^u>€ib-fi%,  **of  the  same  form''  I.  250 


hiiMOfieprfp,  uniform  (of  lines  or  corves)  I.  40, 
161-2 

5/iocot,  similar:  (of  rectilineal  figures)  ii.  188: 
(of  angles)  =  equal  (Thales,  Aristotle)  I. 
252  :  (of  segments  of  circles)  n.  5 ;  (of 
plane  and  solid  numbers)  I.  357,  il.  293 

6/iO(6n7f  \byiap,  **  similarity  of  ratios  "  (inter- 
polated def.  of  proportion)  ii.  119 

6/U6X070S,  homologous,  corresponding  11. 134: 
exceptionally  **in  the  same  ratio  with" 
II.  238 

Bpotia,  name  or  term,  in  snch  expressions  as 
^  iK  6^0  dpofidTfop,  the  binomial  (straight 
line)  III.  7  etc. 

d|eia  {ytopia),  acute  (angle)  I.   181 

dkvyiifPioSf  acute-angled  i.  187 

dxfp  id€i  d6($ai  (or  iroc^ac)  Q.E.D.  (or  F.)  I.  57 

dpdoytijpios,  right-angled  :  as  used  of  quadri- 
laterals =  rectangular  i .  i  88-9 

6piofi6s,  definition  I.  143 

Spas,  definition  i.  143  :  original  meaning  of, 

I.  143:  =  boundary,  limit  I.  182:   =term 
in  a  proportion  n.  131 

Sypis,  visual  ray  I.  166 

rdpT-Q  fieTaXafi3w6fi€P€u,  **  taken  together  in 
any  manner     I.  282 

wapcipdWciP,  to  apply  (an  area) :  wapafidkkMtw 
drb  used,  exceptionally,  instead  of  wapa- 
/3dXXetr  xa^  or  dpay pd^u^  dir6  II.  262 

wapapoXif  tup  xupUap,  application  of  areas 
!•  3^t  343-5  :  contrasted  with  inrtpfioMi 
{exceeding)  and  AXet^cf  (failing'skort)  I. 
343 :  wapafioXifi  contrasted  with  aj^araais 
(construction)  I.  343  :  application  of  terms 
to  conies  by  Apollonius  I.  344-5 

vapddo^os  rdroi,  6,  The  Treasury  of  Para' 
doxes  I.  329 

TopaXXdrrw,  "fall  beside,"  ** sideways"  or 
*'awry"  I.  262,  il.  54 

TtJLpoX\i\Kiieiirtbo%  (adj.),  parallelepipedal  = 
'*with  parallel  planes  or  faces":  VTepeop 
xapaWrfXewiweSop  =  **  parallelepipedal 
solid,"  not  ** solid  parallelepiped*'  in.  326 

wapaWriX&ypafjifAOit  parallelogrammic  (=  pa- 
rallel-lined) :  vapaXXrjXbypafifiop  x^P^o^ 
**  parallelogrammic  area,"  shortened  to 
ira/>aXX7;Xd7pa/>i/ioi',  parallelogram  I.  325 

TaparXT^ptofia,  complement  (of  a  parallelo- 
gram) q.v, 

TriPTdypayLfJLOP  II.   99 

x€paU»ov(Ta  iroobTTjs,  "  limiting  quantity " 
(Thymaridas'  definition  of  unit)  II.  279 

Wpas,  extremity  I.  165,  182  :  xipat  ovyxXtiw 
(Posidonius'  definition  of  fgure)  I.  183 

reptexofUpii  (of  angle),  wtpicxbfiepop  (of  rect- 
angle), cofttained  I.  370:  tA  Mi  tc/hcx^- 
piipopy  twice  the  rectangle  contained  I.  380: 
(of  figure)  contained  or  bounded  I.  182, 
183,   184,   186,  187 

wcpiffffdKis  dpTios,  odd-times  even  Ii.  283-4 

xtpuroaKLS  Tepunrbs,  odd-times  odd  il.  284 

repuradpTios,    odd-even     (Nicomachus    etc.) 

II.  283 

T€pioo6i,  odd  (number)  il.  281 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS  AND  FORMS      533 


r€pi4p4p€iat  circumference  (includes  arc)  I.  184 

T6pc0e/>i^,  circular  I.  159 

r€pi^p6yf>afi/MSf  contained  by  a  circum- 
ference of  a  circle  or  by  arcs  of  circles 
I.  182,  184 

wrfXlKot,  how  great:  refers  to  continuous 
(geometrical)  magnitude  as  Toahi  to  discrete 
(multitude)  ii.  116-7 

in;Xuc6nyf,  used  in  v.  Def.  3  and  vi.  Def.  5 : 
=^sizc  (not  quaniuplicity  as  it  is  translated 
by  De  Morgan)  ii.  116-7,  189-90:  sup- 
posed multiplication  of  in;Xtic6n7r6f  (vi. 
Def.  5)  II.  132 :  distinction  between 
myXwrArijf  and  fidycOos  II.   117 

xXdros,  breadth  I.  158-9:  (of  numbers)  II.  388 

rXeoifdj^op  {TpSpXrifia)^  *'  (problem)  in  excess  " 

I.  129 

rXtvpdt  side  :    (of  factors  of  **  plane  '*  and 

"solid"  numbers)  ii.  288 
wXrjBos  Cifna^ipov  or   v€T€pa<riiivo»^  defined 

or  finite  multitude  (definition  of  number) 

II.  280:    iK  fJLOp&ivp   ffvyxtlfievop   vXijOos 
(Euclid's  def.)  ii.  280 

ToXXaxXao'td^ed',  multiply  :   defined  II.  287 
woXXarXofftaa/i^t  multiplication:  KaO^  6toi- 

opovp  iro\XaTXatriaafi6vt**  (arising)  from  any 

multiple  whatever"  ii.  120 
woXXairXdffios,  nmltiple :  IcdKis  roXXarX(i<rca, 

equimultiples  1 1.  120  etc. 
r6\ot,  a  mathematical  instrument  i.  370 
ToXi>irXev/)oy,  multilateral,  many-sided  figure 

I.  187 :    excludes    rtTpdrXevpoVf    quadri- 
lateral II.  239 

TopiffoadcUf  to  **find*'  or  "furnish"  I.  125, 

II.  248 
wdpiafAa,  porism  g,v. 

Toaducis  voadKis  roaol,  "so  many  times  so 

many  times  so  many"  (of  solid  numbers, 

in  Aristotle)  li.  286,  290 
wo^dxts  woaol,  "  so  many  times  so  many  "  (of 

plane  numbers,  in  Aristotle)  ii.  286 
iro<r6p,  quantity,  in  Aristotle  II.  115:  refers 

to  multitude  as  wtiXIkov  to  magnitude  ii. 

116-7 
wplfffiat  prism  ill.  268 
TpdfiXrffia^  problem  y.v. 
wpoijyoj&fiepot,     leading',     (of    conversion)  = 

complete  I.  256-7 :  irporryoOfuvov  (Btibfni/ia)^ 

leading  (theorem),  contrasted  with  converse 

l-«57 

xfMfiiiKriiy  oblong  (of  numbers)  :  in  Plato 
=  iT€pofi-/iKriSf  but  distinguished  from  it  by 
Nicomachus  etc.  ii.  289-90,  293 

xpds,  in  geometry,  various  meanings  of,  i.  277 

wpoffopaypdrffait  to  draw  on  to :  (of  a  circle)  to 
complete^  when  segment  is  given  ii.  56 

wpoaapfUti^owra  (eO^eta)  =  '*  annex"  the  straight 
line  which,  when  added  to  a  compound  ir- 
rational straight  line  formed  by  subtraction, 
makes  up  me  greater  *'term,"  i.e.  the 
negative  "term*    ill.  15^ 

irpo9€vp€ip,  to  find  in  addition  (of  finding 
third  and  fourth  proportionals)  ii.  214 

wpdraoiSt  enunciation  I.   129-30 

vpoTclvta,  to  propound  I.  128 


wpoTiBhai,  to  propose :  1^  wporcdetaa  e^deta, 
any  assignee  straight  line  ill.  11 

irpCjTOi  rpos  dXXi^Xoi/r,  (numbers)  prime  to 
one  another  11.  285-6 

wpioToSt  prime:  two  senses  of,  I.  146 :  1 1.  284-5 

irrtow-tf,  case  I.   134 

wvpafdty  pyramid  III.  268 

^i7t6i,  rational  (literally  "expressible")  I. 
137,  II.  117,  III.  I  :  a  relative  term,  un- 
like daj^/ifierpos  (incommensurable)  which 
is  a  natural  kind  (Pythagoreans)  III.  i  : 
l^rfTii  Sidfierpos  rrjs  wtfirdSos,  "rational 
diameter  of  5  *'  (  =  7,  as  approximation  to 

>^50)  I-  399»  I"-  "»  5^5  '  l^nrop  kcU  lUtrow 
SwafUpri  ( =  side  of  square  equal  to  sum  of 
a  rational  and  a  medial  area)  etc.  ill.  7 

tnifietoPf  point  I.   155-6 

ffrddfiri,  a  mathematical  instrument  I.  371 

crepeds,  solid  III.  262-3 '    ^^  solid  numbers 

II.  290-1  :  0Te/>ed  yurpla,  solid  angle  III. 

267-8 :     Sfioia    CTcped    <rxi^Mara,    similar 

solid  figures  III.  265-7 
aTiyfii/fj  point  I.  156 
CTOixcioPt  element  i.   114-6 
arpoyy^Xop,  rb^  the  round  (circular),  in  Plato 

I.  159'  184 
arpoyyvX&rriSt  roundness  I.  182 
aOftfAerpoSt  commensurable  :  m^kcc,  in  length, 

Svpdfui  fi(tPOPy  in  square  only  III.  11 
ffv^Tipaur/Mf  conclusion    (of   a    proposition) 

I.  129,  130 

aiipevaitt  convergence  I.  282 
avpcx'fltt     continuous :      avpcx^f     dpaXoyia, 
"  continuous  proportion  "  (in  three  terms) 

II.  131 

ffvPTififiiprt  dyaXoylafConnected  {\,e.  continuous) 
proportion  II.  131,  293 :  <rvpri/ifUpos  of 
compound  ratio  in  Archimedes  li.   133 

ffVpOipTij  compofiendo  II.   134-5 

ffiip0€ffts  X6yoVf  "composition  of  a  ratio," 
distinct   from   compounding  of  ratios    II. 

134-5  ^  ^     . 

a6p0€ToSt  composite:  (of  lines  or  curves) 
I.  160:  (of  surfaces)  I.  170:  (of  numbers), 
in  Nicomachus  and  lamblichus  a  sub- 
division of  odd  u,  286 

ovploTaaOaif  construct:  special  connotation 
I.  259,  289 :  with  iPT6i  I.  289 :  contrasted 
with  xapo/SoXXety  {apply)  I.  343  :  oi  avrra- 
Oifffcraif  avaradifia'OPTait  "  there  cannot  be 
constructed"  I.  259,  ii.  53 

ffvPTl&Tjfii^  <r&yK€ifiai  (of  ratios)  II.  135,  189- 
90 :  ffvyKtlfieva  and  SiaipeBipra  (com- 
ponendo  and  separando)  used  relatively  to 
one  another  1 1.  168,  170 

oit9ry\\ia,  fiopddupt  "  collection  of  units  "  (def. 
of  number)  II.  280 

ffwrrnfULTiKbt,  collective  ii.  279 

a4>aTpaj  sphere  in.  269 

<r0atpcic6f,  spherical  (of  a  particular  species  of 
cube  number)  ii.  291 

ff^trfKioKos  or  ff^nfpiffKOSt  of  solid  number  with 
aJl  three  sides  unequal  (= scalene)  11.  290 


534      GENERAL  INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS  AND  FORMS 


ox^fftf,  ** relation'*:  xotA  <rx^(ris,  "a  sort  of 
relation"  (in  def.  of  ratio)  ii.   116-7 

{rXWOToypa^iPt  (rxi7Maro7/>a^<a,  representing 
(numbers)  by  figures  of  like  shape  i.  35^ 

<rx^A<<*^o*'<MOv<ra  or  <rj(rifia  xocoCfl-a,  **  forming 
a  figure  "  (of  a  line  or  curve)  i.  160-1 

To^ofiiflKTfi,  of  square  number  (Nicomachus) 

II.  293 
ra&r&nis  X67C1W,  "sameness  of  ratios"  ii.  119 
rActof,  perfect  (of  a  class  of  numbers)   ii. 

193-4 
rerayfiiifos,  **  ordered  " :  rrrayiUvop  wp6^rifia, 

"ordered"   problem    i.    ia8 :    TcrayiUpri 
.    djfoKoyla,  "ordered"  proportion  ii.  137 
rtrapayiUvrf  dpoKoyla,  perturbed  proportion 

II.   136 
TerpaywpKT/idst  squaring^  definitions  of,  1. 149- 

rerpdyiOPciPf  square :  sometimes  (but  not  m 
Euclid)  any  four-angled  figure  I.   188 

TCTpdwXevpoPj  quadrilateral  I.  187 :  not  a 
"polygon"  II.  239 

TfiTJfia  KiJicXou,  segment  of  a  circle :  TfiififULTos 
ybfpUi,  angle  o/Si  segment  11.  4:  ip  Tfi-^/ffiari 
yupla,  angle  in  a  segment  ii.  4 

To/i€^  (k6k\ov),  sector  (of  a  circle) :  ckutoto- 
puxbs  TOfi£^t  "shoemaker's  knife"  1 1.  5 

TOfii/l,  section,  =  point  of  section  I.  170,  171, 
278  :  KotPii  TOfii/f,  "  common  section  "  iii. 
163 

TOfiMiiiis  (of  figure),  sector- li^    II.  5 

rowucbp  0€(l>fni/xat  locus-theorem  I.  329 

r&iroiy  locus  I.  329-31  :  =room  or  space 
I.  33  M. :  place  (where  things  may  be 
found),  thus  t6tos  6,pa\vbtxepoi^  Treasury 
of  Analysis  I.  8,  10,  ira/)ddo|os  riiros, 
Treasury  of  Paradoxes ^  i.  329 


T6ppos,  instrument  for  drawing  a  circle  I.  37 1 
TOffaurairXdffioPt  "  the  same  multiple  *'  II.  146 
rpLyupoPf  triangle  :  t6  rpiirXovp,  t6  Si  dXXi^ 
Xfaw,  triple,  mterwoven  triangle,  =  penta- 
gram II.  99 
TpirXdffiot,  triple,  rpiirXairlwr,  triplicate  (of 

ratios)  11.  133 
rptvXevpop,  three-sided  figure  I.  187 
TvyxoufCiP,  happen:  tvx^i^  <niiuiOPt  any  point 
eU  random  I.  252:  n/voOo'a  yvpla^  **  any 
angle"  II.  212  :  dXXa,  a  irvxtp,  IffdjcisvoX- 
\av\dffiaf  "other,  chance,  equimultiples** 
"•  143-4 

inrep^Xiti,  exceeding,  with  reference  to  method 
of   application    of    areas    I.    36,    343-5, 

{nr€pT€Xifls  or  ^eprAecas,  "over-perfect**  (of 

a  class  of  numl)ers)  II.  293-4 
inr6,  in  expressions  for  an  angle  (^  inrb  BAT 

yupla)  I.  249,  and  a  rectangle  i.  370 
uvodiwXaffios,     sub-duplicate,  =  half    (Nico- 
machus) II.  280 
{nroKclfiepos,  laid  down  or  assumed :  t6  inro- 

KclfAfPOp  iwlweSop,  the  plane  of  reference 

III.  272 
vr6K€tTcu,  **is  by  hypothesis**  I.  303,  312 
inrovoXXarX&aios,  submultiple  (Nicomachus) 

II.  280 
inror^lpcuf,  subtend,  with  ace  or  inrb  and  ace. 

I.  249,  283,  350 
0^os,  height  ii.   189 

X^fAo^t  area  ii.  254 

utpuTfUpTi  ypafifii/j,  determinate  line   (curve), 
"forming  a  figure*'  I.   160 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


[The  references  are  to  volumes  and  pages.] 


al-* Abbas  b.  Said  al-Jauharl  I.  85 

**  Abthiniathus"  (or  "  Anthisathus ")  i.  ^03 

Abu  *\  'Abbas  al-Fadl  b.   Hatim,  see  an- 

Naiiizi 
Abu  *Abdallah  Muh.  b.  Mu  adh  al-Jayyanl 

I.  00 
Abu  All  al-Ba^ri  I.  88 
Abu  'All  al- Hasan  b.  al- Hasan  b.  al-Haitham 

I.  88,  89    ' 
Abu  Da'ud  Sulaiman  b.  'Uqba  i.  85,  90 
Abu  Ja'far  al-Khazin  i.  77,  85 
Abu   Ja'far    Muh.    b.    Muh.    b.    al- Hasan 

Na^lraddln  at-Tusl,  see  Nasiraddin 
Abu  Muh.  b.  Abdalbaql  al-Bagdadi  al-Faradl 

I.  8ff.,  90 
Abu  Muh.  al-Hasan  b.  'Ubaidallah  b.  Sulai- 

mSn  b.'  Wahb  i.  87 
Abu  Nasr  Gars  al-Na'ma  i.  90 
Abu  Nasr  Mansur  b.  'All  1^.  'Iraq  I.  90 
Abu   Nasr   Muh.   b.    Muh.    b.    Tarkhan  b. 

Uzlag  *al-Faribl  i.  88 
Abu  Sahl  Wljan  b.  Rustam  al-Kuhi  I.  88 
Abu  Said  Sinan  b.  Thabit  b.  Qurra  i.  88 
Abu  'Uthmiln  ad-Dimashql  i.  25,  77 
Abu  *1  Wafa  al-Buzjanl  I.  77,  85,  86 
Abu  Yusuf  Ya'qub  b.  Ishaq  b.  as-Sabbah  al- 

Kindi  I.  86 
Abu  Yusuf  Yaqub  b.  Muh.  ar-RazI  i.  86 
Adicuent  (^^efi/s),  meaning  i.  181 
Adrastus  ii.  291 

Aenaeas  (or  Aigeias)  of  Hierapolis  I.  a8,  311 
Aganis  I.  27-8,   191 

Ahmad  b.  al-Husain  al-Ahw^I  al-Katib  i.  89 
Ahmad  b.  *Umar  al-KarablsI  I.  85 
al-AhwazI  i.  89 

Aigeias  (?  Aenaeas)  of  Hierapolis  i.  28,  311 
Alcinous  II.  98 

Alexander  Aphrodisiensis  I.  7«.,  19,  ii.  110 
Algebra,  geometrical  i.  372-4 :  classical 
method  was  that  of  Eucl.  11.  (cf.  Apol- 
lonius)  I.  373:  preferable  to  semi-alge- 
braical method  i.  377-8:  semi-algebraical 
method  due  to  Heron  i.  373,  and  favoured 
by  Pappus  I.  373  :  geometrical  eauivalents 
of  algebraical  operations  i.  374:  algebraical 
equivalents  of  propositions  in  Book  li.,  I. 
37^-3*  equivalents  in  Book  x.  of  pro- 
positions in  algebra,  ^k  -  »J\  cannot  be 


equal  to  >&',  ill.  58-60:  \i a^^b^x^^Jy^ 
thena=jr,  b=yt  ill.  93-4,  167-8 
'Al!  b.  Ahmad  Abu  '1  Qasim  al-Antaki  I.  86 
Allman,  G.  J.  I.  135 «.,  318,  352,'  iii.  18- 

9.  439 

Alternate:  (of  angles)  I.  308:  (of  ratios), 
aUemately  Ii.    134 

Alternative  proofs,  interpolated  I.  58,  59 : 
cf.  III.  9  and  following  II.  22 :  that  in 
III.  10  claimed  by  Heron  II.  23-4 

Amaldi,  Ugo  i.  175,  179-80,  193,  201,  313, 
328,  II.  30,  126 

Ambiguous  case  I.  306-7  :  in  vi.  7,  ii.  208-9 

Amphinomus  I.  125,  128,  150/1. 

Amyclas  of  Heraclea  I.  117 

Analysis  (and  synthesis)  I.  18  :  definitions 
of,  interpolated,  i.  138,  ill.  442  :  described 
by  Pappus  I.  138-9:  mystery  of  Greek 
analysis  ill.  246:  modern  studies  of  Greek 
analysis  I.  139:  theoretical  and  problem- 
atical analysis  i.  138:  Treasury  of  Analy- 
sis (r6irot  i.va\vbn(vo%)  I.  8,  10,  11,  138: 
method  of  analysis  and  precautions  neces- 
sary to,  I.  139-40:  analysis  and  synthesis 
of  problems  I.  140-2  :  two  parts  of  analysis 
(a)  transformation^  (b)  resolution^  and  two 
parts  of  synthesis,  (a)  construction,  (b) 
demonstration  i.  141  :  example  from 
Pappus  I.  141-2:  analysis  should  also 
reveal  Sioptcfids  (conditions  of  possibility) 
I.  142:  interpolated  alternative  proofs  of 
xiii.  1-5  by  analysis  and  synthesis  I.  137, 
III.  442-3 

Analytical  method  i.  36 :  supposed  discovery 
of,  by  Plato  I.  134,  137 

Anaximander  i.  370,  II.  11 1 

Anaximenes  11.   iii 

Anchor- ring  I.  163 

Andron  I.   126 

Angle:  curvilineal  and  rectilineal,  Euclid's 
definition  of,  i.  176  so.:  definition  criti- 
cised by  Syrianus  I.  170:  Aristotle's  notion 
of  angle  as  xXdait  i.  176:  Apollonius'  view 
of,  SiS  contraction  I.  176,  177:  Plutarch  and 
Carpus  on,  i.  177:  to  which  category  does 
it  belong?  quantum^  Plutarch,  Carpus, 
"Aganis"  I.  177,  Euclid  i.  178;  quale, 
Aristotle  and  Eudemus  i.  177-8:  relation. 


53^ 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Euclid    I.    178 :    Syrianus*    compromise 

I.  178:  treatise  on  the  Angle  by  Eudemus 
'•  34»  38*  177-8:  classification  of  angles 
(Geminus)  I.  178-9:  curvilineal  and 
"mixed"  angles  I.  26,  178-9,  horn-like 
{K€paTO€iSi/ls)  I.  177,  178,  182,  265,  II.  4, 
39,  40,  lune-like  (tiypfoeib-fit)  I.  26,  178-^, 
scraper- like  {^varpoei^s)  I.  178:  angle  o/a. 
segment  I.  253,  ii.  4:  angle  0/ b.  semi- 
circle I.  182,  253,  II.  4:  controversies  about 
'*  angle  of  semicircle  *'  and  homUke  ai^Ie 

II.  39-42:  definitions  of  angle  classined 
I.  179:  recent  Italian  views  I.  179-81: 
angle  as  cluster  of  straight  lines  or  rays 

I.  180-1,  defined  by  Veronese  i.  180:  as 
part  of  a  plane  ("angular  sector*')  I.  179- 
80 :  flat  angle  (Veronese  etc.)  i.  180^1, 
269 :  three  kinds  of  angles,  which  is  prior 
(Aristotle)?  I.  181-2:  angles  not  less  than 
two  right  angles  not  recognised  as  angles 
(of.  Heron,  Proclus,  ZencSonis)  1 1.  47-9! 
did  Euclid  extend  "angle"  to  angles 
greater  than  two  right  angles  in  vi.  33? 

II.  275-6:  adjacent 2iH!^ts  i.  181 :  alternate 
I.  308:  Jiwi^r(=  equal)  i.  178,  182,  252: 
vertices  I.  278:  exterior  and  interior 
(to  a  figure)  I.  263,  280:  exterior  when 
re-entrant  I.  263,  in  which  case  we  have  a 
hollow-angled  figure  I.  27,  188,  II.  48: 
interior  and  opposite  I.  280:  construction 
by  Apollonius  of  angle  equal  to  angle 
I.  296:  angle  in  a  semicircle,  theorem  of, 
I.  317-9:  trisection  of  angle,  by  con- 
choid of  Nicomedes  I.  265-6,  by  quadratrix 
of  Hippias  i.  266,  by  spiral  of  Archimedes 
I.  267:  dihedral  angle  in.  264-5:  solid 
angle  ill.  261,  267-8 

Annex  (irpo<rapfjL6^ovffa)  =  the  straight  line 
which,  when  added  to  a  compound  ir- 
rational straight  line  formed  by  subtraction, 
makes  up  the  greater  "term,"  i.e.  the 
negative  "term*'  iii.  159 

al-AntakI  i.  86 

Antecedents  (leading  terms  in  proportion)  11. 
'34 

"  Anthisathus  "  (or  **  Ablhiniathus")  i.  203 

Antiparallels :  may  be  used  for  constniction 
of  VI.  12,  II.  215 

Antiphon  i.  7  «.,  35 

Apastamba-Sulba-Sutra  I.  352 :  evidence  in, 
as  to  early  discovery  of  Eucl.  I.  47  and  use 
of  ^omon  I.  360-4:  Blirk's  claim  that 
Indians  had  discovered  the  irrational  i. 
363-4 :  approximation  to  J 2  and  Thibaut's 
explanation  I.  361,  363-4:  inaccurate 
values  of  t  in,   i.  364 

Apollodorus  *' Logisticus "  i.  37,  319,  351 

Apollonius :  disparaged  by  Pappus  in  com- 
parison with  Euclid  i.  3:  supposed  by 
some  Arabians  to  be  author  of  the  Ele- 
ments I.  5:  a  ** carpenter '*  I.  5:  on  ele- 
mentary geometry  i.  43  :  on  the  line  I. 
159:  on  the  angle  i.  176:  general  defini- 
tion of  diameter  i.  325:  tried  to  prove 
axioms   i.   42,   62,   222-3:    his  ** general 


treatise**  i.  42:  constructions  by,  for 
bisection  of  straight  line  l.  268,  for  a 
perpendicular  I.  270,  for  an  angle  equal  to 
an  angle  I.  296:  on  parallel -axiom  (?) 
I.  42-3 :  adaptation  to  conies  of  theory  of 
application  of  areas  I.  344-5 :  geometrical 
algebra  in,  1. 373:  Plane  Loci,  1. 14, 259, 330, 
theorem  from  (arising  out  of  Eucl.  VI.  3), 
also  found  in  Aristotle  ii.  198-200:  Pkiiu 
rei^etf  I.  151,  problem  from,  II.  81,  lemma 
by  Pappus  on,  ii.  64-5:  comparison  of  do^ 
decahedron  and  icosahedron  l.  6,  III.  439, 
512,  513:  on  the  cochlias  i.  34,  42,  162: 
on  ** unordered*'  irrationals  i.  42, 115,  III. 
3, 10,  246,  255-9:  general  definition  of  ob- 
lique (circular)  cone  III.  270:  I.  138,  188, 
221,  222,  246,  259,  370,  373,  II.  75,  190, 
258,  III.  264,  267 

Apotome:  compound  irrational  straight  line 
(difference  between  two  "terms*')  III.  7: 
defined  iii.  158-9:  connected  by  Theae- 
tetus  with  harmonic  mean  ill.  3,  4: 
biquadratic  from  which  it  arises  ill.  7: 
uniquely  formed  ill.  167-8 :  flrsty  second, 
third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  apotomes, 
quadratics  from  which  arising  III.  5-6, 
defined  in.  177,  and  found  respectively 
(x.  85-90)  in.  178-90:  apotome  equivalent 
to  square  root  oi  first  apotome  in.  190-4: 
first,  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth 
apotomes  equivalent  to  squares  of  apotome, 
first  apotome  of  a  medial  etc.  in.  212-29: 
apotome  cannot  be  binomial  Ulso  in.  240-2 : 
different  from  medial  (straight  line)  and 
from  other  irrationals  of  same  series  with 
itself  III.  242  :  used  to  rationalise  binomial 
with  projX)rtional  terms  Iii.  243-8,  252-4 

Apotome  of  a  medial  (straight  line) :  first  and 
second,  and  biquadratics  of  which  they  are 
roots  in.  7:  first  apotome  of  a  medial 
defined  in.  159-60,  uniquely  formed  in. 
168-9,  equivalent  to  square  root  of  second 
apotome  in.  194-8:  second  apotome  of  a 
medial,  defined  in.  161-2,  uniquely  formed 
in.  170-2,  equivalent  to  square  root  of 
third  apotome  III.    199-202 

Application  of  areas  I.  36,  343-5:  contrasted 
with  exceeding  and  falling-short  i.  343: 
complete  method  equivalent  to  geometrical 
solution  of  mixed  quadratic  equation  I. 
344-5.  383-5»  386-8,  II.  187,  258-60. 
2^3-5*  266-7  '  adaptation  to  conies  (Apol- 
lonius) I.  344-5:  application  contrasted 
with  construction  (Proclus)  I.  343 

Approximations :  7/5  as  approximation  to  ^/2 
(Pythagoreans  and  Plato)  n.  119:  approxi- 
mations to  Jt,  in  Archimedes  and  (in 
sexagesimal  fractions)  in  Ptolemy  n.  119: 
to  T  (Archimedes)  n.  119:  to  V4500 
(Theon  of  Alexandria)  II.  119:  remarkably 
close  approximations  (stated  in  sexagesimal 
fractions)  in  scholia  to  Book  x.,  III.  523 
"Aqaton"  I.  88 

Arabian  editors  and  commentators  i.  7^- 
90 


GENERAL  INDEX 


537 


Arabic  numerals  in  scholia  to  Book  x., 
nth  c,  I.  71,  III.  522 

Archimedes:  ** postulates"  in,  I.  120,  123: 
"porisms"  in,  i.  ii«.,  13:  on  straight 
line  I.  166:  on  plane  I.  171-2:  Liber 
assumptorum^  proposition  from,  ii.  65: 
approximations  to  1^3,  square  roots  of  large 
numbers  and  to  ir,  ii.  119:  extension  of 
a  proportion  between  commensurables  to 
cover  mcommensurables  1 1. 193 :  **  Axiom" 
of  (called  however  **  lemma,  assumption, 
by  A.  himself)  i.  234 :  relation  of  "Axiom" 
to  X.  I,  III.  15-6:  "Axiom"  already 
used  by  Eudoxus  and  mentioned  by 
Aristotle  in.  16:  proved  by  means  of 
Dedekind's  Postulate  (Stolz)  ill.  16:  on 
discovery  by  Eudoxus  of  method  of  ex- 
haustion III.  365-6,  374:  new  fragment 
of,  *•  method  (%f^o^i)  of  Archimedes  about 
mechanical  theorems,"  or  i^hiov^  dis- 
covered by  Heiberg  and  published  and 
annotated  by  him  and  Zeuthen  1 1.  40,  III. 
366-8,  adds  new  chapter  to  history  of 
integral  calculus,  which  the  method  actually 
is,  III.  366-7 :  application  to  area  of  para- 
bolic segment,  ibid.-,  spiral  of  Archimedes 
I.  26,  267:  I.  116,  142,  225,  370,  II.  136, 
190,  III.  246,270.  375.  521 

Archytas  I.  20:  proof  that  there  is  no 
numerical  geometric  mean  between  n  and 
«+i  II.  295 

Areskong,  M.  E.  i.  113 

Arethas,  Bishop  of  Caesarea  i.  48:  owned 
Bodleian  MS.  (B)  I.  47-8:  had  famous 
Plato  MS.  of  Patmos  (Cod.  Clarkianus) 
written  i.  48 

Ar^rus,  Isaak  I.  74 

Aristaeus  I.  138:  on  conies  i.  3:  Solid  LoH 
I.  16,  329:  comoarison  of  five  (regular 
solid)  figures  I.  6,  in.  438-9,  513 

Aristotelian  Problems  i.  166,   182,   187 

Aristotle:  on  nature  o{  elements  i.  116:  on 
first  principles  i.  177  sqq. :  on  definitions 
I.  117,  119^-20,  143-4,  146-50:  on  distinc- 
tion between  hypotheses  and  definitions 
I.  119,  120,  between  hypotheses  and 
postulates  I.  118,  119,  between  hypotheses 
and  axioms  I.  120:  on  axioms  I.  iip-21: 
axioms  indemonstrable  I.  121:  on  defini- 
tion by  negation  i.  156-7:  on  points  i. 
'5.S-6,  165:  on  lines^  definitions  of,  i. 
^58-9,  classification  of,  i.  159-60:  quotes 
Plato's  definition  o{  straight  line  i.  166: 
on  definitions  of  surface  I.  1 70 :  definition 
of  "body"  as  that  which  has  three 
dimensions  or  as  "depth"  in.  262  :  body 
"bounded  by  surfaces"  (^irtWJotj)  in. 
263 :  speaks  of  six  "  dimensions  "  in.  263 : 
definition  of  sphere  in.  269:  on  the  angle 
I.  176-8 :  on  priority  as  between  right  and 
acute  angles  I.  18 1-2:  on  Jigttre  and 
definition  of,  I.  182-3:  definitions  of 
"squaring"  I.  149-50,  410:  on  parallels 
I.  190-2,  308-9:  on  gnomon  i.  351,  355, 
359 :  on  attributes  #cot4  TfUfrhn  and  xpCorov 


Ka06\ov  I.  319,  320,  325:  on  the  objection 

I.  135 :  on  reduction  i.  135  :  on  reductio  ad 
absurdum  i.  136:  on  the  infinite  I.  232-4: 
supposed  postulate  or  axiom  about  diver- 
gent lines  taken  by  Proclus  from,  i.  45, 
207 :  gives  pre- Euclidean  proof  of  Eucl.  l. 
5, 1.  252-3 :  on  theorem  of  angle  in  a  semi- 
circle I.  14^;  has  proof  (pre- Euclidean) 
that  angle  m  semicircle  is  right  ii.  63: 
on  sum  of  angles  of  triangle  i.  319-21: 
on  sum  of  exterior  angles  of  polygon  i. 
322 :  on  def.  of  same  ratio  (^  same 
dprapalpeois)  II.  120-1  :  on  proportion  as 
"equality  of  ratios"  II.  119:  on  theorem  in 
proportion  (altemando)  not  proved  generally 
till  his  time  n.  f  13 :  on  proportion  in  three 
terms  ((rvi^ex^'f  continuous),  and  in  four 
terms  (dijifnjfUvrj,  discrete)  II.  131,  293  :  on 
alternate  ratios  ii.  134 :  on  inverse  ratio  il. 
134,  149:  on  similar  rectilineal  figures  il. 
188:  has  locus-theorem  (arising  out  of 
Eucl.  VI.  3)  also  given  in  Apollonius' 
Plane  Loci  II.  198-200:  on  unit  ii.  279: 
on  number  11.  280:  on  non-applicability  of 
arithmetical  proofs  to  magnitudes  if  these 
are  not  numbers  n.  113:  on  definitions  of 
odd  and  even  by  one  another  n.  281 :  on 
prime  numbers  n.  284-5:  on  composite 
numbers  as  plane  and  solid  n.  286,  288, 
290:  on  representation  of  numbers  by 
pebbles  forming  figures  n.  288:  gives 
proof  (no  doubt  Pythagorean)  of  incom- 
mensurability of  iv/29  in.  2:  I.  38,  45,  117, 
150 ».,  181,  184,  185,  187,  188,  195,  202, 
203,  221,  222,  223,  226,  259,  262-3,  283, 

II.  2,  4,  22,  79,  112,  135,  149,  159,  160, 
165,  184,  188,  189,  III.  4 

Arithmetic,  Elements  of,  anterior  to  Euclid 
II.  295 

al-ArjanI,  Ibn  R&hawaihi  i.  86 

Ashkal  at-ta'sis  i.  5  «. 

Ashraf  Shamsaddin  as-Samarqandl,  Muh.  b. 
I.  5  If.,  89 

Astaroff,  Ivan  I.  113 

Asymptotic  (non-secant):  of  lines  I.  40,  161, 
203 :   of  parallel  planes  in.  265 

Athelhard  of  Bath  I.  78,  93-6 

Athenaeus  of  Cyzicus  I.  117 

August,  E.  F.  I.  103,  II.  23,  25,  149,  238, 
256,  412,  in.  2,  48 

Austin,  W.  I.  103,  III,  II.  172,  188,  211,  259 

Autolycus,  On  the  moving  sphere^  I.  17 

Avicenna,  I.  77,  89 

"Axiom  of  Archimedes"  in.  15-6:  already 
used  by  Eudoxus,  in.  15,  and  mentioned  by 
Aristotle,  in.  16:  relation  of,  to  Eucl.  x. 
I,  III.  ij-6 

Axioms,  distinguished  from  postulates  by 
Aristotle  I.  11 8-9,  by  Proclus  (Geminus 
and  "others")  I.  40,  12 1-3:  Proclus  on 
difficulties  in  distinctions  i.  123-4:  distin- 
guished from  hypotheses,  by  Aristotle  I. 
1 20-1,  by  Proclus  1. 12 1-2 :  indemonstrable 
I.  121 :  attempt  by  Apollonius  to  prove  I. 
222-3 :  =  "common  (tnings)"  or '*coiniiioii 


538 


GENERAL  INDEX 


opinions"  in  Aristotle  I.  120,  221:  com- 
mon to  all  sciences  i.  119,  no:  called 
*' common  notions"  in  Euclid  i.  121,  111  : 
which  are  genuine?  I.  221  sqq. :  Proclus 
recognises  hve  1.  222,  Heron  three  I.  222 : 
interpolated  axioms  i.  224,  232:  Pappus* 
additions  to  axioms  I.  25,  223,  224,  232: 
axioms  of  congruence,  ( r )  Euclid's  Common 
Notion  4,  I.  224-7,  (^)  modem  systems 
(Pasch,  Veronese  and  Hilbert)  I.  228-31: 
"axiom"  with  Stoics  =  every  simple 
declaratory  statement  i.  41,  221:  axioms 
tacitly  assumed,  in  Book  v.,  ii.  137,  in 
Book  VI.,  II.  294 
Axis:  of  sphere  in.  261,  269:  of  cone  ill. 
261,271:   of  cylinder  ill.  262,  271 

Babylonians:  knowledge  of  triangle  3,  4,  5, 

I.  352 :  supposed  discoverers  of  **  harmonic 
proportion"  11.  112 

Bacon,  Roger  I.  94 

Baermann,  G.  F.  ii.  213 

Balbus,  de  mensuris  I.  91 

Baltzer,  R.  1 1.  30 

Barbarin  i.  219 

Barlaam,  arithmetical  commentary  on  Eucl. 

II.,  I.  74 
Barrow:    on  Eucl.  v.   Def.  3,  II.  117:    on 

V.  Def.  5,  II.  121:  I.  103,  105,  no,  III, 

II.  56,  186,  238 

Base',  meaning  i.  248-9:  of  cone  ill.  262: 

of  cylinder  III.  262 
Basel  editio  princeps  of  Eucl.,  I.  loo-i 
Basilides  of  Tyre  I.  5,  6,  III.  512 
Baudhayana  Sulba-Sutra  I.  360 
Bayfius  (Ba'if,  Lazare)  I.  100 
Becker,  J.  K.  i.   174 
Beez  I.  176 
Beltrami,  E.  i.  219 
Benjamin  of  I^sbos  i.   113 
Bergh,  P.  I.  400-1 
Bernard,  Edward  I.   102 
Besthorn  and  Heiberg,  edition  of  al-Hajjaj's 

translation   and   an-Nairizi's    commentary 

I.  22,  2711.,   79 «. 
Bhaskara  i.  355 
Billingsley,  Sir  Henry,  i.  109-10,  ii.  56,  238, 

III.  48 

Bimedial  (straight  line):  first  and  second, 
and  biquadratic  equations  of  which  they 
are  roots  ill.  7 :  first  bimedial  defined  III. 
84-5,  equivalent  to  square  root  of  second 
binomial  ill.  84,  120-3,  uniquely  divided 
III.  94-5 :  second  bimedial  defined  ill. 
S5-7»  equivalent  to  square  root  of  third 
binomial  ill.  84,  124-5,  uniquely  divided 

I".  95-7 
Binomial  (straight  line) :  compound  ir- 
rational straight  line  (sum  of  two  *' terms") 
III.  7:  defined  in.  83,  84:  connected  by 
Theaetetus  with  arithmetic  mean  in.  3,  4 : 
biquadratic  of  which  binomial  is  a  p>ositive 
root  III.  7:  firsts  second y  thirds  fourth ^ 
fifth  and  sixth  binomials,  quadratics  from 
which  arising  in.  5-6,  defined  in.  101-2, 


and  found  respectively  (x.  48-53)  ill.  I02> 
15,  are  equivalent  to  squares  of  binomial, 
first  bimedial  etc.  in.  132-45:  binomieU 
equivalent  to  square  root  oi  first  binomial 
III.  116-20:  binomial  uniquely  divided, 
and  algebraical  equivalent  of  this  fact  in. 
92-4:  cannot  be  apotome  also  in.  240-2: 
different  from  medial  (straight  line)  and 
from  other  irrationals  (first  bimedial  etc.) 
of  same  series  with  itself  ill.  242 :  used  to 
rationalise  apotome  with  proportional  terms 
III.  248-52,  252-4 

al-Blrunl  i.  90 

Bjombo,  Axel  Anthon  I.   17^.,  93 

Boccaccio  i.  96 

Bodleian  MS.  (B)  i.  47,  48,  in.  521 

Boeckh  I.  351,  371 

Boethius  I.  92,  95,   184,  II.  295 

Bologna  MS.  (b)  I.  49 

Bolyai,   J.  i.  219 

Bolyai,  W.  i.   174-5,  219,  328 

Bolzano  i.  167 

Boncompagni  I.  93^.,  lo^n, 

Bonola,  R.  i.  202,  219,  237 

Borelli,  Giacomo  Alfonso  I.  106, 194,  il.  2,  84 

Boundary  (6pwi)  I.   182,  183 

Brdkenhjelm,  P.  R.  i.  113 

Breadth  (of  numbers)  =  second  dimension  or 
factor  II.  288 

Breitkopf,  Job.  Gottlieb  Immanuel  I.  97 

Bretschneider  I.  136  «.,  137,  295,  304,  344, 

.S54»  358,  in.  4.^9.  44^ 
Briconnet,  Fran90is  I.  100 
Bripgs,  Henry  i.   102,  n.  143 
Brit.  Mus.  palimpsest,  7th— 8th  c,  I.  50 
Bryson,  I.  8  «. 
BUrk,  A.  I.  352,  360-4 
BUrklen  I.   179 
Buteo  (Borrel),  Johannes  I.  104. 

Cabasilas,  Nicolaus  and  Theodoras  i.  72 

Caiani,  Angelo  I.  loi 

Camerarius,  Joachim  1.  10 1,  III.  523 

Camerer,  J.  G.  I.  103,  293,  il.  22,  25,  28, 
33,  34.  40,  67,  121,  131,  189,  213,  244 

Camorano,  Rodrigo,  I.   112 

Campanus,  Johannes  i.  3,  78,  94-6,  104, 
106,  no,  407,  II.  28,  41,  56,  90,  116,  119, 
121,  146,  189,  211,  234,  235,  253,  275, 
320,  322,  328 

Candalla,  Franciscus  Flussates  (Fran9ois  de 
Foix,  Comte  de  Candale)  I.  3,  104,  no, 
II.  189 

Cantor,  Moritz  i.  7«.,  20,  272,  304,  318, 
320,  333,  352,  355,  357-8,  360,  401,  II.  5, 
40,  97,  III.  8,  15,438 

Cardano,  Hieronimo  ii.  41,  in.  8 

Carduchi,  L.   I.  112 

Carpus,  on  Astronomy,  I.  34,  43:  45,  127, 
128,  177 

Case,  technical  term  I.  134:  cases  inter- 
polated I.  58,  59:  Greeks  did  not  t«/5y 
limiting  cases  but  proved  them  separately 

"•75 
Casey,  J.  il.  227 


GENERAL  INDEX 


539 


Casiri,  i.  4  n.,  9  n, 
Cassiodorius,  Magnus  Aurelius  I.  93 
Catalan  in.  537 
Cataldi,  Pietro  Antonio  i.  106 
Catoptricay  attributed   to   Euclid,   probably 
Theon*s  i.  17:  Catoptrica  of  Heron  I.  «i, 

Cauchy  ill.  167 :  proof  of  Eucl.  xi.  4,  ill.  380 

'*  Cause  " :  consideration  of,  omitted  by  com- 
mentators I.  19,  45 :  definition  should  state 
cause  (Aristotle)  i.  149:  cause  =  middle 
term  (Aristotle)  i.  149:  question  whether 
geometry  should  investigate  cause  (Gemi- 
nus),  I.  45,  i5o». 

Censorinus  I.  91 

Centre,  Kimpov  I.   184-5 

Ceria  Aristotelica  I.  35 

Cesiiro,  E.  iii.  537 

**  Chance  equimultiples  "  in  phrase  **  other, 
chance,  equimultiples'*  II.  143-4 

Chasles  on  Forisms  of  Euclid  i.  10, 11,  14,  15 

Chinese,  knowledge  of  triangle  3,  4,  5, 
I.  35^-   **Tcheou  pei"  I.  355 

Christensen  III.  8 

Chrysippus  i.  330 

Chrystal,  G.  ill.  19 

Cicero  i.  91,  351 

Circle:  definition  of,  i.  183-5:  =  round, 
ffTpcyyCXov  (Plato),  i.  184:  —  v€pi4>€p6' 
ypafifiov  (Aristotle)  i.  184:  a  plant  figure 

I.  183-4:  exceptionally  in  sense  of  "cir- 
cumference" II.  23:  centre  of,  i.  184-5: 
pole  of,  I.  185:  bisected  by  diameter 
(Thales)  i.  185,  (Saccheri)  I.  185-6:  inter- 
sections with  straight  line  I.  237-8,  272-4, 
with  another  circle  i.  238-40,  242-3, 
2^3-4:  definition  of  ** equal  circles*'  11.  2 : 
circles   touchin^y   meaning   of   definition, 

II.  3:  circles  mtersecting  and  touching, 
difficulties  in  Euclid's  treatment  of,  11. 
*5~7»  28-9,  modem  treatment  of,  11.  30-2 

Circumiference,  xepc^pcta,  i.  184 

Cissoid,  I.  161,   164,   176,  330 

Clairaat  I.  328 

Clavius  (Christoph  SchlUssel)  1. 103, 105, 194, 
«3«.  iJ8i,  391,  407,  II.  2,  41,  42,  47,  49, 
53.  56,  67,  70,  73,  130,  170,  190,  231,  238, 
244,  271,  III.  273,  331,  341,  350,359»  433 

Claymundus,  Joan.  i.   loi 

Cleonides,  Introduction  to  Harmony ,  i*  I7 

Cochlias  or  cochiion  (cylindrical  helix)  I.  162 

Codex  Leidensis  399,  1:  i.  22,  27/1.,  79 ». 

Coets,  Hendrik,  i.  109 

Commandinus  I.  4,  102,  103,  104-51  >^» 
no.  III,  407,  II.  47,  130,  190:  scholia 
included  in  translation  of  Elements  i.  73 : 
edited  (with  Dee)  De  divisionibus  i.  8, 
9»  1 10 

Commensurable :  defined  in.  10 :  com- 
mensurable in  lengthy  commensurable  in 
squarCy  and  commensurable  in  square  only 
defined  in.  10,  11 :  symbols  used  in  notes 
for  these  terms  in.  34 

Commentators  on  Eucl.  criticised  by  Produs 
I.  19,  26,  45 


Common  Notions:  =  axioms  I.  62,  120-1, 
221-2:  which  are  genuine?  i.  221  sq. : 
meaning  and  appropriation  of  term  I.  221 : 
called  **  axioms    by  Proclus  I.  221 

Complement y  irapairX^pwMa:  meaning  of,  I. 
341:  "about  diameter"  I.  341:  not 
necessarily  parallelograms  1.  341:  use  for 
application  of  areas  I.  34^-3 

Componendo  {awdivTi),  denoting  **  composi- 
tion '*  of  ratios  q.v, :  componendo  and 
separamlo  used  relatively  to  each  other 
II.    168,   170  V  ^       /  r 

Composite,  ffOpderos:  (of  lines)  l.  160:  (of 
surfaces)  I.  170:  (of  numbers)  li.  286: 
with  Eucl.  and  Theon  of  Smyrna  composite 
numbers  may  be  even,  but  with  Nicom. 
and  lamblichus  are  a  subdivision  oioddiu 
286,' plane  and  solid  numbers  are  species 
of,  II.  286 

**  Composite  to  one  another"  (of  numbers) 
II.  286-7 

Composition  of  ratio  (aivdecu  Xrfyoi/),  de- 
noted by  componendo  (irwOhm)y  distinct 
from  compounding  ratios  11.  134-5 

Compound  ratio:  explanation  of,  il.  132-3: 
(interpolated?)  definition  of,  11.  189-90,  in. 
526:  compounded  ratios  in  v.  20-3,  li. 
176-8 

Conchoids  I.  160-1,  265-6,  330 

Cofulusiony  avtiTipaafJux :  necessary  part  of  a 
proposition  I.  129-30:  particular  con- 
clusion immediately  made  general  I.  131 : 
definition  merely  stating  conclusion  I.  149 

Cone:  definitions  of,  by  Euclid  in.  262,  270, 
by  Apollonius  in.  270:  distinction  between 
right-angled,  obtuse-angled  and  acute- 
angled  cones  a  relic  of  old  theory  of 
conies  III.  270:  similar  cones,  definition 
of.  III.  262,  271 

Congruence- Axioms  or  Postulates :  Common 
Notion  4  in  Euclid  I.  224-5:  modem 
systems  of  (Pasch,  Veronese,  Hilbert)  I. 
228-31 

Congruence  theorems  for  triangles,  recapitula- 
tion of,  I.  305-6 

Conicsy  of  Euclid,  I.  3,  16:  of  Aristaeus,  I.  3, 
16:  of  Apollonius  I.  3,  16:  fundamental 
property  as  proved  by  Apollonius  equi- 
valent to  Cartesian  equation  i.  344-5  •  focus- 
directrix  property  proved  by  Pappus  I.  15 

Consequents  (** following"  terms  in  a  pro- 
'  portion)  ii.  134 

Constantinus  Lascaris  I.  3 

Construct  {awUrrcLadeu)  contrasted  with 
describe  on  i.  348,  with  apply  to  I.  343 : 
special  connotation  I.  259,  289 

Constructiony  KaroffKev^y  one  of  formal 
divisions  of  a  proposition  i.  129:  some- 
times unnecessary  I.  130:  tums  nominal 
into  real  definition  I.  146:  mechanical 
constructions  I.   151,  387 

Continuity,  Principle  of,  I.  234  sq.,  242,  272, 
294 

Continuous  proportion  (crwex^f  or  ffwrififiii^ii 
difaXoyla)  in  three  terms  li.  131 


S40 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Conversion^  geometrical :  distinct  from  logical 
I.  256:  "leading"  and  partial  varieties 
of,  1.  ^56-7,  337 

Conversion  of  ratio  (dj'affTpo0i7  X6701;),  de- 
noted by  convert fndo  (&ifa(rTp4\f/ayTi)  ii. 
135:  convertendo  theorem  not  established 
by  V.  19,  Por.  ii.  174-5,  but  proved  by 
Simson's  Prop.  E.  11. 175, 111.38:  Euclid's 
roundabout  substitute  ill.  38 

Convertendo  denoting  *'  conversion  "  of  ratios, 
q,v. 

Copernicus  I.  foi 

Cordonis,  Mattheus  i.  97 

Corresponding  magnitudes  1 1.   134 

Cossali  III.  8 

Cratistus  i.  133 

Crelle,  on  the  plane  i.   172-4,  iii.  263 

Ctesibius  I.  20,  21,  39 ». 

Cube :  defined  iii.  162 :  problem  of  in- 
cribing  in  sphere,  Euclid's  solution  Hi. 
478-80,  Pappus' solution  ill.  480:  duplica- 
tion of  cube  reduced  by  Hippocrates  of 
Chios  to  problem  of  two  mean  propor- 
tionals I.  135,  II.  133:  cube  number,  de- 
fined II.  291 :  two  mean  proportionals 
between  two  cube  numbers  ii.  294,  364-5 

Cunn,  Samuel  i.  iii 

Curtze,    Maximilian,    editor    of   an-NairIzi 

I.  22,  78,  <>2,  94,  96,  97  «. 
Curves,  classification  of:   see  line 

Cyclic^  of  a  particular  kind  of  square  number 

II.  291 

CychmcUhia  of  Leotaud  1 1.  42 

Cylinder:    definition  of,    iii.   262:    similar 

cylinders  defined  in.   262 
Cylindrical  helix  i.  161,   162,  329,  330 
Czecha,  Jo.  i.  113 

Dasypodius  (Rauchfuss)  Conrad  I.  73,  lo^ 

DcUa  of  Euclid:  i.  8,  132,  141,  385,  391: 
Def.  2,  II.  248:  Prop.  8,  ll.  249-50: 
Prop.  24,  II.  246-7:  Prop.  55,  II.  254: 
Props.  56  and  68,  11.  249:  Prop.  58,  11. 
263-5  •  Props.  59  and  84,  ii.  266-7  '- 
Prop.  67  assumes  part  of  converse  of 
Simson's  Prop.  B  (Book  vi.)  11.  224 : 
Prop.  70,  II.  250:  Prop.  85,  II.  264: 
Prop.  87,  II.  228:    Prop.  93,  II.  227 

Deahna  I.  174 

Dechales,  Claude  Fran9ois  Milliet  I.  106, 
107,  108,  no,  II.  259 

Dedekind's  theory  of  irrational  numbers 
corresponds  exactly  to  Eucl.  v.  Def.  5, 
II.  124-6;  Dedekind's  Postulate  and 
applications  of,  I.  235-40,  ill.  16 

Dee,  John  i.  109,  no;  discovered  De 
divisionibus  i.  8,  9 

Definition^  in  sense  of  ** closer  statement" 
(d(o/}(0'/i6s),  one  of  formal  divisions  of  a  pro- 
position I.  129:  may  be  unnecessary  i.  130 

Definitions:  Aristotle  on,  i.  117,  119,  120, 
143:  a  class  oi  thesis  (Aristotle)  i.  120: 
distinguished  from  hypotheses  I.  119,  but 
confiised  therewith  by  Proclus  I.  12 1-2: 
must  be  assumed  i.  117-9,  but  say  nothing 


about  existence  (except  in  the  case  of  a  few 
primary  things)  i.  119,  143:  terms  for,  5/>ot 
and  6pio/A6t  i.  143:  real  and  nommal 
definitions  (real  =  nominal  plus  pcKStulate 
or  proof).  Mill  anticipated  by  Aristotle, 
Saccheri  and  Leibniz  I.  143-5:  Aristotle's 
requirements    in,    i.    146-50,    exceptions 

I.  148 :  should  state  cause  or  middle  term 
and  ht  genetic  I.  149-50:  Aristotle  on  un- 
scientific definitions  {iK  fi^  vporipuif)  i. 
148-9:  Euclid's  definitions  agree  generally 
with  Aristotle's  doctrine  I.  146:  inter- 
polated definitions  I.  61,  62:  definitions 
of  technical  terms  in  Aristotle  and  Heron, 
not  in  Euclid  i.  150 

De  lem  et  ponderoso^  tract  i.  18 

Demetrius  Cydonius  I.  72 

Democritus  i.  38:  On  difference  of  gnomon 
etc.  (?  on  *' angle  of  contact")  ii.  40:  on 
parallel  and  infinitely  near  sections  of  cone, 

II.  40,  III.  368:  stated,  without  proving, 
propositions  about  volumes  of  cone  and 
pyramid,  ii.  40,  in.  366:  was  evidently 
on  the  track  of  the  infinitesimal  calculus 

III.  368 :  treatise  on  irrationals  (xepi  dX^ycirr 
ypafifiMv  Kal  vaorCav  ff)  in.  4 

De  Morgan,  A.:  i.  246,  260,  269,  284,  291, 
«98,  300.  309»  3i3»  3i4»  3i5.  369*  376. 
"•  5.  7.  9-<o»  "»  n*  20»  ««»  ^9'  56.  76-7. 
83,  101,  104,  1 16-9,  120,  130,  139,  145, 
197,  202,  217-8,  232,  233,  234,  272,  275: 
on  definition  of  ratio  ll.  116-7:  on  ex- 
tension of  meaning  of  rcUio  to  cover 
incommensurables  ii.  118:  means  of  ex- 
pressing ratios  between  incommensurables 
by  approximation  to  any  extent  ii.  118-9: 
defence  and  explanation  of  v.  Def.  5,  ii. 
1 2 1-4:  on  necessity  of  proof  that  tests  for 
greater  and  less,  or  greater  and  equal, 
ratios  cannot  coexist  ii.  130-1,  157:  on 
compound  ratio  II.  132-3,  234:  sketch  of 
proof  of  existence  of  fourth  proportional 
(assumed  in  v.  18)  1 1.  171;  proposed 
lemma  about  duplicate  ratios  as  alternative 
means  of  proving  vi.  22,  II.  246-7:  on 
Book  X.,  III.  8 

Dercyllides  II.  iii 

Desargues  I.  193 

Describe  on  (dyaYpd^eti'  i,vb)  contrasted  with 
construct  I.  348 

De  Zolt  I.  328 

Diagonal  (biayilivioi)  I.    185 

*'  Diagonal  "  numbers  :  see  **  Side-  "  and 
"diagonal-"  numbers 

Diameter  (^td/icr/ws),  of  circle  or  parallelogram 
I.  185:  of  sphere  ill.  261,  269,  270: 
as  applied  to  figures  generally  I.  325; 
**  rational  "  and  **  irrational  "  diameter  of 
5  (Plato)  I.  399,  taken  from  Pythagoreans 

I.  399-40o»  '"•  12.  525 
Dihedral  angle  =  inclination  of  plane  to  plane, 

measured  by  a  plane  angle  III.  264-5 
Dimensions    (cf.    3to<rrd<retj),    I.    157,    158: 

Aristotle's  view  of,  i.  158-9,  in.  262-3, 

speaks  of  six  III.   263 


GENERAL  INDEX 


S4I 


Dinostratus  I.  117,  266 

Diocles  I.  164 

Diodorus  I.  103 

Diogenes  Laertius  i.  37,  305,  3i7»  35i»  "'•  4 

Diophantus  i.  86 

Diorismus  (dto/Mcr/i^s)  =  (a)  **  definition  "  or 
*' specification,"  a  formal  division  of  a 
proposition  I.  139:  (b)  condition  of  possi- 
bility I.  118,  determines  how  far  solution 
possible  and  in  how  many  ways  I.  130-1, 
^43 :  diorismi  said  to  have  been  discovered 
by  Leon  i.  116;  revealed  by  attalysis 
I.  14a:  introduced  by  Set  ^  i.  293:  first 
instances  in  Elements  I.  134,  393:  for 
solution  of  quadratic  li.  359 

Dippe  I.  108 

Direction,  as  primary  notion,  discussed  I. 
179:  direction-theory  of  parallels  i.  191-1 

Discrete  proportion,  dtjfpijfUpri  or  Su^evyfi^mi 
dpaXoyla,  in  four  terms,  1 1.  131,  293 

"  Dissimilarly  ordered'^  proportion  (dyo/io((tfs 
TCTVYfUwiMf  rCav  Xbytay)  in  Archimedes 
=  "/er^wrM/ proportion  "  il.  136 

Distance t  dMorrifiai  =  radius  I.  199:  in 
Aristotle  has  usual  general  sense  and 
=  dimension  i.  199 

Dividendo  (of  ratios) :  see  Separation, 
separando 

Division  (method  of),  Plato's  I.  134 

Diznsions  {of  figures) y  treatise  by  Euclid,  i. 
8,  9 :  translated  by  Muhammad  al-BagdadI 
I.  8 :  found  by  Woepcke  in  Arabic  I.  9, 
and  by  Dee  in  Latin  translation  i.  8,  9 : 

I.  no:  proposition  from,  1 1.  5 
Dodecahedron:  decomposition  of  faces  into 

elementary  triangles  ii.  08:  definition  of, 
III.  262:  dodecahedra  found,  apparently 
dating  from  centuries  before  Pythagoras 
III.  438,  though  said  to  have  been  dis- 
covered by  Pythagoreans  ibid,-,  problem 
of  inscribing  in  sphere,  Euclid's  solution 
in.  493,  Pappus'  solution  in.  501-3 

Dodgson,  C.  L.  I.  i94i^54»^6i, 313,11. 48,275 

Dou,  Jan  Pieterszoon  I.  108 

Duhamel,  J.  M.  C.  I.  139,  328 

Duplicate  ratio  ii.  133 ;  5crXo<rfwr,  duplicate, 
distinct  from  dcrXourtot,  double  ( =  ratio 
2:1),  though  use  of  terms  not  uniform 

II.  133  :  "duplicate"  of  given  ratio  found 
by  VI.  II,  II.  214:  lemma  on  duplicate 
ratio  as  alternative  to  method  of  vi.  22 
(De  Mprgan  and  others)  II.  242-7 

Duplication  of  cube  ;  reduction  of,  by  Hippo- 
crates, to  problem  of  finding  two  mean 
proportionals  i.  135,  11.133:  wrongly  sup- 
posed to  be  alluded  to  in  Timaeus  32  A,  B, 
n.  294-5  n. 

Egyptians  il.  112 :  knowledge  of  right-angled 
triangles  I.  352 :  view  of  number  ii.  280 

Elements:  pre- Euclidean  ElemenU,  by  Hip- 
pocrates of  Chios,  Leon  I.  11 6,  Theudius 
I.  117:  contributions  to,  by  Eudoxus  I.  i, 
37,  II.  112,  III.  15,  365-^1  374»  44i»  The- 
aetetus  I.  i,  37,  ill.  3,  438,  Hermotimus  of 


Colophon  I.  117;  Euclid's  Elements,  ulti- 
mate aims  of,  I.  2,  11 5-6;  commentators 
on,  I.  19-45,  Proclus  I.  19,  29-45  and 
passim.  Heron  i.  20-24,  an-Nairid  i.  21- 
4,  Porphyry  I.  24,  Pappus  i.  24-7, 
Simplicius  i.  28,  Aenaeas  (Aigeias)  i.  28: 
Mss.  of,  I.  46-51 :  Theon's  chiuiges  in  text 
1. 54-8 :  means  of  comparing  Theonine  with 
ante-Theonine  text  I.  51-3:  interpolations 
before  Theon's  time  I.  58-63:  scholia  I. 
64-74,  III.  521-3 :  external  sources 
throwing  light  on  text.  Heron,  Tauriis, 
Sextus  Empiricus,  Proclus,  lamblichus  I. 
62-3:  Arabic  translations  (i)  by  al-Hajjaj 
I-  75.  76,  79»  80,  83-4,  (2)  by  l§haq  and 
Thabit  b.  Qurra  i.  75-80, 83-4,  (3)  Na$irad- 
dln  at-Tusl  I.  77-80,  84:  Hebrew  transla- 
tion by  Moses  b.  Tibbon  or  Jakob  b. 
Machir  I.  76 :  Arabian  versions  compared 
with  Greek  text  I.  79-83,  with  one  another 
I.  83,  84:  translation  by  Boelhius  I.  92: 
old  translation  of  loth  c.  I.  92  ;  translations 
by  Athelhard  i.  93-6,  Gherard  of  Cremona 

I.  93-4,  Campanus  I.  94-6,  97-100  etc., 
Zamberti  I.  98-100,  Commandinus  i.  104- 
5:  introduciion  into  England,  loth  c, 
1.95 :  translation  by  Billingsley  I.  109-10: 
Greek  texts,  ediiio  princeps  I.  loo-ii 
Gr^ory's  I.  102-3,  Peyrard's  I.  103, 
August's  I.  103,  Hei berg's /afii/« :  trans- 
lations and  editions  generally  I.  97-113: 
writers  on  Book  x.,  ill.  8-9:  on  the  nature 
of  elements  (Proclus)  I.  11 4-6,  (Menaech- 
mus)  I.  114,  (Aristotle)  I.  116:  Proclus  on 
advantages  of  Euclid's  Elements  I.  115: 
immediate  recognition  of,  I.  116:  first 
principles  of,  definitions,  postulates,  com- 
mon notions  (axioms)  I.  117-24:  technical 
terms  in  connexion  with,  i.  125-42:  no 
definitions  of  such  technical  terms  i.  150: 
sections  of  Book  i.,  i.  308 

Elinuam  I.  95 

Enestrom,  G.  ill.  521 

Engel  and  Stackel  I.  219,  321 

Enriques,  F.  i.  157,  175,  193,  195,  201,  313, 

II.  30,  126 

Enunciation  (r/)6ra<rtf),  one  of  formal  di« 
visions  of  a  proposition  I.   129-30 

Epicureans,  objection  to  Eucl.  I.  20,  I.  41, 
287:   Savile  on,  I.  287 

Equality,  in  sense  diflferent  from  that  of 
congruence  (=**  equivalent,"  Legendre)  I. 
327-8:  two  senses  of  equal  (i)  **di visibly- 
equal"  (Hilbert)  or  ** equivalent  by  sum" 
(Amaldi),  (2)  "  equal  in  content "  (Hilbert) 
or  "equivalent   by  difference"  (Amaldi) 

I.  328:  modem  definition  of,  I.  228 
Equimultiples:    **any   equimultiples   what- 
ever," IffOKit  ToWarXcuria  Ka$    6iroiarotV 
ToSXairXaffiafftibv    II.     120:     stereotyped 
phrase    "  other,    chance,    equimultiples " 

II.  143-4:  should  include  once  each  magni- 
tude II.  145 

Eratosthenes :  l.  i,  162 :  contemporary  with 
Archimedes  1.1,2:  Archimedes*  **  Method  " 


542 


GENERAL  INDEX 


addressed  to,  ill.  366:    measurement  of 
obliquity  of  ecliptic  (33°  51'  ao")  ll.  in 

Errard,  Jean,  de  Bar-le-Duc  I.  108 

Erycinus  I.  27,  190,  319 

Escribed  circles  of  triangle  li.  85,  86-7 

Euclid :  account  of,  in  Proclus'  summary  1. 1 : 
date  I.  1-3:  allusions  to,  in  Archimedes 
I.  I :  (according  to  Proclus)  a  Platonist 
I.  3:  taught  at  Alexandria  I.  2:  Pappus 
on  personality  of,  I.  3 :  story  of  (in 
Stobiaeus)  i.  3:  not  **of  Megara"  I.  3,  4: 
supposed  to  have  been  bom  at  Gela  I.  4: 
Arabian  traditions  about,  1. 4, 5 :  **  of  Tyre  " 
I.  4-6:  **of  Tus"  I.  4,  5W. :  Arabian 
derivation  of  name  (*'  key  of  geometry  '*) 
1. 6 :  EUmtniSt  ultimate  aim  of,  i.  3, 1 15-6: 
other  works,  Conies  i.  16,  Pseudaria  I.  7, 
Data  I.  8,  131,  141,  385,  391,  On  divisiotis 
(of  figures)  I.  8,  9,  Porisms  I.  10-15, 
Surface-loci  I.  15,  16,  Phaenomena  I.  16, 
17,  Optics  I.  17,  Elements  of  Music  or 
Sectio  Canonis  I.  17,  II.  194-5:  on  **three- 
and  four-line  locus"  I.  3:  Arabian  list  of 
works  I.  17,  18:  bibliography  i.  91-113 

Eudemus  i.  39:  On  the  Angle  I.  34,  38, 
177-8:  History  of  Geometry  I.  34,  35-8, 
278,  «95.  304.  3^7»  3^o,  387,  II.  99,  III, 
in.  3.  360,  534 

Eudoxus  I.  I,  37,  116,  II.  40,  99,  380,  3^5: 
discoverer  of  theory  of  proportion  covermg 
incommensurables  as  expounded  generally 
in  Bks.  v.,  vi.,  i.  137,  351, 11.  ni:  on  the 
golden  section  I.  137 :  discoverer  of  method 
of  exhaustion  I.  334,  in.  ^^5-6,  374:  used 
"Axiom  of  Archimedes'^  in.  15:  first  to 
prove  theorems  about  volume  of  pyramid 
(Eucl.  XII.  7  Por.)  and  cone  (Eucl.  xii.  10), 
also  theurenj  of  Eucl.  xii.  3,  in.  15: 
theorems  of  Eucl.  xni.  1-5  probably  due 
to,  in.  441 :  inventor  of  a  certain  curve, 
the  hippopede^  horse-fetter  I.  163:  possibly 
wrote  Sphaerica  1. 17:  111.442,523,533,536 

Euler,  Leonhard  i.  401 

Eutocius:  I.  35,  35,  39,  143,  161,  164,  259, 
3171  3^9»  330,  373:  on  ''VI.  Def.  5"  and 
meaning  of  iri;XtK6Ti;s  ii.  1 16,  132,  189-90: 
gives  locus-theorem  from  ApoUonius*  Plane 
Loci  II.  198-300 

Even  (number) :  definitions  by  Pythagoreans 
and  in  Nicomachus  II.  281 :  definitions  of 
odd  and  even  by  one  another  unscientific 
(Aristotle)  I.  148-9,  11.  281  :  Nicom. 
divides  even  into  three  classes  (i)  even- 
times  even  and  (2)  even-times  odd  as  ex- 
tremes, and  (3)  odd-times  even  as  interme- 
diate II.  383-3 

Even-times  even:  Eucl  id  *s  use  differs  from 
use  by  Nicomachus,  Theon  of  Smyrna  and 
lamblichus  ii.  381-3 

Even-times  odd  in  Euclid  different  from  even- 
odd  oi  Nicomachus  and  the  rest  ii.  383-4 

Ex  aeifucUiy  of  ratios,  ii.  136 :  ex  aequali  pro- 
positions (v.  30,  33),  and  ex  aequali  '*in 
perturbed  proportion"  (v.  31, 33)  11.  176-8 

Exhaustion,     method    of:     discovered    by 


Eudoxus  I.  334,  III.  365-6:   evidence  of 
Archimedes  in.  365-6:   III.  374-7 
Exterior  and  interior  (of  angles)  I.  363,  380 
Extreme  and  mean  ratio  (line  cut  in) :  defined, 
II.  188:  known  to  Pythagoreans  i.  403, 
II.  99,  III.   19,  535  :   irrationality  of  seg- 
ments of  (apotom€s)  ill.  19,  449-51 
Extremity t  ripatt  l«  183,   183 

Faifofer  II.  136 

Falk,  H.  I.  113 

al-Faradi  I.  8#r.,  90 

Fermat  III.  536-7 

Figure^  as  viewed  by  Plato  I.  183,  by 
Aristotle  I.  183-3,  ^7  Euclid  I.  183: 
according  to  Posidonius  is  confining 
boundary  only  I.  41,  183:  figures  bounded 
by  two  lines  classified  I.  187:  angle-less 
(d^t^i^toy)  figure  I.   187 

Figures,  printing  of,  I.  97 

Fihrist  I.  4«.,  5«.,  17,  31,  34,  35,  37;  list 
of  Euclid's  works  in,  I.  17,  18 

Finaeus,  Orontius  (Oronce  Fine)  I.  loi,  104 

Flauti,  Vincenzo  i.  107 

Florence  MS.  Laurent,  xxvili.  3  (F)  i.  47 

Flussates,  see  Candalla 

Forcadel,  Pierre  I.  108 

Fourier :  definition  of  plane  based  on  Eucl. 
XI.  4,  I.  173-4,  III.  363 

Fourth  proportional :  assumption  of  existence 
of,  in  V.  18,  and  alternative  methods  for 
avoiding  (Saccheri,  De  Morgan,  Simson, 
Smith  and  Bryant)  1 1.  170-4:  Clavius  made 
the  assumption  an  axiom  1 1.  170:  sketch  of 
proof  of  assumption  by  De  Morgan  1 1. 171 : 
condition  for  existence  of  number  which 
is  a  fourth  proportional  to  three  numbers 
II.  409-11 

Frankland,  W.  B.  i.   173,  199 

Frischauf,  J.  i.   174 

Galileo  Galilei :  on  angle  of  contact  ii.  43 

Gartz  I.  9«. 

Gauss  I.  172,  193,   194,  303,  319,   321 

Geminus:  name  not  Latin  I.  38-9:  title  of 
work  (^XoKoXfa)  quoted  from  by  Proclus 
I.  39,  and  by  Schol.,  in.  533 :  elements 
of  astronomy  I.  38:  comm.  on  Posidonius 
I.  39:  Proclus'  obligations  to,  I.  39-43: 
on  postulates  and  axioms  I.  133-3,  in. 
523:  on  theorems  and  problems  i.  138: 
two  classifications  of  lines  (or  curve.s)  i. 
160-2:  on  homoeomeric  (uniform^  lines 
I.  162:  on  ** mixed"  lines  (curves)  and 
surfaces  I.  163 :  classification  of  surfaces 
I.  170,  of  angles  I.  178-9:  on  parallels 
I.  191:  on  Postulate  4,  I.  300:  on  stages 
of  proof  of  theorem  of  I.  33,  I.  317-30: 
I.  31,  27-8,  37,  44, 45,  I33«.,  303,  365,  ^30 

Geometrical  algebra  I.  373-4:  Euclid's 
method  in  Book  ii.  evidently  the  classical 
method  i.  373:  preferable  to  semi-alge- 
braical method  i.   377-8 

Geometrical  progression  II.  346  sqq. :  summa- 
tion of  ff  terms  of  (ix.  35)  n.  430-1 


GENERAL  INDEX 


543 


Geometric  means  ii.  357  sqq.  :  one  mean 
between  square  numbers  ii.  394,  363,  or  be- 
tween similar  plane  numbers  il.  371-2 :  two 
means  between  cube  numbers  1 1. 294, 364-5, 
or  between  similar  solid  numbers  1 1.  373-5 

Gherard  of  Cremona,  translator  of  Elements 
I.  93-4:  of  an-Nairizi's  commentary  I.  13, 
94,  II.  47:  of  tract  De  dwisionibus  I.  9 

Giordano,  Vitale  I.  106,  176 

Given^  dcSofUvoi,  different  senses,  I.   132-3 

Gnomon :  literally  *'that  enabling  (something) 
to  be  known  "  I.  64,  370 :  successive  senses 
of,  (i)  upright  marker  of  sundial,  I.  181, 
185,  271-2,  introduced  into  Greece  by 
Anaximander  i.  370,  (2)  carpenter's  square 
for  drawing  right  angles  i.  371,  (3)  figure 
placed  round  sauare  to  make  larger  square 

I.  351,  371,  Inaian  use  of  gnomon  in  this 
sense  i.  362,  (4)  use  extended  by  Euclid  to 
parallelograms  i.  371,  (5)  by  Heron  and 
rheon  to  any  figures  i.  371-2:  Euclid's 
method  of  denoting  in  figure  l.  383 :  arith- 
metical use  of,  I.  358-60,  371,  II.  289 

**  Gnomon- wise  "  (Karii  yytbfiopa)^  old  name 
for  perpendicular  {KiBerot)  I.  36,  181,  272 

Giirland,  A.  I.  233,  234 

Go/den  section  (section  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio),  discovered  by  Pythagoreans  1.  137, 
403,  II.  99:  connexion  with  theory  of  irra- 
tionals 1. 137,  III.  19:  theory  carried  further 
by  Plato  and  Eudoxus  II.  99:  theorems  of 
Eucl.  XIII.  1-5  on,  probably  due  to  Eu- 
doxus III.  44 1 
.  **  Goose's  foot "  (/tfx  anseris)^  name  for  Eucl. 
III.  7,  I.  99 

Gow,  James  i.  135  «. 

Gracilis,  Stephanus  I.  10 1-2 

Grandi,  Guido  I.  107 

Greater  ratio :  Euclid's  criterion  not  the  only 
one  II.  130:  arguments  from  greater  to  less 
ratios  etc.  unsafe  unless  they  go  back  to 
original  definitions  (Simson  on  v.  10)  II. 
156-7  :  test  for,  cannot  coexist  with  test 
for  equal  or  less  ratio  II.  130-1 

Greatest  common  measure:  Euclid's  method 
of  finding  corresponds  exactly  to  ours  II. 
118,  299,  III.  18,  21-2  :  Nicomachus  gives 
the  same  method  ii.  300:  method  used  to 
prove  incommensurability  ill.  18-9;  for 
this  purpose  often  unnecessary  to  carry  it 
far  (cases  of  extreme  and  mean  ratio  and 
of  ^2)  III.  18-9 

Gregory,  David  i.  102-3,  II.  116,  143,  III.  32 

Gregory  of  St  Vincent  i.  401,  404 

GromoHci  I.  91  ».,  95 

Grynaeus  1.  100- 1 

Habler,  Th.  11.  294 ». 

al-Haitham  I.  88,  89 

al-Hajjaj  b.  Yusuf  b.  Matar,  translator  of  the 

EUmefUs  1.  22,  75,  76,  79,  80,  83,  84 
Halifax,  William  I.  108,   no 
Halliwell  (-Phillips)  I.  9511. 
Hankel,  H.  I.  139,  141,  232,  234,  344,  354, 

II.  116,  117,  III.  8 


Harmonica  of  Ptolemy,  Comm.  on,  I.  17 

Harmony^  Introduction  to^  not  by  Euclid,  1. 17 

Harun  ar-Rashid  i.  75 

al- Hasan  b.  'Ubaidall&h  b.  Sulaiman  b. 
Wahb  I.  87 

Hauber,  C.  F.  11.  244 

Hauff,  J.  K.  F.  I.  108 

"Heavy  and  Light,"  tract  on,  I.  18 

Heiberg,  J.  L.  pcusim 

Helix,  cylindrical  i.  i6i,   162,  329,  330 

Helmholtz,  i.  226,  227 

Henrici  and  Treutlein  i.  313,  404,  1 1.  30 

Henrion,  Denis  i.  108 

Herigone,  Pierre  I.   108 

Herlin,  Christian  i.  100 

Hermotimus  of  Colophon  I.  i 

Herodotus  i.  37«.,  370 

**Heromides"  I.   158 

Heron  of  Alexandria,  mechanicus,  date  of, 
I.  20-1,  III.  521:  Heron  and  Vitruvius 
I.  20-1 ;  commentary  on  Euclid's  Elements 

I.  20-4 :  direct  proof  of  I.  25, 1.  301 :  com- 
parison of  areas  of  triangles  in  I.  24,  1. 334- 
5:  addition  to  1.  47,  i.  366-8:  apparently 
originated  semi -algebraical  method  of 
proving  theorems  of  Book  11.,  i.  373,  378: 
Eucl.  III.  12  interpolated  from,  11.  28: 
extends  in.  20,  21  to  angles  in  segments 
less  than  semicircles  ii.  47-8:  does  not 
recognise  angles  equal  to  or  greater  than  two 
right  angles  ii.  47-8:  proof  of  formula  for 
area  of  triangle,  A  =  \^j(x -  aj (j -b)(s-c)t 

II.  87-8:  I.  137 «.,  159,  163,  168,  170, 
1 71-2,  176,  183,  184,  185,  i88,  189,  222, 
««3»  ^43i  «53»  «85,  287,  299,  351,  369, 
37 »»  405.  407*  4o8»  II.  5,  16-7,  24,  28, 
33,  34»  36*  44»  47.  48,  116,  189,  302,  320, 
383*  395»  '"•  24i  263,  265,  267,  268,  269, 
270,  366,  404,  442 

Heron,  Proclus'  instructor  I.  29 

"Herundes"  I.  156 

Hieronymus  of  Rhodes  i.  305 

Hilbert,  D.  I.  157,  193,  201,  228-31,  249, 

3»3.  3«8 

Hipparchus  i.  4>f.,  30^.,  III.  523 

Hippasus  II.  97,  III.  438 

Hippias  of  Eiis  i.  42,  265-6 

Hippocrates  of  Chios  I.  8«.,  29,  35,  38,  116, 
i35>  136 »..  .^86-7,  II.  133:  first  proved 
that  circles  (and  similar  segments  of  circles) 
are  to  one  another  as  the  squares  on  their 
diameters  ill.  366,  374 

Hippopede  (fwwov  W^),  a  certain  curve  used 
by  Eudoxus  I.  162-3, 176 

Hoftmann,  Heinrich  I.  107 

Hoffmann,  Joh.  Jos.  Ign.  i.  108,  365 

Holgate,  T.  F.  iii.  284,  303,  331 

Holtzmann,  Wilhelm  (Xylander)  I.  107 

Homoeonuric  (uniform)  lines  I.  40,  161,  162 

Hoppe,  E.  I.  21,  III.  521 

Hornlike  angle  («e/)aroctd^f  Ycin^/a)  I.  177, 
178,  182,  265,  II.  39,  40':  hornlike  angle 
and  angle  of  semicircle,  controversies  on, 
II.  39-42:  Proclus  on,  11.  39-40:  Demo- 
critus  may  have  written  on  hornlike  angle 


544 


GENERAL  INDEX 


II.  40:  view  of  Campanus  ("not  angles  in 
same  sense'*)  11.41 :  of  CsLtd&no  (ouaH/ities 
of  different  orders  or  kinds) :  of  Peletier 
(AorniiAi  angle  no  angle,  no  quantity, 
nothing;  angles  of  a//  semicircles  rt'^h/ 
an^es  and  equal)  ii.  41 :  of  Clavius  il.  43 : 
of  Vieta  and  Galileo  (**  angle  of  contact  no 
angle  ")  li.  43 :  of  Wallis  (angle  of  contact 
not  inclination  at  all  but  degree  of  curvature) 
II.  4« 

Horsley,  Samuel  i.   106 

Hotiel,  J.  I.  319 

Hudson,  John  I.  102 

Hultsch,  F.  I.  so,  329,  400,  II.  133,  III.  4, 
5««»  5«3»  5^6,  537 

Hunain  b.  Ishaq  al-'ibadi  I.  75 

Hypotheses,  in  Plato  I.    111:   in  Aristotle 

I.  ii8-ao:  confused  by  Proclus  with 
definitions  I.  111 -a:  geometer's  hypo- 
theses not  false  (Aristotle)  i.  119 

Hypothetical  construction  i.  199 
Hypsicles  1.5:  guthor  of  Book  xiv.  i.  5,  6, 
111.438-^,  51a 

lamblichus  I.  63,  83,  li.  97,  1 16,  279,  280, 
281,  283,  284,  285,  286,  287,  288,  289,  290, 
291,  202,  293,  419,  HI.  526 

Ibn  al-'AmId  i.  86 

Ibn  al-Haitham  I.  88,  89 

Ibn  al-Lubud!  I.  90 

Ibn  Rahawaihi  al-ArjanI  i.  86 

Ibn  Sina  (Avicenna)  I.  77,  89 

Icosahedron  ii.  98:  defined  in.  262:  dis- 
covery of,  attributed  to  Theaetetus  in. 
438:  problem  of  inscribing  in  sphere, 
Euclid  s  solution  in.  481-9,  Pappus'  solu- 
tion in.  489-91 :  Mr  H.  M.  Taylor's  con- 
struction III.  491-2 

**Iflalon"  I.  88 

Inclination  [Kkluvi)  of  straight  line  to  plane, 
defined  in.  260,  263-4  •  of  plane  to  plane 
(  =  dihedral  angle)  in.  260,  264 

Incommensurables :  discovered  by  Pythagoras 
or  Pythagoreans  in.  i,  2,  3,  and  with 
reference  to  ^2,  i.  351,  in.  i,  2,  ip:  in- 
commensurable a  Natural  kind,  unlike  i>- 
rational  which  depends  on  convention  or 
assumption  (Pythagoreans)  in.  i :  proof 
of  incommensurability  of  /^2  no  doubt 
Pythagorean  in.  2,  proof  in  Chrystal's 
Algebra  in.  19-20:  incommensurable  in 
laigth  and  incommensurable  in  square 
defined  in.  10,  11:  symbols  for,  used  in 
notes  III.  34:  method  of  testing  incom- 
mensurability (process  of  finding  g.c.m.) 

II.  118,  III.  18-9:  means  of  expression 
consist  in  power  of  approximation  without 
limit  (De  Morgan)  11. 119 :  approximations 
to  ^1  by  means  of  side-  and  diagonal- 
numbers  i.  399-401,  n.  119,  by  means  of 
sexagesimal  fractions  in.  523,  to  ,^3  ii. 
119,  in.  523:  to  \^4500  by  means  of  sexa- 
gesimal fractions  n.  119:  to  x,  n.  110 

Incomposite:  (of  lines)  I.  160-1,  (of  surfaces) 
1 .  1 70 :  (of  number)  =  prime  1 1.  284 


Indivisible  lines  (4ro/uoc  ypafifjuU),  theory  of, 
rebutted  I.  268 

Infinite,  Aristotle  on  the,  I.  232-4 :  infinite 
division  not  assumed,  but  proved,  by  geo- 
meters I.  268 

Infinity,  parallels  meeting  at,  i.  192-3 

Ingrami,  G.  I.  175,  193,  195,  201,  227-8, 
II.  30,  126 

Integral  calculus,  in  new  fragment  of  Archi- 
medes III.  366-7 

Interior  and  exterior  (of  angles)  I.  263,  280  : 
interior  and  opposite  angle  I.  280 

Interpolations  in  the  Elements  before  Theon's 
time  I.  58-63 :  by  Theon  I.  46, 55-6 :  Eud. 

I.  40  interpolated  i.  338:  other  proposi- 
tions interpolated,  (in.  12)  11.  28,  (propo- 
sition after  xi.  37)  in.  360,  (xiii.  6)  in. 
440-51:  cases  in  xi.  23,  in.  319-21: 
dels,  of  analysis  and  synthesis,  and  proofs 
of  XIII.  1-5  by.  III.  442-3 

Inverse  (ratio),  inversely  (eUdTaXtv)  II.  134: 
inversion  is  subject  of  v.  4,  Por.  (Theon) 

II.  144,  and  of  V.  7,  Por.  n.  149,  but  is 
not  properly  put  in  either  place  ii.  149: 
Simson's  Prop.  B  on,  directly  deducible 
from  V.  Def.  5,  ii.  144 

Irrational :  discovered  by  Pythagoras  or  Py- 
thagoreans I.  351,  III.  1-2,  3,  and  with 
reference  to  ^2, 1.  351,  in.  i,  2,  19,  cf.  in. 
524-5 :  depends  on  assumption  or  conven- 
tion, unlike  incommensurable  which  is  a 
natural  kind  (Pythagoreans)  in.  i:  claim 
of  India  to  priority  of  discovery  I.  363-4; 
"irrational  diameter  of  5"  (Pythagoreans 
and  Plato)  I.  399-400,  in.  12  :  approxima- 
tion to  ^^  by  means  of  *'side-"  and 
** diagonal-"  numbers  i.  399-401,  ii.  119: 
Indian  approximation  to  \J^^  I.  361,  363-4: 
unordered  irrationals  (Apollonius)  I.  42, 
115,  III.  3,  10,  246,  255-9:  irrational 
ratio  (dpprp-os  X&yos)  I.  137:  an  irrational 
straight  line  is  so  relatively  to  a/jty  straight 
//>/^  taken  as  rational  III.  10,  11:  irrational 
area  incommensurable  with  rational  area 
or  square  on  rational  straight  line  in.  10, 
12:  Euclid's  irrationals,  object  of  classifi- 
cation of,  in.  4,  5 :  Book  X.  a  repository 
of  results  of  solution  of  different  types  of 
quadratic  and  biquadratic  equations  in.  5: 
types  of  equations  of  which  Euclid's  irra- 
tionals are  positive  roots  in.  5-7 :  actual 
use  of  Euclid's  irrationals  in  Greek  geo- 
metry III.  9-10:  compound  irrationals  in 
Book  X.  all  different  in.  242-3 

Isaacus  Monachus  (or  Argyrus)  I.  73-4,  407 

Ishao  b.  Hunain  b.  Ishaq  al-'IbadI,  Abu 
Yaqub,  translation  of  Elements  by,  I.  75- 
80,  83-4 

Isidorus  of  Miletus  in.  520 

Ismail  b.  Bulbul  i.  88 

Isoperimetric  (or  isometric)  figures:  Pappus 
and  Zenodorus  on,  I.  26,  27,  333 

Isosceles  (ioo9Kiki\i)  I.  187:  of  numbers  (  = 
even)  i.  188:  isosceles  right-angled  tri- 
angle I.  352  :  isosceles  triangle  of  iv.  10, 


GENERAL  INDEX 


S4S 


construction  of,  due  to  Pythagoreans  ii. 
97-9 

Jacobi,  C.  F.  A.  Ii.  i88 
Jakob  b.  Machir  i.  76 
al-Tauhad,  al- Abbas  b.  Said  i.  85 
al-ja37anl  i.  90 
Joannes  Pediasimus  I.  73-3 
Johannes  of  Palermo  in.  8 
Junge,  G.,  on  attribution  of  theorem  of  I.  47 
and  discovery  of  irrationals  to  Pythagoras 

I.  351,  III.  i».,  sn 

Kastner,  A.  G.  i.  78,  97,  10 1 

al-KarablsIi.  85 

K&tv&yana  Sulba-Sutra  I.  360 

Keill,  John  i.  105,  iio-ii 

Kepler  i.  193 

al-KhlUin,  Abu  Ja*far  i.  77,  85 

Killing,  W.  I.  194,   219,   225-6,  235,  242, 

272,  III.  276 
al-Kind!  i.  5^.,  86 
Klamroth,  M.  I.  75-84 
KlUgel,  G.  S.  I.  212 
Kluge  III.  520 
Knesa,  Jakob  i.  112 
Knoche  i«»32>i.,  33>i.,  73 
Kroll,  W.  I.  399-400 
al-Kuhl  I.  88 

Lachlan,  R.  11.  226,  227,  245-6,  247,  256, 

272 
Lambert,  J.  H.  i.  212-3 
Lardner,  Dionysius  i.  112,  246,   250,  298, 

404,  II.  58,  259,  271 
Lascaris,  Constantinus  3 
Leading^  thtorems  (as  distinct  from  converse)  i. 

257 :  leading  variety  of  conversion  I.  256-7 
Least  common  multiple  11.  336-41 
Leeke,  John  I.  no 
Lef^vre,  Jacques  I.  100 
Legendre,  Adrien  Marie  I.  112,  169,  213-9, 

II.  30,  III.  263,  264,  265,  266,  267,  268, 
«73.  «75»  ^98.  309»  356,  436:  proves  vi.  i 
and  similar  propositions  in  two  parts  ( i )  for 
commensurables,  (2)  for  incommensurables 
II*  193-4:  proof  ot  Eucl.  XI.  4,  III.  280, 
of  XI.  6,  8,  III.  284,  289,  of  XI.  15,  III. 
299,  of  XI.  19,  III.  305:  definition  of 
pumes  at  right  angles  ill.  303 :  alternative 
proofs  of  theorems  relating  to  prisms  in. 
331-3:  on  equivalent  parallelepipeds  in. 
335-6:  proof  of  Eucl.  XII.  2,  in.  377-8: 
propositions  on  volumes  of  pyramids  in. 
^89^-91,  of  cylinders  and  cones  in.  422-3 

Leibniz  i.  145,  169,  176,  194 

Leklen  MS.  399,  i  of  al-Hajjaj  and  an- 
Nairizi  I.  22 

Lemma  I.  114:  meaning  (= assumption)  I. 
133-4:  lemmas  interpolated  i.  59-60, 
especially  from  Pappus  i.  67:  lemma 
assumed  in  vi.  22,  n.  242-3:  alternative 
propositions  on  duplicate  ratios  and  ratios 
of  which  they  are  duplicate  (De  Morgan 
and  others)  n.  242-7:   lemmas  interpo- 

H.  B.  IIL 


lated,  (after  x.  9)  in.  30-1,  (after  X.  59)  ill. 
97»  13 1-2 :  lemma§  suspected,  (those  added 
to  X.  18,  23)  in.  48,  (that  after  xii.  2) 
"!•  375»  (tliat  after  xiii.  2)  in.  444-5 

Length,  iirjKOi  (of  numbers  in  one  dimension) 
II.  287:  Plato  restricts  term  to  side  of 
complete  square  II.  287 

Leodamas  of  Thasos  I.  36,  134 

Leon  I.  116 

Leonardo  of  Pisa  in.  8 

Leotaud,  Vincent  n.  42 

Linderup,  H.  C  i.  113 

Line:  Platonic  definition  I.  158:  objection 
of  Aristotle  i.  158:  "magnitude  extended 
one  way"  (Aristotle,  "Heromides")  I. 
158:  "divisible  or  continuous  one  way" 
(Aristotle)  I.  158-9:  "flux  of  point"  I. 
159:  Apollonius  on,  i.  159:  classification 
of  lines,  Plato  and  Aristotle  I.  159-60, 
Heron  I.  159-60,  Geminus,  first  classifica- 
tion I.  160-1,  second  I.  161 :  straight 
(e^^etd),  curved  (Ka/ATiJXij),  circular  (repc^e- 
pijs),  spiral -shaped  (^Xiicocid^f),  bent  (iccica/it- 
^1^1^17),  broken  (iceicXa<rM^)>  round  {rh 
ffrpoyy6\oy)  I.  159,  composite  (ot^^rroj), 
incomposite  (da^fferoi)^ "  forming  a  figure  " 
((rxi7A^roTO(ov<ra),  determinate  (wpurfihri), 
indeterminate  {aApi<rros)  I.  160:  "asym- 
ptotic*' or  non-secant  {affCfAwrtarotj,  secant 
{(rvfAWTfOT^)  I.  161:  simple,  "mixed"  I. 
161-2:  homoeomeric  (uniform)  I.  161-2: 
Proclus  on  lines  without  extremities  I.  165 : 
loci  on  lines  I.  329,  330 

Linear^  loci  I.  330:  problems  I.  330:  num- 
bers =(i)  in  one  dimension  il.  287,  (2) 
prime  II.  285 

Lionardo  da  Vinci,  proof  of  i.  47,  I.  365-6 

Lippcrt  I.  88 1». 

Lobachewsky,  N.  I.  I.  174-5,  213,  219 

Locus-theorems  (roinKiL  OtfaprfifMTo)  and  loci 
{r&iroi):  locus  defined  by  Proclus  I.  329: 
loci  likened  by  Chrysippus  to  Platonic 
ideas  i.  330-1  :  locus-theorems  and  loci 
(i)on  lines  (a)  plane  loci  (straight  lines  and 
circles)  (b)  solid  loci  (conies),  (2)  on  sur- 
faces I.  329:  corresponding  distinction  be- 
tween plane  and  solid  problems,  to  which 
Pappus  adds  linear  problems  I.  330:  fur- 
ther distinction  in  Pappus  between  (i) 
iip^KTtKol  (2)  di€^o8tKol  (3)  dpoffrpo^Kol 
T&K-oi  I.  330:  Proclus  regards  locus  in 
I.  35,  HI.  21,  31  as  an  area  which  is  locus 
of  area  (parallelogram  or  triangle)  I.  330 

Logical  conversion,  distinct  firom  geometrical 
I.  256 

Logical  deductions  I.  256,  284-5,  30^^  ^^^ 
made  by  Euclid  ii.  22,  29:  logical  equi- 
valents I.  309,  314-5 

Lorenz,  J.  F.   I.  107-8,  ill.  34 

Loria,  Gino  i.  7//.,  ion.,  11  n.,  12 if.,  III. 

8»  9»  527 
Luca  Paciuolo  I.  98-9,  100,  in.  8 
Lucas,  £.  in.  527 
Lucian  n.  99 
Lundgren,  F.  A.  A.  i.  113 

35 


546 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Machir,  Jakob  b.  i.  76 

Magni,  Domenico  I.  106 

Magnitude:  common  definition  vicious  I.  148 

al-MahanI  i.  85 

Major  (irrational)  straight  line:  biquadratic 
of  which  it  is  positive  root  ill.  7:  defined 
III.  87-8:  equivalent  to  square  root  of 
fourth  binomial  ill.  84,  115-7:  uniquely 
divided  ill.  98:  extension  of  meaning  to 
irrational  straight  line  of  Mr^^  terms  III.  258 

al-Ma'mun,  Caliph  i.  75 

Mansion,  P.  i.  219 

al-Mansur,  Caliph  i.  75 

Manuscripts  of  EUmenti  i.  46-51 

Martianus  Capella  I.  91,  155 

Martin,  T.  H.  I.  20,  i^n.y  3011. 

Mas'ud  b.  al-Qass  al-Ba^adl  i.  90 

Maximus  Planudes,  scholia  and  lectures  on 
Elements  I.  72 

Means:  three  kinds,  arithmetic,  geometric 
and  harmonic  11.  292-3 :  geometric  mean 
is  "proportion  par  excellence^'  (Kvplutt)  II. 
292-3:  one  geometric  mean  between  two 
square  numbers,  two  between  two  cube 
numbers  (Plato)  11.  294,  363-5 :  one  geo- 
metric mean  between  similar  plane  num- 
bers, two  between  similar  solid  numbers 
''•  37'~5'  "O  numerical  geometric  mean 
between  n  and  «+ 1  (Archjrtas  and  Euclid) 

II.  294-5 

Medial  (straight  line) :  connected  by  Theae- 
tetus  with  geometric  mean  ill.  3,  4 :  defined 

III.  49,  50:  medial  area  ill.  54-5:  an  un- 
limited number  of  irrationals  can  be  de- 
rived from  medial  straight  line,  III.  254-5 

Meguar^z.\\%  I.  93 

Mehler,  F.  G.  i.  404,  iii.  268,  284-5 

Meier,  Rudolf  I.  2i«.,  in.  521,  522 

Menaechmus :  story  of  M.  and  Alexander  I. 
i:  on  elements  I.  114:  i.  117,  125,  133 /t. 

Menelaus  I.  21,  23:  direct  proof  of  I.  25, 
I.  300 

Middle  term,  or  cause,  in  geometry,  illus- 
trated by  Eucl.  III.  31,  I.  149 

Mill,  J.  S.  I.  144 

Minor  (irrational)  straight  line:  biquadratic 
of  which  it  is  root  ill.  7  :  defined  III. 
163-4:  uniquely  formed  ill.  172-3:  equi- 
valent to  square  root  of  fourth  apotome 
III.  203-6 

"Mixed"  (lines)  i.  161-2:  (surfaces)  i.  162, 
170:  different  meanings  of  "mixed"  1. 162 

Mocenigo,  Prince  i.  97-8 

Moderatus,  a  Pythagorean  ii.  280 

MoUweide,  C.  B.  i.   108 

Mondore  (Montaureus),  Pierre  i.  102 

Moses  b.  Tibbon  i.  76 

Motion,  in  mathematics  I.  226:  motion  with- 
out  deformntion  considered  by  Helmholtz 
necessary  to  geometry  i.  226-7,  but  shown 
by  Veronese  to  he  petitio  principii  i.  226-7 

MUller,  J.   H.  T.  i.  189 

MUller,  J.  W.  I.  365 

Muhammad  (b.'  Abdalbaqi)  al-Bagdadi,  trans- 
lator of  De  dixnsionibus  I.  8  ».,  90,  1 10 


Muh.  b.  Ahmad  Abu'r-Raih&n  al-BIninI  i. 

90 
Muh.  b.  Ashraf  Shamsaddin  as-Samarqandl 

I.' 89 
Muh.  b.  'Isa  Abu'Abdallah  al-MahanI  I.  85 
Multinomial  (straight    line):    an  extension 

from   binomial^  probably  investigated   by 

Apollonius,  III.  2^6 
Multiplication,  definition  of,  li.  287 
Munich  MS.  of  enunciations  (R)  I.  04-5 
Miis&  b.   Muh.   b.   Mahmud  Qadlz&de  ar- 

Ruml  I.  5i».,  90 
Musicj   Elements  of  (Sectio    Canonis),   by 

Euclid  I.  17,  II.  295 
Musici  scriptores  Graeci  II.  294 
al-Musta'sim,  Caliph  i.  90 
al-Mutawakkil,  Caliph  i.  75 

an-Nair!a,  Abu  *1  *Abbas  al-Fadl  b.  H&tim, 
I.  21-4,  85,  184,  190,  191,  193,  223,  2ja, 
258,  270,  285,  299,  303,  326,  364,  367, 
369.  373»  405.  408,  II.  5,  16,  28,  34,  36, 
44,  47»  30«,  3«o»  383 

Napoleon  I.   103 

Na§Iraddin  at-Tusi  i.  4t  5  ».,  77,  84,  89, 
208-10,  II.  28 

Nazif  b.  Yumn  (Yaman)  al-Qass  it  76,  77, 87 

Neide,  J.  G.  C.  I.  103 

Nesselmann,  G.  H.  F.  II.  287,  293,  III.  8, 
5^6 

Nicomachus  I.  92,  II.  116,  119,  131,  279, 
280,  281,  282,  283,  284,  285,  286,  287, 
288,  289,  290,  291,  292,  293,  294,  300, 
363,  in.  526,  527 

Nicomedes  i.  42,  i6q-i,  265-6 

Nipsus,  Marcus  Junius  i.  305 

Nixon,  R.  C.  J.  il.   16 

Nomincd  and  r^i/ definitions:  see  Definitions 

Number:  defined  by  Thales,  Eudoxus, 
Moderatus,  Aristotle,  Euclid  il.  280 : 
Nicomachus  and  lambhchus  on,  li.  280 : 
represented  by  lines  ii.  287,  and  by  points 
or  dots  II.  288-9 

Objection  (^WTotrij),  technical  term,  in  geo- 
metry I.  135,  257,  260,  265  :  in  logic 
(Aristotle)  i.  135 

Oblong:  (of  geometrical  figure)  I.  151,  188: 
(of  number)  in  Plato  either  wpofn^icrit  or 
ircpofi-^Kyft  II.  288  :  but  these  terms  denote 
two  distinct  divisions  of  plane  numbers  in 
Nicomachus,  Theon  of  Smyrna  and  lam- 
blichus  II.  289-90 

Octahedron  Ii.  98 :  definition  of,  ill.  262 : 
discovery  of,  attributed  to  Theaetetus  in. 
438  :  problem  of  inscribing  in  sphere, 
Euclid's  solution  in.  474-7,  Pappus*  solu- 
tion in.  477 

Odd  (number):  defs.  of  in  Nicomachus  11. 
281:  Pythagorean  definition  ii.  281:  def. 
of  odd  and  even  by  one  another  unscientific 
(Aristotle)  i.  148-9,  II.  281  :  Nicom.  and 
Iambi,  distinguish  three  classes  of  odd 
numbers  (i)  prime  and  incomposite, 
(2)  secondary  and  composite,  as  extremes, 


GENERAL  INDEX 


547 


(3)  secondary  and  composite  in  themselves 
but  prime  and  incomposite  to  one  another, 
which  is  intermediate  11.  287 

Odd-times  even  (number) :  definition  in  Eucl. 
spurious  II.  283-4,  and  differs  from  defi- 
nitions by  Nicomachus  etc.  ibid. 

Odd-times  odd  (number)  :  defined  in  Eucl. 
but  not  in  Nicom.  and  Iambi,  li.  284 : 
Theon  of  Smyrna  applies  term  to  prime 
numbers  ii.  284 

Oenopides  of  Chios  i.  34,  36,  126,  271,  295, 
371,  in.  525,  526 

Ofterdinger,  L.  F.  i.  9».,  10 

Olympiodorus  i.  29 

Oppermann  I.  151 

Optics  of  Euclid  i.  17 

**  Ordered  "  proportion  {jrrar^pAvti  dy 0X07/0), 
interpolated  definition  of,  11.  137 

Oresme,  N.   i.  97 

Orontius  Finaeus  (Oronce  Fine)  I.  101,  104 

Ozanam,  Jaques  L  107,   108 

Paciuolo,  Luca  I.  98-9,  100,  III.  8 

Pamphile  i.  317,  319 

Pappus:  contrasts  Euclid  and  Apollonius  1. 3 : 
on  Euclid's  Porisms  I.  10-14,  Sufface-loci 
I.  15,  16,  Data  I.  8  :  on  Treasury  of 
Analysis  I.  8,  10,  11,  138:  commentary 
on  Elements  1.  24-7,  partly  preserved  in 
scholia  I.  (i(i\  evidence  of  scholia  as  to 
Pappus'  text  I.  66-7  :  commentary  on 
Book  X.  survives  in  Arabic  III.  3:  quota- 
tions from  it,  III.  3-4,  255-9:  lemmas  in 
Book  X.  interpolated  from,  I.  67  :  on 
Analysis  and  Synthesis  I.  138-9,  141-2: 
additional  axioms  by,  i.  25,  223,  224,  232: 
on  converse  of  Post.  4,  1. 25, 201 :  proof  of 
*•  5  hy,  I.  254:  extension  of  1.  47,  1.  366: 
semi-algebraical  methods  in,  1.373,  378: 
on  loci  I.  329,  330:  on  conchoids  I.  161, 
266:  on  quadratrix  I.  266:  on  isoperime- 
tric  figures  i.  26,  27,  333:  on  paradoxes 
of  Erycinus  I.  27,  290:  lemma  on  Apollo- 
nius' Plane  wutreij  ii.  64-5:  problem  from 
same  work  11.  81 :  assumes  case  of  vi.  3 
where  external  angle  bisected  (Simson's 
VI.  Prop.  A)  II.  197 :  theorem  firom  Apol- 
lonius' Plane  Loci  11.  1^8:  theorem  that 
ratio  compounded  of  ratios  of  sides  (of  equi- 
angular parallelograms)  is  equal  to  ratio  of 
rectangles  contained  by  sides  il.  250 :  use  of 
Euclid's  irrationals  ill.  9,  10:  methods  of 
inscribing  regular  solids  in  sphere,  tetra- 
*  hedron  in.  472-3,  octahedron  III.  477,  cube 
III.  480,  icosahedron  in.  489-91,  dodeca- 
hedron III.  501-3:  I.  17,  39,  133 «.,  137, 
15^  2^5. 388,  39^  401 :  II.  4»  «7.  «9»  ^7»  79» 
81.  113,  133,  211,  250,  251,  292,  III.  522 

Papyrus,  Herculanensis  No.  106 1,  i.  50, 
184:  Oxyrhynchus  I.  50:  Fayum  I.  51, 
337»  338:   Rhind  I.  304 

Paradoxes,  in  geometry  i.  188:  of  Erycinus 
I.  27,  290,  329:  an  ancient  "Budget  of 
Paradoxes"  I.  329 

**Parallelcpipedal"  =  with  parallel  planes  or 


faces:  " parallelepipedal  solid "  (not  "solid 
parallelepiped")  or  "parallelepiped"  III. 
326 :  generally  has  six  faces  but  sometimes 
more  (" parallelepipedal  prism")  iii.  401, 
404:  "parallelepipedal"  (solid)  numbers 
in  Nicomachus  have  two  of  sides  differing 
by  unity  ii.  290 

Parallelogram  ( =  parallelogrammic  area), 
first  introduced  i.  325 :  rectangular  paral- 
lelogram I.  370 

Parallels:  Aristotle  on,  i.  190,  191-2:  defi- 
nitions,   by  "Aganis"   I.    191,    Geminus 

I.  191,  Posidonius  I.  190,  Simplicius  i. 
190:  as  equi-distants  I.  190-1,194:  direc- 
tion-theory of,  I.  191-2,  194:  definitions 
classified  i.  192-4:  Veronese's  definition 
and  postulate  i.  194:  Parallel  Postulate, 
see  Postulate  5:  Legendre's  attempt  to 
establish  theory  of,  i.  213-9:  parallel 
planes,  definition  of,  in.  260,  265 

Paris  MSS.  oi  Elements ^  (p)  i.  49,  (q)  i.  50 

Pasch,  M.  I.  157,  228,  250 

"  Peacock's  tail,"  name  for  Eucl.  in.  8, 1.  99 

Pediasimus,  Joannes  I.  72-3 

Peithon  i.  203 

Peletarius  (Jacques  Peletier)  i.  103,  104,  249, 
407,  II.  47,  56,  84,  146,  190:  on  angle  of 
contact  and  angle  <^ semicircle  li.  41 

Pcna  I.  104 

Pentagon :  decomposition  of  regular  pentagon 
into  30  elementary  triangles  1 1.  98:  rela- 
tion to  pentagram  n.  99 

Pentagonal  numbers  li.  289 

"Perfect"  (of  a  class  of  numbers)  ii.  293-4, 
42i-5»  III*  5^6-7:  Pjrthagoreans  applied 
term  to  10,  li.  294 :  3  also  called  "  perfect " 

II.  294 

Perpendicular  («:4^erof):  definition  I.  181: 
"plane"  and  "solid"  I.  272:  perpendicu- 
lar and  obliques  I.  291 :  perpendicular  to 
plane,  in.  200,  263:  perpendicular  to  two 
straight  lines  not  in  one  plane  in.  306-7 

Perseus  i.  42,  162-3 

Perturbed  proportion  {TerapayfUvri  waKoyta) 
II.   136,   176-7 

Pesch,  J.  G.  van,  De Proclifontibus  i.  23sqq., 
29  «. 

Petrus  Montaureus  (Pierre  Mondor^)  I.  102 

Peyrard  and  Vatican  MS.  190  (P)  I.  46,  47, 
103:  I.  108 

Pfleiderer,  C  F.  I.  168,  298,  ii.  2 

PAaenomena  of  Euclid  I.  16,  17 

Philippus  of  Mende  I.  i,  116 

Phillips,  George  I.   112 

Philo  of  Byzantium  I.  20,  23 :  proof  of  I.  8, 
I.  263-4 

Philolaus,  I.  34,  351,  371,  399,  II.  97,  III.  525 

Philoponus  I.  45,   191-2,  ii.  234,  282 

Pirckenslein,  A.  E.  Burkh.  von,  I.   107 

Plane  (or.  plane  surfecc) :  Plato's  definition 
of,  I.  171,  III.  272-3:  Proclus*  and  Sim- 
plicius' interpretation  of  Euclid's  def.  I. 
171:  possible  origin  of  Euclid's  def.  I. 
171 :  Archimedes'  assumption  i.  171,  172: 
other  ancient  definitions  of,  in  Proems, 


548 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Heron,  Theon  of  Smyrna,  an-Naiilzi  I. 
1 71-1:  ••Simson*s"  definition  ("axiom  of 
the  plane")  i.  172-3,  ill.  273,  and  Gauss 
on,  I.  172-3:  Crelle's  tract  on,  i.  172-4: 
other  definitions  by  Fourier  i.  173,  Deahna 

I.  174,  J.  K.  Becker  i.  174,  Leibniz  i.  176, 
Beez  I.  176:  evolution  of,  by  Bolyai  and 
Lobachewsky  I.  174-5:  Enriques  and 
Amaldi,  Ingrami,  Veronese  and  Hilbert 
on,  I.  175:  plane  at  right  angles  to  plane, 
Euclid's  definition  of,  in.  260,  263,  and 
alternative  definition  making  it  a  particular 
case  of  "inclination"  HI.  303-4:  parallel 
planes  defined  in.  260,  265 

"Plane  loci"  I.  329-30:  Plane  Loci  of  Apol- 
lonius  I.  14,  259,  330,  II.  198-200 

Plane  numbers,  product  of  two  factors 
("sides"   or   "length"   and   "breadth") 

II.  287-8  :  in  Plato  either  square  or  oblong 

II.  287-8  :  similar  plane  numbers  li.  293  : 
one  mean  proportional  between  similar 
plane  numbers  11.  371-2 

"Plane  problems"  i.  329 

Planudes,  Maximus  i.  72 

Plato:  I.  I,  2,  3,  137,  155-6,  I5?»  184,  187, 
203,  221,  III.  I,  3  ;  supposed  invention  of 
Analysis  by,  i.   134:  def.  of  straight  line 

I.  165-6 :  def.  of  plane  surface  I.  171  :  on 
golden  section  ii.  99 :  on  art  of  stereometry 
(length,  breadth,  and  depth)  as  one  of  three 
/M^i^^ra,  next  to  geometry  but  commonly 
put  after  astronomy  because  little  advanced 

III.  262  :  generation  of  cosmic  figures  by 
putting  together  triangles,  i.  226,  11.  97-8, 
III.  207,  525:  rule  for  rational  right-angled 
triangles  i.  356,  357,  359,  360,  385:  "ra- 
tional diameter  of  5  "  i.  399,  gives  7/5  as 
approximation  to  V2,  n.  119:  passage  of 
Tneaetetus  on  Swdfieit  (square  roots  or  surds) 

II.  288,  290,  III.  1-3,  524-5:  on  square 
and  oblong  numbers  II.  288,  290:  theorem 
that  between  square  numbers  one  mean 
suffices,  between  cube  numbers  two  means 
are  necessary  ii.  294,  364 

"Platonic"  figures  i.  2,  ill.  525:  scholium 
on.  III.   438 

Playfair,  John  i.  103,  iii  :  "Playfair's" 
Axiom  I.  220 :  used  to  prove  Eucl.  i.  29,  I. 
312,  and  Eucl.  Post.  5,  I.  313  :  comparison 
of  Axiom  with  Post.  5,  i.  313-4  :  II.  2 

Pliny  I.  20,  333 

Plutarch  I.  21,  29,  37,  177,  343,  351,  11.  98, 
254.  III.  368 

Point :  Pythagorean  definition  of,  i.  155  :  in- 
terpretation of  Euclid's  definition  i.  155  : 
Plato's  view  of,  and  Aristotle's  criticism 
!•  155-6:  attributes  of,  according  to  Aris- 
totle I.  156  :  terms  for  ((TTiy/xiJ,  arj/JieTov)  I. 
156:  other  definitions  by  "  Herundes," 
Posidonius  I.  156,  Simplicius  i.  157  :  nega- 
tive character  of  Euclid's  def.  I.  156  :  is  it 
suflficient  ?  i.  1 56 :  motion  of,  produces 
line  I.  157  :  an-NairlzI  on,  i.  157 :  modern 
explanations  by  abstraction  I.  157 

Polybius  I.  331 


Polygon:  sum  of  interior  angles  (Proclus' 
proof)  I.  322 :  sum  of  exterior  angles  I.  34a 

Polygonal  numbers  li.  28^ 

Polyhedral  angles,  extension  of  XI.  ai  to, 
III.  310-1 

Porism:  two  senses  I.  13:  (i)= corollary  I. 
1341  278-9:  as  corollary  to  proposition 
precedes  "Q.E.D."  or  "Q.R.F.'*  ii.  8,  64  : 
Porism  to  IV.  15  mentioned  by  Proclus 
II.  109 :  Porism  to  vi.  i^,  ii.  234 :  inter- 
polated Porisms  (corollaries)  I.  60-1,  381  : 
(2)  as  used  in  Porisms  of  Euclid,  d^tin- 
guished   from  theorems  and  problems  I. 

10,  11:  account  of  the  Porisms  given  by 
Pappus  I.  10-13  5  modem  restorations  by 
Simson  and  Chasles  I.  14:  views  of  Hei- 
berg  I.  II,  14,  and  ofZeuthen  I.  15 

Porphyry  i.  17  :  commentary  on  Euclid  i.  24  : 
Symmikta  1. 24, 34,  44:  1. 136, 277, 283, 287 

Paselger  ill.  8 

Posidonius  of  Alexandria  ill.  521 

Posidonius,  the  Stoic  I.  20,  21,  27,  28«., 
189,  197,  III.  521  :  book  directed  against 
the  Epicurean  Zeno  I.  34,  43  :  on  parallels 
I.  40,  190:  definition  oi  figure  I.  41,  183 

Postulate,  distinguished  from  axiom,  by 
Aristotle  I.  11 8-9,  by  Proclus  (Geminus 
and  "others")  I.  12 1-3  :  from  hypothesis, 
by  Aristotle  I.  1 20-1,  by  Proclus  I.  12 1-2  : 

g)stulates  in  Archimedes  I.  120,  123 : 
uclid's  view  of,  reconcileable  with  Aris- 
totle's I.  119-20,  124:  postulates  do  not 
confine  us  to  rule  and  compass  I.  124: 
Postulates  i,  2,  significance  of,  I.  195-0 : 
famous  "  Postulate  or  "  Axiom  of  Archi- 
medes" I.  234,  III.  15-6 

Postulate  4  :  significance  of,  i.  200 :  proofs 
of,  resting  on  other  postulates  I.  200-1, 
231 :  converse  true  only  when  angles  recti- 
lineal (Pappus)  I.  201 

Postulate  5  :  probably  due  to  Euclid  himself 
I.  202  :  Proclus  on,  I.  202-3  •  attempts  to 
prove,  Ptolemy  I.  204-6,  Proclus  i.  206-8, 
Na§i-raddin  at-TusI  I.  208-10,  Wallis  I. 
210-1,  Saccheri  I.  21 1-2,  Lambert  i.  212- 

3  :  substitutes  for,  "  Playfair's  "  axiom  (in 
Proclus)  I.  220,  others  by  Proclus  I.  207, 
220,  Posidonius  and  Geminus  i.  220,  Le- 
gendre  i.  213,  214,  220,  Wallis  i.  220, 
Carnot,  Laplace,  Lorenz,  W.  Bolyai, 
Gauss,  Worpitzky,  Clairaut,  Veronese, 
Ingrami  I.  220 :  Post.  5  proved  from,  and 
compared  with,  "  Playfair  s"  Axiom  I.  313- 

4  :  I.  30  is  logical  equivalent  of,  I.  220 
Potts,  Robert  I.   112,  246 

Prime  (number) :  definitions  of,  ii.  284-5  : 
Aristotle  on  two  senses  of  "prime"  i.  146, 

11.  285  :  2  admitted  as  prime  by  Eucl.  and 
Aristotle,  but  excluded  by  Nicomachus, 
Theon  of  Smyrna  and  lamblichus,  who 
make  prime  a  subdivision  of  odd  1 1.  284-5  * 
"prime  and  incomposite  (d<nJi'tf rroj ) "  11. 
284 :  different  names  for  prime,  "  odd- 
times  odd"  (Theon),  "linear"  (Theon), 
"rectilinear"    (Thymaridas),    "  euthjrme- 


GENERAL  INDEX 


549 


trie  *'  (lamblichus)  1 1.  285  :  prime  abso- 
lutely or  in  themselves  as  distinct  from 
prime  to  one  another  (Theon)  ii.  285 :  defi- 
nitions of  "  prime  to  one  another"  li.  285-6 

Principles,  First,  i.   117-24 

Prism,  definition  of,  by  Euclid  III.  261, 
by  others  iii.  268-9  :  **  parallelepipedal 
prisms"  III.  404 

Problem,  distinguished  from  theorem  I.  124- 
8 :  problems  classified  according  to  number 
of  solutions  (a)  one  solution,  ordered  (re- 
Tayfii^a)  {d)  a  definite  number,  interme- 
diate  {fUva)  {c)  an  infinite  number  of  solu- 
tions, unordered  (AraKTa)  I.  128:  in  widest 
sense  anything  propounded  (possible  or 
not)  but  generally  a  construction  which  is 
possible  I.  128-^:  another  classification 
(i)  problem  in  excess  (xXeord^oi'),  asking 
too  much  I.  129,  (2)  deficient  problem  (AXt- 
xh  irp6^\rifia)y  giving  too  little  I.  129 

Proclus  :  details  of  career  I.  29-30:  remarks 
on  earlier  commentators  I.  19,  33,  45 : 
commentary  on  Eucl.  i,  sources  of,  i.  29- 
45,  object  and  character  of,  I.  31-2 :  com- 
mentary probably  not  continued,  though 
continuation  intended  I.  32-3,  III.  521-2: 
books  quoted  by  name  in,  I.  34 :  famous 
"summary"  I.  37-8 :  list  of  writers  quoted 
I.  44 :  his  own  contributions  I.  44-5 : 
character  of  MS.  used  by,  I.  62,  63 :  on 
the  nature  of  elements  and  things  elemen- 
tary I.  1 14-6:  on  advantages  of  Euclid's 
Elements^  and  their  object  I.  1 1 5-6 :  on 
first  principles,  hypotheses,  postulates, 
axioms  I.  12 1-4:  on  difficulties  in  three 
distinctions  between  postulates  and  axioms 
I.  123  :  on  theorems  and  problems  1. 124-9: 
on  formal  divisions  of  proposition  I.  129- 
31,  II.  100:  attempt  to  prove  Postulate  5, 
I.  206-8:  commentary  on  Plato's  RepubliCy 
allusion  in,  to  *'side-"  and  "diagonal-" 
numbers  in  connexion  with  Eucl.  II.  9,  10, 

I.  399-400 :  on  use  of  **  quindecagon  "  for 
astronomy  II.  iii :  II.  4,  39,  40,  193,  247, 
269,  III.  I,  10,  264,  267,  273,  310,  441,  524, 

525 

Proof  (air6^*|is),  necessary  part  of  proposi- 
tion I.   129-30 

Proportion  :  complete  theory  applicable  to 
incommensurables  as  well  as  commensur- 
ablesisdueto  Eudoxus  I.  i37r^5i«n.  112: 
old  (Pythagorean)  theory  practically  repre- 
sented by  arithmetical  theory  of  Eucl.  vii., 

II.  113:  in  giving  older  theory  as.  well 
Euclid  simply  followed  tradition  il.  113  : 
Aristotle  on  general  proof  (new  in  his 
time)  of  theorem  (altemando)  in  proportion 
II.  113:  X.  5  as  connecting  two  theories 
II.  1 13 :  De  Morgan  on  extension  of  mean- 
ing of  ratio  to  cover  incommensurables  il. 
118:  power  of  expressing  i  ncommensurable 
ratio  IS  power  of  approximation  without 
limit  II.  119:  interpolated  definitions  of 
proportion  as  "sameness"  or  "similarity 
of  ratios"  1 1.  119:  definition  in  v.  Def.  5 


substituted  for  that  of  vii.  Def.  20  because 
latter  found  inadequate,  not  vice  versa  il. 
121:  De  Morgan's  defence  of  v.  Def.  5  as 
necessary  and  sufficient  ii.  122-4  •  v.  Def. 
5  corresponds  to  Weierstrass'  conception 
of  number  in  general  and  to  Dedekind's 
theoryof  irrationals  II.  124-6:  alternatives 
for  V.  Def.  5  by  a  geometer-friend  of  Sac- 
cheri,  by  Faifofer,  Ingrami,  Veronese, 
Enriques  and  Amaldi  II.  126:  propor- 
tionals of  VII.  Def.  20  (numbers)  a  par- 
ticular case  of  those  of  v.  Def.  5  (Simson's 
Props.  C,  D  and  notes)  11.  126-9,  '''•  ^5' 
proportion  in  three  terms  (Aristotle  makes 
It  four)  the  "least"  ii.  131 :  "continuous" 
proportion  ((rwexfys  or  ffwrifitUprj  dpoXoyUif 
in  Euclid  i^rjs  AvdXoyop)  II.  131,  293: 
three  ** proportions"  ii.  292,  but  propor- 
tion par  excellence  or  primary  is  continuous 
or  geometric  ii.  292-3 :  "  discrete "  or 
"disjoined"  {di-ofntfJ^Vf  Stej^evyfUni)  II.131, 
293  :  "  ordered  "  proportion  (Teray/ii^rf), 
interpolated  definition  of,  11.  137:  "per- 
turbed" proportion  {rerapayfjiirri)  1 1.  136 
176-7:  extensive  use  of  proportions  in 
Greek  geometry  11. 187  :  proportions  enable 
any  quadratic  equation  witn  real  roots  to 
be  solved  11.  187:  supposed  use  of  pro- 
positions of  Book  V.  in  arithmetical  Books 
II.  314,  320 

Proposition,  formal  divisions  of,  I.  129-31 

Protarchus  i.  5,  Iii.  512 

Psellus,  Michael,  scholia  by,  i.  70,  71,  11. 

Pseudaria  of  Euclid  I.  7  :  Pseudographemata 

I.  7>f. 
Pseudoboethius  i.  92 

Ptolemy  I.:    i.   i,   2:   story  of  Euclid  and 

Ptolemy  I.  i 
Ptolemy,  Claudius  I.  3o#f. :  Harmonica  of, 
and  commentary  on,  i.  17  :  on  Parallel- 
Postulate  I.  28«.,  34,  43,  45:  attempt  to 
{)rove  it  I.  204-6  :  lemma  about  quadri- 
ateral  in  circle  (Simson's  vi.  Prop.  D) 

II.  225-7 '-  "•  "i»  ii7»  "9.  ni.  523 
Pyramid,  definitions  of,  by  Euclid  ill.  261, 

by  others  in.  268 

Pyramidal  numbers  ii.  290:  pyramids  trun- 
cated, twice- truncated  etc.  ii.  291 

Pythagoras  i.  4«.,  36:  supposed  discoverer 
of  the  irrational  i.  351,  iii.  1-2,  524-5,  of 
application  of  areas  I.  343-4,  III.  524,  of 
theorem  of  I.  47,  i.  343-4,  350-4,  in.  524, 
of  construction  of  five  regular  solids  ii.  97, 

III.  524-5 :  story  of  sacrifice  I.  37,  343, 
350 :  probable  method  of  discovery  of  1. 47  "7 
and  proof  of,  i.  352-5 :  suggestions  by  Bret- 
schneider  and  Hankel  I.  354,  by  Zeuthen  i. 
355-6:  rule  for  forming  right-angled  tri- 
angles in  rational  numbers  I.  351,  356-9, 
385 :  construction  of  figure  equal  to  one  and 
similar  to  another  rectilineal  figure  11.  254: 
introduced  "the  most  perfect  proportion  in 
four  terms  and  specially  called  *  harmonic ' " 
into  Greece  1 1.  112 


35—3 


550 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Pythagoreans  i.  19,  36,  155,  188, 179:  tcnn 
for  surf  cue  (xpoid)  1. 169 :  angles  of  triangle 
equal  to  two  right  angles,  theorem  and 
proof  I.  317-10 :  three  polygons  which  in 
contact  fill  space  rouna  point  I.  318,  il. 
p8 :  method  of  appliccUion  of  areas  (includ- 
ing exceeding  and  falling-short)  I.  343, 
384,  403,  II.  187,  158-60,  163-5,  166-7: 
gnomon  Pythagorean  I.  351:  "rational" 
and  *'  irrational  diameter  of  5  "  I.  390-400, 
^"-  5^5*  story  of  Pythagorean  who,  naving 
divulged  the  irrational,  perished  by  ship- 
wreck III.  1 :  7/5  as  approximation  to  a^i, 

II.  119:  approximation  to  ,^1  by  "side-" 
and  "diagonal-"  numbers  i.  398-400,  ill. 

I,  10 :  proof  of  incommensurability  of  1^1, 

III.  1 :  construction  of  isosceles  triangle  of 
Eucl.  IV.  10,  and  of  regular  pentagon,  ii. 
97-8,  III.  515:  possible  method  of  discovery 
of  latter  11.  97-9 :  distinguished  three  sorts 
of  means^  arithmetic,  geometric  and  har- 
monic II.  Ill  :  had  theory  of  proportion 
applicable  to commensurables only  ii.  in: 
construction  of  dodecahedron  in  sphere  11. 
97,  and  of  other  regular  solids  in.  438, 
515  :  definitions  of  unit  11. 170,  of  even  and 
odd  II.  181  :  called  10  "perfect"  ii.  194 

Qidtzade  ar-RumI  I.  5i».,  90 

q.e!d.  (or  F.)  I.  57 

al-QiftI  I.  4«.,  94 

Quadratic  equations :  solution  assumed  by 
Hippocrates  i.  386-7 :  geometrical  solu- 
tion of  particular  quadratics  I.  383-5, 
386-8 :  solution  of  general  quadratic  by 
means  of  proportions  II.  187,  163-5,  266-7: 
5iopi<rfA6s  or  condition  of  possibility  of  solv- 
ing equation  of  Eucl.  VI.  18,  II.  159:  one 
solution  only  given,   for  obvious  reasons 

II.  160,  164,  167 :  but  method  gives  both 
roots  if  real  11.  158  :  exact  correspondence 
of  geometrical  to  algebraical  solution,  1 1. 
163-4,  266-7  •  indication  that  Greeks 
solved  them  numerically  ill.  43-4 

Quadratrix  1.  265-6,  330 

Quadrature  (rcrpaytavLfffjiht)  definitions  of, 
I.  140 

Quadrilateral:  varieties  of,  I.  188-90:  in- 
scribing in  circle  of  quadrilateral  equi- 
angular to  another  ii.  91-2  :  condition  for 
inscribing  circle  in,  ll.  93,  95  :  quadri- 
lateral in  circle,  Ptolemy's  lemma  (Simson's 
VI.  Prop.  D)  II.  115-7  •  quadrilateral  not 
a  "  polygon  "  11.  139 

Quadrinomial  (straight  line),  compound  ir- 
rational (extension  from  binomial)  ill.  156 

"  Quindecagon  "  (fifteen-angled  figure) :  use- 
ftil  for  astronomy  11.  11 1 

Quintilian  i.  333 

Qusta  b.  LiiqS  al-6alabakkT,  translator  of 
"Books  XIV,  XV "  I.  76,  87,  88 

Radius,  no  Greek  word  for,  i.  190,  ii.  1 
Ramus,  Petrus  (Pierre  de  la  Ram^e)  I.  104 
Ratdolt,  Erhard  i.  78,  97 


Ratio:  definition  of,  11.  116-9,  ^^^  sufficient 
ground  for  regarding  it  as  spurious  li.  117, 
Barrow's  defence  of  it  il.  117  :  method  of 
transition  firom  arithmetical  to  more  general 
sense  covering  incommensurables  li.  118  ; 
means  of  expressing  ratio  of  incommen- 
surables is  by  approximation  to  any  degree 
of  accuracy  ii.  119:  def.  of  greater  ratio 
only  one  criterion  (there  are  others)  ii. 
130 :  tests  for  greater,  equal  and  less  ratios 
mutually  exclusive  li.  130-1  :  test  for 
greater  ratio  easier  to  apply  than  that  for 
equal  ratio  11.  119-30:  arguments  about 
greater  and  less  ratios  unsafe  unless  they 
go  back  to  original  definitions  (Simson  on 
V.  10)  II.  156-7:  compound  rz.\\o  il.  131-3, 
189-90,  134 :  operation  of  compounding 
ratios  11.  134:  "ratio  compounded  of  their 
sides"  (careless  expression)  ii.  148:  dupli- 
cate^  triplicate  etc.  ratio  as  distinct  from 
cbublCf  triple  etc.  II.  133:  cdtemate  ratio, 
altemando  II.  134 :  inverse  ratio,  inversely 
II.  134:  composition  of  ratio,  componendo^ 
different  from  compounding tz\\o&  II.  134-5: 
separatiofi  of  ratio,  separando  (commonly 
divideftdd)  II.  135:  conversion  of  ratio, 
convertencb  ii.  135  :  ratio  ex  aequali  ii. 
136,  ex  aequali  in  perturbed  proportion  ii. 
136 :  division  of  ratios  used  in  Data  as 
general  method  alternative  to  compounding 
II.  149-50:  names  for  particular  arith- 
metical ratios  ii.  191 

Rational  {^ixi)\  (of  ratios)  i.  137  :  "rational 
diameter  of  5  "  I.  399r-40o:  rational  right- 
angled  triangles,  see  right-angled  trian^es: 
any  straight  line  may  be  taken  as  rational 
and  the  irrationcU  is  irrational  in  relation 
thereto  in.  10:  rational  straight  line  is 
still  rational  if  commensurable  with  rational 
straight  line  in  square  only  (extension  of 
meaning  by  Euclid)  ill.  10,  ii-ii 

Rationalisation  of  fractions  with  denominator 
of  form  a^ijB  or  ^A  ^»J^i  ni.  143-51 

Rauchfuss,  see  Dasypodius 

Rausenberger,  O.  i.  157,  175,  313,  III.  307, 
.^09 

ar-RazI,  Abu  Yusuf  Yaqub  b.  Muh.  I.  86 

Reciprocal  or  reciprocally-related  figures :  de- 
finition spurious  II.  189 

Rectangle  :  =  rectangular  parallelogram  i. 
370  :  "  rectangle  contained  by  "  I.  370 

Rectilineal  angle:  definitions  classified  i. 
179-81:  rectilineal  figure  I.  187:  "recti- 
lineal segment"  i.  190 

Reductio  ad  absurdum  I.  134:  described  by 
Aristotle  and  Proclus  I.  136:  synonyms 
for,  in  Aristotle  I.  136:  a  variety  of  Analy- 
sis I.  1 40:  by  exhaustion  i.  185,  193: 
nominal  avoidance  of,  I.  369:  the  only 
possible  method  of  proving  Eucl.  in.  i, 
II.  8  ^ 

Reduction  {airay(irffi)f  technical  term,  ex- 
plained by  Aristotle  and  Proclus  i.  1 35 : 
first  "reduction"  of  a  difficult  construction 
due  to  Hippocrates  I.  135,  ll.  133 


GENERAL  INDEX 


551 


Regiomontaniis  (Johannes  Miiller  of  Konigs- 

^rg)  I-  93i  9^.  'oo 

Reyher,  Samuel  I.  107 

Rhiaeticus  I.  loi,  ill.  533 

Rhomboid  I.   189 

Rhombus,  meaning  and  derivation  I.  189 

Riccardi,  P.  i.  96,   11 3,  302 

Riemann,  B.  I.  319,  375,  374,  380 

Right  angle:  definition  i.  181:  drawing 
straight  line  at  right  angles  to  another, 
Apollonius*  construction  for,  I.  370:  con- 
struction  when  drawn  at  extremity  of  second 
line  (Heron)  I.  370 

Right-angled  triangles,  rational :  rule  for 
hnding,  by  Pythagoras  I.  3S(5-9»  ^7  Plato 
I-  356,  357.  359.  360,  385.  by  Euclid  III. 
63-4:  discovery  of  rules  by  means  of 
gnomons  I.  358-60 :  connexion  of  rules 
with  Eucl.  II.  4,  8,_i.  360:  rational  right- 
angled  triangles  in  Apastamba  I.  361,  363 

Roth  I.  357-8 

Rouch^  and  de  Comberousse  I.  313 

Rudd,  Capt.  Thos.  I.   no 

Ruellius  Joan.  (Jean  Ruel)  I.   too 

••Rule  of  three**:  Eucl.  vi.  i3  equivalent  to, 
n.  315 

Russell,  Bertrand  i.  337,  349 

Saccheri,  Gerolaroo  I.  106,  144-5*  167-8, 
185-6,  194,  197-8,  300-I,  II.  136,  130: 
proof  of  existence  of  fourth  proportional  by 
Eucl.  VI.   I,  3  and  13,  11.  170 

Sa'ld  b.  Mas*ud  b.  al-Qass  I.  90 

Sathapatha-Brahmana  I.  363 

Savile,  Henry  i.  105,  166,  345,  350,  363,  il. 

Scalene  (<nraXifv6f  or  ffKoK^vfit)  I.  187-8:  of 
numbers  (=odd)  I.   188:   a  class  of  solid 
numbers  1 1.  390:  of  cone  (Apollonius)  I. 
188 
Schessler,  Chr.  i.  107 
Scheubel,  Joan.  i.  loi,   107 
Schiaparelli,  G.  V.  I.   163 
SchlUssel,  Christoph,  see  Clavius 
Schmidt,  Max»C.  P.  I.  304,  319 
Schmidt,  W.,  editor  of  Heron,  on  Heron's 

date  I.  30- 1 
Scholia  to  Elements  and  MSS.  of,  i.  64-74: 
historical  information  in,  I.  64:  evidence 
in,  as  to  text  i.  64-5,  66-7 :  sometimes  in- 
terpolated in  text  1. 67 :  classes  of,  ••  Schol. 
Vat.**  I.  65-9,  ••Schol.  Vind.'*  I.  69-70, 
miscellaneous  1. 71-4 :  ••  Schol.  Vat.**  partly 
derived  from  Pappus'  commentary  I.  661 
many  scholia  partly  extracted  from  Proclus 
on  Bk.  I.,  I.  60, 69,  73 :  many  from  Geminus 
solely  III.  533 :  sources  go  back  as  far  as 
Theodorus  ill.  533:  numerical  illustra- 
tions in,  in  Greek  and  Arabic  numerals  I. 
71,  III.  533 :  scholia  by  Psellus  I.  70-1,  bv 
Maximus  Planudes  I.  73,  Joannes  Pediasi- 
niusi.  73-3:  scholia  in  Latin  published  by 
G.  Valla,  Commandinus,  Conrad  Dasypo- 
dius  I.  73:  scholia  on  Eucl.  11.  13,  i.  407: 
Scholium  iv.  No.  3  ascribes  Book  iv.  to 


Pythagoreans' 1 1.  97,  in.  535:  Scholium  v. 
No.  I  attributes  Book  v.  to  Eudoxus  ii.  1 13 : 
Scholium  x.  No.  i  attributes  discovery  of 
irrational  and  incommensurable  to  Pytha- 
goreans in.  I :  scholium  published  later 
by  Heiberg  attributes  Scholium  x.  No.  63 
to  Proclus  III.  531-3 

Scholiast  to  Clouds  of  Aristophanes  ii*  99 

Schooten,  Franz  van  I.   108 

Schopenhauer  I.  337,  354 

Schoiten,  H.  I.  167,  174,  179,  193-3,  303 


179. 
,  F. 


Schultze,  A.  and  Sevenoak,  F.  L.  ill.  384, 

303.  33' 
Schumacher  i.  331 
Schur,  F.  I.  338 
Schweikart,  F.  K.  I.  319 
Scipio  Vegius  I.  99 
Seciic  CoHonis  by  Euclid  I.  17,  1 1.  394-5, 

I"-  33 
Section  {rotiii)  :=  paint  o/stc^on  I.  170.  171, 

383 :  ''the section *'  =  •* golden  section '*  q,v. 
Sector  (of  circle):  explanation  of  name:  two 

kinds  (i)  with  vertex  at  centre,  (3)  with 

vertex  at  circumference  li.  5 
Sector-like  (figure)  ii.  5 :  bisection  of  such  a 

figure  by  straight  line  1 1.  5 
Seefiioff,  P.  III.  537 
Segment  of  circle:  angle  of^  i.  353,  ii.  4: 

similar  segments  II.  5 :    segment  less  than 

semicircle  called  k^t  I.  187 
Semicircle:  I.  186:  centre  of,  i.  186:  angle 

of,  I.   183,  353,  II.  4»  39-41  (J«  Angle): 

angle  in   semicircle  a  right  angle,   pre- 

Euclidean  proof  II.  63 
Separation    of   ratio,    diaip€ffis   X670V,    and 

separando  {8i€\6yTi)  II.  135 :  separando  and 

componendo  used  relatively  to  one  another, 

not  to  original  ratio  II.   168,  170 
Seqt  I.  304 

Serenus  of  Antinoeia  I.  303 
Serle,  George  I.   no 
Servais,  C.  III.  537 
Setting'out  {tKdeais),  one  of  formal  divisions 

of  a  proposition  I.  139 :  may  be  omitted  I. 

130 
Sexagesimal  fractions  in  scholia  ill.  533 
Sextus  Empiricus  I.  63,  63,  184 
Shamsaddin  as-Samarqand!  I.  511.,  89 
••Side-** and  ••diagonal-"  numbers,  described 
I.  398-400:  due  to  Pythagoreans  I.  400, 
III.  3,  3o:  connexion  with  Eucl.  Ii.  9,  10, 
I.  398-400:  use  for  approximation  to  1^3, 

I.  399 

••Side  of  a  medial  minus  a  medial  area**  (in 
Euclid  ••  that  which  produces  with  a  medial 
area  a  medial  whole'*),  a  compound  ir- 
rational straight  line:  biquadratic  of  which 
it  is  a  root  iii.  7:  defined  in.  165-6: 
uniquely  formed  in.  174-7*  equivalent  to 
square  root  o{  sixth  apotome  in.  309-11 

"  Side  of  a  medial  minus  a  rational  area  "  (in 
Euclid  ••  that  which  produces  with  a  rational 
area  a  medial  whole*'),  a  compound  ir- 
rational straight  line :  biauadratic  of  which 
it  is  a   root    in.   7 :    defined    in.    164 : 


552 


GENERAL  INDEX 


.  uniquely  formed  ill.  173-4:  equivalent  to 
square  root  oi  fifth  apoiome  ill.  ao6-8 

''Side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area,"  a 
compound  irrational  straight  line :  biquad- 
ratic equation  of  which  it  is  a  root  ill.  7 : 
defined  ill.  88-9 :  uniquely  divided  III.  gp : 
equivalent  to  square  root  of  fifth  binomial 
III.  84,  128-9 

"Side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas,"  a 
compound  irrational  straight  line :  biquad- 
ratic of  which  it  is  a  root  ill.  7 :  defined 
III.  89-91 :  uniquely  divided  in.  99-101  : 
equivalent  to  square  root  of  sixth  oiftomiai 
III.  84,  130-1 

"Side"  used  in  translation  of  Book  x.  for  ^ 
SvpufAdrrj  (t6  X^P^<>*')i  "side  of  a  square 
equal  to  (the  area)     III.  13,  119 

Sides  of  plane  and  solid  numbers,  II.  287-8 

Sigboto  I.  94 

"Similar"  (=  equal)  angles  I.  182,  252 

"Sunilarly  inclined    (of  planes)  ill.  260,  265 

Similar  plane  and  solid  numbers  I.  357,  ii. 
293 :  one  mean  between  two  similar  plane 
numbers  11.  294, 371-2,  two  means  between 
two  similar  solid  numbers  II.  294,  373-5 

Similar  rectilineal  figures :  def.  of,  given  in 
Aristotle  1 1.  188 :  def.  gives  at  once  too 
little  and  too  much  ii.  188:  similar  fibres 
on  straight  lines  which  are  proportional 
are  themselves  proportional  and  conversely 
(VI.  22),  alternatives  for  proposition  il. 
242-7 

Similar  segments  of  circles  ii.  5 

Similar  solids:  definitions  of,  in.  261,  265-7 

Simon,  Max  I.  108,  155,  157-8,  167,  202, 
328,  II.  124,  134 

Simplicius:  commentary  on  Euclid  I.  27-8: 
on  lunes  of  Hippocrates  i.  29,  35,  386-7 : 
on  Eudemus'  style  I.  35,  38 :  on  parallels 
I.  190-1:  I.  22,  167,  171,  184,  185,  197, 
203,  223,  224,  III.  366 

Simpson,  Thomas,  11.  121,  in.  274 

Simson,  Robert:  on  Euclid's  PoHsms  i.  14: 
on  *•  vitiations"  in  Elements  due  to  Theon 
I.  46,  103,  104,  106,  III,  148:  definition 
of  plane  I.  172-3:  Props.  C,  D  (Bk.  v.) 
connecting  proportionals  of  vii.  Def.  20  as 
particular  case  with  those  of  v.  Def.  5, 11. 
126-9,  ^"-  ^5*  Axioms  to  Bk.  v.,  11.  137: 
Prop.  B  (inversion)  11.  144:  Prop.  E  (con- 
vertendo)  ii.  175:  shortens  v.  8  by  com- 
pressing two  cases  into  one  ii.  152-3: 
important  note  showing  flaw  in  v.  10  and 
giving  alternative  n.  156-7:  Bk.  vi. 
Prop.  A  extending  vi.  3  to  case  where 
external  angle  bisected  n.  197:  Props.  B, 
C,  D  II.  222-7:  remarks  on  vi.  27-9,  ii. 
258-9:  Prop.  D,  Book  XI.,  111.345:  1.185, 
186,  255,  259,  287.  293,  296,  322,  328, 
384*  387*  403»  "•  2.  3.  8»  22,  23,  33,  34, 
37.  43.  49»  53»  70.  73.  79.  90.  «i7'  i3i» 
132.  140.  143-4,  145.  146,  148,  i54»  »6i, 
162,  163,  165,  170-2,  177,  179,  180,  182, 
183,  184,  185,  186,  189,  193,  195,  209,  211, 
212,  230-1,  238,  252,  269,  270,  272-3,  in. 


.  265,  266,  273-4,  275, 276,  286-7,  «89»  «95» 
30^  309'  3i4»  3«'.  3«4»  3^7.  33i.  334» 
340.  34»,  349.  351.  359.  36a,  375»  433.  434 

Sind  b.   Ali  Abu  *t-Taiyib  I.  86 

Size^  proper  translation  of  myXiic^nji  in  v. 
Def.  3,  II.  116-7,  189-90 

Smith  and  Bryant,  alternative  proofs  of  v.  16, 
17,  18  by  means  of  vi.  i ,  where  magnitudes 
are  straight  lines  or  rectilineal  areas  If. 
165-6,  169,  173-4:  I-  404*  "I-  268,  175, 
^84,  303.  307 

Solid :  definition  of,  ill.  260,  262-3 :  similar 
soiids,  definitions  of,  in.  261,  265-7: 
e()ual  and  similar  solids,  ibid. 

Solid  angle:  definitions  of,  in.  261,  267-8: 
solid  "angle"  of  "quarter  of  sphere,"  of 
cone,  or  of  half-cone  in.  268 

"Solid  loci"  I.  329,  330:  Solid  Loci  of 
Aristaeus  I.   16,  329 

Solid  numbers,  three  varieties  according  to 
relative  lengths  of  sides  II.  290-1 

"Solid  problems"  I.  329,  330 

Speusippus  I.   125 

Sphaericay  early  treatise  on,  i.   17 

Sphere:  definitions  of,  by  Euclid  in.  261, 
269,  by  others  in.  269 

5/A^nVfl/ number,  a  particular  sp>ecies  of  cube 
number  ii.  291 

Spiral,  "single-turn,"  1. 122-3  **•»  '^4-5 '  ^^ 
Pappus  =  cylindrical  helix  I.  165 

Spiral  of  Archimedes  I.  26,  267 

Spire  (tore)  or  Sfdric  surface  I.  163,  170; 
varieties  of,  I.   163 

Spiric  curves  or  sections,  discovered  by 
Perseus  I.  161,   162-4 

Square  number,  product  of  equal  numbers 
II.  289,  291 :  one  mean  between  square 
numbers  ir.   294,  363-4 

Staudt,  Ch.  von  in.  276 

Steenstra,  Pybo  i.   109 

Steiner,  Jakob  i.  193 

Steinmann,  Johann  in.  523 

Steinmetz,  Moritz  I.   101,  in.  523 

Steinschneider,  M.   I.  8«.,  76  sqq. 

Stephanus  Gracilis  I.  10 1-2 

Stephen  Clericus  i.  47 

Stevin,  Simon  in.  8 

Stifel,  Michael  in.  8 

Stobaeus  i.  3,  n.  280 

Stoic  "  axioms  "1.41,221:  illustrations  {J^tly- 
fiara)  I.  329 

Stolz,  O.   I.  328,   III.    16 

Stone,  E.   i.   105 

Straight  line:  pre-Euclidean  (Platonic)  de- 
finition I.  165-6:  Archimedes'  assumption 
respecting,  1. 166:  Euclid's  definition,  inter- 
preted by  Proclus  and  Simplicius  I.  166-7: 
language  and  construction  of,  1.  167,  and 
conjecture  as  to  origin  I.  168:  other  defi- 
nitions I.  168-9,  ^^  Heron  i.  168,  by  Leib- 
niz 1.  169,  by  Legend  re  1. 169:  two  straight 
lines  cannot  enclose  a  space  I.  195-6,  can- 
not have  a  common  segment  i.  196-9,  in. 
273:  one  or  two  cannot  make  a  figure  I. 
169,  183:  division  of  straight  line  into  any 


GENERAL  INDEX 


553 


number  of  equal  parts  (an-NairlzI)  I.  326 : 
straight  line  at  right  angles  to  plane,  defi- 
nition of,  III.  360,  alternative  constructions 
for,  III.  193-4 

Stromer,  Mtrten  I.   113 

Studemund,  W.  i.  9a «. 

St  Vincent,  Gregory  of,  I.  401,  404 

Subduplicate  of  any  ratio  found  by  Eucl.  vi. 
13,  II.  216 

Subtendy  meaning  and  construction  i.  249, 
«83.  350 

Suidas  I.  370,  III.  366.  438,  515 

Sulaiman  b.  'U§ma  (or  'Uqba)  I.  85,  90 

Superposition:  Euclid's  dislike  of  method 
of,  I.  225,  249:  apparently  assumed  by 
Aristotle  as  legitimate  I.  ai6:  used  by 
Archimedes  I.  225 :  objected  to  by  Pcle- 
tarius  I.  149:  no  use  theoretically,  but 
merely  isxrnvshes  practical  test  of  equality  I. 
317 :  Bertrand  Russell  on,  I.  327,  240 

Surface:  Pythagorean  term  for,  xp^^  (= co- 
lour, or  skin)  1. 169:  terms  for,  in  Plato  and 
Aristotle  I.  169:  ^T(0aveta  in  Euclid  (not 
ixiirtSw)  I.  1^9 :  alternative  definition  of, 
in  Aristotle  I.  1 70 :  produced  by  motion  of 
line  I.  170:  divisions  or  sections  of  solids 
are  surfaces  i.  170,  171 :  classifications  of 
surfaces  by  Heron  and  Geminus  I.  170: 
composite,  incomposite,  simple,  mixed  I. 
170:  j^'riV  surfaces  I.  163,170:  homoeih 
meric  (uniform)  surfaces  I.  170:  spheroids 
I.  170:  plane  surface,  see  plane:  loci  on 
surfaces  I.  329,  330 

Surface-loci  of  Euclid  I.  15,  16,  330:  Pappus' 
lemmas  on,  I.  15,   16 

Susemihl,  F.  iii.  523 

Suter,  H.  l.  8  m.,  9^.,  17/1.,  18 if.,  2511., 
78«.,  85-90,  III.  3 

Suvoroff,  Pr.  i.   113 

Swinden,  J.  H.  van  I.  169,  ll.  188 

Sylvester,  J.  iii.  527 

Sjrnthesis,  see  Analysis  and  Synthesis 

Syrianus  i.  30,  44,  176,  178 

Tacquet,  Andr^  i.   103,  105,  iii,  il.  121, 

Taittirfya-Samhita  l.  362 

Tannery,  P.  i*.  7».,  37-40,  44,  160,  163,  221, 

223,  224,  225,  232,  305,  353,  II.  112,  113, 

III.  I,  5,  524 
Tc^rikh  al'Hukamd  I.  4«. 
Tartaglia,  Niccol6  I.  3,  103,  106,  Ii.  2,  ^7 
Taurinus,  F.  A.  I.  219 
Taurus  I.  62,  184 
Taylor,  H.  M.  i.  248,  377-8,  404,  il.  16,  22, 

«9»  5<5i  75»  io«»  2«7.  H4.  «47»  «7«»  !"• 
^68,  275,  303,  491-2,498 

Taylor,  Th.  i.  250 

Tetrahedron,  regular:  ii.  98:  problem  of 
inscribing  in  given  sphere,  Euclid's  solu- 
tion III.  467-72,  Pappus'  solution  ill.  472-3 

Thabit  b.  Qurra,  translator  of  Elements  i. 
9«.,  42,  75-80,  82,  84,  87,  94:  proof  of  I. 

47,  I-  364-5 
Thales  i.  36,  37,  185,  252,  253,  278,  317, 


318,  319,  II.  Ill,  280:  on  distance  of  ship 
from  shore  i.  304-5 

Theaetetus  i.  i,  37:  contributions  to  theory 
of  incommensurables  ill.  3:  Eucl.  x.  9 
attributed  to,  ill.  3,  30:  supposed  to  have 
discovered  octahedron  and  icosahedron  ill. 
438:  was  the  first  to  write  a  treatise  on 
regular  solids  iii.  438,  525:   in.  442 

Theodorus  Antiochita  I.  71 

Theodorus  Cabasilas  I.  72 

Theodorus  of  Cyrene:  proved  incommen- 
surability of  V3»  n/s  etc.  up  to  ^/T7,  iii. 

I.  2,  522,  524-5 
Theodorus  Metochita,  i.  3 
Theodosius  11.  37,  ill.  269,  366,  472 
Theognis  I.  371 

Theon  of  Alexandria:  edition  of  Elements  i. 
46:  changes  made  by,  i.  46:  Simson  on 
"vitiations"  by,  1. 46 :  principles  for  detect- 
ing his  alterations,  by  comparison  of  P, 
ancient  papyri  and  **Theonine"  MSS.  I. 
51-3:  character  of  changes  by,  I.  54-8: 
interpolation  in  v.  13  and  Forism  li.  144: 
interpolated  Porism  to  vi.  20,  il.  239:  ad- 
ditions to  VI.  33  (about  sectors)  ii.  274-6: 

II.  43,  109,  117,  119,  149,  152.  161,  186, 
i90»  «34»  «35»  «40,  n^*  «5<5,  262,  311, 
322,  412,  III.  523 

Theon  of  Smyrna:  I.  172,  357,  358,  371, 
398,  II.  Ill,  119,  279,  280,  281,  284,  285, 
286,  288,   289,  290,  291,  292,  293,  294, 

III.  2,  263,  273 

Theorem  and  problem,  distinguished  by 
Speusippus  I.  125,  Amphinomus  i.  125, 
128,  Menaechmus  I.  125,  Zenodotus,  Posi- 
donius  1. 126,  Euclid  I.  126,  Carpus  1. 127, 
128:  views  of  Proclus  I.  127-8,  and  of 
Geminus  I.  128:  "general"  and  "not- 
general  "  (or  partial)  theorems  (Proclus)  I. 

3«5 
Theudius  of  Magnesia  I.  117 
Thibaut,  B.  F.  I.  321 
Thibaut,  C. :  On  Sulvasiitras  I.  360,  363-4 
Thompson,  Thomas  Perronet  I.   112 
Thrasyllus  11.  292 
Thucydides  i.  333 
Thymaridas  II.  279,  28^ 
Tibbon,  Moses  b.  I.  76 
Timaeus  of  Plato  li.  97-8,  294-5,  363,  ill. 

Tiraboschi  i.  9411. 

Tittel,  K.  I.  39 

Todhunter,  I.  I.  112,  189,  246,  258,  277, 
283,  «93,  «98»  307,  "•  3»  7»  ««♦  49»  5»»  5«. 
<57»  73.  90»  99»  '7^.  i95»  «02,  204,  208, 
259,  «7ii  «7«»  300 

Tonstall,  Cuthbert  I.  too 

Tore  I.   163 

Transformation  of  areas  I.  346-7,  410 

Trapezium:  Euclid's  definition  his  own  I. 
189 :  further  division  into  traperia  and 
trapezoids  (Posidonius,  Heron)  i.  189-90: 
a  theorem  on  area  of  parallel-trapeziam  I. 
3^-9 :  name  applied  to  truncated  pjnramidal 
numbers  (Theon  of  Smyrna)  11.  291 


554 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Treasury  of  Analysis  (dyaXv6fi«yot  r6T0f)  I. 
8,  fo,  II,  138 

Trendelenburg,  F.  A.  I.  1^6  n,y  148,  149 

Treutlein,  P.   i.  358-60 

Triangle:  seven  species  of,  I.  188:  * 'four- 
sided"  triangle,  called  also  **barb-like" 
(6.Ki^o€Lhis)  and  (by  Zenodorus)  KoiKorfuivkw 
I.  27,  188:  construction  of  isosceles  and 
scalene  triangles  i.  243:  Heron's  proof 
of  expression  for  area  in  terms  of  sides, 
>Js(s-a)(s-b)(s-c),  II.  87-8:  right- 
angled  triangle  which  is  half  of  equilateral 
triangle  used  for  construct  ion  of  tetrahedron, 
octahedron  and  icosahedron  (Tiffuieus  of 
Plato)  II.  98 

Triangular  numbers  ii.  289 

Trihedral  angles:  conditions  of  equality  ill. 
311-2:  symmetrical  trihedral  angles  ill. 
312 

Trimedial  (straight  line),  first  and  second, 
corresponding  to  bimedial  ill.  257-8 

Trinomial  (straight  line),  extension  from 
binomial  in.  256 

Triplicate^  distinct  from  triplet  ratio  II.  133 

Trisection  of  an  angle  i.  265-7 

at-TusI,  see  Naslraddin 

Unger,  E.  S.  i.   108,   169 

Unit:  definitions  of,  by  Thymaridas,  "some 
Pythagoreans,"  Chrysippus,  Aristotle  and 
others  ii.  279:  Euclid's  definition  that  of 
the  "more  recent"  writers  11.  279:  ftavdt 
connected  etymologically  by  Theon  of 
Smyrna  and  Nicomachus  with  fibwoi  (soli- 
tary) or  fiov-li  (rest)  ii.  279 

Vachtchenko-Zakhartchenko  i.  113 

Vailati,  G.  i.  144 «.,   145 «. 

Valerius  Maximus  I.  3 

Valla,  G.,  De  expetendis  et  fugiendis  rebus  I. 

Van  Swinden,  J.  H.   I.  169,  II.  188 
Vatican  MS.  190  (P)  i.  46,  47 
Vaux,  Carra  de,  1.  20 
Verona  palimpsest  I.  91 
Veronese,  G.  i.  157,   168,  175,  180,  193-4, 
195,  201,  226-7,  ^28,  249,  328,  II.  30,  126 
Vertical  (angles)  I.  278 


Vettius  Valens  iii.  3 

Viennese  Ms.  (V)  I.  48,  49 

Vieta:   on  angle  of  contact  11.  42 

Vinci,  Lionardo  dust  I.  365-6 

Vitruvius  I.  352:  Vitruvius  and  Heron  1. 10, 

21 
Viviani,  Vincenzo  I.  107,  401 
Vogt,  Heinrich,  I.  360,  364,  III.  523-6 
Vooght,  C.  J.  I.  108 

Wachsmuth,  C.  I.  32 «.,  73 

Walker,  John  ii.  204,  208,  259 

Wallis,  John  I.  103 :  edited  Comm.  on  Pto- 
lemy's Harmonica  I.  17 :  attempt  to  prove 
Post.  5,1.2  lo-i  I :  on  angle  of  contact  ("de- 
gree of  curvature  ")  ii.  42 

Weber  (H.)  and  Wellstein  (J.)  I.  157 

Weierstrass  ii.  124 

Weissenbom,  H.  i.  78«.,  92 «.,  94«.,  95, 
96,  97  n. 

Whiston,  W.  I.  Ill 

Williamson,  James  I.  iii,  293 

Witt,  H.  A.  I.  113 

Woepcke,  F.,  discovered  De  divisionibus  in 
Arabic  and  published  translation  I.  9:  on 
Pappus'  commentary  on  Elements  l.  25, 
66,  77:  I.  85>i.,  86,  87,  II.  5,  III.  3,  255, 
256,  258,  259 

Xenocrates  I.  268 
Ximenes,  Leonardo  I.  107 
Xylander  i.  107 

Yahy§  b.  Khalid  b.  Barmak  i.  75 

Yahya  b.  Muh.  b.  *Abdan  b.  Abdalwahid 

(Ibn  al-LubudI)  I.  90 
Yrinus  =  Heron  i.  22 
Yuhanna  b.  Yusuf  b.  al-Harith  b.  al-Bitriq 

al-Qass  i.  76,  87 

Zamberti,  Bartolomeo  i.  98-100,   loi,   104, 

106 
Zeno   the   Epicurean   I.  34,   196,  197,    199, 

242 
Zenodorus  I.  26,  27,  188,  333,  II.  276 
Zenodotus  I.  126 
Zeuthen,  H.  G.  I.  15,  139,  141,  146/1.,  151, 

355-6»  360,  363.  387*  398.  .=599»  "I-  4»  366 


CAMBRIDGE:    PRINTED   BY  JOHN  CLAY,    M.A.   AT  THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS. 


To  avoid  fine,  this  book  should  be  returned  on 
or  before  the  date  last  stamped  below 


SOH-I2-SO-964&5 


MM.  sa 


3  bios  DOS  053  653 


J(^ 


w 


