^ 

^Vr 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


GIFT 

Dr.   K.   R.   Beigelman 


'•k. 


». 


oPTiCKs: 

O  R,    A 

TREATISE 

O  F    T  H  E 

Reflections,    Refradiqns^ 

InfieBions  and  Colours 


O  F 


LIGHT. 


ne  Fourth  Edition,  correSied, 


By  Sir  ISAAC  NEWTON,  Knt. 


L  O  N  D  0  N: 

Printed  for  William  Innys  at  the  Wefl- 
End  of  St.  Paul's,     Mdccxxx. 


© 


837 

■  ^.  'it 


Advertifement  L 

ART  of  the  en- 
fui?ig  Difeourfe  a- 
bout  hight  ivas 
"Written  at  the  De- 
fire  of  fame  Gen- 
tlemen of  the  Royal -Society,  in 
the  Tear  1^7^,  and  then  fent  to 
their  Seeretary,  and  read  at  their 
Meetings,  and  the  refiivas  add- 
ed about  tivehe  Tears  after  to 
complete,  the  Theory ;  except  the 
third  Book,  and  the  lafl  Propo- 
fit  ion  of  the  Second,  vjhich  "were 
fince  put  together  out  of  f car- 
ter d  Papers,  To  a\:oid  be- 
ing engaged  in  Difputes  about 

A  z  thefe 


Advertifement. 

thefe  Matters,  I  haw  hitherto  de- 
layed the  printing,  and  jhould 
flill  ha've  delayed  it,  had  not  the 
Importunity  of  Friends  prevailed 
upon  me.  If  any  other  Papers 
nvrit  on  this  SubjeB  are  got  out 
of  my  Hands  they  are  imperfeB, 
and  ivere  perhaps  ^written  before 
I  had  tried  all  the  Experiments 
here  fet  do'von,  and  fully  fatisfi- 
ed  my  felf  about  theLaivs  of  Re* 
fraBions  and  Compofttion  of  Co- 
lours. I  have  here  publijUd  "vjhat 
I  think  proper  to  eome  abroad, 
mping  that  it  may  not  be  tran- 
Jlated  into  another  hanguage 
mthout  my  Confem. 

The  Crowns  of  Colours,  ivhieh 
fometimes  appear  about  the  Sun 
and  Moon,  I  ha'oe  endea'voured 
to  gi've  an  Account  of)  but  for 

"want 


Advertifement. 

^o^ant  of  fufficient  Obfer'vations 
leave  that  Matter  to  be  farther 
examined.  The  Siibjeti  of  the 
Third  Book  I  have  alfo  left  im- 
perfeBy  not  having  tried  all  the 
Experiments  "which  I  intended 
ivhen  Iivas  about  the fe  Matters, 
nor  repeated  fome  ofthofe  ivhich 
I  did  try,  until  I  had  fatisfied 
my  felf  about  all  their  Circum- 
fiances.  To  communicate  vjhat 
I  have  tried,  and  leave  the  refl 
to  others  for  farther  Enquiry, 
is  all  my  Defign  in  publijhing 
thefe  Papers. 

IndLettervjrittento  Tlfr.Leib- 
nitz  in  the  Tear  I  (!)  7^,  and  pub- 
lijhed  by  Dr,  Wallis,  /  mention  d 
a  Method  by  vohich  I  had  found 
fome  general  Theorems  about 
fquaring  Curvilinear   Figures, 

or 


Advertifement. 

or  comparing  them  mth  the  Co- 
nic SeBions,  or  other  the  jimplefl 
Figures  mth  v)hich  they  may  be 
compared.  And  fome  Tears  ago 
I  lent  out  a  Manuscript  contain- 
ing fuch  Theorems,  and  halving 
fince  met  mth  fome  Things  copi- 
ed out  of  it,  I  have  on  this  Occa- 
fion  made  it  public k,  prefixing  to 
it  ^//Introdudion,  and  Subjoin- 
ing a  Scholium  concerning  that 
Method,  And  Ihavejoinedrnth 
it  another  fmall  TraB  concern- 
ing the  Curvilinear  Figures  of 
the  Second  Kind,  "which  ivas  alfo 
"written  many  Tears  ago,  and 
made  knov)n  to  fome  Friends, 
"who  have  folic  it  ed  the  making  it 
publicL 

April  r.  T     M 

1704.  X.    -L^« 


dvertifement  11. 

this  Second  Edition 
[hefeOpticks  Iha've 
oMtted  the  Mathema- 
tical ^aBs  publipd 
at  the  End  of  the  former  Edi- 
tion, as  not  belonging  to  the 
SiibjeB.  And  at  the  End  of 
the  Third  Book  I  ha%w  added 
fome  Queflions.  And  to  fiev) 
that  I  do  not  take  Gratuity  for 
an  ejfential  Property  of  Bodies, 
I  have  added  one  Queflion  con- 
cerning its  Caufe,  chiifing  to 
propofe  it  by  "way  of  a  Quefli- 
on, becaufe  I  am  not  yet  fatif- 
fied  about  it  for  vjant  of  Expe- 
riments. 


^^-  IN. 


Advertisement  to  this 
Fourth  Edition. 

HIS  neuo  Edition  of 
Sir  Ifaac  Newtonx 
Opticks  is  carefully 
printed frow>  the  Third 
Edition,  as  it  vjas  correBed  by 
the  Author  s  oivn  Hand,  and 
left  before  his  Death  with  the 
Bookfeller,  Since  Sir  Ifaac  j* 
Lediones  Opticas,  which  he 
public kly  read  in  the  Uni'verfity 
of  Cambridge  in  the  Tears 
l66^,  16^0,  and  16'ji,  are 
lately  printed,  it  has  been  thought 
proper  to  make  at  the  bottom  of 
the  Pages  fencer  al  Citations  from 
thence,  where  may  be  found  the 
Demonfirations,  which  the  Au- 
thor omitted  in  thefe  Opticks.  * 


C  I] 


THE 

FIRST  BOOK 


O  F 


OPTICKS. 


PART     I. 


",  Y  Delign  in  this  Book  is  not  to  ex- 
plain the  Properties  of  Light  by  Hy- 
pothefes,  but  to  propofe  and  prove 
them  by  Reafon  and  Experiments : 
In  order  to  which  I  ihall  premife  the 
following  Definitions  and  Axioms. 


B 


DEFI- 


B 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 
DEFINITIONS. 

D  E  F  I  N.    I. 

T  the  Rays  of  Light  I  under/land  its  leafi 
TartSy  and  thofe  as  well  Siiccejive  in  the 
fame  Lines,  as  Contemporary  in  feveral  Lines. 
For  it  is  manifeft  that  Light  confifts  of  Parts, 
both  Succeflive  and  Contemporary  j  becaufe  in 
the  fame  place  you  may  ftop  that  which  comes 
one  moment,  and  let  pafs  that  which  comes  pre- 
fently  after;  and  in  the  fame  time  you  may 
Hop  it  in  any  one  place,  and  let  it  pafs  in  any 
other.  For  that  part  of  Light  which  is  ftopp'd 
cannot  be  the  fame  with  fhat  which  is  let  pafs. 
The  leafl  Light  or  part  of  Light,  which  may 
be  flopp'd  alone  without  the  reft  of  the  Light, 
or  propagated  alone,  or  do  or  fuffer  any  thing 
alone,  which  the  reft  of  the  Light  doth  not  or 
fuifers  not,  I  call  a  Ray  of  Light. 

D  E  F  I  N.    IL 

Refrangibility  of  the  Rays  of  Light,  is  their 
T>ifpofition  to  be  refraBed  or  turned  out  of  their 
Way  in  pafjing  out  of  one  tranfparent  Body  or 
Medium  into  another.  And  a  greater  or  lefs  Re- 
frangibility of  Rays,  is  their  Difpofition  to  be 
turned  more  or  lefs  out  of  their  Way  in  like^  In- 
cidences  on  the  fame  Medium.  Mathematicians 
ufually  confider  the  Rays  of  Light  to  be  Lines 
reaching  from  the  luminous  Body  to  the  Body 
illuminated,  and  the  refradiion  of  thofe  Rays  to 
be  the  bending  or  breaking  of  thofe  lines  in 

their 


BOOK!  3 

their  pafling  out  of  one  Medium  into  another. 
And  thus  may  Rays  and  Refradions  be  confi- 
dered,  if  Light  be  propagated  in  an  inftanr. 
But  by  an  Argument  taken  from  the  i^qua- 
tions  of  the  times  of  the  Eclipfes  of  Jupiter  i 
BatelliteSy  it  feems  that  Light  is  propagated  in 
time,  fpending  in  its  pafTage  from  the  Sun  to  us 
about  feven  Minutes  of  time:  And  therefore  I 
have  chofen  to  define  Rays  and  Pvcfradions  in 
fuch  general  terms  as  may  agree  to  Light  in  both 
cafes. 

D  E  F  I  N.    in. 

Reflexibility  of  Rays^  is  fbeir  Difpojitic?!  to  be 
rejieSted  or  turned  back  into  the  fame  Mediu?n  jroni 
any  other  Medium  upon  whoje  Surface  they  fall. 
And  Rays  are  more  or  lefs  refexible,  which  are 
turned  back  more  or  lefs  eafly.  As  if  Light  pafs 
out  of  a  Glafs  into  Air,  and  by  being  iiiclmed 
more  and  more  to  the  common  Surface  of  the 
Glafs  and  Air,  begins  at  length  to  be  totally  re- 
fledled  by  that  Surface ;  thofe  io:::^  of  Rays 
which  at  like  Incidences  are  refledted  moft  co- 
pioully,  or  by  inclining  the  Rays  begin  fooneil 
to  be  totally  refledted,  are  mofl  reflexible. 

D  E  F  I  N.    IV. 

I'he  A?jgle  of  Licidence  is  that  Angle,   u-hick, 
the  Line  defcribed  by  the  incident  Ray  contains  with 
the  Perpendicular  to  the  refeSiing  or  refracting  Sur-- 
face  at  the,  Point  of  Incidence, 


p2  DEFIN, 


4  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

D  E  F  I  N.     V. 

^ke  Afigle  of  Reflexion  or  HefraBion^    is  the 

Angle  which  the  line  defcribed  by  the  i'-eJleBed  or  re- 

fraBed  Ray  coiitaineth  with  the  Perpendicular  to 

the  refleBing  or  refraSiifig  Surface  at  the  Point  of 

Incidence, 

D  E  F  I  N.     VL 

'^he  Sines  of  Incidence^  Reflexion^  and  Refra- 
Bion,  are  the  Si?ies  of  the  Angles  of  Incidence,  Re- 
fexion,  and  Refr/^Bio?!. 

D  E  F  I  N.    VII. 

^hc  Light  ivhofe  Rays  are  all  alike  Refran- 
gible^ I  call  Simple,  Homogeneal  and  Similar ; 
and  that  whofe  Rays  are  fome  more  Refrangible 
than  others,  I  call  Compound,  Heterogeneal  and 
Diffijnilar.  The  former  Light  I  call  Homoge- 
neal,  not  becaufe  I  would  affirm  it  fo  in  all  re- 
ipedts,  but  becaufe  the  Rays  which  agree  in  Re- 
frangibility,  agree  at  leaft  in  all  thofe  their  other 
Properties  which  I  confider  in  the  following 
Difcourfe, 

D  E  F  I  N.    VIII. 

\the  Colours  of  Homogeneal  Lights,  I  call  Pri~ 
wary,  Ilofjiogeneal  and  Simple  j  ajid  thofe  of  He- 
teroge??.eal  Lights,  Heterogeneal  ajid  Compound.  For 
thefe  are  always  compounded  of  the  colours  of 
Homogeneal  Lights  j  as  will  appear  in  the  fol- 
lowing Difcourfe. 


'O 


AXIOMS. 


B  O  O  K     I.  5 

A  X  I  0  MS. 

A  X.     I. 

npHR  Ajigks  of  RefexioJi   and  "Refracllon^    lit 
in  one  and  the  fame  Flane  with  the  A?igle  of  In- 
cidence. 

A  X.     II. 

'The  Angle  of  Refexion  is  equal  to  the  Angle  of\ 
Incidence. 

AX.     III. 

If  the  ref-aBed  Ray  be  returned  direclly  back  to 
the  Poifit  of  Incidence^  itJJ:all  be  rfraBed  into  the 
Line  before  defcribed  by  the  incident  Ray. 

A  X.     IV. 

RefraBion  out  of  the  rarer  Medium  into  the 
denfer,  is  made  towards  the  Perpendicular  ;  that 
is,  Jo  that  the  A?igle  of  Refraclion  be  lefs  than  the 
Angle  of  Incidence. 

:     A    X.       \. 

The  Siiie  of  Incidence  is  either  accurately  or 
'very  nearly  in  a  green  Ratio  to  the  Sine  of  Re- 
fraBion. 

Whence  if  that  Proportion  be  known  in  any 
one  Inclination  of  the  incident  Ray,  'tis  known 
in  all  the  Inclinations,  and  thereby  the  Refra- 
iftion  in  all  cafes  of  Incidence  on  the  fame  refra- 
<fting  Body  may  be  determined.     Thus  if  the 

B  3  R'efra- 


6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Refradion  be  made  out  of  Air  into  Water,  the 
Sine  of  Incidence  of  the  red  Light  is  to  the  Sine 
of  its  Refracftion  as  4  to  3 .  If  out  of  Air  into  Glafs, 
the  Sines  are  as  17  to  11.  In  Light  of  other 
Colours  the  Sines  have  other  Proportions:  but 
the  difference  is  fo  little  that  it  need  feldom  be 
coniidered. 

Suppofe  therefore,  that  RS  [  in  Fig.  i.  ]  repre- 
fents  the  Surface  of  ftagnating  Water,  and  that  C 
is  the  point  of  Incidence  in  which  any  Ray  coming 
in  the  Air  from  A  in  the  Line  A  C  is  refledled  or 
refrad:ed,  and  I  would  know  whither  this  Ray 
fhall  go  after  Reflexion  or  Refraction:   I  ereA 
upon  the  Surface  of  the  Water  from  the  point 
of  Incidence  the  Perpendicular  CP  and  produce 
it  downwards  to  Q^,  and  conclude  by  the  firft 
Axiom,  that  the  Ray  after  Reflexion  and  Re- 
fradiion,  fliall  be  found  fomewhere  in  the  Plane 
of  the  Angle  of  Incidence  ACP  produced.  I  let 
fall  therefore  upon  the  Perpendicular  C  P  jthe 
Sine  of  Incidence  A  D  j    and  if   the  refiedted 
Ray    be  deflred,    I  produce  AD   to  B  fo  that 
D  B  be  equal  to  A  D,  and  draw  C  B.     For  this 
Line  C  B  fhall  be  the  refiedted  Ray  j  the  Angle 
of  Reflexion  B  C  P  and  its  Sine  B  D  being  e- 
qual  to  the  Angle  and  Sine  of  Incidence,  as  they 
ought  to  be  by  the  fecond  Axiom,     But  if  the 
refra(5led  Ray  be  defired,  I  produce  A  D  to  H, 
fo  that  D  H  may  be  to  A  D  as  the  Sine  of  Re- 
fradion  to  the  Sine  of  Incidence,  that  is,  (if  the 
Light  be  red)  as  3  to  4;  and  about  the  Center 
C  and  in  the  Plane  A  C  P  with  the  Radius  CA 
defcribing  a  Circle  ABE,  I  draw  a  parallel  to  the 
Perpendicular  CPQ^,  the  Line  HE  cutting  tl^e 

Circum- 


B  O  O  K     I.  7 

Circumference  in  E,  and  joining  C  E,  this  Line 
CE  fhall  be  the  Line  of  the  refradied  Ray., 
For  if  E  F  be  let  fiiU  perpendicularly  on  the 
Line  P  Q^  this  Line  E  F  fliall  be  the  Sine  of  Re- 
fra<flion  of  the  Ray  C  E,  the  Angle  of  Refradion 
being  E  C  Qj^  and  this  Sine  E  F  is  equal  to  D  H, 
and  confequently  in  Proportion  to  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  AD  as  3  to 4. 

In  like  manner,  if  there  be  a  Prifm  of  Glafs 
(that  is,  a  Glafs  bounded  with  two  Equal  and 
Parallel  Triangular  ends,  and  three  plain  and 
well  polifhed  Sides,  which  meet  in  three  Parallel 
Lines  running  from  the  three  Angles  of  one 
end  to  the  three  Angles  of  the  other  end)  and 
if  the  Refradion  of  the  Light  in  pafTing  crofs  this 
Prifm  be  defired:  Let  ACB  [inFig,2.]  reprefent 
a  Plane  cutting  this  Prifm  tranfverlly  to  its  three 
Parallel  lines  or  edges  there  where  the  Light 
pafleth  through  it,  and  let  D  E  be  the  Ray  in- 
cident upon  the  firft  fide  of  the  Prifm  A  C  where 
the  Light  goes  into  the  Glafs ;  and  by  putting 
the  Proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the 
Sine  of  Refradion  as  1 7  to  11  find  E  F  the  firft 
refraded  Ray.  Then  taking  this  Ray  for  the 
Incident  Ray  upon  the  fecond  fide  of  the  Glafs 
B  C  where  the  Light  goes  out,  find  the  next 
refraded  Ray  EG  by  putting  the  Proportion 
of  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Re- 
fradion as  II  to  17.  For  if  the  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence out  of  Air  into  Glafs  be  to  the  Sine  of 
Refradion  as  17  to  11,  the  Sine  of  Incidence  out 
of  Glafs  into  Air  muil  on  the  contrary  be  to  the 
Sine  of  Refradipn  as  11  to  15^  by  the  third; 
A?«tom» 


S  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Much  after  the  fame  manner,  if  A  C  B  D  [in 
Fig.  2']  reprefent  a  Glafs  fpherically  convex  on 
both  fides  (ufually  called  aLem^  fuch  as  is  a  Burn- 
ing-glafs,  or  Speftacle-glafs,  or  an  Objedt-glafs  of 
a  Telefcope)  and  it  be  required  to  know  how 
Light  faUing  upon  it  from  any  lucid  point  Q^ 
fhall  be  refra(5led,  let  Q^JVI  reprefent  a  Ray 
falling  upon  any  point  M  of  its  firfl  fpherical 
Surface  A  C  B,  and  by  ered;ing  a  Perpendicular 
to  the  Glafs  at  the  point  M,  find  the  firll  re- 
fracted Ray  M  N  by  the  Proportion  of  the 
Sines  17  to  11.  Let  that  Ray  in  going  out  of 
the  Glafs  be  incident  upon  N,  and  then  find 
the  fecond  refraded  Ray  N  q  by  the  Propor- 
tion of  the  Sines  1 1  to  17.  And  after  the  fame 
manner  may  the  Refradion  be  found  when  the 
Lens  is  convex  on  one  fide  and  plane  or  con- 
cave on  the  other,  or  concave  on  both  fides. 

A  X.     VI. 

Homogeneal  Rays  which  foiD  from  feveral  Points 
cf  any  Objecl^  and  fall  perpendicularly  or  almoji 
perpendicularly  on  any  refieSiing  or  refraBing  Flane 
or  fpherical  Surface^  Jhall  afterwards  diverge 
from  fo  many  other  Points^  or  be  parallel  to  Jo 
tnany  other  Lines,  or  converge  to  fo  many  other 
Points^  either  accurately  or  without  any  fetifble 
'E,rror.  And  the  fame  thing  will  happen,  if  the 
Rays  be  refcBed  or  refracted  fucceffively  by  two 
or  three  or  more  Plane  or  Spherical  Surfaces. 

The  Point  from  which  Rays  diverge  or  to 
which  they  converge  may  be  called  their  Focus, 
And  the  Focus  of  the  incident  Rays  being  gi- 
I'cn,  that  of  the  refleded  or  refraded  ones  may 

be 


B  O  O  K     I.  9 

be  found  by  finding  the  Refradtion  of  any  two 
Rays,  as  above  j  or  niore  readily  thus. 

Caf.  I.  Let  ACB  [in  Fig.  4.]  be  a  refleding  or 
refradling  Plane,  and  Q^he  Focus  of  the  incident 
Rays,  and  Q  ^  C  a  Perpendicular  to  that  Plane. 
And  if  this  Perpendicular  be  produced  to  q^ 
fo  that  ^  C  be  equal  to  Q^,  the  Point  q  fhall 
be  the  Focus  of  the  refledted  Rays :  Or  if  ^  C 
be  taken  on  the  fame  fide  of  the  Plane  with 
Q^,  and  in  proportion  to  Q^  as  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Refra6tion,  the  Point  q 
fliall  be  the  Focus  of  the  refracted  Rays. 

Caf  2.  Let  ACB  [in  Fig.  5.]  be  the  refleding 
Surface  of  any  Sphere  whofe  Centre  is  E.  Bi- 
fed:  any  Radius  thereof,  ( fuppofe  EC)  in  T, 
and  if  in  that  Radius  on  the  fame  fide  the  Point 
T  you  take  the  Points  Q^nd  ^,  fo  that  T  Q^ 
T  E,  and  T  q^  be  continual  Proportionals,  and 
the  Point  QJ)e  the  Focus  of  the  incident  Rays, 
the  Point  q  fliall  be  the  Focus  of  the  refiedted 
ones. 

Caf.  3.  Let  ACB  [in  Fig.  6.]  be  the  refnidting 
Surface  of  any  Sphere  whofe  Centre  is  E.  In 
any  Radius  thereof  E  C  produced  both  ways 
take  E  T  and  C  t  equal  to  one  another  and  fe- 
verally  in  fuch  Proportion  to  that  Radius  as 
the  lefi^er  of  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  P^e- 
fradion  hath  to  the  difference  of  thofe  Sines. 
And  then  if  in  the  fame  Line  you  find  any  two 
Points  Q^nd  ^,  fo  that  T  QJ^e  to  E  T  as  E  /^ 
to  /  q^  taking  t  q  the  contrary  way  from  /  which 
T  QJAeth  from  T,  and  if  the  Point  QJ)e  the 
Focus  of  any  incident  Rays,  the  Point  q  fliall  be 
the  Focus  of  the  refracted  ones> 

2  And 


lo  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

And  by  the  fame  means  the  Focus  of  the  Rays 
after  two  or  more  Reflexions  or  Refradions  may 
be  found. 

Caf.^.  Let  ACBD  [in  Fig.  7.]  be  any  refrad- 
ing  Lens ,  fpherically  Convex  or  Concave  or 
Plane  on  either  fide,  and  let  C  D  be  its  Axis 
( that  is,  the  Line  which  cuts  both  its  Surfaces 
perpendicularly,  and  paiTes  through  the  Centres 
of  the  Spheres,)  and  in  this  Axis  produced  let 
F  andybe  the  Foci  of  the  refradled  Rays  found  as 
above,  w^hen  the  incident  Rays  on  both  iides  the 
Lens  are  parallel  to  the  fame  Axis  j  and  upon  the 
Diameter  F  f  bifecCled  in  E,  defcribe  a  Circle. 
Suppofe  now  that  any  Point  QJ>e  the  Focus  of 
any  incident  Rsys.  Draw  QJ^  cutting  the  faid 
Circle  in  T  and  t^  and  therein  take  t  q  m  fuch 
proportion  to  /  E  as  /^  E  or  T  E  hath  to  T  Q^ 
Let  /  ^  lie  the  contrary  way  from  t  which  T  Q 
doth  from  T,  and  q  fhall  be  the  Focus  of  the, 
rcfrafted  Rays  without  any  'fenfible  Error,  pro- 
vided the  Point  QJ)e  not  fo  remote  from  the 
Axis,  nor  the  Lens  fo  broad  as  to  make  any  of 
the  Rays  fall  too  obliquely  on  the  refracting 
Surfaces.  * 

And  by  the  like  Operations  may  the  reflecting 
or  refracHiing  Surfaces  be  found  when  the  two 
Foci  are  given,  and  thereby  a  Lens  be  formed, 
which  Ihall  make  the  Rays  flow  towards  or 
from  what  Place  you  pleafe.  -f- 

*  In  our  Author's  LeEliones  Optica:,  Part  I.  Seft.  IV.  Prop.  29, 
30,  there  is  an  elegant  Method  of  determining  thefe  Foci  ;  not  only 
in  fpherical  Surfaces,  but  likewife  in  any  other  curved  Figure  what- 
ev«r :  And  in  Prop.  32,  33,  the  fame  thing  is  done  tor  any  Ray  ly- 
ing out  of  the  Axis. 

f  Ibid.  Prop.  ^4. 

.        Sq 


B  O  O  K     I.  It 

So  then  the  Meaning  of  this  Axiom  is,  that 
if  Rays  fall  upon  any  Plane  or  Spherical  Surface 
or  Lens,  and  before  their  Incidence  flow  from 
or  towards  any  Point  Q^  they  fhall  after  Re- 
flexion or  Refra6lion  flow  from  or  towards  the 
Point  q  found  by  the  foregoing  Rules.  And  if 
the  incident  Rays  flow  from  or  towards  feveral 
points  Q^  the  refleded  or  refradled  Rays  fliall 
flow  from  or  towards  fo  many  other  Points  q 
found  by  the  fame  Rules.  Whether  the  refle<5t- 
ed  and  refracted  Rays  flow  from  or  towards  the 
Point  q  is  eafily  known  by  the  fltuation  of  that 
Point.  For  if  that  Point  be  on  the  fame  flde 
of  the  refleding  or  refracting  Surface  or  Lens 
with  the  Point  Q^  and  the  incident  Rays  flow 
from  the  Point  Q^  the  reflected  flow  towards 
the  Point  q  and  the  refradled  from  it ;  and  if  the 
incident  Rays  flow  towards  Q,  the  refleded 
flow  from  q,  and  the  refraded  towards  it.  And 
the  contrary  happens  when  q  is  on  the  other 
fide  of  the  Surface. 

A  X.    VIL 

Wherever  the  Rays  which  come  from  all  the 
Points  of  any  Object  meet  again  in  Jo  many 
Poi?its  after  they  have  been  made  to  converge  by 
RefeBion  or  RefraBion^  there  they  will  make  a  Pi' 
Bure  of  the  ObjeB  upon  any  white  Body  on  which 
they  fall. 

So  if  PR  [in  Fig.  3.]  reprefent  any  Objed  with- 
out Doors,  and  A  B  be  a  Lens  placed  at  a  hole 
in  the  Window-ihut  of  a  dark  Chamber,  where- 
by the  Rays  that  come  from  any  Point  Q^of 
I  that 


12  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

that  Qbje6t  are  made  to  converge  and  meet  a- 
gain  in  the  Point  q  j  and  if  a  Sheet  of  white  Pa- 
per be  held  at  q  for  the  Light  there  to  fall  up- 
on it,  the  Pidlure  of  that  Objed;  P  R  will  ap- 
pear upon  the  Paper  in  its  proper  jQiape  and  Co- 
lours. For  as  the  Light  which  comes  from  the 
Point  Q^goes  to  the  Point  q,  fo  the  Light  which 
comes  from  other  Points  P  and  R  of  the  Objed:, 
will  go  to  fo  many  other  correfpondent  Points 
p  and  r  ( as  is  manifell  by  the  fixth  Axiom  j )  fo 
that  every  Point  of  the  Objed:  fhall  illuminate  a 
correfpondent  Point  of  the  Pidure,  and  there- 
by make  a  Pidture  like  the  Objed  in  Shape  and 
Colour,  this  only  excepted,  that  the  Pidture  fhall 
be  inverted.  And  this  is  the  Reafon  of  that  vul- 
gar Experiment  of  cafting  the  Species  of  Objeds 
from  abroad  upon  a  Wall  or  Sheet  of  white  Pa- 
per in  a  dark  Room. 

In  like  manner,  when  a  Man  views  any  Objed: 
P  QR,  [in  Fig.  8.]  the  Light  which  comes  from 
the  feveral  Points  of  the  Objed  is  fo  refraded 
by  the  tranfparent  fkins  and  humours  of  the 
Eye,  (that  is,  by  the  outward  coat  E  F  G,  called 
the  "Tunica  Corfiea,  and  by  the  cryftalline  hu- 
mour A  B  which  is  beyond  the  Pupil  ;;z  ^ )  as  to 
converge  and  meet  again  in  fo  many  Points  in 
the  bottom  of  the  Eye,  and  there  to  paint  the 
Pidure  of  the  Objed  upon  that  fkin  (called  the 
Tunica  Retina )  with  which  the  bottom  of  the 
Eye  is  covered.  For  Anatomifts,  when  they  have 
taken  off  from  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  that  out- 
ward and  moft  thick  Coat  called  the  Dura  Ma- 
ter^ can  then  fee  through  the  thinner  Coats, 
the  Pidures  of  Objeds  ,  lively  paint^  there- 
on^ 


B  O  O  K     I.  13 

on.  And  thefe  Pidlures,  propagated  by  Mo- 
tion along  the  Fibres  of  the  Optick  Nerves  in- 
to the  Brain,  are  the  caufe  of  Vilion.  For  ac- 
cordingly as  thefe  Pidtures  are  perfed:  or  im- 
perfedl,  the  Objed:  is  feen  perfectly  or  imperfed:- 
ly.  If  the  Eye  be  tinged  with  any  colour  (as  in 
the  Difeafe  of  the  yawidice)  fo  as  to  tinge  the 
Pidures  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  with  that 
Colour,  then  all  Objeds  appear  tinged  with  the 
fame  Colour.  If  the  Humours  of  the  Eye  by 
old  Age  decay,  fo  as  by  (hrinking  to  make  the 
Cornea  and  Coat  of  the  Ci'yiialline  Humour  grow 
flatter  than  before,  the  Light  will  not  be  re- 
frad:ed  enough,  and  for  want  of  a  fufficient  Re- 
fraction will  not  converge  to  the  bottom  of  the 
Eye  but  to  fome  place  beyond  it,  and  by  con- 
fequence  paint  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  a  con- 
fufed  Pidlure,  and  according  to  the  Indifl:in(ft- 
nefs  of  this  Pidture  the  Objed:  will  appear  con- 
fufed.  This  is  the  reafon  of  the  decay  of  fight 
in  old  Men,  and  fhews  why  their  Sight  is  mend- 
ed by  Spedacles.  For  thofe  Convex  glalTes  fup- 
ply  the  defed  of  plumpnefs  in  the  Eye,  and  by 
increafing  the  Refradion  make  the  Rays  con- 
verge fooner,  fo  as  to  convene  diftindly  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Eye  if  the  Glafs  have  a  due  de- 
gree of  convexity.  And  the  contrary  happens 
in  fhort-fighted  Men  whofe  Eyes  are  too  plump. 
For  the  Refradion  being  now  too  great,  the 
Rays  converge  and  convene  in  the  Eyes  before 
they  come  at  the  bottom  >  and  therefore  the 
Pidure  made  in  the  bottom  and  the  Vifion 
caufed  thereby  will  not  be  diftind,  unlefs  the 
Object  be  brought  fo  near  the  Eye  as  that  the  , 

place 


14        o  p  T  I  c  k:  s. 

place  where  the  converging  Rays  convene  may 
be  removed  to  the  bottom,  or  that  the  plump- 
nefs  of  the  Eye  be  taken  off  and  the  Refrad:i- 
ons  diminifhed  by  a  Concave-glafs  of  a  due  de- 
gree of  Concavity,  or  laflly  that  by  Age  the 
Eye  grow  flatter  till  it  come  to  a  due  Figure: 
For  fhort-fighted  Men  fee  remote  Objeds  beft 
in  Old  Age,  and  therefore  they  are  accounted  to 
have  the  moft  lafling  Eyes. 

A  X.    VIII. 

An  ObjeB  fcen  by  Reflexion  or  "RefraSiion,  ap' 
pears  in  that  place  from  whence  the  Rays  after  their 
laji  Reflexion  or  RefraBion  diverge  in  falling  on  the 
SpeBators  Eye, 

If  the  Object  A  [in  Fig.^!\  be  feen  by  Reflexion 
of  a  Looking-glafs  m  n^  it  fliall  appear,  not  in  its 
proper  place  A,  but  behind  the  Glafs  at  a,  from 
whence  any  Rays  AB,  AC,  AD,  which  flow  from 
one  and  the  fame  Point  of  the  Objed,  do  after 
their  Reflexion  made  in  the  Points  B,  C,  D,  di- 
verge in  going  from  the  Glafs  to  E,  F,  G, 
where  they  are  incident  on  the  Spectator's  Eyes. 
For  theJf^  Rays  do  make  the  fame  Picture  in  the 
bottom  of  the  Eyes  as  if  they  had  come  from 
the  Objed:  really  placed  at  a  without  the  Inter- 
pofition  of  the  Looking-glafs;  and  all  Vifion  is 
made  according  to  the  place  and  fliape  of  that 
Pidure. 

In  like  manner  the  Obje6t  D  [in  Fig.  2.]  feen 
through  a  Prifm,  appears  not  in  its  proper  place 
D,  but  is  thence  tranflated  to  fome  other  place 
d  fituated  in  the  laft  refraded  Ray  F  G  drawn 
backward  from  F  to  d.  And 


B  O  O  K    I.  15 

And  fo  the'Objed:  Q^[  in  Fig.  10.]  feentlirough 
tlie  Lens  A  B,  appears  at  the  place  q  from  whence 
the  Rays  diverge  in  paffing  from  the  Lens  to  the 
Eye.  Now  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  Image  of 
the  Objed;  at  q  is  fo  much  bigger  or  lelTer  than 
the  Objed:  it  felf  at  Q^,  as  the  diftance  of  the 
Image  at  q  from  the  Lens  A  B  is  bigger  or  lefs 
than  the  diftance  of  the  Objed:  at  C^rom  the 
fame  Lens.  And  if  the  Objedl  be  feen  through 
two  or  more  fuch  Convex  or  Concave-glafl'es, 
every  Glafs  fhall  make  a  new  Image,  and  the 
Object  fhall  appear  in  the  pkce  of  the  big- 
nefs  of  the  laft  Image.  Which  confideration  un- 
folds the  Theory  of  Microfcopes  and  Telefcopcs. 
For  that  Theory  coniifts  in  almoll  nothing  elfe 
than  the  defcribing  fuch  Glafles  as  fliall  make  the 
laft  Image  of  any  Objedl  as  diHind  and  large  and 
luminous  as  it  can  conveniently  be  made. 

I  have  now  given  in  Axioms  and  their  Ex- 
plications the  fum  of  what  hath  hitherto  been 
treated  of  in  Opticks.  For  what  hath  been  ge- 
nerally agreed  on  I  content  my  felf  to  allume 
under  the  notion  of  Principles,  in  order  to  what 
I  have  farther  to  write.  And  this  may  fuffice 
for  an  Introdu6tion  to  Readers  of  quick  Wit 
and  good  Underftanding  not  yet  verfed  in  Op- 
ticks  :  Although  thofe  who  are  already  acquaint- 
ed with  this  Science,  and  have  handled  GlalTes, 
will  more  readily  apprehend  what  followeth. 


PROPO" 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


PROPOSITIONS. 

P  ROP.l       T  H  E  O  R.    I. 

T  IG  HTS  which  differ  in  Colour,  differ  alfo  in 
Degrees  of  Refrangibility, 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 

Exper.  I.  I  took  a  black  oblong  ftifF  Paper 
terminated  by  Parallel  Sides,  and  with  a  Per- 
pendicular right  Line  drawn  crofs  from  one 
Side  to  the  other,  diftinguifhed  it  into  two  e- 
qual  Parts.  One  of  thefe  parts  I  painted  with 
a  red  colour  and  the  other  with  a  blue.  The 
Paper  was  very  black,  and  the  Colours  intenfe 
and  thickJy  laid  on,  that  the  Phaenomenon 
might  be  more  confpicuous.  This  Paper  I 
view'd  through  a  Prifm  of  folid  Glafs,  wllofe 
two  Sides  through  which  the  Light  pafled  to  the 
Eye  were  plane  and  well  polifhed,  and  contained 
an  Angle  of  about  fixty  degrees ;  which  Angle 
I  call  the  refracting;  Angle  of  the  Prifm.  And 
whilft  I  view'd  it,  I  held  it  and  the  Prifm  before 
a  Window  in  fuch  manner  that  the  Sides  of  the 
Paper  were  parallel  to  the  Prifm,  and  both  thofe 
Sides  and  the  Prifm  were  parallel  to  the  Horizon, 
and  the  crofs  Line  was*alfo  parallel  to  it:  and 
that  the  Light  which  fell  from  the  Window  upon 
the  Paper  made  an  Angle  with  the  Paper,  equal 
to  that  Angle  which  was  made  with  the  fame 

Paper 


B  O  O  K     I.  J7 

Paper  by  the  Light  refle6led  from  It  to  the  Eye. 
Beyond  the  Prifm  was  the  Wall  of  the  Chamber 
under  the  Window  covered  over  with  black 
Cloth,  and  the  Cloth  was  involved  in  Darknefs 
that  no  Light  might  be  reflected  from  thence, 
which  in  palTing  by  the  Edges  of  the  Paper  to 
the  Eye,  might  mingle  itfelf  with  the  Light  of 
the  Paper,  and  obfcure  the  Phaenomenon  there- 
of. Thefe  things  being  thus  ordered,  I  found 
that  if  the  refracting  Angle  of  the  Prifm  be 
turned  upwards,  fo  that  the  Paper  may  feem  to 
be  lifted  upwards  by  the  Refraction,  its  blue 
half  will  be  lifted  higher  by  the  Refradlon  ; ban 
its  red  half.  But  if  the  refrad:ing  Angle  of  the 
Prifm  be  turned  downward,  fo  that  the  Paper 
may  feem  to  be  carried  lower  by  the  Refra- 
d:ion,  its  blue  half  will  be  carried  fomethin^ 
lower  thereby  than  its  red  half  Wherefore  in 
both  Cafes  the  Light  which  comes  from  the 
blue  half  of  the  Paper  tlirough  the  Prifm  to 
the  Eye,  does  in  like  Circumitances  fuffer  a 
greater  Refradion  than  the  Light  which  comes 
from  the  red  half,  and  by  confequence  is  m.ore 
refrangible. 

Ilhijlration.  In  the  eleventh  Figure,  M  N 
reprefents  the  Window,  and  D  E  the  Paper 
terminated  with  parallel  Sides  D  J  and  H  E, 
and  by  the  tranfverfe  Line  F  G  diftinguiilied 
into  two  halfs,  the  one  D  G  of  an  intenfely 
blue  Colour,  the  other  F  E  of  an  intenfely 
red.  And  ^  hC  c  a  b  reprefents  the  Prifm 
whofe  refrading  Planes  KB  b  a  and  KC  c  a 
meet  in  the  Edge  of  the  refracting  Angle  *%  a. 
This  Edge  A  a  being  upward,  is  paralldftoth  to 

C  the 


i8  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  Horizon,  and  to  the  Parallel-Edges  of  the 
Paper  D  J  and  HE,  and  the  tranfverfe  Line  FG 
is  perpendicular  to  the  Plane  of  the  Window. 
And  de  reprefents  the  Image  of  the  Paper  {0,^x1 
by  Refraction  upwards  in  fuch  manner,  that  the 
blue  half  DG  is  carried  higher  to  dg  than  the 
red  half  F  E  is  to  fe^  and  therefore  fuffers  a 
greater  Refrad:ion.  If  the  Edge  of  the  refracting 
Angle  be  turned  downward,  the  Image  of  the 
Paper  vv^ill  be  refraded  downward  j  fuppofe  to 
^  e,  and  the  blue  half  will  be  refracted  lower  to 
^  y,   than  the  red  half  is  to  9  g. 

Exper,  2.  About  the  aforeiaid  Paper,  whofe 
two  halfs  were  painted  over  with  red  and  blue, 
and  which  was  ftifflike  thin  Pafteboard,  I  lapped 
feveral  times  a  llender  Thred  of  very  black  Silk, 
in  fuch  manner  that  the  feveral  parts  of  the 
Thred  might  appear  upon  the  Colours  like  fo 
many  black  Lines  drawn  over  them,  or  like 
long  and  {lender  dark  Shadows  caft  upon  them. 
I  might  have  drawn  black  Lines  with  a  Pen, 
but  the  Threds  were  fmaller  and  better  defined. 
This  Paper  thus  coloured  and  lined  I  fet  againft 
a  Wall  perpendicularly  to  the  Horizon,  fo  that 
one  of  the  Colours  might  ftand  to  the  Right 
Hand,  and  the  other  to  the  Left.  Clofe  before 
the  Paper,  at  the  Confine  of  the  Colours  below, 
I  placed  a  Candle  to  illuminate  the  Paper  ftrong- 
ly :  For  the  Experiment  was  tried  in  the  Night. 
The  Flame  of  the  Candle  reached  up  to  the 
lower  edge  of  the  Paper,  or  a  very  little  higher. 
Then  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet,  and  one  or  two 
Inches  from  the  Paper  upon  the  Floor  I  ereCted 
a  Giafs  Lens  four  Inches  ajid  a  quarter  broad, 

which 


B  O  O  K     I.  x^ 

which  might  colled:  the  Rays  coming  from  the 
feveral  Points  of  the  Paper,  and  make  them  con- 
verge towards  fo  many  other  Points  at  the  fame 
diftance  of  fix  Feet,  and  one  or  two  Inches  on 
the  other  fide  of  the  Lens,  and  fo  form  the  Image 
of  the  coloured  Paper  upon  a  white  Paper  placed 
there,   after  the  fame  manner  that  a  Lens  at  a 
Hole  in  a  Window  cafts  the  Images  of  Objedts 
abroad  upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper  in  a  dark 
Room.    The  aforefiid  white  Paper,  ere<5i:ed  per- 
pendicular to  the  Horizon,     and   to    the  Rays 
which    fell  upon  it    from  the  Lens,    I  moved 
fometimes   towards  the  Lens,    fometimes  from 
it,  to  find  the  Places  where  the  Images  of  the 
blue  and  red  Parts  of  the  coloured  Paper  appear- 
ed mojft  diftindt.     Thofe  Places  I  eafily  knew  by 
the  Images  of  the  black  Lines  which  I  had  made 
by  winding  the  Silk  about  the  Paper.     For  the 
Images  of  thofe  fine  and  flender  Lines  (which 
by  reafon  of  their  Blacknefs  were  like  Shadows 
on  the  Colours)  were  confufed  and  fcarce  vifi- 
ble,    unlefs  when  the  Colours  on  either  fide  of 
each  Line  were  terminated  moft  diftindlly.    No- 
ting therefore,    as    diligently  as    I    could,    the 
Places  where  the  Images  of  the   red  and  blue 
halfs  of  the  coloured  Paper  appeared  mofl  di- 
flindt,    I  found  that  where  the  red  half  of  the 
Paper  appeared  diftindt,  the  blue  half  appeared 
confufed,    fo  that  the  black  Lines  drawn  upon 
it  could  fcarce  be  feen  ;    and  on  the  contrary, 
where  the  blue  half  appeared  mofl  diftindt,  the 
red  half  appeared  confufed,    fo  that  the  black 
Lines  upon  it  were  fcarce  vifible.     And  between 
the    two  Places   where  thefe  Images   appeared 

C  3  diflindt 


2®  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

diftind  there  was  the  diftance  of  an  Inch  atid  a 
half;  the  diftance  of  the  white  Paper  from  the 
Lens,  when  the  Image  of  the  red.  half  of  the  co- 
loured Paper  appeared  moft  diftind,  being  greater 
by  an  Inch  and  an  half  than  the  diftance  of  the 
fame  white  Paper  from  the  Lens,  when  the  Image 
of  the  blue  half  appeared  moft  diftind:.  Irv 
like  Incidences  therefore  of  the  blue  and  red 
upon  the  Lens,  the  blue  was  refradted  more  by 
the  Lens  than  the  red,  fo  as  to  converge  fooner  by 
an  Inch  and  a  half,  and  therefore  is  more  refran- 
gible. 

Illiijlration.  In  the  twelfth  Figure,  D  E  iig- 
nifies  the  coloured  Paper,  D  G  the  blue  half, 
FE  the  red  half,  MN  the  Lens,  HJ  the  white 
Paper  in  that  Place  where  the  red  half  with  its 
black  Lines  appeared  diftind,  and  h  i  the  fame 
Paper  in  that  Place  where  the  blue  half  appeared 
diftind:.  The  Place  h  i  was  nearer  to  the  Lens 
M  N  than  the  Place  H  J  by  an  Inch  and  an 
half 

^  Scholium.  The  fame  Things  fucceed,  notwith- 
ftanding  that  fome  of  the  Circumftances  be  va- 
ried y  as  in  the  firft  Experiment  when  the  Prifm 
and  Paper  are  any  ways  inclined  to  the  Hori- 
zon, and  in  both  when  coloured  Lines  are 
drawn  upon  very  black  Paper.  But  in  the  De- 
fcription  of  thefe  Experiments,  I  have  fet  down 
fuch  Circumftances,  by  which  either  the  Phae- 
nomenon  might  be  render'd  more  confpicuous, 
or  a  Novice  might  more  eafily  try  them,  or  by 
which  I  did  try  them  only.  The  fame  Thing,  I 
have  often  done  in  the  following  Experiments  : 
Concerning  all  which,  this  one  Admonition  may 

fuffice. 


B  O  O  K     I.  2£ 

fuffice.  Now  from  thefe  Experiments  It  follows 
nor,  that  all  the  Light  of  the  blue  is  more  refran- 
gible than  all  the  Light  of  the  red :  For  both 
Lights  are  mixed  of  Rays  differently  refrangible, 
fo  that  in  the  red  there  are  fome  Rays  not  lefs  re- 
frangible than  thofe  of  the  blue,  and  in  the  blue 
there  are  fome  Rays  not  more  refrangible  than 
thofe  of  the  red :  But  thefe  Rays,  in  proportion  to 
the  whole  Light,  are  but  few,  and  ferve  to  dimi- 
nifh  the  Event  of  the  Experiment,  but  are  not 
able  to  deftroy  it.  For,  if  the  red  and  blue  Co- 
lours were  more  dilute  and  weak,  the  diflance  of 
the  Images  would  be  lefs  than  an  Inch  and  a  half; 
and  if  they  were  more  intenfe  and  full,  that  di- 
ftance  would  be  greater,  as  will  appear  hereafter. 
Thefe  Experiments  may  fuffice  for  the  Colours  of 
Natural  Bodies.  For  in  the  Colours  made  by  the 
Refradtion  of  Prifms,  this  Propof  tion  will  ap- 
pear by  the  Experiments  which  are  now  to  fol- 
low in  the  next  Fropolition. 


PROP.  11.     The  OR.   II. 

lie  Light  of  the  Sim  confifls   of  Rajs 
differently  Refrangible, 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 

Exper.  3.  TN  a  very  dark  Chamber,  at  a  round 
jj  Hole,  about  one  third  Part  of  an 
Inch  broaa,  made  in  the  Shut  of  a  Window,  I 
placed  a  Glafs  Prifm,  whereby  the  Beam  of  tlie 
Sun's  Light,  which  came  in  at  that  Hole,  might 
be  refraj^ed  upwards  toward  the  oppofite  \Vail 

C  3  of 


22  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

of  the  Chamber,   and  there  form  a  colour'd  I- 
mage  of  the  Sun.    The  Axis  of  the  Prifm  ( that 
is,  the  Line  paffing  through  the  middle  of  the 
Prifm.  from  one  end  of  it  to  the  other  end  pa- 
rallel to  the  edge  of  the  Refracting  Angle  )  was 
in  this  and  the  following  Experiments  perpen- 
dicular to  the  incident  Rays.     About  this  Axis 
I  turned  the  Prifm  flowly,  and  faw  the  refradt- 
ed  Light  on  the  Wall,    or  coloured  Image  of 
the  Sun,   firfl  to  defcend,  and  then  to  afcend. 
Between  the  Defcent  and  Afcent,  when  the  I- 
mage  feemed  Stationary,    I   ftopp'd  the  Prifm, 
and  fix'd  it  in  that  Pofture,  that  it  fhould  be 
moved  no  more.     For  in  that  Pofture  the  Re- 
fractions of  the  Light  at  the  two  Sides  of  the 
refracting  Angle,  that  is,  at  the  Entrance  of  the 
Rays  into  the  Prifm,  and  at  their  going  out  of 
it,  were  equal  to  one  another*.     So  alfo  in  other 
Experiments,  as  often  as  I  would  have  the  Re-' 
fractions  on  both  fides  the  Prifm  to  be  equal  to 
one  another,  I  noted  the  Place  where  the  Image 
of  the  Sun  formed  by  the  refraCted  Light  ftood 
ftill  between  its  two  contrary  Motions,  in  the 
common  Period  of  its  Progrefs  and  Regrefs ;  and 
when  the  Image  fell  upon  that  Place,  I  made 
faft  the  Prifm.     And  in  this  Pofture,  as  the  moft 
convenient,  it  is  to  be  underftood  that  all  the 
Prifms  are  placed  in  the  following  Experiments, 
unlefs  where  fome    other  Pofture  is  defcribed. 
The  Prifm  therefore  being  placed  in  this  Po- 
fture, I  let  the  refracted  Light  fall  perpendicu- 
larly upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper  at  the  oppo- 
fite  Wall  of  the  Chamber,  and  obferved  the  Fi- 

*   See  eur  AuthorV  Leftiones  Optica,    Parti.   Se£i.  i.    §  !©• 
StU,  II.  §  29.  and  SeSl.  III.  frop.  25.  gurc 


B  O  O  K     I.  Q3 

gure  and  Dimenrions  of  the  Solar  Image  form- 
ed on  the  Paper  by  that  Light.  This  Image 
was  Oblong  and  not  Oval,  but  terminated  with 
two  Rectilinear  and  Parallel  Sides,  and  tv/o  Se- 
micircular Ends.  On  its  Sides  it  was  bounded 
pretty  diftindtly,  but  on  its  Ends  very  confuled- 
ly  and  indiftindly,  the  Light  there  decaying 
and  vanifl:iing  by  degrees.  The  Breadch  of  this 
Image  anfwered  to  the  Sun's  Diam.eter,  and  was 
about  two  Inches  and  the  eighth  Part  of  an 
Inch,  including  the  Penumbra.  For  the  Image 
was  eighteen  Feet  and  an  half  dlftant  from  the 
Prifm,  and  at  this  diftance  that  Breadth,  if  di- 
minifhed  by  the  Diameter  of  the  Hole  in  the 
Window-fhut,  that  is  by  a  quarter  of  an  Inch, 
fubtended  an  Angle  at  the  Prifm  of  about  half 
a  Degree,  which  is  the  Sun's  apparent  Diame- 
ter. But  the  Length  of  rhe  Image  was  about  ten 
Inches  and  a  quarter,  and  the  Length  oi  the  Re- 
d-ilinear  Sides  about  eight  Inches ;  and  the  re- 
fracting Angle  of  the  Prifm,  whereby  fo  great  a 
Length  was  made,  was  64  degrees.  With  a  lefs 
Angle  the  Length  of  the  Image  was  lefs,  the 
Breadth  remaining  the  fame.  If  the  Prifm  was 
turned  about  its  Axis  that  way  which  made  the 
Rays  emerge  more  obliquely  out  of  the  fecond 
refracting  Surface  of  the  Prifm,  the  Image  foon 
became  an  Inch  or  two  longer,  or  morej  and 
if  the  Prifm  was  turned  about  the  contrary 
way,  fo  as  to  make  the  Rays  fall  more  obliquely 
on  the  firft  refraCting  Surface,  the  Image  fooa 
became  an  Inch  or  two  fhorter.  And  there- 
fore in  trying  this  Experiment,  I  was  as  curi- 
Qus  as  I  could  be  in  placing  the  Prifm  by  xhe 

C  4  abo\^* 


24  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

above-mention'd  Rule  exadtly  in  fuch  a  Poflure, 
that  the  Refradions  of  the  Rays  at  their  Emer- 
gence out  of  the  Prifm  might  be  equal  to  that 
at  their  Incidence  on  it.  This  Prifm  had  fome 
Veins  running  along  within  the  Glafs  from  one 
end  to  the  other,  which  fcattered  fome  of  the 
Sun's  Light  irregularly,  but  had  no  fenfible  Ef- 
fect in  increafing  the  Length  of  the  coloured 
Spedirum.  For  I  tried  the  fame  Experiment 
with  other  Prifms  with  the  fame  Succefs.  And 
particularly  with  a  Prifm  which  feemed  free 
from  fuch  Veins,  and  whofe  refracting  Angle 
was  625  Degrees,  I  found  the  Length  of  the 
Image  95  or  10  Inches  at  the  diflance  of  i8| 
Feet  from  the  Prifm,  the  Breadth  of  the  Hole 
in  the  Window-fhut  being  J  of  an  Inch,  as  be- 
fore. And  becaufe  it  is  eaiy  to  commit  aMi- 
llake  in  placing  the  Prifm  in  its  due  Pofture,  I 
repeated  the  Experiment  four  or  five  Times, 
and  always  found  the  Length  of  the  Image  that 
which  is  fet  down  above.  With  another  Prifm 
of  clearer  Glafs  and  better  Polifh,  which  feem- 
ed free  from  Veins,  and  whofe  refracting  Angle 
was  631  Degrees,  the  Length  of  this  Image  at 
the  fam^e  diftance  of  i8i  Feet  was  alfo  about  10 
Inches,  or  loi  Beyond  thefe  Meafures  for  a- 
bout  a  :  or  i  of  an  Inch  at  either  end  of  the 
SpeCtrum  the  Light  of  the  Clouds  feemed  to  be  a 
little  tinged  with  red  and  violet,  but  fo  very 
faintly,  that  I  fufpeded  that  TinCture  might  ei- 
ther v/holly,  or  in  great  Meafure  arife  from  fome 
Rays  of  the  Spedtrum  fcattered  irregularly  by 
fome  Inequalities  in  the  Subftance  and  Polilli  of 
the  Glafs,  and  therefore  I  did  not  include  it  in 
I  tliefe 


B  O  O  K     I.  25 

thefe  Meafures.  Now  the  different  Magnitude 
of  the  hole  in  the  Window-fhut,  and  different 
thicknefs  of  the  Prifm  where  the  Rays  palled 
through  it,  and  different  inclinations  of  the 
Prifm  to  the  Horizon,  made  no  fenfible  chan- 
ges in  the  length  of  the  Image.  Neither  did 
the  different  matter  of  the  Prifms  make  any: 
for  in  a  Veffel  made  of  polifhed  Plates  of  Glafs 
cemented  together  in  the  fhape  of  a  Prifm  and 
filled  with  Water,  there  is  the  like  Succefs  of 
the  Experiment  according  to  the  quantity  of 
the  Refradlion.  It  is  farther  to  be  obferved, 
that  the  Rays  went  on  in  right  Lines  from  the 
Prifm  to  the  Image,  and  therefore  at  their  very 
going  out  of  the  Prifm  had  all  that  Inclina- 
tion to  one  another  from  which  the  length  of 
the  Image  proceeded,  that  is,  the  Inclination  of 
more  than  two  degrees  and  an  half.  And  yet 
according  to  the  Laws  of  Opticks  vulgarly  re- 
ceived, they  could  not  poffibly  be  fo  much  incli- 
ned to  one  another  *.  For  let  E  G  [ mFig.  1 3.]  re- 
prefent  the  Window-fhut,  F  the  hole  made  there- 
in through  which  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light 
was  tranfmitted  into  the  darkned  Chamber,  and 
ABC  a  Triangular  Imaginary  Plane  whereby  the 
Prifm  is  feigned  to  be  cut  tranfverfly  through 
the  middle  of  the  Light.  Or  if  you  pleafe,  let 
ABC  reprefent  the  Prifm  it  felf,  looking  di- 
redtly  towards  the  Speftator's  Eye  with  its  nearer 
end;  And  let  X Y  be  the  Sun,  MN  the  Pa- 
per upon  which  the  Solar  Image  or  Spectrum  is 
caff,  and  P  T  the  Image  it  felf  whofe  fides  to- 
wards 1;  and  w  are  Redlilinear  and  Parallel,  and 
ends  towards  P  and  T  Semicircular.     YKHP 

and 

*  See  OMx  Author's  Lenionei  Opticcy  Part.  I.  Sect.  i.  §.5. 


^6         d  p  T  I  c  K  a 

and  X  L  J  T  are  two  Rays,  the  firft  of.  which 
comes  from  the  lower  part  of  the  Sun  to  the 
higher  part  of  the  Image,  and  is  refraded  in  the 
Prifm  at  K  and  H,  and  the  latter  comes  from 
the  higher  part  of  the  Sun  to  the  lower  part  of 
the  Image,  and  is  refradted  at  L  and  J.     Since 
the  Refradions  on  both  fides  the  Prifm  are  e- 
qual  to  one  another,   that  is,  the  Refraction  at 
K  equal  to  the  Refradion  at  J,  and  the  Refra- 
dion  at  L  equal  to  the  Refradion  at  H,  fo  that 
the  Refradions  of  the  incident  Rays  at  K  and  L 
taken  together,  are  equal  to  the  Refradions  of 
the  emergent  Rays  at  H  and  J  taken  together : 
it  follows  by  adding  equal  things  to  equal  things, 
that  the  Refradions  at  K  and  H  taken  together, 
are  equal  to  the  Refradions  at  J  and  L  taken 
together,   and  therefore  the  two  Rays  being  e- 
qually  refraded,    have  the  fame  Inclination  to 
one  another  after  Refradion   which   they  had 
before ;  that  is,  the  Inclination  of  half  a  Degree 
anfwering  to  the  Sun's  Diameter.     For  fo  great 
was  the  Inclination  of  the  Rays  to  one  another 
before  Refradion.     So  then,  the  length  of  the 
Image  P  T  would  by  the  Rules  of  Vulgar  Op- 
ticks  fubtend  an  Angle  of  half  a  Degree  at  the 
Prifm ,    and  by  Confequence  be  equal  to  the 
breadth  'y  w  -,  and  therefore  the  Image  would 
be   round.      Thus   it  would  be  were  the  two 
Rays  XL  JT  and  YKHP,  and  all  the  reft  which 
form  the  Image  P  w  T  'u,    alike  refrangible. 
And  therefore  feeing  by  Experience  it  is  found 
that  the  Image  is  not  round,  but  about  five  times 
longer  than  broad,  the  Rays  which  going  to  the 
upper  end  P  of  the  Image  fuffer  the  greateft  Re- 
fradion, 


BOOK     I.  a; 

fradion,  mufl  be  more  refrarxgible  than  thofe 
which  go  to  the  lower  end  T,  unlefs  the  Inequa- 
lity of  Refradtion  be  cafual. 

This  Image  or  Spectrum  P  T  was  .coloured, 
being  red  at  its  leaft  refradled  end  T,  and  vio- 
let at  its  moil  refraded  end  P  ,  and  yellow 
green  and  blue  in  the  intermediate  Spaces. 
Which  agrees  with  the  firft  Proportion,  that 
Lights  which  differ  in  Colour,  do  alio  differ  in 
Refrangibility.  The  length  of  the  Image  in  the 
foregoing  Experiments,  I  meafured  from  the 
fainteft  and  outmoft  red  at  one  end,  to  the 
fainteft  and  outmoft  blue  at  the  other  end,  ex- 
cepting only  a  little  Penumbra,  whofe  breadth 
fcarce  exceeded  a  (quarter  of  an  Inch,  as  was 
faid  above. 

Exper.  4.  In  the  Sun's  Beam  which  was  pro- 
pagated into  the  Room  through  the  hole  in  the 
Window-fhut ,  at  the  diffance  of  fome  Feet 
from  the  hole,  I  held  the  Prifm  in  fuch  a  Po- 
llure,  that  its  Axis  might  be  perpendicular  to 
that  Beam.  Then  I  looked  through  the  Prifm 
upon  the  hole,  and  turning  the  Prifm  to  and 
fro  about  its  Axis,  to  rhake  the  Image  of  the 
Hole  afcend  and  defcend-,  when  between  its 
two  contrary  Motions  it  feemed  Stationary,  I 
ftopp'd  the  Prifm,  that  the  Refradions  of  both 
fides  of  the  refrading  Angle  might  be  equal  to 
each  other,  as  in  the  former  Experiment.  In 
this  Situation  of  the  Priim  viewing  through  it 
the  faid  Hole,  I  obferved  the  length  of  its  re- 
fraded  Image  to  be  many  times  greater  than 
its  breadth,  and  that  the  moH:  refraded  part 
■  thereof  appeared  violet,  the  lead  refraded  red, 
2  the 


28  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  middle  parts  blue,  green  and  yellow  in  or- 
der. The  fame  thing  happen'd  when  I  remo- 
ved the  Prifm  out  of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  look- 
ed through  it  upon  the  hole  fliining  by  the 
Light  of  the  Clouds  beyond  it.  And  yet  if  the 
Refradtion  were  done  regularly  according  to 
one  certain  Proportion  of  the  Sines  of  Inci- 
dence and  Refradion  as  is  vulgarly  fuppofed, 
the  refraded  Image  ought  to  have  appeared 
round. 

So  then,  by  thefe  two  Experiments  it  appears, 
that  in  equafi  Incidences  there  is  a  confiderable 
inequality  of  Refractions.  But  whence  this  in- 
equality arifes,  whether  it  be  that  fome  of  the 
incident  Rays  are  refradled  more,  and  others  lefs, 
conftantly,  or  by  chance,  or  that  one  and  the 
fame  Ray  is  by  Refrad;ion  difturbed,  fliatter'd, 
dilated ,  and  as  it  were  fplit  and  fpread  into  ma- 
ny diverging  Rays,  as  Grimaldo  fuppofes,  does 
not  yet  appear  by  thefe  Experiments,  but  will 
appear  by  thofe  that  follow. 

Exper.  5.  Confidering  therefore,  that  if  in 
the  third  Experiment  the  Image  of  the  Sun 
jfhould  be  drawn  out  into  an  oblong  Form,  ei- 
ther by  a  Dilatation  of  every  Ray,  or  by  any  o- 
ther  cafual  inequality  of  the  Refradions,  the 
fame  oblong  Image  would  by  a  fecond  Refra- 
dion  made  fideways  be  drawn  out  as  much  in 
breadth  by  the  like  Dilatation  of  the  Rays,  or  o- 
ther  cafual  inequality  of  the  Refradions  fide- 
ways,  I  tried  what  would  be  the  Effeds  of  fuch 
a  fecond  Refradion.  For  this  end  I  ordered 
all  things  as  in  the  third  Experiment,  and  then 
placed  a  fecond  Prifm   immediately  after  the 

firfl 


B  O  O  K     L  2p 

I  firfl:  in  a  crofs  Pofition  to  it,  that  it  might  again 
refrad;  the  beam  of  the  Sun*s  Light  which  came 
to  it  through  the  firfl:  Prifm.  In  the  firfl  Prifm 
this  beam  was  refracted  upwards,  and  in  the 
fecond  fideways.  And  I  found  that  by  the  Re- 
fraction of  the  fecond  Prifm,  the  breadth  of  the 
Image  was  not  increafed,  but  its  fuperior  part, 
which  in  the  firfl  Prifm  fuffered  the  greater  Re- 
fradlion,  and  appeared  violet  and  blue,  did  again 
in  the  fecond  Prifm  fuffer  a  greater  Refradlion 
than  its  inferior  part,  which  appeared  red  and 
yellow,  and  this  without  any  Dilatation  of  the 
Image  in  breadth. 

Illiijiration.  Let  S  [in  Fig.  14.  ]  reprefent 
the  Sun,  F  the  hole  in  the  Window,  ABC  tlie 
iirfl  Prifm,  D  H  the  fecond  Prifm,  Y  the  round 
Image  of  the  Sun  made  by  a  diredl  beam  of 
Light  when  the  Prifms  are  taken  away,  P  T 
the  oblong  Image  of  the  Sun  made  by  that  beam 
pafling  through  the  firfl  Prifm  alone,  when  the 
fecond  Prifm  is  taken  away,  and  p  t  the  Image 
made  by  the  crofs  Refradions  of  both  Prifms 
together.  Now  if  the  Rays  which  tend  to- 
wards the  feveral  Points  of  the  round  Image  Y 
were  dilated  and  fpread  by  the  Refraction  of 
the  firfl  Prifm,  fg  that  they  fhould  not  any  lon- 
ger go  in  fmgle  Lines  to  fingle  Points,  but  that 
every  Ray  being  fplit,  fliattered,  and  changed 
from  a  Linear  Ray  to  a  Superficies  of  Rays  di- 
verging from  the  Point  of  Refraction,  and  ly- 
ing in  the  Plane  of  the  Angles  of  Incidence  and 
Refraction,  they  fhould  go  in  thofe  Planes  to 
fo  many  Lines  reaching  almofl  from  one  end  of 
the  Image  P  T  to  the  other,  and  if  that  Image 

fhould 


50    '        OP  T  I  C  K  S. 

fhould  thence  become  oblong:  thofe  Rays  and 
their  feveral  parts  tending  towards  the  feveral 
Points  of  the  Image  P  T  ought  to  be  again  di- 
lated and  fpread  fide  ways  by  the  tranfverfe 
Refraftion  of  the  fecond  Prifm,  fo  as  to  com- 
pofe  a  four  fquare  Image,  fuch  as  is  reprefented 
at  iH.  For  the  better  underftanding  of  which, 
let  the  Image  P  T  be  diftinguiflied  into  five  e- 
qual  parts  P QK,  KQRL,  LRSM,  MSVN, 
N  VT.  And  by  the  fame  irregularity  that  the 
orbicular  Light  Y  is  by  the  Refraction  of  the 
firft  Prifm  dilated  and  drawn  out  into  a  long 
Image  P  T,  the  Light  P  QK  which  takes  up  a 
fpace  of  the  fame  length  and  breadth  with  the 
Light  Y  ought  to  be  by  the  Refraftion  of  the 
fecond  Prifm  dilated  and  drawn  out  into  the 
long  Image  tt  q  k  p,  and  the  Light  K  QjR.  L  into 
the  long  Image  kqrl,  and  the  Lights  LRSM, 
MSVN,  N  V  T,  into  fo  many  other  long  I- 
mages /r  ^?;7,  ?nsvny  nvtl,  and  all  thefe  long 
Images  would  compofe  the  four  fquare  Image 
•TT?.  Thus  it  ought  to  be  were  every  Ray  dila- 
ted by  Refraction,  and  fpread  into  a  triangular 
Superficies  of  Rays  diverging  from  the  Point 
of  Refradlion.  For  the  fecond  Refradion 
would  fpread  the  Rays  one  way  as  much  as  the 
firft  doth  another,  and  fo  dilate  the  Image  in 
breadth  as  much  as  the  firft  doth  in  length. 
And  the  fame  thing  ought  to  happen  ,  were 
fome  Rays  cafually  refradled  more  than  others. 
But  the  Event  is  other  wife.  The  Image  P  T 
was  not  made  broader  by  the  Refraction  of  the 
fecond  Prifm.,  but  only  became  oblique,  as  'tis 
reprefented  at  /  ^ ,   its  upper  end  P  being  by 

the 


B  O  O  K     I.  31 

the  Refradion  tranflatedto  a  greater  diftance  than 
its  lower  end  T.  So  then  the  Light  which  went 
towards  the  upper  end  P  of  the  Image,  was  (  at 
equal  Incidences  )  more  refraded  in  the  fecond 
Prifm,  than  the  Light  which  tended  towards  the 
lower  end  T,  that  is  the  blue  and  violet,  than  the 
red  and  yellow  j  and  therefore  was  more  refran- 
gible. The  fame  Light  was  by  the  Refradion  of 
the  iirft  Prifm  tranflated  farther  from  the  place. 
Y  to  which  it  tended  before  Refraction ;  and 
therefore  fuffered  as  well  in  the  firft  Prifm  as  in 
the  fecond  a  greater  Refradion  than  the  reft  of 
the  Light,  and  by  confequence  was  more  refran- 
gible than  the  reft,  even  before  its  incidence  on 
the  firft  Prifm. 

Sometimes  I  placed  a  third  Prifm  after  the 
fecond,  and  fometimes  alfo  a  fourth  after  the 
third,  by  all  which  the  Image  might  be  often 
refraded  fideways:  but  the  Rays  which  were 
more  refradted  than  the  reft  in  the  firft  Prifm 
were  alfo  more  refraded  in  all  the  reft,  and  that 
without  any  Dilatation  of  the  Image  fideways : 
and  therefore  thofe  Rays  for  their  conftancy  of  a 
greater  Refraction  are  defervedly  reputed  more 
refrangible. 

But  that  the  meaning  of  this  Experiment  may 
more  clearly  appear,  it  is  to  be  confidercd  that 
the  Rays  which  are  equally  refrangible  do  fall 
upon  a  Circle  anfwering  to  the  Sun's  Difque. 
For  this  was  proved  in  the  third  Experiment. 
By  a  Circle  I  underftand  not  here  a  perfect  geo- 
metrical Circle,  but  any  orbicular  Figure  whofe 
length  is  equal  to  its  breadth,'  and  which,  as 
to  Senfe,  may  feem  circular.     Let  therefore  A  G 

[in 


32  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

[in  Fig.  15.]  reprefent  the  Circle  which  all  the 
niofl:    refrangible    Rays    propagated   from  the 
whole  Difque  of  the  Sun,  would  illuminate  and 
paint  upon  the  oppofite  Wall  if  they  were  a- 
lonej  E  L  the  Circle  which  all  the  leafl  refran- 
gible Rays  would  in  like  manner  illuminate  and 
paint  if  they  were  alone;   B  H,  C  J,  DK,  the 
Circles  which   fo   many    intermediate  forts  of 
Rays  would  fucceffively  paint  upon  the  Wall, 
if  they  were  fmgly  propagated  from  the  Sun 
in  fucceflive  order,  the  reft  being  always  inter- 
cepted ;   and  conceive  that  there  are  other  in* 
termediate    Circles   without    Number ,    which 
innumerable  other  intermediate  forts  of  Rays 
would  fucceffively  paint  upon  the  Wall  if  the 
Sun  fliould  fucceffively  emit  every  fort  apart. 
And  feeing  the  Sun  emits  all  thefe  forts  at  once, 
they  muft  all  together  illuminate  and  paint  in- 
numerable equal  Circles,   of  all  which,  being 
according    to    their    degrees    of   Refrangibility 
placed  in  order  in  a  continual  Series,    that  ob- 
long Spedrum  P  T  is  compofed  which  I  defcri- 
bed   in    the    third  Experiment.     Now    if    the 
Sun's 'circular  Image  Y  [in  Fig.  14,  15.]  which 
is  made  by  an  unrefradled  beam  of  Light  was 
by  any  Dilation  of  the  fnigle  Rays,    or  by  any 
other  irregularity  in  the  Refra<5lion  of  the  iirft 
Prifm,    converted    into    the   oblong   Spedtrum, 
P  T  :  then  ought  every  Circle  AG,  B  H,  C  J, 
^c.  in  that  Spedtrum,  by  the  crofs  Refradion 
of  the  fecond  Prifm  again  dilating  or  other  wife 
fcattering  the  Rays  as  before,  to  be  in  like  man- 
ner drawn  out  and  transformed  into  an  oblong 
Figure,  and  thereby  the  breadth  of  the  Image 

"    FT 


B  O  O  K     I.  3  3 

PT  would  be  now  as  much  augmented  as  tlie 
length  of  the  Image  Y  was  before  by  the  Refra- 
dionof  the  firftPrifmj  and  thus  by  the  Refra- 
ctions of  both  Prifms  together  would  be  formed 
a  four  fquare  Figure  p  ir  t%  as  I  defcribed  a- 
bove.  Wherefore  fmce  the  breadth  of  the  Spe- 
drum  PT  is  not  increafed  by  the  Refradion 
fideways,  it  is  certain  that  the  Rays  are  nqt  fplit 
or  dilated,  or  otherways  irregularly  fcatter'd 
by  that  Refradtion,  but  that  every  Circle  is  by 
a  regular  and  uniform  Refradion  tranflated 
entire  into  another  Place,  as  the  Circle  AG 
by  the  greateft  Refradion  into  the  place  a  gy 
the  Circle  B  H  by  a  lefs  Refradioh  into  the 
place  b  h,  the  Circle  C  J  by  a  Refradion  ftill 
lefs  into  the  place  c  i,  and  fo  of  the  reft)  by 
which  means  a  new  Spedrum  p  t  inclined  to 
the  former  P  T  is  in  like  manner  compofed  of 
Circles  lying  in  a  right  Line ;  and  thefe  Circles 
muft  be  of  the  fame  bignefs  with  the  former, 
becaufe  the  breadths  of  all  the  Spedrums  Y, 
P  T  and  />  /  at  equal  diftances  from  the  Prifms 
are  equal. 

I  conlidered  farther,  tliat  by  the  breadth  of 
the  hole  F  through  which  the  Light  enters  in- 
to the  dark  Chamber ,  there  is  a  Penumbra 
made  in  the  Circuit  of  the  Spedrum  Y,  and 
that  Penumbra  remains  in  the  redilinear  Sides 
of  the  Spedrums  P  T  and  pt.  I  'placed  there- 
fore at  that  hole  a  Lens  or  Objed-glafs  of  a  Te- 
lefcope  w^hich  might  caft  the  Image  of  the  Sun 
diftindly  on  Y  without  any  Penumbra  at  all, 
and  found  that  the  Penumbra  of  the  redilinear 
Sides  of  the  oblong  Spedrums  P  T  and  / 1  was 

D  alfo 


34  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

alfu  thereby  taken  away,  fo  that  thofe  Sides  ap- 
peared as  diilindily  defined  as  did  the  Circum- 
ference of  the  firft  Image  Y.     Thus  it  happens 
if  the  Glafs  of  the  Prifms  be  free  from  Veins, 
and  their  Sides  be    accurately  plane  and  well 
polifhed   without    thofe  numberlefs  Waves   or 
Curies  which  ufually   arife  from   Sand-holes  a 
little  fmoothed  in  polilliing  with  Putty.     If  the 
Glafs  be  only  well  polifhed  and  free  from  Veins, 
and  the  Sides  not  accurately  plane,  but  a  little 
Convex  or  Concave,  as  it  frequently  happens; 
yet  may  the  three  Spedtrums  Y,   P  T  and  p  t 
want   Penumbras ,    but   not  in  equal   diftances 
from  the  Prifms.     Now  from  this  want  of  Pe- 
numbras, I  knew  more  certainly  that  every  one 
of  the  Circles  v/as  refracted  according  to  fome 
inoft  regular,  uniform  and  conftant  Law.     For 
if  there  were  any  irregularity  in  the  Refra(5tion, 
rhe  right  Lines  A  E  and  G  L,  which  all  the  Cir- 
cles in  the  Spe6lrum  P  T  do  touch,  could  not 
by  that  Refraction  be  tranflated  into  the  Lines 
a  e  and  ^  /  as  diflind:  and  fcraight  as  they  were 
before,  but  there  would  arife  in  thofe  tranflated 
Lines  fome  Penumbra  or  Crookednefs  or  Un- 
dulation, or  other  fenfible  Perturbation  contrary 
to  what  is  found  by  Experience.     Whatfoever 
Penumbra  or  Perturbation  fhould  be  made  in  the 
Circles  by  the   crofs  Refraction  of  the  fecond 
Prifm,  all  that  Penumbra  or  Perturbation  would 
be  confpicuous  in  the  right  Lines   ae  and  gl 
which  touch  thofe  Circles.     And  therefore  fince 
there  is  no  fuch  Penumbra  or  Perturbation  in 
thofe  right  Lines,  there  muft  be  none  in  the  Cir^ 
cles.     Since  the  difbance  between  thofe  Tangents 

■2  or 


B  O  O  K    r.  35 

or  breadth  of  the  Spedrum  is  not  increafed 
by  the  Refra<5tions,  the  Diameters  of  the  Circles 
are  not  increafed  thereby.  Since  thofe  Tangents 
continue  to  be  right  Lines,  every  Circle  wiiich 
in  the  iirft  Prifm  is  more  or  lefs  refraded,  is 
exactly  in  the  fame  proportion  more  or  lefs  re- 
fracted in  the  fecond.  And  feeing  all  thefe 
things  continue  to  fucceed  after  the  lame  man- 
ner when  the  Rays  are  again  in  a  third  Prifm, 
and  again  in  a  fourth  refra6led  fideways,  it  is 
evident  that  the  Rays  of  one  and  the  fame  Circle, 
as  to  their  degree  of  Refrangibility,  continue  al- 
ways uniform  and  homogeneal  to  one  another, 
and  that  thole  of  feveral  Circles  do  differ  in  de- 
gree of  Refrangibility,  and  that  in  fome  certain 
and  conflant  Proportion.  Which  is  the  thing  I 
was  to  prove. 

There  is  yet  another  Clrcumflance  or  two  of 
this  Experiment  by  which  it  becomes  Hill  more 
plain  and  convincing.  Let  the  fecond  Prifm 
DH  [in  Fig,  i6.]  be  placed  not  immedi- 
ately after  the  firlt ,  but  at  fome  diftance 
from  it;  fuppofe  in  the  mid-way  between  it 
and  the  Wall  on  which  the  oblong  Spe<5truni 
PT  is  caft,  fo  that  the  Light  from  the  firft 
Prifm  may  fall  upon  it  in  the  form  of  an  ob- 
long Spedrum  -r^  parallel  to  this  fecond  Prifm, 
and  be  refraded  tideways  to  form  the  oblong 
Spedrum  pt  upon  the  Wall.  And  you- will 
find  as  before,  that  this  Spedirum  />  /  is  inclined 
to  that  Spedrum  P  T,  which  the  firft  Prifm 
forms  alone  without  the  fecond;  the  blue  ends 
P  and  p  being  farther  diftant  from  one  another 
than  the  red  ones  T  and  /,  and  by  confequence 

D  2  '  that 


3^  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

that  the  Rays  which  go  to  the  blue  end  cr  of 
the  Image  <t  7,  and  which  therefore  fuffer  the 
greateft  Refradion  in  the  firft  Prifm,  are  again 
in  the  fecond  Prifm  more  refradied  than  the 
reft. 

The  fame  thing  I  try'd  alfo  by  letting  the 
Sun's  Light  into  a  dark  Room  through  two  lit- 
tle round  holes  F  and  (p  [in  Fig.  17.]  made  in 
the  Window ,  and  with  two  parallel  Prifms 
ABC  and  a/Sy  placed  at  thofe  holes  ( one  at 
each )  refra6ting  thofe  two  beams  of  Light  to 
the  oppofite  Wall  of  the  Chamber,  in  fuch  man- 
ner that  the  tv/o  colour'd  Images  P  T  and  M  N 
which  they  there  painted  were  joined  end  to  end 
and  lay  in  one  flraight  Line,  the  red  end  T  of 
the  one  touching  the  blue  end  M  of  the  other. 
For  if  thefe  two  refracfted  Beams  were  again. 
by  a  third  Prifm  DH  placed  crofs  to  the  two 
firft ,  refraded  fideways ,  and  the  Spedlrums 
thereby  tranilated  to  fome  other  part  of  the 
Wall  of  the  Chamber,  fuppofe  the  Sped:rum 
P  T  to  pt  and  the  Spedrum  M  N  to  m ;/,  thefe 
tranflated  Spedrums  p  t  and.  m  n  would  not  lie 
in  one  ftraight  Line  with  their  ends  contiguous 
as  before,  but  be  broken  oif  from  one  another 
and  become  parallel,  the  blue  end  m  of  the  I- 
mage  m  n  bein^  by  a  greater  Refradion  tran- 
flated farther  from  its  former  place  M  T,  than 
the  red  end  t  of  the  other  Image  p  t  from  the 
fam.e  place  M  T ;  which  puts  the  Propofition 
pad  Difpute.  And  this  happens  whether  the 
third  Prifm  D  H  be  placed  immediately  after 
the  two  firft,  or  at  a  great  diftance  from 
them,  fo  that  the  Light  refraded  in  the  two 

firfl 


B  O  O  K     I.         '      37 

iirft  Prifms  be  either  white  and  circular,  or  co- 
loured and  oblong  when  it  falls  on  the  third. 

^xper.  6.  In  the  middle  of  two. thin  Boards 
I  made  round  holes  a  third  part  of  an  Inch  in 
diameter ,  and  iri  the  Window-fliut  a  much 
broader  hole  being  made  to  let  into  my  dark- 
ned  Chamber  a  large  Beam  of  the  Sun's  Light; 
I  placed  a  Prifm  behind  the  Shut  in  that  beam 
to  refradl  it  towards  the  oppofite  Wali,  and 
clofe  behind  the  Prifm  I  fixed  one  of  the  Boards, 
in  fuch  manner  that  the  middle  of  the  refradled 
Light  might  pafs  through  the  hole  made  in  it, 
and  the  reft  be  intercepted  by  the  Board.  Then 
at  the  diftance  of  about  twelve  Feet  from  the 
firft  Board  I  fixed  the  other  Board  in  fuch  man- 
ner, that  the  middle  of  the  refraded  Light  which 
canie  through  the  hole  in  the  firft  Board,  and 
fell  upon  the  oppofite  Wall,  might  pafs  through 
the  hole  in  this  other  Board ,  and  the  reft  being 
intercepted  by  the  Board  might  paint  upon  it 
the  coloured  Spectrum  of  the  Sun.  And  clofe 
behind  this  Board  I  fixed  another  Prifm  to  rc- 
fra<ft  the  Light  v/hich  came  through  the  hole. 
Then  I  returned  fpeedily  to  the  firft  Prifm,  and 
by  turning  it  llowly  to  and  fro  about  its  Axis, 
I  caufed  the  Image  which  fell  upon  the  fecond 
Board  to  move  up  and  down  upon  that  Board, 
that  all  its  parts  might  fucceflively  pafs  through 
the  hole  in  that  Board  and  fall  upon  the  Prifm 
behind  it.  And  in.  the  mean  time,  I  noted  the 
places  on  the  oppofite  Wall  to  which  that  Light 
after  its  Refraftion  in  the  fecond  Prifm  did  pafs ; 
and  by  the  difference  of  the  places  I  found  that 
the  Light  which  being  ir.olt    refraded   in  the 

JD  3  firft 


38  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

firfl  Prifm  did  go  to  the  blue  end  of  the  Image, 
was  again  more  refraded  in  the  fecond  Prifm 
than  the  Light  which  went  to  the  red  end  of 
that  Image,  which  proves  as  well  the  firfl  Pro- 
portion as  the  fecond.  And  this  happened  whe- 
ther the  Axis  of  the  two  Prifms  were  parallel,  or 
inclined  to  one  another,  and  to  the  Horizon  in 
any  given  Angles. 

TUnJlration.     Let  F  \\xs.Fig.  i8.]  be  the  wide 
hole  in  the  Window-ihut,   through  which  the 
Sun  fliines  upon  the  firfl  Prifrii  ABC,  and  let 
the  refracted  Light  fall  upon  the  middle  of  the 
Board  D  E,  and  the  middle  part  of  that  Light 
upon  the  hole  G  made  in  the  middle  part  of  that 
Board.     Let  this  trajed:ed  part  of  that  Light 
fall  again  upon  the  middle  of  the  fecond  Board 
d  e,  and  there  paint  fuch  an  oblong  coloured  I- 
mage  of  the  Sun  as  was  defcribed  in  the  third 
Experiment.     By  turning  the  Prifm  ABC  flow- 
iy  to  and  fro  about  its  Axis,  this  Image  will  be 
made  to  move  up  and  down    the   Board  de, 
and  by  this  means  all  its  parts  from  one  end  to 
the  other  may  be    made    to    pafs  fucceffively 
through  the  hole  g  which  is  made  in  the  mid- 
dle of  that  Board.     In  the  mean  while  another 
Prifm  abcisto  be  fixed  next  after  that  hole  gy 
to  refrad:   the   trajed:ed  Light    a   fecond  time. 
And  thefe  things  being  thus  orderea,  I  marked 
the  places  M  and  N  of  the  oppofite  Wall  upon 
which  the  refracted  Light  fell,  and  found  that 
whilft   the   two  Boards  and  fecond  Prifm  re- 
mained unmoved,   thofe  places  by  turning  the 
firfl:  Prifm  about  its  Axis  were  changed  perpe- 
tually.    For  when  the  lower  part  of  the  Light 

which 


B  O  O  K     I.  3p 

which  fell  upon  the  fecond  Board  d  e  \vas  call 
through  the  hole  g,  it  went  to  a  lower  place  M 
on  the  Wall,  and  when  the  higher  part  of  that 
Light  was  caft  through  the  fame  hole  o-,  it  went 
to  a  higher  place  N  on  the  Wall,  and  wheii  any 
intermediate  part  of  the  Light  was  caft  through 
that  hole,  it  went  to  fome  place  on  the  Wall  be- 
tween M  and  N.  The  unchanged  Pofition  of 
the  holes  in  the  Boards,  made  the  L^cidence 
of  the  Rays  upon  the  fecond  Prifm  to  be  the 
fame  in  all  cafes.  And  yet  in  that  common  In- 
cidence fome  of  the  Rays  were  more  refra(5tcd, 
and  others  lefs.  ,  And  thofe  were  more  refraded 
in  this  Prifm,  which  by  a  greater  Refradion  in 
the  firft  Prifm  were  more  turned  out  of  the 
way,  and  therefore  for  their  Conftancy  of  being 
more  refradied  are  defervedly  called  more  refran- 
gible. 

Exper.  J.  At  two  holes  made  near  one  ano- 
ther in  my  Window- fliut  I  placed  two  Prifms, 
one  at  each,  which  nii?;ht  caft  upon  the  oppo- 
fite  Wall  (after  the  manner  of  the  third  Expe- 
riment) two  oblong  coloured  Luages  of  the 
Sun.  And  at  a  little  diftance  from  the  Wall  I 
placed  a  long  (lender  Paper  with  ftraight  and  pa- 
rallel edges,  and  ordered  the  Prifms  and  Pa- 
per fo,  that  the  red  Colour  of  cneiCmage  might 
fall  diredly  upon  one  half  of  the  Paper,  and 
the  violet  Colour  of  the  other  Image  upon  the 
other  half  of  the  fame  Paper ;  fo  that  the  Pa- 
per appeared  of  two  Colours,  red  and  violet, 
much  after  the  manner  of  the  painted  Paper 
in  the  firft  and  fecond  Experiments.  Then 
with  a  black  Cloth  I  covered  the  Wall  behind 

D  4  thQ 


40  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  Paper,  that  no  Light  might  be  refledied  from 
it  to  difliirb  the  Experiment,  and  viewing  the 
Paper  through  a  third  Prifm  held  parallel  to  it, 
I  faw  that  half  of  it  which  was  illuminated  by 
the  violet  Light  to  be  divided  from  the  other 
half  by  a  greater  Refra(5lion,  efpecially  when  I 
went  a  good  way  off  from  the  Paper.  For 
when  I  viewed  it  too  near  at  hand,  the  two  halfs 
of  the  Paper  did  not  appear  fully  divided  from 
one  another,  but  feemed  contiguous  at  one  of 
their  Angles  like  the  painted  Paper  in  the  firft 
Experiment.  Which  alfo  happened  when  the 
Paper  was  too  broad. 

Sometimes  inftead  of  the  Paper  I  ufed  a  white 
Thred,  and  this  appeared  through  the  Prifm 
divided  into  two  parallel  Threds  as  is  repre- 
fented  in  the  nineteenth  Figure ,  where  D  G 
denotes  the  Thred  illuminated  with  violet  Light 
from  D  to  E  and  with  red  Light  from  F  to  G, 
and  d  e  fg  are  the  parts  of  the  Thred  feen  by 
Refradion.  If  one  half  of  the  Thred  be  con- 
ftanrly  illuminated  v/ith  red,  and  the  other  half 
be  ilkuninated  with  all  the  Colours  fucceffively, 
( which  may  be  done  by  caufing  one  of  the 
Prifms  to  be  turned  about  its  Axis  whilft  the 
other  remains  unmoved)  this  other  half  in  view- 
ing the  Thred  through  the  Prifm,  will  appear 
in  a  continual  right  Line  with  the  firfl  half  when 
illuminated  with  red,  and  begin  to  be  a  little 
divided  from  it  when  illuminated  with  Orange, 
jind  remove  farther  from  it  when  illuminated 
yvith  yellow,  and  ftill  farther  when  with  green, 
^nd  farther  when  with  blue,  and  go  yet  farther 
pff  when  illuriiinated  with  Iiidigo,  and  fartheft 

when 


B  O  O  K     L  41 

when  with  deep  violet.  Which  plainly  fhews, 
that  the  Lights  of  feveral  Colours  are  more  and 
more  refrangible  one  than  another,  in  this  Order 
of  their  Colours,  red,  orange,  yellow,  green, 
blue,  indigo,  deep  violet  j  and  fo  proves  as  well 
the  firft  Proportion  as  the  fecond. 

I  caufed  alfo  the  coloured  Spedrums  P  T 
[  in  Fig.  ij.  ]  and  M  N  made  in  a  dark  Cham- 
ber by  the  Refradions  of  -two  Prifms  to  lie  in 
a  Right  Line  end  to  end,  as  was  defcribed  above 
in  the  fifth  Experiment,  and  viewing  them 
through  a  third  Prifm  held  parallel  to  their 
Length,  they  appeared  no  longer  in  a  Right 
Line,  but  became  broken  from  one  another,  as 
they  are  reprefented  at  ^  ^  and  ;;/ ;/,  the  violet 
end  m  of  the  Specftrum  m  n  being  by  a  greater 
Refradion  tranllated  farther  from  its  former 
Place  M  T  than  the  red  end  t  of  the  other 
Spedrum  pt. 

I  farther  caufed  thofe  two  Spedtrums  P  T 
[  in  Fig.  20.  ]  and  M  N  to  become  co-incident 
in  an  inverted  Order  of  their  Colours,  the  red 
end  of  each  falling  on  the  violet  end  of  the  o- 
ther,  as  they  are  reprefented  in  the  oblong  Fi- 
gure PTMN  J  and  then  viewing  them  through 
a  Prifm  D  H  held  parallel  to  their  Length,  they 
appeared  not  co-incident,  as  when  view'd  with 
the  naked  Eye,  but  in  the  form  of  two  diftindt 
Spedrums  p  t  and  m  n  croffing  one  another  in 
the  middle  after  the  manner  of  the  Letter  X. 
"Which  fliews  that  the  red  of  the  one  Spedrum 
and  violet  of  the  other,  which  were  co-incident 
at  PN  and  MT,  being  parted  from  one  another 
by  a  greater  Refradipn  of  the  violet  to  p  and  m 

thau 


42  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

than  of  the  red  to  n  and  /,  do  differ  in  degrees  of 
Refrangibility. 

I  illuminated  alfo  a  little  Circular  fiece  of 
white  Paper  all  over  with  the  Lights  of  both 
Prifms  intermixed,  and  when  it  was  illumina- 
ted with  the  red  of  one  Speftrum,  and  deep 
violet  of  the  other,  fo  as  by  the  Mixture  of 
thofe  Colours  to  appear  all  over  purple,  I  view- 
ed the  Paper,  firft  at  a  lefs  diflance,  and  then 
at  a  greater,  through  a  third  Prifmj  and  as  I 
went  from  the  Paper,  the  refracted  Image  there- 
of became  more  and  more  divided  by  the  une- 
qual Refraction  of  the  two  mixed  Colours,  and 
at  length  parted  into  two  diftind:  Images,  a  red 
one  and  a  violet  one,  whereof  the  violet  v/as 
fartheft  from  the  Paper,  and  therefore  fuffered 
the  greateft  Refraction.  And  when  that  Prifm 
at  the  Window,  which  caft  the  violet  on  the  Pa- 
per was  taken  away,  the  violet  Image  difiip- 
peared ;  but  when  the  other  Prifm  was  taken 
away  the  red  vaniflied  ;  which  fhews,  that  thefe 
two  Images  were  nothing  elfe  than  the  Lights 
of  the  two  Prifms,  which  had  been  intermixed 
on  the  purple  Paper,  but  were  parted  again  by 
their  unequal  Refradions  made  in  the  third 
Prifm,  through  which  the  Paper  was  view'd. 
This  alfo  was  obfervable,  that  if  one  of  the 
Prifms  at  the  Window,  fuppgfe  that  which  caft 
the  violet  on  the  Paper,  v/as  turned  about  its 
Axis  to  make  all  the  Colours  in  this  order,-  vio- 
let, indigo,  blue,  green,  yellow,  orange,  red, 
fall  fucceffively  on  the  Paper  from  that  Prifm, 
the  violet  Image  changed  Colour  accordingly, 
turning  fucceffively  to  indigo,  blue,  green,  yel- 
low 


B  O  O  K     ^.  45 

low  and  red,  and  in  changing  Colbur  came  nearer 
and  nearer  to  the  red  Image  made  by  the  other 
Prifm,  until  when  it  was  alfo  red  both  Images  be- 
came fully  co-incident. 

I  placed  alfo  tv/o  Paper  Circles  very  near  one 
another,  the  one  in  the  red  Light  of  one  Prifm, 
and  the  other  in  the  violet  Light  of  the  other. 
The  Circles  were  each  of  tliem  an  Inch  in  diame- 
ter, and  behind  them  the  Wall  was  dark,  that-  the 
Experiment  might  not  be  diflurbed  by  any  Light 
coming  from  thence.  Thefe  Circles  thus  illu* 
minated,  I  viewed  through  a  Prifm  fo  held,  that 
the  Refradlion  might  be  made  towards  the  red 
Circle,  and  as  1  went  from  them  they  came  nearer 
and  nearer  together,  and  at  length  became  co- 
incident }  and  afterwards  when  I  went  flill  far- 
ther off,  they  parted  again  in  a  contrary  Order, 
the  violet  by  a  greater  Refradtion  being  carried 
beyond  the  red. 

Exper.  8.  In  Summer,  when  the  Sun's  Light 
ufes  to  be  ftrongefl,  I  placed  a  Prifm  at  the 
Hole  of  the  Window-fliut,  as  in  the  third  Expe- 
riment, yet  fo  that  its  Axis  might  be  parallel  to 
the  Axis  of  the.  World,  and  at  the  oppofite 
Wall  in  the  Sun's  refrad:ed  Light,  I  placed  an 
open  Book.  Then  going  fix  Feet  and  two  Inches 
from  the  Book,  1  placed  there  the  above- 
mentioned  Lens,  by  which  the  Light  reflected 
from  the  Book  might  be  made  to  converge  and 
meet  again  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  and  two 
Inches  behind  the  Lens,  and  there  paint  the 
Species  of  the  Book  upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Pa- 
per much  after  the  manner  of  the  fecond  Ex- 
periment.   The  Book  and  Lens  being  made  fall, 

I  no- 


44  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

I  noted  the  Place  where  the  Paper  was,  when 
the  Letters  of  the  Book,  illuminated  by  the 
fuUeft  red  Light  of  the  Solar  Image  falling  upon 
it,  did  cafl  their  Species  on  that  Paper  moft 
diftinftly :  And  then  I  ftay'd  till  by  the  Motion 
of  the  Sun,  and  confequent  Motion  of  his  Image 
on  the  Book,  all  the  Colours  from  that  red  to 
the  middle  of  the  blue  pafs'd  over  thofe  Let- 
ters J  and  when  thofe  Letters  were  illuminated 
by  that  blue,  I  noted  again  the  Place  of  the  Pa- 
per when  they  caft  their  Species  moft  diftincftly 
upon  it :  And  I  found  that  this  laft  Place  of  the 
Paper  was  nearer  to  the  Lens  than  its  former 
Place  by  about  two  Inches  and  an  half,  or  two 
and  three  quarters.  So  much  fooner  therefore 
did  the  Light  in  the  violet  end  of  the  Image 
by  a  greater  Refradion  converge  and  meet, 
than  the  Light  in  the  red  end.  But  in  trying 
this,  the  Chamber  was  as  dark  as  I  could  make 
it.  For,  if  thefe  Colours  be  diluted  and  weak- 
ned  by  the  Mixture  of  any  adventitious  Light, 
the  diftance  between  the  Places  of  the  Paper 
will  not  be  fo  great.  This  diftance  in  the  fe- 
cond  Experiment,  where  the  Colours  of  natural 
Bodies  were  made  ufe  of,  was  but  an  Inch  and 
an  half,  by  reafon  of  the  Imperfection  of  thofe 
Colours.  Flere  in  the  Colours  of  the  Prifm, 
which  are  manifeftly  more  full,  intenfe,  and 
lively  than  thofe  of  natural  Bodies,  the  diftance 
is  two  Inches  and  three  quarters.  And  were  the 
Colours  ftill  more  full,  I  queftion  not  but  that 
the  diftance  would  be  confiderably  greater.  For 
the  coloured  Light  of  the  Prifm,  by  the  inter- 
fering of   the  Circles  defcribed   in   the  fecond 

Figure 


B  O  O  K     L  45 

Figure  of  the  fifth  Experiment,  and  alfo  by  the 
Light  of  the  very  bright  Cloiick  next  the  Sun's 
Body  intermixing  with  thefe  Colours,  and  by 
the  Light  fcattered  by  the  Inequalities  in  the 
Polifh  of  the  Prifin,  was  fo  very  much  com- 
pounded, that  the  Species  which  thofe  faint  and 
dark  Colours,  the  indigo  and  violet,  caft  upon 
the  Paper  were  not  diilind  enough  to  be  well  ob- 
ferved. 

Exper.  g.  A  Prifm,  whofe  two  Angles  at  its 
Bafe  were  equal  to  one  another,  and  half  right 
ones,  and  the  third  a  right  one,  I  placed  in  a 
Beam  of  the  Sun's  Light  let  into  a  dark  Cham- 
ber through  a  Hole  in  the  Window-fhut,  as  in 
the  third  Experiment.  And  turning  the  Prifin 
flowly.  about  its  Axis,  until  all  the  Light  which 
went  through  one  of  its  Angles,  and  was  refradl- 
ed  by  it  began  to  be  refled:ed  by  its  Bafe,  at 
which  till  then  it  went  out  of  the  Glafs,  I  cb- 
ferved  that  thofe  Rays  which  had  fuifered  the 
greateft  Pvcfradiion  were  fooner  reflected  than 
the  refi:.  I.  conceived  therefore,  that  thofe  Ravs 
of  the  refledled  Light,  which  were  mofi:  re- 
frangible, did  firfl  of  all  by  a  total  Reflexion 
become  more  copious  in  that  Light  than  the 
refi:,  and  that  afterwards  the  refi:  alfo,  by  a  total 
Reflexion,  became  as  copious  as  thefe.  To  try 
this,  I  made  the  refledted  Light  pafs  through 
another  Prifm,  and  being  refracted  by  it  to  fall 
afterwards  upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper  placed 
at  fome  difiance  behind  it,  and  there  by  that 
Refradion  to  paint  the  ufual  Colours  of  the 
Prifm.  And  then  caufing  the  firfi:  Prifm  to  be 
turned  about  its  Axis  as  above,  I  obferved  that 

when 


4<5  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

when  thofe  Rays,  which  in  this  Prifm  had  fuf- 
fered  the  greateft  Refraction,  and  appeared  of  a 
bkie  and  violet  Colour  began  to  be  totally  re- 
flected, the  blue  and  violet  Light  on  the  Paper, 
which  was  moft  refracted  in  the  fecond  Prifm, 
received  a  fenlible  Increafe  above  that  of  the 
red  and  yellow,  which  was  leafl  refracted  ;  and 
afterwards,  when  the  reft  of  the  Light  which 
was  green,  yellow,  and  red,  began  to  be  totally 
reflected  in  the  firft  Prifm,  the  Light  of  thofe 
Colours  on  the  Paper  received  as  great  an  In- 
creafe as  the  violet  and  blue  had  done  before. 
Whence  'tis  manifeft,  that  the  Beam  of  Light 
reflected  by  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm,  being  aug- 
mented firft  by  the  more  refrangible  Rays,  and 
afterwards  by  the  lefs  refrangible  ones,  is  com- 
pounded of  Rays  diiferently  refrangible.  And 
that  all  fuch  reflected  Light  is  of  the  fame  Na- 
ture with  the  Sun's  Light  before  its  Incidence 
on  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm,  no  Man  ever  doubt- 
ed y  it  being  generally  allowed,  that  Light  by 
fuch  Reflexions  fuffers  no  Alteration  in  its  Modi- 
fications and  Properties.  I  do  not  here  take  No- 
tice of  any  RefraCtions  made  in  the  fides  of  the 
firft  Prifm,  becaufe  the  Light  enters  it  perpendi- 
cularly at  the  firft  fide,  and  goes  out  perpendicu- 
larly at  the  fecond  fide,  and  therefore  fuffers 
none.  So  then,  the  Sun's  incident  Light  being  of 
tlie  fame  Temper  and  Conftitution  with  his  emer- 
gent Light,  and  the  laft  being  compounded  of 
Rays  differently  refrangible,  the  firft  muft  be  in 
like  manner  compounded. 

lUuJtratmi.    In  the  twenty-firft  Figure,  ABC 
is  the  firft  Prifm,   B  C  its  Bafe,   B  and  C  its 

equal 


B  O  O  K     I.  47 

equal  Angles  at  the  Bafc,  each  of  4^  Degrees, 
A  its  reftangular  Vertex,  F  M  a  beam  of  the 
€un's  Light  let  into  a  dark  Room  through  a 
hole  F  one  third  part  of  an  Inch  broad,  M  its 
Incidence  on  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm,  M  G  a  lefs 
refrafted  Ray,  M  H  a  more  refradted  Ray,  M  N 
the  beam  of  Light  refleded  from  the  Bafe, 
V  X  Y  the  fecond  Prifm  by  which  this  beam  in 
paffing  through  it  is  refradled,  N  t  the  lefs  re- 
fraded  Light  of  this  beam,  and  N/>  the  more 
refraded  part  thereof.  When  the  firft  Prifm 
A  B  C  is  turned  about  its  Axis  according  to  the 
order  of  the  Letters  ABC,  the  Rays  MH  e- 
merge^more  and  more  obliquely  out  of  that 
Prifm,  and  at  length  after  their  moft  oblique 
Emergence  are  refleded  towards  N,  and  going 
on  to  p  do  increafe  the  Number  of  the  Rays 
N^.  Afterwards  by  continuing  the  Motion  of 
the  iirft  Prifm,  the  Rays  M  G  are  alfo  refleded 
to  N  and  increafe  the  number  of  the  Rays  N  f. 
And  therefore  the  Light  MN  admits  into  its 
Compofition,  firft  the  more  refrangible  Rays, 
and  then  the  lefs  refrangible  Rays,  and  yet  af- 
ter this  Compofition  is  of  the  fame  Nature  with 
the  Sun's  immediate  Light  F  M,  the  Reflexion 
of  the  fpecular  Bafe  B  C  caufing  no  Alteration 
therein. 

Rxper.  10.  Two  Prifms,  which  were  alike 
in  Shape,  I  tied  fo  together,  that  their  Axis  and 
oppofite  Sides  being  parallel,  they  compofed  a 
Parallelopiped.  x^nd,  the  Sun  finning  into  my 
dark  Chamber  through  a  little  hole  in  the  Win- 
dow-fliut ,  I  placed  that  Parallelopiped  in  his 
beam  at  fome  diftancc  from  the  hole,  in  fuch  a 

Pofi:urc\ 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Pofture,  that  the  Axes  of  the  Prifms  might  be 
perpendicular  to  the  incident  Rays  ,  and  that 
thole  •  Rays  being  incident  upon  the  firft  Side 
of  one  Prifm,  might  go  on  through  the  two 
contiguous  Sides  of  both  Prifms,  and  emerge 
out  of  the  laft  Side  of  the  fecond  Prifm.  This 
Side  being  parallel  to  the  firft  Side  of  the  firfl 
Prifm,  caufed  the  emerging  Light  to  be  paral- 
lel to  the  incident.  Then,  beyond  thefe  two 
Prifms  I  placed  a  third,  which  might  refrad; 
that  emergent  Light ,  and  by  that  Refradiion 
caft  the  ufual  Colours  of  the  Prifm  upon  the 
oppofite  Wall,  or  upon  a  fheet  of  white  Paper 
held  at  a  convenient  Diftance  behind  the  Prifm 
for  that  refracCled  Light  to  fall  upon  it.  After 
this  I  turned  the  Parallelopiped  about  its  Axis, 
and  found  that  when  the  contiguous  Sides  of 
the  two  Prifms  became  fo  oblique  to  the  inci- 
dent Rays,  that  thofe  Rays  began  all  of  them  to 
be  refled:ed,  thofe  Rays  which  in  the  third 
Prifm  had  fuffered  the  greateft  Refraction,  and 
painted  the  Paper  with  violet  and  blue,  were 
firft  of  all  by  a  total  Reflexion  taken  out  of  the 
tranfmitted  Light ,  the  reft  remaining  and  on 
the  Paper  painting  their  Colours  of  green,  yel- 
low, orange  and  red,  as  before ;  and  afterwards 
by  continuing  the  Motion  of  the  two  Prifms, 
the  reft  of  the  Rays  alfo  by  a  total  Reflexion 
vanift^ed  in  order,  according  to  their  degrees 
of  Refrangibility.  The  Light  therefore  which 
emerged  out  of  the  two  Prifms  is  compound- 
ed of  Rays  differently  refrangible,  feeing  the 
more  refrangible  Rays  may  be  taken  out  of  it, 
while    the    lefs    refrangible   remain.     But  this 

Light 


B  O  O  K     I.  4p 

Light  being  trajeded  only  through  the  parallel 
Superficies  of  the  two  Prifms,  if  it  fuffer'd  any 
change  by  the  Refradlion  of  one  Superficies  it 
lofl  that  Impreihon  by  the  contrary  Refraction 
of  the  other  Superficies,  and  fo  being  refbor'd  to 
its  priftine  Conftitution,  became  of  the  fame  Na- 
ture and  Condition  as  at  firfl  before  its  Incidence 
on  thofe  Prifms ;  and  therefore,  before  its  Inci- 
dence, was  as  much  compounded  of  Rays  diffe- 
rently refrangible,  as  afterwaVds. 

llliiftration.  In  the  twenty  fecond  Figure 
ABC  and  BCD  are  the  two  Prifms  tied  together 
in  the  form  of  a  Parallelopiped ,  their  Sides 
B  C  and  C  B  being  contiguous,  and  their  Sides 
A  B  and  C  D  parallel.  And  H  J  K  is  the  third 
Prifm,  by  which  the  Sun's  Light  propagated 
through  the  hole  F  into  the  dark  Chamber,  and 
there  pafiing  through  thofe  fides  of  the  Prifms 
AB,  BC,  CBandCD,  is  refraded  at  O  to 
the  white  Paper  P  T,  falling  there  partly  upon 
P  by  a  greater  Refra6ticn,  partly  upon  T  by  a 
lefs  Refraction,  and  partly  upon  R  and  other  in- 
termediate places  by  intermediate  Ref rations. 
By  turning  the  Parallelopiped  A  C  B  D  about  its 
Axis,  according  to  the  order  of  tlie  Letters  A, 
C,  D,  B,  at  length  when  the  contiguous  Planes 
B  C  and  C  B  become  futhciently  oblique  to  the 
Rays  F  M,  which  are  incident  upon  them  at  M, 
there  will  vanifh  totally  out  of  the  refraded 
Light  OPT,  firfl  of  ail  the  mofl  refraded  Rays 
OP,  (the  reft  OR  and  O  T  remaining  as  be- 
fore )  then  the  Rays  O  R  and  other  intermedi- 
ate ones,  and  laftly,  the  leaft  refracted  Rays  OT- 
For  when  the  Plane  BC  becomes  fufficiently 

E  oblique 


50  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

oblique  to  the  Rays  incident  upon  it ,    tliofe 
Rays  will  begin  to  be  totally  refleded  by  it  to- 
wards N  J  and  firft  the  moft  refrangible  Rays 
will  be  totally  refledted  ( as  was  explained  in 
the  preceding  Experiment )  and  by  Confequence 
muft  firft  difappear  at  P ,    and  afterwards  the 
reft  as  they  are  in  order  totally  refledted  to  N, 
they  niuft  difappear  in   the  fame  order  at  R 
and  T.      So  then  the  Rays  which  at  O  fuf- 
fer  the  greatefl  Refraftion,  may  be  taken  out 
of  the  Light  M  O  whilft  the  reft  of  the  Rays 
remain  in  it ,    and  therefore  that  Light  M  O 
is  compounded   of  Rays    differently    refrangi- 
ble.     And  becaufe    the  Planes  A  B  and  C  D 
are  parallel,  and  therefore  by  equal   and  con- 
trary   Refradlions    deftroy    one    anothers    Ef- 
fects, the  incident  Light  F  M  muft  be  of  the 
fame  Kind  and  Nature  with  the  emergent  Light 
M  O,  and  therefore  doth  alfo  confifl  of  Rays 
differently  refrangible.     Thefe  two  Lights  F  M 
and  M  O,  before  the  moft  refrangible  Rays  are 
feparated  out  of  the  emergent  Light  M  O,  a- 
gree  in  Colour,  and  in  all  other  Properties  lo 
far  as  my  Obfervation  reaches ,    and  therefore 
are  defervedly  reputed  of  the  fame  Nature  and 
Conftitution,    and  by  Confequence  the  one  is 
compounded   as  well  as   the  other.     But  after 
the  moft  refrangible  Rays  begin  to  be  totally 
refledted,   and  thereby  feparated  out  of  the  e- 
mergent  Light  M  O,  that  Light  changes  its  Co- 
lour from  white  to  a  dilute  and  faint  yellow, 
a  pretty  good  orange,   a  very  full  red  fuccef- 
fively,  and  then  totally  vanifties.     For  after  the 
moft  refrangible  Rays  which  paint  the  Paper  at 
2  P  with 


B  O  O  K     I.  51 

P  with  a  purple  Colour^  are  by  a  total  P.efje^ 
xion  taken  out  of  the  beam  of  Light  M  O,  the 
reft  of  the  Colours  which  appear  on  the  Paper 
at  R  and  T  being  mix'd  in  the  Liglit  M  O 
compound  there  a  faint  yellow,  and  after  the 
blue  and  part  of  the  green  which  appear  on  the 
Paper  between  P  and  R  are  taken  away,  the  reft 
which  appear  between  R  and  T  ( that  is  the  yel- 
low, orange,  red  and  a  little  green)  being  mix- 
ed in  the  beam  MO  compouiid  there  an  orange; 
and  when  all  the  Rays  are  by  Reflexion  taken 
out  of  the  beam  M  O,  except:  the  leaft  refran- 
gible, which  at  T  appear  of  a  full  red,  their 
Colour  is  the  fame  in  that  beam  M  O  as  after- 
wards at  T,  the  Refrafticn  of  the  Prifm  H  J  K 
ferving  only  to  feparate  the  differently  refrangible 
Rays,  without  making  any  Alteration  in  their 
Colours,  as  ftiall  be  more  fully  proved  hereafter. 
All  which  confirms  as  well  the  firft  Propofition 
as  the  fecond. 

Scholium.  If  this  Experiment  and  the  former 
be  conjoined  and  made  one  by  applying  a  fourth 
Prifm  VX  Y  [in  Fig.  22.]  to  refra(5t  the  refied:ed 
beam  M  N  towards  //>,  the  Conclufion  will  be 
clearer.  For  then  the  Light  N/>  v/hich  in  the 
fourth  Prifm  is  more  refracted,-  will  become  ful- 
ler and  ftronger  when  the  Light  O  P,  which  in 
the  third  Prifm  H  J  K  is  more  refracted,  va- 
nifties  at  P;  and  afterwards  when  the  lefs  re- 
fracted Light  O  T  vanifhes  at  T,  the  lefs  re- 
fraded  Light  N  t  will  become  increafed  whilft 
the  more  refracted  Light  at  p  receives  no  far- 
ther increafe.  And  as  the  traje6ted  beam  M  O 
in  vanifbing  is  always  of  fuch  a  Colour  as  ought 


52        o  p  T  I  c  K  s: 

to  refult  from  the  mixture  of  the  Colours  which 
fall  upon  the  Paper  P  T ,  fo  is  the  refleded 
beam  M  N  always  of  fuch  a  Colour  as  ought  to 
refult  from  the  mixture  of  the  Colours  which 
fall  upon  the  Paper  p  t.  For  when  the  mofl 
refrangible  Rays  are  by  a  total  Reflexion  taken 
out  of-  the  beam  M  O,  and  leave  that  beam  of 
an  orange  Colour,  the  Excefs  of  thofe  Rays  in 
the  refled:ed  Light,  does  not  only  make  the  vio- 
let, indigo  and  blue  at  p  more  full,  but  alfo 
makes  the  beam  M  N  change  from  the  yellowidi 
Colour  of  the  Sun's  Light,  to  a  pale  white  in- 
clining to  blue,  and  afterward  recover  its  yel- 
lowifli  Colour  again,  fo  foon  as  all  the  reft  of  the 
tranfmitted  Light  M  O  T  is  reflected. 

Now  feeing  that  in  all  this  variety  of  Expe- 
riments ,  whether  the  Trial  be  made  in  Light 
refledled,  and  that  either  from  natural  Bodies, 
as  in  the  firft  and  fecond  Experiment,  or  fpe- 
cular,  as  in  the  ninth;  or  in  Light  refrad:ed, 
and  that  either  before  the  unequally  refracted 
Rays  are  by  diverging  fepa rated  from  one  an- 
other, and  loling  their  whitenefs  which  they 
have  altogether,  appear  feverally  of  feveral  Co- 
lours, as  in  the  fifth  Experiment;  or  after  they 
are  feparated  from  one  another,  and  appear  co- 
lour'd  as  in  the  fixth,  feventh,  and  eighth  Ex- 
periments; or  in  Light  trajedted  through  paral- 
lel Superficies,  deftroying  each  others  Eifedis, 
as  in  the  tenth  Experiment ;  there  are  always 
found  Rays,  which  at  equal  Incidences  on  the 
fame  Medium  fufFer  unequal  Refractions,  and 
that  without  any  fplitting  or  dilating  of  fmgle 
Rays,  or  contingence  in  the  inequality  of  the 
3.  Refra- 


B  O  O  K     I.  53 

Refradtions,  as  is  proved  in  the  fifth  and  fixth 
Experiments.  And  feeing  the  Rays  which  dif- 
fer in  Refranglbility  may  be  parted  and  forted 
from  one  another,  and  that  either  by  Refradion 
as  in  the  third  Experiment,  or  by  Reflexion  as  in 
the  tenth,  and  then  the  fcveral  forts  apart  at 
equal  Incidences  fuffer  unequal  Refradions,  and 
thofe' forts  are  more  refracted  than  others  after 
Separation,  which  were  more  refraded  before 
it,  as  in  the  fixth  and  following  Experiments, 
and  if  the  Sun's  Light  be  trajeded  through  three 
or  more  crofs  Prifms  fucceffively,  thofe  Rays 
•which  in  the  firft  Prilm  are  refraded  more  than 
others,  are  in  all  the  following  Prifms  refraded 
more  than  others  in  the  fame  Rate  and  Propor- 
tion, as  appears  by  the  fifth  Experiment  j  it's 
manifeft  that  the  Sun's  Light  is  an  heterogeneous 
Mixture  of  Rays,  fome  of  which  are  conftantly 
more  refrangible  than  others,  as  was  propofed. 


PROP,    m.     Theor.    III. 
'The  Suns  Light  conftjls  of  PMys  differing 
in  Reflexibility^  and  thofe  Puiys  are  more 
reflexible  than  others  'which  are  more 
refra?igible. 

np  H I  8  is  manifeft  by  the  ninth  and  tenth 
*■-  Experiments :  For  in  the  ninth  Experi- 
ment, by  turning  the  Prifm  about  its  Axis,  un- 
til the  Rays  within  it  which  in  going  out  into 
the  Air  were  refraded  by  its  Bafe,  became  fo 
oblique  to  that  Bafe,  as  to  begin  to  be  totally 

E  3  refiede4 


54  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

refleded  thereby;  thofe  Rays  became  iirft  of  all 
totally  refledied,  which  before  at  equal  Inciden- 
ces with  the  reft  had  fuffered  the  greateft  Refra-. 
(Stion.  And  the  fame  thing  "happens  in  the  Refle- 
xion made  by  the  commDn  Bafe  of  the  two 
Prifms  in  the  tenth  Experiment. 

PROP.  IV.     Prob.  L 

7v  fepa7^ate  from  one  another  the  heteroge- 
neous Rays  of  compound  Light, 


^"T^  H  E  heterogeneous  Rays  are  in  fome  mea- 
-*-    fure   feparated   from   one   another  by  the 
Refradion  of  the  Prifm   in   the  third  Experi^ 
ment,  and  in  the  fifth  Experiment,  by  taking  a-r 
way  the  Penumbra  from  the  redilinear  fides  of 
the  coloured  Image,  that  Separation  in  thofe  ve- 
ry rcdilinear  lides   or  ftraight  edges  of  the  I- 
mage  becomes   perfed.     But   in  all  places  be- 
tween thofe  rectilinear  edges,   thofe  innumera- 
ble Circles  there  defcribed,  which  are  feveral- 
ly  illuminated  by  homogeneal  Rays,  by  interfe- 
ring with  one  another,   and  being  every  where 
commix'd ,    do   render    the    Light    fufficiently 
compound.     But  if  thefe  Circles,  whilft  their 
Centers  keep  their  Diftances  and  Pofitions,  could 
be  made  lefs  in  Diameter,  their  interfering  one 
with  another,  and  by  Confequence  the  Mixture 
of   the  heterogeneous  Rays  would  be  propor- 
tionally diminiih'd.     In  the  twenty  third  Figure 
let  AG,  BH,  CJ,  DK,  EL,  FM  be  the  Cir- 
cles which  fo  many  forts  of  Rays  flowing  frppi 

the 


B  O  O  K     I.  55 

the  fame  dlfque  of  the  Sun,  do  in  the  third  Ex- 
periment illuminate  j  of  all  •  which  and  innu- 
merable other  intermediate  ones  lying  in  a  con- 
tinual Series  between  the  two  rectilinear  and  pa- 
rallel edges  of  the  Sun's  oblong  Image  P  T , 
that  Image  is  compos'd,  as  was  explained  in 
the  fifth  Experiment.  And  let  ^^,  bh^  ci^  d  ky 
e  /,  fm  be  fo  many  lefs  Circles  lying  in  a  like 
continual  Series  between  two  parallel  right  Lines 
^y  and  g  m  with  the  fame  diftances  between  their 
Centers,  and  illuminated  by  the  fame  forts  of 
Rays,  that  is  the  Circle  a  g  with  the  fmie  fort 
by  which  the  correfponding  Circle  A  G  was  il- 
luminated, and  the  Circle  b  h  with  the  furie  fort 
by  which  the  correfponding  Circle  B  H  was  illu- 
minated, and  the  reft  of  the  Circles  ci,  d k,  el, 
fm  refped;ively,  with  the  fame  forts  of  Rays  by 
which  the  feveral  correfponding  Circles  C  J, 
D  K,  EL,  F  M  were  illuminated.  In  the  Fi- 
gure P  T  compofed  of  the  greater  Circles,  three 
of  thofe  Circles  A  G,  B  H,  C  J,  are  fo  ex- 
panded into  one  another,  that  the  three  forts  of 
Rays  by  which  thofe  Circles  are  illuminated  , 
together  with  other  innumerable  forts  of  inter- 
mediate Rays,  are  mixed  at  Q^^  in  the  middle  of 
the  Circle  B  H.  And  the  like  Mixture  happens 
throughout  almofl  the  whole  length  of  the  Fi- 
gure P  T.  But  in  the  Figure  p  t  compofed  of 
the  lefs  Circles,  the  three  lefs  Circles  a  g^  b  hy  c  /, 
which  anfwer  to  thofe  three  greater,  do  not  ex- 
tend into  one  another  j  nor  are  there  any  v/liere 
mingled  fo  much  as  any  two  of  the  three  forts  of 
Rays  by  which  thofe  Circles  are  illuminated,  and 

E  4  whicls 


5^ 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


which  in  the  Figure  P  T  are  all  of  them  inter- 
mingled at  B  H. 

Now  he  that  fhall  thus  conlider  It,  will  eafily 
underfland  that  the  Mixture  is  diminifhed  in 
the  fame  Proportion  with  the  Diameters  of  the 
Circles.  If  the  Diameters  of  the  Circles  whilil . 
their  Centers  remain  the  fame,  be  made  three 
times  lefs  than  before,  the  Mixture  will  be  alfo 
three  times  lefs;  if  ten  times  lefs,  the  Mixture 
will  be  ten  times  lefs,  and  fo  of  other  Propor- 
tions. That  is,  the  Mixture  of  the  Rays  in  the 
greater  Figure  P  T  will  be  to  their  Mixture  in 
the  lefs/>/,  as  the  Latitude  of  the  greater  Fi- 
gure is  to  the  Latitude  of  the  lefs.  For  the  La- 
titudes of  thefe  Figures  are  equal  to  the  Dia- 
meters of  their  Circles.  And  iience  it  eafily  fol- 
lows, that  the  Mixture  of  the  Rays  in  the  re- 
'fra(fted  Spedlrum  pt  is  to  the  Mixture  of  the 
Rays  in  the  dired:  and  immediate  Light  of  the 
Sun,  as  the  breadth  of  that  Spedrum  is  to  the 
difference  between  the  length  and  breadth  of  the 
fame  Specflrum. 

So  then,  if  we  would  diminifh  the  Mixture 
of  the  Rays,  we  are  to  diminifli  the  Diameters 
of  the  Circles.  Now  thefe  would  be  diminifh- 
ed if  the  Sun's  Diameter  to  which  they  anfwer 
could  be  made  lefs  than  it  is,  or  ( which  comes 
to  the  fame  Purpofe)  if  without  Doors,  at  a 
great  diflance  from  the  Prifm  towards  the  Sun, 
fom.e  opake  Body  were  placed,  with  a  round 
iioje  in  the  middle  of  it ,  to  intercept  ail  the 
Sun's  Light ,  excepting  fo  much  as  coming 
from  the  middle  of  his  Body  could  pafs  through 

that 


BOOK!  57 

that  Hole  to  the  Prifm.  For  fo  the  Circles  A  G, 
B  H,  and  the  reft,  would  not  any  longer  anfwer 
to  the  whole  Difque  of  the  Sun,  but  only  to  that 
Part  of  it  which  could  be  feen  from  the  Prifm 
through  that  Hole,  that  it  is  to  the  apparent  Mag- 
nitude of  that  Hole  view'd  from  the  Prifm.  But 
that  thefe  Circles  may  anfwer  more  diftindtly  to 
that  Hole,  a  Lens  is  to  be  placed  by  the  Prifm  to 
cafl  the  Image  of  the  Hole,  (that  is,  every  one 
of  the  Circles  AG,  BH,  &c.) .  diflindly  upon 
the  Paper  at  PT,  after  fuch  a  manner,  as  by  a 
Lens  placed  at  a  Windovy%  the  Species  of  Ob- 
jects abroad  are  caft  diftindtly  upon  a  Paper 
within  the  Room,  and  the  red:ilinear  Sides  of 
the  oblong  Solar  Image  in  the  fifth  Experiment 
became  diilind:  without  any  Penum.bra.  If  this 
be  done,  it  will  not  be  neceflary  to  place  that 
Hole  very  far  off,  no  not  beyond  the  Win- 
dow. And  therefore  inftead  of  that  Hole,  I 
ufed  the  Hole  in  the  Window-lluit,  as  fol- 
lows. 

Expcr.  II.  In  the  Sun's  Light  let  into  my 
darken'd  Chamber  through  a  fmall  round  Hole 
in  my  Window-fluit,  at  about  ten  or  twelve 
Feet  from  the  Window,  I  placed  a  I^ens,  by 
which  the  Image  of  the  Hole  might  be  diilindly 
call  upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper,  placed  at 
the  diftance  of  fix,  eight,  ten,  or  twelve  Feet 
from  the  Lens.  For,  according  to  the  diffe* 
rence  of  the  Lenfes  I  ufed  various  diftances, 
which  I  think  not  worth  the  while  to  defcribe. 
Then  immediately  after  the  Lens  I  placed  a 
Prifm,  by  which  the  trajeded  Light  might  be 
refracted  either  upwards  or  fide-ways,  and  there- 

'  by 


y8  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

by  the  round  Image,  which  the  Lens  alone  did 
caft  upon  the  Paper  might  be  drawn  out  into  a 
long  one  with  Parallel  Sides,  as  in  the  third  Ex- 
periment. This  oblong  Image  I  let  fall  upon 
another  Paper  at  about  the  fame  diftance  from 
the  Prifm  as  before,  moving  the  Paper  either 
towards  the  Prifm  or  from  it,  until  I  found  the 
juil  diftance  where  the  Redilinear  Sides  of  the 
Image  became  moft  diflind:.  For  in  this  Cafe, 
theCircular  Images  of  the  Hole,  which  compofe 
that  Image  after  the  fame  manner,  that  the  Cir- 
cles ag^  bh^  ci^  &c.  do  the  Figure  ^/  [in  Fig.21^ 
were  terminated  moft  diftindly  without  any 
Penumbra,  and  therefore' extended  into  one  ano- 
ther the  leaft  that  they  could,  and  by  confequence 
the  Mixture  of  the  heterogeneous  Rays  was  now 
the  leaft  of  all.  By  this  means  I  ufed  to  form 
an  oblong  Image  (fuch  as  is  p  t)  [in  Fig.  23, 
and  24.]  of  Circular  Images  of  the  Hole,  (fuch 
as  are  agy  bh,  ciy  &;c.)  and  by  ufmg  a  greater 
or^lefs  Hole  in  the  Window-fhut,  I  made  the 
Circular  Images  a g,  b hy  ciy  Sec.  of  which  it 
was  formed,  to  become  greater  or  lefs  at  pleafure, 
and  thereby  the  Mixture  of  the  Rays  in  the 
Image  p  t  to  be  as  much,  or  as  little  as  I  de- 
fired. 

IlluJlratio7i.  In  the  tu'enty-fourth  Figure,  F 
reprefents  the  Circular  Hole  in  the  Window- 
fhut,  MN  the  Lens,  whereby  the  Image  or  Spe- 
cies of  that  Hole  is  caft  diftindly  upon  a  Paper 
at  J,  ABC  the  Prifm,  whereby  the  Rays  are  at 
their  emerging  out  of  the  Lens  refrafted  from. 
J  towards  another  Paper  at  p  /,  and  the  round 
Image  at  J  is  turned  into  an  oblong  Image  pt 

falling 


B  O  O  K     I.  s-p 

falling  on  that  other  Paper.  This  Image  //  con- 
lifts  of  Circles  placed  one  after  another  in  a  Recti- 
linear Order,  as  was  fufficiently  cxplaii^^ed  in  the 
fifth  Experiment  j  and  thefe  Circles  are  equal  to 
the  Circle  J,  and  confequently  anfwer  in  magni- 
tude to  the  Hole  F^  and  therefore  by  diminifhing 
that  Hole  they  may  be  at  pleafure  diminiihed, 
whilft  their  Centers  remain  in  their  Places.  By 
this  means  I  made  the  Breadth  of  the  Image  p  t 
to  be  forty  times,  and  fometimes  fixty  or  feventy 
times  lefs  than  its  Length.  As  for  inflance,  if 
tlie  Breadth  of  the  Hole  F  be  one  tenth  of  an 
Inch,  and  MF  the  diflance  of  the  Lens  from  the 
Hole  be  12  Feet;  and  \i pV>  or  pM  the  diftance 
of  the  Image  pi  from  the  Prifm  or  Lens  be  10 
Feet,  and  the  refracting  Angle  of  the  Prifm  be 
62  Degrees,  the  Breadth  of  the  Image  pt  will 
be  one  twelfth  of  an  Inch,  and  the  Length  about 
iix  Inches,  and  therefore  the  Length  to  the 
Breadth  as  72  to  i,  and  by  confequence  the 
Light  of  this  Image  71  times  lefs  compound 
than  the  Sun's  dired:  Light.  And  Light  thus  far 
iimple  and  homogeneal,  is  fufficient  for  trying 
all  the  Experiments  in  this  Book  about  fimple 
Light.  For  the  Compofition  of  heterogeneal 
Rays  is  in  this  Light  fo  little,  that  it  is  fcarce  to 
be  difcovered  and  perceiv'd  by  Senfe,  except  per- 
haps in  the  indigo  and  violet.  For  thefe  being 
dark  Colours,  do  eafily  fuffer  a  fenfible  Allay 
by  that  little  fcattcring  Light  which  ufes  to  be 
refraded  irregularly  by  the  Inequalities  of  the 
Prifm. 

Yet  inftead  of  the  Circular  Llole  F,   'tis  better 
to  fubftitute  an  oblong  Hole  iliaped  like  a  long 

Paral- 


6o  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Parallelogram  with  its  Length  parallel  to  the 
Prifm  ABC.  For  if  this  Hole  be  an  Inch  or 
two  long,  •  and  but  a  tenth  or  twentieth  Part  of  an 
Inch  broad,  or  narrower  j  the  Light  of  the  Image 
ft  will  be  as  fimple  as  before,  or  fimpler,  and 
the  Image  will  become  much  broader,  and  there- 
fore more  fit  to  have  Experiinents  try'd  in  its 
Lisht  than  before. 

Inftead  of  this  Parallelogram  Hole  may  be  fub- 
ftituted  a  triangular  one  of  equal  Sides,  whofe 
Bafe,  for  inftance,  is  about  the  tenth  Part  of  an 
Inch,  and  its  Height  an  Inch  or  more.  For  by 
this  means,  if  the  Axis  of  the  Prifm  be  parallel  to 
the  Perpendicular  of  the  Triangle,  the  Image />^ 
[in  Fig.  25.]  will  now  be  form'd  of  equicrural 
Triangles  ^o-j  bh^  ci,  dk^  el,f?ji,  &c.  and  in- 
numerable other  intermediate  ones  anfwering  to 
the  triangular  Hole  in  Shape  and  Bignefs,  and  lying 
one  after  another  in  a  continual  Series  between 
two  Parallel  Lines  ^y^and  gm.  Thefe  Triangles, 
are  a  little  intermingled  at  their  Bafes,  but  not  at 
their  Vertices ;  and  therefore  the  Light  on  the 
brighter  Side  af  of  the  Image,  where  the  Bafes 
of  the  Triangles  are,  is  a  little  compounded,  but 
on  the  darker  Side  gm  \%  altogether  uncom- 
pounded,  and  in  all  Places  between  the  Sides  the 
Compofition  is  proportional  to  the  diftances  of 
the  Places  from  that  obfcurer  Side  gm.  And  ha-? 
ving  a  Spedrum  pt  oi  fuch  a  Compofition,  we 
m.ay  try  Experiments  either  in  its  fcronger  and  lefs 
fimple  Light  near  the  Side  af^  or  in  its  weaker  and 
fimpler  Light  near  the  other  Side  gm,  as.  it  fhall 
feem  mofl  convenient. 


But 


B  O  O  K     L  6 1 

But  ill  making  Experiments  of  this  kind,  the 
Chamber  ought  to  be  made  as  dark  as  can  be, 
left  any  Foreign  Light  mingle  it  felf  with  the 
Light  of  the  Spedrum  p  t^  and  render  it  com- 
pound J  efpecially  if  we  would  try  Experiments 
in  the  more  fmiple  Light  next  the  Side  g  m  of 
the  Spectrum  J  which  being  fainter,  will  have 
a  lefs  proportion  to  the  Foreign  Light ;  and  fo 
•  by  the  mixture  of  that  Light  be  more  troubled, 
and  made  more  compound.  The  Lens  alfo 
ought  to  be  good,  fuch  as  may  ferve  for  opti- 
cal Ufes,  and  the  Prifm  ought  to  have  a  large 
Angle,  fuppofe  of  65  or  70  Degrees,  and  to  be 
well  wrought,  being  made  of  Glafs  free  from 
Bubbles  and  Veins,  with  its  Sides  not  a  little 
convex  or  concave,  as  ufually  happens,  but  truly 
plane,  and  its  Polifli  elaborate,  as  in  working 
Optick-glalTes,  and  not  fuch  as  is  ufually  wrought 
with  Putty,  whereby  the  edges  of  the  Sand- 
holes  being  worn  away,  there  are  left  all  over 
the  Glafs  a  numberlefs  Company  of  very  little 
convex  polite  Rifings  like  Waves.  The  edges 
alfo  of  the  Prifm  and  Lens,  fo  far  as  they  may 
make  any  irregular  Refraftion,  muft  be  covered 
with  2l  black  Paper  glewed  on.  ilad  all  the 
Light  of  the  Sun's-Beam  let  into  the  Chamber, 
which  is  ufelefs  and  unprofitable  to  the  Experi- 
ment, ought  to  be  intercepted  v/ith  black  Pa- 
per, or  other  bkck  Obftacles.  For  otherwife 
the  ufelefs  Light  being  refled:ed  every  way  in 
the  Chamber,  will  mix  with  the  oblong  Spe- 
ctrum, and  help  to  difturb  it.  In  trying  thefe 
Things,  fo  much  diligence  is  not  altogether  ne- 
celiary,  but  it  will  promote  tlie  Succefs  of  the 

Expe- 


6i  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Experiments,  and  by  a  veiy  fcrupulous  Examiner 
of  Things  deferves  to  be  apply'd.  It's  difficult 
to  get  Glafs  Prifms  lit  for  riiis  Purpofe,  and  there- 
fore I  ufed  fometimes  prifmatick  VelTels  made 
with  pieces  of  broken  Looking-glaffes,  and  filled 
with  Rain  Water.  And  to  increafe  the  Refradion, 
I  fometimes  impregnated  the  Water  ftrongly  with 
Saccharum  Saturni, 


PROP.  V.    Theor.  IV. 

Homogeneal  Light  is  refraSied  regularly 
^without  any  D  Hat atio7if putting  or  Jhatter^ 
ing  of  the  Rays ^  a7id  the  co?if  ufed  Vijion  of 
ObjeBs  feen  through  refraEiing  Bodies  by 
heteroge7ieal  Light  arifes  from  the  diffe-^ 
rent  Refrangibility  of  fever  al forts  of  Rays, 

TH  E  firft  Part  of  this  Propofition  has  been 
already  fufficiently  proved  in  the  fifth  Ex- 
periment, and  will  farther  appear  by  the  Experi- 
ments which  follow. 

Exper.  12.  In  the  middle  of  a  black  Paper  I 
made  a  round  Hole  about  a  fifth  or  fixth  Part  of 
an  Inch  in  diameter.  Upon  this  Paper  I  caufed 
the  Spedrum  of  homogeneal  Light  defcribed 
in  the  former  Propofition,  fo  to  fall,  that  fome 
part  of  the  Light  m.ight  pafs  through  the  Hole 
of  the  Paper.  This  tranfmitted  part  of  the 
Light  I  refrafted  with  a  Prifm  placed  behind 
^he  Paper,  and  letting  this  refracted  Light  fall 
perpendicularly  upon  a  white  Paper  two  or 
three  Feet  diftant  from  the  Prifm,  1  found  that 

the 


B  O  O  K     I.  63 

the  Spe6trum  formed  on  the  Paper  by  this  Light 
was  not  oblong,  as  when  'tis  made  ( in  the  third 
Experiment)  by  refra-fling  the  Sun's  compound 
Light,  but  was  (fo  far  as  I  could  judge  by  my 
Eye )  perfedily  circular,  the  Length  being  no 
greater  than  the  Breadtl  1.  Which  fhev/s,  that  this 
Light  is  refracted  regularly  without  any  Dilatation 
of  the  Rays. 

Exper.  13.  In  the  homogeneal  Light  I  placed 
a  Paper  Circle  of  a  quarter  of  an  Lich  in  diameter, 
and  in  the  Sun's  unrefra6ted  heterogeneal  white 
Light  I  placed  another  Paper  Circle  of  the  fame 
Bignefs.  And  going  from  the  Papers  to  the  di- 
ftance  of  fomeFeet,  I  viewed  both  Circles  through 
a  Prifm.  The  Circle  illuminated  by  the  Sun's  he- 
terogeneal Light  appeared  very  oblong,  as  in  the 
fourth  Experiment,  the  Length  being  many  times 
greater  than  the  Breadth  j  but  the  other  Circle, 
illuminated  with  homogeneal  Light,  appeared  cir- 
(iular  and  diftindtly  defined,  as  when  'tis  view'd 
with  the  naked  Eye.  Which  proves  the  whole  Pro- 
pofition. 

Exper.  14.  In  the  homogeneal  Light  I  placed 
Flies,  and  fuch-like  minute  Objedls,  and  view- 
ing them  through  a  Prifm,  I  faw  their  Parts  as 
diftindlly  defined,  as  if  I  had  viewed  them  with 
the  naked  Eye.  The  fame  Objed:s  placed  in 
the  Sun's  unrefradted  hetero2;eneal  Lig-ht,  which 
was  white,  I  viewed  alio  through  a  Prifm,  and 
faw  them  rnoxl  confufcdly  defined,  fo  that  I 
could  not  diftinguiili  their  fmaller  Parts  from 
one  another.  I  placed  alfo  the  Letters  of  a 
fmall  print,  one  while  in  the  homogeneal  Light, 
and  then  in  the  heterogeneal,  and  viewing  them 

through 


^4  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

through  a  Prifm,  they  appeared  in  the  latter  Cafe 
fo  confufed  and  indiftin^t,  that  I  could  not  read 
them  J  but  in  the  former  they  appeared  fo  diftindt, 
that  I  could  read  readily,  and  thought  I  faw  them 
as  diflind:,  as  when  I  view'd  them  with  my  naked 
Eye.     In  both  Cafes  I  view'd  the  fame  Objeds, 
through  the  fame  Prifm  at  the  fame  diftance  from 
me,  and  in  the  fame  Situation.     There  was  no 
difference,  but  in  the  Light  by  which  the  Objedts 
were  illuminated,   and  which  in  one  Cafe  was 
iimple,  and  in  the  other  compound ;  and  there- 
fore,  the  diftindl  Vifion  in  the  former  Cafe,  and 
confufed  in  the  latter,   could  arife  from  nothing 
elfe  than  from  that  difference    of  the  Lights. 
Which  proves  the  whole  Propofition. 

And  in  thefe  three  Experiments  it  is  farther 
very  remarkable,  that  the  Colour  of  homogeneal 
Light  w^as  never  changed  by  the  Refrad:ion. 


PROP.  VL    Theor.  V. 

T'he  Sine  of  Incidence  of  every  Ray  confi- 
dered  apart ^  is  to  its  Sine  of  RefraEiion 
i7i  a  given  Ratio, 

THAT  every  Ray  confider'd  apart.  Is  con- 
ftant  to  it  felf  in  fome  degree  of  Refran- 
gibility,  is  fufficiently  manifeft  out  of  what  has 
been  faid.  Thofe  Rays,  which  in  the  firfh  Re- 
fra(5tion,  are  at  equal  Incidences  moll  refraded, 
are  alfo  in  the  following  Refradions  at  equal 

Inci- 


BOOK!.  S^ 

Incidences  moft  refracted  ;  and  fo  of  the  leaft 
refrangible,  and  the  reft  which  have  any  mean 
Degree  of  Refrangibility,  as  is  manifeft  by  the 
fifth,  fixth,  feventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  Expe- 
riments. And  thofe  which  the  firft  Tiilie  at 
like  Incidences  are  equally  refraded,  are  again 
at  like  Incidences  equally  and  uniformly  retract- 
ed, and  that  whether  they  be  refraded  before 
they  be  feparated  from  one  another,  as  in  the 
fifth  Expernnent,  or  whether  they  be  refradted 
apart,  as  in  the  twelfth,  thirteenth  and  four- 
teenth Experiments.  The  Refraction  therefore 
of  every  Ray  apart  is  regular,  and  what  Rule  that 
Refradiion  obferves  we  are  now  to  (liew*. 

The  late  Writers  in  Opticks  teach,  that  the 
Sines  of  Incidence  are  in  a  given  Proportion 
to  the  Sines  of  Refradion,  as  was  explained  in 
the  fifth  Axiom  ;  and  fome  by  Inllruments  fit- 
ted for  meafuring  of  Refractions,  or  otherwife 
experimentally  examining  this  Proportion,  do 
acquaint  us  that  they  have  found  it  accurate. 
But  whilft  they,  not  underftanding  the  difife- 
rent  Refrangibility  of  feveral  Rays,  conceived 
them  all  to  be  refraCted  according  to  one  and 
the  fame  Proportion,  'tis  to  be  prefumed  that 
they  adapted  their  Meafures  only  to  the  middle 
of  the  refracted  Light ;  fo  that  from  their  Mea- 
fures we  may  conclude  only  that  the  R^iys 
which  have  a  mean  Degree  of  Refrangibility, 
that  is,  thofe  which  when  feparated  from  the 
reft  appear  green,  are  refraCted  according  to  a 
given  Proportion  ,of   their  Sines.     And    there- 

*  This  is  •venfulh  treated  of  in  our  Author'/  Left.  Optic  Part  \, 
Seil.lL 

F  fore 


6&  O  F  T  I  C  K  S. 

fore  we  are  now  to  fhew,  that  the  like  given 
Proportions  obtain  in  all  the  reft.  That  it 
fhould  be  fo  is  very  reafonable,  Nature  being 
ever  conformable  to  her  felf  -,  but  an  experimen- 
tal Proof  is  defired.  And  fuch  a  Proof  will  be  had, 
if  we  can  fliew  that  the  Sines  of  Refradion  of 
Rays  differently  refrangible  are  one  to  another  ia 
a  given  Proportion  when  their  Sines  of  Incidence 
are  equal.  For,  if  the  Sines  of  Refraction  of  all 
the  Rays  are  in  given  Proportions  to  the  Sine  of 
Refractions  of  a  Ray  which  has  a  mean  Degree  of 
Refrangibility,  and  this  Sine  is  in  a  given  Propor- 
,  tion  to  the  equal  Sines  of  Incidence,  thofe  other 
Sines  of  Refradtion  will  alfo  be  in  given  Propor- 
tions to  the  equal  Sines  of  Incidence.  Now, 
when  the  Sines  of  Incidence  are  equal,  it  will 
appear  by  the  following  Experiment,  that  the 
Sines  of  Refradion  are  in  a  given  Proportion  tQ 
one  another. 

Exper.  15.  The  Sun  fhining  into  a  dark  Cham- 
ber through  a  little  round  Hole  in  the  Window- 
fhut,  let  S  [in  Fig.  26.]  reprefent  his  round 
white  Image  painted  on  the  oppofite  Wall  by 
his  dired:  Light,  P  T  his  oblong  coloured 
Image  made  by  refrading  that  Light  with  a 
Prifm  placed  at  the  Window  -,  and  p  t,  or 
2p  2.t^  or  3/>  3  Z',  his  oblong  colour'd  Image 
made  by  refrading  again  the  fame  Light  fide- 
ways  with  a  fecond  Prilm  placed  immediately 
after  the  firft  in  a  crofs  Pontion  to  it,  as  was 
explained  in  the  fifth  Experiment  j  that  is  to 
fay,  p  t  when  the  Refradion  of  the  fecond 
Prifm  is  fmall,  zp  2  t  when  its  Refracftion  is 
greater,   and  3  />  3  ^  when  it  is  greateft.     For 

fuch 


B  O  O  K     I.  6j 

fuch  will  be  the  diverfity  of  the  Pvefradions,  if 
the  refrading  Angle  of  the  fecond  Prifm  be  of 
various  Magnitudes  3  fuppofc  of  fifteen  or  twen- 
ty Degrees  to  make  the  Image  pt^  of  thirty  or 
forty  to  make  the  Image  2p  2t^  and  of  fixty  to 
make  the  Image  3/>  3/.  But  for  want  of  folid 
Glafs  Prifms  with  Angles  of  convenient  Big- 
neffes,  there  may  be  Veffels  made  of  poliflied 
Plates  of  Glafs  cemented  together  in  the  form  of 
Prifms  and  filled  with  Water.  Thefe  things  be- 
ing thus  ordered,  I  obferved  that  all  the  folar 
Images  or  coloured  Spectrums  P  T ,  />/ ,  2p 
2.ty  3/>  3^  did  very  nearly  converge  to  the  place 
S  on  which  the  dired  Light  of  the  Sun  fell 
and  painted  his  white  round  Image  when  the 
Prifms  were  taken  away.  The  Axis  of  the  Spe- 
ctrum PT,  that  is  the  Line  drawn  through  the 
middle  of  it  parallel  to  its  re(5tilinear  Sides , 
did  when  produced  pafs  exadtly  through  the 
middle  of  that  white  round  Image  S.  And  when 
the  RefracStion  of  the  fecond  Prifm  \t^s  equal 
to  the  Refradion  of  the  firfi:,  the  refrading  An* 
gles  of  them  both  being  about  60  Degrees,  the 
Axis  of  the  Spectrum  3/^3^  made  by  that  Re- 
fraction, did  when  produced  pafs  alfo  throuo-h 
the  middle  of' the  fame  white  round  Imao-e  S. 
But  when  the  Refraction  of  the  fecond  Prifm 
was  lefs  than  that  of  the  firft,  the  produced 
Axes  of  the  SpeClrums  tp  or  2t  2p  made  by 
that  Refraction  did  cut  the  produced  A^xis  of 
the  Spectrum  TP  in  the  points  m  and  fi,  a  lit- 
tle beyond  the  Center  of  that  white  round  I- 
mage  S.  Whence  the  proportion  of  the  Line 
3/  T  to  the  Line  3/>P  was  a  little  greater  than 

F  2  the 


6%  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

d^e  Proportion  of  2/T  to  2/>P,  and  this  Pro- 
portion a  little  greater  than  that  of  iT  to  p  P. 
Now  -^vhefi  the  Light  of  the  Spedtrum  P  T  falls 
perpendicularly  upon  the  Wall ,  thofe  Lines 
3  4fT,  3/»P,  and2^T,  2/P,  and  ^T,  /P,  are 
the  Tangents  of  the  Refra<5tions,  and  therefore 
hy  this  Experiment  the  Proportions  of  the  Tan-- 
gents  of  the  Refradions  are  obtained ,  from 
whence  the  Proportions  of  the  Sines  being  de- 
rived, they  come  out  equal,  fo  far  as  by  view- 
ing the  SpeftrumSj  and  ufing  fome  mathemati- 
cal R^albiiing  i  could  eftimate.  For  I  did  not 
irtaJic  an  accurate  Computation.  So  then  the 
Propolition  holds  true  in  every  Ray  apart,  fo 
hr  as  appears  by  Experiment.  And  that  it  is 
accurately  true,  may  be  demonftrated  upon  this 
Suppolition.  1'hat  Bodies  refi-a^  Light  by  a5fing 
zipoti  its  Rays  in  Li?i€s  perpmdicular  to  their  Sur^ 
faces.  But  in  order  to  this  Demonftration,  I  muil 
diftinguifh  the  Motion  of  every  Ray  into  two 
Motions,  the  one  perpendicular  to  the  refradiing 
Surface,  the  other  parallel  to  it,  and  concerning 
the  perpendicular  Motion  lay  down  the  follow- 
ing Propolition. 

If  any  Motion  or  moving  thing  whatfoever  he 
incident  with  any  Velocity  on  any  broad  and 
thin  fpace  terminated  on  both  fides  by  two  paral- 
lel Planes ,  and  in  its  Paffage  through  that 
fpace  be  urged  perpendicularly  towards  the  far- 
ther Plane  by  any  force  which  at  given  diftances 
fi-om  the  Plane  is  of  given  Quantities ;  the  per- 
pendicular velocity  of  that  Motion  or  Thing, 
at  is  emerging  out  of  that  fpace,  fhall  be  always 
equal  to  the  fquare  Root  of  the  funi  of  the 
3 .  fquare 


B  O  O  K     I.  69 

fquare  of  the  perpendicular  velocit}^  of  xki'iX 
Motion  or  Thing  at  its  Incidence  on  that  fpace^ 
and  of  the  fquare  of  the  perpendicular  velocity 
wliich  that  Motion  or  Tiling  would  have  at  its 
Emergence,  if  at  its  Incidence  its  perpendicular 
velocity  '^vas  infinitely  little. 

And'  the  fame  Propofition  holds  true  of  any 
Motion  or  Thing  perpendicul^ly  retarded  in  its 
paffage  through  that  Ipace,  if  inilead  of  the  iura 
of  the  two  Squares  you  take  their  ditference;. 
The  Demonflration  Mathematicians  v*ill  eafily 
find  out,  and  therefore  I  iliall  not  trouble  the 
Reader  with  it. 

Suppofe  now  that  a  Ray  coming  mod  oblique- 
ly in  the  LineMC  [in  Fig.  i.]  be  refradted  at 
C  by  the  Plane  RS  into  the  Line  CN,  and.jf 
it  be  required  to  find  the  Line  CE,  into  which 
any  other  Ray  AC  fliall  be  refradjed ;  let  MC, 
AD,  be  the  Sines  of  Incidence  of  the  two  Rays, 
and  NG,  EF,  their  Sines -of  Refradion,  and 
let  the  equal  Motions  of  the  incident  Rays  be 
reprcfented  by  the  equal  Lines  MC  and  AC, 
and  the  Motion  M  C  being  confidered  as  parai^ 
lei  to  the  refracting  Plane,  let  the  other  Motion 
AC  be  diflinguiflied  into  two  Motions  AD 
and  DC,  one  of  which  AD  is  parallel,  and  tlie 
other  DC  perpendicular  to  the  refracfting  Sur- 
face. In  like  manner,  let  the  Motions  of  the 
emerging  Rays  be  diftinguifh'd  into  two,  whereof 

the  perpendicular  ones  are  -^  CG  and  ^  CF. 

And  if  the  force  of  the  refracting  Plane  begins 
to  a<ft  upon  the  Rays  either  in  that  Plane  or  at 
a  Certain  diftance  from  it  on  the  one  fide,  and 
ends  ^t  a  certain  diftance  from  it  on  the  other 

F  3  Side 


^o  OPTIC  K  s. 

fide,  and  in  all  places  between  .thofe  two  limits 
ad:«  upoa  the  Rays  in  Lines  perpendicular  to 
that  refrading  Plane,  and  the  Actions  upon  the 
Rays  at  equal  diftances  from  the  refrading  Plane 
be  equal,  and  at  unequal  ones  either  equal  or  un- 
equal according  to  any  rate  whatever  j  that  Mo- 
tion of  the  Ray  which  is  parallel  to  the  re- 
frading  Plane,  will  fuffer  no  Alteration  by  that 
Fopce  5  and  that  Motion  which  is  perpendicular 
to  it  will  be  altered  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
foregoing  Proportion.  If  therefore  for  the  per- 
pendicular velocity  of  the  emerging  Ray  C  N 

you  write  -^^  CG  as  above,  then  the  perpendi- 
cular velocity  of  any  other  emerging  Ray  CE 
which  was -^-^CF,  will  be  equal  to  the  fquarc 

Root  of  CD^  -h  f§^  CGq.     And  by  fquaring 

thefe  Equals,  and  adding  to  them  the  Equals 
AD^  and  MC^  —  CD^,  and  dividing  the 
Sums  by  the  Equals  CF^-f-EF^  and  CG^-f- 

NG^',  you  will  have  ~-^  equal  to  jf^-  Whence 

to,  the  Sine  of  Incidence,  is  to  E  F  the  Sine  of 
efradion,  as  MC  to  NG,  that  is,  in  a  given 
ratio.  And  this  Demonftration  being  general, 
without  determining  what  Light  is,  or  by  what 
kind  of  Force  i:  is  refraded,  or  alTuming  any 
thing  farther  than  that  the  refrading  Body  ada 
upon  the  Rays  in  Lines  perpendicular  to  its  Sur-. 
face  J  I  take  it  to  be  a  very  convincing  Argument 
of  the  full  truth  of  this  Propoiition, 

So  then,    if  the  ratio  of   the  Sines  of  Inci- 
dence and  Refradion  of  any  fort  of   Rays  be 

found 


BOOK     I.  7.1 

'  found  in  any  one  cafe,  'tis  given  in  all  cafes;  and 
this  may  be  readily  found  by  the  Method  in  the 
following  Propofition. 

PROP,  VII.     Theor.  VI. 
^he  PerfeEiion  of  Telef copes  is  hnpeded  by 
the  different  Refrangibilitj  of  the  Rays 
of  Light. 

THE  Imperfedtion  of  Telefcopes  is  vul- 
garly attributed  to  the  fpherical  Figures  of 
the  Glaffes,  and  therefore  Mathematicians  have 
propounded  to  figure  them  by  the  conical  Sedi- 
ons.  To  fhew  that  they  are  miftaken,  I  have  in- 
ferted  this  Propofition ;  the  truth  of  which  will 
appear  by  the  nieafure  of  the  Refractions  of  the 
feveral  forts  of  Rays ;  and  thefe  meafures  I  thus 
determine. 

In  the  third  Experiment  of  this  firft  Part, 
.where  the  refracting  Angle  of  the  Prifm  was  62^ 
Degrees,  the  half  of  that  Angle  31  deg.  15  min. 
is  the  Angle  of  Incidence  of  the  Rays  at  their  go- 
ing out  of  the  Glafs  into  the  Air  * ;  and  the  Sine  of 
this  Angle  is  5 188,  the  Radius  being  loooo.  When 
the  Axis  of  this  Ptifm  was  parallel  to  the  Horizon, 
and  the  Refraction  of  the  Rays  at  their  Incidence 
6n  this  Prifm  equal  to  that  at  their  Emergence  out 
of  it,  I  obferved  v/ith  a  Quadrant  the  Angle  which 
the  mean  refrangible  P  ays,  ( that  is  thofe  which 
went  to  the  middle  of  the  Sun's  coloured  Image  ) 
made  with  the  Horizon,  and  by  this  Angle  and  the 
Sun's  altitude  obferved  at  the  fame  time,  I  found  the 

•  Seesur  AxiXhox's  Left.  Optic.  Parti.  Sed.  II.  §.  29. 

F  4  Angle 


7x  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Angle  which  the  emergent  Rays  contained  with  the 
incident  to  be  44  deg.  and  40  min.  and  the  half  of 
this  Angle  added  to  the  Angle  of  Incidence  3 1  deg. 
15  min.  makes  the  Angle  of  Refracflion,  which  is 
therefore  5  3  deg.  35  min.  and  its  Sine  8047.  Thefe 
are  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refradtion  of  the 
m^an  refrangible  Rays,  and  their  Proportion  in 
round  Numbers  is  20  to  3 1.  This  Glafs  was  of  a 
Colour  inclining  to  green.  The  laft  of  the  Prifms 
mentioned  in  the  third  Experiment  was  of  clear 
white  Glafs.  Its  refracting  Angle  635  Degrees. 
The  Angle  which  the  emergent  Rays  contained, 
with  the  incident  45  deg.  50  min.  The  Sine  of 
half  the  firft  Angle  5262.  The  Sine  of  half  the 
Sum  of  the  Angles  8157.  ^^^^  their  Proportion  in 
round  Numbers  2a  to  3 1,  as  before. 

From  the  Length  of  the  Image,  which  was 
about  95  or  10  Inches,  fubdud  its  Breadth,  which 
was  2s  Inches,  and  the  Rerhainder  71  Inches 
would  be  the  Length  of  the  Image  were  the  Sun 
but  a  Point,  and  therefore  fubtends  the  Angle 
which  the  moft  and  leafl  refrangible  Rays,  when 
incident   on  the  Prifm  in  the   fame  Lines,    do 

.'contain  with  one  another  after  their  Emergence. 
"Whence  this  x^^ngle  is  2  deg.  o'.  f.     For,  the 

^^if^ance  between  the  Image  and  the  Prifm 
where  this  Angle  is  made,  was  iSj-  Feet,  and 
at  that  diftance  the  Chord  7^  Inches  fubtends 
an  Angle  of  2  deg.  o'.  y".  Now  half  this  Angle 
is  the  Angle  which  thefe  emergent  Rays  con- 

'  taiH  with  the  emergent  mean  refrangible  Rays, 
and  a  quarter  thereof,  that  is  30'.  2".  may  be 
accounted  the  Angle  which  they  would  contain 
with  the  fame  emergent  mean  refrangible  Rays, 

were 


B  O  OK     I.  73 

were  they  co-incident  to  them  within  the  Clafs, 
and  fuffered  no  other  Refraction  than  that  at.their 
Emergence.  For,  if  two  equal  Refractions,  the 
one  at  the  Incidence  of  the  Rays  on  the  Prifm, 
the  other  at  their  Emergence,  make  half  the 
Angle  2  deg.  o'.  7''.  then  one  of  thofe  RefraCtions 
will  make  about  a  quarter  of  that  Angle,  and  this 
quarter  added  to,  and  fubduded  from  the  Angle 
of  Refraction  of  the  mean  refrangible  Rays, 
which  was  53  deg.  35',  gives  the  Angles  of  Re- 
fraCtion  of  the  moft  and  leaft  refrangible  Rays 
54  deg.  5'  2",  and  53  deg.  4'  58",  whofe  Sines 
are  8099  and  7995,  the  common  Angle  of  In- 
cidence being  31  deg.  15',  and  its  Sine  5188; 
and  thefe  Sines  in  the  leafl  round  Numbers  are  in 
proportion  to  one  another,  as  78  and  'jj  to  50. 

Now,  if  you  fubduCt  the  common  Sine  of  In- 
cidence 50  from  the  Sines  of  RefraCtion  'jy  and 
78,  the  Remainders  27  and  28  fliew,  that  in  fmall 
Refractions  the  RefraCtion  of  the  leafl  refrangi- 
ble Rays  is  to  the  Refraction  of  the  moft  refran- 
gible ones,  as  27  to  28  very  nearly,  and  that  the 
difference  of  the  RefraCtions  of  the  leafl  refran- 
gible and  mofl  refrangible  Rays  is  about  the 
27kh  Part  of  the  whole  RefraCtion  of  the  mean 
refrangible  Rays. 

Whence  they  that  are  skilled  in  Opticks.will 
eafily  underfland,  *'  that  the  Breadth  of  the  leafl 
circular  Space,  into  which  ObjeCt-glaffes  of  Te- 
lefcopes  can  colleCt  all  forts  of  Parallel  Rays,  is 
about  the  27^th  Part  of  half  the  Aperture  of  the 
Glafs,  or  55  th  Part  of  the  whole  Aperture ;  and 

*  This  is  demonfi rated  in  our  AuihoiV  Led.  Optic.  Part  I.  SeSI.  IV. 
Fyp.  57. 

that 


74  O  P  T  I  C  K  a 

that  the  Focus  of  the  moft  refrangible  Rays  is 
nearer  to  the  Objeft-glafs  than  the  Focus  of  the 
leaft  refrangible  ones,  by  about  the  275th  Part  of 
the  diflance  between  the  Objed:-glafs  and  the 
Focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  ones. 

And  if  Rays  of  all  forts,  flowing  from  any 
one  lucid  Point  in  the  Axis  of  any  convex  Lens, 
be  made  by  the  Refra(3:ion  of  the  Lens  to  con- 
verge to  Points  not  too  remote  from  the  Lens, 
the  Focus  of  the  mofl:  refrangible  Rays  fliall  be 
nearer  to  the  Lens  than  the  Focus  of  the  leaft 
refrangible  ones,  by  a  diflance  which  is  to  the 
275th  Part  of  the  diftpnce  of  the  Focus  of  the 
mean  refrangible  Rays  from  the  Lens,  as  the  di- 
ftance  between  thrt  Focus  and  the  lucid  Point, 
from  whence  the  Rays  flow,  is  to  the  diflance  be- 
tween that  lucid  Point  and  the  Lens  very  nearly. 

Now  to  examine  whether  the  Difference  be- 
tween the  Refra([lions,  v^hich  the  mofl  refrangi- 
ble and  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  flowing  from 
the  fame  Point  fuffer  in  the  Objed-glafTes  of  Te- 
lefcopes  and  fuch-like  Glafles,  be  fo  great  as  is 
here  defcribed,  I  contrived  the  following  Experi- 
ment.  • 

Exper.  16.  The  Lens  which  I  ufed  in  the  fe- 
cond  and  eighth  Experiments,  being  placed  fix 
Feet  and  an  Inch  diflant  from  any  Obje6t,  col- 
leifled  the  Species  of  that  Objed:  by  the  mean 
refrangible  Rays  at  the  diflance  of  fix  Feet  and 
an  Inch  from  the  Lens  on  the  other  fide.  And 
therefore  by  the  foregoing  P-ule,  it  ought  to  col- 
led the  Species  of  that  Objedl  by  the  leafl  re- 
frangible Rays  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  and 
31  Inches  from  the  Lens,  and  by  the  mofl  re- 
• -'  frangible 


BOOK!  75 

frangible  ones  at  the  diftance  of  five  Feet  and 
iQi  Inches  from  it:  So  that  between  the  two 
Places,  where  thefe  lead  and  moft  refrangible 
Rays  colledl  the  Species,  there  may  be  the  di- 
ftance  of  about  5^  Inches.  For  by  that  Rule, 
as  fix  Feet  and  an  Inch  (the  diftance  of  the  Lens 
from  the  lucid  Obje6t)  is  to  twelve  Feet  and 
two  Inches  ( the  diflance  of  the  lucid  Objedt 
from  the  Focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  Rays ) 
that  is,  as  One  is  to  Two;  fo  is  the  27ith  Part 
of  fix  Feet  and  an  Inch '(the  diftance  between 
the  Lens  and  the  fame  Focus)  to  the  diftance 
between  the  Focus  of  the  moft  refrangible  Rays 
and  the  Focus  of  the  leaft  refrangible  ones, 
which  is  therefore  5g  Inches,  that  is  very  nearly 
5^  Inches.  Now  to  know  whether  this  Meafure 
was  true,  I  repeated  the  fecond  and  eighth  Ex- 
pariment  with  coloured  Light,  which  was  lefs 
compounded  than  that  I  there  made  life  of: 
For  I  now  feparated  the  heterogeneous  Rays 
from  one  another  by  the  Method  I  defcribed 
in  the  eleventh  Experiment,  fo  as  to  make  a 
coloured  SpecStrum  about  twelve  or  fifte^sn  Times 
longer  than  broad.  This  Spectrum  I  caft  on  a 
printed  Book,  and  placing  the  above-mentioned 
Lens  at  the  diftance  of  lix  Feet  and  an  Inch 
from  this  Spectrum  to  colleft  the  Species  of 
the  illuminated  Letters  at  the  fame  diftance  on 
the  other  lidey  I  found  that  the  Species  of  the 
Letters  illuminated  with  blue  were  nearer  to 
the  Lens  than  thole  illuminated  with  deep 
red  by  about  three  Inches,  or  three  and  a  quar- 
ter ;  but  the  Species  of  the  Letters  illumi- 
nated with  indigo  and  violet  appeared  fo  con- 
I  fufed 


75  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

fufed  and  indiftindt,  that  I  could  not  read  them : 
Whereupon  viewing  the  Prifm,  I  found  it  was 
s^  full  of  Veins  running  from  one  end  of  the  Glafs 
to  the  other  j  fo  that  the  Refradion  could  not 
be  regular.  I  took  another  Prifm  therefore 
which  was  free  from  Veins,  and  inftead  of  the 
Letters  I  ufed  two  or  three  Parallel  black  Lines 
a  little  broader  than  the  Strokes  of  the  Let- 
ters, and  calling  the  Colours  upon  thefe  Lines 
in  fuch  manner,  that  the  Lines  ran  along  the 
Colours  from  one  end  of  the  Spedrum  to  the 
other,  I  found  that  the  Focus  where  the  indigo, 
or  confine  of  this  Colour  and  violet  caft  the 
Species  of  the  black  Lines  mofl  diilindly,  to 
be  about  four  Inches,  or  4^  nearer  to  the  Lens 
than  the  Focus,  where  the  deepefl  red  caft  the 
Species  of  th^  fame  black  Lines  mofl  diilind:- 
ly.  The  violet  was  fo  faint  and  dark,  that  I 
could  not  difcern  the  Species  of  the  Lines  di- 
ilindly  by  that  Colour  j  and  therefore  confi- 
dering  that  the  Prifm  was  made  of  a  dark  co- 
loured Glafs  inclining  to  green,  I  took  another 
Prifm  of  clear  white  Glafs ;  but  the  Spedrum 
of  Colours  which  this  Prifm  made  had  long 
white  Streams  of  faint  Light  (liooting  out  from 
both  ends  of  the  Colours,  which  made  me  con- 
clude that  fomething  w'as  amifs  j  and  viewing 
the  Prifm,  I  found  two  or  three  little  Bubbles 
ja  the  Glafs,  which  refraded  the  Light  irregu- 
lar! v.  Wherefore  I  covered  that  Part  of  the  Glafs 
with  black  Paper,  and  letting  the  Light  pafs 
throucrh  another  Part  of  it  which  was  free  from 
fuch  Bubbles,  the  Spedrum  of  Colours  became 
free  from  thofe  irregular  Streams  of  Light,  and, 

was 


B  o  o  k:    I.  >7 

was  now  fuch  as  I  defircd.     But  ftill^I  found 
the  violet  fo  dark  and  faint,  that  I  could  fcarce 
fee  the  Species  of  the  Lines  by  the  violet,  and* 
not  at  all  by  the  deepeft  Part  of  it,  which  was 
next  the  end  of  the  Spc,(5lrum.    I  fufpeded  there- 
fore,  that  this  faint  and  dark  Colour  might  be 
allayed  by  that  fcattering  Light  which  was  re- 
fraded,  and  refleded  irregularly,  partly  by  fome 
very  fmall  Bubbles  in  the  GlafTes,    and   partly 
by    the   Inequalities    of   their   Polifh  ;     which 
Light,  tho'  it  was  but  little,  yet  it  being  of  a 
white  Colour,  might  fuffice  to  affed  the  Senfe 
fo  ftrongly  as  to  difturb  the  Phaenomena  of  that 
weak  and  dark  Colour  the  violet,    and  there- 
fore I  tried,  as  in  the  12th,   13th,  and   14th  Ex- 
periments,   whether  the  Light  of   this  Colour 
did  not  confifl  of  a  fenfible  Mixture  of  heteroge- 
neous Rays,  but  found  it  did  not.     Nor  did  the 
Refradlions  caufe  any  other  fenfible  Colour  than 
violet  to  emerge  ©ut   of  this   Light,     as   they 
would  have  done  out  of  white  Light,   and  by 
confequence  out  of  this  violet  Light  had  it  been 
fenlibly  compounded  with  white  Light.     And 
therefore  I  concluded,    that  the  reafon  why  I 
could  not  fee  the  Species  of  the  Lines  diftindly 
by  this  Colour,  was  only  the  Darknefs  of  this 
Colour,  and  Thinnefs  of  its  Light,  and  its  di- 
ftance  from  the  Axis  of  the  Lens  j    I  divided 
therefore  thofe  Parallel  black  Lines  into  equal 
Parts,  by  which  I  might  readily  know  the  di- 
ftances  of  the  Colours  in  the  Speftrum  from 
one  another,     and    noted  the  diftances   of  the 
Lens  from  the  Foci  of  fuch  Colours,  as  c<ift  the  . 
Species  of  the  Lines  dillindtly,  and  then  confi- 

dered 


'7&  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

dered  vvlaether  the  difference  of  thofe  distances 
bear  fuch  proportion  to  5|  Inches,  the  greatefl 
Difference  of  the  diftances,  which  the  Foci  of 
the  deepefl  red  and  violet  ought  to  have  from 
the  Lens,  as  the  diflance  of  the  obferved  Co- 
lours from  one  another  in  the  Speftrum  bear  to 
the  greatefl  diflance  of  the  deepeft  red  and 
violet  meafured  in  the  Redilinear  Sides  of  the 
Spedrum,  that  is,  to  the  Length  of  thofe  Sides, 
or  Excefs  of  the  Length  of  the  Spedrum  above 
its  Breadth.  And  my  Obfervations  were  as  fol- 
lows. 

When  I  obferved  and  compared  the  deepefl 
fenfible  red,  and  the  Colour  in  the  Confine  of 
green  and  blue,  which  at  the  Redilinear  Sides 
of  the  Spedirum  was  diftant  from  it  half  the 
Length  of  thofe  Sides,  the  Focus  where  the  Con- 
fine of  green  and  blue  cafl  the  Species  of  the 
Lines  diflindly  on  the  Paper,  was  nearer  to  the 
Lens  than  the  Focus,  where  the  red  cafl  thofe 
Lines  diflind:ly  on  it  by  about  25  or  2~  Liches. 
For  fometimes  the  Meafures  were  a  Jittle  greater, 
fometimes  a  little  lefs,  but  feldom  varied  from 
one  another  above  \  of  an  Inch.  For  it  was  very 
difficult  to  define  the  Places  of  the  Foci,  with- 
out fome  little  Errors.  Now,  if  the  Colours 
diflant  half  the  Length  of  the  Image,  ( mea- 
fured at  its  Rectilinear  Sides)  give  25  or  2|  Diffe- 
rence of  the  diflances  of  their  Foci  from  the 
Lens,  then  the  Colours  dillant  the  whole  Length 
ought  to  give  5  or  55  Inches  difference  of  thofe 
diflances. 

Bpt  here  it's  to  be  noted,  that  I  could  not 
fee   the  red  to  the  full  end  of  the  Sped:rum, 

biit 


B  O  O  K     I.  7p 

but  only  to  the  Center  of  the  Semicircle  which 
bounded  that  end,  or  a  little  farther  j  and  there- 
fore I  compared  this  red  not  with  that  Colour 
which  was  exadlly  in  the  middle  of  the  Spedlrum, 
or  Confine  of  green  and  blue,  but  with  that  which 
verged  a  little  more  to  the  blue  than  to  the  green : 
And,  as  I  reckoned  the  whole  Length  of  the 
Colours  not  to  be  the  whole  Length  of  the 
Spedjum,  but  the  Length  of  its  Redilinear  Sides, 
fo  compleating  the  femicircularEnds  into  Circles, 
when  either  of  the  obferved  Colours  fell  within 
thofe  Circles,  I  meafured  the  diftance  of  that 
Colour  from  the  femicircular  End  of  the  Spe- 
drum,  and  fubdudting  half  this  diftance  from 
the  meafured  diftance  of  the  two  Colours,  I 
took  the  Remainder  for  their  corrected  di- 
ftance;  and  in  thefe  Obfcrvations  fet  down  this 
correfted  diilance  for  the  difference  of  the  di- 
flances  of  their  Foci  from  the  Lens.  For,  as 
the  Length  of  the  Rectilinear  Sides  of  the  Spe- 
<3:rum  would  be  the  whole  Length  of  all  the 
Colours,  were  the  Circles  of  which  ( as  we 
Ihewed)  that  Spedrum  confifts  contraded  and 
reduced  to  Phyfical  Points,  fo  in  that  Cafe  this 
correded  diftance  would  be  the  real  diftance  of 
the  two  obferved  Colours. 

When  therefore  I  farther  obferved  tlie  deepcft 
fenfible  red,  and  that  blue  whofe  correded  di- . 
ftance  from  it  was  i_  Parts  of  the  Length  of 
the  Redilinear  Sides  of  the  Spedrum,  the  diffe- 
rence of  the  diftances  of  their  Foci  from  the 
Lens  was  about  3^  Inches,  and  as  7  to  12,  fo  is 
3?  ^o  S'v 

When 


8o  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

When  I  obferved  the  deepeft  fenfible  red,  and 
that  indigo  whofe  corredied  diftance  was  ~  or  |  of 
the  Length  of  the  Rediilinear  Sides  of  the  Spe- 
(ftrum,  the  difference  of  the  diftances  of  theii^ 
Foei  from  the  Lens,  was  about  3I  Inches,  and  as 
2  to  3,  fois3|to  5I. 

When  I  obferved  the  deepefl  fenfible  red,  and 
that  deep  indigo  whofe  corredted  diftance  from 
one  another  was  ^  or  l  of  the  Length  of  the 
Rectilinear  Sides  of  the  Spectrum,  the  diffe- 
rence of  the  diftances  of  their  Foci  from  the 
Lens  was  about  4  Inches  -,  and  as  3  to  4,  fo 
is  4  to  5|. 

When  I  obferved  the  deepeft  feniible  red, 
and  that  Part  of  the  violet  next  the  indigo, 
whofe  corredled  diftance  from  the  red  was  {| 
or  I  of  the  Length  of  the  Red:ilinear  Sides  of  the 
Spedlrum,  the  difference  of  the  diftances  of  their 
Foci  from  the  Lens  was  about  4-  Inches,  and 
as  5  to  6,  fo  is  4i  to  55.  For  fometimes,  when 
the  Lens  was  advantageoufly  placed,  fo  that  its 
Axis  refpedted  the  blue,  and  all  Things  elfe 
were  well  ordered,  and  the  Sun  ftione  clear,  and 
1  held  my  Eye  very  near  to  the  Paper  on 
which  the  Lens  caft  the  Species  of  the  Lines,  I 
could  fee  pretty  diftind:ly  the  Species  of  thofe 
Lines  by  that  Part  of  the  violet  which  was  next 
.the  indigo  J  and  fometimes  I  could  fee  them 
by  above  half  the  violet.  For  in  making  thefe 
Experiments  I  had  obferved,  that  the  Species 
of  thofe  Colours  only  appear  diftindt,  which  were 
in  or  near  the  Axis  of  the  Lens  :  So  that  if  the 
blue  or  indigo  were  in  the  Axis,  I  could  fee 
their  Species  diftindlyj  and  then  the  red  ap- 
peared 


B  O  O  K     L  8i 

peared  much  kfs  diftin6t  than  before.  Wherefore 
I  contrived  to  make  theSped:riim  of  Colours  flior- 
ter  than  before,  fo  that  both  its  Ends  might  be 
nearer  to  the  Axis  of  the  Lens.  And  now  its 
Length  was  about  2t  Inches,  and  Breadth  a^ 
bout  r  01*  i  of  ^^^  Inch.  Alfo  inftead  of  the 
black  Lines  on  which  the  Spectrum  was  caft,  I 
made  one  black  Line  broader  than  thofe,  that  I 
might  fee  its  Species  more  eafily  j  and  this  Line  I 
divided  by  Ihort  crofs  Lines  into  equal  Parts,  for 
meafuring  the  diflances  of  the  obferved  Colours. 
And  now  I  could  fometimes  fee  the  Species  of 
this  Line  with  its  Divifions  almofl:  as  far  as  the 
Center  of  the  femicircular  violet  End  of  the 
-Spedrunij  and  made  thefe  farther  Obferva-^ 
tions. 

When  I  obferved  the  deepeft  fenfible  red,  and 
that  Part  of  the  violet,  whofe  correfted  diftance 
from  it  was  about  '  Parts  of  the  Re<ftilinear  Sides 
of  the  Spectrum,  the  Difference  of  the  diftances 
of  the  Foci  of  thofe  Colours  from  the  Lens^ 
was  one  time  4],  another  time  47,  another  time 
4t  Inches  J  and  as  8  to  9,  fo  are  47,  4t>  4t,  to 
5?>  5t'^^  5^  refpedively. 

When  I  obferved  the  deepeft  fenfible  red,, 
and  deepeft  fenfible  violet,  ( the  correded  di- 
ftance of  which  Colours,  when  all  Things  were 
ordered  to  the  beft  Advantage,  and  the  Sun 
(hone  very  clear,  was  about  H  or  iy  Parts  of  the 
Length  of  the  Rectilinear  Sides  of  the  colour- 
ed Spedrum )  I  found  the  Difference  of  the  di- 
ftances of  their  Feci  from  the  Lens  fometimes 
4|-  fometimes  ^^y    and  for  the  moft  part  ^  In- 

G  .    ehgsi 


8i  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ches  or  thereabouts ;   and  as  ii  to  12,  or  15  to 
16,  fo  is  five  Inches  to  5*  or  51.  Inches. 

And  by  this  ProgreiTion  of  Experiments  I  fatif- 
fied  my  felf,  that  had  the  Light  at  the  very  Ends 
of  the  Spedrum  been  ftrong  enough  to  make  the 
Species  of  the  black  Lines  appear  plainly  on  the 
Paper,  the  Focus  of  the  deepefh  violet  would 
have  been  found  nearer  to  the  Lens,  than  the 
Focus  of  the  deepeft  red,  by  about  5^  Inches 
at  leaft.  And  this  is  a  farther  Evidence,  that 
the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refradion  of  the  fe- 
veral  forts  of  Rays,  hold  the  fame  Proportion  to 
one  another  in  the  fmallefl  Refractions  w^hich  they 
do  in  the  greateft. 

My  Progrefs  in  making  this^ice  and  trouble- 
fome  Experiment  I  have  fet  down  more  at  large, 
that  they  that  iliall  try  it  after  me  niay  be  aware 
of  the  Circumfpe(llion  requifite  to  make  it  fuc- 
ceed  well.  And  if  they  cannot  make  it  fuc- 
ceed  fo  well  as  I  did,  they  may  notwithftand- 
ing  coUedl  by  the  Proportion  of  the  diftance  of 
the  Colours  of  the  Spedrum,  to  the  Difference 
of  the  diftances  of  their  Foci  from  the  Lens, 
what  would  be  the  Succefs  in  the  more  diftant 
Colours  by  a  better  trial.  And  yet,  if  they  ufe 
a  broader  Lens  than  I  did,  and  fix  it  to  a  long 
ftrait  Staif,  by  means  of  which  it  may  be  rea- 
dily and  truly  diredled  to  the  Colour  whofe  Fo- 
cus is  defired,  I  queftion  not  but  the  Experi- 
ment will  fucceed  better  with  them  than  it  did 
with  me.  For  I  directed  the  Axis  as  nearly  as  I 
could  to  the  middle  of  the  Colours,  and  then 
the  faint  Ends  of  the  Spedlrum  being  remote 
from  the  Axis,  caft  their  Species  lefs  diflindtly 

1  on 


B  O  O  K     t  85 

on  the  Paper  than  they  would  have  done,  had  the 
Axis  been  fucceffively  diredled  to  them. 

Now  by  what  has  been  faid,  it's  certain  that  the 
Rays  which  differ  inRefrangibilitydo  not  converge 
to  the  fame  Focus  j  but  if  they  flow  from  a  lucid 
Point,  as  far  from  the  Lens  on  one  fide  as  their 
Foci  are  on  the  other,  the  Focus  of  the  moft  re- 
frangible Rays  fhall  be  nearer  to  the  Lens  than  that 
of  the  leafl  refrangible,  by  above  the  fourteenth 
Part  of  the  whole  diflance  j  and  if  they  flow  from 
a  lucid  Point,  fo  very  remote  from  the  Lens,  that 
before  their  Incidence  they  may  be  accounted  pa- 
rallel, the  Focus  of  the  moft  refrangible  Rays  fliall 
be  nearer  to  the  Lens  than  the  Focus  of  the  kail 
refrangible,  by  about  the  27th  or  2  8  th  Part  of  their 
whole  diftance  from  it.    And  the  Diameter  of  the 
Circle  in  the  middle  Space  between  thofe  two 
Foci  which  they  illuminate,  when  they  fall  there 
on  any  Plane,  perpendicular  to  the  Axis  (which 
Circle  is  the  leaft  into  which  they  can  all  be  ga- 
thered )    is*  about  the  55th  Part  of  the  Diameter 
of  the  Aperture  of  the  Glafs.    So  that  'tis  a  won- 
der, that  Telefcopes  reprefent  Objeds  fo  diftindt 
as  they  do.     But  were  all   the  Rays  of  Light 
equally  refrangible,  the  Error  ariflng  only  from 
the  Sphericalnefs  of  the  Figures  of  Glaffes  would 
be  many  hundred  times  lefs.    For,  if  the  Obje6t- 
glafs  of  a  Telefcope  be  Plano-convex,  and  the 
Plane  fide  be  turned  towards  the  Objedlj   and 
the  Diameter  of  the  Sphere,  whereof  this  Glafs 
is  a  Segment,  be  called  D,  and  the  Semidiame- 
ter  of  the  Aperture  of  the  Glafs  be  called  S,  and 
the  Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  be 
to  the  Sine  of  Refradtion  as  I  to  R  j    the  Rays 

G  2  which 


84  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

w  hich  come  parallel  to  the  Axis  of  the  Glafs,  fhall 
in  the  Place  where  the  Image  of  theObjed:  is  moft 
diflindly  made,  be  fcattered  all  over  a  little  Circle, 

whofe  Diameter  is  —  X  very  nearly,  *  as 

Iq  Dquad.  ^  ^' 

I  gather  by  computing  the  Errors  of  the  Rays  by 
the  Method  of  infinite  Series,  and  rejecting  the 
Terms,  vi^hofe  Quantities  are  inconfiderable.  As 
for  inflance,  if  the  Sine  of  Incidence  I,  be  to  the 
Sine  of  Refradion  R,  as  20  to  3 1,  and  if  D  the 
Diameter  of  the  Sphere,  to  which  the  Convex- 
fide  of  the  Glafs  is  ground,  be  100  Feet  or  1200 
Inches,  and  S  the  Semidiametcr  of  the  Aperture  be 
two  Inches,    the  Diameter  of  the  little  Circle, 

(that  IS  ^ -)  will  be , (or 

Iq  ycD  quad.  20  X  20  X  1 200  X  i  zoo 

961  X 

72000000  )  Parts  of  an  Inch.    But  the  Diameter  of 

the  little  Circle,  through  which  thefe  Rays  are 
fcattered  by  unequal  Refrangibility,  will  be  about 
the  55  th  Part  of  the  Aperture  of  the  Objed-glafs, 
which  here  is  four  Inches.  And  therefore,  the 
Error  arifing  from  the  Spherical  Figure  of  the 
Glafs,  is  to  the  Error  arifing  from  the  different  Re- 
frangibility of  the  Rays,  as to  -  .  that  is 

*^      ■        •'  ■'  72000000  rj* 

as  I  to  5449 ;  and  therefore,  being  in  comparifon 
fo  very  little,  deferves  not  to  be  confidered. 

But  you  will  fay,  if  the  Errors  caufed  by  the 
different  Refrangibility  be  fo  very  great,  how 
comes  it  to  pafs,  that  Objeds  appear  through 
Telefcopes  fo  diflind:  as  they  do  ?   I  anfwer,   'tis 

*  Hovj  to  do  this,  is  pezvn  in  our  AuthorV  Left.  Optic.  Part  I. 
Se^.  IV.   Pnp.^x. 

becaufe 


B  O  O  K     I.  85 

becaufe  the  erring  Rays  are  not  fcattered  uni- 
formly over  all  that  Circular  Space,  but  colleded 
infinitely  more  denfely  in  tlie  Center  than  in 
any  other  Part  of  the  Circle,  and  in  the  Way 
from  the  Center  to  the  Circumference,  grow 
continually  rarer  and  rarer,  fo  as  at  the  Circum- 
ference to  become  infinitely  rare  5  and  by  rea- 
fon  of  their  Rarity  are  not  flrong  enough  to  be 
vifible,  unlefs  in  the  Center  and  very  near  it. 
Let  ADE  [in  Fig.  27.]  reprefent  one  of  thofe 
Circles  defcribed  with  the  Center  C,  and  Semi- 
diameter  AC,  and  let  BFG  be  a  finaller  Circle 
concentrick  to  the  former,  cutting  with  its  Cir- 
cumference the  Diameter  AC  in  B,  and  bife<fl 
AC  in  N }  and  by  my  reckoning,  the  Denfity  of 
the  Light  in  any  Place  B,  will  be  to  its  Denfity 
in  N,  as  AB  to  BC;  and  the  whole  Light  with- 
in the  Icffer  Circle  BFG,  will  be  to  the  whole 
Light  within  the  greater  A  ED,  as  the  Excefs 
of  the  Square  of  A  C  above  the  Square  of  A  B, 
is  to  the  Square  of  AC.  As  if  B C  be  the  fifth 
Part  of  AC,  the  Light  will  be  four  times  dcn- 
fer  in  B  than  in  N,  and  the  whole  Light  within 
the  lefs  Circle,  will  be  to  the  whole  Light  with- 
in the  greater,  as  nine  to  twenty-five.  Whence 
it's  evident,  that  the  Light  within  the  lefs  Cir- 
cle, mufl  ftrike  the  Senfe  much  more  ftrongly, 
than  that  faint  and  dilated  Light  round  about 
between  it  and  the  Circumference  of  the  grea- 
ter. 

But  it's  farther  to  be  noted,  that  the  mcft  lu- 
minous of  the  Prifmatick  Colours  are  the  yeU 
low  and  orange.  Thefe  aifed:  the  Senfes  more 
ftrongly  than  all  the  reft  together,  and  next  to 

G  3  thefc 


S6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

thefe  in  flrength  are  the  red  and  green.    Th^ 
blue  compared  with  thefe  is  a  faint  and  dark 
Colour,    and  the  indigo    and   violet  are  fnuch 
darker  and  fainter,  fo  that  thefe  compared  with 
the  ftronger  Colours  are  little  to   be  regarded^ 
The  Images  of  Ohjecfls  are  therefore  to  be  pla-? 
ced,  not  in  the  Focus  of  the  mean  refrangible 
Rays,  which  are  in  the  Confine  of  green  and 
blue,  but  in  the  Focus  of  thofe  Rays  which  are 
in  the  middle  of  the  orange  and  yellow  j    therQ 
where  the  Colour  is  moil:  luminous  and  fulgent^ 
that  is  in  the  brighteft  yellow,  that  yellow  which 
inclines  more  to  orange  than  to  green.     And 
by  the  Refraction  of  thefe  Rays  (whofe  Sines  of- 
incidence  and  Refraction  in  Glafs  are  as   17  apd 
1 1 )  the  Refradion  of  Glafs  and  Cryflal  for  Op- 
tical Ufes  is  to  be  meafured.     Let  us  therefore 
place  the  Image  of  the  Objed;  in  the  Focus  of 
thefe  Rays,  and  all  the  yellow  and  orange  will 
fall  within  a  Circle,  wnofe  Diameter  is  about 
the  250th  Part  of  the  Diameter  of  the  Aperture 
of  the  Glafs.     And  if  you  add  the  brighter  half 
of  the  red,  ( that  half  which  is  next  the  orange  ) 
and  the  brighter  half  of  the  green,  ( that  half 
which  is  next  the    yellow  )     about  three  fifth 
Parts  of  the  Light  of  thefe  two  Coloi;irs  will 
fall  within  the  fame  Circle,  and  two  fifth  Parts 
will  fall  without  it  round  about  y  and  that  which 
falls  without  will  be  fpread  through  alinoil  as 
much  more  fpace  as  that  which    falls  within, 
and  fo  in  the  grofs  be  almoft  three  times  rarer. 
Of  the  other  half  of  the  red  and  green,  (that  is 
of  the  deep  dark  red  and  willow  green)  about 
pne  quarter  will  fall  within  this  Circle,    and 

three 


B  O  O  K     I.  87 

three  quarters  without,  and  that  which  falls 
without  will  be  fpread  through  about  four  o^ 
five  times  more  fpace  than  that  which  falls  with- 
in ;  and  fo  in  the  grofs  be  rarer,  and  if  com 
pared  with  the  whole  Light  within  it,  will  be 
about  25  times  rarer  than  all  that  taken  in  the 
grofs  J  or  rather  more  than  30  or  40  times  ra- 
rer, becaufe  the  deep  red  in  the  end  of  the 
Spedtmm  of  Colours  made  by  a  Prifm  is  very- 
thin  and  rare,  and  the  willow  green  is  fome- 
thing  rarer  than  the  orange  and  yellow.  The 
Light  of  thefe  Colours  therefore  being  fo  very 
much  rarer  than  that  within  the  Circle,  will 
fcarce  affe<5t  the  Senfe,  efpecially  fince  the  deep 
red  and  willow  green  of  this  Light,  are  much 
darker  Colours  than  the  reft.  And  for  the  fame 
reafon  the  blue  and  violet  being  much  darker 
Colours  than  thefe,  and  much  more  rarified, 
may  be  neglected.  For  the  denfe  and  bright 
Light  of'  the  Circle,  will  obfcure  the  rare  and 
weak  Light  of  thefe  dark  Colours  round  about 
it,  and  render  them  almoft  infenfible.  The 
fenfible  Image  of  a  lucid  Point  is  therefore 
fcarce  broader  than  a  Circle,  whofe  Diameter  is 
the  250th  Part  of  the  Diameter  of  the  Aperture 
of  the  Objedt-glafs  of  a  good  Telefcope,  or  not 
much  brorder,  if  you  except  a  faint  and  dark  mifty 
Light  round  about  it,  which  a  Spectator  wifr. 
fcarce  regard.  And  therefore  in  a  Telefcope, 
whofe  Aperture  is  four  Liches,  and  Length  an 
hundred  Feet,  it  exceeds  not  2"  45'",  or  3".  And 
in  a  Telefcope  whofe  Aperture  is  two  Inches, 
and  Length  20  or  30  Feet,  it  may  be  5"  or  6", 
and  fcarce  above.     And   this  anfwers   well  to 

G  4  Expe- 


88  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Experience :  For  fpme  Aftronomers  have  found 
the  Diameters  pf  the  fix'd  Stars,  in  Telefcopes 
of  between  20  and  60  Feet  in  length,  to  be  a- 
bout  5"  or  6",  or  at  moft  8''  or  10"  in  diame- 
ter. But  if  the  Eye-Glafs  be  tinfted  faintly 
with  the  Smoak  of  a  Lamp  or  Torch,  to  ob- 
fcure  the  Light  of  the  Star,  the  fainter  Light 
in  the  Circumference  of  the  Star  ceafes  to  be 
vilib  .-,  and  the  Star  (if  the  Glafs  be  fufficiently 
foilta  witli  Smoak )  appears  fomething  more 
like  a  mathematical  Point.  And  for  the  fame 
Reafon,  the  enormous  Part  of  the  Light  in  the 
Circumference  of  every  lucid  Point  ought  to  be 
Icfs  difcernible  in  fhorter  Telefcopes  than  in  lon- 
ger, becaufe  the^fhorter  tranfmit  lefs  Light  to  the 
Eye. 

Now,  that  the  fix'd  Stars,  by  reafon  of  their 
immenfe  Diliance,  appear  like  Points,  unlefs  fo 
far  as  tl^eir  Light  is  dilated  by  Refra6lion,  may 
appear  from  hence  j  that  when  the  Moon  pafTes 
over  them  and  eclipfes  them,  their  Light  vanifhes, 
not  gradually  like  that  of  the  Planets,  but  all  at 
once  J  and  in  the  end  of  the  Eclipfe  it  returns 
into  Sight  all  at  once,  or  certainly  in  lefs  time 
than  the  fecond  of  a  Minute  ;  the  Refradion  of 
the  Moon's  Atmofphere  a  little  protrading  th^ 
time  in  which  the  Light  of  the  Star  firfl  vaniilies, 
^nd  afterwards  returns  into  Sight. 

NoWj  if  we  fuppofe  the  fenfible  Image  of  a  lu- 
cid Point,  to  be  even  250  times  narrower  than 
the  Aperture  of  the  Glafs  5  yet  this  Image  would 
be  fciil  much  greater  than  if  it  were  only  from 
th^  fpherical  Figure  of  the' Glafs.  For  were 
i^  not   for   the  different  Refrangibility    of  the 

Raysj 


B  O  O  K     I.  8p 

Rays,  its  breadth   in   an    loo   Foot   Tclefcope 

whofe  aperture  is  4  Inches,  would  be  but  ^-^^^^— 

parts  of  an  Inch,  as  is  manifeil  by  the  foregoing 
Computation.  And  therefore  in  this  cafe  the 
greateft  Errors  arifing  from  the  fpherical  Figure 
of  the  Glafs,  would  be  to  the  greateft  fenfible 
Errors  arihng  from  the  different  Refrangibihty 

of  the  Rays  as  ^^^^  to  ^  at  moft,  that  is  on- 
ly as  I  to  1200.  And  this  fufficiently  (hews  that 
it  is  not  the  fpherical  Figures  of  Glalfes,  but  the 
different  Refrangibihty  of  the  Rays  which  hin- 
ders the  perfeftion  of  Telefcopes. 

There  is  another  Argument  by  w4iich  it  may 
appear  that  the  different  Refrangibihty  of  Rays, 
is  the  true  caufe  of  the  imperfed:ion  of  Tele- 
fcopes. For  the  Errors  of  the  Rays  arifmg  from 
the  fpherical  Figures  of  Obje6t-glaffes,  -Are  as  the 
Cubes  of  the  Apertures  of  the  Objed:  Glaffes ; 
and  thence  to  make  Telefcopes  of  various 
Lengths  magnify  with  equal  diftindlnefs ,  the 
Apertures  of  the  Objeft-glaffes,  and  the  Charges 
or  magnifying  Powers  ought  to  be  as  the 
Cubes  of  the  fquare  Roots  of  their  lengths; 
which  doth  not  anfwer  to  Experience.  But 
the  Errors  of  the  Rays  arifing  from  the  different 
Refrangibihty,  are  as  the  Apertures  of  the  Ob- 
jedt-glaffes ;  and  thence  to  make  Telefcopes  of 
various  lengths,  magnify  with  equal  dillin6tnefs, 
their  Apertures  and  Charges  ought  to  be  as  the 
fquare  Roots  of  their  lengths ;  and  this  anfwers 
to  Experience,  as  is  v/ell  know^n.  For  Inffance, 
^  Tclefcope  of  64  Feet  in  length,  with  an  Aper- 

2  turQ 


90  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ture  of  2 1  Inches,  magnifies  about  120  times, 
with  as  much  diftinftnefs  as  one  of  a  Foot  in 
length,  with  ^  of  an  Inch  aperture,  magnifies  i^ 
times. 

Now  were  it  not  for  this  different  Refrangi- 
bility  of  Rays,  Telefcopes  might  be  brought  to 
a  greater  perfeftion  than  we  have  yet  defcrib'd, 
by  compofmg  the  Objedi-glafs  of  two  Glaffes 
with  Water  between  them.  Let  A  D F C  [in  Fig, 
28.]  reprefent  the  Objed:-glafs  compofed  of  two 
Glaffes  ABED  and  BEFC,  alike  convex  on  th® 
outfides  AGD  and  CHF,  and  alike  concave 
on  the  infides  BME,  BNE,  with  Water  in 
the  concavity  BMEN.  Let  the  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence out  of  Glafs  into  Air  be  as  I  to  R,  and 
out  of  Water  into  Air,  as  K  to  R,  and  by  con- 
fequence  out  of  Glafs  into  Water,  as  I  to  K: 
and  let  the  Diameter  of  the  Sphere  to  which  the 
convex  fides  AGD  and  CHF  are  ground  be 
D,  and  the  Diameter  of  the  Sphere  to  which 
the  concave  fides  BME  and  BNE,  are  ground 
be  to  D,  as  the  Cube  Root  of  KK — KI  to  the 
Cube  Root  of  R  K-— R I :  and  the  Refractions 
on  the  concave  fides  of  the  Glaffes,  will  very 
much  corred  the  Errors  of  the  Refradions  on 
the  convex  fides,  fo  far  as  they  arife  from  the 
fphericalnefs  of  the  Figure.  And  by  this  means 
might  Telefcopes  be  brought  to  fufiicient  per- 
fection, were  it  hot  for  the  different  Refrangi- 
bility  of  feveral  forts  of  Rays.  But  by  reafon 
of  this  different  Refrangibility,  I  do  not  yet  fee 
any  other  means  of  improving  Telefcopes  by 
Refractions  alone,  than  that  of  increafing  their 
lengths,  for  which  end  the  late  Contrivance  of 

Hugenhis 


B  O  O  K     I.  pi 

Jlugenius  feems  well  accommodated.  For  very 
long  Tubes  are  cumberfome,  and  fcarce  to  be 
readily  managed,  and  by  reafon  of  their  length 
are  very  apt  to  bend,  and  fhake  by  bending,  fo 
as  to  cauie  a  continual  trembling  in  the  Objects, 
whereby  it  becomes  difficult  to  fee  them  difl;in(fl- 
ly:  whereas  by  his  Contrivance  the  Glaffes  are 
readily  manageable,  and  the  Objed-glafs  being 
fix'd  upon  a  flrong  upright  Pole  becomes  more 
fteady. 

Seeing  therefore  the  Improvement  of  Tele- 
fcopes  of  given  lengths  by  Refradions  is  defpe- 
ratej  I  contrived  heretofore  a  Perfpedive  by- 
Reflexion  ,  ufmg  inftead  of  an  Objed-glafs  a 
concave  Metal.  The  diameter  of  the  Sphere 
to  which  the  Metal  was  ground  concave  was  a- 
bout  25  Englijh  Inches,  and  by  confequence 
the  length  of  the  Inftrument  about  fix  Inches 
and  a  quarter.  The  Eye-glafs  v/as  Plano-con- 
vex, and  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  to  which 
the  convex  iide  was  ground  was  about  t  of  an 
Inch,  or  a  little  lefs,  and  by  confequence  it 
niagniiied  between  30  and  40  times.  By  ano- 
ther way  of  meafuring  I  found  that  it  magnified 
about  35  times.  The  concave  Metal  bore  an 
Aperture  of  an  Inch  and  a  third  part;  but  the 
Aperture  was  limited  not  by  an  opake  Circle, 
covering  the  Limb  of  the  Metal  round  about, 
but  by  an  opake  Circle  placed  between  the  Eye- 
glafs  and  the  Eye,  and  perforated  in  the  mid- 
dle with  a  little  round  hole  for  the  Rays  to  pafs 
through  to  the  Eye.  For  this  Circle  by  being 
placed  here,  ftopp'd  much  of  the  errroneous 
Light,   which  otherwiie  would  have  difturbed 

the 


p2  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  Vifion.     By  comparing  it  with  a  pretty  good 
Perfped;ive  of  four  Feet  in  length,   made  with 
a  concave  Eye-glafs,   I  could  read  at  a  greater 
diftance  with  my  own  Inftrument  than  with  the 
Glafs.     Yet   Objedts  appeared  much  darker  in 
it  than  in  the  Glafs,   and  that  partly  becaufe 
more  Light  was  loft  by  Reflexion  in  the  Metal, 
than  by  Refraction  in  the  Glafs,  and  partly  be- 
caufe my  Inftrument  was  overcharged.     Had  it. 
magnified  but  30  or  25  times,    it  would  have 
made  the  Obje(5t  appear  more  brisk  and  pleafant, 
Tv/o  of  thefe  I  made  about  16  Years  ago,   and 
have  one  of  them  flill  by  me,   by  which  I  can 
prove  the  truth  of  v/hat  I  write.     Yet  it  is  not 
fo  2:ood  as  at  the  firft.     For  the  concave  has  been 
divers  times  tarnifhed  and  cleared  again,  by  rub- 
bing it  with  very  foft  Leather.     When  I  made 
thefe  an  Artifl  in  London  undertook  to  imitate  it; 
but  ufing  another  way  of  polifhing  them  than  I 
did,  he  fell  much  fhort  of  what  I  had  attained 
to,   as  I  afterwards  underftood  by  difcourfmg. 
the  Under- work  man  he  had  employed.      The 
Polifh    I    ufed   was    in    this    manner.     I    had 
two  round  Copper  Plates,   each  fix  Inches  in 
Diameter,    the  one  convex,  the  other  concave,' 
ground  very  true  to  one  another,     On  the  con- 
vex   I    ground    the    Objedt-Metal    or    Concave 
which  was  to  be  polifli'd,  'till  it  had  taken  the 
Figure    of   the  Convex   and  was   ready   for  a 
Poliih.     Then  I  pitched  over  the  convex  very' 
thinly,   by  dropping  melted  Pitch  upon  it,  and 
warming  it  to  keep   the  Pitch  foft,    whilft  I 
ground    it    with    the.  concave    Copper   wetted 
to  make  it  fpread  eavenly  all  over  the  convex. 
^  Thus 


BOOK     I.  95 

Thus  by  working  it  well  I  made  it  as  thin  as  a 
Groat,  and  after  the  convex  was  cold  I  ground 
it  again  to  give  it  as  true  a  Figure  as  1  could. 
Then  I  took  Putty  which  I  had  made  very  fine 
by  wafhing  it  from  all  its  groiler  Particles,  and 
laying  a  little  of  this  upon  tlie  Pitch,  I  ground 
it  upon  the  Pitch  with  the  concave  Copper,  till 
it  had  done  making  a  Noife ;  and  then  upon  the 
Pitch  I  ground  the  Objed:-Metal  with  a  brisk 
motion,  for  about  two  or  three  Minutes  of 
time,  leaning  hard  upon  it.  Then  I  put  frefh. 
Putty  upon  the  Pitch,  and  ground  it  again  till  it 
had  done  making  a  noife,  and  afterwards  ground 
the  Objed:-Metal  upon  it  as  before.  And  this 
Work  I  repeated  till  the  Metal  was  poliflied, 
grinding  it  the  laft  time  with  all  my  llrength 
for  a  good  while  together ,  and  frequently 
breathing  upon  the  Pitch,  to  keep  it  moift  with- 
out laying  on  any  more  frefli  Putty.  The  Ob- 
jedl-Metal  was  two  Inches  broad,  and  about  one 
third  part  of  an  Inch  thick,  to  keep  it  from 
bending.  I  had  two  of  thefe  Metals,  and  when 
I  had  poliflied  them  both,  I  tried  which  was 
beft,  and  ground  the  other  again,  to  fee  if  I  could 
make  it  better  than  that  which  I  kept.  And 
thus  by  many  Trials  I  learn'd  the  way  of  po- 
lifhing,  till  I  made  thofe  two  reflecting  Perfpe- 
dlives  I  fpake  of  above.  For  this  Art  of  po- 
lilhing  will  be  better  learn'd  by  repeated  Pra- 
ctice than  by  my  Defcription.  Before  I  ground 
the  Objedt-Metal  on  the  Pitch,  I  always  ground  ' 
the  Putty  on  it  v/ith  the  concave  Copper,  till  it 
had  done  making  a  noife,  becaufe  if  the  Parti- 
cles of  the  Putty  were  not  by  this  means  made 

to 


^4  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

to  flick  faft  in  the  Pitch,  they  would  by  rolling 
up  and  down  grate  and  fret  the  Objed-Metal  and 
fill  it  full  of  little  holes. 

But  becaufc  Metal  is  more  difficult  to  polifll 
than  Glafs,    and  is  afterwards  very  apt  to  be 
fpoiled  by  tarnifhing,  and  reflects  not  fo  much 
Light  as  Glafs  quick-filver'd  over  does :  I  would 
propound  to  ufe  inflead  of  the  Metal,  a  Glafs 
ground  concave  on  the  forefide,  and  as  much 
convex  on  the  back-fide,  and  quick-filver'd  o- 
ver  on  the  convex  fide.     The  Glafs  mufl  be  e- 
very  where  of  the  fame  thicknefs  exactly.     O- 
therwife  it  will  make  Objedls  look  colour'd  and 
indiftind:.     By  fuch  a  Glafs  I  tried  about  five  or 
fix  Years  ago  to  make  a  reflecfling  Telefcope  of 
four  Feet  in  length  to  magnify  about  150  times, 
and  I  fatislied  my  felf  that  there  wants  nothing 
but  a  good  Artift  to  bring  the  Delign  to  perfe-- 
ftion.     For  the  Glafs  being  wrought  by  one  of 
our  London  Artifls  after  fuch  a  manner  as  they 
grind  GlalTes  for  Telefcopes,  though  it  feemed  as 
well  wrought  as  the  Objed:-glaires  ufe  to  be,  yet 
when  it  was  quick-filver'd,    the  Reflexion  dif- 
covered  innumerable  Inequalities   all    over    the 
Glafs.     And  by  reafon  of  thefe  Inequalities,  Ob- 
jedls appeared  indiftindl  in  this  Inflrument.     For 
the  Errors  of  refledled  Rays  caufed  by  any  Ine- 
quality of  the  Glafs,  are  about  fix  times  greater 
than    the   Errors  of   refradled  Rays   caufed  by 
the  like  Inequalities.     Yet  by  this  Experiment 
I  fatisfied  my  felf  that    the   Reflexion   on   the 
concave  fide  of  the  Glafs,  which  I  feared  would 
diflurb  the  Vifion,  did  no  fenfible  prejudice  to 
it,  and  by  confequence  that  nothing  is  wanting 

to 


B  O  O  K    I.  p5 

to  perfed  thefe  Telefcopes,  but  good  Workmen 
who  can  grind  and  polifh  GlaiTes  truly  fpherical. 
An  Objedt-glafs  of  a  fourteen  Foot  Telefcope, 
made  by  an  Artificer  at  Lo?ido)i,  I  once  mended 
confiderably,  by  grinding  it  on  Pitch  with  Put- 
ty, and  leaning  very  eafily  on  it  in  the  grinding, 
left  the  Putty  {hould  fcratch  it.  Whether  this 
way  may  not  do  well  enough  for  polifhing  thefe 
reflecting  Glaffes,  I  have  not  yet  tried.  But  he 
that  Ihall  try  either  this  or  any  other  way  of  po- 
liftiing  which  he  may  think  better,  may  do  well 
to  make  his  GlafTes  ready  for  poliihing,  by  grind- 
ing them  without  that  Violence,  wherewith  our 
Londofi  Workmen  prefs  their  Glafles  in  grinding. 
For  by  fuch  violent  preiTure,  Glafles  are  apt  to 
bend  a  little  in  the  grinding,  and  fuch  bendino^ 
will  certainly  fpoil  their  Figure.  To  recom- 
mend therefore  the  confideration  of  thefe  refled- 
ing  GlaiTes  to  fuch  Artifts  as  are  curious  in  fi- 
guring GlafTes,  I  fliall  defcribe  this  optical  Inftru- 
ment  in  the  following  Propofition. 


PROP.  VIII.  Prob.  II. 
To  pjorten  Telefcopes. 

LET  ABDC  [mFig.2g.]  reprefent  a  Glafs 
fpherically  concave  on  the  forefide  AB,  and 
as  much  convex  on  the  backfide  CD,  fo  that 
it  be  every  where  of  an  equal  thicknefs.  Let  it 
not  be  thicker  on  one  fide  than  on  the  other, 
left  it  make  Objects  appear  colour'd  and  indi- 

ftina, 


^6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

flindl ,  and  let  it  be  very  truly  wrought  and 
quick-filver'd  over  on  the  backfide;  and  fet  in 
the  Tube  VXYZ  which  muft  be  very  black 
within.  Let  EFG  reprefent  a  Prifm  of  Glafs 
or  Cryftal  placed  near  the  other  end  of  the 
Tube,  in  the  middle  of  it,  by  means  of  a  han- 
dle of  Brafs  or  Iron  FGK,  to  the  end  of  which 
made  flat  it  is  cemented.  Let  this  Prifm  be 
redangular  at  E,  and  let  the  other  two  Angles 
at  F  and  G  be  accurately  equal  to  each  other, 
and  by  confequence  equal  to  half  right  ones, 
and  let  the  plane  fides  FE  and  GE  be  fquare, 
and  by  confequence  the  third  fide  F  G  a  redlan- 
gular  Parallelogram  ,  whofe  length  is  to  its 
breadth  in  a  fubduplicate  proportion  of  two  to 
one.  Let  it  be  fo  placea  in  the  Tube ,  that 
the  Axis  of  the  Speculum  may  pafs  through  the 
middle  of  the  fquare  fide  EF  perpendicularly 
and  by  confequence  through  the  middle  of  the 
fide  FG  at  an  Angle  of  45  Degrees,  and  let  the 
fide  E  F  be  turned  towards  the  Speculum,  and 
the  diftance  of  this  Prifm  from  the  Speculum 
be  fuch  that  the  Rays  of  the  Light  PQ,  RS,  ^c, 
which  are  incident  upon  the  Speculum  in  Lines 
parallel  to  the  Axis  thereof,  may  enter  the  Prifm 
at  the  fide  EF,  and  be  reflected  by  the  fide 
FG,  and  thence  go  out  of  it  through  the  fide 
GE,  to  the  point  T,  which  muft  be  the  com- 
mon Focus  of  the  Speculum  ABDC,  and  of  a 
Plano-convex  Eye-glafs  H,  through  which  thofe 
Rays  muft  pafs  to  the  Eye.  And  let  \  -  Rays  at 
their  coming  out  of  the.  Glafs  pafs  .  irough 
a  fmall  round  hole,  or  aperture  made  in  a  lit* 
tie  plate  of  Lead,  Brafs,  or  Silver,  wherewith 

the 


B  O  O  K     I.  97 

the  Glafs  is  to  be  covered,  which  hole  mufl  be 
no  bigger  than  is  neceflary  for  Light  enovigh  to 
pafs  through.  For  fo  it  will  render  the  Objedt 
diftindt,  the  Plate  in  which  'tis  made  intercept- 
ing all  the  erroneous  part  of  the  Light  which 
comes  from  the  verges  of  the  Speculum  AB. 
Such  an  Inftrument  well  made,  if  it  be  fix  Foot 
long,  (reckoning  the  length  from  the  Speculum 
to  the  Prifm,  and  thence  to  the  Focus  T )  will 
bear  an  aperture  of  fix  Inches  at  the  Speculum, 
and  magnify  between  two  and  three  hundred 
times.  But  the  hole  H  here  limits  the  aperture 
with  more  advantage,  than  if  the  aperture  was 
placed  at  the  Speculum.  If  the  Inftrument  be 
made  longer  or  fhorter,  the  aperture  muft  be  in 
proportion  as  the  Cube  of  the  fquare-fquare  Root 
of  the  length,  and  the  magnifying  as  the  aper- 
ture. But  it's  convenient  that  the  Speculum  be 
an  Inch  or  two  broader  than  the  aperture  at  the 
leaft,  and  that  the  Glafs  of  the  Speculum  be 
thick,  that  it  bend  not  in  the  working.  The 
Prifm  EFG  muft  be  no  bigger  than  is  necelTary, 
and  its  back  lide  FG  muft  not  be  quick-lilver'd 
over.  For  without  quickfilver  it  will  refledl  all 
the  Light  incident  on  it  from  the  Speculum. 

In  this  Inftrument  the  Objedl  will  be  invertc^, 
but  may  be  erected  by  making  the  fquare  fides 
FF  and  EG  of  the  Prifm  EFG  not  plane  but 
fpherically  convex,  that  the  Rays  may  crofs  as 
well  before  they  come  at  it  as  afterwards  between 
it  andj.rj-e  Eye-glafs.  If  it  be  defired  that  the 
Inft^^  iie.it  bear  a  larger  aperture,  that  may  be 
alfo  Qone  by  compofmg  the  Speculum  of  two 
GlalTes  with  Water  between  them. 

H  If 


pg  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

If  the  Theory  of  making  Telefcopes  could  at 
length  be  fully  brought  into  Pradtice, ,  yet  there 
would '  be  certain  Bounds  beyond  which  Tele- 
fcopes could  not  perform.     For  the  Air  through 
which  we  look  upon  the  Stars,  is  in  a  perpetual 
Tremor  J  as  may  be  ften  by  the  tremulous  Moti- 
on of  Shadows  call:  from  high  Towers,-  and  by- 
the  twinkling  of  the  fix'd  Stars.     But  thefe  Stars 
do  not  twinkle  when  viewed  through  Telefcopes 
which  have  large  apertures.     For  the  Rays  of 
Light  which  pafs  through  divers  parts  of  the 
aperture,  tremble  each  of  them  apart,  and  by 
means  of  their  various  and  fometimes  contrary 
Tremors,  fall  at  one  and  the  fame  time  upon  dif- 
ferent points  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye,  and  their 
trembling  Motions  are  too  quick  and  confufed  to 
be  perceived  feverally.     And  all  thefe  illuminated 
Points  conftitute  one  broad  lucid  Point,    com- 
pofed  of  thofe  many  trembling  Points  confufed- 
ly  and  infenlibly  mixed  with  one  another  by  very 
ihort  and  fwift  Tremors,  and  thereby  caufe  the 
Star  to  appear  broader  than  it  is,  and  without 
any  trembling  of  the  whole.     Long  Telefcopes 
may  caufe  Objeds  to  appear  brighter  and  larger 
than  fliort  ones  can  do,  but  they  cannot  be  fo 
formed  as  to  take  away  that  confuiion  of  the 
Rays  which  arifes  from  the  Tremors  of  the  At- 
mofphere.     The  only  Remedy  is  a  moft  ferene 
and  quiet  Air,  fuch  as  may  perhaps  be  found  on 
the  tops  of  the  higheft  Mountains  above  the  grof-  . 
ier  Clouds. 


THE 


THE 

FIRST  BOOK 


O  F 


OPTICKS. 


PART     II. 


PROP,   I.     Theor.    I. 

T%e  Phczno7nena  of  Colours  hi  refraEled  or 
refie&ed  Light  are  not  caufed  by  new 
Modifications  of  the  Light  varioufly  im- 
frefsd^  according  to  the  various  Termi- 
nations of  the  Light  and  Shadow. 


Exper.  I. 


The  Proof  by  Experiments. 


O  R  if  the  Sun  fhine  into  a 
I  very  dark  Chamber  through 
an  obiong  hole  F,  [in  Fig.  i.] 
whofe  breadth  is  tlie  fixth  or 
eighth  part  of  an  Inch,  or  fomething  lefs  j  and 
his  beam  F  H  do  afterwards  pafs  firft  through  a 

H  2  very 


i6o  O  P  T  i  C  K  S. 

very  large  Prifm  ABC,  diftant  about  20  Feet 
from  the  hole,  and  parallel  to  it,  and  then  ( with 
it3  white  part)  through  an  oblong  hole  H,  whofe 
breadth  is  about  the  fortieth  or  lixtieth  part  of 
an  Inch,  and  which  is  made  in  a  black  opake 
Body  GI,  and  placed  at  thediftanceof  two  or 
three  Feet  from  the  Prifm, 'in  a  parallel  Situa- 
tion both  to  the  Prifm  and  to  the  former  hole, 
and  if  this  white  Light  thus  tranfmitted  through 
the  hole  H,  fall  afterwards  upon  a  white  Paper 
//,  placed  after  that  hole  H,  at  thediftanceof 
three  or  four  Feet  from  it,  and  there  paint  thC; 
ufual '  Colours  of  the  Prifm,    fuppofe  red  at  /, 
yellow  at  s,  green  at  r,  blue  at  ^,    and  violet 
at  p  ',  you  may  with  an  Iron  Wire,  or  any  fuch 
like  (lender  opake  Body,   whofe  breadth  is  a- 
bout  the  tenth  part  of  an  Inch,  by  intercepting 
the  Rays  at  k,  /,  w,  ;z  or  0,  take  away  any  one 
of  the  Colours  at  t,  s,  r,  q  or  />,  whilft  the  other 
Colours  remain  upon  the  Paper  as  before  j  or 
with   an   Obftacle   fomething  bigger  you  may 
tak  away  any  two,   or  three,  or  four  Colours 
together,  the  reft  remaining:    So  that  any  one 
of   the  Colours  as  well  as  violet  may  become 
outmoft  in  the  Confine  of  the  Shadow  towards 
^,  and  any  one  of  them  as  well  as  red  may  be- 
come outmoft  in  the  Confine  of  the  Shadow  to- 
wards /,  and  any"  one  of  them  may  alfo  bor- 
der upon  the  Shadow  made  within  the  Colours 
by  the  Obftacle  R  intercepting  fome   interme- 
diate part  of  the  Light;  and,  laftly,  any  one  of 
them  by  being  left  alone,  may  border  upon  the 
Shadow  on  either  hand.     All  the  Colours  have 
themfelves  indifferently  to  any  Confines  of  Sha- 

I  dow. 


BOOK    I.  lor 

dow,  and  therefore  the  differences,  of  thefe  Co- 
lours from  one  another,  do  not  arife  from  the 
different  Confines  of  Shadow,  whereby  Light 
is  varioufly  modified,  as  has  hitherto  been  the 
Opinion  of  Philofophcrs.  In  trying  thefe  things 
*tis  to  be  obferved,  that  by  how  much  the  holes 
F  and  H  are  narrower,  and  the  Intervals  be- 
tween them  and  the  Prifm  greater,  and  the 
Chamber  darker,  by  fo  much  the  better  doth  the 
Experiment  fucceed ;  provided  the  Light  be 
not  fo  far  diminifhed,  but  that  the  Colours  at 
pt  he  fufficiently  vifible.  To  procure  a  Prifm 
of  folid  Glafs  large  enough  for  this  Experiment 
will  be  difficult,  and  therefore  a  prifmatick  Vef- 
fel  muft  be  made  of  poliili'd  Glafs  Plates  ce- 
mented together,  and  filled  with  fait  Water  or 
clear  Oil. 

Exper.  2.  The  Sun's  Light  let  into  a  dark 
Chamber  through  the  round  hole  F,  [in  Fig.  2.] 
half  an  Inch  wide,  paffed  firft  through  the  Prifm 
ABC  placed  at  the  hole,  and  then  through  a 
Lens  PT  fomething  more  than  four  Inches 
broad^  and  about  eight  Feet  diflant  from  the 
Prifm,  and  thence  converged  to  O  the  Focus 
of  the  Lens  diftant  from  it  about  three  Feet, 
and  there  fell  upon  a  white  Paper  D  E.  If  that 
Paper  was  perpendicular  to  that  Light  incident 
upon  it,  as  'tis  reprefented  in  the  pollure  DE, 
all  the  Colours  upon  it  at  O  appeared  white. 
But  if  the  Paper  being  turned  about  an  Axis 
parallel  to  the  Prifm,  became  very  much  incli- 
ned to  the  Light,  as  'tis  reprefented  in  the  Po- 
fitions  de-Andi  ^i-,  the  fame  Light  in  the  one 
cafe  appeared  yellow  and  red,  in  the  other  blue. 

H  3  Here 


102  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Here  one  and  the  fame  part  of  the  Light  in  one 
and  the  fame  place,  according  to  the  various  In- 
clinations of  the  Paper,  appeared  in  one  cafe 
white,  in  another  yellow  or  red,  in  a  third  blue, 
whilft  the  Confine  of  Light  and  Shadow,  and 
the  Refradions  of  the  Prifm  in  all  thefe  cafes 
remained  the  fame. 

Expcr.  3.  Such  another  Experiment  may  be 
more  eaiily  tried  as  follows.  Let  a  broad  beam 
of  the  Sun's  Light  coming  into  a  dark  Cham- 
ber through  a  hole  in  the  Window-fhut  be  re- 
fracted by  a  large  Prifm  ABC,  [in  Fig.  3.] 
whofe  refradting  Angle  C  is  more  than  60  De- 
grees, and  fo  foon  as  it  comes  out  of  the  Prifm, 
let  it  fall  upon  the  white  Paper  DE  glewed  up- 
on a  ilifF  Plane;  and  this  Light,  when  the  Pa- 
per is  perpendicular  to  it,  as  'tis  reprefented  in 
DE,  will  appear  perfed:ly  white  upon  the  Pa- 
per; but  when  the  Paper  is  very  much  inclin'd 
to  it  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  keep  always  paral- 
lel to  the  Axis  of  the  Prifm,  the  whitenefs  of 
the  whole  Light  upon  the  Paper  will  according 
to  the  inclination  of  the  Paper  this  way  or  that 
way,  change  either  into  yellow  and  red,  as  in 
the  pofture  J^,  or  into  blue  and  violet,  as  in 
the  pofture  ^  e.  And  if  the  Light  before  it  fall 
upon  the  Paper  be  twice  refracted  the  fame 
way  by  two  parallel  Prifms,  thefe  Colours  will 
become  the  more  confpicuous.  Here  all  the 
middle  parts  of  the  broad  beam  of  white  Light 
which  fell  upon  the  Paper,  did  without  any 
Confine  of  Shadow  to  modify  it,  become  co- 
lour'd  all  over  with  one  uniform  Colour,  the 
Colour  being  always  the  fame  in  the  middle  of 

the 


B  O  O  K     I.  103 

the  Paper  as  at  the  edges,  and  this  Colour  chan- 
ged according  to  the  various  Obliquity  of  the 
reflefting  Paper,  without  any  change  in  the  Re- 
fradlions  or  Shadow,  or  in  the  Light  which  fell 
upon  the  Paper.  And  therefore  thefe  Colours 
are  to  be  derived  from  fome  other  Caufe  than  the 
new  Modifications  of  Light  by  Refradions  and 
Shadows. 

If  it  be  aiked,  what  then  is  their  Caufe  ?   I 
anfwer,  That  the  Paper  in  the  poilure  Jt',  being 
more  oblique  to  the  more  refrangible  Rays  than 
to  the  lefs  refrangible  ones,  is  more  ilrongly  illu- 
minated by  the  latter  than  by  the  former,   and 
therefore  the  lefs  refrangible  Rays  are  predomi- 
nant in  the  refledted  Light.      And  where-ever 
they  are  predominant  in  any  Light,  they  tinge  it 
with  red  or  yellow,  as  may  in  fome  meafure  ap- 
pear by  the  firft  Propofition  of  the  firfl  Part  of 
this  Book,  and  will  more  fully  appear  hereafter. 
And  the  contrary  happens  in  the  poflure  cf  the 
Paper  ^e,  the  more  refrangible  Rays  being  then 
predominant  which  always    tinge    Light  with 
blues  and  violets. 

Exper  4.  The  Colours  of  Bubbles  with  which 
Children  play  are  various,  and  change  their  Si- 
tuation varioufly  ,  without  any  refped  to  any 
Confine  or  Shadow.  If  fuch  a  Bubble  be  co- 
ver'd  with  a  concave  Glafs,  to  keep  it  from  be- 
ing agitated  by  any  Wind  or  Motion  of  the  Air, 
the  Colours  will  flowly  and  regularly  change 
their  Situation ,  even  whilll  the  Eye  and  the 
Bubble,  and  all  Bodies  which  emit  any  Light, 
or  caft  any  Shadow ,  remain  unmoved.  And 
therefore  their  Colours  arife  from  fome  regular 

H  4  Caufe 


104  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Caufe  which  depends  not  on  any  Confine  of  Sha- 
dow. What  this  Caufe  is  will  be  fliewed  in  the 
next  Book. 

To    thefe    Experiments   may  be   added   the 
tenth  Experiment  of  the  firft  Part  of  this  firft 
Book,  where  the  Sun's  Light  in  a  dark  Room  be- 
ing trajeded  through  the  parallel  Superficies  of 
two  Prifms  tied  together  in  the  form  of  a  Paralle- 
lopipede,  became  totally  of  one  uniform  yellow 
or  red  Colour,  at  its  emerging  out  of  the  Prifms. 
Here,  in  the  production  of  thefe  Colours,  the 
Confine  of   Shadow   can    have    nothing  to  do. 
For  the  Light  changes  from  white  to  yellow, 
orange  and  red  fuccefiively,  without  any  alte- 
ration of  the  Confine  of  Shadow :  And  at  both 
edges  of  the  emerging  Light  where   the  con- 
trary Confines    of  Shadow  ought  to    produce 
different  Effeds ,    the  Colour    is   one  and  the 
fame,   whether  it  be  white,  yellow,  orange  or 
red :  And  in  the  middle  of  the  emerging  Light, 
where  there  is  no  Confine  of  Shadow  at  all,  the 
Colour  is  the  very  fame  as  at  the  edges,    the 
whole  Light  at  its  very  firft  Emergence  being  of 
one  uniform  Colour,    whether  white,    yellow, 
orange  or  red,  and  going  on  thence  perpetual- 
ly without  any  change  of  Colour,  fuch  as  the 
Confine  of  Shadow  is  vulgarly  fuppofed  to  wotk 
in  refradted  Light  after  its  Emergence.     Nei- 
ther can  thefe  Colours  arife  from  any  new  Mo- 
difications of  the  Light  by  Refradions,  becaufe 
they  change  fuecefiively  frorri  white  to  yellow, 
orange  and  red,  v^hile  the  Refradtions  remain 
the  fame,   and  alfo  becaufe  the  Refradions  are 
made  contrary  ways  by  parallel  Superficies  which 

deftro'y 


B  O  O  K     I.  105 

deftroy  one  another's  Effeds.  They  arife  not 
therefore  from  any  Modifications  of  Light  made 
byRefradions  and  Shadows,  but  have  foire  or  her 
Caufe.  What  that  Caufe  is  we  (hewed  abov-e  in 
this  tenth  Experiment,  and  need  not  here  re- 
peat it. 

There  is  yet  another  material  Circumftance  of 
this  Experiment.  For  this  emerging  Light  being 
by  a  third  Prifm  HIK"  [in  Fig.  22.  Part  L]  re- 
fradled  towards  the  Paper  FT,  and  there  painting 
theufual  Colours  of  the  Frifm,  red,  yellow,  green, 
blue,  violet :  If  thefe  Colours  arole  from  the  Re- 
fradions  of  that  Frifm  modifying  the  Light,  they 
would  not  be  in  the  Light  before  its  Incidence  on 
that  Frifm.  And  yet  in  that  Experiment  we 
found,  that  when  by  turning  the  two  firft  Prifms 
about  their  common  Axis  all  the  Colours  were 
made  to  vanifh  but  the  red;  the  Light  which 
makes  that  red  being  left  alone,  appeared  of 
the  very  fame  red  Colour  before  its  Incidence 
on  the  third  Frifm.  And  in  general  we  find 
by  other  Experiments,  that  when  the  Rays 
which  differ  in  Refrangibility  are  feparated  from 
one  another,  and  any  one  Sort  of  them  is  con- 
fidered  apart,  the  Colour  of  the  Light  which 
they  compofe  cannot  be  changed  by  any  Re- 
fraction or  Reflexion  whatever,  as  it  ought  to 
be  were  Colours  nothing  elfe  than  Modifica- 
tions of  Light  caufed  by  Refractions,  and  Re- 
flexions, and  Shadows.  This  Unchangeablenefs 
of  Colour  I  am  now  to  defcribe  in  the  following 
Propofition. 

PROP, 


io6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

PROP.  IT.     Theor.  II. 

u47/  homogeneal  Light  has  its  proper  Colour 
anfweriftg  to  its  Degree  of  Refrangibi- 
lity^  and  that  Colour  cannot  be  changed 
by  Reflexions  and  RefraSiions, 

IN  the  Experiments  of  the  fourth  Propofition 
of  the  firfh  Part  of  this  firft  Book,  when  I  had 
leparated  the  heterogeneous  Rays  from  one  ano- 
ther, the  Spedrum  pt  formed  by  the  feparated 
Rays,  did  in  the  Progrefs  from  its  End^,  on  which 
the  moft  refrangible  Rays  fell,  unto  its  other 
End  /,  on  which  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  fell, 
appear  tinged  with  this  Series  of  Colours,  violet, 
indigo,  blue,  green,  yellow,  orange,  red,  together 
with  all  their  intermediate  Degrees  in  a  continual 
Succeffion  perpetually  varying.  So  that  there  ap- 
peared as  many  Degrees  oi  Colours,  as  there  were 
forts  of  Rays  differing  in  Refrangibility. 

Exper.^.  Now,  that  thefe  Colours  could  not  be 
changed  by  Refradtion,  I  knew  by  refradiing  with 
aPrifm  fometimes  one  very  little  Part  of  tbisLight, 
fometimes  another  very  little  Part,  as  is  defcribed 
in  the  twelfth  Experiment  of  the  firft  Part  of  this 
Book.  For  by  this  Refradtion  the  Colour  of  the 
Light  was  never  changed  in  the  leaft.  If  any 
Part  of  the  red  Light  was  refracted,  it  remained 
totally  of  the  fame  red  Colour  as  before.  No 
orange,  no  yellow,  no  green  or  blue,  no  other 
new  Colour  was  produced  by  that  Refradtion. 
Neither  did  the  Colour  any  ways  change  by 
repeated  Refradtions,  but  continued  always  the 

fame 


B  O  O  K     I.  107 

fame  red  entirely  as  at  firft.  The  like  Con- 
ftancy  and  Immutability  I  found  alfo  in  the  blue, 
green,  and  other  Colours.  So  alfo,  if  I  looked 
through  a  Prifm  upon  any  Body  illuminated  with 
any  Part  of  this  homogeneal  Light,  as  in  the  four- 
teenth Experiment  of  the  firfl  Part  of  this  Book 
is  defcribed ;  I  could  not  perceive  any  new  Co- 
lour generated  this  way.  All  Bodies  illumina- 
ted with  compound  Light  appear  through  Prifms 
confufed,  (as  was  faid  above)  and  tinged  with 
various  new  Colours,  but  thofe  illuminated  with 
homogeneal  Light  appeared  through  Prifms 
neither  lefs  diflincfl,  nor  otherwife  colour'd, 
than  when  viewed  with  the  naked  Eyes.  Their 
Colours  were  not  in  the  leaft  changed  by  the 
Refrad:ion  of  the  interpofed  Prifm.  I  fpeak 
here  of  a  fenfible  Change  of  Colour  :  For  the 
Light  which  I  here  call  homogeneal,  being  not 
abfolutely  homogeneal,  there  ought  to  arife 
fome  little  Change  of  Colour  from  its  Hetero- 
geneity. But,  if  that  Heterogeneity  was  fo  lit- 
tle as  it  might  be  made  by  the  faid  Experiments 
of  the  fourth  Propofition,  that  Change  was  not 
fenfible,  and  therefore  in  Experiments,  where 
Senfe  is  Judge,  ought  to  be  accounted  none 
at  all. 

Exper.  6.  And  as  thefe  Colours  were  not 
changeable  by  Refradions,  fo  neither  were  they 
by  Reflexions.  For  all  white,  grey,  red,  yel- 
low, green,  blue,  violet  Bodies,  as  Paper,  Afhes, 
red  Lead,  Orpiment,  Lidico,  Bife,  Gold,  Sil- 
ver, Copper,  Grafs,  blue  Flowers,  Violets, 
Bubbles  of  Water  tinged  with  various  Colours, 
Peacock's  Feathers,    the  Tindure    of    Lignum 

NepbrU 


io8  G  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Nephriticiwi^  and  fuch-like,  in  red  homogeneal 
Light  appeared  totally  red,  in  blue  Light  totally 
blue,  in  green  Light  totally  green,  and  fo  of  other 
Colours.  In  the  homogeneal  Light  of  any  Cc- 
lour  they  all  appeared  totally  of  that  fame  Co- 
lour, with  this  only  Difference,  that  fome  of  them 
reflected  that  Light  more  ftrongly,  others  more 
faintly.  I  never  yet  found  any  Body,  which  by 
reflecting  homogeneal  Light  could  fenfibly  change 
its  Colour. 

From  all  which  it  is  manifeft,  that  if  the  Sun's 
Light  confifted  of  but  one  fort  of  Rays,  there 
wduld  be  but  one  Colour  in  the  whole  World, 
nor  would  it  be  poflible  to  produce  any  new  Co- 
lour by  Reflexions  and  Refradlions,  and  by  confe- 
quence  that  the  Variety  of  Colours  depends  upon 
the  Compofition  of  Light. 

DEFINITION. 

TH  E  homogeneal  Light  and  Rays  which 
appear  red,  or  rather  make  Obje<fls  apr 
pear  fo,  I  call  Rubrifick  or  Red-making ;  thofe 
which  make  Objects  appear  yellow,  green,  blue, 
and  violet,  I  call  Yellow-making,  Green-making, 
Blue-making,  Violet-making,  and  fo  of  the  reft. 
And  if  at  any  time  I  fpeak  of  Light  and  Rays 
as  coloured  or  endued  with  Colours,  I  would 
be  underftood  to  fpeak  not  philofophically  and 
properly,  but  grolly,  and  accordingly  to  fuch 
Conceptions  as  vulgar  People  in  feeing  all  thefe 
Experiments  would  be  apt  to  frame.  For  the 
Rays  to  fpeak  properly  are  not  coloured.  In 
them  there  is  nothing  elfe  than  a  certain  Power 

and 


B  O  O  K     I.  lop 

dndDifpofition  to  ftir  up  aSenfatlon  of  this  or  that 
Colour.  For  as  Sound  in  a  Bell  or  mufical  String, 
or  other  founding  Body,  is  nothing  but  a  trem- 
bling Motion,  and  in  the  Air  nothing  but  that 
Motion  propagated  from  the  Objed,  and  in  the 
Senforium  'tis  a  Senfe  of  that  Motion  under  the 
Form  of  Sound ;  fo  Colours  in  the  Objedt  are  no- 
thing but  a  Difpofition  to  refledl  this  or  that  fort 
of  Rays  more  copioufly  than  the  reftj  in  the 
Rays  they  are  nothing  but  their  Difpolitions  to 
propagate  this  or  that  Motion  into  the  Senforium, 
and  in  the  Senforium  they  are  Senfations  of  thofe 
Motions  under  the  Forms  of  Colours. 


PROP,  III.    Prob.  I. 

To  defifte  the  Refra77gibility  of  the  fever al 
forts  of  homogeneal  Light  anfwering  to 
the  feveral  Colours, 

FOR  determining  this  Problem  I  made  the 
following  Experiment.  * 
Exper,  7.  When  I  had  caufed  the  Redtilinear 
Sides  AF,  GM,  [in  /%4.]  of  the  Spedrum  of 
Colours  made  by  the  Prifm  to  be  dirtiniflly  de- 
fined,^ as  in  the  fifth  Experiment  of  the  firft  Part 
of  this  Book  is  defcribed,  rhere  were  found  in  it 
all  the  homogeneal  Colours  in  the  fame  Order 
and  Situation  one  among  another  as  in  the 
Spe^rum  of  fimple  Light,  defcribed  in  the 
fourth  Proportion  of  that  Part.  For  the  Cir- 
cles of  which  the  Spedrum  of  compound  Light 
*  5^^  «Ar  AuthorV  Lea.  Optic.  Partll.  Se^.U.  /.  239. 

PT 


jio  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

P  T  is  compofed,  and  which  in  the  middle  Parts 
of  the  Spectrum  interfere,  and  are  intermix'd  with 
one  another,  are  not  intermix'd  in  their  outmoft 
Parts  where  they  touch  thofe  Redilinear  Sides 
AF  and  GM.     And  therefore,   in  thofe  Redi- 
linear  Sides  when  diftindly  defined,   there  is  no 
n^w  Colour  generated  by  Refradlion.     I  obferved 
alfo,  that  if  any  where  between  the  two  outmoft 
Circles  TMF  and  PGA  a  Right  Line,  as  y^, 
w^as  crofs  to  the  Spectrum,  fo  as  both  Ends  to 
fall  perpendicularly  upon  its  Rectilinear  Sides, 
there  appeared  one  and  the  fame  Colour,  and  de- 
gree of  Colour  from  one  End  of  this  Line  to 
the  other.     I  delineated    therefore    in   a   Paper 
the  Perimeter   of  the   Speft'rum  FAP  GMT, 
and  in  trying  the  third  Experiment  of  the  firft 
Part  of  this  Book,    I  held  the  Paper  fo    that 
the  Spe([lrum  might  fall  upon  this    delineated 
Figure,    and  agree    with  it  exactly,    whilft  an 
Affiiiant,  whofe  Eyes  for  diftinguilhing  Colours 
were  more  critical   than  mine,    did    by  Right 
Lines  cc{Bj  ^^,  g^,  &c.  drawn   crofs   the   Spe- 
ctrum, note  the  Confines  of  the  Colours,  that 
is  of  the  red  M  a  /3  F,    of  the  orange  a  ^  ^  /3, 
of  the  yellow  ye^^,  of  the  green  g  ^9  ^,    of  the 
blue  »iix9,  of  the  indico  iXfjua,   and  of  the  vio- 
let AGA^.     And  this  Operation  being  divers 
times  repeated  both  in  the  fame,  and  in  feveral 
Papers,    I  found  that  the   Obfervations  agreed 
well  enough  with  one  another,    and  that    the 
Redilinear  Sides  MG  and  FA  were  by  the  faid 
crofs  Lines  divided  after  the  manner  of  a  Mufi- 
cal  Chord.     Let  GM  be  produced  to  X,    that 
MX    may    be   equal    to    GM,    and  conceive 
2  GX, 


BOOK     L  III 

GX,  aX,  iX,  «X,  gX,  yX,  aX,  MX,  to  be 

in  proportion  to  one  another,  as  the  Numbers, 
I,  I,  f,  1,  f,  f,  i'tt,  4,  and  fo  to  reprefent  the  Chords 
of  the  Key,  and  of  a  Tone,  a  third  Minor,  a 
fourth,  a  fifth,  a  fixth  Major,  a  feventh  and  an 
eighth  above  that  Key :  And  the  Intervals  M  a, 
ay,  ye,  in,  »',  'A,  and  aG,  will  be  tlie  Spaces 
which  the  feveral  Colours  (  red,  orange,  yel- 
low, green,  blue,  indigo,  violet )   take  up. 

.Now  thefe  Intervals  or  Spaces  fubtending  the 
Differences  of  the  Refradlions  of  the  Rays  go- 
ing to  the  Limits  of  thofe  Colours,  that  is,  to 
the  Points  M,  a,  y,  g,  y\,  j,  A,  G,  may  without 
any  fenfible  Error  be  accounted  proportional 
to  the  Difierences  of  the  Sines  of  Refradion  of 
thofe  Rays  having  one  common  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence, and  therefore  fince  the  common  Sine  of 
Incidence  of  the  mofl  and  leaft  refrangible  Rays 
out  of  Glafs  into  Air  was  ( by  a  Method  defcri- 
bed  above)  found  in  proportion  to  their  Sines 
of  Refraction,  as  50  to  yy  and  78,  divide  the 
Difference  between  the  Sines  of  Refradiion  77 
and  78,  as  the  Line  GM  is  divided  by  thofe 
Intervals,  and  you  will  have  77,  77?,  yy^,  77-f, 
77t>  77h  77iy  78,  the  Sines  of  Refradion  of  thofe 
Rays  out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  their  common  Sine 
of  Incidence  being  50.  So  then  the  Sines  of 
the  Incidences  of  all  the  red-making  Rays  out 
of  Glafs  into  Air,  were  to  the  Sines  of  their  Re- 
fradions,  not  greater  than  50  to  yy,  nor  lefs 
than  50  to  yyiy  but  they  varied  from  one  ano- 
ther according  to  all  intermediate  Proportions. 
And  the  Sines  of  the  Incidences  of  the  green- 
making 


Ill  O  P  T  t  C  K  S. 

making  Rays  were  to  the  Sines  of  their  Refradli-. 
ons  in  all  Proportions  from  that  of  50  to  'j'jl^ 
unto  that  of  50  to  'j'j^.  And  by  the  like  Limits 
above-mentioned  were  the  Refrddlions  of  the 
Rays  belonging  to  the  reft  of  the  Colours  .de- 
fined, the  Sines  of  the  red-making  Rays  extend- 
ing from  77  to  'j'j^^  thofe  of  the  orange-making 
from  771-  to.77-f,  thofe  of  the  yellow-making 
from  j'j}^  to  77 j,  thofe  of  the  green-making 
from  'j'jy^  to  "jji^^  thofe  of  the  blue-making  from 
77  i  to  'J'j^i  thofe  of  the  indigo-making  from 
'i']^  to  ji^L^  and  thofe  of  the  violet  from  77I  to 

Thefe  are  the  Laws  of  the  Refradlons  made 
out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  and  thence  by  the  third 
Axiom  of  the  iirfl  Part  of  this  Book,  the  Laws  of 
the  Refractions  made  out  of  Air  into  Glafs  are  ea- 
fily  derived. 

Exper.  8.  I  found  moreover,  that  when  Light 
goes  out  of  Air  through  feveral  contiguous  re- 
fracting Mediums  as  through  Water  and  Glafs, 
and  thence  goes  out  again  into  Air,  whether 
the  refracting  Superficies  be  parallel  or  inclin'd 
to  one  another,  that  Light  as  often  as  by  con- 
trary Refractions  'tis  fo  corrected,  that  it  emer- 
geth  in  Lines  parallel  to  thofe  in  which  it  was 
incident,  continues  ever  after  to  be  white.  But 
if  the  emergent  Rays  be  inclined  to  the  inci- 
dent, the  Wnitenefs  of  the  emerging  Light  will 
by  degrees  in  paffing  on  from  the  Place  of  Emer- 
gence, become  tinged  in  its  Edges  with  Co- 
lours. This  I  try'd  by  refraCting  Light  with 
Prifms  of  Glafs  placed  within  a  Prifmatick  Vef- 
iel  of  Water.  Now  thofe  Colours  argue  a  di- 
verging 


B  O  O  K     I.  113 

▼erging  and  feparation  of  the  heterogeneous  Rays 
from  one  another  by  means  of  their  unequal  Re- 
fractions, as  in  what  follows  will  more  fully  ap- 
pear. And,  on  the  contrary,  the  permanent 
whitenefs  argues,  that  in  like  Incidences  of  the 
Rays  there  is  no  fuch  feparation  of  the  emerging 
Rays,  and  by  confequence  no  inequality  of  their 
whole  Refrad:ions.  Whence  I  feem  to  gather 
the  two  following  Theorems. 

1.  The  Exceffes  of  t-he  Sines  of  Refracflion  of 
feveral  forts  of  Rays  above  their  common  SiAe  of 
Incidence  when  the  Refractions  are  made  out  of 
divers  denfer  Mediums  immediately  into  one  and 
the  fame  rarer  Medium,  fuppofe  of  Air,  are  to 
one  another  in  a  given  Proportion. 

2.  The  Proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Incidence 
to  the  Sine  of  Refradtion  of  one  and  the  fame 
fort  of  Rays  out  of  one  Medium  into  another, 
is  compofed  of  the  Proportion  of  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Refradtion  out  of  the 
firft  Medium  into  any  third  Medium,  and  of  the 
Proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the  Sine 
of  Refradtion  out  of  that  third  Medium  into  the 
fecond  Medium. 

By  the  firft  Theorem  the  Refradtlons  of  the 
Rays  of  every  fort  made  out  of  any  Medium  in- 
to Air  are  known  by  having  the  Refradtion  of 
the  Rays  of  any  one  fort.  As  for  inftance,  if 
the  Refradtions  of  the  Rays  of  every  fort  out 
of  Rain-water  into  Air  be  defired,  let  the  com- 
mon Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Glafs  into  Air  be 
fubdudted  from  the  Sines    of  Refradtion,    and 

I  the 


114  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  ExcelTes  will  be  27,  27^,  27 1,  27J,  ^jl, 
2j\,  275,  28.  Suppofe  now  that  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  of  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  be  to 
their  Sine  of  Refraction  out  of  Rain-water  into 
Air  as  3  to  4,  and  fay  as  i  the  difference  of  thofe 
Sines  is  to  3  the  Sine  of  Incidence,  fo  is  27  the 
leaft  of  the  ExcefTes  above-mentioned  to  a  fourth 
Number  8 1  j  and  8 1  will  be  the  common  Sine  of 
Incidence  out  of  Rain-water  into  Air,  to  which 
Sine  if  you  add  all  the  abovementioned  ExcefTes, 
you  will  have  the  defired  Sines  of  the  Refrad:ions 
108,  io8f,  108-I,  iq8',  108 ",  1085,  io8|, 
109. 

By  the  latter  Theorem  the  Refradlion  out  of 
one  Medium  into  another  is  gathered  as  often 
£s  you  have  the  Refractions  out  of  them  both  in- 
to any  third  Medium.  As  if  the  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence of  any  Ray  out  of  Glafs  into  Air  be  to  its 
Sine  of  Refradion,  as  20  to  3  i,  and  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  of  the  fame  Ray  out  of  Air  into  Wa- 
ter, be  to  its  Sine  of  Refraction  as  4  to  3;  the 
Sine  of  Incidence  of  that  Ray  out  of  Glafs  into 
Water  will  be  to  its  Sine  of  RefraCtion  as  20  to  3 1 
and  4  to  3  jointly,  that  is,  as  the  FaCtum  of '20 
and  4  to  the  FaCtum  of  3 1  and  3,  or  as  80  to  93. 

And  thefe  Theorems  being  admitted  into  Op- 
ticks,  there  would  be  fcope  enough  of  hand- 
ling that  Science  voluminoufly  after  a  new  man- 
ner *j  not  only  by  teaching  thofe  things  which 
tend  to  the  perfection  of  Vifion,  but  alfo-by 
determining  mathematically  all  kinds  of  Phae- 
nomena  of  Colours  which  could  be  produced 

*  Js  is  done  in  our  Author'i  Left.  Optic.  Part  I.  SeSl.  III.  and 
IV.  and  Par  til.  Se^.  II. 

by 


BOOK     I.  rx5* 

by  Refradlions.  For  to  do  this^  there  is  nothing 
elle  requifite  than  to  find  out  the  Separations  of 
heterogeneous  Rays,  and  their  various  Mixtures 
and  Proportions  in  every  Mixture.  By  this  way 
of  arguing  I  invented  almoft  all  the  Phsenomena 
defcribed  in  thefe  Books,  befide  fome  others  lefs 
neceffary  to  the  Argument;  and  by  the  fuccelles 
I  met  with  in  the  Trials,  I  dare  promife,  that  to 
him  who  fhall  argue  truly,  and  then  try  all  things 
with  good  'Glaffes  and  fufficient  Circumfpeclion, 
the  cxpeded  Event  will  not  be  wanting.  But  he 
is  firft  to  know  what  Colours  will  arife  from  any 
others  mix'd  in  any  affigned  Proportion. 

PROP.  IV.  Theor.  hi. 
Colours  may  be  produced  by  Compofttion 
ix^hich  Jljall  belike  to  the  Colours  of  homO" 
■  geneal  Light  as  to  the  Appear a7ice  of  Co- 
lour^ hut  not  as  to  the  hrmiut ability  of 
Colour  and  Co7iflitution  of  Light.  Aftd 
thofe  Colours  by  how  much  they  are  more 
co7npounded  by  fo  much  are  they  lefs  full 
and  inte?ife^  a?id  by  too  much  Compofition 
they  may  be  diluted  and  weflke?id  till  they 
ceafey  and  the  Mixture  beco77ies  white  or 
grey,  'There  may  be  alfo  Colours  produced 
by  Compoftio?tj  which  are  not  fully  like 
any  of  the  Colours  of  homoge?2eal  Light. 

FOR  a  Mixture  of  homogeneal  red  and  yel- 
low compounds  an  Orauge,  like  in  appea- 
I  2  ranee 


ii6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ranee  of  Colour  to  that  orange  which  in  the 
feries  of  unmixed  prifmatick  Colours  lies  between 
them;  but  the  Light  of  one  orange  is  homogeneal 
as  to  Refrangibility,  and  that  of  the  other  is  he- 
terogeneal,  and  the  Colour  of  the  one,  if  viewed 
through  a  Prifm,   remains  unchanged,    that  of 
the  other  is  changed  and  refolved  into  its  compo- 
nent Colours  red  and  yellow.  And  after  the  fame 
manner  other  neighbouring  homogeneal  Colours 
may  compound   new    Colours ,    like    the    in- 
termediate homogeneal  ones,  as  yellow  and  green, 
the  Colour  between  them  both,  and  afterwards, 
if  blue  be   added,  there  will  be  made  a  green 
the  middle  Colour  of  the  three  which  enter  the 
Compofition.     For  the  yellow  and  blue  on  either 
hand,  if  they  are  equal  in  quantity  they  draw  the 
intermediate  green  equally  towards  themfelves  in 
Compofition,  and  fo  keep  it  as  it  were  in  i^qui- 
librio,  that  it  verge  not  more  to  the  yellow  on  the 
one  hand,  and  to  the  blue  on  the  other,  but  by 
their  mix'd  Actions  remain  ftill  a  middle  Colour. 
To  this  mix'd  green  there  may  be  farther  added 
fome  red  and  violet,  and  yet  the  green  will  not 
prefently  ceafe,  but  only  grow  lefs  full  and  vivid, 
and  by  increalingthe  red  and  violet,  it  will  grow 
more  and  more  dilute,  until  by  the  prevalence  of 
the  added  Colours  it  be  overcome  and  turned  into 
whitenefs,  or  fome  other  Colour.     So  if  to  the 
Colour  of  any  homogeneal  Light,  the  Sun's  white 
Light  compofed  of  all  forts  of  Rays  be  added, 
tliat  Colour  will  not  vanifh  or  change  its  Species, 
but  be  diluted,  and  by  adding  more  and  more 
white  it  will  be  dikited  more  and  more  perpetu- 
ally.  Laflly,  If  r^d  and  violet  be  mingled,  there 
1  will 


B  O  O  K     I.  117 

will  be  generated  according  to  their  various  Pro- 
portions various  Purples,  fuch  as  are  not  like  in 
appearance  to  the  Colour  of  any  homogeneal 
Light,  and  of  thefe  Purples  mix'd  v^dth  yellow 
and  blue  may  be  made  other  nev^  Colours. 


PROP.  V.  Theor.  IV. 
Whiumjs  and  all  grey  Colours  hetwee?i 
white  and  blacky  may  be  compounded  of 
Colours^  and  the  whitenefs  of  the  Suns 
Light  is  compounded  of  all  the  primary 
^Colours  mix'd  in  a  due  Proportion, 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 
Exper.  9.np  H  E  Sun  fliining  into  a  dark  Cham- 

-*-  ber  through  a  little  round  hole  in 
the  Window-fliut ,  and  his  Light  being  there 
refraded  by  a  Prifm  to  cafl  his  coloured  Image 
PT  [in  Fig.  5.]  upon  the  oppofite  Wall :  I  held 
a  white  Paper  V  to  that  Image  in  fuch  manner 
that  it  might  be  illuminated  by  the  colon  r'd 
Light  refle(5ted  from  thence,  and  yet  not  inter- 
cept any  part  of  that  Light  in  its  paflage  from 
the  Prifm  to  the  Spectrum.  And  I  found  that 
when  the  Paper  was  held  nearer  to  any  Colour 
than  to  the  reft,  it  appeared  of  that  Coiour  to 
which  it  approached  neareft^  but  when  it  was 
equally  or  almoft  equally  diftant  from  all  the 
Colours,  fo  that  it  might  be  equally  illumina- 
ted by  them  all  it  appeared  white.  And  in  this 
laft  fituation  of  the  Paper,  if  fome  Colours  were 

I  3  inter- 


ii8  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

,  intercepted,  the  Paper  loft  its  white  Colour,  and 
appeared  of  the  Colour  of  the  reft  of  the  Light 
which  was  not  intercepted.  So  then  the  Pa- 
per was  illuminated  with  Lights  of  various  Co- 
lours, namely,  red,  yellow,  green,  blue  and 
violet,  and  every  part  of  the  Light  retained  its 
'proper  Colour,  until  it  was  incident  on  the  Pa- 
per, and  became  refleded  thence  to  the  Eycj 
fo  that  If  it  had  been-  either  alone  ( the  reft  of 
the  Light  being  intercepted )  or  if  it  had  a- 
bounded  moft ,  and  been  predominant  in  the 
Light  refled:ed  from  the  Paper,  it  would  have 
tinged  the  Paper  with  its  own  Colour  j  and  yet 
being  mixed  with  the  reft  of  the  Colours  in  a 
due  pi:oporti6n,  it  made  the  Paper  look  white, 
and  therefore  by  a  Compoiition  with  the  reft 
produced  that  Colour.  The  feveral  parts  of 
the  coloured  Light  refleded  from  the  Spectrum, 
whilft  they  are  propagated  from  thence  through 
the  Air,  do  perpetually  retain  their  proper  Co- 
lours, becaufe  wherever  they  fall  upon  the  Eyes 
of  any  Spedator,  they  m.ake  the  feveral  parts  of 
the  Spectrum  to  appear  under  their  proper  Co- 
lours. They  retain  therefore  their  proper  Co- 
lours when  they  fall. upon  the  Paper  V,  and  fo 
\)y  the  confuficn  and  perfed:  mixture  of  thofe' 
Colours  compound  the  whitenefs  of  the  Light 
refleded  from  thence. 

Expcr.  lo.  Let  that  Spe6trum  or  folar  Image 
]^T  [in  Fig.  6,'\  f^ll  now  upon  the  Lens  MN 
above  four  Liches  broad,  and  about  fix  Feet  di- 
ftarit  fi'om  the  Prifm  ABC  and  fo  figured  that 
it  may  caufe  the  coloured  Light  which  diverg-^ 
^ph  from  the  Prifm  to  converge  and  meet  again- 

"i  a*. 


"B  O  O  K     I.  iig 

at  its  Focus  G,  about  fix  or  eight  Feet  diflant 
from  the  Lens,  and  there  to  fall  perpendicularly 
upon  a  white  Paper  DE.  And  if  you  move 
this  Paper  to  and  fro,  you  will  perceive  that 
near  the  Lens,  as  at  de^  the  whole  folar  Image 
(fuppofe  2X  pt)  will  appear  upon  it  intenfely 
coloured  after  the  manner  above-explained,  and 
that  by  receding  from  the  Lens  thofe  Colours 
will  perpetually  come  towards  one  another,  and 
by  mixing  more  and  more  dilute  one  another 
continually,  until  at  length  the  Paper  come  to 
the  Focus  G,  where  by  a  perfed:  mixture  they 
will  wholly  vanifh  and  be  converted  into  white- 
nefs,  the  whole  Light  appearing  now  upon  the 
Paper  like  a  little  white  Circle.  And  after- 
wards by  receding  farther  from  the  Lens,  the 
Rays  which  before  converged  will  now  crofs 
one  another  in  the  Focus  G,  and  diverge  from 
thence,  and  thereby  make  the  Colours  to  appear 
again,  but  yet  in  a  contrary  order;  fuppofe  at 
^i,  where  the  red  t  is  now  above  which  before 
was  below,  and  the  violet  p  is  below  which  be- 
fore was  above. 

Let  us  now  flop  the  Paper  at  the  Focus  G, 
where  the  Light  appears  totally  white  and  cir- 
cular, and  let  us  confider  its  whitenefs.  I  fay, 
that  this  is  compofed  of  the  converging  Colours. 
For  if  any  of  thofe  Colours  be  intercepted  at 
the  Lens,  the  whitenefs  will  ceafe  and  degene- 
rate into  that  Colour  which  arifeth  from  the 
compofition  of  the  other  Colours  which  are  not 
intercepted.  And  then  if  the  intercepted  Co- 
lours be  let  pafs  and  fall  upon  that  compound 
Colour,  they  mix  with  it,  and  by  their  mixture 

I  4.  reilore 


I20  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ilore  the  whitenefs.  So  if  the  violet,  blue  and 
green  be  intercepted,  the  remaining  yellow, 
orange  and  red  will  compound  upon  the  Paper 
an  orange,  and  then  if  the  intercepted  Colours 
be  let  pafs,  they  will  fall  upon  this  compounded 
orange,  and  together  with  it  decompound  a 
white.  So  alfo  if  the  red  and  violet  be  inter- 
cepted, the  remaining  yellow,  green  and  blue, 
will  compound  a  green  upon  the  Paper,  and 
then  the  red  and  violet  being  let  pafs  will  fall  up- 
on this  green,  and  together  with  it  decompound 
a  white.  And  that  in  this  Compoiition  of  white 
the  feveral  Rays  do  not  fuffer  any  Change  in  their 
colorific  Qualities  by  ading  upon  one  another, 
but  are  only  mixed,  and  by  a  mixture  of  their 
Colours  produce  white,  may  farther  appear  by 
thefe  Arguments. 

If  the  Paper  be  placed  beyond  the  Focus  G, 
fuppofe  at  h^i,  and  then  the  red  Colour  at  the 
Lens  be  alternately  intercepted,  and  let  pafs  a- 
gain,  the  violet  Colour  on  the  Paper  will  not  fuf^ 
fer  any  Change  thereby,  as  it  ought  to  do  if  the 
feverai  forts  of  Rays  adted  upon  one  another  in 
the  Focus  G,  where  they  crofs.  Neither  will 
the  red  upon  the  Paper  be  changed  by  any  alter- 
nate flopping,  and  letting  pafs  the  violet  which 
crolieih  it. 

And  if  the  Paper  be  placed  at  the  Focus  G, 
and  the  white  round  Image  at  G  be  viewed 
through  the  Pnfm  HIK,  and  by  the  Refradiion 
of  that  Prifm  be  tranllated  to  the  place  ri',  and 
there  sppear  tinged  with  various  Colours,  name- 
ly, the  violet  at  v  and  red  at  r,  and  others  be- 
tween,   and  then  the  red  Colours  at  the  Lens 

be 


B  O  O  K     I.  121 

be  often  ftopp'd  and  let  pafs  by  turns,  the  red 
at  r  will  accordingly  difappear,  and  return  as  of- 
ten, but  the  violet  at  v  will  not  thereby  fuffer  any 
Change.  And  fo  by  flopping  and  letting  pafs 
alternately  the  blue  at  the  Lens,  the  blue  at  v 
will  accordingly  difappear  and  return,  without 
any  Change  made  in  the  red  at  r.  The  red  there- 
fore depends  on  one  fort  ot  Rays,  and  the  blue 
on  another  fort,  which  in  the  Focus  G  v/here 
they  are  commix'd,  do  not  acTt  on  one  another. 
And  there  is  the  fame  Reafon  of  the  other  Co- 
lours.* 

I  confidered  farther,  that  when  the  moft  re- 
frangible Rays  P/>,  and  the  leaft  refrangible 
ones  T  t,  are  by  converging  inclined  to  one  ano- 
ther, the  Paper,  if  held  very  oblique  to  thofe 
Rays  in  the  Focus  G,  might  refled:  one  fort  of 
them  more  copioully  than  the  other  fort,  and 
by  that  Means  the  remedied  Light  would  be 
tinged  in  that  Focus  with  the  Colour  of  the  pre- 
dominant Rays,  provided  thofe  Rays  feverally 
retained  their  Colours,  or  coloriiic  Qualities  in 
the  Compofition  of  White  made  by  them,  in  tliat 
Focus.  But  if  they  did  not  retain  them  in  that 
White,  but  became  all  of  them  feverally  endued 
there  with  a  Difpof^tion  to  flrike  the  Senfe  with 
the  Perception  of  White,  then  they  could  never 
lofe  their  Whitenefs  by  fuch  Reflexions.  I  in- 
clined therefore  the  Paper  to  the  Rays  very  oblique- 
ly, as  in  the  fecond  Experiment  of  this  fecondPart 
of  the  firft  Book,  that  the  moft  refrangible  Rays 
might  be  more  copioufiy  refieded  than  the  refl, 
and  the  Whitenefs  at  Length  changed  fucceffively 
into  blue,  indigo,  and  violet.     Then  I  inclined  it 

the 


122  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  contrary  Way,  that  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays 
might  be  more  copious  in  the  reflected  Light  than 
the  reft,  and  the  Whitenefs  turned  fucceffively  to 
yellow,  orange,  and  red. 

Laftly,  I  made  an  Inftrument  X  Y  in  fafhion 
of  a  Comb,  whofe  Teeth  being  in  number  fix- 
teen,  were  about  an  Inch  and  an  half  broad,  and 
the  Intervals  of  the  Teeth  about  two  Inches 
wide.  Then  by  interpofmg  fucceffively  the 
Teeth  of  this  Inftrument  near  the  Lens,  I  inter- 
cepted Part  of  the  Colours  by  the  interpofed 
Tooth,  whilft  the  reft  of  them  went  on  through 
the  Interval  of  the  Teeth  to  the  Paper  DE,  and 
there  painted  a  round  Solar  Image.  But  the  Pa- 
per I  had  iirft  placed  fo,  that  the  Image  might 
appear  white  as  often  as  the  Comb  was  taken 
away  j  and  then  the  Comb  being  as  was  faid  in- 
terpofed, that  Whitenefs  by  reafon  of  the  inter- 
cepted Part  of  the  Colours  at  the  Lens  did  al- 
ways change  into  the  Colour  compounded  of 
thofe  Colours  which  were  not  intercepted,  and 
that  Colour  was  by  the  Motion  of  the  Comb 
perpetually  varied  fo,  that  in  the  paffing  of  every 
Tooth  over  the  Lens  all  thefe  Colours,  red,  yel- 
low, green,  blue,  and  purple,  did  alw^ays  fuc- 
ceed  one  another.  I  caufed  therefore  all  the 
Teeth  to  pafs  fucceffively  over  the  Lens,  and 
when  the  Motion  w^as  flow,  there  appeared  a 
perpetual  Succeffion  of  the  Colours  upon  the 
Paper :  But  if  I  fo  much  accelerated  the  Mo- 
tion, that  the  Colours  by  reafon  of  their  quick 
Succeffion  could  not  be  diftinguiffied  from  one 
another,  the  Appearance  of  the  fmgle  Colours 
ceafed.      There   was   no  redj    no    yellow,    nq 

green. 


B  O  O  K     I.  123 

green,  no  blue,  nor  purple  to  be  feen  any  lon- 
ger, but  from  a  Confulion  of  rhem  all  there  a- 
rofe  one  uniform  white  Colour.  Of  the  Light 
which  now  by  the  Mixture  of  all  the  Colours  ap- 
peared white,  there  was  no  Part  really  white. 
One  Part  was  red,  another  yellow,  a  third  green, 
a  fourth  blue,  a  fifth  purple,  and  every  Part  re-» 
tains  its  proper  Colour  till  it  ftrike  the  Senfo- 
rium.  If  the  Impreffions  follow  one  another 
flowly,  fo  that  they  may  be  feverally  perceived, 
there  is  made  a  diftind:  Senfation  of  all  the  Co- 
lours one  after  another  in  a  continual  SucceA 
fion.  But  if  the  Impreffions  follow  one  ano- 
ther fo  quickly,  that  they  cannot  be  feverally 
perceived,  there  arifeth  out  of  them  all  one 
common  Senfation,  which  is  neither  of  this 
Colour  alone  nor  of  that  alone,  but  hath  it  felf 
indifferently  to  'em  all,  and  this  is  a  Senfation 
of  Whitenefs.  By  the  Quicknefs  of  the  Succei^ 
lions,  the  Impreffions  of  the  feveral  Colours  are 
confounded  in  the  Senforium,  and  out  of  that 
Confufion  arifeth  a  mix'd  Senfation.  If  a  burn- 
ing Coal  be  nimbly  moved  round  in  a  Circle 
with  Gyrations  continually  repeated,  the  whole 
Circle  will  appear  like  Fire ;  the  reafon  of  which 
is,  that  the  Senfation  of  the  Coal  in  the  feve- 
ral Places  of  that  Circle  remains  imprefs'd  on 
the  Senforium,  until  the  Coal  return  again  to 
the  fame  Place.  And  fo  in  a  quick  Confecu- 
tion  of  the  Colours  the  Impreffion  of  every  Co- 
lour remains  in  the  Senforium,  until  a  Revolu- 
tion of  all  the  Colours  be  compleated,  and  that 
firit  Colour  return  again.  The  Impreffions  there- 
fore of  all  the  fucceffive  Colours  are  at  once  in 

the 


124  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  Senforium,  and  jointly  ftir  up  a  Senfation  of  , 
them  all ;  and  fo  it  is  manifeft  by  this  Experi- 
inent,  that  the  commix'd  Impreffions  of  all  the 
Colours  do  ilir  up  and  beget  a  Senfation  of  white, 
that  is,  that  Whitenefs  is  compounded  of  all  the 
Colours. 

And  if  the  Comb  be  now  taken  away,  that  all 
the  Colours  may  at  once  pafs  from  the  Lens  to 
the  Paper,  and  be  there  intermixed,  and  toge- 
ther refleded  thence  to  the  Spectator's  Eyes;  their 
Impreffions  on  the  Senforium  being  now  more 
fubtilly  and  perfe(5lly  commixed  there,  ought 
much  more  to  ftir  up  a  Senfation  of  White- 
nefs. 

You  may  inftead  of  the  Lens  ufe  two  Prifms 
HIK  and  LMN,  which  by  refracting  the  co- 
loured Light  the  contrary  Way  to  that  of  the 
^rft  Refraction,  may  make  the  diverging  Rays 
converge  and  meet  again  in  G,  as  you  fee  repre-, 
fented  in  the  feventh  Figure.  For  where  they 
meet  and  mix,  they  will  Qompofe  a  white  Light, 
as  when  a  Lens  is  ufed. 

Exper.  1 1.  Let  the  Sun's  coloured  Image  P  T 
[in  Fig.  8.]  fall  upon  the  Wall  of  a  dark  Cham- 
ber, as  in  the  third  Experiment  of  the  firft  Book, 
and  let  the  fame  be  viewed  through  a  Prifm 
aifCy  held  parallel  to  the  Prifm  ABC,  by  whofe 
Refraction  that  Image  was  made,  and  let  it  now 
appear  lower  than  before,  fuppofe  in  the  Place 
S  over-againft  the  red  Colour  T.  And  if  you 
go  near  to  the  Liiage  P  T,  the  SpeCtrum  S  will 
appear  oblong  and  coloured  like  the  Image  P  T  $ 
but  if  you  recede  from  it,  the  Colours  of  the 
SpeCtrum  S  will  be  contracted  more  and  more, 

and 


B  O  O  K     T.  125 

and  at  length  vanifli,  that  Sped:rum  S  becoming 
perfedly  round  and  white  j  and  if  you  recede  yet 
farther,  the  Colours  will  emerge  again,  but  in  a 
contrary  Order.  Now  that  Spedlrum  S  appears 
white  in  that  Cafe,  when  the  Rays  of  feveral 
forts  which  converge  from  the  feveral' Parts  of 
the  Image  P  T,  to  the  Prifm  abc,  are  fo  re- 
fradted  unequally  by  it,  that  in  their  PalTage 
from  the  Prifm  to  the  Eye  they  may  diverge 
from  one  and  the  fame  Point  of  the  Spedirum 
S,  and  fo  fall  afterwards  upon  one  and  the 
fame  Point  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye,  and  there 
be  mingled. 

And  farther,  if  the  Comb  be  here  made  ufe  of, 
by  whofe  Teeth  the  Colours  at  the  Image  PT 
may  be  fucceffively  intercepted ;  the  Spe(ftrum  S, 
when  the  Comb  is  moved  llowly,  will  be  perpe- 
tually tinged  with  fucceiTive  Colours:  But  when 
by  accelerating  the  Motion  of  the  Comb,  the 
Succeffion  of  the  Colours .  is  fo  quick  that  they 
cannot  be  feverally  feen,  that  Spedrum  S,  by  a 
confufed  and  mix'd  Senfation  of  them  all,  will 
appear  white. 

Exper.  12.  The  Su.i  ihining*  through  a  large 
Prifm  ABC  [in  Fig,  9.]  upon  a  Comb  X  Y, 
placed  immediately  behind  the  Prifm,  his  Light 
which  pafTed  through  the  Interftices  of  the 
Teeth  fell  upon  a  white  Paper  D  E.  The 
Breadths  of  the  Teeth  were  equal  to  their  In- 
terftices, and  feven  Teeth  together  w^th  their 
Interftices  took  up  an  Inch  in  Breadth.  Now, 
when  the  Paper  was  about  two  or  three  Inches 
diftant  from  the  Comb,  the  Light  which  paf- 
fed  through  its.    feveral  Interftices    painted    fo 

many 


126  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

many  Ranges  of  Colours,  kl^  mn,  op^  qr^  &c. 
which  were  parallel  to  one  another^  and  conti- 
guous, and  without  any  Mixture  of  white.  And 
thefe  Ranges  of  Colours,  if  the  Comb  was  moved 
continually  up  and  down  with  a  reciprocal  Mo- 
tion, afcended  and  defcended  in  the  Paper,  and 
when  the  Motion  of  the  Comb  was  fo  quick,  that 
the  Colours  could  not  be  diftinguiflied  from 
one  another,  the  whole  Paper  by  their  Con- 
fufion  and  Mixture  in  the  Senforium  appeared 
white. 

Let  the  Comb  now  reft,  and  let  the  Paper 
be  removed  farther  from  the  Prifm,  and  the  fe- 
veral  Ranges  of  Colours  will  be  dilated  and 
expanded  into  one  another  more  and  more,  and 
by  mixing  their  Colours  will  dilute  one  ano- 
ther, and  at  length,  when  the  diftance  of  the 
Paper  from  the  Comb  is  about  a  Foot,  or  a 
little  more  (fuppofe  in  the  Place  2D  2E)  they 
will  fo  far  dilute  one  another,  as  to  become 
white. 

With  any  Obftacle,  let  all  the  Light  be  now 
ftopp'd  which  paffes  through  any  one  Literval 
of  the  Teeth,  fo  that  the  Range  of  Colours  which 
comes  from  thence  may  be  taken  away,  and 
you  will  fee  the  Light  of  the  reft  of  the  Ranges 
to  be  expanded  into  the  Place  of  the  Range  taken 
away,  and  there  to  be  coloured.  Let  the  in- 
tercepted Range  pafs  on  as  before,  and  its  Co- 
lours falling  upon  the  Colours  of  the  other 
Ranges,  and  mixing  with  them,  will  reftore  the 
Whitenefs. 

Let  the  Paper  2  D  2  E  be  now  very  much  in- 
clined to  the  RaySj  fo  that  the  moft  refrangible 

Rays 


BOOK     I.  127 

Rays  may  be  more  copioufly  refleded  than  the 
reft,  and  the  white  Colour  of  the  Paper  through 
the  Excefs  of  thofe  Rays  will  be  changed  into 
blue  and  violet.  Let  the  Paper  be  as  much  in- 
clined the  contrary  way,  that  the  leaft  refran- 
gible Rays  may  be  now  more  copioufly  refledl- 
ed  than  the  reft,  and  by  their  Excefs  the  White- 
nefs  will  be  changed  into  yellow  and.  red.  The 
feveral  Rays  therefore  in  that  white  Light  do 
retain  their  colorific  Qualities,  by  which  thofe 
of  any  fort,  whenever  they  become  more  co- 
pious than  the  reft,  do  by  their  Excefs  and  Pre- 
dominance   caufe   their    proper  Colour  to  ap- 

And  by  the  fame  way  of  arguing,  applied  to  the 
third  Experiment  of  this  fecond  Part  of  the  firft 
Book,  it  may  be  concluded,  that  the  white  Colour 
of  all  refracted  Light  at  its  very  firft  Emergence, 
where  it  appears  as  white  as  before  its  Incidence, 
is  compounded  of  various  Colours. 

Exper,  13.  In  the  foregoing  Experiment  the 
feveral  Intervals  of  the  Teeth  of  the  Comb  do 
the  Office  of  fo  many  Prifms,  every  Interval  pro- 
ducitig  the  Phcenomenon  of  one  Prifm.  Whence 
inftead  of  thofe  Intervals  ufing  feveral  Prifms, 
I  try'd  to  compound  Whitenefs  by  mixing  their 
Colours,  and  did  it  by  ufing  only  three  Prifms, 
as  alfo  by  ufing  only  two  as  follows.  Let  two 
Prifms  ABC  and  a  be,  [in  Fig.  10.]  whofe  re- 
frading  Angles  B  and  b  are  equal,  be  fo  placed 
parallel  to  one  another,  that  the  refrading  An- 
gle B  of  the  one  may  touch  the  Angle  c  at  the 
Bafe  of  the  other,  and  their  Planes  C  B  and 
cbj  at  which  the  Rays  emerge,  may  lie  in  Di- 

redum. 


128  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

re(5luin.  Then  let  the  Light  trajedied  through 
them  fall  upon  the  Paper  M  N,  diiftant  about  8 
or  12  Inches  from  the  Prifms.  And  the  Co- 
lours generated  by  the  interior  Limits  B  and  c 
of  the  two  Prifms,  will  be  mingled  at  P  T,  and 
there  compound  white.  For  if  either  Prifm  be 
taken  away,  the  Colours  made  by  the  other  will 
appear  in  that  Place  P  T,  and  when  the  Prifmi 
is  reftored  to  its  Place  again,  fo  that  its  Co- 
lours may  there  fall  upon  the  Colours  of  the 
other,  the  Mixture  of  them  both  will  reftore  the 
White  nefs. 

This  Experiment  fucceeds  alfo,  as  I  have  tried, 
when  the  Angle  b  of  the  lower  Prifm,  is  a  lit- 
tle greater  than  the  Angle  B  of  the  upper,  and 
between  the  interior  Angles  B  and  f,  there  in- 
tercedes fome  Space  B  c,  as  is  reprefented  in 
the  Figure,  and  the  refrading  Planes  B  C  and 
b  c,  are  neither  in  Directum,  nor  parallel  to  one 
another.  For  there  is  nothing  more  requilite 
to  the  Succefs  of  this  Experiment,  than  that 
the  Rays  of  all  forts  may  be  uniformly  mixed 
upon  the  Paper  in  the  Place  P  T.  If  the  moft 
refrangible  Rays  coming  from  the  fuperior 
Prifm  take  up  all  the  Space  from  M  to  P,  the 
Rays  of  the  fame  fort  which  come  from  the  in- 
ferior Prifm  ought  to  begin  at  P,  and  take  up 
all  the  reft  of  the  Space  from  thence  towards 
N.  If  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  coming  from 
the  fuperior  Prifm  take  up  the  Space  M  T,  the 
Rays  of  the  fame  kind  which  come  from  the 
other  Prifm  ought  to  begin  at  T,  and  take  up 
the  remaining  Space  TIN.  If  oric  fort  of  the 
Rays  which  have  intermediate  Degrees  of  Re- 

frangibility, 


B  O  O  K     I.  129 

frangibillty,  and  come  from  the  fuperlor  Prifm 
be  extended  through  the  Space  M  Q^  and  ano- 
ther fort  of  thofe  Rays  through  the  Space  M  JR., 
and  a  third  fort  of  them  through  the  Space  M  S, 
the  fame  forts  of  Rays  coming  from  the  lower 
Prifm,  ought  to  illuminate  the  remaining  Spaces 
QN,  R  N,  S  N,  refpedively.  And  the  fame  is 
to  be  underftood  of  all  the  other  forts  of  Rays. 
For  thus  the  Rays  of  every  fort  will  be  fcattered 
uniformly  and  evenly  through  the  whole  Space 
MN,  and  fo  being  every  where  mix'd  in  the  fame 
Proportion,  they  muft  every  where  produce  the 
fame  Colour.  And  therefore,  fince  by  this  Mix- 
ture they  produce  white  in  the  Exterior  Spaces 
MP  and  TN,  they  muft  alfo  produce  white 
in  the  Interior  Space  PT.  This  is  the  reafon 
of  the  Compolition  by  which  Whitenefs  was  pro- 
duced in  this  Experiment,  and  by  what  other 
way  foever  I  made  the  like  Compofition,  the  Re- 
fult  was  Whitenefs. 

Laftly,  If  with  the  Teeth  of  a  Comb  of  a  due 
Size,  the  coloured  Lights  of  the  two  Prifms 
which  fall  upon  the  Space  PT  be  alternately  in- 
tercepted, that  Space  P  T,  when  the  Motion  of 
the  Comb  is  flow,  will  always  appear  coloured, 
but  by  accelerating  the  Motion  of  the  Comb  fo 
much  that  the  fucceffive  Colours  cannot  be 
diftinguifhed  from  one  another,  it  will  appear 
white. 

Exper,  14.  Hitherto  I  have  produced  White- 
nefs by  mixing  the  Colours  of  Prifms.  If  now 
the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies  are  to  be  min- 
gled, let  Water  a  little  thicken'd  with  Soap  be 
agitated  to  raife  a  Froth,  and  after  that  Froth 

K  has 


130  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

has  ftood  a  little,  there  will  appear  to  one  that 
{hall  view  it  intently  various  Colours  every  where 
in  the  Surfaces  of  the  feveral  Bubbles  j  but  to 
one  that  fliall  go  fo  far  off,  that  he  cannot  diftin- 
guifh  the  Colours  from  one  another,  the  whole 
Froth  will  grow  white  with  a  perfedl  White- 
nefs. 

Exper.  15.  Laftly,  In  attempting  to  compound 
a  white,  by  mixing  the  coloured  Powders  which 
Painters  ufe,  I  conlider'd  that  all  coloured  Pow- 
ders do  fupprefs  and  flop  in  them  a  very  confi- 
derable  Part  of  the  Light  by  which  they  are  illu- 
minated.    For  they  become  coloured  by  refledl- 
ing  the  Light  of  their  own  Colours  more  co- 
pioufly,  and  that  of  all  other  Colours  more  fpa- 
ringly,  and  yet  they  do  not  refied:  the  Light  of 
their  own  Colours  fo  copioufly  as  white  Bodies 
do.     If  red  Lead,  for  inflance,  and  a  white  Pa- 
per, be  placed  in  the  red  Light  of  the  colour'd 
Spedtrum  made  in  a  dark  Chamber  by  the  Re- 
fraction of  a  Prifm,  as  is  defcribed  in  the  third 
Experiment  of  the  firfl  Part  of  this  Book ;  the  Pa- 
per will  appear  more  lucid  than  the  red  Lead, 
and  therefore  refledis  the  red-making  Rays  more 
copioufly  than  red  Lead  doth.     And  if  they  be 
held  in   the   Light  of  any  other  Colour,    the 
Light   reiledled    by  the  Paper  will  exceed  the 
Light  reflefted    by  the   red  Lead    in    a   much 
greater  Proportion.     And    the  like  happens  in 
Powders  of   other  Colours.     And  therefore  by 
mixing  fuch  Powders,  we  are  not  to   exped;  a 
flrong  and  full  White,   fuch  as  is  that  of  Pa- 
per, but  fome  dusky  obfcure  one,  fuch  as  might 
arife  from  a  Mixture  of   Light  and  Darknefs, 

I  or 


BOOK     I.  131 

or  from  white  and  black,  that  is,  a  grey,  pr 
dun,  or  ruflet  brown,  fuch  as  are  the  Colours' 
of  a  Man's  Nail,  of  a  Moufe,  of  Afhcs,  of  or- 
dinary Stohes,  of  Mortar,  of  Dull:  and  Dirt  in 
High-ways,  and  the  like.  And  fuch  a  dark  white 
I  have  often  produced  by  mixing  colour 'd  Pow- 
ders. For  thus  one  Part  of  red  Lead,  and  five 
Parts  of  Viridc  lEris,  compofed  a  dun  Colour 
like  that  of  a  Moufe.  For  thefe  two  Colours 
were  feverally  fo  compounded  of  others,  that 
in  both  together  were  a  Mixture  of  all  Co- 
lours; and  there  was  lefs  red  Lead  ufed  than 
Viride  Mr  is,  becaufe  of  the  Fulnefs  of  its  Co- 
lour. Again,  one  Part  of  red  Lead,  and  four 
Parts  of  blue  Bife,  compofed  a  dun  Colour 
verging  a  little  to  purple,  and  by  adding  to 
this  a  certain  Mixture  of  Orpiment  and  Viride 
Mris  in  a  due  Proportion,  the  Mixture  loft  its 
purple  TinQure,  and  became  perfed:ly  dun. 
But  the  Experiment  fucceedcd  belt  without  Mi- 
nium thus.  To  Orpiment  I  added  by  little 
and  little  a  certain  full  bright  purple,  which 
Painters  ufe,  until  the  Orpiment  ceafed  to  be 
yellow,  and  became  of  a  pale  red.  Then  I  di- 
luted that  red  by  adding  a  little  Vitide  JEris, 
and  a  little  more  blue  Bife  than  Viride  Mris,  un- 
til it  became  of  fuch  a  "grey  or  pale  white,  as 
verged  to  no  one  of  the  Colours  more  than  to 
another.  For  thus  it  became  of  a  Colour  equal 
in  Whitenefs  to  that  of  Afhes,  or  of  Wood  newly 
cut,  or  of  a  Man's  Skin.  The  Orpiment  re- 
fledled  more  Light,  than  did  any  other  of  the 
Powders,  and  therefore  conduced  more  to  the 
Whitenefs  of  the  com.pounded  Colour  than  thev. 
.  K  2  fo 


132  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

To  affign  the  Proportions  accurately  may  be  diffi- 
cult, by  reafon  of  the  different  Goodnefs  of  Pow- 
ders of  the  fame  kind.  Accordingly,  as  the  Co- 
lour of  any  Powder  is  more  or  lefs  full  and  lumi- 
nous, it  ought  to  be  ufed  in  a  lefs  or  greater  Pro- 
portion. 

Now,  confidering  that  thefe  grey  and  dun  Co- 
lours may  be  alfo  produced  by  mixing  Whites 
and  Blacks,    and   by  confequence    differ   from 
perfedt  Whites,  not  in  Species  of  Colours,  but 
only  in  degree  of  Luminoufnefs,  it  is  manifefl  that 
there  is  nothing  more  requifite  to  make  them 
perfectly  white  than  to  increafe  their  Light  fuffici- 
ently  ;    and,   on  the  contrary,   if  by  increafmg 
their  Light  they  can  be  brought  to  perfedl  White- 
nefs,  it  will  thence  alfo  follow,  that  they  are  of 
the  fame  Species  of  Colour  with  the  beft  Whites, 
and  differ  from  them  only  in  the  Quantity  of 
Light.     And  this  I  tried  as  follows.     I  took  the 
third  of  the  above-mention'd  grey  Mixtures,  ( that 
which  was  compounded  of  Orpiment,    Purple, 
Biie.    and  Viride  Mrh )    and  rubbed  it  thickly 
upon  the  Floor  of  my  Chamber,  where  the  Sun 
{hone  upon  it  through  the  opened  Cafement  ; 
and  by  it,  in  the  fhadow,  I  laid  a  Piece  of  white 
Paper  of  the  fame  Bignefs.     Then  going  from 
them  to  the  diflance  of  12  or  18  Feet,  fo  that 
I  could  not  difcern  the  Unevennefs  of  the  Sur- 
face of  the  Powder,   nor  the  little  Shadows  let 
fall  from  the  gritty  Particles  thereof  j   the  Pow- 
der appeared  intenfely  white,  fo  as  to  tranfcend 
even  the  Paper  it  felf  in  Whitenefs,    efpecially 
if  the  Paper  were  a  little  fliaded  from  the  Light 
of  the  Clouds,   and  then  the  Paper  compared 
5  with 


,A 


B  O  O  K     I.  133 

with  the  Powder  appeared  of  fuch  a  grey  Colour 
as  the  Powder  had  done  before.  But  by  laying 
the  Paper  where  the  Sun  fliines  through  the 
Glafs  of  the  Window,  or  by  fhutting  the  Win- 
dow that  the  Sun  might  fhine  through  the  Glafs 
upon  the  Powder,  and  by  fuch  other  fit  Means  of 
iiicreafing  or  decreafnig  the  Lights  wherewith  the 
Powder  and  Paper  were  illuminated,  the  Light 
wherewith  the  Powder  is  illuminated  may  be* 
made  ilronger  in  fuch  a  due  Proportion  than 
the  Light  wherewith  the  Paper  is  illuminated, 
that  they  fhall  both  appear  exadly  alike  in 
Whitenefs.  For  when  I  was  trying  this,  a  Friend 
coming  to  vifit  me,  I  ftopp'd  him  at  the  Door, 
and  before  I  told  him  what  the  Colours  were,  or 
what  I  was  doing  ;  I  asked  him.  Which  of  the 
two  Whites  were  the  beft,  and  wherein  they  dif- 
fered ?  And  after  he  had  at  that  diflance  viewed 
them  well,  he  anfwer'd,  that  they  were  both  good 
Whites,  and  that  he  could  not  fay  which  was 
beft,  nor  wherein  their  Colours  differed.  Now, 
if  you  confider,  that  this  White  of  the  Powder 
in  the  Sun-fliine  was  compounded  of  the  Co- 
lours which  the  component  Powders  (  Orpi- 
ment.  Purple,  Bife,  and  Viride  JEris )  have  in 
the  fame  Sun-fhine,  you  muft  acknowledge  by 
this  Experiment,  as  well  as  by  the  former,  that 
perfedt  Whitenefs  may  be  compounded  of  Co- 
lours. 

From  what  has  been  faid  it  is  alfo  evident, 
that  the  Whitenefs  of  the  Sun's  Lisrht  is  com- 
pounded  of  all  the  Colours  wherewirh  the  feve- 
ral  forts  of  Rays  whereof  that  Light  confifts, 
when  by  their  feveral  Refrangibilities  they  are 

K  3  fepa- 


134  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

feparated  from  one  another,  do  tinge  Paper  or  any 
other  white  Body  whereon  they  fall.  For  thofe 
Colours  {hy  Prop.ll.  Part  2.)  are  unchangeable, 
and  whenever  all  thofe  Rays  w^ith  thofe  their  Co- 
lours are  mix'd  again,  they  reproduce  the  fame 
white  Light  as  before. 


PROP.  VI.    Prob.  II. 

Lt  a  mixture  of  Primary  Colour s-^  the 
^luantity  and  S^uality  of  each  bei7tg 
given^  to  know  theColour  of  the  Compound, 

WITH  the  Center  O  [m  Fig.  11.]  and 
Radius  OD  defcribe  a  Circle  ADF,  and 
diltinguiih  its  Circumference  into  feven  Parts 
DE,  EF,  FG,  GA,  AB,  B  C,  CD,  propor- 
tional to  the  feven  Mufical  Tones  or  Intervals 
of  the  eight  Sounds,  «So/,  /^,  fa^  fol^  la^  mi,  fa, 
fol,  contained  in  an  eight,  that  is,  proportional 
to  the  Number  ~,  75,  ts,  |,  15,  is,  \.  Let  the  firfl 
Part  I>E  reprefent  a  red  Colour,  the  fecond  E  F 
orange,  the  third  F  G  yellow,  the  fourth  C  A 
green,  the  fifth  AB  blue,  the  fixth  BC  indigo, 
and  the  feventh  C  D  violet.  And  conceive  that 
thefe  are  all  the  Colours  of  uncompounded  Light 
gradually  pafiing  into  one  another,  as  they  do 
when  made  by  Prifms  j  the  Circumference 
DEFGABCD,  reprefenting  the  whole  Series 
of  Colours  from  one  end  of  the  Sun's  colour'd 
Image  to  the  other,  fo  that  from  D  to  E  be 
all  degrees  of  red,  at  E  the  m.ean  Colour  be- 
tween red  and  orange,  from  E  to  F  all  de- 
crees 


B  O  O  K     I.  135 

grees  of  orange,  at  F  the  mean  between  orange 
and  yellow,  from  F  to  G  all  degrees  of  yellow, 
and  fo  on.  Let  p  be  the  Center  of  Gravity 
of  the  Arch  D  E,  and  q^  r,  j,  t,  u^  Xy  the  Cen- 
ters of  Gravity  of  the  Arches  E  F,  F  G,  G  A,  - 
A  B,  B  C,  and  C  D  refpedively,  and  about 
thofe  Centers  of  Gravity  let  Circles  proportio- 
nal to  the  Number  of  Rays  of  each  Colour  in 
the  given  Mixture  be  defcrib'd  ;  that  is,  the 
Circle  p  proportional  to  the  Number  of  the 
red-making  Rays  in  the  Mixture,  the  Circle  q 
proportional  to  the  Number  of  the  orange-ma- 
king Rays  in  the  Mixture,  and  fo  of  the  reft. 
Find  the  common  Center  of  Gravity  of  all  thofe 
Circles  p,  q^  r,  s,  t,  z/,  x.  Let  that  Center  be 
Z;  and  from  the  Center  of  the  Circle  ADF, 
through  Z  to  the  Circumference,  drawing  the 
Right  Line  O  Y,  the  Place  of  the  Point  Y  in  the 
Circumference  Ihall  ihew  the  Colour  arifmg  from 
the  Compofition  of  all  the  Colours  in  the  given 
Mixture,  and  the  Line  OZ  fhall  be  propor- 
tional to  the  Fulnefs  or  Intenfenefs  of  the 
Cok)ur,  that  is,  to  its  diftanCe  from  Vv^iitenefs. 
As  if  Y  fall  in  the  middle  between  F  and  G, 
the  compounded  Colour  fliall  be  the  beft  yel- 
low J  if  Y  verge  from  the  middle  towards  F 
or  G,  the  compound  Colour  fliall  accordingly 
be  a  yellow,  verging  towards  orange  or  green. 
If  Z  fall  upon  the  Circumference,  the  Colour 
fhall  be  intenfe  and  florid  in  the  higheft  Degree  ; 
if  it  fall  in  the  mid- way  between  the  Circum- 
ference and  Center,  it  fhall  be  but  half  fo 
intenfe,  that  is,  it  fhall  be  fuch  a  Colour  as 
would  be  made  by  diluting  the  intenfeil  yellow 

K  4  with 


136  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

with  an  equal  quantity  of  whitenefs ;  and  if  it 
fall  upon  the  center  O,  the  Colour  fhall  have  loft 
all  its  intenfenefs,  and  become  a  white.     But  it 
is  to  be  noted,  That  if  the  point  Z  fall  in  or 
near  the  line  OD,   the  main  ingredients  being 
the  red  and  violet ,    the    Colour  compounded 
fhall  not  be  any  of  the  prifmatick  Colours,  but 
a  purple,  inclining  to  red  or  violet,  according- 
ly as  the  point  Z  lieth  on  the  fide  of  the  line 
DO  towards  E  or  towards  C,  and  in  general 
the  compounded  violet  is  more  bright  and  more 
fiery  than  the  uncompounded.     Alfo  if  only  two 
of  the  primary  Colours  which  in  the  circle  are 
pppofite  to  one  another  be  rnixed  in  an  equal 
proportion,  the  point  Z  {hall  fall  upon  the  cen- 
ter O,  and  yet  the  Colour  compounded  of  thofe 
two  fhall    not   be  perfectly  white ,    but  fome 
faint  anonymous   Colour,      For  I  could  never 
yet  by  mixing  only  two  primary  Colours  pro- 
duce a  perfeft  white.     Whether  it  may  be  com- 
pounded of  a  mixture  of  three  taken  at  equal 
diftances  in  the  circumference  I  do  not  know, 
but  of  four  or  five  I  do  not  much  queftion  but 
it  may.     But  thefe  are  Curiofities  of  little  or  no 
moment  to  the  underflanding  the  Phaenomena 
of  Nature.     For  in  all  whites  produced  by  Na- 
ture, there  ufes  to  be  a  mixture  of  all  forts  of 
Rays,  and  by  confequence  a  compofition  of  all 
Colours. 

To  give  an  inftance  of  this  Rule;  fuppofe  a 
Colour  is  compounded  of  rhefe  homogeneal 
Colours,  of  violet  one  part,  of  indigo  one  part, 
of  blue  two  parts,  of  gi^een  three  parts,  of  yel- 
)pw  five  parts,  of  orange  fix  parts,  and  of  red 

ten 


B  O  O  K     I.  137 

ten  parts.  Proportional  to  thefe  parts  defcribe 
the  Circles  x,  v,  /,  s,  r,  q,  p,  refpedively,  that  is, 
fo  that  if  the  Circle  x  be  one,  the  Circle  1;  may- 
be one,  the  Circle  f  two,  the  Circle  s  three,  and 
the  Circles  r,  q  and/>,  five,  fix  and  ten.  Then  I 
find  Z  the  common  center  of  gravity  of  thefe 
Circles,  and  through  Z  drawing  the  Line  OY, 
the  Point  Y  falls  upon  the  circumference  between 
E  and  F,  fomething  nearer  to  E  than  to  F,  and 
thence  I  conclude,  that  the  Colour  compounded 
of  thefe  Ingredients  will  be  an  orange,  verging  a 
little  more  to  red  than  to  yellow.  Alfo  I  find 
that  OZ  is  a  little  lefs  than  one  half  of  O  Y,  and 
thence  I  conclude,  that  this  orange  hath  a  little 
lefs  than  half  the  fulnefs  or  intenfenefs  of  an  un- 
compounded  orange  j  that  is  to  fay,  that  it  is 
fuch  an  orange  as  may  be  made  by  mixing  an  ho- 
mogeneal  orange  with  a  good  white  in  the  pro- 
portion of  the  Line  OZ  to  the  Line  ZY,  this 
Proportion  being  not  of  the  quantities  of  mixed 
orange  and  white  Powders,  but  of  the  quantities 
of  the  Lights  reflected  from  them. 

This  Rule  I  conceive  accurate  enough  for  pra- 
dtice,  though  not  mathematically  accurate ;  and 
the  truth  of  it  may  be  fufliciently  proved  to  Senfe, 
by  flopping  any  of  the  Colours  at  the  Lens  in  the 
tenth  Experiment  of  this  Book.  For  the  refi:  of 
the  Colours  which  are  not  fi:opp'd,  but  pafs  on  to 
the  Focus  of  the  Lens,  will  there  compound 
either  accurately  or  very  nearly  fuch  a  Colour,  as 
by  thi^  Rule  ought  to  refult  from  their  Mixture. 

FRO  P. 


138  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

PROP.  VIL     The  OR.  V. 

/ill  the  Colours  in  the  Univerfe  which  are 
made  by  Lights  and  depend  not  on  the 
Power  of  Imagination^  are  either  the 
Colours  of  homogeneal  Lights^  or  com- 
founded  of  thefe-^  and  that  either  accu- 
rately or  very  nearly^  according  to  the, 
Rule  of  the  foregoing  Problem, 

FOR  it  has  been  proved  (in  Frop.  i.  Fart  2.) 
that  the  changes  of  Colours  made  by  Refra- 
d:ions  do  not  arife  from  any  new  Modifications  of 
the  Rays  imprefs'd  by  thofe  Refradions,  and  by 
the  various  Terminations  of  Light  and  Shadow, 
as  has  been  the  conftant  and  general  Opinion  of 
Philofophers.  It  has  alfo  been  proved  that  the 
feveral  Colours  of  the  homogeneal  Rays  do  con- 
ftantly  anfwer  to  their  degrees  of  Refrangibility, 
[Prop.  I.  Part  i.  andPrc/^.  2.  Part  2.)  and  that 
their  degrees  of  Refrangibility  cannot  be  changed 
by  Refractions  and  Reflexions  [Prop.  2.  Part  i.) 
and  by  confequence  that  thofe  their  Colours 
are  likewife  immutable.  It  has  alfo  been  pro- 
ved diredlly  by  refrafting  and  reflecting  homo- 
geneal Lights  apart,  that  their  Colours  cannot  be 
changed,  [Prop.  2.  Part  2.)  It  has  been  proved 
alfoj  that  when  the  feveral  forts  of  Rays  are  mix- 
ed, and  in  croflmg  pafs  through  the  fame'fpace, 
they  do  not  ad-  on  one  another  fo  as  to  change 
each  others  colorific  qualities.  [Exper.  10.  Part 2.) 
but  by  mixing  their  Adions  in  the  Senforium  be- 
get 


BOOK     I.  139 

get  a  Senfation  differing  from  what  either  would 
do  apart,  that  is  a  Senfation  of  a  mean  Colour 
between  their  proper  Colours  j  and  particularly 
when  by  the  concourfe  and  mixtures  of  all  forts 
of  Rays,  a  white  Colour  is  produced,  the  white 
is  a  mixture  of  all  the  Colours  which  the  Rays 
would  have  apart,  [Frop.  5.  Part  2.)  The  Rays 
in  that  mixture  do  not  lofe  or  alter  their  feveral 
colorific  qualities,  but  by  all  their  various  kinds 
of  Adions  mix'd  in  the  Senforium,  beget  a  Sen- 
fation of  a  middling  Colour  between  all  their  Co- 
lours, which  is  whitenefs.     For  whitenefs  is  a 
mean  between  all  Colours,  having  it  felf  indiffe- 
rently to  them  aU,  fo  as  with  equal  facility  to  be 
tinged  with  any  of  them.     A  red  Powder  mixed 
with  a  little  blue,  or  a  blue  with  a  little  red,'  doth 
not  prefcnrly  lofe  its  Colour,  but  a  white  Powder 
mix'd  with  any  Colour  is  prefently  tinged  with 
that  Colour,  •  and  is  equally  capable  of  being 
tinged  with  any  Colour  whatever.     It  has  been 
fhewed  alfo,  that  as  the  Sun's  Light  is  mix'd  of 
all  forts  of  Rays,  fo  its  whitenefs  is  a  mixture  of 
the  Colours  of  all  forts  of  Rays  -,  thofe  Rays  ha- 
ving from  the  beginning  their  feveral  colorific 
qualities  as  well  as  their  feveral  Refrangibilities, 
and  retaining  them  perpetually  unchanged  not- 
withftanding  any  Refradtions  or  Reflexions  they 
may  at  any  time  fuffer,  and  that  whenever  any 
fort  of  the  Sun's  Rays  is  by  any  means  (as  by 
Reflexion  in  Exper.  g.  and   10.  Part  i.    or  by 
Refradion  as  happens  in  all  Refractions)  fepara- 
ted  from  the  reft,  they  then  manifell;  their  proper 
Colours.     Thefe  things  have  been  prov'd,   and 
the  fujn  of  all  this  amounts  to  the  Propofitioa 

here 


I40  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

here  to  be  proved.  For  if  the  Sun's  Light  is 
mix'd  of  feveral  forts  of  Rays,  each  of  which 
have  originally  their  feveral  Refrangibilities  and 
colorific  Qualities,  andnotwithftanding  their  Re- 
.fraftions  and  Reflexions,  and  their  various  Sepa- 
rations or  Mixtures,  keep  thofe  their  original 
Properties  perpetually  the  fame  without  alterati- 
on ;  then  all  the  Colours  in  the  World  muft  be 
fuch  as  conftantly  ought  to  arife  from  the  origi- 
nal colorific  qualities  of  the  Rays  whereof  the 
Li2;hts  confift  by  which  thofe  Colours  are  feen. 
And  therefore  if  the  reafon  of  any  Colour  what- 
ever be  required,  we  have  nothing  elfe  to  do  than 
to  confider  how  the  Rays  in  the  Sun's  Light  have 
by  Reflexions  or  Refraftions,  or  other  caufes,  been 
parted  from  one  another,  or  mixed  together  j  or 
otherwfe  to  find  out  what  forts  of  Rays  are  in  the 
Light  by  which  that  Colour  is  made,  and  in  what 
Proportion ;  and  then  by  the  laft  Problem  to 
learn  the  Colour  which  ought  to  arife  by  mixing 
thofe  Rays  (or  their  Colours)  in  that  proportion. 
I  fpeak  here  of  Colours  fo  far  as  they  arife  from 
Light.  For  they  appear  fometimes  by  other  Cau- 
fes, as  when  by  the  power  of  Phantafy  wc  fee  Co- 
lours in  a  Dream,  or  a  Mad-man  fees  things  be- 
fore him  which  are  not  there;  or  when  we  fee 
Fire  by  flriking  the  Eye,  or  fee  Colours  like  the 
Eye  of  a  Peacock's  Feather,  by  prefTing  our  Eyes 
in  either  corner  whilft  we  look  the  other  way. 
Wliere  thefe  and  fuch  like  Caufes  interpofe  nor, 
the  Colour  always  anfwers  to  the  fort  or  forts 
of  the  Rays  whereof  the  Light  confifts,  as  I 
have  conftantly  found  in  whatever  Phasnomena  of 
Colours  I  have  hitherto  been  able  to  examine. 

I  aiall 


B  O  O  K     I.  141 

I  {hall  in  the  following  Proportions  give  inftan- 
ces  of  this  in  the  Phaenomena  of  chiefeft  note. 


PROP,  VIII.     Prob.  III. 

By  the  difcove7'ed  Properties  of  Light  to 
explain  the  Colours  made  by  Prijms. 

LET  ABC  [in  Fig.  12.]  reprefent  a  Prifnl 
refracting  the  Light  of  the  Sun,  which 
comes  into  a  dark  Chamber  through  a  hole  F  <j> 
almofl  as  broad  as  the  Prifm,  and  let  M  N  re- 
prefent a  white  Paper  on  which  the  refracted 
Light  is  caft,  and  fuppofe  the  moil  refrangible 
or  deepeft  violet-making  Rays  fall  upon  the 
Space  Pttj  the  leaft  refrangible  or  deepeft  red- 
making  Rays  upon  the  Space  T7,  the  rniddle, 
fort  between  the  Indigo-making  and  blue-mu- 
king  Rays  upon  the  Space  Qv,  the  middle  fort 
of  the  green-making  Rays  upon  the  Space  Rp, 
the  middle  fort  between  the  yellow-making  and 
orange-making  Rays  upon  the  Space  S  a-,  and  o- 
ther  intermediate  forts  upon  intermediate  Spa- 
ces. For  fo  the  Spaces  upon  which  the  feveral 
forts  adequately  fall  will  by  reafon  of  the  diffe- 
rent Refrangibility  of  thofe  forts  be  one  lower 
than  another.  Now  if  the  Paper  MN  be  fo 
near  the  Prifm  that  the  Spaces  PT  and  ^-j  do 
not  interfere  with  one  another,  the  diftance  be- 
tween them  T  it  will  be  illuminated  by  all  the 
forts  of  Rays  in  that  proportion  to  one  another 
which  they  have  at  their  very  firft  coming  out 

of 


142  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

of  the  Prifm,  and  confequently  be  white.  But 
the  Spaces  P  T  and  ttT  on  either  hand,  will  not 
be  illuminated  by  them  all,  and  therefore  will 
appear  coloured.  And  particularly  at  P,  where 
the  outmofl  violet-making  Rays  fall  alone,  the 
Colotir  mufi:  be  the  deepeft  violet.  At  Q^here 
the  violet-making  and  indigo-making  Rays  are 
mixed,  it  mufl:  be  a  violet  inclining  much  to 
indigo.  At  R  where  the  violet-making,  indigo- 
making  ,  blue-making ,  and  one  half  of  the 
green-making  Rays  are  mixed  ,  their  Colours 
muft  (by  the  conftrudtion  of  the  fecond  Pro- 
blem )  compound  a  middle  Colour  between  in- 
digo arid  blue.  At  S  where  all  the  Rays  are 
mixed,  except  the  red-making  and  orange-ma- 
king, their  Colours  ought  by  the  fame  Rule  to 
compound  a  faint  blue,  verging  more  to  green 
than  indigo.  And  in  the  progrefs  from  S  to  T, 
this  blue  will  grow  more  and  more  faint  and' 
dilute,  till  at  T,  where  all  the  Colours  begin  to 
be  mixed,  it  ends  in  whitenefs.  ^ 

So  again,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  white  at  r, 
where  the  leaft  refrangible  or  utmoft  red-ma- 
king Rays  are  alone,  the  Colour  mull:  be  the 
deepeft  red.  At  a  the  mixture  of  red  and  o- 
range  will  compound  a  red  inclining  to  orange. 
At  ^  the  mixture  of  red,  orange,  yellow,  and 
one  half  of  the  green  muft  compound  a  middle 
Colour  between  orange  and  yellow.  At  ^  the 
mixture  of  all  Colours  but  violet  and  indigo  will 
compound  a  faint  yellow,  verging  more  to  green 
than  to  orange.  And  this  yellow  will  grow 
more  faint  and  dilute  continually  in  its  progrefs 

from 


B  O  O  K     I.  143 

from  V  to  TT,  where  by  a  mixture  of  all  forts  of 
Rays  it  will  become  white. 

Thefe  Colours  ought  to  appear  were  the  Sun*s 
Light  perfedly  white:  But  becaufe  it  inclines  to 
yellow,  the  Excefs  of  the  yellow-making  Rays 
whereby  'tis  tinged  with  that  Colour,  being 
mixed  with  the  faint  blue  between  S  and  T,  will 
draw  it  to  a  faint  green.  And  fo  the  Colours  In 
order  from  P  to  r  ought  to  be  violet,  indigo, 
blue,  very  faint  green,  white,  faint  yellow,  o- 
range,  red.  Thus  it  is  by  the  computation :  And 
they  that  pleafe  to  view  the  Colours  made  by  a 
Prifm  will  find  it  fo  in  Nature. 

Thefe  are  the  Colours  on  both  fides  the  white 
when  the  Paper  is  held  between  tlie  Prifm  and 
the  Point  X  where  the  Colours  meet,  and  the 
interjacent  white  vaniflies.  For  if  the  Paper  be 
held  flill  farther  off  from  the  Prifm,  the  mofl 
refrangible  and  leaft  refrangible  Rays  will  be 
wanting  in  the  middle  of  the  Light,  and  the  refl . 
of  the  Rays  which  are  found  there,  will  by  mix- 
ture produce  a  fuller  green  than  before.  Alfo 
the.yellowand  blue  will  now  become  lefs  com- 
pounded, alid  by  confequence  more  intenfe  than 
before.     And  this  alfo  agrees  with  experience. 

And  if  one  look  through  a  Prifm  upon  a 
white  Objed:  cncompafTed  with  blacknefs  or 
darknefs,  the  reafon  of  the  Colours  arifing  on 
the  edges  is  much  the  fame,  as  will  appear  to 
ons  that  fhall  a  little  confider  it.  If  a  black  Ob- 
jed:  be  encompafTed  with  a  white  one,  the  Co- 
lours which  appear  through  the  Prifm  are  to  be 
derived  from  the  Light  of  the  white  one,  fpread- 
ing  into  the  Regions  of  the  black,  and  therefore 

they 


144  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

they  appear  in  a  contrary  order  to  that,  when  a 
white  Objeft  is  furrounded  with  black.  And  the 
fame  is  to  be  underftood  when  an  Obje6l  is  view- 
ed, whofe  parts  are  fome  of  them  lefs  luminous 
than  others.  For  in  the  borders  of  the  more  and  lefs 
luminous  Parts,  Colours  ought  always  by  the  fame 
Principles  to  arife  from  the  Excefs  of  the  Light 
of  the  more  luminous,  and  to  be  of  the  fame 
kind  as  if  the  darker  parts  were  black,  but  yet  to 
be  more  faint  and  dilute. 

What  is  faid  of  Colours  made  by  Prifms  may 
be  eafily  applied  to  Colours  made  by  the  GlalTes 
of  Telefcopes  or  Microfcopes,  or  by  the  Hu- 
mours of  the  Eye.     For  if  the  Objedl-glafs  of 
a  Telefcope  be  thicker  on  one  fide  than  on  the 
other,  or  if  one  half  of  the  Glafs,  or  one  half 
of  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye  be  cover'd  with  any 
opake  fubftance  j  the  Objedi-glafs,  or  that  part  of 
it  or  of  the  Eye  which  is  not  cover'd,  may  be 
confider'd  as  a  Wedge  with  crooked  Sides,  and 
*  every  Wedge  of  Glafa  or  other  pellucid  Subftance 
has  the  effect  of  a  Prifm  in  refradiing  the  Light 
which  paffes  through  it  *. 

How  the  Colours  in  the  ninth  and  tenth  Ex- 
periments of  the  lirfl  Part  arife  from  the  diffe- 
rent Reflexibility  of  Light,  is  evident  by  whar 
was  there  faid.  But  it  is  obfervable  in  the  ninth 
Experiment,  that  whilft  the  Sun's  dired:  Light 
is  yellow,  the  Excefs  of  the  blue-making  Rays 
in  the  refleded  beam  of  Light  MN,  fuffices 
only  to  bring  that  yellow  to  a  pale  white  incli- 
ning to  blue,  and  not  to  tinge  it  with  a  mani- 

*  See  eur  AuthorV  Left.  Optic.  Part  II.  Se^.  II.  fa^.  i6g,  &(. 

feftly 


B  Q  O  K     I.  145 

feftly  blue  Colour.  To  obtain  therefore  a  better 
blue,  I  ufed  inftead  of  the  yellow  Light  of  the 
Sun  the  white  Light  of  the  Clouds^  by  varying  a 
little  the  Experiment,  as  follows. 

Exper,  16.  Let  HFG  [in  Fig.  13.]  repre- 
fent  a  Prifm  in  the  open  Air,  and  S  the  Eye  of 
the  Spedator,  viewing  the  Clouds  by  their 
Light  coming  into  the  Prifm  at  the  Plane  Side 
FIGK,  and  refleded  in  it  by  its  Bafe  HEIG, 
and  thence  going  out  through  its  Plane  Side 
H  E  F  K  to  the  Eye.  And  when  the  Prifm  and 
Eye  are  conveniently  placed,  fo  that  the  Angles 
of  Incidence  and  Reflexion  at  the  Bafe  may  be 
about  40  Degrees,  the  Spe£latpr  will  fee  a  Bow 
MN  of  a  blue  Colour,  running  from  one  End 
of  the  Bafe  to  the  other,  with  the  Concave  Side 
towards  him,  and  the  Part  of  the  Bafe  IMNG 
beyond  this  Bow  will  be  brighter  than  the  other 
Part  E  M  N  H  on  the  other  Side  of  it.  This  blue 
Colour  M  N  being  made  by  nothing  elfe  than  by 
Reflexion  of  a  fpecular  Superficies,  feems  fo  odd 
a  Phaenomenon,  and  fo  difficult  to  be  explain- 
ed by  the  vulgar  Hypothefis  of  Philofophers, 
that  I  could  not  but  think  it  deferved  to  be  taken 
Notice  of.  Now  for  underftanding  the  Rea- 
fgn  of  it,  fuppofe  the  Plane.  ABC  to  cut  the 
Plane  Sides  and  Bafe  of  the  Prifm  perpendicu-r 
larly.  From  the  Eye  to  the  Line  B  C,  wherein 
that  Plane  cuts  the  Bafe,  draw  the  Lines  S^ 
and  S/',  in  the  Angles  S^^:  50  degr.  i,  and  Stc 
49  degr.  Vt,  and  the  Point  p  will  he  the  Limit 
beyond  which  none  of  the  moft  refrangible 
Rays  can  pafs  through  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm, 
and  be  refraded,   whofe  Incidence  is  fuch  thai; 

L  t'hey 


14,6  OPTIC  K  S. 

they  may  be  refieded  to  the  Eye  ;  and  the  Point 
t  will  be  the  like  Limit  for  the  leaft  refrangi- 
ble. Rays,    that  is,  beyond  which  none  of  them 
can  pafs  through  the  Bafe,    whoie  Incidence  is 
fuch  that  by  Reflexion  they  may  come  to  the 
Eye.  .  And  the  Point  r  taken    in-  the    middle 
Way  betv/een  p  and  ^,    will  be  the  like  Limit 
for  the  meanly .  refrangible  Rays.     And  there- 
fore all  the    leaft    refrangible  Rays  which  fall 
upon  the  Bafe  beyond  /,  that  is,  between  t  and  B, 
and  can  come  from  thence  to  the  Eye,  will  be 
refledted  thither :    But   on  this  fide  t^    that  is, 
between  t  and  f,    many  of  thefe  Rays  will  be 
tranfmitted  through  the  Bafe.     And  all  the  moft 
refrangible  Pvays  which  fall  upon  the  Bafe  be- 
yond ^,  that  is,  between  p  and  B,  and  can  by 
Reflexion  come  from  thence  to  the  Eye,  will  be 
refleded  thither,    but  every  where   between   p 
and  r,  many  of  thefe  Rays  will  get  through  the 
Bafe,  and  be  refraded  j    and  the  fame  is  to  be 
underftood  of  the  meanly  refrangible  Rays  on 
either  fide  of  the  Point  r.     Whence  it  follows, 
that  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm  rriufl  every  where 
between  t  and  B,  by  a  total  Reflexion  of  all  forts 
of   Rays  to  the  Eye,    look  white  and  bright. 
And  every  where  between  p  and  C,  by  reafon  of 
the  Tranfmiflion  of  many  Rays  of  every  fort, 
look  more  pale,  obfcure,  and  dafk.     But  at  r, 
and  in  other  Places  between  p  and  /,  where  all 
the  more  refrangible  Rays  are  refledied  to  the 
Eye,  and  many  of  the  lefs  refrangible  are.  tranf- 
.mitted,   the  Excefs  of  the  moft  refrangible  in 
the  refleded  Light  will  tinge  that  Light  with 
their  Colour,   which  is  violet  and  blue.     Arid- 

this 


B  O  O  K     I.  147 

this  happens  by  taking  the  Line  C/r/B  any 
.where  between  the  Ends  of  the  Prilm  H  G 
and  EI. 


PROP,  IX.  prob.  r\^. 

By  the  difcGvered  Pf'operties  of  Lighi  to 
explain  the  Colours  of  the  Rain-bow, 

THIS  Bow  never  appears,  but  where  it 
n|ins  in  the  Sun-fhine,  and  may  be  made 
artiticially  by  fpouting  up  Water  which  may 
break  aloft,  and  fcatter  into  Drops,  and  fall  down 
like  Rain.  For  the  Sun  fliining  upon  thefe 
Drops  certainly  caufes  the  Bow  to  appe^f*  to  a 
Spectator  ftanding  in  a  due  Polition  to  the  Rain 
and  Sun.  And  hence  it  is  now  agreed  upon, 
that  this  Bow  is  made  by  Refraction  of  the  Sun's 
Light  in  Drops  of  falling  Rain.  This^was  un- 
derllood  by  fome  of  the  Antients,  and  of  late 
more  fully  difcover'd  and  explain'd  by  the  fa- 
mous Antoniiis  de  Dominis  Archbilhop  of  ^pa- 
lato,  in  his  Book  De  Radiis  Visits  &  Liicis,  pub- 
lifhed  by  his  Friend  Bartolus  at  Venice^  in  the 
Year  161 1,.  and  written  above  20  Yeai's  before. 
For  he  teacher'  there  how  the  interior  Bow  is 
made  in  round  Drops  of  Raiii  by  two  Refracti- 
ons of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  one  Reflexion  be- 
tween them,  and  the  exterior  by  two  Refradti- 
ons,  and  two  forts  of  Reflexions  between  them 
in  each  Drop  of  Vv^ater,  and  proves  his  Expli- 
cations by  Experiments  made  witba  Phial  full 
lof  Water,    and    with  Globes    of   Glafs  filled 

L  2  with 


148  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

with  Water,  and  placed  in  the  Sun  to  make  the 
Colours  of  the  two  Bows  appear  in  them.  The 
fame  Explication  Des-Cartes  hath  purfued  in  his- 
Meteors,  and  mended  that  of  the  exterior  Bow. 
But  whilft  they  underftood  not  the  true  Ori- 
gin of  Colours,  it's  neceffary  to  purfue  it  here 
a  little  farther.  For  underftanding  therefore  how 
the  Bow  is  made,  let  a  Drop  of  Rain,  or  any 
other  fpherical  tranfparent  Body  be  reprefented 
by  the  Sphere  BNFG,  [in  Fig.  14.]  defcribed 
with  the  Center  C,  and  Semi-diameter  C  N. 
And  let  AN  be  one  of  the  Sun's  R^s  inci- 
dent upon  it  at  N,  and  thence  refradled  to  F, 
where  let  it  either  go  out  of  the  Sphere  by  Re- 
fraction towards  V,  or  be  refle<5ted  to  G ;  and 
at  G "  let  it  either  go  out  by  Refradion  to  R,  or 
be  refledled  to  H;  and  at  H  let  it  go  out  by 
Refrad:ion  towards  S,  cutting  the  incident  Ray 
in  Y.  Produce  AN  and  RG,  till  they  meet  in 
X,  and  upon  AX  and  NF,  let  fall  the  Per- 
pendiculars CD  and  CE,  and  produce  CD  till 
it  fall  upon  the  Circumference  at  L.  Parallel  to 
the  incident  Ray  AN  draw  the  Diameter  B  Q^ 
and  let  the  Sine  .of  Incidence  out  of  Air  into 
Water  be  to  the  Sine  of  Refradion  as  I  to  R. 
Now,  if  you  fuppofe  the  Point  of  Incidence  N 
to  move  from  the  Point  B,  continually  till  it 
come  to  L,  the  Arch  Q  F  will  firil  increafe  and 
then  decrcafe,  and  fo  will  the  Angle  A  X  R 
which  the  Rays  A  N  and  G  R  contain ;  and  the 
Arch  QJ'  and  Angle  AXR  will  be  biggeft 
when  ND  is  to  CN  as  -/H^RR  to  v/  3  RR,  in 
which  cafe  NE  will  be  to  ND  as  2  R  to  I.  Alfo 
the  Angle  AYS,  which  the  Rays  AN  and  HS 

contain 


B  O  O  K     I.  149 

contain  will  firft  decreafe,  and  then  increafe  and 
grow  leaft  when  ND  is  to  CN  as  y'llZlRK  to 
^8RR,  in  which  cafe  NE  will  be  to  ND,  as 
3  Rtol.  And  fo  the  Angle  which  the  next  emer- 
gent Ray  ( that  is,  the  emergent  Ray  after  three 
Reflexions)  contains  with  tlie  incident  Ray  AN 
will  come  to  its  Limit  when  ND  is  to  CN 
as  y/li— KR  to  /  15  RR,  in  which  cafe  NE  will 
be  to  N  D  as  4  R  to  I.  And  the  Angle  which  the 
Ray  next  after  that  Emergent,  that  is,  the  Ray 
emergent  after  four  Reflexions,  contains  with  the 
Incident,  will  come  to  its  Limit,  when  N  D  is  to 
CN  as  /ii — KK  to  v/  24  RR,  in  which  cafe  NE 
will  be  to  ND  as  5  R  to  I  i  and  fo  on  infinitely, 
the  Numbers  3,8,  15,  24,  &c.  being  gather'd  by 
continual  Addition  of  the  Terms  of  the  arithme- 
tical Progreflion  3,  5,  7,  9,  ^c.  The  Truth  of  all 
this  Mathematicians  will  ealily  examine.*      >  . 

Now  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  as  when  the  Sun 
comes  to  his  Tropicks,  Days  increafe  and  decrcafe 
but  a  very  little  for  a  great  while  together  j  fo  when 
by  increaling  the  diflance  CD,  thefe  Angles  come 
to  their  Limits,  they  vary  their  quantity  but  very 
little  for  fome  time  together,  and  therefore  a  fir 
greater  Number  of  the  Rays  which  fill  upon  all 
the  Points  N  in  the  Quadrant  BL,  {hall  emcrg.  in 
theLimits  of  thefe  Angles,  than  in  any  other  Incli- 
nations. And  farther  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  the 
Rays  which  differ  in  Refrangibility  will  have  dif- 
ferent Limits  of  their  Angles  of  Emergence,  and 
by  confequence  according  to  their  different  De^ 
grees  of  Refrangibility  emerge  moft  copioufly 

_,     *  This  is  demonjirated  in  our  Author'j  Ledl.  Optic  Part  I.  Se^l.  IV. 
Prop.  35  and  36. 

L  3  in 


150  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

in  different  Angles,  and  being  feparated  from  one 
another  appear  each  in  their  proper  Colours, 
And  v/hat  thole  Angles  are  may  be  eaiily  ga- 
ther'd  from  the  foregoing  Theorem  by  Com- 
putation. 

For  in  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  the  Sines  I 
and  R  (as  was  found  above)  are  io8  and  8i, 
and  thence  by  Computation  the  greateft  Angle 
AXR  will  be  found  42  Degrees  and  2  Minutes, 
and  the  kail  Angle  AYS,  50  Degrees  and  c^j 
Minutes.  And  in  the  moll  refrangible  Rays  the 
Sines  I  and  R  are  109  and  81,  and  thence  by 
Computation  the  greateft  Angle  AXR  wilh  be 
found  40  Degrees  and  17  Minutes,  and  the  leaft 
Angle  AYS  54  Degrees  and  7  Minutes. 

Suppofe  now  \^\'^x.  O  [  in  Fig.  15.  ]  is  the  Spe- 
6lator's  Eve,  and  OP  a  Line  drawn  parallel  to 
the.  Sun's 'Rays,  and  let  POE,  POF,  POG, 
POH,  be  Angles  of  40  Degr.  17  Min.  42  Degr. 
2  Mm.  50  Degr.  c^-j  Min.  and  54  Degr.  7  Min. 
refpe6tively,  and  thefe  Angles  turned  about 
their  common  Side  O  P,  fhall  with  their  other 
Sides  OE,  OF;  OG,  OH,  defcribe  the  Verges 
of  two  Rain-bows  AF  BE  and  CHDG.  Foi* 
if  E,  F,  G,  H,  be  drops  placed  any  where  in 
the  conical  Superficies  defcribed  by  OE,  OF, 
OG,  OH,  and  be  illuminated  by  the  Sun's  Rays 
SE,  SF,  SG,  SH;  the  Angle  SEO  being  e- 
qual  to  the  Angle  POE,  or  40  Degr.  17  Min. 
ihall  be  the  greateft  Angle  in  which  the  moft 
refrangible  Rays  can  after  one  Pvetiexion  be  re- 
fradled  to  the  Eye,  and  therefore  all  the  Drops 
in  the  Line  O  E  Inall  fend  the  moft  refrangible 
Rays  moft  copioufly  to  the  Eye,    and  thereby 

ftrike 


BOO  KllC  fi5a 

i\nkt  the  ^fes  with  the  deepeft  violet  Colour  in 
that  Region.  And  in  like  manner  the^^ngle  SFO 
being  equal  to  the  Angle  POF,  or  42  Degr. 
2  Min.  fhall  be  the  greateft  in  which  the  Icall:  re- 
frangible Rays  after  one  Reflexion  can  emerge 
out  of  the  Drops,  and  therefore  thofe  Rays 
.fliall  come  moft  copioufly  to  the  Eye  from  the 
Drops  in  the  Line  O  F,  and  flrike  the  Senfes  with 
the  deepeft  red  Colour  in  that  Region.  And  by 
■the  fame  Argument,  the  Rays  which  have  inter- 
mediate Degrees  of  Refrangibility  fliall  comeiinofl 
copioufly  from  Drops  between  E  and  F,  and'llirike 
the  Senies  with  the  intermediate  Colours,  in  the 
Order  which  their  Degrees  of  Refrangibility  rc- 
€|uiie,  that  is  in  the  Progfefs  'from  E  toF,  or 
from  the  infide  of  the  Bow  to  the  outfide  in  this 
order,  violet,  indigo,  blue,  green,  ycllow,"^^  orange, 
red.  But  the  violet,  by  the  mixtiue  of  the  white 
Light  of  the  Clouds,  will  appear  laint  and  in- 
cline to  purple. 

-  Again,  the  Angle  SGO  being  equal  to  the 
Angfe  POG,  or  5oGr.  51  Min.  fhall  be  the  Iciift 
Angle  in  which  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  can 
after  two  Reflexions  emerge  out  of  the  Drops, 
and  therefore  the  leafl  refrangible  Rays  lliall 
come  moffc  copioufly  to  the  Eye  from  the  Drops 
i-n  the  Line  OG,  and  firike  the  StnfQ  with  the 
deepeft  red  in  that  Region.  And  the  Angle 
SHO  being  equal  to  the  Angle  POH,  or  54  Gr.- 
7  Min.  fliall  be  the  leafl  Angle,  in  which  the  moft 
refrangible  Rays  after  two  Pvcfiexions  can  emerge 
out  of  the  Drops  J  and  therefore  thofe  Rays 
fhall  come  mofl  copioufly  to  the  Eye  froni^ 
the  Drops  in  the  Line  OFI,  and  ilrike  the  Senfes 

L  4  with 


152  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

with  the  deepeft  violet  in  that  Region.  And  by  the 
fame  Argument,  the  Drops  in  the  Regions  be- 
tween G  and  H  fliall  ftrike  the  Senfe  with  the  in- 
termediate Colours  in  the  Order  which  their 
Degrees  of  Refrangibility  require,  that  is,  in  the 
Progrefs  from  G  to  H,  or  from  the  infide  of  the 
Bow  to  the  outiide  in  this  order,  red,  orange,  yel- 
low, green,  blue,  indigo,  violet.  And  fmce 
thefe  four  Lines  OE,  OF,  OG,  OH,  may  be 
■fituated  any  where  in  the  above-mention'd  co- 
iiical  Superficies ;  what  is  faid  of  the  Drops 
and  Colours  in  thefe  Lines  is  to  be  underftood 
of  the  Drops  and  Colours  every  where  in  thofe 
Superficies. 

Thus  iliall  there  be  made  tv^o  Bows  of  Co- 
lours, an  interior  and  ftronger,  by  one  Reflexion 
jn  the  Drops,    and  an  exterior  and  fainter   by 
two  J    for  the  Light  becomes    fainter  by  every 
Reflexion.     And  their  Colours  fhall  lie  in  a  con- 
trary  Order  to  one  another,  the  red  of  both  Bows 
bordering    upon  the  Space  GF,    which  is  be- 
tween the  Bows.      The  Breadth   of  the    inte- 
rior Bow  EOF  meafured  crofs  the  Colours  fhall 
be  I  Degr.  45  Min.  and  the  Breadth  of  the  ex- 
terior GOH  fhall  be  3  Degr.  10  Min.  and  the 
diflance  between  them  GOF  fhall  be  8  Gr.  15 
Min.    the  greateft  Semi-diameter  of  the  inner- 
mofl,  that  is,  the  Angle  POF  being  42  Gr.  2 
Min.  and  the  leafl  Semi-diameter  of  the  outer- 
mofl  POG,   being  50  Gr.  57  Min.     Thefe  are 
the  Meafures  of   the  Bows,   as  they  would,  be 
were  the  Sun  but  a  Point ;   for  by  the  Breadth 
of  his  Body,  the  Breadth  of  the  Bows  will  be  in^ 
creafed,  and  ^heir  Diflance  decreafed  by  half  a 

Degree,' 


B  O  O  K     I.  153 

Degreq,  and  (o  the  breadth  of  the  interior  Iris 
will  be  2  Degr.  J5  Min.  that  of  the  exterior  3 
Degr.  40  Min.  their  diftance  8  Degr.  25  Min. 
the  greateft  Semi-diameter  of  the  interior  Bow 
42  Degr.  17  Min.  and  the  leail  of  the  exterior 
50  Degr.  42  Min.     And  fuch  are  the  Dimenfions 
of  the  Bows  in  the  Heavens  found  to  be  very 
nearly,    when  their  Colours  appear  ftrong  and 
perfed:.     For  once,  by  fuch  means  as  I  then  liad, 
I  .meafured  the  greateft  Semi-diameter  of  the 
interior  Iris  about  42  Degrees,  and  the  breadth 
of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  in  that  Iris  63  or 
64  Minutes,  befides  the  outmoft  faint  red  ob- 
fcured  by   the  brightnefs   of  the    Clouds,    for 
which  we  may  allow  3  or  4  Minutes  more. ,  The 
breadth  of  the  blue  was  about  40  Minutes  more 
belides  the  violet,  .which  was  fo  much  obfcu- 
red  by  the  brightnefs  of  the  Clouds,  that  I  could 
not   meafure    its    breadth.      But  fuppofing  the 
breadth  of  the  blue  and  violet  together  to  equal 
that  of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  together,  the 
whole  breadth  of  this  Iris  will  be  about  2  t  De- 
grees, as  above.     The  leail  diftance  between  this 
Iris  and  the  exterior  Iris  was  about  8  De2;rees  and 
30  Minutes.     The  exterior  Iris  was  broader  than 
the  interior,  but  fo  faint,  efpecially  on  the  blue 
fide,  that  I  could  not  meafure  its  breadth  di- 
ftindlly.     At  another  time  when  both  Bows  ap- 
peared more  diftind:,  I  meafured  the  breadth  of 
the  interior  Iris  2  Gr.  10',  and  the  breadth  of  the 
red,  yellow  and  green  in  the  exterior  Iris,  was  to 
the  breadth  of  the  fame  Colours  in  the  interior 
as  3  to  2. 

this 


154  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

This  Explication  of  the  Rain-bow  is  yet  far- 
ther confirmed  by  the  known  Experiment  (made 
by  Antonius  de  Domini s  and  Des-Cartes )  of 
hanging  up  any  where  in  the  Sun-iliine  a  Glafs 
Globe  filled  with  Water,  and  viewing  it  ih  fuch 
a  poflure,  that  the  Rays  which  come  from  the 
Globe  to  the  Eye  may  contain  with  the  Sun's 
Rays  an  Angle  of  either  42  or  50  Degrees.  ^  For 
if  the  Angle  be  about  42  or  43  Degrees,  the 
Spectator  ( fuppofe  at  O )  {hall  fee  a  full  i:ed 
Colour  in  that  fide  of  the  Globe  oppofed  to 
the  Sun  as  'tis  reprefented  at  F,  and  if  that  An- 
^gle  become  lefs  (fuppofe  by  depreflnig  the  Globe 
to  E)  there  will  appear  other  Colours,  yellow, 
green  and  blue  fucceflive  in  the  fame  fide  of 
the  Globe.  But  if  the-  Angle  be  made  about 
50  Degrees  (fuppofe  by  lifting  up  the  Globe  to 
G)  there  will  appear  a  red  Colour  in  that  Me 
of  the  Globe  towards  the  Sjun,  and  if  the  An- 
gle be  made  greater  (fuppofe  by  lifting  up  tlie 
Globe  to  H)  the  red  will  turn  fucceffively  to 
the  other  Colours,  yellow,  green  and  blue.  The 
fame  thing  I  have  tried,  by  letting  a  Globe  reft, 
and  raifing  or  depreifing  the  Eye  ,  or  other- 
wife  moving  it  to  make  the  Angle  of  ajufl  mag* 
nitude.  ;u  y-. 

I  have  heard  it  reprefented,  that  if  the  Light 
of  a  Candle  be  refraded  by  a  Prifm  to  the  Eye ; 
when  the  blue  Colour  falls  upon  the  Eye,  the 
Spe<5tator  {hall  fee  red  in  the  Prifm,  and  when 
the  red  falls  upon  the  Eye  he  fhall  fee  blue ; 
and  if  this  were  certain ,  the  Colours  of  .  the 
Globe  and  Rain-bow  ought  to  appear  in  a.  con- 
nary  order  to  what  we  find.  But  the  Colours 
^  of 


BOOK     I.  155 

of  the  Candle  being  very  faint,  the  miftake  feems 
to  arife  from  the  difficulty  of  difcerning  what 
Colours  fall  on  the  Eye.  For,  on  the  contrary, 
I  have  fometimes  had  occafion  to  obferve  in  the 
Sun's  Light  refraded  by  a  Prifm,  that  the  Spe- 
ctator always  fees  that  Colour  in  the  Prifm  which 
falls  upon  his  Eye.  And  the  fame  I  have  found 
true  alfo  in  Candle-light.  For  when  the  Prifm 
is  moved  (lowly  from  the  Line  which  is  drawn 
diredly  from  the  Candle  to  the  Eye,  the  red  ap- 
pears firft  in  the  Prifm  and  then  the  blue,  and 
therefore  each  of  them  is  feen  when  it  falls  upon 
the  Eye.  For  the  red  pafTes  over  the  Eye  firft, 
and  then  the  blue. 

The  Light  which  comes  through  drops  of 
Rain  by  two  Refra6tions  without  any  Reflexion, 
ought  to  appear  ftrongeft  at  the  diftance  of  a- 
bout.  26-  Degrees  from  the  Sun,  and  to  decay 
gradually  both  ways  as  the  diftance  from  him  in- 
creafes  and  decreafes.  And  the  fame  is  to  be  un- 
derftood  of  Light  tranfmitted  through  fphe- 
"rical  Hail-ftones.  And  if  the  Hail  be  a  little 
flatted ,  as  it  often  is ,  the  Light  tranfmitted 
may  grow  fo  ftrong  at  a  little  lefs  diftance  than 
that  of  26  Degrees,  as  to  form  a  Halo  about 
the  Sun  or  Moon  ;  which  Halo,  as  often  as  the 
Hail-ftones  are  duly  figured  may  be  colour'd, 
and  then  it  muft  be  red  within  by  the  leaft  re- 
frangible Rays,  and  blue  without  by  the  moft 
refrangible  ones,  efpecially  if  the  Hail-ftones 
have"  opake  Globules  of  Snow  in  their  center 
to  intercept  the  Light  within  the  Halo  {asHu^ 
genius  has  obferv'd)  and  make  the  infide  there- 
of more  diftind')y  defined  than  it  would  other- 
wife 


156  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

wife  be.  For  fuch  Hail-ftones,  though  fpheri- 
cal,  by  terminating  the  Light  by  the  Snow, 
may  make  a  Halo  red  within  and  colourlefs 
without,  and  darker  in  the  red  than  without, 
as  Halos  ufed  to  be.  For  of  thole  Rays  which 
pafs  clofe  by  the  Snow  the  Rubriform  will  be 
ieaft  refracted,  and  fo  come  to  the  Eye  in  the  di- 
refteft  Lines. 

The  Light  which  pafTes  through  a  drop  of 
Rain  after  two  Refra6:ions,  and  three  or  more 
Reflexions,  is  fcarce  ftrong  enough  to  caufe  a 
fenfible  Bow;  but  in  thofe  Cylinders  of  Ice  by 
which  Hiigenius  explains  the  Parhelia^  it  may 
perhaps  be  fenfible. 


PROP.  X.     Prob.  V. 
By  the  difccvered  Properties  of  Light  to 
explain  the  permanent  Colours  of  Natu- 
ral Bodies, 

THESE  Colours  arife  from  hence ,  that 
fome  natural  Bodies  refled:  fome  forts  of 
Rays,  others  other  forts  more  copioufly  than  the 
reft.  Minium  refledts  the  Ieaft  refrangible  or 
red-rfiaking  Rays  moft  copioufly,  and  thence  ap- 
pears red.  Violets  refled:  the  moft  refrangible 
moft  copioufly,  and  thence  have  their  Colour, 
and  fo  of  other  Bodies.  Every  Body  refledls  the 
Rays  of  its  own  Colour  more  copioufly  than  the 
reft,  and  from  their  excefs  and  predominance  in 
the  refleded  Light  has  its  Colour. 

Exper^ 


B  O  O  K     I.  157 

Exper.  ij.  For  if  in  the  homogeneal  Lights 
obtained  by  the  folution  of  the  Problem  pro- 
pofed  in  the  fourth  Propolition  of  the  firft  Part 
of  this  Book,  you  place  Bodies  of  feveral  Co- 
lours, you  will  find,  as  I  have  done,  that  every 
Body  looks  mofl  fpiendid  and  luminous  in  the 
Light  of  its  own  Colour.  Cinnaber  in  the  ho- 
mogeneal red  Light  is  mofl  refplendent,  in  the 
.green  Light  it  is  manifeftly  lefs  refplendent,  and 
in  jhe  blue  Light  ftill  lefs.  Lidigo  in  the  vi- 
olet blue  Light  is  moll  refplendent,  and  its  fplen- 
dor  is  gradually  diminiih'd,  as  it  is  removed 
thence  by  degrees  through  the  green  and  yellow 
Light  to  the  red.  By  a  Leek  the  green  Light, 
and  next  that  the  blue  and  yellow  which  com- 
pound green,  are  more  flrongly  refle6ted  than  the 
other  Colours  red  and  violet,  and  fo  of  the  reft. 
But  to  make  thefe  Experiments  the  more  mani- 
feft,  fuch  Bodies  ought  to  be  chofen  as  have  the 
fulleft  and  moft  vivid  Colours,  and  two  of  thofe 
Bodies  are  to  be  compared  together.  Thus,  for 
inftance,  if  Cinnaber  and  ultra-nMxv'mt  blue,  or 
fome  other  full  blue  be  held  together  in  the  red 
homogeneal  Light,  they  will  both  appear  red, 
but  the  Cinnaber  will  appear  of  a  ftrongly  lumi- 
nous and  refplendent  red ,  and  the  ultra-mz- 
rine  blue  of  a  faint  obfcure  and  dark  red ;  and 
if  they  be  held  together  in  the  blue  homogeneal ' 
Light,  they  will  both  appear  blue,  but  the  ultra- 
marine  will  appear  of  a  ftrongly  luminous  and 
refplendent  blue,  and  the  Cinnaber  of  a  faint 
and  dark  blue.  Which  puts  it  out  of  difpute, 
that  the  Cinnaber  reflecfts  the  red  Light  much 
more  copioufly  than  the  ////n;-marine  doth,  and 
2  the 


158  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  ulfra-m^i'lne  refleds  the  blue  Light  much 
more  copioully  than  theCinnaber  doth.  The  fame 
Experiment  may  be  tried  fuccefsfully  with  red 
Lead  and  Indigo,  or  with  any  other  two  colour'd 
Bodies,  if  due  allowance  be  made  for  the  diffe- 
rent ftrength  or  wealoiefs  of  their  Colour  and 
Light. 

And  as  the  reafon  of  the  Colours  of  natural 
Bodies  is  evident  by  thefe  Experiments,  fo  it  is. 
farther  confirmed  and  put  pafl  difpute  by  ,the 
two  firft  Experiments  of  the  firft  Part,  where- 
by 'twas  proved  in  fuch  Bodies  that  the  reflefed 
Lights  which  differ  in  Colours  do  differ  alfo  in 
degrees  of  Refrangibility.^  For  thence  it's  cer- 
tain, that  fome  Bodies  reflect  the  more  refran- 
gible, others  the  lefs  refrangible  Rays  more  co- 
piouily. 

And  that  this  is  not  only  a  true  reafon  of  thefe 
Colours,  but  even  the  only  reafon,  may  appear 
farther  from  this  Confideration,  that  the  Colour 
of  homogeneal  Light  cannot  be  changed  by  the 
Reflexion  of  natural  Bodies. 

For  if  Bodies  by  Reflexion  cannot  in  the  leafl 
change  the  Colour  of  any  one  fort  of  Rays,  they 
cannot  appear  colour'd  by  any  other  means  than 
by  refle(^ting  thofe  which  either  are  of  their 
own  Colour,  or  which  by  mixture  muft  pro- 
duce it. 

But  in  trying  Experiments  of  this  kind  care 
muft  be  had  that  the  Light  be  fufficiently  ho- 
mogeneal. For  if  Bodies  be  illuminated  by  the 
ordinary  prifmatick  Colours,  they  will  appear 
neither  of  their  own  Day-light  Colours,  nor  of 
the  Colour  of  the  Light  caft  on  them,  but  of 

fome 


BOOK!.  159 

feme  middle  Colour  between  both,  as  I  have 
found  by  Experience.  Thus  red  Lead  (for  in- 
ftance )  illuminated  with  the  ordinary  prifma- 
"tick  green  will  not  appear  either  red  or  green, 
but  orange  or  yellow,  or  between  yellow  and 
green,  accordingly  as  the  green  Light  by  which 
'tis  illuminated  is  more  or  lefs  compounded. 
For  becaufe  red  Lead  appears  red  when  illumi- 
nated with  white  Light ,  wherein  all  forts  of 
Rays  are  equally  mix'd,  and  in  the  green  Light 
all  forts  of  Rays  are  not  equally  mix'd,  the  Lx- 
cefs  of  the  yellow-making  ,  green-making  and 
blue-making  Rays  in  the  incident  green  Light,' 
will  caufe  thofe  Rays  to  abound  fo  niuch  in  the 
refle<^ted  Light,  as  to  draw  the  Colour  from  red 
towards  their  Colour.  And  becaufe  the  red  Lead 
refle(fts  the  red-making  Rays  moft  copioufly  in 
proportion  to  their  number,  *and  next  after  them 
the  orange-making  and  yellow-making  Rays ; 
thefe  Rays  in  the  refledted  Light  will  be  more  in 
proportion  to  the  Light  than  they  were  in  the  in- 
cident green  Light,  and  thereby  will  draw  the 
refleded  Light  from  green  towards  their  Co- 
lour. And  therefore  the  red  Lead  will  appear 
neither  red  nor  green,  but  of  a  Colour  between 
both. 

In  tranfparently  colour'd  Liquors  'tis  obfer- 
vable,  that  their  Colour  ufes  to  vary  with  their 
thicknefs.  Thus,  for  inftance,  a  red  Liquor  in 
a  conical  Glafs  held  between  the  Light  and  the 
Eye,  looks  of  a  pale  and  dilute  yellow  at  the 
bottom  where  'tis  thin,  and  a  little  higher  where 
'tis  thicker  grows  orange,  and  where  'tis  ftili 
thicker  becomes  red,    and  where  'tis  thickeft 

V  the 


i6o  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  red  is.deepefl  anddarkeft.  For  it  is  to  be 
conceiv'd  that  fuch  a  Liquor  flops  the  indigo- 
making  and  violet-making  Rays  moft  eafily,  the 
blue-making  Rays  more  difficultly,  the  green-' 
making  Rays  ftill  more  difficultly,  and  the  red- 
making  moft  difficultly :  And  that  if  the  thick- 
nefs  of  the  Liquor  be  only  fo  much  as  fuffices 
to  Hop  a  competent  number  of  the  violet-ma- 
king and  indigo-making  Rays,  without  dimi- 
nifliing  much  the  number  of  the  reft,  the  reft 
muft  (by  Prop.  6.  Part  2.)  compound  a  pale 
yellow.  But  if  the  Liquor  be  fo  much  thicker 
as  to  ftop  alfo  a  great  number  of  the  blue-ma- 
king* Rays,  and  fo^ie  of  the  ^reen-making,  the 
reft  muft  compound  an  orange  j  and  where  it  is 
fo  thick  as  to  ftop  alfo  a  great  number  of  the 
green-making  and  a  confiderable  number  of  the 
yellow-making,  the  I'eft  muft  begin  to  compound 
a  red,  and  this  red  muft  grow  deeper  and  darker 
as  the  yellow-making  and  orange-making  Rays 
are  more  and  more  ftopp'd  by  increafmg  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Liquor,  fo  that  few  Rays  befides 
the  red-making  can  get  through.  • 

Of  this  kind  is  an  Experiment  lately  related 
to  me  by  Mr.  Halley,  who,  in  diving  deep  ,  into 
the  Sea  in  a  diving  Veftel,  found  in  a  clear  Sun- 
fhine  Day,  that  when  he  was  funk  many  Fa- 
thoms deep  into  the  Water,  the  upper  part  of 
his  Hand  on  which  the  Sun  ftione  dired:ly 
through  the  Water  and  through  a  fmall  Glafs 
Window  in  the  Vefiel  appeared  of  a  red  Co- 
lour, like  that  of  a  Damask  Rofe,  and  the  Wa- 
ter below  and  the  under  part  of  his  Hand 
illuminated  by  Light  refleded  from  the  Water 

below 


BOOK     I.  i6i 

below  look'd  green.  For  thence  it  may  be  ga- 
ther'd,  that  the  Sea- Water  refleds  back  the  violet 
and  bhie-making  Rays  moft  eafily,  ,and  lets  the  • 
red-making  Rays  pafs  moft  freely  and  copioufly  to 
ffreat  Depths.  For  thereby  the  Sun's  direct  Light 
at  all  great  Depths,  by  reafcn  of  the  predomi- 
nating red-making  Rays,  muft  appear  red  j  and 
the  greater  the  Depth  is,  the  fuller  and  in- 
tenfer  muft  that  red  be.  And  at  fuch  Depths 
as  the  violet-making  Rays  fcarce  penetrate  unto, 
the  blue-making,  green-making,  and  yellow- 
making  Rays  being  refleded  from  below  more 
copioully  than  the  red-making  ones,  muft  com- 
pound a  green. 

Now,  if  there  be  two  Liquons  of  full  Colours, 
fiif)pofe  a  red  and  a  blue,  and  both  of  them  fo 
thick  as  fuffices  to  tnake  their  Colours  fufficiently 
full;  though  either  Liquor  be  fufficiently  tranfpa- 
tenz  apart,  yet  will  you  not  bfe  able  to  fee  through 
Doth  together.  For,  if  only  the  red-making  Rays 
pafs  through  one  Liquor,  arid  only  the  blue* 
making  through  the  other,  no  'Rays  can  pafs 
through  both.  This  Mr.  H^ok'  tried  cafuilly 
^ith  Glafs  Wedges  filled  with  red  and  blue  Li- 
quors, and  was  furprized  at  the  unexpeded  Event, 
the  reafon  of  it  being  then  unknown  ;  which 
makes  me  truft  the  more  to  his  Experiment, 
though  I  have  not  tried  it  my  felf.  But  he 
that  would  repeat  it,  muft  take  care  the  Li- 
quors be  of  very  good  and  full  Colours. 

Now,  whilft  Bodies  become  coloured  by  refled:- 
ing  or  tranfmitting  this  or  that  fort  of  Rays  more 
eopiouily  than  the  reft,  it  is  to  be  conceived  that 
they    ftop    and    ftrfle    in    themfelves   the  Rays 

M  >  which 


i62  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

which  they  do  not  refledt  or  tranfmit.  For,  if 
Gold  be  foliated  and  held  between  your  Eye  and 
.  the  Light,  the  Light  looks  of  a  greenifh  blue, 
and  therefore  mafTy  Gold  lets  into  its  Body  the 
blue-making  Rays  to  be  reflected  to  and  fro 
within  it  till  they  be  ftopp'd  and  ftifled,  whilft 
it  refle(5ls  the  yellow-making  outwards,  and 
thereby  looks  yellow.  And  much  after  the  fame 
manner  that  Leaf  Gold  is  yellow  by  refle<ited, 
and  blue  by  tranfmitted  Light,  and  maify  Gold 
.is  yellow  in  all  Pofitions  of  the  Eye  -,  there  are 
foqie  Liqi:jors,  as  the  Tincfture  of  Lignum 
Nephriticumy  and  fome  forts  of  Glafs  which 
tranfmit  one  fort  of  Light  moft  copioufly,  and 
refled  another  fort,  and  thereby  look  of  feve- 
4^al  Colours,  according  to  the  Pofition  of  the 
Eye  to  the  Light.  But,  if  thefe  Liquors  or 
.Glafles  were  fo  thick  and  mafTy  that  no  Light 
could  get  through  them,  I  queftion  not  but  they 
fwould  like  all  other  opake  Bodies  appear  or 
ohe  and  the  fame  Colour  in  all  Pofitions  of  the 
Eye,  though  this  I  cannot  yet  affirm  by  Expe^ 
rience.  For  all  colour'd  Bodies,  fo  far  as  my 
Obfervation  reaches,  may  be  feen  through  if 
made  fufficiently  thin,  and  therefore  are  in  fome 
meafure  tranfparent,  and  differ  only  in  degrees 
of  Tranfparency  from  tinged  tranfparent  Li- 
<juors;  thefe  Liquors,  as  well  as  thofe  Bodies, 
by  a  fufficient  Thicknefs  becoming  opake.  A 
tranfparent  Body  which  looks  of  any  Colour  by 
tranfmitted  Light,  may  alfo  look  of  the  fame 
Colour  by  reflected  Light,  the  Light  of  that 
Colour  being  reflected  by  the  farther  Surface 
of  the  Body,    or  by  the  Air  beyond  it.     And 

then 


BOOK     L  .161 

then  the  refleded  Colour  will  be  diminlfhed,  and 
perhaps  ceafe,  by  making  the  Body  very  thick, 
and  pitching  it  on  the  backfide  to  diminifh  the 
Reflexion  of  its  farther  Surface,  fo  that  the  Light 
refle(3;ed  from  the  tinging  Particles  may  predomi- 
nate. In  fuch  Cafes,  the  Colour  of  the  reflecfted 
Light  will  be  apt  to  vary  from  that  of  the  Light 
tranfmitted.  But  whence  it  is  that  tinged  Bo- 
dies and  Liquors  refledt  fome  fort  of  Rays,  and 
intromit  or  tranfmit  other  forts,  fhall  be  faid  in 
the  next  Book.  In  this  Propofition  I  content  my 
felf  to  have  put  it  paft  difpute,  that  Bodies  have 
fuch  Properties,  and  thence  appear  colour'd. 


PROP.  XI.     Prob.  VI. 

By  mixing  colour  d  Lights  to  compound  a 
beam  of  Light  of  the  fa^ne  Colour  and 
Nature  with  a  beam  of  the  Su?is  direEi 
Light y  and  therein  to  experience  the 
Truth  of  the  foregoing  Propoftions, 

LET  ABC  abc  [in  Fif[.  16.]  reprefent  a 
Prifm,  by  which  the  Sun's  Light  let  into 
a  dark  Chamber  through  the  Hole  F,  may  be 
refradted  towards  the  Lens  MN,  and  paint  upon 
it  at  py  q,  r,  j,  and  /,  the  ufual  Colours  vio- 
let, blue,  green,  yellow,  and  red,  and  let  the 
diverging  Rays  by  the  Refrad:ion  of  this  Leng 
converge  again  towards  X,  and  there,  by  the 
mixture  of  all  thofe  their  Colours,  compound  a 
white  according    to    what    was    fhewo   above. 

M  2  Then 


i64  OPTIC  K  S. 

Then  let  another  Prifm  DEG  deg,  parallel  to 
the  former,  be  placed  at  X,  to  refrad:  that  white 
Light  upward*  towards  Y.  Let  the  refracting, 
Angles  of  the  Prifms,  and  their  diflances  from 
the  Lens  be  equal,  fo  that  the  Rays  which  con- 
verged from  the  Lens  towards  X,  and  without 
Refradion,  would  there  have  crofled  and  di- 
verged again,  may  by  the  Refradtion  of  the  fe- 
cond  Prifm  be  reduced  into  Parallelifm  and 
diverge  no  more.  For  then  thofe  Rays  will  re- 
compofe  a  beam  of  white  Light  XY.  If  the 
refradting  Angle  of  either  Prifm  be  the  bigger, 
that  Prifm  muft  be  fo  much  the  nearer  to  the 
Lens.  You  will  know  when  the  Prifms  and  the 
Lens  are  well  fet  together,  by  obferving  if  the 
beam  of  Light  X  Y,  which  comes  out  of  the  fe- 
cond  Prifm  be  perfectly  white  to  the  very  edges 
of  the  Light,  and  at  all  diftances  from  the  Prifm 
continue  perfectly  and  totally  white  like  a  beam 
of  the  Sun's  Light.  For  till  this  happens,  the 
Polition  of  the  Prifms  and  Lens  to  one  another 
muft  be  correded ;  and  then  if  by  the  help  ©f  a 
long  beam  of  Wood,  as  is  reprefehted  in  the 
Figure,  or  by  a  Tube,  or  fbme  other  fuch  In- 
ftrument  made  for  that  Purpofe,  they-  be  made 
faft  in  that  Situation,  you  may  try  all  the  fame 
Experiments  in  this  compounded  beam  of  Light 
X  Y,  which  have  been  made  in  the  Sun's  dired: 
Light.  For  this  compounded  beam  of  Light 
has  the  fame  appearance,  and  is  endow'd  with 
all. the  fame  Properties  with  a  diredt  beam  of  the 
Sun's  Light,  fo  far  as  my  Obfervation  reaches. 
And  in  trying  Experiments  in  this  beam  you 
may  by  flopping  any  of  the  Colours  /,  q^  r,  /> 

and 


B  O  O  K     I.  165 

and  /,  at  the  Lens,  fee  how  the  Colours  produce^ 
in  the  Experiments  are  no  other  than  thofe  which 
the  Rays  had  at  the  Lens  before  they  entered  the 
Compofition  of  this  Beam :  And  by  confcqijence> 
that  they  arife  not  from  any  new  Modifications  of 
the  Light  by  Refradtions  and  Reflexions,  but  from 
the  various  Separations  and  Mixtures  of  the  Rays 
originally  endow'd  with  theircolour-making  Qua- 
lities. 

So,  for  inftance,  having  with  a  Lens  4,  Liches 
broad,  and  two  Prifms  on  either  hand  6i  Feet 
diftant  from  the  Lens,  made  fuch  a  beam  of 
compounded  Light ;  to  examine  the  reafon  of 
the  Colours  made  by  Prifms,  I  rcfraded  this  com- 
pounded beam  of  Light  XY  with  another  Prifm. 
HIK  kh,  and  thereby  call  the  ufual  Prifma- 
tick  Colours  PQRST  upon  the  Paper  LV 
placed  behind.  And  then  by  flopping  any  of 
the  Colours  />,  ^,  r,  j,  /,  at  the  Lens,  I  found 
that  the  fame  Colour  would  vanifh  at  the  Pa- 
per. So  if  the  Purple  p  was  ftopp'd  at  the 
Lens,  the  Purple  P  upon  the  Paper  would  vanifh, 
and  the  reft  of  the  Colours  would  remain  un- 
alter'd,  imlefs  perhaps  the  blue,  fo  far  as  fome 
purple  latent  in  it  at  the  Lens  might  be  fepa- 
rated  from  it  by  the  following  RefraSions.  And 
fo  by  intercepting  the  green  upon  the  Lens,  the 
green  R  upon  the  Paper  would  vanifli,  and  fo 
of  the  refl  j  which  plainly  fhews,  that  as  the 
white  beam  of  Light  XY  was  compounded  of 
feveral  Lights  varioufly  colour'd  at  the  Lens, 
fo  the  Colours  which  afterwards  emerge  out  of 
it  by  new  Refradlions  are  no  other  than  thofe 
of  which  its  Whitenefs  was  compounded.     The 

M  3  Refradion 


i66  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Refradion  of  the  Prifm  HIK  /^^  generates  the 
Colours  PQ^ST  upon  the  Paper,  not  by  chan- 
ging the  colorific  Qualities  of  the  Rays,  but  by 
feparating  the  Rays  which  had  the  very  fame  colo- 
rific Qualities  before  they  enter'd  the  Compofition 
of  the  refradied  beam  of  white  Light  X  Y.  For 
otherwife  the  Rays  which  were  of  one  Colour  at 
the  Lens  might  be  of  another  upon  the  Paper, 
contrary  to  what  we  find. 

So  again,  to  examine  the  reafon  of  the  Co- 
lours of  natural  Bodies,  I  placed  fuch  Bodies 
in  the  Beam  of  Light  XY,  and  found  that  they 
all  appeared  there  of  thofe  their  own  Colours 
which  they  have  in  Day-light,  and  that  thofe 
Colours  depend  upon  the  Rays  which  had  the 
fame  Colours  at  the  Lens  before  they  enter'd  the 
Compofition  of  that  beam.  Thus,  for  inflance, 
Cinnaber  illuminated  by  this  beam  appears  of 
the  fame  red  Colour  as  in  Day-light ;  and  if 
at  the  Lens  you  intercept  the  green-making  and 
blue-making  Rays,  its  rednefs  will  become  more 
full  and  lively :  But  if  you  there  intercept  the 
red-making  Rays,  it  will  not  any  longer  ap- 
pear red,  but  become  yellow  or  green,  or  of 
lome  other  Colour,  according  to  the  forts  of 
Rays  which  you  do  not  intercept.  So  Gold 
in  this  Light  XY  appears  of  the  fame  yellow 
Colour  as  in  Day-light,  but  by  intercepting  at 
the  Lens  a  due  Quantity  of  the  yellow-making 
Rays  it  will  appear  white  like  Silver  ( as  I  have 
tried )  which  Ihews  that  its  yellownefs  arifes  from 
the  Excefs  of  the  intercepted  Rays  tinging  that 
Whitenefs  with  their  Colour  when  they  are  let 
pafs.     So  the  Infuiion  of  Ugmm  Nephriticum 

(as 


B  O  O  K     I.  167 

(as  I  have  alfo  tried)  when  held  in  this  beam  of 
Light  XY,  looks  blue  by  the  reflected  Part  of  the 
Light,  and  red  by  the  tranfrrjitted  Part  of  it,  as 
when 'tis  view'd  in  Day-light  j  but  if  you  intercepc 
the  blue  at  the  Lens  the  Infufion  will  lofe  its  re- 
fled:ed  blue  Colour,  whilft  its  tranfmitted  red  re- 
mains perfect,    and  by  the  lofs  of  fome  blue- 
making  Rays,  wherewith  it  was  allay'd,  becomes 
more  intenfe  and  full.     And,  on  the  contrary,  if 
the  red  and  orange-making  Rays  be  intercepted  at 
the  Lens,  the  Infufion  will  lofe  its  tranfmitted  red, 
whilft  its  blue  will  remain  and  become  more  full 
and   perfedl.     Which  fhews,    that  the  Infufion 
does  not  tinge  the  Rays  with  blue  and  red,  but 
only  tranfmit  thofe  mofl  copioufiy  which  were 
red-making  before,  and  refledts  thofe  moft  copi- 
oufly  which  were  blue-making  before.    And  after 
the  fame  manner  may  theReafons  of  other  Phaeno- 
mena  be  examined,  by  trying  thorn  in  this  artificial 
beam  of  Light  XY. 


M  4  THE 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 

OF 


OPTICKS. 


P  A  R  T     I. 


Obfervations  concerning  the  Reflexions y  Re- 
fraBionSy  and  Colours  of  thi^t  tranfpa- 
rent  Bodies, 


T  has  been  obferved  by  others, 
that  tranfparent  Subftances,  as 
Glafs,  Water,  Air,  &V.  when 
made  very  thin  by  being  blown 
into  Bubbles,  or  otherwife  formed 
into  Plates,  do  exhibit  various  Co- 
lours according  to  thcjr  various  thinnefs,  altho'  at 

a  greater 


BOOK     II.  169 

a  greater  tlucknefs  they  appear  very  clear  and 
colour! efs.  In  the  former  Book  I  forbore  to 
treat  of,  thefe  Colours,  becaufe  they  feemed  of  a 
more  difficult  Confideration,  and  were  not  necef- 
fary  for  eftabliihing  the  Properties  of  Light  there 
difcourfed  of.  But  becaufe  they  may  conduce  to 
farther  Difcpveries  for  compleating  the  Theory  of 
Light,  efpecially  as  to  the  conftitution  of  the 
parts  of  natural  Bodies,  on  which  their  Colours 
or  Tranfparency  depend  j  I  have  here  fet  down 
an  account  of  thern.  To  render  this  Difcourfe 
fhort  and  didindt,  I  have  fiifl  defcribed  the  prin- 
cipal of  my  Obfervations ,  and  then  confider'd 
and  made  ufe  of  them.  The  Obfervations  are 
thefe. 

Ohf.  I.,  Comprefiing  two  Prifms  hard  toge- 
ther that  their  fides  (which  by  chance  were  a 
very  little  convex)  might  fomewhere  touch  one 
another  :  I  found  the  place  in  which  they  touch- 
ed to  become  abfolutely  tranfparent,  as  if  they 
had  there  been  one  continued  piece  of  Glafs, 
For  when  the  Light  fell  fo  obliquely  on  the 
Air,  which  in  other  places  was  between  them, 
as  to  be  all  refledcds  ic  feemed  in  that  place  of 
contact  to  be  wholly  tranfmitted,  infomuch  that 
when  look'd  upon,  it  appeared  like  a  black  or 
dark  fpot,  by  reafon  that  little  or  no  fenfible 
Light  was  refledled  from  thence,  as  from  other 
places ;  and  when  looked  through  it  feemed  (  a^ 
it  were)  a  hole  in  that-  Air  which  was  formed 
into  a  thin  Plate,  by  being  comprefs'd  between 
the  Glafles.  And  through  this  hole  Objeds  that 
were  beyond  might  be  feen  diftindly ,  which 
could  not  at  all  be  feen  through  other  parts  of 

the 


lyo  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  GlafTes  where  -the  Air  was  interjacent.  Al- 
though the  GlafTes  were  a  little  convex,  yet  this 
transparent  fpot  was  of  a  confiderable  breadth, 
which  breadth  feemed  principally  to  proceed 
from  the  yielding  inwards  of  the  parts  of  the 
GlafTes,  by  reafon  of  their  mutual  prefTure.  For 
by  prefTing  them  very  hard  together  it  would  be- 
come much  broader  than  otherwife. 

Obf.  2.  When  the  Plate  of  Air,  by  turning 
the  Prifms  about  their  common  Axis,  became  (o 
little  inclined  to  the  incident  Rays,  that  fome  of 
them  began  to  be  tranfmitted,  there  arofe  in  it 
many  flender  Arcs  of  Colours  which  at  firfl  were 
fhaped  almofl  like  the  Conchoid ,  as  you  fee 
them  delineated  in  the  firfl  Figure.  And  by  con- 
tinuing the  Motion  of  the  Prifms,  thefe  Arcs 
increafed  and  bended  more  and  more  about  the 
faid  tranfparent  fpot,  till  they  were  compleated 
into  Circles  or  Rings  incompafling  it,  and  af- 
terwards continually  grew  more  and  more  con- 
tradted. 

Thefe  Arcs  at  their  firfl  appearance  were  of 
a  violet  and  blue  Colour,  and  between  them 
were  white  Arcs  of  Circles  ,  which  prefently 
by  continuing  the  Motion  of  the  Prifms  became 
a  little  tinged  m  their  inward  Limbs  with  red 
and  yellow,  and  to  their  outward  Limbs  the 
blue  was  adjacent.  So  that  the  order  of  thefe 
Colours  from  the  central  dark  fpot,  was  at  that 
time  white,  blue,  violet  j  black,  red,  orange, 
yellow,  white,  blue,  violet,  &c.  But  the  yel- 
low and  red  were  much  fainter  than  the  blue  and 
violet.  * 

2  '  The 


BOOK     11.  171 

The  Motion  of  the  Prifms  aBout  their  Axis 
being  continued,  thefe  Colours  contracl^ed  more 
and  more,  Shrinking  towards  the  whitenefs  on 
either  fide  of  it,  until  they  totally  vaniihed  into 
it.  And  then  the  Circles  in  thofe  parts  appear'd 
black  and  white,  without  any  other  Colours  in~ 
termix'd.  But  by  farther  moving  the  Prifms 
about,  the  Colours  again  emerged  out  of  the 
whitenefs,  the  violet  and  blue  at  its  inward 
Limb,  and  at  its  outward  Limb  the  red  and  yel- 
low. So  that  now  their  order  from  the  central 
Spot  was  white,  yellow,  red;  black;  violet, 
.blue,  white,  yellow,  red,  ^c,  contrary  to  what 
it  was  before. 

Obf.  3.  When  the  Rings  or  fome  parts  of 
them  appeared  only  black  and  white,  they  were 
very  diftindl  and  well  defined,  and  the  blacknefs 
feemed  as  intenfe  as  that  of  the  central  Spot. 
Alfo  in  the  Borders  of  the  "Rings,  where  the 
Colours  began  to  emerge  out  of  the  white- 
nefs, they  were  pretty  diftind: ,  which  made 
them  vifible  to  a  very  great  multitude.  I  have 
fometimes  number'd  above  thirty  Succeffions 
(reckoning  every  black  and  white  Ring  for  one 
Succeflion)  and  feen  more  of  them,  which  by 
reafon  of  their  fmalnefs  I  could  not  number. 
But  in  other  Pofitions  of  the  Prifms,  at  which 
the  Rings  appeared  of  many  Colours,  I  could 
not  diftinguiih  above  eight  or  nine  of  them,  and 
the  Exterior  of  thofe  were  very  confufed  and 
dilute. 

In  thefe  two  Obfervations  to  fee  the  Rings  di- 
ilin<5t,  and  without  any  other  Colour  than  bl^ck 
and  white,  I  found  it  neceflary  to  hold  my  Eye 

at 


172  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

at  a  good  diftance  from  them.  For  by  ap- 
proachijfjg  nearer,  although  in  the  fame  inclina- 
tion of  my  Eye  to  the  Plane  of  the  Rings,  there 
emerged  a  bluifH  Colour  out  of  the  white, 
which  by  dilating  it  felf  more  and  more  into 
the  black,  render'd  the  Circles  lefs  diflindt,  and 
left  the  white  a  little  tinged  with  red  and  yel- 
low. I  found  alfo  by  looking  through  a  flit  or 
oblong  hole,  which  was  narrower  than  the  pupil 
of  my  Eye,  and  held  clofe  to  it  pjirallel  to  the 
Piifms,  I  could  fee  the  Circles  much  diftindter 
and  vifible  to  a  far  greater  number  than  other- 
wife. 

Ohf.\>  To  obferve  more  nicely  the  order  of 
the  Colours  which  arofe  out  of  the  white  Cir- 
cles as  the  Rays  became  lefs  and  lefs  inclined 
to  the  Plate  of  Airj  I  took  two  Objed-glafTes, 
the  one  a  Plano-convex  for  a  fourteen  Foot 
Telefcope,  and  the  other  a  large  double  Con- 
vex for  one  of  about  fifty  Footj  and  upon  this, 
laying  the  other  with  its  plane  fide  downwards, 
I  prelfed  them  (lowly  together,,  to  make  the 
Colours  fucceffively  emerge  in  the  middle  of  the 
Circles,  and  then  fiowly  lifted  the  upper  Glafs 
from  the  lower  to  make  them  fuccefTively  vaniih 
again  in  the  fame  place.  The  Colour,  which 
by  preffing  the  GlalTes  together,  emerged  laft  in 
the  middle  of  the  other  Colours,  would  upon  its 
firft  appearance  look  like  a  Circle  of  a  Colour 
almoft  uniform  from  the  circumference  to  the 
center,  and  by  compreffing  the  GlaiTes  ftill  more, 
grow  continually  broader  until  a  new  Colour 
emerged  in  its  center,  afid  thereby  it  becanie  a 
Ring  encompaihng  ^hat  new  Colour.     And  by 

2  com- 


BOOK     IL  t73 

domprefiing  the  Gkfles  ftill  more,  the  diameter 
of  this  Ring  would  increafe,  and  the  breadth  of 
its  Orbit  or  Perimeter  decreafe  until  another  new 
Colour  emerged  in  the  center  of  the  laft:  And 
fo  on  until  a  third,  a  fourth,  a  fifth,  and  other 
following  new  Colours  fuccefiively  emerged 
there,  and  became  Rings  encompalfmg  the  inner- 
moft  Colour,  the  laft  of  which  was  the  black 
Spot.  And,  on  the  contrary,  by  lifting  up  the 
upper  Glafs  from  the  lower,  the  diameter  of  the 
Rings  would  decreafe,  and  the  breadth  of  their 
Orbit  increafe,  until  their  Colours  reached  fuc- 
cefiively to  the  center  ;  and  then  they  being  of  a 
confiderable  breadth,  I  could  more  eafily  difcern 
and  diftinguifti  their  Species  than  before.  And 
by  this  means  I  obferv'd  their  Succeflion  and 
Quantity  to  be  as  foUoweth. 

Next  to  the  pellucid  central  Spot  made  by 
the  contadl  of  the  Glaffes  fucceeded  blue,  white, 
yellow,  and  red.  The  blue  was  ib  little  in  quan- 
tity, that  I  could  not  difcern  it  in  the  Circles 
made  by  the  Prifms,  nor  could  I  well  diftinguifti 
any  violet  in  it,  but  the  yellow  and  red  were 
pretty  copious,  and  feemed  about  as  much  in 
extent  as  the  white,  and  four  or  five  times  more 
than  the  blue.  The  next  Circuit  in  order  of 
Colours  immediately  encompaffmg  thefe  were 
violet,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and  red:  and  thefe 
were  all  of  them  copious  and  vivid,  excepting 
the  green,  which  was  very  little  in  quantity,  and 
feemed  much  more  faint  and  dilute  than  the 
other  Colours.  Of  the  other  four,  the  vio- 
let was  the  leaft  in  extent,  and  the  blue  lefs 
than  the  yellow  or  red.    The  third  Circuit  or 

^  Order 


174.  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Order  was  purple,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and 
red ;  in  which  the  purple  feemed  more  reddifh 
than  the  violet  in  the  former  Circuit,  and  the 
green  was  much  more  confpicuous ,  being  as 
brisk  and  copious  as  any  of  the  other  Colours, 
except  the  yellow,  but  the  red  began  to  be  a  lit- 
tle faded,  inclining  very  much  to  purple.  Af- 
ter this  fucceeded  the  fourth  Circuit  of  green 
and  red.  The  green  was  very  copious  and  live- 
ly, inclining  on  the  one  lide  to  blue,  and  on 
the  othtr  fide  to  yellow.  But  in  this  fourth 
Circuit  there  was  neither  violet,  blue,  nor  yel- 
low, and  the  red  was  very  imperfe6l  and  dir- 
ty. Alfo  the  fucceeding  Colours  became  more 
and  more  imperfed:  and  dilute,  till  after  three 
or  four  revolutions  they  ended  in  perfedt 
whitenefs.  Their  form,  when  the  Glafles  were 
moft  comprefs'd  fo  as  to  make  the  black  Spot 
appear  in  the  center,  is  delineated  in  the  fe- 
Gond  Figure ;  where  a,  b,  f,  ^,  e  :  /,  ^,  h,  /, 
k  :  /,  w,  w,  0,  p:  q,  r  :  s,  t  :  v,  x :  )\  z,  de- 
note the  Colours  reckon'd  in  order  from  the 
center,  black,  blue,  white,  yellOw,  red:  vio- 
let, blue,  green,  yellow,  red:  purple,  blue, 
green,  yellow,  red:  green,  red:  greenifh  blue, 
red:  greenifli  blue,  pale  red:  greenifli  blue, 
reddifh  white. 

Obf.  5.  To  determine  the  interval  of  the 
Glalfes,  or  thicknefs  of  the  interjacent  Air,  by 
which  each  Colour  was  produced,  I  meafured 
the  Diameters  of  the  firfl  fix  Rings  at  the  moft 
lucid  part  of  their  Orbits,  and  fquaring  them,  I 
found  their  Squares  to  be  in  the  arithmetical  Pro- 
greffion  of  the  odd  Numbers,    i,  3,  5,  7,  9,  1 1. 

And 


BOOK     II.  175 

And  fince  one  of  thefe  Glafles  was  plane,  and 
the  other  fpherical,  their  Intervals  at  thofe  Rings 
jnuft  be  in  the  fame  Progreffion.  I  meafured  alio 
the  Diameters  of  the  dark  or  faint  Rings  between 
the  more  lucid  Colours,  and  found  their  Squares 
to  be  in  the  arithmetical  Progrelfion  of  the.  even 
Numbers,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12.  And  it  being  very 
nice  and  difficult  to  take  thefe  meafures  exadly; 
I  repeated  them  divers  times  at  divers  parts  of 
ihe  GlafTes,  that  by  their  Agreement  I  might  be 
confirmed  in  them.  And  the  lame  method  I  ufed 
in  determining  fome  others  of  the  following  Ob- 
fervations. 

Obf.  6.    The  Diameter  of  the  fixth  Ring  at 

the  moil  lucid  part  of  its  Orbit  was  -^  parts  of 

an  Inch,  and  the  Diameter  of  the '  Sphere  on 
which  the  double  convex  Objedt-glals  was 
ground  was  about  102  Feet,  and  hence  I  ga- 
thered the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  or  Aereal  Inter- 
val of  the  Glaffes  at  that  Ring.  But  fome  time 
after,  fufpedting  that  in  making  this  Obfervatioii 
I  had  not  determined  the  Diameter  of  the 
Sphere  with  fufficient  accuratenefs,  and  being 
uncertain  whether  the  Plano-convex  Glafs  was 
truly  plane,  and  not  fomething  concave  or  con- 
vex on  that  fide  which  I  accounted  plane ;  and 
whether  I  had  not  preiTed  the  GlafiTes  together, 
as  I  often  did,  to  make  them  touch  j  ( For  by 
preffing  fuch  GlalTes  together  their  parts  eafily 
yield  inwards,  and  the  Rings  thereby  become 
fenfibly  broader  than  they  would  be,  did  the 
GlalTes  keep  their  Figures.)  I  repeated  the 
Experiment ,    and  found  the  Diameter  of  the 

fixth 


176  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

fixth  Iticid  Ring  about  -^  parts  of  an  Inch.     1 

repeated  the  Experiment  alfo  with  fuch  an  Ob- 
jed-glafs  of  another  Tclefcope  as  I  had  at  hand. 
This  was  a  double  Convex   ground    on    both 
fides  to  one  and  the  fame  Sphere,  and  its  Fo- 
cus was  diftant  from  it  83  f  Inches.     And  thence, 
if  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refraction  of  the 
bright  yellow  Light  be  affumed  in  proportion 
as    II   to   17,    the  Diameter  of  the   Sphere  to 
which  the  Glafs  was  figured  will  by  computa- 
tion be  fougd   182  Inches.     This  Glafs  I   laid 
upon  a  flat  one,  fo  that  the  black  Spot  appear- 
ed in  the  middle  of  the  Rings  of  Colours  with- 
out any  other  PrelTure  than  that  of  the  weight 
of  the  Glafs.     And  now  meafuring  the  Diame- 
ter of  the   fifth  dark  Circle  as  accurately  as  I 
could,  I  found  it  the  fifth  part  of  an  Inch  pre- 
cifely.     This  Meafure  was  taken  with  the  point$ 
of  a  pair  of  CompaiTes  on  the  upper  Surface 
on  the  upper  Glafs,    and  my  Eye  was   about 
eight  or  nine  Inches  diftance  from  the  Qlafs, 
almofl  perpendicularly  over  it,  'and  the  Glafs 
was  r  of  an  Inch  thick,  and  thence  it  is  eafy  to 
colled:  that  the  true  Diameter  of  the  Ring  be- 
tween the  Glaffes  was  greater  than  its  meafur'd 
Diameter  above  the  Glaffes  in  the  Proportiort 
of  80  to  y9,  or  thereabouts,  and  by  confequence 
equal  to  ^|  parts  of  an  Inch,  and  its  true  Semi- 
diameter  equal  to  tV  parts.     Now  as  the  Dia- 
meter of  the  Sphere  (.182  Inches)  is  to  the  Se- 
mi-diameter of  this  fifth  dark  Ring  .(t*  parts  of 
an  Inch)  fo  is  this  Semi-diameter  to  the  thick- 
:  nefs  of  the  Air  at  this  fifth  dark  Ring  j  which  is 

there- 


BOOK     II.  ?t77 

therefore  -7^^—  or  — ^^  Parts  of  an  Inch ;  and 
^  567931      1774784  ^ 

the  fifth  Part  thereof,  viz.  tke  -r^   Part  of  an 

•0739 

Inch,  is  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  thefirft 
of  thefe  dark  Rings. 

The  fame  Experiment  I  repeated  with  another 
double  convex  Objed'-glafs  ground  on  both  fides 
to  one  and  the  fame  Sphere.  Its  Focus  was  di- 
flarit  from  it  i68j  Inches,  and  therefore  the  Dia- 
meter of  that  Sphere  was  iS'4  Inches.  This 
Glafs  being  laid  upon  the  fijme  plain, Glafs, 
the  Diameter  of  the  fifth  of  the  dark  Rings, 
when  the  black  Spot  in  their  Center  appear'd 
plainly  without  preffing  the  Glailes,  was  by  the 
meafure  of  the  Compafles  upon  fhe  upper  Glafs 

!ii  Parts  of  an  Inch,  and  by.  confequence  be- 
tween theGlaffes  it  was  ~^:..  For  the  upper  Glafs 

was  ^  of  an  Inch  thick,  arid  rhy  Eye  was  diitant 
from  it  8  Inches.  And  a  third  proportional  to 
"half  this  from  the  Diameter  ,,©jf  the/Sphere  is 

,,-r- Parts  of  an  Inch.  Thi^  is  therefore  the 
Thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  this.  Ring,  and  a  fifth 
Part  thereof,  viz.  the  ~— th  Part  of.  an  Incli  is 

the  Thicknefs  thereof  at  the  firfl  of  the  Rings,  as 
above. 

I  tried  the  fame  Thing,  by  laying  thefe  Obje(5t- 
glafies  upon  flat  Pieces  of  a  broken  Looking- 
glafs,  and  found  the  fame  Meafures  of  the 
Rings:    Which  makes  me  rely  upon  them  till 

N  they 


178  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

.they  can  be  determin'd  more  accurately  byGlailes 
ground  to  larger  Spheres,  though  in  fuch  GlafTes 
greater  care  muft  be  taken  of  a  true  Plane. 

Thefe  Dimenfions  were  taken,  when  my  Eye 
was  placed  almoft  perpendicularly  over  the  Glaf- 
fes,  being  about  an  Inch,  or  an  Inch  and  a  quar- 
ter, diilant  from  the  incident  Rays,  and  eight 
Inches  diftant  from  the  Glafs  j  fo  that  the  Rays 
were  inclined  to  the  Glafs  in  an  Angle  of  about 
four  Degrees.  Whence  by  the  following  Obfer- 
vation  you  will  underftand,  that  had  the  Rays 
been  perpendicular  to  the  GlafTes,  the  Thicknefs 
of  the  Air  at  thefe  Rings  would  have  been  lefs  ia 
the  Proportion  of  the  Radius  to  the  Secant  of  four 
Degrees,  that  is,  of  loooo  to  10024.  Let  the 
ThicknefTes  found  be  therefore  dimini{h'd  in  this 

Proportion,  and  they  will  become  —^  and  --^ — ^. 

or    ( to  ufe   the  nearefl    round  Number )    the 

g~^th  Part  of  an  Inch.    This  is  the  Thicknefs  of 

the  Air  at  the  darkeft  Part  of  the  iirft  dark  Ring 
made  by  perpendicular  Rays;  and  half  this  Thick- 
nefs multiplied  by  the  ProgreiTion,'  i,  3,  5,  7,  g^ 
iiy^^c.  gives  the  Thicknefles  of  the  Air  at  the 
moft  luminous  Parts  of  all  the  brighteft  Rings,  viz, 

{^y  T^o)  T^oy  r78^>  ^^'  ^heir  arithme- 
tical Means  ^^,  -  g^~,  ^j^^,  &c.  being  its 
ThicknefTes  at  the  darkefl  Parts  of  all  the  dark 
ones. 


Oi/.j. 


BOOK     IL 


179 


Obf.  7.  The  Rings  were  leaft,  when  my  Eye 
was  placed  perpendicularly  over  theGlafTes  in  the 
Axis  of  the  Rings :  And  when  I  view'd  them 
obliquely  they  became  bigger,  continually  fwel- 
ling  as  I  removed  my  Eye  farther  from  the  Axis. 
And  partly  by  meafuring  the  Diameter  of  the 
fame  Circle  at  feveral  Obliquities  of  my  Eye, 
partly  by  other  Means,  as  alfo  by  making  ufe  of 
the  two  Prifms  for  very  great  Obliquities,  I  found 
its  Diameter,  and  confequently  the  Thicknefs  of 
the  Air  at  its  Perimeter  in  all  thofe  Obliquities  to 
be  very  nearly  in  the  Proportions  exprefs'd  in 
this  Table. 


Angle  of  In- 

Angle of  Re- 

Diameter 

"Ihickricf 

cidence   on 

f ration  in- 

of  the 

of  the 

the  Air. 

to  the  Air. 

Ring. 

Air.   . 

Deg.  Min. 

00     00 

00     00 

10 

\^ 

06     26 

10     00 

IOtV 

IOtV 

12     45 

20     00 

lOf 

IQi 

18     49 

30     00 

lOA 

Ilf 

24     30 

40     00 

IIv 

13 

29     37 

50     00 

12k 

i5i 

33     58 

60     00 

14 

20 

35     47 

65     00 

i5i 

23t 

37     19 

70     00 

i6t 

28^ 

3S     33 

7S    00 

'^I 

37 

39     27 

'80    00 

22f 

52i 

40     00 
..     40     II 

85       GO 

29 

Hu 

90       00 

3< 

\    122', 

N  2 


In 


i8o  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

*  In  the  two  firll  Columns  are  exprefs'd  the  Obli- 
quities of  the  incident  and  emergent  Rays  to  the 
Plate  of  the  Air,  that  is,  their  Angles  of  Inci- 
dence and  Refraction.  In  the  third  Column  the 
Diameter  of  any  colour'd  Ring  at  thofe  Obliqui- 
ties is  exprelTed  in  Parts,  of  which  ten  conffcitute 
that  Diameter  when  the  Rays  are  perpendicular. 
And  in  the  fourth  Column  the  Thicknefs  of 
the  Air  at  the  Circumference  of  that  Ring  is 
exprelTed  in  Parts,  of  which  alfo  ten  eonfti- 
tute  its  Thicknefs  when  the  Rays  are  perpen- 
dicular. 

And  from  thefe  Meafures  I  feem   to  gather 
this  Rule:  That  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Air  is  pro- 
portional to  the  Secant  of  an  Angle,  whofe  Sine* 
is  a  certain  mean  Proportional  between  the  Sines.' 
of  Incidence  and  Refradlion.     Arid  that  mean 
.  Proportional,  fb  far  as  by  thefe  Meaftires  I  caw 
determine  it,  is  the  firft  of  an  hundred  and  fix 
arithmetical   mean  Proportionals  between  thofe» 
Sines   counted    from  the   bigger  Sine,    that;  is, 
*  from    the    Sine    of   Refradion    when    the   Re- 
fraction   is    made    out    of  the  Glafs    into    the^ 
Plate  of  Air,  or  from  the  Sine  of  Incidence  when* 
the  Refraftion  is  made  out  oi  the  ■  Plate  of  Air 
into  the  Glafs.  , 

O^.'  8.  The  dark  Spot  in  the  middle  of  the 
Rings  increafed  alfo  by  the  Obliquation  of  the 
Eye,  although  almofl  infenfibly.  But,  if  inftead 
of  the  ObjeS-glafTes  the  Prifms  were  made  ufe 
of,  its  Increafe  was  more  manifefl  when  viewed 
fo,  obliquely  that  no  Colours  appeared  about 
it. '  It  was  leafl  when  the  Rays  were  incident 
moll  obliquely  on  the  interjacent  Air,   and  as 

the 


BOOK     II.  i8i 

the  obliquity  decreafed  it  increafed  more  and 
more  until  the  colour'd  Rings  appear'd,  and 
then  decreafed  again,  but  not  fo  much  as  it  in- 
creafed before.  And  hence  it  is  evident,  that 
the  Tranfparency  was  not  only  at  the  abfolute 
Contad  of  the  GlalTes,  but  alfo^here  they  had 
fome  little  Interval.  I  have  fometimes  obferved 
the  Diameter  of  that  Spot  to  be  between  half 
and  two  fifth  parts  of  the  Diameter  of  the  ex- 
terior Circumference  of  the  red  in  the  firft  Cir- 
cuit or  Revolution  of  Colours  when  view'd  al- 
moft  perpendicularly ;  whereas  when  view'd  ob- 
liquely it  hath  wholly  vanifli'd  and  become 
opake  and -white  like  the  other  parts  of  the 
Glafs  3  whence  it  may  be  coUeded  that  the 
Glaffes  did  then  fcarcely,  or  not  at  all,  touch 
one  another,  and  that  their  Interval  at  the  pe- 
rimeter of  that  Spot  when  view'd  perpendicu- 
larly was  about  a  fifth  or  fixth  part  of  their  In- 
terval at  the  circumference  of  the  faid  red. 

O/y^rT'.  9..  By  looking  through  the  two  conti- 
guous Objed-glafies,  I  found  that  the  interja- 
cent Air  exhibited  Rings  of  Colours,  as  well 
by  tranfmitting  Light  as  by  refleding  it.  The 
central  Spot  was  now  white,  and  from  it  the 
order  of  the  Colours  were  yellowifli  red;  black, 
violet,  blue,  white,  yellow,  red;  violet,  blue, 
green,  yellow,  red,  &c.  But  thefe  Colours 
were  very  faint  and  dilute,  unlefs  when  the 
Light  was  trajecled  very  obliquely  through  the 
Glaffes :  For  by  that  means  they  became  pretty 
vivid.  Only  the  firft  yellowifh  red ,  like  the 
blue  in  the  fourth  Obfervation,  was  fo  little  and 
faint  as  fcarcely  to  be  difcern'd.      Comparing 

N  3  the 


i82  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  colour'd  Rings  made  by  Reflexion,  with 
thefe  made  by  tranfmilTion  of  the  Light  j  I 
found  that  white  was  oppofite  to  black,  red  to 
blue,  yellow  to  violet,  and  green  to  a  Compound 
of  red  and  violet.  That  is,  thafe  parts  of  the 
Glafs  were  black  when  looked  through,  which 
when  looked  upon  appeared  white,  and  on  the 
contrary.  And  fo  thofe  which  in  one  cafe  exhi- 
bited blue,  did  in  the  other  cafe  exhibit  red. 
And  the  like  of  the  other  Colours.  The  man- 
ner you  have  reprefented  in  the  third  Figure, 
where  A B,  CD,  are  the  Surfaces  of  theGlaifes 
contiguous  at  E,  and  the  black  Lines  between 
them  are  their  Diftances  in  arithmetical  Progref-. 
iion,  and  the  Colours  written  above  are  feen  by 
refiedied  Light,  and  thofe  below  by  Light  tranf- 
mitted. 

Oof.   10.    Wetting  the  Objed-glafTes  a  little 

■  at  their  edges,  the  Water  crept  in  flowly  be- 
tween them,  and  the  Circles  thereby  became 
lefs  and  the  Colours  more  faint :  Infomuch  that 
as  the  Water  crept  along,  one  half  of  them  at 
which  it  firft  arrived  would  appear  broken  off 
from  the  other  half,  and  contracted  into  a  lefs 
Room.  By  meafuring  them  I  found  the  Pro- 
portions of  their  Diameters  to  the  Diameters  of 
the  like  Circles  made  by  Air  to  be  about  itvtu. 
to  eight,  and  confequently  the  Intervals  of  the 
Glaffes  at  like  Circles,  caufed  by  thofe  two  Me- 
diums Water  and  Air,  are  as  about  three  to  four. 

•  Perhaps  it  may  be  a  general  Rule,  That  if  any 
other  Medium  more  or  lefs  denfe  than  Water 
be  comprefs'd  between  the  Glaffes,  their  Inter- 
vals at  the  Rings  cavifed  thereby  will  be  to  their 

Intervals 


BOOK     II.  183 

Intervals  caufed  by  interjacent  Air,  as  the  Sines 
are  which  meafure  the  Refrad;ion  made  out  of 
that  Medium  into  Air. 

Obf.  II.  When  the  Water  was  between  the 
Glafles,  if  I  prefTed  the  upper  Glafs  varioully  at 
its  edges  to  make  the  Rings  move  nimbly  from 
one  place  to  another,  a  little  white  Spot  would 
immediately  follow  the  center  of  them,  which 
upon  creeping  in  of  the  ambient  Water  into  that 
place  would  prefently  vanilh.  Its  appearance 
was  fuch  as  interjacent  Air  would  have  caufed, 
and  it  exhibited  the  fame  Colours.  But  it  was 
not  Air,  for  where  any  Bubbles  of  Air  were  in 
the  Water  they  would  not  vanilli.  The  Refle- 
xion- muft  have  rather  been  caufed  by  a  fubtiler 
Medium,  which  could  recede  through  the  Glaf-^ 
fes  at  the  creeping  in  of  the  Water. 

Obf.  12.  Thefe  Obfervations  were  made  in 
the  open  Air.  But  farther  to  examine  the  Effects 
of  colour'd  Light  falling  on  the  Glaffes,  I  dar- 
3cen'd  the  Room,  and  view'd  them  by  Reflexion 
of  the  Colours  of  a  Prifm  caft  on  a  Sheet  of 
white  Paper,  my  Eye  being  fo  placed  that  I 
could  fee  the  colour'd  Paper  by  Reflexion  in  the 
Glalfes ,  as  in  a  Looking-glals.  And  by  this 
means  the  Rings  became  diftind:er  and  vifible  to 
a  far  greater  number  than  in  the  open  Air.  I 
have  fometimes  feen  more  than  twenty  of  them, 
whereas  in  the  open  Air  I  could  not  difcern  above 
eight  or  nine. 

Obf.  13.  Appointing  an  A ffiftant  to  move  the 
Prifm  to  and  fro  about  its  Axis,  that  ail  the 
Colours  might  fucceffively  fall  on  that  part  of 
the  Paper  which  I  faw  by  Reflexion  from  that 

N  4  part 


j84  OPTIC  K  S. 

part  of  "the  GlafTes,  where  the  Circles  appear'd, 
£o  thax  all.  the  Colours  might  be  fucceffively  re, 
fiefted  from  the  Circles  to  my  Eye  whilft  I  held 
it  immovable,  I  found,  the  Circles  which  the 
red  Light  made  to  be  manifeftly  bigger  than 
thofe  which  were  made  by  the  blue  and  violet. 
And  it  was  very  pleafant  to  fee  them  gradually 
fwell  or  contrad:  accordingly  as  the  Colour  of  the 
Light  was  changed.  The  Interval  of  the  Glaf- 
fes  at  any  of  the  Rings  when  they  were  made  by 
|:he  utmoft  red  Light,  was  to  their  Interval  at  the 
fame  Ring  when  made  by  the  utmoft  violet, 
greater  than  as  3  to  2,  and  lefs  than  as  13  to  8. 
By  the  moft  of  my  Obfer  vat  ions  it  was  as  14  to 
9.  And  this  Proportion  feem'd  very  nearly  the 
fame  in  all  Obliquities  of  my  Eye ;  unlefs  whea 
two  Prifms  were  made  ufe  of  inftead  of  the  Ob^ 
jedi-glafTes.  For  then  at  a  certain  great  obliquity 
of  my  Eye,  the  Rings  made  by  the  feveral  Co- 
lours {eem'd  equal,  and  at  a  greater  obliquity 
thofe  made  by  the  violet  would  be  greater  than 
the  fame  Rings  made  by  the  red:  the  Refrad:ion 
of  the  Prifm  in  this  cafe  caafing  the  moft  refran^ 
gible  Rays  to  fall  more  obliquely  on  that  plate  of 
the  Air  than  the  leaft  refrangible  ones.  Thus 
the  Experiment  fucceeded  in  the  colour'd  Light, 
which  was  fufhciently  ftrong  and  copious  to 
jnake  the  Rings  fenfible.  And  thence  it  may  be 
gather'd,  that  if  the  moft  refrangible  and  leaft 
refrangible  Rays  had  been  copious  enough  to 
make  the  Rings  fenfible  without  the  mixture  of 
other  Rays,  the  Proportion  which  here  was  14  to 
9  would  have  been  a  little  greater,  fuppofe  14? 
or  14T  to  9. 


BOOK     IT.  185 

Obf.  14.  Whilft  the  Prifm  was  turn'd  about 
its  Axis  with  an  uniform  Motion,  to  make  all 
the  feveral  Colours  fall  fucceffively  upon  the 
Objedi-glafles,  and  thereby  to  marke  the  Rings 
contrad:  and  dilate  :  The  Contradion  or  Dilata- 
tion of  each  Ring  thus  made  by  the  variation  of 
its  Colour  was  fwifteft  in  the  red,  and  floweft 
in  the  violet,  and  in  the  intermediate  Colours 
it  had  intermediate  degrees  of  Celerity.  Com- 
paring the  quantity  of  Contrad:ion  and  Dilata- 
tion made  by  all  the  degrees  of  each  Colour,  I 
found  that  it  was  greatefl  in  the  red  j  lefs  in 
the  yellow,  ftill  lefs  in  the  blue,  and  leaft  in  the 
violet.  And  to  make  as  juft  an  Eftimation  as  I 
could  of  the  Proportions  of  their  Contrad:ions 
or  Dilatations,  I  obferv'd  that  the  whole  Con- 
traction or  Dilatation  of  the  Diameter  of  any 
Ring  made  by  all  the  degrees  of  red,  was  to 
that  of  the  Diameter  of  the  fame  Ring  made  by 
all  the  degrees  of  violet,  as  about  four  to  three, 
or  five  to  four,  and  that  when  the  Light  was 
of  the  middle  Colour  between  yellow  and  green, 
the  Diameter  of  the  Ring  was  very  nearly  an 
arithmetical  Mean  between  the  greatefl  Diame- 
ter of  the  fame  Ring  made  by  the  outmoft  red, 
and  the  leaft  Diameter  thereof  made  by  the 
outmoft  violet :  Contrary  to  what  happens  in 
the  Colours  of  the  oblong  Spedlrum  made  by 
the  Refraction  of  a  Prifm,  where  the  red  is 
moft  contracted ,  the  violet  moft  expanded , 
and  in  the  midft  of  all  the  Colours  is  the  Con- 
fine of  green  and  blue.  And  hence  I  feem  to 
collect  that  the  thicknefies  of  the  Air  between 
the  GlaiTcs  there,  where  the  Ring  is  fucceffive- 
ly 


i86  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ly  made  by  the  limits  of  the  five  principal  Co- 
lours ( red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  violet )  in  or- 
der ( that  is,  by  the  extreme  red,  by  the  limit 
of  red  and  yellow  in  the  middle  of  the  orange, 
by  the  limit  of  yellow  and  green,  by  the  limit 
of  green  and  blue,  by  the  limit  of  blue  and 
violet  in  the  middle  of  the  indigo,  and  by  the 
extreme  violet )  are  to  one  another  very  nearly 
as  the  fixth  lengths  of  -aXhord  which  found  the 
Notes  in  a  fixth  Major,  Jhl^  la,  mi\  fa,  Jol,  la. 
But  it  agrees  fomething  better  with  the  Obferva- 
tion  to  fay,  that  the  thickneffes  of  the  Air  be- 
tween the  GlafTes  there,  where  the  Rings  are 
fuccefTively  made  by  the  limits  of  the  feven  Co- 
lours, red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indi- 
go, violet  in  order,  are  to  one  another  as  the 
Cube  Roots  of  the  Squares  of  the  eight  lengths 
^f  a  Chord,  which  found  the  Notes  in  an  eighth, 
Jhl,  la,  fa,  Jbl,  la,  mi,  fa,  fol ;  that  is,  as  the 
Cube  Roots  of -the  Squares  of  the  Nurinbers,   i, 

8     f     J     i     i    ^     I 

§>  5>  4J   1;   Si   '^J   2* 

Obf  15.  Thefe  Rings  were  not  of  various 
Colours  like  thofe  made  in  the  open  Air,  but 
appeared  all  over  of  that  prifmatick  Colour  on- 
ly witli  which  they  were  illuminated.  And  by 
projediing  the  prifmatick  Colours  immediately 
upon  the  GlalTes,  I  found  that  the  Light  which 
fell  on  the  dark  Spaces  which  were  between 
the  colour'd  Rings  was  tranfmitted  through  the 
GlalTes  without  any  variation  of  Colour.  For 
on  a  white  Paper  placed  behind,  it  would  paint 
Rings  of  the  fame  Colour  with  thofe  which 
were  refleded,  and  of  the  bignefs  of  their  im- 
mediate Spaces.     And  from  thence  the  origin 

I  of 


BOOK     II.  187 

of  thefe  Rings  Is  manifefl;  namely,  that  the  Air 
.between  the  Glaffes,  according  to  its  various 
thicknefs,  is  difpofed  in  fome  places  to  refledt, 
and  in  others  to  tranfmit  the  Light  of  any  one 
Colour  (as  you  may  fee  reprefented  in  the 
fourth  Figure )  and  in  the  fame  place  to  refled: 
that  of  one  Colour  where  it  tranfmits  that  of 
another.  , 

Obf.  16.  The  Squares  of  the  Diameters  of 
thefe  Rings  made  by  any  prifmatick  Colour  were 
in  arithmetical  Progrefilon,  as  in  the  fifth  Ob- 
fervation.  And  the  Diameter  of  the  fixth  Cir- 
cle,   when   made    by   the  citrine  yellow,    and 

viewed  almofl  perpendicularly,    was  about  ^ 

parts  of  an  Inch,  or  a  little  lefs,  agreeable  to  the 
fixth  Obfervation. 

The  precedent  Obfervations  were  made  with 
a  rarer  thin  Mediuni;  terminated  by  a  denfer, 
fuch  as  was  Air  or  Water  comprefs'd  between 
two  GlalTes.  In  thofe  that  follow  are  fet  down 
the  Appearances  of  a  denfer  Medium  thin'd 
within  a  rarer,  fuch  as  are  Plates  of  Mufcovy 
Glafs,  Bubbles  of  Water,  and  fome  other  thin 
Subftances  terminated  on  all  fides  with  Air. 

Obf.  17.  If  a  Bubble  be  blown  with  Water 
firft  made  tenacious  by  dilTolving  a  little  Soap 
in  it,  'tis  a  common  Obfervation,  that  after  a 
while  it  will  appear  tinged  with  a  great  variety  of 
Colours.  To  defend  thefe  Bubbles  from  being 
agitated  by  the  external  Air  (whereby  their  Co- 
lours are  irregularly  moved  one  among  ano- 
ther, fo  that  no  accurate  Obfervation  can  be 
made  of  themj  as  foon  as  I  had  blown  any  of 

thorn 


i88  OPTIC  K  S. 

them  I  cover'd  it  with  a  clear  Glafs,  and  by  that 
means  its  Colours  emerged  in  a  very  regular 
order,  like  fo  many  concentrick  Rings  encom- 
paffing  the  top  of  the  Bubble.  And  as  the  Bub- 
ble grew  thinner  by  the  continual  fubfiding  of 
the  Water,  thefe  Rings  dilated  flowly  and  over- 
fpread  the  whole  Bubble,  defcending  in  order  to 
the  bottom  of  it,  where  they  vanifn'd  fuc- 
celTively.  In  the  mean  while,  after  all  the  Co- 
lours were  emerged  at  the  top,  there  grew  in  the 
center  of  the  Rings  a  fmall  round  black  Spot, 
like  that  in  the  firft  Obfervation,  which  con- 
tinually dilated  it  felf  till  it  became  fometimes 
more  than  i  or  ^  of  an  Inch  in  breadth  before 
the  Bubble  broke.  At  firft  I  thought  there  had 
been  no  Light  refleded  from  the  Water  in  that 
place,  but  obferving  it  more  curioufly,  I  faw 
within  it  feveral  fmaller  round  Spots,  which 
appeared  much  blacker  €nd  darker  than  the 
reft,  whereby  I  knew  that  there  was  fome  Re- 
flexion at  the  other  places  which  were  not  fo 
dark  as  thofe  Spots.  And  by  farther  Tryal  I 
found  that  I  could  fee  the  Images  of  fome 
things  (as  of  a  Candle  or  the  Sun)  very  faintly 
refled:ed,  not  only  from  the  great  black  Spot, 
but  alfo  from  the  little  darker  Spots  which  were 
within  it. 

Belides  the  aforefaid  colour'd  Rings  there 
would  often  appear  fmall  Spots  of  Colours,  af- 
cending  and  defcending  up  and  down  the  fides 
of  the  Bubble,  by  reafon  of  fome  Inequalities  in 
the  fubfiding  of  the  Water.  And  fometimes 
fmall  black  Spots  generated  at  the  fides  would 
2  afcend 


BOOK     II.  189 

afcend  up  to  the  larger  black  Spot  at  the  top  of 
the  Bubble,  and  unite  with  it. 

ObJ.  18.  Becaufe  the  Colours  of  thefe  Bubbles 
were  more  extended  and  lively  than  thofe  of  the 
Air  thinn'^d  between  two  GlafTes,  and  fo  more 
eafy  to  be  diiliinguilli'd,  I  Ihall  here  give  you  a 
farther  defcription  of  their  order,  as  they  were 
obferv'd  in  viewing  them  by  Reflexion  of  the 
Skies  when  of  a  white  Colour,  whilft  a  black 
fubftance  was  placed  behind  the  Bubble.  And 
they  were  thele,  red,  blue;  red,  blue;  red, 
blue;  red,  green;  red,  yellow,  green,  blue, 
purple;  red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  violet;  red, 
yellow,  white,  blue,  black. 

The  three  fir  ft  Succeffions  of  red  and  blue 
were  very  dilute  and  dirty,  efpecially  the  firft, 
where  the  red  feem'd  in  a  manner  to  be  white. 
Among  thefe  there  was  fcarce  any  other  Colour 
fenfible  befides  red  an^  blue,  only  the  blues  ( and 
principally  the  fecond  blue )  inclined  a  little  to 


green. 


The  fourth  red  was  alfo  dilute  and  dirtv,  bur 
not  fo  much  as  the  former  three ;  after  that  fuc- 
ceeded  little  or  no  yellow ,  but  a  copious 
green,  which  at  firft  inclined  a  little  to  yellow, 
and  then  became  a  pretty  brisk  and  good  wil- 
low green,  and  afterwards  changed  to  a  bluiib 
Colour;  but  there  fucceeded  neither  blue  noF 
violet.  • 

The  fifth  red  at  firft  inclined  very  much  to 
purple,  and  afterwards  became  more  bright 
and  brisk,  but  yet  not  very  pure.  This  was 
fucceeded  with  a  very  bright  and  intenfe  yel- 
low»  which  was  but  little  in  quantity,  and  foon 

chang'd 


xgo  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

chang'4  to  green:  But  that  green  was  copious 
and  fomething  more  pure,  deep  and  lively,  than 
the  former  green.  After  that  follow'd  an  ex- 
cellent blue  of  a  bright  Sky-colour,  and  then  a 
purple,  which  was  lefs  in  quantity  than  the  blue, 
and  much  inclined  to  red. 

The  fixth  red  was  at  firft  of  a  very  fair  and 
lively  fcarlet,  and  foon  after  of  a  brighter  Co- 
lour, being  very  pure  and  brisk,  and  the  beft 
of  all  the  reds.  Then  after  a  lively  orange  fol- 
low'd an  intenfe  bright  and  copious  yellow, 
which  was  alfo  the  beft  of  all  the. yellows,  and 
this  changed  firft  to  a  greenifti  yellow,  and  then 
to  a  greenifli  bluej  but  the  green  between  the 
yellow  and  the  blue,  was  very  little  and  dilute, 
feeming  rather  a  greenifli  white  than  a  green. 
The  blue  which  fucceeded  became  very  good, 
and  of  a  very  fair  bright  Sky-colour,  but  yet 
fomething  inferior  to  the  former  blue  3  and  the 
violet  was  intenfe  and  deep  with  little  or  no 
rednefs  in  it.  And  lefs  in  quantity  than  the 
blue. 

In  the  laft  red  appeared  a  tin6lure  of  fcarlet 
next  to  violet,  which  foon  changed  to  a  bright- 
er Colour,  inclining  to  an  orange  j  and  the  yel- 
low which  follow'd  was  at  firft  pretty  good 
and  lively,  but  afterwards  it  grew  more  dilute, 
until  by  degrees  it  ended  in  perfed:  whitenefs. 
And  this  whitenefs,  if  the  Water  was  very  te- 
nacious and  well-temper'd,  would  fiowly  fpread 
and  dilate  it  felf  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
Bubble;  continually  growing  puler.  at  the  top, 
where  at  length  it  would  crack  in  many  places, 
and  thofe  cracks,  as  they  dilated,  would  appear 

of 


BOOK     II.     .         rgt 

of  a  pretty  good,  but  yet  obfcure  and  dark 
Sky-colour;  the  white  between  the  blue  Spots 
diminifliing,  until  it  refembled  the  Threds  of 
an  irregular  Net-work,  and  foon  after  vanifh'd, 
and  left  all  the  upper  part  of  the  Bubble  of  the 
faid  dark  blue  Colour.  And  this  Colour,  after 
the  aforefaid  manner,  dilated  it  felf  downwards, 
until  fometimes  it  hath  overfpread  the  whole 
Bubble.  In  the  mean  while  at  the  top,  which 
was  of  a  darker  blue  than  the  bottom,  and  ap- 
pear'd  alfo  full  of  many  round  blue  Spots,  fome- 
thing  darker  than  the  reft,  there  woiild  emerge 
one  or  more  very  black  Spots,  and  within  thofe, 
other  Spots  of  an  intenfer  blacknefs,  which  I 
mention'd  in  the  former  Obfervation  ;  and  thefe 
continually  dilated  themfelves  until  the  Bubble 
broke. 

If  the  Water  was  not  very  tenacious,  the  black 
Spots  would  break  forth  in  the  white,  without 
any  fenfible  intervention  of  the  blue.  And  fome- 
times  they  would  break  forth  within  the  prece- 
dent yellow,  or  red,  or  perhaps  within  the  blue 
of  the  fecond  order,  before  the  intermediate  Co- 
lours had  time  to  difplay  themfelves. 

By  this  defcription  you  may  perceive  how  great 
an  affinity  thefe  Colours  have  with  thofe  of  Air 
defcribed  in  the  fourth  Obfervation,  although 
fet  down  in  a  contrary  order,  by  reafon  that 
they  begin  to  appear  when  the  Bubble  is  thick- 
eft,  and  are  moft  conveniently  reckon'd  from 
the  loweft  and  thickeft  part  of  the  Bubble  up- 
wards. 

Obf.  19.  Viewing  in  feveral  oblique  Poiitions 
of  my  Eye  the  Rings  of  Colours  emerging  on 

the 


192  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  top  of  the  Bubble,  I  found  that  they  were 
fenfibly  dilated  by  increafing  the  obliquity,  but 
yet  not  fo  much  by  far  as  thofe  made  by  thinn'd 
Air  in  the  feventh  Obfervation.  For  there  they 
v/ere  dilated  fo  much  as,  when  view'd  moft  ob- 
liquely, to  arrive  at  a  part  of  the  Plate  more  than 
twelve  times  thicker  than  that  where  they  ap- 
pear'd  when  viewed  perpendicularly  j  whereas  ii;i 
this  cafe  the  thicknefs  of  the  Water,  at  which 
they  arrived  when  viewed  moil  obliquely,  was  to 
that  thicknefs  which  exhibited  them  by  per- 
pendicular Rays,  fomething  lefs  than  as  8  to  5'. 
By  the  beft  of  my  Obfervations  it  was  between 
15  and  15;  to  10;  an  increafe  about  24  times  lefs 
than  in  the  other  cafe. 

Sometimes  the  Bubble  would  become  of  an 
uniform  thicknefs  all  over,  except  at  the  top  of 
it  near  the  black  Spot,  as  I  knew,  becaufe  it 
would  exhibit  the  fame  appearance  of  Colours 
in  all  Portions  of  the  Eye.  And  then  the  Co- 
lours which  were  feen  at  its  apparent  circumfe- 
rence by  the  obliquefl  Rays,  would  be  different 
from  thofe  that  were  feen  in  other  places,  by 
Rays  lefs  oblique  to  it.  And  divers  Spedtators 
might  fee  the  fame  part  of  it  of  differing  Co- 
lours, by  viewing  it  at  very  differing  Obliqui- 
ties. Now  obferving  how  much  the  Colours  at 
the  fame  places  of  the  Bubble,  or  at  divers  pla* 
ces  of  equal  thicknefs,  were  varied  by  the  fe- 
veral  Obliquities  of  the  Rays;  by  the  affiflance 
of  the  4th,  14th,  1 6th  and  i8th  Obfervations, 
as  they  are  hereafter  explain'd,  I  colled:  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Water  requifite  to  exhibit  any 
one  and  the  fame  Colour,  at  feveral  Obliquities, 

to 


BOOK     II. 


193 


to  be  very  nearly  in  the  Proportion  expTeffed  in 


this  Table. 


Incidence  on 
the  Water. 

Rejra5lion  into 
the  Water. 

Thicknefs  of 
the  Water. 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg.  Min. 

00     00 

00     00 

10 

15     00 

II      II 

loi 

30     00 

22        I 

10^ 

45    00 
60    00 

7S    00 
90    00 

32       2 

40     30 

•     46     25 

48     35 

I  If 
13 

In  the  two  firft  Columns  are  exprefs'd  the 
Obliquities  of  the  Rays  to  the  Superficies  of  the 
Water,  that  is,  their  Angles  of  Incidence  and 
Refradion.  Where  I  fuppofe^  that  the  Sines 
which  meafure  them  are  in  round  Numbers,  as 
3  to  4,  though  probably  the  DifTolution  of  Soap 
in  the  Water,  may  a  little  alter  its  refradive 
Virtue.  In  the  third  Colpmn,  the  Thicknefs  of 
the  Bubble,  at  which  any  one  Colour  is  exhibit- 
ed in  thofe  feveral  Obliquities,  is  exprefs'd  in 
Parts,  of  which  ten  conftitute  its  Thicknefs  when 
the  Rays  are  perpendicular.  And  the  Rule 
found  by  the  feventh  Obfervation  agrees  well 
with  thefe  Meafures,  if  duly  apply'd  -,  namely, 
that  the  Thicknefs  of  a  Plate  of  Water  requifite 
to  exhibit  one  and  the  fame  Colour  at  feveral 
Obliquities  of  the  Eye,  is  proportional  to  the 
Secant  of  an  Angle,  whofe  Sine  is  the  firft  of  an 
hundred    and  fix  arithmetical  mean.  Proportion 

O.  nals 


194  OP  TIC  KS. 

nals  between  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refradion  ^ 
counted  from  the  lelTer  Sine,  that  is,  from  the 
Sine  of  Refrad:ion  when  the  Refradion  is  made 
out  of  Air  into  Water,  otherwife  from  the  Sine 
of  Incidence. 

I  ,have  fometimes  obferv'd,  that  the  Colours 
whi<;h  arife  on  polifh'd  Steel  by  heating  it,  or  on 
Bell-metal,  and  fome  other  metalline  Sub- 
ftances,  when  melted  and  pour'd  on  the  Ground, 
where  they  may  cool  in  the  open  Air,  have,  like 
the  Colours  of  Water-bubbles,  been  a  little 
changed  by  viewing  them  at  divers  Obliquities, 
and  particularly  that  a  deep'  blue,  or  violet, 
when  view'd  very  obliquely,  hath  been  changed 
to  a  deep  red.  But  the  Changes  of  thefe  Co- 
lours are  not  fo  great  and  fenfible  as  of  thofe 
made  by  Water.  For  the  Scoria,  or  vitrified  Part 
of  the  Metal,  which  mofl  Metals  when  heated  or 
melted  do  continually  protrude,  and  fend  out 
to  their  Surface,  and  which  by  covering  the 
Metals  in  form  of  a  thin  glafly  Skin,  caufes 
thefe  Colours,  is  much  denfer  than  Water  ;  and 
I  find  that  the  Change  made  by  the  Obliquation 
x)f  the  Eye  is  leaft  in  Colours  of  the  denfeft  thin 
Subilances. 

Obf.  20.  As  in  the  ninth  Obfervation,  fo  here, 
the  Bubble,  by  tranfmitted  Light,  appear'd  of  a 
contrary  Colour  to  that  which  it  exhibited  by 
Reflexion.  Thus  when  the  Bubble  being  look'd 
on  by  the  Light  of  the  Clouds  reflected  from 
it,  feemed  red  at  its  apparent  Circumference, 
if  the  Clouds  at  the  fame  time,  or  immediately 
after,  were  view'd  through  it,  the  Colour  at  its 
Circumference   would  be  blue-.      And,    on  the 

contrary. 


BOOK     IL  19$ 

.contrary,  when  by  refleded  Light  it  appeared 
blue,  it  would  appear  red  by  tranfmitted  Light. 

Obf.  2 1.  By  wetting  very  thin  Plates  of  Muf- 
CGvy  Glals,  whole  thmnels  made  the  like  Co- 
lours appear,  the  Colours  became  more  taint  and 
languid ,  efpecially  by  wetting  the  Plates  on 
that  fide  oppofite  to  the  Eye:  But  I  could  not 
perceive  any  variation  of  their  Species.  So  then 
the  thicknefs  of  a  Plate  requiiite  to  produce 
any  Colour,  depends  only  on  the  denlity  of  the 
Plate,  and  not  on  that  of  the  ambient  Medium. 
And  hence,  by  the  loth  and  i6th  Obfervations, 
may  be  known  the  thicknefs  which  Bubbles  of 
Water,  or  Plates  of  Mufco'-cy  Glafs,  or  other 
Subftances,  have  at  any  Colour  produced  by 
them. 

Obf,  22.  A  thin  tranfparent  Body,  which  is 
denfer  than  its  ambient  Medium,  exhibits  more 
brisk  and  vivid  Colours  than  that  which  is  fo 
much  rarer;  as  I  have  particularly  obferved  iii 
the  Air  and  Clafs.  For  blowing  Glafs  very  thin 
at  a  Lamp  Furnace,  thofe  Plates  encompalTed 
with_  Air  did  exhibit  Colours  much  more  vivid 
than  thofe  of  Air  made  thin  between  two  Glaf- 
fes. 

Obf.  23.  Comparing  the  quantity  of  Light 
refledted  from  the  feveral  Rings,  I  found  that 
it  was  mpft  copious  from  the  iiril  or  inniofi;, 
and  in  the  exterior  Rings  became  gradually  lef^ 
and  lefs.  Alfo  the  whitenefs  of  the  iirft  Ring 
was  flronger  than  that  refleded  from  thofe 
parts  of  the  thin  Medium  or  Plate  which  wxre 
without  the  Rings  j  as  I  co aid  manifeftly  per- 
ceive by  viewing  at  a  diftance  the  Rings  made 

C  a  by 


196  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

by  the  two  Objed-glafTes ;  or  by  comparing  tw6 
Bubbles  of  Water  blown  at  diflant  Times,  in  the 
firft  of  which  the  Whitenefsappear'd,  which  fuc- 
ceeded  all  the  Colours,  and  in  the  other,  the 
Whitenefs  which  preceded  them  all. 

Obf.  24.  When  the  two  Objeil-glafTes  were 
lay'd  upon  one  an  cither,  fo  as  to  make  the  Rings- 
of  the  Colours  appear,  though  with  my  naked  Eye 
I  could  not  difcern  aljove  eiffht  or  nine  of  thofe 

o 

Rings,  yet  by  viewing  them  through  a  Prifm  I 
have  feen  a  far  greater  Multitude,  infomuch  that 
I  could  number  more  than  forty,  befides  many 
others,  that  were  fo  very  fmall  and  clofe  together, 
that  I  could  not  keep  my  Eye  fteady  on  them  fe- 
verally  fo  as  to  number  them,  but  by  their 
Extent  I  have  fometimes  eftimated  them  to  be 
more  than  an  hundred.  And  I  believe  the  Expe- 
riment may  be  improved  to  the  Difcovery  of  far 
greater  Numbers.  For  they  feem  to  be  really  un- 
limited, though  vifible  only  fo  far  as  they  can  be 
feparated  by  the  Refradion  of  the  Prifm,  as  I  (hall 
hereafter  explain. 

But  it  was  but  one  fide  of  thefe  Rings,  namely, 
that  towards  which  the  Refraction  was  made, 
which  by  that  Refradion  was  render'd  diftind:, 
and  the  other  fide  became  more  confufed  than 
when  view'd  by  the  naked  Eye,  infomuch  that 
there  I  could  not  difcern  above  one  or  two, 
and  fometimes  none  of  thofe  Rings,  of  which 
I  could  difcern  eight  or  nine  with  my  naked 
Eye.  And  their  Segments  or  Arcs,  which  on 
the  other  fide  appear'd  fo  numerous,  for  the 
moft  part  exceeded  not  the  third  Part  of  a  Cir- 
cle.    If  the  Refraction  was  very  great,    or  the 

Prifm 


B  O  O  K     II.  197 

Prilm  very  diftant  from  the  Ohjed-glalTes,  the 
middle  Part  of  thofe  Arcs  became  alfo  confu- 
fed,  fo  as  to  difappear  and  conftitute  an  even 
Whitenefs,  whiUl  on  either  fide  their  Ends,  as 
alfo  the  whole  Arcs  farthefl  from  the  Center, 
became  diftinder  than  before,  appearing  in  the 
Form  as  you  fee  them  defign'd  in  the  hfth  Fi- 
gure. 

The  Arcs,  where  they  feem'd  diflindteft,  were 
only  white  and  black  fuccellively,  without  any 
other  Colours  intermix'd.  But  in  other  Places 
there  appeared  Colpurs,  whofe  Order  was  inverted 
by  the  Kefradtion  in  fuch  manner,  that  if  I  firft 
held  the  Prifm  very  near  the  Objedt-glafles,  and 
then  gradually  removed  it  farther  off  towards  my 
Eye,  the  Colours  of  the  2d,  3d,  4th,  and  fol- 
lowing Rings  flirunk  towards  the  white  that 
emerged  between  them,  until  they  wholly  va- 
nifli'd  into  it  at  the  middle  of  the  Arcs,  and 
afterwards  emerged  again  in  a  contrary  Order. 
But  at  the  Ends  of  the  Arcs  they  retain'd  their 
Order  unchanged. 

I  have  fometimes  fo  lay'd  one  Objed-glafs 
upon  the  other,  that  to  the  naked  Eye  they 
have  all  over  feem'd  uniformly  white,  without 
the  leaft  Appearance  of  any  of  the  colour'd 
Rings  ;  and  yet  by  viewing  them  through  a 
Prifm,  great  Multitudes  of  thofe  Rings  have 
difcover'd  themfelves.  And  in  like  manner 
Plates  of  Miifcovy  Glafs,  and  Bubbles  of  Glafs 
blown  at  a  Lamp-Furnace,  which  were  not  fo 
tlijn  as  to  exhibit  any  Colours  to  the  naked  Eye, 
have  through  the  Prifm  exhibited  a  great  Va^ 
riety  of  them  ranged  irregularly  up  and  down  in 

O  3  the 


198  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  Form  of  Waves.  And  fo  Bubbles  of  Water, 
before  they  began  to  exhibit  their  Colours  to  the 
naked  Eye  of  aBy-ftander,  have  appeared  through 
fl  Prlfrn,  girded  about  with  many  parallel  and 
horizontal  Rings  ^  to  produce  v^hich  Effed:,  it 
was  neceffary  to  hpld  the  Prifm  parallel,  or 
very  nearly  parallel  to  the  Horizon,  and  to 
difpofe  it  {q  th^t  the  Rays  might  be  refraded 
upwards. 


T  H»E 


THE 


SECOND  BOOJ^ 


O  F 


OPTICKS 


PART     II. 


Remarks  tipo-n  the  foregoing  Obfervatio?ts, 

A  V  I  N  G  given  my  Obfervations 
of  thefe  Colours,  before  I  make 
life  of  them  to  unfold  the  Caufes 
of  the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies, 
it  is  convenient  that  by  the  fim- 
pleft  of  them,fuch  asare  the  ad,  3d, 
4th,  9th,  I2thj  1 8th,  20th,  and  24th,  I  firft  ex- 

O  4  plaiu 


20O  ;        O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

plain  the  more  compounded.  And  firft  to  fhew 
now  the  Colours  in  the  fourth  and  eighteenth 
Obiervations  are  produced,  let  there  be  taken  in 
any  Right  Line  from  the  Point  Y,  [in  Ffg.6.]  the 
Lengths  YA,  YB,  YC,  YD,  YE,  YF,  YG,  YH, 
in  proportion  to  one  another,  as  the  Cube-RoOts 
of  the  Squares  of  the  Numbers,  5,  f^g,  t,  |,  ^,  |,  |,  i, 
whereby  the  Lengths  of  aMulical  Chord  to  found 
all  the  Notes  in  an  eighth  are  reprefented;  that 
is,  in  the  Proportion  of  the  Numbers  6300,  68 14, 
71 14,  7631,  8255,  8855,  9243>  loooo.  And 
at  the  Points  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  let  Perpen- 
diculars A  a,  B  /3,  &c,  be  erefted,  by  whofe  In- 
tervals the  Extent  of  the  feveral  Colours  fet  under- 
neath againft  them,  is  to  be  reprefented.  Then 
divide  the  Line  A  a  in  fuch  Proportion  as  the 
lumbers  i,  2,  3,  5,  6,  7,  9,  xo,  1 1,  &c.  fet  at 
the  Points  of  Divifion  denote.  And  through 
thofe  Divifions  from  Y  draw  Lines  1 1,  2  K,  3  L, 
5  M,  6  N,  7  O,  &c. 

Now,  if  A  2  be  fuppofed  to  reprefent  the 
Thicknefs  of  any  thin  tranfparent  Body,  at  which 
the  outmoft  Violet  is  moft  copioully  reflected 
in  the  firft  Ring,  or  Series  of  Colours,  then  by 
the  13th  Obfervation,  HK  will  reprefent  its 
Thicknefs,  at  which  the  utmoft  Red  is  moft  co- 
pioufly  refleded  in  the  fame  Series.  Alfo  by 
the  5th  and  i6th  Obfervations,  A  6  and  HN 
will  denote  the  ThicknelTes  at  which  thofe  ex- 
treme Colours  are  moft  copioufly  refledied  in 
the  fecond  Series,  and  A 10  and  HQ^he  Thick- 
neffes  at  which  they  are  moft  copioufly  refledl- 
ed  in  the  third  Series,  ■  and  fo  on.  And  the 
Thicknefs  at  which  any  of  the  intermediate  Co- 
i  lours 


BOOK     II.  20I 

iours  are  reflefted  moft  copioufly,  will,  accor- 
ding to  the  14th  Obfervation,  be  defined  by  the 
diftance  of  the  Line  AH  from  the  intermediate 
parts  of  the  Lines  2  K,  6N,  10  Q,  &c.  againft 
which  the  Names  of  thofe  Colours  are  written 
below. 

But  farther,  to  define  the  Latitude  of  thefe 
Colours  in  each  Ring  or  Series,  let  A  i  defign 
the  leajft  thicknels,  and  A  3  the  greateft  thi,ck- 
nefs ,  at  which  the  extreme  violet  in  the  firft 
Series  is  reiledted,  and  let  HI,  and  H  L,  de- 
fign the  like  limits  for  the  extreme  red,  and  let 
the  intermediate  Colours  be  limited  by  the  in- 
termediate parts  of  the  Lines  il,  and  3L,  a- 
gainfi;  which  the  Names  of  thofe  Colours  are 
written,  and  fo  on:  But  yet  with  this  caution, 
that  the  Reflexions  be  fuppofed  flrongefl  at  the 
intermediate  Spaces,  2K,  6N,  ioQ>  ci?r.  and 
from  thence  to  decreafe  gradually  towards  thefe 
limits,  1 1,  3L,  5M,  7O,  &c.  on  either  fide; 
where  you  muft  not  conceive  them  to  be  pre- 
cifely  limited,  but  to  decay  indefinitely.  And 
whereas  I  have  afiign'd  the  fame  Latitude  to  e- 
very  Series,  I  did  it,  becaufe  although  the  Co- 
lours in  the  firfl  Series  feem  to  be  a  little  broad- 
er than  die* reft,  by  reafon  of  a  ftronger  Re- 
flexion tliere,  yet  that  inequality  is  fo  infenfi- 
ble  as  fcarcely  to  be  determin'd  by  Obferva- 
tion. 

Now  according  to  this  Defcription,  concei- 
ving that  the  Rays  originally  of  feveral  Colours 
are  by  turns  refleded  at  the  Spaces  1 1  L  3,  5M 
O7,  9P  R  1 1,  ^c.  and  tranfmitted  at  the  Spaces 
AHIi,  3LM5,  7 OP 9,  &c,  it  is  eafy  to  know 

wliat 


202  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

what  Colour  muft  in  the  open  Air  be  exhi- 
bited at  any  thickneis  of  a  tranlparent  thin  Bo- 
dy. For  if  a  Ruler  be -applied  parallel  to  AH, 
at  that  diftance  from  it  by  which  the  thicknefs 
of  the  Body  is  reprefented,  the  alternate  Spaces 
il  L3,  5M  O7,  &c.  which  it  croiTeth  will  de- 
note the  reflected  original  Colours,  of  which 
the  Colour  exhibited  in  the  open  Air  is  com- 
pounded. Thus  if  the  conftitutiop  of  the  green 
in  the  third  Series  of  Colours  be  defired,  apply 
the  Ruler  as  you  fee  at  tt  p  cr  9,  and  by  its  paffing 
through  fome  of  the  blue  at  tt  and  yellow  at  cr, 
as'  well  as  through  the  green  at  ^,  you  may  con- 
clude that  the  green  exhibited  at  that  thicknefs  of 
the  Body  is  principally  conflituted  of  original 
green,  but  not  without  a  mixture  of  fome  blue 
and  yellow. 

By  this  means  you  may  know  how  the  Co- 
lours from  the  Center  of  the  Rings  outward 
ought  to  fucceed  in  order  as  they  were  defcri- 
bed  in  the  4th  and  i8th  Obfervations.  For  if 
you  move  the  Ruler  gradually  from  AH  through 
all  diflances,  having  pafs'd  over  the  firfl  Space 
which  denotes  little  or  no  Reflexion  to  be  made 
by  thinneft  Subftances,  it  will  firft  arrive  at  i  the 
violet,  and  then  very  quickly  at  the  blue  and 
green',  which  together  with  that  violet  com- 
pound blue,  and  then  at  the  yellow  and  red,  by 
whofe  farther  addition  that  blue  is  converted 
into  whitenefs,  which  whitenefs  continues  du- 
ring the  tranfit  of  the  edge  of  the  Ruler  from 
I  to  3,  and  after  that  by  the  fucceffive  dehci- 
cnce  of  its  component  Colours,  turns  firfl  to 
co-mpound  yellow,  and  then  to  red,  and  lafl  of 
9  all 


BOOK     IT.  203 

■all  the  red  ceafeth  at  L.  Then  begin  the  Co- 
lours of  the  fecond  Series,  which  fucceed  in 
order  during  the  tranfit  of  the  edge  of  the 
Ruler  from  5  to  O,  and  are  more  lively  than 
before ,  becaufe  more  expanded  and  fevered. 
-And  for  the  fame  reafon,  inftead  of  the  former 
v^hite  there  intercedes  between  the  blue  and 
yellow  a  mixture  of  orange,  yellow,  green, 
blue  and  indigo,  all  which  together  ought  to 
exhibit  a  dilute  and  imperfect  green.  So  the 
Colours  of  the  third  Series  all  fucceed  in  or- 
der; firft,  the  violet,  which  a  little  interferes 
with  the  red  of  the  fecond  order,  and  is  there- 
by inclined  to  a  reddifli  purple;  then  the  blue 
and  green,  which  are  lefs  mix'd  with  other 
Colours,  and  confequently  more  lively  than  be- 
fore, efpecially  the  green:  Then  follows  the 
yellow,  forne  of  which  towards  the  green  is  di- 
Itintt  and  good,  but  that  part  of  it  towards  the 
fucceeding  red,  as  alfo  that  red  is  mix'd  with 
the  violet  and  blue  of  the  fourth  Series,  where- 
by various  degrees  of  red  very  much  inclining 
to  purple  are  compounded.  This  violet  and 
blue,  which  fliould  fucceed  this  red,  being  mix- 
ed with ,  and  hidden  in  it ,  there  fucceeds  a 
green.  And  this  at  firft  is  much  inclined  to 
blue,  but  foon  becomes  a  good  green,  the  on- 
ly unmix'd  and  lively  Colour  in  this  fourth  Se- 
ries. For  as, it  verges  towards  the  yellow,  it 
begins  to  interfere  with  the  Colours  of  the  fifth 
Series ,  by  whofe  mixture  the  fucceeding  yel- 
low and  red  are  very  much  diluted  and  made 
dirty,  efpecially  the  yellow,  which  being  the 
v/eaker   Colour   is  fcarce   able  to  iTiew  it  felf. 

After 


204  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

After  this  the  feveral  Series  interfere  more  and 
more,  and  their  Colours  become  more  apd  more 
intermix'd,  till  after  three  or  four  more  revo- 
lutions ( in  which  the  red  and  blue  predominate 
by  turns)  all  forts  of  Colours  are  in  all  places 
pretty  equally  blended,  and  compound  an  even 
whitenefs. 

And  fmce  by  the  15th  Obfervation  the  Rays 
endued  with  one  Colour  are  tranfmitted,  where 
thofe  of  another  Colour  are  reflected,  the  reafon 
of  the  Colours  made  by  the  tranfmitted  Light  in 
the  9th  and  20th  Obfervations  is  from  hence 
evident. 

If  not  only  the  Order  and  Species  of  thefe 
Colours,  but  alfo  the  precife  thicknefs  of  the 
Plate,  or  thin  Body  at  which  they  are  exhibited, 
be  defired  in  parts  of  an  Inch,  that  may  be  alfo 
obtained  by  affiftance  of  the  6th  or  i6th  Obfer- 
vations. For  according  to  thofe  Obfervations 
the  thicknefs  of  the  thinned  Air,  which  be- 
tween two  GlalTes  exhibited  the  moil  luminous 

fjarts  of  the  firfl  fix  Rings  were  ^7^^  -^^ 

-4 —    —1—    — 1—     —V-   parts  of   an  Inch, 

178000     178000^   178000^    178000  -I 

Suppofe  the  Light  refle(5ted  moll  copioufly  at 
thefe  thicknefles  be  the  bright  citrine  yellow, 
or  confine  of  yellow  and  orange,  and  thefe  thick- 
nefles will  be  Fa,  Fyu,  Fr,  F|,  Fo,  F7.  And 
this  being  known,  it  is  eafy  to  determine  what 
thicknefs  of  Air  is  reprefented  by  G(p,  or  by  any 
other  difl:ance  of  the  Ruler  from  A  H. 

But  farther,  fince  by  the  loth  Obfervation  the 
thicknefs  of  Air  was  to  the  thicknefs  of  Water, 

which 


BOOK     11.  205 

which  between  the  fame  GlaiTes  exhibited  the 
fame  Colour,  as  4  to  3,  and  by  the  21ft  Obfer- 
vation  the  Colours  of  thin  Bodies  are  not  varied 
by  varying  the  ambient  Medium  j  the  thick- 
nefs  of  a  Bubble  of  Water,  exhibiting  any  Co- 
lour, will  be  J  of  the  thicknefs  of  Air  produ- 
cing the  fame  Colour.  And  fo  according  to 
the  fame  loth  and  21ft  Obfervat ions,  the  thiok- 
nefs  of  a  Plate  of  Glafs,  whofe  Refradion  of 
the  mean  refrangible  Ray,  is  meafured  by  the 
proportion  of  the  Sines  31  to  20,  may  be  \°  of 
the  thicknefs  of  Air  producing  the  fame  Co- 
lours; and  the  lijce  of  other  Mediums.  I  do 
not  affirm ,  that  this  proportion  of  20  to  3  r, 
holds  in  all  the  Rays ;  for  the  Sines  of  other 
forts  of  Rays  have  other  Proportions.  But  the 
differences  of  thofe  Proportions  are  fo  little 
that  I  do  not  here  confider  them.  On  thefe 
Grounds  I  have  compofed  the  following  Table, 
wherein  the  thicknefs  of  Air,  Water,  and  Glafs, 
at  which  each  Colour  is  mofl  intenfe  and  fpeci- 
fick,  is  exprelfed  in  parts  of  an  Inch  divided  in- 
to ten  hundred  thoufand  equal  parts. 


•  me 


2o6 


O  P  T  I  C  K  a 


I'he  thicknefs  of  colour  d  Plates  and  Particles  of 


-^ 


Their  Colours  of  the 
4kft  Order,  *\ 


^Very  black 

Black 

Beginning  of 
Black 

Blue 

White 
I  Yellow 

Orange 
vRed 


r  Violet 

V  Indigo 

A  Blue 

Of  thcfecond  Order,  J  Green 
Alellow 
y  Orange 
/  Bright  red 
L  Scarlet 


of  the  third  Order,< 


Purple 

Indigo 

Blue 

Green 

Yellow 

Red 

Bluifh  red 

Bluifli  green 
Green 

Yellowiih  green 
Red 

Ofihe  fifth  Order,  {Gre^eniih  blue 

-rvr  1     r    1-  «  J        TGreenifli  blue 
Of  the  fixth  Order,  \^q^ 

of  the  fevemh  Or-rGreeniih  blue 
der,  (.Ruddy  white 


of  the  fourth  Order,* 


^  Jir. 

Water. 

Ghfs. 

1 

J 

J-' 

1 

T 

^  [ 

I 

} 

2  a 

+ 

Tr 

2 

Ij- 

It 

^1 

I'r 

lir 

5t 

3^  . 

3f 

7^ 

5f 

41 

8 

6 

5t 

9 

H 

5t- 

II*- 

81- 

7t 

li^ 

^f 

8tt 

14 

loi- 

9 

i5t 

11^ 

^t 

16} 

I2| 

lof 

17^ 

1? 

ii> 

i8f 

'3^ 

u^ 

i9f 

i+i 

12f 

21 

i5i 

i3t^ 

22t'- 

i6± 

147 

23?- 

T-lVo 

I5t',- 

^51 

18-,^, 

16^ 

27^ 

20.1 

i7t 

^9. 

^4 

1%^ 

1L_ 

24 

20} 

34 

ijf 

22 

5  54 

2cr; 

2Z^ 

3^ 

27 

237- 

Jf7_ 

2<5 

4<? 

34t 

/-9i 

52f 

391- 

34 

5H 

44 

38 

^5 

48}  1 

42 

71 

557 
57|- 

45t 

77 

49f 

Now 


BOOK     IL  20  j 

•  Now  if  this  Table  be  compared  with  the  6th 
Scheme,  you  will  there  fee  the  conftitntion  of 
each  Colour,  as  to  its  Ingredients,  or  the  ori- 
ginal Colours  of  which  it  is  compounded,  and 
dience  be  enabled  to  judge  of  its  Intenfenefs  or 
Imperfection  ;  which  may  fuffice  in  explication 
of  the  4th  and  i8th  Obfervations,  unlefs  it  be 
farther  delired  to  delineate  the  manner  how 
the  Colours  appear,  when  the  two  Objed;-glaf- 
fes  are  laid  upon  one  another.  To  do  which, 
let  there  be  defcribed  a  large  Arc  of  a  Circle, 
and  a  ftreight  Line  which  may  -touch  that  Arc, 
and  parallel  to  that  Tangent  feveral  occult 
Lines,  at  fuch  diftances  from  it,  as  the  Num- 
bers fet  againft  the  feveral  Colours  in  the  Ta- 
ble denote.  For  the  Arc,  and  its  Tangent,  will 
reprefent  the  Superficies  of  the  Glalles  termi- 
nating the  interjacent  Air;  and  the  places  where 
the  occult  Lines  cut  the  Arc  will  (how  at  what 
diftances  from  the  center,  or  Point  of  contadl, 
each  Colour  is  refiedled. 

There  are.alfo  other  Ufesof  this  Table:  For 
by  its  afiirtance  the  thicknefs  of  the  Bubble  in 
the  19th  Obfervation  was  determin'd  by  the  Co- 
lours which  it  exhibited.  And  fo  the-bignefs  of 
the  parts  of  natural  Bodies  may  be  conje- 
diured  by  their  Colours,  as  ihall  be  hereafter 
fhewn.  Alfo,  if  two  "or  more  very  thin  Plates 
be  laid  one  upon  another,  fo  as  to  compofe  one 
Plate  equalling  them  all  in  thicknefs,  the  refult- 
ing  Colour  may  be  hereby  determin'd.  For  in- 
flance,  Mr.  Hook  obferved,  as  is  mentioned  in 
his  Micrograpkia^  that  a  faint  yellow  Plate  of 
Miijccoy  Glafs  laid  upon  a  bli^e  one,  conftituted 

a  very 


2o8  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

a  very  deep  purple.  Tke  yellow  of  the  firfl  Or- 
der is  a  faint  one,  and  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate 
exhibiting  it,  according  to  the  Table  is  42,  to 
which  add  9,  the  thicknefs  exhibiting  blue  of 
the  fecond  Order,  and  the  Sum  will  be  13I, 
which  is  the  thicknefs  exhibiting  the  purple  of 
the  thir4  Order. 

To  explain,  in  the  next  place,  the  circum- 
ftances  of  the  2d  and  3d  Obfervations  5  that  is, 
how  the  Rings  of  the  Colours  may  ( by  turning 
the  Prifms  about  their  common  Axis  the  con- 
trary way  to  that  expreffed  in  thofe  Obferva- 
tions )  be  converted  into  white  and  black  Rings, 
and  afterwards  into  Rings  of  Colours  again,  the 
Colours  of  each  Ring  lying  now  in  an  inverted 
order;  it  muft  be  remember'd,  that  thofe  Rings 
of  Colours  are  dilated  by  the  obliquation  of  the 
Rays  to  the  Air  which  intercedes  the  GlalTes, 
and  that  according  to  the  Table  in  the  7th  Ob- 
fervation,  their  Dilatation  or  Increafe  of  their 
Diameter  is  mofl  manifeft  and  fpeedy  when 
they  are  obliquefl:.  Now, the  Rays  of  yellow 
being  more  refra(5led  by  tne  firft  Superficies  of 
the  faid  Air  than  thofe  of  red,  are  thereby 
made  more  oblique  to  the  fecond  Superficies, 
at  which  they  are  refieded  to  produce  the  co- 
lour'd  Rings,  and  confequently  the  yellow  Cir- 
cle in  each  Ring  will  be  more  dilated  than  the 
red  ;  and  the  Excefs  of  its  Dilatation  will  be  fo 
much  the  greater,  by  how  much  the  greater  is 
the  obliquity  of  the  Rays,  until  at  laft  it  be- 
come of  equal  extent  with  the  red  of  the  fame 
Ring.  And  for  the  fame  reafon  the  green,  blue 
and  violet,  will  be  alfo  fo  much  dilated  by  the 

ftill. 


BOOK     II.  209 

iibill  greater  obliquity  of  their  Rays,  as  to  be- 
come all  very  nearly  of  equal  extent  with  the 
red,  that  is,  equally  diltant  from  the  center  of 
the  Rings,  And  then  all  -the  Colours  of  the 
fame  Ring  mull  be  coincident,  and  by  their 
mixture  exhibit  a  white  Ring.  And  thefe  white 
Rings  muft  have  black  and  dark  Rings  between 
them,  becaufe  they  do  not  fpread  and  interfvire 
with  one  another,  as  before.  And  for  that  rea- 
fon  alfo  they  mufl  become  diftindler,  and  vifible 
to  far  greater  numbers.  But  yet  the  violet  be- 
ing obliqueft  will  be  fomething  more  dilated, 
in  proportion  to  its  extent,  than  the  other  Co- 
lours, and  fo  very  apt  to  appear  at  the  exterior 
Verges  of  the  white. 

Afterwards,  by  a  greater  obliquity  of  the 
Rays,  the  violet  and  blue  become  more  fenfibly 
dilated  than  the  red  and  yellow,  and  fo  being 
farther  removed  from  the  center  of  the  Rines, 
the  Colours  muft  emerge  out  of  the  white  in-  an 
order  contrary  to  that  which  they  had  before; 
the  violet  and  blue  at  the  exterior  Limbs  of 
each  Ring,  and  the  red  and  yellow  at  the  in- 
terior. And  the  violet,  by  reafon  of  the  great- 
eft  obliquity  of  its  Rays,  being  in  proportion 
moft  of  all  expanded,  will  fooneft  appear  at 
the  exterior  Limb  of  each  white  Ring,  and  be- 
come more  confpicuous  than  the  reft.  And  the 
feveral  Series  of  Colours  belonging  to  the  feve- 
ral  Rings,  will,  by  their  unfolding  and  fpread- 
ing,  begin  again  to  interfere,  and  thereby  ren- 
der the  Rings  lefs  diftindt,  and  not  vifible  to  fo 
great  numbers. 

P  If 


2IO  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

If  inflead  of  the  Prifms  the  Objed-glafleS  be 
made  ufe  of,  the  Rings  which  they  exhibit  be- 
come not  white  and  diilindl  by  the  obhquity  of 
the  Eye,  by  reafon  that  the  Rays  in  their  paflage 
through  that  Air  which  intercedes  tne  Glafles 
are  very  nearly  parallel  to  thofe  Lines  in  which 
they  were  lirft  incident  on  the  GlafTes,  and  con- 
fequently  the  Rays  endued  with  feveral  Colours  ^ 
are  not  inclined  one  more  than  another  to  that 
Air,  as  it  happens  in  the  Prifms. 

There  is  yet  another  circumftance  of  thefe 
Experiments  to  be  confider'd,  and  that  is  why 
the  black  and  white  Rings  which  when  view'd 
at  a  diftance  appear  diftincft,  fliould  not  only  be- 
come confufed  by  viewing  them  near  at  hand, 
but  alfo  yield  a  violet  Colour  at  both  the  edges 
of  every  white  Ring.  And  the  reafon  is,  that 
the  Rays  which  enter  the  Eye  at  feveral  parts 
of  the  Pupil,  have  feveral  Obliquities  to  the  Glaf- 
fes,  and  thofe  which  are  mofl  oblique,  if  confi- 
der'd apart,  would  reprefent  the  Rings  bigger 
than  thofe  which  are  the  leaft  oblique.  Whence 
the  breadth  of  the  Perimeter  of  every  white 
Ring  is  expanded  outwards  by  the  obliquefl 
Rays,  and  inwards  by  the  leafi  oblique.  And 
this  Expanfion  is  fo  much  the  greater  by  how 
much  the  greater  is  the  difference  of  the  Obli- 
quity ;  that  is,  by  how  much  the  Pupil  is  wider^ 
or  the  Eye  nearer  to  the  Glafles.  And  the 
breadth  of  the  violet  muft  be  mofb  expanded, 
becaufe  the  Rays  apt  to  excite  a  Senfation  of 
that  Colour  arc  mofl  oblique  to  a  fecond  or 
farther  Superficies  of  the.  thinn'd  Air  at  which 
they    are  rcfiedted,    and  have  alfo  the  grearefl 

varia- 


BOOK     II.  211 

variation  of  Obliquity,  which  makes  that  Co- 
lour fooneft  emerge  out  of  the  edges  of  the 
white.  And  as  the  breadth  of  every  Ring  is 
thus  augnaented,  the  dark  Intervals  niufl  be  di- 
minifli'd,  until  the  neighbouring  Rings  become 
continuous,  and  are  blended,  the  exteiior  iiril, 
and  then  thofe  nearer  the  center  j  fo  that  they 
can  no  longer  be  diftinguifh'd  apart,  but  feem  to 
conflitute  an  even  and  uniform  whitenefs. 

Among  all  the  Obfervations  there  is  none  ac- 
companied   with   fo   odd  circumftances  as  the 
twenty-fourth.     Of  thofe  the  principal  are,  that 
in  thin  Plates,  v/hich  to  the  naked  Eye  feem  of 
an    even    and    uniform    tranfparent    whitenefs, 
without  any  terminations  of  Shadows,  the  Re- 
fraction of  a  Prifm  fhould  make  Rings  of  Co- 
lours appear,  whereas  it  ufually  makes  Objedts 
appear  colour'd  only  there  where  they  are  ter- 
minated with  Shadows,  or  have  parts  unequal- 
ly luminous ;   and  that   it   fliould   make    thofe 
Kings  exceedingly  diftindl  and  white,  although 
it  ufually  renders  Objeds  confufed  and  colour- 
ed.    The  Caufe  of  thefe  things  you  will  under- 
ftand  by  confidering,  that  all  the  Rings  of  Co- 
lours are  really  in  tiie  Plate,  when  vie w'd  with 
the  naked  Eye,  although  by  reafon  of  the  great  ' 
breadth  of  their  Circumferences  they  fo  much 
interfere    and  are   blended  together,    that  they 
feem  to  conflitute  an  uniform  whitenefs.     But 
when  the  Rays  oafs  through  the  Prifm  to  the 
Eye,  the  Orbits  of  the  feveral  Colours  in  every 
Ring  are  refraded,  fome  more  than  others,  ac- 
cording to  their  degrees  of  Pvcfrangibility :   By 
which  means  the  Colours  on  one  fide  of  the 

P  2  Ring 


212  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Ring  (that  is  in  the  circumference  on  one  fide  of 
its  center, )  become  more  unfolded  and  dilated, 
and  thofe  on  the  othef  fide  more  complicated  and 
contraded.  And  where  by  a  due  Refra(3:ion  they 
are  fo  much  contradied,  that  the  feveral  Rings' 
become  narrower  than  to  interfere  with  one  ano- 
ther, they  muft  appear  diftind:,  and  alfo  white, 
if  the  conftituent  Colours  be  fo  much  contrad:ed 
as  to  be  wholly  coincident.  But  on  the  other 
fide,  where  the  Orbit  of  every  Ring  is  made 
broader  by  the  farther  unfolding  of  its  Colours, 
it  muft  interfere  more  with  other  Rings  than  be- 
fore, and  fo  become  lefs  diftind;. 

To  explain  this  a  little  farther,  fuppofe  the 
concentrick  Circles  A  V,  and  B  X,  [in  Fig.  7.] 
reprefent  the  red  and  violet  of  any  Order,- 
which,  together  with  the  intermediate  Colours, 
conllitute  any  one  of  thefe  Rings.  Now  thefe 
being  view'd  through  a  Prifm,  the  violet  Circle 
B  X,  will,  by  a  greater  Refraction,  be  farther 
tranllated  from  its  place  than  the  red  A  V^  and 
fo  approach  nearer  to  it  on  that  fide  of  the  Cir- 
cles, towards  which  the  Refractions  are  made. 
For  inftance  -,  if  the  red  be  tranflated  to  a  v, 
the  violet  may  be  tranflated  to  I?  x,  fo  as  to  ap- 
proach nearer  to  it  at  x  than  before  y  and  if  the 
red  be  farther  tranllated  to  av,  the  violet  may 
be  fo  much  farther  tranflated  to  b  x  as  to  con- 
vene with  it  at  X ;  and  if  the  red  be  yet  farther 
tranflated  to  a  T,  the  violet  may  be  ftill  fo  much 
farther  tranflated  to  /?  |  as  to  pafs  beyond  it  at 
§,  and  convene  with  it  at  e  and  f.  And  this 
being  underllood  not  only  of  the  red  and  vio- 
let, but  of  all  the  other  intermediate  Colours, 

and 


BOOK     II.  213 

and  alfo  of  every  revolution  of  thofe  Colours, 
you  will  ealily  perceive  how  thofe  of  the  fame 
revolution  or  order,  by  their  nearnefs  at  x  v 
and  T  J,  and  their  coincidence  at  x  v,  e  and  J\ 
ought  to  conftitute  pretty  diftindt  Arcs  of  Cir- 
cles, efpecially  at  x  v,  or  at  e  and  f;  and  that 
they  will  appear  feverally  at  x  Vy  and  at  x  v  ex- 
hibit whitenefs  by  their  coincidence,  and  again 
appear  feveral  at  T  |,  but  yet  in  a  contrary  or- 
der to  that  which  they  had  before,  and  ftill  re- 
tain beyond  e  and  f.  But  on  the  other  fide, 
at  a  I?,  a  b,  or  a  l3,  thefe  Colours  mufl:  become 
much  more  confufed  by  being  dilated  and  fpread 
fo  as  to  interfere  with  thofe  of  other  Orders. 
And  the  fame  confufion  will  happen  at  T  |  be- 
tween e  and  f^  if  the  Refraction  be  very  great, 
or  the  Prifm  very  diftant  from  the  Objcdt-glaf- 
fes :  In  which  cafe  no  parts  of  the  Rings  will 
be  feen,  fave  only  two  little  Arcs  at  e  and  J\ 
whofe  diftance  from  one  another  will  be  aug- 
mented by  removing  the  Prifm  flill  farther  from 
the  Objed-glafTes :  And  thefe  little  Arcs  mult 
be  diftindtefl  and  w^hiteft  at  their  middle,  and 
at  their  ends,  where  they  begin  to  grow  con- 
fufed, they  mull  be  colour'd.  And  the  Colours 
at  one  end  of  every  Arc  mufl  be  in  a  contrary 
order  to  thofe  at  the  other  end,  by  reafon  that 
they  crofs  in  the  intermediate  white ;  namely, 
their  ends,  which  verge  towards  T  g,  will  be 
red  and  yellow  on  that  fide  next  the  center, 
and  blue  and  violet  on  the  other  fide.  But 
their  other  ends  which  verge  from.  T  J,  will  on 
the  contrary  be  blue  and  violet  on  that  fide  to- 

P  2  ^ya^ds 


214  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

wards  the  center,  and  on  the  other  fide  red  and 
yellow. 

Now  as  all  thefe  things  follow  from  the  pro- 
perties of  Light  by  a  mathematical  way  of  rea- 
foning,  fo  the  truth  of  them  may  be  manifefted 
by  Experiments.  For  in  a  dark  Room,  by  view- 
ing thefe  Rings  through  a  Prifm,  by  reflexion 
of  the  feveral  prifmatick  Colours,  which  an 
affiftant  caufes  to.  move  to  and  fro  upon  a  Wall 
or  Paper  from  whence  they  are  reflected,  whilft 
the  Spe6:ator's  Eye,  ihe  Prifm,  and  the  Objed:- 
glaffes,  (as  in  the  13th  Obfervation,)  are  placed 
Iteadyj  the  Polition  of  the  Circles  made  fuc- 
ceifively  by  the  feveral  Colours,  will  be  found 
fuch,  in  refped:  of  one  another,  as  I  have  de- 
scribed in  the  Figures  a  b  x  ^0^  or  a  b  x  v,  or 
a  /S  I  T.  And  by  the  fame  method  the  truth  of 
the  Explications  of  other  Obfervations  may  be 
examined. 

By  what  hath  been  faid,  the  like  Phaenomena 
of  Water  and  thin  Plates  of  Glafs  may  be  un- 
derftood.  But  in  fmall  fragments  of  thofe  Plates 
there  is  this  farther  obfervable,  that  where  they 
lie  flat  upon  a  Table,  and  are  turned  about  their 
centers  whilfl  they  are  view'd  through  a  Prifm, 
they  will  in  fome  poflures  exhibit  Waves  of  va- 
rious Colours ;  and  fome  of  them  exhibit  thefe 
Waves  in  one  or  two  Pofitions  only,  but  the 
mofc  of  them  do  in  all  Pofitions  exhibit  them, 
and  make  them  for  the  mofl  part  appear  al- 
mioft  all  over  the  Plates.  The  reafon  is,  that 
the  Superficies  of  fuch  Plates  are  not  even,  but 
have  many  Cavities  and  Swellings,  which,  how 
fhallow  foever,  do  a  little  vary  the  thicknefs  of 

th^ 


BOOK     II.  215 

tlie  Plate.  For  at  the  feveral  fides  of  thofe  Ca- 
vities, for  the  Reafons  newly  defcribed,  there 
ought  to  be  produced  Waves  in  feveral  po- 
llures  of  the  Prifm.  Now  though  it  be  but 
fome  very  fmall  and  narrower  parts  of  the  Glafs, 
by  which  thefe  Waves  for  the  niofl  part  are  cau- 
fed,  yet  they  may  feem  to  extend  themfelves 
over  the  whole  Glafs,  becaufe  from  the  narrow- 
eft  of  thofe  parts  there  are  Colours  of  feveral 
Orders,  that  is,  of  feveral  Rings,  confufedly  re- 
fleded,  which  by  Refraction  of  the  Prifm  are 
unfolded,  feparated,  and,  according  to  their 
degrees  of  Refraction,  difperfed  to  feveral  pla- 
ces, fo  as  to  conftitute  fo  many  feveral  Waves, 
as  there  were  divers  orders  of  Colours  promifcu- 
oufly  reflected  from  that  part  of  the  Glafs. 

Thefe  are  the  principal  Phasnomena  of  thin 
Plates  or  Bubbles,  whofe  Explications  depend 
on  the  properties  of  Light,  which  I  have  here- 
tofore deliver'd.  And  thefe  you  fee  do  necef- 
farily  follow  from  them,  and  agree  with  them, 
even  to  their  very  leaft  circumftancesj  and  not 
only  fo,  but  do  very  much  tend  to  their  proof. 
Thus,  by  the  24th  Obfervation  it  appears,  that 
the  Rays  of  feveral  Colours,  made  as  well  by  thin 
Plates  or  Bubbles,  as  by  Refradions  of  a  Prifm, 
haye  feveral  degrees  of  Refrangibility  j  where- 
by thofe  of  each  order,  which  at  the  reflexion 
from  the  Plate  or  Bubble  are  intermix'd  with 
thofe  of  other  orders,  are  feparated  from  them 
by  Refraction,  and  aflbciated  together  fo  as  to 
become  vifible  by  themfelves  like  Arcs  of  Cir- 
cles. For  if  the  Rays  were  all  alike  refrangi- 
ble,  'tis  impofiible  that  the  whitenefs,  which 

P  4  to 


2i6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

to  the  naked  Senfe  appears  uniform,  fhould  by 
Refraction  have  its  parts  tranfpofed  and  ranged 
into  thofe  black  and  white  Arcs. 

It  appears  alfo  that  the  unequal  Refradlions 
of  difforin  Rays  proceed  not  from  any  contin- 
gent irregularities ;  fuch  as  are  Veins,  an  uneven 
Polifh,  or  fortuitous  Polition  of  the  Pores  of 
Glafs ;  unequal  and  cafual  Motions  in  the  Air 
or  /Ether,  the  fpreading,  breaking,  or  dividing 
the  fame  Ray  into  many  diverging  parts ;  or  the 
like.  For,  admitting  any  fuch  irregularities, 
it  v^ould  be  impoiTible  for  Refractions  to  render 
ihofe  Rings  fo  very  diflincft,  and  well  defined, 
as  they  do  in  the  24th  Obfervation.  It  is  ne^ 
cefTary  therefore  that  every  Ray  have  its  proper 
and  conftant  degree  of  Refrangibility  connate 
with  it,  according  to  which  its  refraction  is  ever 
juflly  ^nd  regularly  perform'd^  and  that  feveral 
flays  have  feveral  of  thofe  degrees. 

And  what  is  faid  of  their  Refrangibility  may 
be  alfo  underflood  of  their  Reflexibility,  that  is, 
of  their  Difpofitions  to  be  refle<^ed,  fome  at  a 
greater,  and  others  at  a  lefs  thicknefs  of  thin 
Plates  or  Bubbles  j  namely,  that  thofe  Difpofi- 
tions are  alfo  connate  with  the  Rays,  and  im- 
mutable ;  a^  may  appear  by  the  13  th,  14th,  and 
J  5  th  Obfervations,  compared  with  the  fourth  and 
eighteenth. 

By  the  precedent  Obfervations  it  appears  al- 
fo, that  whitenefs  is  a  diihmilar  mixture  of  all 
polours,  and  that  Light  is  a  mixture  of  Rays 
endued  with  all  thofe  Colours.  .For,  confider- 
ing  the  multitude  of  the  Rings  of  Colours  in 
jhe  ^d^  I2th5  and  24th  Obfervations,  itismani- 
"■■^       ■  ;     feft, 


BOOK     11.  217 

feft,  that  although  in  the  4th  and  i8th  Obfer- 
vations  there  appear  no  more  than  eight  or 
jiine  of  thofe  Rings,  yet  there  are  really  a  far 
greater  number,  which  fo  much  interfere  and 
mingle  with  one  another,  as  after  thofe  eight 
or  nine  revolutions  to  dilute  one  another  whol- 
ly, and  conllitute  an  even  and  fenfibly  uniform 
whitenefs.  And  confequently  that  whitenefs 
muft  be  allow'd  a  mixture  of  all  Colours,  and 
the  Light  which  conveys  it  to  the  Eye  muft 
be  a  mixture  of  Rays  endued  with  all  thofe  Co- 
lours. 

But  farther  J  by  the  24th  Obfervation  it  ap- 
pears, that  there  is  a  conftant  relation  between 
Colours  and  Refrangibility ;  the  moft  refrangi- 
ble Rays  being  violet,  the  leaft  refrangible  red, 
and  thofe  of  intermediate  Colours  having  pro- 
portionably  intermediate  degrees  of  Refrangibi- 
lity. And  by  the  13th,  14th,  and  J5th  Obfer- 
vations,  compared  with  the  4th  or  i8th,  there 
appears  to  be  tlie  fame  conftant  relation  be- 
tween Colour  and  Reflexibility ;  the  violet  be- 
ing in  like  circumftances  refleded  at  leaft  thick- 
nelfes  of  any  thin  Plate  or  Bubble,  the  red  at 
greateft  thicknelTes,  and  the  intermediate  Co- 
lours at  intermediate  thicknefles.  Whence  it 
follows,  that  the  colorifick  Difpofitions  of  Rays 
are  alfo  connate  with  them,  and  immutable^  and 
by  confequence,  that  all  the  Produdions  and 
Appearances  of  Colours  in  the  World  are  de- 
rived, not  from  any  phyfical  Change  caufed  in 
Light  by  •  Refradion  or  Reflexion,  but  only 
Irom  the  various  Mixtures  or  Separations  of 
|lays,  by  virtue  of  their  different  Refrangibility 

or 


-^ 


218 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


or  Reflexibility.  And  in  this  refped  the  Scicncd 
of  Colours  becomes  a  Speculation  as  truly  ma- 
thematical as  any  other  part  of  Opticks.  I  mean, 
fo  far  as  they  depend  on  the  Nature  of  Light, 
and  are  not  produced  or  alter'd  by  the  Power 
v  of  Imagination,  or  by  ilriking  or  preffing  the 
Eye. 


THE 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 


O  F 


OPTICKS. 


PART     III. 


Of  the  permanejit  Colours  of  natural  Bo- 
dies^  and  the  Analogy  between  them  and 
the  Colours  of  thiii  tranfparent  Plates* 

AM  now  come  to   another  part   of 
this  Defign,  which  is  to  confider  how 
the   PhiEnomena  of  thin  tranfparent 
Plates  fland  related  to  thofe  of  all  o- 
ther  natural  Bodies.     Of  thefe  Bodies  I  have  al- 
ready told  you  that  they  appear  of  divers  Co- 
lours, 


220  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

lours,  accordingly  as  they  are  difpofed  to  refled: 
moft  copiouily  the  Rays  originally  endued  with 
thofe  Colours.  But  their  Conflitutions,  where- 
by they  refied:  fome  Rays  more  copiouily  than 
others,  remain  to  be  difcover'd ;  and  thefe  I  lliall 
endeavour  to  manifeft  in  the  following  Propo- 
iitions. 


P   R  O  p.      I. 

*ith'ofe  Superficies  of  t ran/ parent  Bodies  refieEi  the 
greatejl  quantity  of  Lights  which  have  the  great- 
eft  refraBing  Power  ^  that  is,  which  i7itercede 
Mediums  that  differ  mofi  in  their  refraBiije  Den- 
Jities.  And  in  the  Confines  of  equally  refraBing 
Mediums  there  is  no  Kefiexion. 

TH  E  Analogy  between  Reflexion  and  Re- 
fradion  will  appear  by  confidering,  that 
when  Light  paffeth  obliquely  out  of  one  Medi- 
um into  another  which  refracts  from  the  per- 
pendicular, the  greater  is  the  difference  of  their 
refradive  Denfuy,  the  lefs  Obliquity  of  Inci-  • 
dence  is  requifite  to  caufe  a  total  Reflexion, 
For  as  the  Sines  are  which  meafure  the  Refra- 
(Ttion,  fo  is  the  Sine  of  Incidence  at  which  the 
total  Reflexion  begins,  to  the  Radius  of  the 
Circle ;  and  confequently  that  Angle  of  Inci-  * 
dence  is  leaft  where  there  is  the  greateft  difl^e- 
rence  of  the  Sines;  Thus  in  the  paffing  of 
Light  out  of  Water  into  Air,  where  the  Refra- 
ction is  meafured  by  the  Ratio  of  the  Sines  3  to 
4,  the  total  Reflexion  begins  when  the  Angle 
of  Incidence  is  about  48  Degrees  35  Minutes, 
'^  In 


BOOK     II.  ill 

Iti  pafling  out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  where  the  Re- 
fradiion  is  meafured  by  the  Ratio  of  the  Sines 
20  to  31,  the  total  Reflexion  begins  when  the 
Angle  of  Incidence  is  40  Degrees  10  Minutes; 
and  fo  in  paffing  out  of  Cryftal,  or  more  flrong- 
ly  refrading  Mediums  into  Air,  there  is  ftill  a  lefs 
obliquity  requifite  to  caufe  a  total  reflexion. 
Superficies  therefore  v/hich  refrad;  mofl:  do 
fooneft  refled:  all  the  Light  which  is  incident 
on  them,  and  fo  muft  be  allowed  moft  flrongly 
reflexive. 

But  the  truth  of  this  Propofition  will  farther 
appear  by  obferving,  that  in  the  Superficies  in- 
terceding two  tranfparent  Mediums,  (fuch  as  are' 
Air,  Water,  Oil,  common  Glafs,  Cryftal,  me- 
talline Glafies,  Ifland  Glafl^es,  white  tranfparent 
Arfenick,  Diamonds,  ^c.)  the  Reflexion  is 
ftronger  or  weaker  accordingly,  as  the  Super- 
ficies hath  a  greater  or  lefs  refrading  Power. 
For  in  the  Confine  of  Air  and  Sal-gem  'tis 
ftronger  than  in  the  Confine  of  Air  and  Water, 
and  ftill  ftronger  in  the  Confine  of  Air  and  .com- 
mon Glafs  or  Cryftal,  and  ftronger  in  the  Con- 
fine of  Air  and  a  Diamond.  If  any  of  thefe, 
and  fuch  like  tranfparent  Solids,  be  immerged 
in  Water,  its  Reflexion  becomes  much  weak- 
er than  before  j  and  ftill  weaker  if  they  be  im- 
merged in  the  more  ftrongly  refrading  Liquors 
of  well  rectified  Oil  of  Vitriol  or  Spirit  of  Tur- 
pentine. If  Water  be  diftinguifli'd  into  two 
parts  by  any  imaginary  Surface,  the  Reflexion 
in  the  Confine  of  thofe  two  parts  is  none  at  all. 
In  the  Confine  of  Water  and  Ice  'tis  very  little ; 
in  that  of  Water  and  Oil  'tis  fomething  greater; 

la 


222  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

in  that  of  Water  and  Sal-gem  ftill  greater ;  and 
in  that  of  Water  and  Glafs,  or  Cryftal,  or  other 
denfer  Subftances  ftill  greater,  accordingly  as 
thofe  Mediums  differ  more  or  lefs  in  their  re- 
frading  Powers.  Hence  in  the  Confine  of  com- 
mon Glafs  and  Cryftal,  there  ought  to  be  a 
weak  Reflexion,  and  a  ftronger  Reflexion  in 
the  Confine  of  common  and  metalline  Glafs; 
though  I  have  not  yet  tried  this.  But  in  the 
Confine  of  two  Glafies  of  equal  denfity,  there 
is  not  any  fenfible  Reflexion ;  as  was  fliewn  in 
the  firft  Obfervation.  And  tlie  fame  may  be 
underftood  of  the  Superficies  interceding  two 
Cryftals,  or  two  Liquors,  or  any  other  Sub- 
ftances in  which  no  Refradion  is  caufed.  So 
then  the  reafon  why  uniform  pellucid  Mediums 
(fuch  as  Water,  Glafs,  or  Cryftal,)  have  no  fen- 
fible Reflexion  but  in  their  external  Superficies, 
where  they  are  adjacent  to  other  Mediums  of 
a  diflferent  denfity,  is  becaufe  all  their  conti- 
guous parts  have  one  and  the  fame  degree  of 
denfity. 

Prop.    II. 

^he  leajl  parts  of  almojl  all  jtatiiral  Bodies  are 
in  fome  meajure  tranfparent :  And  the  Opa- 
city of  thofe  Bodies  arifeth  from  the  multi- 
tude of  "Reflexions  caufed  in  their  intertial 
Parts, 

'Tp  HAT  this  is  fo  has  been  obferved  by  o- 

-*•     thers,  and  will  eafily  be  granted  by  them 

that  have  been    converfant    with  Microfcopes. 

And  it  may  be  alfo  tried  by  applying  any  fub- 

flancc 


BOOK   JL  223 

ftance  to  a  hole  through  which  fome  Light  is 
immitted  into  a  dark  Room.  For  how  opake 
foever  that  Subftance  may  feem  in  the  opea 
Air,  it  will  by  that  means  appear  very  manifeft- 
ly  tranfparent,  if  it  be  of  a  fufficient  thiniiefs. 
Only  white  metalline  Bodies  miift  be  excepted, 
which  by  reafon  of  their  exceffive  denfity  feem 
to  refled:  almoft  all  the  Light  incident  on  their 
firft  Superficies  j  unlefs  by  folution  in  Menftru- 
ums  they  be  reduced  into  very  fmall  Particles, 
and  then  they  become  tranfparent. 

Prop.    IIL 

Between  the  parts  of  opake  mid  colour  d  Bodies 
are  many  Spaces^  either  empt)\  or  repleniJUd 
with  Mediians  of  other  DenfitieSy  as  Water 
between  the  tingijig  Corpufcles  wherewith  a- 
ny  Liquor  is  impregnated  ^  Air  between  the 
aqueous  Globules  that  confiitute  Clouds  or  Mijh\ 
and  for  the  mofl  part  Spaces  loid  of  both  Air 
and  Water ^  but  yet  perhaps  not  wholly  ^coid  of 
all  Subjlance^  between  the  parts  of  hard  Bo- 
dies, 

'  I  ^  H  E  truth  of  this  Is  evinced  by  the  two 
-^  precedent  Propofitions :  For  by  the  fe- 
cond  Propofition  there  are  many  Reflexions 
made  by  the  internal  parts  of  Bodies,  which,  by 
the  firll  Propoiition,  would  not  happen  if  the 
parts  of  thole  Bodies  were  continued  without 
any  fuch  Interftices  between  them ;  becaufe  Re- 
flexions are  caufed  only  in  Superficies,  which 
intercede  Mediums  of  a  differing  denfity,  by 
'Frop,  I. 

•  ^  Buc 


224  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

But  farther,  that  this  difcontinuity  of  parts 
is  the  principal  Caufe  of  the  opacity  of  Bodies, 
will  appear  by  confidering,  that  opake  Subftan- 
ces  become  tranfparent  by  filling  their  Pores 
with  any  Subftance  of  equal  or  almoft  equal  den- 
fity  with  their  parts.  Thus  Paper  dipped  in 
Water  or  Oil,  the  O cuius  Mundi  Stone  fteep'd 
in  Water,  Linnen  Cloth  oiled  or  varniih'd,  and 
many  other  Subilances  foaked  in  fuch  Liquors 
as  will  intimately  pervade  their  little  Pores,  be- 
come by  that  means  more  tranfparent  than  other- 
wife  ;  fo,  on  the  contrary,  the  mofh  tranfparent 
Subftances  may,  by  evacuating  their  Pores,  or 
feparating  their  parts,  be  render'd  fufficiently  o* 
pake ;  as  Salts  or  wet  Paper,  or  the  Oculus  Mun- 
di Stone  by  being  dried,  Horn  by  being  fcraped, 
Glafs  by  being  reduced  to  Powder,  or  otherwife 
flawed;  Turpentine  by  being  ftirred  about  with 
Water  till  they  irdx  imperfectly,  and  Water  by 
being  form'd  into  many  fmall  Bubbles,  either  a- 
lone  in  the  form  of  Froth,  or  by  fliaking  it  to- 
gether with  Oil  of  Turpentine,  or  Oil  Olive,  or 
with  fome  other  convenient  Liquor,  with  which 
it  will  not  perfectly  incorporate.  And  to  the  in- 
creafe  of  the  opacity  of  thefe  Bodies,  it  condu- 
ces fomething,  tliat  by  the  23d  Obfervation  the 
Reflexions  of  very  thin  tranfparent  Subftances  are 
conliderably  ftronger  than  thofe  made  by  the 
faipe  Subftances  of  a  greater  thicknefs, 


Prop* 


BOOK     IL  225 

Prop.   IV. 

The  Farts  of  Bodies  and  their  Interftices  mi/fl  not 
be  lefs  than  of  feme  definite  bignefs^  to  render^ 
them  opake  and  colour  d. 

■p.OR  the  opakeft  Bodies,  if  their  parts  be 
■*-  fubtilly  divided,  (as  Metals,  by  being  diflbl- 
ved  in  acid  Menftruums,  ^c^  become  perfect- 
ly tranfparent.  And  you  may  alfo  remember, 
that  in  the  eighth  Obfervation  there 'was  no 
fenfible  reflexion  at  the  Superficies  of  the  Ob- 
ied-glaffes,  where  they  were  very  near  one  an- 
other, though  they  did  not  ablblutely  touch. 
And  in  the  1 7th  Obfervation  the  •  Reflexion  of 
the  Water-  bubble  where  it  became  thinriell  was 
almofl  infenfible,  fo  as  to  caufe  very  black  Spots 
to  appear  on  the  top  of  the  BubblCj  by  the  want 
of  reflected  Light. 

On  thefe  grounds  I  perceive  it  is  that  Water, 
Salt,  Glafs,  Stones,  and  fuch  like  Subftances, 
are  tranfparent.  For,  upon  divers  Confidera- 
tions,  they  feem  to  be  as  full  of  Pores  or  Inter- 
ftices between  their  parts  as  other  Bodies  are, 
but  yet  their  Parts  and  Interftices  to  be  too 
fmall  to  caufe  Reflexions  in  their  common  Sur- 
faces. 


Q^  Prop. 


226  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

P  R  O  p.     V. 

^he  tranfparcnt  farts  of  Bodies,  according  to  their 
Je-veral  Jizes^  reJieEl  Rays  of  one  Colour^  and 
traifmit  thofe  of  another y  on  the  fame  grounds 
that  thin  Plates  or  Bubbles  do  refeB  or  tranfmit 
thofe  Rays,  Atid  this,  I  take  to  be  the  ground  of 
all'their  Colours. 

*P  O  R  if  a  thinn'd  or  plated  Body,  which 
-■-  being  of  an  even  thicknefs,  appears  all  o- 
ver  of  one  uniform  Colour,  fliould  be  flit  into 
Threads,  or  broken  into  Fragments,  of  the  fame 
thicknefs  with  the  Plate  j  I  fee  no  reafon  why 
every  Thread  or  Fragment  fhould  not  keep  its 
Colour,  and  by  confequence  why  a  heap  of  thofe 
Theads  or  Fragmmts  fliould  not  conflitute  a 
Mafs  or  Powder  of  the  fame  Colour,  which  the 
Plate  exhibited  before  it  was  broken.  And  the 
parts  of  all  natural  Bodies  being  like  fo  many 
Fragments  of  a  Plate,  muft  on  the  fame  grounds 
exhibit  the  fame  Colours. 

Now,  that  they  do  fo  will  appear  by  the  affi- 
nity of  their  Properties.  *  The  finely  colour'd 
Feathers  of  fome  Birds,  and  particularly  thofe 
of  Peacocks  Tails,  do,  in  the  very  fame  part  of 
the  Feather,  appear  of  feveral  Colours  in  feveral 
Pofitions  of  the  Eye,  after  the  very  fame  man- 
ner that  thin  Plates  were  found  to  do  in  the 
7th  and  1 9th  Obfervations,  and  therefore  their 
Colours  arife  from  the  thinnefs  of  the  tranfpa- 
rent  parts  of  the  Feathers;  that  is,  from  the 
flendernefs  of  the  very  fine  Hairs,  or  Capilla- 
menta^    which  grow  put  of  the  fides    of  the 

groifer 


BOOK     II.  227 

grofler  lateral  Branches  or  Fibres  of  thofe  Fea- 
thers. And  to  the  fame  purpofe  it  is,  that  the 
"Webs  of  fome  Spiders,  by  being  fpun  very  fine, 
have  appeared  colour'd,  as  fome  have  oblerv'd, 
and  that  the  colour'd  Fibres  of  fome  Silks,  by 
varying  the  Pofition  of  the  Eye,  do  vary  their 
Colour.  Alfo  the  Colours  of  Silks,  Cloths, 
and  other  Subftances,  which  Water  or  Oil  can 
intimately  penetrate,  become  more  faint  and 
obfcure  by  being  immerged  in  thofe  Liquors, 
and  recover  their  Vigor  again  by  being  dried ; 
much  after  the  manner  declared  of  thin  Bodies 
in  the  loth  and  21ft  Obfervations.  Leaf-Gold, 
fome  forts  of  painted  Glafs,  the  Infufion  of 
Lignutn  Nephritiaun,  and  fome  other  Subilan-' 
ces,  refledl  one  Colour,  an(i  tranfmit  another;, 
like  thin  Bodies  in  the  9th  and  20th  Obferva- 
tions. And  fome  of  thofe  colour'd  Powder5 
which  Painters  ufe,  may  have  their  Colours  a 
little  changed,  by  being  very  elaborately  and 
finely  ground.  Where  I  fee  not  what  can  be 
juftly  pretended  for  thofe  changes,  befides  the 
breaking  of  their  parts  into  lefs  parts  by  that 
contrition,  after  the  fame  manner  that  the  Co- 
lour of  a  thin  Plate  is  changed  by  varying  its 
thicknefs.  For  which  reafon  alfo  it  is  that  the 
colour'd  Flowers  of  Plants  and  Vegetables,  by 
being  bruifed,  ufually  become  more  tranfparenz 
than  before,  or  at  leafl  in  fome  degree  or  o- 
ther  change  their  Colours.  Nor  is  it  much  lefs 
to  my  purpofe,  that,  by  mixing  divers  Liq^uors, 
very  odd  and  remarkable  Produd:ions  and 
Changes  of  Colours  may  be  effected,  of  which 
no  caufe  can  be  more  obvious  and  rational  than 

Q^  that. 


228  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

tha:t  the  faiine  Corpufcles  of  one  Liquor  da  vari- 
oufly  ad  upon  or  unite  with  the  tinging  Corpufcles 
of  another,  fo  as  to  make  them  fwell,  or  fhrink, 
( whereby  not  only  their  bulk  but  their  denfity 
alfo  may  be  changed,)  or  to  divide  them  into 
fmaller  Corpufcles,  (whereby  a  colour'd  Liquor 
may  become  tranfparent,)  or  to  make  many  of 
them  affociate  into  one  clufter,  whereby  two 
tranfparent  Liquors  may  compofe  a  colour'd  one. 
For  we  fee  how  apt  thofe  faiine  Menftruums  are 
to  penetrate  and  diffolve  Subftances  to  which 
they  are  applied,  and  fome  of  them  to  precipi- 
tate what  others  diilblve.  In  like  manner,  if  we 
confider  the  various  Phaenomena  of  the  Atmo- 
fphere,  we  may  obferve,  that  when  Vapours  are 
iirft  raifed,  they  hinder  not  the  tranfparcncy  of 
the  Air,  being  divided  into  parts  too  fmall  to 
caufe  any  Reflexion  in  their  Superficies.  But 
when  in  order  to  compofe  drops  of  Rain  they 
begin  to  coalefce  and  conflitute  Globules  of  all 
intermediate  lizes,  thofe  Globules,  when  they 
become  of  a  convenient  fize  to  refle6t  fome  Co- 
lours and  tranfmic  others,  may  conftitute  Clouds 
of  various  Colours  according  to  their  fizes.  And 
I  fee  not  what  can  be  rationally  conceived  in  fo 
tranfparent  a  Subftance  as  Water  for  the  produ- 
ction of  thefe  Colours,  befides  the  various  fizes 
of  its  fluid  and  globular  Parcels. 


Prop, 


BOOK     11.  229 

Prop.    VI. 

^he  parts  of  Bodies  011  ivhich  their  Colours  depend ^ 
are  denjer  than  the  Medium  which  pervadet 
their  Interjiices, 

np  HIS  will  appear  by  confidering,  that  the 
-■"  Colour  of  a  Body  depends  not  only  on 
the  Rays  which  are  incident  perpendicularly 
on  its  parts,  but  on  thofe  alfo  which  arc  inci- 
dent at  all  other  Angles.  And  that  according 
to  the  7th  Oblervation,  a  very  little  variation 
of  obliquity  will  change  the  refled:ed  Colour, 
where  the  thin  Body  or  fmall  Particle  is  rarer 
than  the  ambient  Medium,  infomuch  that  fuch 
a  fmall  Particle  will  at  diverfly  oblique  Inci- 
dences refledl  all  forts  of  Colours,  in  fo  great  a 
variety  that  the  Colour  refuking  from  them  all, 
confufedly  refled:ed  from  a  heap  of  fuch  Parti- 
cles, muft  rather  be  a  white  or  grey  than  any 
other  Colour,  or  at  beft  it  muft  be  but  a  very 
imperfecft  and  dirty  Colour.  Whereas  if  the 
thin  Body  or  fmall  Particle  be  much  denfer  than 
the  ambient  Medium,  the  Colours,  according  to 
the  19th  Obfervation,  are  fo  little  changed  by 
the  variation  of  obliquity,  that  the  Rays  which 
are  refled;ed  leafl  obliquely  may  predominate 
over  the  feft,  fo  much  as  to  caufe  a  heap  of  fuch 
Particles  to  appear  very  intenfely  of  their  Co- 
lour. 

It  conduces  alfo  fomething  to  the  confirma- 
tion of  this  Propolition,  that,  according  to  the 
22d  Obfervation,  the  Colours  exhibited  by  the 
denfer  thin  Body  within  the  rarer,'   are   more 

0^3  ^  brisk 


130  O  P  t  I  C  K  S. 

brisk  than  thofe  exhibited  by  the  rarer  within  the 
denfer. 

I  Prop.   VII. 

*the  bignefs  of  the  component  parts  of  natural  Bo- 
dies  may  be  conjellured  by  their  Colours. 

FO  R  fince  the  parts  of  thefe  Bodies,  by 
Frop,  5.  do  mofl  probably  exhibit  the 
fame  Colours  with  a  Plate  of  equal  thicknefs, 
provided  they  have  the  fame  refradiive  denlity ; 
and  fince  their  parts  feem  for  the  mcft  part  to 
have  much  the  fame  dehfity  with  Water  or 
Glafs,  as  by  many  circumftances  is  obvious  to 
colledt  J  to  determine  the  fizes  of  thofe  parts, 
you  need  only  have  recourfe  to  the  precedent 
Tables,  in  which  the  thicknefs  of  Water  or 
Glafs  exhibiting  any  Colour  is  exprefled.  Thus 
if  it  be  defired  to  know  the  diameter  of  a  Cor- 
p.ufcle,  which  being  of  equal  denlity  with  Glafs 
ihall  refled:  green  of  the  third  Orders  the  Num- 
ber 165  (hews  it  to  be  ^-^  parts  of 'an  Inch. 
^  I 0000  A 

The  greatefl:  difficulty  is  here  to  know  of 
what  Order  the  Colour  of  any  Body  is.  And 
for  this  end  we  muft  have  recourfe  to  the  4th 
and  1 8th  Obfervations ;  from  whence  may  be 
coUedted  thefe  particulars. 

■Scarlets  y  and  other  reds^  oranges  y  and  yel~ 
JowSy  if  they  be  pure  and  intenfe,  are  mofl  pro- 
bably of  the  fecond  order.  Thofe  of  fhe  firfl 
and  third  order  alfo  may  be  pretty  goodj  only 
the  yellow  of  the  firfl  order  is  faint,  and  the 

_  orange 


BOOK     II.  231 

orange  and  red  of  the  third  Order  have  a  great 
Mixture  of  violet  and  bkie. 

There  may  be  good  Greens  of  the  fourth  Order, 
but  the  pureft  are  of  the  third.  And  of  this 
Order  the  green  of  all  Vegetables  feenis  to  be, 
partly  by  reafon  of  the  Intenfenefs  of  their  Co- 
lours, and  partly  becaufe  when  they  wither  fome 
of  them  turn  to  a  greenifh  yellow,  and  others 
to  a  more  perfed:  yellow  or  orange,  or  perhaps 
to  red,  paiTing  firft  through  all  the  aforefaid  in- 
termediate Colours.  Which  Changes  feem  to 
be  effected  by  the  exhaling  of  the  Moifture 
which  may  leave  the  tinging  Corpufcles  more 
denfe,  and  fomething  augmented  by  the  Accre- 
tion of  the  oily  and  earthy  Part  of  that  Moifture. 
Now  the  green,  without  doubt,  is  of  the  fame 
Order  with  thofe  Colours  into  which  it  changeth, 
becaufe  the  Changes  are  gradual,  and  thofe  Co- 
lours, though  ufually  not  very  full,  yet  ar& 
often  too  full  and  lively  to  be  of  the  fourth 
Order. 

Blues  and  Purples  may  be  either  of  the  fe- 
cond  or  third  Order,  but  the  beft  are  of  the 
third.  Thus  the  Colour  of  Violets  feems  to  be 
of  that  Order,  becaufe  their  Syrup  by  acid  Li- 
quors turns  red,  and  by  urinous  and  alcaiizate 
turns  green.  For  fince  it  is  of  the  Nature  of 
Acids  to  diffolve  or  attenuate,  and  of  Alcalies 
to  precipitate  or  incrailate,  if  the  Purple  Co^ 
lour  of  the  Syrup  was  of  the  fecond  Order,  an 
acid  Liquor  by  attenuating  its  tinging  Cor- 
pufcles would  change  it  to  a  red  of  the  in  ft  Or- 
der, and  an  Alcali  by  incralTating  them  would 
change    it  to  a  green    of   the    fecond  Order  ; 

Qjj.  which 


232         O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

which  red  and  green j  efpecially  the  green,  feem 
too  imperfed:  to  be  the  Colours  produced  by 
thefe  Changes.  But  if  the  faid  Purple  be  fup- 
pofed  of  the  third  Order,  its  Change  to  red  of  the 
fecond,  and  green  of  the  third,  may  without  any 
Inconvenience  be  allow'd. 

If  there  be  found  any  Body  of  a  deeper  and  lefs 
reddifh  Purple  than  that  of  the  Violets,  its  Colour 
moft  probably  is  of  the  fecond  Order.  But  yet 
there  being  no  Body  commonly  known  whofe  Co- 
lour is  conftantly  more  deep  than  theirs,  I  have 
made  ufe  of  their  Name  to  denote  the  deepeft  and 
leaft  reddilh  Purples,  fuch  as  manifeftly  tranfccnd 
their  Colour  in  purity. 

The  blue  of  the  firft  Order,  though  very  faint 
and  little,  may  poffibly  be  the  Colour  of  fome 
Subftances  j  and  particularly  the  azure  Colour 
of  the  Skies  feems  to  be  of  this  Order.  For  all 
Vapours  when  they  begin  to  condenfe  and  coa- 
lefce  into  fmall  Parcels,  become  firft  of  that  Big- 
nefs,  whereby  fuch  an  Azure  muft  be  reflected  be- 
fore they  can  conftitute  Clouds  of  other  Colours. 
And  fo  this  being  the  firft  Colour  which  Vapours 
begin  to  refled,  it  ought  to  be  the  Colour  of  the 
fineft  and  moft  tranfparent  Skies,  in  which  Va- 
pours are  not  arrived  to  that  Grofliiefs  requifite  to 
refled:  other  Colours,  as  we  find  it  is  by  Expe- 
rience. 

JVhitenefs,  if  moft  intenfe  and  luminous,  is 
that  of  the  firft  Order,  if  lefs  ftrong  and  lumi- 
nous, a  Mixture  of  the  Colours  of  feveral  Or- 
ders. Of  this  laft  kind  is  the  Whitenefs  of 
Froth,  Paper,  Linnen,  and  moft  white  Sub- 
ftances  j  of  the  former  I  reckon  that  of  white 

Metals 


BOOK     II.  233 

Metals  to  be.     For  whilft  the  denfell  of  Metals, 
Gold,  if  foliated,  is  tranfparent,  and  all  Metals 
become  tranfparent  if  dilfolved  in  Menftriiums 
or  vitrified,    the  Opacity  of  white  Metals  ari- 
feth  not  from  their  Denfity  alone.     They  be- 
ing lefs  denfe  than  Gold  would  be  more  tranf- 
parent than  it,  did  not  fome  other  Caufe  con- 
cur with  their   Denfity  to   make  them  opake. 
And  this  Caufe  I  take  to  be  fuch'  a  Bignefs  of 
their  Particles  as  fits  them  to  refledl  the  white  of 
the  firft  order.     For,  if  they  be  of  other  Thick- 
nefi!es  they  may  refled:  other  Colours,   as  is  ma- 
nifeft  by  the  Colours  which  appear  upon  hot 
Steel  in  tempering  it,  and  fometimes  upon  the 
Surface  of  melted  Metals  in  the  Skin  or  Scoria 
which  arifes  upon  them  in  their  cooling.     And 
as  the  white  of  the  firfl  order  is  the  Itrongefl 
which  can   be   made  by  Plates  of   tranfparent 
Subftances,    fo  it  ought  to  be  ftronger  in  the 
denfer  Subftances  of  Metals  tlian  in  the  rarer 
of  Air,  Water,  and  Glafs.     Nor  do  I   fee  but 
that  metallick  Subftances  of  fuch  a  Thicknefs  as 
may  fit  them  to  reflect  the  white  of  the  firft  or- 
der, may,  byreafon  of  their  great  Denfity  (ac- 
cording to  the  Tenor  of  the  firft  of  thefe  Pro- 
pofitions)    refled:  all  the  Light    incident  upon 
them,  andfo  be  as  opake  and  fplendent  as  it's 
poflible  for  any  Body  to  be.     Gold,  or  Copper 
mix'd  with  lefs  than  half  their  Weight  of  Silver, 
or  Tin,  or  Regulus  of  Antimony,  in  fufion,  or 
amalgamed  with  a  very  little  Mercury,  become 
white  J  which  fhews  both  that  the  Particles  of 
white  Metals  have  much  more  Superficies,  and 
fo  are  fmaller,  than  thofe  of  Gold  and  Copper, 

and 


234-  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

and  alfo  that  they  are  fo  opake  as  not  to  fuflef 
the  Particles  of  Gold  or  Copper  to  fhine  through 
them.  Now  it  is  fcarce  to  be  doubted,  but 
that  the  Colours  of  Gold  and  Copper  are  of 
the  fecond  or  third  order,  and  therefore  the 
Particles  of  white  Metals  cannot  be  much  big- 
ger than  is  requifite  to  make  them  reflect  the 
white  of  the  firft  order.  The  Volatility  of  Mer- 
cury argues  that  they  are  not  much  bigger, 
nor  may  they  be  much  lefs,  left  they  lofe  their 
Opacity,  and  become  either  tranfparent  as  they 
do  when  attenuated  by  Vitrification,  or  by  Solu- 
tion in  Menftruums,  or  black  as  they  do  when 
ground  fmaller,  by  rubbing  Silver,  or  Tin,  or 
Lead,  upon  other  Subftances  to  draw  black 
Lines.  The  firft  and  only  Colour  which  white 
Metals  take  by  grinding  their  Particles  fmaller, 
is  black,  and  therefore  their  white  ought  to  be 
that  which  borders  upon  the  black  Spot  in  the 
Center  of  the  Rings  of  Colours,  that  is,  the 
white  of  the  firft  order.  But,  if  you  would 
hence  gather  the  Bignefs  of  metallick  Particles, 
you  muft  allow  for  their  Denfity.  For  were 
Mercury  tranfparent,  its  Denfity  is  fuch  that 
the  Sine  of  Incidence  upon  it  ( by  my  Compu- 
tation) would  be  to  the  Sine  of  its  Refraction, 
as  7 1  to  20,  or  7  to  2.  And  therefore'the  Thick- 
nefs  of  its  Particles,  that  they  may  exhibit  the 
fame  Colours  with  thofe  of  Bubbles  of  Water, 
ought  to  be  lefs  than  the  Thicknefs  of  the 
Skin  of  thofe  Bubbles  in  the  Proportion  of  2 
to  7.  Whence  it's  pofiible,  that  the  Particles 
of  Mercury  m.ay  be  as  little  as*  the  Particles  of 

fome 


BOOK    II.  235 

(ome  tranfparent  and  volatile  Fluids,   and  yet 
refled  the  white  of  the  firft  order. 

Laftly,  for  the  produdtion  of  blacky  the  Cor- 
pufcles  mufl  be  lefs  than  any  of  thofe  which  ex- 
hibit Colours.      For  at  all  greater  fizes  there  is 
too  much  Light  reflected  to  conftitute  this  Co- 
lour.    But  if  they  be  fuppofed  a  little  lefs  than 
is  requifite  to  refled^  the  white  and  very  faint 
blue  of  the  firfl  order,   they  will,    according  to 
the  4th,  8th,   i7thand  iSthObfervations,  refled: 
fo  very  little  Light  as  to  appear  intenily  black, 
and  yet  may  perhaps  varioully  refrad  it  to  and 
fro  within  themfelves  fo  long,  until  it  happen 
to  be  ftifled  and  loft,  by  which  means  they  will 
appear  black  in  all  pofitions  of  the  Eye  without 
any  tranfparency.  And  from  hence  may  be  under- 
flood  why  Fire,  and  the  more  fubtile  diffolver Pu- 
trefaction, by  dividing  the  Particles  of  Subftan- 
ces,   turn  them  to  black,   why  fmall  quantities 
of  black  Subftances   impart   their  Colour  very 
freely  and  intenfly  to  other  Subftances  to  which 
they  are  applied  ;  the  minute  Particles  of  thefe, 
by  reafon  of  their  very  great  number,  eaftly  o- 
verfpreading  the  grofs  Particles  of  others ;  why 
Glals  ground  very  elaborately  with  Sand  on  a 
Copper  Plate,   'till   it  be  well  poliftVd,    mukes 
the  Sand,  together  with  what  is  worn  off"  from 
the  Glafs    and    Copper,    become    very    black : 
wiiy  black  Subftances  do  fooneft  of  all  others 
become  hot  in  the  Sun's  Light  and  burn,  (which 
Effed:  may  proceed  partly  from  the  multitude 
of  Refradions  in  a  little  room,  and  partly  from 
the    eafy    Cominotion  of   fo  very  fmall  Cor- 
pufcies; )  and  why  blacks  are  ufually  a  little  in- 
clined 


236  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

clined  to  a  bluifli  Colour.  For  that  they  are  Co 
may  be  feen  by  illuminating  white  Paper  by 
Light  refie.ded  from  black  Subftances.  For  the 
Paper  will  ufually  appear  of  a  bluifh  white  j  and 
the  reafon  is,  that  black  borders  on  the  obfcure 
blue  of  the  order  defcribed  in  the  i8th  Obferva- 
tion,  and  therefore  refled:s  more  Rays  of  that  Co- 
lour than  of  any  other. 

In  thcfe  Defcriptions  I  have  been  the  more 
particular,  becaufe  it  is  not  impoffible  but  that 
Mifcrofcopes  may  at  length  be  improved  to  the 
difcovery  of  the  Particles  of  Bodies  on  which 
their  Colours  depend,  if  they  are  not  already  in 
fome  meafure  arrived  to  that  degree  of  per- 
fedion.  For  if  thofe  Inftruments  are  or  can  be 
fo  far  improved  as  with  fufficient  diflindtnefs 
to  reprefent  Objedls  five  or  fix  hundred  times 
bigger  than  at  a  Foot  diftance  they  appear  to 
our  naked  Eyes,  I  fliould  hope  that  we  might 
be  able  to  difcover  fome  of  the  greatefi;  of  thofe 
Corpufcles.  And  by  one  that  would  magnify 
three  or  four  thoufand  times  perhaps  they  might 
all  be  difcover'd,  but  thofe  which  produce 
blacknefs.  In  the  mean  while  I  fee  nothing  ma- 
terial in  this  Difcourfe  that  may  rationally  be 
doubted  of,  excepting  this  Pofition :  That  tran- 
fparent  Corpufcles  of  the  fame  thicknefs  and 
denfity  with  a  Plate,  do  exhibit  the  fame  Co- 
lour. And  this  I  would  have  underftood  not 
without  fome  Latitude,,  as  well  becaufe  thofe 
Corpufcles  may  be  of  irregular  Figures,  and 
many  Rays  muft  be  obliquely  incident  on  them, 
and  fo  have  a  fliorter  way  through  them  than 
the  length  of  their  DiameterSj   as  becaufe  the 

flraitnels 


B  O  O  K     II.  237 

ftraknefs  of  the  Medium  put  in  on  all  fides 
within  fuch  Corpufcles  may  a  little  alter  its  Mo- 
tions or  other  qualities  on  which  the  Reflexion 
depends.  But  yet  I  cannot  much  fufped:  the 
laft ,  becaule  I  have  obferved  of  fome  fmall 
Plates  of  Mufcovy  Glafs  which  were  of  an  even 
thicknefs,  that  through  a  Microfcope  they  have 
appeared  of  the  fame  Colour  at  their  edges  and 
corners  where  the  included  Medium  was  ter- 
minated, which  they  appeared  of  in  other  pla- 
ces. However  it  will  add  much  to  our  Satif^ 
fadion,  if  thofe  Corpufcles  can  be  difcover'd 
with  Microfcopes ;  which  if  we  fhall  at  length 
attain  to,  I  fear  it  will  be  the  utmofl  improve- 
ment of  this  Senfe.  For  it  feems  impoflible  to 
fee  the  more  fecret  and  noble  Works  of  Nature 
within  the  Corpufcles  by  reafon  of  their  tranfpa- 
rency. 

Prop.     VIII. 

^he  Cmife  of  Refcxion  is  not  the  impinging  of 
Light  on  thefolid  or  impervious  parts  of  Bodies^ 
as  is  commonly  believed. 

np  HIS  will  appear  by  the  following  Confi- 
-°-  derations.  Firft,  That  in  the  paflage  of 
Light  out  of  Glafs  into  Air  there  is  a  Reflexion 
as  ftrong  as  in  its  palTage  out  of  Air  into  Glafs, 
or  rather  a  little  ftronger,  and  by  many  degrees 
ilronger  than  in  its  pallage  out  of  Glafs  into  Wa- 
ter. And  it  feems  not  probable  that  Air  {hould 
have  more  flrongly  refleding  parts  than  Waf^r 
or  Glafs.  But  if  that  ihould  poflibly  be  fuppo- 
fed,  yet  it  will  avail  nothing  j  for  the  Reflexion 


238  O  P  T  I  C  K  S.     ' 

is  as  flrong  or  ftronger  when  the  Air  is  drawn 
away  from  the  Glafs,  ( fuppofe  by  the  Air-Pump 
invented  by  Otto  Gueriet^  and  improved  and  made 
ufeful  by  Mr.  Boyle)  as  when  it  is  adjacent  to  it. 
Secondly,  If  Light  in  its  pafTage  out  of  Glafs 
into  Air  be  inqident  more  obUquely  than  at  an 
Angle  of  40  or  4 1  Degrees  it  is  wholly  refleded, 
if  lefs  obliquely  it  is  in  great  meafure  tranfmit- 
ted.  Now  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  Light  at 
one  degree  of  obliquity  fhould  meet  with  Pores 
enough  in  the  Air  to  tranfmit  the  greater  part  of 
it,  and  at  another  degree  of  obliquity  fliould 
meet  with  nothing  but  parts  to  refled:  it  wholly, 
efpecially  coniidering  that  in  its  palTage  out  of 
Air  into  Glafs,  how  oblique  foever  be  its  Inci- 
dence, it  finds  Pores  enough  in  the  Glafs  to  tranf- 
mit a  great  part  of  it.  If  any  Man  fuppofe  that 
it  is  not  refledled  by  the  Air,  but  by  the  outmofl 
fuperficial  parts  of  the  Glafs,  tliere  is  itill  the 
fame  dithculty:  Befides,  that  fuch  a  Suppofition 
is  unintelligible,  and  will  alfo  appear  to  be  falfe 
by  applying  Water  behind  fome  part  of  the  Glafs 
inllead  of  Air.  For  fo  in  a  convenient  obliquity 
of  the  Rays,  fuppofe  of  45  or  46  Degrees,  at 
which  they  are  all  refleded  where  the  Air  is  adja- 
cent to  the  Glafs,  they  Ihall  be  in  great  meafure 
tranfmitted  where  the  Water  is  adjacent  to  it; 
which  argues,  that  their  Reflexion  or  Tranfmiffi- 
on  depends  on  the  conilitution  of  the  Air  and 
W^ater  behind  the  Glafs,  and  not  on  the  ftriking 
of  the  Rays  upon  the  parts  of  the  Glafs.  Third- 
ly, If  the  Colours  made  by  a  Prifm  placed  at 
the  entrance  of  a  Beam  of  Light  into  a  darken'd 
Room  te  lucceffively  call:  on  a  fecond  Prifm 

placed 


BOOK     II.  239 

placed  at  a  greater   diftance  from  the  former, 
in  luch  manner  that  they  are  all  alike  incident 
upon  it,  the  fecond  Prifm  may  be  lo  inclined  to 
the   incident  Rays,    that  thole  which  are  of  a 
blue  Colour  fliall  be  all  refleded  by  it,   and  yet 
thofe  of  a  red  Colour  pretty  copioufly  tranlmit- 
ted.     Now  if  the  Reflexion  be   caufed  by  the 
parts  of  Air  or  Glafs,  I  would  ask,  why  at  the 
fame  Obliquity  of  Incidence    tiie  blue    fliould 
wholly  impinge  on  thofe  parts,  fo  as  to  be  all 
reflected,    and   yet   the    red  find  Pores  enough 
to  be  in  a  great  meafure  tranfmitted.     Fourth- 
ly, Where  two  Glaffes  touch  one  another,  there 
is  no  fejifible  Reflexion,  as  was  declared  in  the 
iirft  Obfervation;  and  yet  I  fee  no  feafon  why 
the  Rays  fhould  not  impinge  on  the  parts  of 
Glafs,  as  much  when  contiguous  to  other  Glafs 
as  when    contiguous   to  Air.      Fifthly,   When 
the  top  of  a  Water-Bubble  (in  the  17th  Obfer- 
vation, )  by   the  continual  fubflding  and  exha- 
ling  of  the  Water  grew  very  thin,   there  Vv^as 
fuch  a  little  and  almofl  infenfible  quantity  of 
Light   reflected  from  it,    that  it   appeared    in- 
tenfly  black;    whereas  round  about  that  black 
Spot,  where  the  Water  was  thicker, -the  Refle- 
xion was  fo  ftrong  as  to  make  the  Water  feem 
very  white.     Nor  is  it  only  at  the  leaft  thick- 
nefs  of  thin  Plates  or  Bubbles,  that  there  is  no 
manifeft  Reflexion,   but  at   many  other  thick- 
neffes  continually  greater  and  greater.     For  in 
the  15th  Obfervation  the  Rays  of  the  fame  Co- 
lour were  by  turns  tranfmitted  at  one  thicknefs, 
and   refledied  at   another  thicknefs,   for  an  in- 
determinate number   of  Succeflions.     And  yet 
I  in 


2/,o  ,  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

in  the  Superficies  of  the  thinned  Body,   where 
it  is  of  any  one  thicknefs,   there  are  as  many 
parts  for  the  Rays  to  impinge  on,  as  where  it 
is  of  any  other  thicknefs.     Sixthly,  If  Reflexion 
were  caufed  by  the   parts  of  reflecting  Bodies, 
it  would  be  impoilible  for  thin  Plates  or  Bub- . 
bles,  at  one  and  the  fame  place,    to  refled;  the 
Rays  of  one  Colour,  and  tranfmit  thofe  of  ano- 
ther, as  they  do  according  to  the  13  th  and  15  th 
Obfervations.     For   it    is   not    to   be  imagined 
that  at  one  place  the  Rays  which,  for  infliance, 
exhibit  a  blue  Colour,  fliould  have  the  fortune 
to  dalh  upon  the  parts,  and  thofe  which  exhi- 
bit a  red  to  hit  upon  the  Pores  of  the  Body  5 
and  tfien  at  another  place,   where  the  Body  is 
either  -a  little  thicker,  or  a  little  thinner,  that 
on  the  contrary  the  blue   fhould  hit  upon  its 
pores,  and  the  red  upon  its  parts.     Laftly,  Were 
the  Rays  of  Light    refleded  by  impinging  on 
the  folid  parts  of  Bodies,  their  Reflexions  from 
polifh'd  Bodies  could  not  be  fo  regular  as  they 
are.     For  in  polifliing  Glafs  with  Sand,  Putty,  or 
Tripoly,    it  is  not   to  be  imagined   that  thofe 
Subftances  can,  by  grating  and  fretting  the  Glafs, 
bring  all  its  leafl:  Particles  to- an  accurate  Polifh; 
fo  that  all  their  Surfaces  fliall  be  truly  plain  or 
truly  fpherical,  and  look  all  the  fame  way,  fo 
as  together  to  compofe  one  even  Surface.     The 
fmaller  the   Particles  of  thofe   Subftances   are, 
the  fmalier  will  be  the  Scratches  by  which  they 
continually  fret  and  wear  away  the  Glafs  until 
it  be  polifli'd  j  but  be  they  never  fo  fmall  they 
can  wear  away  the  Glafs  no  otherwife  than  by 
grating    and   fcratching    it,    and   breaking   the 
3  Protu-. 


BOOK     11.  241 

Protuberances;  and  therefore  polifli  it  no  o- 
therwife  than  by  bringing  its  roughnefs  to  a  ve- 
ry fine  Grain,  lb  that  the  Scratches  and  Fret- 
tings  of  the  Surface  become  too  fmall  to  be 
vifible.  And  therefore  if  Light  were  refled:ed 
by  impinging  upon  the  folid  parts  of  the  Giafs, 
it  would  be  fcatter'd  as  much  by  the  moll  po- 
lilh'd  Glafs  as  by  the  rougheft.  So  then  it  re- 
anains  a  Problem,  how  Glafs  poliili'd  by  fretting 
Subftances  can  refled;  Light  lb  regularly  as  it 
does.  And  this  Problem  is  fcarce  otherwife  to 
be  folved,  than  by  faying,  that  the  Reflexion  of 
a  Ray  is  etfe(5ted,  not  by  a  lingle  point  of  the 
reflecting  Body,  but  by  Ibme  power  of  the  Bo- 
dy which  is  evenly  diffufed  all  over  its  Surface, 
and  by  which  it  a6ls  upon  the  Ray  without  im- 
mediate Contad:.  For  that  the  parts  of  Bodies 
do  a(fl  upon  Light  at  a  diftance  Ihall  be  Ihewn 
hereafter. 

Now  if  Light  be  refled:ed,  not  by  impinging 
on  the  folid  parts  of  Bodies,  but  by  fome  other 
principle  j  it's  probable  that  as  many  of  its  Rays 
as  impinge  on  the  folid  parts  of  Bodies  are  not 
refleded  but  ftifled  and  loll  in  the  Bodies.  For 
otherwife  we  mull  allow  two  forts  of  Refle- 
xions. Should  all  the  Rays  be  refledled  which, , 
impinge  on  the  internal  parts  of  clear  Water  or 
Cryllal,  thofe  Subftances  would  rather  have  a 
cloudy  Colour  than  a  clear  Tranfparency.  To 
make  Bodies  look  black,  it's  necefiary  that  ma- 
ny Rays  be  llopp'd,  retained,  and  loft  in  them  ; 
and  it  feems  not  probable  that  any  Rays  can  be 
llopp'd  and  ftifled  in  them  which  do  not  im- 
pinge on  their  parts. 

R  And 


a+2  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

And  heilce  we  may  underftand  that  Bodies 
are  much  more  rare  and  porous^,  than  is  com- 
monly believed.     Water  is  nineteen  times  light- 
er,   and  by   confequence   nineteen    times    rarer 
than  Gold ;  and  Gold  is  fo  rare  as  very  readily 
and  vv^ithout  the  leafl  oppofition  to  tranfmit  the 
magnetick  Effluvia,  and  eafily  to  admit  Quick- 
filver   into  its  Pores,    and  to   let  Water    pafs 
through  it.     For  a  concave  Sphere  of  Gold  fil- 
led with  Water,  and  folder'd  up,  has,  upon  pref- 
fmg  the  Sphere  with  great  force,  let  the  Water 
fqueeze  through  it,  and  ftand  all  over  its   out- 
fide  in  multitudes  of   fmall  Drops,    like  Dew, 
without  burfting  or  cracking  the  Body  of  the 
Gold,  as  I  have  been  inform'd  by  an  Eye-wit- 
nefs.     From  all  which  we  may  conclude,  that 
Gold  has  more  Pores  than  folid  parts,   and  by 
confequence  that  Water  has   above  forty  times 
more  Pores  than  Parts.     And  he  that  fhall  find 
out  an  Hypothefls,  by  which  Water  may  be  fo 
rare,  and  yet  not  be  capable  of  compreffion  by 
force,    may  doubtlefs  by  the   fapie  Hypothefis 
make  Gold,  and  Water,  and  all  other  Bodies,  as 
much   rarer  as  he  pleafesj  fo  that  Light  may 
find  a  ready  pafTage  through  tranfparent   Sub- 
ftances. 

The  Magnet  ads  upon  Iron  through  all  denfe 
Bodies  not  magnetick  nor  red  hot,'  without  a- 
ny  diminution  of  its  Virtue ;  as  for  inftance, 
through  Gold,  Silver,  Lead,  Glafs,  Water. 
The  gravitating  Power  of  the  Sun  is  tranfmit- 
ted  through  the  vafl  Bodies  of  the  Planets  with- 
out any  diminution,  fo  as  to  ad;  upon  all  their 
parts  to  their  very  centers  with  the  fame  Force 

and 


B  O  O  K     II.  243 

and  according  to  the  fame  Laws,  as  if  the  part 
upon  which  it  ads  were  not  furrounded  with 
the  Body  of  the  Planet.    .The  Rays  of  Light, 
whether  they  be  very    fmall  Bodies .  projeded, 
or  only  Motion  or  Force  propagated,  are  mo- 
ved in  right   Lines ;    and  whenever  a   Ray  of 
Light  is  by  any  Obftacle  turned  out  of  its  rcdi- 
linear  way,  it  will  never  return  into    the  fame 
redilinear  way,  unlefs  perhaps  by  very  great  ac- 
cident.    And  yet  Light  is  tranfniittcd  through 
pellucid  folid  Bodies  in  right  Lines  to  very  .great 
diftances.      How  Bodies  can    have   a  futikient 
quantity  of  Pores  for  producing  thefe  EtfcAs  is 
very  difficult  to  conceive,   but  perhaps  not  al- 
together impolTible.     For  the  Colours  of  Bodies 
arife  from  the  Magnitudes  of  the  Particles  winch 
refled  them,  as  was  explained  above.     Now  if 
we  conceive  thefe  Particles  of  Bodks  to  be  fo 
difpofcd  amongll  themfelves,  that  the  Intervals 
or  empty  Spaceb  between  them  may  be  equal  in 
magnitude  to  them  all  j    and  that  tne£e  i^arii- 
cles  may  be  compufed  of  other  Particles  nmch 
fmaller,  which  have  as  much  empty  Space  be- 
tween   them  as  equals  all  the  Magnitudes    of 
thefe  fmaller  Particles:  And  that  in  like  man- 
ner theie  fmaller  Particles  are  again  compufed 
of  others  much  fmaller,  all  which  together  are 
equal  to  all  the  Pores  or  empty  Spaces  between 
them;  and  fo  on  perpetually  till  \ou  come  to 
fond  Particles,  fuch  2.\  have  no  Pores  or  empty 
Spaces  within  them  :   And  if  in  any  grofs  Lody 
there  be,   for  inftance,    three   fuch    degrees    of 
Particles,  the  leaft  of  which  are  folid ;  this  Bo- 
dy will  have  feven  times  more  Pores  than  folid 

R  2  Parts. 


244  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Parts.  But  if  there  be  four  fuch  degrees  of 
Particles,  the  leaft  of  which  are  folid,  the  Bo- 
dy will  have  fifteen  times  more  Pores  than  folid 
Parts.  If  there  be  five  degrees,  the  Body  will 
have  one  and  thirty  times  more  Pores  than  folid 
Parts.  If  fix  degrees,  the  Body  will  have  fixty 
and  three  times  more  Pores  than  folid  Farts.  And 
fo  on  perpetually.  And  there  are  other  ways  of 
conceiving  how  Bodies  may  be  exceeding  porous. 
But  what  is  really  their  inward  Frame  is  not  yet 
known  to  us. 

Prop.    IX. 

Bodies  refeB  and  refradf  Light  by  o?ie  and  the 
fame  power,  ^varioiijly  exercijed  in  'various-  Cir- 
cumjiances. 

THIS  appears  by  feveral  Confiderations. 
Firft,  Becaufe  when  Light  goes  out  of 
Glafs  into  Air,  as  obliquely  as  it  can  pofiibly 
do.  If  its  Incidence  be  made  ftill  more  oblique, 
it  becomes  totally  refledted.  For  the  power  of 
the  Glafs  after  it  has  refracfled  the  Light  as  ob- 
liquely as  is  poflible,  if  the  Incidence  be  ftill 
made  more  oblique,  becomes  too  firong  to  let 
any  of  its  Rays  go  through,  and  by  confequence 
caufes  total  Reflexions.  Secondly ,  Becaufe 
Light  is  alternately  reflected  and  tranfmitted 
by  thin  Plates  of  Glafs  for  many  Succeflions, 
accordingly  as  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  increa- 
fes  in  an  arithmetical  Progreflion.  For  here 
the  thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  determines  whether 
that  Power  by  which  Glafs  ad:s  upon  Light 
ihall  caufe  it  to  be  rcfle(5ted,  or  fufier  it  to  be 

tranf- 


BOOK     11. 


245 


tranfmitted.  And,  Thirdly,  becaufe  thofe  Sur- 
faces of  tranfparent  Bodies  which  have  the  great- 
eft  refradling  power,  refled  the  greateft  quan- 
tity of  Light,  as  was  fliewn  in  the  fir'll  Propofi- 
tion. 

Prop.    X. 

If  Light  be  fwifter  in  Bodies  'than  in  Vacuo,  in 
the  proportion  of  the  Sines  which  7ncafure  the 
RefraElion  of  the  Bodies,  the  Forres  of  the 
Bodies  to  refcB  and  refrafl  Light,  are  very 
nearly  proportional  to  the  denfities  of  the  fame 
Bodies ;  excepting  that  unBuous  a?id  fulphureous 
Bodies  refraSt  more  than  others  of  this  fame  den- 

LE  T  AB  reprefent  the  refrading  plane  Sur- 
face of  any  Body,  and  IC  a  Ray  incident 
very  obliquely  upon  the  Body  in  C,  fo  that  the 


Angle  ACI  may  be  Infinitely  little,  and  let  CR 
be  the  refracfled  Ray.  From  a  given  Point  B 
perpendicular  to  the  refradling  Surface  ered:  B  R 
meeting  with  the  refrading  Ray  C  R  in  R,  and 
if  C  R  reprefent  the  Motion  of  the  refraded 
Ray,  and  this  Motion  be  diftinguifh'd  into  two 
Motions  CB  and  BR,   whereof  C  B  is  paral- 

R  3  lei 


246  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

lei  to  the  refracting  Plane,  and  BR  perpendi- 
cular, to  it:  CB  fhall  reprefent  the  Motion ^o.f 
the  incident  Ray,  and  B  R  the  Motion  genera- 
ted by  the  Reiradtion,  as  Opticians  have  of  late 
explain'd. 

Now  if  any  Body  or  Thing,  in  moving  through 
any  Space  of  a  given  breadth  terminated  on 
both  fides  by  two  parallel  Planes,  be  urged  for- 
ward in  all  parts  of  that  Space  by  Forces  tend- 
ing direftly  forwards  towards  the  laft  Plane,  and 
before  its  Incidence  on  the  firil  Plane,  had  no 
Motion  towards  it,  -or  but  an  infinitely  little 
one  J  and  if  tlie  Forces  in  all  parts  of  that  Space, 
between  the  Planes,  be  at  equal  diftances  from 
the  Planes  equal  to  one  another,  but  at  feveral 
diftances  be  bigger  or  lefs  in  any  given  Propor- 
tion, the  Motion  generated  by  the  Forces  in 
the  whole  pafiage  of  the  Body  or  thing  through 
that  Space  fliall  be  in  a  fubduplicate  Proportion 
of  the  Forces,  as  Mathematicians  will  eafily 
underftand.  And  therefore,  if  the  Space  of  adti- 
vity  of  the  refrafting  Superficies  of  the  Body 
be  confider'd  as  fuch  a  Space,  the  Motion  of 
the  Ray  generated  by  the  refracting  Force  of 
the  Body,  during  its  pafiage  through  that  Space, 
that  is,  the  Motion  B  R,  muft  be  in  fubdupli- 
cate Proportion  of  that  refracting  Force.  I  fay 
therefore,  that  the  Square  of  the  Line  B  R,  and 
by  confequence  the  refracting  Force  of  the  Bo- 
dy, is  very  nearly  as  the  denfity  of  the  fame  Bo- 
dy. For  this  will  appear  by  the  following  Ta- 
ble, wherein  the  Proportion  of  the  Sines  which 
meafure  the  Refracftions  of  feveral  Bodies,  the 
Square  of  B  R,  fuppofing  C  B  an  unite,  the  Den- 

fities 


BOOK     II.  247 

fities  of  the  Bodies  eftimated  by  their  Specifick 
Gravities,  and  their  Refradtive  Power  in  refpea 
of  their  Denfities  are  fet  down  in  feveral  Co- 
lumns. 


The  P report 

ion  1  The  Square 

Theden- 

The  re- 

of  the  %i 

ncs       of  B  R, 

ffy  and 

fiaSliz'e 

of  Incidt 

nee 

to   which 

fpccifick 

Pcicer 

The  refrafting  Bo- 

and Refra- 

the  refra- 

gravi- 

of the 

dies. 

ftion   of  yel- 

Slingforce 

ty     of 

Bod^  i n 

lovj  Light 

of  the  Bo- 

thi Bo- 

refpeH 

dy  is  pro- 

dy. 

of  its 

portionate 

denfity . 

APieudo-Top.-.zius, 

being   a    natural, 

pellucid,    brittle, 

23    to 

H 

I '699 

4*27 

3979 

hairy  Stone,  of  a 

yellow  Colour. 

Air. 

3201  to  3 

200 

o''ooo62  5 

0'00I2 

5208 

Glafs  of  Antimony. 

17  to. 

9 

2*568 

5'28 

4864 

A  Selenitis. 

61   to 

41 

I '2 1 3 

2*252 

5386 

Glafs  vulgar. 

31   to 

20 

I '4025 

2'58 

543^ 

Cryibl  0*"  the  Rock. 

25  to 

16 

1^445 

2*65 

5450 

Jfl.lnd  Cryftal. 

5  to 

3 

i'778 

2*72 

6536 

Sal  GemmDC. 

17  to 

II 

i'388 

2*143 

6477 

Alume. 

35  to 

24 

1*1267 

1*714 

6570 

Borax. 

22  to 

»5 

I'lSii 

1*714 

67.6 

Niter. 

32  to 

21 

i'345 

i'9 

7079 

Dantzick  Vitriol. 

303  to 

200 

1*295 

1*715 

755 » 

Oil  of  Vitriol. 

10  to 

7 

1*041 

>'7 

6124 

Rain  Water. 

529  to 

396 

0*7845 

i' 

7845 

Gum  Arabick. 

31   to 

21 

1*179 

i'37S 

8574 

Spirit  of  Wine  well 
reftified. 

100  to 

73 

0*8765 

0*866 

10121 

Camphire. 

3  to 

2 

1*25 

0*996 

12551 

Oil  Olive. 

22    to 

15 

1*1511 

0*913 

12607 

Linfeed  Oil. 

40  to 

27 

1*1948 

0*932 

12819 

SpiritofTurpcntipe. 

25  to 

17 

1*1626 

0*874 

13222 

Amber. 

14  to 

9 

1*42 

1*04 

13654 

A  Diamond. 

1 00  -to 

41  l4'949 

3*4 

i4556__ 

The  Refradibn  of  the  Air  in  this  Table  is  de- 
termin'd  by  that  of  the   Atmofphere   obferved 

R  4  by 


248  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

by  Aftronomers.  For,  if  Light  pafs  through  many 
refradling  Subftances  or  Mediums  gradually  denfer 
and  denfer,  and  terminated  with  parallel  Surfaces, 
the  Sum  of  all  the  Refradions  will  be  equal  to 
the  iingle  Refraction  which  it  would  have  fuirer'd 
in  paffing  immediately  out  of  the  firft  Medium 
into  the  lafl.  And  this  holds  true,  though  the 
Number  of  the  refradling  Subftances  be  increafed 
to  Infinity,  and  the  Diftances  from  one  another 
as  much  decreafed,  fo  that  the  Light  may  be 
refraded  in  every  Point  of  its  Paflage,  and  by 
continual  Refradions  bent  into  a  Curve-Line. 
And  therefore  the  whole  Refradlion  of  Light 
in  paffing  through  the  Atmofphere  from  the 
higheft  and  rareft  Part  thereof  down  to  the  loweft 
and  denfeil  Part,  mufl  be  equal  to  the  Re- 
fradion  which  it  would  fuffer  in  paffing  at 
like  Obliquity  out  of  a  Vacuum  immediately 
into  Air  oi  equal  Denfity  with  that  in  the  loweft 
Part  of  the  Atmofphere. 

Now,  although  a  Pfeudo-Topaz,  a  Selenitis, 
Rock  Cryftal,  Ifland  Cryftal,  Vulgar  Glafs 
(that  is.  Sand  melted  together)  'and  Glafs  of 
Antimony,  which  are  terreftrial  ftony  alcalizate 
Concretes,  and  Air  which  probably  arifes  from 
ftich  Subftances  by  Fermentation,  be  Subftances 
very  differing  from  one  another  in  Denfity,  yet 
by  this  Table,  they  have  their  refradive  Powers 
almoft  in  the  fame  Proportion  to  one  another 
as  their  Denfities  are,  excepting  that  the  Re- 
fradion  of  that  ftrange  Subftance,  Ifland  Cryftal 
is  a  little  bigger  than  the  reft.  And  parti- 
cularly Air,  which  is  3500  Times  rarer  than 
the  Pfeudo-Topaz,  and  4.400  Times  rarer  than 
a  Glafs 


BOOK     IL  249 

Glafs  of  Antimony;  and  2000  Times  rarer  than 
the  Seleniti8,  Glafs  vulgar,  or  Cryflal  of  the 
Rock,  has  notwithftanding  its  rarity  the  fame  re- 
fradive  Power  in  refped:  of  its  Denfity  which 
thofe  very  denfe  Subftances  have  in  refped  of 
theirs,  excepting  fo  far  as  thofe  differ  from  one 
another. 

Again,  the  Refraction  of  Camphire,  Oil  Olive, 
Linfeed  Oil,  Spirit  of  Turpentine  and  Amber, 
which  are  fat  fulphureous  unduous  Bodies,  and 
a  Diamond,  which  probably  is  an  unduous  Sub- 
ftance  coagulated,  have  their  refradive  Powers  in 
Proportion  to  one  another  as  their  Denlities  with- 
out any  confiderable  Variation.  But  the  re- 
fradive  Powers  of  thefe  undluous  Subftances  are 
two  or  three  Times  greater  in  refpedt  of  their 
Denfities  than  the  refradive  Powers  of  the  former 
5ubftances  in  refped  of  theirs. 

Water  has  a  refradive  Power  in  a  middle  de- 
gree between  thofe  two  forts  of  Subflances, 
and  probably  is  of  a  middle  nature.  For  out 
of  it  grow  all  vegetable  and  animal  Subftances, 
which  confift  as  well  of  fulphureous  fat  and  in- 
flamable  Parts,  as  of  earthy  lean  and  alcalizate 
ones. 

Salts  and  Vitriols  have  refradive  Powers  in  a 
middle  degree  between  thofe  of  earthy  Subflances 
and  Water,  and  accordingly  are  compofed  of 
thofe  two  forts  of  Subflances.  For  by  dill  illation 
and  redification  of  their  Spirits  *a  great  Part  of 
them  goes  into  Water,  and  a  great  Part  remains 
behind  in  the  form  of  a  dry  fix'd  Earth  capable 
of  Vitrification. 

Spirit 


250  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Spirit  of  Wine  has  a  refradiv^e  Power  in  a 
middle  degree  between  thofe  of  Water  and  oily 
Subftances,  and  accordingly  feems  to  be  compo- 
fed  of  both,  united  by  Fern^.entation;  the  Water, 
by  means  of  fome  faline  Spirits  with  which  'tis 
impregnated,  dillolving  the  Oil,  and  volatizing 
it  by  the  Ad;ion.  For  Spirit  of  Wine  is  inflama- 
blc  by  means  of  its  oily  Parts,  and  being  diftilled 
often  from  Salt  of  Tartar,,  grow  by  every  diftil- 
lation  more  and  more  aqueous  and  phlegma- 
tick.  And  Chymiils  obferve,  that  Vegetables 
(as  Lavender,  Rue,  Marjoram,  (^f. )  diftilled  ^^r 
fe^  before  fermentation  yield  Oils  without  any 
burning  Spirits,  but  after  fermentation  yield  ar- 
dent Spirits  without  Oils  :  W^hich  fliews,  that 
their  Oil  is  by  fermentation  converted  into  Spi- 
rit. They  find  alfo,  that  if  Oils  be  poured  in  a 
fmall  quantity  upon  fermentating  Vegetables, 
they  diftil  over  after  fermentation  in  the  form 
of  Spirits* 

So  then,  by  the  foregoing  Table,  all  Bodies 
feem  to  have  their  retradive  Powers  propor- 
tional to  their  Denfities,  (or  vei'y  nearly;)  ex- 
cepting fo  far  as  they  partake  more  or  lefs  of 
iulphureous  oily  Particles,  and  thereby  have  their 
refradiive  Power  made  greater  or  lefs.  Whence 
it  feems  rational  to  attribute  the  refrad-ive  Power 
of  all  Bodies  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  to  the  ful- 
phureous  Parts  with  which  they  abound.  For 
it's  probable  that  all  Bodies  aJDOund  more  or  lefs 
with  Sulphurs.  And  as  Light  congregated  by  a 
Burning-glafs  ads  moft  upon  fulphureous  Bo- 
dies, to  turn  them  into  Fire  and  Flame ;  fo, 
fince  all  Adion  is  mutual.  Sulphurs  ought  to  a6t 

moft 


BOOK     II.  251 

moil  upon  Light.  For  that  the  action  between 
Light  and  Bodies  is  mutual,  may  appear  from 
this  Confideration ;  That  the  denfeil  Bodies 
which  rtfrad:  and  reflect  Light  moft  Wrongly, 
grow  hotteft  in  the  Summer  Sun,  by  the  adtion 
of  the  refradcd  or  refied:ed  Light. 

I  have  hitherto  explain'd  the  power  of  Bo- 
dies to  reflect  and  refradt,  and  (liew'd,  that  thin 
tranfparent  Plates,  Fibres,  and  Particles,  do,  ac- 
cording to  their  feveral  thickneifes  and  dcnli- 
ties,  refled:  feveral  forts  of  Ravs,  and  thereby 
appear  of  feveral  Colours;  and  by  confecjuence 
that  nothing  more  is  requifitc  for  producing  all 
the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies,  than  the  feveral 
fizes  and  denfities  of  their  tranfparent  Particles. 
But  whence  it  is  that  thefe  Plates,  Fibres,  and 
Particles,  do,  according  to  their  feveral  thick- 
nelTes  and  denfities,  refledt  feveral  forts  of  kays, 
I  have  not  yet  explain'd.  To  give  fome  infight 
into  this  matter,  and  make  way  for  underftand- 
ing  the  next  part  of  this  Book,  I  fhall  conclude 
this  part  with  a  few  more  Proportions.  Thofe 
which  preceded  refpeft  the  nature  of  Bodies, 
thefe  the  nature  of  Light :  For  both  mufl  be 
underftood,  before  the  reafon  of  their  Adlions 
upon  one  another  can  be  known.  And  becaufe 
the  laft  Propofition  depended  upon  the  velocity 
of  Light,  I  will  begin  with  a  Propofition  of  that 
kind. 


Prop. 


252  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Prop.     XL 

Light  is  propagated  from  luminous  Bodies  in 
time,  and  Jpends  about  feven  or  eight  Mi- 
nutes of  an  Hour  in  paffing  from  the  Sun  to  the 
Earth, 

'l  ^  HIS  was  (obferved  firfl  by  Roemer,  and 
-*-  then  by  others,  by  means  of  the  Eclipfes  of 
the  Satellites  of  Jupiter.  For  thefe  Eclipfes, 
when  the  Earth  is  between  the  Sun  and  Jupiter, 
happen  about  itvtn.  or  eight  Minutes  fooner 
than  they  ought  to  do  by  the  Tables,  and  when 
the  Earth  is  beyond  the  Sun  they  happen  about 
feven  or  eight  Minutes  later  than  they  ought  to 
do;  the  reafon  bemg,  that  the  Light  of  the 
Satellites  has  farther  to  go  in  the  latter  cafe 
than*  in  the  former  by  the  Diameter  of 
the  Earth's  OrbiL  Some  inequalities  of  time 
may  arife  from  the  Excentricities  of  the  Orbs  of 
the  Satellites ;  but  thofe  cannot  anfwer  in  all  the 
Satellites,  and  at  all  times  to  the  Poiition  and 
Diftance  of  the  Earth  from  the  Sun.  The  mean 
motions  of  Jupiter  s  Satellites  is  alfo  fwifter  in 
his  defcent  from  his  Aphelium  to  his  Perihelium, 
than  in  his  afcent  in  the  other  half  of  his  Orb. 
But  this  inequality  ha^  no  refpcd:  to  the  pofition 
of  the  Earth,  and  in  the  three  interior  Satellites 
5s  infenfible,  as  I  find  by  computation  from  the 
Theory  of  their  Gravity. 


Prop. 


BOOK     IL 


Prop.     XII. 


253 


Every  Ray  of  Light  in  its  pajfagc  through  any 
refraBing  Surface  is  put  into  a  certain  trajijicnt 
Conjlitution  or  State  ^  which  in  the  progrefs 
of  the  Ray  returns,  at  equal  Intervals^  and 
difpofes  the  Ray  at  every  return  to  be  eafily 
tranfmitted  through  '  the  next  refraSfitjg  Sur- 
face, and  betiveen  the  returns  to  be  eafdy  refieSied 
by  it. 

TH I S  is  manifeil  by  the  5th,  9th,  12th, 
and  15th  jObfervations.  For  by  thofe  Ob- 
fervations  it  appears ,  that  one  and  the  fame 
fort  of  Rays  at  equal  Angles  of  Incidence  on  a- 
ny  thin  tranfparent  Plate,  is  alternately  refledled 
and  tranfmitted  for  many  Succeffions  according- 
ly as  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  increafes  in 
arithmetical   Progreffion  of    the  Numbers,    o, 

I,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  ^c.  fo  that  if  the  firft 
Reflexion  ( that  which  makes  the  firfl:  or  inner- 
moft  of  the  Rings  of  Colours  there  defcribed ) 
be  made  at  the  thicknefs  i,  the  Rays  fliall  be 
tranfmitted  at  the  thicknelTes  o,  2,  4,  6,   8,   lo, 

12,  ^c.  and  thereby  make  the  central  Spot  and 
Rings  of  Light,  which  appear  by  tranfmillion, 
and  be  refledied  at  the  thicknefs  i,  3,  ^,  7,  o, 

I I,  ^c.  and  thereby  make  the  Rings  which 
appear  by  Reflexion.  And-  this  alternate  Re*- 
flexion  and  TranfmilTion,  as  I  gather  by  the  24th 
Obfervation,  continues  for  above  an  hundred 
viciflitudes,  and  by  the  Obfervations  in  the  next 
part  of  this  Book,  for  many  thoufands,  being 
propagated  from  one  Surface  of  a  Glafs  Plate  to 

the 


254  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  other,  though  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  be 
a  quarter  of  an  Inch  or  above :  So  that  this  al- 
ternation feems  to  be  propagated  from  every 
refrading  Surface  to  all  diflances  w^ithout  end  or 
limitation. 

This  alternate  Reflexion  and  Refradtion  de- 
pends on  both  the  Surfaces  of  every  thin  Plate, 
becaufe  it  depends  on  their  diflance.  By  tlie 
21  ft  Obfervation,  if  either  Surface  of  a  thin 
Pjate  of  Miifcovy  Glafs  be  wetted,  the  Colours 
caufed  by  the  alternate  Reflexion  and  Refraction 
grow  faint,  and  therefore  it  depends  on  them 
both. 

It  is  therefore  performed  at  the  fecond  Surface; 
for  if  it  were  perform'd  at  the  firft,  before  the 
Rays  arrive  at  the  fecond,  it  would  not  depend 
on  the  fecond. 

It  is  alfo  influenced  by  fome  action  or  difpo- 
fition,  propagated  from  the  firft  to  the  fecond, 
becaufe  other  wife  at  the  fecond  it  v^ould  not 
depend  on  the  firft.  And  this  adion  or  difpo- 
fition,  in  its  propagation,  intermits  and  returns 
by  equal  Intervals,  becaufe  in  all  its  progrefs  it 
inclines  the  Ray  at  one  diftance  from  the- firft 
Surface  to  be  reflefted  by  the  fecond,  at  ano- 
ther to  be  tranfmitted  by  it,  and  that  by  equal 
Intervals  for  innumerable  viciflitudes.  And  be- 
caufe the  Ray  is  difpofed  to  Reflexion  at  the 
diliances  i,  3,  5,  7,  9,  ^c.  and  to  Tranfmiflion 
at  the  diftances  o,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  Gfr.  (for  its 
tranfmillion  through  the  firft  Surface,  is  at  the 
diftance  o,  and  it  is  tranfmitted  tiirough  both 
together,  if  their  diftance  be  infinitely  little  or 
much  lefs  than  i )  the  difpofition  to  be  tranf- 
I  mit.e4 


BOOK     11.  255 

mitted  at  the  diftances  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  &c.  is  to  be 
accounted  a  return  of  the  lame  difpofition  which 
the  Ray  firft  had  at  the  diftance  o,  that  is  at  its 
tranfmiffion  through  the  firft  refradling  Surface. 
All  which  is  the  thing  I  would  prove. 

What  kind  of  adion  or  difpofition  this  is; 
Whether  it  confifts  in  a.  circulating  or  a  vibra- 
ting motion  of -the  Ray,  or  of  the  Medium,  or 
fomething  elfe,   I  do  not  here  enquire.     Thofe 
that  are  averfe  from  alTenting  to  any  new  Dif- 
coveries,  but  fuch  as  they  can- explain  by  an  Hy- 
pothecs, may  for  the  prefent  fuppofe,   that  as 
Stones  by  falling  upon  Water  put  the  Watef  in- 
to an  undulating  Motion,    and   all  Bodies  by 
percufTion  excite  vibrations  in  the  Air;  fo  the 
Rays  of  Light,  by  impinging  on  any  refracting 
or  reflecfting   Surface ,    excite  vibrations  in  the 
refrafting   or  refiecfting  Medium   or  Subftance, 
and  by  exciting  them  agitate  the  folid  parts  of 
the  refrad:ing  or  reflecting  Body,  and  by  agita- 
ting   them   caufe   the  Body  to  grow  warm  or 
hot;  that  the  vibrations  thus  excited  are  pro- 
pagated in  the  refradting  or  reflecfting  Medium 
or  Subftance,  much  after  tlie  manner  that  vibra- 
tions  are   propagated    in   the   Air    for   caufing 
Sound,  and  move  fafter  than  the  Rays  fo  as  to 
overtake  thenij  and  that  when  any  Ray   is  in 
that  part  of  the  vibration  which  confpires  with 
its  Motion,  it  eafily  breaks  through  a  refrading 
Surface,  but  when  it  is  in  the  contrary  part  of 
the  vibration  which  impedes  its  Motion,  it  is 
eafily  reflected ;   and,    by  confequence,   that  e- 
very  Ray  is  fucceftively  difpofed  to  be  eafily  re- 
flected, or  eafliy  tranfmitted,  by  every  vibration 

which 


256  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

which  overtakes  it.  But  whether  this  Hypothe- 
lis  be  true  or  falfe  I  do  not  here  conlider.  I  con- 
tent my  felf  with  the  bare  Difcovery,  that  the 
Rays  of  Light  are  by  fome  caufe  or  other  alter- 
nately difpofed  to  be  refled:ed  or  refraded  for 
many  viciffitudes. 

DEFINITION. 

I'he  returns  of  the  difpofition  of  any  Ray  to  be 
refeBed  I  will  call  its  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion, 
and  thofe  of  its  difpoftion  to  be  tranfmitted  its 
Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiffion,  and  the  [pace  it 
pa[fes  between  every  return  and  the  next  re- 
tunty  the  Interval  of  its  Fits. 

Prop.     XIII, 

'The  reafon  why  the  Surfaces  of  all  thick  tranf- 
farent  Bodies  refledi  part  of  the  Light  inci^ 
dent  on  thein^  and  refraSi  the  reji  ^  isy  that 
fome  Rays  at  their  Incidence  are  in  Fits  of  eafy 
Reflexion^  a7id  others  in  Fits  of  eafy  Tranf- 
mifjion. 

np  HIS  may  be  gather'd  from  the  24th  Ob- 
-*-  fervation,  where  the  Light  reflected  by 
thin  Plates  of  Kv:  and  Glafs,  which  to  the  naked 
Eye  appear'd  evenly  white  all  over  the  Plate,  did 
through  a  Prifm  appear  waved  with  many  Suc- 
ceffions  of  Light  and  Darknefs  made  by  alter- 
nate Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and  eafy  Tranfmiffi- 
on, the  Prifm  fevering  and  difl:inguifliing  the 
Waves  of  which  the  white  refledled  Light  was 
compofed,  as  was  explain' d  above. 

And 


BOOK       II;  2^7 

And  hence  Light  is  in  Fits  of  cafy  Reflexion 
and  eafy  Tranfmiflion,  before  its  Incidence  on 
tranfparent  Bodies.  And  probably  it  is  put  in- 
to fuch  Fits  at  its  firfl  emilTion  from  luminous 
Bodies,  and  continues  in  them  during  all  its  pro- 
grefs.  For  thefe  Fits  are  of  a  lafting  naturcj  as 
will  appear  by  the  next  part  of  this  Book. 

In  this  Proportion  I  fuppofe  the  tranfparent 
Bodies  to  be  thick  j  becaufc  if  the  thicknefs  of 
the  Body  be  much  lefs  than  the  Interval  of  the 
Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and  Tranfmitiion  of  the 
Rays,  the  Body  lofeth  its  refleclling  power.  For 
if  the  Rays,  which  at  their  entering  into  the' 
Body  are  put  into  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiflion,  ar- 
tive  at  the  farthefl  Surface  of  the  Body  before 
they  be  out  of  thofe  Fits,  they  muil:  be  tranfmit- 
ted.  And  this  is  the  reafon  why  Bubbles'  of 
Water  lofe  their  refledling  power  when  they 
grow  very  thin ;  and  why  all  opake  Bodies,  when 
reduced  into  very  fmall  parts,  become  tranfpa^ 
rent. 

Prop.    XIV. 

'Thofe  Surfaces  cf  tranfparent  Bodies^  which  if  the 
Ray  be  in  a  Fit  of  'Refratlicn  do  rfra6i  it  vicf: 
fli-ongly^  if  the  Ray  be  in  a  Fit  of  Rcfiexion  do 
refeB  it  7nofi  eafdy. 

FO  R  we  fhewed  above,  in  Frop.  8.  that  thai 
caufe  of  Reflexion  is  not  the  impinging  of 
Light  on  the  folid  impervious  parts  of  Bodies^ 
but  fome  other  power  by  which  thofe  folid 
parts  ad;  on  Light  at  a  diilance.  We  fhewed 
alio  in  Frop,  9.  that  Bodies  refled:  and  refrad: 

S  Lighc 


258  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Light  by  one  and  the  fame  power,  varloufly  ex- 
ercifed  in  various  circumftances;  and  in  Prop.  i. 
that  the  moft  ftrongly  refracting  Surfaces  refledt 
the  moft  Light:  All  which  compared  together 
evince  and  ratify  both  this  and  the  laft  Propo- 
rtion. 

Prop.    XV. 

In  any  one  and  the  fame  fort  of  Rays,  emerging  in 
any  Angle  out  of  any  refraSling  Surface  into  one 
and  the  fame  Medium,  the  hitervalaf  the  fol- 
lowing Fits  of  eafy  Refexion  and  'T^ranfmifjion 
are  either  accurately  or  very  nearly,  as  the  ReB- 
angle  of  the  Secaiit  of  the  Angle  of  RefraSlion, 
and  of  the  Secant  of  another  Angle,  whofe  Sine 
is  the  firfi  of  106  arithmetical  mean  Rroporti- 
onals,  between  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refra- 
Bion,  counted  from  the  Si?2e  of  RefraBion. 

T^  H I  S  is  manifefl  by  the  7th  and  19th  Obfcr- 
••■"    vations. 


Prop. 


B  O  O  K     n.  259 

Prop.    XVI. 

Lt  fever al  forts  of  Rays  e-merging  in  equal  Anglci. 
out  of  any  refradiing  Surface  into  the  fame  Me^ 
dium^  the  Litervals  of  the  foiio'wing  hits  of  eafy 
'Reflexion  and  eafy  T'ranfniJJion  are  either  accu- 
rately, or  very  nearly,  as  the  Cube-Roots  of  the 
Squares  of  the  lengths  of  a  Chord,  which  fownd 
the  Notes  in  an  Eight,  fol,  la,  fa,  fol,  la,  mi, 
fa,  fol,  ivith  all  their  imter mediate  degrees  an- 
fuoering  to  the  Colours  of  thofe  Rays,  accordtfg  to 
the  Analogy  defcrihed  in  the  feventh  Experiment 
of  the  fecond  Part  of  theflrft  Book. 

np  H  I S  is  manifeft  by  the  13th  and  14th  Ob- 
■*■    fervations. 

Prop.    XVII. 

Jf  Rays  of  any  fort  pafs  perpendicularly  ifito  feve^ 
ral  Mediums,  the  hitcrvcls  of  the  Fits  cf  eafy 
Reflexion  and  l^ranfmiflion  in  any  one  Medium, 
are  to  thofe  Intervals  in  any  other,  as  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  RefraBion,  wlmi  the 
Rays  pafs  out  of  the  flrfl  of  thofe  ti^o  Mediums 
into  the  fecond. 

T^  H I  S  is  manifeft  by   the    loth   Obferva- 
-^    tion. 


S  2  Prop, 


26o  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Prop.    XVIII. 

If  the  Rays  nvhich  paint  the  Colour  in  the  Confine 
of  yellow  and  orange  pafs  perpejidicularly  out  of 
any  Medium  into  Air,  the  Intervals  of  their  Fits 

of  eafy  Reflexion  are  the  th  part  of  an  Inch, 

And  of  the  fa?ne  length  are  the  Intervals  of  their 
Fits  of '  eafy  I^ranfmifjion, 

^  I  ^  H  I S  is  manifeft  by  the  6th  Obfervation. 
-*"  From  thefe  Propofitions  it  is  eafy  to  col- 
led: the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion 
and  eafy  Tranfmiffion  of  any  fort  of  Rays  refra- 
ined in  any  Angle  into  any  Medium  j  and  thence 
to  know,  whether  the  Rays  fhall  be  reflected,  or 
tranfmitted  at  their  fubfequent  Incidence  upon 
any  other  pellucid  Medium.  Which  thing,  be- 
ing ufeful  for  underflanding  the  next  part  of  this 
Book,  was  here  to  be  fet  down.  And  for  the 
fame  reafon  I  add  the  two  following  Propofi- 
tions. 


Prop, 


BOOK     II.  261 

Prop.    XIX. 

If  any  fort  of  Rays  faUi7ig  on  the  polite  Surface 
of  any  pellucid  Medium  be  refeBed  back^  the  Fits 
of  eafy  Refexion^  which  they  have  at  the  point  of 
Refexion,  fall  fill  continue  to  return  j  a?jd  the 
Returns  fiall  be  at  diftances  from  the  point  of 
Refexicn  in  the  arithmetical  prcgrejfon  of  the 
'Numbers  7.^  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  &c.  and  between 
thefe  Fits  the  Rays  pall  be  in  Fits  of  eafy  7'rafif 
mijjion. 

"P  O  R  fiRce  the  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and 
•*-  Qafy  TranfmilTion  are  of  a  returning  na- 
ture, there  is  no  reafoa  why  thefe  Fits,  which 
continued  till  the  Ray  arrived  at  the  reflecting 
Medium,  and  there  inclined  the  Ray  to  Refle- 
xion, ihould  there  ceafe.  And  if  the  Ray  at  the 
point  of  Reflexion  was  in  a  Fit  of  eafy  Reflexion, 
the  progreflion  of  the  diftances  of  thefe  Fits 
from  that  point  mufl:  begin  from  o,  and  fo  be  of 
the  Numbers  o,  2,  4,  6,  8,  &c.  And  therefore 
the  progreffion  of  the  dillances  of  the  interme- 
diate Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiflion,  reckon'd  from 
the  fame  point,  mufl  be  in  the  progreflion  of 
the  odd  Numbers  i,  3,  5,  7,  9,  ^c.  contrary 
to  what  happens  when  the  Fits  are  propagated 
from  points  of  Refradion. 


S3  Prop, 


262  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Prop.    XX. 

^he  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and, 
eafy  T'ranfmifjion^  propagated  from  points  of 
KeHexion  into  afiy  Medium^  are  equal  to  the 
Intervals  of  the  like  Fits^  which  the  fame  Rays 
would  ba-vey  if  refraBed  into  the  fame  Medium 
in  Angles  of  Rejraciion  equal  to  their  Angles  of 
Reflexion, 

'P  O  R  when  Light  is  refleded  by  the  fecond 
■"-  Surface  of  thin  Plates,  it  goes  out  after- 
wards  fieely  at  the  firft  Surface  to  make  the 
Rin^s  of  Colours  which  appear  by  Reflexion  j 
and,  by  the  freedom  of  its  egrefs,  makes  the 
Colours  of  thefe  Rings  more  vivid  and  ftrong 
than  thofe  which  appear  on  the  other  fide  of 
the  Plates  by  the  tranfmitted  Light.  The  re- 
fieded  Rays  are  therefore  in  Fits  of  eafy  Tranf- 
miffion  at  their  egrefs;  v/hich  would  not  always 
happen,  if  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  within  the 
Plate  after  Reflexion  were  not  equal,  both  in 
kngth  and  number,  to  their  Intervals  before  it. 
And  this  confirms  alfo  the  proportions  fet  down 
in  the  former  Propofition.  For  if  the  Rays 
both  in  going  in  and  out  at  the  firfh  Surface  be 
in  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiffion,  and  the  Intervals 
and  Numbers  of  thofe  Fits  between  the  firft 
and  fecond  Surface,  before  and  after  Reflexion, 
be  equal,  the  diftances  of  the  Fits  of  eafy 
Tranfmiflion  from  either  Surface,  muft  be  in 
the  fame  prpgreffion  after  Reflexion  as  before ; 
that  is,  from  the  firft  Surface  which  tranfmit- 
ted them,  in  the  progreffion  of  the  even  Num-. 

bers 


B  O  O  K     IL  263 

bers  o,  2,  4,  6,  8,  (^c.  and  from  the  fecond 
which  refledled  them,  in  that  of  the  odd  Num- 
bers I,  3,  5,  7,  &c.  But  thefe  two  Propofi- 
tions  will  become  much  more  evident  by  the 
Obfervations  in  the  following  part  of  this 
Book. 


S4 


THE 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 


O  F 


OPTICKS 


PART     IV. 


Qbfervations  concerning  the  Reflexions  and 
Colour^  of  thick  tranfparent  polij^d 
Platzs. 


HERE  Is  no  Glafs  or  Speculum  how 
well  foever  polifliedjbut,  befides  the 
Light  which  it  refradts  or  refledls  re-, 
gularlyj  fcatters  every  way  irregularly 
a  faint  Light,  by  means  of  which  the 
polifh'd  Surface,  v/hen  illuminated  in  a  dark  room 

by 


BOOK     II.  265 

by  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light,  may  be  eafily  feen 
in  all  pofitions  of  the  Eye.  There  are  certain 
Phaenomena  of  this  fcatter'd  Light,  which  when 
I  firft  obferved  them,  feem'd  very  flrange  and 
furprizing  to  me.  My  Obfervations  were  as  fol- 
lows. 

Obf.  I.  The  Sun  fhining  into  ray  darkened 
Chamber  through  a  hole  one  third  of  an  Inch 
wide,  riet  the  intromitted  beam  of  Light  fall 
perpendicularly  upon  a  Glafs  Speculum  ground 
concave  on  one  fide  and  convex  on  the  other, 
to  a  Sphere  of  five  Feet  and  eleven  Inches  Ra- 
dius, and  Quick-filver'd  over  on  the  convex 
fide.  And  holding  a  white  opake  Chart,  or  a 
Quire  of  Paper  at  the  center  of  the  Spheres  to 
which  the  Speculum  was  ground,  that  is,  at  the 
diftance  of  about  live  Feet  and  eleven  Inches 
from  the  Speculum,  in  fuch  manner,  that  the 
beam  ©f  Light  might  pafs  through  a  little  hole 
made  in  the  middle  of  the  Chart  to  the  Specu- 
lum, and  thence  be  reflected  back  to  the  fime 
hole:  I  obferved  upon  the  Chart  four  or  five 
concentric  Irifes  or  Rings  of  Colours,  like  Rain- 
bows, encorapaffing  the  hole  much  after  the 
manner  that  thofe,  which  in  the  fourth  and  fol- 
lowing Obfervations  of  the  firft  part  of  this  third 
Book  appear'd  between  the  Objedl-glaiTes,  en- 
compafled  the  black  Spot,  but  yet  larger  and 
fainter  than  thofe.  Thefe  Rings  as  they  grew 
larger  and  larger  became  diluter  and  fainter,  fo 
that  the  fifth  was  fcarce  vifible.  Yet  fome- 
times,  when  the  Sun  llione  very  clear,  there 
appear'd  faint  Lineaments  of  a  fixth  and  fe- 
vgnth.    If  the  diftance  of  the  Chart  from  the 

S,pecu-» 


266  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Speculum  was  much  greater  or  much  lefs  than 
that  of  fix  Feet,  the  Rings  became  dilute  and 
vaniQi'd.  And  if  the  diftance  of  the  Speculum 
from  the  Window  was  much  greater  than  that 
of  fix  Feet,  the  refledied  beam  of  Light  would 
be  fo  broad  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet .  from  the 
Speculum  where  the  Rings  appear'd,  as  to  ob- 
fcure  one  or  two  of  the  innermoft  Rings.  And 
therefore  I  ufually  placed  the  Speculum  at  a- 
bout  fix  Feet  from  the  Window  j  fo  that  its 
Focus  might  there  fall  in  with  the  center  of  its 
concavity  at  the  Rings  upon  the  Chart.  And 
this  Pofiiure  is  always  to  be  underfi:ood  in  the 
following  Obfervations  where  no  other  is  ex- 
prefs'd. 

Obf.  2.  The  Colours  of  thefe  Rain-bows  fuc- 
ceeded  one  another  from  the  center  outwards, 
in  the  fame  form  and  order  with  thofe  which 
were  made  in  the  ninth  Obfervation  of  the  firft 
Part  of  this  Book  by  Light  not  refledled,  but 
tranfmitted  through  the  two  Objedi-glafiTes.  For, 
firfi:,  there  was  in  their  common  center  a  white 
round  Spot  of  faint  Light,  fomething  broader 
than  the  refleded  beam  of  Light,  which  beam 
fometimes  fell  upon  the  middle  of  the  Spot,  and 
fometimes  by  a  little  inclination  of  the  Specu- 
lum receded  from  the  middle,  and  left  the  Spot 
white  to  the  center. 

This  white  Spot  was  immediately  encompaf- 
fed  with  a  dark  grey  or  rufleti  and  that  dark  grey 
with  the  Colours  of  the  firfi:  Iris;  which  Colours 
on  the  infide  next  the  dark  grey  were  a  little 
violet  and  indigo,  and  next  to  that  a  blue,  which 
on  the  outfide  grew  pale,  and  then  fucceeded  a 

little 


BOOK     11.  267 

little  greenifh  yellow,  and  after  that  a  brighter 
yellow,  and  then  on  the  outward  edge  of  the 
Iris  a  red  which  on  the  outfide  inclined  to  pur- 
ple. 

This  Iris  was  immediately  encompaffed  with  a 
fecond,  whofe  Colours  were  in  order  from  the  in- 
fide  outwards,  purple,  blue,  green,  "yellow,  light 
red,  a  red  mix'd  with  purple. 

Then  immediately  foUow'd  the  Colours  of  the 
third  Iris,  which  were  in  order  outwards  a  green 
inclining  to  purple,  a  good  green,  and  a  red  more 
bright  than  that  of  the  former  Iris. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  Iris  feem'd  of  a  bluifli 
green  within,  and  red  without,  but  fo  faintly 
that  it  was  difficult  to  difcern  the  Colours. 

Obf.  3.  Meafuring  the  Diameters  of  thefe 
Rings  upon  the  Chart  as  accurately  as  I  could, 
I  found  them  alfo  in  the  fame  proportion  to 
one  another  with  the  Rings  made  by  Light  tranf- 
mitted  through  the  two  Objed-glafies.  For 
the  Diameters  of  the  four  iirfl  of  the  brjf^ht 
Rings  meafured  between  the  brightefl  parts  of 
their  Orbits,  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  from  the 
Speculum  were  144,  2I,  2—  3^  Inches,  whofe 
Squares  are  in  arithmetical  progreffion  of  the 
numbers  i,  2,  3,  4.  If  the  white  circular  Spot 
in  the  middle  be  reckon'd  amongfl  the  Rings, 
and  its  central  Light,  where  it  fsems  to  be  n:oil 
luminous,  be  put  equipollent  to  an  infinitely 
little  Ring  ;  the  Squares  of  the  Diameters  of  the 
Rings  will  be  in  the  progrefiion  o,  i,  2,  3,  4, 
&c.  I  meafured  alfo  the  Diameters  of  the  dark 
Circles  between  thefe  luminous  ones,  and  found 
their  Squares  in  the  progreflion  of  the  num- 
bers 


268  O  P  T  I  C  K  S.^ 

bers  T,  It,  2^,  3^,  '&c.  the  Diameters  of  the 
firft  four  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feetsfrom  the 
Speculum,  being  i.?^,  2tV,  2t,  3tt  Iiiches.  If 
the  diftance  of  the  Chart  from  the  Speculum 
was  increafed  or  diminilhed,  the  Diameters  of 
the  Circles  were  increafed  or  diminifhed  pro- 
portionally. 

Obf.  ^.  By  the  analogy  between  thefe  Rings 
and  thofe  defcribed  in  the  Obfervations  of  the 
firft  Part  of  this  Book,  I  fufpedted  that  there 
were  many  more  of  them  which  fpread  into 
one  another,  and  by  interfering  mix'd  their  Co- 
lours, and  diluted  one  another  fo  that  they  could 
not  be  feen  apart.  I  viewed  them  therefore 
through  a  Prifm,  as  I  did  thofe  in  the  24th  Ob- 
fervation  of  the  firft  Part  of  this  Book.  And 
when  the  Prifm  was  fo  placed  as  by  refradling 
the  Light  of  their  mix'd  Colours  to  feparate 
them,  and  diftinguilh  the  Rings  from  one  ano- 
ther, as  it  did  thofe  in  that  Obfervation,  I  could 
then  fee  them  diftind:er  than  before,  and  eafily 
number  eight  or  nine  of  them,  and  fometimes 
twelve  or  thirteen.  And  had  not  their  Light 
been  fo  very  faint,  I  queftion  not  but  that  I  might 
have  feen  many  more. 

Ohf.  5.  Placing  a  Prifm  at  the  Window  to  re- 
fradl  the  intromitted  beam  of  Light,  and  caft 
the  oblong  Speftrum  of  Colours  on  the  Specu- 
lum :  I  covered  the  Speculum  with  a  black  Pa- 
per which  had  in  the  middle  of  it  a  hole  to  let 
any  one  of  the  Colours  pafs  through  to  the  Spe- 
culum, whilft  the  reft  were  intercepted  by 
the  Paper.  And  now  I  found  Rings  of  that  Co- 
lour only  which  fell  upon  the  Speculum.    If 

the 


BOOK     II.  269 

the  Speculum  was  illuminated  with  red,  the 
Rings  were  totally  red  with  dark  Intervals,  if 
with  blue  they  were  totally  blue,  and  fo  of  the 
other  Colours.  And  when  they  v/ere  illumi- 
nated wi'th  any  one  Colour,  the  Squares  of  their 
Diameters  meafured  between  their  moil  lumi- 
nous Parts,  were  in  the  arithmetical  Progreilion 
of  the  Numbers,  o,  i,  2,  3,  4,  and  the  Squares 
of  the  Diameters  of  their  dark  Intervals  in  the 
Progreffion  of  the  intermediate  Numbers  j,  It, 
2f,  33.  But  if  the  Colour  was  varied,  they  va- 
ried their  Magnitude.  In  the  red  they  were  lar- 
geft,  in  the  indigo  and  violet  leaft,  and  in  the 
intermediate  Colours  yellow,  green,  and  blue, 
they  were  of  feveral  intermediate  Bigneffes  an- 
fwering  to  the  Colour,  that  is,  greater  in  yel- 
low than  ia  green,  and  greater  in  green  than  in 
blue.  And  iicnce  I  knew,  that  when  the  Spe- 
culum was  illuminated  with  white  Light,  the 
red  and  yellow  on  the  outlide  of  the  Rings  were 
produced  by  the  hoA  refrangible  Rays,  and  the 
blue  and  violet  by  the  moir  refrangible,  and  that 
the  Colours  of  each  Ring  fpread  into  the  Co- 
lours of  the  neighbouring  Rings  on  either  fide, 
after  the  manner  explain'd  in  the  firft  and  fe- 
cond  Part  of  this  Book,  and  by  mixing  diluted 
one  another  fo  tliat  they  could  not  be  diflin- 
guifli'd,  unlefs  near  the  Center  where  they  were 
leaft  mix'd.  For  in  this  Obfervation  I  could 
fee  the  Rings  more  diftindly,  and  to  a  greater 
Number  than  before,  being  able  in  the  yellow 
Light  to  number  eight  or  nine  of  them,  be- 
iides  a  faint  ihadow  of  a  tenth.  To  fatisfy  my 
felf  how  much  th^  Colours  of  the  feveral  Rings 

fpread 


270  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

fpread  Into  one  another,  I  meafured  the  Dia- 
meters of  the  fecond  and  third  Rings,  and  found 
them  when  made  by  the  Confine  of  the  red  and 
orange  to?  be  to  the  fame  Diameters  when  made 
by  the  Confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  as  9  to  8, 
or  thereabouts.  For  it  was  hard  to  determine 
this  Proportion  accurately.  Alfo  the  Circles 
made  fuccefiively  by  the  red,  yellow,  and  green, 
differ'd  more  from  one  another  than  thofe  made 
fuccefTively  by  the  green,  blue,  and  indigo.  For 
the  Circle  made  by  the  violet  was  too  dark  to 
be  feen.  To  carry  on  the  Computation,  let  us 
therefore  fuppofe  that  the  Differences  of  the 
Diameters  of  the  Circles  made  by  the  outmoft 
red,  the  Confine  of  red  and  orange,  the  Confine 
of  orange  and  yellow,  the  Confine  of  yellow 
and  green,  the  Confine  of  green  and  blue,  the 
Confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  the  Confine  of  in- 
digo and  violet,  and  outmoft  violet,  are  in  pro- 
portion as  the  Differences  of  the  Lengths  of  a 
Monochord  which  found  the  Tones  in  an  Eight  j 
jbl,  la^  fa,  Jol,  la,  mi,  fa,  fol,  ,  that  is,  as  the 
Numbers  ir,  tV,  tV,  t'-,  tV,  tV>  ■^'  ^"d  if  the 
Diameter  of  the  Circle  made  by  the  Confine  of 
red  and  orange  be  9  A,  and  that  of  the  Circle 
made  by  the  Confine  of  blue  and  indigo  be  8  A 
as  above  ;  their  difference  9  A  —  8  A  will  be 
to  the  difference  of  the  Diameters  of  the  Cir- 
cles made  by  the  outmoft  red,  and  by  the  Con- 
fine of  red  and  orange,  as  tV  -1-  tt  A-  rV  -^  tV  ^o  \, 
that  is  as  tV  to  \,  or  8  to  3,  and  to  the  diffe- 
rence of  the  Circles  m.ade  by  the  outmoft  vio- 
let, and  by  the  Confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  as 

TT  4-  TT  -1-  tV  4-  vT  to  rr  4-  iV,  that  is,   as  -iy  to  tV> 

or 


BOOK     IL  271 

or  as  16  to  5.  And  therefore  thefe  differences 
will  be  g  A  and  /g  A.  Add  the  firft  to  9  A  and 
fubdud  the  lafi:  from  8  A,  and  you  will  have  the 
Diameters  of  the  Circles  made  by  the  leafl  and 

moft  refrangible  Rays  ''i.  A  and  -^  A.  Thefe  di- 
ameters are  therefore  to  one  another  as  75  to 
61^  or  50  to  41,  and  their  Squares  as  2500  to 
168 1,  that  is,  as  3  to  2  very  nearly.  Which 
proportion  differs  not  much  from  the  proportion 
of  the  Diameters  of  the  Circles  made  by  the 
outmoft  red  and  outm-oft  violet,  in  the  13  th  Ob- 
fervation  of  the  firft  part  of  this  Book. 

Ol?f.  6.  Placing  my  Eye  where  thefe  Rings 
appear'd  plaineft,  I  faw  the  Speculum  tinged  all 
over  with  Waves  of  Colours,  (red,  yellov/,  green, 
blue  J )  like  thofe  which  in  the  Obfervations  of 
the  firft  part  of  this  Book  appeared  between 
the  Obje(3:-glaffes,  and  upon  Bubbles  of  Water, 
but  much  largei".  And  after  the  manner  of  thofe, 
they  were  of  various  magnitudes  in  various  Po- 
litions  of  the  Eye,  fwellin-^  and  ihrinking  as  I 
moved  my  Eye  this  way  and  that  way.  They 
were  formed  like  Arcs  of  ccnccntrick  Circles,  as 
thofe  were  5  and  v/hen  my  Eye  was  over  againft 
the  center  of  the  concavity  of  tho  Speculum,  (that 
is,  5  Feet  and  10  Inches  diftant  from  the  Specu- 
lum,) their  common  center  was  in  a  right  Line 
with  that  center  of  concavity,  and  with  the 
hole  in  the  Window.  But  m  other  poftures  of 
my  Eye  their  center  had  other  pofitions.  They 
appear'd  by  the  Light  of  tlie  Clouds  propagated 
to  the  Speculum  through  the  hole  in  the  Win- 
dow J    and  when  the   Sun  {hone  through  that 

2  hole 


272  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

hole  upon  the  Speculum,  his  Light  upon  it  was 
of  the  Colour  of  the  Ring  whereon  it  fell,  but  by 
its  fplendor  obfcured  the  Rings  made  by  the  Light 
of  the  Clouds,  unlefs  when  the  Speculum  was 
removed  to'  a  great  diftance  from  the  Window, 
fo  that  his  Light  upon  it  might  be  broad  and  faint. 
By  varying  the  polition  of  my  Eye,  and  moving 
it  nearer  to  or  farther  from  the  direct  beam  of  the 
Sun's  Light,  the  Colour  of  the  Sun's  refleded 
Light  conflantly  varied  upon  the  Speculum,  as  it 
did  upon  my  Eye,  the  fame  Colour  always  ap- 
pearing to  a  By-ftander  upon  my  Eye  which  to 
me  appear'd  upon  the  Speculum.  And  thence  I 
knew  that  the  Rings  of  Colours  upon  the  Chart 
were  made  by  thefe  refledled  Colours,  propagated 
thither  from  the  Speculum  in  feveral  Angles,  and 
that  their  produdion  depended  not  upon  the  ter- 
mination of  Light  and  Shadow. 

Obf.  J.  By  the  Analogy  of  all  thefe  Pheno- 
mena with  thofe  of  the  like  Rings  of  Colours 
defcribed  in  the  f  rft  part  of  this  Book,  it  feem- 
ed  to  me  that  thefe  Colours  were  produced  by 
this  thick  Plate  of  Glafs,  much  after  the  manner 
that  thofe  were  produced  by  very  thin  Plates. 
For,  upon  trial,  I  found  that  if  the  Quick-fil- 
ver  were  rubb'd  off  from  the  backfide  of  the 
Speculum,  the  Glafs  alone  would  caufe  the 
fame  Rings  of  Colours,  but  much  more  faint 
than  before  j  and  therefore  the  Phaenomenon 
depends  not  upon  the  Quick-lilver,  unlefs  fo  far 
as  the  Quick-hlver  by  increaiing  the  Reflexion 
of  the  backfide  of  the  Glafs  increafes  the  Light 
of  the  Rings  of  Colours.  I  found  alfo  that  a 
Speculum  of  Metal  without  Glafs  made  fome 

Years 


BOOK     II.  273 

Years  fince  for  optical  ufes,  and  very  well 
wrought,  produced  none  of  thofe  Rings  j  and 
thence  I  underfbood  that  thefe  Rings  arifc  not 
from  one  fpecular  Surface  alone,  but  d'epend 
upon  the  two  Surfaces  of  the  Plate  of  Glafs 
whereof  the  Speculum  was  made,  and  upon  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  between  them.  For 
as  in  the  7th  and  19th  Obfervations  of  the  firft 
part  of  this  Book  a  "thin  Plate  of  Air,  Water, 
or  Glafs  of  an  even  thicknefs  appeared  of  one 
Colour  when  the  Rays  were  perpendicular  to 
it,  of  another  v/hen  they  were  a  little  oblique, 
of  another  v/hen  more  oblique,  of  another  when 
ftill  more  oblique,  and  fo  on  y  fo  here,  in  the 
lixth  Obfervation,  the  Light  which  emerged 
out  of  the  Glafs  in  feveral  Obliquities,-  made  tlie 
Glafs  appear  of  feveral  Colours,  and  being  pro- 
pagated in  thofe  Obliquities  to  the  Chart,  tiierc 
painted  Rings  of  thofe  Colours.  And  as  the 
reafon  why  a  thin  Plate  appeared  of  feveral  Co- 
lours in  feveral  Obliquities  of  the  Rays,  v/as, 
that  the  Rays  of  one  and  the  fame  fort  are  re- 
fleded  by  the  thin  Plate  at  one  obliquity  and 
tranfmitted  at  another,  and  thofe  of  other  forts 
tranfmitted  where  thefe  are  refleded,  and  re- 
flected where  thefe  are  tranfmitted  :  So  the 
reafon  why  .the  thick  Plate  of  Glafs  whereof 
the  Speculum  was  made  did  appear  of  various 
Colours  in  various  Obliquities,  and  in  thofe 
Obliquities  propagated  thofe ,  Colours  to  the 
Chart,  was,  that  the  Rays  of  one  and  the 
fame  fort  did  at  one  Obliquity  emerge  out 
of  the  Glafs,  at  another  did  not  emerge,  but 
were  refleded  back   towards  the   Quick-filver 

T  .  by 


t74  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

by  the  hither  Surface  of  the  Glafs,  and  according- 
ly as  the  Obliquity  became  greater  and  greater, 
emerged  and  were  refiedted  alternately  for  ma- 
ny Succeffignsj  and  that  in  one  and  the  fame 
Obliquity  the  Rays  of  one  fort  were  refled:ed, 
and  thofe  of  another  tranfmitted.     This  is  ma- 
nifeft  by  the  fifth  Obfervation  of  this  part  of  this 
Book.     For  in  that  Obfervation,  when  the  Spe- 
culum was  illuminated  by  any  one  of  the  prif- 
matick  Colours,   that  Light   made  many  Rings 
of  the  fame  Colour  upon  the  Chart  with  dark 
Intervals,  and  therefore  at  its  emergence  out  of 
the  Speculum   was  alternately  tranfmitted  and 
not  tranfmitted  from  the  Speculum  to  the  Chart 
for  many  SuccefTions,    according  to  the  various 
Obliquities  of  its  Emergence.     And  when   the 
Colour  caft  on  the  Speculum  by  the  Prifm  was 
varied,  the  Rings  became  of  the  Colour  cafl  on 
it,    and  varied  their  bignefs  with  their  Colour, 
and  therefore    the  Light   was  now   alternately 
tranfmitted  and  not  tranfmitted  from  the  Spe- 
culum to  the  Chart  at  other  Obliquitiss   than 
before.     It  feemed  to  me  therefore  that  thefe 
Rings  were  of  one  and  the  fame  original  with 
thofe  of  thin  Plates,  but  yet  with  this  difference, 
that  thofe  of  thin  Plates  are  made  by  the  alter- 
nate Reflexions  and  Tranfmiffions  of  the  Rays 
at  the  fecond  Surface  of  the  Plate,  after  one  paf- 
fage  through  itj   but  here   the  Rays  go  twice 
through  the  Plate  before  they  are  alternately  re- 
ileded  and  tranfmitted.     Firft,  they  go  through 
it  from  the  firfi:  Surface  to  the  Quick-filver,  and 
then  return   through  it   from  the  Quick-filver 
to  the  firil  Surface,  and  there  are  either  tranf- 
mitted 


BOOK     II.  275 

micted  to  the  Chart  or  refledled  back  to  the 
Quick-filver,  accordingly  as  they  are  in  their 
Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  or  Tranfmiffion  when 
they  arrive  at  that  Surface.  For  the  Intervals 
of  the  Fits  of  the  Rays  which  fall  perpendicu- 
larly on  the  Speculum,,  and  are  reiledled  back 
in  the  fame  perpendicular  Lines,  by  rcafon"  of 
the  equality  of  tbefe  Angles  and  Lines,  are  of 
the  fame  length  and  number  within  the  Glafs 
after  Reflexion  as  before,  by  the  19th  Propofl- 
tion  of  the  third  part  of  this  Book.  And  there- 
fore fince  all  the  Rays  that  enter  through  the 
iirll:  Surface  are  in  their  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmif- 
fion at  their  entrance,  and  as  many  of  thefe  as 
are  refledted  by  the  fecond  are  in  their  Fits  of 
eafy  Reflexion  there,  all  thefe  mufl:  be  again  in 
their  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiffion  at  their  return 
to  the  firil,  and  by  confequence  there  go  Out 
of  the  Glafs  to  the  Chart,  and  form  upon  it  the 
white  Spot  of  Light  in  the  center  of  the  Rings. 
For  the  reafon  holds  good  in  all  forts  of  Rays, 
and  therefore  all  forts  mufl  go  out  promifcu- 
oufly  to  that  Spot,  and  by  their  mixture "  caufe 
it  to  be  white.  But  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of 
thofe  Rays  which  are  reflected  more  obliquely 
than  they  enter,  mull:  be  greater  after  Reflexion 
than  before,  by  the  15th  and  20th  Propcfitlons. 
And  thence  it  may  happen  that  the  Rays  at  their 
return  to  the  firli  Surface,  may  in  certain  Ob- 
liquities be  in  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion,  and  return 
back  to  the  Qu]ck-f:!ver,  and  in  other  interme- 
diate Obliquities  be  again  in  Fits  of  eafy  Tranf- 
miffion, and  fo  go  out  to  the  Chart,  and  paint 
on  it  the  Rings  of  Colours  about  the  white  Spot. 

T  2  And 


276  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

And  becaufe  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  at  equal 
obliquities  are  greater  and  fewer  in  the  lefs  re- 
franf^ible  Rays,  and  lefs  and  more  numerous  in 
rhe  more  refrangible,  therefore  the  lefs  refrangi- 
ble at  equal  obliquities  fhall  make  fewer  Rings 
than  the  more  refrangible,  and  the  Rings  made 
by  thofe  iliall  be  larger  than  the  like  number  of 
Rings  made  by  thefej  that  is,  the  red  Rings 
fhali  be  larger  than  the  yellow,  the  yellow  than 
the  green,  the  green  than  the  blue,  and  the  blue 
than  the  violet,  as  they  were  really  found  to  be 
in  the  fifth  Obfervation.  And  therefore  the  firll 
Ring  of  all  Colours  encompaffing  the  white 
Spot  of  Light  lliall  be  red  without  any  violet 
within,  and  yellow,  and  green,  and  blue  in  the 
middle,  as  it  was  found  in  the  fecond  Obferva- 
tion ;  and  thefe  Colours  in  the  fecond  Ring,  and 
thofe  that  follow,  fliall  be  more  expanded,  till 
they  fpread  into  one  another,  and  blend  one  an- 
other by  interfering. 

Thefe  feem  to  be  the  reafons  of  thefe  Rings 
in  general  j  and  this  put  me  upoi;i  obferving  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Glals,  and  confidering  whether 
the  dimenfions  and  proportions  of  the  Rings  may 
be  truly  derived  from  it  by  computation. 

Obf.  8.  I  meafured  therefore  the  thicknefs  of 
this  concavo-convex  Plate  of  Glafs,  and  found  it 
every  where  \  of  an  Inch  precifely.  Now,  by 
the  fixth  Obfervation  of  the  firft  Part  of  this 
Book,  a  thin  Plate  of  Air  tranfmits  the  brighteft 
Light  of  the  firft  Ring,  that  is,  the  bright  yel- 
low, when  its  thicknefs  is  the  g-^  th  part  of  an 

Inchi  and  by  the  tenth  Obfervation  of  the  fame 

Part, 


BOOK     IT.  277 

Parr,  a  thin  Plate  of  Glafs  trLinfmits  the  fame 
Light  of"  the  farrie  Ring,  when  its  diicknefs  k 
lefs  in  proportion  of  tb.e  Sine  of  Refrad:ion  to 
the  Sine  of  Incidence,   that  is,    when  its  thick- 

nefs  is  the  ,-- 1 '";;;;;;  th  or   -  ' —  th  part  of  an  Inch, 
1^13000  137545       ^ 

fappofing  the  Sines  are  as  1 1  to  17.  And  it  this 
thickncfs  be  doubled,  it  tranfmits  the  fame  bright 
Light  of  thefecond  Ring;  if  trippled,  it  tranf- 
mits that  "of  tlie  third,  and  fo  on;  the  bright 
yellow  Light  in  all  thefe  cafes  being  in  its  Fits 
of  Tranfmiiiion.  And  therefore  if  its  thickncfs 
be  multiplied  34386  times,  fo  as  to  become  J  of 
an  Inch,  it  tranfmits  the  fame  bright  Liglit  of 
the  34386th  Ring.  Suppofe  this  be  the  bright 
yellow  Light  tranfmitted  perpendicularly  from 
the  refled-ing  convex  lide  of  the  Glafs  through 
the  concave  fide  to  the  white  Spot  in  the  cen- 
ter of  the  Rings  of  Colours  on  the  Chart:  And 
by  a  Rule  in  the  7th  and  igvh  Obfervations  in 
the  firft  Part  of  this  Book,  and  by  the  J5ch  and 
20th  Propofitions  of  the  third  Part  of  this  Book, 
if  the  Rays  be  made  oblique  to  the  Glafs,  the 
thickncfs  of  the  Glafs  requilite  to  tranfmit  the 
fame  bright  Light  of  the  fame  Ring  in  any  ob- 
liquity, is  to  this  fliickncfs  of;  of  an  Inch,  as  the- 
Secant  of  a  certain  Angle  to  the  Radius,  the 
Sine  of  which.  Angle  is  the  firfl  of  an  hundred 
and  fiX  arithmetical  Means  between  the  Sines 
of  Incidence  and  Rcfrartion,  counted  from  the 
Sine  of  Incidence  when  the  Refrac^liion  is  made 
out  of  any  plated  Body  into  any  Medium  en- 
compafTmg  it ;  that  isj  in  this  cafe,  out  of  Glafs 
into  Air.     Now  if  the  thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  be 

T  3  increafed 


278  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

increafed  by  degrees,  fo  as  to  bear  to  its  firft 
thicknefs,  (viz.  that  of  a  quarter  of  an  Inch,)' 
the  Proportions  which  34386  .(the  number  of 
Fits  of  the  perpendicular  Rays  in  ^oing  through 
the  Glafs  tov/ards  the  white  Spot  in  the  center 
of  the  Rings,)  hath  to  34385,  34384,  34383,  and 
34382,  (the'  numbers  of  the  Fits  of  the  oblique 
Rays  in  going  through  the  Glafs  towards  the 
firft,  fecond,  third,  and  fourth  Rings  of  Co- 
lours, )  and  if  the  firfl  thicknefs  be  divided  in- 
to 1 00000000  equal  parts,  the  increafed  thick- 
nefies  will  be  1 00002908, 1 00005 8 1 6, 1 00008725, 
and  100011633,  and  the  Angles  of  which  thefe 
thicknelTes  are  Secants  will  be  26'  13",  37'  5", 
45'  6",  and  52'  26",  the  Radius  being  looooooooj 
and  die  Sines  of  thefe  Angjjes  are  762,  1079, 
1321,  and  1525,  and  the  proportional  Sines  of 
Refradion  1 172,  1659,  203 1,  and  2345,  the  Ra- 
dius being  1 00000.  For  fmce  the  Sines  of  In- 
cidence out  of  Glafs  into  Air  are  to  the  Sines 
of  Refraiftion  as  11  to  17,  and  to  the  above- 
mentioned  Secants  as  1 1  to  the  iirft  of  106  arith- 
metical Means  betVv^een   11  and  17,  that  is,   as; 

1 1  to   II  —>,  thofe  Secants  will  be  to  the  Sines 
106' 

of  Refradion  as  11  -j^  to  17,  and  by  this  Ana- 
logy will  give  thefe  Sines.  So  then,  if  the  ob- 
liquities of  the  Rays  to  the  concave  Surface  of 
the  Glafs  be  fuch  that  the  Sines  of  their  Refra- 
dion  in  paiTing  out  of  the  Glafs  through  that 
Surface  into  the  Air  be  1172,  1659,  2031,  2345, 
the  bright  Light  of  the  34386th  Ring  fhall  e- 
jnerge  at  the  thickneffes  of  the  Glafs,  which  are 

2  to 


BOOK     II.  279 

to  5  of  aninch  as  34386  to  34385,.34384,  34383, 
34382,  refpedively.  And  therefore,  if  the  thick- 
nefs  in  all  thefe  Cafes T3e  5  of  an  Inch  (as  it  is  in 
the  Glafs  of  which  the  Speculum  was  made) 
the  bright  Light  of  the  34385th  Ring  fhall  e- 
merge  where  the  Sine  of  Refracftion  is  1 172, 
and  that  of  the  34384th,  34383th,  and  34382th 
Ring  where  the  Sine  is  1659,  2031,  and  2345 
refpedtively.  And  in  thefc  Angles  of  Refra- 
ction the  Light  of  thefe  Rings  fliall  be  propaga- 
ted from  the  Speculum  to  the  Chart,  and  there 
paint  Rings  about  the  white  central  round  Spot 
of  Light  which  we  faid  was  the  Light  of  thp 
34386th  Ring.  And  the  Semidiameters  of  thefe 
Rings  fhall  fubtend  the  Angles  of  Refraction 
made  at  the  Concave-Surface  of  the  Speculum, 
and  by  confequence  their  Diameters  flrjll  be  to 
the  diftance  of  the  Chart  from  the  Speculum  as 
thofe  Sines  of  Refraction  doubled  are  to  the 
Radius,  that  is,  as  1172,  1659,  2031,  and  2345, 
doubled  are  to  1 00000.  And  therefore,  if  the 
diftance  of  the  Chart  from  the  Concave-Surface 
of  the  Speculum  be  fix  Feet  ( as  it  was  in  the 
third  of  thefe  Obfervations )  the  Diameters  of 
the  Rings  of  this  bright  yellov/  Light  upon  the 
Chart  fhall  be  i'688,  2*389,  2*925,  3*375 Inches: 
For  thefe  Diameters  are  to  fix  Feet,  as  the  above- 
mention'd  Sines  doubled  are  to  the  Radius. 
Now,  thefe  Diameters  of  the  bright  yellow 
Rings,  thus  found  by  Computation  are  the 
very  fame  with  thofe  found  in  the  third  of  thefe 
Obfervations  by  meafuring  them,  viz.  with 
I  IS,  2g,  2ii,  and  3g  Inches,,  and  therefore  the 
1  heory  of  deriving  thefe  Rings  from  the  thick- 

T  4  nsfs 


28o  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

nefs  of  the  Plate  of  Glafs"*  of  which  the  Specu- 
.lurii  was  made,  and  from  the  Obliquity  of  the 
emerging  P.ays  agrees  with  the  Obfervation.  In 
this  Computation  1  have  equalled  the  Diameters 
of  the  bright  Rings  made  by  Light  of  all  Co- 
lours, to  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  made  by 
the  bright  yellow.  For  this  yellow  makes  the 
brighteft  Part  of  the  Rings  of  all  Colours.  If 
you  defire  theDiameters  of  the  Rings  made  by  the 
Light  of  any  other  unmix'd  Colour,  you  may 
find  them  readily  by  putting  them  to  the  Diame- 
ters of  the  bright  yellow  ones  in  a  fubduplicate 
Proportion  of  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  the 
Rays  of  thofe  Colours  when  equally  inclined  to 
the  refrading  or  reflecting  Surflice  which  caufed 
thofe  Fits,  that  is,  by  putting  the  Diameters  of 
the  Rings  made  by  the  Rays  in  the  Extremities 
and  Limits  of  the  feven  Colours,  red,  orange, 
yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  violet,  proportio- 
nal to  the  Cube-roots  of  the  Numbers,  i,  |,  ^,  J, 
|,  55  -^5  ly  which  exprefs  the  Lengths  of  a  Mono- 
chord  founding  the  Notes  in  an  Lighth:  For 
by  this  m.eans  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  of 
thefe  Colours  will  be  found  pretty  nearly  in 
the  fame  Proportion  to  one  another,  which 
they  ought  to  have  by  the  fifth  of  thefe  Obferva- 
tions. 

And  thus  I  fatisfy'd  my  felf,  that  thefe  Rings 
were  of  the  fame  Kind  and  Original  with  thofe 
of  thin  Plates,  and  by  confequenxe  that  the  Fits 
or  alternate  Difpofitions  of  the  Rays  to  be 
refleded  and  tranfmirted  are  propagated  to 
great  diftances  from  every  refleding  and  re- 
frading Surface.  But  yet  to  put  the  mat- 
ter 


BOO  K     II,  281 

ter  out  of  doubt,  I  added  the  following  Obfer- 
vation. 

Obf.  9.  If  ^thefe  Rings  thus  depend  on  the 
thicknels  of  the  Plate  of  Glafs, '  their  Diameters 
at  equal  diilances  from  feveral  Speculums  made 
of  iuch  CDncavo-convex  Plates  of  Glafs  as  are 
ground  on  the  fame  Sphere,  ought  to  be  recipro- 
cally in  a  fubduplicate  Proportion  of  the  thick- 
neffes  of  the  Plates  of  Glafs.  And  if  this  Pro- 
portion be  found  true  by  experience  it  will  amount 
to  a  demonftratlon  that  thefe  Rings  (like  thofe 
formed  in  thin  Plates)  do  depend  on  the  thick- 
nefs  of  the  Glafs.  I  procured  therefore  ano- 
ther concavo-convex  Plate  of  Glafs  ground  on 
both  lides  to  the  fame  Sphere  with  the  former 
Plate.  Its  thicknefs  was  l^  Parts  of  an  Inch ; 
and  the  Diameters  of  the  three  hYi\.  bright  Rings 
meafured  between  the  brightell  Parts  of  their 
Orbits  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  from  the 
Glafs  were  3.  4^-.  5J.  Inches.  Now,  the  thick- 
nefs of  the  other  Glafs  being  \  of  an  Inch  v/as 
to  the  thicknefs  of  this  Glafs  as  ?  to  4  that  is 
as  31  to  10,  or  310000000  to  icooooooo,  and 
the  Roots  of  thefe  Numbers  are  1 7607  and  loooo, 
and  in  the  Proportion  of  the  iirlt  of  thefe  Roots 
to  the  fecond  are  the  Diameters  of  the  brip-ht 
Rings  made  in  this  Obfervation  by  the  tliinner 
Glafs,  3.  4fi.  57,  to  the  Diam.eters  of  the  fime 
Rings  made  in  the  tliird  of  thefe  Obfervations" 
by  the  thicker  Glafs  i-.^.  2!.  2^k,  that  is,  the  Dia- 
meters of  the  Rings  are  reciprocally  in  a  fubdu- 
plicate Proportion  of  the  thickneffcs  of  the  Plates 
of  Glafs. 


282  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

So  then  in  Plates  of  Glafs  which  are  alike 
concave  on  one  fide,  and  alike  convex  on  the 
other  fide,  and  alike  quick-filver'd  on  the  con- 
vex fides,  and  differ  in  nothing  but '  their  thick- 
nefs,  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  are  reciprocally 
in  a  fubduplicate  Proportion  of  the  thickneffes  of 
the  Plates.  And  this  fhew^s  fufticiently  that  the 
Rings  depend  on  both  the  Surfaces  of  the  Glafs, 
They  depend  on  the  convex  Surface,  becaufe  they 
lare  more  luminous  when  that  Surface  is  quick- 
filver'd  over  than  when  it  is  without  Quick-filver. 
They  depend  alfo  upon  the  concave  Surface,  be- 
caufe without  that  Surface  a  Speculum  makes  them 
not.  They  depend  on  both  Surfaces,  and  on  the 
difiiances  between  them,  becaufe  their  bignefs  is 
varied  by  varying  only  that  diftance.  And  this 
dependance  is  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which 
the  Colours  of  thin  Plates  have  on  the  difi:ance 
of  the  Surfaces  of  thofe  Plates,  becaufe  the  big- 
nefs of  the  Rings,  and  their  Proportion  to  one 
another,  and  the  variation  of  their  bignefs  arifing 
from  the  variation  of  the  thicknefs  of  the  Glafs, 
and  the  Orders  of  their  Colours,  is  fuch  as  ought 
to  refult  from  th©  Propofitions  in  the  end  of  the 
third  Part  of  this  Book,  derived  from  the  Phaeno- 
mena  of  the  Colours  of  thin  Plates  fet  down  in 
the  firfi:  Part. 

There  are  yet  other  Phenomena  of  thefe  Rings 
of  Colours,  but  fuch  as  follow  from  the  fame 
Propofitions,  and  therefore  confirm  both  the 
Truth  of  thofe  Propofitions,  and  the  Analogy  be^ 
tween  thefe  Rings  and  the  Rings  of  Colours 
made  by  very  thin  Plates.  I  fhali  fubjoin  fome 
of  them. 

ObJ\ 


BOOK     II.  283 

Obf.  10.  When  the  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light 
was  refleded  back  from  the  Speculum  not  di- 
redly  to  the  hole  in  the  Window,  but  to  a  pLce 
a  little  diftant  from  it,  the  common  center  of 
that  Spot,  and  of  all  the  Rings  of  Colours  fell 
in  the  middle  way  between  the  beam  of  the  in- 
cident Light,  and  the  beam  of  the  refleded 
Light,  and  by  confequence  in  the  center  of  the 
fpherical  concavity  of  the  Speculum,  whenever 
the  Chart  on  which  the  Rings  of  Colours  fell 
was  placed  at  that  center.  And  as  the  beam  of 
refledfed  Light  by  inclining  the  Speculum  re- 
ceded more  and  more  from  the  beam  of  inci- 
dent Light  and  from  the  common  center  of  the 
colour'd  Rings  between  them,  thofe  Rings  grew 
bigger  and  bigger ,  and  fo  alfo  did  the  white 
round  Spot,  and  new  Rings  of  Colours  emer- 
ged fucceffively  out  of  their  common  center, 
and  the  white  Spot  became  a  white  Ring  en- 
compaffing  them  3  and  the  incident  and  reflected 
beams  of  Light  always  fell  upon  the  oppofite 
parts  of  this  white  Ring,  illuminating  its  Peri- 
meter like  two  mock  Suns  in  the  oppofite  parts 
of  an  Iris.  So  then  the  Diameter  of  this  Ring, 
meafured  from  the  middle  of  its  Light  on  one 
lide  to  the  middle  of  its  Light  on  the  other  fide, 
was  always  equal  to  the  diftance  between  the 
middle  of  the  incident  beam  of  Light,''  and  the 
middle  of  the  refleded  beam  meafured  at  the 
Chart  on  which  the  Rings  appeared:  And  the 
Rays  which  form'd  this  Ring  were  reflected  by 
the  Speculum  in  Angles  equal  to  their  Angles  of 
Incidence,  and  by  confequence  to  their  Angles 
pf  Refradion  at  their  entrance  into  the  Glafs, 

but 


284  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

but  yet  their  Angles  of  Reflexion  were  not  in 
the  fame  Planes  with  their  Angles  of  Inci- 
dence. 

'  Obf.  1 1.  The  Colours  of  the  new  Rings  Were 
in  a  contrary  order  to  thofe  of  the  former,  and 
arofe  after  this  manner.  •  The  white  round  Spot 
of  Light  in  the  middle  of  the  Rings  continued 
white  to  the  center  till  the  diftance  of  the  inci- 
dent and  refleded  beams  at  the  Chart  was  about 
8  parts  of  an  Inch,  and  then  it  began  to  grow 
dark  in  the  middle.  And  when  that  diftance  was  a- 
bout  ItV  of  an  Inch,  the  white  Spot  was  become 
a  Ring  encompaffing  a  dark  round  Spot  which  in 
the  middle  inclined  to  violet  and  indigo.  And 
the  luminous  Rings  encompafling  it  were  grown 
equal  to  thofe  dark  ones  which  in  the  four  firft 
Obfervations  encompafled  them,  that  is  to  fay, 
the  white  Spot  was  grown  a  white  Ring  equal  to 
the  firft  of  thofe  dark  Rings,  and  the  firft  of 
thofe  luminous  Rings  was  now  grown  equal  to 
the  fecond  of  thofe  dark  ones,  and  the  fe- 
cond  of  thofe  luminous  ones  to  the  third  of 
thofe  dark  ones,  and  fo  on.  For  the  Diameters 
of  the  luminous  Rings  were  now  itV,  2'V,  2j, 
3  iV,  S^c.  Inches. 

When  the  diftance  between  the  incident  and 
reflected  beams  of  Light  became  a  little  big- 
ger, there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  of  the 
dark  Spot  after  the  indigo  a  blue,  and  then  out 
of  that  biue  a  pale  green,  and  foon  after  a  yel- 
low and  red.  And  when  the  Colour  at  the 
center  was  brighteft,  being  between  yellow  and 
red,  the  bright  Rings  were  grown  equal  to  thofe 
Rings  -which  in  the  four  firft  Obfervations  next 

encom- 


BOOK     II.  285 

encompaiTed  them;  that  is  to  fay,  the  white 
Spot  in  the  middle  of  thofe  Rings  was  now  be- 
come a  white  Ring  equal  to  the  iirft  of  thofe 
bright  Rings,  and  the  firft  of  thofe  bright  ones 
was  now  become  equal  to  the  fecond  of  thofe, 
and  fo  on.  For  the  Diameters  of  the  white 
Ring,  and  of  the  other  luminous  Rings  encom- 
paffing  it,  were  now  1 44,  2|,  2|i,  3|.,  J^c.  or 
thereabouts. 

When  the  diftance  of  the  two  beams  of 
Light  at  the  Chart  was  a  little  more  increafed, 
there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  in  order  after 
the  red,  a  purple,  a  blue,  a  green,  a  yellow, 
and  a  red  inclining  much  to  purple,  and  when 
the  Colour  was  brighteft  being  between  yellow 
and  red,  the  former  indigo,  blue,  green,  yel- 
low and,  red,  were  become  an  Iris  or  Ring  of 
Colours  equal  to  the  firlt  of  thofe  luminous 
Rings  which  appeared  in  the  four  firfh  Obfer- 
vations,  and  the  white  Ring  which  was  now 
become  the  fecond  of  the  luminous  Rings  was 
grown  equal  to  the  fecond  of  thofe,  and  the 
lirft  of  thofe  which  was  now  become  the  third 
Ring  was  become  equal  to  the  third  of  thofe, 
and  fo  on.  For  their  Diameters  were  Itx,  2g, 
2-rT,  3 1- Inches,  the  diftance  of  the  two  beams 
of  Light,  and  the  Diameter  of  the  v/hite  Ring 
being  2t  Inches. 

When  thefe  two  beams  became  more  diflant 
there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  of  the  pur- 
plifh  red,  firft  a  darker  round  Spot,  and  then 
out  of  the  middle  of  that  Spot  a  brighter.  And 
now  the  former  Colours  (  purple,  blue,  green, 
yellow,  and  purplilh  red)  were  become  a  Ring 

equal 


286  O  P  T.  I  C  K  S. 

equal  to  the  firft  of  the  bright  Rings  mentioned 
in  the  four  firfl  Obfervations,  and  the  Rings 
about  this  Ring  were  grown  equal  to  the  Rings 
about  that  refpedtively  j  the  diftance  between 
the  two  beams  of  Light  and  the  Diameter  of  the 
white  Ring  ( which  was  now  become  the  third 
Ring )  being  about  3  Inches. 

The  Colours  of  the  Rings  in  the  middle  be- 
gan now  to  grow  very  dilute,  and  if  the  di- 
ftance between  the  two  Beams  was  increafed 
half  an  Inch,  or  an  Inch  more,  they  vanifh'd 
whilfl  the  white  Ring,  with  one  or  two  of  the 
Rings  next  it  on  either  fide,  continued  ftill  vi- 
able. But  if  the  diftance  of  the  two  beams  of 
Light  was  ftill  more  increafed,  thefe  alfo  va-  . 
nifhed:  For  the  Light  which  coming  from  fe- 
veral  parts  of  the  hole  in  the  Window  fell  up- 
on the  Speculum  in  feveral  Angles  of  Incidence, 
made  Rings  of  feveral  bigneffes,  which  diluted 
and  blotted  out  one  another,  as  I  knew  by  inter- 
cepting fome  part  of  that  Light.  For  if  I  in- 
tercepted that  part  which  was  neareft  to  the 
Axis  of  the  Speculum  the  Ring's  would  be  lefs, 
if  the  other  part  which  was  remoteft  from  it 
they  would  be  bigger. 

Obf.  12.  When  the  Colours  of  the  Prifm 
were  caft  fucceffively  on  the  Speculum,  that 
Ring  which  in  the  two  laft  Obfervations  was 
white,  was  of  the  fame  bignefs  in  all  the  Co- 
lours, but  the  Rings  without  it  were  greater  in 
the  green  than  in  the  blue,  and  ftill  greater  in 
the  yellow,  and  greateft  in  the  red.  And,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Rings  within  that  white  Circle 
were  lefs  in  the  green  than  in  the  blue,  and  ftill 

lefs 


BOOK     II.  287 

lefs  in  the  yellow,  and  leaft  in  the  red.  For  the 
Angles  of  Reflexion  of  thofe  Rays  which  made 
this  Ring,  being  equal  to  their  Angles  of  Inci- 
dence, the  Fits  of  every  reflected  Ray  within 
the  Glafs  after  Reflexion  are  equal  in  length 
and  number  to  the  Fits  of  the  fame  Ray  with- 
in the  Glafs  before  its  Incidence  on  the  refled:- 
ing  Surface.  And  therefore  flnce  all  the  Rays 
of  all  forts  at  their  entrance  into  the  Glafs  were 
in  a  Fit  of  Tranfmiffion,  they  were  alfo  in  a  Fit 
of  Tranfmiflion  at  their  returning  to  the  fame 
Surface  after  Reflexion  j  and  by  confequence 
were  tranfmitted,  and  went  out  to  the  white 
Ring  on  the  Chart.  This  is  the  reafon  why 
that  Ring  was  of  the  fame  bignefs  in  all  the  Co- 
lours, and  why  in  a  mixture  of  all  it  appears 
white.  But  in  Rays  which  are  reflefted  in  o- 
ther  Angles,  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  the 
leaft  refrangible  being  greateft,  make  the  Rings 
of  their  Colour  in  their  progrefs  from  this  white 
Ring,  either  outwards  or  inwards,  increafe  or 
decreafe  by  the  greateft  fteps ;  fo  that  the  Rings 
of  this  Colour  without  are  greateft,  and  within 
leaft.  And  this  is  the  reafon  why  in  the  laft 
Obfervation,  when  the  Speculum  was  illumina- 
ted with  white  Light,  the  exterior  Rings  made 
by  all  Colours  appeared  red  without  and  blue 
within,  and  the  interior  blue  without  ^nd  red 
within. 

Thefe.  are  the  Pha?nomena  of  thick  convexo- 
concave  Plates  of  Glafs,  which  are  every  where 
of  the  fame  thicknefs.  There  are  yet  other 
Phaenomena  when  thefe  Plates  are  a  little  thick- 
er on  one  fide  than  on  the  other,   and  others 

when 


288  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

when  the  Plates  are  more  or  lefs  concave  than 
convex,  or  plano-convex,  or  double-convex.  For 
in  all  thefe  cafes  the  Plates  make  Rings  of  Co- 
lours, but  after  various  manners;  all  which,  fo 
far  as  I  have  yet  obferved,  follow  from  the  Pro- 
pofitions  in  the  end  of  the  third  part  of  this 
Book,  and  fo  confpire  to  confirm  the  truth  of 
thofe  Propofitions.  But  the  Phaenomeiia  are 
too  various,  and  the  Calculations  whereby  they 
follow  from  thofe  Proportions  too  intricate  to 
be  here  profecuted.  I  content  my  felf  with  ha- 
ving profecuted  this  kind  of  Phaenomena  fo  far 
-as  to  difcover  their  Caufe,  and  by  difcovering 
it  to  ratify  the  Propofitions  in  the  third  Part  of 
this  Book. 

Obf.  13.  As  Light  reflecSled  by  a  Lens  quick- 
iilver'd  on  the  backfide  makes  the  Rings  of  Co- 
lours above  defcribed,  fo  it  ought  to  make  the 
like  Rings  of  Colours  in  pafling  through  a  drop 
of  Water.  At  the  firft  Reflexion  of  the  Rays 
within  the  drop,  fome  Colours  ought  to  be 
tranfmitted,  as  in  the  cafe  of  aj^ens,  and  others 
to  be  refie(^l:ed  back  to  the  Eye.  For  inftance, 
if  the  Diameter  of  a  fmall  drop  or  globule  of 
"Water  be  about  the  500th  part  of  an  Inch,  fo 
that  a  red-making  Ray  in  paffing  through  the 
middle  of  this  globule  has  250  Fits  of  eafy 
Tranlhiifiion  within  the  globule,  and  that  all 
the  red-making  Rays  which  are  at  a  certain  di- 
ftance  from  this  middle  Ray  round  about  it 
have  249  Fits  within  the  globule,  and  all  the 
like  Rays  at  a  certain  farther  diftance  found  a- 
bout  it  have  248  Fits,  and  all  thofe  at  a  cer- 
tain farther  diftance  247  Fits,  and  fo  on;  thefe 

concern- 


BOOK     II.  2S9 

concentrick  Cirdes  of  Rays  after  their  tranf- 
miiTion,  falling  on  a  white  Paper,  will  make 
concentrick  Rings  of  red  upon  the  Paper,  fup- 
pofing  the  Light  .which  pafles  through  one  An- 
gle globule,  llrong  enough  to  be  fenlible.  And, 
in  like  manner,  the  Rays  of  other  Colours  will 
make  Rings  of  other  Colours.  Suppole  now 
that  in  a  fair  Day  the  Sun  ihines  through  a  thin 
Cloud  of  fuch  globules  of  Water  or  Hail,  and 
that  the  globules  are  all  of  the  fame  bignefs; 
and  the  Sun  feen  through  this  Cloud  fhall  ap- 
pear encompaffed  with  the  like  concentrick 
Rings  of  Colours,  and  the  Diameter  of  the  firfl: 
Ring  of  red  fliall  be  7 1.  Degrees,  that  of  the  fe- 
cond  10  i  Degrees,  that  of  the  third  12  Degrees 
33  Minutes.  And  accordingly  as  the  Globules 
of  Water  are  bigger  or  lefs,  the  Rings  lliall  be 
lefs  or  bigger.  This  is  the  Theory,  and  Expe- 
rience anfwers  it.  For  in  'jiuh;  1692,  I  faw  by 
reflexion  in  a  Veflel  of  ftagnating  Water  three 
Halos,  Crowns,  or  Rings  of  Colours  about  the 
Sun,  like  three  little  Rain-bows,  concentrick 
to  his  Body.  The  Colours  of  the  firft  or  In- 
nermoft  Crown  were  blue  next  the  Sun,  red 
without,  and  white  in  the  middle  between  the 
blue  and  red.  Thofe  of  the  fecond  Crown 
were  purple  and  blue  within,  and  pale  red  with- 
out, and  green  in  the  middle.  And  thofe  of 
the  third  were  pale  blue  within,  and  pale  red 
without;  thefs  Crowns  enclofed  one  another 
immediately ,  fo  that  their  Colours  proceeded 
in  this  continual  order  from  the  Sun  outward: 
blue,   white,   red 3   purple,    blue,    green,   pale 

U  yello;v 


290  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

yellow  and  red  j  pale  blue,  paid  red.     The  Di- 
ameter of   the   fecond  Crown  meafured  from 
the  middle  of  the  yellow  and  red  on  one  fide 
of  the  Sun,  to  the  middle  of  the  fame  Colour 
on  the  other  fide  was   gr  Degrees,   or   therea- 
bouts.     The  Diameters  of  the  firfl  and  third 
1  had  not  time  to  meafure,  but  that  of  the  firfl 
feemed  to  be  about  five  or  fix  Degrees,    and 
that    of   the    third    about    twelve.      The  like 
Crov/ns  appear   fometimes   about    the  Moon; 
for  in  the  beginning  of   the  Year   1664,  Fel?r, 
19th  at  Night,  I  faw  two  fuch  Crowns  about 
her.     The  Diameter  of  the  firfi:  or  innermoft 
was  about  three  Degrees,  and  that  of  the  fe- 
cond about  five  Degrees  and  an  half     Next  a- 
bout  the  Moon  was  a  Circle  of  white,  and  next 
about  that  the  inner  Crown,    which  was  of  a 
bluifli  green  within  next  the  white,  and  of  a 
yellow  and  red  without,    and  next  about  thefe 
Colours  were  blue  and  green  on  the  infide  of 
the  outward  Crown,  and  red  on  the  outfide  of 
it.     At  the  fame  time  there  appear'd  a  Halo  a- 
bout  22  Degrees  35'  diftant  from  the  center  of 
the  Moon.     It  was  elliptical,  and  its  long  Dia- 
meter was  perpendicular  to  the  Horizon,   verg- 
ing belovv  farthefk  from  the  Moon.     I  am  told 
that  the  Moon   has   fometimes   three  or  more 
concentrick  Crowns  of  Colours  encompafiing 
one  another  next  about  her  Body.     The  more 
equal  the  globules  of  Water  or  Ice  are  to  one 
another,  the  more  Crowns  of  Colours  will  ap- 
pear, and  the  Colours  will  be  the  more  lively. 
The  Halo  at  the  diilance  of  22t  Degrees  from 

the 


BOOK 


IL  291 

By  its  beino;  oval 


the  Moon  is  of  another  fort, 
and  remoter  from  the  Moon  beiow  than  above, 
I  conclude,  that  it  v^cis  made  by  Refradlion  in 
fome  fort  of  Hail  or  Snow  floating  in  the  Air  in 
an  horizontal  pofture,  the  refra<5ting  Angle  being 
about  58  or  60  Degrees. 


U  2 


THE 


^ 

1 

©^ 

m 

i 

1 

>^ 

THE 


THIRD  BOOK 


O  F 


OPTICKS 


PART     1. 


Ohfervations  concerning  the  Inflexions  of 
the  Rays  of  Lights  and  the  Colours 
made  thereby. 

RIMALDO  has  inform'd  us,  that 
if  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light  be  let  in- 
to a  dark  Room  through  a  very  fmall 
hole,  the  Shadows  of  things  in  this 
Light  will  be  larger  than  they  ought  to  be  if 
the  Rays  went  on  by  the  Bodies  in  ilrait  Lines, 

and 


BOOK     III.  293 

and  'that  thefe  Shadows  have  three  parallel 
Fringes,  Bands  or  Ranks  of  colour'd  Light  ad- 
jacent to  them.  Rut  if  the  Hole  be  enlarged 
the  Fringes  grow  broad  and  run  into  one  ano- 
ther, fo  that  they  cannot  be  diftinguifh'd.  Thefe 
broad  Shadows  'and  Fringes  have  been  reckon'd 
by  fome  to  proceed  from  the  ordinary  refra6tion 
of  the  Air,  but  without  due  examination  of  the 
Matter.  For  the  circumftances  of  the  Phano- 
nienon,  fo  far  as  I  have  obferved  them,  are  as 
follows. 

Obf.  I.  I  made  in  a  piece  of  Lead  a  fmall 
Hole  with  a  Pin,  whofe  breadth  was  the  42d 
part  of  an  Inch.  For  2 1  of  thofe  Pins  laid  to- 
gether took  up  the  breadth  of  half  an  Inch. 
Through  this  Hole  I  let  into  my  darken'd 
Chamber  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  found 
that  the  Shadows  of  Hairs,  Thred,  Pins,  Straws, 
and  fuch  like  flender  Subftances  placed  in  this 
beam  of  Light,  were  confiderably  broader  than 
they  ought  to  be,  if  the  Rays  of  Light  pa  fled 
on  by  thefe  Bodies  in  right  Lines.  And  parti- 
cularly a  Hair  of  a  Man's  Head,  whofe  breadth 
was  but  the  280th  part  of  an  Inch,  being  held  in 
this  Light,  at  the  diftance  of  about  twelve  Feet 
from  the  Hole,  did  caft  a  Shadow  which  at  the 
diftance  of  four  Inches  from  the  Hair  was  the 
fixtieth  part  of  an  Inch  broad,  that  is,  above  " 
four  times  broader  than  the  Hair, '  and  at  the  di- 
ftance of  two  Feet  from  the  Hair  Vs^as  about  the 
eight  and  twentieth  part  of  an  Inch  broad,  that 
is,  ten  times  broader  than  the  Hair,  and  at  the 
diftance  of  ten  Feet  was  the  eighth  part  of  an 
Inch  bsoad,  that  is  35  times  broader, 

U  3  Nor 


294  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Nor  is  it  material  whether  the  Hair  be  en- 
compaffed  with  Air,  or  with  any  other  pellucid 
Subllance.  For  I  wetted  a  polifli'd  Plate  of 
Glafs,  and  laid  the  Hair  in  the  Water  upon  the 
Glafs,  and.  then  laying  another  polifli'd  Plate  of 
Glafs  upon  it,  fo  that  the  Water*  might  fill  up 
the  fpace  between  the  GlafTes,  I  held  them  in 
the  aforefaid  beam  of  Light,  fo  that  the  Light 
might  pafs  through  them  perpendicularly,  and 
the  Shadow  of  the  Hair  was  at  the  fame  di- 
flances  as  big  as  before.  The  Shadows  of 
Scratches  made  in  polifh'd  Plates  of  Glafs  were 
alfo  much  broader  than  they  ought  to  be,  and 
the  Veins  In  polifh'd  Plates  of  Glafs  did  alfo  caft* 
the  like  broad  Shadows.  And  therefore  the 
great  breadth  of  thefe  Shadows  proceeds  from 
feme  other  caufe  than  the"  Refraction  of  the 
Air. 

Let  the  Circle  X  [in  Fig.  i.]  reprefent  the 
middle  of  the  Hair;  ADG,  BEH,  CFI, 
three  Rays  pafTmg  by  one  fide  of  the  Hair  at 
feveral  diflances ;  KNQ^LOR,  MPS,  three 
other  Rays  paffmg  by  the  other  fide  of  the  Hair 
at  the  like  diflancesj  D,  E,  F,  and  N,  O,  P,  the 
places  where  the  Rays  are  bent  in  their  paf- 
fage  by  the  Hair  j  G,  H,  I,  and  Q^,  S,  the 
places  where  the  Rays  fall  on  a  Paper  GQ^ 
I S  the  breadth  of  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair  cafl 
on  the  Paper,  and  TI,  VS,  two  Rays  paffing 
to  the  Points  1  and  S  without  bending  when 
the  Hair  is  taken  away.  And  it's  manifefl  that 
all  the  Light  between  thefe  two  Rays  TI  and 
VS  is  bent  in  paffmg  by  the  Hair,  and  turned 
alide  from  the  Shadow  I S,  becaufe  if  any  part 

cf 


BOOK     III.  295 

of  this  Light  were  not  bent  it  would  fall  on  the 
Paper  within  the  Shadow,  and  there  illuminaie 
the  Paper,  contrary  to  experience.  And  becaufe 
when  the  Paper  is  at  a  great  diftance  from  the 
Hair,  the  Shadow  is  broad,  and  ■  therefore  the 
Rays  TI  and  VS  are  *at  a  great  diftance  from 
one  another,  it  follows  that  the  Hair  ads  unon 
the  Rays  of  Light  at  a  good  diltance  in  their  paf- 
fing  by  it.  But  the  Action  is  frrongeft  on  the 
Rays  which  pafs  by  at  leaft^  diflances,  and 
grows  weaker  and  weaker  accordingly  as  the 
Rays  pafs  by  at  diftances  greater  and  greater,  as 
is  reprefented  in  the  Scheme  :  For  thence  it 
comes  to  pafs,  that  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair  is 
much  broader  in  proportion  to  the  diflance  of  the 
Paper  from  the  Hair,  when  the  Paper  is  nearer 
the  Hair,  than  when  it  is  at  a  great  diftance 
from  it. 

0I?j:2.  The  Shadov/s  of  all  Bodies  (Metals, 
Stones,  Glafs,  Wood,  Horn,  Ice,  &c. )  in  this 
Light  were  border'd  with  three  Parallel  Fringes 
or  Bands  of  coloured  Light,  whereof  that  which 
was  contiguous  to  the  Shadow  was  broadeft 
and  moft  luminous,  and  that  which  was  remo- 
teft  from  it  was  narroweft,  and  fo  faint,  ^  as  not 
eafily  to  be  vifible.  It  v/as  difficult  to  diftinguiili 
the  Colours,  unlefs  when  the  Light  fell  very  ob- 
liquely/upon a  fmooth  Pap:-r,  or  fome  other 
fmooth  white  Body,  fo  as  to  make  them  appear 
much  broader  than  they  would  otherwife  do. 
And  then  the  Colours  were  plainly  vifible  in 
this  Order:  The  tirft  or  innermoft  Fringe  wViS 
violet  and  deep  blue  next  the  Shadow,  and  then 
light  blue,  green,  and  yellow  in  the  middle,  ai :d 

U  4  .r^^d 


2o6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

red  without.  The  fecond  Fringe  was  almoft 
contiguous  to  the  firft,  and  the  third  to  the  fe- 
cond, and  both  were  blue  within,  and  yellow  and 
red  without,  but  their  Colc^rs  were  very  faint, 
cfpecially  thofe  of  the  third.  The  Colours  there- 
fore proceeded  in  this  order  from  the  Shadow ; 
violet,  indigo,  pale  blue,  green,  yellow,  red ; 
blue,  yellow,  red;  pale  blue,  pale  yellow  and 
red.  The  Shadows  made  by  Scratches  and 
Bubbles  in  polifh'd  Plates  of  Glafs  were  bor- 
der'd  with  the  like  Fringes  of  colour'd  Light. 
And  if  Plates  of  Looking-glafs  floop'd  off  near 
the  edges  with  a  Diamond-cut,  be  held  in  the 
fame  beam  of  Light,  the  Light  which  paffes 
through  the  parallel  Planes  of  the  Glafs  will  be 
border'd  with  the  like  Fringes  of  Colours  where 
thofe  Planes  meet  with  the  Diamond-cut,  and 
by  this  means  there  will  fometimes  appear  four 
or  five  Fringes  of  Colours.  Let  AB,  CD  [in 
Vig.  2.]  reprefent  the  parallel  Planes  of  a  Look- 
ing-glafs, and  B  D  the  Plane  of  the  Diamond- 
cut,  making  at  B  a  very  obtufe  Angle  with  the 
Plane  AB.  And  let  all  the  Light  between  the 
Rays  ENI  and  FBM  pafs  diredly  through  the 
parallel  Planes  of  the  Glafs,  and  fall  upon  the 
Paper  between  I  and  M,  and  all  the  Light  be- 
tween the  Rays  GO  and  HD  be  refraded  by 
the  oblique  Plane  of  the  Diamond-cut  BD, 
and  fall  upon  the  Paper  between  K  and  L; 
and  the  Light  which  paffes  diredly  through  the 
parallel  Planes  of  the  Glafs,  and  falls  upon  the 
Paper  between  I  and  M,  will  be  border'd  with 
three  or  more  Fringes  at  M. 

So 


BOOK     III.  297 

So  by  looking  on  the  Syn  through  a  Feather 
or  black  Rifcband  held  clofe  to  the  Eye,  feveral 
Rain-bows  will  appear  j  the  Shadows  which  the 
Fibres  or  Threds  caft  on  the  T'unica  Retina^ 
being  border'd  wi^h'  the  like  Fringes  of  Co- 
lours. 

^kf'Z'  When  the  Hair  was  twelve  Feet  diftant 
from  this  Hole,  and  its  Shadow  fell  obliquely 
upon  a  flat  white  Scale  of  Inches  and  Parts  of  an 
Inch  placed  half  a  Foot  beyond  it,  and  alfo  when 
the  Shadow  fell  perpendicularly  upon  the  fame 
Scale  placed  nine  Feet  beyond  it  j  I  meafured  the 
breadth  of  the  Shadow  and  Fringes  as  accu- 
rately as  I  could,  and  found  them  in  Parts  of  an 
Inch  as  follows. 


The 


298 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


At  tloe  I)iftance  of 

hcAf  a 
Foot 

Nine 
Feet 

I 
9 

The  breadth  of  tliC  Shadow 

1 

The  breadth  between  the  Middles 
of  the  brightefl  Light  of  the  in- 
nermofl  Fringes  oh  either  fide 
the  Shadow       .     '^ 

h  or  ,\ 

I 

^3i 

1   d 

T 

I 

~l~ 

r 

?T 

I 
TT 

The  breadth  between  the  Middles 
of  the  brightefl  Light  of  the 
middlemoft  Fringes   on  either 
fide  the  Shadow 

The  breadth  between  the  Middles 
of  the  brighteft  Light  of   the 
outmofl  Fringes  on  either  fide 
the  Shadow 

I          I 

The  diflance  between  the  Middles 
of  the  brightefl  Light  of  the  firfl: 
and  fecond  Fringes 

The  diflance  between  the  Middles 
of  the"  brightefl  Light  of  the  fe- 
cond and  third  Fringes 

I  To 

The  breadth  of  the  luminous  Part 
(green,  white,  yellow,  and  red) 
of  tiie  firfl  Fringe 

1 70 

The  bread tlx  oi  tne  darker  bpact 
between    the  firfl   and    fecond 
Fringes 

I 
140 

The  breadcli  of  the  luminous  Pan 
of  the  fecond  Fringe 

27^ 

The  breadth  ot  the  darker  Space 
between  the  fecond  and  third 
Fringes 

T4~ 

Tiiefe 


BOOK     III.  299 

Thefe  Meafures  I  took  by  letting  the  Shadow 
of  the  Hair,  at  half  a  Foot  diflance,  fall  fo  ob- 
liquely on  the  Scale,  as  to  appear  twelve  times 
broader  than  when  it  fell  perpendicularly  on  it 
atthe  fame  diftance,  and  fetting  down  in  this 
Table  the  twelfth  part  of  the  Meafures  I  then 
took. 

ObC.  4.  When  the  Shadow  and  Fringes  were 
caft  obliquely  upon  a  fmooth  white  Body,  and 
that  Body  was  removed  farther  and  farther 
from  the  Hair,  the  firft  Fringe  began  to  appear 
and  look  brighter  than  the  reft  of  the  Light 
at  the  diftance  of  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  an  Inch 
from  the  Hair,  and  the  dark  Line  or  Shadow 
between  that  and  the  fecond  Fringe  began  to 
appear  at  a  lefs  diftance  from  the  Hair  than  that 
of  the  third  part  of  an  Inch.  The  fecond  Fringe 
began  to  appear  at  a  diftance  from  the  Hair  of 
lefs  than  half  an  Inch,  oand  the  Shadow  between 
that  and  the  third  Fringe  at  a  diftance  lefs  than 
ail  Inch,  and  the  third  Fringe  at  a  diftance  lefs 
than  three  Inches.  At  greater  diftances  they 
became  much  more  fenlible,  but  kept  very 
nearly  the  fame  proportion  of  their  breadths 
and  intervals  which  they  had  at  their  firft  ap- 
pearing. For  the  diftance  between ♦  the  middle 
of  the  firft,  and  middle  of  the  fecond  Fringe, 
was  to  the  diftance  between  the  middle  of  the 
fecond  and  middle  of  the  third  Fringe,  as  three 
to  two,  or  ten  to  feven.  And  the  laft  of  thefe 
two  diftances  was  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the 
bright  Light  or  luniinous  part  of  the  firft  Fringe. 
And  this  breadth  was  to  the  breadth  of  the 
bright  Light  of  the  fecond  Fringe  as  feven  to 

four, 


30O  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

four,  and  to  the  dark  Interval  of  the  firft  and 
fecond  Fringe  as  three  to  two,  and  to  the  like 
dark  Interval  between  the  fecond  and  third  as 
two  to  one.  For  the  breadths  of  the  Fringes 
feem'd  to  be  in  the  progreffion  of  the  Numbers 
I)  v^i  v^l,  and  their  Intervals  to  be  in  the 
fame  progreffion  with  them  j  that  is,  the  Frin- 
ges and  their  kitervals  together  to  be  in  the 
continual  progreffion  of  the  Numbers  i,  /?,  /f, 
</!,  v'i-,  or  thereabouts.  And  thefe  Proportions 
held  the  fame  very  nearly  at  all  diftances  from 
the  Hair ;  the  dark  Intervals  of  the  Fringes  be- 
ing as  broad  in  proportion  to  the  breadth  of  the 
Fringes  at  their  firil  appearance  as  afterwards  at 
great  dillances  from  the  Hair,  though  not  fo  dark 
and  diftind:.    • 

Obf.  5.  The  Sun  fhining  into  my  darken'd 
Chamber  through  a  hole  a  quarter  of  an  Inch 
broad,  I  placed  at  the  diilance  of  two  or  three 
Feet  from  the  Hole  a  Sheet  of  Pafteboard,  which 
was  black'd  all  over  on  both  fides,  and  in  the 
middle  of  it  had  a  hole  about^  three  quarters 
of  an  Inch  fquare  for  the  Light  to  pafs  through. 
And  behind  the  hole  I  faften'd  to  the  Palte- 
board  with  Pitch  the  blade  of  a  ffiarp  Knife,  to 
intercept  fome  part  of  the  Light  which  paffied 
through  the  hole.  The  Planes  of  the  Pafte- 
board  and  blade  of  the  Knife  were  parallel  to 
one  another,  and  perpendicular  to  the  Rays. 
And  when  they  w^re  fo  placed  that  none  of 
the  Sun's  Light  fell  on  the  Pafteboard,  but  all  of 
it  pafied  through  the  h.ole'to  t*he  Knife,  and  there 
part  of  it  fell  upon  the  blade  of  the  Knife,  and 
part  of  it  paifed  by  its  edge  j  I  let  this  part  of 

the 


BOOK     III.  301  ' 

the  Light  which  paiTed  by,  fall  on  a  white  Pa- 
per two  or  three  Feet  beyond  the   Knife,  and 
there  faw  two  ftreams  of  faint  Light  fhoot  out 
both  ways  from  the  beam  of  Light  into  the  flia- 
dow,  like  the  Tails  of  Comets.     But  becaufe  the 
Sun's  dired:  Light  by  its   brightnefs  upon   the 
Paper  obfcured    thefe   faint  ftreams,   fo  that  I 
could  fcarce  fee  them,    I  made  a  little  hole  in 
the  midft  of  the  Paper  for  that  Light  to  pafs 
through  and  fall  on  a  black  Cloth  behind  it ; 
and  then  I  faw  the  two   ftreams  plainly.     They 
were  like  one  another,  and  pretty  nearly  equal 
in  length,  and  breadth,   and  quantity  of  Light. 
Their  Light  at  that  end  next  the   Sun's  direct 
Light  was  pretty  ftrong  for  the  fpace  of  about 
a  quarter  of  an  Inch,  or  half  an  Lich,  and  in  all 
*  its  progrefs   from   that    direct   Light  decreafed 
gradually  till   it  became  infenfible.     The  whole 
length  of  either  of  thefe  ftreams  meafured  up- 
on the  Paper  at  the  diftance  of  three  Feet  from 
the  Knife  was  about  fix  or  eight  Inches ;  fo  that 
it  fubtended  an  Angle  at  the  edge  of  the  Knife 
of  about  10  or  12,  or  at  moft  14  Degrees.     Yet 
fometimes  I  thought  I  faw  it  ftioot  three  or  four 
Degrees  farther,  but  with  a  Light  fo  very  faint 
that  I  could  fcarce  perceive  it,  and  fufpe(5ted  it 
might  (  in  fome  meafure  at  leaft )    arife  from 
fome  other  caufe  than  the  two  ftreams  did.     For 
placing  my  Eye  in  that  Light  beyond  the  end 
of  that  ftream  which  was  behind  the  Knife,  and 
looking  towards  the  Knife,  I  could  fee  a  line  of     ^  • 
Light  upon  its  edge,   and  that  not  only  when 
my  Eye  was  in  the  line  cf  the  Streams,  but  al- 
fo  when  it  was  without  that  line  either  towards 

the 


302  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

the  point  of  the  Knife,  or  towards  the  handle. 
This  line  of  Light  appear'd  contiguous  to  the 
edge  of  the  Knife,  and  was  narrower  than  the 
Light  of  the  innermofl  Fringe,  and  narroweft 
when  my  Eye  was  fartheft  from  the  dired:  Light, 
and  therefore  feem'd  to  pafs  between  the  Light 
of  that  Fringe  and  the  edge  of  the  Knife,  and 
that  which  palTed  nearefl  the  edge  to  be  mofl  . 
bent,  though  not  all  of  it. 

Ohf.  6.  I  placed  another  Knife  by  this,  fo 
that  their  edges  might  be  parallel,  and  look  to- 
wards one  another,  and  that  the  beam  of  Light 
might  fall  upon  both  the  Knives,  and  fome  part 
of  it  pafs  between  their  edges.  And  when  the 
diflance  of  their  edges  was  about  the  400th 
part  of  an  Inch,  the  ftream  pjlrted  in  the  mid-  ^ 
die,  and  left  a  Shadow  between  the  two  parts. 
This  Shadow  was  fo  black  and  dark  that  all  the 
Light  which  pafTed  between  the  Knives  feem'd 
to  be  bent,  and  turn'd  afide  to  the  one.  hand  or 
to  the  other.  And  as  the  Knives  ftill  approach'd 
one  another  the  Shadow  grew  broader,  and  the 
ftreams  ihorter  at  their  inward  ends  which  were 
next  the  Shadow,  until  upon  the  contad;  of  the 
Knives  the  whole  Light  vahilh'd,  leaving  its  place 
to  the  Shadow. 

And  hence  I  gather  that  the  Light  which  is 
leaft  bent,  and  goes  to  the  inward  ends  of  the 
ftreams,  palTes  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  at 
the  greatefh  diftance,  and  this  diflance  when 
the  Shadow  begins  to  appear  between  the 
ftreams,  is  about  the  Sooth  part  of  an  Inch.  And 
the  Light  which  paffes  by  the  edges  of  the 
Knives  at  diftances  ftill  lefs  and  lefs,  is  more  and 

more 


BOOK     III.  303 

more  bent,  and  goes  ta  thofe  parts  of  the 
ftreams  which  are  farther  and  farther  from  the 
diredt  Light;  becaufe  when  the  Knives  approach 
one  another  till  they  touch,  thofe  parts  of  the 
ftreams  vanifti  laft  v/hich  are  fartheil  from  the 
dired  Light. 

Obf.  7.     In  the  fifth  Obfervation  the  Fringes 
did  not  appear,  but  by  reafon  of  the  breadth  of 
the  hole  in  the  Window  became  fo  broad  as  to  run 
into  one  another,  and  by  joining,   to  rriake  one 
continued  Light  in  the  beginning  of  the  ftreams. 
But  in  the  fixth,  as  the  Knives  approached  one 
another,   a  little  before  the  Shadow   appeared 
between-  the  two    ftreams,   the    Fringes   began 
to  appear  on  the  inner  ends  of  the  Streams  on 
either  fide  of  the  dired:  Light ;    three  on  one 
fide  made  by  the  edge  of  one  Knife,  and  three 
on  the  other  fide  made  by  the  edge  of  the  o- 
ther  Knife.      They  Were   diftindeft  when  the 
Knives  were  placed  at  the  greateft  diftance  from 
the  hole  in  the  Window,  and  ftill  became  more 
diftind:  by  making  the  hole  lefs,  infomuch  that 
I  could  fometimes   fee  a  faint  lineament  of  a 
fourth  Fringe  beyond    the   three    above    men- 
tion'd.  '  And   as    the   Knives    continually    ap- 
proach'd    one   another,    the  Fringes  grew    di- 
ftinder  and  larger,    until  they  vanifh'd.      The 
outmoft  Fringe  vanifli'd  firft,   and  the  middle- 
moft  next,  and   the  innermoft  laft.     And  after 
they  were   all  vanifh'd',   and  the  line  of  Light 
which  was  in  the  middle   between  them  was 
grown  very  broad,  enlarging  it  felf  on  both  fides 
into  the  ftreams  of  Light  defcribed  in  the  fifth" 
Obfervation,    the  above-rnention'd   Shadow  be- 

.1  ■    gan 


304-  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

gan  to  appear  in  the  middle  of  this  line,  and 
divide  it  along  the  middle  into  two  lines  of 
Li^ht,  and  increafed  until  the  whole  Light  va- 
nilh'd.  This  enlargement  of  the  Fringes  was 
fo  great  that  the  Rays  which  go  to  the  inner- 
moft  Fringe  feem'd '  to  be  bent  above  twenty  • 
times  more  v/hen  this  Fringe  was  ready  to  va- 
nifh,  than  when  one  of  the  Knives  was  taken 
away. 

And  from  this  and  the  former  Obfervation 
compared,  I  gather,  that  the  Light  of  the  firffc 
Fringe  pafTed  by  the  edge  of  the  Knife  at  a  di- 
flance  greater  than  the  Sooth  part  of  an  Inch, 
and  the  Light  of  the  fecond  Fringe  paiTed  by 
the  edge  of  the  Knife  at  a  greater  diftance  than 
the  Light  of  the  firft  Fringe  did,  and  that  of 
the  third  at  a  greater  diftance  than  that  of  the 
fecond,  and  that  of  the  ftreams  of  Light  defcri- 
bed  in  the  fifth  and  fixth  Obfervations  pafTed  by 
the  edsies  of  the  Knives  at  lefs  diftances  than  that 
of  any  of  the  Fringes. 

Obf.  8.  I  caufed  the  edges  of  two  Knives 
to  be  ground  truly  ftrait,  and  pricking  their 
points  into  a  Board  fo  that  their  edges  might 
look  towards  one  another,  and  meeting  near 
their,  points  contain  a  redtilinear  Angle,  I  faften'd 
their  Handles  together  with  Pitch  to  make  this 
Angle  invariable.  The  diftance  of  the  edges  of 
the  Knives  from  one  another  at  the  diltance  of 
four  Inches  from  the  angular  Point,  where  the 
edges  of  the  Knives  met,  was  the  eight;:  part 
of  an  Inch  j  and  therefore  the  Angle  contain'd  ' 
by  the  edges  was  about  one  Degree  54'.  The 
Knives  thus  fix'd  together  I  placed  in  a  beam 

of 


BOOK     III.  305 

of  the  Sun's  Light,  let  into  my  darken'd  Cham- 
ber through  a  Hole  the  420!  Part  of  an  Inch  wide, 
at  the  diftance  of  10  or  15  Feet  from  the  Hole, 
and  let  the  Light  which  pafled  between  their  edges 
fall  very  obliquely  upon  a  fmooth  white  Ruler  at 
the  diftance  of  half  an  Inch,  or  an  Inch  from 
the  Knives,  and  there  faw  the  Fringes  by  the 
two  edges  of  the  Knives  run  along  the  edges  of 
the  Shadows  of  the  Knives  in  Lines  parallel  to 
thofe  edges  without  growing  fenfibly  broader, 
till  they  met  in  Angles  equal  to  the  Angle 
contained  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives,  ai  d 
where  they  met  and  joined  they  ended  without 
croffing  one  another.  But  if  the  Ruler  was 
held  at  a  much  greater  diftance  from  the 
Knives,  the  Fringes  w^here  they  were  firther 
from  the  Place  of  their  Meeting,  were  a  little 
narrower,  and  became  fomething  broader  and 
broader  as  they  approach'd  nearer  and  nearer  to 
one  another,  and  after  they  met  tiiey  crofs'd 
one  another,  and  then  became  much  broader 
than  before. 

Whence  I  gather  that  the  diftances  at  which 
the  Fringes  pafs  by  the  Knives  are  not  increafed 
nor  alter'd  by  the  approach  of  the  Knives,  but 
the  Angles  in  whicli  the  Rays  are  there  bent 
are  much  increafed  by  that  approach ;  and  that 
the  Knife  which  is  neareli  any  Ray  determines 
which  way  the  Ray  ftiall  be  bent,  and  the  other 
Knife  increafes  the  bent. 

Obf,  9.  When  the  Rays  fell  very  obliquely 
upon  the  Ruler  at  the  diftance  of  the  third  Part, 
of  an  Inch  from  the  Knives,  the  dark  Line  be- 
tween the  firft  and  fecond  Fringe  of  the  Sha- 

X  dow 


3o6  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

dow  of  one  Knife,  and  the  dark  Line  between 
the  firft  and  fecond  Fringe  of  the  Shadow  of 
the  other  Knife  met  with  one  another,  at  the 
diftance  of  the  fifth  Part  of  an  Inch  from  th« 
end  of  the  Light  which  pafTed  between  the 
Knives  at  the  concourfe  of  their  edges.  And 
therefore  the  diftance  of  the  edges  of  the  Knives 
at  the  meeting  of  thefe  dark  Lines  was  the  i6oth 
Part  of  an  Inch.  For  as  four  Inches  to  the 
eighth  Part  of  an  Inch,  fo  is  any  Length  of  the 
edges  of  the  Knives  meafured  from  the  point 
of  their  concourfe  to  the  diftance  of  the  edges 
of  the  Knives  at  the  end  of  that  Length,  and  fo 
is  the  fifth  Part  of  an  Inch  to  the  i6oth  Fart. 
So  then  the  dark  Lines  above-mention'd  meet 
in  the  middle  of  the  Light  which  pafTes  be- 
tween the  Knives  where  they  are  diftant  the 
i6oth  Part  of  an  Inch,  and  the  one  half  of  that 
Light  pafles  by  the  edge  of  one  Knife  at  a  di- 
ftance not  greater  than  the  320th  Part  of  an 
Inch,  and  falling  upon  the  Paper  makes  the 
Fringes  of  the  Shadow  of  that  Knife,  and  the 
other  half  pafies  by  the  edge  of  the  other  Knife, 
at  a  diftance  not  greater  than  the  320th  Part  of 
an  Inch,  and  falling  upon  the  Paper  makes  the 
Fringes  of  the  Shadow  of  the  other  Knife.  But 
if  the  Paper  be  held  at  a  diftance  from  the 
Knives  greater  than  the  third  Part  of  an  Inch, 
the  dark  Lines  above-mention'd  meet  at  a  greater 
diftance  than  the  fifth  Part  of  an  Inch  from 
the  end  of  the  Light  which  pafTed  between  the 
Knives  at  the  concourfe  of  their  edges  ;  and 
therefore  the  Light  which  falls  upon  the  Paper 
where  thofe  dark  Lines  meet  pafles  between  the  . 

Knives 


BOOK     III. 


307 


Knives  where  the  edges   are   diftant  above  the 
160th  part  of  an  Inch. 

For  at  another  time,  when  the  two  Knives 
were  diltant  eigiit  Feet  and  five  Inches  from  the 
little  hole  in  the  Window,  made  with  a  fmall 
Pin  as  above,  the  Light  which  fell  upon  the  Pa- 
per where  the  aforefaid  dark  lines  met,  paffed 
between  the  Knives,  where  the  dillance  between 
their  edges  was  as  in  the  following  Table,  w^hen 
the  diftance  of  the  Paper  from  the  Knives  was 
alfo  as  follows. 


Dijiaiices   of  the  Paper 
from    the  Knhes    i}i 
Inches. 

Dijtances     betixeen  .  the 
edges  of  the  Kfiizrs  in 
millefmal  parts  of  an 
Inch. 

.  3i- 

32. 
96. 

131- 

o'oi2 

0'020 

•^    o'o34 

■    o'o^7 
o'oSi 

o'oS/ 

And  hence  I  gather,  that  the  Light  which 
makes  the  Fringes  upon  the  Paper  is  not  the 
fame  Light  at  all  diftances  of  the  Paper  from 
the  Knives,  but  when  the  Paper  is  held  near 
the  Knives,  the  Fringes  are  made  by  Light 
which  pafTes  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  at  a 
lefs  diftance,  and  is  more  bent  than  when  the 
Paper  is  held  at  a  greater  diftance  from  the 
Knives. 


X  2 


Obf 


3o8  OPTIC  K  S. 

Obf.  10.  When  the  Fringes  of  the  Shadows 
of  the  Knives  fell  perpendicularly  upon  a  Paper 
at  a  great  diftance  from  the  Knives,  they'w^ere 
in  the  form  of  Hyperbola's,  and  their  Dimen- 
fions  were  as  follows.    Let  CA,  CB  [in  Fig.  3.] 
reprefent  Lines  drawn  upon  the  Paper  parallel 
to  the  edges  of  the  Knives,  and  between  which 
all  the  Light  would  fall,   if  it  pafled  between 
the  edges  of  the  Knives  without  inflexion ;    DE 
a  Right  Line  drawn  through  C  making  the  An- 
gles A  CD,  BCE,  equal   to  one  another,  and 
terminating  all 'the  Light  which  falls  upon  the 
Paper  from  the  point  where  the  edges  of  the 
Knives  meet;  eisy  fkt^  and  glv^  three  hyper- 
bolical Lines  reprefenting  the  Terminus  of  the 
Shadow  of  one  of  the  Knives,    the  dark  Line 
between  the  firft  and  fecond  Fringes  of    that 
Shadow,  and  the  dark  Line  between  the  fecond 
and  third  Fringes  of  the  fame  Shadow ;  xip,  ykq, 
and  z/r,    three  other  hyperbolical  Lines  repre- 
fenting the  Terminus  of  the  Shadow  of  the  other 
Knife,  the  dark  Line  between  the  firfl  and  fecond 
Fringes  of  that  Shadow,  and  the  dark  line  be- 
tween the  fecond  and  third  Fringes  of  the  fame 
Shadow.     And  conceive  that  thefe  three  Hyper- 
bola's are  like  and  equal  to  the  former  three,  and 
crofs  them  in  the  points  /',  i,  and  /,  and  that  the 
Shadows  of  the  Knives  are  terminated  and  diflin- 
guifh'd  from  the  lirft  luminous  Fringes  by  the 
lines  e  i  s  and  x  ip,  until  the  meeting  and  crof- 
fmg  of  the  Fringes,  and  then  thofe  lines   crofs 
the  Fringes  in  the  form  of  dark  lines,  termina- 
ting the  firft  luminous  Fringes  within  fide,  and 
diftinguifhing  them  from  another  Light  which 

begins 


BOOK     III.  309 

begins  to  appear  at  /,  and  illuminates  all  the 
triangular  fpace  /j^DEj. comprehended  by  thefe 
dark  lines,  and  the  right  line  DE.  Of  thefe 
Hyperbola's  one  Afymptote  is  the  line  DE,  and 
their  other  Afymptotes  are  parallel  to  the  lines 
C  A  and  C  B.  Let  r  'v  reprefent  a  line  drawn 
any  where  upon  the  Paper  parallel  to  the  Afym- 
ptote DE,  and  let  this  line  crofs  the  right  lines 
AC  in  w,  and  B C  in  «,  and  the  fix  dark  hy- 
perbolical lines  in  />,  ^,  ^  3  J,  ^,  i' ;  and  by  mea- 
suring the  diftances /)  J,  gt,  r'-j,  and  thence 
collecting  the  lengths  of  the  Ordinates  n  p,  n  q^ 
nr  or  m  s^  m  /,  m  v^  and  doing  this  at  feveral 
diftances  of  the  line  r  v  from  the  Afymptote  DD, 
you  may  find  as  many  points  of  thefe  Hyperbo- 
la's as  you  pleafe,  and  thereby  know  that  thefe 
curve  lines  are  Hyperbola's  differing  little  from 
the  conical  Hyperbola.  And  by  meafuring  the 
lines  C  /,  C  k,  C  /,  you  may  find  other  points  of 
thefe  Curves. 

For  inftance;  when  the  Knives  were  diftant 
from  the  hole  in  the  Window  ten  Feet,  and  the 
Paper  from  the  Knives  nine  Feet,  and  the  An- 
gle contained  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  to 
which  the  Angle  ACBis  equal,  was  fubtend- 
ed  by  a  Chord  which  was  to  the  Radius  as  i 
to  32,  and  the  diftance  of  the  line  rv  from  the 
Afymptote  DE  was  half  an  Inch:  I  meafured 
the  lines  pSy  qt,  rv,  and  found  them  0*35, 
o'65,  o'98  Inches  refped;ively ;  and  by  adding 
to  their  halfs  the  line  r  m  n^  ( w^hich  here  was 
the  128th  part  of  an  Inch,  or  0*0078  Inches,)  the 
Sums  «^,  nq^nVy  were  o' 1828,  ©'3328,  0*4978 
Inches.     I   meafured  alfo   the  diftances  of  the 

X  3  brighteft 


3IO         O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

brightefl  parts  of  the  Fringes  which  run  between 
fq  and  st,  qr  and  t 'U,  and  next  beyond  r  and  'u> 
and  found  them  o'5,  o'B,  and  iij  Inches. 

Obf.  II.  The  Sun  fhining  into  my  darkened 
Room  through  a  fmall  round  hole  made  in  a 
Plate  of  Lead  with  a  flender  Pin,  as  above ;  I 
placed  at  the  hole  a  Prifm  to  refrad  the  Light, 
and  form  on  the  oppofite  Wall  the  Spedtrum 
of  Colours,  defcribed  in  the  third  Experiment 
of  the  firft  Book.  And  then  I  found  that  the 
Shadows  of  all  Bodies  held  in  the  colour'd 
Light  between  the  Prifm  and  the  Wall,  were 
border'd  with  Fringes  of  the  Colour  of  that 
Light  in  which  they  were  held.  In  the  full  red 
Light  they  were  totally  red  without  any  fenfi- 
ble  blue  or  violet,  and  in  tiie  deep  blue  Light 
they  were  totally  blue  without  any  fenfible  red 
or  yellow ;  and  fo  in  the  green  Light  they  were 
totally  green,  excepting  a  little  yellow  and  blue, 
which  were  mixed  .in  the  green  Light  of  the 
Prifm.  And  comparing  the  Fringes  made  in 
the  feveral  colour'd  Lights,  I  found  that  thofe 
made  in  the  red  Light  were  largeft,  thofe 
made  in  the  violet  were  leail,  and  thofe  made 
-in  the  green  Vv^ere  of  a  middle  bignefs.  For 
the  Fringes  with  which  the  Siradow  of  a  Man's 
Hair  were  bordered,  being  meafured  crofs  the 
Shadow  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Liches  from  the 
Hair,  the  diflance  between  the  middle  and  moil; 
luminous  part  of  the  iirfl  or  innermoft  Fringe 
on  one.  fide  of  the  Shadow,  and  that  of  the  like 
Fringe  on  the  other  iide  of  the  Shadow,  was  in 

the  full  red  Lieht  -~  of  an  Inch,  and  in  the  full 

violet 


BOOK     III.  311 

violet  ?V.  And  the  like  diftance  between  the 
middle  and  mofl  luminous  parts  of  the  fecond 
Fringes  on  either  iide  the  Shadow  was  in  the  full 
red  Light  »'=-,  and  in  the  violet  tV  of  an  Inch. 
And  thefe  diftances  of  the  Fringes  held  the  fame 
proportion  at  all  diftances  from  the  Hair  without 
any  fenfible 'variation. 

So  then  the  Rays  which  made  thefe  Fringes 
in  the  red  Light  paffed  by  the  Hair  at  a  greater 
diftance  than  thofe  did  which  made  the  like 
Fringes  in  the  violet  j  and  therefore  the  Hair 
in  caufing  thefe  Fringes  adied  alike  upon  the 
red  Light  or  leaft  refrangible  Rays  at  a  greater 
diftance,  and  upon  the  violet  or  moft  refrangi- 
ble Rays  at  a  lefs  diftance,  and  by  thofe  adions 
difpofed  the  red  Li^ht  into  larger  Fringes,  and 
the  violet  into  fmaller,  and  the  Lights  of  inter- 
mediate Colours  into  Fringes  of  intermediate  big- 
neftes  without  changing  the  Colour  of  any  fort 
of  Light. 

When  therefore  the  Hair  in  the  firft  and  fe- 
cond of  thefe  Obfervations  was  held  in  the 
white  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  caft  a  Sha- 
dow which  was  border'd  with  three  Fringes  of 
coloured  Light,  thofe  Colours  arofe  not  from 
any  new  modifications  imprefs'd  upon  the  Rays 
of  Light  by  the  Hair,  but  only  from  the  vari- 
ous inflexions  whereby  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Rays 
were  feparated  from  one  another,  which  before 
feparation,  by  the  mixture  of  all  their  Colours, 
compofed  the  white  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light, 
but  whenever  feparated  compofe  Lights  of  the 
feveral  Colours  which  they  are  originally  difpo- 
fed to  exhibit.     In  this  i  ithObfervation,  where 

X  4  the 


312  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

!Dhe  Colours  are  feparated  before  the  Light  paf- 
fes  by  the  Hair,  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays,  which 
when  feparated  from   the  reft  make  red,   were 
infleded  at  a  greater  diftance  from  the  Hair,  fo 
as  to  make   three  red  Fringes  at  a  greater  di- 
ftance from  the  middle  of  the  Shadow  of  the 
Hair  j    and   the    moft    refrangible  Rays   which 
when  feparated   make  violet,   were  inflected  at 
a  lefs  diftance  from  the  Hair,    fo  as  to  make 
three  violet  Fringes  at  a  lefs  diftance  from  the 
middle  of  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair.     And  other 
Rays  of  intermediate  degrees  of  Refrangibility 
were   inflefted  at    intermediate    diftances  from 
the  Hair,  fo  as  to  make  Fringes  of  intermediate 
Colours  at  intermediate  diftances  from  the  mid- 
dle of  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair.     And  in  the 
fecond  Obfervation,    where  all  the  Colours  are 
mix'd  in  the  white  Light  which  pafles  by  the 
Hair,  thefe  Colours  are  feparated  by  the  vari- 
ous   inflexions  of   the  Rays,    and   the  Fringes 
which  they  make  appear  all  together,   and  the 
innermoft   Fringes  being  contiguous  make  on^^ 
broad  Fringe  compofed  of  all  the  Colours  in  . 
due  order,  the  violet  lying  on  the  infide  of  the 
Frmge  next  the  Shadow,  the  red  on  the  out- 
fide  fartheft   from  the  Shadow,    and  the   blue, 
green,  and  yellow,  in  the  middle.     And,  in  like 
manner,  the  middlemoft  Fringes  of  all  the  Co- 
lours lying    in   order,    and    being    contiguous, 
make  another  broad  Fringe  compofed  of  all  the 
Colours  -J    and  the  outm.oft    Fringes  of  all  the 
Colours  lying  in  order,    and  being  contiguous, 
make  a  third  broad  Fringe  compofed  of  all  the 
Colours.     Thefe  are  the  three  Fringes  of  co- 

lour'd 


BOOK     III.  313 

lour'd  Light  with  which  the  Shadows  of  all  Bo- 
dies are  border'd  in  the  fecond  Cbfervation. 

When  I  made  the  foregoing  Obfervations,  I 
defign'd  to  repeat  moft  of  thcm.with  more  care 
and  exadnefs,  and  to  mJike  fome  new  ones  for 
determining  the  manner  how  the  Rays  of  Light 
are  bent  in  their  palTage  by  Bodies,  for  making 
the  Fringes  of  Colours  with  the  dark  lines  be- 
tween them.  But  I  was  then  interrupted,  and 
cannot  now  think  of  taking  thefe  things  into  far- 
ther Confideration.  And  fince  1  have  not  finifh'd 
this  part  of  my  Defign,  I  fhall  conclude  with 
propofing  only  fome  Queries,  in  order  to  a  far- 
ther fearch  to  be  made  by  odiers. 

^ery  i.  Do  not  Bodies  a<5t  upon  Light  at 
a  diltance,  and  by  their  action  bend  irs  Raysj  and 
is  not  this  action  ( cceteris  paribus )  flrongeft  at 
the  leaft  diftance  ? 

^.  2.  Do  not  the  Rays  which  differ  in  Re- 
frangibility  differ  alfo  in  Flexibity  j  and  are  they 
not  by  their  different  Inflexions  feparatcd  from 
one  another,  fo  as  after  feparation  to  niake  the 
Colours  in  the  three  Fringes  above  defer ibed  ? 
And  after  what  manner  are  they  infle(5ted  to  make 
thofe  Fringes  ? 

^.  3  Are  not  the  Rays  of  Light  in  pafling 
by  the  edges  and  fides  of  Bodies,  bent  feveral 
times  backwards  and  forwards,  with  a  motion 
like  that  of  an  Eel  ?  And  do  not  the  three  Frin- 
ges of  colour'd  Light  above-mention'd  arife  from 
three  fuch  bendings  ? 

^.  4.  Do  not  the  Rays  of  Light  which  fall 
upon  Bodies,  and  are  refleded  or  refraded,  be- 
gin 


314  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

gin  to  bend  before  they  arrive  at  the  Bodies ;  and 
are  they  not  reflecfled,  refrafted,  and  infledied, 
by  one  and  the  fame  Principle,  ading  varioufly 
in  various  Circumftances  ? 

^.  5.  Do  not  Bodies  and  Light  ad  mutually 
upon  one  another ;  that  is  to  fay.  Bodies  upon 
Light  in  emitting,  receding,  refrading  and  in- 
fleding  it,  and  Light  upon  Bodies  for  heating 
them,  and  putting  their  parts  into  a  vibrating 
motion  vs^herein  heat  confifts  ? 

^.  6.  Do  not  black  Bodies  conceive  heat 
more  eafily  from  Light  than  thofe  of  other  Co- 
lours do,  by  reafon  that  the  Light  falling  on  them 
is  not  refleded  outw^ards,  but  enters  the  Bodies, 
and  is  often  refleded  and  refraded  within  them, 
until  it  be  ftifled  and  loft  ? 

^.  7.  Is  not  the  ftrength  and  vigor  of  the 
a^ion  between  Light  and  fulphureous  Bodies  ob- 
ferved  above,  one  reafon  why  fulphureous  Bodies 
take  fire  more,readily,  and  burn  more  vehement- 
ly than  other  Bodies  do  ? 

^.  8.  Do  not  all  fix'd  Bodies,  when  heated 
beyoiifl  a  certain  degree,  emit  Light  and  fhine ; 
and  is  not  this  Emiffion  perform'd  by  the  vi- 
brating motions  of  their  parts  ?  And  do  not  all 
Bodies  which  abound  with  terreflrial  parts,  and 
efpecially  with  fulphureous  ones,  emit  Light 
as  often  as  thofe  parts  are  fufficiently  agitated  j 
whether  that  agitation  be  made  by  Heat,  or  by 
Fridicn,  or  Percuffion,  or  Putrefadion,  or  by 
any  vital  Motion,  or  any  other  Caufe?  As  for 
infliance  ;  Sea- Water  in  a  raging  Storm  ;  Quick- 
filver  agitated  in  ^jacuo ;  the  Back  of  a  Cat,  or 
Neck  of  a  Horfe,  obliquely  ftruck  or  rubbed  in 

a  dark 


BOOK     III.  315 

a  dark  place ;  Wood,  Flefh  and  Fifli  while  they 
putrefy ;  Vapours  ariling  from  putrefy 'd  Wa- 
ters, ufually  call'd  Ignes  Fatui ;  Stacks  of  moifl 
Hay  or  Corn  growing  hot  by  fermentation ; 
Glcfw-worms  and  the  Eyes  of  fome  Animals  by 
vital  Motions  J  the  vulgar  Phofphoriis  agitated 
by  the  attrition  of  any  Body,  or  by  the  acid 
Particles  of  the  Air;  Amber  and  fome  Dia- 
monds by  ftriking,  preffing  or  rubbing  them; 
Scrapings  of  Steel  ftruck  off  with  a  Flint ;  Iron 
hammer'd  very  nimbly  till  it  become  fo  hot  as 
to  kindle  Sulphur  thrown  upon  it ;  the  Axle- 
trees  of  Chariots  taking  fire  by  the  rapid  rota- 
tion of  the  Wheels  ;  and  fome  Liquors  mix'd 
with  one  another  whofe  Particles  come  toge- 
ther with  an  Impetus,  as  Oil  of  Vitriol  diftilled 
from  its  weight  of  Nitre,  and  then  mix'd  with 
twice  its  weight  of  Oil  of  Annifeeds.  So  alfo  a 
Globe  of  Glafs  about  8  or  10  Inches  in  diameter, 
being  put  into  a  Frame  where  it  may  be  fwiftly 
turn'd  round  its  Axis ,  will  in  turning  fhine 
where  it  rubs  againft  the  palm  of  ones  Hand 
apply 'd  to  it:  And  if  at  the  fame  time  a  <^iece 
of  white  Paper  or  white  Cloth,  or  the  end  of 
ones  Finger  be  held  at  the  diftance  of  about  a 
quarter  of  an  Inch  or  half  an  Inch  from  that 
part  of  the  Glafs  where  it  is  mojft  in  motion, 
the  eled:rick  Vapour  which  is  excited  by  the 
fri6lion  of  the  Glafs  againft  the  Hand,  will  by 
dafhing  againft  the  white  Paper,  .Cloth  or  Fin- 
ger, be  put  into  fuch  an  agitation  as  to  emit 
Light,  and  make  the  white  Paper,  Cloth  or  Fin- 
ger, appear  lucid  like  a  Glow-worm ;  and  in 
rufhing  out  of  the  Glafs  will  fometimes  pufti 

againft 


3i6  *        O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

againft  the  Finger  fo  as  to  be  felt.  And  the  fame 
things  have  been  found  by  rubbing  a  long  and 
large  Cylinder  of  Glafs  or  Amber  with  a  Paper 
held  in  ones  hand,  and  continuing  the  fridiion  till 
the  Glafs  grew  warm. 

^.  9.  Is  not  Fire  a  Body  heated  fo  hot  as  to 
emit  Light  copioufly?  For  what  elfe  is  a  red  hot 
Iron  than  Fire?  And  what  elfe  is  a  burning  Coal 
than  red  hot  Wood  ? 

§u.  10.  Is  not  Flame  a  Vapour,  Fume  or  Ex- 
halation heated  red  hot,  that  is,  fo  hot  as  to 
fhine  ?  For  Bodies  do  not  flame  without  emit- 
ting a  copious  Fume,  and  this  Fume  burns  in 
the  Flame.  The  Igms  Fatuus  is  a  Vapour  fhi- 
ning  without  heat,  and  is  there  not  the  fame 
difference  between  this  Vapour  and  Flame,  as 
between  rotten  Wood  fhining  without  heat  and. 
burning  Coals  of  Fire  ?  In  diftilling  hot  Spirits, 
if  the  Head  of  the  Still  be  taken  off,  the  Va- 
pour which  afcends  out  of  the  Still  will  take  fire 
at  the  Flame  of  a  Candle,  and  turn  into  Flame, 
and  the  Flame  will  run  along  the  Vapour  from 
the  Candle  to  the  Still.  Some  Bodies  heated  by 
Motion  or  Fermentation,  if  the  heat  grow  in- 
renfe,  fume  copioufly,  and  if  the  heat  be  great 
enough  the  Fumes  will  (liine  and  become  Flame. 
Metals  in  fuflon  do  not  flame  for  want  of  a  co- 
pious Fume,  except  Spelter,  which  fumes  co- 
pioufly, and  thereby  flames.  All  flaming  Bo- 
dies, as  Oil,  Tallow,  Wa"^,  Wood,  foffil  Coals, 
Pitch,  Sulphur,  by  flaming  waflie  and  vanifli  in- 
to burning  Smoke,  which  Smoke,  if  the  Flame 
be  pur  out,  is  very  thick  and  vifible,  and  fome- 
times  fmells  ftrongly,  but  in  the  Flame  lofes  its 

fmell 


BOOK     III.  317 

fmell  by  burning,  and  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  Smoke  the  Flame  is  of  feveral  Colours, 
as  that  of  Sulphur  blue,  that  of  Copper  open'd 
with  fublimate  green,    that  of  Tallow  yellow, 
that  of  Camphire  white.  Smoke  paffing  through 
Flame  cannot  but  grow  red  hot ,   and  red  hot 
Smoke  can  have  no  other  appearance  than  that 
of  Flame.     When  Gun-powder  takes  fire,    it 
goes  away  into  flaming  Smoke.     For  the  Char- 
coal and  Sulphur  eafily  take  fire,  and  fet  fire  to 
the  Nitre,  and  the  Spirit  of   the   Nitre  being 
thereby  rarified  into  Vapour ,    ruflies  out  with 
Explofion  much  after  the  manner  that  the  Va- 
pour of  Water  rufhes  out  of  an  ^olipile^   the 
Sulphur    alfo   being  volatile  is   converted  into 
Vapour,    and  augments  the   Explofion.      And 
the  acid  Vapour  of  the  Sulphur  (namely  that 
which  diftils  under  a  Bell  into  Oil  of  Sulphur,) 
entring  violently  into  the  fix'd  Body  of  the  Ni- 
tre, fets  loofe  the  Spirit  of  the  Nitre,  and  ex- 
cites a  great  Fermentation,    whereby  the  Heat 
is  farther  augmented,  and  the  fix'd  Body  of  the 
Nitre  is  alfo  rarified  into  Fume,  and  the  Explo- 
fion is  thereby  made  more  vehement  and  quick. 
For  if  Salt  of  Tartar  be  mix'd  with  Gun-pow- 
der,  and  that  Mixture  be  warm'd  till  it  takes 
fire,    the  Explofion  will  be  more  violent  and 
quick  than  that  of  Gun-powder  alone;  which^ 
cannot  proceed  from  any  other  caufe  than  the 
action  of  the  Vapour  of  the  Gun-powder  upon 
the  Salt  of  Tartar,  whereby  that  Salt  is  rarified. 
The  Explofion  of  Gun-powder  arifes  therefore 
from  the  violent  aftion  whereby  all  the  Mixture 
being  quickly  and  vehemently  heated,  is  rarified 

r  and 


3i8  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

and  converted  into  Fume  and  Vapour:  which 
Vapour,  by  the  violence  of  that  adiion ,  be- 
coming fo  hot  as  to  fhine,  appears  in  the  form  of 
Flame. 

^.  1 1.    Do  not  great  Bodies  conferve  their 
heat  the  longeft,    their  parts  heating  one  ano- 
ther,   and  may  not  great  denfe  and  fix'd  Bo- 
dies,   when  heated  beyond  a  certain  degree,   e- 
mit  Light  fo  copioufly,  as  by  the  Emilfion  and 
Re-a6tion  of  its  Light,  and  the  Reflexions  and 
Refradions  of  its  Rays  within  its  Pores  to  grow 
ilill  hotter,  till  it  comes  to  a  certain  period  of 
heat,  fuch  as  is  that  of  the  Sun  ?  And  are  not 
the  Sun  and  fix'd  Stars  great  Earths  vehemently 
hot,  whofe  heat  is  conferved  by  the  greatnef^ 
of  the  Bodies,  and  the  mutual  Adiion  and  Re- 
action between  them,  and  the  Light  which  they 
emit,  and  whofe  parts  are  kept  from  fuming  a- 
way,  not  only  by  their  fixity,  but  alfo  by  the 
vaft  weight  and  denfity  of  the  Atmofpheres  in- 
cumbent upon  them ;  and  very  ftrongly  com- 
preffing  them,  and  condenfing  the  Vapours  and 
Exhalations  which   arife   from    them?    For  if 
Water  be  made  warm   in  any  pellucid  Veflel 
emptied  of  Air,  that  Water  in  the  Vacuum  will 
bubble  and  boil  as  vehemently  as  it  would  in 
the  open  xAir  in  a  Veffel  fet  upon  the  Fire  till 
it    conceives   a    much  greater  heat.      For  the 
weight   of   the  incumbent    Atmofphere   keeps 
down  the  Vapours,  and  hinders  the  Water  from 
boiling,  until  it  grow  much  hotter  than  is  re- 
quifite  to  make  it  boil  in  vacuo.     Alfo  a  mix- 
ture of  Tin  and  Lead  being  put  upon  a  red  hot 
Iron  in  vacuo  emits  a  Fume  and  Flame^  but  the 
3  fame 


BOOK     III.  319 

fame  Mixture  in  the  open  Air,  by  reafon  of  the 
incumbent  Atmofphere,  does  not  fo  much  as  e- 
mit  any  Fume  which  can  be  perceived  by  Sight. 
In  like  manner  the  great  weight  of  the  Atmo- 
fphere which  lies  upon  the  Globe  of  the  Sun 
may  hinder  Bqdies  there  from  riling  up  and 
going  away  from  the  Sun  in  the  form  of  Va- 
pours and  Fumes,  unlefs  by  means  of  a  far 
greater  heat  than  that  which  on  the  Surface  of 
our  Earth  would  very  eafily  turn  them  into  Va- 
pours and  Fumes.  And  the  fime  great  weight 
may  condenfe  thofe  Vapours  and  Exhalations  as 
foon  as  they  fliall  at  any  time  begin  to  afcend 
from  the  Sun,  and  make  them  prefently  fall 
back  again  into  him,  and  by  that  adion  increafe 
his  Pleat  much  after  the  manner  that  in  our 
Earth  the  Air  increafes  the  Heat  of  a  culinary 
Fire.  And  the  fame  weight  may  hinder  the 
Globe  of  the  Sun  from  being  diminifh'd,  unlefs 
by  the  Emiflion  of  Light,  and  a  very  fmall  quan- 
tity of  Vapours  and  Exhalations. 

%/.  12.  Do  not  the  Rays  of  Light  in  falling 
upon  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  excite  Vibrations 
in  the  Tunica  Retina?  Which  Vibrations,  be- 
ing propagated  along  the  folid  Fibres  of  the  op- 
tick  Nerves  into  the  Brain,  caufe  the  Senfe  of 
feeing.  For  becaufe  denfe  Bodies  conferve  their 
Heat  a  long  time,  and  the  denfeft  Bodies  con- 
ferve their  Heat  the  longeft,  the  Vibrations  of 
their  parts  are  of  a  lalling  nature,  and  there- 
fore may  be  propagated  along  folid  Fibres  of 
uniform  denfe  Matter  to  a  great  diftance,  for 
conveying  into  the  Brain  the  impreffions  made 
upon  all  the  Organs  of  Senfe.     For  that  Motion 

which 


320  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

which  can  continue  long  in  one  and  the  fame  part 
of  a  Body,  can  be  propagated  a  long  way  from 
one  part  to  another,  fuppofing  the  Body  homo- 
geneal,  fo  that  the  Motion  may  not  be  refleded, 
reffaded,  interrupted  or  diforder'd  by  any  un- 
evennefs  of  the  Body. 

^.  13.  Do  not  feveral  forts  of  Rays  make 
Vibrations  of  feveral  |)ignefres,  which  according 
to  their  bignelfes  excite  Senfations  of  feveral  Co- 
lours, much  after  the  manner  that  the  Vibrations 
of  the  Air,  according  to  their  feveral  bignelfes 
excite  Senfations  of  feveral  Sounds  ?  And  parti- 
cularly do  not  the  moft  refrangible  Rays  excite 
the  fhorteft  Vibrations  for  making  a  Senfation  of 
deep  violet,  the  leafl  refrangible  the  largeft  for 
making  a  Senfation  of  deep  red,  and  the  feveral 
intermediate  forts  of  Rays,  Vibrations  of  feveral 
intermediate  bigneffes  to  make  Senfations  of  the 
feveral  intermediate  Colours  ? 

^.  14.  May  not  the  harmony  and  difcord  of 
Colours  arife  from  the  proportions  of  the  Vibra- 
tions propagated  through  the  Fibres  of  the  op- 
tick  Nerves  into  the  Brain,  as  the  harmony  and 
difcord  of  Sounds  arife  from  the  proportions  of 
the  Vibrations  of  the  Air?  For  fome  Colours,  if 
they  be  view'd  together,  are  agreeable  to  one 
another,  as  thofe  of  Gold  and  Indigo,  and  others 
difagree. 

^i.  15.  Are  not  the  Species  of  Objedls  feen 
with  both  Eyes  united  where  the  optick  Nerves 
meet  before  they  come  into  the  Brain,  the  Fi- 
bres on  the  right  fide  of  both  Nerves  uniting 
there,  and  after  union  going  thence  into  the 
Brain  in  the  Nerve  whicji  is  on  the  right  fide  of 

thq 


BOOK     III.  .21 

the  Head,  and  the  Fibres  on  the  left  fide  of 
both  Nerves  uniting  in  the  fame  place,  and  af- 
ter union  going  into  the  Brain  in  the  Nerve 
which  is  on  the  left  fide  of  the  Head,  and  thefe 
tw^o  Nerves  meeting  in  the  Brain  in  fuch  a  man- 
ner that  their  Fibres  make  but  one  entire  Spe- 
cies or  Pidure,  half  of  which  on  the  right  fide 
of  the  Senforium  comes  from  the  right  fide  of 
both  Eyes  through  the  right  fide  of  both  op- 
tick  Nerves  to  the  place  where  the  Nerves  meet, 
end  from  thence  on  the  right  fide  of  the  Head 
into  the  Brain,  and  the  other  half  on  the  left 
fide  of  the  Senforium  comes  in  like  manner  from 
the  left  fide  of  both  Eyes.  For  the  op  tick 
Nerves  of  fuch  Animals  as  look  the  fame  way 
with  both  Eyes  (as  of  Men,  Dogs,  Sheep,  Oxen, 
&c\)  meet  before  they  come  into  the  Brain,  but 
the  optick  Nerves  of  fuch  Animals  as  do  not 
look  the  fame  way  with  both  Eyes  (as  of  Fifiics, 
and  of  the  Chameleon,)  do  not  meet,  if  I  am 
rightly  inform'd. 

^.  1 6.  When  a  Man  in  the  dark  prefTes  either 
corner  of  his  Eye  with  his  Finger,  and  turns  his 
Eye  away  from  his  Finger,  he  will  fee  a  Circle 
of  Colours  like  thofe  in  the  Feather  of  a  Pea- 
cock's Tail.  If  the  Eye  and  the  Finger  remain 
quiet  thefe  Colours  vanifh  in  a  fecond  Minute  of 
Time,  but  if  the  Finger  be  moved  with  a  qua- 
vering Motion  they  appear  again.  Do  not  thefe 
Colours  arife  from  fuch  Motions  excited  in  the 
bottom  of  the  Eye  by  the  PrelTure  and  Motion 
of  the  Finger,  as  at  other  times  are  excited 
there  by  Light  for  caufing  Vifion  ?  And  do  not 
the  Motions  once  excited  continue  about  a  Se- 

,y  cond 


322  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

cond  of  Time  before  they  ceafe  ?  And  when  a 
Man  by  a  ftroke  upon  his  Eye  fees  a  flafh  of 
Light,  are  not  the  Hke  Motions  excited  in  the 
Retina  by  the  ftroke  ?  And  when  a  Coal  of  Fire 
moved  nimbly  in  the  circumference  of  a  Cir- 
cle, makes  the  whole  circumference  appear  like 
a  Circle  of  Fire ;  is  it  not  becaufe  the  Motions 
excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  by  the  Rays 
of  Light  are  of  a  lafting  nature,  and  continue 
till  the  Coal  of  Fire  in  going  round  returns  to 
its  former  place  ?  And  confidering  the  lafting- 
nefs  of  the  Motions  excited  in  the  bottom  of 
the  Eye  by  Light,  are  they  not  of  a  vibrating 
nature  ? 

%/.  17.    If  a  Stone  be  thrown  into  ftagnating 
Water,    the    Waves    excited    thereby    continue- 
fome  time  to  arife  in  the  place  where  the  Stone 
fell  into  the  Water,   and  are  propagated  from 
thence  in  concentrick  Circles  upon  the  Surface 
of  the  Water  to  great  diftances.     And  the  Vi- 
brations or  Tremors  excited  in  the  Air  by  per- 
cuffion,  continue  a  little  time  to  move  from  the 
place  of  percufTion  in   concentrick   Spheres  to 
great  diftances.   And  in  like  manner,  when  a  Ray 
of  Light  falls  upon  the  Surface  of  any  pellucid 
Body,  and  is  there  refra(fted  or  reflected,  may  not 
Waves  of  Vibrations,  or  Tremors,    be  thereby 
excited  in  the  refracting  or  reflecfling  Medium  at 
the  point  of  Incidence,   and  continue  to  arife 
there,  and  to  be  propagated  from  thence  as  long 
as  they  continue  to  arife  and  be  propagated,  when 
they  are  excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  by  the 
Prellure  or  Motion  of  the  Finger,  or  by  the  Light 
which  comes  from  the  Coal  of  Fire  in  the  Ex- 
periments. 


B  o  o  ic  in.         323 

perimetits  abovemention'd  ?  and  are  not  thefa 
Vibrations  propagated  from  the  point  of  Inci- 
dence to  great  diltances  ?  And  do  they  not  over- 
take the  Rays  of  Light,  and  by  overtaking  them 
fucceffively,  do  they  not  put  them  into  the  Fits 
of  eafy  Reflex io.^.  and  eafy  Tranfmiinon  defcribed 
above?  For  if  the  Rays  endeavour  to  recede  from 
the  denfeft  part  of  the  Vibration,  they  may  be 
ahernately  accelerated  and  retarded  by  the  Vi- 
brations overtaking  them. 

%.  18.  If  in  two  large  tall  cylindrical  Vef-* 
fels  of  Glafs  inverted,  two  little  Thermometers 
be  fufpended  fo  as  not  to  touch  the  Veffels,  and 
the  Air  be  drawn  out  of  one  of  thefe  Veffels, 
and  thefe  Veffels  thus  prepared  be  carried  out 
of  a  cold  place  into  a  warm  one;  the  Thermo- 
meter ift  'Vacuo  will  grov/  warm  as  much,  and 
almoft  as  foon  as  the  Thermometer  which  is 
not  in  vacuo.  And  when  the  Veffels  are  carri- 
ed back  into  the  cold  place,  the  Thermometer 
in  vacuo  will  grow  cold  almofi:  as  foon  as  the 
other  Thermometer.  Is  not  th^e  Heat  of  the 
warm  Room  convey'd  through  the  Vacuum  by 
the  Vibrations  of  a  much  fubriler  Medium  than 
Air,  which  after  the  Air  was  drawn  out  remain- 
ed in  the  Vacuum  f  And  is  not  this  Medium  the 
fame  with  that  Medium  by  which  Light  is  re- 
fracted and  refleded,  and  bv  whofe  Vibrations 
Light  communicates  Heat  to  Bodies,  and  is 
put  into  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and  eafy  Tranf- 
miffion  ?  And  do  not  the  Vibrations  of  this  Me-* 
dium  in  hot  Bodies  contribute  to  the  intenfenefs 
and  duration  of  their  Heat  ?  And  do  not  hot 
Bodies  communicate  their  Heat  to  contiguous 

y  3  cdld 


324  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

cold  ones,  by  the  Vibrations  of  this  Medium 
propagated  from  them  into  the  cold  ones  ?  And 
is  not  this  Medium  exceedingly  more  rare  and 
fubtile  than  the  Air,  and  exceedingly  more  ela- 
ftick  and  adlive?  And  doth  it  not  readily  per- 
vade all  Bodies?  And  is  it  not  ( by  its  elaftick 
force)  expanded  through  all  the  Heavens  ?    . 

^.  19.  Doth  not  the  Refradtion  of  Light 
proceed  from  the  different  denfity  of  this  JEzhe- 
real  Medium  in  different  places,  the  Light  re- 
ceding always  from  the  denfer  parts  of  the  Me- 
dium? And  is  not  the  denfity  thereof  greater 
in  free  and  open  Spaces  void  of  Air  and  other 
groffer  Bodies,  than  vi^ithin  tjie  Pores  of  Wa- 
ter,' Glafs,  Cryflal,  Gems,  and  other  compacfl 
Bodies?  For  w^hen  Light  paffes  through  Glafs 
or  Cryflal,  and  falling  very  obliquely  upon  the 
farther  Surface  thereof  is  totally  refleded,  the 
total  Reflexion  ought  to  proceed  rather  from  the 
denfity  and  vigour  of  the  Medium  w^ithout  and 
beyond  the  Glafs,  than  from  the  rarity  and  w^eak- 
nefs  thereof 

^.  20.  Doth  not  this  Ethereal  Medium  in 
paffing  out  of  Water,  Glafs,  Cryflal,  and  other 
compad:  and  denfe  Bodies  into  empty  Spaces, 
grov^  denfer  and  denfer  by  degrees,  and  by  that 
means  refraft  the  Rays  of  Light  nor  in  a  point, 
but  by  bending  them  gradually  in  curve  Lines  ? 
And  doth  not  the  gradual  condcnfation  of  this 
Medium  extend  to  fome  diflance  from  the  Bo- 
dies, and  thereby  caufe  the  Inflexions  of  the 
Rays  of  Light,  which  pafs  by  the  edges  of  denfe 
Bodies,  at  fome  diflance  from  the  Bodies  ? 


^. 


BOOK     III.  325 

^.  21.  Is  not  this  Medium  much  rarer  with- 
in the  denfe  Bodies  of  the  Sun,  Stars,  Planets 
and  Comets,  than  in  the  empty  celeftial  Spaces 
between  them  ?  And  in  pafling  from  them  to 
great  diftances ,  doth  it  not  grow  denfer  and 
denfer  perpetually,  and  thereby  caufe  the  gra- 
vity of  thofe  great  Bodies  towards  one  another, 
and  of  their  parts  towards  the  Bodies;  every 
Body  endeavouring  to  go  from  the  denfer  parts 
of  the  Medium  towards  the  rarer  ?  For  if  this 
Medium  be  rarer  within  the  Sun's  Body  than  at 
its  Surface,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the  hun- 
dredth part  of  an  Inch  from  Its  Body,  and  ra- 
rer there  than  at  the  fiftieth  part  of  an  Inch  ftom 
its  Body,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the  Orb  of 
Saturn,  I  fee  no  reafon  why  the  Increafe  of 
denfity  fhould  flop  any  where,  and  not  rather 
be  continued  through  all  diftances  from  the  Sun 
to  Saturn^  and  beyond.  And  though  this  In- 
creafe of  denfity  may  at  great  diftances  be  ex- 
ceeding flow,  yet  if  the  elaftick  force  of  this 
Medium  be  exceeding  great,  it  may  fufhce  to 
impel  Bodies  from  the  denfer  parts  of  the  Me- 
dium towards  the  rarer ,  with  all  that  power 
which  we  call  Gravity.  And  that  the  elaflick 
force  of  this  Medium  is  exceeding  great,  may 
be  gather'd  from  the  fwiftnefs  of  its  Vibrations. 
Sounds  move  about  1 140  EnMh  Feet  in  a  fe- 
cond  Minute  of  Time,  and  in  feven  or  eight 
Minutes  of  Time  they  move  about  one  hundred 
Englijlo  Miles.  Light  moves  from  t':e  Sun  to 
us  in  about  feven  or  eight  Minutes  f  Time, 
which  diflance  is  about  70000000  Eng  jh  Miles, 
fuppofing  the  horizontal  Parallax  of  tiic  Sun  to 

Y  3  be 


3^6         O  P  T  I  C  K  S, 

be  about  12".  And  the  Vibrations  or  Pulfes  of 
this  Medium,  that  they  may  caufe  the  akernatc 
Fits  of  eafy  TraDfiriillion  and  eafy  Reflexion,  . 
muft  be  fwlJtcr  th;  n  Light,  and  by  confequencc 
above  700000  amL?.  fwiirer.than  Sounds.  And 
therefore  the  eUitick  force  of  this  Medium,  in 
proportion  to  its  denfiiy,  muft  be  above  70000Q 
X  700000  (that  is,  above 490000000000)  times 
greater  than  the  elaftick  force  of  the  Air  is  in 
proportion  to  its  deufity.  For  the  Velocities  of 
the  Puh'es  of  ehifticiv  Mediums  are  in  a  fubdupU^ 
cate  Ratio  of  the  Hlailiciries  and  the  Rarities  of 
the  Mediums  taken  together. 

As  Attraction  is  ilronger  in  fmall  Magnets 
than  in  great  ones  in  proportion  to  their  Bulk, 
and  Gravity  is  greater  in  the  Surfaces  of  fmall 
Planets  than  in  thofe  of  great  ones  in  propor- 
tion to  their  bulk,  and  fmall  Bodies  are  agita- 
ted much  more  by  eledric  attradion  than  great 
ones  J  fo  the  fmallnefs  of  the  Rays  of  Light 
may  contribute  very  much  to  the  power  of 
the  Agent  by  which  they  are  refraded.  And 
fo  if  any  one  fhould  fuppofe  that  Mther  ( like 
our  Air)  may  contain  Particles  which  endeavour 
to  recede  from  one  another  ( for  J  do  not  know 
what  this  Mther  is)  and  that  its  Particles  are 
exceedingly  fmaller  than  thofe  of  Air,  or  even 
than  thofe  of  Light:  The  exceeding  fmallnefs 
of  its  Particles  may  contribute  to  the  greatnefs 
of  the  force  by  which  thofe  Particles  may  re-, 
cede  from  one  anqther,  and  thereby  make  that 
Medium  exceedingly  more  rare  and  elaftick 
than  Air,  and  by  confequence  exceedingly  lefs 
able  to  refift  the  motions  of  Projediles,    and 

exceed- 


BOOK     III.  327 

exceedingly  more  able  to  prefs  upon  grofs  Bodies, 
by  endeavouring  to  expand  it  lelf. 

^/.  22.  May  not  Planets  and  Comets,  and  all 
grofs  Bodies,  perform  their  Motions  more  freely, 
and  with  lefs  refiftance  in  this  ^Ethereal  Medium 
than  in  any  Fluid,   which  fills  all  Space  ade- 
quately without  leaving  any  Pores,  and  by  confe- 
quence  is  much  denfer  than Quick'-lilver  or  Gold? 
And  may  not  its  refiftance  be  fo  fmall,  as  to  be 
inconfiderable  ?  Forinftance;  1£  this  Mther  (for 
fo  I  will  call  it )   fhould  be  -  fuppofed  700000 
times  more  elaftick  than  our  Air,    and  above 
700000  times  more   rare  j    its  refiftance  would 
be  above  600000000  times  lefs  than  that  of  Wa- 
ter.     And  fo   fmall    a  refiftance  would  fcarce 
make  any  fenfible  alteration  in  the  Motions  of 
the  Planets  in  ten  thoufand  Years.     If  any  one 
would  ask  how  a  Medium  can  be  fo  rare,  let 
him  tell  me  how  the  Air,  in  the  upper  parts  of 
the  Atmofphere,  Qin  be  above  an  hundred  thou- 
fand thoufand  times  rarer  than  Gold.     Let  him 
alfo  tell  me,  how  an  eledtrick  Body  can  by  Fri- 
ction emit  an  Exhalation  fo  rare  and  fubtile,  and 
yet  fo  potent,    as  by  its  Emiflion  to  caufe  no 
fenftble  Diminution  of  the  weight  of  the  de- 
rrick Body,    and  to  be  expanded   through   a 
Sphere,  whofe  Diameter  is  above  two  Feet,  and 
yet  to  be  able  to  agitate  and  carry  up  Leaf  Cop- 
per, or  Leaf  Gold,  at  the  diftance  of  above  a 
Foot  from  the  eledrick  Body?    And  how  the 
Effluvia  of  a  Magnet  can  be  fo  rare  and  fubtile,  as 
to  pafs  through  a  Plate  of  Glafs  without  any  Reii- 
ftance  or  Diminution  of  their  Force,  and  vet  fo 
potent  as  to  turn  a  magnetick  Needle  beyond  the 
Glafs?  y  4  ^, 


328  0  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

^/.  23.  Is  not  Vifion  perform'd  chiefly  by  the 
Vibrations  of  this  Medium,  excited  in,  the  bot- 
tom of  the  Eye  by  the  Rays  of  Light,  and  pro- 
pagated through  the  folid,  pellucid  and  uniform 
Capillamenta  of  the  optick  Nerves  into  the  place 
of  Senfaticn  ?  And  is  not  Hearing  perform'd  by 
the  Vibrations  either  of  this  or  fome  other  Medi- 
um, excited  in  the  auditory  Nerves  by  the  Tre- 
mors of  the  Air,  and  propagated  through  the  fo- 
lid, pellucid  and  uniform  Capillamenta  of  thofe 
Nerves  into  the  place  of  Senfatiofi  ?  And  fo  of 
the  other  Senfes. 

^.  24.  Is  not  Animal  Motion  perform'd  by 
the  Vibrations  of  this  Medium,  excited  in  the 
Brain  by  the  power  of  the  Will,  and  propaga- 
ted from  thence  through  the  folid,  pellucid  and 
uniform  Capillamenta  of  the  Nerves  into  the 
Mufcles,  for  contrad:ing  and  dilating  them  ?  I 
fuppofe  that  the  Capillamenta  of  the  Nerves  are 
each  of  them  folid  and  uniform,  that  the  vibra- 
ting Motion  of  the  iEthereal  Medium  may  be 
propagated  along  them  from  one  e;id  to  the  other 
uniformly,  and  w^ithout  interruption:  For  Ob- 
ftrudions  in  the  Nerves  create  Palfies.  And  that 
they  may  be  Sufficiently  uniform ,  I  fuppofe 
them  to  be  pellucid  when  view'd  fmgly,  tho'  the 
Reflexions  in  their  cylindrical  Surfaces  may  make 
the  whole  Nerve  ( compofed  of  many  Capilla- 
menta) appear  opake  and  white.  For  opacity 
.arifes  from  reflecting  Surfaces,  fuch  as  may  di- 
fturb  and  interrupt  the  Motions  of  this  Medium. 

^/.  25.  Are  there  not  other  original  Proper- 
ties of  the  Rays  of  Light,  befides  thofe  alrea- 
dy defcribed  ?    An  inftance  of  another  original 

Fro- 


BOOK     III.  329 

Property  we  have  in  the  Refradion  of  Illand 
Cryftal ,  defcribed  firft  by  Erajmm  Bartholine^ 
and  afterwards  more  exadly  by  Hugeniin^  in  his 
Book  De  la  Lumiere,  This  Gryftal  is  a  pel- 
kicid  fiffile  Stone,  clear  as  Water  or  Cryftal  of 
the  Rock,  and  without  Colour  j  enduring  a  red 
Heat  without  lofing  its  tranfparency,  and  in  a 
very  ftrong  Heat  calcining  without  Fufion. 
Steep'd  a  Day  or  two  in  Water,  it  lofes  its  na- 
tural Polifh.  Being  rubb'd  on  Cloth,  it  attracfls 
pieces  of  Straws  and  other  light  things,  like  Am- 
bar  or  Glafs;  and  with  Aqua  Jortis  it  makes  an 
Ebullition.  It  feems  to  be  a  fort  of  Talk,  and 
is  found  in  form  of  an  oblique  Parallelopiped, 
with  lix  parallelogram  Sides  and  eight  folid  An- 
gles. The  obtule  Angles  of  the  Parallelograms 
are  each  of  them  10 1  Degrees,  and  52  Minutes; 
the  acute  ones  78  Degrees  and  8  Minutes.  Two 
of  the  folid  Angles  oppofite  to  one  another,  as 
C  and  E,  are  compalTed  each  of 
them  with  three  of  thefe  obtufe  ^'* '/£""" 
Angles,  and  each  of  the  other 
fix  with  one  obtufe  and  two  acute  ones.  It 
cleaves  eaiily  in  planes  parallel  to  any  of  its 
Sides,  and  not  in  any  other  Planes.  It  cleaves 
with  a  glofly  polite  Surface  not  perfectly  plane, 
but  with  fome  little  unevennefs.  It  is  eafily 
fcratch'd,  and  by  reafon  of  its  foftnefs  it  takes  a 
Polifh  very  difficultly.  It  polifhes  better  upon 
polifh'd  Looking-glafs  than  upon  Metal,  and 
perhaps  better  upon  Pitch,  Leather  or  Parch- 
ment. Afterwards  it  muft  be  rubb'd  with  a  lit- 
tle Oil  or  white  of  an  Egg,  to  fill  up  its  Scratches; 
whereby  it  will  become  very  tranfparent  and  po- 
lite. 


330 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


lite.  But  for  feveral  Experiments,  it  is  not  necef- 
fary  to  polifh  it.  If  a  piece  of  this  cryflalline 
Stone  be  laid  upon  a  Book,  every  Letter  of  the 
Book  feen  through  it  will  appear  double,  by 
means  of  a  double  Refracflion.  And  if  any  beam 
of  Light  falls  either  perpendicularly,  or  in  any 
oblique  Angle  upon  any  Surface  of  this  Cryftal, 
it  becomes  divided  into  two  beams  by  means  of, 
the  fame  double  Refraction.  Which  beams  are  of 
the  fame  Colour  with  the  incident  beam  of  Light, 
and  feem  equal  to  one  another  in  the  quantity  of 
their  Light,  or  very  nearly  equal.  One  of  thefe 
Refra<flions  is  perform'd  by  the  ufual  Rule  of  Op- 
ticks,  the  Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Air  into  this 
Cryftal  being  to  the  Sine  of  Refradion,  as  five  to 
three.  The  other  Refra(5tion,  which  may  be  cal- 
led the  unufual  Refraction,  is  perform'd  by  the 
following  Rule. 

5\ 


H  ^ 

Let  ADBC  reprefent  the  refrading  Surface 

of 
\ 


BOOK     III.  331 

of  the  Cryftal,  C  the  biggeft  folid  Angle  at  that 
Surface,  GEHF  the  oppofite  Surface,  and  CK 
a  perpendicular  on  that  Surface.  This  perpen- 
dicular makes  with  the  edge  of  the  Cryftal  C  F, 
an  Angle  of  19  Degr.  3'.  Join  KF,  and  in  it 
take  KL,  fo  that  the  Angle  KCL  be  6  Degr. 
40'.  and  the  Angle  LCF  12  Degr.  23'.  And  if 
ST  reprefent  any  beam  of  Light  incident  at  T 
in  any  Angle  upon  the  refracfting  Surface  AD  B  C, 
let  TV  be  the  refradted  beam  determin'd  by  the 
given  Portion  of  the  Sines  5  to  3,  according  to 
the  ufual  Rule  of  Opticks.  Draw  V  X  parallel 
and  equal  to  KL.  Draw  it  the  fame  way  from 
V  in  which  L  liethfromK;  and  joining  TX, 
this  line  T  X  fhall  be  the  other  refracted  beam 
carried  from  T  to  X,  by  the  unufual  Refra- 
d;ion, 

If  therefore  the  incident  beam  S  T  be  perpen- 
dicular to  the  refra(5ling  Surface,  the  two  beams 
TV  and  TX,  into  which  it  fhall  become  di- 
vided, fliall  be  parallel  to  the  lines  CK  and  CL  ; 
one  of  thofe  beams  going  through  the  Cryftal 
perpendicularly,  as  it  ought  to  do  by  the  ufual 
Laws  of  Opticks,  and  the  other  T  X  by  an  unu- 
fual Refradion  diverging  from  the  perpendicular, 
and  making  with  it  an  Angle  V  T  X  of  about  6 1 
Degrees,  as  is  found  by  Experience.  And 
hence,  the  Plane  VTX,  and  fuch  like  Planes 
which  are  parallel  to  the  Plane  C  F  K,  may  be 
called  the  Planes  of  perpendicular  Refradion. 
And  the  Coaft  towards  which  the  lines  KL  and 
VX  are  drawn,  may  be  call'd  the  Coaft  of  unu- 
fual Refraction. 

In  like  manner  Cryftal  of  the  Hock  has  a 
5  double 


332  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

double  Refra(5tion :  But  the  difference  of  tl^  two 
Refradions  is  not  fo  great  and  manifefl  as  in 
Ifland  Cryftal. 

When  the  beam  S  T  incident  on  Ifland  Cry- 
ftal is  divided  into  two  beams  T  V  and  T  X, 
and  thefe  two  beams  arrive  at  the  farther  Surface 
of  the  Giafs ;  the  beam  T  V,  which  was  refra- 
cted at  the  firfl  Surface  after  the  ufual  manner, 
Ihall  be  again  refracted  entirely  after  the  ufual 
manner  at  the  fecond  Surface ;  and  the  beam  T  X, 
which  was  refracted  after  the  unufual  manner  in 
the  firft  Surface,  lliall  be  again  refradlied  entirely 
after  the  unufual  manner  in  the  fecond  Surface ; 
fo  that  both  thefe  beams  fliall  emerge  out  of  the 
lecond  Surface  in  lines  parallel  to  the  firft  incident 
beam  S  T. 

And  if  two  pieces  of  Ifland  Cryftal  be  pla- 
ced one  after  another,  in  fuch  manner  that  all 
the  Surfaces  of  the  latter  be  parallel  to  all  the 
correfponding  Surfaces  of  the  former:  The 
Rays  which  are  refradted  after  the  ufual  man- 
ner in  the  flrft  Surface  of  the  firft  Cryftal,  ftiall 
be  reflated  after  the  ufual  manner  in  all  the 
following  Surliices  j  and  the  Rays  which  are  re- 
fraded  alter  the  unufual  manner  in  the  firft  Sur- 
face, fhaii  be  relradted  after  the  unufual  manner 
in  all  tlie  following  Surfaces.  And  the  fame  thing 
happens,  though  the  Surfaces  of  the  Cryftals  be 
any  ways  inclined  to  one  another,  provided  that 
their  Planes  of  perpendicular  Refradlion  be  pa- 
rallel to  ope  another. 

And  therefore  there  is  an  original  difterencc 

an  the  Rays  of  Light,  by  means  of  which  fome 

Rays  are  m  this  Experiment  conftantly  refra(S- 

k.'  ed 


BOOK     m.  333 

cd  after  the  ufual  manner,  and  others  conftant- 
ly  after  the  unufual  manner :  For  if  the  diffe- 
rence be  not  original,  but  arifes  from  new  Mo- 
difications imprefs'd  on  the  Rays  at  their  firft 
Refrad:ion,  it  would  be  aker'd  by  new  Modi- 
fications in  the  three  following  Refractions; 
whereas  it  fuffers  no  alteration,  but  is  conftant, 
and  has  the  fame  effed  upon  the  Rays  in  all  the 
Refractions.  The  unufual  Refraction  is  there- 
fore perform'd  by  an  original  property  of  the 
Rays.  And  it  remains  to  be  enquired,  whether 
the  Rays  have  not  more  original  Properties  than 
are  yet  difcover'd. 

^.  26.     Have  not  the  Rays  of  Light  feveral 
fides,    endued  with  feveral  original  Properties  ? 
For  if  the  Planes  of  perpendicular  Refradtion 
of  the  fecond  Cryftal  be  at  right  Angles  with 
the   Planes  of   perpendicular  RefraCtion  of  the 
firft  Cryftal,  the  Rays  which  are  refradted  after 
the  ufual  manner  in  paffing   through  the  firft 
Cryftal,  will  be  all  of  them  refradted  after  the 
unufual  manner  in  pafling  through   the  fecond 
Cryftal;   and  the  Rays  which  are  refradted  af- 
ter the  unufual  manner  in  paffing  through  the 
firft  Cryftal,  will  be  all  of  them  refradted  after 
the  ufual  manner  in  paffing  through  the  fecond 
Cryftal.     And  therefore  there  are  not  two  forts 
of  Rays  differing  in  their  nature  from  one  ano- 
ther, one  of  which  is  conftantly  and  in  all  Po- 
fitions  refradted  after  the  ufual  manner,  and  the 
other  conftantly  and  in  all  Pofitions  after  the 
unufual  manner.     The  difference   between  the 
two  forts  of  Rays  in  the  Experiment  mention'd 
in  the  25th  Queftion,  was  only  in  the  Pofitions 

I  ©f 


334  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

of  the  Sides  of  the  Rays  to  the  Planes  of  pef<» 
pendicular  Refrad:ion.      For  one  and  the  fame 
Ray  is  here  refraded  fometimes  after  the  ufual, 
and  fometimes  after  the  unufual  manner,  ac- 
cording to  the  Polition  which  its  Sides  have  to 
the  Cryflals.     If  the  Sides  of  the  Ray  are  poii- 
ted  the  fame  way  to  both  Cryflals,  it  is  refra^ 
fted  after  the  fame  manner  in  them  both :  But 
if   that  fide  of  the  Ray  which  looks   towards 
the  Coaft  of  the  unufual  Refradion  of  the  iirft 
Cryftal,   be  90  Degrees  from  that  fide  of  the 
fame  Ray  which  looks  toward  the  Coaft  of  the 
unufual  Refradion  of  the  fecond  Cryltal,  (which 
may  be  effected  by  varying  the  Pofition  of  the 
fecond  Cryftal  to  the  firft,  and  by  confequence 
to  the  Rays  of  Light, )  the  Ray  {hall  be  refraded 
after   feveral    manners   in    the  feveral  Cryflals. 
There   is  nothing  more  required  to  determine 
whether  the  Rays  of  Light  which  fall  upon  the 
fecond  Cryflal  fhall  be  refraded  after  the  ufual 
or  after  the  unufual  manner,  but  to  turn  about 
this  Cryflal,  fo  that  the  Coafl  of  this  Cryflal's 
unufual  Refradion  may  be  orf  this  or  on  that 
fide  of  the  Ray.     And  therefore  every  Ray  may 
be  confider'd  as  having  four  Sides  or  Quarters, 
two  of  which  oppofite  to  one  another  incline 
the  Ray  to  be  refradled  after  the  unufual  man- 
ner,   as  often  as  either  of  them  are  turn'd  to- 
wards the  Coafl  of  unufuil  Refradion  j  and  the 
other  two,  whenever  either  of  them  are  turn'd 
towards  the  Coafl  of  unufual  Refradion,  do  not 
incline  it  to  be  otherwife  refracted  than   after 
the  ufual  manner.     The  two  iirfl  may  there- 
fore be  call'd  the  Sides  of  unufual  Refradion- 

And 


BOOK     in.  335 

And  fince  thefe  DifpofitioRS  were  in  the  Rays 
before  their  Incidence  on  the  fecond,  third,  and 
fourth  Surfaces  of  the  two  Cryflals,  and  fuffer- 
ed  no  alteration  (  fo  far  as  appears, )  by  the  Re- 
fra(flion  of  the  Rays  in  their  paflilge  through 
thofe  Surfaces,  and  the  Rays  v/ere  refrad:ed  by 
the  fame  Laws  in  all  the  four  Surfaces ;  it  ap- 
pears that  thofe  Difpofitions  were  in  the  Rays 
originally,  and  fufier'd  no  alteration  by  the  firil 
Refradion,  and  that  by  means  of  thofe  Difpofi- 
tions the  Rays  -were  refradied  at  their  Incidence 
on  the  firft  Surface  of  the  firfh  Cryilal,  fome  of 
them  after  the  ufual,  and  fome  of  them  after  the 
unufual  manner,  accordingly  as  their  Sides  of 
vinufual  Refradion  were  then  turn'd  towards  the 
Coaft  of  the  unufual  Refradion  of  that  Cryilal, 
or  lideways  from  it. 

Every  Ray  of  Light  has  therefore  two  oppo- 
fite  Sides,  originally  endued  with  a  Property  on 
which  the  unufual  Refradion  depends,  and  the 
other  two  oppofite  Sides  not  endued  with  that 
Property.  And  it  remains  to  be  enquired,  whe- 
ther there  are  not  more  Properties  of  Light  by 
which  the  Sides  of  the  Rays  differ,  ani  are  di- 
ftinguifh'd  from  one  another. 

In  explaining  the  difference  of  the  Sides  of 
the  Rays  above  mention'd,  I  have  fuppofed  that 
the  Rays  fall  perpendicularly  on  the  firfl  Cry- 
ftal.  But  if  they  falK  obliquely  on  it,  the  Suc- 
cefs  is  the  fame.  Thofe  Rays  which  are  refra- 
ded  after  the  ufual  manner  in  the  firfl  Cryflal, 
will  be  refraded  after  the  unufual  manner  in  the 
fecond  Cryflal,  fuppoiing  the  Planes  of  perpen- 
dicular 


336  O  P  T  I  C  K  a 

dicular  Refradtion  to  be  at  right  Angles  with  one 
another,  as  above  j  and  on  the  contrary. 

If  the  Planes  of  the  perpendicular  Refraction 
of  the  two  Cryflals  be  neither  parallel  nor  per- 
pendicular to  one  another,  but  contain  an  acute 
Angle :  The  two  beams  of  Light  which  emerge 
out  of  the  firfl  Cryftal,  will  be  each  of  them  di- 
vided into  two  more  at  their  Incidence  on  the  fe- 
cond  Cryftal.  For  in  this  cafe  the  Rays  in  each 
of  the  two  beams  will  fome  of  them  have  their  . 
Sides  of  unufual  Refradlion,  and  fome  of  them 
their  other  Sides  turn'd  towards  the  Coaft  of  the 
unufual  Refradtion  of  the  fecond  Cryftal. 

^/.  27.  Are  not  all  Hypothefes  erroneous 
which  have  hitherto  been  invented  for  explain- 
ing the  Phaenomena  of  Light,  by  new  Modifica- 
tions of  the  Rays  ?  For  thofe  Phaenomena  de- 
pend not  upon  new  Modifications,  a§  has  been 
fuppofed,  but  upon  the  original  and  unchange- 
able Properties  of  the  Rays. 

^.  28.  Are  not  all  Hypothefes  erroneous, 
in  which  Light  is  fuppofed  to  confift  in  Pref- 
lion  or  Motion,  propagated  through  a  fluid  Me- 
dium ?  For  in  all  thefe  Hypothefes  the  Phaeno- 
mena of  Light  have  been  hitherto  explain'd  by 
fuppofing  that  they  arife  from  new  Modifica- 
tions of  the  Rays  j  which  is  an  erroneous  Sup- 
pofition. 

If  Light  confifted  only  in  PreiTion  propaga- 
ted without  adhial  Motion,  it  would  not  be  a- 
ble  to  agitate  and  heat  the  Bodies  which  refrad: 
and  refledl  it.  If  it  confifted  in  Motion  propa- 
gated to  all  diftances  in  an  inftant,  it  would  re- 
quire an  infinite  force  every  moment,  in  every 

fhining 


BOOK     IIL  337 

fhinlng  Particle,  to  generate  that  Motion.  And 
if  it  confiiled  in  Preflion  or  Motion,  propaga- 
ted either  in  an  inftant  or  in  time,  it  would  bend 
into  the  Shadow.'  For  Preffion  or  Motion 
cannot  be  propagated  in  a  Fluid  in  right  Lines, 
beyond  an  Obitacle  which  ftops  part  of  the  Mo- 
tion, but  will  bend  and  fpread  every  way  into 
the  quiefcent  Medium  which  lies  beyond  the 
Obftacle.  Gravity  tends  downwards,  but  the 
PrelTure  of  Water  arifnig  from  Gravity  tends 
every  way  with  equal  Force,  and  is  propagated 
as  readily,  and  with  as  much  force  lideways  as 
downwards,  and  through  crooked  paflages  as 
through  ftaait  ones.  The  Waves  on  the  Surface 
of  ftagnating  Water,  paffing  by  the  fides  of  a 
broad  Obftacle  which  Itops  part  of  them,  bend 
afterwards  and  dilate  themfelves  gradually  into 
the  quiet  Water  behind  the  Obftacle.  The 
Waves,  Pulfes  or  Vibrations  of  the  Air,  where- 
in Sounds  confift,  bend  manifeftly,  though  not 
fo  much  as  the  Waves  of  Water.  For  a  Bell 
or  a  Cannon  may  be  heard  beyond  a  Hill  which 
intercepts  the  fight  of  the  founding  Body,  and 
Sounds  are  propagated  as  readily  through  crook- 
ed Pipes  as  through  ftreight  ones.  But  Light 
is  never  known  to  follow  crooked  Paftages  nor 
to  bend  into  the  Shadow.  For  the  fix'd  Stars 
by  the  Interpofition  of  any  of  the  Planets  ceafe 
to  be  fien.  And  fo  do  the  Parts  of  the  Sun 
by  the  Interpofition  of  the  Moon,  Mercury  or 
Venm.  The  Rays  which  pafs  very  near  to  the 
edges  of  any  Body,  are  bent  a  little  by  the  adion 
of  the  Body,  as  we  ftiew'd  above j  but  this 
bending  is  not  towards  but  from  the  Shaiow, 

Z  and 


338  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

and  is  perform'd  only  in  the  paffage  of  the  Ray 
by  the  Body,  and  at  a  very  fmall  diftance  from 
it*  So  foon  as  the  Ray  is  pafl  the  Body,  it  goes 
right  on. 

To  explain  the  unufual  Refra^ion  of  Ifland 
Cryftal  by  PreiTion  or  Motion  propagated,  has 
not  hitherto  been  attempted  ( to  my  knowledge) 
except  by  Huygms^  who  for  that  end  fuppofed 
two  feveral  vibrating  Mediums  within  that  Cry- 
ftal. But  when  he  tried  the  Refradions  in  two 
fucceffive  pieces  of  that  Cryftal ,  and  found 
them  fuch  as  is  mention'd  above;  he  confef- 
fed  himfelf  at  a  lofs  for  explaining  them.  For 
PrefTions  or  Motions,  propagated  from  a  Ihining 
Body  through  an  uniform  Medium,  muft  be 
on  all  fides  alike  j  whereas  by  thofe  Experi- 
ments it  appears,  that  the  Rays  of  Light  have 
different  Properties  in  their  different  Sides.  He 
fufpeded  that  the  Pulfes  of  /Ether  in  pafling 
through  the  firft  Cryftal  might  receive  certain 
new  Modifications,  which  might  determine 
them  to  be  propagated  in  this  or  that  Medium 
within  the   fecond    Cryftal,   according   to  tht 

Pofition  of    that   Cryftal. 
M^is  tour  dirt  comment     But    what    Modifications 

ceU  fe  fait,  je  nay  rlen  ^l^^fg  might  be  he  COuld 
trove  jufqu    id  qui  me  fa-  r.         ^  i  •    i        r 

tisfaje.  c.  H.  de  la  iumi-  Hot  lay,  nor  think  of  any 
ere.  c.  5.  p.  91.  thing   fatisfadory  in  that 

Point.  And  if  he  had 
knov^n  that  the  unufual  Refradlion  depends  not 
on  new  Modifications,  but  on  the  original  and 
unchangeable  Difpofitionsof  theRays,  he  would 
have  found  it  as  difficult  to  explain  how  thofe 
Pifpofitions  which  he  fuppofed  to  be  imprefs'd 

_  on 


BOOK     IIL  339 

on  the  Rays  by  the  firft  Cryftal,  could  be  in 
them  before  their  Incidence  on  that  Cryftal, 
and  in  general,  how  all  Rays  emitted  by  £hi- 
ning  Bodies,  can  have  thpfe  Difpofitions  in 
them  from  the  beginning.  To  me ,  at  leafl:, 
this  feems  inexplicable ,.  if  Light  be  nothing 
elfe  than  Preffion  or  Motion  propagated  through 
Mther, 

And  it  is  as  difficult  to  explain  by  thefe  Hy- 
pothefes,  how  Rays  can  be  alternately  in  Fits 
of  eafy  Reflexion  and  eafy  Tranfmiffion  j  unlefs 
perhaps  one  might  fuppofe  that  there  are  in  all 
Space  two  ^Ethereal  vibrating  Mediums,  and 
that  the  Vibrations  of  one  of  them  conftitute 
Light,  and  the  Vibrations  of  the  other  are  fwift- 
er,  and  as  often  as  they  overtake  the  Vibrations 
of  the  firft,  put  them  into  thofe  Fits.  But  how 
two  Mthers  can  be  diffufed  through  all  Space, 
one  of  which  ads  upon  the  other,  and  by  con- 
fequence  is  re-a<5led  upon,  without  retarding, 
fliattering,  difperling  and  confounding  one  an- 
others  Motions,  is  inconceivable.  And  againft 
filling  the  Heavens  with  fluid  Mediums,  unlefs 
they  be  exceeding  rare,  a  great  Objedion  arifes 
from  the  regular  and  very  lafting  Motions  of 
the  Planets  and  Comets  in  all  manner  of  Courfes 
through  the  Heavens.  For  thence  it  is  mani- 
feft,  that  the  Heavens  are  void  of  all  fenfible 
Refiftance,  and  by  confequence  of  all  fenfible 
Matter. 

For  the  refifling  Power  of  fluid  Mediums  a- 
rifes  partly  from  the  Attrition  of  the  Parts  of 
the  Medium,  and  partly  from  the  Vis  inertia 
of  the  Matter.     That  part  of  the  Refiftance  of 

Z  2  afphe- 


340  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

a  fpherical  Body  which  arifes  from  the  Attrition 
of  the  Parts  of  the  Medium  is  very  nearly  as  the 
Diameter,  or,  at  the  moft,  as  the  FaSfum  of  the 
Diameter,  and  the  Velocity  of  the  fpherical  Bo- 
dy together.  And  that  part  of  the  Reliflance 
which  arifes  from  the  Vis  inertia  of  the  Matter, 
is  as  the  Square  of  that  FaBiim.  And  by  this 
difference  the  two  forts  of  Refiftance  may  be  di- 
flinguifh'd  from  one  another  in  any  Medium; 
and  thefe  being  diftinguifh'd,  it  will  be  found 
that  almoft  all  the  Refiftance  of  Bodies  of  a  com- 
petent Magnitude  moving-in  Air,  Water,  Quick- 
filver,  and  fuch  like  Fluids  with  a  competent  Ve- 
locity, arifes  from  the  Vis  inertice  of  the  Parts  of 
the  Fluid. 

Now  that  part  of  the  refifting  Power  of  any 
Medium  which  arifes  from  the  Tenacity,  Fri- 
ction or  Attrition  of  the  Parts  of  the  Medium, 
may  be  dimini(h'd  by  dividing  the  Matter  into 
fmaller  Parts,  and  making  the  Parts  more  fmooth 
and  flippery:  But  that  part  of  the  Refiftance 
which  arifes  from  the  Vis  inerti(X,  is  proportio- 
nal to  the  Denfity  of  the  Mattel,  and  cannot  be 
diminifh'd  by  dividing  the  Matter  into  fmaller 
Parts,  nor  by  any  other  means  than  by  decrea- 
iing  the  Denlity  of  the  Medium.  And  for  thefe 
Reafons  the  Denlity  of  fluid  Mediums  is  very 
nearly  proportional  to  their  Refiftance.  Li- 
quors which  differ  not  much  in  Denfity,  as  Wa- 
ter, Spirit  of  Wine,  Spirit  of  Turpentine,  hot 
Oil,  differ  not  much  in  Refiftance.  Water  is 
thirteen  or  fourteen  times  lighter  than  Quick- 
.  iilver,  and  by  confequence  thirteen  or  fourteen 
times  rarer,  and  its  Refiftance  is  lefs  than  that 

of 


BOOK     III.  341 

of  Quick-filver  in  the  fame  Proportion,  or  there- 
abouts, as  I  have  found  by  Experiments  made 
with  Pendulums.  The  open  Air  in  which  we 
breathe  is  eight  or  nine  hundred  times  lighter 
than  Water,  and  by  confequence  eight  or  nine 
hundred  times  rarer,  and  accordingly  its  Refi- 
ftance  is  lefs  than  that  of  Water  -in  the  fame 
Proportion,  or  thereabouts  j  as  I  have  alfo  found 
by  Experiments  made  with  Pendulums.  And  in 
thinner  Air  the  Reiiftance  is  ftill  lefs,  and  at 
length,  by  ratifying  the  Air,  becomes  infenfi- 
ble.  For  fmall  Feathers  falling  in  the  open  Air 
meet  with  great  Refiftance,  but  in  a  tall  Glafs 
well  emptied  of  Air,  they  fall  as  fail  as  Lead  or 
Gold,  as  I  have  feen  tried  feveral  times.  Whence 
the  Refiftance  feems  ftill  to  decreafe  in  propor- 
tion to  the  Denlity  of  the  Fluid.  For  I  do  not 
find  by  any  Experiments,  that  Bodies  moving 
in  Quick-filver,  Water  or  Air,  meet  with  any 
oaher  fenfible  Refiftance  than  what  arifes  from 
the  Denfity  and  Tenacity  of  thofe  fenfible  Flu- 
ids, as  they  would  do  if  the  Pores  of  thofe  Flu- 
ids, and  all  other  Spaces,  were  filled  with  a 
denfe  and  fubtile  Fluid.  Now  if  the  Refiftance 
in  a  Veffel  well  emptied  of  Air,  was  but  an 
hundred  times  lefs  than  in  the  open  Air,  it 
would  be  about  a  million  of  times  lefs  than  in 
Quick- filver.  But  it  feems  to  be  much  lefs  in 
fuch  a  Veffel,  and.  ftill  much  lefs  in  the  Hea- 
vens, at  the  height  of  three  or  four  hundred 
Miles  from  the  Earth,  or  above.  For  Mr.  Boyle 
has  fliew'd  that  Air  may  be  rarified  above  ten 
thoufand  times  in  VefTels  of  Glafs  j  and  the 
Heavens  are  much  emptier  of  Air  than  any  Va-^ 

23.  cuiim 


342         O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

cuum  we  can  make  below.  For  fmce  the  Air 
is  comprefs'd  by  the  Weight  of  the  incumbent 
Atmoiphere.,  and  the  Denfity  of  Air  is  propor- 
tional to  the  Force  compreffing  it,  it  follows  by 
Computation,  that  at  the  lieight  of  about  fe- 
ven  and  a  half  Engliflj  Miles  from  the  Earth,  the 
Air  is  four  times  rra-er  than  at  the  Surface  of  the 
Earth  J  and  at  the  height  of  15  Miles  it  is  fix- 
teen  times  rarer  than  that  at  the  Surface  of  the 
Earth  J  and  at  the  height  of  22^,  30,  or  38  Miles, 
it  is  refpedively  64,  256,  or  1024  times  rarer, 
or  thereabouts  J  and  at  the  height  of  76,  152, 
228  Miles,  it  is  about  loooooo,  1 000000000000, 
or  loooGOOoooooooooooo  times  rarer  j  and  fo 
on. 

Heat  promotes  Fluidity  very  much,  by  dimi- 
nifliing  the  Tenacity  of  Bodies.  It  makes  ma- 
ny Bodies  fluid  which  are  not  fluid  in  cold,  and 
increafes  the  Fluidity  of  tenacious  Liquids,  as 
of  Oil,  Balfam,  and  Honey,  and  thereby  de- 
creafes  their  Refiftance.  But  it  decreafes  not 
the  Refiftance  of  Water  confiderably,  as  it  would 
do  if  any  confiderable  part  of  the  Refiftance  of 
Water  arofe  from  the  Attrition  or  Tenacity  of 
its  Parts.  And  therefore  the  Refiftance  of  Wa- 
ter arifes  principally  and  almoft  entirely  from 
the  Vis  inertice  of  its  Matter  j  and  by  confe- 
quence,  if  the  Heavens  were  as  denfe  as  War» 
ter,  they  would  not  have  much  lefs  Refiftance 
than  Water  J  if  as  denfe  as  Quick-filver,  they 
would  not  have  much  lefs  Refiftance  than  Quicks 
filver;  if  abfolutely  denfe,  or  full  of  Matter 
without  any  Vacimm^  let  the  Matter  be  never 
fo  fubtil  and  fluid,    they  would  have  a  greater 

Refiftance 


BOOK     m.  343 

Refiftance  than  Qulck-filver.  A  folid  Globe  in 
fuch  a  Medium  would  lofe  above  half  its  Mo- 
tion in  moving  three  times  the  length  of  its 
Diameter,  and  a  Globe  not  folid  ( fuch  as  are 
the  Planets, )  would  be  retarded  fooner.  And 
therefore  to  make  way  for  the  regular  and  lad- 
ing Motions  of  the  Planets  and  Comets,-  it's  ne- 
ceffary  to  empty  the  Pleavens  of  all  Matter,  ex% 
cept  perhaps  fome  very  thin  Vapours,  Steams, 
or  Effluvia,  arifmg  from  the  Atmofpheres  of  the 
Earth,  Planets,  and  Comets,  and  from  fuch  an 
exceedingly  rare  ;^thereal  Medium  as  we  de- 
fcribed  above.  A  denfe  Fluid  can  be  of  no  ufe 
foi-  explaining  the  Phaenomena  of  Nature,  the 
Motions  of  the  Planets  and  Comets  being  better 
explain'd  without  it.  It  ferves  only  to  difturb 
and'  retard  the  Motions  of  thofe  great  Bodies, 
and  make  the  Frame  of  Nature  languifh :  And 
in  the  Pores  of  Bodies,  it  ferves  only  to  ftop 
the  vibrating  Motions  of  their  Parts,  wherein 
their  Heat  and  A<fl:ivity  conlifts.  And  as  it  is 
of  no  ufe,  and  hinders  the  Operations  of  Na- 
ture, and  makes  her  languifn,  fo  there  is  no  e- 
vidence  for  its  Exiftence,  and  therefore  it  oueht 
to  be  rejected.  And  if  it  be  rejeded,  the  Hy- 
pothefes  that  Light  confiils  in  Preffion  or  Mo- 
tion, propagated  through  fuch  a  Medium,  are 
rejeded  with  it. 

And  for  rejeding  fuch  a  Medium,  we  have 
the  Authority  of  thofe  the  oldeft  and  moll  ce- 
lebrated Philofophers  -of  Greece  and  Phcenkiay 
who  made  a  Vacuum^  and  Atoms,  and  the  Gra- 
vity of  Atoms,  the  firft  Principles  of  their  Phi- 
lofophyj  tacitly  attributing  Gravity  to  fo.Ec- o- 

Z  4  thci 


344-  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ther  Caufe  than  denfe  Matter.  Later  Philofo- 
phers  baniili  the  Confi deration  of  fuch  a  Caufe 
out  of  natural  Philofophy,  feigning  Hypothefes 
for  explaining  all  things  mechanically,  and  re- 
ferring other  Caufes  to  Metaphylicks :  Whereas 
the  main  Bufniefs  of  natural  Philofophy  is  to 
argue  from  Phcenomena  without  feigning  Hy- 
pothefes, and  to  deduce  Caufes  from  Effects, 
till  we  come  to  the  very  firft  Caufe,  which  cer- 
tainly is  not  mechanical ;  and  not  only  to  un- 
fold the  Mechanifm  of  the  World,  but  chiefly 
to  refolve  thefe  and  fuch  like  Queftions.  What 
is  there  in  places  almofl  empty  of  Matter,  and 
whence  is  it  that  the  Sun  and  Planets  gravitate 
towards  one  another,  without  denfe  Matter  be- 
tween them  ?  Whence  is  it  that  Nature  doth 
nothing  in  vain ;  and  whence  arifes  all  that  Or- 
der and  Beauty  which  we  fee  in  the  World  ? 
To  what  end  are  Comets,  and  whence  is  it  that 
Planets  move  all  one  and  the  fame  way  in  Orbs 
concentrick,  while  Comets  move  all  manner  of 
ways  in  Orbs  very  excentrick ;  and  what  hinders 
the  fix'd  Stars  from  falling  upon  one  another  ? 
How  came  the  Bodies  of  Animals  to  be  contri- 
ved with  fo  much  Art,  and  for  what  ends  were 
their  feveral  Parts  ?  Was  the  Eye  contrived 
without  Skill  in  Opticks,  and  the  Ear  without 
Knowledge  of  Sounds  ?  Plow  do  the  Motions 
of  the  Body  follow  from  the  Will,  and  whence 
is  the  Inftindt  in  Animals  ?  Is  not  the  Senfory  of 
Animals  that  place  to  which  the  fenfitive  Sub- 
itance  is  prefent,  and  into  which  the  fenfible 
Species  of  Things  ap  carried  through  jthe  Nerves 
and   Brain,    that  there  they  may  be  perceived 


BOOK     III.  345 

by  their  immediate  prefence  to  that  Scbftancc  ? 
And  thefe  things  being  rightly  difpatch'd,  does 
it  not  appear  from  Plia^nomena  that  there  is  a 
Being  incorporeal,  living,  intelligent,  omnipre- 
fent,  who  in  infinite  Space,  as  it  were  in  his  Sen- 
fory,  fees  the  things  themfelves  intimately,  and 
throughly  perceives  them,  and  comprehends 
them  wholly  by  their  immediate  prefence  to 
himfelf :  Of  which  things  the  Images  only  car- 
ried through  the  Organs  of  Senfe  into  pur  little 
Senforiums,  are  there  feen  and  beheld  by  that 
which  in  us  perceives  and  thinks.  And  though 
every  true  Step  made  in  this  Philofophy  brings  us 
not  immediately  to  the  Knowledge  of  the  firll 
Caufe,  yet  it  brings  us  nearer  to  it,  and  on  that 
account  is  to  be  highly  valued. 

^.  29.  Are  not  the  Rays  of  Light  very 
fmall  Bodies  emitted  from  lliining  Subllances  ? 
For  fuch  Bodies  will  pafs  through  uniform  Me- 
diums in  right  Lines  without  bending  into  the 
Shadow,  which  is  the  Nature  of  the  Rays  of 
Light.  They  will  alfo  be  capable  of  feveral 
Properties,  and  be  able  to  conferve  their  Pro- 
perties unchanged  in  paffing  through  feveral 
Mediums,  which  is  another  Condition  of  thq 
Rays  of  Light.  Pellucid  Subllauces  a6t  upon 
the  Rays  of  Light  at  a  diftance  in  refracting-,  re- 
flecting, and  inflecting  them,  and  the  Rays  m.u- 
tually  agitate  the  Parts  of  thofe  Subfl:ances  at  ^a 
difl:arce  for  heating  them  i  and  this  ACtion  and 
Re-aUion  at  a  difl:ance  very  much  refembles  an 
attractive  Force  between  Bodies.  If  RefraCtion 
be  perform'd  by  Attraction  of  the  Rays,  the 
Sines  of  Incidencs  muft  be  to  the  Sines  of  Re- 
fraCtion 


346  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

fraftion  in  a  given  Proportion,  as  we  {hew'd  in 
our  Principles  of  Philofophy :  And  this  Rule  is 
true  by  Experience.  The  Rays  of  Light  in 
going  out  of  Giafs  into  a  Vacuum^  are  bent  to- 
wards the  Glafs ;  and  if  they  fall  too  obliquely 
on  the  Vacuum^  they  are  bent  backwards  into 
the  Glafs,  and  totally  reflected  j  and  ^  this  Refle- 
xion cannot  be  afcribed  to  the  Refiftance  of  an 
abfolute  Vacuum^  but  muft  be  caufed  by  the 
Power  of  the  Glafs  attracting  the  Rays  at  their 
going  out  of  it  into  the  Vacuum^  and  bringing 
them  back.  For  if  the  farther  Surface  of  the 
Glafs  be  moiflen'd  with  Water  or  clear  Oil,  or 
liquid  and  clear  Honey,  the  Rays  which  would 
otherwife  be  refleded  will  go  into  the  Water, 
Oil,  or  Honey ;  and  therefore  are  not  refle(5ted 
before  they  arrive  at  the  farther  Surface  of  the 
Glafs,  and  begin  to  go  out  of  it.  If  they  go  out 
of  it  into  the  Water,  Oil,  or  Honey,  they 
go  on,  becaufe  the  Attraction  of  the  Glafs  is 
almoft  balanced  and  rendered  ineffectual  by 
the  contrary  Attraction  of  the  .Liquor.  But  if 
they  go  out  of  it  into  a  Vacuum  which  has  no 
Attraction  to  balance  that  of  the  Glals,  the  At- 
traction of  the  Glafs  either  bends  and  refraCts 
them,  or  brings  them  back  and  reflects  them.- 
And  this  is  ftill  more  evident  by  laying  together 
two  Prifms  of  Glafs,  or  two  ObjeCt-glaSes  of 
very  long  Telefcopes,  the  one  plane,  the  o- 
ther  a  little  convex,  and  fo  compreffing  them 
that  they  do  not  fully  touch,  nor  are  too  far  a- 
funder.  For  the  Light  which  falls  upon  the 
farther  Surface  of  the  firfl  Glafs  where  the  In- 
terval between  the  Glaffes  is  not  above  the  ten 

hundred 


BOOK     III.  347 

hundred  thoufandrh  Part  of  an  Inch,  will  go 
through  that  Surface,  and  through  tbe  Air  or 
Vacuum  between  the  GlaiTes,  and  enter  into  the 
fecondGlafs,  as  was  explain'd  in  the  firft,  fourth, 
and  eighth  Obfervations  of  the  firft  Part  of  the 
fecond  Book.  But,  if  the  fecond  Glafs  be  taken 
away,  the  Light  which  goes  out  of  the  fecond 
Surface  of  the.  firft  Glafs  into  the  Air  or  Va- 
cuum^ will  not  go  on  forwards,  but  turns  back 
into  the  firft  Glafs,  and  is  reflecftcd ;  and  there- 
fore it  is  drawn  back  by  the  Power  of  the  firft 
Glafs,  there  being  nothing  elfe  to  turn  it  back. 
Nothing  more  is  requifite  for  producing  all  the 
variety  of  Colours,  and  degrees  of  Refrangibi- 
lity,  than  that  the  Rays  of  Light  be  Bodies  of 
different  Sizes,  the  leaft  of  which  may  take 
violet  the  weakeft  and  darkeft  of  the  Colours, 
and  be  more  cafily  diverted  by  refrad:ing  Sur- 
faces from  the  right  Courfe  ;  and  the  reft  as 
they  are  bigger  and  bigger,  may  make  tlie 
ftronger  and  more  lucid  Colours,  blue,  green, 
yellow,  and  red,  and  be  more  and  more  diHi- 
cultly  diverted.  Nothing  more  is  requifite  for 
putting  the  Rays  of  Light  into  Fits  of  eafy  Re- 
flexion and  eafy  Tranfmiffion,  than  that  they  be 
fmall  Bocjies  which  by  their  attractive  Powers, 
or  fome  other  Force,  ftir  up  Vibrations  in  what 
they  ad;  upon,  which  Vibrations  being  fwifter 
than  the  Rays,  overtake  them  fucceftively,  and 
agitate  them  fo  as  by  turns  to  increafe  and  de- 
creafe  their  Velocities,  and  thereby  put  them 
into  thofe  Fits.  And  laftly,  the  unufual  Refra- 
(ftion  of  Ifland-Cryftal  looks  very  much  as  if  it 
were  perform'd  by  fome  kind  of  attractive  vir- 
tue 


348  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

tue  lodged  in  certain  Sides  both  of  the  Rays, 
and  of  the  Particles  of  the  Cryftal.  For  were 
it  not  for*  fome  kind  of  Difpofition  or  Virtue 
lodged  in  fome  Sides  of  the  Particles  of  the 
Cryflal,  and  not  in  their  other  Sides,  and  which 
inclines  and  bends  the  Rays  towards  the  Coafl 
of  unufual  Refraction,  the  Rays  which  fall  per- 
pendicularly on  the  Cryllal,  would  not  be  re- 
fraded  towards  that  Coafl  rather  than  towards 
any  other  Coaft,  both  at  their  Incidence  and  at 
their  Emergence,  fo  as  to  emerge  perpendicu- 
larly by  a  contrary  Situation  of  the  Coaft  of 
unufual  Refradion  at  the  fecond  Surface ;  the 
Cryftal  acting  upon  the  Rays  after  they  have 
■pafs'd  through  it,  and  are  emerging  into  the 
Air;  or,  if  you  pieafe,  into  a  V aciium'  And 
lince  the  Cryftal  by  this  Difpofition  or  Virtue 
does  not  ad:  upon  the  Rays,  unlefs  when  one 
of  their  Sides  of  unufual  Refradion  looks  to- 
wards that  Coaft,  this  argues  a  Virtue  or  Difpo- 
fition in  thofe  Sides  of  the  Rays,  which  an- 
fwers  to,  and  fympathizes  with  that  Virtue  or 
Difpofition  of  the  Cryftal,  as  the  Poles  of  two 
Magnets  anfwer  to  one  another.  And  as  Mag- 
netifm  may  be  intended  and  remitted,  and  is 
found  only  in  the  Magnet  2nd  in  Iron :  So  this 
Virtue  of  refrading  the  perpendicular  Rays  is 
greater  in  Ifland-Cryftal,  lefs-  in  Cryftal  of  the 
Rock,  and  is  not  yet  found  in  other  Bodies.  I 
do  not  fay  that  this  Virtue  is  magnetical :  It 
feems  to  be  of  another  kind.  I  only  fay,  that 
wnatever  it  be,  it's  difficult  to  conceive  how 
the  Rays  of  Light,  unlefs  they  be  Bodies,  can 
have  a  permanent  Virtue  in  two  of  their  Sides 
I  which 


BOOK     III.  349 

which  is  not  in  their  other  Sides,  and  this  without 
any  regard  to  their  PoUtion  to  the  Space  or  Me- 
dium through  which  they  pafs. 

What  I  mean  in  this  Queftion  by  a  Vacuum^ 
and  by  the  Attradions  of  the  Rays  of  Light  to- 
wards Giafs  or  Cryftal,  may  be  undcrftood '  by 
what  was  faid  in  the  i8th,  19th,  and  20th  Que- 
ftions. 

^eji.  30.  Are  not  grofs  Bodies  and  Light  con- 
vertible into  one  another,  and  may  not  Bodies  re- 
ceive much  of  their  A(^l:ivity  from  the  Particles 
of  Light  which  enter  their  Compofition?  For  all 
fix'd  Bodies  being  heated  emit  Light  fo  long  as 
they  continue  fufficiently  hot,  and  Light  mutually 
flops  in  Bodies  as  often  as  its  Rays  ftrike  upon 
their  Parts,  as  we  fliew'd  above.  I  know  no 
Body  lefs  apt  to  fliine  than  Water;  and  yet  Wa- 
ter by  frequent  Diftillations  changes  into  fix'd 
Earth,  as  Mr.Boy/e^  has  try'd  ;  and  then  this  Earth 
being  enabled  to  endure  a  fufficient  Heat,  {hines 
by  Heat  like  other  Bodies. 

The  changing  of  Bodies  into  Light,  and  Light 
into  Bodies,  is  very  conformable  to  the  Courfe 
of  Nature,  which  feems  delighted  with  Tranf- 
mutations.  Water,  which  is  a  very  fluid  taflelefs 
Salt,  fhe  changes  by  Heat  into  Vapour,  which  is 
a  fort  of  Air,  and  by  Cold  into  Ice,  which  is  a 
hard,  pellucid,  brittle,  fufible  Stone ;  and  this 
Stone  returns  into  Water  by  Heat,  and  Vapour 
returns  into  Water  by  Cold.  Earth  by  Heat  be- 
comes Fire,  and  by  Cold  returns  into  Earth. 
Denfe  Bodies  by  Fermentation  rarify  into  feve- 
ral  forts  of  Air,  and  this  Air  by  Fermentation, 
and  fometimes  without  it,    returns  into  denfe 

Bodies. 


350  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Bodies.  Mercury  appears  fometimes  in  the  form 
of  a  fluid  Metal,  fometimes  in  the  form  of  a  hard 
brittle  Metal,  fometimes  in  the  form  of  a  corro- 
live  pellucid  Salt  call'd  Sublimate,  fometimes  in 
the  form  of  a  taftelefs,  pellucid,  volatile  white 
Earth,  call'd  Mercip^ius  Dulcis  j  or  in  that  of  a 
red  opake  volatile  Earth,  call'd  Cinnaber  j  or  in 
that  of  a  red  or  vv^hite  Precipitate,  or  in  that  of 
a  fluid  Salt ;  and  in  Diftillation  it  turns  into 
Vapour,  and  being  .agitated  i?i  VaciiOj  it  fhines 
like  Fire.  And  after  all  thefe  Changes  it  re- 
turns again  into  its  firfl:  form  of  Mercury. 
Eggs  grow  from  infenfible  Magnitudes,  and 
change  into  Animals  j  Tadpoles  into  Frogs ; 
and  Worms  into  Flies.  All  Birds,  Beaflis  and 
Fifhes,  Infers,  Trees,  and  other  Vegetables, 
with  their  feveral  Parts,  grow  out  of  Water 
and  watry  Tinctures  and  Salts,  and  by  Putre- 
fadtion  return  again  into  watry  Subftances.  And 
Water  ftanding  a  few  Days  in  the  open  Air, 
yields  aTindurc,  which  (like  that  of  Malt)  by 
ftanding  longer  yields  a  Sediment  and  a  Spi- 
rit, but  before  Putrefaction  is  fit  Nourifhment 
for  Animals  and  Vegetables.  And  among  fuch 
various-  and  fl:range  Tranfmutations,  why  may 
not  Nature  change  Bodies  into  Light,  and  Light 
into  Bodies  ? 

^leji.  3 1.  Have  not  the  fmall  Particles  of  Bo- 
dies certain  Powers,  Virtues,  or  Forces,  by  which 
they  adt  at  a  diftance,  not  only  upon  the  Rays 
of  Light  for  reflecting,  refra(fling,  and  inflect- 
ing them,  but  alio  upon  one  another  for  pro- 
ducing a  great  Part  of  the  Phaenomena  of  Na- 
ture ?    For  it's  well  known,    that  Bodies    ad: 

one 


BOOK     TIL  351 

one  upon  anotlier  by  the  Attradions  of  Gravity, 
Magnetifm,  and  Eledtricity  j  and  thefe  Inftances 
ihew  the  Tenor  and  Courfe  of  Nature,  and  make 
it  not  improbable  but  that  there  may  be  more  at- 
tradlive  Powers  than  thefe.  For  Nature  is  very 
confonant  and  conformable  to  her  felf  How 
thefe  Attradtions  may  be  perform'd,  I  do  not  here 
confider.  What  I  call  Attraction  may  be  per- 
form'd by  impulfe,  or  by  fome  other  means  un- 
known to  me.  I  ufe  that  Word  here  to  fignify 
only  in  general  any  Force  by  which  Bodies  tend 
towards  one  another,  whatfoever  be  the  Caufe. 
For  we  muft  learn  from  the  Phcenomena  of 
Nature  what  Bodies  attradt  one  another,  and 
what  are  the  Laws  and  Properties  of  the  At- 
traction, before  we  enquire  the  Caufe  by  which 
the  Attraction  is  perform'd. .  The  Attractions  of 
Gravity,  Magnetifm,  and  EleCtricity,  reach  to 
very  fenfible  diflances,  and  fo  have  been  obferved 
by  vulgar  Eyes,  and  there  may  be  others  which 
reach  to  fo  fmall  diflances  as  hitherto  efcape  Ob- 
fervation  j  and  perhaps  eleCtrical  Attraction  may 
reach  to  fuch  fmall  diftances,  even  without  being 
excited  by  FriCtion. 

For  when  Salt  of  Tartar  runs  per  IDeliquium, 
is  not  this  done  by  an  Attraction  between  the 
Particles  of  the  Salt  of  Tartar,  and  the  Parti- 
cles of  the  Water  which  float  in  the  Air  in  the 
form  of  Vapours  ?  And  why  does  not  common 
Salt,  or  Salt-petre,  or  Vitriol,  run  per  Deliqimirn^ 
but  for  want  of  fuch  an  Attraction  ?  Or  why 
docs  not  -Salt  of  Tartar  drav^^  more  Water  out 
of  the  Air  than  in  a  certain  Proportion  to  its 
quantity,  but  for  want  of  an  attractive  Force 
2  after 


^52  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

after  it  is  fatiated  with  Water  ?  And  whence 
is  it  but  from  this  attractive  Power  that  Water 
which  alone  diftils  with  a  gentle  luke-warm 
Heat,  will  not  diftil  from  Salt  of  Tartar  with- 
out a  great  Heat  ?  And  is  it  not  from  the  like 
attractive  Power  between  the  Particles  of  Oil  of 
Vitriol  and  the  Particles  of  Water,  that  Oil  of 
Vitriol  draws  to  it  a  good  quantity  of  Water 
out  of  the  Air,  and  after  it  is  fatiated  draws  no 
more,  and  in  Diftillation  lets  go  the  Water  very 
difficultly  ?  And  when  Water  and  Oil  of  Vi- 
triol poured  fucceffively  into  the  fame  Veffel 
grow  very  hot  in  the  mixing,  does  not  this 
Heat  argue  a  great  Motion  in  the  Parts  of  the 
Liquors  ?  And  does  not  this  Motion  argue,  that 
-  the  Parts  of  the  two  Liquors  in  mixing  coa- 
lefce  with  Violence,  and  by  confequence  rufli  to- 
wards one  another  with  an  accelerated  Mo- 
tion ?  And  when  Aqua  fortis,  or  Spirit  of  Vi- 
triol poured  upon  Filings  of  Iron,  dilTolves  the 
Filings  with  a  great  Heat  and  Ebullition,  is  not 
this  Heat  and  Ebullition  effected  by  a  violent 
Motion  of  the  Parts,  and  does'  not  that  Motion 
argue  that  the  acid  Parts  of  the  Liquor  rufh  to- 
wards the  Parts  of  the  Metal  with  violence, 
and  run  forcibly  into  its  Pores  till  they  get  be- 
tween its  outmoft  Particles,  and  the  main  Mafs 
of  the  Metal,  and  furrounding  thofe  Particles 
loofen  them  from  the  main  Mafs,  and  fet  them 
at  liberty  to  float  off  into  the  Water  ?  And 
when  the  acid  Particles,  which  alone  would 
diftil  with  an  eafy  Heat,  will  not  feparate  from 
the  Particles  of  the  Metal  without  a  very  vio- 
lent 


BOOK     III.  353 

lent  Heat,  does  not  this  confirm  the  Attradtioa 
between  them  ? 

When  Spirit  of  Vitriol  poured  upon  com- 
mon Salt  or  Salt-petre  makes, an  Ebulhtion  with 
the  Salt,  and  unites  wich  it,  and  in  Diftillatian  ' 
the  Spirit  of  the  common  Salt  'or  Salt-petre 
comes  over  much  eafier  than  it  would  do  be- 
fore, and  the  acid  part  of  the  Spirit  of  Vitriol 
ilays  behind  j  does  not  this  argue  that  the  fi:<'d 
Alcaly  of  the  Salt  attrads  the  acid  Spirit  ot  the 
Vitriol  more  ftrongly  than  its  own  Spirit,  and 
not  being  able  to  hold  them  both,  lets  go  its 
own?  And  when  Oil  of  Vitriol  is  draw^n  off 
from  its  weight  of  Nitre j  and  from  both  the 
Ingredients  a  compound  Spirit  of  Nitre  is  diflil- 
led,  and  two  parts  of  this  Spirit  are  poured  on 
one  part  of  Oil  of  Cloves  or  Carraway  Seeds,  or.  of 
any  ponderous  Oil  of  vegetable  or  animal  Sub- 
ftanCes,  or  Oil  of  Turpentine  thicken'd  with  a 
little  Balfam  of  Sulphur,  and  the  Liquors  grow  fo 
very  hot  in  mixing,  as  prefently  to  fend  up  a  burn- 
ing Flame ;  does  not  this  very  great  and  fudden 
Heat  argue  that  the  two  Liquors  mix  with  vio- 
lence, and  that  their  Parts  in  mixing  run  to- 
wards one  another  with  an  accelerated  Motion, 
and  cla(h  with  the  greateft  Force  ?  And  is  it 
not  for  the  fame  reafon  that  well  redlified  Spi- 
rit of  Wine  poured  on  the  fame  compound  Spi- 
rit fla{hes*f  and  that  the  Piilvis  fuUninam,  com- 
pofed  of  Sulphur,  Nitre,  and  Salt  of  Tartar, 
goes  off  with  a  more  fudden  and  violent  Ex- 
plofion  than  Gun-powder,  the  acid  Spirits  of 
the  Sulphur  and  Nitre  ruihing  towards  one  an- 
other, and  towards  the  Salt  of  Tartar,  with  fo 

A  a  great 


354-  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

great  a  violence,  as  by  the  (hock  to  turn  the 
whole  at  once  into  Vapour  and  Flame  ?  Where 
the  DilTolution  is  flow,  it  makes  a  flow  Ebulli- 
tion and  a  gentle  Heat  j  and  where  it  is  quick- 
er:, it  makes  a  greater  Ebullition  with  more 
heat ;  and  where  it  is  done  at  once,  the  Ebul- 
lition is  contraded  into  a  fudden  Blaft  or  vio- 
lent Explofion,  with  a  heat  equal  to  that  of 
Fire  and  Flame.  So  when  a  Drachm  of  the  a- 
bove-mention'd  compound  Spirit  of  Nitre  was 
poured  upon  half  a  Drachm  of  Oil  of  Carraway 
Seeds  i?i  vaciio^  the  Mixture  immediately  made 
a  flafh  like  Gun-powder,  and  burll  the  ex- 
haufted  Receiver,  which  was  a  Glafs  fix  Inches 
wide,  and  eight  Inches  deep.  And  even  the 
grofs  Body  of  Sulphur  powder'd,  and  with  an 
equal  weight  of  Iron  Filings  and  a  little  Water 
made  into  Pafte,  ads  upon  the  Iron,*  and  in  five 
or  fix  hours  grows  too  hot  to  be  touch'd,  and 
emits  a  Flame,  And  by  thefe  Experiments  com- 
pared with  the  great  quantity  of  Sulphur  with 
which  the  Earth  abounds,  and  the  warmth  of 
the  interior  Parts  of  the  Earth,  and  hot  Springs, 
and  burning  Mountains,  and  with  Damps,  mi- 
neral Corufcations,  Earthquakes,  hot  fuffoca- 
ting  Exhalations,  Flurricanes,  and  Spouts;  we 
may  learn, that  fulphureous  Steams  abound  in 
the  Bowels  of  the  Earth  and  ferment  with  Mi- 
nerals, and  fomietim^es  take  fire  with  a  fudden 
Corufcatlon  and  Explofion;  and  if  pent  up  in 
fubterraneous  Caverns,  burfl  the  Caverns  with  a 
great  {baking  of  the  Earth,  as  in  fpringing  of  a 
Mine.  And  then  the  Vapour  generated  by  the 
Explofion,    expiring  through  the  Fores  of  the 

3  Earth, 


BOOK     III.  355 

Earth,  feels  hot  and  fuffocateSj  and  iiiakes  Tem-« 
pefls  and  Hurricanes,  and  fometimes  caufes  the" 
Land  to  Hide,  or  the  Sea  to  boil,  and  carries 
up  the  Water  thereof  in  Drop3,  which  by  their 
weight  fall  down  again  in  Spouts,  ^xlfo  fome 
fulphureous  Steams,  at  all  times  when  the  Earth 
is  dry,  afcending  into  the  Air,  ferment  there 
with  nitrous  Acids^  and  fometimes  taking  fire 
caufe  Lightning  and  Thunder,  and  fiery  Me- 
teors. For  the  Air  abounds  with  acid  Vapours 
fit  to  promote  Fermentations,  as  appears  by  the- 
rufling  of  Iron  and  Copper  in  it,  the  kindling 
of  Fire  by  blowing,  and  the  beating  of  the 
Heart  by  means  of  Refpiration.  Now  the  a- 
bove-mention'd  Motions  are  fo  great  and  violent 
as  to  fhew  t]iat  in  Fermentations  the  Particles  of 
Bodies  which  almofi:  reft,  are  put  into  new  Mo- 
tions by  a  very  potent  Principle,  w^hich  ad:s  up- 
on them  only  when  they  approach  one  another, 
and  caufes  them  to  meet  and  clafh  with  2;reat  vi* 
olence,  and  grow  hot  with  the  motion,  and  dafli 
one  another  into  pieces,  and  vapifli  into  Air,  and 
Vapour,  and  Flame. 

When  Salt  of  Tartar  per  deliqiiium^  being 
poured  into  the  Solution  of  any  Metal,  preci- 
pitates the  Metal,  and  makes  it  fail  down  to  the 
bottom  of  the  Liquor  in  the  form  of  Mud: 
Does  not  this  argue  tliat  the  acid  Particles  are 
attracted  more  ftrong-ly  by  the  Salt  of  Tartar 
than  by  the  Metal,  and  by  the  ftronger  Attra- 
d:ion  go  from  the  Metal  to  the  Salt  of  Tartar  ? 
And  fo  when  a  Solution  of  Iron  in  Anna  forth 
diffolves  the  Lapis  Calciminarh^  and  lets  go  the 
Iron,  or  a  Solution  of  Copper  difiblves  Iron  im- 

A  a  2  merfed 


356  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

irierfed  in  it  and  lets  go  the  Copper,  or  a  So- 
'4ution  of  Silver  difTolves  Copper  and  lets  go  the 
Silver,  or  a  Solution  of  Mercury  in  Aquafortis 
being  poured  upon  Iron,  Copper,  Tin,  or  Lead, 
difTolves  the  Metal  and  lets  go  the  Mercury ; 
does  not  this  argue  that  the  acid  Particles  of 
the  Aqua  fortis  are  attracted  more  ftrongly  by 
the  Lapis  Calamniaris  than  by  Iron,  and  more 
flrongly  by  Iron  than  by  Copper,  and  more 
ftrongly  by  Copper  than  by  Silver j  and  more 
ftrongly  by  Iron,  Copper,  Tin,  and  Lead,  than 
by  Mercury  ?  And  is  it  not  for  the  fame  reafon 
that  Iron  requires  more  Aqua  fortis  to  dilTolve 
it  than  Copper,  and  Copper  more  than  the  other 
Metals ;  and  that  of  all  Metals,  Iron  is  dilTolved 
moft  eafily,  and  is  mofi:  apt  to  ruft ;  and  next  af- 
ter Iron,  Copper? 

When  Oil  of  Vitriol  is  mix'd  w^ith  a  little 
Water,  or  is  run  per  deliquiuni^    and  in  Diftil- 
lation  the  Water  afcends  difficultly,   and  brings 
over  v^rith  it  fome  part  of  the  Oil  of  Vitriol  in 
the  form  of  Spirit  of  Vitriol,  and  this  Spirit  be- 
ing poured  upon  Iron,  Copper,'  or  Salt  of  Tar- 
tar, unites  with  the  Body  and  lets  go  the  Wa- 
ter 'j  doth  not  this  fliew  that  the  acid  Spirit  is  at-  ■ 
traded  by  the   Water,    and  more  attracted   by 
the  fix'd  Body  than  by  the  Water,   and  there- 
fore lets  go  the  Water  to  clofe  v^ith  the  fix'd 
Body  ?    And  is  it  not  for  the  fame  reafon  that 
the  Water  and  acid  Spirits  which  are  mix'd  to- 
gether in  Vinegar,    Aqua  fortis^    and   Spirit  of 
Salt,    cohere  and  rife  together   in  Diftillation ; 
but  if  the  Mejiftruum  be  poured  on  Salt  of  Tar- 
tar,   or  on  Lead,    or  Iron,    or  any  fix'd  Body 

which 


BOOK     III.  357 

which  it  can  diflblve,  the  Acid  by  a  fironger  At- 
traction adheres  to  the  Body,  and  lets  go  ths 
Water  ?  And  is  it  not  alfo  from  a  mutual  At- 
tracftion  that  the  Spirits  o£  Soot  and  Sea-Sak 
unite  and  compofe  the  Panicles  of  Sal-armo- 
niac,  which  are  lefs  volatile  than  before,  be- 
caufe  grofler  and  frc€r  from  Water ;  and  that 
the  Particles  of  Sal-armoniac  in  Sublimation  car- 
ry up  the  Particles  of  Antimony,  which  will  not 
fublime  alone ;  and  that  the  Particles  of  Mer- 
cury uniting  with  the  acid  Particles  of  Spirit 
of  Salt  compofe  Mercury  fublimate,  and  with 
the  Particles  of  Sulphur,  compofe  Cinnaber; 
and  that  the  Particles  of  Spirit  of  Wine  and 
Spirit  of  Urine  well  redlitied  unite,  and  letting 
go  the  Water  which  dillblved  them,  compofe  a 
confident  Body;  and  that  in  fubliming  Cinna- 
ber  from  Salt  of  Tartar,  or  from  quick  Lime, 
the  Sulphur  by  a  ftronger  Attraftion  of  the  Salt 
or  Lime  lets  go  the  Mercury,  and  flays  with 
the  fix'd  Body  ;  and  that  when  Mercury  fubli- 
mate is  fublimed  from  Antimony,  or  from  Re- 
gulus  of  Antimony,  the  Spirit  of  Salt  lets  go  the 
Mercury,  and  unites  with  the  antimonial  Me- 
tal which  attracts  it  more  ftrongly,  and  ftays 
with  it  till  the  Heat  be  great  enough  to  make 
them  both  afcend  together,  'and  then  carries 
up  the  Metal  with  it  in  the  form  of  a  very  fu^ 
fible  Salt,  called  Butter  of  Antimony,  although 
the  Spirit  of  Salt  alone  be  almoft  as  volatile  as 
Water,  and  the  Antimony  alone  as  fix'd  as 
Lead  ? 

When  yi^ua  fortis  diffolves  Silver    and    not 
Gold,    and  Aqua  regia  diffolves  Gold  and  not 

A  a  3  Silver, 


35^ 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


Silver,  may  it  not  be  faid  that  Aqua  forth  is 
fubtil  enough  to  penetrate  Gold  as  well  as  Sil- 
ver, but  wants  the  attracflive  Force  to  give  it 
Entrance  j  and  that  Aqua  regia  is  fubtil  enough 
to  penetrate  Silver  as  v/ell  as  Gold,  but  wants 
the  attractive  Force  to  give  it  Entrance  ?  For 
Aqua  rcgia  is  nothing  elfe  than  Aqua  fortis 
mix'd  v/ith  fome  Spirit  of  Salt,  or  with  Sal-ar- 
moniac  J  and  even  common  Salt  diiTolved  in  A-^ 
qua  fcrtis^  en.ibies  the  Metijiruwrn  to  dilfolve 
Gold,  though  the  Salt  be  a  grofs  Body.  When 
therefore  Spirit  of  Snlt  precipitates  Silver  out 
of  Aqua  fortis^  is  it  not  done  by  attrading  and 
jnixing  with  the  Aqua  Jortisy  and  not  attrad:- 
jng,  or  perhaps  repelling  Silver?  And  when 
Water  precipitates  Antimony  out  of  the  Subli- 
mate of  Antimony  and  Sal-armoniac,  or  out  of 
putter  of  Antimony,  is  it  not  done  by  its  dif^ 
folving,  mixing  with,  and  weakening  the  Sal^ 
grmoniac  or  Spirit  of  Salt,  and  its  not  attract- 
ing, or  perhaps  repelling  the  Antimony  ?  And 
is  it  not  for  want  of  an  attradive  virtue  be- 
tween the  Parts  of  Water  and  Oil,  of  Quick-^ 
lilver  and  Antimony,  of  Lead  and  Iron,  that 
thefe  Subllances  do  not  mixj  .and  by  a  weak 
Attradion,  that  Quick-filver  and  Copper  mix 
difiicultly  j  and  fi'om  a  flrong  one,  that  Quick- 
filver.  and  Tin,  Antimony  and  Iron,  Water  and 
Salts,  mix  readily?  And  in  general,  is  it  not 
from  the  fame  Principle  that  Heat  congregates; 
homogeneal  Bodies,  and  feparates  heterogeneal 
ones? 

When  Arfenick  with  Soap  gives  a  Regulus^ 

and  with  Mercury  fublimate  a  volatile  fufible 

^         ■  Salt, 


BOOK     III.  359 

Salt,  like  Butter  of.  Antimony,  doth  not  this 
lliew  that  Arfenick,  which  is  a  Subftance  totally 
volatile,  is  compounded  of  fix'd  and  volatile 
Parts,  ftrongly  cohering  by  a  mutual  Attradion, 
fo  that  the  volatile  will  not  afcend  without  car- 
rying up  the  fixed  ?  And  fo,  when  an  equal 
weight  of  Spirit  of  Wine  and  Oil  of  Vitriol 
are  digefted  together,  and  in  Diftillation  yield 
two  fragrant  and  volatile  Spirits  which  will  not 
mix  with  one  another,  and  a  fix'd  black  Earth 
remains  behind ;  doth  not  this  fliew  that  Oil  of 
Vitriol  is  compofed  of  volatile  and  fix'd  Parts 
ftrongly  united  by  Attradion,  fo  as  to  afcend  to- 
gether in  form  of  a  volatile,  acid,  fluid  Salt, 
until  the  Spirit  of  Wine  attrads  and  feparates 
the  volatile  Parts  from  the  fixed  ?  And  there- 
fore, fince  Oil  of  Sulphur  per  Campcmam  is  of 
the  fame  Nature  with  Oil  of  Vitriol,  may  it  not 
be  inferred,  that  Sulphur  is  alfo  a  mixture  of 
volatile  and  fix'd  Parts  fo  ftrongly  cohering  by 
Attradion,  as  to  afcend  together  in  Sublima- 
tion. By  diflblving  Flowers  of  Sulphur  in  Oil 
of  Turpentine,  and  diftilling  the  Solution,  it  is 
found  that  Sulphur  is  compofed  of  an  inflama- 
ble  thick  Oil  or  fat  Bitumen,  an  acid  Salt,  a 
very  fix'd  Earth,  and  a  little  Metal.  The  three 
firfl  were  found  not  much  unequal  to  one 
another,  the  fourth  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity  as 
fcarce  to  be  worth  confidering.  The  acid  Salt 
difix)lved  in  Water,  is  the  fame  with  Oil  of  Sul- 
phur per  Campanam,  arid  abounding  .much  in 
the  Bowels  of  the  Earth,  and  particularly  in 
Markafites,  unites  it  felf  to  the  other  Ingredi- 
ents of  the  Markafite,  which  are.  Bitumen,  I- 

A  a  4  ron, 


360  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

ron.  Copper,  and  Earth,  acid  with  them  corn- 
pounds  Alkim,  Vitriol,  and  Sulphur.  With  the 
Earth  alone  it  compounds  AUum ;  with  the  Me- 
tal alone,  or  Metal  and  Earth  together,  it  com- 
pounds Vitriol;  and  with  the  Bitumen  and  Earth 
it  compounds  Sulphur.  Whence  it  comes  to 
pafs  that  Markances  abound  v/ith  thofe  three  Mi- 
nerals. And  is  it  not  from  the  mutual  Attradtior^ 
of  the  Ingredients  that  they  ftick  together  for 
ccmpoundins;  thefe  Minerals,  and  that  the  Bitu- 
men carries  up  the  other  Ingredients  of  the  Sul- 
phur, which  without  it  would  not  fublime  ?  And 
the  fame  Queftion  may  be*  put  concerning  all, 
or  almofc  all  the  grofs  Bodies  in  Nature.  For 
all  the  Parts  of  Animals  and  Vegetables  are  com- 
pofed  of  Subftances  volatile  and  fix'd,  fluid  and 
folid,  as  appears  by  their  Analyfis  ;  and  fo 
are  Salts  and  Minerals,  fo  far  as  Chymifls  have 
been  hitherto  abl?  to  examine  their  Compofi- 
tion. 

When  Mercury  fublimate  is  re-fublimed  with 
frefh  Mercury,  and  becomes  Mercurius  Dulcis^ 
which  is  a  white  taftelefs  Earth  fcarce  dilTolva- 
ble  in  Water,  and  Mercurius  Dulcis  re-fublimed 
with  Spirit  of  Salt  returns  into  Mercury  fubli- 
mate ;  and  when  Metals  corrpded  with  a  little 
acid  turn  into  ruft,  which  is  an  Earth  taftelefs 
and  indiffolvable  in  Water,  and  this  Earth  im- 
bibed with  more  acid  becomes  •  a  metallick 
Salt ;  and  when  fome  Stones,  as  Spar  of  Lead, 
diifolv^d  in  proper  M^nfiruums  become  Salts  ; 
do  not  thef.:;  tilings  fhew  that  Salts  are  dry  Earth 
and  watry  Acid  united  by  Attradion,  and  that 
the  Earth  \\all  not  become  a  Salt  without  fq 

muql^ 


BOOK     III.  361 

much  acid  as  makes  it  diffolvable  in  Water  ?  Do 
not  the  {harp  and  pungent  Taftes  of  Acids 
arife  from  the  ftrong  Attradtion  whereby  the 
acid  Particles  rufli  upon  and  agitate  the  Par- 
ticles of  the  Tongue  ?  And  when  Metals  are  dif- 
folved  in  acid  MenJi?'immSy  and  the  Acids  in 
conjunction  with  the  Metal  ad  after  a  different 
manner,  fo  that  the  Compound  has  a  different 
Tafte  much  milder  than  before,  and  fometimes 
a  fweet  one  j  is  it  not  becaufe  the  Acids  ad-, 
here  to  the  metallick  Particles,  and  thereby 
lofe  much  of  their  Aftivity  ?  And  if  the  Acid 
be  in  too  fmall  a  Proportion  to  make  the  Com- 
pound diffolvable  in  Water,  will  it  not  by  ad- 
hering flrongly  to  the  Metal  become  unadive  and 
lofe  its  Tafle,  and  the  Compound  be  a  taflelefs 
Earth  ?  For  fuch  things  as  are  not  diffolvable  by 
the  Moiflure  of  the  Tongue,  ad  not  upon  the 
Tafle. 

As  Gravity  makes  the  Sea  flow  round  the 
deafer  and  weightier  Parts  of  the  Globe  of  the 
Earth,  fo  the  Attraction  may  make  the  watry 
Acid  flow  round  the  denfer  and  compader  Par- 
ticles of  Earth  for  compofing  the  Particles  of 
Salt.  For  otherwife  the  Acid  would  not  do 
the  Ofhce  of  a  Medium  between  the  Earth  and 
common  Water,  for  making  Salts  diffolvable  in 
the  Water  j  nor  would  Salt  of  Tartar  readily 
draw  off  the  Acid  from  diffolved  Metals,  nor 
Metals  the  Acid  from  Mercury.  Now,  as  in  the 
great  Globe  of  the  Earth  and  Sea,  the  denfefl 
Bodies  by  their  Gravity  fink  down  in  Water, 
^nd  always  endeavour  to  go  towards  the  Cen- 
ter of  the 'Globe;    fo  in  Particles  of  Salt,  the 

denfefl 


362  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

denfcft  Matter  may  always  endeavour  to  approach 
the  Center  of  the  Particle  :  So  that  a  Particle  of 
Salt  may  be  compared  to  a  Chaos ;  being  denfe, 
hard,  diy,  and  earthy  in  the  Center  j  and  rare, 
foft,  moift,  and  watry -in  the  Circumference. 
And  hence  it  feems  to  be  that  Salts  are  of  a 
lafting  Nature,  bejng  fcarce  dellroy'd,  unlefs  by 
drawing  away  their  watry  Parts  by  violence, 
or  by  letting  them  foak  into  the  Pores  of  the 
central  Earth  by  a  gentle  Heat  in  Putrefa- 
ction, until  the  Earth  be  diflblved  by  the  Wa- 
ter, and  feparated  into  fmaller  Particles,  which 
by  reafon  of  their  Smallnefs  make  the  rotten 
Compound  appear  of  a  black  Colour.  Hence 
ilfo  It  may  be,  that  the  Parts  of  Animals  and 
"Vegetables  preferve  their  feveral  Forms,  and 
affimilate  their  Nouriihment  j  the  foft  and  moift 
Nourifhment  eafily  changing  its  Texture  by  a 
gentle  Heat  and  Motion,  till  it  becomes  like  the 
denfe,  hard,  dry,  and  durable  Earth  in  the  Cen- 
ter of  each  Particle.  But  when  the  Nourilh- 
ment  grows  unfit  to  be  allimilated,  or  the  cen- 
tral Earth  grows  too  feeble  to  affimilate  it,  the 
Motion  ends  in  Confufion,  Putrefacftion,  and 
Death. 

If  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  any  Salt  or  Vitriol 
be  dilfolved  in  a  great  quantity  of  Water,  the. 
particles  of  the  Salt  or  Vitriol  will  not  fmk  to 
the  bottom,  though  they  be  heavier  in  Specie 
than  the  Water,  but  will  eveidy  diffufe  them- 
felves  into  all  the  Water,  fo  as  to  make  it  as  fa- 
line  at  the  top  as  at  the  bottom.  And  does  not 
this  imply  that  the  Parts  of  the  Salt  or  Vitriol 
recede  from  one  another,  and  endeavour  to  ex- 
pand 


BOOK     III.  363 

pand  themfelves,  and  get  as  far  afunder  as  the 
quantity  of  Water  in  which  they  float,  will  al- 
low ?  And  does  not  this  Endeavour  imply  that 
they  have  a  repulfive  Force  by  which  they  fly 
from  one  another,  or  at  leaft,  that  they  attrad: 
the  Water  more  llrongly  than  they  do  one  ano- 
ther ?  For  as  all  things  afcend  in  Water  which 
are  lefs  attraded  than  Water,  by  the  gravitating 
Power  of  the  Earth  j  fo  all  the  Particles  of  Salt 
which  float  in  Water,  and  are  lefs  attraded  than 
Water  by  any  one  Particle  of  Salt,  muil  recede 
from  that  Particle,  and  give  way  to  the  more  at- 
traded V/ater. 

When  any  faline Liquor  is  evaporated  to  aCu- 
ticle  and  let  cool,  the  Salt  concretes  in  regular 
Figures  j  which  argues,  that  the  Particles  of  the 
Salt  before  they  concreted,  floated  in  the  Liquor 
^t  equal  difl:ances  in  rank  and  file,  and  by  confe- 
quence  that  they  aded  upon  one  another  by  fome 
Power  which  at  equal  diilances  is  equal,  at  une- 
qual diftances  unequal.  For  by  fuch  a  Power 
they  will  range  themfelves  uniformly,  and  with- 
out it  they  will  float  irregularly,  and  come  to- 
gether as  irregularly.  And  fmce  the  Particles 
of  Ifland-Cryftal  ad  all  the  fame  way  upon 
the  Rays  of  Light  for  caufing  the  unufual  Re- 
fradion,  may  it  not  be  fuppofed  that  in  the  For- 
mation of  this  Cryfl:al,  the  Particles  not  only 
ranged  themfelves  in  rank  and  file  for  concreting 
in  regular  Figures,  but  alfo  by  fome  kind  of  po- 
lar Virtue  turned  their  homogeneal  Sides  the 
fame  way. 

The  Parts  of  all  homogeneal  hard  Bodies 
which  fully  touch  one  another,  flick  together 

N'ery 


364  OPTIC  K  S. 

very  ftrongly.  And  for  explaining  how  this 
may  be,  fome  have  invented  hooked  Atoms, 
which  is  begging  the  Queftion^  and  others  tell 
us  that  Bodies  are  glued  together  by  reft,  that 
is,  by  an  occult  Quf.lity,  or  rather  by  nothing; 
and  others,  that  they  flick  together  by  confpi- 
ring  Motions,  that  is,  by  relative  reft  .  amongft 
themfelves.  I  had  rather  infer  from  their  Co- 
hefion,  that  their  Particles  attrad:  one  another  by 
fbme  Force ,  which  in  immediate  Contaft  is  ex- 
ceeding ftrong,  at  fmall  diftances  performs  the 
chymical  Operations  above-mention'd ,  and 
reaches  not  far  from  the  Particles  with  any  fenfi- 
ble  -Effea. 

All  Bodies  fcem  to  be  compofed  of  hard  Par- 
ticles :  For  otherwife  Fluids  would  not  congeal  5 
as  Water,  Oils,  Vinegar ,  and  Spirit  or  Oil  of 
Vitriol  do  by  freezing ;  Mercury  by  Fumes  of 
Lead;  Spirit  of  Nitre  and  Mercury,  by  diflbl- 
ving  the  Mercury  and  evaporating  the  Flegm ; 
Spirit  of  Wine  and  Spirit  of  Urine,  by  deflegm- 
ing  and  mixing  them;  and  Spirit  of  Urine  and 
Spirit  of  Salt,  by  fubliming  them  together  to 
make  Sal-armoniac.  Even  the  Rays  of  Light 
feem  to  be  hard  Bodies ;  for  otherwife  they 
would  not  retain  different  Properties  in  their 
different  Sides,  And  therefore  Hardnefs  may 
be  reckon'd  the  Property  of  all  uncompounded 
Matter.  At  leaft,  this  feems  to  be  as  evident 
as  the  univerfal  Impenetrability  of  Matter.  For 
all  Bodies,  fo  far  as  Experience  reaches,  are  ei- 
ther hard,  or  may  be  harden'd;  and  we  have 
no  other  Evidence  of  univerfal  Impenetrability, 
befides  a  large  Experience  without  an  experi- 
mental 


BOOK     III.  365 

mental  Exception.  Now  if  compound  Bodies 
are  fo  very  hard  as  we  find  fome  of  them  to 
be,  and  yet  are  very  porous,  and  confift  of  Parts 
which  are  only  laid  together j  the  fimple  Par- 
ticles which  are  void  of  Pores,  and  were  never 
yet  divided,  muft  be  much  harder.  For  fuch 
hard  Particles  being  heaped  up  together,  can 
fcarce  touch  one  another  in  more  than  a  few 
Points,  and  therefore  muft  be  feparable  %by 
much  lefs  Force  than  is  requifite  to  break  a  fo~ 
lid  Particle,  whofe  Parts  touch  in  all  the  Space 
between  them,  without  any  Pores  or  Interftices 
to  weaken  their  Cohelion.  And  how  fuch  ve- 
ry hard  Particles  which  are  only  laid  together 
and  touch  only  .in  a  few  Points,  can  flick  toge- 
ther, and  that  (b  firmly  as  they  do,  without  the 
a{rifi;ance  of  fomething  which  caufes  them  to 
be  attracted  or  prefs'd  towards  one  another,  is 
very  difficult  to  conceive. 

The  fame  thing  I  infer  alfo  from  the  cohe- 
ring of  two  polifh'd  Marbles  in  vacuo^  and  from 
tlie  llanding  of  Quick-filver  in  the  Barometer  at 
the  height  of  50,  60  or  70  Inches,  or  above, 
when  ever  it  is  well-purged  of  Air  and  careful- 
ly poured  in,  fo  that  its  Parts  be  every  where 
contiguous  both  to  one  another  and  to  the 
Glais.  The  Atmofphere  by  its  weight  prefles 
the  Quick-filver  into  the  Glafs,  to  the  height  of 
29  or  30  Inches.  And  fome  other  Agent  railes 
it  higher,  not  by  preihng  it  into  the  Glafs,  but 
by  making  its  Parts  flick  to  the  Glafs,  and  to 
one  another.  For  upon  any  difcontinuation  of 
Parts,  made  either  by  Bubbles  or  by  fhaking  the 

Glafs, 


366  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Glafs,   the  whole  Mercury  falls  down  to  the 
height  of  29  or  30  Inches. 

And  of   the  fame  kind  with  thefe  Experi- 
ments are  thofe  that  follow.     If  two  plane  po- 
lifh'd  Plates  of  Glafs  ( fuppofe  two  pieces  of  a 
polifh'd  Looking-glafs )  be  laid  together,  fo  that 
their  fides  be  parallel  and  at  a  very  fmall  di- 
ftance  from  one  another,   and  then  their  lower 
edggs  be  dipped  into   Water,    the  Water  will 
rife  up  between  them.     And   the   lei's   the  di- 
ftance  of  the  Glaffes  is,    the  greater  will  be  the 
height   to   which  the  Water  will  rife.     If  the 
diftance  be  about  the  hundredth  part  of  an  Inch, 
the  Water  will  rife  to  the  height  of  about  an 
Inch  J  and  if  the  diilance  be  greater  or  lefs  in 
any  Proportion,  the  height  will  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  diftance  very  nearly.     For 
the  attractive  Force  of  the  Glaffes  is  the  fame, 
whether  the  diftance  between  them  be  greater 
or  lefsi    and  the  weight  of  tlie  Water  drawn 
up  is  the  fame,  if  the  height  of  it  be  recipro- 
cally proportional  to  the  diftance  of  the  Glaffes. 
And  in  like  manner ,    Water  afcends  between 
two  Marbles  polifti'd  plane,  when  their  poliftied 
lides  are  parallel,   and  at  a  very  little  diftance 
from    one   another.     And   if   flender  Pipes    of 
Glafs  be  dipped  at  one  end  into  ftagnating  Wa- 
ter, the  Water  will  rife  up  within  the  Pipe,  and 
the  height  to  which  it  riles  will  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  Diameter  of  the  Cavity  of 
the  Pipe,  and  will  equal  the  height  to  which  it 
rifes  between  two  Planes  of  Glafs,  if  the  Semir- 
diameter  of  the  Cavity  of  the  Pipe  be  equal  to 
the  diftance  betv/een  the  Planes,  or  thereabouts. 

And 


BOOK     IIL  367 

An.d  thefe  Experiments  fucceed  after  the  fame 
manner  in  'vacuo  as  in  the  open  Air,  (as  hath 
been  tried  before  the  Royal  Society, )  and  there- 
fore are  not  influenced  by  the  Weight  or  Pref- 
fiire  of  t!^e  Atmofphere. 

And  if  a  large  Pipe  of  Giafs  be  fiiied  with 
fifted  Afhes  well  preffed  together  in  the  Glafs, 
.and  one  end  of  the  Pipe  be  dipped  into  ftagna- 
ting  Water,  the  Water  will  rife  up  flowly^  in 
the  Afhes,  fo  as  in  the  fpace  of  a  Week  or  Fort- 
night to  reach  up  within  the  Glafs,  to  the  height 
of  30  or  40  Inches  above  the  ftagnating  Water. 
And  the  Water  rifes  up  to  this  height  by  the 
Action  only  of  thofc  Particles  of  the  Aihes  which 
are  upon  the  Surface  of  the  elevated  Water; 
the  Particles  which  are  within  the  Water,  at- 
tra6ting  or  repelling  it  as  much  downwards  as 
upwards.  And  therefore  the  Action  of  the  Par- 
ticles is  very  ftrong.  But  the  Particles  of  the 
Alhes  being  not  lb  denfe  and  clofe  together 
as  rhofe  of  Glafs,  their  Action  is  not  fo  flrong 
as  that  of  Glafs,  which  keeps  Quick- fiiver  fuf- 
pended  to  the  height  of  60  or  70  Inches,  and 
therefore  a6ls  with  a  Force  which  would  keep 
Water  fufpcnded  to  the  height  of  above  60 
Feet. 

By  the  fame  Principle,  a  Sponge  fucks  in 
Water,  and  the  Glands  in  the  Bodies  of  Ani- 
mals, according  to  their  feveral  Natures  and 
Difpofitions,  fuck  in  various  Juices  from  the 
Blood.      .  ■        - 

If  two  plane  polifh'd  Plates  of  Gafs  three  or 
four  Inches  broad,  and  twenty  or  twenty  five 
long,  be  laid  one  of  them  parallel  to  the  Ho- 
rizon, 


368  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

1-izon,  the  other  upon  the  firft,  fo  as  at  one  of 
their  ends  to  touch  one  another,  and  contain  an 
Angle  of  about  lo  or  15  Minutes,  and  the  fame 
be  firft  moiften'd  on  their  inward  fides  with  a 
Glean  Cloth  dipp'd  into  Oil  of  Oranges  or  Spirit 
of  Turpentine,  and  a  Drop  or  two  of  the  Oil 
or  Spirit  be  let  fall  upon  the  lower  Glafs  at  thei. 
other  end  j  fo  foon  as  the  upper  Glafs  is  laid  • 
down  upon  the  lower,  fo  as  to  touch  it  at  one 
end  as  above,  and  to  touch  the  Drop  at  the  other 
end,  making  with  the  lower  Glafs  an  Angle  of 
about  10  or  15  Minutes;  the  Drop  will  begin  to 
move  towards  the  Concourfe  of  the  GlalTes,  and 
will  continue  to  move  with  an  accelerated  Mo- 
tion, till  it  arrives  at  that  Concourfe  of  the 
Glailes.  For  the  two  Glaffes  attradt  the  Drop, 
and  make  it  run  that  way  towards  which  the  At-^ 
tradlions .  incline.  And  if  when  the  Drop  is  in 
motion  you  lift  up  that  end  of  the  Glaffes  where 
they  meet,  and  towards  which  the  Drop  moves, 
the  Drop  will  afcend  between  the  Glaffes,  and 
therefore  is  attracted.  And  as  you  lift  up  the 
Glaffes  more  and  more,  the  Drop  will  afcend 
flower  and  flower,  and  at  length  reit,  being  then 
carried  downward  by  its  Weight,  as  much  as  up- 
wards by  the  Attraction.  And  by  this  means 
you  may  know  the  Force  by  which  the  Drop  is 
attracted  at  all  diftances  from  the  Concourfe  of 
the  Glaffes.  ^ 

Now  by  fome  Experiments  of  this  kind, 
(made  by  Mr.  Hauksbee)  it  has  been  found  that 
the  Attraction  is  almofl  reciprocally  in  a  dupli- 
cate Proportion  of  the  diflance  of  the  middle 
of  the  Drop  from  the  Concourfe  of  the  Glaffes, 

viz. 


BOOK     III.  369 

1/2;.  reciprocally  in  a  limple  Propoition,  by  rea- 
fon  of  the  fpreading  of  the  Drop,  and  its  touch- 
ing each  Glafs  in  a  larger  Surface;  and  again  re- 
ciprocally in  a  fimple  Proportion,  by*  reaibn  of 
the  Attradions  growing  ftronger  within  the 
fame  quantity  of  attracting  Surface.  The  At- 
traction therefore  within  the  fame  quantity  of 
attrading  Surface,  is  reciprocally  as  the  diftance 
between  the  Glaiies.  And  therefore  where  the 
diftance  is  exceeding  fmall,  the  Attraction  muft 
be  exceeding  great.  By  the  Table  in  the  fe- 
cond  Part  of  the  fecond  Book,  wherein  the 
thicknefles  of  colour'd  Plates  of  Water  be- 
tween two  Glafles  are  fet  down,  the  thicknefs 
of  the  Plate  where  it  appears  very  black,  is 
three  eighths  of  the  ten  hundred  thoufandth 
part  of  an  Inch.  And  where  the  Oil  of  O- 
ranges  between  the  Glafles  is  of  this  thicknefs, 
the  Attraction  coUeCled  by  the  foregoing  Rule, 
feems  to  be  fo  ftrong,  as  within  a  Circle  of  an 
Inch  in  diam.eter,  to  fuffice  to  hold  up  a 
Weight  equal  to  that  of  a  Cylinder  of  Water 
of  an  Inch  in  diameter,  and  two  or  three  Fur- 
longs in  length.  And  where  it  is  of  a  lefs 
thicknefs  the  Attraction  mny  be  proportionally 
greater,  and  continue  to  increafe,  until  the 
thicknefs  do  not*  exceed  that  of  a  iinglc  Par- 
ticle of  the  Oil.  There  are  therefore  Agents 
in  Nature  able  to  make  the  Particles  of  Bo- 
dies ftick  together  by  very  ftrong  Attractions. 
And  it  is  the  Bufinefs  o£  experimental  Philofophy 
to  find  them  out. 

B  b         ^  .  Now 


370  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

fjow  the  fmalleft  Particles  of  Matter  may  co- 
here by  the  ftrongeil  Attra61:ions,  and  compofe 
bigger  Particles  of  weaker  Virtue  ;  and  many  of 
thele  may*  cohere  and  compofe  bigger  Particles 
whofe  Virtue  is  flill  weaker,  and  fo  on  for  divers 
Succeffions,  until  the  Progrellion  end  in  the  big- 
geft  Particles  on  which  the  Operations  in  Chymi- 
Itry,  and  the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies  depend, 
and  which  by  cohering  compofe  Bodies  of  a  fen- 
fible  Magnitude.  If  the  Body  is  compact,  and 
bends  or  yields  inward  to  Preflion  without  any 
Hiding  of  its  Parts,  it  is  hard  and  elaftick,  re- 
turning to  'its  Figure  with  a  Force  riling  from 
the  mutual  AttracCtion  of  its  Parts.  If  the 
Parts  flide  upon  one  another,  the  Body  is  mal- 
leable or  foft.  If  they  flip  eafily,  and  are  of  a 
fit  Size  to  be  agitated  by  Heat,  and  the  Heat  is 
big  enough  to  keep  them  in  Agitation,  the  Body 
is  fluid ;  and  if  it  be  apt  to  flick  to  things,  it  is 
humid  ;  and  the  Drops  of  every  fluid  affed  a 
round  Figure  by  the  mutual  Attradiion  of  their 
Parts,  as  the  Globe  of  the  Earth  and  Sea  affedrs  a 
round  Figure  by  the  mutual  Attraction  of  its  Parts 
by  Gravity, 

Since  Metals  difTolved  in  Acids  attradt  but  a 
fniall  quantity  of  the  Acid,  their  attradiive  Force 
can  reach  but  to  a  fmall  diftance  from  them. 
And  as  in  Algebra,  where  affirmative  Quanti- 
ties vanifli  and  ceafe,  there  negative  ones  be- 
gin J  fo  in  Mechanicks,  where  Attradion  cea- 
fes,  there  a  repulfive  Virtue  ought  to  fucceed. 
And  that  there  is  fuch  a  Virtue,  feems  to  fol- 
low from  the  Reflexions  and  Inticxions  of  the 
I  Rays 


BOOK     III.  371 

Rays  of  Light.     For  the  Rays  are  repelled  by 
Bodies  in  both  thefe  Cafes,  without  the  imme- 
diate Contad;  of  the  reflecting  or  inflecting  Bo- 
dy.    It  feems  alfo  to  follow  from  the  Emillion 
of  Light ;    the  Ray  fo  foon  as  it  is  ihaken  off 
from  a  fhining  Body  by  the  vibrating  Motion  of 
the  Parts  of   the  Body,    and   gets   beyond    the 
reach  of  Attraction,  being  driven  away  with  ex- 
ceeding great  Velocity.     For  that  Force  which 
is  fufficient  to  turn  it  back  in  Reflexion,   may 
be  fufficient  to  emit  it.      It  feems  alfo  to  fol- 
low from  the  Produdion  of  Air  and  Vapour. 
The  Particles   when  they  are  fjjaken  off  from 
Bodies  by  Heat  or  Fermentation,    fo   foon    as 
they  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  Attradion  of 
the  Body,  receding  from  it,  and  alfo  from  one 
another  with  great  Strength,  and  keeping  at  a 
diftance,    fo  as  fometimcs  to  take  up  above  a 
Million  of  Times  more  fpace  than  they  did  be- 
fore in  the  form  of  a  denfe  Body.     WliicJi  vafh 
Contradion  and  Expanfion  feems  unintelligible, 
by  feigning  the  Particles  of  Air  to  be  fpringy 
and  ramous,    or  rolled  up  like  Hoops,    or  by 
any  other  means  than  a  repulfive  Power.     The 
Particles   of  Fluids  which   do  not  cohere   100 
ftrongly,  and  are  of  fuch  a  Smallncfs  as  renders 
them  mofl:  fufceptibk  of  thofe  Agitations  which 
keep  Liquors  \n  a  Fluor,   are  mofl:  eafily  fepa- 
rated  and  rarifled  into  Vapour,  and  in  the  Lan- 
guage of  the  Chymifl:s,   they  are  volatile,  rari- 
fying  with  an  eafy  Heat,  and  condenfing  with 
Cold.     But  thofe  which  are  groffer,  and  fo  lefs 
ibfceptible  of  Agitationj  or  cohere  by  a  flironger 
B  b  2  Attradion, 


372  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

Attradlon,  are  not  feparated  without  'a  fironger 
Pleat,    or    perhaps   not  without  Fermentation. 
And  thefe  iaft  are  the  Bodies  which  Chymifls 
call  fix'd,    and  being  rarified  by  Fermentation, 
become  true  permanent  Air  j   thofe  Particles  re- 
ceding   from    one  another    with    the    greateft 
Force,  and  being  moft  difficultly  brought  toge- 
ther, which  upon  Conrad:  cohere  moft  ftrongly. 
And  becaufe  the  Particles  of  permanent  Air  are 
grofter,   and  arife  from  denfer  Subftances  than 
thofe  of  Vapours,  thence  it  is  that  true  Air  is 
more  ponderous  than  Vapour,  and  that  a  moift 
Atmofphere  is  lighter  than  a  dry  one,  quantity 
for  quantity.     From  the  fame  repelling  Power 
it  feems  to  be  that  Flies  walk,  upon   the  Wa- 
ter -without  wetting  their  Feet ;    and  that  the 
Obje<5t-giaiTes  of  long  Telefcopes  lie  upon  one 
another  without  touching  j   and  that  dry  Pow- 
ders are  difficultly    made    to    touch  one  ano- 
ther fo  as  to  ftick  together,  unlefs  by  melting 
them,  or  wetting  them  with  Water,   which  by 
exhaling  may  bring   them  together  ;    and  that 
two  poliih'd  Marbles,  which  by  immediate  Con- 
tad  ftick  together,    are  difficultly  brought    fo 
clofe  together  as  to  ftick. 

And  thus  Nature  will  be  very  conformable 
to  herfelf  and  very  fimple,  performing  all  the 
great  Motions  of  the  heavenly  Bodies  by  the 
Attradion  of  Gravity  which  intercedes  thofe 
Bodies,  and  almoft^U  the  fmall  ones  of  their 
Particles  by  fome  other  attractive  and  repelling 
Powers  which  intercede  the  Particles.  The 
Vis  inertias  is  a  paffive  Principle  by  which  Bo- 
dies 


BOOK     III.  373 

dies  perfift  in  their  Motion  or  Reft,  receive  Mo- 
tion in  proportion  to  the  Force  kiiprefTing  it, 
and  refift  as  much  as  they  are  itfifted.  By 
this  Principle  alone  there  never  could  Ivxvq  been 
any  Motion  in  the  World.  Some  other  Principle 
was  neceffary  for  putting  Bodies  into  Motion ; 
and  now  they  are  in  Motion,  fome  other  Prin- 
ciple is  neceflary  for  conferving  the  Motion. 
For  from  the  various  Compofition  of  two  Mo- 
tions, 'tis  very  certain  that  there  is  not  always 
the  fame  quantity  of  Motion  in  the  World.  For 
if  two  Globes  joined  by  a  Ilendtr  Rod,  revolve 
•  about  their  common  Center  of  Gravity  with 
an  uniform  Motion,  while  that  Center  moves 
on  uniformly  in  a  right  Line  drawn  in  the 
Plane  of  their  circular  Motion  j  the  Sum  of 
the  Motions  of  the  two  Globes,  as  often  as  the 
Globes  are  in  the  right  Line  defcribed  by  their 
common  Center  of  Gravity,  will  be  bigger  than 
the  Sum  of  their  Motions,  when  they  are  in  a 
Line  perpendicular  to  that  right  Line.  By  this 
Liftance  it  appears  that  Motion  may  be  got  or 
loft.  But  by  reafon  of  the  Tenacity  of  Fluids, 
and  Attrition  of  their  Parts,  and  the  Weakneli 
of  Elafticity  in  Solids,  Motion  is  much  more 
apt  to  be  loft  than  got,  and  is  always  -upon  the 
Decay.  For  Bodies  which  are  either  abfolutely 
hard,  or  fo  foft  as  to  be  void  of  Elafticity, 
will  not  rebound  from  one  another.  Impene- 
trability makes  them  only  ftop.  If  two  equal 
Bodies  meet  diredly  t^i  'vacuo,  they  will  by  the 
Laws  of  Motion  ftop  where  they  meet,  and 
lofe  all  their  Motion,  and  remain  in  reft,  unlefs 

B  b  3  they 


374         O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

they  be  elafcick,  and  receive  new  Motion  froi^ 
their  Spring.  If  they  have  lb  much  Elafticit] 
aSifuffices  to  make  them  re- bound  with  a  quar- 
ter, or  half,  or  three  quarters  of  tlie  Force  with 
which  they  come  together,  they  will  lofe  three 
quarters,  or  half,  or  a  quarter  of  their  Motion. 
And  this  may  be  try'd,  by  letting  two  equal 
Pendulums  fall  againft  one  another  from  equal 
heights.  If  the  Pendulums  be  of  Lead  or  foft 
Clay,  they  will  lofe  all  or  almoft  all  tlieir  Mo- 
tions: If  of  elaftick  Bodies  they  will  lofe  all  but 
what  they  recover  from  their  Elafticity.  If  it 
be  faid,  that  they  can  lofe  no  Motion  but  what . 
they  communicate  to  other  Bodies,  the  confe- 
quence  l;,  that  i?t  vacuo  they  can  lofe  no  Mo- 
tion, but  when  they  meet  they  muft  go  on  and 
penetrate  one  another's  Dimenlions.  If  three 
equal  round  Veffels  be  filled,  the  one  with  Wa- 
ter, the  other  with  Oil,  the  third  with  molten 
Pitch,  and  the  Liquors  be  ftirred  about  alike 
to  give  them  a  vortical  Motion  j  the  Pitch  by 
its  Tenacity  will  lofe  its  Motion  quickly,  the 
Oil  being  lefs  tenacious  will  keep  i^  longer,  and 
the  Water  being  lefs  tenacious  will  keep  it  long- 
eft,  but  yet  will  lofe  it  in  a  fliort  time.  Whence 
it  is  eafy  to  underftand,  that  if  many  contiguous 
Vortices  of  molten  Pitch  were  each  of  them  as 
large  as  thofe  which  fome  fuppofe  to  revolve 
about  the  Sun  and  fix'd  Stars,  yet  thefe  and  all 
their  Parts  would,  by  their  Tenacity  and  Stiffnefs, 
communicate  their  Motion  to  one  another  till 
they  all  refted  among  themfelves.  Vortices  of 
Oil  or  Water,    or  fome  fluider  Matter,    might 

continue 


BOOK     III.  375 

continue  longer  in  Motion  ;  but  unlefs  the  Mat- 
ter were  void  of  all  Tenacity  and  Attrition  of 
Parts,  and  Communication  of  Motion,  (which 
is  not  to  be  fuppofed,)  the  Motion  v/ould  con- 
ftantly  decay.  Seeing  therefore  the  variety  of 
Motion  which  we  find  in  the  World  is  ahvays 
decreafing,  there  is  a  neceflity  of  confer ving 
and  recruiting  it  by  adive  Principles,  fuch  as 
are  the  caufe  of  Gravity,  by  which  Planets  and 
Comets  keep  their  Motions  in  their  Orbs,  and 
Bodies  acquire  great  Motion  in  falling;  ai>d  the 
caufe  of  Fermentation,  by  which  the  Heart  and 
Blood  of  Animals  are  kept  in  perpetual  Motion 
and  Heat;  the  inward  Parts  of  the  Earth  are 
conftantly  warm'd,  and  in  fome  places  grow 
very  hot;  Bodies  burn  and  fhine.  Mountain^ 
take  Fire,  the  Caverns  of  the  Earth  are  blown 
up,  and  the  Sun  continues  violently  hot  and 
lucid,  and  warms  all  things  by  his  Light.  For 
we  meet  with  very  little  Motion  in  the  World, 
befides  what  is  owing  to  thefe  ad:ive  Principles. 
And  if  it  were  not  for  thefe  Principles,  the  Bo- 
dies of  the  Earth,  Planets,  Comets,  Sun,  and 
all  things  in  them,  would  grow  cold  and  freeze, 
and  become  inadtive  Mafles ;  and  all  Putrefadi- 
on,  Generation,  Vegetation  and  Life  would  ceafe, 
and  the  Planets  and  Comets  would  not  remain  in 
their  Orbs. 

All  thefe  things  being  confider'd,  it  feems  pro- 
bable to  me,  that  God  in  the  Beginning  form'd 
Matter  in  folid,  mafly,  hard,  impenetrable,  move- 
able Particles,  of  fuch  Sizes  and  Figures,  and  with 
fuch  other  Properties,    and  in  fuch  Proportion 

B  b  4  to 


376  OPTIC  K  S. 

to  Space,  as  moft  conduced  to  the  End  £o\ 
which  he  form'd  them  j  and  that  thefe  primi-) 
tive  Particles  being  Solids,  are  incomparably 
harder  than  any  porous  Bodies  compounded  of 
them  J  even  lb  very  hard,  as  never  to  v^^ear  or 
break  in  pieces ;  no  ordinary  Pov^er  being  able 
to  divide  what  God  himfelf  made  one  in  the  jErft 
Creation.  While  the  Particles  continue  entire, 
they  may  compofe  Bodies  of  one  and  the  fame 
Nature  and  Texture  in  all  Ages :  But  fhould 
they  wear  away,  or  break  in  pieces,  the  Nature 
of  Things  depending  on  them,  would  be  chan- 
ged. Water  and  Earth,  compofed  of  old  worn 
Particles  and  Fragments  of  Particles,  would  not 
be  of  the  fame  Nature  and  Texture  now,  with 
Water  and  Earth  compofed  of  entire  Particles 
in  the  Beginning.  And  therefore,  that  Nature 
may  be  lafting,  the  Changes  of  corporeal  Things 
are  to  be  placed  only  in  the  various  Separations 
and  new  Aflbciations  and  Motions  of  thefe  per- 
manent Particles  j  compound  Bjodies  being  apt 
to  break,  not  in  the  midfi  of  fclid  Particles,  but 
where  thofe  Particles  are  laid  together,  and  only 
touch  in  a  few  Points. 

It  feems  to  me  farther,  that  thefe  Particles 
have  not  only  a  Vis  i?ierticej  accompanied  with 
fuch  paffive  Laws  of  Motion  as  naturally  refult 
from  that  Force,  but  alfo  that  they  are  moved 
by  certain  adive  Principles,  fuch  as  is  that  of 
Gravity,  and  that  which  caufes  Fermentation, 
and  the  Cohefion  of  Bodies.  Thefe  Principles 
I  confider,  not  as  occult  Qualities,  fuppofed  to 
refult  from  the  fpeciiick  Forms  of  Things,  but 

as 


BOOK     in.  377 

PS  general  Laws  of  Nature,  by  which  the  Things 
themfelves  are  form'd;    their  Truth  appearing 
to  us  by  Phenomena,   though  their  Caufes  be 
not  yet  difcover'd.     For  theie  are  manifeil  Qua- 
lities,   and  their  Caufes  only  are  occult.     iVud 
the  Arijloteiians  gave  the  Name  of  occult  Qua- 
lities,   not   to   manifeil  Qualities,    but   to  iuch 
Qualities  only  as   they  fuppofed    to  lie  hid   im 
Bodies,  and  to  be  the  unknown  Caufes  of  ma- 
nifeft  Effeds :  Such  as  would  be  the  Caufes  of 
Gravity,    and  of  m.agnetick  and   eledrick  At- 
tradtions,    and  of  Fermentations,   if  we  fliould 
fuppofe  that  thefe  Forces  or  Adions  arofc  from 
Qucilities  unknov/n  to  us,  and  uncapable  of  be- 
ing difcovered  and   made   manifeil.     Such  oc- 
cult  Qualities  put  a  Hop  to  the  Improvement 
of  natural   Philofophy,    and    therefore   of.  late 
Years  have  been    rcjedled.      To  tell  us  that  e-r 
very  Species  of  Thii^gs  is  endow'd  with  an  oc- 
cult fpecifick  Quality  by  which  it  ads  and  pro-  v 
duces  manifefl  Etfeds,  is  to  tell  us  nothing:  But 
to  derive  two  or  three  general  Principles  of  Mo- 
tion from  Phaenomena,  and  afterwards  to  tell  us 
how  the  Properues  and  Adions  of  ail  corporeal 
Things  follow  from  thofe  manifeil  Principles, 
would  be  a  very  great  ilep  in  Philofophy,  though 
the  Caufes  of  thofe  Principles  were  not  yet  dif- 
cover'd :  And  therefore  I  fcruple  not  to  propbfe 
the  Principles  of  Motion  above-mention'd,  they 
being  of  very  general  Extent,  and    leave  tl^ir* 
Caufes  to  be  found  out. 

Now  by  the  help  of  thefe  Principles,  all  ma- 
terial Things  feern  to  have  been  comoofed  of 

the 


378  O  P  T  I  C'k  S. 

the  hard  and  folid  Particles  above-mention'! 
varioufly  aiTociated  in  the  iirfl  Creation  By  th) 
Counfel  of  an  intelligent  Agent.  For  it  beeame) 
him  who  created  them  to  fet  them  in  order. 
And  if  he  did  fo,  it's  unphilofophical  to  feek 
for  any  other  Origin  of  the  World,  or  to  pre- 
tend that  it  might  arife  out  of  a  Chaos  by  the 
mere  Laws  of  Nature  j  though  being  once 
form'd,  it  may  continue  by  thofe  Laws  for  ma- 
ny Ages.  For  while  Comets  move  in  very  ex- 
centrick  Orbs  in  all  manner  of  Pofitions,  blind 
Fate  could  never  make  all  the  Planets  move 
one  and  the  fame  way  in  Orbs  concentrick, 
fome  inconfiderable  Irregularities  excepted, 
which  may  have  rifen  from  the  mutual  Ad:ions 
of  Comets  and  Planets  upon  one  another,  and 
which  will  be  apt  to  increafe,  till  this  Syflem 
wants  a  Reformation.  Such  a  wonderful  Uni- 
formity in  the  Planetary  Syflem  mufl  be  allow- 
ed the  Effect  of  Choice.  And  fo  muft  the 
Uniformity  in  the  Bodies  of  Animals,  they  ha- 
ving generally  a  right  and  a  left  fide  fhaped  a- 
like,  and  on  either  fide  of  theii:  Bodies  two 
Legs  behind,  and  either  two  •  Arms,  or  two 
Legs,  or  two  Wings  before  upon  their  Shoul- 
ders, and  between  their  Shoulders  a  Neck  run- 
ning down  into  a  Back-bone,  and  a  Head  up- 
on it  J  and  in  the  Head  two  Ears,  two  Eyes,  a 
Nofe,  a  Mouth,  and  a  Tongue,  alike  fituated. 
•Alfo  the  firfl  Contrivance  of  thofe  very  artifi- 
cial Parts  of  Animals,  the  Eyes,  Ears,  Brain, 
Mufcles,  Heart,  Lungs,  Midriff,  Glands,  La- 
rynx, Hands,  Wings,  fwimming  Bladders,  na- 
tural 


BOOK     III.  379 

.  nral  Spedlacles,  and  other  Organs  of  Senfe  and 
Motion  J  and  the  Inftin(!^  of  Brutes  and  Infeds, 
can  be  the  effed  of  nothing  elfe  than  the  Wif- 
dom  and  Skill  of  a  powerful  ever-living  Agent, 
who  being  in  all  Places,  is  more  able  by 
his  Will  to  niove  the  Bodies  within  his  bound- 
lefs  uniform  Senforium,  and  thereby  to  form 
and  reform  the  Parts  of  the  Univerfe,  than  we 
are  by  our  Will  to  move  the  Parts  of  our  own 
Bodies.  And  yet  we  are  not  to  confider  the 
World  as  the  Body  of  God,  or  the  feveral  Parts 
thereof,  as  tlie  Parts  of  God.  He  is  an  uni- 
form Being,  void  of  Organs,  Members  or  Parts, 
and  they  are  his  Creatures  fubordinate  to  him, 
and  fubiervient  to  his  Will  j  and  he  is  no  more 
the  Soul  of  them,  than  the  Soul  of  Man  is  the 
Soul  of  the  Species  of  Things  carried  through 
the  Organs  of  Senfe  into  the  place  of  its  Sen- 
fation,  where  it  perceives  them  by  means  of  its 
immediate  Prefence,  without  the  Intervention 
of  any  third  thing.  The  Organs  of  Scnic  are 
not  for  enabling  the  Soul  to  perceive  the  Spe- 
cies of  Things  in  its  Senforium,  but  only  for 
conveying  them  thither  j  and  God  has  no  need 
of  fuch  Organs,  he  being  every  where  prefent 
to  the  Things  themfelves.  And  fince  Space  is 
divifible  in  injimtum^  and  Matter  is  not  necef- 
farily  in  all  places,  it  may  be,  alfo  allow'd  that 
God  is  able  to  create  Particles  of  Matter  of  fe- 
veral Sizes  and  Figures,  and  in  feveral  Propor- 
.  tions  to  Space,  and  perhaps  of  different  Denli- 
ties  and  Forces,  and  theieby  to  vary  the  Laws 
of  Nature,  and  make  Worlds  of  feveral  forts  in 

feveral 


380  O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 

feveral  Parts  of  the  Univerfe.     At  leafl,  I  fee  i^j- 
thiiig  of  Contradidiion  in  all  this. 

As  in  Mathematicks,  fo  in  Natural  Philofo- 
phy,  the  Inveftigation  of  difficult  Things  by  the\ 
Method  of  Analyfis,  ought  ever  to  precede  the 
Method  of  Compofition.  This  Analylis  con- 
fifts  in  making  Experiments  and  Obfervations, 
and  in  drawing  general  Concluiions  from  them 
by  Induction,  and  admitting  of  no  Objections 
againft  the  Conclufions,  but  fuch  as  are  taken 
from  Experiments ,  or  other  certain  Truths. 
For  Hypothefes  are  not  to  be  regarded  in  ex- 
perimental Philofophy.  And  although  the  ar- 
guing from  Experiments  and  Obfervations  by 
Induction  be  no  Demonftration  of  general  Con- 
clufions ;  yet  it  is  the  befl  way  of  arguing  which 
the  Nature  of  Things  admits  of,  and  may  be 
looked  upon  as  fo  much  the  flronger,  by  how 
much  the  Induction  is  more  general.  And  if 
no  Exception  occur  from  Phaenomena,  the  Con- 
clufion  may  be  pronounced  generally.  But  if 
at  any  time  afterwards  any  Exception  fliall  oc- 
cur from  Experiments,  it  may  then  begin  to  be 
pronounced  with  fuch  Exceptions  as  occur.  By 
this  way  of  Analylis  we  may  proceed  from  Com- 
pounds to  Ingredients,  and  from  Motions  to  the 
Forces  producing  them  j  and  in  general,  from 
Effeds  to  their  Caufes ,  and  from  particular 
Cauies  to  more  general  ones,  till  the  Argument 
end  in  the  moll  general.  This  is  the  Method 
of  Analyfis :  And  the  Synthefis  coniifls  in  af- 
fuming  the  Caufes  difcover'd,  and  eftablifh'd 
as  Principles,  and  by  them  explaining  the  Phae- 

nomena 


{  BOO  K     III.  381 

noraena  proceeding  from  them,  and  proving  the 
Explanations." 

In  the  two  firfl  -Books  of  thefe  Opticks,  I 
.  proceeded  by  this  Analyfis  to  difcover  and  prove 
'  the  original  Differences  of  the  Rays  of  Light  in 
refped:  of  Refrangibility,  Reflexibility,  and  Co- 
lour, and  their  alternate  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion 
and  eafy  Tranfmiffion,    and  the  Properties  of 
Bodies,    both   opake   and    pellucid,    on   which 
their   Reflexions    and    Colours    depend.      And 
thefe  Difcoveries  being  proved,  may  be  alTumed 
in  the  Method  of  Compofition  for  explaining 
the    Phzenomena  arifmg   from  them:    An  In- 
ftance  of  which  Method  I  gave  in  the  End  of 
the  firft  Book.     In  this  third  Book  I  have  only 
begun  the  Analyfis  of  what  remains  to  be  dif- 
cover'd  about  Light  and   its  Eflfcdts  upon   the 
Frame  of  Nature,  hinting  feveral  things  about 
it,    and  leaving  the   Hints  to  be  examin'd  and 
improv'd  by  the  farther  Experiments   and  Ob- 
fervations  of   fuch   as    are  inquifitive.     And  if 
natural  Philofophy  in  all  its  Parts,  by  purfuing 
this  Method,   Ihall  at  length  be  perfedied,    the 
Bounds  of  Moral  Philofophy  will  be  alfo  enlar- 
ged.    For  fo  far  as  we  can   know  by  natural 
Philofophy  what  is  the  firlt  Caufe,  what  Power 
he  has  over  us,    and  what  Benefits  we  receive 
from  him,  fo  far  our  Duty  towards  him,  as  well 
as  that  towards  one  another,  will  appear  to  us 
by  the  Light  of  Nature.     And  no  doubt,  if  the 
Worlhip  of  falfe  Gods  had  not  blinded  the  Hea*- 
then,  their  moral  Pmioibphy  would  have  gone 
farther  than  to  the  four  Cardinal  Virtues j  and 

infi:ead 


382 


O  P  T  I  C  K  S. 


infteadof  teaching  the  Tranfmigration  of  Souls, 
and  to  worfhip  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  dead 
Heroes,  they  would  have  tajught  us  to  worfhip 
our  true  Author  and  Benefactor,  as  their  Ance- 
ftors  did  under  the  Government  of  Noah  and  his 
Sons  before  they  corrupted  themfelves. 


FINIS. 


BOOKS  printed  for  William  Innys. 

Is  A  A  CI  Newtoni,  Equ.  Aur.  in  Academia  Cantabrigienfi  Ma- 
thefeos  olim  Profeflbris  Lucafiani  Leftiones  opiicae.     4/0.  1729. 

The  fame  in  Englijh.     %vo.  1728. 

Univerfal  Arithmctick.  By  Sir  Ifaac  Newton.  The  Second  E- 
dition.     %vo.  1728. 

Opticas :  Sive  de  Reflexionibus,  Refraflionibus,  Inflexionibus  & 
Coloribus  Lucis  Libri  ties,  Authore  Ifaaco  Newton,  Equite  Au- 
rato.  Latine  reddidit  Samuel  Clarke,  S.  T.  P.  Editio  fecunda, 
auftior.     8cff.  1719- 

Philofophise  Naturalis  Principia  Mathcmatica.  Authore  Ifaaco 
Newton,  Equ.  Aur.     Editio  tertia,  aufta  ^  emendata.     \to.  1726. 

The  Method  of  Fluxions  both  Direft  and  Inverfe  :  The  former 
being  a  Tranllation  from  the  Marquis  de  V  Hofpital,  and  the  latter 
fupplied  by  the  Tranflator,  E.  Stone,  F.  R.  S.  Jn  two  Volumes. 
%vo.  1730.  _  / 

Epiilola  ad  amicum  de  Cotelii  Inventis  Ciirvarum  ratione,  ^V. 
\to.  1722. 

An  Analytick  Treatife  of  Conic  Sedlions.     By  E.  Stone.  \t9. 

Mathematical  Elements  of  Natural  Phiiofophy  confirm'd  by  Ex- 
periments :  Or  an  Introduftion  to  Sir  Ij'aac  Newton's  Phiiofophy. 
By1V.J.'sGravefandt,hL.D.  In  two  Vols.  8:/^.  The  Third 
Edition.     1726. 

Phyfico-Theology  :  Or  a  Demonftration  of  the  Being  and  Attri- 
butes of  God,  from  his  Works  of  Creation ;  with  large  Notes  and 
many  curious  Obfervations.  By  IV.  Derham,  Canon  of  WindjoTy 
and  F.  R.  S.     The  Seventh  Edition.     %vo.  1727. 

Mr.  Derhani's  Allro-ThcoJogy  :  Or  a  Demonftration  of  the  Be- 
ing and  Attributes  of  Gc  I  from  a  Survey  of  the  Heavens;  with 
Cuts.     The  Fifth  Edition.    Sr-a.  1726. 

Philofophical  Letters  between  the  la:e  Learned  Mr.  Ray  and  fe- 
veral  of  his  Ingenipus  Correfpendents,  Natives  and  Foreigners.  To 
which  are  added  thofe  of  fra^icis  Wiiloughby,  Efq;  The  whole 
confining  of  many  curious  Difcoverics  and  Improvements  in  the 
Hii^ory  of  Quadrupeds,  Birds,  Fifr.es,  Infefts,  Plants,  Fofiils, 
Fountains,  idc.     Publifhed  by  Mr.  Dcrhatn.    Zvo. 

Mr.  Ray\  Three  Phyiico-Theologlcal  Difcourfes,  concerning 
I.  The  primitive  Chaos,  and  Creation  of  the  World.  II.  The 
general  Deluge,  its  Caufes  artd  EfFedls.  III.  The  DilTolution  of 
the  World  and  future  Conflagration,  l^c.  Illuftrated  with  Copper- 
Plates.     The  fourth  Edition,  with  Additions.   %vo. 

His  Wifdom  of  God  in  the  Works  of  the  Creation.     The 

Ninth  Edition.  %vo.  1727. 

Mr.  Ronayne\  Treatile  of  Algebra.  The  Second  Edition,  with 
Additions.    Sec.  1727 

Geometria  Organica :  Sive  Defcriptio  Linearum  Curvarum  uni- 
verfilis.  Auftore  Colino  Mac  Laurin,  Math.  Col.  Abred.  Prof.  & 
R.  S.  S.   4/(?.  1720. 

Aa 


BOOKS  printed  for  W.  I  n  N  y  s.    • 

An  Introduftion  to  Natural  Philofophy :  Or  PhiJorophrcal  Le- 
£lures  read  in  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford,  A.  D.  1 700.  To  which 
zre  added,  The  DcmonHrations  of  Mr.  Huyge?;is  Theorems,  con- 
cerning Force  and  circular  Motion.  By  yo/:?n  Kei'/,  M.  D.  Sav. 
Prof,  of  Allronomy,    and   F.  R.  S.    The  Second    Edition.    Svff. 

PhilofophicrJ  Tranfaclinns,  giving  fome  Account  of  the  prefent 
"Ehidertakings,  Studies  and  Labours  of  the  Ingenious,  in  many  con- 
fiderable  Parts  of  the  World.  Vol.  36.  Continued  and  publifh'd 
by  JV.  Rr/ity,  M.  D.  and  Reg.  Soc.  Seer.  4/1?.  1730. 

The  Lives  of  the  French,  Italian  and  Gerjnaii  Philofophers,  late 
Members  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  in  Paris.  Together 
with  Abftracls  of  the  chqicefl  Pieces  communicated  by  them  to  that 
Tlluftrious  Society.  To  which  is  added,  the  Preface  of  the  Ingeni- 
ous Monfieur  Fonicnelie,  Sccretgry  and  Author  of  the  Hiilory  of 
the  faid  x'\cademy,  ^vo. 

\Leonaidi  Plukeneti'.  M.  D.  Opera  omnia  Botanica  in  fex  Tomoe 
divifa,.  viz.  I.  II.  III.  Phytographise.  IV.  Almageftum  Botani- 
<wm.  V.  Almagefti  Botanici  MantifTa.  VI.  Amaltheum  Botani- 
cum  in  quibus  Stirpes  illuftriores  minus  cognitae,  exoticae,  Rarioref- 
due  novjffime  detcftae  ad  plures  Chiliadas  defcribuntur.  Turn 
ionibus  Tabulis  JEntis  CCCCLIV.  fumma  cura  depiftis  Figu- 
fintur. 

I  Methodus  Incrementorum  direfla  &  univerfa.  Auftore  Brook 
Taylor,  L.  L.  D.  &  Reg.  Soc.  Seer.  4/^.  171 7. 
i  The  Pollhumous  Works  of  Dr.  Robert  Hcoke;  in  which,  I.  The 
j^refcnt  Deficiency  of  natural  Philofophy  is  difcourfed  of,  with 
tiie  Methods  of  rendring  it  more  certain  and  beneficial.  II.  Of 
the  Nature,  Motion  and  Effedls  of  Light,  particularly  that  of  the 
Sun  and  Comets.  III.  An  hypothetical  Explication  of  Memory  ; 
how  the  Organs  made  ufe  of  by  the  Mind  in  its  Operation  may  be 
inechanically  underftood.  IV.  An  Hypothefis  and  Explication  of 
^e  Cauie  of  Gravity,  or  Gravitation,  Maignetifm,  iffc.  V.  Dif- 
courfes  of  Earthquakes,  their  Caufes  and  Effects,  and  Hiftories  of 
fcveral :  To  which  are  annex'd,  Phyfical  Explicntions  of  feveral 
of  the  Fables  in  Oviifs  Metamorphofis,  very  difisrent  from  other 
Mythologick  Interpreters.  VI.  Ledures  for  improving  Navi- 
gation and  Aftronomy,  with  the  Defcriptions  of  feveral  new  and 
ufeful  Inlh-uments-,  illuftrated  with  Sculptures  To  thefe  Dif- 
courfes  is  prefix'd  the  Author's  Life.  By  Richard  IVttller,  R.  S. 
Seer.     Folio. 

Synopfis  Univerfa  Medicina  TraFltca :  Sive  doftiffimorum  vi- 
rorum  de  Morbis  eorumque  Caufis  ac  Rem.ediis  judicia.  Accefle- 
runt  nunc  demum  cafus  nonnulli  oppido  rari.  Authorc  J.  Allen,  M.D. 
Editio  tertia;,  prioribus,  triente  plus,  auftior.    In  2  Vol.  'ivo.  1729. 


%'4 


p. 


i;  y 


o 


r; 


•■■.-k^-4 

1 


77 


Book E  Tab.  I. 


>. 


i;\Ji^>\\\N\^' 


'^ 


^j^ — Ji 


,.,#• 


'i.J  ,    ^,lt:B,„A,\,i 


^^P^ 


I] 


2'-J- 


4    -^ 


B 


G 


HV 


X 

I 

M 

V  — 


H 


G 


-R 


-Q 


A 

7.'-.A.-.- .i,m 


<'iri"."my"iifT'''ii'i'''''''''"'''''''* 


R 


E  I 


/ 


/ 


o 
\ 

M 
L 


'lab   Uiil 


i     I 


ki^ 


1- 


V 

G 

^^ 

H! 

B 

I( 

t 

4- 

D 

E 

I. ^ 

X 


I- 


JC: 


^^^ 


rM  \ 


<^ 


G 


B 


-4^^ 


U 


H. 
G 


A.- 


/  M 


1    lai)  .^ 

X 


1o^  y_/ 


^J 


\^   . 


