he 4 
if} is * 


i 


aan 


5 be 
ah 


PLATE I. 


The Admonitions or Teaching of Amen 
From Brit. Mus. Papyrus No. 10474, col. XVII. 


emapt, the son of Kanekht, 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN- 
EM-APT, SON OF KANEKHT 


THE EGYPTIAN HIEROGLYPHIC TEXT AND AN 
ENGLISH TRANSLATION, WITH TRANSLATIONS OF THE 
MORAL AND RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS OF EGYPTIAN 
KINGS AND OFFICIALS ILLUSTRATING THE DEVELOP- 
MENT OF RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY IN EGYPT DURING 
A PERIOD OF ABOUT TWO THOUSAND YEARS, BY 
SIR E. A. WALLIS BUDGE, LITT.D., D.LITT., 
SOMETIME KEEPER OF THE ASSYRIAN 
AND EGYPTIAN ANTIQUITIES IN 
THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 


LONDON: MARTIN HOPKINSON 
AND COMPANY LTD: 14 HENRIETTA 
STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 1924 


Printed in Great Britain by 


Harrison & Sons, Ltd., 44-47, St. Martin’s Lane, 


London, W.C. e. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Morality in Egypt and the Moral Papyri. I 
The Teaching of Kagemna 2 7 
The Teaching of Ptah-hetep .. eS 8 
The Teaching of Tuauf ise ae 12 
The Teaching of King Khati .. mie 14 
The Teaching of Amenemhat I S. 26 
The Philosophy of Antef a a 28 
The Teaching of Sehetepabra .. my 28 
The Religious and Moral Code of Osiris 29 
Translations from Egyptian Moral 
Papyri .. = es i é 47-92 
The Teaching of Amen-em-apt .. a 93 
Amen-em-apt, his Genealogy and Offices 94 
The Teaching of Amen-em-apt described. 100 
God and Man’s Duty to Him .. ca 103 
Summary of Amen-em-apt’s Teaching .. II5 


The Morality and Religion of Amen-em-apt 130 
Translation of the Teaching of Amen-em- 

apt a Ks 2. ; . 140-179 
Hieroglyphic Transcript ‘of the Hieratic 

Text of the Teaching of Amen-em-apt . 181-234 
The Teaching of the Scribe Ani .. We 235 


Index as aN, a rae os 251 
a2 


7 


any 1% > ts 


os 


LIST OF PLATES 


PAGE. 
Frontispiece—The Teaching of Amen-em- 
apt, the Son of Kanekht. 


Plate— 
II].—The Teaching of Ptah-hetep Facing 8 


III.—The Teaching of Tuauf, the 


Son of Khattai .. 4 Ps 12 
IV.—The Teaching of King Khati ,, 25 
V.—The Negative Confession .. ,, 29 


VI.—Thoth weighing the Heart 
of Nebseni.. ie i »” 33 


VII.—Anubis weighing the Heart 
of the Priestess Anhai_ .. Honey a T 


VIII.—The Teaching of the Scribe 


Ani .. ae ee 9» 236 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT 


PAGE 


The Judgement Hall of Osiris in the Sixth 


Division of the Tuat . ae 31 
The Ape of Thoth and Moat oe the 

Heart of Iuau 3 40 
The Ape of Thoth weighing the Heart of 

Amenemheb .. 4I 


The Heart of Nebget in We Scales, the 
Lake of Fire, and the “ Eater of the 
Dead” nif 42 


Ra or Horus ae the Heart of f Thena 43 
The Lake of Fire and the Four Holy Apes 44 
The Ape of Thoth eee the Utchat 


to Thoth + 109 
Apep chained in the Tuat. ap ve Wyeereae 1 4° 
Apep and the Crocodile Shesshes Fae hae 6 


Apep chained by the Four Sons of Horus 112 
The “ Hidden Hand” grasping the Chain 112 


The Ape-gods oie Models of the Great 
Hand .. é Cokes § ©: 


Thoth acting as Scribe eS ae Ree Ws 


PREFACE 


In the present volume a series of translations of 
the moral teachings of Egyptian kings and officials, 
arranged chronologically, has been brought 
together, so that the student of primitive Oriental 
Morality may be able to watch the evolution of 
moral ideas in Egypt through a period of about 
two thousand years, and their development into 
a religious philosophy of a very high character. 
The immediate cause of the appearance of this 
work is the recent publication of the original 
hieratic text of the “‘ Teaching of Amen-em-apt ” 
in the Second Series of Facsimiles of Egyptian 
Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum, London, 
1923. I published a short account of it in the 
Recueil d’Etudes LEgyptologiques dédiges a2 la 
Mémotre de Jean Frangois Champollion, Paris, 
1922, pp. 431-436, with a few extracts from the 
texts with translations. In the official publication 
I gave a longer description of its contents and a 
pioneer rendering of the greater part of the text, 
and added a hieroglyphic transcript! of the whole 


1 A writer about the volume has complained because this 
transcript was not printed column for column opposite to the 
hieratic text on the plates of the facsimile, but this method 
would have added more than thirty folio pages to the volume. 
The exigencies of official economy rendered such a costly form 
of publication impossible, just as they made it necessary to 
omit other hieroglyphic transcripts, and fuller translations 
and descriptions, which had been prepared to appear in the 
volume. There was no oversight in the matter; it was merely 
the need of rigid economy. 


x PREFACE | 


work. During the past years I recollated the text 
and succeeded in making out many of the passages 
that were obscure to me when writing the descrip- 
tion of the papyrus for the official publication, 
and corrected a few misprints. There still remain 
passages in ‘“ Amen-em-apt’s Teaching ”’ as to the 
exact meaning of which I am uncertain, but these 
will no doubt be made clear when the text has been 
more fully examined. 

Meanwhile it has been pointed out to me that 
the official publication is costly (£6 Ios.), and that 
as the edition is small, the volume will be wholly 
inaccessible to many who wish to read and study 
the new teaching. It has been suggested that the 
publication of the revised hieroglyphic transcript 
and translation in a handy form would be accept- 
able to many, especially if they were accompanied 
by translations of the Teachings of Ptah-hetep, 
Tuauf, King Khati, Ani and other writers of 
Moral Precepts for purposes of comparison. In 
accordance with this suggestion the present volume 
has been written. 

We have now, thanks to the labours of M. E. 
Dévaud, a good critical edition of the Teaching 
of Ptah-hetep, and for the first time a study of the 
Recensions of that work can be made. And 
Golénischeff has given us a complete reproduction 
of the papyri containing the Teaching of King 
Khati, with hieroglyphic transcripts. The impor- 
tance of this little-known work, with its descriptions 
of the power and majesty of God and the Last 
Judgement, for the study of morality and religion 


PREFACE Xl 


in Egypt cannot be over-estimated. The Teach- 
ings of Tuauf and Ani the Scribe are well-known, 
but the Rules that Antef, the son of Sent, laid 
down for himself in the performance of his duty 
as a magistrate and highly trusted official, and 
that have been recently translated from Dr. Hall’s 
text by Moret, will be new to many. The same 
may be said also of Sehetepabra’s description of 
the greatness and might and majesty of Pharaoh 
his lord, whom he regarded as the counterpart of 
God. The value of the Moral and Religious 
Code which the followers of Osiris were bound to 
observe, if they wished to live in the kingdom of 
that god in the Hereafter, has been strangely 
overlooked, and a translation of it must necessarily 
appear in a book of this kind. For under the 
XVIIIth dynasty, if not earlier, it epitomized 
the whole Law, both moral and religious. 

The Collections of moral and religious Teachings 
translated in the following pages were written 
between the IVth and XXIst dynasties ; of their 
authors two, Khati and Amen-em-hat, were kings, 
and the remainder were professional scribes and 
officials. The royal authors wrote their works for 
the exclusive benefit of their sons and heirs. The 
scribes and officials, with one exception, wrote 
their Teachings with the definite object of instruct- 
ing their sons in the course that they should 
follow, if they wished to be appointed by the 
Pharaoh to positions similar to those held by their 
fathers. The exception, the Teaching of Amen- 
em-apt, is addressed to no son, whether prince 


xii PREFACE 


or subject, but to all men. Many of his Precepts 
would no doubt be of more use to officials than to 
any other class of people. But the greater number 
of his exhortations, especially those that inculcate 
respect for the aged, pity for the widow and the 
poor and the needy, mercy in judgement, sympathy 
with and compassion for the suffering and 
unfortunate, reverence for the dead and their tombs, 
and the showing of courtesy and kindness to all 
men, were written with the view of making every 
Egyptian love his neighbour and so serve God, 
whether he called him Ra or Aten. The kindly 
disposition of the man and his thoughtfulness for 
others is well illustrated by his admonition “ Treat 
not the blind man with ridicule (7.e., make a fool 
of him) and browbeat not the dwarf”’ (line 478). 
A remarkable feature in the Teaching of Amen- 
em-apt is the omission of all precepts dealing with 
the relations of men with women, whether licit or 
illicit. Thus it differs greatly from the Teaching 
of Ptah-hetep, which contains warnings against 
the “woman from outside’ and the ‘‘ immature 
maiden,” and most carefully advises a husband 
to love and honour his wife, and to provide her 
with food and raiment in abundance, and also to 
protect and treat generously the woman whom he 
has loved, but did not marry. The Scribe Ani 
repeated many of Ptah-hetep’s warnings against 
strange women, and also warned’ his readers that 
the man who treated his mother lightly or neglected 
or wronged her in any way, might make her appeal 
to God for relief, and so bring punishment upon 


PREFACE Xlil 


himself. With the exception of one possible 
allusion to the dancing girl, Amen-em-apt makes 
no reference to any woman. 

Another characteristic difference between the 
Teachings of the sages of the Old Kingdom and 
the Teaching of Amen-em-apt may be noted. 
The former exhorted a man to lead a moral life 
and to be good because emoluments, promotion 
and physical well-being were to be obtained 
thereby, but the latter urged him to practise 
precepts, the observance of which would not be 
followed by material benefit to himself. Clearly 
Amen-em-apt believed that virtue was its own 
reward. A perusal of his teaching will, I believe, 
convince the reader that he was a deeply religious 
man and a devout worshipper of God, whose 
temple he frequented and enriched with offerings. 
But by what name did he call his God? Though 
he flourished under the XVIIIth dynasty, he was 
no follower of Amen or Amen-Ra, for neither 
of these names is mentioned in his teaching. 
Evidently the cult of Osiris did not appeal to him, 
for neither the name of this god nor that of any 
god of his company occurs in his Precepts; and 
as he always, when referring to the supreme 
Divine Power, speaks of “God” or “ the God,” 
it is clear that for him ‘“ the gods ”’ did not exist. 
But he exhorts men to pray daily for health and 
strength to Aten, or Athen, when he rises, and 
might therefore be regarded as a “ Disk wor- 
shipper’ and an adherent of the cult of Aten, 
which under the patronage of Amenhetep IV 


XIV PREFACE 


attained such unenviable notoriety about B.c. 
1400. But if he were, his Teaching lacks the 
exclusiveness and intolerance and lax principles of 
the followers of the cult of material things pro- 
fessed by that king. On the other hand, it seems 
to bear upon it the impress of some non-Egyptian 
influence, as do the well-known hymns to Aten 
which are put into the mouths of Amenhetep IV 
and his officials. 

Amen-em-apt’s Teaching may represent the 
pure and original doctrines of the priesthood of 
Aten at Heliopolis under the Old Kingdom, who 
even at that early period must have been influenced. 
by (or at least been in contact with) religious. 
views and opinions which were derived ultimately 
from the more easterly parts of Western Asia and 
perhaps from beyond. Heliopolis was certainly 
the mythological capital of Egypt when the 
Pyramid Texts were written, and I believe that it 
was the geographical capital of Egypt long before 
Memphis was built or Menes became King of the 
South and North. It is futile to ignore any 
longer the proofs, which the Assyriologists are 
adding to almost daily, that the religious beliefs. 
and ceremonies and legends of the Sumerians and 
Babylonians are similar in many fundamentals to 
those of the early dynastic peoples of Egypt. 
But the Teaching of Amen-em-apt may be derived 
from, or based upon, the doctrines that the priest- 
hood of Herakleopolis held during the reigns of 
the kings of the IXth and Xth dynasties. The 
Teaching of Khati was a product of this period, 


PREFACE XV 


which was one of great literary activity, and it is 
probable that many of the Chapters of the Recen- 
sions of the Book of the Dead in use under the 
XIIth and XVIIIth dynasties were composed 
about that time. But, whichever view is correct, 
it appears to me certain that Amen-em-apt’s high 
moral and religious ideals were inspired by an 
influence that was not of African but was of Asiatic 


origin. 
E. A. WALLIS BUDGE. 


48, Bloomsbury Street, W.C. 1. 
May I, 1924. 


MORALITY IN EGYPT AND THE 
MORAL PAPYRI. 


Moratity and religion appear to have existed 
in Egypt from the earliest times, and the oldest 
remains show that although neither, judged from 
a modern standard, was of a very high character, 
primitive man recognized that he owed certain 
duties to his village god and to his neighbour. 
The god and his worshippers formed one family, 
and every member of the community, whether it 
was large or small, regarded the god as his natural 
protector and, as time went on, as his father. In 
some cases the object of worship was a goddess, 
who was eventually regarded as the mother of the 
community. MNekhebit, Uatchit, Bast and Net 
(Neith) are characteristic examples of very ancient 
mother-goddesses who were never changed into 
gods. The worship of the god or goddess was a 
distinct moral force in the community, and the 
obligations of primitive religion in Egypt forced 
a man to be moral, at all events in respect of his 
fellow members of the god’s family. Any act of 
murder, adultery or theft not only injured some 
member of the family, but hurt the god, and 
punishment followed in its train swiftly. The 
fear of the god and the approval of the god were 
strong incentives to a man to act morally. In the 
earliest times the moral obligations of the Egyp- 
tian were comparatively few. He had to help to 
maintain the simple house of the god and the god’s 
servant, to take his part in all work that was 


essential for the well-being of the community, and 
A 


2 MORALITY IN ANCIENT EGYPT 


above all he must respect the lives and property of 
his neighbours and their wives and cattle. When 
necessary he had to fight the enemies of the god 
and of his family, to take part in all acts of public 
worship of the god, and to assist at all the festivals 
when the community as a whole ate and drank 
with the god. In predynastic times the Egyptian’s 
“neighbour”? might be defined as his fellow 
member in the god’s family, and no one outside it ; 
about his duty to him he had no doubt. But to 
the stranger, still more to the enemy, he might do 
exactly what he pleased, and the knowledge that he 
was acting with the approval of his god would 
stimulate him in his work. 

There is no doubt that even in primitive times 
in Egypt there must have been men in every 
village community who possessed feelings of kind- 
ness and humanity towards man and beast, and 
it is probable that such men soon realized that it 
did not pay to retaliate, or take vengeance, or 
exact their due to the uttermost. Old men with 
experience and discretion would have found out 
that there were cases in which it was good policy 
to temper justice with mercy, and their actions 
and decisions would permeate the community and 
serve as examples and guides to the younger men. 
And as religion developed, morality would develop, 
and men would be more than ever convinced that 
it was profitable to discharge their moral obliga- 
tions honourably. It would happen of necessity 
that sometimes the head man or leader of a com- 
munity would earn the reputation of being a good 
lawgiver, or a good judge, and in such a case his 
decisions would help to form the foundation of 
the law of the land, and his influence would make 
itself felt on the customs of the people. And 
when the judgements of such a leader represented 


THE LAWS OF THE ANCESTORS 3 


the will of the family god, men in general would 
soon discover that the way of the transgressor was 
hard, and that it only led to loss and ruin. 

When, at the end of the Neolithic Period, the 
Egyptians had learned to write, among the first 
things their scribes wrote down were the legal 
decisions and judgements of the “‘ ancestors,’”’ and 
the religious and moral laws of the country were 
also done into writing. Under the IIIrd dynasty 


the scribe Methen, INS ) reer received certain 


‘ 


royal benefactions which were “‘ recorded in the 
register of the king,’’! and we are sure therefore 
that even at this early period the king kept a 
scribe, or scribes, who wrote at his command. 
And each temple must have numbered among its 
officials scribes whose duty it was to draft and 
make copies of religious texts, and presumably of 
the moral precepts that were composed by various 
authors, and were current at that time. The 
religious texts and the moral precepts formed two 
distinct classes of literature, and the object of 
each was different: the former were written to 
help the souls of the dead to secure immortality 
and happiness in the next world, and the latter to 
help a man to lead a safe and reputable life in this 
world. The priestly theologian spared no pains 
in collecting the information that would benefit 
the dead, and the wise and experienced public 
official spent anxious days in trying to make the 
knowledge of men and things that he had acquired 
available for the living, who were generally his own 
kinsfolk. The collector of moral precepts, as we 
shall see, existed in all periods of dynastic history, 


Id BP IR = the 


Urkunden, Vol. I, p. 4. 


A 2 


4 EGYPTIAN MORAL PAPYRI 


and his “ Teachings ” are to be found in Demotic! 
as well as in Hieratic Moral Papyri, and even the 
Egyptian Christian ascetics compiled their books 
of “Sayings of the Fathers” which contained 
many hundreds of admonitions, rules for life and 
ascetic precepts. The brother who went to Abba 
Abraham? and said, ‘‘ Tell me, what shall I do to 
live ?’’ only asked the question which the Egyptian 
had in all ages asked the sages, for both pagan and 
Christian sought for help to lead the life which 
would save his body and soul. 

The Egyptian Moral Papyri known to us are 
comparatively few, and they can hardly represent 
all that were written by the sages ; but the Books 
of Morals which form their contents are sufficient 
to enable us to judge of the scope and character 
of Egyptian Morality. Before we proceed to 
summarize their contents, it will be well to say a 
few words about the difficulties that beset every- 
one who tries to translate them. In the first place, 
the texts are corrupt in many passages, and the 
transcription of the hieratic characters in which 
they are written is sometimes very difficult. Two 
of the oldest Books (the Teaching of Kagemna and 
the Teaching of Ptah-hetep) were composed in the 
IlIrd and Vth dynasty respectively, but we have 
no contemporaneous copies of them, and the 
oldest papyrus containing them was written prob- 
ably under the XIIth dynasty. To the scribe of 
the XIIth dynasty, who wrote the copies which 
we have, the language of the IIIrd and Vth 
dynasties was archaic, and it is quite clear that in| 
some passages he did not understand what he was 


* See, for example, Revillout, Le Papyrus Moral de Leide, 
in the Journal Asiatique, Ser. X, tom. V, pp. 193-249, 1905 ; 
tom. VI, pp. 275-332, 1905 ; and tom. VIII, pp. 83-148, 1906. 

* Sayings of the Fathers, ed. Budge, No. 89. 


TRANSLATING THE MORAL PAPYRI 5 


copying. Obsolete words also must have puzzled 
him, and the terse character of some of the utter- 
ances, to say nothing of mutilated passages and 
lacunae, and the similarity in form of some of the 
hieratic characters, often made him write nonsense, 
or, at any rate, something that we are wholly unable 
to understand. We possess portions of two copies 
of the Teaching of Ptah-hetep copied under the 
New Empire, viz., British Museum Papyrus No. 
10,509 and the Carnarvon ostrakon, and one has 
only to consult M. Dévaud’s scholarly transcrip- 
tions of the work to see how greatly the XVIIIth 
or XIXth dynasty text differs from that copied 
under the XIJIth dynasty. The difficulty of 
translating such texts into a modern language can 
be well illustrated by selecting a passage from one 
of the best-known Egyptian Moral Papyri, and 
printing below it the translations of it which have 
been published by some of the greatest Egyptolo- 
gists. The XIIIth Precept of the Teaching of the 
scribe Ani reads :— 


IWS SOPPL Sood W Te 
ee ee > he I 
Hp 1S Amt So} I oe 
Sool MGS he Sea y= 
=fe SARS = RUM 
Pe ey Se 
en = ISJS 2d (8S 
AS we HIS CS ob NG 


6 PRECEPT OF THE SCRIBE ANI 


Ke (2J% #4Q$5 KA 
eal & = JERS eS 
FLAS STP A ee ae 


The following are translations of it by E. de 
Rougé: ‘‘ Ne réprimande pas une femme dans sa 
maison, quand méme cela te paraitrait juste. Ne 
lui dis pas : (Ot est ce qu’on a apporté pour nous ?). 
Si elle 1’a mis a la place convenable, regarde et 
tais-toi (car) ta main est avecelle. Il y a beaucoup 
de gens qui ne savent pas ce que fait un homme 
qui introduit les querelles dans sa maison, sans y 
trouver son chef, en réalité. (Celui-la deviendra 
maitre chez lui) quisaura s’apaiser promptement.” 


By H. Brugsch: “ Ne frappe pas la femme dans 
sa maison, quand tu sais qu’elle est une personne 
vertueuse. Ne lui dis pas: Ou est elle ? Apporte- 
nous cect et cela; car elle soigne d’elle-méme pour 
le mieux. Ce que ton ceil voit (en elle), tais-le ; 
car tu connais sa vertu. Sois joyeux de ce que 
ta main soit avec elle. Il ya beaucoup de gens 
qui ne savent pas ce qu’ils font. L’homme rapide 
met la dispute dans sa maison, et jamais il ne 
trouve son avantage. Chacun emporte le mobilier 


hors de la maison. Impose silence a ton coeur 
promptement.”’ 


By F. Chabas: “Ne sois pas rude pour la 
femme dans sa maison, quand tu sais qu’elle est 
en bon ordre. Ne lui dis pas: Ow est cela? 
apporte-le nous! car elle l’a-mis 4 sa place con- 
venable, car ton ceil l’a vu et tu as gardé le silence, 
reconnaissant son mérite. Plein de joie, met ta 
main dans la sienne. II existe encore beaucoup 
de gens ne sachant pas comment fait l’homme 


THE TEACHING OF KAGEMNA 7 


qui se plait 4 mettre le malheur dans sa maison 
et qui en réalité ne trouve pas la maniére de la 
conduire. Toute direction de la tenue d’une 
maison git dans l’impassibilité de l’homme.”’ 

By A. Erman: “ Kontrolliere eine Frau nicht 
in ihrem Hause, wenn du weisst, dass sie tiichtig 
ist. Sage nicht zu ihr: ‘wo ist es? bringe es 
uns, wenn (?) sie (es) an die richtige Stelle getan 
hat. Deine Auge blicke (hin) und _ schweige, 
damit (?) du ihren guten Werke kennest. (Sie ist) 
iroh, wenn deme Hand mit ihr ist — — — — 
Hort der Mann damit auf, Streit in seinem Hause 
zu erregen — — — —.’’ The dashes indicate 
the parts of the extract which Erman regards as 
untranslatable. 

The oldest Egyptian Book of Moral Precepts 
that has come down to us is the Teaching of 
Kagemna, and the text of it in hieratic is found 
in the Prisse Papyrus,} together with the Teaching 
of Ptah-hetep. The text in the Prisse Papyrus 
is incomplete; the first part of the Teaching of 
Kagemna, consisting probably of several pages, 
is wanting. Some authorities believe that the 
columns of the text of it which we have represent 
the complete work, and some do not. From the 
Colophon we learn that Kagemna flourished in 
the reign of Huni, at the end of the IIIrd dynasty, 
and he must not be confounded with a later man 
of the same name whose tomb was found at 
Sakka4rah some years ago. The five paragraphs 
which remain of Kagemna’s Precepts inculcate 


2 An excellent reproduction of this papyrus was published 
by G. Jéquier, Le Papyrus Prisse et ses Variantes. Papyrus 
de la Bibliotheque Nationale (Nos. 183-194), Papyrus No. 10,371 
and 10,435 du British Museum, Tablette Carnarvon au Musée 
du Caire, Paris, 1911. (Contains 16 phototype plates, with 
an Introduction by the Editor.) 


8 THE ACTS OF GOD INSCRUTABLE 


humility, moderation in eating, and how to behave 
at table, and exhort the reader to seek after a 
good reputation and to avoid arrogance. He must 
behave in such a way that he does not rouse the 
opposition of anyone, for no man knows the future, 
and no man knows what God will do when he 
strikes. The reference to God here is noteworthy. 
The Colophon is of singular interest, and states 
that Kagemna, having studied the characters of 
men, wrote his book, and summoning his children, 
he ordered them to pay heed to his written pre- 
cepts as if he himself were reciting them. His 
children did homage to him, and then read what 
he had written, and they thought the Precepts 
the best things which they had ever heard and 
recited them sitting and standing, 7.e., by night 
and by day. Many other sages must have com- 
piled books of moral Precepts similar to those of 
Kagemna, and if the family of each of them learned 
and recited their father’s Precepts, their influence 
on the young must have been very considerable. 
The next oldest Book of Moral Precepts is that 
of Ptah-hetep, who flourished in the reign of Assa, 
a king of the Vth dynasty. His work exists in 
two Kecensions, the older belonging to the XIIth 
dynasty (Prisse Papyrus), and the later to the 
XVIIIth dynasty or a little later (British Museum 
Papyrus No. 10,509 and the Carnarvon Ostra- 
kon). Ptah-hetep held many high offices under 
King Assa,1 and we see from his work that he 
was very anxious that his son, who was also 
called Ptah-hetep, should succeed him in them. 
He wrote his famous Teaching chiefly for the 
benefit of his son, hoping that he would read and 


* Ptah-hetep senior was buried in a mastabah tomb at 


sehen See Mariette, Les Mastaba de I’ Ancien Empire, 


PLATE II. 


"TAX "109 ‘somnbs p “pa * 


‘kqseukg YYA IY} Jo sury e 


( 


F6l 


EST “SON 


essy BIBYIOT, JO UzVA\ ® ‘doqoy-yeig Jo sutyovey, eq], 


‘aqnuoyn any anbeyuoygg) snihdng assrug 94} WOT 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 9 


learn the instructions which he had compiled, 
and act upon them and follow in every way the 
example of the ancestors. His teaching opens 
with a warning to his son against conceit, and he 
bids him remember that something may be learned 
from the ignorant as well as from the learned man. 
Then follow counsels concerning the loud, noisy 
talker, and an exhortation to follow Truth (Maat), 
which is eternal and everlasting. ‘‘ Terrify not 
subordinates or the people, for it is only what God 
has decreed that happens.” The God here referred 
to cannot be the “ town-god,’’ but must be the 
Disposer of destinies. It seems as if Ptah-hetep 
leaned towards the ideas which the Arabs connect 
with Kismat (what is apportioned to a man) and 
Maktib (what is written or decreed). Then follow 
paragraphs dealing with rules for eating in public 
(all food is given by God), showing politeness to 
fellow guests, the conduct of a mission, behaviour 
when God gives a good harvest, a subordinate’s 
duty to a kind master (VII-X). The XIth para- 
graph is very remarkable, for it counsels a man: 
I. To do exactly what he pleases, and no more 
than is absolutely necessary. 2. To enjoy every 
hour that can possibly be spent in doing what he 
likes. 3. Not to bother about business concerning 
his house and estate, and not to trouble himself 
about the daily routine. In other words, to be 
always happy at all costs. If a man has an 
estate he must beget a son pleasing to God. If 
this son does well he should help him in every way ; 
if he does evilly he should cast him out and God 
will punish him (XII). Then follows more advice 
as to behaviour towards superiors and inferiors 
(XIII, XIV), the discharge of duty by an envoy 
(XV), and how a man in a position of authority 
shall behave (XVI, XVII), The warning against 


10 THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 


women is emphatic. Have nothing to do with 
women in other people’s houses under any con- 
sideration. Their pretty limbs make fools of men, 
but they are found to be harder than quartzite 
sandstone ; the pleasure they give is only momen- 
tary, and in its enjoyment men find death (XVIII). 
Avoid avarice at all costs (XIX, XX), for it pro- 
duces hatred and strife. If thou art wise thou 
wilt marry. Love thy wife and treat her hand- 
somely (XXI), and be generous to thy servants 
(XXII). Repeat not the words of an angry man, 
nor any gossip (XXIII). Speak only when thou 
hast full knowledge; words are weighty things 
(XXIV). In giving orders be calm and courteous, 
and control thy tongue. He who goes softly 
walks rightly! (XXV). Choose thy time carefully 
in visiting a nobleman (or magistrate) (XXVI), 
and let the credit of thy good service be given to 
thy master (XXVII). Be a peace-maker rather 
than a judge (XXVIII). Turn away from the 
man who is obnoxious to thee (XXIX). If thou 
hast prospered, forget not thy humble beginning, 
thy possessions are the gifts of God (XXX). 
Honour thy chief (XXXI), have nothing to do 
with immature women (XXXII), cultivate friend- 
ship (XXXIII), always be cheerful (XXXIV), 
study to preserve a good reputation (XXXV), 
drive not away the cheerful, good-looking woman 
with whom thou hast been on intimate terms 
(XXXVI). These precepts are followed by 
several paragraphs in which Ptah-hetep exhorts 
his son to hearken to all that he has written. He 
refers to the solid truth which underlies them, and 
to the beauty of their literary style. They will 
give to him that hears them not only wisdom but 


* Compare ‘“‘ Chi va piano va sano.” 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 11 


prosperity upon earth. They will develop the 
natural excellences of his disposition, and heart 
and tongue will work together, and lips, eyes and 
ears will perform their duties more correctly in 
consequence. To hearken is the best of all 
virtues, and the memorial of the son who has 
heard his father’s precepts and performs them, 
will spread on the earth now, and be current in 
the mouths of generations yet unborn. The man 
who hearkens not to them is a fool who will do 
all manner of reprehensible things, and his food 
will be abominable stuff. Princes and peasants 
alike will recognize his character and shun him 
so that they may not be mixed up in his calamities. 
Of the son who hears and obeys his lord the 
people will say, “‘ Behold a good son of the gift 
of God.’”’ Ptah-hetep concludes by saying that 
he attained the great age of 110 years through the 
benefits and favours which the king conferred 
upon him because he did what was right. 

When we look at the Teaching of Ptah-hetep as 
a whole we see that the sage’s counsels contain 
no religious teaching of any kind; he refers 
clearly to God as the Disposer of the destinies of 
men, and as the giver of all material benefits, but 
he in no way suggests that man has any duty 
to God. Neither prayer nor sacrifices are men- 
tioned, and there is no reference to death, or to 
the life beyond the grave, or to man’s moral 
responsibility. The sum total of Ptah-hetep’s 
moral teaching is: Keep on friendly terms with 
everyone ; do not be arrogant, or conceited, or ill- 
tempered, or covetous, because these failings annoy 
people ; marry a wife and’avoid entanglement with 
women, whether strangers or kinsfolk ; be courteous 
and deferential to your superiors and keep clear of 
quarrels ; always be cheerful, lead the happiest life 


EZ THE TEACHING OF TUAUF 


you can as long as you can, taking care not to work 
harder than you need, and not to worry about your 
house and estate and their everyday concerns. 


THE TEACHING OF TUAUF. 


The next oldest Book of Moral Precepts known 
to us is probably the Teaching of Tuauf, the son 
of Khattai, who wrote it for the benefit of his son 
Pepi; when and where Tuauf lived is unknown. 
The Teaching of Tuauf, though found in a more 
or less complete state only in papyri of the XI Xth 
or XXth dynasty, was probably composed soon 
after the end of the Ancient Kingdom. Maspero 
assigned it to a writer who flourished under the 
XIIth dynasty, but Birch considered it to be a work 
of the VIth dynasty. The name of Tuauf’s father, _ 
Khattai (formerly read Khartai), was common 
in the [Xth, Xth and XIth dynasties, but that 
of Pepi his son suggests the VIth dynasty or the 
period immediately following as the time when 
this Teaching was written. The Teaching of 
Tuauf was a very popular composition under the 
New Empire, and it seems to have been used as a 
text-book in schools and colleges, partly because 
its contents were more interesting than the 
religious texts that were usually studied, and 
partly because from one end to the other it is 
an eulogy of the profession of the scribe and the 
man of books. But from the copies which have 
come down to us, and which certainly date from 
the XIXth or XXth dynasties, it seems clear that 
the copyists of it at that time did not understand 
what they were writing ; the obvious mistakes in 
the text are very numerous, and many passages 
mean nothing, or at any rate, are untranslatable. 
In spite of these defects, the main object of Tuauf 
in writing his work was to instil into the mind of 


PLATE III. 


"AT ‘109 “(TT 42NIVY) ZSIOL ‘ON Snihdng ‘snjy ‘yug wong 


‘TeqIVIPY] JO UOS oY} nvny, Jo Suryovay, syJ, 


Sabena oe 


cS ae = pring oa aq 
ee MBB EWS SAN TIE: Lee 
Daren “ENA TEENA TENY CET AUN 
aS precio eG IeET ET 
see Mii la Ai 
6 lle eee macy sepa 


ne ee 
enna a 


pees incor ra eee 


OBJECT OF TUAUF’S TEACHING 13 


his son Pepi a love for letters and for the profession | 
of the scribe, and also to make him study the 
apophthegms of the Ancestors. What Tuauf’s 
social position was we know not, but by some 
means or other he learned to write and to express 
himself with tolerable clearness. He was prob- 
ably not a man of high rank, and he seems to have 
worked at some kind of trade. In the course of 
this he found his ability to read and write of such 
importance that he determined to have his son 
properly educated, and to make him a scribe. 
He, no doubt, lacked the skill of the professional 
scribe in turning his sentences, and he employed 
in his Teaching the words that were in common 
use among the people of his own class. A 
thousand or twelve hundred years later, when the 
temple scribes and teachers under the Ramessid 

ings began to use his Teaching as a text-book, 
these words were regarded as archaisms and were 
no longer understood, and others of more modern 
use were substituted for them. Blunders in copy- 
ing and attempts at emendation have brought the 
text of Tuauf’s Teaching into the unsatisfactory 
state in which we find it to-day. The hieratic 
text is found in two papyri in the British Museum, 
viz., Sallier IJ (No. 10,182) and Anastasi VII 
(No. 10,222), and these have been published in 
Select Papyri in the Hieratic Character, ed. Birch, 
London, 1841, and in Facsimiles of Egyptian 
Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum, ed. Budge, 
Second Series, London, 1923. A_ hieroglyphic 
transcript with a French translation was published 
by Maspero,! and an English rendering by Birch. 
The composition contains twenty-eight paragraphs. 

The Teaching of Tuauf may be divided into 
two parts: the first (Pars. I-XIX) contains his 


1 Du Genre Epistolaire, Paris, 1872. 
* Records of the Past, Old Series, Vol. VIII, p. 146. 


14 TUAUF’S TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


survey of the handicrafts of Egypt and his 
laudations of the profession of the scribe, and 
the second (Pars. XX-X XVIII) includes a number 
of moral precepts. The latter are not of great 
interest. They counsel Pepi not to act hastily, 
not to ask questions in a neighbour’s house, not 
to use elaborate phrases, or words of pride, when 
talking to his neighbours, not to enter the houses 
of neighbours unbidden when school hours are 
ended, to delivera message word for word as he 
received it, to practise no deception on his mother, 
to control his appetite for meat and drink, to pay 
attention to the words of great men, and to obey. 
The references to the goddesses Renenit and 
Meskhenit are obscure, but Tuauf evidently thinks 
that they concern themselves with the growth and 
advancement of the scribe. The words in para- 
graph XXVIII saying that the father and mother 
of the successful scribe praise Ra, show that Ra 
was the god whom Tuauf worshipped. From 
first to last there is no religious teaching in Tuauf’s 
work, and his sole object in writing it was to make 
his son become a scribe. To be scribe and secre- 
tary of the Town Council seemed to him to be the 
highest post to which a man could attain on earth. 


THE TEACHING OF KING KHATI. 


The next “ Teaching” to be considered is that 
of King Khati, who wrote this remarkable com- 
position for the benefit of his son Meri-ka-Ra. 
Unfortunately the only version of it which we 
have is the work of the scribes of the XIXth 
dynasty, but there seems to. be little doubt that 
the composition itself is about two thousand years 
older. This Teaching of Khati is different in 
every way from that of his predecessors, and this 
royal author intended to teach his son something 


KHATI’S INSTRUCTIONS FOR RULING 15 


more than morality. The first six paragraphs 
advise Meri-ka~-Ra how to deal with disloyal, 
noisy sedition-mongers, who go about the city 
talking and inciting men to overthrow the existing 
government. He is to use no half measures, but 
to seize such folk, kill them, blot out their name 
and memorial, and destroy their adherents. The 
king continues: Make thyself able to justify 
thyself, or prove thy integrity, before God 


i=] efi oe | Kj (VII) ; speak wisely and 
skilfully, speech is mightier than any fighting 


2 | ——. OA Soo Prey 


comes to the wise man and is extracted (or, brewed 
oe | : 2 
= ay) from him like the precepts of the Ancestors 


(VIII). Follow the example of thy forefathers. 
Read their sayings and be guided by them; do 
good to thy people and the favour of God shall 
be thine (IX). 

The next three paragraphs counsel just and 
considerate treatment of the nobles and the people 
in general: Stablish thy boundaries and provide 
for the future, seize not all the land. [Life] 
passes quickly upon earth and is of short duration. 
All men pass away (X). Confer authority on thy 
nobles and they will carry out thy commands ; 
great is the king whose nobles are great (XI). 
Rule justly, satisfy the man who has a grievance, 
rob neither widows nor children, slay no one 
except the rebel and sedition-monger (XII). Teach 
thy young men the art of war (XIV). Treat 
gentle and simple alike, and select a follower for 
his ability only. Build monuments for thyself 
and for the God, for such perpetuate thy name. 
Visit the temple regularly, eat bread there, and 


16 KHATI’S RELIGIOUS TEACHING 


contribute liberally to the offerings and sacrifices. 
Give according to thy means. God knows those 

° —> 1 Tn IS 
who work for Him, 8 lr ani <i eee 
(XV, XVI). The next seven paragraphs deal with 
an incident in a fight which King Khati had with 
the princes of Thebes at This, near Abydos; the 
subjugation of the peoples to the north-west and 
north-east of Herakleopolis; the nomad tribes 
of the Aamu (or Syrians) and their warlike and 
unconquerable disposition; and the building of 
block-houses and castles to protect the boundaries 
of Egypt. Paragraphs XXV and XXVI have for 
their principal subject the King and his office ; 
and in paragraph XXIX the King calls upon his 
son not to do anything which he has warned him 
against in so far as it refers to the King. 

We will now refer to three paragraphs which 
we have not mentioned, viz., XIII, XXVII and 
XXVIII, but which give to the Teaching of Khati 
a character possessed by no other moral work 
except that of Amen-em-apt. These paragraphs 
deal with religion and not morality, and that they 
should occur in a work written nearly three 
thousand years before Christ is very remarkable. 
Paragraph XIII carries on the subject of the 
preceding paragraph, in which the King says: 
“ Do right deeds, thou shalt remain on the earth,” 
<> ae 6 ia me |: He goes on to say, 
If thou wilt oppress the widow, and usurp the 
orphans’ possessions, and dismiss the magistrates 
who judge rightly, and punish innocent men, and 
murder people, thou wilt be judged and punished 
after death. The passage concerning the Judge- 
ment is so important that I reproduce Golénischeff’s 
transcript of it, and a translation of it :— 


KHATI ON LAST JUDGEMENT 17 


THE JUDGEMENT. 


58 ALS EA! eR IB Meryhoyp? 
Wee |, ed” ee 
bom TG $04. Whe ho SO 
mo 2H! tee ee TS ew 
le RWS KR DPS | OT 
Pe ae A Peot 
me Oy 0 li NOR com OLB 
ee Sh tee {I 
Riek eS = IN INES 
eee fe LS 
Pe ee TNT [dl co ste 
Won = om Aho ial 


Papyrus 116A, obv. 


18 FORGET NOT LAST JUDGEMENT 


THE JUDGEMENT. 


“‘ [Remember] the Tchatchaut! who judge wrong- 
doers. 


Know thou that they will not be lenient (or, 
pitiful) 

[On] that day of the judgement of wretched 
man, 

[In] the hour of the doing of [their] appointed 
duty. 

It is a terrible thing for a man who knows [his 
sin] to be charged with it. 


Fill not thy heart [with hope] because of length 
of years, 


[For] they regard a whole lifetime as a single 
hour. 


They prove [a man] after [his] arrival in port 
(t.é., death). 

His qualities are placed near him as means of 
subsistence (?). 

There (7.e., in the Other World) existence is 
everlasting. 


A fool is he who has put [the remembrance of] 
it away from him. 


The man who attains to that place without 
wrongdoing 


Has an existence there like that of God, 
Going about unhampered like the Everlasting 
Lords.” 


* I.e., the Company of Assessors in the Other World, 
presumably the Forty-two great gods of the Hall of Maati, 
which was presided over by Osiris, 


BELIEF IN LAST JUDGEMENT 19 


The Tchatchaut, or ‘‘ Heads,” are well known 
from the funerary works of the XVIIIth and 
XIXth dynasties. They appear in the Fifth 
Division of the Book of Gates and are there eight 
in number. They kept the registers of Osiris, 
which presumably contained the names of those 
who were in the Other World, and the period of 
time which each had to serve there, and the 
amount of work which each had to perform. In 
the Book of the Dead they are mentioned (Chapter 
XXXB) in connection with the Great Scales, and 
the deceased says: ‘‘Let no one stand up to 
testify against me, let none of the Tchatchaut, 


\ > La. , thrust me back, and do not thou 
Vea. pv ait 


(z.e., his heart) turn aside from me in the presence 
of the Guardian of the Scales.”’ Chapter XXXB 
was, according to one tradition, composed by 
Thoth, and it was “ found ” by Hertataf, a son of 
Khufu (Cheops), inscribed on a tablet under the 
feet of a statue of this god; and according to 
another it was known in the reign of Semti-Hesepti, 
a king of the Ist dynasty. Assuming these tradi- 
tions to be based on facts, the belief in the Judge- 
ment after death is as old in Egypt as dynastic 
civilization. From the IVth dynasty to the 
Ptolemaic Period the deceased was believed to 
recite the prayer contained in this Chapter when 
he entered the Hall of Judgement, and it must 
therefore have been in general use between three 
and four thousand years. 

The equally remarkable paragraphs XXVII and 
XXVIII treat of God and,His worship, and His 
power as the great Creator :— 


1 See Budge, Egyptian Heaven and Hell, Vol. II, p. 156. 
B 2 


20 KHATI DESCRIBES POWER OF GOD 


GOD THE CREATOR. His WORSHIP AND POWER. 


‘124, God has hidden Himself; [He] knows the 
dispositions [of men]. 

None can resist the lord of the hand, 

Who attacks 125. the things which are seen by 
the eyes (or, whilst the eyes look on). 

God is to be adored [when] He is on His way. 

Stones are worked upon, copper (or, bronze) is 
wrought [into images of Him]. 

The parched land (?) is 126. rewarded with a 
stream. 

A river will not permit itself to disappear, it 
destroys (or, dissolves away) that ground in 
which it hid itself. 


127. The soul journeys to the place which it 
knows. 


Found [and] make perfect (or, magnificent) thy 
house of Ament (i.e., the west bank of the 
Nile), 

Beautify thy house 128. of Khert-Neter (i.e., 
the cemetery) 


As is right to do, like one who observes the 
law, 

For the minds (or, hearts) of men rely upon 
it. 

129. The disposition of him that is right of heart 


* A phrase difficult to explain. Can it refer to the great 
Hand of Geb which is grasping the chain by means of which 
the Four Sons of Horus fetter Apep and his sons, as shown 
in the Tenth Division of the Book of Gates? This Hand 


is called the “Hidden Hand”? l fam. See Budge, 
StS 


a 
Egyptian Heaven and Hell, Vol. Il, pp. 270-272. 


KHATI DESCRIBES POWER OF GOD ar 


GOD THE CREATOR. His WorsHIP AND PowER. 


4 fed mm dle Td) eel Woers 
~ 4S Swe KS 
ay fee eM tle 

a! ve SA Son Mh 2.) 
gqa) = Abe t Beene ena 
fee i Ja wi 
se WL et UR PR 
ee = Je ee Sl Mei 
eee fons den 


ag RoR WS > 25" 


Bee eo Pet St ae, 
Pale = allo = 


22 KHATI DESCRIBES POWER OF GOD 


Is more acceptable than the ox of the worker of 
iniquity. 

Work for God, He will work for thee in like 
manner. 

Make offerings 130. to keep the tables for offer- 
ings well-supplied, 

[And] with the cutting [of funerary texts add] 
the similitude of thy name. 

God knows well [the man] who works for him.” 


King Khati continues his advice thus (Para. 
XXVITT) :— 


“ Regulate (or, keep order among) 131. men and 
women, who [are] the flocks and herds of 
God. (Compare Psalm 74,1; 79,13; 95,7; 
100, 3.) 

He made heaven [and] earth for their will (7.e., 
pleasure), 


He dissipated the darkness! (?) of the waters, 

He made the breezes of life (or, the life-giving 
air) 132. for their nostrils. 

They are the images (or, likenesses) of Him, 
(Compare Gen. i, 26, 27; ix, 6.) 

Who came forth from His members. 

He mounts up into the sky for their hearts (i.e., 
gratification). 

He has made 133. for them fruits and vegetables, 


flocks and herds, feathered fowl [and] fish 
for their subsistence. 


* The allusion here is to the monster Aapep, whose symbol 
was a crocodile. He was the personification of fog, mist, 
rain and the primeval darkness which was everywhere until 
the sun rose for the first time. 


KHATI DESCRIBES POWER OF GOD 23 
new = Ire 
ee tel RNS 
wo. (¥_) VO TU Bs ont 
oe. a ed 


= pa me SA 1S 


ae AWM oes toe S es 

<a PAWS 

e od Oe a | eK 
aaa (sic) 

= aera AA re 

—— AWWW) eee KT rie 

A Ka 


wn (1, UT Ea 


S 
fh ia blo- NS 


oa) | Hh = 
IK )oes fo? [2 RRG> 
2 oly lear ieee 


24 KHATI DESCRIBES POWER OF GOD 


He has slain his enemies, he destroyed his own 
children! 134. because they conspired and made 
rebellion. 

He made the daylight for their hearts (t.e., 
gratification). 


He made himself to travel in a boat so that he 
could see them. 


He has raised up a 135. shrine(?) behind them. 
[When] they weep he hearkens [to their cry]. 
He made for them a governor in the egg, 


A captain to 136. strengthen the back of the 
feeble man. 


He made for them words of power [for] weapons 
To repulse the might 137. of [untoward] 
happenings 
te terrifying] visions by night as well as by 
ay. 

He has slain those who were rebels in heart 

138. As a man chastises his son for his brother. 
God knows every name.” 


? The allusion here is to the old Egyptian tradition which 
states that Ra destroyed the men whom he had made because 
they reviled him. This god said: ‘‘ The men who came 
into being from my eye have spoken words against me,” 


=H 6-3 = oh Re — 
aie Rane S| = YP. The text is found in the tomb 


of Seti I and has been published with a French translation by 
Naville, Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch., Vol. IV, p. 1 ff. 


* I.e., governors who were kings before they were born. 
For oe reading t @ : = (instead of | . 8) see Golénischeff, 
op. ctt., Pl. Suppl. C, line 135. 


PLATE 


The Teaching which Khati, a king of Herakleopolis, wrote for his son Merikara. 


TV. 


énischeff, No. 1116a, obv, il. 106-117. 


tage at St. Petersburg, ed. Gol 


yrus of the Hermi 


Y 


From the Pap 


KHATI DESCRIBES POWER OF GOD 25 


4 FOSS NOS IN Bo 
ee FE See 

—(2ina ("TS we 
eel hil A 
pee felt 
lejos eile we S14 |W 
Pek foe Se ce 
,, (UNF = oho 
Safi ow BTS i= | 
air om Bape! eS eres 
“Whoo H! > KT VAS 
0. 3, Sh FL fe TA 


eel = 


26 MAGIC INVENTED BY RA 


The above passages contain the simplest and 
grandest description of the power and majesty of 
the God of Creation which has been found in 
Egyptian papyri. It is clear from some of the lines 
in them that the god whose power Khati describes 
is Ra, the oldest sun-god of Heliopolis, who was 
undoubtedly regarded as the creator of the material 
universe. King Khati’s monotheism is of a very 
high order, but Ra was, apparently, not almighty, 
for he had enemies, who subsisted against his will, 
and whom he had to slay. And his power over 
the men whom he had created in his image was 
not great enough to prevent them from conspiring 
against him. Moreover, to help men to overcome 
“happenings,”’ 7.¢e., accidents and calamities, and 
diurnal and nocturnal visions, he was obliged to 


invent for them Hekau, UK &. “words of 


power,” 7.¢., magical spells, incantations, exor- 
cisms, and the like. As these were to be recited 
whilst certain ceremonies, of a symbolic and 
magical character, were being performed, and as 
both the spells and ceremonies were designed to 
destroy the power and works of evil beings, they 
must be regarded as the foundation of the 
“White Magic,” which Ra invented to defeat 
‘Black Magic.” 


Tue Tracuinc oF AMENEMHAT I. 
In the Teaching! of Sehetepabra Amenemhat (J), 


* The hieratic text, from Sallier Papyrus II (Brit. Mus., 
No. 10,182), is reproduced in Egyptian Hieratic Papyri in 
the British Museum, Second Series, Plates LXIII-LXXVI. 
There are English translations by Goodwin, Cambridge Essays, 
p. 227 ff; Maspero, Records of the Past, Vol. II, pp. 9-16; 
Birch, Egyptian Texts, p. 16 ff; and Griffith, Zeitschrift fur 
Aeg. Sprache, Bd. XXXIV (1896), p. 35. The last is accom- 
panied by a hieroglyphic transcript. 


PRECEPTS FOR RULING AS KING 27 


the first king of the XIIth dynasty, we have a set 
of precepts wholly different in character from those 
of Kagemna, Ptah-hetep and Khati. Amenemhat I 
wrote his Teaching to help his son Usertsen 
(Senusert) I to rule and not to become moral ; 
therefore I have not included any extracts 
from it among my translations. The first para- 
graph advises his son to trust no brother, to make 
no intimate friends, to keep everybody at a safe 
distance, and to keep his weapons near him when 
he sleeps. Amenemhat says that he fed the beggar 
and the destitute, and received gentle and simple 
alike ; but those who had prospered under him 
turned against him. A plot was formed against 
him, and one night after supper, when he was 
lying down, he heard the clash of weapons and, 
springing up, he found that men had tried to 
burst into the chamber to kill him. His sentry had, 
it seems, been killed by them, and he found himself 
without a protector, but he escaped by some means, 
and the plot collapsed. The rest of the work tells 
how he sent expeditions to Elephantine and the 
Delta, and encouraged irrigation and agriculture, 
hunted lions, caught crocodiles, and reduced the 
Nubians and the Nomads, who followed him like 
dogs, and brought Saidani men (the M’tchaiu, 


Ke |S Me ye GA) to Egypt as soldiers. 


As a result of all these works no man suffered 
from hunger or thirst in his days, and the 
people dwelt in peace and quietness, and had 
leisure to discuss their king’s mighty deeds. The 
last two paragraphs of ‘Amenemhat’s work are 
full of difficulties; they contain no moral 
precepts. 


28 MORAL TEACHING AND OFFICIAL LIFE 


TuE TEACHING OF ANTEF. 


That the Teachings of Kagemna and Ptah-hetep 
were known and read under the XIIth dynasty is 
certain, for the oldest copies of these works are 
contained in the Prisse Papyrus, which was written 
at this period. By good fortune a monument has 
come down to us containing an inscription in which 
the man commemorated, one Antef, the son of 
Sent, describes his own character, and tells us 
about the way in which he fulfilled his duties as a 
high official of Usertsen I, the second king of the 
XIIth dynasty. He makes twenty statements 
about himself, and in each of them he shows that 
he put into practice a precept which is contained . 
in the Teachings of the sages which are known to 
us. The whole inscription proves that the precepts 
of the Teachings are not merely aphorisms 
academic in character, but rules for conduct which 
officials were expected to learn and carry out. 
M. Moret, who has recently republished the text 
and added a French translation, has aptly called 
it ‘“La Profession de Foi d’un Magistrat sous la 
XII° Dynastie” (Cinquantenaire del’ Ecole Pratique 
des Hautes Etudes, Paris, 1821). 


THE TEACHING OF SEHETEPABRA, 


Next, according to the chronological order of the 
Teachings, comes the Teaching of Sehetepabra, 


@/P== 0, an hereditary prince and seal-bearer 


of Amenemhat IIT, a mighty king of the XIIth 
dynasty. This official was high in the favour 
of his king, and performed many exalted duties 
in connection with the worship of the gods at 
Abydos. He wrote his Teaching for the benefit 
of his children, and claims that he will ‘‘ make them 
to know the dispensation of eternity, and make to 


PLATE V. 


=] 3 NS NS SS —— = ed sat j 

x a Se NG 
‘Si ao Se: =, oe 
g nae 


=u CREED 


Cia Ea cet se 
Bo SNS SCNC 
SIA) 


CATR 
= Saree i = ie 
SWErciaNwe 


The ‘‘ Negative Confession,” ¢.¢., the categorical denial by the deceased before the Two-and-Forty 


Assessors in the Hall of Osiris that he had committed any one of the offences that he enumerated. 


From Brit. Mus. Papyrus No. 10477, sheet 23 (Bool: of the Dead, Chap. CX XV). 


THE KING AS GOD 29 


grow and flourish the life of truth (7.e., the real or 
genuine life), and to pass the whole period of their 
See af <—-f——s 
oe ee om (2 ]  A 
SN) — = oO 
Pe Fe Bh + Ish 
age The composition deals neither with 
religion nor morality, and contains nothing but a 
deification and glorification of the king and his 
power. Sehetepabra was a loyal, whole-hearted 
follower of Amenemhat III, and as a result 
prospered greatly ; he urges his children to follow 
his example, for only by so doing can they attain 
to the sole kind of life that is real, and pass their 
days happily. Since Amenemhat III was to him 
as God, service to him, in his opinion, embraced 
both religion and morality. 


THE THEBAN RECENSION OF THE BOOK OF THE 
DEAD, AND THE RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 
OF OsIRIS. 

With the Teaching of Sehetepabra our series of 
moral works of the Ancient and Middle Empire 
comes to an end. The period between the end of 
the XIIth dynasty and the beginning of the 
XVIIIth is barren, but when the Hyksos had been 
expelled, and the rule of the great Theban kings 
began, a period of great activity in connection with 
the writing and copying of religious and moral 
works was inaugurated. It must have been early 
in the XVIIIth dynasty that the Theban Recension 
of the Book of the Dead was made. A great many 
of the texts included in that were in existence in 
the XIth and XIIth dynasties, as we know from 
the rectangular painted wooden coffins from 
Al-Barshah, in Upper Egypt. But after the XIIth 
dynasty these and many other texts were grouped 


30 RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 


together and arranged in a kind of order, and the 
Book of PER-EM-HRu, Ss IN au . (or 


PERT-EM-HRrv), came into being at the beginning 
of the XVIIIth dynasty. At this time Amen, or 
Amen-R4, was the King of the gods at Thebes, but 
Osiris was King of the Other World, and Judge of 
the Dead, and the chief Ancestor-god of all 
Egypt. The object of the compilers of the Book 
of the Dead was to help the deceased, who is 
throughout identified with Osiris, to reach the 
Kingdom of Osiris. It included spells and magical 
texts of all periods, which were intended to pre- 
serve his body from evil hap and destruction in 
every form, and hymns to the gods, and a number of 
compositions, the knowledge of which would enable 
him to enjoy to the full the delights of the Kingdom 
of Osiris, and to make ample use of the super- 
natural powers which he would possess there. 
But Osiris demanded much of the deceased before 
he admitted him into the abode of the blessed. 
The deceased had to prove to the Divine Magis- 
trates, or Assessors, that he had led a good life 
upon earth, and to submit to his actions being 
weighed in the Great Scales against Maat, 7.e., the 
Truth (or, the Law). This weighing was per- 
formed with scrupulous care by Thoth and his 
deputy, in the presence of Osiris and the Great 
Company of the gods, and unless a man’s good 
deeds exactly counterbalanced Maat, he was 
doomed to annihilation. The Assessors were im- 
partial, incorruptible and merciless ; the Law had 
to be satisfied. A man was responsible to his god, 
whether it were Ra or Osiris, for his deeds and 
words ; on this fundamental fact the Egyptian 
conception of the Judgement of Souls was based. 
In addition to satisfying Thoth, the Advocate and 


ae 


nen re waseeec coe stsesotn, 


3 
s 
: 
: 
: 
$ 
$ 
H 
3 
° 
. 
« 
* 
° 
e 
° 
e 
* 
& 
¢ 
° 
x 
. 
. 
: 
: 


eesd wes cetoc ees 


Teeeeeresnerces tte ce 


eee 
- 


The Judgement Hall of Osiris, and the Gate of the Sixth Division of the 
Tuat called Nebtaha. Osiris is seated on a throne with nine steps, on each 
of which stands a god of his Company, and the Great Scales stand before 
him. The standard is a god in mummy form, but what is in the pans of 
the scales is doubtful. The Ape of Thoth is driving away evil in the form 
of the black pig, Ama. Anubis is addressing Osiris. 


From the sarcophagus of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum. 


32 RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 


Secretary of Osiris, a man had to satisly the 
Forty-two Assessors that he had not committed 
the forty-two sins the committal of any one of 
which would exclude him from the Kingdom of 
Osiris. He did this by declaring to each of the 
Assessors that he had not committed a certain 
sin, and if the result of the weighing of his deeds 
in the Great Scales confirmed this, he was declared 


maa kheru, > eh, “true of speech,” 4.6, 


innocent. 

At the beginning of the XVIIIth dynasty, under 
some influence which is unknown to us, the scribes 
began to add Vignettes, 7.¢., to illustrate the Book of 
the Dead, and they gave free play to their imagina- 
tions in their representations of the Judgement 
Scene. A small vignette of the weighing of the 
deceased illustrated Chapter XX XB, and this they 
made the central feature of their larger vignette, 
which primarily they designed to illustrate Chapter 
CXXV. They considered this latter chapter of 
such great importance that they made it the 
introductory section of the Book of the Dead in all 
the great Codices of that work. Probably the 
finest coloured example known is that found in the 
Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus., No. 10,470), where it 
is given with two introductory hymns, one to Ra 
and the other to Osiris. In later Codices of the 
Book of the Dead the treatment of the Judge- 
ment Scene varies in details, but its main features 
remained unchanged for more than one thousand 
years. 

The collection of declarations of innocence of 
the forty-two sins which the deceased made to the 
Forty-two Assessors forms what may be called “The 
Moral and Religious Code of Osiris,’ and the 
scribes of the XVIIIth dynasty regarded it as one 


PLATE VI. 


Ser eeu eplajid 


Se (acerca 


ig WHE NOEMSees: 


Reta cae einer enigma tere 


eee 


pains Wie ASAI) 


Eee ea 
SF Wena Mal 


ea ae 
es r 


oat me el 


= een Nile 
iN aed 


pte Y eee 


sila Wat IPT ES) 
: ee ce | 


Ne thal) Ae 


. 
: S, 


t 


r 


Yi ot 

tes 

Le 
f _ ms Bi esa 
Recipe Vecaniniae 


ee ee ee et 


, weighing the Scribe 
ebseni’s ?) in the 


a heart 


Seales of the Two Lands 


Thoth, Lord of the 


tS) 


N 


( 


ainst 


ag 
o 
presence of Osiris. 


Seales, 


Nebseni in the Great 


of the Dead, 


ook 


B 


sheet 4 ( 


Xb 


): 


0 
BG 


Chap. X 


From Brit. Mus. Papyrus No. 990 


RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 33 


of the most important sections of the Book of the 
Dead. In modern works it is known as the 
“ Negative Confession,”’ a name given to it by the 
early Egyptologists because each declaration begins 
with “I have not.” It was addressed to Osiris 
in the first instance by the deceased, who said: 
“TI know thee and I know thy name and the names 
of the Forty-two Gods who dwell with thee in 
the hall of Maati,” etc. Hethen went on: ‘‘ Ihave 
brought thee Truth, I have destroyed sin, I have 
not sinned against mankind, I have not slain my 
kinsfolk,’’ and so on to the end of the Confession 
which is part of Chap. CX XV (Introduction). But 
the scribes were not content to leave it in this form, 
and they added the Vignette in the Papyrus of 
Nu, which is reproduced on Plate V. Here we 
see a long pylon-shaped hall, called the “ Hall of 
Maati,”’ the doors of which are thrown open, and 
down the middle of it, arranged in a single row, are 
forty-two mummified human forms, each having 
upon his head a feather, symbolic of Maat (Truth). 
Above and below these are the texts of the declara- 
tions of innocence. In the Papyrus of Nebseni 
(Brit. Mus. 9900) the cornice of the Hall is decorated 


with rows of feathers of Maat, f, and uraei with 
horns and disks, it figures of four apes, each 


sitting by the side of a pair of scales, rth rit 


and a seated god with his hands stretched out over 
the two eyes of Ra. At the end of the Hall are 
figures of the Maati goddesses, Isis and Nephthys 


1 These are the four holy apes who in the Vignette to 
Chap. CXXVI are seen sitting one at each corner of the Lake 
of Liquid Fire, into which the bodies of the damned were 
thrown. In the Papyrus of Nesitanebtashru the Lake with 
its apes is seen quite close to the Great Scales. 


Cc 


a4 


es 


\ 


RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 


and in the Papyrus of Ani, small vignettes repre- 
senting Ani before Osiris, the Great Scales, and 
Thoth writing on a feather, are added. The texts 


read : 
. Hail, Usekht-nemmt, appearing from Anu 


fo ae © Tages coi Ca 


(Heliopolis), I have not committed sins. 


. Hail, Hept-seshet, appearing from Kheraha,' © 


T have not robbed with violence. 


. Hail, Fenti (Thoth), appearing from Khem- 


enu (Hermopolis), I have not plundered. 
Hail, Am-Khaibitu, appearing from Qerrt, 
I have not stolen. 


. Hail, Neha-hau, appearing from Restau, I 


have not slain men. 


. Hail, Ruruti, appearing from heaven, I have 


not cheated over the bushel. 


7. Hail, Arti-f-em-tes, appearing from Sekhem 


I; 
12. 
13. 


14. Hail, Unem-besku, appearing from [the 


(Letopolis), I have not acted with deceit. 
Hail, Neba-per-em-khetkhet, I have not 
stolen the property of God. 


. Hail, Set-qesu, appearing from MHennsu 


(Herakleopolis), I have not uttered les. 


. Hail, Uatch-nesert, appearing from Heka- 


ptah (Memphis), I have not carried off food. 

Hail, Qerti, appearing from Ament (the 
West), I have not uttered words of 
blasphemy (or, sedition). 

Hail, Hetch-abehu, appearing from Ta-she 
(the Fayyim), I have not invaded any 
man’s land. 

Hail, Unem-snef, appearing from the 
Slaughter-house, I have not slain an ox 
set apart for the god.- 


Mabet-chamber], I have not cheated in 
respectiol ia as 


* A town which stood near the modern Fustat. 


4 


15. 
16. 
ye 
18. 
19. 
20. 


21. 


22. 
23. 
24. 


25. 
26. 
ae 
28. 


RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 35 


Hail, Neb-Maat, appearing from Maati, I 
have not pillaged the grain-lands. 

Hail, Thenemi, appearing from Bast 
(Bubastis), I have not played the spy 
(or, eavesdropper ?). 

Hail, Aati (or Anti), appearing from Anu 
(Heliopolis), I have not set my mouth in 
motion (7.e., reviled any man). 

Hail, Tutu-f, appearing from Ati, or Athi 
(Busiris oN, Haw ent es. oe G5: except 
over the things which were mine. 

Hail, Uamemti, appearing from the 
Slaughter-house, I have not had inter- 
course with the wife of a young (?) man. 

Hail, Maa-antuf, appearing from Per-Menu, 
I have not polluted myself. 

Hail, Heri-seru, appearing from [Nehat]u 
(Sycamore City), I have not terrified 
[men] by my acts. 

Hail, Khemi, appearing from the Lake of 
Kaui, I have not attacked [any man]. 
Hail, Sheti-kheru, appearing from Urit, I 

have not been an incendiary (?). 

Hail, Nekhen, appearing from Heq-at(?), 
I have not made myself deaf to the words 
of truth (or, the Law). 

Hail, Seri-kheru, appearing from Unes, I 
have not stirred up strife (or, sedition). 

Hail, Basti, appearing from Shetait, I have 
made no man to weep. 

Hail, Herf-haf, appearing from Hept-tchat,?1 
have not committed acts of sexual impurity. 

Hail, Ta-ret, appearing from Akhekhu 
(Darkness), I have not eaten my heart. 


* He was the ferryman who ferried souls over the river to 


the Island of Osiris. 
* The “ Cabin of the Ferryboat ” (?). 


36 RELIGIOUS AND MORAL CODE 


29, Hail, Kenemti, appearing from Kenemt, I 
have not cursed. 

30. Hail, An-hetep-f, appearing from Sau (Sais), 
I have not acted with violence. 

31. Hail, Neb-heru, appearing from Tchefet, I 
have not hurried my mind (judged hastily?). 

32. Hail, Serekhi, appearing from Unth, I have 
NOES Sse es my skin, I have not taken 
vengeance (?) on the god. 

33. Hail, Neb-abui, appearing from Satiu, I 
have not talked overmuch. 

34. Hail, Nefer-tem, appearing from Hekaptah 
(Memphis), I have not acted deceitfully, 
I have not done evil. 

35. Hail, Tem-sep, appearing from Tetu 
(Mendes), I have not acted as an enemy 
fof the king]. 

36. Hail, Ari-em-ab-f, appearing from Tebti, I 
have not befouled running water. 

37. Hail, Hi-mu, appearing from Nenu (Nu), I 
have not made high (arrogant ?) my voice. 

38. Hail, Utchu-rekhit, appearing from his 
abode, I have not cursed God. 

39. Hail, Neheb-nefert, appearing from Nefer(?), 
I have not behaved with insolence. 

40. Hail, Neheb-kau, appearing from [thy] city, 
I have not sought distinctions (honours ?) 
for myself. 

41. Hail, Tcheser-tep, appearing from [his] 
cavern, I have not added to my wealth 
except such things as are my own. 

42. Hail, An-a-f, appearing from Augert, I have 
not thought scorn of the god of my city. 


The names of the Forty-two Assessors are titles 
of gods of the forty-two nomes of Egypt. Some 
of them explain themselves, ¢.g., No. 1. Usekht- 


THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION 37 


nemmt, 7.¢., ‘‘ He of the long strides ” from Helio- 
polis is Ra, and No. 3. Fenti, i.e., ‘‘ Nose” 
from Hermopolis is Thoth, the allusion being 
to the beak of the ibis, the bird that was 
sacred to him. In many cases it is not possible 
to identify the god referred to, and it is probable 
that most of the names are titles of local gods 
who were associated with the cult of Osiris in his 
numerous shrines throughout Egypt. The nega- 
tive form of the declarations (‘I have not 
done’’) suggests that they are an answer to 
precepts either from some Teaching of Osiris that 
began with the words “Do not,” or “ Thou 
shalt not,’ or from the Teaching of some Sage 
like Ptah-hetep. 

It is possible that originally the Negative Con- 
fession was composed for the king, and that he 
alone was supposed to recite it before Osiris, for 
it is inconceivable that every Egyptian who was 
a follower of Osiris could or did make use of it. 
And the question arises whether the idea of it 
was of native origin, and whether the Book of the 
Dead is the place for which it was originally 
intended. The ordinary text of Chap. CXXV 
contains the substance of it, and there must be 
some reason why the Negative Confession in 
tabular form was given in addition. It seems to 
have nothing to do with the weighing of the words 
and deeds of a man in the Great Scales, and some 
special benefit must have accrued to the deceased 
from its recital! The Babylonians placed a 


1 The priests of Amen attached great importance to the 
Negative Confession in tabular form, a fact proved by the 
Papyrus of Nesitanebtashru. There Chap. CXXV is given 
in hieratic (ed. Budge, Plates XLIJI and XLIV), and on 
Plates CX-CXII we have the Negative Confession in hiero- 


glyphs. 


38 BABYLONIAN NEGATIVE CONFESSION 


Negative Confession in the mouth of their king 
when he went annually to the temple of Marduk 
to obtain the renewal of his sovereignty over Baby- 
lonia. The king was brought before Bél, and the 
Urigallu (a kind of priest) went out from the 
sanctuary, and, taking the king’s crown from his 
head and the three emblems of rule which he had 
in his hands, the Urigallu took them into the 
sanctuary and set them on a stand before Bél. 
He then went out and smote the king on his face, 
and brought him in before Bél, and, taking hold 
of the king’s ears, he drew him down to the ground 
and made him kneel before the god. And the 
king said, ‘‘I have not committed sin, O lord of 
the lands. I have not been careless about the 
service of thy godship. I have not destroyed 
Babel, I have not commanded its destruction. 
I have not destroyed E. Sagila, I have not forgotten 
its rites. I have not smitten the cheeks of legal 
vassals, I have not caused them to be abased. 
I made Babel my first care, I have not stricken 
down its walls.” When the Urigallu, speaking for 
the god, had assured the king that Bél would 
hear his prayers and destroy his enemies, he 
restored the crown and symbols of sovereignty 
to the king, who then arrayed himself as before. 
The Urigallu again smote the king on his cheek, 
and if tears came from the king’s eyes they showed 
that Bél was propitious to the king. If no tears 
came it showed that Bél was wroth with him, and 
that the king’s enemies would arise and bring 
about his downfall... The Negative Confession of 
the Egyptian before Osiris, and the Negative 
Confession of the King of Babylon before Marduk 


* See Thureau-Dangin, Ritwels Accadiens, Paris, 1921, 
pp. 144-145. 


] 


OSIRIS AND MARDUK 39 


are extraordinarily close parallels. Marduk, as the 
god who visited the Underworld and had to be 
restored to life, seems to be the Babylonian counter- 
part of Osiris, god of the Underworld and god of 
the Resurrection. 

The translation of the Moral and Religious 
Code of Osiris is made from the oldest known copy 
of it, which is found in the Papyrus of Nebseni, 
but the later Theban Codices show that con- 
siderable alterations were made by the scribes in 
the catalogue of sins there given. Thus, in the 
Papyrus of Nu the deceased says in the Introduc- 
tion to the Negative Confession: I have not 
sinned against men, oppressed my kinsfolk, done 
evil in the place of truth, known reprobates, done 
abominable deeds, done more than was necessary, 
put forward my name for honours, dominated over 
slaves, scorned God, robbed the poor, done deeds 
hateful to the gods, caused a man to harm his 
slave, made any man suffer, let any man go 
hungry, made any man weep, committed murder, 
caused any murder to be committed, hurt the 
people, robbed the temple-offerings, stolen sacred 
cakes, stolen sepulchral offerings, committed 
sodomy, defiled sacred places, cheated in selling 
grain, filched land, encroached on the lands of 
others, cheated with the weights, cheated by mis- 
reading the pointer of the scales, taken milk from 
babes, driven beasts off their pastures, snared 
sacred geese, caught fish with bait of their bodies, 
fouled (or obstructed) water, breached a canal, 
extinguished a flame that should burn, abolished 
festal days, driven cattle from sacred property, or 
thrust aside the god when he appeared in his 
processions. This having been said, the deceased 
cries out, ““I am pure, I am pure, I am pure, 
I am pure.” 


“(IIXX 81g ‘9061 Suopuoy ‘aytAeyy *po) neny jo snifdvg oy} wo1g 
*SUISQ JO vdUasaI1d 94} UI 
WEN] pesedoo9p ay3 jo jwoY ay} Jo SuryZiom oy Buryoyem Jeep, ssoppoS oy} pue qjoyy, jo ody Pepesy-sop oy 


a Wd ah! 


N 


NS) = 


7 
\ 


40 


THE WEIGHING OF THE HEART 41 


The Vignettes in the papyri copied in the first 
half of the period of the XVIIIth dynasty show 
that the weighing of the words and deeds of the 
deceased was a comparatively simple matter. 
Thoth, in the form of a dog-headed ape, conducted 
the weighing and announced the result to Osiris, 
who sat close by on his throne. (See Plate VI.) 


In the Papyrus of Iuau, USdys (ed. 


Naville, Pl. XXII), Osiris stands by the Scales 


I, Ra, in the form of a mummy, watching the weighing of the heart 
of Amenemheb; Ra here takes the place of Osiris. 

2. The dog-headed Ape of Thoth. 

3. The Great Scales, the pillar of which is surmounted by the head 
of Maat (Truth). The heart of the deceased counterbalances 
Truth. 

4. An Ape-headed god leading the deceased to the Great Scales. 

From the Papyrus of Amenemheb in the Louvre, No. 3097. 

(Naville, Zodtenbuch, Vol. 1, Chap. CXXV.) 


and watches the heart of the deceased balancing 
itself against the symbol of truth, and Thoth, 
in the form of a dog-headed ape with the 
crescent and full moon on his head, and his 
counterpart Maat stand by watching. In the 
Louvre Papyrus No. 3073 the Maati goddesses 
watch the weighing, and the top of the pillar 
of the Scales is in the form of the head of 
Maat. In the Louvre Papyrus No. 3074, the 


42 THE WEIGHING OF THE HEART 


weighing is performed by Ra or Horus, the ape 
sits on the top of the pillar of the Scales, and 
the heart is presented by Anubis to the two 
apes who sit before Osiris. In the Papyrus 
of Neb-Qet (Louvre, No. 3132) the top of the 
standard is made in the form of the head of the 
ibis of Thoth, and to the left of it are the Eater 
of the Dead and the Lake of Fire with the Four 
Apes. In many papyri Anubis performs the 


1. Osiris in his shrine. 

2. The deceased Nebget adoring the god. 

3. The heart of the deceased in the Great Scales being weighed against Truth. 

4. The feather of Truth (Maat). 

5. The Lake of Fire and the Four Holy Apes. 

6. The monster Am-mit, ‘‘ Eater of the Dead,” waiting to destroy sinners. 
From the Papyrus of Nebqet (ed. Devéria and Pierret, Paris, 1872). 


weighing and the ape of Thoth sits on the top of 
the standard. In papyri of the latter half of the 
XVIIIth dynasty, e.g., the Papyrus of Ani, the 
Judgement Scene is greatly elaborated, and the 
weighing is watched not only by the deceased, 
but by his soul and his Luck, and his embryo (?) 
and the goddess of his birth-chamber Meskhenit, 
and the goddess of his destiny Renenit. The ape 
sits on the Scales, and the god Thoth, the “ Lord 


PLATE VII. 


ig ; 
—* 

=]. 
—= liu 


fe 


= 
md 


a i 


oe Se 


if 


Anubis weighing the heart of the priestess Anhai against a figure of Maat, 
goddess of Truth. The Ape of Thoth watches the weighing on behalf of 
Thoth, who is recording the result on his palette. 


From Brit. Mus. Papyrus No. 10472 (Book of the Dead, Chap. CX. XV). 


THE VERDICT OF THOTH 43 


of the words of the god,”! ibis-headed, stands 
writing down on his palette the result of the 
weighing which Anubis reports. 

The verdict which Thoth returns to the gods is 
both interesting and instructive, and shows what 
was demanded of a man before he could enter the 


I, 2. The Truth goddesses of Upper and Lower Egypt. 
3. The Great Scales in which Horus or Ra is weighing the heart of 
Thena; the Ape of Thoth sits on the standard. 
4. Anubis presenting the heart of Thena to Osiris who sits enthroned 
as Judge with two of the Holy Apes before him. 
From the Papyrus of Thena in the Louvre (Naville, Zodtenduch, 
Vol. I, Chap. CXXV). 


Kingdom of Osiris. He says: “In real truth 
(t.e., with the strictest regard to the demands of 
the Law) the heart of the Osiris (Ani) has been 
weighed. His soul stood up bearing witness on 
his behalf. His character (or, disposition) is right 


* “Neb metu neter, —7 i Be | al .” Eisler’s theory that 
i refers to the standards of the god, or gods, is disposed 
of by Boylan in his Thoth as Hermes, p. 92. 


44 THE FOUR HOLY APES 


according to the Great Scales. No vice (or, abomi- 
nation) has been found in him. He has not filched 
from the offerings in the temples. He did not 
commit deceitful deeds, he did not spread about 
with his mouth lies whilst he lived upon the earth.” 
Thus the Code of Osiris regarded as the essential 
qualities in a candidate for the Elysian Fields 


The Four Holy Apes who guard the Lake of Fire into which 
the remains of those who were condemned'in the Judgement 
Hall of Osiris were cast. 


Vignette of Chap. CXXVI in the Papyrus of Nebseni, 
(Brit. Mus. Papyrus, No. 9900.) 


a right spirit, honesty in his work, and absolute 
truth in word and deed. And this was Thoth’s 
summary of the Law. — 

In the Papyrus of Neb-Qet the monster “ Eater 
of the Dead ”’ is seen lying by the side of the Lake 
of Fire with its Four Apes, but in the later papyri 
the Lake is removed from the Hall of Judgement, 


THE FOUR HOLY APES 45 


and the Vignette of it, with its text, forms Chap. 
CXXVI. These Apes were originally supposed to 
sit in the Boat of Ra, and each told the god the 
truth about what was happening in one quarter of 
the world, but here they are seated each at one 
corner or side of a rectangular lake of fire. They 
lived by the truth, and they fed on the truth, and 
were free from deceit and fraud and vice of every 
kind. To these the deceased prayed, saying : 
“Blot out my evil deeds, and put away my 
culpable deeds committed upon earth, and destroy 
anything of evil that clings to me, and let there be 
nothing in me to alienate you from me. Let me 
pass through the Ammehet, and enter Restau, and 
pass through the secret gates of Amentt.’”’ And 
when the deceased was a righteous man they 
answered: ‘‘ Come, for we have blotted out thy 
evil deeds, and put away thy sin and thy culpable 
deeds committed upon earth, and we _ have 
destroyed every evil thing that clung to thee upon 
earth. Enter therefore into Restau, and pass 
through the secret pylons of Amentt.” 


TRANSLATIONS OF EXTRACTS FROM 
EGYPTIAN MORAL PAPYRI. 


49 


THE TEACHING OF KAGEMNA:? 


[The beginning is lost.] 


I. The timid man is strong, and he who is just 
in word and deed is praised. The hall is opened 
to the humble man, and a wide room [is given to 
him] that is gentle in speech ; but sharp knives are 
against him that would forcea way. Aman should 
not seek an entrance except at his [appointed] 
time. 

II. If thou art seated at meat with many 
people hate (2.¢., abstain from) the food which thou 
lovest. It is only a minute’s restraint of the 
appetite, and greediness is a disgrace and tends to 
gluttony. A cup of water will quench the thirst 
satisfactorily, and a mouthful only will stablish 
the heart. One good thing takes the place of 
another, and a small quantity even of something 
which is of inferior quality will take the place of a 
large quantity. He who is intent on satisfying 
the lust of the belly is a shameful person. Passing 
the time he is unable to loosen the body in strange 
houses. 

III. If thou art seated at meat with a greedy 
man eat thou when he has finished his meal; and 
if thou art seated at meat with a winebibber, 
accept thou a drink whenever it pleases him to 
offer thee one. Reject not the pieces of flesh 
which [are found with] a man of bestial appetite. 
Take what he offers thee, and refuse it not; 
remember acceptance conduces to gentleness on 
his part. 


1 The hieratic text of this Teaching is found in the Prisse 
Papyrus, which is described on p. 51. 
D 


~ 


50 WRITTEN WORD TO BE ACCEPTED 


IV. If a man lacks the knowledge of what a 
man should know, and if nothing said [to him] 
moves him, and if he maintains a sullen attitude 
to the person who is well-disposed towards him, 
he is a calamity for his mother and for his neigh- 
bours and for people in general. Make thy name 
to come forth (i.e., be known). Being silent (or, 
modest) in thy speech, thou shalt be proclaimed. 

V. Be not arrogant because of thy strength 
when thou art among thy contemporaries. Take 
care to act in such a way that people do not oppose 
thee. No man knows what is going to happen, or 
what God will do when He strikes. 

And the Wazir (or, mayor) caused his children 
to be summoned to him having made himself fully 
acquainted with the dispositions of men, and they 
came being filled with wonder......, He 
said to them: ‘‘ Whatsoever is in writing on this 
roll pay heed unto it as if I myself were repeating 
TEED VENTE ae Ge tee And the children laid them- 
selves down flat upon their bellies, and they re- 
cited these sayings according to what was written. 
And in their opinion these sayings were more 
beautiful than everything else in the whole land, 
and [they recited them] both standing up and sitting 
down. His Majesty King Huni died, and His 
Majesty Seneferu, the King of the South and the 
North, became the gracious King of all this land. 
And Kagemna was appointed governor of the town 
and Wazir. 


51 - 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP. 


The only complete copy of this work known was 
purchased from a native of Western Thebes by 
Prisse d’Avennes, who was making excavations 
there, and was given by him to the Bibliothéque 
Royale in Paris in 1847. He published the text 
in an oblong quarto volume, entitled Facsimile 
d'un papyrus Egyptien en caractéres hiératiques, 
trouvé a Thebes, donné a la Bibliothéque Royale de 
Paris, et publié par E. Prisse d’Avennes, Paris, 
1847. The papyrus was written under the XIth or 
XIIth dynasty, and supplies us with a copy, more 
or less accurate, of the text as it was received about 
B.C. 2500 or earlier. Hieroglyphic transcripts of 
this text were published by Virey, Atudes sur le 
Papyrus Prisse, Paris, 1887, and by myself, Egyptian 
Reading Book, London, 1896, pp. 244-274. A later 
Version of a portion of the Teaching is found in a 
papyrus which IJ acquired for the British Museum 
(No. 10,509), and on an ostrakon which was dis- 
covered by the late Lord Carnarvon. A valuable 
edition of all the available texts of both Versions 
has been published by E. Dévaud, Les Maximes de 
Pitahhotep, Fribourg, 1916. Translations of the 
Teaching, in whole or in part, have been made by 
Dr. Heath (Proverbs of Aphobis, 1864), Chabas 
(Rev. Arch., XV, 1858), Lauth (Sitzwngsberichte der 
Kénig. Bayer. Akad. 1869, p. 530 ff.; 1870, 
p. 245), Virey (Atudes, Paris, 1887), Maspero 
(Recueil, XXXI, 146), Virey (Records of the Past, 
2nd ed., Vol. III, p. 1), and others. The title of 
the work of Ptah-hetep reads :— 


D 2 


82 PTAH-HETEP’S APPEAL TO ASSA 


THE TEACHING OF THE GOVERNOR OF THE TOWN, 
THE WaAztR PTAH-HETEP, [WHO LIVED] UNDER 
THE MAJESTY OF THE KING OF THE SOUTH 
AND THE KING oF THE NortH, AssA, WHO 
LIVES FOR EVER AND EVER. 


The Governor of the Town, the Wazir Ptah- 
hetep, says to the Majesty of the King of the South 
and the King of the North, Assa, who lives for 
ever and ever: ‘“‘ O King my Lord, grey hairs have 
come upon me, old age has advanced, decay has 
come to me, oldness has taken the place of newness, 
some new defect settles upon one every day. The 
eyesight fails, the ears become stopped, the - 
strength diminishes, the heart is sluggish, the 
mouth is silent and speaks not, the mind forgets 
and cannot remember the things of yesterday, 
every bone in the body aches, happiness turns into 
discomfort, the taste of everything vanishes. Old 
age makes men miserable in every way. The nose 
becomes stopped up and can smell nothing. It is 
misery for the old man whether he sits or stands up. 
Give the order then on behalf of thy servant here 
present to make a staff for my old age, and let my 
son stand in my place. Then will I tell him the 
speech of those who hearkened and the weighty 
sayings of the ancestors, and those who have 
obeyed the gods. And thou likewise, mayest thou 
act in such a way as to drive out strife from among 
the people, and to make those who dwell on both 
banks of the Nile serve thee loyally.” The 
Majesty of this god (i.e. King Assa) said: ‘ In- 
struct him in the speech of olden time as thou 
sittest. O make him to be a marvel to the children 


PTAH-HETEP ORDERED TO SPEAK 53 


of the princes. May obedience enter into him, 
together with all rightmindedness which has been 
described. No one is born who possesses under- 
standing naturally.” 

Here begin the Precepts in noble language which 
were uttered by the Prince and hereditary Chief, 
the father of the god, the beloved of the god, the 
son of the king, truly begotten by him, the 
Governor of the Town, the Wazir Ptah-hetep. 
They will teach the ignorant man to become a man 
of knowledge and to express himself in the best 
possible way, and will prove a blessing to him that 
will hearken to them, and a curse to him that will 
cast them behind him. He spake to his son! 
thus :— 


I. Magnify not thy heart because of thy know- 
ledge, and fill not thy heart with the thought about 
it because thou hast knowledge. Hold converse 
with the ignorant man as well as with the learned. 
No limit has been set to a handicraft, and no 
handicraftsman is equipped with all its excellences, 
Fine speech is hidden deeper than mother-of- 
emerald stone, and yet it is to be found among the 
women who grind flour at the mill. 

II. If thou meetest a man of words who is 
bolder and better equipped than thyself in his 
hour (i.e. when he is coming to the conclusion of 
his speech), bend thy arm and bow thy back. Let 
not thy heart be carried away, let him not rest 
upon thee ; [but] make thou thyself small. When 
he says things that are evil make no attempt to 
stop him in his hour, so, that he may be called the 
‘man who knows nothing about things.” Bear 
thy disgust. It is his treasure (or, food). 


1 Var. ‘“ to his son Ptah-hetep the little ” (¢.¢. junior). 


54 WHAT GOD DECREES HAPPENS 


III. If thou meetest a man of words in his 
hour, if he be one like thyself, that which is on 
thy shoulders set down and become wiser than he 
is through thy silence, whenever he is speaking 
evil things. Those who are listening will applaud 
him, but thy name will be fair in the opinion of the 
princes. 

IV. If thou meetest a man of words in his hour, 
curse him not if he be thy inferior. Let not thy 
heart rage because of him, for he is a miserable 
being. Let him remain on the ground, he will 
punish himself. 

V. If thou art in the position of a leader and 
it is thy duty to give orders to a great number of 
people, pursue thou a course which is wholly 
excellent, and continue in it until there is no defect 
whatsoever in thy administration. Truth (Maat) 
is great, and her virtue is lasting, and she has never 
been overthrown since the time of Osiris (var. since 
Ra created it); the man who transgresses her 
behests (or, laws) is sorely punished. She is the 
path of him that is [not] a robber. The wicked 
can indeed steal possessions, but the wicked cannot 
attain to her state. There is great power in Truth, 
for she is permanent ; the good man says: “ She 
was a possession of my father.” 

VI. Make not terror to exist among the people, 
for it effects nothing ; it is what God has decreed 
that happens. 

VII. If thou art one of those who are sitting at 
table with a man who is greater than thyself, 
accept what he gives thee, what is set before thy 
nose. Look not at that which’he has before him, 
but set thy gaze upon that which is before thee. 
Cast not a multitude of prying glances upon him, 
for this behaviour will cause him discomfort. 
Keep thy face turned downwards until he addresses 


.\ 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 55 


thee, and speak only when he speaks to thee. 
Laugh thou when he laughs. That will be exceed- 
ingly pleasing to his mind, and what thou doest 
will be very good behaviour. What is in the heart 
cannot be known. When a great man is [sitting] 
behind food, his commands are in accordance with 
his (disposition). A great man gives to the person 
whom he can reach, but the Ka makes him stretch 
his hands to those beyond. The eating of bread is 
under the dispensation of God. When plans of the 
night come into being, the ignorant man suffers loss 
thereby. 

VIII. If thou art in the position of a man who 
is treated with confidence, whom one nobleman 
sends to another on business, when he sends thee 
on a mission conduct the business in a right and 
fitting manner. Perform the mission according to 
what he says to thee. Let not thy heart eat (1.e. 
hide) anything of what is said to thee, and guard 
thyself carefully against forgetting any part of it. 
Guard thyself also against making harsh the words 
which one nobleman may speak about another 
contemptuously by using the utterances of folk 
in general. Whether it be a nobleman or a man 
of no account, it is disgrace to the Ka. . 

IX. When thou ploughest, and there is abun- 
dant growth in thy field, and God gives a plentiful 
crop into thy hand, praise not the man who has no 
children, curse not, boast not, and eat not thy 
fill from the provisions of thy family. The fear 
of silence (?) works great things ; the man who is 
master of the kat weight is master of the goods 
[also], he seizes like the crocodile among the genbet 
ein ire ye 

X. If thou art a man in a menial position, and 
art in the service of a man of honourable estate, 
and thy treatment by God is good (or, generous), 


56 SEEK HAPPINESS OF MIND AND BODY 


seek not to acquire any knowledge whatsoever 
about his former estate. Make not great thy 
heart (i.e. be not arrogant) towards him because 
of what thou knowest about him and his former 
condition. Fear him because of what has hap- 
pened to him, for behold, wealth comes not of 
itself; it is a law to those who love it. If he 
squanders it one fears him. It is God Who creates 
his honourable estate ; if he fights on his own behalf 
he falls down (t.e. dies). 

XI. Follow thy heart’s desire as long as thou 
livest, and do not more than is ordered. Waste 
not the time in which thou canst follow thy heart’s 
desire, for it is a hateful thing to the Ka (2.e. 
the natural disposition) to limit its period. Weary 
not thyself concerning the affairs of the day, nor 
be anxious overmuch about thy house and estate ; 
things happen (or, come), follow [thy] inclina- 
(EG reo teas Se 

XII. If thou wouldst be a perfect man and 
dost possess a house and estate, beget a son who 
shall be well-pleasing to God. If he does what is 
right, and if he imitates thee in thy actions, and 
hearkens to thy teaching, and his behaving is 
perfect in thy house, and he cares for thy property 
as if it was his own, seek thou for him every kind 
of honour. He is thy son whom thy heart’s desire 
has begotten ; let not thy heart drift away from 
Binisea eet But if he follows an evil course, 
and opposes thy plans, and does not carry out 
thy instructions, and his behaviour in thy house is 
detestable, and he treats with contempt all thy 
words, and sets his mouth in motion with vile 
words, and his face is turned away, and nothing 
remains in his hands, cast him away, for he is no 
son of thine, and he was not born for thee. He is 
thy servant by his tongue through his qualities 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 57 


(or, characteristics) ; he is one who blames them. 
God will smite him in the body. He will never 
turn back to control them. The shipwrecked ones 
will not find a boat for themselves. 

XIII. If thou art in the ante-chamber of a 
nobleman, whether thou art standing up or 
squatting, abase thyself the first day. Press not 
forward, lest thy being turned back should take 
place. Keep a keen watch on the confidential 
servant who announces thee; the man who is 
summoned [by the nobleman] finds a wide seat 
(t.e. plenty of room). The ante-chamber of a 
nobleman is governed by precedence, and all its 
procedure is according to rule. It is God who 
_ advances the seat of him that is advanced. It is 
not effected by the shoulder of a man (7.e. by 
force). 

XIV. If thou art with common people make 
thyself like the peasant folk by concealing thy 
mind. The man who conceals his mind enjoys a 
good reputation, if he does not wander about after 
the word of his body. He becomes his own master, 
a master of affairs by his own planning. Thy name 
is good without thy word. Thy limbs (or, body) 
are fat; thy face is with (?) thee, thou praisest 
thyself without knowing it. The man who is 
small of heart (timid?) hearkens to his body, he 
sets his defects (or, littlenesses) in the place of his 
love, his heart becomes a wretched thing, his 
members dwindle to nothing. The man who is 
great of heart (i.e. bold) is one of God’s men. 
He hearkens to the command of his heart, his 
enemy becomes his possession. 

XV. Declare thy mission and conceal nothing. 
Devote all thy thought to the counsel of thy lord. . . 
. . . Supposing that a noble destroys his posses- 
sions : evenif he (7.¢. the envoy) thinks of opposing 


58 AVOID THE SOCIETY OF WOMEN 


him in the matter, he must hold his peace, having 
already spoken to him. 

XVI. If thou art in the position of a leader, 
press forward thy plans by thy commands; do 
thou what thou hast decided upon. But remember 
(or, take good heed concerning) the days that are 
to follow. If there be no word on thy behalf 
among those who are praised, calamity will over- 
whelm thee and misery will overtake thee. 

XVII. If thou art in the position of a leader (or, 
one to whom petitions are made), be courteous, and 
listen to the petition of the petitioner. Stop not his 
words, until he has poured out all that is in his heart 
and has said what he came to say. A man witha 
petition to make loves the official who will agree to 
what he says, and will let him talk out his grievance 
fully. Every petitioner rejoices to have his griev- 
ance heard. A fair word rejoices (literally, paints) 
the heart. If an official stops the flow of words 
of the petitioner, the people say: ‘‘ Why is this 
fellow there having the power to act in this way?” 

XVIII. If thou wishest to maintain a perma- 
nent friendship in the house to which thou art in 
the habit of going, whether as master, or whether 
as brother, or whether as friend, or in fact in any 
place to which thou hast the entry, strive against 
associating with the women. The place which they 
frequent is not good. The man who is not prudent 
follows after them. A thousand men seeking what 
is beautiful are destroyed by them. A man is 
made a fool of by their shining limbs, but they turn 
into things that are harder than quartzite sand- 
stone. The pleasure is only for a little moment, 
and it [passes] like a dream, and a man at the end 
thereof finds death through knowing it....... 

XIX. If thou wouldst have thy lot as a leader 
a happy one, guard thyself against every evil deed, 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 59 


and above all fight against the vice of avarice, 
which is a disease fraught with pain that cannot be 
conquered. Confidence cannot exist side by side 
with it. It turns fathers and mothers into evil 
folk, and also the brothers of the mother. It turns 
the kindly friend into a bitter enemy, it drives 
away the trusted servant from his master, and it 
makes a wife hateful to her husband. It is a 
strong treasure-house of every kind of evil, and a 
purse containing abominable vices of every kind. 
The man who has truth (maat) for his tow-line 
walks whither her steps lead him, and acquires 
house and estate; but the avaricious possesses 
not even a tomb. 

XX. Be not avaricious when a division of 
property is made, and be not greedy, and what is 
thy due shall come to thee. Be not avaricious in 
thy dealings with thy kinsfolk. The prayer of the 
long-suffering man is greater than force, even 
though he be of no account among the people of 
his own time, and is destitute of the gifts of speech. 
A very little avarice about a matter of the kind 
will make hostility to arise even in the man who is 
usually cool-hearted (¢.e., unexcitable). 

XXI. If thou wouldst be wise (or, prosperous) 
stablish thyself in a house (t.e., get married). Love 
thou thy wife in the house wholly and rightly. 
Fill her belly and clothe her back ; oil for anointing 
is the medicine for her limbs. Make her heart to 
rejoice as long as thou livest ; she is a profitable 
field for her lord. Enter not into disputes with her. 
She will withdraw herself before force....... 
Make her to prosper permanently in thy house. If 
thou art hostile to her she is a well (or, ditch) ; she 
gives herself to herself. 

XXII. Satisfy thy servants whom thou trustest 
with thy possessions, so that they may feel as if 


60 SPEAK ONLY WITH KNOWLEDGE 


they had been rewarded by God. If a man is 
niggardly in satisfying his trusted servants, he is 
declared tobe 4 thievish person: =. 92-6) eee 
No man knows what will happen as he meditates 
in the morning. When troublesome events come 
upon him it will be the trusted servants who will 
bid him ‘‘ Welcome.”” Peace (?) cannot be brought 
to the town (or, estate), and when it is brought by 
the servants ruin supervenes. 

XXIII. Repeat not the words spoken by a man 
who is furiously angry; hearken not to him; 
they are the outpouring of a heated mind (or, body). 
At the repetition of a matter, look on, hear not ; 
let it go.to:the ground... <(..25.2 5 

XXIV. If thou art in the position of a man of 
high rank who sits in the council of his lord, devote 
thy heart entirely to what is good (or, perfect). 
To hold thy peace is better for thee than the teftef 
flower. Speak thou only when thou knowest a 
matter and canst explain it. Behold, the word isa 
handicraftsman who speaks in the council, and 
speech is the most laborious of all works. The 
explanation thereof hands one over to the staff 
[of punishment]. 

XXV. If thou art strong, make respect for 
thyself to spread with understanding and with 
gentleness of speech. Command not except when 
thou canst guide ; abuse brings a man to calamity. 
Be not haughty in thy heart, lest it be humbled. 
Keep not silence entirely, take care as to the path 
thou treadest. Answer a word in a suitable (?) 
taannere ws Putoawa ysis, ce aur control thyself. 
Subdue the heated emotions of, an ardent mind. 
The man who walks softly fashions his path aright. 
The man who toils the whole day long never 
passes a happy moment; and the man who 
indulges in pleasure all the day long never acquires 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 61 


possessions. Seize a time for rest as does the 
steersman ; the time he is on land another toils 
(t.é., grasps the pole)... ...... 

XXVI. Approach not a great man in his hour, 
and irritate not the heart of him who is heavily 
burdened with care. Injury caused by him comes 
upon him that is hated by him. He sets free his 
Ka, he loves him who gives food, who is with God. 
What he loves he does...... There is peace 
with his Ka [when] the calamity has fallen (?) 

XXVII. Instruct thou a nobleman in the 
matters which will be advantageous to him ; make 
his splendour to be among the people ; make thou 
that what a man knows shall fall (¢.e., be attri- 
buted) to his lord. Thine own food depends upon 
his Ka (2.e., good pleasure) ; a kindly (or, loving) 
heart obtains the meals which satisfy, and thine 
own back becomes clothed thereby. His light (?) 
is upon thee to make thy house to live...... 
He offers a gracious (7.e., helpful) shoulder. .. . 
Verily he who hearkens is a being who is loved. 

XXVIII. If thou art the son of a man who is a 
member of council and art chosen to go on a mission 
to make tranquil the multitude, search out the 
matter with strict justice, and declare thy finding, 
taking no side. Take heed to what one says as 
go-the cnieis:. .... < it is for thee to adjust the 
case rather than to act as judge. 

XXIX. If thou hast been long-suffering with 
a man in time past, and thou art wearied by a man 
suing for his right, turn thyself away from him, 
and remember him not. Whilst he keeps silent to 
Pee ie olla’: the first day. 

XXX. If thou hast become great, having been 
once in a very lowly state, and if thou hast acquired 
possessions, having been at one time in a state of 
destitution in the quarter of the city that is known 


62 SERVE LOYALLY AND FAITHFULLY 


to thee, forget not that which happened to thee 
in the times that are past. Set not thy heart’s 
confidence on thy goods, which have, after all, 
only come to thee as gifts of God. Thou wouldst 
not be superior to any other man if what has 
happened to thee had happened to him. 

XXXI. Bend thy back in reverence to him that 
is thy chief and thy governor by virtue of the power 
that he derives from the House (1.e., authority) 
of the King. Thy house and all that is in it shall 
prosper thereby, and thou shalt receive the wages 
that it is meet for thee to have. It isa bad thing 
to set oneself in opposition to the man who is 
appointed chief. A man lives as long as he displays 
gentleness and patience. A man should never 
injure the shoulder that covers (7.e., protects) him. 
Rob not the house of the peasants, and seize not 
by force the property that comes into thy hands. 
He (i.¢., thy chief) will not revile thee because of 


' what thou hast heard...... If he knows it 


he will be hostile to thee. It is a bad thing to set 
thyself in opposition in the place which thou hast 
entered. 

XXXII. Have no intercourse with a woman- 
pelo: ik Say oat Path ee 

XXXIII. If thou seekest for friendship with 
a man, ask not for it, but go to his house, and pass 
the time (or, pay a visit) with him alone, so that 
he may not be able to make his attitude to thee 
unpleasant. Talk wisely to him after a certain 
period. Find out what his mind is by conversing 
with him. If there comes up as a subject something 
that he has seen thee do, or if he does something 
that makes thee to be ashamed, hold thy peace or 
show thyself friendly to him ; browbeat him not. 
Prepare an answer for him with words that will 
tell, answer not in a way that will irritate him ; 


THE TEACHING OF PTAH-HETEP 63 


do not leave him, and do not harass (?) him. His 
moment must not come, and he must not be cast 
down at what has been ordered for him. 

XXXIV. Let thy face shine with cheerfulness 
as long as thou livest. When there comes forth 
from the storehouse one of those who went in at 
the distribution of loaves of bread and his face is 
set in a frown, he makes known the emptiness of 
his belly, and he becomes an enemy, being unsatis- 
fied. Do not let any man approach thee and find 
thee with a gloomy face. A man wishes to remem- 
ber what is pleasant in the years that he has yet 
to live (?). 

XXXV. Know thy people (or, acquaintances) 
when thy prosperity is at a low ebb; thy character 
(or, reputation) is more than thy friends. It fills 
the river-side ; it is greater than a man’s valuable 
possessions. Riches pass from one man to another. 
It is an excellent thing for the son of a man to have 
a [good] character. Good qualities are remem- 
bered. 

wg oe xis ws 7 

XXXVII. If thou takest as a handmaid a 
woman who has always enjoyed good cheer, and is 
of a merry disposition and is well known to her 
fellow townsfolk, and she is as thy lawful wife, and 
is good to look upon, drive her not away, but 
supply her with food to eat (or, make her fat with 
good food). 


[Here ends the Teaching of Ptah-hetep.] 


PTAH-HETEP’S COMMENTS ON HIS TEACHING. 


I. If thou wilt hearken to these things which I 
have said to thee, thy condition of life will be like 
unto that of all those who have gone before thee. 


64 HIS COMMENTS ON HIS TEACHING 


And besides the truth that belongs to them remains 
their beauty: the memory of them shall never 
depart from the mouths of men by reason of the 
beauty of their phrasing. Every word will pass 
current as a thing that can never perish in this 
land, and it will beautify exceedingly the utterances 
that the princes and nobles make. It is the 
Teaching that a man should hand on when speaking 
to his posterity, so that they may hearit. Thereby 
he becomes a craftsman in speech, and having 
heard fine speech himself, he declares it to those 
who shall come after him, so that they likewise 
may hear what he has heard. If a well-doing dis- 
position exists in him that is set at the head of 
affairs he will always be beneficent, and all his 
wisdom shall endure for ever and ever. The soul 
that is well trained (or, is understanding) rejoices 
when its wisdom is established, and it is happy 
when it is prosperous on the earth. Behold, he 
becomes a prince through his well-doing dis- 
position, his heart serves as the counterpoise to his 
tongue, and his lips are true when he speaks, his 
eyes see rightly, and his two ears hear at the same 
time. It is a very excellent thing for his son to do 
what is right, and to keep himself from falsehood 
[in word and deed]. 

II. It is a good thing for the son who hears to 
have heard. He who hears enters in as one who 
has heard, and he who has heard becomes a hearer 
who hears what is good and speaks what is good. 
Everyone who has heard is an excellent person, 
and it is an excellent thing for him that has already 
heard [teaching] to hear [more]. To hear is the 
best of all qualities (or, characteristics), and 
beautiful affection springs into being thereby. 
How beautiful is it to see a son searching into the 
Teaching of his father; through this act he will 


HIS COMMENTS ON HIS TEACHING 65 


attain to old age. The man who loves God will 
hear, but he whom God hates will not hear. 
Behold, it is the heart of a man that makes its 
possessor hear or not hear. The heart of a man is 
life, strength and health to him. Behold, he who 
has heard hears the word, and he who loves to hear 
is he who will perform words. How beautiful it is 
when a son hearkens to his father! And how 
happy is he (7.e., the father) to whom these words 
are applicable! How beautiful is the son as a 
lord of hearing, who has heard and of whom it can 
be said, He is good in his body, and is treasured 
by his father! The memorial of him shall be ever 
in the mouths of those who are alive on the earth 
at this present, and in the mouths of unborn 
generations. 

III. If the son of a man receives what his 
father says to him, none of his plans shall fail. 
Thou art instructed by a son who hearkens. His 
merit [becomes known] among the princes. His 
control is over that which he speaks—seeing in 
ee Calamity overtakes [the son 
who] will not hear. The man of knowledge rises 
betimes to stablish himself, but the fool of a man 
injures himself. 

IV. The fool of a man who has not hearkened 
effects nothing whatsoever. He looks upon the 
man of knowledge as a man who knows nothing, 
and the qualities of virtue and excellence he con- 
siders to be defects. He does every kind of thing 
that is reprehensible, and these cause him to be 
abused daily. He lives (i.e., flourishes) upon that 
through which men die, and his bread is that which 
is filthy and abominable. But his character and 
disposition are well known to the princes. He goes 
on living day by day, but he is as one dead, and 
people keep themselves at a distance from him 

E 


66 HIS COMMENTS ON HIS TEACHING 


because of his evil moods, and because of the many 
calamities that come upon him every day. 

V. Theson who has hearkened is like a Follower 
of Horus, and when he has hearkened good [comes] 
to him. When he is old and has attained the state 
when reverence is paid to him, he tells his children 
the things that were told to him, and so makes 
new the instruction of his father. Every man 
instructs as he has been instructed, and tells his 
children what he has been told, and they tell it 
again to their children. 

VI. Build up a character and gainsay not thy 
precept (?). Make Truth to flourish, give life to 
(ey mehitdren, wc lt. coc ek Pees it will come 
bearing sins (or, defects). Act thou in such a way 
that the people when they see thee shall say: 
“ Behold, he is exactly like that one’’; and that 
when they hear of thee they shall also say: “ Be- 
hold, he is exactly lke that one.’’ The people 
shiall-see. and: shall.[say]+.-) eee subduing the 
MO tude sr ei 

VII. Suppress no word [in this book], and add 
nothing to it, and set not one thing in the place of 
another. Take good heed not to open the writ- 
ings (?) that thou hast ; instruct according to the 
[traditional] word. Thou, a man of learning, 
hearken thyself. Desire thou to establish thy 
behest in the mouths of those who hear. [Let 
thy speech be suitable to the occasion] and let 
every plan of thine be in its place. 

VIII. Make thy heart to sink as in water, 
control thy mouth, so shall thy plans be among 
the princes. Make thyself to be wholly in accord 
with thy lord, make him to say: “ This is my 
son.” Then shall those who hear these words say: 
“ Assuredly praise is due to his begetters.’’ Con- 
centrate thy mind at the time when thou art 


HIS COMMENTS ON HIS TEACHING 67 


speaking, and thou shalt make remarkable utter- 
ances, and the princes who hear them shall say : 
“Good, good are the things that come forth from 
his mouth.” 

IX. Act in such a way that thy lord shall say 
of thee :—The Teaching of his father must have 
been very, very good. He came forth from him 
(t.e., his father), the first of his loins. He has 
declared his Teaching to him, and the whole of it 
is in his body, and what he did in making him was 
greater than what he said to him. Behold a good 
son, of the gift of God, who has done more than 
his lord ordered him to do. He does that which is 
right, and his heart does (i.e., follows) according 
to his footsteps. 

May thy members have strength (or, good health) 
similar to that which I have obtained, the King at 
the same time being satisfied with everything that 
has happened, and mayest thou be master of 
[many] years of life. It is not a little thing that I 
have upon the earth. Ihave obtained one hundred 
and ten years of life, which the King has given 
to me, in addition to the favours which surpassed 
those of my ancestors, for doing what was right 
for the King up to the place of reverence (t.e., to 
old age). 


Here ends [the book]—its beginning to its end 
as it was found in writing. 


68 


-THE TEACHING. OF TUAUF, . THE 
SON OF KHATTAT 


THE BEGINNING OF THE TEACHING THAT WAS 
COMPOSED BY A MAN OF THE 7H#ART, WHOSE 
NAME IS TUAUF, THE SON OF KHATTAI, FOR 
HIS SON WHOSE NAME IS PEPI, WHEN HE WAS 
SAILING UP THE RIVER WITH HIM TO KHENNU 
(OR TO THE COURT ?), TO PLACE HIM IN THE 
HOUSE OF THE TEACHING OF BOOKS (t.e., WITH 
THE SONS OF THE PRINCES OF KHENNU). He 
said to him :— 


I. I have considered the exhaustion caused by 
labour, I repeat I have considered it ; [therefore] 
devote thy mind to books. I have also considered 
who has been released from the corvée, and assuredly 
there is nothing more [to be esteemed] than books. 
They are like a well. Dig down deeply therefore 
into the depth of Kamit (7.e., the literature of 
Egypt), and thou wilt find the following aphorism : 
As for the scribe, any (or every) position at Court 
may be his; he needs not be a beggar therein. 
The man who works to satisfy another never 
obtains a settled position. I have considered the 
other professions likewise, and to them also this 
aphorism may be applied. I would make thee to 
love books as thy mother. I would bring in their 
beauties before thy face, for the profession of the 
scribe is greater than any other—there is nothing 
equal to it upon the earth. Even when he is 
a beginner and is making progress, though still 


THE HARDSHIPS OF WORKMEN 69 


a mere youth, his views are discussed. He is 
despatched on missions of state, but does not come 
[back] to place himself under restraint (?). 

II. I have never seen the blacksmith (literally, 
the man who casts statues in metal) in charge of a 
mission, or the gold-worker despatched on one. 
But I have seen the coppersmith at his work at the 
door of his blazing fiery furnace. His fingers are 
[knotted and rough] like the hide of the crocodile, 
and he stinks more than the guts of fish. 

III. Every artisan who wields the chisel, has 
he any more rest than! the ploughman? His 
fields are [made of] wood, his tools of tillage are of 
copper. He is released from work in the night- 
season, and works more than he did with his arms 
{in the day-time]; in the night-season he lights 
his lamp. 

IV. The stone-mason is always seeking blocks 
of sandstone of all kinds suitable for his work. 
When his period of work is ended in the evening, 
his arms are weary, and he (7.e., his whole body) is 
exhausted. He sits himself down when Ra enters 
[the Tuat], and his thighs and the bones of his back . 
[seem] as if they were coming asunder. 

V. The barber shaves until far into the night. 
When he sets himself to eat (?) he must put himself 
on his upper arm. He betakes himself from one 
quarter of the town to another in search of the 
men who want shaving (i.e., his customers). He 
tortures his hands and arms to fill his belly, just 
as do the honey-flies (i.¢., bees) which devour their 
own productions. 

VI. The waterman (?) has to work down the 
river into the Delta in order to gain his wages. 
He must toil excessively and work as long as his 


1 Or, perhaps, “ he needs more rest than the ploughman.” 


70 THE HARDSHIPS OF WORKMEN 


arms are able to do so. The mosquitoes (?) and 
gnats sting him to death, his stink chokes (?) him. 
He sets out for his garden, he sets out for his 
PiGIS@ Sar ee. 

VII. The workman (or, mud-puddler) who 
builds dams (or, makes bricks) in the fields must 
pass his time among the cattle. He has to do 
work in the vineyards and for the pigs. He cooks 
his food (?) in the fields. His garments are stiff 
with the mud which is caked on them, the straps 
break (?). If he goes into the wind it stifles him ; 
when his fire appears (7.e., burns up) he is com- 
fortable. He works wooden tools with his feet. 
If he frees himself from them and crosses the 
threshold, he is driven from the place. 

VIII. J will speak to thee also about the builder 
of walls. He is eaten up with disease, for he lives 
out in the open air among the winds. The building 
material isin his garb. He is tied to the walls like 
the lilies (?) in order to attain to what he seeks. 
His arms are in evil case . . . . all his clothes are 
dilapidated. He eats the bread of his fingers, he 
washes himself once only. 

His misery is so great that it can hardly be 
déseribéd correctly “=. *. . from one chamber to 
another, ten cubits by six cubits..... from one 
month to another he clings to the scaffolding like 
the lilies on the houses, doing work of every kind. 
If he has bread [to eat] it is to his house that he 
gives it. His children are cruelly beaten [by him]. 

IX. The gardener brings in to me gazelle (sic). 
His shoulders are bowed under crushing loads, and 
his arms and his neck become diseased. He 
spends the forenoon in watching the onions and 
the afternoon in attending to the vines. He is 


obliged to work every day, and everything he does 
exhausts his body. 


THE HARDSHIPS OF WORKMEN 71 


X. The farm-labourer, his clothes [last] for 
ever.1 He has a raucous voice like that of the 
corncrake (?) His fingers and hands and arms 
are dried up by the winds and are cracked. He is 
worked to exhaustion...... a man would 
choose the security afforded by lions to that which 
he has. The taste of death isin him. His roof (?) 
is the earth among them. He comes through the 
fields, he comes to his house in the evening, and 
is utterly worn out by the journey. 

XI. The weaver sits in a closed hut, and has a 
lot which is worse than that of a woman. His 
thighs are drawn up close to his body, and he 
cannot breathe freely. The day on which he fails 
to do his tale of woven work he is dragged out 
[from his hut] like a lily (or lotus) from the pool. 
Only by bribing the watchman at the door with 
[his] bread-cakes can he make him let him see the 
sunlight. 

XII. The spear-maker (literally, the maker of 
weapons for fighting) suffers sorely when he has to 
go out into the hills. He must pay much money 
for the hire of the asses and [their drivers], and his 
expenses for provender for them on the way are 
very great. He comes through the fields, he comes 
to his house, and is utterly worn out by the 
journey. 

XIII. The envoy (?) when he is about to come 
forth into the mountainous country (or, desert) 
bequeaths his possessions to his children, being 
afraid of lions and the thievish nomads, the Aamu. 
And when he returns to Egypt, and has come 
through the fields, and reaches his house at night- 
fall, he is utterly broken by the fatigues of the 
journey. 

1 Or, perhaps, “ The farm-labourer is always held account- 
able by his employer.” 


72 THE HARDSHIPS OF WORKMEN 


XIV. The reed-cutter, his fingers are filthy, 
and the stink of them is that of the dealer in 
fish (?) His eyes are dazed (or, sunken), his hand 
never rests. He passes the whole day in cutting 
papyrus (?), he detests [wearing] clothes. _ 

XV. The lot of the sandal-maker is an evil one 
indeed. He must beg [for work] everlastingly. 
His health is the health of a hooked-fish (?) He 
gnaws the strips of leather. 

XVI. The washerman who toils on the river 
bank is a neighbour (?) of the crocodile. ...... 
filth rises on the water, his hand never stops. It © 
is not a restful profession which I now set before 
thee, or the happiest of all professions! His food 
is mixed up with his apparel, not one of his 
members is clean, he must put himself into the 
garments of women. His miserable state is one 
to weep over. He spends his whole day with the 
stick for beating the clothes [in his hands]. When 
clothes are brought to him to wash he is told that 
if he delays he will be beaten (?) 

XVII. The snarer of wild-fowl toils exceedingly 
hard when he tries to see the birds as they fly high 
in the sky. When he sees the birds in a mass in 
the sky, he says: ‘‘ How I wish that I had a net 
handy !’’ but God does not give him his heart’s 
desire to help him to carry out his thoughts. 

XVIII. Moreover I tell thee that the trade of 
the fisherman is the worst of all trades. Does he 
not verily have to toil in the waters of the river, 
where he is mixed up with the crocodiles ? When 
the river-plants are sparse there is no one to cry 
out to him, “A crocodile lurking there.’ Fear 
blinds? his-eyeas Sa otyars Verily there is no occu- 
pation than which better cannot be found except 
the pesion of the scribe, which is the best 
of all. 


THE HARDSHIPS OF WORKMEN 73 


XIX. When a man knows the books one will 
say, “ They are good for thee.” No other pro- 
fession will I set before thee (?); verily each 
worker curses his work [except the scribe]. No 
man says to the scribe, “‘ Work in the fields for 
such and such a man.” Verily that which I am 
now doing as I sail up the river to Khennu (the 
Court ?), behold, I do it for love of thee. Even 
one day [spent] in the house of instruction (i.e., 
school) is profitable for thee, and the work done 
therein will endure as long as the mountains. 
These are the things that I would have thee 
to know quickly, quickly, for they drive away 


_ the Beast (or, Serpent ?) Betennu J wen Ss WU. 


XX. I will [now] speak to thee words con- 
cerning other matters, to instruct thee and make 
thee to know [how to behave] and how to avoid 
contention (or, quarrelling), Be thou one of those 
who have weight (a settled object ?) in their 
plans, for if a man adopts an object hastily he 
knows not where his plans will end. A man 
may have lapis lazuli (?) in his hand [for] the 
ee 

XXI. When thou art following in the train of 
princes walk decorously, as if thou wert feeling 
pleasure. When thou goest into a house and 
findest the master therein, the hands of another 
not being before thee; sit down, [lay] thy hand 
on thy mouth, and ask no questions of anyone 
who may happen to be near thee. He who says 
‘(Tell me,] I pray,” is like the man who tries to 


break a cudgel with a twig (?) ? 


* Or, perhaps, “and findest the master therein [engaged] 
in discussing with another man affairs [of which thou art 


ignorant].” : ; 
* Tuauf is here quoting a proverb; he quotes it again a 


few paragraphs later. 


74 MODERATE EATING AND DRINKING 


XXII. Ur-shefit lays a burden upon thee. 
Utter no cryptic words ; he who conceals his body 
(or, mind) works against him. Speak not words 
of pride and arrogance, even when thou art sitting 
by thyself, or, according to a variant reading, 
alone. 

XXIII. When thou comest out of the house of 
teaching (i.e., school)—it having been told thee 
that midday has come—and thou goest singing 
(or, shouting) about the courtyards of the houses, 
I charge thee not to enter into [the houses] to 
which they belong. 

XXIV. When a great man of the town sends 
thee on an errand, deliver the message which he 
gave thee word for word, even as he uttered it. 
Take nothing away from the message which he 
gave, and abandon [the idea] of making any addi- 
tion to it. Let him not set his heart. He is 
filled with [good] qualities of every kind, there 
exist no hidden things to him, no place is large 
enough to contain him. 

XXV. Speak not les to (or, concerning) thy 
mother, for the sake of this Great Chief (Osiris ?). 
Sale ace ee Act not in any wise against her, 
not even when thou art by thyself or, according to 
a variant reading, alone. If thou art one who 
despises the belly thou wilt be hearkened to. If, 
when thou hast eaten three bread-cakes, and hast 
drunk two pitchers of beer, thy belly is not full, 
thou must fight against it (7.e., thy ravenous 
appetite). If another man is filled therewith 
make no stand : it is like a man trying to break a 
cudgel with a twig. ey 

XXVI. Behold, it is a good thing for thee to 
dismiss the crowd of people that are about thee, 
[so that] thou canst hear [privily] the words of 
the nobles. O that I could make myself like unto 


SCRIBE UNDER DIVINE GUIDANCE 75 


thee—a son of men (?). Thou marchest like one 
who has made himself the master of ....., 
The scribe who hears (or, obeys) is seen [and 
known]; he who obeys becomes a man of might. 
Fight against the words that are against (i.e., 
condemn) it. Make thy feet hasten when thou 
Marchest and. spare not thyself......... 
Make thyself to be friendly with thy young 
companions. 

XXVII. Behold, the goddess Renenit is on the 
way of God, and it is the goddess Renenit whom 
the scribe has upon his shoulder on the day of 
his birth, and when having become a man, he 
enters the Council Chamber. Verily there is no 
scribe who does not eat the food of the King ; 
life, strength, and health be to him ! 

AXVIII. The goddess Meskhenit makes the 
scribe to flourish and to prosper, and sets him at 
the head of the Council. Tua-Ra is his father 
and his mother (or, his father and his mother 
praise Ra). They set him on the path of life. 

Behold, these are the things that I would set 
before thee, and before the children of his (7.e., 
his son’s) children. 


76 


THE TEACHING WHICH KING 
KHATI~WROTE: FOR - His 
SON MERIKARA. 


The hieratic text of this Teaching is only found 
in copies of it which were made by the scribes 
who flourished under the New Empire, and is 
preserved at St. Petersburg and Moscow. It was 
published by Golénischeff in Les Papyrus Hiéra- 
tiques No. No. 1115, 1116A e¢ 1116B de L’Ermitage 
Impérial ad St. Pétersbourg, 1913. The photo- 
graphic facsimiles are accompanied by a transcript 
of the hieratic text into hieroglyphs. The first 
two or three columns are much mutilated, and 
little connected sense can be got from the fragments. 

I. The few words which remain suggest that 
the king tells his son what characteristic in a man 
he considers to be absolutely essential for ruling 
successfully. 

II-IV. These paragraphs deal with the sup- 
pression of rebellion. 

V. The king, considering the case of a man 
who is friendly with disloyal folk, and possesses the 
gift of fluent speech, and is very popular with 
many in the city and can bend them to his will, 
and is a mischievous chatterer, advises his son 
to seize him, and kill him, and blot out his name, 
and wipe out every memorial of his existence, and 
suppress all who were his adherents. 

* An English translation of most of the published text was 


given by Gardiner in the Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 
Voll, pi 22 ff. i a os 


THE GREAT VALUE OF WISE SPEECH 77 


VI. A quarrelsome discontented man causes 
uproar in a city, and will split the community into 
two parties. If thou dost find a man of this kind, 
but canst not thyself deal adequately with him, 
summon him to appear before the council, and 
prosecute him as arebel, forheisone. A chatterer 
in any case causes trouble in a city. Curb the 
mob. The man with nothing to lose rebels 
naturally. 

VII. A king must not punish in the heat of 
passion; use discretion in punishing, and thy 
people will rejoice. Show thyself to be a speaker 
of the truth before the God. ..... The heaven 
of a man is a good disposition (or, nature) ; the 
curse of a man who is broken-hearted through 
suffering is a terrible thing (or, calamity). 

VIII. Make thyself a craftsman in speech, for 
thereby thou shalt gain the upper hand. The 
tongue of a man is his weapon, and speech is 
mightier than fighting. No man can come behind 
fim that is’ sialled~m: heart: *... . Those who 
do not know cannot seize the man who knows, and 
where he is no evil thing takes place. Truth 
comes to him in a well rubbed-down state in the 
form of the sayings of the ancestors. 

IX. Follow after (or, imitate) thy fathers of 
olden time. The [mind] is trained by knowledge. 
Behold, their words stand fast in writing. Open 
[their book], read, and follow their wise counsels, 
and in this wise shall the workman become a man 
who has been taught. Be not evil; good is 
graciousness (or, sympathy). Let thy loving 
sympathy stand as a permanent memorial of thee. 
Multiply thy [benefit]. ..in the city. The 
people will give thanks to God for thy benefactions, 
and they will praise thy goodness, and will pray 
for thy health [in years to come]. 


78 RULE JUSTLY AND RIGHTEOUSLY 


X. Pay honour to princes, and treat thy people 
well. Make the boundaries of thy country to_ 
flourish (¢.e., enlarge them), and the districts 
about thee. It is a good thing to work (7.e., make 
provision) for what is (or, those who are) to come 
after. Pay honour to a life of work, for he who 1s 
satisfied in heart becomes anevil...... It isa 
despicable thing for a man to fetter the land (his 
estate ?). The man who has nothing is greedy for 
the property [of others]... .... upon earth has 
NO-COMPMUIt ssc tak ate 

XI. Make great thy princes and they will carry 
out thy laws. The man who possesses wealth in 
his house favours no man; the man with pos- 
sessions has no need of [bribes]. The poor man 
does not say what it would be right for him [to say], 
and the man who says, ‘“‘ I would have more ”’ is 
not trustworthy for he will favour the side that will 
bribe him. A prince is truly great when his princes 
are great ; a king is strong when he has shentt (1.e., 
mighty men) about him. Awe-inspiring is he who 
has many princes about him. Speak what is true 
in thy house, and the princes who are on the earth 
shall fear thee. All is well when the Lord is right 
of heart, [for] the chief (or, innermost ?) chamber 
makes reverence to be felt for the outside thereof. 

XII. Do the right, and thou shalt continue 
upon the earth. Make the weeper to cease his 
plaint. Fleece not the widow woman. Drive no 
man away from the property of his father (i.e., 
ancestral estate). Defraud not the princes by 
removing them from their hereditary offices. Take 
good heed not to inflict punishment unjustly. 
Slay none unnecessarily ; it will not be profitable 
for thee. Inflict punishment by means of beatings 
and putting men under restraint ; through treat- 
ment of this kind this land shall have a sure 


REBELS MUST BE SLAIN 79 


foundation. But an exception to this treatment 
shall be the rebel whose plottings have been found 
out. God knows the evil-hearted. God smites 
him for transgressions against Him even to 
Jo SSE oe ee Slay not the man with 
whose virtues thou art acquainted, with whom 
thou hast in times past sung the writings [in 
school] and read the [Sapu Book] of God. Enter 
with a long stride the place of hidden things (or, 
mysteries). The soul of the man who is slain, 


& Me, comes to the place which it knows, it 


steps not aside from the ways of yesterday. No 
words of power (t.e., magical spells) can turn it 
back, and it advances to the place where waters 
flow for it. 


[For paragraph XIII, see page 17.] 


XIV. Train up the young men to be soldiers 
and thou wilt be beloved by the Court, and let 
thy retinue of servants be great and numerous. 
See that thy town is always filled with hale young 
men who have newly arrived, being twenty years 
of age. Young men rejoice in following the 
dictates of their hearts. Successors of dependants 
appear, and a father with his children..... 
Thus I raised soldiers when I ascended the throne. 
Make great thy great men, promote [those who 
fight] for thee. I pray thee to increase thy young 
men who follow thee, provided with inventories (?), 
endowed with fields and supplied with cattle. 

XV. Make no distinction in thy behaviour 
towards the son of a man of rank and the son of a 
man of humble parentage, but attach to thyself 
a man by reason of what his hands have effected. 
All handicrafts are performed according to the 
the Lord of Strength. Guard thy 


CU CIES ae er a eae 


80 GIVE GENEROUSLY TO THE TEMPLES 


border, set up thy lasting monuments, so that the 
corvée gangs may be profitable to their lord. Set 
up thy [fine] monumental buildings to God, for 
this will make to live the name of him that builds 
them. Let a man do what is of benefit to his 
souls, [that is to say] let him make the monthly 
purification, and take the white sandals, and 
betake himself to the temple, and unveil what is 
usually secret, and enter the shrine (or, sanctuary), 
and eat bread in the house of the god. 

XVI. Make the libation tank to overflow, 
make great (or, large) the bread-cakes, multiply 
the daily offerings, for it benefits the man who does 
this. Make to flourish thy monuments according 
to thy wealth (or, power). One day [only] will 
provide for eternity, and one hour [only] will 
produce benefit for him that comes after. God has 
knowledge of the man who works for him. Carry 
statues of thyself into a remote land, and let not 
the people count [the labour] of doing so. Sick 
is the man who lacks a thing to fight about, in 
the interior of Egypt the fighting man is never 
cool. 

XVII. Young recruits attack young recruits, 
according to what the men of olden time have said 
about the matter. Egypt fights in the cemetery, 
smashing the tombs and smashing... . . Thus 
did I myself and thus did it happen. ........ 
Entreat not evilly the country of the Sourn. 
Thou knowest what the Court said concerning it in 
times past, and it came to pass even as these things 
came to pass. They did not invade it, as they 
SHI: Senses The town of Ten (Thinis), which 
was the boundary on the south, and as far Taut (?), 
I captured it like a water flood. King Meri[ka]- 
Ra, whose word is truth; did not do this. Be 


1 T.e., this king was dead. 


DO WHAT THY HEART PROMPTS 81 


long-suffering in ruling that country. ........ 
act wisely, having regard to the future. 

XVIII. Keep on good terms with the region of 
the South. Men will come to thee bowed under 
loads with offerings. I acted as the men of olden 
time did. If a man has no grain to give [as 
tribute] be compassionate, for they are feeble folk 
by the side of thee. Fill thyself full of thine own 
bread-cakes and beer. Then shall the granite 
come to thee [from Sun, 7.e., Syene] without 
any hindrance. Destroy not the monuments of 
another man, but hew stone for thyself in Reau.t 
Build not thy tomb with stones from a wrecked 
ROU oe Behold, thou Kine, Lord of 
joy of heart, thou art lazy, thou sleepest in thy 
strength. Follow thy inclination as I have done 
and thou shalt not have an enemy within thy 
border. 

XIX. A certain man stood up, he was a lord 
of the town, and his heart was broken because of 
Ta-Mehu (7.e., the Delta), from Het-shennu to 
Sebaqa, its southern border as far as the marsh 
land of Khaui (near Herakleopolis). I settled the 
country on the west [of the Delta] as far as the 
margins of the Lake (or, Sea). They work (or, pay 
Paamer rit  welas.§ Se The Eastern 
country is full of nomad Arabs, their tribute 

[The next five paragraphs are full of difficult 
words and passages. They refer to the writer’s 
conquest of the country to the north-east of Egypt, 
including Syria. He had subjugated it as far as 
Kantarah, and apparently had established garri- 
sons to keep away the Semites and other Asiatic 
peoples. He now wishes to see a strong man arise 


1 J.¢,, the quarries of Turah, about 20 miles south of Cairo 
on the East bank of the Nile. 
F 


82 NOMADS OF DESERT DESCRIBED 


in the person of his son. And, moreover, he says, 
the Pett peoples (7.e., the nomad tribes of Palestine 
and Syria) may be described thus. The Amu are 
a despicable folk. The region in which they live 
is a miserable place, the water of the well{s] is 
horrible, it is difficult to travel about in because of 
the great number of the trees (or, jungle), and their 
roads are bad because of the mountainous dis- 
tricts. The Amu is never to be found in the same 
place, and his feet are always on the move, march- 
ing from one place to another. He has been 
fighting ever since the time of Horus. He con- 
quers nobody and nobody conquers him. He 
never announces the day on which he is going to 
fight, and is like the captain who rushes off sud- 
denly to quell a rebellion. During my time the 
Pett tribes of the Amu were like a weapon in a 
fortress. 5-10.55 I allowed the people of Ta- 
Mehu (i.e., the North-land, or Delta) to fight them. 
I carried away captive their holders of land and 
their-tatthe jer sk the Amu are a beastly folk 
to the Egyptians. Let not thy heart have concern 
about him. He will attack and rob an isolated 
encampment, but he will not attack a walled town. 
Dig down the dyke and flood half of the district as 
far as Kamui (Athribis), verily it is the navel-cord 
of the nomads of the desert. Its walls are manned 
with armed men, its inhabitants are many and 
they know how to handle. ..... Then there is 
the town of Tetu-Asut,) the people whereof are ten 
thousand in number, and they are free and untaxed. 
There are princes in it who from the time of Ra 
have gone to the Court [Memphis ?]. Its borders 
are well defined, its coast-guards are strong, and it 
has many Northern men (7.e., Delta folk) in it, and 


1 A part of the modern district of Sakkarah, to the South 
of Memphis. i 


BUILD FORTS IN THE DELTA 83 


they irrigate (?) it. The North-land gives tribute 
in the shape of grain. Behold, it is the lands of 
wood of the North-land. They built a dyke that 
reached to Hensu (Hanes—Herakleopolis)....... 
Take good care not to be hemmed in by hostile 
subjects: $6. 23... 

When there is revolt on thy southern border it is 
the Pett folk (7.e., nomad tribes) who will take up 
arms against thee. Therefore build forts (block- 
houses ?) in the North-land. A man’s name is 
not belittled because of what he has done, and the 
city that is protected cannot be injured. Build 
ot eee The enemy loves the man who 
is evil-hearted, for his disposition is vile. King 
Kuati, whose word is truth, has laid down the 
following in his wise counsel: He who is silent 
(t.e., inactive) against the man of violent heart is 
destroyed ; God fights against the man who is an 
enemy of the temple. 

Here the section of the text that contains 
Khati’s advice of a political character comes to an 
end ; he now harks back to his moral Teaching. 


Pv sa nere shall come one ..+ 4. 0.560. who 
shall carry it out; he shall understand what has 
Peeaenccerced: ... ss the day of his coming. 


Provide drink offerings in abundance. Pay honour 
to God, and say not: “ He is poor-spirited.”” Let 
not thy hands and arms drop in idleness, but work 
willingly. What destroys heaven is apathy (?). 
Monuments are regarded by an enemy, [for] he 
does not destroy them because he wishes that what 
he himself has made shall be maintained in good 
order by him who comes after him. There exists 
no man who has not ah’enemy. [The Lord] of the 
Two Lands understands affairs, and the King who 


1 Presumably Khati I, the founder of the Herakleopolitan 
Dynasty. 
F 2 


84 THE GLORY OF SOVEREIGNTY 


is surrounded by nobles does not act stupidly. 
He was wise even when he came forth from the 
womb ; he was set apart (or, distinguished) to be 
at the head of the land of millions [of men]. 
XXVI. Kingship is a splendid rank. Even 
when [a king] has no son and no brother to per- 
petuate his monuments, lo, one king maintains the 
reputation of another. A man works on behalf of 
his predecessor, because he wishes that what he 
himself has done shall be maintained in good order 
by his successor. Behold, an evil happening took 
place in my time, that is to say, the funerary 
districts of Tenu (Thinis) were laid waste. It took 
place because of an act of my own, and I only had 
knowledge of it after the deed was done. Verily 
my punishment was in proportion to what I had 
done. A contemptible man and unprofitable is he 
who thinks that he can make to flourish again what 
he has laid waste, or build up what he has over- 
thrown, restoring its perfect state and beauty. 
Take good heed to this matter; a blow struck 
brings a counter blow in its train ; and this is the 
irresistible result of every action (or, deed). 


[For Paragraphs XXVII and XXVIII, see 
page 21 ff.] 


XXIX. Do no evil thing. My mouth gives 
laws of every kind for the King. Make direct thy 
face before thee, lift up thyself like aman. O that 
thou mayest come to where I am without any 
laying information against thee. Slay not any 
man who approaches thee and whom thou hast 
favoured, for God knows him. He who flourishes 
on earth is one of them; those who follow the 
King are gods. Make the love of thee to be among 
all the peoples. A generous (or, well-doing) 
character is held in remembrance ...... it was 


THE TIME FOR ACTION HAS COME 85 


said concerning thee the time of the feeble man 
isatanend. Thus said those who were dependants 
in the House of King Khat-ti when prophesying 
about him that was to come to-day. Behold, I 
have declared to thee the profitable things of my 
mind ; make them to be firmly grounded before 
thee. 


COLOPHON. 


It (.e., the book) has gone out (1.¢., it is finished) 
in peace, as it was found in writing in the writing of 
Khamuas for himself, the silent one of truth, of 
kindly nature, generous and a lover of men. He 
stood not in the eye (?) of another, he was not one 
given to scurrilous (or, blasphemous) abuse, he was 
the servant of his lord, a scribe who..... 
man skilled in the craft of Thoth, the abe 
Khamuas, and for his brother whom he loved 
dearly, the silent one of truth, of kindly nature, 
a man skilled in the craft of Thoth, the scribe 
Mahu. 


86 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANTEF, THE 
SON; OF SENT. 


From his stele in the British Museum, No. 197 
[58x].* 


‘“ Antef, the governor of the offices of the 
Government,? smells the ground (7.e., does homage) 
before Khenti-Amenti, and looks upon the bene- 
ficent deeds of Up-uatu. He says: Now as con- 
cerning this tomb which I have made in the 
mountain (7.e., cemetery)* of Abydos, this region 
which is surrounded by walls, which was made in 
the beginning by Nebertcher,* a place profitable 
(or glorious) since the time of Osiris, a settlement of 
Horus for his Fathers, [the place] that the stars 
in the sky serve, [the place that is] the mistress of 
the henmemet beings, whereto come the great ones 
of Tetu (Mendes), the sister-site of Anu (Helio- 
polis), [the place of] Horus-splendours, whereon 
rests Nebertcher—may offerings appear at the 
word here for the loyal servant, the governor of 


the offices of the Government, Antef, the son of 
Sent. 


* Published by Sharpe, Egyptian Inscriptions, II, pl. 83; 
and Hall, H. R., Hieroglyphic Texts, Part II, pl. 23; and 
Moret, La Profession, p. 80. 

* The equivalent of the Mudirfyah of our days. 

* To this day the Egyptians call the region where the tombs 
are situated “ gabal,’’ t.e., mountain. 


‘I.e., “Lord to the uttermost limit,” perhaps God or 
God Almighty. 


IO 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANTEF 87 


. Iam a silent man before a raging man and 


before a fool, in order to suppress wrath. 


. Tam cold (i.¢., calm, or cautious), without 


hasty impulses, knowing what circum- 
stances may arise, understanding possi- 
bilities of failure. 


. [ am a man who speaks in places where 


violence is applied, and I know when, 
according to custom, it is right for me to 
show anger. 


. Iam a long-suffering man. I pay heed to 


my name (or, reputation) ; it gives (?) [me] 
what is in my heart. 


. I am a man who collects [his facts or 


thoughts], returning to a matter, long- 
suffering (or, patient), silencing the weeper 
with happiness. 


I am a man who has a bright (7.e., pleasant) 
face for his subordinate, and who does good 
to the man who is like himself (7.e., is in 
the same social position). 


. I am an impartial man in the house of his 


lord, knowing what will heal the man who 
is diseased in speech. 


. Lam a man who is bright (0.e., pleasant) of 


face, open-handed, a lord of food, without 
withdrawal of face [from any man]. 


. Il am a friend towards those who are in a 


lowly condition, and to the man who has 
nothing my true (or, just) dealing is sweet. 


I am the food of the hungry man who has 
no possessions, and open-handed to the 


destitute. 


88 


LE. 


12. 


13: 


14. 


ZS. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANTEF 


I act as the man of knowledge for him that 
is ignorant, and I teach a man that which 
will be beneficial for him. 


I am the impartial man in the house of the 
king, knowing that which is said in every 
court-house. 


I am a man who hearkens, I hearken to 
Maat (the Law, or the Truth), and, indeed, 
cause it to declare its message to my 
heart. 


I am the peacemaker of the house of his 
lord, being remembered by reason of his 
amiable qualities. 


I am a good one in the courts when cases 
are being tried, equable of mind, free from 
words (or, acts) that irritate. 


I am a good man, not acting hastily, not 


coercing a man because of an utterance 
[of his}. 


I am a man of justice, like the scales, im- 
partial, true like Thoth. 


I am a man firm of foot, whose design is 
well thought out, who prepares the way 
for the man who would make him to 
prosper. 


Iam a man who recognizes the man who can 
teach him, and the man who will allow him 
to discuss a matter with him. 


I am a man who speaks in the Court of Law 
(or, Truth), who sets (literally, sharpens) 


his mouth against the restrictions of the 
mind.” 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANTEF 89 


Another stele! from the tomb of Antef, the son of 
Sent, is dated in the thirty-ninth year of Usertsen I, 
and after the usual prayer to Osiris, ‘‘ Lord of Tetu 
(Mendes), Khenti-Amenti, the great god, Lord of 
Abydos,” for sepulchral offerings, the text goes on 
to supply further information about the position 
and duties of Antef. According to this, Antef led 
the chiefs of the Land of the South, and made them 
do homage on their bellies in the Court of the 
hereditary prince and Wazir. Then he set them 
at the head of some ceremony of truth-speaking 
before the judges who tried cases, and seems to 
have assigned places to them, with due regard to 
their rank, in the Council Chamber. He was 
President of the Works in the Land of the South, 
- and he was well acquainted with the laws and he 
instructed his officials how to apply them. Many 
of the statements that he makes about himself 
are, to me, untranslatable, but the general meaning 
seems to be that which he has expressed in the 
twenty lines given above. He was beloved by all 
the royal court officials, he enjoyed the reputation 
of being a just and a learned man, he pursued his 
course without hesitation, he ‘‘ heard the word in 
the White House of Geb,” etc. Hitherto the 
inscriptions of Antef have dealt with his official 
philosophy, and have left his moral actions un- 
mentioned. On a third stele of his in the British 
Museum (No. 141 [562]),” he says: “‘ I set goodness 
(or, prosperity) under my house, love for me went 
throughout the whole country . . . . I gave bread 
to the hungry, beer to the thirsty, and I set the 


1 British Museum, Stele No. 140 [572]. Published in 
Sharpe, Egyptian Inscriptions, I, pl. 80; Hall, Hieroglyphic 
Texts, Part II, pl. 22; Piehl, Inscriptions, Part III, pli. 12 ff. 

2 For the text see Sharpe, Egyptian Inscriptions, II, pl. 84 ; 
and Hall, Hieroglyphic Texts, Part II, pl. 24. 


go THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANTEF 


shipwrecked man on his way . . . . I buried the 
aged, I clothed the naked, I committed no sin 
against men [and none] that God hates. I per- 
formed (or, I applied) the Law which is beloved of 
the King. I have come to my city, and entered 
my home. I have done that which men and 
women love, and the things that are approved of 
by the gods. The Majesty of the King of the 
South and the North, Kheperkara, Son of Ra, 
Usertsen, the everliving, has set me among his 
princes.” 


or 


THE TEACHING OF SEHETEPABRA,’ 
AN OVERSEER OF AMENEMHAT IIL. 


THE BEGINNING OF THE TEACHING which he 
(t.e., Sehetepabra) composed for his children :— 


[ will speak that which is great. I will make you 
hear, I will make you to understand a scheme of life 
which will be enduring, which will make to flourish 
the life that is real, and enable [you] to bring your 
life to an end in peace. 

Praise ye the King of the South, ENMAATRA the 
everliving, in the interior of your bodies. Make ye 
a league with His Majesty in your hearts. He is 
the god Saa? (7.e., the god who knows all things), 
who is in your hearts (or breasts). 

His two eyes search through the reins of every 
man. 

He is Ra, by means of whose rays [everything] 
is seen. 

He lights up the Two Lands (1.e., Egypt) with a 
light greater than that of Aten (the solar Disk). 

He makes the land burst into a green colour with 
vegetation more than does a great Hap (the Nile). 
He inundates the Two Lands with the strength of 
life. He makes cool the nostrils [when] he sets 
out to fight (or do battle) ; he is appeased with 


? The hieroglyphic text will be found in Mariette, Abydos, 
II, Pl. 25, but a better edition of the text will be found 
in Piehl, Inscriptions Hiéroglyphiques recueillies en Egypte, 
III*me Série, Leipzig, 1895, Pll. VI and VII, lines 8-20. 

* Saa, the ‘‘ knowing one,” is a well-known title of Thoth. 


Q2 THE KING AS GOD 


offerings of ...... He is the giver of food to 
those who are in his following. He fills with rich 
food those who make firm his path. 

The King of the South is himself food, his 
mouth itself is abundance. 

It is he who made (or, makes) to come into being 
his existence (7.¢., he is self-subsistent). 

He is Khnemu, the god who fashions the bodies 
of all men. 

He is the Lord of generation, who makes men 
and women to come into being. 

He is Bastt, the guardian Lady of the Two 
Lands (t.¢e., Egypt). 

His arm shall avoid the man who prays to him. 

He is the goddess Sekhet (Sekhmit) to him who 
breaks his decree ; he is hostile to the ....... 

Do battle for his name, purify yourselves by 
swearing by his life ; [then] shall ye be free from a 
period of destitution (or, nakedness). 

He who enjoys the favour of the King shall be 
revered. 

There is no tomb allotted to the man who rebels 
against His Majesty; on the contrary, his body shall 
be cast into the stream. 

Do these things and your bodies shall be strong 
and healthy, and they shall prove of benefit to 
you for ever and ever. 


38) 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT:; 
Translated from Brit. Mus. Papyrus No. 10,474. 


THE PAPYRUS. 


Papyrus No. 10,474 is about 12 ft. 14 ins. in 
length, and its greatest width is about. Io ins. 
It is tolerably coarse in texture, and in places the 
strips from the papyrus stalk are not well gummed, 
and when found the roll was thicker at one end 
than at the other, and the lower end was covered 
with clots of bitumen. After many attempts the 
bitumen was removed, but the unrolling presented 
some difficulty. When this was overcome, and 
the papyrus was unrolled inch by inch, it lay fan- 
shaped, for the upper margin was stretched and 
the lower margin was contracted, and in a few 
places, chiefly at the beginning of the text, the 
papyrus crumbled into coarse dust. One side of 
the papyrus is covered with twenty-eight columns 
of text, including the colophon (consisting of one 
line standing by itself), which are written in small, 
clear, though, in places, somewhat cursive, hieratic 
characters. The twenty-seven columns of text 
contain a copy of a work entitled ‘“ Teaching 
concerning Life,’’ which was composed by Amen- 
em-apt, the son of Ka-Nekht. In places the scribe 
crowded his words together, and the characters 
are ill-formed and difficult to transcribe. The 


copyist was one SHENNU, ee Bye, the son of 
Pamai (?), a Divine Father. The general style of 


1 This name was probably pronounced Amen-em-ap. 


94 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


the writing suggests that this copy of Amen-em- 
apt’s ‘‘ Teaching” was made under the XXth or 
XXIst dynasty. A column of text contains from 
nineteen to twenty-three lines, and the total 
number of lines in the work, including the title 
and the colophon, is 551. The title and the 
number of the chapters and two or three lines 
are written in red ink. On the reverse of the 
papyrus are forty-nine lines of hieratic text, very 
badly written in a large, coarse hand by an 
unskilled scribe. The first line of Column 1, which 
is in red ink, contains the title of the work that 
the scribe was copying for practice, and reads: 


a Cpe: b 
oa Deke nee IN ud 7 Pi oe 
ning of the Teaching in solving problems of the 
heart (or, mind).’’ Its author bore the name of 
Amen-em-apt, and the lines here given may be 
an extract from another work by his namesake, 
the son of Ka-Nekht, mentioned above. Some of 
the lines seem to be of a poetical character, for 
mention is made in them of the Moon-cop Aauu, 


|_afedd, ORION, SAHU, lo Wedd * A. 


and the GREAT BEAR, MESKHETI, fh i \ Air 


AMEN-EM-APT, HIS GENEALOGY AND OFFICES. 


Amen-em-apt, J 7 B22 vB, was 
the son of Ka-Nekht, —a a he: who 


appears to have been a dweller in or native of 
Nifur, a quarter of the great town of Abydos. 
From line 43 it seems that Ka-Nekht was a Buai, 


Je £) IN qq i “iP (a chieftain or nobleman), 


THE PARENTS OF AMEN-EM-APT 95 


and magistrate and member of the Town Council of 
Apu (Panopolis), the Akhmim of the Arabs. He 
held many priestly offices in connection with the 
cult and temple of Menti (or, Menu), and Horus. 
The mother of Amen-em-apt was called Ta-Usrit 


a\ pa | I, and she was the chief sistrum- 


bearer, ‘‘Sekhmit,”’ 1° LSS Hh Bod, of the 


god Shu and his consort Tefnut. In addition 
to this she was Directress of the College of Horus, 
not Horus the son of Isis, but either Horus the 
Aged (Aroeris), the oldest god of the day in Egypt, 
who fought and defeated Set, the god of the night, 
or Her-Aakhuti (Horus of the Two Horizons). 
Shu and Tefnut, according to ancient Egyptian 
mythology, were emanations of Ra, the great Sun- 
god in his strength, and they formed with Ra the 
first triad, or trinity, which the Egyptian mind in 
the Dynastic Period conceived. They were also 
the first of the four pairs of gods who, with Ra, 
formed the Great Company of the Nine Gods of 
Heliopolis. Horus and his numerous forms were 
adored in very early times at Heliopolis, and thus 
we see that Ta-Usrit the sistrum-bearer was, at any 
rate officially, a servant of the old solar gods of 
Heliopolis. Amen-em-apt probably grew up under 
her care, and absorbed her views, for, as will be 
seen from his ‘ Teaching,’ he was a devout 
worshipper of Ra and the old solar gods of Helio- 
olis. 
‘ When Amen-em-apt lived, and under which 
king he flourished, cannot be said, but it seems 
highly probable that he was born during the reign 
of one of the kings of the XVIIIth dynasty. In 


1 Tf lines 43-45 refer to Ka-Nekht, Ta-Usrit must have been 
Amen-em-apt’s grandmother. 


96  AMEN-EM-APT’S TITLES, ETC. 


line 16 of his ‘‘ Teaching”? he refers to “ his 
Lord,” in line 18 to ‘‘ His Majesty,” and in line 20 
to ‘the King,” but from first to last there is in it 
nothing to indicate who the Lord, or Majesty, or 
King was. The fact that the name of Amen, the 
king of the gods, forms part of our author’s name, 
suggests that the cult of this god was predominant 
when he was born, but it is quite clear that he 
was no follower of Amen, and no admirer of his 
cult, for, except as a component part of his name, 
Amen is neither mentioned nor referred to in the 
“ Teaching.” On the other hand, it is pretty 
clear that when Amen-em-apt composed his 
“Teaching? Amen had not reached the exalted 
position of ‘‘ King of the Gods,”’ which he attained 
as the result of the conquests of Thothmes III 
in the Sidan and Western Asia. I would therefore 
assign the “ Teaching”’ to the first half of the 
period of the XVIIIth dynasty, probably soon 
after Amenhetep I had rebuilt the temple of Amen 
in the Northern Ap (Karnak), and established and 
endowed the Priesthood of Amen. 

From line 13 ff. we learn what offices Amen-em- 
apt filled, and the titles of these afford some clue 
to the social position of his family. His father 
was, as we have seen, a “‘ nobleman,” or, as we 
should say, a magistrate, and therefore a man 
of means, perhaps even of wealth, and his son 
would be brought up in much the same way as the 
sons of the wealthy Fallahin, or gentlemen- 
farmers, of Bani Suwéf, the Fayyim, and Middle 
Egypt were brought up until two or three genera- 
tions ago. It is quite clear from the language of 
the “‘ Teaching ’’ that Amen-em-apt was not only 
a clever but a diligent pupil, and that he studied 
the best examples of literature of Egypt to good 
purpose. His mother’s position as priestess would 


MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE 97 


secure for him the help and friendship of the temple 
authorities, and from them he would learn the 
religion and mythology of his country. There 
was no need for him to earn his living by manual 
labour, and he became a skilled writer as well as 
reader. But he was not a “royal scribe,” or 
“King’s Scribe,’ either real or titular. He 
employed his abilities in connection with the great 
grain-producing lands which lay and still lie 
between Akhmim and Balyanah (Abydos), and if 
we may believe his own naive statement, he was 
highly skilled and experienced in his profession 
(line 13). His chief office was that of “ Grain 
scribe of Ta-mera’”’ (Upper and Lower Egypt). 
He was overseer of all the crops in his district ; he 
controlled the grain that was due to the god and 
the king; he was Registrary of the Department 
of Agriculture ; he had charge of the endowments 
of grain that were bequeathed by pious bene- 
factors for the maintenance of the funerary offer- 
ings to the Aakhu, or Ancestral Spirits; and he 
was the regulator of the grain traffic in every 
part of his district. Not only did he control the 
produce of the harvests, but he directed the manage- 
ment of the corn-lands and superintended the 
letting of the farms to peasant farmers, and 
naturally would select the tenants for the farms 
on the royal estates, and on the property of the 
temples, and the lands belonging to the Depart- 
ment of Religious Endowments, or pious bequests, 
like the Awkaf, Wilt, of the Muhammadans. 


He was also the GER MAA, EZ Aw= fh {| 


of This and Nifur, near Abydos, and ‘“‘ Reporter ” 
of the town of Apu (Panopolis), and Master of the 
necropolis there, and he held a third office at 
Abydos. What is meant by ‘Ger Maa” is 


G 


98 AMEN-EM-APT AS GER MAA 


difficult to say. As words, “‘ Ger’ means “ silent 
one,” and ‘‘ Maa ”’ means “ true”’ or “ real,” and 
adopting these meanings, we get “‘ the real Ger,” 
i.e., the “real silent one.” But it is probable 
that ‘“‘Ger” has some very special meaning, 
probably of a religious character, which Egyptolo- 
gists have so far failed to discover.1 The words 
occur again in line 102, where they undoubtedly 
seem to mean “a man who is truly a religious 
man who knows how to hold his peace.” In 
line 121 we have “‘ Every Ger of the house of the 
god’’; and in line 184 it is said, “ the boat of the 
Ger sails along with fair winds.” In lines 433 and 
and it is 


‘ > 


NN : Mees ’ 
458, S & certainly means “ silence, 


quite clear that the writer regards “silence ”’ as a 
form of worship.? In line 123 Amen-em-apt says, 
“ Fill thyself full with silence, thou shalt find the 
life.”’ The idea of silence and repose which under- 
lies ‘‘ Ger ’’ seems to me to be that of RESIGNATION, 
Or SUBMISSION, and if this be so, “Ger Maa” 
means “‘ the man who is truly resigned,”’ to God’s 
guiding hand of course, and is prepared to obey 
Him. The doctrine of the “‘ Ger,” then, is sub- 
mission and obedience, and finds its exact counter- 
part in the Islém preached by Muhammad and 
the Arabs two thousand years later. The funda- 
mental idea of that Religion, like much else, came 
out of Egypt. 

Now the lines that follow the name of Ka- 
Nekht, the father of Amen-em-apt, in line 30, 


1 See the remarks in Vogelsang, Kommentar zu den Klagen 
des Bauern, Leipzig, 1913, pp. 162, 206, 215; and in Moret’s 
La Profession de Foi d’un Magistrat sous la XII¢ Dynastie (in 
Cinquantenatve, Paris, 1921, p. 75). 

* Compare the use of the Hebrew TOIT dimiyyah, 


silence, repose, still waiting, in Psalm xxxix, 3, and Ixii, 2. 


AMEN-EM-APT’S PRIESTLY DESCENT 99 


appear to be somewhat mixed. Line 32 reads, 
“His son,’ presumably Ka-Nekht’s, “is the 
youngest of his children,” and these words are 
followed by ‘‘ Overseer of the mysteries of Menti (?) 
in the character of Ka-mut-f.” Immediately after 
this line comes the statement, ‘‘ He is the man of 
least account among his kinsfolk,”’ and this line 
is followed by several priestly titles. We should 
expect line 34, “‘ He is the man of least account 
among his relatives,” to follow immediately after 
line 32, ‘‘ His son is the youngest of his children,” 
but they are separated by line 33, which gives the 
title of a priest of Menti (?). The priestly offices 
enumerated in line 33 ff. must have been held 
either by Ka-Nekht or his son Amen-em-apt, 
most probably by the former, for the latter can 
hardly have discharged them, considering how 
heavy his duties were as Director of Agriculture. 
Why lines 32 and 34 were inserted in the list of 
priestly offices cannot be stated with certainty, 
but they were probably added by Amen-em-apt 
himself in self-depreciation and in his character 
of the Ger Maa. The priestly offices of Ka-Nekht 
were as follows: 1. Inductor of Un-Nefer, 1.e., 
he led the procession when the image of this god 
was carried about. Un-Nefer was originally a 
form or name of the Sun-god, but under the New 
Empire the name was bestowed upon Osiris ; it 
means “ beautiful springer up” or “ beautiful 
hastener,’’ an appropriate title of the Sun-god. 
2. Inductor of Horus upon the throne of his 
father. The Horus here referred to is not Horus 
the son of Isis and Osiris, but the old solar god of 
Heliopolis. Neither Isis or Osiris is mentioned in 
the ‘‘ Teaching ’’ of Amen-em-apt. On the occa- 
sions when the statue of Horus was set upon the 
throne in his sanctuary Ka-Nekht directed the 
G 2 


I00 AMEN-EM-APT’S TEACHING 


proceedings. 3. Surveyor of the mother of the 
god. The god here referred to must be Menti (?) 
(Menu), whose mother, according to late texts, 


was Khent-Abtt, iG Se She appears on a wall 


at Denderah in the form of a woman wearing 
on her head the disk and horns of the Cow-goddess 
Hathor, and is assisting at the ceremony of setting 
up the “ladder” before her son Menu. 4. In- 
spector of the black bulls, which were sacred to 
Menti and were kept at Panopolis for the sacrifices 
of the god. 5. Defender of Menti in his shrine. 
The cult of Menti, or Menu, was of Heliopolitan 
origin, and at a very early period this god was 
identified with Tem-Khepera and Ra, in their 
character of solar gods and gods of generation. | 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT DESCRIBED. 


Amen-em-apt divides his Teaching into Thirty 
Sections, or Chapters, which vary in length from 
a few lines to a column and a half on the papyrus. 
For convenience of reference these chapters have 
been broken up into one hundred and fourteen 
paragraphs, but in a few cases it is difficult to see 
exactly where the new paragraph begins. 

The Teaching of Amen-em-apt is different from 
the Teaching of every other Egyptian sage known 
to us, and reveals an aspect of the religion and 
morality of the Egyptians that is wanting in all 
the other Moral Papyri. The Teaching of Ptah- 
hetep, the Teaching of King Khati, the Teaching 
of Ani, the Teaching of Tuauf, etc., were all defi- 
nitely written for the benefit of the sons of these 
sages, and were intended to teach them how to 


* Brugsch, Dict. Géog., p. 724. 


AMEN-EM-APT’S TEACHING 101 


achieve success in this world. But Amen-em-apt 
addresses his Teaching to no son, and though the 
wise rules of conduct which he lays down would 
benefit all classes of officials and secure promotion 
for them, one great object in writing seems to have 
been to teach a man how to live to God and to 
love his neighbour. Portions of his Teaching will 
be found in all the other Teachings known to us, 
but there are many which will be sought for in 
them in vain. His Teaching was essentially that 
of the Ger Maa, or man who was truly resigned to 
the Will of his God, and its object was to teach 
men to treat their fellow-men of every class with 
kindness and consideration, to have pity upon the 
widow and the orphan, to show charity to the 
destitute, and to help the man who was in need, 
or trouble or adversity. The language he uses is 
simple, and, though the exact meaning of many of 
the words is not at present known, and the words 
themselves are not to be found in the existing 
dictionaries, the general purport of them is clear. 
The style is free from the obscurities and imitations 
of archaic phraseology in which the earlier authors 
of moral works have indulged, and as a literary 
work the Teaching of Amen-em-apt will always 
hold a very high place among ancient Egyptian 
writings. We are here dealing with a document 
that is practically complete, and the text of which 
has suffered little if any corruption at the hands 
of copyists. The length of the text adds to its 
importance, for no other document of its class now 
known contains so many unmutilated lines. The 
style of the document is that of the apophthegm, 
which rules supreme in the Moral Papyri. The 
oldest examples of its use outside Egypt are found 
in Babylonia and Syria, that is to say, in the texts 
on Babylonian tablets and in the Book of the 


102 USE OF METAPHOR AND SIMILE 


Proverbs of Solomon and in Ecclesiastes. Amen-em- 
apt, like Solomon, uses both metaphor and simile 
freely, but the Babylonian relied chiefly on simile* 
to enforce his point. Amen-em-apt’s metaphors 
are unusually interesting and are most original :— 
The boat of the Ger (7.¢., the silent righteous man) 
is safer to sail in than the boat of the sinner 
(line 184) ; a man’s tongue gives orders on the boat 
of his life, but Nebertcher is the captain of it 
(line 387) ;. row thy boat lustily to save the man 
who is on a wrong course (line 76) ; the very day 
stands still in horror of the evil man (line 227) ; 
the lying mischief-maker is a potter’s wheel that is 
worked by the devil Tar, and he mixes together 
the stuff that destroys the minds of men (lines 
230, 231) ; the scandal-monger destroys the skin 
(or, hair) of the god Shu, 7.e., he rends the sky 
and blackens heaven with his wickedness (line 
236); his lips are date-syrup, his tongue is a 
deadly dagger (line 239), etc. Amen-em-apt’s 
similes are numerous and uncommon? :—The fate 
of the man of iniquity is like that of the man cast 
out on a dyke (line 68) ; the noisy bully is like a 
raging wind and fire (line 89) ; riches fly away like 
geese (line 178) ; the scandal-monger is like a sullen 
whelp in a stable eyeing jealously the other dogs 
(line 232) ; he is like the blast of the desert sand- 
storm (line 235) ; the beak of the Ibis-god (Thoth) 


* Compare “ Giving is like loving, interest is like begetting 
ason”’ (Langdon, Babylonian Wisdom, p. 78) ; “‘ their counsels 
change like day and night” (ibid., p. 42). In the following 
the simile is disguised, ‘‘ Woman is a, well, a slough, a ditch : 
woman is a sharp iron dagger which cuts into the neck of a 
man ”’ (tbid., pp. 75-77). 

* On comparisons in Egyptian generally see Grapow, 
Vergleiche und andere bildliche Ausdriicke im Aegyptischen, 
Leipzig, 1920 (in Dey Alte Orient, 21 Jahrgang). 


ASIATIC INFLUENCE IN TEACHING 103 


is the scribe’s finger (line 321) ; the love of precious 
metal and the dancing girl is like a bond and 
fetter (line 344) ; the mind of a man is the nose 
of God (line 473), etc. The precepts are both 
positive and negative, the latter predominating 
throughout the work. 

The system of religious morality which it reveals 
is of a very high character, and in many particulars 
closely resembles that which has hitherto been 
regarded as almost exclusively the property of 
ancient Semitic and Sumerian peoples. Parallels to 
some of its Precepts can be found in the Penta- 
teuch, the Psalms, and the Proverbs of Solomon, 
and it is impossible not to wonder whether these 
at least are not due to some Asiatic influence which 
found its way into Egypt under the Middle 
Empire, or about the time of the rule of the 
Hyksos over Lower Egypt. The doctrines of the 
Ger Maa may have been in existence in Egypt 
when the Pyramids were built, and assuming that 
some of them are of Asiatic origin, they might well 
have been brought there by way of Heliopolis 
from Syria and Babylonia by caravan men. 
Whether this be so or not I cannot believe that 
they are of African, or native Egyptian, origin. 
From time immemorial Heliopolis was a cosmo- 
politan city, and a central desert mart where 
merchants of all nationalities exchanged not only 
material goods, but ideas and information. 

The Teaching of Amen-em-apt may now be 
summarized. 


Gop AND Man’s Duty To Him. 
Throughout his Teaching Amen-em-apt speaks 


of God, | fe or the God, r<GN apie just as 
the Arabs speak of Allah and Al-Allah. To him 


104 MAN’S DUTY TO GOD 


there was only one God, and we never find him 
making use of the form neteru Wd I or ve 
or ani : “sods,” as is the case in many Egyptian 


texts even when the One God is referred to. It 
may be argued that the god to whom he referred 
was Ra, or even Aten, the solar Disk, but when 
he means Ra he says so distinctly, as we may see 
from lines 496, 509, and 512. Ra was the god of 
material things, but God, of whom no similitude 
existed, was the Ruler of man’s mind and destiny 
and his Judge. This God formulated plans, 


| © © |, and a man must do nothing to 
SS (I 

disarrange them (line 418), or attempt to find out 
what his Will, a I, would keep hidden (line 


419). God rests upon Maat, z.e., Truth, and Maat 
is his chief support, that is, God is established 
or founded upon Truth (line 409). Maat repre- 
sented law and order in the physical world; Ra 
the Sun-god lived in and by it. In the spiritual 
world it stood for the right, truth of word and 
deed, justice and integrity. God hates the liar 
(line 254), and the man who holds converse with 
the liar and enjoys talk with him is an abomination 
to the God. God is kind and gracious, and his 
love is more to be praised and adored than the 
honour that is awarded by the magistrate, or 
President of the Town Council (line 525). 
Imagine not that God does not concern himself 
with the affairs of men, for though a man mixes 
earth with water and makes bricks, and collects 
the straw, it is God who is the Architect, and it is 
he who throws down a wall or builds it up (lines 
483, 484). With this may be compared : ‘“‘ Except 
the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that 


GOD IN MAN’S LIFE 105 


build it’ (Psalm cxxvii, 1). A man may think 
that he is directing the course of the boat of his life 
by his tongue, which he uses as a steering pole, but 
remember it is ‘‘ Nebertcher (z.e., the God of the 
Universe) who is the Captain ”’ (lines 386-388). 

Amen-em-apt thought that goodness and badness 
could not be considered in connection with God, for 
he writes: Say not that nothing abominable is 
permitted to exist, whilst at that very moment thou 
art seeking to stir up strife. If the abominable 
thing belonged to the God, He would set the seal 
of his finger upon it. There is no goodness in the 
hand (t.e., action) of the God, because there is 
nothing abominable before Him. If He could 
bring Himself to seek after goodness as soon as 
the occasion for the exercise of it was passed He 
would destroy it”’ (lines 377-384). I know of no 
other example of an attempt to discuss the attri- 
butes of God in Egyptian papyri. 

God is not separated from man by an impassable 
gulf, there is a connection between them, for “ the 
heart (or, mind) of man is the nose of God” 
(line 473), and the life-breath of the heart of man 
is the life-breath of God’s nostrils. Man is only 
safe and well-guarded when he places himself in 
“ the hand of God ” (line 253). Ifaman would be 
a Ger Maa, that is to say, one who can say with 
David, “ Truly my soul waiteth (7.e., is silent) 
upon God ” (Psalm Ixii, 1), he must repose wholly 
on God, and follow Amen-em-apt’s direction given 
in line 431 and repeated in line 457: ‘‘ Seat thyself 
on the arms of the God.” The mention of the 
two arms of the God recalls the verse in Deut. 
XXxili, 27, where the God of olden time is described 
as a refuge, and the “everlasting arms” are 
beneath ready to protect the refugee. The worship 
most acceptable to God is that of the Ger, the 


106 THE SPIRITUAL LIFE OF A MAN 


resigned silent one, but to his silence he must 
add hetbu, fan Jt 4 2 a word which must 
mean something like “ prostrations,”’ or ‘‘ bowings 
down to the ground” (lines 431, 457). The 
Egyptians have in all periods made bowings to 
their gods, or God. The pre-Christian Egyptians 
“smelt the earth,” z.e., set their faces in the dust, 
before the Deity, the Christian ascetics boasted of 
the number of bowings which they performed in 
the course of the twenty-four hours of the day and 
night, and the Muhammadans in Egypt are most 
scrupulous in making their bowings at their times 
of prayer. It is not sufficient for the Ger to be 
silent and resigned at one time and not at another, 
but he must “ fill himself full of silence.” The 
reward of the Ger who does this is great, for he 
“shall find the Life ’”’ (line 123) and “‘ his members 
shall enjoy health and strength upon the earth ”’ 
(line 124). The Life here alluded to is not the mere 
animal life, but the true life of the spiritual part 
of a man and of the soul, which directs its thoughts 
and aspirations to this unseen Neter, or God. By 
silence and resignation the soul finds wisdom and 
contentment, and the life that is based on the 
truth. Health of the soul produces health of the 
body, so that a man’s gain is twofold. The same 
idea is expressed in the Book of Proverbs, where 
Wisdom claims that he who finds her finds life, as 
well as riches that are durable and honour and 
righteousness (Proverbs viii, 18, 35). And the 
Ger does good not only to himself, but to his 
neighbours, for the man who embarks in the boat 
of the robber suffers shipwreck, whilst he who sets 
out in the boat of the Ger sails easily with favouring 
winds behind him and reaches his destination 
(lines 182, 183). And to what may the Ger be 


OSIRIS AND HIS JUDGEMENT 107 


compared? “‘ He is like unto a large tree by the 
wayside, with dense foliage, which is planted in 
rich ground. It bursts into blossom at its ap- 
pointed time, during the fierce heats of summer it 
produces a twofold yield of fruit, and its position 
is under the eye of its lord, who rejoices therein. 
Its fruit is luscious, men find its shadow refreshing 
to rest in, and finally it is removed and trans- 
planted into the garden of the God”’ (lines 102- 
107). This picturesque passage calls to mind the 
man who meditates day and night on the Law of 
God as described by David: “A tree planted by 
the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in 
his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and 
whatsoever he doeth shall prosper ”’ (Psalm i, 3). 
Throughout his Teaching Amen-em-apt expresses 
no opinion as to the future state of the Ger, and 
his views on this point are unknown. From lines 
482-489, which describe God’s direction of the 
affairs and lives of men, it is possible to conclude 
that he had no doubt about the existence of man 
after death, or about his passing into the care of 
God. Thus he says: “A man lives his hour of 
life; rejoice, be glad. It is He Who makes [a 
man] to arrive in Amentt (7.e., the grave, the Other 
World), where he is safe in the hand of the God.”’ 
Amen-em-apt uses the very ancient word Amentt? 
for the Other World, but nowhere does he speak 
of Osiris, the God and Judge of the Dead, the 
Prince of Amentt, or the gods of his Company. 
He must have been well acquainted with the 
popular theology of Egypt, according to which the 
souls of the dead were weighed in the Great Scales 
under the supervision’ of Thoth and his Ape-god, 
for he mentions Thoth in line 321, and the Ape-god 


‘ T.e., the country of the dead on the west bank of the Nile. 


108 OSIRIS AND THE GODS REJECTED 


in lines 323 and 336. Furthermore, he must have 
known the belief which was current in his day 
that all those whose hearts had been weighed by 
Thoth, and were declared by him to be maa 


kheru, = ee » [ &, (“true of word,” 2.., 


speaker of the truth), passed into the kingdom of 
Osiris, where they lived a life that was a glorified 
copy of their life upon earth. It seems quite clear 
that Amen-em-apt did not accept such views, 
either because they were opposed to the teachings 
of Heliopolitan theology, or because he considered 
them foolish or contemptible. In his Teaching he 
mentions Ra (lines 496, 509, 512), Shu (line 236), 
Khnemu-Ra (line 229), Thoth (line 321), Uben 
(line 353), Nebertcher (line 188), Aten (lines 185, 
510), and Aahu (lines 75, 133), and all these were 
Heliopolitan gods ; Amen-em-apt found the recog- 
nition of these to be compatible with his belief in 
Neter, or God. As he rejected Osiris, he must also 
have rejected the multitude of fiends, devils, and 
monsters that we find mentioned in the Book of 
Ammi Tuat, the Book of Gates, and the Helio- 
politan, Theban, and Saite Recensions of the Book 
of the Dead. Nevertheless, for purposes of argu- 
ment, he mentions two devils, in the existence of 
whom he can hardly have believed, namely, Apep, 
or Apepi, and Tar (lines 193, 230). 

Of the Heliopolitan gods referred to above, Ra, 
Khnemu-Ra, Shu, Aten and Uben, or Ubni, were 
forms of the Sun-god, Aadhu was the Moon-god 
with whom Thoth was closely associated. Neber- 
tcher’ is a title given to all the ancient solar gods, 


1 This name survives in Coptic under the form of xoeIC 


2x2 WTHpY, “ the Lord of the All,” and is found in a Homily 
by Theophilus (ed. Budge, Coptic Homilies, p. 73). 


109g 


*(4LV‘ol ‘on, ‘SQN ‘WIg) ON jo sniddeg oy} wor 
‘pos-ady ey} Aq paiaaovar sem pue ‘ag Aq Yo pallies pue pazias sem yorum pos ay} jo oAq ay} ‘pod-uocopy 
ayy Jo Tayowreyo ay} Ul payuesoidax st say oYM “TOUT 0} Sunuesaid ‘yjoyy, jo ody paproy-Sop ayy, 


Co <> oS <P Osc<m ~¢ 
oe <a © Occ © S<cz== 9 


110 THE DEVILS APEP AND TAR 


and in early times no special form seems to have 
been assigned to him. Uben, or Ubni, is a very 
ancient name of the Sun-god, and means “‘ he who 
thrusts himself up [into the sky] ”’; in the Pyramid 
Texts he is called “‘ Great Ubni.”* The cult of this 
form of the Sun-god must have been popular in 
Syria as well as in Egypt, for, joined to the 
d i name of Shu, we find it on one of the ivories 
O from Nimrid,? within a cartouche, as here 
given. The cutting of the hieroglyphs proves 
f @ 3] that the carver of them was not an Egyptian, 
for they lack the characteristic touches. 
NM As regards the devils Apep and Tar, of 
¥ the latter little is known (see page 158). 
|} The former was the personification of all 
i evil, both physical and moral. Popular 
Ubenu. tradition assigned to Apep (the Apophis of 
the Greeks and Copts) the form of a monster 
crocodile, which lay in wait in the thick blackness of 
night to swallow up the sun when he rose in the sky. 
He was the creator of storms and habdbs, rain, hail, 
thunder and lightning, and disorder in general. 
With a view of destroying his malign influence and 
evil deeds the priests composed a work which they 
recited at certain times on certain days. This 
work, which was called ‘‘ The Book of Over- 
throwing Apepi,’’* contained several chapters, and 
during their recital figures of Apep made. of wax, 
or written in green ink on papyrus, were burnt 


SJ RSS. J ny Ss, M. 754, P. 744. The 


form » J at ans is found in N. 705. 


* This ivory is exhibited in the Babylonian Room in the 
British Museum, Table Case I. 

* For a facsimile of the*hieratic text and a hieroglyphic 
transcript and translation, see Egyptian Hieratic Papyrt in 
the British Museum, ed. Budge, First Series, London, 1910 fol. 


ShESE 


Apep, whose voice goes round about the Tuat, fettered by a chain which is 
held by sixteen gods. The figure with four Serpents’ heads and holding a 
knife and an instrument of torture is one of the four Antiu gods who protect 
Ra. The figure lying along the chain is that of the Scorpion-goddess Serqit. 

From the Sarcophagus of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum. 


The serpent Apep (1) and the monster crocodile Shesshes (2) waiting to 
attack and destroy Ra. The defenders of Ra are the Ass-god Aai (3), three 
gods with harpoons (4), four goddesses (5), four apes (6), and six gods (7) who 
hold nets made of knotted cords with which they weave spells to destroy Apep. 

From the Sarcophagus of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum. 


II2 


Apep chained to the earth by chains fastened to him by the Four Sons 
of Horus. 
From the Sarcophagus of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum. 


The four figures lying along the chain are the Four Sons of Horus, each of 
whom holds by a chain one of the four monster serpents who were the sons 
of Apep. Behind them stands Osiris. 

From the Sarcophagus of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum. 


\ 


The Four Ape-gods, holding models of the Great Hand with which they 
fashion the Disk of the Sun-god. 
From the Sarcophagus of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum. 


DOCTRINE OF DESTINY AND FATE 113 


ceremonially in sacred fire. Filth was heaped upon 
these figures, and they were trodden into shapeless 
masses, and spat upon by the officiating priests 
before they were finally destroyed by fire. When 
Amen-em-apt says : “ Spit upon Apep ” (line 193), 
he is merely referring to the well-known magical 
rites described above. In a similar way Amen- 
em-apt mentions the god Shai and his consort 
Renenit, who are commonly believed to represent 
Luck and Destiny, or Destiny and Fate (line 164). 
When he says: ‘ Urge not thyself to find out 
for thyself the Will of God, do not Shai and 
Renenit exist?” (lines 419, 420), all he means 
to say is: Seek not to pry into God’s intentions 
as regards thyself, for are not thy luck and destiny 
already decided ? The God has apportioned thee 
thy lot and thy fate is decreed, why trouble 
thyself further? Or, Thou hast already thy lot, 
and thy end is, as the Arabs would say, MAKTOB, 
“ written.” 

To his cult of silence and his prostrations the 
Ger added prayer, but it is an interesting fact that 
he did not address his petition to God, but to the 
Aten, or visible symbol of Ra, the Sun-god. Thus 
Amen-em-apt says: ‘“‘ Make thou the prayer 
which it is thy duty to make to the Aten when he 
is shooting up in the sky. Say: Grant to me 
strength and health. He will give to thee the things 
necessary for the life’”’ (lines 185-187). Thus the 


1 The following extract from a rubric explains Amen-em- 
apt’s allusion :—Say this Chapter over a figure of Apep 
drawn in green paint upon a new piece of papyrus, in which 
is wrapped a wax figure of Apep with his name cut into it in 
green colour. Put these in the fire, and burn them, and collect 
the ashes; pour filth upon them, and stamp on them with 
thy left foot, and put them into a fire, and spit upon them 
many, many times each hour. 


H 


114 AMEN-EM-APT ADMIRES NATURE 


Aten is the giver of health, and strength, and meat 
and drink, and raiment, in other words, all man’s 
material wants were, according to this passage, 
supplied by the god of the solar Disk, who shared 
with Ra the lordship of the physical world. 

Two passages in his Teaching prove that 
Amen-em-apt admired the works of God as 
displayed in His visible creation, although he 
coupled them with the gods Ra and Aten. Thus, 
when he looked upon the Nile-flood and saw its 
waters at the entrances of the canals and irrigation 
basins, and watched the crocodiles showing them- 
selves as they rose from the sand, and the hippo- 
potami disporting themselves in the sun, and the 
fish leaping, and the wolves (dogs?) filled with 
food, and the geese [happy] in the field (or, keeping 
festival), and restraint relaxed (?), every Ger of 
the house of the god must say : Great is the praise 
(or, graciousness) of Ra (lines 116-122). We may 
note in passing that hippopotami must have been 
common in Middle Egypt in the days of Amen-em- 
apt. The beauty of the dawn and the sunrise 
were other phases of nature that greatly impressed 

en-em-apt, who was clearly a man who did 
most of his work in the early hours of the day. 
He says: Lie not in bed when the dawn is break- 
ing. What can be compared with the dawn for 
beauty ? What kind of a man is he who has not 
seen the dawn ? Whilst the lie-a-bed is slumbering 
the God is performing his gracious works. Con- 
sider : On the one hand we see the paltry affairs of 
men, and on the other the works of the God [in 
the heavens] (lines 370-376). Timeis precious. If 
a man says to-day and to-morrow are the same, 
what will the result be? To-day is here, to-morrow 
has yet to come (lines 113-115). Waste not in 
slumber the early hours of the day (line 431). 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 115 


SUMMARY OF AMEN-EM-APT’S TEACHING. 


Plunder not the poor man and “ squeeze ”’ not 
the destitute. Assume not the manner of a 
nobleman, and pass the aged man by unnoticed. 
Despatch not a friend on a mission of danger. Hurt 
not a man when thou canst explain thyself. As 
for the evildoer, make no attempt to punish him, 
for he will punish himself. He is like the man who 
is cast out on the dyke. The waters will rise and 
envelop him, the winds will blow him hither and 
thither as he lies in the raging waters, storms will 
beat upon him, and finally the crocodiles will find 
him and devour him (lines 68-72). 

What is the fiery, hot-headed, aggressive man 
like? He is always shrieking out curses and im- 
precations, and his voice which rises to heaven is so 
terrifying that Aahu, the Moon-god, stands still 
in horror of him (lines 73-75). Have nothing to 
do with him, run away before him, and leave him 
to the hands of the God, who will know how to 
requite him. Bear this in mind and thou shalt 
live to see thy children’s children (lines 90-94). 
How shall this man when he is in the god’s house 
be described ? He is like a large, leafy tree planted 
in a courtyard, {but there being no water there] its 
leaves wither, its fruit fails to ripen and drops off. 
Finally it is removed, and a flame of fire is its 
winding-sheet (7.¢., it is burnt) (lines 96-r07). 
The chattering fool is a raging wind, and he is like 
a destroying fire among the reeds (line 89). (Com- 
pare the “crackling of thorns under a pot,’ in 
Eccles. vii, 6.) 

When we see the wicked man steering a wrong 
course, we must get out our oars, and row him toa 
place of safety, for may we not ourselves become 
like him? Set him on his feet, help him willingly, 


H 2 


116 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


commit him to the hands of the God, provide him 
with meat and drink, for perhaps it is the intention 
of the God to give him another opportunity 
(lines 76-82). 

In the performance of thy duties take care not 
to encroach on the estates of the temples, and do 
nothing in connection with them for thy individual 
profit. Moreover, withdraw not a temple-servant 
from his duty in order to work for some other 
man’s benefit (lines Iog-112). Remove no land- 
mark, break not down any boundary, and avoid 
all encroachments on lands set apart for the 
endowments of tombs (lines 126, 142, 145). Fail 
in any of these things and terrible calamity will 
befall thee (line 143). And in verifying the estate 
of the widow do not filch away any of her land 
through the cubit of the fields (line 129). The 
man who cheats in land is snared in the counsels of 
iniquity, and the Will of the Moon-god shall fetter 
him (7.e., make him go mad ?). Observe what he 
does. Herobs the helpless man in a shameless 
fashion. He is thy enemy, and a man’s life is 
snatched away by a mere glance of his eye, and 
his house is a menace to the town. But his sons 
and daughters shall never inherit his property, 
and his possessions shall be given to another 
(lines 130-141). 

As for thee, drive not thy furrows through the 
[unploughed or neglected] fields of another man, 
for the well-being that comes from thine own 
furrows is better for thee. Plough the fields that 
thou knowest to be thine own property, and get 
thy bread from the treasure-house of thy body 
(lines 148-151). Six feet of land that God has 
given thee are better than thirty thousand that 
thou hast acquired by fraud (lines 152, 153). 
Treat thyself well, and make thy body strong and 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED | 117 


happy, but remember not to do that for which 
Nebertcher, 7.e., the All-Lord, will hold thee 
responsible (lines 146, 147). | 
Avoid over-eating, wine-bibbing, and gluttony ; 
which waste time, destroy the mind, and bring 
sickness to the body. About these vices Amen- 
em-apt says: Spend not the hours of the day in 
cookshops and taverns, and sit not down in them 
and drink pot after pot of beer, for those who 
spend their days in this wise become merely masses 
of food (lines 154-157). Even if thou art hungry 
and wishest to eat, lust not like a greedy beast for 
the dainty, spiced meats of the rich man who loves 
such meats. For the rich meats of the glutton 
produce a storm of wind in the stomach, and the 
bowels eject them. They turn the upright man 
into a wrongdoer, and his sense (or, understanding) 
departs from his body. Thus, inasmuch as the 
evil nature of man corrupts inclination for well- 
doing, the evil destroys the good [in him] (lines 
257-264). When thou hast swallowed a mouthful 
of a nobleman’s food thou shalt vomit it, and thus 
thy body will be emptied of the dainty [which 
thou hast coveted] (lines 269, 270). Because a 
great man offers thee food without stint, eat not 
of it greedily. If he gives it to thee so that thou 
mayest help him to get richer, reject it and eat 
thine own food (lines 280-283). Eat not bread 
with the magistrate, and thrust not forward thy 
mouth. If thou fillest thyself with the rich meats 
of the wicked man they will depart with thy vomit 
(lines 462, 463). Keep thine eyes on the platter 
that is before thee, and make it to satisfy all thy 
cravings (lines 464,465). Do not accustom thyself to 
sit in the beer-house (line 491). Hasten not to follow 
the worship of the wine-cup, for it will double 
the courage of thine adversaries (lines 523, 524). 


r18 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


And now observe the foresight of the glutton. 
He himself collects the staves of the hunting nets. 
He makes all his servants to help in the hunt, and 
he keeps a strong man to kill the beasts in his 
slaughter-house. Keep away from him, and watch 
him and refuse his gifts (lines 271-278). 

Be not avaricious, and covet not riches. Hanker 
not after the things that riches give, for Shai, the 
god who has given thee thy lot in life, and Renenit, 
the goddess of thy fate, know what is best for thee 
(lines 163, 164). Seek not for more than thou 
hast (line 167). Remember that if thou hast 
heaped up treasures which thou hast obtained by 
foul means, they will not remain with thee for a 
night, and on the following morning they will not 
be in thy house. Men will look at the place where 
they were, and most assuredly they will not find 
them, for they will have swallowed themselves 
up. [What has become of them?] Either the 
earth has opened its mouth and swallowed them 
up straightway, and they have sunk down into 
the deepest depth of Hell; or they have become 
a heap of broken fragments, which are covered 
by rust ; or they have been mixed up with rubbish 
on the dust-heap; or they have made wings for 
themselves like the geese, and have spread them 
out, and flown away in the sky (lines 169-178). 
Take not pleasure in stolen treasures and at the 
same time pretend to be grieved for the victims 
of the robbery (lines 179, 180). 

Amen-em-apt warns us against the danger of the 
malicious scandal-monger and says: “ The gossip 
of this man is swifter to hurt than the blast that 
precedes the storm. He tears down [reputations], 
or builds them up with his tongue. His strings 
of words carry destruction with them. His state- 
ments merit chastisement, for their object is to 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 119 


injure. Like other folk he uses a boat, but he 
loads it with lies. He acts as ferryman to him 
that snares men in a net of words. Whether going 
or coming he continues to gossip, and when he is 
eating or drinking, even in his own house, he goes 
on talking about other people’s affairs. The day 
itself stands still and accuses him. His sons and 
daughters lament that they are his children. 
Khnem-Ra [who fashioned his body, and is 
ashamed of what he has made] proceeds to attack 
him. He is the potter’s wheel which the devil 
Tar uses, and he mixes together and makes the 
material that destroys the minds of men. He is 
like a surly whelp in the stable which watches 
with hate and jealousy the doings of his com- 
panion. He sets people against each other by 
his scandal-mongering. He goes before every wind 
like the blast that precedes the hurricane and the 
sandstorm in the desert, [and like it] he destroys 
the skin of Shu (z.e., hides the sun and the sky 
by his clouds of scandalous lies]. He twists his 
tail like the crocodile and makes it ready for the 
sweep which is fatal for his victim. His lips are 
{as sweet as] the syrup of the date palm, but his 
tongue is a deadly dagger, and a consuming fire 
blazes in his belly! (lines 215-240). 

[Be content with thy lot.] It is better to be the 
beggar who is in the hand of the God than the rich 
man in a comfortable house (lines 158, 159). 
Better are bread-cakes made of flour and water 
with a loving heart than rich meats with bickering 
and enmity ”’ (lines 160, 161, 305, 306). Compare 
“ Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a 
stalled ox and hatred therewith (Proverbs xv, 17). 


1 Compare: The words of his mouth were smoother than 
butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer 
than oil, yet were they drawn swords. Psalm lv, 21, 


1z0 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, 
than an house full of good cheer with strife ” 
(Proverbs xvii, 1). 

Concerning a man’s behaviour towards his 
neighbours Amen-em-apt says: ‘ Be generous to 
the people, and every one will applaud thee (lines 
190, 191). Show kindness to people of lowly con- 
dition (line 195). Make no innovation that will 
harm the people (line 200). Hide the matter of 
the fugitive (runaway slave who seeks protection ? 
line 201). If by chance thou discoverest that a 
man is engaged on a dangerous mission, speak not 
about it; help him on his way and let him come 
back (lines 288, 289). If thou findest treasure that 
has been hidden (buried ?) in the hands of a poor 
man, divide it into three portions : keep one-third 
thyself and let him keep two-thirds (lines 297-299). 
When a man offers thee a gift do not browbeat him, 
eye him not with displeasure, turn not away thy 
face, salute him cordially and speak to him com- 
fortably, and he will come again (lines 308-317). 
When thou seest a man stumble (or, going astray) 
go with him and help him on his way (lines 342, 
343). Call not a fellow townsman who happens 
to be a wrong-doer a ‘chief of robbers,’ and 
because a man is thy personal enemy brand him 
not as a sedition-monger (lines 426-429). Do 
nothing that will make the blind man a laughing- 
stock to his neighbours. Moreover, mock not the 
dwarf because of his form and colour, and interfere 
not in the affairs of the man with a physical defect 
to injure him. When a man is in trouble or 
suffering some affliction, do not, praise to him the 
man who has caused his calamity (lines 478-481). 
Even if thou hast a dislike for a man show thyself 
friendly to him (line 495). Give thy arm to the 
old man who is drunk, and pay respect to him in 


at & 
3 ie 


. 
] 


122 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


the presence of his family (lines 499, 500). Crush 
not the poor man who has said something that is 
good, letting the rich man who has only uttered 
windy platitudes go unrebuked ”’ (lines 503, 504). 

In very definite words Amen-em-apt calls upon 
the scribe to be both accurate and honest in his 
work. The scribe’s finger is not a finger only, but 
the beak of the Ibis-god Thoth, the great divine 
scribe who presided over the weighing of the deeds 
and hearts of men at the Great Judgement. As 
we see from the vignette in the Book of the Dead, 
Thoth wrote down with accuracy the result of the 
weighing, which was personally supervised by the 
Ape-god, his assistant. Wherever the scribe may 
be, let him remember that the Ape-god, who 
dwells in Per-Khemenu (Hermopolis, the city of 
Thoth), is watching all Egypt, and will know when 
the scribe makes a mistake wilfully or accidentally. 
If the scribe continues to make mistakes, 7.e., to 
falsify his texts, the god will withdraw his emolu- 
ments, and his son will fail to obtain employment. 
“ Bear these things in thy mind always,’ says 
Amen-em-apt, ‘‘ and thou shalt see thy posterity ” 
(lines 321-330). 

In all transactions of barter or buying and selling, 
a man must be strictly honest. He must neither 
cheat with the weights nor with the grain measures. 
The Ape-god sits on the scales and his heart is the 
pointer ; if thou givest light or short weight he 
will know at once, and thy punishment is certain. 
For as Thoth removes the scribe who renders 
false accounts, even so will God remove the man 
who makes the pointer of the scales to register 
falsely by the use of false weights: Every cunning 
device of the cheater will become known to the 
Ape-god, therefore do not obliterate the characters 
on the weights, and on the measures for grain, 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED — 123 


which indicate weight and capacity. Another 
matter: The weights and measures in use in the 
country are different from the standard Govern- 
ment weights and measures in use in the city, 
therefore thou must not employ them too fre- 
quently in thy business transactions (lines 332~ 
341). Be careful not to defraud the Utchat 
(literally the Eye of Ra), and remember that the 
god Uben is in the Utchat, and he is all-seeing. 
Give full weight, or measure, and register it 
correctly (lines 351-356). 

Similarly, the transfer or purchase of land, 
and the measuring of fields, must be carried out 
with honesty. The measuring rod is called Aft, 


)° “, and Brugsch thought that it was a 
al 


cubit in length, but the Coptic gmwt, which 
is possibly its equivalent, was an orgyia in length, 
or about six feet. Amen-em-apt says: ‘‘ Make not 
a land-measuring rod for thy use whereby thou 
canst measure with different results, but do always 
the thing that is right (7.e., measure accurately). 
The Apt measure is the Eye of Ra, which holds in 
abomination the man who robs and steals by 
making many mistakes when measuring [the land]. 
And the seal of the Eye of Ra is stamped on the 
Apt measure ” (lines 357-362). In connection with 
this we may note that the mystic cord ennuh, 


mie, which was used in the Tuat to 


measure the estates of the Aakhu, or Spirits, was 
inhabited by a god who did not allow those who 


1 I have seen in some parts, of the Delta measuring rods 
with inner and outer sliding pieces, which I was told were 
dishonestly used by the wakils of the Government when they 
were sent to measure fields and estates after the boundaries 
had been destroyed by the Inundation, 


124 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


used the cord to cheat in their measurements.! 
And the registers of estates must not be tampered 
with in any way: ‘‘ Thou shalt not undervalue 
property, for by so doing thou wilt falsify the 
rolls (line 295). Erase (?) (or, alter) nothing 
in the rolls for the benefit of the encroacher 
(line 320). Falsify not what is on the rolls, for 
thou wilt disarrange God’s plans by so doing 
(line 417). And any addition made to the rolls 
is an abominable thing in the sight of God” 
(line 291). 

To speak the truth and act with sincerity is the 
duty of every man. “ Keep thy tongue from 
lying speech (line 194). Do not support one evil 
man with thy acts and another with thy tongue at 
the same time (line 293). Go not into the Town- 
Council before the Presiding Magistrate, or thou 
mayest be obliged to eat thy words. Do not get 
up and sit down continually during thy speech, for 
thy statements must justify themselves. Attempt 
not to coerce any nobleman’s witness, for a [hasty] 
word uttered in the Council Chamber may lead to 
serious trouble. Speak the truth before the Magis- 
trate, lest he arrest thee and imprison thee, and 
if thou dost appear before him early in the day, 
he will listen graciously to thy words. Say all 
thou hast to say, and be careful so that thou 
mayest return there. Do not permit any member 
of the Courts of Law to deliver a wrong judgement 
because thou hast hidden the truth: thou mayest 
keep thyself concealed, but he will as the result 
suffer (lines 390-406). Accept no gift from any 
man if thou art in return for it to commit an act 
of wrong against a poor man ”” (line 407) 


“ See Budge, Egyptian Heaven and Hell, vol. Il. (Fifth 
Division of the Tuat.) 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 125 


_A man in his dealings with men should always 
give his countenance and support to the things 
that are good, or that tend to edification ; there- 
fore let him “applaud the Serpent, or Goddess, 
and spit upon Apep”’ (or Apepi, 7.e., the Devil, 
line 192). Moreover, he should follow the religious 
customs of the people about him. “Take thy 
seat in the sanctuary of the house of the God, 
and present offerings on behalf of thy Lord. Make 
thyself to appear like one of the revered dead, and 
as if thou wast bandaged in thy coffin. Be 
strenuous in performing the Will of God (lines 
198, 199). Hold no converse in the company of 
liars, for before God that is an abominable thing 
to do (line 248); God hates the frivolous liar ”’ 
(line 254). 

As regards thy duty to the superior officer, he 
says : “‘ Guard well thy tongue when thou answerest 
thy chief, and take heed that thou dost not revile 
him. Thou must never let his speech catch thee 
like a lasso, and must uncoil it with thy answers. 
Discuss matters with him, and make thy replies 
humbly after the manner of a subordinate ; oppose 
him not” (lines 209-214). And again: “In the 
presence of thy chief make thyself as of no account. 
Address him respectfully, and the compliments 
which thou must pay him will turn aside his curses, 
and thy bowings to the ground before him will 
disarm his violence” (7.e., save thee from a 
beating, lines 265-268). This advice must be 
intended to apply to the subordinate who has 
failed to perform his duty in some particular, and 
who must in consequence admit his fault, and 
strive to turn away his’lord’s anger by means of 
submission and adroit flattery. 

In granting interviews to people an official must 
be both patient and courteous. Therefore,‘* When 


126 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


a man comes to discuss a matter with thee, do 
not try to close his mouth, but urge him to say 
fully all he wants to say. Do not attempt to 
break in upon his remarks because thou dost not 
see the point which he is trying to make. Think 
out before thou speakest what is the correct answer 
for thee to make, for if thou becomest heated (1.e., 
losest thy temper) thy end comes. Let him go 
on talking and he will pour out his whole mind. 
When thou knowest his opinion he himself can 
be found (understood ?). Remove his legs (i.e., 
excuses or supports), and he cannot work evil, 
and he will not behave in an underhand manner, 
being afraid ”’ (lines 445-454). 

The wise man will repeat nothing that he hears, 
whether it be good, bad, or indifferent, and Amen- 
em-apt says: ‘‘ Whether thou hearest what is 
good or what is bad, treat the report thereof as 
no affair of thine, and hearken not to it. If 
thou must talk, I beseech thee to tell people only 
what is good upon the earth, and as for the reports 
of evil, hide them in the depth of thy heart (lines 
202-205).. Listen not to the conversation which 
the Magistrate may have with thee in his own 
house, and then go and repeat what he said to 
thee outside it. Even if thou canst not help 
bringing thy mouth with thee outside his house, 
it is not necessary for thee to pour out into the 
street all that is in thy mind. Now the mind of 
a man is the nose of God ; take good heed, there- 
fore, that thou doest it no injury. The man to 
whom thou repeatest the matter may be a powerful 
official, but he may also bea private person whose 
name is wholly unknown” (lines 470-476). In 
thy dealings with the Governor (or, Magistrate), 
remember that “although he may have the 
appearance of a nobleman, he may also resemble 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 127 


the crocodiles in the water in rapacity and cruelty ”’ 
(lines 466, 467). 
The wise man must be careful about his personal 
dignity, and about the kind of men he makes 
friends with, and on these and similar matters 
Amen-em-apt says: Make not a friend of the 
hot-headed, noisy man, even if thou must visit 
him for purposes of business (lines 207, 208). 
Let not this kind of man salute thee as a friend, 
especially if he is an opponent of thine, or thou 
wilt harm thyself (lines 244, 245). And do not 
salute him with cordial greetings because thou art 
afraid of him (lines 246, 247). Have no doubt 
when once thou hast spoken, and let all thy plans 
and acts be based on sound judgement (lines 250, 
251). Be dignified in the presence of thy subor- 
dinates (line 252). Have no dealings with the hot- 
headed, noisy man, or thou wilt make thyself a 
friend of the wrong-doer (lines 284, 285). Do the 
thing which is right, and thou wilt attain to the 
[true] life (ine 319). Think out thy plansseriously, 
concentrate thy mind, and be not guided by thy 
tongue only (lines 385, 386). Study to increase 
the possessions of wealthy men, but at the same 
time seek a living for thyself. Covet not the 
houses they live in, or thou mayest perish (lines 
421-424). Obey not the calls of nature when 
people are about thee, for if thou dost, thou wilt 
destroy their respect for thy dignity (lines 436, 
437). Chat not too freely with the peasants, or 
thou wilt become a companion of the sedition- 
monger (lines 438, 439). It is better for a man to 
keep his information to himself than to publish 
it abroad, when lies will be added to it (lines 
440, 441). Hasten not to acquire a benefit, but 
act not in such a way as to lose it (lines 442, 443). 
Devote not thy mind to things that do not concern 


128 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


thee (line 165). Seek for nothing more than thou 
already hast (line 167). 

Give not orders to a man who is thy superior, 
whether he be thy junior in an official position, 
or senior by birth (lines 492-494). When thou 
meetest a man in the bazar, follow him and salute 
him with respect (lines 497, 498). Curse not thy 
superior, for he will look at Ra, and make his 
report to Aten. For a man of the mob to curse a 
nobleman is an offence which Ra will not condone. 
It is far better that the man of the mob should 
strike thee and curse thee and that thou shouldst 
fold thy hands on thy breast and keep silent 
whilst he is doing it (lines 508-515). If thou 
visitest a man early in the day and he gives thee 
gifts generously, remember that if the things 
which he has acquired are derived from his lord’s 
property they will consume the man to whom 
they are given (lines 516-5109). . 

A man must not only avoid the laying up of 
treasure, but Amen-em-apt would have him avoid 
greed and avarice of every kind. He says: “‘ Covet 
not precious metals, and hate the beautiful dancing 
woman.’ The love of these things is a tie and 
a fetter to a man, and “it makes a man to err in 
the presence of the God.’ And the scraping 
together of riches is quite futile, “for if a man 
scrapes off a quantity (?) of gold from an object 
which is made of pure and refined gold, by day- 
break to-morrow morning it will be found to be 
lead” (lines 344-349). 


1 The hieratic character must, it seems, be transcribed by 
fp shema, but it may be a mistake for a nub; “covet 


neither ingots of precious metal nor music and the pretty 
dancer ’’ probably represents the meaning of the lines. 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 129 


The Egyptians have crossed the Nile by 
swimming, and on ferry-boats, rafts and floats, 
from time immemorial. Usually the ferry-boats 
were owned by private individuals, and every 
passenger had to pay his fare, but sometimes 
landed proprietors established ferry-boats for the 
use of their workmen and dependants, and though 
they maintained them, at the discretion of the 
ferryman strangers were allowed to cross the Nile 
inthem. When a great official came to a privately 
owned ferry-boat, he entered it and seated himself 
comfortably, but Amen-em-apt says to the man 
who is in the habit of doing this: ‘‘ Turn not away 
from the ferry the people who are waiting to cross 
the river, so that thou mayest stretch thyself at 
ease in the cabin.” But the current may be 
strong and may carry the boat so far down the 
river that paddles have to be got out, and some of 
the passengers set to keep her from drifting. 
Amen-em-apt supposes such a case, and says: 
“Tf a paddle (7.e., oar) be brought to thee when 
the ferry-boat is in mid-stream, take it and work it. 
Is not he who toils a happy man ? ”’ (lines 528-532). 
Line 533 reads: “ There is nothing abominable in 
the hand—the God.” May this mean, there is 
nothing abominable before God in manual labour ? 
Continuing his words concerning the ferry-boat, 
Amen-em-apt says: ‘‘ Establish not a ferry-boat 
on the river if thou art going to exact rigorously 
a fare from every person who uses it. Let the 
fares go to the man who works the ferry-boat, 
[for] he must gain a living, and be thou content to 
take no part of it”’ (lines 534-537). 

Among the pithy Precepts in the Teaching with a 
characteristically Oriental flavour are: “ If thou 
art sent to fetch straw take care to avoid the 
nettles (?) in it’ (lines 286, 287). ‘‘ Exact not the 


I 


130 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


summer grain from the peasant farmer, when if 
thou forcest him to pay what is due from him thou 
wilt ruin him. Make not thyself as unyielding as 
the measure, thou art assuming the mastery of 
his house. God’s Will increases the grain in the 
store more than the Director of the High Court ” 
(lines 363-368). “‘If the crocodile is going to 
lash out with his tail, cry out a warning, for even 
the papyrus plants hold him in fear”’ (lines 434, 
435). ‘‘ The man who is captain of his own boat 
watches its course and does not allow it to 
capsize ’’ (lines 505, 506). 

Lines 413 and 521 present difficulties. In the 
former the transcription of the word determined 
by } is doubtful, and in the latter I do not 
understand the allusion. The widow referred to 
may be one of the old women who were held to be 
witches and lived in the fields, even as widows do in 
many parts of Africa at the present day. Natives 
in going through the fields where they are always 
avoid them if possible, because they are afraid of 
being cursed by them. 


THE MORALITY AND RELIGION OF AMEN-EM-APT. 


A perusal of this Teaching will, I believe, con- 
vince the reader that it enshrines the highest system 
of morality ever taught or promulgated in Egypt, 
and that from the point of view of morality it 
deserves to rank with the Book of Proverbs and 
Ecclesiastes. There are many passages in it that 
prove that Amen-em-apt was not only a highly 
moral, but also a religious man, and held the view 
that the best foundation for morality was religion. 
But his Teaching cannot be regarded as a work 
written to teach the Egyptians religion, for we see 
that such religious advice as he gives was only 


~ 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 131 


intended to safeguard his high moral teaching. 
The purist among teachers of morality might even 
complain that he left unnoticed many breaches of 
the law, e.g., murder, and adultery, and sexual 
immorality in general. He does not warn his 
readers against manslaughter and murder, and a 
man’s relations with women, regular or irregular, 
are not mentioned. Ptah-hetep advised his son 
to marry and beget a son, and to treat his wife 
well, but to avoid all other women, because a 
thousand men have destroyed themselves through 
the quest of their ‘shining limbs.” Ani the 
scribe advised his son to marry, and to rear a son 
to succeed him, and warned him against the 
“strange woman,’ who was a deep water, the 
current of which would carry a man he knew not 
whither. Ani also impressed upon his son the 
necessity of treating his mother with affection and 
care. But Amen-em-apt says nothing about a 
man’s right behaviour to the women of his family, 
and seems to assume that the man who was wise 
enough to follow his Teaching would need no advice 
on such private and domestic matters. 

The opening lines of his Teaching tell us the real 
object of it. He writes, he says, the admonitions 
that will enable a man to maintain a “safe” 
position under all circumstances. They will help 
him to preserve his fair name, to keep his character 
unsullied, to move in good society, to be healthy 
in body, to be free from carking care, and to keep a 
firm hold on his possessions. Another class of 
admonitions is based upon the rules and regula- 
tions and sayings of generations of high officials, 
whose duties and social position gave them the 
right of free entry into the council chambers and 
private offices of Wazirs, all of them_ being 
intended to teach the young official how to honour 

I 2 


132 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


his chiefs and at the same time to maintain his 
position with safety and dignity. In addition to 
these Amen-em-apt included a number of terse, 
shrewd, and highly treasured sayings of the officials 
who had been honoured by kings with the title 
of friends. All these admonitions would teach a 
man how to lead, not a religious life, but a life in 
which he would be able to hold his own among 
courtiers, officials, noblemen, and subordinates of 
many kinds, and how to treat ordinary folk with 
kindness sufficient to gain their goodwill, and at the 
same time to avoid undue familiarity and friend- 
ship with them. Many of his wise counsels must 
embody the results of his personal experience in 
dealing with men and affairs, and taken together 
they form a very remarkable collection of precepts. 

Judging from the number of priestly offices which 
his father held, and from his own lucrative position 
as Controller of the grain of his district, Amen-em- 

apt must have been a man passing rich, but he 
_ inveighs against the heaping up of riches, and 
especially ill-gotten wealth. Riches easily acquired 
disappear no one knows where, therefore seek for 
nothing more than you have, and be content with 
that. Cultivate not the hunger for land, for a 
small parcel of land given by God is better than a 
large estate obtained by robbery. Amen-em-apt 
preached abstemiousness, and preferred dry bread 
and herbs with content to dainty meats where 
strife was. Frequent not the house of the glutton, 
because his meal may be a bribe. And besides, 
rich, highly spiced meats disturb the digestion and 
produce vomiting and colic and other evils in the 
body, and the dainty food is wasted. Avoid the 
bazars where grilled and baked meats are sold, 
and also the beer shops. On the other hand, if 
an old man is overtaken by drink help him on his 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 133 


way and see him home. Moreover, the official who 
spends his time in the cookshop and tavern ceases 
to be aman and becomes a mere mass of food. 
Over-eating and over-drinking do not pay, there- 
fore avoid these vices. Waste not your time, 
especially the early hours of the day; thrice does 
Amen-em-apt give this advice. Choose your 
company, and avoid the sedition-monger and the 
scandal-monger ; if you do not you will lose not 
only your character but your position, and you will 
have no means for rearing a family. Therefore 
avoid such men; it does not pay. Encroach not 
on sacrosanct property ; any act of the kind is 
followed by calamity ; it does not pay to rob the 
dead or God. Live not on the provisions of others, 
but be independent, and work for yourself, and eat 
the bread of your toil. Your lot is fixed, your end 
is known, it is useless to set your mind on things 
you cannot have ; it doesnot pay. And mind your 
own business; every man will do as he pleases 
when he pleases. If you sail with a thief you will 
suffer shipwreck; it will pay you better to sail 
with a righteous man. Pray to Athen in the early 
morning and ask for health and strength, and he 
will give you everything you want; get into the 
habit of praying thus, forit will pay you. Always 
keep on the side of the angels and repudiate the 
Devil; it pays to do so. Give gifts to the people 
and be kind to them, and they will applaud you for 
your pity and benevolence ; this will help you in 
your official career. Repeat not evil gossip; it 
causes trouble and never pays. Control your 
tongue in talking to your chief, or you may lose 
both your position and your prestige ; it never pays 
to argue with him or oppose him. Hold not con- 
verse with sinners, for God hates the man who 
does so; it does not pay. Impress the people by 


134 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


your weighty speech and dignified behaviour ; it 
will tend to your promotion. Use the soft answer 
to turn away wrath; it pays to do so with your 
chief. Never alter the registers; it offends the 
God and will harm you. 

The scribe who falsifies his copies will suffer. 
Men may not find him out, but the dog-headed 
Ape, who is an incarnation of Thoth, sits in Per- 
Khemenu (Hermopolis), watching on behalf of 
Thoth the heart and mind of Ra. His eye travels 
through all Egypt and sees everything, and notes 
every sin, and reports the sinner. It does not pay 
a scribe to falsify his copies, for the god will with- 
draw his help from him, and his son will fail to 
obtain employment. Similarly it does not pay 
to cheat with the weights and scales, for this same 
Ape sits on or by the Scales, and his heart acts as 
the pointer, and whether you set the scales awry, 
or sweat the weights or misread the stamps on 
them, the Ape will know of it and the Souls of 
God will weep. And love not precious metals or 
the dancing woman (?), for they make a man to 
err before God; moreover, by to-morrow the 
stolen gold will have turned into lead. You 
cannot cheat the Utchat (Eye of Ra) nor steal from 
the god Uben, for he is always present in the 
Utchat, and will know of your theft. Similarly, 
do not steal land by manipulating the Apt measure, 
because the Utchat is in the measure, and his seal 
is on it. Sins of this kind are always followed by 
punishment, therefore it does not pay a man to 
commit them. Do your best to benefit the rich 
men who employ you, but at the same time forget 
not your own interests. Be moderate in all your 
actions, being neither over-zealous nor apathetic ; 
thus your conduct will be approved by all classes 
of men. If you sit in a beer-house you may forget 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 135 


your station in life and insult some great man; 
this, likewise, does not pay. Therefore avoid the 
beer-house. Cultivate not the wine-cup, for that 
will put fresh courage into your adversaries, and 
therefore do you harm. And take care to frequent 
the temple of the god of the city, 7.¢., attend divine 
service regularly, for that will both please the 
god and enhance your reputation for piety. 
Moreover, contribute to the expenses of the temple 
generously, but be humble and unostentatious in 
your gifts. 

The courtesy, kindness, humanity and considera- 
tion for the feelings of others which Amen-em-apt 
counselled are everywhere visible in his Teaching, 
and need no special mention here, but a word or 
two may be said about his personal religion. 
Apart from his canon of official morality, and his 
adhesion to the official religion of his town, he 
seems to me to have possessed a personal religion 
of a very high character. His monotheism is 
undoubted, and he worshipped God, or ‘‘ the God”’ 
alone, and nowhere does he acknowledge the 
existence of, or mention, “ gods ”’ in his Teaching. 
In some passages the god to whom he refers may 
be Ra, the Sun-god, ¢.g., those referring to his works 
in the physical world, but others seem to show that 
he conceived of the existence of the great Disposer 
of the destinies of men, both living and dead. 
When he says: “It is He Who makes a man to 
arrive in Amentt, 7.e., the Other World, [where] 
he is safe in the hand of the God ”’ (lines 408, 409), 
it cannot be Ra who is referred to. In the 
passages: “‘ Seat thyself (7.e., repose) on the two 
arms of the God ”’ (line 432) ; ‘“‘ Commit thyself for 
safe-keeping to the hand of the God”’ (line 253). 
“The love of God is more precious and to be 
esteemed than the respect (or, reverence) of the 


136 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


nobleman” (lines 525, 526), if Ra be the God 
referred to Amen-em-apt ascribed to him the 
attributes of the Hebrew and Christian God. 

Of Amen-em-apt’s views as to the future life 
we know nothing, but as there is no mention of 
Osiris, or of any god of his Company, we may 
assume tentatively that he did not accept the 
popular teaching as to the future state of the 
dead which was current in his time. It is clear 
that he recognized that a man was responsible to 
God for his actions, for he says, “‘ Be kind to 
thyself, make thy body strong and happy, but 
take good heed to thyself in respect of Nebertcher, 
7.e., God Almighty ” (lines 146,147). This passage 
has its equivalent in Ecclesiastes (xi, 9): ‘‘ Rejoice, 
O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart 
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in 
the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine 
eyes: but know thou, that for all these things 
God will bring thee into judgement.”” And follow- 
ing moral responsibility came the subsequent 
enquiry into the way in which it had been exer- 
cised, that is to say, the Last Judgement after 
death. The belief in this Judgement is a very 
old one in Egypt, and men had no need of the vivid 
vignette which we find in the Theban Recension 
of the Book of the Dead to help them to bear it 
in mind. But Amen-em-apt must have seen and 
known the vignette, for he speaks of the “ Ape 
sitting by the side of the Scales,” and says that 
“ his heart is the pointer ’’ (lines 336, 337), and in 
the following line he refers to the god Thoth. In 
the accompanying scene, which is reproduced from 
the Papyrus of Iuau, who must have been a con- 
temporary of Amen-em-apt, we see the Ape sitting 
by the side of the Scales, and he is described as 
being “ Thoth, the Lord of the words of the 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 137 


God ”’ (i.e., Ra). In line 324 Amen-em-apt gives 
the reason why the Ape sits by the Scales: it 
was because “ his eye travelled round about the 
Two Lands”’ (.e., through all Egypt), and he saw 
everything that was done everywhere. Now the 
Dog-headed Baboon (Cynocephalus Hamadryas) is 
known by naturalists to be a marvellously alert, 
untiring, and all-seeing watcher} and the theolo- 
gians who designed the vignette made Thoth 
employ him to watch the weighing of words and 
deeds in the Great Scales on his behalf. In the 
Book of the Dead the Judgement takes place 
before Osiris, and Thoth reports to him, but 
Amen-em-apt will have none of Osiris, and he 
makes Thoth the final arbiter. Thoth, as the 
heart and mind of God, alone was qualified to be 
the judge of the words and deeds of men. And 
it was Thoth who, in the dim past, when Osiris 
himself was arraigned before the Great Company 
of the gods of Heliopolis, recognized the truth of 
the words of Osiris and his innocence, and gave 
him the verdict of Truth-speaker. 

From first to last the Teaching of Amen-em-apt 
seems to show that his official religious views were 
based on the old solar cult of Heliopolis, and that 
his personal religion was of the same character 
as that of the great scribes and sages of that city 


1 See Blanford, W. T., Observations on the Geology and 
Zoology of Abyssinia, London, 1870, p. 222; and Brehm, 
Reise nach Habesch, p. 88. Ludolf says (Hist. Aethiopica, 
lib. I, cap. X) that when a company of these baboons wish 
to steal fruit from a garden they act with great craftiness 
and send out spies to find out if there is a guardian in it. 
If there is not, they make signs to their companions, who 
then rush into the garden and devour everything. “‘ Astutis- 
sime agunt, nec eos ingrediuntur nisi exploratoribus praemissis : 
qui ubi tuta omnia sociis significaverint, toto agmine irrumpunt 
nihil prorsus reliqui facientes.” 


138 THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED 


who flourished under the Ancient Empire. Pas- 
sages like that in which he discusses evil and good 
in relation to God link him with the religious 
philosophers of that period. There is little doubt 
that he lived in the first half of the XVIIIth 
dynasty, at all events before Amenhetep III gave 
his powerful support to the cult of Aten, the 
physical body of the Sun-god. It is clear that 
he adopted the views current as to the power of 
this god, for he advises his readers and hearers to 
pray to him daily for health and strength, because 
he will give them everything necessary for their 
life and physical well-being. But he does not 
ascribe to him the powers which Aakhunaten 
(Amenhetep IV) and his followers claimed for him, 
and he reserves his admiration and wonder for 
the might and majesty of Ra as displayed in the 
physical works of creation. He cannot have been 
an Atenite, or ‘‘ Disk-worshipper,” in the modern 
meaning of the word, for his Teaching possesses 
a distinctly ascetic character, which that of 
Amenhetep IV, judging by the tombs and other 
remains at Tall al-‘Amarnah, did not possess. 
And the cult of Amen, or Amen-Ra, which was 
predominant in the Thebaid under the XVIIIth 
dynasty, cannot have appealed to him, or in some 
way or other he would certainly have made 
mention of that god in his Teaching; he was 
certainly no devoted Amenite. In his daily life 
he probably lived like a typical Egyptian country 
gentleman, exact in the fulfilment of his duties 
to his God, a respecter of ancient traditions and 
customs, generous to the widow and the orphan, 
kind to the poor, and a refugé for his dependants 
and for those who were unfortunate and sorrowing. 
No one went hungry or naked in his days. His 
counterpart may be found to-day among the 


THE TEACHING SUMMARIZED _ 139 


educated gentlemen fallah proprietors in the great 
grain-producing districts of Upper Egypt, the 
principal difference being that they worship Allah, 
and not Ra as did their forefathers three thousand 
years ago. 

King Khati advised his son to build himself a 
splendid tomb in the necropolis on the west bank 
of the Nile, and to cut upon it inscriptions which 
would not only honour God, but commemorate 
his own works. The scribe Ani also counselled his 
son to prepare a fine tomb for himself in the necro- 
polis of the mountain, wherein his body must in 
the course of time be buried. He told him not to 
forget to do this, and not to let any of his daily 
occupations cause him to forget the preparation 
of his tomb, and not to let the terrible form of 
death come to carry him off and find him unpro- 
vided with a tomb; the babe at the breast and 
the old man alike must die. Amen-em-apt gives 
no advice of this kind, and he mentions neither 
the tomb as the final abode of a man nor his death. 
Ra, or Khnem-Ra, he argued, gave him his body, 
and another solar god, Aten, or Athen, provided 
for its physical wants ; Ra guided him to Amentt, 
where, he says, a man is “safe in the hand of 
God,” and thus he was content to leave the matter 
of the future life. 


140 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT, 
THE SON OF KA-NEKHT. 


TRANSLATION. 


[Ine TITLE OF THE WoRK AND ITS OBJECT.] 


1. (Cot. I). THE BEGINNING OF THE TEACHING 
CONCERNING LIFE (t.e., of how to live), 

2. [and of] the testimonies (or, admonitions) of 
(t.e., which lead to) safe conduct, 

[and of] the directions for behaviour set 
forth by the AgAotu (i.e., the high officials 
who had the privilege of entering the 
council chambers of kings and governors), 

4. [and of] the commandments! of the SMERU 

(v.e., the friends [of the king], or high 
officers of state). 

[This Teaching and the precepts con- 
tained therein will enable a man] 


5. to know how to return a suitable answer to 
him that has spoken to him, 
6. [and] to carry back a [satisfactory] report 


to the man who has despatched him on 
a mission, 

7. [and] will make him to follow a straight 
course on the roads of life, 


1 The testimonies, directions for behaviour, and command- 
ments mentioned in the above lines are the equivalents of 
the testimonies, precepts, and righteous judgements spoken 
of by David in Psalm cxix, and the “ instruction of wisdom, 
justice and judgement and equity,” referred to by Solomon 
in Proverbs, Chap. I. 


8. 
9. 
IO. 
BE: 


r2. 


ry. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17, 


18. 
IQ. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 141 


[and] will enable him to maintain his position 
of safety upon the earth, 

[and] will cause his heart to descend (or, 
enter) its case, 

[and] make him steer his course away from 
evil (or, the evil one), 

{and] make him to deliver himself! from 
the mouth of the common folk (?) 

[and] to be applauded by the mouth of men 
of understanding. 


[AMEN-EM-APT AND HIS TITLES.] 


[This Teaching was] 


made (7.e., written) by the Director of the 
Crops, who was highly skilled and expe- 
rienced in his profession, 

Scribe of the grain? of Upper and Lower 
Egypt, 

Overseer of the barley crops, heaping up the 
grain to overflowing in the divine granary 
(or, granary of the god), 

Officer in chief in charge of the harvests of 
his lord, 

Registrary of the arable lands [and] of the 
coming in of the gifts (or, offerings) as 
ordered by the Law 

in (?) the Great Name of His Majesty, 

Custodian (?) of the funerary memorials on 
the boundaries of the Aakhut (7.e., of the 
ancestral spirits whose bodies were buried 
in a special quarter of the necropolis, or 
merely the blessed dead in general). 


1 Literally, “‘ to save him.” 


2 Or, 


perhaps, “Grain scribe,” a well-known title of an 


agricultural official. 


142 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


20. (Cox. II). Defender of the King in his 
edicts of government, 

21. Performer of the office of deputy (Wazir ?) 
of Kam (Egypt), 

22. Scribe of the various grains [that formed] 
the divine offerings of all the gods, 

23. Allotter of farms to the peasants [who wished 
to become tenants on the royal estates], 

24. Overseer of the barley crops, Purveyor of 
supplies of grain, 

25. Supplier of the Ahat (palace or tomb ?) with 
stores of barley, 

26. GER MAA? of the town of Teni® and of the 
town of Nifu-ur,* 

27. Reporter of the town of Apu® (Panopolis), 

28. Master of the Necropolis by the town 
Amentt® [and] of the town of Sen,’ 


1 Presumably of Memphis, Abydos and Thebes, but his 
effective overlordship was probably limited to that part of 
Egypt which in later days was called the Thebaid. 

2 I.e., a real GER, not a titular GER. The meaning of ger 
is “‘ to be silent, to hold one’s peace.” It may be the religious 
title of the head of some form of the Egyptian Religion, and 
if this be so, the use of maa in connection with it suggests 
that this title was sometimes bestowed upon men honorifically. 
The inscriptions speak of a “‘ real royal scribe,” 1.¢., a scribe 
who could and did work as a scribe, and also of a “‘ real royal 
kinsman,”’ meaning a man of the same blood as the king, 
and not an honorary kinsman. But see above, p. 101. 

$ Ten, or Teni, was the capital of the nome of Abydos 
in Upper Egypt: it is the ls or @ivs of the Greek writers. 

* A quarter of Abydos. 


5 Ap, Api, or Apu was the capital of the nome f 
(Panopolites) in Upper Egypt ; perhaps = Khem . oes 2 
The Greeks called it Panopolis,- and the Copts CARIN, 
which is preserved in the modern Arabic name of Akhmim. 

6 Translation doubtful. Some pyramid-town on the western 
bank of the Nile may be referred to. 

’ The famous sanctuary of the god Menu at Panopolis. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 143 


29. Master of the sanctuary (?)! of Abydos, 

30. AMEN-EM-APT, THE SON OF Ka-NEKHT, 

31. whose word is truth, of Nifu-ur. 

32. His son is the little one? (youngest ?) of his 
children. 

33. Overseer of the mysteries of the god 
Menti (?)? in the character of Ka-mut-f* 
(t.é., the “‘ Bull or husband of his mother ’’). 

34. He is the man of least account among his 
relatives [and acquaintances], 

35. Inductor® of Un-Nefer,® 

36. Inductor of Horus upon the throne of his 
father, 

37. Watcher (?)’ who is in his holy shrine. 

38. [Text mutilated. ] 

39. (Cov.II1). Surveyor of the Mother of theGod. 

40. Inspector of the Black Bulls of the stable (?) 
of Menti (?), 

41. Defender of the god Menti (?) in his sanc- 
tuary. 


1 IT cannot complete the transcription of the hieratic text 
of this name. Some well-known quarter of Abydos must be 
referred to. 

2 Or, perhaps, “ least,’ using the word in a depreciatory 
sense. 


3 J.e., Menu , the Greek Mi. For a list of 


some of his forms see my Egyptian Hieroglyphic Dictionary, 

. 299. 

4 A self-produced and self-existent god who was much 
worshipped at Panopolis (Akhmim). He is the Kdpy¢us or 
Kapjdis of the Greeks (see Damascius, ed. Wolf, tom. III, 
p. 261), and perhaps the Ku7y¢ mentioned by Wessely (Eph. 
Gr., p. 20, No. 171). ae 

5 Probably the priest whose duty it was to “ bring in” 
Un-Nefer. 

6 J.e,, the Good or Beneficent Being, a form of Osiris. 

7 Or, perhaps, “ inspecting priest.’” The break in the text 
makes the transcription of the title doubtful. 


pa 


144 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


42. Horus as the Truth-speaker, his name of 
Maat (his real name ?)}, 

43. Boy begotten by a nobleman (or, magistrate) 
of Ap (Panopolis), 

44. Son of the sistrum-bearer and directress of 
the singing of the god Shu? and the goddess 
Tefnut,® 

Powerful of word (i.e., Mistress) in the 
College of Horus, [called] Ta-Usrir. 


[With the name of the mother of Amen-em-apt 
the Introduction to the ‘‘ Teaching,’ which con- 
tains the title and object of the work, and the 
genealogy and list of offices held by its author, 
comes to an end. The “ Teaching ”’ itself begins 
with the words :—] 


46. He speaks the First CHAPTER. 

47. I pray thee to lend me thine ears, hearken 
to the things that will be said [by me]. 

48. I pray thee to give thy mind (or, pay 
attention) to the difficult matters which 
will be unravelled [by me]. 

49. The setting of them in thy heart will be 
advantageous [to thee], 


1 This line suggests that when Amen-em-apt wrote his 
Teaching the identity of Menu, or Menti, was absorbed in 
that of Horus. The following forms of the dual god are well 


known : aN <— , Menu-Horus of the lifted 


—~<tom rany - : ag I 
arm, NS | 6? Menu-Horus, son of Isis, s 


oS, — Menu-Horus, the avenger of his father. 


2 He was an emanation of Tem, or Khepera, or Ra, and 
the personification of heat, light, and dryness, and the god 
of the space between earth and sky. 

8 She was an emission of Tem, or Khepera, or Ra, and 
the personification of water and moisture of every kind. 


- 


50. 
51. 
52. 
53- 
54- 
55: 
56. 
57: 
58. 


59: 


60. 
61. 


62. 
63. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 145 


And the rejection of them will be a calamity 
{for thee]. 

I beseech thee to deposit them in the treasure- 
house of thy belly. 

They will enable thy heart (or, mind) to 
tight itself! 

When a gale of words is beating hard upon 
it, [and] 

They will form a guiding support in thy 
tongue. 

If thou wilt live thy life day by day these 
things being in thy heart 

Thou wilt find them [beneficial] in the 
season of adversity’s trial. 

(Cot. IV). Thou wilt find my words to be 
like a treasure-house of life, 

And a source of strength and safety [as 
long as thou art] upon the earth. 


SECOND CHAPTER. 


a 


Guard thyself against plundering the poor 
man 

And from treating with harshness the desti- 
tute. 


1D 


Make not thy hand to turn aside at the 
approach of an aged man, 

Thou assuming the mouth (i.¢., speech) of a 
great man. 


1 J.e., they will help the ship of the heart not to overturn 
(which is the usual meaning of pena) but to alter its course, 
and to sail, if necessary, in the opposite direction. 


K 


146 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


III. 


64. Not ever (i.e., never) let a man be despatched 
by thee on a dangerous mission 

6s. When thou hast any affection for him who 
is to carry it out. 


WwW 


66. Thou shalt not inflict an injury on him 
that has attacked thee 

67. When thou art able to return an answer to 
him on thine own behalf. 


V. 


68. The worker of iniquity—abandon him to the 
dyke (or, river) bank, 

69. His water-flood he will bring [upon] himself. 

70. The north wind hurled upon him will bring 
to an end in misery his hour (or, period of 
life), 

71. He will be seized by the raging waters, 

72. The Storm fiend will mount on high [and] 
the evil crocodiles. 


Wk 

73. The fiery, hot-headed man—what is he like 
to thee ? 

74. He shrieks imprecations, his voice soars 
upwards into the heights of heaven, 

75. The god Aahu (.e., the Moon-god) stands 
still in his course, and holds him to be an 
abomination. 


VII. 
76. (Cor. V). Work the steering oar, we must 
give a passage to the wicked man 


1 The translation of the last half of the line is doubtful ; 


for wicked man we should perhaps read “the man in evil 
case, 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 147 


77. May not we become ourselves like unto him ? 

78. Set him up on his feet, extend to him gladly 
thy hand, 

79. Commit him to the hands of the God 

80. Fill his belly with the bread-cakes of thy 
providing. 


82. Another “occasion of beneficence is in the 
heart of the God, 
83. Idleness of the mind is speech [in this case]. 


84. THIRD CHAPTER. 


VIII. 


85. Couple not together the chattering man with 
the devil Tar (?) 

86. When thou canst pierce him in speech. 

87. Idle in int [is] the crooked man (?), bow 
thyself to the attacker. 

ME cr 3 ee [is] speech. 

89. A raging wind he rushes forth like a destroy- 
ing fire among the reeds. 

go. The noisy, hot-headed man in his hour 
(.e., when his rage is greatest), 

gt. Turn thyself aside from before him, leave 
the matter of him 

92. To the God [Who] knows how to requite 
him. 


1 “The God,” pa neter, DK IN ney Amen-em-apt, 


like the earlier and later writers of this class of literature, 
does not mention the name of any particular god, and “ the 
God” to him meant what Al‘All4h means to the Arabs. 
In the course of his Teaching he mentions Ra, Aten, and 
other gods, but I do not think he is referring to any of them 
here. In funerary texts “ the god”’ frequently means Osiris, 
but this Teaching is not a funerary text. 
K 2 


148 


93. 
94. 


95: 


96. 


97: 

98. 

99: 
00. 
IOI. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
r06. 


107. 


1 Some noun seems to be wanting after KAI l mee 
Ko 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


EX; 


If thou wilt pass the days of thy life 
[keeping] these things in thy heart, 
Thy children, behold them ! 


FourRTH CHAPTER. 


X. 


(Cot. VI). Now (or, as for) the noisy, hot- 
headed man of the house of the god (or, 
temple), 

He is like a large, leafy tree planted in the 
courtyard [of a temple] ; 

Its [leaves]! come to an end (i.e., wither), his 
unripe fruit drops off, 

Brought when its end has come to the 
water-course (?) 

It is [cast] into the water, and carried away 
far from its place, 

The flame of fire is its winding-sheet (or, 
shroud). 

[But] the Ger Maa who sets himself by the 
side [of the road], 

He is like a large leafy tree planted in shining 
(or, fertile) ground (?). 

It blossoms, it doubles its yield of fruit in the 
summer. 

It has its place before the face of its lord 
(or, Owner). 

Its foliage (or, fruit) is sweet, the shadow 
thereof is pleasant, 

And it is carried at its-end (z.e., finally) into 
the groves of the God. 


1 


q 
d 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 149 


108. FIFTH CHAPTER. 
XI. 
109. Make no encroachment on the dykes of the 
house of the god. 
pS hE 


tro. Commit not an act of avariciousness so that 
thou mayest find (7.e., obtain) additional 
wealth. 


XIII. 


11m. Make not to turn aside from his duty a 
servant of God 
112. To do what is profitable to another man. 


XIV. 


113. Say not, “ To-day is even as to-morrow 
morning [will be].” 

114. The end (or, result) of this [reasoning] will 
be like what ? 

1z5. (Cor. VII). To-morrow has yet to come, 
to-day has yet to pass away. 


XV. 


116. The water-flood (Inundation) is on the 
mouth (1.e., crest) of the surging waves. 

117. The crocodiles make themselves visible 
(from the mud], the hippopotami appear in 
the light [from the water]. 

118. The fish leap (?) in the waters. 

11g. The wolves gorge themselves, the geese keep 
high festival. 

120. The restraining cords are cast loose. 

121. Now every GER of the house of God 

122. Shall say, ‘‘Great is the graciousness of 
Ra.”’ 


150 


127, 


124. 
125. 


126. 


127. 


128. 
120. 
130. 
131. 


132, 
133. 


134. 


135. 
136. 


137. 
138. 
139. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


O thou who art filled with silence, thou shalt 
find the life, 

Thy body shall be preserved in safety upon 
the earth. 


SIXTH CHAPTER. 


XVI. 


Thrust not aside the funerary monument on 
the boundaries of the Aakhu (i.e., remove 
not a tombstone which is on the borders of 
the Necropolis) 

When thou art marking out additional lands 
for crops (?). 


XVII. 


Commit no robbery (i.e., filch not away land) 
by means of the cubit of the fields 

When thou art assessing the bounds of the 
estate of the widow. 

The land that has gone back from the 
plough is the waste of a man’s lifetime. 

He who cheats thee, himself belonging to the 
fields (or, land), 

Is snared in the counsels of iniquity, 

He is fettered by the Divine Souls (7.e., Will) 
of Aahu (the Moon-god). 

(Cor. VIII). Make thyself to see what he 
does upon the earth. 

He is a greedy robber of the helpless man. 

He is the deadly enemy who would work the 
overthrow of thy body. 

Life is snatched away by the mere sight of 
his aspect. “as 

His house is the enemy of the town [in which 
he lives]. 

[But] his store-houses shall be swept away 
as by a flood, 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 151 


140. His possessions shall be carried off from 
the hand{s] of his sons and daughters, 

141. His goods (or, wealth) shall be given to 
another (7.¢., stranger). 


XVIII. 


142. Take good heed concerning the treading down 
of the boundaries of the fields, 
143. Lest horrible calamity be brought upon thee. 


XIX. 


144. Likewise make propitiatory offerings to God 
by the Divine Souls (7.e., Will) of Aahu 
(the Moon-god). 

145. Occupy thyself with the affairs of the 
boundaries of the Aakhu (7.¢., the Ancestral 
Spirits, or the blessed dead). 

146. Be kind to thyself, make thy body strong 


and happy, 
147. [But] take good heed to thyself in respect of 
Nebertcher.t 
XX. 
148. Drive not thy furrows through the lands? of 
another. 


149. Profitable to thee is the strength (or, well- 
being) which comes by their mouth (?). 

150. Plough thou in the fields which thou findest 
to be thy own property, 

151. Take thou the bread-cakes from the store- 
house of thy body. 


1 J.¢., ‘‘ Lord to the uttermost limit,” or God of the Universe, 
the All-Lord. 


tos 5 ae 
t dge of a field where 
Ga aNG re perhaps the edg 
the plough turns. 


152 


152. 


153. 


154. 
155. 
156. 
157. 
158. 
159. 


t60. 


TOT: 


162. 
163. 


164. 
165. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


RAL. 
Better is one aft of land (about six feet) 
which the God has given thee 
Than five thousand ats which thou hast 
gotten by fraud (or, violence). 


XXII. 

(Cor. IX). Do not acquire the habit of 
passing the day in eating-houses and places 
where roasted meat [is sold]. 

Do not acquire the habit [of passing the day] 
in tasting one pot of beer after another. 

Those who pass their whole time at the 
food-store? 

Become to-morrow [merely] victuals. 


XXIII. 
Better is the beggar who is in the hand of 
the God 
Than the rich who are safely housed in a 
comfortable dwelling. 


XXIV. 
Better are bread-cakes of flour and water 
with a loving heart (or, mind) 
Than rich meats that carry with them 
bickering and quarrelling. 


SEVENTH CHAPTER. 


XXV. 

Fashion not thy heart in such wise that it 
hankers after things of wealth (i.e., 
luxurious foods and apparel), 

Not unknowing are the god Shai (Luck) and 
the goddess Renenit (Destiny). 

Let not thyself abandon thy heart (or, mind) 
to the things that are extraneous. 


1 Literally, “ granary.” 


166. 


167. 
168. 


169. 
170. 
171. 


172. 


173. 
174. 
175. 
176. 
177. 
17S. 


179. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 153 


Let every man have his hour (?.e., let every 
man choose his own time for his own 
affairs). 

XXVI. 

Form not the habit of ordering thyself to 
seek for more than thou hast 

[When] thy own goods and possessions are 
in thy safe keeping. 


XXVII. 

If valuable goods which have been obtained 
by robbery have been brought together by 
thee 

They will not pass the night in thy hands, 

At daybreak certainly they will not be in thy 
house. 

They will look at the place where they were, 
and most assuredly they will not be 
[there]; they have swallowed them- 
selves. 

Either the ground has opened its mouth, and 
swallowed them up straightway, 

(Cot. X). And they have sunk down deep 
in the abyss [thereof] ; 

[Or] they have become a great broken heap 
through rust (or, decay) ; 

[Or] they have become submerged in the 
room [for waste] ; 

[Or] they have made for themselves wings 
like the geese, 

[And] have spread their wings and flown up 
into the sky. 


XXVITI. 


Make not thyself to take pleasure in rich 
treasures that have been obtained by 
robbery, 


154 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


180. 


I8r. 


182. 


Whilst sighing (i.e., pretending to grieve) for 
the man who has been plundered (or, the 


beggar). 
oe XXIX. 
When the chieftain of the Stiu (Asiatics, or 
bowmen ?) departs from a man 
His servants destroy him. 


XXX. 

[If] thou sailest with a robber thou wilt be 
left in the stream, 

[But] the boat of the Ger has a fair wind 
[behind it]. 

XXXI. 

Accustom thyself to direct thy sincere prayer 
to the Aten (i.e, the God of the Solar 
Disk or the Disk itself) when he is rolling 
up into the sky, 

Saying, ‘‘Grant to me, I beseech thee, 
strength and health.” 

He will give to thee the things that are 
necessary for the life. 

Thou shalt be safe from anxious care. 


EIGHTH CHAPTER. 


XXXII. 
Bestow thou thy beneficence (or, bounty ?) 
on the bodies of the people, 
[And] thou shalt be applauded by all faces 
(1.¢., everybody). 
XXXII. 
Praise and exult in the Serpent (1.e., Goddess), 


Spit upon Apep. : 
XXXIV. 
Keep thy tongue from speech of lying (or, 
slander). 


a 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 155 


XAXXYV. 


195. (Cor. XI). Show thou kindness (or, affec- 
_tion) to people of humble condition. 


XXXVI. 


196. Find thou thy seat in the sanctuary of the 
: house of the god, 
197. The gifts made by thee shall be the cake- 
offerings of thy Lord. 
198. Make thyself to be [as if] thou wast one of 
the blessed dead, [and as if] thou wast a 
swathed [mummy] in thy coffin. 


AXXVIT. 


199. Be thou strong for the Divine Souls (i.e., 
Will) of God (to do His Will ?). 


AXXVITLI. 


200. Make not an invocation to bring a detestable 
thing upon people. 


XXXIX. 


201. Hide [thou] the affairs (or, plans) of the 
fugitive (slave ?) 


XL. 


202. Whether thou hearest the thing that is good 
or the thing that is evil, 

203. Treat it as a matter that is outside thy 
interest ; hearken not to it. 

204. I beseech thee to spread with thy tongue 
only the report of that which is good upon 
the earth, 

205. Whilst as far as reports of evil are concerned, 
hide them in thy belly. 


156 


2006. 


221. 


222. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


NINTH CHAPTER. 


XLI. 

Make not to be a friend of thine the hasty, 
hot-headed man, 

Even though thou hast to go to his house 
frequently to have speech with him. 

XLII. 

Keep well thy tongue in making an answer 
to him that is thy chief, 

At the same time guarding thyself against 
reviling him. 

Never permit his speech to fall on thee like 
‘a lasso 

So that thou must uncoil it by means of thy 
answer. 

Put questions to him (or, consult with him), 
answering like a subordinate in thy agita- 
tion. 

At the same time taking good heed not to 
oppose (?) him. 

XLIII. 

(Cor. XII). The word that is uttered by a 
man with malicious (?) intent is swifter to 
hurt 

Than the wind that precedes the storm (?). 

This man casts to the ground, this man 
builds up with his tongue, 

He gives utterance to strings of words that 
carry destruction in them. 

This man makes an answer that merits a 
beating (?). 

[For] the burden (i.¢., object) thereof is to 
do harm. aS 

He trafficks by means of a boat after the 
manner of other folk. 

He loads the boat with the discourse of 
iniquity, 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 157 


223. He makes himself the ferryman of him that 
catches [men] in a net of words. 

224. [Whether] he is going away [or whether] 
he is coming back, he continues to chatter 
(or, gossip). 

225. Whether he is eating or whether he is 
drinking, even in his own house, } 

226. His conversation returns to matters that ar 
outside (or, that have-nothing to do with 
him).? 

227. The Day itself stands up and makes an 
accusation against his abominable deeds, 

228. His sons and daughter cry out ‘‘ Woe” to 
themselves. 

229. The god Khnem-Ra? makes a process (or, 
brings a case) against him. 


1 J.e., his answer to any question is always beside the mark. 
2? Khnemu was one of the oldest gods of Egypt, and the 
animal sacred to him was the flat-horned ram, which dis- 
appears from the monuments before the XIIth dynasty. 
His name means “‘ the uniter,” 7.¢., it was he who put together 
the material from which man was made. He was also the 


“* builder,” Q INSEE of men. He was older than Ra, 


and was “‘ the fashioner of mankind, the creator of the gods, 
the Father, “ who was in the beginning.” He “made 


the things that are, and will make those that shall be ; he is 
the source from which all that is sprang, and was the Father 
of fathers, and the Mother of mothers.” He was “the 
Grandfather of the gods and goddesses, he was self-created, 
and the maker of heaven, earth, underworld, water, and 
mountains.”” Later he associated with himself Ra, Shu, Geb 
and Osiris, and his priests identified him with the primeval 
Water-god Nu, or Nenu, and subsequently with Hap-Ur, 
the Great Nile of Egypt. Amen-em-apt, assuming that the 
mischief-making scandal-monger whom he is denouncing was 
made by Khnem-Ra, suggests that the god is so disgusted 
with the behaviour of the being whom he created that he 
renounces all responsibility for him. 


158 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


230. He is of the potter’s wheel of (z.e., worked by) 
the devil Tar} 

231. He mixes together and kneads [material] to 
destroy the hearts (or, minds of men) 
therewith. 

232. He is like a whelp of [one of] the dogs 
(literally, wolves) of the stable (or, farm- 
yard) 

233. With his eye fixed jealously on [the move- 
ments of] his companions. 

234. (CoL. XIII). He causes men and women to 
become enemies by his scandal-mongering. 

235. He goes before every wind like the blast 
that goes before the habiéb (1.e., the sand- 
storm or whirlwind of the desert). . 

236. He destroys the hair (or, skin) of Shu? 

237. He gathers his tail (7.e., bends it round) 
about him like the young crocodile, 

238. Bringing it close to him ready for the deadly 
sweep. 

239. His lips are date-syrup, his tongue is a 
deadly dagger. 

240. A consuming fire blazes within his belly. 

241. Make no flights (7.e., attempts) to fill (7.e., 
please) that fellow, 

242. Lest thou bring calamity upon thyself. 


243. TENTH CHAPTER. 


ALIYV, 

244. Allow not thyself to be greeted as a friend 
among thy [neighbours] by the hasty, 
hot-headed man who is thy opponent ; 

1 This devil is mentioned in the Rubric to Chap. CLXIV 
of the Saite Recension of the Book of the Dead under the 
a 
form p Ys 
? This seems to be an allusion to the obscuring of the face 
of the sky by the storm-clouds produced by the hurricane. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 159 


245. [If thou dost] thou wilt thyself damage thy 
heart (or, mind). 

246. Make not thyself to say to him, “ Thou art 
praised,’’ with evil intent, 

247. There being terror in thy body. 


XLV. 
248. Hold not converse in the company of men 
of iniquity, me 
249. For that is an abominable thing [to do] 
before the God. 


XLVI. 
250. Make not thy mind to be divided for the 
sake of thy tongue. 
251. Let all thy plans and behaviour have a 
sound foundation. | 
XLVIL. 
252. Be weighty (7.e., dignified) in the presence 
of people of lowly condition. 
253. (Cor. XIV). Put thou thyself for safe 
keeping in the hand of the God. 


XLVITI. 
254. God hates the man who utters frivolous, 
lying speech. 
255. The greatest abomination to Him is the man 
who [nourishes] enmity [in his] belly. 
250. ELEVENTH CHAPTER. 


p44 9.¢ 
257. Hanker not greedily after the things of the 
man whose food is dainty and spiced,} 
258. Though thou art hungry for his bread. 


1 Or, perhaps, Hanker not greedily for the things (?.e., food) 
of the man who eats and drinks luxuriously, 1.¢., the gourmand 
or glutton (not epicure). 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


Now the food that is dainty and spiced is as 
a storm in the gullet (or, turns the 
stomach), 

[And] it makes the bowels to eject it. 

It turns the man who is a counsellor into a 
man of iniquity, 


_ And his sense turns itself away from his body. 


Inasmuch as the evil nature (or, base appe- 
tite) corrupts [his] disposition for well- 
doing, 

The evil [in him] destroys what is good. 


L. 


Be thou a creature of nought in the presence 
of thy chief (7.e., superior officer). 

Thou shalt acclaim him humbly in thy 
speech (7.e., conversation). 

Thy adulatory remarks, they shall meet and 
turn aside his cursings. 

Thy homage when smelling the earth [shall 
disarm his] violence. 


Li 


When thou hast swallowed the mouthful of 
bread of a great man thou shalt vomit it, 

[And] thou shalt be empty of thy good thing 
(or, dainty ?). 


LU. 


Make thyself to understand (or, see) the 
foresight (?) of the glutton. 

(Cor. XV). He himself gathers together 
staves [for the hunting nets ?]. 

Every one of his servants is a beater for the 
hunting traps, 

[And] a strong man smites (7.e., kills) in the 
slaughter-house. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 161 


TAL: 


275. [If] thou art undone (or, vanquished) in the 
presence of thy chief 

276. It will be a disgrace for thy subordinates 
(or, servants). 

277. Steer thou thy course away from the glutton 

; forthwith ; 

278. Observe him, at the same time avoiding the 
things [which he offers thee]. 

279. TWELFTH CHAPTER. 

LIV. 

280. Behave not greedily in respect of the things 
(t.e., food) of the nobleman, 

281. Since the filling of the mouth with the bread 
of a great man is unstinted (i.¢., is free to 
every comer). 

282. If he gives to thee for the growth (2.e., 
increase) of his possessions 

283. Hate (z.e., reject) what is his [and] keep safe 
what is thine. 

VG 

284. Make no undertaking (?) in company with 
the noisy, hot-headed man, 

285. [Or] thou wilt be making thyself a friend of 
a man of moral obliquity. 


LVI. 
286. Ifthou art sent onamission to transport straw 
287. Hate (t.¢c., cast away, or reject) the weeds (?) 
that are [in] it. 
LVII. 
288. If thine eye lights upon a person who is 
engaged on a mission of danger (?) 
289. Report it not, but dispatch him on his errand 
[and] let him return for another occasion, 
L 


162 


290. 
20l. 
292. 
203. 


294. 


295- 
296. 


297. 


208. 
299. 


300. 
301. 


302. 


303. 
304. 
305. 
300, 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. 
LVIII. 

Make not men to affix [additions ?] to the 
roll (register ?). 

This is an abominable thing to the God. 

1). 

(Cot. XVI). Make not the word of one 
man of iniquity [to appear] to be the truth 
by any act of thine, 

Whilst at the same time thou art supporting 
another man of iniquity with thy tongue. 

1D.e 

Reckon not as nothing things [that have 
value], 


[By so doing] thou wilt falsify thy rolls (or, : 


registers). 
LXI. 
If thou findest a great mass of hidden treasure 
in the possession of a poor man, 
Make (z.¢., divide) it into three portions. 
Release two portions [and] let one remain 
[with thee], 
Thou shalt find it like the ways of life. 
Thou shalt lie down and sleep and pass thy 
whole night [as safely] as if it were to-day ; 
Thou shalt find it like the report (or, news) 
of a good thing. 
LXII. 
Better is the praise (7.e., approval) with the 
love of men 
Than the riches (or, wealth) laid up in a 
treasure house. : 
Better are the cakes of flour and water 
[eaten] with a loving mind (or, disposition) 
Than strong meats [eaten] with strife and 
enmity. 


| 
: 


a) 2 - 


_I-—_— = 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 163 


307. FOURTEENTH CHAPTER. 
LXIII. 
308. Remember not [too exactly] the antecedents 
of a man 


309. When thou art striving (?) to seek for his 
hand (help ?), 

310. If he says to thee, ‘‘ Accept the things [which 
I have] brought.” 

yi... die%1s not one’who has no... .. . 

312. Cast not malign looks at him whilst bending 
down thy face, 
313. Whilst turning away thy glance elsewhere. 
314. Greet him with kind words in thy mouth, 
speak and salute (?) him cordially. 
315. (Cor. XVII). [If] he approaches thee (?) 
thy end comes. 

316. Make him not to go down to his former 
[state], 

317. On another occasion he can be brought (?). 


318. FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. 


LXIV. 


319. Do the thing that is right [and] thou wilt 
attain to a [true] state of being. 


LXV. 


320. Make no erasure (?) in the registers on behalf 
of an encroacher. 


LXVI. 
321. Since the beak of the Ibis-god (z.e., Thoth) 
is the finger of the scribe, 
322. Take good heed not to thrust it aside. 
323. The Ape [of Thoth] sits directing Per- 
Khemenu (Hermopolis), 
L 2 


164 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


324. His eye travels round about through the 
Two Lands (i.e., Upper and Lower Egypt). 

325. Since he observes the man who makes a 
slip (or, mistake) with his finger, 

326. He will withdraw his benefactions (or, 

endowments) according to what is right (?). 

327. If the scribe continues to make slips (or, 
mistakes) with his finger. 

328. Hisson willnot be decreed [for employment. ] 


[The idea that the beak of the Ibis-god (Thoth) 
is the finger of the scribe is new to me. It has 
long been known that the deceased was identified 
with the palette of Thoth, and the scribe’s palette 
with Osiris. In Chap. XCIV of the Theban 
Recension of the Book of the Dead, which is 
entitled ‘‘ Chapter of praying for an ink-pot and 
palette,” the deceased says, “Hail, Aged God, 
who sees his father, guardian of the Book of Thoth. 
I bring [them], I hasten, Aker, dweller in Set. 
I bring the ink-pot and the palette, which are the 
necessary things for the hand of Thoth ; hidden 
(or, secret) is what is in them. Behold me, a 
scribe. I bring the corruptible body of Osiris, 
I write on it. I make (i.e., write) the words of the 
great and beautiful god every day, happily. Thou 
didst order me, Her-Aakhuti. I do what is right 
(i.e., I perform truth), I bear it to thee every day.” 
On the palette as Osiris see Pietschmann, Der 
Verstorbene als Schriebpalette in Festschrift fiir Georg 
Ebers, Leipzig, 1897, p. 82.] 


LXVII. 


329. If thou wilt pass the days of thy life these 
things being in thy heart, 
330. Thy children—behold them ! 


ito fea eae 
: : 
The transcription \} | em doubtful, 


Boks 


332. 
333- 


334. 
335- 
336. 
337: 
338. 
339. 
340. 
341. 


342. 
343. 


344. 
345. 
346. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 16s 


SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. 
LXV 

Make not the balance to swerve [either] 
through thy falsification of the get weights, 

[Or] through thy obliteration of the mouths 
of the measures (7.e., the characters or 
stamps on the weights and measures). 

Make not a practice of preferring the 
measures of the fields, 

Thou abandoning those in use in the house 
of silver (or, White House). 

The Ape [of Thoth] sits by the side of the 
Scales, 

(Cot. XVIII). [And] his heart facts] as the 
tongue (or, pointer) thereof. 

God removes, even as does the Great One 
Thoth, 

Him that is in the habit of finding these 
devices to do them. 

Accustom not thyself to cheat by means of 
the get weights. 

It is they (7.e., the cheaters) who multiply the 
tears of the Divine Souls (7.¢., Will) of God. 

UXIX, 

If thou seest another man stumbling from 
time to time, 

Go with him and enable him to continue on 


his way. 
LXX. 


Covet not (or, be not greedy for) the precious 
metals. 

Hate (i.e., avoid or reject) the beautiful 
singing woman (?). 

What is it like ? A fetter, a tie. 


1 Or, If thou seest a man going astray, guide him to the 
road which he ought to follow. 


361. 
362. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


It makes [a man] to stumble (or, go astray) 
in the presence of the God. 

If a paddle (?) of gold be scraped off from 
an object of the finest gold 

At daybreak to-morrow morning it will be 
lead. 


SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER. 


1.0.4 & 


Take heed neither to defraud the divine 
Utchat (7.e., the Eye of Ra) 

Nor to falsify the mouths (or, commands ?) 
thereof. 

Make no robbery of [the things of] Uben, the 
mighty god, 

For he (i.e., Uben) is never wanting in (or, 
absent from) its (the Utchat’s) body.* 

Thou shalt give its measure, as to a great 
man [when] he is coming in. 

Thy hand shall set it down (?) justly (or, 
correctly). 

LXXII. 


Make not a measuring rod, At, for thy use, 
whereby thou canst measure with two 
(different results}. 

Do always the thing that is right (d.e., 
measure correctly) 

Since the Ap? measure is the Eye of Ra. 

(Cor. XIX). It (1.e., the Utchat, or Eye of 
Ra) holds in abomination the man who 
robs and steals 

And who when measuring makes many 
mistakes, : 

Since the seal of his eyé is upon the Apt 
measure. 


1 This seems to mean that the god Uben, who is Ra, is 
always in the body of his Eye. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 167 


363. 
364. 


365. 
360. 


307. 
368. 
369. 


370. 
371. 
372. 
373. 


374- 
375: 


376. 


377: 


378. 


EXAT: 


Receive not the summer grain of the peasant 
farmer, 

Thou binding [him] by what is registered 
against him to ruin him. 

Make not thyself one (?) with the measurer(?) 

Thou meanwhile playing (?) the master of 
the house. 

The Divine Souls (or, Will of God) increase 
the store-house grain 

More than the Director of the Great Place. 


EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. 


LXXIV. 


Accustom not thyself to lie in bed (or, sleep) 
whilst the dawn is rising in an awesome 
manner in the sky. 

The break of the day and the dawn [are] like 
what ? (7.e., to what can they be compared 
for beauty ?) 

The man who has no knowledge of the dawn 
[is] like what ? (1.e., to what can he be 
compared for ignorance ?) 

Whilst the God is [occupied] with His works 
of beneficence 

The man is [indulging in] his slothfulness. 

On the one side are the words (or, gossip) 
that men utter, 

On the other are the works that the God is 
doing. 

LXXV. 


Say not, ‘‘ By no manner of means is what is 
abominable (or, evil) to be permitted [to 
exist],” 

Whilst thou thyself art doing thy utmost to 
seek after strife. 


168 


379: 


380. 
381. 
382. 
383. 


384. 


385. 
380. 
387. 
388. 


389. 


390. 
391. 
392. 
393. 
394. 
395. 
396. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


If the thing that is abominable (i.¢., evil) 


belongs to the God, " 
He Himself will stamp it with the seal of 
His finger. 


There is no goodness in the hand of the God 

Because there is no badness before Him. 

(Cor. XX). If He could bring Himself to 
seek after goodness 

The occasion ended (i.¢., the opportunity 
served) He would destroy it. 


LXXVI,. 


Be weighty in thy mind, consolidate thy 
heart, 

Accustom not thyself to shape thy course 
by thy tongue [only]. 

Even if the tongue of a man be the steersman 
of the boat, 

It is Nebertcher who is its watcher in the 
bows (i.e., captain). 


NINETEENTH CHAPTER. 


LXXVII. 


Go not among the mombers of the Town 
Council in the presence of the President, 
Or thou mayest be obliged to contradict (or, 
show to be inaccurate) thine own words. 

Be not continually rising up and sitting down 
whilst thou art making thy answer ; 

Thy testimonies must support themselves. 

Make no altercation with (or, make no 
attempt to coerce) the supporters of a lord 
(v.e., any owner of property), 

A word [spoken] in the- Gouncil Chamber 
may lead to a vexatious inquiry. 

Speak the truth in the presence of the 
President, 


4 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 169 


397. Lest he seize and take possession of thy 
person. 

398. If thou wilt appear before him in the early 
hours of the day 

399. He will consider graciously every word of 
thine. 

400. Speak thy mouth (i.e., say thy say) in the 
Court before the headmen, 

401. Watch carefully, so that thou mayest come 
back on a second occasion. 


402. TWENTIETH CHAPTER. 


LXXVIII. 


403. Make not a member of the Courts of Law! 
to trip up (t.e., to arrive at a wrong con- 
clusion or verdict) 

404. Through thy setting aside (or, hiding) the 
truth, 

405. (Cor. XXI). For whilst thy face is cloaked 
with a garment (?) 

406. And thou art sheltered (or, content) he is 
under constraint (?). 


LXXIX. 


407. Accept not a present (7.¢., bribe) from aman 
of power and authority 

408. [If] thou art to treat wrongfully for him the 
poor man in distress. 


LXXX. 


409. Now Truth is the great bearer of God, 

410. He gives it to the man who loves Him. 

411. Since the mighty power is with him who is 
like unto Him | 

412. He carries off (or, slays) the impotent one in 
his violence. 


1 Or, perhaps, of the “ Official Classes.” 


170 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


LXXXI. 


413..¢ .Make not-for thyselt ac... - eee 1 of 
iniquity. 

414. They are the great auxiliaries of Death, _ 

415. They are the great incentives to sloth [in 
respect of] honourable actions, 

416. They are the guides who report for the 
herald [of judgement]. 


LXXXII. 


417. Falsify not the things that make thee to 
wonder [written] on the roll, 

418. For thus thou wilt be injuring (or, dis- 
arranging) the plans of God. 


LXXXITI. 


419. Make no [attempt] to find for thyself the 
Divine Souls (7.e., Will) of God, 

420. Donot the god Shai (Luck) [and] the goddess 
Renenit (Destiny) exist ? 


LXXXIV. 
421. Study to make to increase (or, flourish) the 
possessions of the lords of wealth, 
422. Thou at the same time seeking for thyself 
the means of subsistence. 
423. Never build thy heart in their houses (7.e., set 
not thy affections upon the houses they 


live in), 
424. Thy carcase [being] in the house of slaughter. 
425. TWENTY-FIRST CHAPTER. 


' 


LXXXV. 
426. (Col. XXII). Say*not,.‘' I have found a 
very chief of robbers,”’ 
1 The determinative +} indicates some article of furniture, 
perhaps couch or bed; the word is unknown to me. 


— 
ee 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 171 


427. When the offender happens to be a man in 
thine own town. 

428. Say not, “I have found a sedition-monger ” 
(or, rebel) 

429. When the offender happens to be a hater 
(z.e., enemy of thine). 

430. For most assuredly thou knowest not the 
plans of Godt 


LXXXVI. 


431. Bring not to an end (i.e., waste not) in 
slumber the early hours of the day (or, the 


dawn). 
LXXXVII. 
432. Seat thou thyself on the two arms of the 
God. 


433. To thy silence (silent meditation ?) [add] 
prostrations on the ground. 


LXXXVIII. 


434. If the crocodile is going to lash out with his 
tail, cry out (7.e., give warning), 

435. For even the papyrus plants hold him in 
awe. 


LXXXIX. 
436. Do not empty thy belly when the people are 
round about thee, 
437. For if thou dost thou wilt destroy their 
respect for thy dignity. 


ka 


438. Make not thy words to circulate among the 
common folk (or, peasants), 

439. If thou dost thou wilt become a companion 
of the man of violence. 


1 Lines 430-433 are repeated in lines 455-458. 


172 


440. 
44t. 


442. 
443. 


444. 
445. 
440. 
447. 


448. 


449. 
450. 
451. 
452. 
453. 
454. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


<cn 
Better is it for a man to keep his information 
(or, news) in his belly on 
Than to publish it abroad with the addition 
of lies. 


XCII. 


Never run with swift steps to attain that 
which will be advantageous [to thee], 

[On the other hand] never create the circum- 
stances that will destroy it. 


TWENTY-SECOND CHAPTER. 


XCITI. 


Make no attempt to shut the mouth of (or, 
to make dumb) the man who is holding 
converse with thee ; 

Do thou tell him that he must declare [what 
is in his] heart. 

Make no flight (¢.e., attempt) to enter [into 
the conversation] against him (i.e, to 
anticipate his remarks) 

(Cot. XXIII). [When] thou dost not see 
what he is doing (t.e., the point which he is 
making). 

Make thyself to understand beforehand what 
the answer to him must be. 

[If] thou art heated (7.e., losest thy temper) 
thy end comes. 

Let the matter rest upon him, he wil’empty 
his belly. ) 
Knowing jhis character (or, view) he can be 

found out, my 

His feet (or, legs) being removed he cannot 
work his iniquity, 

Being afraid he will not act underhandedly, 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 173 


455. For, most assuredly, thou knowest not the 
plans of God. 

456. Bring not to an end (i.e., waste not) in 
slumber the early hours of the day (or, 
the dawn).t 

457. Seat thou thyself on the two arms of the God. 

458. To thy silence (silent meditation ?) [add] 
prostrations on the ground. 


459. TWENTY-THIRD CHAPTER. 
XCIV. 
460. Eat not thou bread in the presence of the 
Governor, 


461. Thus setting thy mouth forward into pro- 
minence (?). 


XCV. 
462. If thou fillest thyself full of the rich meats 
of iniquity 
463. They will pass back again in thy vomit. 
XCVI. 


464. Keep thy gaze fixed upon the vessel (platter?) 
which is before thee, 
465. Thou must make it to serve all thy needs. 
XCVITI. 


466. Though the Governor may resemble a 
nobleman in his official position, 

467. He may also resemble the sacred crocodiles 
in the water [in] rapacity and cruelty. 


468. TWENTY-FOURTH CHAPTER. 


XCVIII. 


469. Listen not to the answers (i.e., conversation) 
of the Governor in his own house, 


1 Lines 455-458 are a repetition of lines 430-433, 


Ww 
| 

q 

4 


470. (CoL. XXIV). Thou then repeating what 
he said to thee outside in the town. 

471. Even when thou hast brought thy mouth 
outside [his house], 

472. Do not empty out into the street what is in 
thy breast. 

473. Since the heart (or, mind) of a man is the 
nose of God 

474. Take good heed that thou dost not cause it 
sorrow. 

475. The man [to whom thou speakest] may bea 
powerful official, 

476. [He may also be] a private person whose 
name is quite unknown. 


174 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


477. TWENTY-FIFTH CHAPTER. 


ACIX, 


478. Make not a laughing-stock of the blind man. 
Vex! (or, browbeat) not the dwarf, 

479. [And] frustrate not the plans of the afflicted 
(or, lame) man. 

480. Vex" (or, irritate) not a man who is in the 
hand of the God (i.e. the man who is 
suffering through some dispensation of 
God) 

481. By singing to him the praises of him who 
has wronged him. 


C. 
482. Even if aman mixes the mud [and] the straw 
483. It is the God Who is his builder. 
484. It is He Who throws down [a house], it is He 
Who builds [it] up daily. 
485. It is He Who can turn a thousand [men] 
into corruption at His pleasure, 


* Or, perhaps, ‘‘ make not a mock of.” 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 175 


486. It is He Who can make one man to have the 
overseership of a thousand. 

487. Aman lives his [allotted] hour of life : 

488. Rejoice, be glad. It is He Who makes [a 
man] to arrive in Amentt ; 

489. He is safe in the hand of the God. 


490. TWENTY-SIXTH CHAPTER. 
WE 
491. Accustom not thyself to sit in the beer- 
house. 
CII. 


492. (Cot. XXV). Give not commands to one 
who is greater than thyself, 

493. Whether he be [thy] junior in his official 
position, 

494. Or whether he be [thy] senior by birth. 


CITI. 


495. Show thyself friendly to the man for whom 
thou hast antipathy. 
496. The strength of Ra is to him that is on the 


road. 
CIV. 


497. If thou seest a man who is greater than 
thyself outside [his house], 
498. Follow after him and greet him with words 
of respect. 
GY. 


499. Stretch out the hand to the aged man when 
he is filled full of beer, 

500. Treat him reverently when he is in the 
company of his sons and daughters. 

501. Is not thy arm (or, strength) made weak by 
robbery ? ee 

502, Is not the back bowed by affliction ? 


176 


503. 
504. 


595. 
500. 


597- 


508. 


509. 
510. 


511. 
512. 
513. 
514. 
515. 


516. 
O17. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


CVI. 


Reduce not to beggary the [poor] man who 
has uttered something which is pleasant 
Rather than the rich man whose strings of 

words are straw. 


CVII. 


The man who is in the bows of the boat 
(z.e., the captain) watches the going thereof, 

He does not allow his bark to capsize (or, be 
submerged). 


TWENTY-SEVENTH CHAPTER. 


CVIII. 


Curse (7.e., abuse) not the man who is 
greater than thyself, 

He will look at the god Ra in front of thee. 

And moreover, he will report thee to the 
god Aten as he rolls up into the sky. 

Say: For a man of no importance to heap 
curses upon a great man, 

[Is] a crime (i.e., a thing worthy of death) 
unknown to the Ra. 

(Cor. XXVI). [If] a man of no importance 
wishes to curse a great man, 

Come! Let him inflict a beating on thee, 
thou [keeping] thy hand in thy bosom. 

Come! Let him heap curses upon thee, 
thou remaining silent. 


CIX. 
If like the dawn (at ‘the time of dawn ?) 
thou appearest before him, 
He will give to thee the means of living in 
an open-handed manner. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 177 


518. If the means of which he is master [are] 
from the finger (or, seal) of his lord, 
519. They consume (?) him to whom they are 


given (?) 
520. TWENTY-EIGHTH CHAPTER. 
CX. 
521. Do not make find (i.e., search out) the 
RO IW ee eS in the fields, 
522. Do not permit thyself to return an answer 
to her. 
CXI, 


523. Make no undue haste to sing the praises (or, 
to follow the cult) of the wine cup! (?), 

524. It will increase (or, double) the heart (7.e., 
courage) of thine adversaries. 


CXII. 
525. The love of God is more precious [and] 
estimable 
526. Than the reverence of the nobleman (or, 
magistrate). . 
527. TWENTY-NINTH CHAPTER. 
CXITI. 


528. Turn not back the people who wish to cross 
over the river 

529. Whilst thou art stretched out at thy ease 
in the cabin. 

530. Ifa paddle (or, oar) be brought to thee when 
the ferry-boat is in mid-stream, 


1 The word AN | ING Ql ©, m’tchagata, seems to 


be of Babylonian origin, for in a syllabary published by 
Meissner (Muti. der Vorder Asiat. Gesellschaft, 1913, No. 2, 
p. 65, line 21) we have &Y >< YY 4] Y¥ = 8 ~] oes, 
mu-zi-ku, a kind of wine. 

M 


178 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


531. Grasp it with both thy hands, take it [and 
use it], . 

532. There is nothing which is an abomination 
in the hand [to] the God. 

533. (Cor. XXVII). Is not happy (or, content) 
the toiler ? 


CXIV. 


534. Set not to ply a ferry-boat on the river 

535. If thou art strenuous in thy quest of the 
fares of those who cross the river on it. 

536. Let the fares drop into the hand of the 
master of the craft (?) 

537. Thou being happy (or, content) with no 
part of them. 


538. THIRTIETH CHAPTER. 


539. Behold the Thirty Chapters ! 

540. They will give [thee] pleasure, they will 

teach [thee], 

541. They will [serve as] a leader (or, guide) to 
every book} 

542. They will give knowledge to (1.e., make to 
be wise) the ignorant man. 

543. If they be read out in the presence of an 
ignorant man 

544. Assuredly he will steer his course [through 
life] according to their mouth (7.e., direc- 
tion). 

545. Fill thyself full (or, steep thyself) in [the 
counsel of] what is in them, set them, I 
beseech thee, in thy heart ; 

546. Make thyself to be the man who has un- 
ravelled their contents, . 

‘ Or, perhaps, “They are the first (or, principal things) 


ut iy book ”—in fact, the cream of every work of this 
ind. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 179 


547. Thinking out and understanding [their] 
teaching. 

548. If [the bearer be] a scribe who would make 
himself to be pre-eminent in his profession, 

549. He will find himself to be of equal impor- 
tance with the SMERU (i.e., the “ friends ” 
of the King). 


550. Here ends the Book (Explicit liber). 


COLOPHON. 


551. (Cor. XXVIII). [Done] into writing by 
Shennu, the son of the Divine Father 
Pamai (?). 


181 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT, 
THE SON OF KANEKHT. 


HIEROGLYPHIC ‘TRANSCRIPT OF THE MHIsRATIC TEXT IN 


Brit. Mus. Papyrus, No. 10474. 


183 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT, 
THE SON OF KANEKHT, 


HIEROGLYPHIC TRANSCRIPT OF THE HIERATIC TEXT IN 
Brit. Mus. Papyrus, No. 10474. 


t= NW DRY ST WR Te 
2 Se Si mm cL ind 

ail So Zene alae 
2) mm ER Ro | 

6 Ie om 2 
e. = = Ne —~ oeJe Je 


frase ze roar Gea oie 


184 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. I. 


2 Oh ING = Se 
> Sho- } ae 
RAMEE 
2IRIRES wR T= 


w= 2 eH CeR de & 
TNSa ro 

4 SF Ba 2 TES] S| 

6 ZS HS S48 lied 

16 Sh Te ode 

7g Js SE An SPSS 

1 FG Sm idee 


a ve Are 


19. ee 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 185 | 


Core ke. 


0 KA Ld KR RWS 


21. <P = syst ee Ne 


an Kets leon om TT ell 


So, 
ent 


ee ewe oe SNe 
Doed: 
w= Tt RE YN 
a. fis FSW TW 
2. Deb hl kK Ke Sigs 
ar. (\esyt —- Tae 
Se tac % fem? HV 
2. |olom— -- tem 


186 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. Il. 


30. JT NICS SR mm aim 

5. A 

6 [eye — a= 

Sie She ~~ Als Adie 

2 as SiN oP eee 
ata D.. J} 

Moye mm Dey MO 

SBT owe Mp si ee | 

ae. IIs= SN FS Ve de 

37. em ds ges ge ile 

38. ua se a aS 

Gouciti: 

sto mm Boal - 

1 ae AS — OF aM 
aE 


3 


m~ 
se 


a) 


“e 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 187 


a N14 Md WR Slod= 

2S NN Blesiae ge om 
=f | 

43. iM Pee mm Ses NUR om 


p——1 


a ee ome YOM AG ed 
Bed 285 


45. Joe mm Ka oR 1S 
aye ie 2 

a7 (Re FES YA 1G OE! 
a. IQ ee = 8 
eee ee tS I SE 

50. S Wohi ~~ KA R Me 
ih} 8 & 8B 


a— 
Axel =A 


@ 


188 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. III. 


pare a ee es 

22 By S A IF 

seg | aan bean Soo FS 

61 TS OANASS |e 
LAR & 

ce -#AS 1 Roe Will 


RRS IB R elo 


o ANS = bS4 IKE 
ot oe Ni Se et ee 


PNW 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 189 
Se eG oe 
oR BS oVIess A Mat 
EPCS 
oo AS thet KR = Ie 
eK=- = JoQle = KA 
AKA 
KOS a SI kD 
0 KR S JIS TQ de SB 
2 oR PRWEs A 
mot her] malls 
lI=aKr- Roe 
ele = KS oes SS 
ise Cl EI 
Alem JIS 
aE HRAIGS $ 12: 


too THE Bare OF AMEN-EM-APT 
ajo (RS ef = Sad 
lj A Ma ISaq 
7. (SS ORIN Ul 
Ba We 
we 3 trem KR UM AEA 
7. =a Je hae 
r1iwr Te wi KR ag 
oD ah s&h ee 
1 foeQorge KES —he 
vo. lls oo SS A KA MA 
68, e (li eee 


Ballo hoe 


© a an 


oo LULY Soke KD 
show 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT ror 
Col. V. 


0 KOS Jel = IS 
eelfK. 2 TASH 
TiJent ~ Shas 

88. f) & 1a So ee Le ee 

oe QI] Se 9) OS AW 
moe i 

Ke “ALIS W& BTS 

ou SABO Pe LNG Ne 


9 | 
— 


oa 


ao KAW Ee 

at TE ohARES b 
Guy ak Ss 

SUL AM awal LIS, 


—— 
@ 
06. (JSS — > 


9 


° 


) 


192 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


Coun Vi. 


0 1 KR HAAS ~ Sd 
o je Ql mi} Sod dhas 
eohS KAW IX 
oh ee NG 
vo. f77 Set He SRE 
100. Je ese HAR = IEE 
101 o% MODIS “WWE Sil ce 
102. B Gy 0] dle TUN 
on Je QQ mF! Sod WOSn 
Je PRE hE “hE 
108, Je om 0 PL ded 
108. SO JH! PR IeT 2 
ANG 
te Pe iane 


( / 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM- pes 193 
Col, VI. 


aT 
os, |] SS ee ES 


ee eo 
Tig 


mh= Qh &~ ys 
ma HS 00 IS 


KM III 


Gou. Vil. 

Mees, «on MA Soo” 
oA leta 

Dee 8 Ce 
ee 

17. Ber het MI 
UR eal er 


194 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


Col. VII. 
Dap Soe <> 1 ES et 
118. KX! I — | 
| Se i toa g f) | 


nn 


eS i ee 
RSE! WK Uesh 

20. fi ROR 1S TNS 

CTE Re ag ie ikea ISU 

ef, = le Se 

sl Se oe ae 


meas Qo 
mltan Spas 

wR O14 DARE 
Soh mw Ne 


ah = El= D— are 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 195 


Pee UR ee 
ras) 

Bee, Om OT 
Jaa ~~ KL for 

11 KR SAleS Je mm» Mss 

13g, Se AN OS 
— |X» 

Pee th he 
AN kedd 

14. [GS =e > KA 


Ne 


196 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. VIII. 


138. Je KAM ye 
KE —lls 
is. Je YS Sn a We SA 
40.4, Wo Wel ee, 
NS gt gL 
a KAN Sli em Tet 
42. AIS > ORR Set 
oat NY a 
4. A SVM NA Aes 
ee (an It SS Sl ool 
145, Wx ST] mm Sp 8 
46. Joh = [lek Ad lat= 
uA Roe = Sad 
48. Re maj TRA 
Wt ¥ 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 197 
Col. VIII. 


149. Siete ae el] ? sage 

150. [ltt fe iN MA ssw €&RS 
1S 

151, SE ]M§— wom | ee ia 

152. ere eke Je ea a aN aK 

w= [TT KoA BA 


Con ih: 
o>, —SaW <a i A wT ee Wa ia 
154. Je @ Ill \\ COM NS SO CI 
<a 
— 
\\ 


155. Je = 


se aR Ko Kn fo 
a Whe 

fois An TNS! 

ss. SS KW RAM os 
KE 1d 


1988 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


we SiR lho 

1 FS KRAS! le 89 
UM! 

a= 1S) 21 1S4) 


14 
a 
as III 


wah = + Rpg & AP, 
{ (a 
4 ONS MAW A Ssd 


162. (jas 


io koe TQS eee 


168. ge So OKI Re 

7 > HMA ly = JRE 
ONE 

TS NG || 

1 LAT SE TS | RS 


170, AHS Ho 


— 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 199 


mtn 7 oles ae * ae 

eee i 
AMI— te 

ee NS een ae le 
je 

m4 BS opel fn A XRS 

16.) on IMR SR 


| ad 


el MRSC Mn om ASN 


a7 MF ein mck OY en 
(i OK = owe 

17. WS lo es Pe | hes 
180. KEE [NARS ~~ AALS 


200 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


i 1 USS! SHY whe 


@ | 
AN a 
hoa 


2. Shef4 je Ks = 

183. [JOY mm BESO RMB [RE 
PANS 

164 Je tas mm DB Gy 2s rea] 

6. (FSS le ~m KA 
Isa 12 ICE 

6 ID FY AAI ITY 

167. bP BOE om OB FS 

18 J elds S Zln4 


189. [}Ss ALES 
BOT os 


mele ft Sibel 


eters <8 ae (Sch 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 201 
0 2B RIT = shed 
fel Md Wek = IS8 TAS 
Soe PGF 
6. T= Sh — SRA 
Sade Ba es 
fee KLAS) ~ 

a 
wT. ISS TROY 2S 

Ale 
eel = Hdl — 1 
0. K= WE IBK~ = SH 
or ERI4 KR IS ~ 

SF 
ot R= KAISER 

“a 


202 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


203. IRS Je Kh TOS Je VRS 
mel de MG HE 2 2 7 


e 


al\ Ss 


as. Je KY coh FAs 4A KH 


208. jes Ean Pree 


207. iN <_- | Yess GN mR ANS 
aos. OS ae Oe oT. lan & 
209. lel ni = ee 


WWW eo SO 
— 


2 KO ARLYS = SBE 

uh Bt ihe Irs = 
Ths 

a Ket SEG he eee 


ae 
Sa, 


_ THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 203 
Col. XI. 


ela bt eo a 
ait & [No 

mS ANS = SRL 

a6. Nols IS KR AY 
IQ 

216, <> a6 —? Bie ss 

arje MS fe THI & 

2 SY glk Ale 

219. |e Ss aoe x & iN It 6 
caneeag 

woe KAW HA K Ue 

aa je SS WSS wm Ol AAS 

aaa. fe WD Sd LB om LN 


204 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. XII. 


aaa. Jo S NBME om alah 
es oe 

aa. je Gl» Jla Se 

avs, 2 TORS 2 ae 
SN 

226. : oA OIE & IAF 

227. Bee ae J5 (Noe: . es 

ae Te wom TN PRS 

a0. Sige = Od S 

aso. KS Acs —~ KA smd 


231. a me [|x x Hf eos soe Kom (1) 


aD F | 


me 1 Re —- Bal 
tae 


ass. Je (\[iSe4 = — ito | 


Q | 


a 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 205 
SOL bats 


ete = toed] SS * 

en) eS ie 

mete [toe — —~— Pod 

a7 fe (=P R4 Io § Be 
ee 

a0 Je S HI BEY 

ee al ae 

ao. oh 2ho% Sleek? KR ML 

ah = NK) = 2 oe 

242. ee DY SY es 

aa3, [JSS “\ (= ae 

mh = SWE h RUS 
=RAIS AT SHS 

ie te) oS 


206 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. XIII. 


meh > Do Not oo 
— |X 

ar je 2 Te See 

wh = LYS — 4k Se 
— Qe 

act Je -- AK Td 

50. Km ca Jo mate = ale 

2. Go [SES NV he 

22.9 el dboe A OS 
=PFN AT 

fe elQi ec Ro KD Id 

as fis Tt [bine PY 

a8. oh Il Ja SiS Sl 


256. [|Ss bora Wee 


a 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 207 
Col. XIV. 
wh = SS =o Si 


wt Si) — Abs Ie 
LSlnm = UpS Wte 

ojo S It = atk 

20. (FS— IBIS WK Tals! 
om | 


ge2. le O}x [lm Qa eee: 
2. KS] KA SZ TIS KA 
Sh4 


Ke JI JS 


= & Se ae Ra 
265. em =O ae 5 ea ale sity 


6) 5 (RIKI KR PWS 
Sst 


908 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 7 

cor MS, MS Te, AAO 
bh Meee 

co <2. =A 

0. K® D> A SSRIS 
}p IF= Is 

m2, [22 & KAS IS 

migSo ahhe = pile 
om RES 

ava. Je =QUS— Je mt QIaem 

mle SB > RBA 
oT hE 

mile BG 144 —bR 
pate 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 209 
Col. XV. 


ao ofS om MSTA 

= ohIN4 = 
sARS % = 

me 22(F Jo OS TEwK = 


Ga ae 
Ss 
Piha 


a77. | M— 


a ys —— al <—_— 
ah 29 3 T Fk 
= 
e (larg fa 
b—I| O — ae] ~) Da 
gs2, | Wen he > a pee) Bes 


as. lS KW IM Ble. 
mh = BiG Ak KA 


mR ANS 
286. Sent Aes ne y, NGOS : 


a10 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT : 


Col. XV. ’ 


et nee = YB 
=F Ray 

we NS KAU RINUES 

“127 Gh Mea 

je= he 


a AI (AS MAD = 


ee Le 
(oe XW 


oss, | 


0. JF re 

mh = fins SH hl = 
at 

moh I~ KA 

Con. a5.Va. 


8 Om SSNS om Lo 
MM eel KN 
at WN ates WE NY a= 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT arr 
Col. XVI. 


a5. KS EJ aN oe SS 


AX 


ae RO INR} KAS 


= U 
e% 1 


7 '§ -#KQo elt Do 
Ele 
ae. [PS Je Ko LF 
2.1K 2 UR RL 
Paes pel os SFE wm PG 
sor [RH fefReres fl 
«9 
soa ESS Je Ql MIS IS 
soa. Ge 2 is & SH Swe 
sa {foi & d= 
see KCNA! Ie =P 
til 


212 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. XVI. 


ce jf} 21 12h 
3o7. {|Ss Me We 


308. 


iN 
309. i ae Kea ttt 2 54 = elQS 
suk 


310. =) aT ow sirat 

Ase ve JEH fe 

an oe Owe = 
Sarda: 

13 WS ot Mh ed afc 
ce 


a4. 4H Jo le R SS TH Dee 
No 


Cou Vile 


ast }om gla 2 


s 


. 
, 


=~ = [lysh oe 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 213 
Col. XVII. 


we oe TRO KA 


OWS. 
———-t Seema NAN 
oe te, 5 Nae 


oe Lo Se = KR In 
AL 


214 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. XVII. 


x }e SRG Bt KA 
mes 

sor Haut 1.2 Ime BH VLE 
2 eR C Be 

1 2. mhNhsl 
RR & 

0 => TUS, HiS Awa 2f—8 


oo Jee ame 

mh = S& 81D AS 
I=. > 1s 

333. ae Ge cere JF mn 

a > ted — Jee oe Mey, 

e221 Ale 

ao Ue KE JV IG S 
oh NIAWSS 


4 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 215 


Cer 2Viil: 


sje KAL FAK O43 
a0. FS Il UY SS Bd 
0 KR SAMS = Fi 
wh =— SX icin KR 1a 
sal 2 IPB mm KR Sel 
wom TA 
ee ee i. Lo 
0. (Ge i NAB 


tee CANN 


344. een ae \ a bees 


a6. (SY IS 

ae. 2 mm 2, flekes KF 

a7. .° [aX Ko KS Id 
4 SQla Loe ele ST oe 


“Ue: 


216 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col, XVIII. 


0. ol is I 


cL alice. pemamie te 
oll 


3 WMS = SAlG cline 
s.—> [lal Qe Al 
3 Rm BATRA om cS od 

oa 

BS EY bee 
6. SINUS PQ S de 
a fe St RD om ONE 
367. 2 ee 
Bb Sa ae 


| Reais 


359, 4 = 
or Ey (3) 


=— 


om Jot ~ E4R 
oA TRWIS be Lt tS loge 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 217 


Col. XIX. 
362, © re Meee te 
=— | (a) oa ae 


oh. - AM “ALE - 
AG # 

ake, RO 7. IS 
OA\IAS 

aie SO RS 
[AU oe 

6 KS IJ SEA Be 

ser. Hd aAST om = 

sa > Fl fo SI 

seo, (] SS SS nil. 

a7. R= RBYS fe Zlln4 

ees KO ) |e 

372. A 08 i oh «Are § 

a a Gs NO Oa | 


218 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


ale Kh Eh El oh 


om SINS VI IVS UGS 

2 INS AS KD Te 

m= DRE oo JoRS 

7 KS NWAYY = TRA 
eco 

a7, |. Pe Jo 
AN 1d | 

a0, 1° 2 A 


oR BY A OS KR 


1d 
NE ole Re 


Col. ook, 


KN sai 


so L oR Je = efRe 


q 


7 


A 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 219 
Col. XX. 


a oh RS IQ Ie 

NS KL I] 2 

6 Qe S UA ~ TS 

ser, I Se mm Sep CAN 
Aa 

oo SBA KRM (Te = 


Beet Ae 
as IIliil 


oh = if = 28 ho fi 

ee! (olke 1a 

oh = Tir whl 2 2 
Sj5°5 2° 

so fe FNS TSR Ms 

ch = SRT THiS! 
a 

so. JG 1 fp ? 2°84 


a 
220 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT : 


mG ZL fh 

on NS feRI4 Bh ioe 
ot Ql ASI SS KO 

0. Oh om [Tas = 
100 = BS, oh PUA 
oI — = Te 7 


AO 


] 
a 


aoa, [|S 
403. OS oe — ito re 
To oP 

om KO Ss KA She 

ei Ter Tea ~~ Geet oles 
se NS 1 OM] de ASN Me 
or = 14 SQ~ SHE 
ONS CT WE 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 221 
Col. a 


ot Sih a~ a 

410. dx Jeo wm SFr 

an A oy ‘abl ~" BN aw 
: MS 

az.je 4 ae & KE 
ees, 

413. oe Te Jo fh sa 
—|Q% 

a4 oe YB) om OH 

a5.) TNS 
PANTS 21a 

are. 1, om To A A om FRE 

a7 > fal Qe JIA eT 
peme 


we R25 1D ILI} om Td 


222 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT : 


Col. XXIL 


ao R= ERE RT — Td QD 

420. le eae HOR Nee Te man a 

aA] RET WK BU SS 
Bes: 


mbit the — Kb ITE 


eh 2 1A SS 
ae KAS & om Anlef= 
mer he as) AYR & St 
on le SRY4E HAS 
wo = 2 fae [oh 
oe TARAS Ilse | 
m2 = he Tas 128 
~ 4d 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 223 
Col. XXII. 


id ei oa =e «Ko, | 
12. Ve. > a! KD id 
> KAS SE lJ 
ee I TORS TS 
eel sl 
ee eS 
v= AA 
or RO 1S KAS Slalh 
ES a age a “area 
=Asl ated 
Pee ST 
a0. See NL MGS | 
a— KE Ode WA IQ 
aa. Je Se flefofn > S KA 
of 14 


— 
Exe] 
Km 


‘Col. XXII. 
<Oo—>- O 
443. Je = 


So SRRKIT Se 


224 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


we KOS QR AKGH BP 


Cot. XXIII. 


448, Je J 


uw. [GSa aRhe 2 
eM LIC 

0. 25 PEM Jl» Da 

1a fle om 3 


@ 
aw Y pee —— 
—= 
Q | 
Re. 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 225 
Col. XXIII. 


452. © 9 KY] SS 

fe a SS 
oe oes 

aa (ler fe R = N= 
TRS 

ass, °F, Je SIRS fet 
1s 

456. ho Re * HE 

7 Oh So a KA Id 

a —— SG f= JeHel 

woh = this ZS ail Aly 

wo Ret Uel4 Di = 

ot eR BS oe 


226 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 


Col. XXIII. 


231° (RU KR ois 
A NG a 

i [SSe => KA “Alls 2s 
N= 

a5 OS Ae ed ee 

aco, | Q) = he WK VRS SS 

sez je Ql Sed KK Bes Jabs 


aes. ||SS He 


as Wa 


wh = MAL ol) 
Rep SN TS 


EBL. scl. 


mo KE TRIG SO ETE 
oh BS oh de 
mehi 22 lee 


are Re mon St ee ee 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM- APT 227 


_ Col. XXIV, 


a7 IN 4S NOPAS 

ee a4 8 

476. Hel SB ee oe 

ar. (JSS Sn 

LRN Fn =| R= 
KS 4 ERIG 

15 Soe ae ae aja) 

OR = olf 4 ae ye \ 
at XN IP 

Se ee 1a 
oN KAS 


= SD Td KY 4s 
sete APSS14 |e INI4 § B80 
406, Jo SS J wm ef NG. =i 


228 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 
Col. XXIV. | 


ase. |e SS i wre Ell = 

ag7. [| mm AME ec ea 
ee 

ce SIS IDRIS kc KR > 
® fos 

450. | daa War KS 

seontlee So a, 

mh = Uh Kh SIs 

oa Sl 

ot i Se bh URSTH 

494, Sa 2 UNAS ee i> 

496. eer = i W& 


ba es 
7] [note eect 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 229 | 
Col. XXV. 


eee or ROSA 

ee SIS 

ce ws PF Slee 

foe ss, I 
EBNRO Sr Sas MS 

Meas 3 RS RMS 
== ° pit ol 

ee ee 

con J INT ARO 
Ti Jess 

sos. Je = 1 AALeM Ye ID 
XS Ut 

50a > {fl KS KH PAU 

co. J} art IS me KR 


NK | 


230 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT. 

a ee ee 

cor. JSS tune 

co KO [fe SUS l= 

p09, Je BSS a ss ron 

so KR BIN [se Som KD 
Asd b Jog 

mS Ne Sle esis 

tee oh". KP Sd 

COL, eee 1 

ole Ie Mess S 

ui hiy Se 22m fe 

at fs 

6. (RN Se [emi IS 
Efe 


“7 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT. 231 
Col. XXVI. 


ne 1 Ql Ro, S= KE 
a — 2 \ tl eets 
as 1 agi Tis Rk = 
si. fe efor => KR Oo 
520. JSS iain 
oa > AAT TAY le oY 
Si fe KR Wav 
me yl Liclt a = 
Bae | 
a hm Fe BIB AS 
NI MALO 
cua. AJ |! = footie 
525. <p 1! Sie SAM 
sx. > Of H JeA NURS 


Nas as omn, 
527. ee x atin > 


232 THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT 

Col. XXVI. 

ae = (ee Sil — Lllen 
om (ce 


J leie KR Bom 


pA ce Se ASS eee 


re. )) RY 
a peat 


22 eB NOS 
taht Nii Se ad ee x 1d 


Cot, XXVII. 


sa3. Je J uc Ost DENG DENG Whi 


634, <> = — WR OS wx } = 


ALY 


so KOS AINA, = elQe 
“WI ORAS 
oY OK NT KB 


SS] 
< 


THE TEACHING OF AMEN-EM-APT ~ 233 
Col. XXVII. 


ae all Jigga GW 
ose, Jag 7 
690, {Se ORK nn ww UES 
540. (I LIN Fab i [JX OU 
mie 2 - Boe 
wale SI KR ht 
wot heh 12 ho KB 
NO 
eee aS Sel 
sD 2 UNS UBS Me 
bh 2 
ua Qo = S Mm ee, 
a7. © S14 bs LB ek Nea 
os, | he OL spe BIS W& 


ahd o 


234 “THE é 


~ Col. XXVII. i 
| 549. ET 1s Semis is 
Bete) i680. eee 


COLOPHON. 


ee Hie i loop it Si 4s a: 


235 


THE TEACHING OF THE SCRIBE 
ANI, WHICH WAS WRITTEN FOR 
HIS SON, KHENSU-HETEP. 


The Teaching of the scribe Ani is preserved in a 
hieratic papyrus which was written under the 
XXIst or XXIInd dynasty, and now forms No. 4 
of the Collection of Papyriin the Egyptian Museum 
in Cairo. This papyrus is said to have been found, 
together with other Egyptian papyri (Nos. 5 and 7, 
according to Mariette’s numbering) and a collec- 
tion of Coptic letters written on papyrus, in a 
wooden box in the tomb of a Christian monk 
at Dér al-Madinah, or Western Thebes. Papyrus 
No. 5 contains part of the Demotic text of the 
story of Khamuas, the great magician and son 
of Rameses II, and No. 7 contains prayers in the 
hieratic character addressed to the hours of the 
night, and a description of them. If all these 
documents were found together in the tomb of a 
Christian monk it is difficult not to assume that 
this monk (who lived at a time when the know- 
ledge of the old language is commonly supposed 
to have died out) was a student of ancient books of 
moral precepts, and could read and understand 
works written in the hieratic and Demotic cha- 
racters. The hieratic text of the Teaching of 
Ani was published by Mariette in Papyrus Egyptiens 
du Musée de Boulaq, Paris, 1871. A description 
of the contents of the text was published by 
E. de Rougé in the Moniteur for August, 1861, 


236 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


and a full translation of it in Comptes Rendus des. 

Séances de l’ Académie des Inscriptions et Belles 
Lettres, Paris, 1871, pp. 340-350. A short account 
of the papyrus was published by Maspero in the 
Journal de Paris, Mars, 1871, and Chabas repub- 
lished the hieratic text, with a hieroglyphic trans- 
cript and a French translation with a commentary, 
in L’£eyptologie, Chalon, 1871-1878. The Teach- 
ing of Ani was also treated at considerable length 
by Amélineau in his La Morale Egyptienne quinze 
siecles avant notre éve, Paris, 1892. In this work 
he printed a hieroglyphic transcript and a French 
translation, and enunciated the view that the 
composition was not the work of Ani, but of his 
son, Khensu-hetep. This view is not generally 
accepted. Although the papyrus No. 4 cannot 
have been written earlier than the XXIst dynasty, 
it is not at all certain that the composition itself 
does not belong to a much earlier period The 
papyrus lacks one or more columns at the begin- 
ning, so it is impossible to know the contents 
of the title of this Teaching, and how the opening 
lines ran. Parts of them are given in the fragments 
printed on Plate 15 of Mariette’s edition, but the 
text does not become understandable until we 
reach Plate 16, line 1. There we have :— 


1 A scribe’s tablet at Berlin (see Aegyptische Zettschrift, 
Bd. 32 (1894), p. 127) contains the opening words of a copy 


of the Teaching of a scribe called Ani, l & a Q4 “WP who 


is there said to be of the “‘ house of King Nefer-[ka]-Ra-Tera,” 
and it has been suggested that this king is no other than the 
Nefer-ka-R4-terr, ( oh U 5 Ge], who is mentioned in 


the two Abydos King-Lists (Nos. 49 and 23). If this Ani 
be the author of the Teaching here described, the work must 
have been written before the XIIth dynasty. 


PLATE VIII. 


‘ez agnpd “7 amo; “(apqaumpy pa) snahdog YYIRT 92 WoL 


‘daqaynsuorpyy UOS ST] IOF FOIA OGIO Vy} IW 7eYY Surpoeoy, WL, 


eames S015 
SP aa Us yaaa 
saypts 4 i la Sa 
ORGY Wi Kresge Cerin yt 
piers mae. ap es SNEAK 
iS ¢alontd eT CLM ayers Sgt 17 ray 
re: Pua i asi ORS rar 
YT an (24 ¢ : fete 
laps shacrin wap Ssucat peter nas ae 
RRA tent a ep te 2 Sage 39h gee? 
srrmaueaie sbrcarrecrenesonounpsly 
iy ks a cdi as 
sey, AM rss ae wd 
ce EAS heen Mere 
nike herein a 


THE TEACHING OF ANI 237 


I. Work a woman (i.e., marry a wife) whilst 
thou art a young man; she will produce thy son. 
If thou dost produce thy son whilst thou art still 
young, thou wilt be able to train him to become a 
proper man. Good is it for a man if his men 
(i.e., posterity) are numerous, [and] he will be 
applauded by reason of his children. 

II. Make (t.e., celebrate) the festival of thy 
God, repeat continually his praises. God (literally, 
Gods) is angry with the man who breaks (or 
invades) his ordinance. Establish (or, set up), 
witnesses round about thy offerings. He who has 
done this has [done] most excellently for himself. 

III. If it be that a man comes to seek for thy 
opinions (or, views), I pray thee to let it cause thee 
to sink thyself in the writings of the past. 

IV. The opportunity having come [and let 
pass], one may seek [in vain] to seize another. 

V. Let His (7.e., God’s) Will be exalted. Sing- 
ing, dancing, and incense form his service (or, 
perhaps, form his meat and drink). The receipt 
of homage is among what belongs to him. Offer 
these things to the god, so as to magnify his 
name. 

VI. If there be a man who is drunk, go not 
into his presence (?) at the instigation of another, 
even though his making [thee] to enter would 
make thee honoured (or, revered). 

VII. Look not too closely at the behaviour of 
a neighbour in thy (his?) house. Whatsoever 
thine eye sees thou shalt hold thy peace. Describe 
it not to any person in the street, lest the man 
who hears of it shall later inflict upon thee a 
punishment of a serious character {and perhaps] 
death. 

VIII. Guard thyself well against the woman 
from the outer district who is not known in her 


238 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


town (or, quarter of the city). Cast no longing 
glances after her as do those who are like to her, 
and have no carnal intercourse or other relation 
with her. She is a deep ditch (or, lake), and 
where her currents will lead no man knows. When 
a woman, whose husband is absent from her, 
[shows her] beauty and invites thee to her every 
day, saying that there are no witnesses present, 
and puts her net in position [to snare thee], it is 
a great, abominable deed deserving the death 
penalty for a man to hearken to her, even if she 
has not succeeded in her object... . Yet men 
will commit abominable deeds in order to gratify 
this one passion (?). 

IX. Go not in and out of the town-council, 
so that thy name may not stink. 

X. When an interrogation in court takes place, 
multiply not thy words. Hold thy peace and 
thou wilt occupy a favourable position. Make 
thyself no mere tongue-wagger. 

XI. Noisy, vain repetitions are an abomination 
to the sanctuary of God. Pray thou thy prayer 
with a loving heart, all the words (or, petitions) 
are hidden. He will do for thee all that is neces- 
sary for thy daily needs; He will hearken to thy 
supplications, receiving thine offerings. 

XII. Pour out libations to thy father and to 
thy mother, who rest in the cemetery in the 
mountain. The water is a witness for those who 
offer what is due, or what is acceptable to the 
gods Fail at todd this 2 ye what thou 
doest thy son shall do for thee. 

XIII. Undertake nothing as the result of 
having drunk beer, for if thou dost, words which 
can have a second meaning may come forth from 
thy mouth without thy knowing it. When thou 
fallest down and breakest thy bones (or, members) 


THE TEACHING OF ANI 239 


there will be no one there to put out his hand [to 
help thee]. Thy boon companions will stand up 
and say, “‘ Away with this drunken beast !’’ When 
people come to have speech with thee they will 
find thee lying prostrate on the ground, and thou 
wilt be as helpless as a little child. 

XIV. Go not forth from thy house to any 
place with which thou art not acquainted ; have 
no hankering for it. Eat at any place which 
thou lovest, remember that [place] which thou 
knowest. 

XV. I pray thee to set before thyself the path 
that must be traversed, and let old age testify 
to thee this fact. Thou must be found to have 
prepared for thyself a fine tomb in the cemetery 
in the mountain, which shall be the Tuat (?) that 
shall hide thy body. I pray thee to set it before 
thee in the midst of thy daily occupations and 
the business under thy eye. [Do this] even as 
did the very ancient ones who [now] rest in their 
sepulchres (?). The man who does thus on his 
own behalf suffers no calamity, and it shall be 
well with thee if thou also art furnished with thy 
tomb (or, domain). Thy messenger shall come to 
thee to take thee, he shall find thee provided with 
a tomb, assuredly thou shalt have no anxiety. 
Verily his terrifying form will come and set itself 
before thee ; say not, ‘‘ I am too young for thee to 
snatch me away.” Thou knowest not thy death 
(t.e., how or when it shall be). Death comes and 
bears away the child who is at the breast of his 
mother, as well as the man who has reached old age. 

XVI. Behold, I will declare unto thee also 
other good advice whereon thou shalt meditate 
in thy heart. Act upon it and thou wilt become a 
good man, and evil hap of every kind shall be far 
from thee. 


240 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


XVII. Take good heed to avoid the man of evil 
finer, © eee oie pea pape Keep thyself far from men 
who act crookedly, and make none of them thy 
companion. [On the other hand] 

XVIII. Be friendly and associate thyself with 
one who is just and true, when thou hast observed 
the manner in which he acts. Thy rectitude will 
take possession of his balance; their....... 
strengthen thy hand to him that is in thy house, - 
since thy possessions are under his care. 

XIX. Let not thy hand waste thy goods on a 
man whom thou knowest not; he comes to thee 
[bringing] ruin. When [thy] goods are placed in 
their storehouses (?) he comes to thee as one who 
reports, and he has the safe keeping of thine own 
possessions. Thy people will find him on thy road. 

XX. Gifts being made to the small man, he 
acquires the [greatness of the] great man, even as 
does a brick built up (?) [with others]. 

XXI. Teaching in the house is life; by the 
use of correction (or, chastisement) thou thyself 
shalt find it. 

XXII. Let thine eye be open, so that thou 
dost not come out as a beggar. The man who 
becomes one of the many inert, helpless folk will 
never be applauded as is the man who has marked 
out the course of his life. 

XXIII. Open not up a friendship with the slave 
of another man. If his name stinks it will become 
a matter for evil report; if he be a great and 
important man, though unknown [to thee], he will 
rise up, and an answer must be returned to him 
concerning the theft of his servant, whom he will 
seize with his hand, and he‘will follow after him 
and command him to safeguard that which was 
in his [master’s] house. [If thou doest this] thou 
wilt sorrow, saying, ‘‘ What shall I do?” and 


/ THE TEACHING OF ANI 241 


all thy household will upbraid thee, to make thee 
to know upon earth that a man seeks to found a 
house [for himself]. 

XXIV. Thou markest out an estate and settest 
bounds to it. Thou makest the forepart of it 
into arable land to produce fodder and fencest it 
in, thou plantest avenues of sycamore trees round 
about thy house, thou fillest thy hand with flowers 
of every kind, so that thine eye may gaze upon 
them, but in spite of all this, thou wilt feel dis- 
content. Lucky is the man who does not forsake 
these things. 

XXV. Fill not thy heart with love for the 
possessions of another man ; guard thyself [against 
this], and do it not. Support not thyself with the 
things that belong to another man unless he has 
made them enter thy house. 

XXVI. Build thou a house for thyself when 
thou findest enmity in a dwelling shared with 
others (?). Say not :—The father of my mother 
Sesra NOUSE. 5. When thou goest to divide 
the property with thy brethren the granaries shall 
be thine. 

XXVII. God grant that children may be born to 
thee whom thy father knows. As for him that is in 
want, let every one have his fillin his house ; be thou 
his girdle wall. Make none destitute at thy desire, 
for it is God Who provides that whereon men live. 

XXVIII. Sit not whilst another man stands, 
if he be older than thyself, or if he has attained to 
a higher grade in his profession than thyself. 

XXIX. A man cannot expect to attain to a 
good disposition if he speaks with an evil intent. 

XXX. Make thyself to walk daily in the path 
of thy hands (7.e., a correct path), and thou shalt 
~ succeed in reaching the place whither thou wouldst 
go (?) 

Q 


242 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


XXXI. What is there that remains (or, con- 
tinues) to be spoken about every day? A pro- 
fession carries with it its regulations (or, obliga- 
tions). A woman must necessarily talk about (or, 
discuss) her husband, a man in office must discuss 
his work. 

XXXII. Make use of no evil speech towards 
any who comes (?); a word [dropped] on the 
day of thy gossiping may turn thy house upside 
down. 

XXXIII. If thou findest thyself able to keep 
an even mind during the time when thou art 
friendly with everybody, when adversity comes 
thou wilt find thyself able to bear it. 

XXXIV. The boastful flatterer makes himself 
a supporter [of thine]. Now, even the useful 
dispositions of the man who is a flatterer will be 
as dirt to [thy] brother. The members of thy 
household will sing and rejoice outwardly, but will 
weep in their hearts. 

XXXV._ If thou art a well-doing man thou wilt 
be observed. Whether thou art with many (or, 
wealthy), or whether thou art alone, thy kinsfolk 
will find thee, and will do everything that thou 
commandest. 

XXXVI. Make thyself learned in the written 
rolls. Go deeply into the written rolls, and I 
beseech thee to set them in thy heart, and then 
everything that thou sayest will be valuable (or, 
profitable). If ascribe be placed in any profession 
(or, occupation) he must consult the writings that 
deal with the same. The governor of the White 
House (the Treasury, the Bét al-Mal) has no son, 
and the Keeper of the Seal’has no heir. Princes 
value the scribe. His hand is his profession, it 
cannot be handed on to children. Their needy 
state is his living, their seniors form his protection. 


THE TEACHING OF ANI 243 


XXXVII. Let not thy heart be exalted (or, 
displayed) before the flatterer (?). A word capable 
of two meanings, spoken hastily, if it comes forth 
from thy mouth, being repeated will make thee 
bitter enemies. A man is overthrown and ruined 
through his tongue. Take good heed that thou 
dost not thyself produce thine own ruin. 

XXXVIIT. Since the body of a man is more 
capacious than a government granary, and is full 
of answers of every kind, thou shalt make a 
selection of those that are good and give expression 
to them, and those that are evil thou shalt guard 
closely within thyself. A violent answer sets 
weapons of fight in motion ; speak therefore with 
the sweetness (or, graciousness) of affection, and 
[thou shalt be beloved ?] for ever. 

XXXIX. He who has been accused by a liar 
in defiance of God, Who judges the right, may 
return an answer, but his (the liar’s) calamity shall 
come and shall carry him off. 

XL. When thou art making thy offerings to 
God, take good heed that thou doest not that 
which He holds in abomination. -Discuss not the 
forms in which He appears, walk not with bold 
and careless strides when He makes Himself 
manifest [in the streets]. Thrust not thyself 
among those who bear Him [in his shrine]. Bawl 
not [the words of] His books. Take heed not to 
add aught to the praises that are directed to be 
sung to Him. Let thine eye watch carefully His 
dispensations [and] wrath, and do thou adore His 
name. He gives will (or, strength) to millions of 
forms, He makes great him that magnifies Him. 
The God of this earth igs Shu (7.e., the Sun-god), 
who is on the horizon, and his similitudes are upon 
the earth. The incense which is offered is their food 
daily. His rising makes all green things to flourish. 

Q2 


244 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


XLI. Increase (or, make double) the bread- 
cakes which thou givest to thy mother, and carry 
her as she carried thee. She carried thee as a 
heavy load many times, and left me nothing to do 
[for thee]. When she brought thee forth after 
thy months, she set thee like a veritable yoke 
upon her neck, and her breasts were in thy mouth 
for three years. Whilst thou wast growing, dis- 
gusting in thy excrement, she felt no disgust at thee, 
saying, ‘‘ What I have to do!” Afterwards she 
placed thee in the house of instruction (7.e., school), 
and whilst thou wast being taught [thy] letters, 
she [came] to thee there day by day, regularly and 
unfailingly, with bread-cakes and beer from her 
house. When thou art a young man, and dost 
marry a wife, and art the master and possessor of 
a house, I pray thee to look [back] at thine own 
childhood and how thou wast reared, and do for 
the child that shall be born to thee everything that 
thy mother did for thee. Let it not happen that 
she has cause to blame thee, and may she not lift 
up her hands to God [in complaint] and may He 
not hear her supplications. 

XLII. Eat not bread whilst another stands by 
[hungry] and thou dost not stretch out thy hand 
to him with bread in it. It has never (?) been 
known whether a man will become destitute. One 
man has riches, and another man is poor ; bread is 
CONSTANCE (0). onus ks The man who was rich a 
year ago is a stable servant this year. 

XLITI. Be not anxious to fill thy belly, for 
whither thy course tends is unknown. ....... 
I will give thee another good [saying ?]. 

XLIV. The course that a stream followed last 
year has changed this year and moved elsewhere : 
large masses of water have become tracts of dry 
land; the dykes have become abysses. There 


THE TEACHING OF ANI 245 


exists not for a man one state of life (z.e., nothing: 
remains unchanged) ; this is the answer of the 
lord of life. 

XLV. I would have thee note that whether 
thou pass thy period of existence in a lowly con- 
dition or in a high one thou wilt not attain to full 
happiness; go forth on thy way, and thy foot 
shall find its place. 

XLVI. Go not into the house of a man in a too 
familiar manner, but go into it only after thou hast 
been announced. When he greets thee with words 
of welcome (?) from his mouth, thou wilt understand 
his views [concerning thee]. A repast will be then 
set out. 

XLVII. He who hates waiting comes without 
being invited. 

XLVIII. Without making haste the runner 
reaches his goal. 

XLIX. Let a man [give] himself to God. 
Take good heed to thyself daily for God, to-morrow 
as well as to-day. Make thyself to observe what 
God does; He will punish (?) the man who 
punishes (?) thee. | 

L. Go not into a crowd of people if thou findest 
that thou art stirred up [to fight] in the presence 
of men who are about to strike each other. 

LI. Make no trespass (1.e., claim) in any 
domain, guard thyself carefully from tampering 
with any title deeds, so that thou mayest not be 
seized and accused before the Council, in the 
presence of the governors after the witnesses have 
made their depositions. 

LII. Remove thyself far from the men who 
transgress the laws (i.e, are sedition-mongers). 
The man who is silent of mouth (7.¢., is of a peaceful 
disposition) among soldiers (or, troops) is not haled 
before the Council and accused [of sedition], and 


246 THE TEACHING OF ANT 


is not put under restraint, and knows not pro- 
pitiatory gifts (i.c., has no need to bribe men to 
hold their tongues). 

LIII. The actions of a man who loves one are 
profitable. He is free from his deeds of abomina- 
tion, thou art safe from many annoyances (?). 
Take good heed to avoid any break [in this 
friendship]. 

LIV. The chief of the flock which leads it to 
the pasture-grounds is only an animal like the 
rest (?). 

LV. When the crops on the cultivated lands in 
the fields are laid waste, then the spirits (of the 
ancestors] are appealed to in earnest. 

LVI. The man who is of an indolent (?) dis- 
position makes strife to arise in his house, and he 
himself destroys the boundaries thereof in very 
truth. 

LVJI. Attempt not to direct a married woman 
in her house, when thou knowest that she is a 
perfect housewife. Say not to her, “‘ Where is that 
(i.e, such and such a thing)? Bring it to us,” 
when she has put [the object] in the proper place. 
Make thine eye to watch her, and hold thy peace, 
and then thou wilt be able to appreciate her wise 
and good management. Happy wilt thou be if 
thou art hand in hand with her. There are very 
many men who do not understand [this]. The 
interfering man only sets confusion in his house, 
and never finds himself the actual master thereof 
in all matters, in reality. He who would be master 
of his house should speedily make firm his mind. 

LVIII. Follow not after. [the counsels of] a 
woman, and let her not lead captive thy under- 
standing. 

LIX. Answer not a man in authority over thee 
when he is wroth, but set him aside (or, make him 


THE TEACHING OF ANI 247 


to be remote from thee, #.e., remove thyself far 
from him). Speak thou that which is sweet 
(z.e., return him a soft answer) when he speaks 
words that are bitter (or, rankle), and pacify his 
heart. 

LX. Answers that provoke to strife carry [in 
their train] staves that will overthrow thy froward- 
ness. Anger will react upon thy occupation (or, 
affairs). 

LXI. Let not thy heart grieve concerning 
thyself, for it will reverse its action and will speedily 
applaud thee after its temporary depression. 

LXII. When thy words are such as to be 
restful for the heart, the heart inclines itself gladly 
to receive them. 

LXIII. Seek after silence and submit thyself 
to the man who keeps it. Keep on friendly terms 
with the administrative officer of thy district, and 
give him no opportunity of bringing a charge 
against thee. Give him food when it is in thy 
house and do not set aside his request. Say to 
fm. words of- approval... ....... 

LXIV. At thy entrances into the town (or, 
village) at first there is acclamation, but at thy 
goings forth thou must save thyself by thy hand. 


LXV. THE ANSWER OF THE SCRIBE KHENSU-HETEP 
TO HIS FATHER, THE SCRIBE ANI. 


Oh, I wish that I were even as thou art! being 
known (or, learned) like thyself. Then certainly 
I would act according to thy testimonies, and the 
son would be brought to the position of the father, 
and every man would ‘be drawn to be like him 
(i.e., be of the same character). Thou art a man 


1 Compare Proverbs xv, 4. 


- 248 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


with exalted aspirations, whose every word is 
chosen (or, selected). The son who speaks words 
of contempt [concerning] books [of admonition] 
has a depraved judgement in him. Thy words give 
rest and satisfaction to my heart, and my heart 
inclines willingly to receive them. Nay, more, my 
breast (or, mind) rejoices in them. But make not 
thy excellent instructions to be too numerous. A 
young man who has borne (or, endured) good 
counsels has not hitherto been found to put into 
practice teaching and testimonies because he has 
the books on his tongue (i.e., because he can quote 
glibly the precepts of the fathers). 


LXVI. THE scRIBE ANI MAKES ANSWER TO HIS 
SON KHENSU-HETEP THE SCRIBE, SAYING :— 


Grieve not thy heart by pondering on these 
depressing matters, and take care how thou 
makest thy complaints, which will in no way 
afflict my heart. I have testified to thee con- 
CeTning a ets our speech which thou sayest 
thou dost wish to read. The old bull which has 
smashed the slaughter-house to pieces, is unable to 
get free from the place where he has kicked and 
struggled, and is obliged to fashion his will accord- 
ing to the discipline of the herdsman who rears (or, 
fattens) cattle. The fierce-eyed lion lays aside his 
ferocity and paces side by side with the poor-spirited 
ass. The horse enters under the yoke, and goes 
hither and thither obediently. The dog hearkens 
to the words spoken to him and follows his master. 


The kaariu beast, = 17 i, Carried a 


load of the magurau pots, Nap | ee 


THE TEACHING OF ANI 249 


which its dam never carried. The wild goose flies 
out into the lake where the snarer of water-fowl 
pursues it and drags it shrieking into his net. The 
Stidani man is made to learn the language of the 
people of Egypt, as are also the Syrians and every 
other foreign people. Therefore have I made thee 
to know concerning every profession ; and having 
heard thou [now] knowest what to do. 


J 


LXVII. THE scRIBE KHENSU-HETEP, THE SON 
OF THE SCRIBE ANI, MAKES ANSWER, SAYING :— 


Make not to be terrifying thy mighty deeds, for 
I am overburdened with the things that thou hast 
laid down. A man does not become slack of hand 
(apathetic ?) through hearing an answer in its 
proper place. Now a man is the fellow (counter- 
part ?) of God. Their (7.e., men’s) admonitions 
(or, orderings) must be hearkened to; a man 
possesses his own answer (?). The one knows not 
his fellow. There is a great number of every kind 
of bad ones, and one knows not his teaching. 
There may be one possessing meaning, but many 
are worthless. Everything that thou hast said is 
excellent (or, perfect), Makeno..... of them 
the gr pare from the time of the blessed dead. I 
swear to thee an oath by God that I will carry them 
out. Set them (i.e, my words) on thy path 
(i.e., before thee). 


LXVIII. THE SCRIBE ANI MAKES ANSWER TO 
HIS SON, THE SCRIBE KHENSU-HETEP, SAYING :— 


Put behind thy back these many words which 
are too remote [from the subject] to be heard 
(i.e., understood). The dry branch of the tree 


250 THE TEACHING OF ANI 


which [lies] on the ground, and which has been 
matured (?) by the light of the day and the darkness 
of the night, is taken by the handicraftsman and 
worked straight, and made into the walking-stick 
of princes ; but the sound wood [of the tree] he 
makes into beams (or, planks). O thou simple- 
hearted one, is it the wish of thy heart to give (or, 
take) an oath, or art thou still feeble (?) | Observe 
what one who knows well the strength which is in 
his hand is like; [he is like] the child who lies in 
his mother’s bosom. When the child knows that 
he has sucked [enough], behold, he finds his mouth 
and cries out “ Give me bread.” 


INDEX 


Aahu (Moon-god), 94, 108, 115, 

_ 146, 150, 151. 

Aakhu (Ancestral Spirits), 97, 
123. 

Aakhunaten, 138. 

Aamu 16, 71. 

Aapep (Apep, Apophis), 22. 

Aati, 35. 

Abraham, Abba, 4. 

Abydos, 16, 28, 86, 89, 94, 97, 
143. 

Adultery, 131. 

Agriculture, 27 ; Department 
of, 97. 

Aker, 164. 

Akhekhu, 35. 

Akhmim, 95, 142; see Apu. 

Allah, 139. 

Al-Allah, 147. 

All-Lord, 117, 151. 

Ama (Am-8), the Pig, 31. 

Amélineau, 236. 

Amen, 30, 96. 

Amen-Ra, 30. 

Amen-em-apt, 16; 
of, 93, ff. 

Amenemheb, 41. 

Amenemhat I, Teaching of, 26. 

Amenemhat III, 28, 29. 

Amenhetep I, 96. 

Amenhetep IV, 138. 

Ament, 20, 34. 

Amenti, 197, 

Amentt, 45, 135, 139, 174. 

Am-Khaibitu, 34. 

Ammehet, 45. 

Amu (Aamu), 82. 

An-a-f, 36. 


Teaching 


Ancestor-god, 30. 

Ancestors, 3, 13, 77. 

Ancestral Spirits, 97, 121. 

Anger, 247. 

An-hetep-f, 36. 

Ani, a scribe, Papyrus of, 42. 

Ani, a scribe, Teaching of, 5, 
235, 236, ff. 

Annihilation, 30. 

Answer, the soft, 134; the 

_ violent, 243, 

Antef, Philosophy of, 28, 86, 
89. 

Anu (Heliopolis), 35, 86. 

Anubis, 31, 43; see Anpu. 

Anxiety, 56. 

Apathy, 83. 

Ape-god of Thoth, 107, 122. 

Ape of Thoth, 31, 41. 

Apes, the Four Holy, 33, 42, 
44, 112. 

Apep, 20, 110, 125, 154; wax 
figure of, 113; chain of, 
leo 

Apophis, 110. 

Apophthegm, 101, 102. 

Apt, a land measure, 123, 166. 

Apt of land, 152. 

Apu (Panopolis), 95, 142. 

Aqaqiu, 140. 

Arabs, 9, 81. 

Architect (God), 174. 

Ari-em-ab-f, 36. 

Aroeris, 95. 


‘| Arrogance, 8, 50, 56. 


Arti-f-em-tes, 34. 
Ascetics, Christian, 4. 
Asiatics, 81, 154. 


252 


Assa, King, 8, 52. 

Assessors, the Forty-two, 18, 
oO, 32. 

Ass-god (?), 111. 

Aten (Aten, Athen), 91, 104, 
108, 113, 114, 139, 154. 

Atenite, 138. 

Athi, 35. 

Ati, 35, 

Athribis, 82. 

Augert, 36. 

Avarice, 59, 118, 128. 

Awkaf, 97. 


Babel, 38. 

Baboon, the Dog-headed, 137. 

Babylonia, 38, 101. 

Badness, 168. 

Balyanah, 97, 

Bani Suwéf, 96. 

Barber, 69. 

Barter, 122. 

Bast, 1, 35, 92. 

Basti, 35. 

Beerhouse, 132, 135, 175. 

Beggar, the, 152. 

Behaviour at table, 8. 

Bél, 38. 

Belly, greed of the, 244. 

Benevolence, 133. 

Betennu, 73. 

Birch, Dr. S., 12, 13, 26. 

Blacksmith, the, 69. 

Blandford, Mr. W. T., 137. 

Blind man, 174. 

Blockhouses, 83. 

Blow provokes blow, 84. 

Boat of God, 24. 

Boat of Ra, 45. 

Book of Ammi Tuat, 108. 

Book of Gates, 19, 20, 108. 

Book of Overthrowing Apep, 
110. 


INDEX 


Book of Proverbs, 130. 
Book of the Dead, 29, 108. 
Book of Morals, 4. 

Books, value of, 73. 
Boylan, Mr., 43. 

Bread cakes, 80. 

Bread, dry and herbs, 132. 
Brehm, Dr., 137. 
Bricklayer, the, 70. 
Brugsch, Dr. H., 6. 
Bubastis, 35. 

Bull, 248 ; black, 143. 
Busiris, 35. 


Calmness, 10. 

Carnarvon, Lord, his Ostrakon, 
B,- Os tots 

Chabas, F, 6, 51, 236. 

Chastisement, 240. 

Cheating, 39, 134. 

Cheerfulness, 10, 63. 

Children, 241. 

Colic, 132. 

Compassion, 81. 

Concentration, 127. 

Confidence, 59. 

Contentment, 116, 133. 

Cookshop, 133. 

Coppersmith, 69. 

Cord, measuring, 123. 

Cords for weaving spells, 111. 

Correction valuable, 240. 

Corvée, 68, 80. 

Courage, 57. 

Courtesy, 10, 58. 

Covetousness, 241. 

Cow-goddess, 100. 

Creation described, 22. 

Crocodile, 114, 130, 149, 171. 

Cruelty to slaves, 39. 

Cubit of the fields, 150. 

Curse, 176. 


Cynocephalus hamadryas, 137. 


INDEX 


Damascius, 143. 

Dancing, 237. 

Darkness, 24. 

Date-syrup, 102, 158. 

Dawn, 114, 176; beauty of 
the, 167. 

Daylight, 24. 

Death, impartiality of, 11, 
170 ; messenger of, 239. 

Delta, 27, 81, 82. 

Demotic, Precepts in, 4. 

Denderah, 100. 

Dér al-Madinah, 235. 

de Rougé, E., 6, 235. 

Destiny, 113, 152, 170. 

Dévaud, M. E., 5; his edition 
of the Teaching of Ptah- 
hetep, 51. 

Devil, 183 ; see Tar. 

Dignity in deportment, 127. 

Disposition, good, 241. 

Dog, 248. 

Drunkard, 237. 

Drunkenness, 238. 

Dwarf, 174. 


Eater of the Dead, 42. 

Eating and drinking with the 
god, 2. 

Ecclesiastes, 102, 130, 136. 

Egypt, language of, 249. 

Eisler, 43. 

Elephantine, 27. 

Elysian Fields, 44. 

Embryo, 42. 

Endowments, religious, 97. 

Engraver, the, 69. 

Enmaatra, 91. 

Envoy, 71. 

Erman, Dr. E., 7. 

E. Sagila, 38. 

Evil, existence of, 167. 

Evil hap, 239, 


253 


Evil tongue, the, 240. 
Eye of Ra, 123, 166. 


Falsification of documents, 
124. 

Fare of boat, 178. 

Farm labourer, the, 71. 

Fate, 113. 

Fathers, Counsels of the, 77. 

Fayydm, 34, 96. 

Feather of Truth, 33. 

Fenti, 34. 

Ferry boat, 129, 178. 

Festivals, divine, 237. 

Fidelity, 55. 

Fisherman, the, 72. 

Flattery, adroit, 125; to be 
rejected, 243. 

Floats, 129. 

Flock, leader of the, 246. 

Fool, the, described, 65. 

Forefathers, 15. 

Fowler, the, 72, 

Friendliness, 240. 

Friendship, 63, 296. 

Fustat, 34. 


Gardener, the, 70. 

Gardiner, Dr., 76. 

Geb, the Earth-god, 20, 89, 
157. 

Gentleness, 62. 

Ger Maa, 97, 101, 103, 105, 
106, 107, 114, 142, 146. 

Glutton, 118, 132. 

Gluttony, 49, 74, 117. 

Goal, 245. 

God, 10, 15, 16, 18, 22, 34, 55, 
56, 57, 60, 61, 62, 65, 75, 77, 
79, 83, 116; the Architect, 
104; the Creator, 20, 26; 
the Immaculate, 105; the 
Punisher, 9; watches every 


254 
man, 80; acts of inscrut- 
able, 50; man’s duty to 


Him, 103; hand of, 135, 147, 
159; house and servant of, 
[2 slovesot, 1355 WA7-< “nose 
of, 103 ; not to be discussed, 
243; reference to, 8; the 
village, 1; trust in, 245; 
two--arms. of, 13550 1748; 
worship of, 19. 

Gold worker, the, 69. 

Golénischeff, Dr., 16, 24, 76. 

Goodness, 168. 

Goodwin, C., 26. 

Goose, 249. 

Gossip, 133; to be avoided, 
10; evil effects of, 242. 

Grain-scribe, 141. 

Grain, the summer, 130, 167. 

Granary, 241. 

Grapow, Dr., 102. 

Great Bear, 94. 

Great Hand, 112. 

Great Judgement, the, 122. 

Great Scales, 19, 31, 37, 41, 44, 
107. 

Greediness, 49, 54. 

Grice, FC LE 26: 


Habtb, 158. 

Hall, Dr. H. R., 86, 89. 
Hall of Maati, 18. 
Handicrafts of Egypt, 14. 
Handmaid, 63. 

Hand of Geb, 20. 
Hand of God, 105. 
Hanes, 83. 

Hap (Nile), 91. 
Happiness, 9, 245. 
Hap-ur, 157. 
Harpoons, 111. 
Harvest, 55. 

Hathor, 100. 
Haughtiness, 60. 


INDEX 


Heath, Dr. D., 51. 

Heart, the, 65. 

Hekaptah, 34, 36. 

Hekau, 26. 

Heliopolis, 26, 35, 86, 103, 
137 ; Nine Gods of, 95. 

Henmemet, 86. 

Hensu, 34, 83. 

Hept-seshet, 34. 

Hept-tchat, 35. 

Heq-at, 35. 

Her-aakhuti, 95, 164. 

Herakleopolis, 16, 34, 81, 83. 

Herf-haf, 35. 

Heri-seru, 35. 

Hermopolis, 34, 37, 122, 134, 
163. 

Hertataf, 19. 

Hetch-abehu, 34. 

Het-shennu, 81. 

Hidden Hand, 20, 112. 

Himu, 36. 

Hippopotamuses, 114, 149. 

Honour due to princes, 78. 

Horse, 248. 

Horus, 86, 95. 

Horus of Heliopolis, 99. 

Horus the Aged, 95. 

Horus the Judge, 42. 

Horus the Truth-speaker (?) 
144, ; 

Horus, College of, 95, 144; 
the Followers of, 66; time 
of, 82. 

Housewife, the perfect, 246. 

Humility, 8, 10, 60. 

Huni, King, 7, 50. 

Hyksos, 29, 103. 


Ibis-god, 102, 163, 164; beak 
of the, 122. 

Immorality, sexual, 131. 

Impartiality, 79. 

Impatience, 245. 


INDEX 


Incense, 237. 
Independence, 133. 
Indigestion, 117, 132. 
Indolence, 246 

Ink, green, 110. 
Ink-pot, 164. 

Interest, personal, 134. 
Inundation, 149. 
Irrigation, 27. 

Isis, 33, 95, 99. 

Tuau, papyrus of, 41, 136. 


Jéquier, M. G., 7. 

Judgement, the Last, 136; 
described, 16-18. 

Judgement of Souls, 30. 


Ka, the, 55. 

Kaariu, animal, 248. 

Kagemna, 4, 7, 27, 49, ff. 

Kam (Egypt), 140. 

Kamephis, 143. 

Kamit, 68. 

Kamui, 82. 

Ka-mut-f, 99, 143. 

Ka-Nekht, 93, 98, 99, 143. 

Kantarah, 81. 

Karnak, 96. 

Kaui, Lake of, 35. 

Kenemt, 36. 

Kenemti, 36. 

Khamuas, 85, 235. 

Khati, 27, 83, 189; Teaching 
of, 14ff, 76ff. 

Khattai, 12, 68. 

Khat-ti, 85. 

Khaui, 81. 

Khem, 142. 

Khemenu, 34. 

Khemi, 35. 

Khennu, 73. 

Khensu-hetep, 236, 247 ff. 

Khenti Abtt, 100. 

Khenti Amenti, 86. 


255 


Khepera, 144. 

Kheperkara, 90. 
Khert-neter, 20. 

Khnemu, 92, 157. 
Khnemu-Ra, 108, 119, 139. 
Khufu (Cheops), 19. 

King, the, as god, 29. 
King, the register of, 3. 
King’s scribe, 97. 
Kingship, discourse on, 16, 84. 
Kismat, 9. 

Kmeph, 143. 


Labours, manual, described,68. 

Ladder, setting up the, 100. 

Lake of Fire, 33, 42, 44. 

Langdon, Prof., 102. 

Lasso, 156. 

Latopolis, 34. 

Laughter, 55. 

Law, the, 30. 

Law of God, 107. 

Laws in writing, 3. 

Lawgiver, 2. 

Learning, value of, 242. 

Letters, love of, 13. 

Liar, his doom, 243. 

Libations to the dead, 238 ; 
in the temple, 80. 

Lie-a-bed, the, 167. 

Life, the, 106. 

Life, the future, 136; short- 
ness of, 15. 

Lion, 248. 

Longsuffering, 59. 

Lord of the All, 108. 

Fuck AZ 113,-152,. 170: 

Ludolf, 137. 

Lying, 74. 


Maa-antuf, 35. 


‘| Maa-kheru, 32, 108. 


Maat (Truth), 9, 30, 33, 35, 40, 
41, 88, 104; Hall of, 33. 


256 


Maat goddess, 33, 41. 

Mabet, 34. 

Magic, Black and White, 26. 

Magic, a creation of God, 24. 

Mahu the scribe, 85. 

Maiden, the immature, 62. 

Makttib, 9, 113. 

Man the counterpart of God, 
249, 

Man, the silent, 245. 

Marduk, 38. 

Marduk and Osiris, 39. 

Mariette, F. A., 8, 9, 235. 

Marriage, 59, 237. 

Maspero, 12, 13, 26, 51, 236. 

Measure, 122. 

Meats, baked, 132. 

Meissner, Dr., 177. 

Memphis, 34, 36, 82. 

Men and women the flock of 
God, 22. 

Men rebel against God, 24. 

Men the images of God, 22. 

Mendes, 36, 86, 89. 

Menti, 95, 99, 100, 143, 144. 

Menu, 95, 100, 142, 143. 

Menu Horus, 144. 

Merikara, 14, 15, 80. 

Meskhenit, 14, 42, 75, 94. 

Methen, 3. 

Military service, 79. 

Moderation, 8, 56. 

Modesty, 50. 

Monotheism, 26, 135. 

Monuments, funerary, 80. 

Moon-god, 94, 108, 115, 116, 

146. 

Morality in Egypt, 1 ff. 

Moret, M. A., 28, 86, 98. 

Mosquitoes, 70. 

Mother-goddesses, 1 ff. 

Mother of the god, 143. 

Mother, honour and love due 
to the, 131, 244. 


INDEX 


M’tchaiu, 27. 
Mud-puddler (ditcher ?), 70. 
Murder, 39, 131. 


Navel-cord, 82. 

Naville, Prof. E., 24. 

Neb-abui, 36. 

Neba-per-em-khetkhet, 34. 

Nebertcher, 86, 102, 108, 117, 
136, 151, 168; the Captain, 
105. 

Neb-heru, 36. 

Neb-Maat, 35. 

Nebseni, Papyrus of, 33, 39, 
44 


Neb-Qet, Papyrus of, 42, 44. 

Nebt-aha, 31. 

Nefer (?), 36. 

Neferkaratera, 236. 

Neferkaraterr, 236. 

Nefer-Tem, 36. 

Negative Confession, 33 ; in 
Babylonia, 38; for use of 
kings only, 37. 

Neha-hau, 34. 

Nehatu, 35. 

Nehebkau, 36. 

Neheb-nefert, 36. 

Neighbour, definition of, 2. 

Neith, goddess, 1. 

Nekhebit, 1. 

Nekhen, 35. 

Nenu, 36, 157. 

Nephthys, 33. 

Nesitanebtashru, 33, 37, 121. 

Nets, 111. 

Nifur, 94, 97. 

Nifu-ur, 142, 143. 

Nile, 52. 

Nile-flood, 114. 

Nimrfid, ivory from, 110. 

Nomads, 27. 

Nomes, the Forty-two, 73. 


INDEX 


North, men of, 82, land of, 
83 ; wind of, 146. 

Nose (Thoth), 37. 

Nu, 157. 

Nu, Papyrus of, 33, 39. 

Nubians, 27. 


Oar, steering, 146. 

Obedience, 75; the greatest 
virtue, 64. 

Obligations, 242. 

Offerings, 16, 22, 24; daily, 80. 

Old age, 52, 65. 

Opportunity, 237. 

Orion, 94, 

Osiris, 18, 30, 86, 99, 109, 131, 
164, 

Osiris, Island of, 35; time of, 
54. 

Osiris, Code of, 32 ff. 

Other World, 135. 

Over drinking, 133. 

Over eating, 117, 133. 


Paddle, 129. 

Palestine, 82. 

Palette, 164. 

Pamai, 93, 179. 

Panopolis, 95, 97, 142. 
Panopolites, 142. 

Papyri, the Moral, 4 ff. 
Patience, 58, 62, 125, 126. 
Peacemaker, the, 10. 
Pentateuch, 103. 

Pepi, son of Khattai, 12, 14. 
Per-em-hru, Book of, 30. 
Per-Khemenu, 122, 134, 163. 
Per Menu, 35. 

Pett peoples, 82. 

Piehl, Dr., 89, 91. 
Pietschmann, Dr., 164. 
Piety, 135. 

Pig, the Black, 31. 
Pleasure, excess in, 60. 


12294x 


257 


Ploughman, the, 69. 

Politeness, 9. 

Potter’s wheel, 102, 119, 158. 

Prayer, 11, 113; habitual, 
133 ; silent, 238. 

Precepts, Moral, 3; positive 
and negative, 103. 

Priesthood of Amen, 96. 

Prisse Papyrus, 7, 28, 51 ff. 

Property, respect for, 2. 

Property, sacrosanct, 133. 

Prostrations, 106. 

Proverbs of Aphobis, 51. 

Proverbs of Solomon, 
103. 

Ptah-hetep, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 27, 
37; translation of his Teach 
ing, 51 ff. 

Ptah-hetep, junior, 8. 

Punishment, just, 77. 

Purification, 80. 


102, 


Qerrt, 34. 
Oerti, 34. 
Quarrels, avoidance of, 73. 


Ra, 14, 26, 37, 69, 91, 95, 104, 
108, 128, 134, 135, 139, 144, 
175, 176 ; destroys men, 24; 
time of, 54; weighing the 
heart, 41. 

Raft, 129. 

Rastau, 34, 45. 

Reau, 81. 

Rebel, 77. 

Rectitude, 240. 

Reed cutter, the, 72. 

Registers, 134. 

Religion, 11. 

Renenit, 14, 42, 75, 113. 

Responsibility, 11. 


’ Rest, essential, 61. 


Resurrection, 39. 
Reverence for superiors, 62. 


R 


258 


Revillout, E., 4. 

Riches, 102, fleeting, 63, 118 ; 
futility, 128. 

Right of heart, 22. 

Rod, measuring, 123. 

Robber, 154. 

Robbery, 39. 

Rules for conduct, 28. 

Ruruti, 34. 


Saa, 91. 

Sacrifices, 11, 16. 

Sacrilege, 39. 

Sahu, 94. 

Sais, 31. 

Sakkaérah, 82. 

Sandal maker, the, 72. 

Sandals, white, 80. 

Sandstone, 158. 

Sapu Book, 79. 

Satiu, 36. 

Sayings of the Fathers, 4. 

Scales, 136. 

Scandalmonger, 118, 133. 

School, 244 ; house, 74. 

Scribe, the, 242; finger of, 
103; the just, 164; pro- 
fession extolled, 12, 68. 

Sebaqa, 81. 

ee 15, 133, 171, 

245. 


Sehetepabra, Teaching of, 28, 
91. 

Sekhem, 34. 

Sekhmit, 92, 95. 

Semites, 81. 

Semti-Hesepti, 19. 

Seneferu, 50. 

Sent, 76. 

Serekhi, 36. 

Seri-kheru, 35. 

Serqit, 111. 

Service, divine, 135. 

Set, 95, 109. 


INDEX 


Seti I, 24, 111, 112. 
Set-qesu, 34. 

Shai, 113, 118. 
Sharpe, S., 86. 
Shennu (?) 93. 
Shesshes, 111. 


Shetait, 35. 

Sheti-kheru, 35. 

Shmin, 142. 

Shu, 95, 108, 119, 144, 157, 
158, 243; skin of, 102. 


Silence, 55, 106, 113, 247; in 
council, 60. 

Simile, use of the, 102. 

Singing, 237. 

Slaughter-house, 34, 35. 

Slaves, treatment of, 240. 

Sleep, the morning, 167. 

Slothfulness, 114. 

Smeru, 140, 179. 

Solomon, 39, 102. 

Son, duty of to father, 9; a 
git of God, 56; the good, 


South, country of, 80, 81. 

Spear maker, the, 71. 

Speech, 60, 242 ; choice of, 66; 
fine, 64; glib, 76; mightier 
than fighting, 15, 77; 
weighty, 134. 

Spirits, ancestral, 
151, 246. 

Spitting, 113. 

Spying on neighbours, 237. 

Stay-at-home, 239. 

Stone mason, the, 69. 

Storm fiend, 146. 

Stranger, the, 2. 

Straw, 129. 


141, 150, 


: Submission, 125. 


Subordinate, duty of a, 9. 
Sfidan, 96, 249. 

Sun, 81. 

Sun-god, 243. 


INDEX 


Sunrise, 114. 
Syene, 81. 

Syria, 81, 101, 110. 
Syrians, 16, 249. 


Tall al--Amarnah, 138. 

Ta-mehu, 81, 82. 

Ta-mera, 97. 

Tar (Devil), 
147, 158. 

Ta-ret, 35. 

Ta-she, 34, 

Ta-Usrit, 95, 144. 

Taut, 80. 

Tavern, 133. 

Tchatchaut, 18. 

Tchefet, 36. 

Tcheser-tep, 36. 

Teaching of Amenemapt, 140- 
179. 

Teaching of the Ancestors, 3, 
4 


102, 110, 119, 


Tebti, 36. 

Tefnut, 95, 144. 

Tem, 144. 

Tem-Khepera, 100. 

Tem-Sep, 36. 

Temper, the even, 242. 

Ten, Teni, 80, 142. 

Tenu, 84. 

Tetu, 36, 86. 

Tetu-Asut, 82. 

Texts, religious, 3. 

Thebes, princes of, 16. 

Thena, Papyrus of, 43. 

Thenemi, 35. 

Theophilus, 108. 

Thinis, 80, 84. 

This, 97 ; battle at, 16. 

Thoth, 19, 34, 37, 85, 88, 102, 
107, 108, 134, 137, 163, 164, 
165; Thoth and Ra, 121; 
the ‘advocate, 30. 


259 


Thothmes III, 96. 

Thureau Dangin, 38. 

Time, value of, 114, 
waste of, 56. 

Tithe, 60. 

To-day, 114. 

Tomb, 139, 239 ; 

To-morrow, 114. 

Tongue, 243; a steersman, 
168, a weapon, 77; to be 
ruled, 10; rule of the, 133. 

Tongue-wagging, 238. 

Town Council, 14, 168. 

Town-god, 9. 

Treasure, hidden, 120, 162. 

Trespass, 245. 

Trinity, the first, 95. 

Truth, 9, 15, 30, 33, 54, 66, 77, 
88, 104, 169, ; the life of, 29. 

Tuat, 123, 239. 

Tuauf, Teaching of, 12, 14, 
68 ff 


138 ; 


injury to, 80. 


Turah, 81. 
Tutuf, 35. 


Uamemti, 35. 
Uatchet, 1. 
Uatch-nesert, 34. 
Uben, 108, 123, 134, 166. 
Ubni Shu, 108, 110. 
Unem-besku, 34. 
Unem-snef, 34. 

Unes, 35. 

Un-Nefer, 99, 143. 
Unth, 36. 

Up-uatu, 86. 
Urigallu, 38. 

Urit, 35. 

Ur-shefit, 74. 
Usekht-nemmat, 34. 
Usertsen I, 28, 89. 
Utchat, 123, 134, 166. 
Utchu-rekhit, 36. 


260 


Verdict, lying, 169. 
Virey, 51. 

Visions by night, 24. 
Vogelsang, 98. 


Walking-stick, 250. 
Washerman, 72. 

Waste of goods, 240. 
Waterman, the, 69. 

Wax figure, 110. 

Weaver, the, 71. 

Weighing the heart, 30. 
Weights, false, 134, 122, 165. 
Wessely, 143. 

Whelp, 158. 

Whirlwind, 158. 

White House of Geb, 89. 
Widow, 177. 

Wife, treatment of a, 10, 59. 


INDEX 


Will of God, 101, 104, 125> 
155, 237. 

Wine-bibbing, 117. 

Wine cup, 135, 177. 

Wisdom, 106. 

Wolves, 149. 

Woman, a well, 102. 

Woman, dancing, 125, 165 ; 
old in fields, 130; the 
strange, 131, 238; advice 
of a, to be avoided, 246. 

Women to be avoided, 58; 
warnings against, 10. 

Word, the soft, 243. 

Words of Power of divine 
origin, 24. 

Work, excessive, 60. 

Worship of God, 1 ff. 

Writingin Neolithic Period, 3 


re 
Oy 
#2 


Seseaas 


