TFIE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS;  PSYCHIC 
Cf  PHYSICAL  TREATISES,  VOLUME  IL 
TRANSLATED  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


NUNC  COCNOSCO  EX  PARTE 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
EIBRARY 


IBMCJSSI  ,4  *'A.s.  .,2—  ^‘  -.  ^  A»7*  •  •  [fltMMTSi*  *  '  V 

"•"■*■  ■  ■  ’}  ' 

'••-i;'4-%^.*  •  t  >,-*  -Jr3SK*>  V '  ''■...  *1'.* 


•>‘•1 


1*^ 


■5'rT^  •  •  ,  .33^  -i-K--: 


^T"-- *•  ■  ■-»'  -<»'-  ■■  f:j‘yv,»‘;'*'^B^CwHB  _r-^  i  »■  ■  - ,  ••  •*  .*  *■  _  •' 


«T/:/: 

A-i;  ~"'^' 

_  -  „  _ 

■,-  -r  -  -  jj  ■r\.f^_  I  -  r 


i<A  ft 


H,' 

J '•  * 


-  >1 


.  *' 

>  ■* « 


J#,  -. 


>  ' 


t  • 


JSr  t  V-  '  '  • 

•  y|i  ,- 


■  '!* 


(  *  *. 


• 

4 


L.JC.  I  ’  J»  ,  ,*  _ 

*^  *  f.  f 


i  fm  S*:-'* 

.*!•••  * 


K* 


V6?3S. 

=*  ■'^• 


■  ■  t 

•m 


-  .  (j' . 

■-  '.  t  .^— '  ••  f'i'r  *1 

■i.- 


:;y  '"■V  -f- 


1 


t  ■  •4ik 

'•/■*'  ■•- 

>•  '  ‘  •  ;VS»  ^ 


t  '7 . 

>  * 


r->--  ■'-■ 

jiMfr  ^  •.  “v,^  ^  •'•  ' 


',X'‘'^ '  -•  *•'>,  '^  ’  -?.'4  -  ‘ 

'  ■  .,•  .  '■  ;-lWs  :^'?’  ■  ♦  ■ 

t»  Wl  ,4^  J  - 2. . 

^  ^  •  V . .  ♦  ^;v ' 


1*1  4' 


..,"  TV, 


“t  «M  i*.(i 


4  1f.‘ 


•*  ,r> 


i  >  -v* 


,-3 


A  l  -  . 


«•< 


ft*'  * 


i.**-'* 


. . 

V.  --  ♦•  W.  .  •'  •’ 

’H  .V  _  ’  AWRPTWV* ^  .'  I  'i^<  *1^1 

.jT*^  *’  V...v'5.. 

T  T  M  AJ  -4  /M  ' 


.'♦'P-1 


T,.-., '  ■'■•^^  ^  ,'.v  T:,' ‘  ■'.'f'T^aSI 

^|f  T,:.v:  5.2741 


■-t. 


T.'h 


ur 


‘'.'S't' 


.-Ni.*sfl 


fV.'v'^S^-SSsi^atfa 


l  *** 

*  J 

♦  •■  * 

.  1  a , 

.  (W  j 

fi-ri 

ui^V 

■  ■» 

.^S■ 


4  I . 


'X'vvr 


ifSS- 

.-rvrti  ♦' 


r.-*'  'v. 


i 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/psychicphysicalt0002plot 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS  ;  PSYCHIC 
&  PHYSICAL  TREATISES,  VOLUME  11. 


dutn  glOifte  ”06  ■]  onOtu  n/i  li-6it\e^nti, 
n’OorhnxJkC-biioc  t!)Aite-^t^-Clix\C  -Oom, 

Scfop^n  mAC-entiA.  Ho-oIais  1916. 


LOTINUS 

PSYCHIC  AND  PHYSICAL 

TREATISES;  COMPRISING 
THE  SECOND  AND  THIRD 
ENNEADS,  TRANSLATED 
FROM  THE  GREEK  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


PHILIP  LEE  WARNER,  PUBLISHER 
TO  THE  MEDICI  SOCIETY,  LIMITED 
7  GRAFTON  ST.  LONDON,  W.  1.  1921 


Of  this  Edition  looo  copies  have 
been  printed  on  pure  rag  paper 


T'rhttd  jv  Great  Britain 


CONTENTS 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  THIRD  ENNEAD 

PAGE 

I.  Fate  i 

II.  Providence  :  First  Treatise  ii 

III.  On  Providence  :  Second  Treatise  36 

IV.  Our  Tutelary  Spirit  46 

V.  On  Love  53 

VI.  The  Impassivity  of  the  Unembodied  67 

VII.  Time  and  Eternity  96 

VIII.  Nature  Contemplation  and  the  One  119 

IX.  Detached  Considerations  136 

THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  SECOND  ENNEAD 

I.  On  the  Kosmos  or  on  the  Heavenly  System  143 

II.  The  Heavenly  Circuit  154 

III.  Are  the  Stars  Causes  ?  159 

IV.  Matter  in  its  Two  Kinds  178 

V.  On  Potentiality  and  Actuality  196 

VI.  Quality  and  Form-Idea  203 

VII.  On  Complete  Transfusion  208 

VIII.  Why  Distant  Objects  Appear  Small  212 

IX.  Against  Those  that  Affirm  the  Creator  of  the  Kosmos  and  the 
Kosmos  Itself  to  be  Evil  :  [Generally  Quoted  as  “  Against 
THE  Gnostics”]  215 

Note  on  the  Order  of  the  Tractates  of  the  Third  and  Second  Enneads  245 

Acknowledgements  246 

vii 


■<]  'f  ■''  ft 


>  ' 


X'- 


'.  ■;> 


*  '■■■'- 


,  ^X/L 

■1.  ,  r ,  ■ 

‘*  ‘  -c> 


■1^* 


V  ;fm:iT^vQ 

1  '*  '  t 


■.  ;'!■ -4®. ; 


XJ^lF^T  ?niT  ^0'  «5iOOH  HHT 


.  . 
s  # 


*-  X-.' 

T. 


V'- 


'  Jfc.^  p.*  ■'_  ■  rfA'*£  4 


V/ 


,fj 


J}' 


F- 


f.: 

V«l> 

tH* 

«:  t 


“’Ll 


•  »■  ••I- 


asiTA^a  .  fs^^l  :  .li 

.^iV  i^JlT  viV.r>'*n  •  M 'X  xO  4|I 

'  itm^  h  jO  .Vf 

■ ...  1  . 

•470i  <0  ,y 

ti3it;ntjW3'AU  jftiT  tilV^A^rK^  jchT  4V 

. ■ . ~*  ici»i>.  t>'*T  ^nv 

Vi.v’ 33iin>>?  .iUV.j, 
aWflJfAJTSttlEVJOCl  C  Ui  .XJ 


- 


*.-  I 


fc*r- 


£>i 


4Z* 


.'Tj'fx  '^t>  rioQfr  ant 

^  viv.'m:-i1f  -if'T  >•*►  HO  zjur  r&  J 

.'^  .1 

’  "V  = 


y(  '  • 

riTi?j»:*j  'riA3:‘rjj:iLi  3S  f  .tl 


/t  •• 


•  * 


'!  i;fry/.3  2Xm:  jot  xtX  ,?II 


€■  — 


srfrrSi  vVfT  wt  Tti  iianrAU  ,V^ 


*3tT  ; 


i ytuaut^A  ii'fiA  V  ri  jAf  4  »*0  V* 

*  ‘4  A  t/.  *i\<*  Y  .IV 


«f5*  ."l 


jr‘yj7ii:<*a  .ilY" 

c'l'rji^O'TKfcTjii.I  ysr’W  .'llF/ 

& 


>f»’ .’^i*  ^T*-  5«rnf>{^  v/4»r.  mnvioA  .Xf 

^  til  V  ■  v 

c  im  r^f  ^»T.  ^  T5?^tK  ’  ar:  Ki:  .ttcV?  •*‘'- 


I  •k. 


M' 


'in 


'T-y  f 

s\Mi  •j 


V  I*  . 


I  • 

' .  >»•*  -#•< 

;  j  •  ^ 


50 


■  lik  T*  .t"  ' 

;'"■-  ■  ■  .■ .  if  .  .  • 

,  c^sac  ■■■■) ,  .•'c':is 


r  '*P<  - 

r  .'--W.  -  . 

f_“  ,’■-  • —  -.ifi 


■» ,  • 

A-.  •: 


A 


..#■,  4*; 


‘r**s 

,;,4.}g 


..  .Jff\  •  Itp"  -  *».. 


THE  THIRD  ENNEAD 


FIRST  TRACTATE 
Fate 

I. 

In  the  two  orders  of  things — those  whose  existence  is  that  of  process 
and  those  in  whom  it  is  Authentic  Being — there  is  a  variety  of  possible 
relation  to  Cause. 

Cause  might  conceivably  underly  all  the  entities  in  both  orders  or 
none  in  either.  It  might  underly  some,  only,  in  each  order,  the  others 
being  causeless.  It  might,  again,  underly  the  Realm  of  Process  univer¬ 
sally  while  in  the  Realm  of  Authentic  Existence  some  things  were  caused, 
others  not,  or  all  were  causeless.  Conceivably,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Authentic  Existents  are  all  caused  while  in  the  Realm  of  Process  some 
things  are  caused  and  others  not,  or  all' are  causeless. 

Now,  to  begin  with  the  Eternal  Existents  : — 

The  Firsts  among  these,  by  the  fact  that  they  are  Firsts,  cannot 
be  referred  to  outside  Causes  ;  but  all  such  (Eternals)  as  depend  upon 
those  Firsts  may  be  admitted  to  derive  their  Being  from  them. 

And  in  all  cases  the  Act  may  be  referred  to  the  Essence  (as  its  cause), 
for  their  Essence  consists,  precisely,  in  giving  forth  an  appropriate  Act. 

As  for  Things  of  Process — or  for  Eternal  Existents  whose  Act  is  not 
eternally  invariable — we  must  hold  that  these  are  due  to  Cause  ;  Cause¬ 
lessness  is  quite  inadmissible  ;  we  can  make  no  place  here  for  unwar¬ 
ranted  “  slantings,”  for  sudden  movement  of  bodies  apart  from  any 
initiating  power,  for  precipitate  spurts  in  a  soul  with  nothing  to  drive 
it  into  the  new  course  of  action.  Such  causelessness  would  bind  the 
Soul  under  an  even  sterner  compulsion,  no  longer  master  of  itself,  but 
at  the  mercy  of  movements  apart  from  will  and  cause.  Something  willed 


2 


PLOTINUS 


— within  itself  or  without — something  desired,  must  lead  it  to  action  ; 
without  motive  it  can  have  no  motion. 

On  the  assumption  that  all  happens  by  Cause,  it  is  easy  to  discover 
the  nearest  determinants  of  any  particular  act  or  state  and  to  trace  it 
plainly  to  them. 

The  cause  of  a  visit  to  the  centre  of  affairs  will  be  that  one  thinks 
it  necessary  to  see  some  person  or  to  receive  a  debt,  or,  in  a  word,  that 
one  has  some  definite  motive  or  impulse  confirmed  by  a  judgment  of 
expediency.  Sometimes  a  condition  may  be  referred  to  the  arts,  the 
recovery  of  health  for  instance  to  medical  science  and  the  doctor. 
Wealth  has  for  its  cause  the  discovery  of  a  treasure  or  the  receipt  of  a 
gift,  or  the  earning  of  money  by  manual  or  intellectual  labour.  The 
child  is  traced  to  the  father  as  its  Cause  and  perhaps  to  a  chain  of 
favourable  outside  circumstances  such  as  a  particular  diet  or,  more 
immediately,  a  special  organic  aptitude  or  a  wife  apt  to  childbirth. 

And  the  general  cause  of  all  is  Nature. 

2. 

But  to  halt  at  these  nearest  determinants,  not  to  be  willing  to 
penetrate  deeper,  indicates  a  sluggish  mind,  a  dullness  to  all  that  calls 
us  towards  the  primal  and  transcendent  causes. 

How  comes  it  that  the  same  surface  causes  produce  different  results  ? 
There  is  moonshine,  and  one  man  steals  and  the  other  does  not :  under 
the  influence  of  exactly  similar  surroundings  one  man  falls  sick  and  the 
other  keeps  well ;  an  identical  set  of  operations  makes  one  rich  and  leaves 
another  poor.  The  differences  amongst  us  in  manners,  in  characters,  in 
success,  force  us  to  go  still  further  back. 

Men  therefore  have  never  been  able  to  rest  at  the  surface  causes. 

One  school  postulates  material  principles,  such  as  atoms ;  from  the 
movement,  from  the  collisions  and  combinations  of  these,  it  derives  the 
existence  and  the  mode  of  being  of  all  particular  phenomena,  supposing 
that  all  depends  upon  how  these  atoms  are  agglomerated,  how  they  act, 
how  they  are  affected  ;  our  own  impulses  and  states,  even,  are  supposed 
to  be  determined  by  these  principles. 

Such  teaching,  then,  obtrudes  this  compulsion,  an  atomic  Anagke, 


III.  I.  3] 


FATE 


3 


even  upon  Real  Being.  Substitute,  for  the  atoms,  any  other  material 
entities  as  principles  and  the  cause  of  all  things,  and  at  once  Real  Being 
becomes  servile  to  the  determination  set  up  by  them. 

Others  rise  to  the  first-principle  of  all  that  exists  and  from  it  derive 
all  they  tell  of  a  cause  penetrating  all  things,  not  merely  moving  all  but 
making  each  and  everything  ;  but  they  pose  this  as  a  fate  and  a  supremely 
dominating  cauSe  ;  not  merely  all  else  that  comes  into  being,  but  even 
our  own  thinking  and  thoughts  would  spring  from  its  movement,  just 
as  the  several  members  of  an  animal  move  not  at  their  own  choice  but 
at  the  dictation  of  the  leading  principle  which  animal  life  presupposes. 

Yet  another  school  fastens  on  the  universal  Circuit  as  embracing  all 
things  and  producing  all  by  its  motion  and  by  the  positions  and  mutual 
aspect  of  the  planets  and  fixed  stars  in  whose  power  of  foretelling  they 
find  warrant  for  the  belief  that  this  Circuit  is  the  universal  determinant. 

Finally,  there  are  those  that  dwell  on  the  interconnection  of  the  causa¬ 
tive  forces  and  on  their  linked  descent — every  later  phenomenon  following 
upon  an  earlier,  one  always  leading  back  to  others  by  which  it  arose  and 
without  which  it  could  not  be,  and  the  latest  always  subservient  to  what 
went  before  them — but  this  is  obviously  to  bring  in  fate  by  another  path. 
This  school  may  be  fairly  distinguished  into  two  branches ;  a  section 
which  makes  all  depend  upon  some  one  principle  and  a  section  which 
ignores  such  a  unity. 

Of  this  last  opinion  we  will  have  something  to  say,  but  for  the 
moment  we  will  deal  with  the  former,  taking  the  others  in  their  turn. 

3- 

“  Atoms  ”  or  “  elements  ” — it  is  in  either  case  an  absurdity,  an 
impossibility,  to  hand  over  the  universe  and  its  contents  to  material 
entities,  and  out  of  the  disorderly  swirl  thus  occasioned  to  call  order, 
reasoning,  and  the  governing  soul  into  being  ;  but  the  atomic  origin  is, 
if  we  may  use  the  phrase,  the  most  impossible. 

A  good  deal  of  truth  has  resulted  from  the  discussion  of  this  subject ; 
but,  even  to  admit  such  principles  does  not  compel  us  to  admit  universal 
compulsion  or  any  kind  of  “  fate.” 


4 


PLOTINUS 


Suppose  the  atoms  to  exist : — 

These  atoms  are  to  move,  one  downwards— admitting  a  down  and 
an  up  (in  the  Universe  or  before  the  Universe  is  in  being) — another  slant¬ 
wise,  all  at  haphazard,  in  a  confused  conflict.  Nothing  here  is  orderly  ; 
order  has  not  come  into  being,  though  the  outcome,  this  Universe, 
when  it  achieves  existence,  is  all  order ;  and  thus  prediction  and  divination 
are  utterly  impossible,  whether  by  the  laws  of  the  science — what  science 
can  operate  where  there  is  no  order  ? — or  by  divine  possession  and 
inspiration,  which  no  less  require  that  the  future  be  something  regulated. 

Material  entities  exposed  to  all  this  onslaught  may  very  well  be  under 
compulsion  to  yield  to  whatsoever  the  atoms  may  bring  :  but  would 
anyone  pretend  that  the  acts  and  states  of  a  soul  or  mind  could  be 
explained  by  any  atomic  movements  ?  How  can  we  imagine  that  the 
onslaught  of  an  atom,  striking  downwards  or  dashing  in  from  any 
direction,  could  force  the  soul  to  definite  and  necessary  reasonings  or 
impulses  or  into  any  reasonings,  impulses  or  thoughts  at  all,  necessary 
or  otherwise  ?  And  what  of  the  souFs  resistance  to  bodily  states  ? 
What  movement  of  atoms  could  compel  one  man  to  be  a  geometrician, 
set  another  studying  arithmetic  or  astronomy,  lead  a  third  to  the  philo¬ 
sophic  life  ?  In  a  word,  if  we  must  go,  like  soulless  bodies,  wherever 
bodies  push  and  drive  us,  there  is  an  end  to  our  personal  act  and  to  our 
very  existence  as  living  beings. 

The  School  that  erects  other  material  forces  (such  as  "  the  elements  ”) 
into  universal  causes  is  met  by  the  same  reasoning  :  we  say  that  while 
these  can  warm  us  and  chill  us,  and  destroy  weaker  forms  of  existence, 
they  can  be  causes  of  nothing  that  is  done  in  the  sphere  of  mind  or  soul : 
all  this  must  be  traceable  to  quite  another  kind  of  Principle. 

4’ 

Another  theory  : — 

The  Universe  is  permeated  by  one  Soul,  Cause  of  all  things  and 
events  ;  every  separate  phenomenon  as  a  member  of  a  whole  moves  in 
Its  place  with  the  general  movement ;  all  the  various  causes  spring  into 
action  from  one  source  :  therefore,  it  is  argued,  the  entire  descending 


III.  I.  5] 


FATE 


5 


claim  of  causes  and  all  their  interaction  must  follow  inevitably  and  so 
constitute  a  universal  determination.  A  plant  rises  from  a  root,  and  we 
are  asked  on  that  account  to  reason  that  not  only  the  interconnection 
linking  the  root  to  all  the  members  and  every  member  to  every  other 
but  the  entire  activity  and  experience  of  the  plant,  as  well,  must  be  one 
organised  overruling,  a  “  destiny  ”  of  the  plant. 

But  such  an  extremity  of  determination,  a  destiny  so  all-pervasive, 
does  away  with  the  very  destiny  that  is  affirmed  :  it  shatters  the  sequence 
and  co-operation  of  causes. 

It  would  be  unreasonable  to  attribute  to  destiny  the  movement  of 
our  limbs  dictated  by  the  mind  and  will :  this  is  no  case  of  something 
outside  (some  destiny)  bestowing  motion  while  another  thing  (mind) 
accepts  it  and  is  thus  set  into  action  ;  the  mind  itself  (and  not  destiny) 
is  the  prime  mover. 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  universal  system ;  if  all  that  performs 
act  and  is  subject  to  experience  constitutes  one  substance,  if  one  thing 
does  not  really  produce  another  thing  under  causes  leading  back  con¬ 
tinuously  one  to  another,  then  it  is  not  a  truth  that  all  happens  by 
causes,  there  is  nothing  but  a  rigid  unity.  We  are  no  “  We  ”  :  nothing 
is  our  act ;  our  thought  is  not  ours  ;  our  decisions  are  the  reasoning  of 
something  outside  ourselves  ;  we  are  no  more  agents  than  our  feet  are 
kickers  when  we  use  them  to  kick  with. 

No  ;  each  several  thing  must  be  a  separate  thing ;  there  must  be 
acts  and  thoughts  that  are  our  own  ;  the  good  and  evil  done  by  each 
human  being  must  be  his  own  ;  and  it  is  quite  certain  that  we  must  not 
lay  any  vileness  to  the  charge  of  the  All. 

5- 

But  perhaps  the  explanation  of  every  particular  act  or  event  is 
rather  that  they  are  determined  by  the  spheric  movement — the  Phora — 
and  by  the  changing  position  of  the  heavenly  bodies  as  these  stand  at 
setting  or  rising  or  in  mid  course  and  in  various  aspects  with  each  other. 

Augury,  it  is  urged,  is  able  from  these  indications  to  foretell  what 
is  to  happen  not  merely  to  the  universe  as  a  whole,  but  even  to  indi- 


6 


PLOTINUS 


viduals,  and  this  not  merely  as  regards  external  conditions  of  fortune 
but  even  as  to  the  events  of  the  mind.  We  observe,  too,  how  growth  or 
check  in  other  orders  of  beings — animals  and  plants — ^is  determined  by 
their  sympathetic  relations  with  the  heavenly  bodies  and  how  widely 
they  are  influenced  by  them,  how,  for  example,  the  various  countries 
show  a  different  produce  according  to  their  situation  on  the  earth  and 
especially  their  lie  towards  the  sun.  And  the  effect  of  place  is  not 
limited  to  plants  and  animals  ;  it  rules  human  beings  too,  determining 
their  appearance,  their  height  and  colour,  their  mentality  and  their 
desires,  their  pursuits  and  their  moral  habit.  Thus  the  universal  circuit 
would  seem  to  be  the  monarch  of  the  All. 

Now  a  first  answer  to  this  theory  is  that  its  advocates  have  merely 
devised  another  shift  to  immolate  to  the  heavenly  bodies  all  that  is  ours, 
our  acts  of  will  and  our  states,  all  the  evil  in  us,  our  entire  personality  ; 
nothing  is  allowed  to  us  ’  we  are  left  to  be  stones  set  rolling,  not  men, 
not  beings  whose  nature  implies  a  task. 

But  we  must  be  allowed  our  own— with  the  understanding  that  to 
what  is  primarily  ours,  our  personal  holding,  there  is  added  some  influx 
from  the  All— the  distinction  must  be  made  between  our  individual  act 

and  what  is  thrust  upon  us  :  we  are  not  to  be  immolated  to  the 
stars. 

Place  and  climate,  no  doubt,  produce  constitutions  warmer  or  colder ; 
and  the  parents  tell  on  the  offspring,  as  is  seen  in  the  resemblance  between 
them,  very  general  in  personal  appearance  and  noted  also  in  some  of  the 
unreflecting  states  of  the  mind. 

None  the  less,  in  spite  of  physical  resemblance  and  similar  environ¬ 
ment,  we  observe  the  greatest  difference  in  temperament  and  in  ideas  : 
this  side  of  the  human  being,  then,  derives  from  some  quite  other 
Principle  (than  any  external  causation  or  destiny).  A  further  confirma¬ 
tion  is  found  in  the  efforts  we  make  to  correct  both  bodily  constitution  and 
mental  aspirations. 

If  the  stars  are  held  to  be  causing  principles  on  the  ground  of  the 
possibility  of  foretelling  individual  fate  or  fortune  from  observation  of 
their  positions,  then  the  birds  and  all  the  other  things  which  the  sooth- 


III.  I.  6] 


FATE 


7 


sayer  observes  for  divination  must  equally  be  taken  as  causing  what 
they  indicate. 

Some  further  considerations  will  help  to  clarify  this  matter  : — 

The  heavens  are  observed  at  the  moment  of  a  birth  and  the  individual 
fate  is  thence  predicted  in  the  idea  that  the  stars  are  no  mere  indications, 
but  active  causes,  of  the  future  events.  Sometimes  the  Astrologers  tell 
of  noble  birth  ;  “  the  child  is  bom  of  highly  placed  parents  ”  ;  yet  how 
is  it  possible  to  make  out  the  stars  (of  the  natal  chart)  to  be  causes  of  a 
condition  which  existed  in  the  father  and  mother  previously  to  that  star 
pattern  on  which  the  prediction  is  based  ? 

And  consider  still  further  : — 

They  are  really  announcing  the  fortunes  of  parents  from  the  birth 
of  children ;  the  character  and  career  of  children  are  included  in  the 
predictions  as  to  the  parents — ^they  predict  for  the  yet  unborn  ! — ^in  the 
lot  of  one  brother  they  are  foretelling  the'death  of  another  ;  a  girl’s  fate 
includes  that  of  a  future  husband,  a  boy’s  that  of  a  wife. 

Now,  can  we  think  that  the  star-grouping  over  any  particular  birth 
can  be  the  cause  of  what  stands  already  announced  in  the  facts  about 
the  parents  ?  Either  the  previous  star-groupings  were  the  determinants 
of  the  child’s  future  career  or,  if  they  were  not,  then  neither  is  the 
immediate  grouping.  And  notice  further  that  physical  likeness  to  the 
parents — the  Astrologers  hold — is  of  purely  domestic  origin  :  this  implies 
that  ugliness  and  beauty  are  so  caused  and  not  by  astral  movements. 

Again,  there  must  at  one  and  the  same  time  be  a  widespread  coming 
to  birth — ^men,  and  the  most  varied  forms  of  animal  life  at  the  same  moment 
— and  these  should  aU  be  under  the  one  destiny  since  the  one  pattern 
rules  at  the  moment ;  how  explain  that  identical  star-groupings  give 
here  the  human  form,  there  the  animal  ? 


6. 

But  in  fact  everything  follows  its  own  Kind  ;  the  birth  is  a  horse 
because  it  comes  from  the  Horse  Kind,  a  man  by  springing  from  the 
Human  Kind ;  offspring  answers  to  species.  Allow  the  kosmic  circuit 
its  part,  a  very  powerful  influence  upon  the  thing  brought  into  being  ; 


8 


PLOTINUS 


allow  the  stars  a  wide  material  action  upon  the  bodily  part  of  the  man, 
producing  heat  and  cold  and  their  natural  resultants  in  the  physical 
constitution  ;  still  does  such  action  explain  character,  vocation  and 
especially  all  that  seems  quite  independent  of  material  elements,  a  man 
taking  to  letters,  to  geometry,  to  gambling,  and  becoming  an  originator 
in  any  of  these  pursuits  ?  And  can  we  imagine  the  stars,  divine  beings, 
bestowing  wickedness  ?  And  what  of  a  doctrine  that  makes  them 
wreak  vengeance,  as  for  a  wrong,  because  they  are  in  their  decline  or  are 
being  carried  to  a  position  beneath  the  earth — as  if  a  decline  from  our 
point  of  view  brought  any  change  to  themselves,  as  if  they  ever  ceased  to 
traverse  the  heavenly  spheres  and  to  make  the  same  figure  around  the 
earth. 

Nor  may  we  think  that  these  divine  beings  lose  or  gain  in  goodness 
as  they  see  this  one  or  another  of  the  company  in  various  aspects,  and 
that  in  their  happier  position  they  are  benignant  to  us  and,  less  pleasantly 
situated,  turn  maleficent.  We  can  but  believe  that  their  circuit  is  for  the 
protection  of  the  entirety  of  things  while  they  furnish  the  incidental 
service  of  being  letters  on  which  the  augur,  acquainted  with  that  alphabet, 
may  look  and  read  the  future  from  their  pattern— arriving  at  the  thing 
signified  by  such  analogies  as  that  a  soaring  bird  tells  of  some  lofty  event. 

7- 

It  remains  to  notice  the  theory  of  the  one  Causing-Principle  alleged 
to  interweave  everything  with  everything  else,  to  make  things  into  a 
chain,  to  determine  the  nature  and  condition  of  each  phenomenon — a 
Principle  which,  acting  through  seminal  (operatively  productive)  Reason- 
Forms— Logoi  Spermatikoi— elaborates  all  that  exists  and  happens. 

The  doctrine  is  close  to  that  which  makes  the  Soul  of  the  Universe 
the  source  and  cause  of  all  condition  and  of  all  movement  whether  without 
or  supposing  that  we  are  allowed  as  individuals  some  little  power 
towards  personal  act — within  ourselves. 

But  it  is  the  theory  of  the  most  rigid  and  universal  Necessity  ;  all 
the  causative  forces  enter  into  the  system,  and  so  every  several  phenome¬ 
non  rises  necessarily  ;  where  nothing  escapes  Destiny,  nothing  has  power 


III.  I.  8] 


FATE 


9 


to  check  or  to  change.  Such  forces  beating  upon  us,  as  it  were,  from  one 
general  cause  leave  us  no  resource  but  to  go  where  they  drive.  All  our 
ideas  will  be  determined  by  a  chain  of  previous  causes  ;  our  doings  will 
be  determined  by  those  ideas  ;  personal  action  becomes  a  mere  word. 
That  we  are  the  agents  does  not  save  our  freedom  when  our  action  is 
prescribed  by  those  causes  ;  we  have  precisely  what  belongs  to  everything 
that  lives,  to  infants  guided  by  blind  impulses,  to  lunatics  ;  all  these  act ; 
why,  even  fire  acts  ;  there  is  act  in  everything  that  follows  the  plan  of 
its  being,  servilely. 

No  one  that  sees  the  implications  of  this  theory  can  hesitate  :  unable 
to  halt  at  such  a  determinant  principle,  we  seek  for  other  explanations 
of  our  action. 

8. 

What  can  this  other  cause  be  ;  one  standing  above  those  treated  of ; 
one  that  leaves  nothing  causeless,  that  preserves  sequence  and  order  in 
the  Universe  and  yet  allows  ourselves  some  reality  and  leaves  room  for 
prediction  and  augury  ? 

Soul ;  we  must  place  at  the  crest  of  the  world  of  beings,  this  other 
Principle,  not  merely  the  Soul  of  the  Universe  but,  included  in  it,  the 
Soul  of  the  individual :  this,  no  mean  Principle,  is  needed  to  be  the 
bond  of  union  in  the  total  of  things,  not,  itself,  a  thing  sprung  like  things 
from  life-seeds,  but  a  first-hand  Cause,  bodiless  and  therefore  supreme  over 
itself,  free,  beyond  the  reach  of  kosmic  Cause ;  for,  brought  into  body, 
it  would  not  be  unrestrictedly  sovereign  ;  it  would  hold  rank  in  a 
series. 

Now  the  environment  into  which  this  independent  principle  enters, 
when  it  comes  to  this  midpoint,  will  be  largely  led  by  secondary  causes 
(or,  by  chance-causes)  :  there  will  therefore  be  a  compromise  ;  the  action 
of  the  Soul  will  be  in  part  guided  by  this  environment  while  in  other 
matters  it  will  be  sovereign,  leading  the  way  where  it  will.  The  nobler 
Soul  will  have  the  greater  power  ;  the  poorer  Soul,  the  lesser.  A  soul 
which  defers  to  the  bodily  temperament  cannot  escape  desire  and  rage 
and  is  abject  in  poverty,  overbearing  in  wealth,  arbitrary  in  power.  The 


c 


10 


PLOTINUS 


soul  of  nobler  nature  holds  good  against  its  surroundings  ;  it  is  more 
apt  to  change  them  than  to  be  changed,  so  that  often  it  improves  the 
environment  and,  where  it  must  make  concession,  at  least  keeps  its 
innocence. 

9- 

We  admit,  then,  a  Necessity  in  all  that  is  brought  about  by  this 
compromise  between  evil  and  accidental  circumstance  :  what  room  was  ‘ 
there  for  anything  else  than  the  thing  that  is  ?  Given  all  the  causes, 
all  must  happen  beyond  aye  or  nay — that  is,  all  the  external  and  whatever 
may  be  due  to  the  sidereal  circuit— therefore  when  the  Soul  has  been 
modified  by  outer  forces  and  acts  under  that  pressure  so  that  what  it 
does  is  no  more  than  an  unreflecting  acceptance  of  stimulus,  neither  the 
act  nor  the  state  can  be  described  as  voluntary  ;  so,  too,  when  even  from 

within  itself,  it  falls  at  times  below  its  best  and  ignores  the  true,  the 
highest,  laws  of  action. 

But  when  our  Soul  holds  to  its  Reason-Principle,  to  the  guide,  pure 
and  detached  and  native  to  itself,  only  then  can  we  speak  of  personal 
operation,  of  voluntary  act.  Things  so  done  may  truly  be  described  as 
our  doing,  for  they  have  no  other  source  ;  they  are  the  issue  of  the 
unmingled  Soul,  a  Principle  that  is  a  First,  a  leader,  a  sovereign  not 
subject  to  the  errors  of  ignorance,  not  to  be  overthrown  by  the  tyranny 
of  the  desires  which,  where  they  can  break  in,  drive  and  drag,  so  as  to 
allow  of  no  act  of  ours,  but  mere  answer  to  stimulus. 

10. 

To  sum  the  results  of  our  argument All  things  and  events  are 
foreshown  and  brought  into  being  by  causes  ;  but  the  causation  is  of 
two  Kinds ;  there  are  results  originating  from  the  Soul  and  results  due 
to  other  causes,  those  of  the  environment. 

*1.  Souls  all  that  is  done  of  their  own  motion  in 

e  ig  of  sound  reason  is  the  Soul’s  work,  while  what  is  done  where 
they  are  Inndered  from  their  own  action  is  not  so  much  done  as  suffered 
Unwisdom,  then,  is  not  due  to  the  Soul,  and,  in  general-if  we  mean  by 


III.  2.  l] 


PROVIDENCE 


II 


Fate  a  compulsion  outside  ourselves — an  act  is  fated  when  it  is  contrary 
to  wisdom. 

But  all  our  best  is  of  our  own  doing  :  such  is  our  nature  as  long  as 
we  remain  detached.  The  wise  and  good  do  perform  acts ;  their  right 
action  is  the  expression  of  their  own  power  :  in  the  others  it  comes  in 
the  breathing  spaces  when  the  passions  are  in  abeyance  ;  but  it  is  not 
that  they  draw  this  occasional  wisdom  from  outside  themselves ;  simply, 
they  are  for  the  time  being  unhindered. 


SECOND  TRACTATE 
Providence  :  First  Treatise 

I. 

To  make  the  existence  and  coherent  structure  of  this  Universe 
depend  upon  automatic  activity  and  upon  chance  is  against  all  good  sense. 

Such  a  notion  could  be  entertained  only  where  there  is  neither 
intelligence  nor  even  ordinary  perception  ;  and  reason  enough  has  been 
urged  against  it,  though  none  is  really  necessary. 

But  there  is  still  the  question  as  to  the  process  by  which  the  indi¬ 
vidual  things  of  this  sphere  have  come  into  being,  how  they  were  made. 

Some  of  them  seem  so  undesirable  as  to  cast  doubts  upon  a  Universal 
Providence  ;  and  we  find,  on  the  one  hand,  the  denial  of  any  controlling 
power,  on  the  other  the  belief  that  the  Kosmos  is  the  work  of  an  evil 
creator. 

This  matter  must  be  examined  through  and  through  from  the  very 
first  principles.  We  may,  however,  omit  for  the  present  any  consideration 
of  the  particular  providence,  that  beforehand  decision  which  accom¬ 
plishes  or  holds  things  in  abeyance  to  some  good  purpose  and  gives  or 
withholds  in  our  own  regard  :  when  we  have  established  the  Universal 
Providence  which  we  affirm,  we  can  link  the  secondary  with  it. 

Of  course  the  belief  that  after  a  certain  lapse  of  time  a  Kosmos 
previously  non-existent  came  into  being  would  imply  a  foreseeing  and  a 
reasoned  plan  on  the  part  of  God  providing  for  the  production  of  the 
Universe  and  securing  all  possible  perfection  in  it— a  guidance  and 


12 


PLOTINUS 


partial  providence,  therefore,  such  as  is  indicated.  But  since  we 
hold  the  eternal  existence  of  the  Universe,  the  utter  absence  of  a 
beginning  to  it,  we  are  forced,  in  sound  and  sequent  reasoning,  to  explain 
the  providence  ruling  in  the  Universe  as  a  universal  consonance  with 
the  divine  Intelligence  to  which  the  Kosmos  is  subsequent  not  in  time 
but  in  the  fact  of  derivation,  in  the  fact  that  the  Divine  Intelligence, 
preceding  it  in  Kind,  is  its  cause  as  being  the  Archtype  and  Model  which 
it  merely  images,  the  primal  by  which,  from  all  eternity,  it  has  its  existence 
and  subsistence. 

The  relationship  may  be  presented  thus  : — 

The  authentic  and  primal  Kosmos  is  the  Being  of  the  Intellectual 
Principle  and  of  the  Veritable  Existent.  This  contains  within  itself  no 
spatial  distinction,  and  has  none  of  the  feebleness  of  division,  and  even  its 
parts  bring  no  incompleteness  to  it  since  here  the  individual  is  not 
severed  from  the  entire.  In  this  Nature  inheres  all  life  and  aU  inteUect, 
a  life  living  and  having  intellection  as  one  act  within  a  unity  :  every 
part  that  it  gives  forth  is  a  whole  ;  all  its  content  is  its  very  own,  for 
there  is  here  no  separation  of  thing  from  thing,  no  part  standing  in 
isolated  existence  estranged  from  the  rest,  and  therefore  nowhere  is  there 
any  wronging  of  any  other,  any  opposition.  Everywhere  one  and  com¬ 
plete,  it  is  at  rest  throughout  and  shows  difference  at  no  point ;  it  does 
not  make  over  any  of  its  content  into  any  new  form  ;  there  can  be  no 
reason  for  changing  what  is  everywhere  perfect. 

Why  should  Reason  elaborate  yet  another  Reason,  or  Intelligence 
another  Intelligence  ?  An  indwelling  power  of  making  things  is  in  the 
character  of  a  being  not  at  all  points  as  it  should  be  but  making,  moving 
by  reason  of  some  failure  in  quality.  Those  whose  nature  is  all  blessed¬ 
ness  have  no  more  to  do  than  to  repose  in  themselves  and  be  their 
being. 

A  widespread  activity  is  dangerous  to  those  who  must  go  out  from 

themselves  to  act.  But  such  is  the  blessedness  of  this  Being  that  in  its 

very  non-action  it  magnificently  operates  and  in  its  self-dwelling  it  pro¬ 
duces  mightily.  ^ 


III.  2,  2] 


PROVIDENCE 


13 


2. 

By  derivation  from  that  Authentic  Kosmos,  one  within  itself,  there 
subsists  this  lower  kosmos,  no  longer  a  true  unity. 

It  is  multiple,  divided  into  various  elements,  thing  standing  apart 
from  thing  in  a  new  estrangement.  No  longer  is  there  concord  unbroken ; 
hostility,  too,  has  entered  as  the  result  of  difference  and  distance  ;  im¬ 
perfection  has  inevitably  introduced  discord ;  for  a  part  is  not  self- 
sufficient,  it  must  pursue  something  outside  itself  for  its  fulfilment,  and 
so  it  becomes  the  enemy  to  what  it  needs. 

This  Kosmos  of  parts  has  come  into  being  not  as  the  result  of  a 
judgment  establishing  its  desirability,  but  by  the  sheer  necessity  of  a 
secondary  Kind. 

The  Intellectual  Realm  was  not  of  a  nature  to  be  the  ultimate  of 
existents.  It  was  the  First  and  it  held  great  power,  all  there  is  of  power ; 
this  means  that  it  is  productive  without  seeking  to  produce  ;  for  if 
effort  and  search  were  incumbent  upon  it,  the  Act  would  not  be  its 
own,  would  not  spring  from  its  essential  nature  ;  it  would  be,  like  a 
craftsman,  producing  by  a  power  not  inherent  but  acquired,  mastered 
by  dint  of  study. 

The  Intellectual  Principle,  then,  in  its  unperturbed  serenity  has 
brought  the  universe  into  being,  by  communicating  from  its  own  store 
to  Matter  :  and  this  gift  is  the  Reason-Form  flowing  from  it.  For  the 
Emanation  of  the  Intellectual  Principle  is  Reason,  an  emanation 
unfailing  as  long  as  the  Intellectual  Principle  continues  to  have  place 
among  beings. 

The  Reason-Principle  within  a  seed  contains  all  the  parts  and 
qualities  concentrated  in  identity  ;  there  is  no  distinction,  no  jarring,  no 
internal  hindering  ;  then  there  comes  a  pushing  out  into  bulk,  part 
rises  in  distinction  with  part,  and  at  once  the  members  of  the  organism 
stand  in  each  other’s  way  and  begin  to  wear  each  other  down. 

So  from  this,  the  One  Intellectual  Principle,  and  the  Reason-Form 
emanating  from  it,  our  Universe  rises  and  develops  part,  and  inevitably 
are  formed  groups  concordant  and  helpful  in  contrast  with  groups 
discordant  and  combative  ;  sometimes  of  choice  and  sometimes  inci- 


14 


PLOTINUS 


dentally,  the  parts  maltreat  each  other;  engendering  proceeds  by 
destruction. 

Yet :  Amid  all  that  they  effect  and  accept,  the  divine  Realm  imposes 
the  one  harmonious  act ;  each  utters  its  own  voice,  but  all  is  brought 
into  accord,  into  an  ordered  system,  for  the  universal  purpose,  by  the 
ruling  Reason-Principle.  This  Universe  is  not  Intelligence  and  Reason, 
like  the  Supernal,  but  participant  in  Intelligence  and  Reason  :  it  stands 
in  need  of  the  harmonising  because  it  is  the  meeting  ground  of  Necessity 
and  divine  Reason  Necessity  pulhng  towards  the  lower,  towards  the 
unreason  which  is  its  own  characteristic,  while  yet  the  Intellectual 
Principle  remains  sovran  over  it. 

The  Intellectual  Sphere  (the  Divine)  alone  is  Reason,  and  there  can 
never  be  another  Sphere  that  is  Reason  and  nothing  else  ;  so  that, 
given  some  other  system,  it  cannot  be  as  noble  as  that  first ;  it  cannot 
be  Reason  :  yet  since  such  a  system  cannot  be  merely  Matter,  which  is 
the  utterly  unordered,  it  must  be  a  mixed  thing.  Its  two  extremes  are 
Matter  and  the  Divine  Reason  ;  its  governing  principle  is  Soul,  presiding 
over  the  conjunction  of  the  two,  and  to  be  thought  of  not  as  labouring 

in  the  task  but  as  administering  serenely  by  little  more  than  an  act  of 
presence. 

3- 

Nor  would  It  be  sound  to  condemn  this  Kosmos  as  less  than  beautiful, 
as  less  than  the  noblest  possible  in  the  corporeal ;  and  neither  can  any 
charge  be  laid  against  its  source. 

The  world,  we  must  reflect,  is  a  product  of  Necessity,  not  of  deliberate 
purpose  :  it  is  due  to  a  higher  Kind  engendering  in  its  own  likeness  by 
a  natural  process.  And  none  the  less,  a  second  consideration,  if  a  con¬ 
sidered  plan  brought  it  into  being  it  would  still  be  no  disgrace  to  its  maker 
for  It  stands  a  stately  whole,  complete  within  itself,  serving  at  once 
Its  own  purpose  and  that  of  all  its  parts  which,  leading  and  lesser  alike, 
are  of  such  a  nature  as  to  further  the  interests  of  the  total.  It  is,  there- 
ore  impossible  to  condemn  the  whole  on  the  merits  of  the  parts' which 
esides,  must  be  judged  only  as  they  enter  harmoniously  or  not  into  the 


III.  2.  3] 


PROVIDENCE 


15 


whole,  the  main  consideration,  quite  overpassing  the  members  which 
thus  cease  to  have  importance.  To  linger  about  the  parts  is  to  condemn 
not  the  Kosmos  but  some  isolated  appendage  of  it ;  in  the  entire  living 
Being  we  fasten  our  eyes  on  a  hair  or  a  toe  neglecting  the  marvellous 
spectacle  of  the  complete  Man ;  we  ignore  aU  the  tribes  and  kinds  of  animals 
except  for  the  meanest ;  we  pass  over  an  entire  race,  humanity,  and  bring 
forward — Thersites. 

No  :  this  thing  that  has  come  into  Being  is  (not  a  mass  of  fragments, 
but)  the  Kosmos  complete  :  do  but  survey  it,  and  surely  this  is  the 
pleading  you  wiU  hear  : — 

I  am  made  by  a  God  :  from  that  God  I  came  perfect  above  all 
forms  of  life,  adequate  to  my  function,  self-sufficing,  lacking  nothing  : 
for  I  am  the  container  of  all,  that  is,  of  every  plant  and  every  animal, 
of  all  the  Kinds  of  created  things,  and  many  Gods  and  nations  of 
Spirit-Beings  and  lofty  souls  and  men  happy  in  their  goodness. 

And  do  not  think  that,  while  earth  is  ornate  with  all  its  growths 
and  with  living  things  of  every  race,  and  while  the  very  sea  has 
answered  to  the  power  of  Soul,  do  not  think  that  the  great  air  and 
the  ether  and  the  far-spread  heavens  remain  void  of  it :  there  it 
is  that  all  good  Souls  dwell,  infusing  life  into  the  stars  and  into  that 
orderly  eternal  circuit  of  the  heavens  which  in  its  conscious  move¬ 
ment  ever  about  the  one  Centre,  seeking  nothing  beyond,  is  a  faithful 
copy  of  the  divine  Mind.  And  all  that  is  within  me  strives  towards 
the  Good  ;  and  each,  to  the  measure  of  its  faculty,  attains.  For 
from  that  Good  all  the  heavens  depend,  with  all  my  own  Soul  and 
the  Gods  that  dwell  in  my  every  part,  and  all  that  lives  and  grows, 
and  even  all  in  me  that  you  may  judge  inanimate. 

But  there  are  degrees  of  participation  :  here  no  more  than  Existence, 
elsewhere  Life  ;  and,  in  Life,  sometimes  mainly  that  of  Sensation,  higher 
again  that  of  Reason,  finally  Life  in  all  its  fullness.  We  have  no  right  to 
demand  equal  powers  in  the  unequal :  the  finger  is  not  to  be  asked  to 
see  ;  there  is  the  eye  for  that ;  a  finger  has  its  own  business — to  be  finger 
and  have  finger  power. 


i6 


PLOTINUS 


4- 

That  water  extinguishes  fire  and  fire  consumes  other  things  should  not 
astonish  us.  The  thing  destroyed  derived  its  being  from  outside  itself : 
this  is  no  case  of  a  self-originating  substance  being  annihilated  by  an 
external ;  it  rose  on  the  ruin  of  something  else,  and  thus  in  its  own  ruin 
it  suffers  nothing  strange  ;  and  for  every  fire  quenched,  another  is 
kindled. 

In  the  immaterial  heaven  every  member  is  unchangeably  itself  for 
ever  ;  in  the  heavens  of  our  universe,  while  the  whole  has  life  eternally 
and  so  too  all  the  nobler  and  lordlier  components,  the  Souls  pass  from  body 
to  body  entering  into  varied  forms — and,  when  it  may,  a  Soul  will  rise 
outside  of  the  realm  of  birth  and  dwell  with  the  one  Soul  of  all.  For  the 
embodied  lives  by  virtue  of  a  Form  or  Idea  :  individual  or  partial  things 
exist  by  virtue  of  Universals  ;  from  these  priors  they  derive  their  life 
and  maintenance,  for  life  here  is  a  thing  of  change ;  only  in  that  prior 
realm  is  it  unmoving.  From  that  unchangingness  change  had  to  emerge 
and  from  that  self-cloistered  Life  its  derivative,  this  which  breathes 
and  stirs,  the  respiration  of  the  still  life  of  the  divine. 

The  conflict  and  destruction  that  reign  among  living  beings  are  in¬ 
evitable,  since  things  here  are  derived,  brought  into  existence  because 
the  Divine  Reason  which  contains  all  of  them  in  the  upper  Heavens — 
how  could  they  come  here  unless  they  were  There  ? — must  outflow  over 
the  whole  extent  of  Matter. 

Similarly,  the  very  wronging  of  man  by  man  may  be  derived  from 
an  effort  towards  the  Good  ;  foiled,  in  their  weakness,  of  their  true  desire, 
they  turn  against  each  other  :  still,  when  they  do  wrong,  they  pay  the 
penalty  that  of  having  hurt  their  Souls  by  their  evil  conduct  and  of 
degradation  to  a  lower  place — for  nothing  can  ever  escape  what  stands 
decreed  in  the  law  of  the  Universe. 

This  is  not  to  accept  the  idea,  sometimes  urged,  that  order  is  an 
outcome  of  disorder  and  law  of  lawlessness,  as  if  evil  were  a  necessary 
preliminary  to  their  existence  or  their  manifestation  i  on  the  contrary 
order  is  the  original  and  enters  this  sphere  as  imposed  from  without :  it  is 
because  order,  law  and  reason  exist  that  there  can  be  disorder ;  breach 


III.  2.5] 


PROVIDENCE 


17 


of  law  and  unreason  exist  because  Reason  exists — not  that  these  better 
things  are  directly  the  causes  of  the  bad  but  simply  that  what  ought  to 
absorb  the  Best  is  prevented  by  its  own  nature,  or  by  some  accident,  or 
by  foreign  interference.  An  entity  which  must  look  outside  itself  for  a 
law,  may  be  foiled  of  its  purpose  by  either  an  internal  or  an  external 
cause ;  there  will  be  some  flaw  in  its  own  nature,  or  it  will  be  hurt  by 
some  alien  influence,  for  often  harm  follows,  unintended,  upon  the  action 
of  others  in  the  pursuit  of  quite  unrelated  aims.  Such  living  beings,  on 
the  other  hand,  as  have  freedom  of  motion  under  their  own  will  sometimes 
take  the  right  turn,  sometimes  the  wrong. 

Why  the  wrong  course  is  followed  is  scarcely  worth  enquiring  :  a 
slight  deviation  at  the  beginning  develops  with  every  advance  into  a 
continuously  wider  and  graver  error — especially  since  there  is  the  attached 
body  with  its  inevitable  concomitant  of  desire — and  the  first  step,  the 
hasty  movement  not  previously  considered  and  not  immediately  corrected, 
ends  by  establishing  a  set  habit  where  there  was  at  first  only  a  fall. 

Punishment  naturally  follows  :  there  is  no  injustice  in  a  man  suffer¬ 
ing  what  belongs  to  the  condition  in  which  he  is  ;  nor  can  we  ask  to  be 
happy  when  our  actions  have  not  earned  us  happiness  ;  the  good,  only, 
are  happy  ;  divine  beings  are  happy  only  because  they  are  good. 

5- 

Now,  once  Happiness  is  possible  at  all  to  Souls  in  this  Universe,  if 
some  fail  of  it,  the  blame  must  fall  not  upon  the  place  but  upon  the 
feebleness  insufficient  to  the  staunch  combat  in  the  one  arena  where  the 
rewards  of  excellence  are  offered.  Men  are  not  born  divine ;  what 
wonder  that  they  do  not  enjoy  a  divine  life.  And  poverty  and  sickness 
mean  nothing  to  the  good — only  to  the  evil  are  they  disastrous — and 
where  there  is  body  there  must  be  ill-health. 

Besides,  these  accidents  are  not  without  their  service  in  the  co¬ 
ordination  and  completion  of  the  Universal  system. 

One  thing  perishes,  and  the  Kosmic  Reason — whose  control  nothing 
anywhere  eludes — employs  that  ending  to  the  beginning  of  something 
new  ;  and,  so,  when  the  body  suffers  and  the  Soul,  under  the  affliction. 


i8 


PLOTINUS 


loses  power,  all  that  has  been  bound  under  illness  and  evil  is  brought  into 
a  new  set  of  relations,  into  another  class  or  order.  Some  of  these  troubles 
are  helpful  to  the  very  sufferers — poverty  and  sickness,  for  example — 
and  as  for  vice,  even  this  brings  something  to  the  general  service  :  it 
acts  as  a  lesson  in  right  doing,  and,  in  many  ways  even,  produces  good  ; 
thus,  by  setting  men  face  to  face  with  the  ways  and  consequences  of 
iniquity,  it  calls  them  from  lethargy,  stirs  the  deeper  mind  and  sets  the 
understanding  to  work  ;  by  the  contrast  of  the  evil  under  which  wrong¬ 
doers  labour  it  displays  the  worth  of  the  right.  Not  that  evil  exists  for 
this  purpose  ;  but,  as  we  have  indicated,  once  the  wrong  has  come  to  be, 
the  Reason  of  the  Kosmos  employs  it  to  good  ends  ;  and,  precisely,  the 
proof  of  the  mightiest  power  is  to  be  able  to  use  the  ignoble  nobly  and, 
given  formlessness,  to  make  it  the  material  of  unknown  forms. 

The  principle  is  that  evil  by  definition  is  a  falling  short  in  good, 
and  good  cannot  be  at  full  strength  in  this  Sphere  where  it  is  lodged  in 
the  alien  :  the  good  here  is  in  something  else,  in  something  distinct  from  the 
Good,  and  this  something  else  constitutes  the  falling  short  for  it  is  not 
good.  And  this  is  why  evil  is  ineradicable  :  there  is,  first,  the  fact 
that  in  relation  to  this  principle  of  Good,  thing  will  always  stand  less  than 
thing,  and,  besides,  all  things  come  into  being  through  it,  and  are  what 
they  are  by  standing  away  from  it. 

6. 

As  for  the  disregard  of  desert — the  good  afflicted,  the  unworthy 
thriving  it  is  a  sound  explanation  no  doubt  that  to  the  good  nothing 
is  evil  and  to  the  evil  nothing  can  be  good  :  still  the  question  remains 
why  should  what  essentially  offends  our  nature  fall  to  the  good  while 

the  wicked  enjoy  all  it  demands  ?  How  can  such  an  allotment  be 
approved  ? 

No  doubt  since  pleasant  conditions  add  nothing  to  true  happiness 
and  the  unpleasant  do  not  lessen  the  evil  in  the  wicked,  the  conditions 
matter  little  :  as  well  complain  that  a  good  man  happens  to  be  ugly 
and  a  bad  man  handsome. 

Still,  under  such  a  dispensation,  there  would  surely  be  a  propriety. 


III.  2.  7] 


PROVIDENCE 


19 


a  reasonableness,  a  regard  to  merit  which,  as  things  are,  do  not  appear, 
though  this  would  certainly  be  in  keeping  with  the  noblest  Providence  ; 
even  though  external  conditions  do  not  affect  a  man’s  hold  upon  good 
or  evil,  none  the  less  it  would  seem  utterly  unfitting  that  the  bad  should 
be  the  masters,  be  sovereign  in  the  state,  while  honourable  men  are 
slaves  ;  a  wicked  ruler  may  commit  the  most  lawless  acts  ;  and  in  war 
the  worst  men  have  a  free  hand  and  perpetrate  every  kind  of  crime 
against  their  prisoners. 

We  are  forced  to  ask  how  such  things  can  be,  under  a  Providence. 
Certainly  a  maker  must  consider  his  work  as  a  whole,  but  none  the  less 
he  should  see  to  the  due  ordering  of  all  the  parts,  especially  when  these 
parts  have  Soul,  that  is,  are  Living  and  Reasoning  Beings  ;  the  Provi¬ 
dence  must  reach  to  all  the  details  ;  its  functioning  must  consist  in 
neglecting  no  point. 

Holding,  therefore,  as  we  do,  despite  all,  that  the  Universe  lies 
under  an  Intellectual  Principle  whose  power  has  touched  every  existent, 
we  cannot  be  absolved  from  the  attempt  to  show  in  what  way  the  detail 
of  this  sphere  is  just. 

7-  .  . 

A  preliminary  observation  :  in  looking  for  excellence  in  this  thing 

of  mixture,  the  Kosmos,  we  cannot  require  all  that  is  implied  in  the 
excellence  of  the  unmingled  ;  it  is  folly  to  ask  for  Firsts  in  the  Secondary, 
and  since  this  Universe  contains  body,  we  must  allow  for  some  bodily 
influence  upon  the  total  and  be  thankful  if  the  mingled  existent  lack 
nothing  of  what  its  nature  allowed  it  to  receive  from  the  Divine 
Reason. 

Thus,  supposing  we  were  enquiring  for  the  finest  type  of  the  human 
being  as  known  here,  we  would  certainly  not  demand  that  he  prove 
identical  with  Man  as  in  the  Divine  Intellect ;  we  would  think  it  enough 
in  the  Creator  to  have  so  brought  this  thing  of  flesh  and  nerve  and  bone 
under  Reason  as  to  give  grace  to  these  corporeal  elements  and  to  have 
made  it  possible  for  Reason  to  have  contact  with  Matter. 

Our  progress  towards  the  object  of  our  investigation  must  begin 


20 


PLOTINUS 


from  this  principle  of  gradation  which  will  open  to  us  the  wonder  of  the 
Providence  and  of  the  power  by  which  our  universe  holds  its  being. 

We  begin  with  evil  acts  entirely  dependent  upon  the  Souls  which 
perpetrate  them — the  harm,  for  example,  which  perverted  Souls  do  to 
the  good  and  to  each  other.  Unless  the  fore-planning  power  alone  is  to 
be  charged  with  the  vice  in  such  Souls,  we  have  no  ground  of  accusation, 
no  claim  to  redress  :  the  blame  lies  on  the  Soul  exercising  its  choice. 
Even  a  Soul,  we  have  seen,  must  have  its  individual  movement ;  it  is 
not  abstract  Spirit ;  the  first  step  towards  animal  life  has  been  taken 
and  the  conduct  will  naturally  be  in  keeping  with  that  character. 

It  is  not  because  the  world  existed  that  Souls  are  here  :  before  the 
world  was,  they  had  it  in  them  to  be  of  the  world,  to  concern  themselves 
with  it,  to  presuppose  it,  to  administer  it :  it  was  in  their  nature  to 
produce  it  by  whatever  method,  whether  by  giving  forth  some  emana¬ 
tion  while  they  themselves  remained  above,  or  by  an  actual  descent,  or  in 
both  ways  together,  some  presiding  from  above,  others  descending  ; 
for  we  are  not  at  the  moment  concerned  about  the  mode  of  creation 
but  are  simply  urging  that,  however  the  world  was  produced,  no  blame 
falls  on  Providence  for  what  exists  within  it. 

There  remains  the  other  phase  of  the  question — the  distribution  of 
evil  to  the  opposite  classes  of  men  :  the  good  go  bare  while  the  wicked 
are  rich  :  all  that  human  need  demands,  the  least  deserving  have  in 
abundance  ;  it  is  they  that  rule  ;  peoples  and  states  are  at  their  disposal. 

Would  not  all  this  imply  that  the  divine  power  does  not  reach  to 
earth  ? 

That  It  does  is  sufficiently  established  by  the  fact  that  Reason  rules 

in  the  lower  things  :  animals  and  plants  have  their  share  in  Reason,  Soul 
and  Life. 

Perhaps,  then,  it  reaches  to  earth  but  is  not  master  over  all  ? 

We  answer  that  the  universe  is  one  living  organism  :  as  well 
maintam  that  while  human  head  and  face  are  the  work  of  nature  and 
of  the  ruling  reason-principle,  the  rest  of  the  frame  is  due  to  other 
agencies— accident  or  sheer  necessity— and  owes  its  inferiority  to  this 
origin,  or  to  the  incompetence  of  unaided  Nature.  And  even  granting  that 


III.  3.  8] 


PROVIDENCE 


21 


those  less  noble  members  are  not  in  themselves  admirable  it  would  still 
be  neither  pious  nor  even  reverent  to  censure  the  entire  structure. 

8. 

Thus  we  come  to  our  enquiry  as  to  the  degree  of  excellence  found  in 
things  of  this  Sphere,  and  how  far  they  belong  to  an  ordered  system  or 
in  what  degree  they  are,  at  least,  not  evil. 

Now  in  every  living  being  the  upper  parts — head,  face — are  the  most 
beautiful,  the  mid  and  lower  members  inferior.  In  the  Universe  the 
middle  and  lower  members  are  human  beings  ;  above  them,  the  Heavens 
and  the  Gods  that  dwell  there  ;  these  Gods  with  the  entire  circling 
expanse  of  the  heavens  constitute  the  greater  part  of  the  Kosmos  ;  the 
earth  is  but  a  central  point,  and  may  be  considered  as  simply  one  among 
the  stars.  Yet  human  wrong-doing  is  made  a  matter  of  wonder ;  we  are 
evidently  asked  to  take  humanity  as  the  choice  member  of  the  Universe, 
nothing  wiser  existent ! 

But  humanity,  in  reality,  is  poised  midway  between  gods  and 
beasts,  and  inclines  now  to  the  one  order,  now  to  the  other  ;  some  men 
grow  like  to  the  divine,  others  to  the  brute,  the  greater  number  stand 
neutral.  But  those  that  are  corrupted  to  the  point  of  approximating 
to  irrational  animals  and  wild  beasts  pull  the  mid-folk  about  and  inflict 
wrong  upon  them ;  the  victims  are  no  doubt  better  than  the  wrong¬ 
doers,  but  are  at  the  mercy  of  their  inferiors  in  the  field  in  which  they 
themselves  are  inferior,  where,  that  is,  they  cannot  be  classed  among 
the  good  since  they  have  not  trained  themselves  in  self-defence. 

A  gang  of  lads,  morally  neglected,  and  in  that  respect  inferior  to 
the  intermediate  class,  but  in  good  physical  training,  attack  and  throw 
another  set,  trained  neither  physically  nor  morally,  and  make  off  with 
their  food  and  their  dainty  clothes.  What  more  is  called  for  than  a  laugh  ? 

And  surely  even  the  lawgiver  would  be  right  in  allowing  the  second 
group  to  suffer  this  treatment,  the  penalty  of  their  sloth  and  self-indul¬ 
gence  :  the  gymnasium  lies  there  before  them,  and  they,  in  laziness  and 
luxury  and  listlessness,  have  allowed  themselves  to  fall  like  fat-loaded 
sheep,  a  prey  to  the  wolves. 


22 


PLOTINUS 


But  the  evil-doers  also  have  their  punishment :  first  they  pay  in 
that  very  wolfishness,  in  the  disaster  to  their  human  quality  :  and  next 
there  is  laid  up  for  them  the  due  of  their  Kind  ;  living  ill  here,  they  will 
not  get  off  by  death  ;  on  every  precedent  through  all  the  line  there  waits 
its  sequent,  reasonable  and  natural — worse  to  the  bad,  better  to  the  good. 

This  at  once  brings  us  outside  the  gymnasium  with  its  fun  for  boys  ; 
they  must  grow  up,  both  kinds,  amid  their  childishness  and  both  one  day 
stand  girt  and  armed.  Then  there  is  a  finer  spectacle  than  is  ever  seen 
by  those  that  train  in  the  ring.  But  at  this  stage  some  have  not  armed 
themselves — and  the  duly  armed  win  the  day. 

Not  even  a  God  would  have  the  right  to  deal  a  blow  for  the  un warlike: 
the  law  decrees  that  to  come  safe  out  of  battle  is  for  fighting  men,  not 
for  those  that  pray.  The  harvest  comes  home  not  for  praying  but  for 
tilling ;  healthy  days  are  not  for  those  that  neglect  their  health  :  we 
have  no  right  to  complain  of  the  ignoble  getting  the  richer  harvest  if 
they  are  the  only  workers  in  the  fields,  or  the  best. 

Again  :  it  is  childish,  while  we  carry  on  all  the  affairs  of  our  Hfe 
to  our  own  taste  and  not  as  the  Gods  would  have  us,  to  expect  them  to 
keep  all  well  for  us  in  spite  of  a  life  that  is  lived  without  regard  to  the 
conditions  which  the  Gods  have  prescribed  for  our  well-being.  Yet 
death  would  be  better  for  us  than  to  go  on  living  lives  condemned  by 
the  laws  of  the  Universe.  If  things  took  the  contrary  course,  if  all  the 
modes  of  folly  and  wickedness  brought  no  trouble  in  life— then  indeed 
we  might  complain  of  the  indifference  of  a  Providence  leaving  the  victory 
to  evil. 

Bad  men  rule  by  the  feebleness  of  the  ruled  :  and  this  is  just ;  the 
triumph  of  weaklings  would  not  be  just. 

9- 

It  would  not  be  just,  because  Providence  cannot  be  a  something 
reducing  us  to  nothingness  :  to  think  of  Providence  as  everything,  with 
no  other  thing  in  existence,  is  to  annihilate  the  Universe  ;  such  a 
providence  could  have  no  field  of  action  ;  nothing  would  exist  except 
the  Divine.  As  things  are,  the  Divine,  of  course,  exists,  but  has  reached 


III.  2.  9] 


PROVIDENCE 


23 


forth  to  something  other — not  to  reduce  that  to  nothingness  but  to  preside 
over  it ;  thus  in  the  case  of  Man,  for  instance,  the  Divine  presides  as  the 
Providence,  preserving  the  character  of  human  nature,  that  is  the 
character  of  a  being  under  the  providential  law,  which,  again,  implies 
subjection  to  what  that  law  may  enjoin. 

And  that  law  enjoins  that  those  who  have  made  themselves  good 
shall  know  the  best  of  life,  here  and  later,  the  bad  the  reverse.  But  the 
law  does  not  warrant  the  wicked  in  expecting  that  their  prayers  should 
bring  others  to  sacrifice  themselves  for  their  sakes  ;  or  that  the  gods 
should  lay  aside  the  divine  life  in  order  to  direct  their  daily  concerns  ; 
or  that  good  men,  who  have  chosen  a  path  nobler  than  all  earthly  rule, 
should  become  their  rulers.  The  perverse  have  never  made  a  single 
effort  to  bring  the  good  into  authority,  nor  do  they  take  any  steps  to 
improve  themselves  ;  they  are  all  spite  against  anyone  that  becomes 
good  of  his  own  motion,  though  if  good  men  were  placed  in  authority  the 
total  of  goodness  would  be  increased. 

In  sum  ;  Man  has  come  into  existence,  a  living  being  but  not  a 
member  of  the  noblest  order ;  he  occupies  by  choice  an  intermediate  rank ; 
still,  in  that  place  in  which  he  exists.  Providence  does  not  allow  him  to 
be  reduced  to  nothing  ;  on  the  contrary  he  is  ever  being  led  upwards  by 
all  those  varied  devices  which  the  Divine  employs  in  its  labour  to  increase 
the  dominance  of  moral  value.  The  human  race,  therefore,  is  not  deprived 
by  Providence  of  its  rational  being  ;  it  retains  its  share,  though  neces¬ 
sarily  limited,  in  wisdom,  intelligence,  executive  power  and  right  doing, 
the  right  doing,  at  least,  of  individuals  to  each  other — and  even  in 
wronging  others  people  think  they  are  doing  right  and  only  paying 
what  is  due. 

Man  is,  therefore,  a  noble  creation,  as  perfect  as  the  scheme  allows  ; 
a  part,  no  doubt,  in  the  fabric  of  the  All,  he  yet  holds  a  lot  higher  than 
that  of  all  the  other  living  things  of  earth. 

Now,  no  one  of  any  intelligence  complains  of  these  others,  man’s 
inferiors,  which  serve  to  the  adornment  of  the  world  ;  it  would  be  feeble 
indeed  to  complain  of  animals  biting  man,  as  if  we  were  to  pass  our 
days  asleep.  No  :  the  animal,  too,  exists  of  necessity,  and  is  serviceable 


24 


PLOTINUS 


in  many  ways,  some  obvious  and  many  progressively  discovered — so 
that  not  one  lives  without  profit  to  itself  and  even  to  humanity.  It  is 
ridiculous,  also,  to  complain  that  many  of  them  are  dangerous — there 
are  dangerous  men  abroad  as  well — and  if  they  distrust  us,  and  in  their 
distrust  attack,  is  that  anything  to  wonder  at  ? 

10. 

But :  if  the  evil  in  men  is  involuntary,  if  their  own  will  has  not 
made  them  what  they  are,  how  can  we  either  blame  wrong-doers  or  even 
reproach  their  victims  with  suffering  through  their  own  fault  ? 

If  there  is  a  Necessity,  bringing  about  human  wickedness  either  by 
force  of  the  celestial  movement  or  by  a  rigorous  sequence  set  up  by  the 
First  Cause,  is  not  the  evil  a  thing  rooted  in  Nature  ?  And  if  thus  the 
Reason-Principle  of  the  universe  is  the  creator  of  evil,  surely  all  is 
injustice  ? 

No  :  Men  are  no  doubt  involuntary  sinners  in  the  sense  that  they 
do  not  actually  desire  to  sin  ;  but  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  wrong¬ 
doers,  of  their  own  choice,  are,  themselves,  the  agents  ;  it  is  because 
they  themselves  act  that  the  sin  is  in  their  own  ;  if  they  were  not  agents 
they  could  not  sin. 

The  Necessity  (held  to  underlie  human  wickedness)  is  not  an  outer 
force  (actually  compelling  the  individual),  but  exists  only  in  the  sense 
of  a  universal  relationship. 

Nor  is  the  force  of  the  celestial  Movement  such  as  to  leave  us  power¬ 
less  :  if  the  universe  were  something  outside  and  apart  from  us  it  would 
stand  as  its  makers  willed  so  that,  once  the  gods  had  done  their  part, 
no  man,  however  impious,  could  introduce  anything  contrary  to  their 
intention.  But,  as  things  are,  efficient  act  does  come  from  men  i  given 
the  starting  Principle,  the  secondary  line,  no  doubt,  is  inevitably  com¬ 
pleted  ;  but  each  and  every  principle  contributes  towards  the  sequence. 
Now  Men  are  Principles,  or,  at  least,  they  are  moved  by  their  characteristic 
nature  towards  all  that  is  good,  and  that  nature  is  a  Principle,  a  freely 
acting  cause. 


III.  2.  12] 


PROVIDENCE 


25 


II. 

Are  we,  then,  to  conclude  that  particular  things  are  determined  by 
Necessities  rooted  in  Nature  and  by  the  sequence  of  causes,  and  that 
everything  is  as  good  as  anything  can  be  ? 

No  ;  the  Reason-Principle  is  the  sovereign,  making  all :  it  wills 
things  as  they  are  and,  in  its  reasonable  act,  it  produces  even  what  we 
know  as  evil :  it  cannot  desire  all  to  be  good :  an  artist  would  not  make 
an  animal  all  eyes  ;  and  in  the  same  way,  the  Reason-Principle  would  not 
make  aU  divine  ;  it  makes  Gods  but  also  celestial  spirits,  the  intermediate 
order,  then  men,  then  the  animals  ;  all  is  graded  succession,  and  this  in 
no  spirit  of  grudging  but  in  the  expression  of  a  Reason  teeming  with 
intellectual  variety. 

We  are  like  people  ignorant  of  painting  who  complain  that  the 
colours  are  not  beautiful  everywhere  in  the  picture  :  but  the  Artist  has 
laid  on  the  appropriate  tint  to  every  spot.  Or  we  are  censuring  a  drama, 
because  the  persons  are  not  all  heroes  but  include  a  servant  and  a  rustic 
and  some  scurrilous  clown ;  yet  take  away  the  low  characters  and  the 
power  of  the  drama  is  gone  ;  these  are  part  and  parcel  of  it. 


12. 

Suppose  this  Universe  were  the  direct  creation  of  the  Reason-Prin¬ 
ciple  applying  itself,  quite  unchanged,  to  Matter,  retaining,  that  is,  the 
hostility  to  partition  which  it  derives  from  its  Prior,  the  Intellectual 
Principle — then,  this  its  product,  so  produced,  would  be  of  supreme  and 
unparalleled  excellence.  But  the  Reason-Principle  (if  it  is  to  be  the 
author  of  a  universe)  could  not  be  a  thing  of  entire  identity  or  even  of 
closely  compact  diversity  ;  and  the  mode  in  which  it  is  here  manifested 
is  no  matter  of  censure  since  its  function  is  to  be  all  things,  each  single 
thing  in  some  distinctive  way. 

But  (it  will  be  asked)  has  it  not,  besides  itself  entering  Matter, 
brought  other  beings  down  ?  Has  it  not  for  example  brought  Souls 
into  Matter  and,  in  adapting  them  to  its  creation,  twisted  them  against 
their  own  nature  and  been  the  ruin  of  many  of  them  ?  And  can  this  be 
right  ? 


E 


26 


PLOTINUS 


The  answer  is  that  the  Souls  are,  in  a  fair  sense,  members  of  this 
Reason-Principle  and  that  it  has  not  adapted  them  to  the  creation  by 
perverting  them,  but  has  set  them  in  the  place  here  to  which  their  quality 
entitles  them. 

13. 

And  we  must  not  despise  the  familiar  observation  that  there  is 
something  more  to  be  considered  than  the  present.  There  are  the  periods 
of  the  past  and,  again,  those  in  the  future  ;  and  these  have  everything 
to  do  with  fixing  worth  of  place. 

Thus  a  man,  once  a  ruler,  wiU  be  made  a  slave  because  he  abused 
his  power  and  because  the  fall  is  to  his  future  good.  Those  that  have 
money  will  be  made  poor — and  to  the  good  poverty  is  no  hindrance. 
Those  that  have  unjustly  killed,  are  killed  in  turn,  imjustly  as  regards 
the  murderer  but  justly  as  regards  the  victim,  and  those  that  are  to 
suffer  are  thrown  into  the  path  of  those  that  administer  the  merited 
treatment. 

It  is  not  an  accident  that  makes  a  man  a  slave  ;  no  one  is  a  prisoner 
by  chance  ;  every  bodily  outrage  has  its  due  cause.  The  man  once  did 
what  he  now  suffers.  A  man  that  murders  his  mother  will  become  a 
woman  and  be  murdered  by  a  son  ;  a  man  that  wrongs  a  woman  will 
become  a  woman,  to  be  wronged. 

Hence  arises  that  awesome  word  Adrasteia  (the  Inevadable  Retri¬ 
bution)  ;  for  in  very  truth  this  ordinance  is  an  Adrasteia,  Justice  itself 
and  a  wonderful  wisdom. 

We  cannot  but  recognise  from  what  we  observe  in  this  universe 
that  some  such  principle  of  order  prevails  throughout  the  entire  of 
existence  the  minutest  of  things  a  tributary  to  the  vast  total ;  the 
marvellous  art  shown  not  merely  in  the  mightiest  works  and  sublimest 
members  of  the  All,  but  even  amid  such  littleness  as  one  would  think 
Providence  must  disdain  :  the  varied  workmanship  of  wonder  in  any 
and  every  animal  form  ;  the  world  of  vegetation,  too  ;  the  grace  of 
fruits  and  even  of  leaves,  the  lavishness,  the  delicacy,  the  diversity  of 
exquisite  bloom  :  and  all  this  not  issuing  once,  and  then  to  die  out. 


Ill  h]  providence  27 

but  made  ever  and  ever  anew  as  the  Transcendent  Beings  move  variously 
over  this  earth. 

In  all  the  changing,  there  is  no  change  by  chance  :  there  is  no  taking 
of  new  forms  but  to  desirable  ends  and  in  ways  worthy  of  Divine  Powers. 
All  that  is  Divine  executes  the  Act  of  its  quality  ;  its  quality  is  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  its  essential  Being :  and  this  essential  Being  in  the  Divine 
is  the  Being  whose  activities  produce  as  one  thing  the  desirable  and  the 
just — for  if  the  good  and  the  just  are  not  produced,  there,  where,  then, 
have  they  their  being  ? 

14. 

The  ordinance  of  the  Kosmos,  then,  is  in  keeping  with  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Principle.  True,  no  reasoning  went  to  its  creation,  but  it  so 
stands  that  the  keenest  reasoning  must  wonder— since  no  reasoning  could 
be  able  to  make  it  otherwise — at  the  spectacle  before  it,  a  product  which, 
even  in  the  Kinds  of  the  partial  and  particular  Sphere,  displays  the 
Divine  Intelligence  to  a  degree  in  which  no  arranging  by  reason  could 
express  it.  Every  one  of  the  ceaselessly  recurrent  types  of  being  manifests 
a  creating  Reason-Principle  above  all  censure.  No  fault  is  to  be  found 
unless  on  the  assumption  that  everything  ought  to  come  into  being  with 
all  the  perfection  of  those  that  have  never  known  such  a  coming,  the 
Eternals.  In  that  case,  things  of  the  Intellectual  realm  and  things  of 
the  realm  of  sense  must  remain  one  unbroken  identity  for  ever. 

In  this  demand  for  more  good  than  exists,  there  is  implied  a  failure 
to  recognise  that  the  form  allotted  to  each  entity  is  sufficient  in  itself  ;  it 
is  like  complaining  because  one  kind  of  animal  lacks  horns.  We  ought 
to  understand  both  that  the  Reason-Principle  must  extend  to  every 
possible  existent  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  every  greater  must  include 
lesser  things,  that  to  every  whole  belong  its  parts,  and  that  all  cannot 
be  equahty  unless  all  part  is  to  be  absent. 

This  is  why  in  the  Over-World  each  entity  is  all,  while  here,  below, 
the  single  thing  is  not  all  (is  not  the  Universe  but  a  “  Self  ”).  Thus  too, 
a  man,  an  individual,  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  part,  is  not  Humanity  complete  : 
but  wheresoever  there  is  associated  with  the  parts  something  that  is  no 


28 


PLOTINUS 


part  (but  a  Divine,  an  Intellectual  Being),  this  makes  a  whole  of  that 
in  which  it  dwells.  Man,  man  as  partial  thing,  cannot  be  required  to 
have  attained  to  the  very  summit  of  goodness  :  if  he  had,  he  would  have 
ceased  to  be  of  the  partial  order.  Not  that  there  is  any  grudging  in  the 
whole  towards  the  part  that  grows  in  goodness  and  dignity  ;  such  an 
increase  in  value  is  a  gain  to  the  beauty  of  the  whole  ;  the  lesser  grows 
by  being  made  over  in  the  likeness  of  the  greater,  by  being  admitted, 
as  it  were,  to  something  of  that  greatness,  by  sharing  in  that  rank,  and 
thus  even  from  this  place  of  man,  from  man’s  own  self,  something  gleams 
forth,  as  the  stars  shine  in  the  divine  firmament,  so  that  all  appears  one 
great  and  lovely  figure— living  or  wrought  in  the  furnaces  of  craftsman¬ 
ship — with  stars  radiant  not  only  in  the  ears  and  on  the  brow  but  on  the 
breasts  too,  and  wherever  else  they  may  be  displayed  in  beauty. 

15- 

These  considerations  apply  very  well  to  things  considered  as  standing 
alone  ;  but  there  is  a  stumbling-block,  a  new  problem,  when  we  think  of  all 
these  forms,  permanent  and  ceaselessly  produced,  in  mutual  relationship. 

The  animals  devour  each  other  :  men  attack  each  other  :  all  is 
war  without  rest,  without  truce  ;  this  gives  new  force  to  the  question 
how  Reason  can  be  author  of  the  plan  and  how  all  can  be  declared  well 
done. 

This  new  difficulty  is  not  met  by  the  former  answer  ;  that  all  stands 
as  well  as  the  nature  of  things  allows  ;  that  the  blame  for  their  condition 
falls  on  Matter  dragging  them  down  ;  that,  given  the  plan  as  we  know  it, 
evil  cannot  be  eliminated  and  should  not  be  ;  that  the  Matter  making 
its  presence  felt  is  still  not  supreme  but  remains  an  element  taken  in 
from  outside  to  contribute  to  a  definite  total,  or  rather  to  be  itself  brought 
to  order  by  Reason. 

The  Divine  Reason  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  ;  all  that  comes  into 
being  must  be  rational  and  fall  at  its  coming  into  an  ordered  scheme 
reasonable  at  every  point.  Where,  then,  is  the  necessity  of  this  bandit 
war  of  man  and  beast  ? 

This  devouring  of  Kind  by  Kind  is  necessary  as  the  means  to  the 


III.  2.  is] 


PROVIDENCE 


29 


transmutation  of  living  things  which  could  not  keep  form  for  ever  even 
though  no  other  killed  them  :  what  grievance  is  it  that  when  they  must 
go  their  despatch  is  so  planned  as  to  be  serviceable  to  others  ? 

Still  more,  what  does  it  matter  when  they  are  devoured  only  to 
return  in  some  new  form  ?  It  comes  to  no  more  than  the  murder  of  one 
of  the  personages  in  a  play  ;  the  actor  alters  his  make-up  and  enters  in 
a  new  role.  The  actor,  of  course,  was  not  really  killed  ;  but  if  dying  is 
but  changing  a  body  as  the  actor  changes  a  costume,  or  even  an  exit  from 
the  body  like  the  exit  of  the  actor  from  the  boards  when  he  has  no  more 
to  say  or  do,  what  is  there  so  very  dreadful  in  this  transformation  of 
living  beings  one  into  another  ? 

Surely  it  is  much  better  so  than  if  they  had  never  existed  :  that 
way  would  meaji  the  bleak  quenching  of  life,  precluded  from  passing 
outside  itself  ;  as  the  plan  holds,  life  is  poured  copiously  throughout  a 
Universe,  engendering  the  universal  things  and  weaving  variety  into 
their  being,  never  at  rest  from  producing  an  endless  sequence  of  come- 
hness  and  shapeliness,  a  living  pastime. 

Men  directing  their  weapons  against  each  other — ^under  doom  of 
death  yet  neatly  lined  up  to  fight  as  in  the  pyrrhic  sword-dances  of  their 
sport — ^this  is  enough  to  tell  us  that  all  human  intentions  are  but  play, 
that  death  is  nothing  terrible,  that  to  die  in  a  war  or  in  a  fight  is  but 
to  taste  a  little  beforehand  what  old  age  has  in  store,  to  go  away  earher 
and  come  back  the  sooner.  So  for  misfortunes  that  may  accompany  life, 
the  loss  of  property,  for  instance  ;  the  loser  will  see  that  there  was  a  time 
when  it  was  not  his,  that  its  possession  is  but  a  mock  boon  to  the  robbers, 
who  will  in  their  turn  lose  it  to  others,  and  even,  that  to  retain  property 
is  a  greater  loss  than  to  forfeit  it. 

Murders,  death  in  all  its  guises,  the  reduction  and  sacking  of  cities, 
all  must  be  to  us  just  such  a  spectacle  as  the  changing  scenes  of  a  play  ; 
all  is  but  the  varied  incident  of  a  plot,  costume  on  and  off,  acted  grief 
and  lament.  For  on  earth,  in  all  the  succession  of  life,  it  is  not  the 
Soul  within  but  the  Shadow  outside  of  the  authentic  man,  that  grieves 
and  complains  and  acts  out  the  plot  on  this  world  stage  which  men  have 
dotted  with  stages  of  their  own  constructing.  All  this  is  the  doing  of 


30 


PLOTINUS 


man  knowing  no  more  than  to  live  the  lower  and  outer  life,  and  never 
perceiving  that,  in  his  weeping  and  in  his  graver  doings  alike,  he  is  but 
at  play ;  to  handle  austere  matters  austerely  is  reserved  for  the  thoughtful : 
the  other  kind  of  man  is  himself  a  futility.  Those  incapable  of  thinking 
gravely  read  gravity  into  frivolities  which  correspond  to  their  own 
frivolous  Nature.  Anyone  that  joins  in  their  trifling  and  so  comes  to 
look  on  life  with  their  eyes  must  understand  that  by  lending  himself  to 
such  idleness  he  has  laid  aside  his  own  character.  If  Socrates  himself 
takes  part  in  the  trifling,  he  trifles  in  the  outer  Socrates. 

We  must  remember,  too,  that  we  cannot  take  tears  and  laments 
as  proof  that  anything  is  wrong  ;  children  cry  and  whimper  where  there 
is  nothing  amiss. 

i6. 

But  if  all  this  is  true,  what  room  is  left  for  evil  ?  Where  are  we  to 
place  wrong-doing  and  sin  ? 

How  explain  that  in  a  world  organised  in  good,  the  efflcient  agents 
(human  beings)  behave  unjustly,  commit  sin  ?  And  how  comes  misery 
if  neither  ^n  nor  injustice  exists  ? 

Again,  if  all  our  action  is  determined  by  a  natural  process,  how  can 
the  distinction  be  maintained  between  behaviour  in  accordance  with 
nature  and  behaviour  in  conflict  with  it  ? 

And  what  becomes  of  blasphemy  against  the  divine  ?  The  blas¬ 
phemer  is  made  what  he  is  :  a  dramatist  has  written  a  part  insulting 
and  maligning  himself  and  given  it  to  an  actor  to  play. 

These  considerations  oblige  us  to  state  the  Logos  (the  Reason- 
Principle  of  the  Universe)  once  again,  and  more  clearly,  and  to  justify 
its  nature. 

This  Reason-Principle,  then — let  us  dare  the  definition  in  the  hope 
of  conveying  the  truth— this  Logos  is  not  the  Intellectual  Principle 
unmingled,  not  the  Absolute  Divine  Intellect  ;  nor  does  it  descend  from 
the  pure  Soul  alone  ;  it  is  a  dependent  of  that  Soul  while,  in  a  sense, 
it  is  a  radiation  from  both  those  divine  Hypostases  :  the  Intellectual 
Principle  and  the  Soul— the  Soul  as  conditioned  by  the  Intellectual 


III.  2. 16]  PROVIDENCE  31 

Principle — engender  this  Logos  which  is  a  Life  holding  restfully  a  certain 
measure  of  Reason. 

Now  all  life,  even  the  least  valuable,  is  an  activity,  and  not  a  blind 
activity  like  that  of  flame  ;  even  where  there  is  not  sensation  the  activity 
of  life  is  no  mere  haphazard  play  of  Movement :  any  object  in  which 
life  is  present,  any  object  which  participates  in  Life,  is  at  once  enreasoned 
in  the  sense  that  the  activity  peculiar  to  life  is  formative,  shaping  as  it 
moves. 

Life,  then,  aims  at  pattern  as  does  the  pantomimic  dancer  with  his 
set  movements  ;  the  mime,  in  himself,  represents  life,  and,  besides,  his 
movements  proceed  in  obedience  to  a  pattern  designed  to  symbolise  life. 

Thus  far  to  give  us  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  Life  in  general. 

But  this  Reason-Principle  which  emanates  from  the  complete  unity, 
divine  Mind,  and  the  complete  unity  Life  (=Soul) — is  neither  a  uniate 
complete  Life  nor  a  uniate  complete  divine  Mind,  nor  does  it  give  itself 
whole  and  all-including  to  its  subj  ect.  (By  an  imperfect  communication)  it 
sets  up  a  conflict  of  part  against  part :  it  produces  imperfect  things  and 
so  engenders  and  maintains  war  and  attack,  and  thus  its  unity  can  be 
that  only  of  a  sum-total  not  of  a  thing  undivided.  At  w^  with  itself 
in  the  parts  which  it  now  exhibits,  it  has  the  unity,  or  harmony,  of  a 
drama  tom  with  struggle.  The  drama,  of  course,  brings  the  conflicting 
elements  to  one  final  harmony,  weaving  the  entire  story  of  the  clashing 
characters  into  one  thing  ;  while  in  the  Logos  the  conflict  of  the  divergent 
elements  rises  within  the  one  element,  the  Reason-Principle  :  the  com¬ 
parison  therefore  is  rather  with  a  harmony  emerging  directly  from  the 
conflicting  elements  themselves,  and  the  question  becomes  what  intro¬ 
duces  clashing  elements  among  these  Reason-Principles. 

Now  in  the  case  of  music,  tones  high  and  low  are  the  product  of 
Reason-Principles  which,  by  the  fact  that  they  are  Principles  of  harmony, 
meet  in  the  unit  of  Harmony,  the  absolute  Harmony,  a  more  compre¬ 
hensive  Principle,  greater  than  they  and  including  them  as  its  parts. 
Similarly  in  the  Universe  at  large  we  find  contraries — white  and  black, 
hot  and  cold,  winged  and  wingless,  footed  and  footless,  reasoning  and 
unreasoning — but  all  these  elements  are  members  of  one  living  body. 


32 


PLOTINUS 


their  sum-total ;  the  Universe  is  a  self-accordant  entity,  its  members 
everywhere  clashing  but  the  total  being  the  manifestation  of  a  Reason- 
Principle.  That  one  Reason-Principle,  then,  must  be  the  unification  of 
conflicting  Reason-Principles  whose  very  opposition  is  the  support  of 
its  coherence  and,  almost,  of  its  Being. 

And  indeed,  if  it  were  not  multiple,  it  could  not  be  a  Universal 
Principle,  it  could  not  even  be  at  all  a  Reason-Principle  ;  in  the  fact  of 
its  being  a  Reason-Principle  is  contained  the  fact  of  interior  difference. 
Now  the  maximum  of  difference  is  contrariety ;  admitting  that  this 
differentiation  exists  and  creates,  it  will  create  difference  in  the  greatest 
and  not  in  the  least  degree  ;  in  other  words,  the  Reason-Principle,  bringing 
about  differentiation  to  the  uttermost  degree,  will  of  necessity  create 
contrarieties  :  it  will  be  complete  only  by  producing  itself  not  in  merely 
diverse  things  but  in  contrary  things. 

17- 

The  nature  of  the  Reason-Principle  is  adequately  expressed  in  its 
Act  and,  therefore,  the  wider  its  extension  the  nearer  will  its  productions 
approach  to  full  contrariety :  hence  the  world  of  sense  is  less  a  unity 
than  is  its  Reason-Principle  ;  it  contains  a  wider  multiplicity  and 
contrariety  :  its  partial  members  will,  therefore,  be  urged  by  a  closer 
intention  towards  fullness  of  life,  a  warmer  desire  for  unification. 

But  desire  often  destroys  the  desired  ;  it  seeks  its  own  good,  and  if 
the  desired  object  is  perishable,  the  ruin  follows  :  and  the  partial  thing 
(a  human  being,  for  example)  straining  towards  its  completing  principle 
draws  towards  itself  all  it  possibly  can. 

Thus,  with  the  good  we  have  the  bad  :  we  have  the  opposed  move¬ 
ments  of  a  dancer  guided  by  one  artistic  plan  ;  we  recognise  in  his  steps 
the  good  as  against  the  bad,  and  see  that  in  the  opposition  lies  the  merit 
of  the  design. 

But,  thus,  the  wicked  disappear  ? 

No  ;  their  wickedness  remains  ;  simply,  their  role  is  not  of  their 
own  planning. 

But,  surely,  this  excuses  them  ? 


Ill- 2. 17]  PROVIDENCE  33 

No  ;  excuse  lies  with  the  Reason-Principle — and  the  Reason- 
Principle  does  not  excuse  them. 

No  doubt  all  are  members  of  this  Principle  but  one  is  a  good  man, 
another  is  bad — the  larger  class,  this — and  it  goes  as  in  a  play  ;  the 
poet  while  he  gives  each  actor  a  part  is  also  using  them  as  they  are  in 
their  own  persons  :  he  does  not  himself  rank  the  men  as  leading  actor, 
second,  third  ;  he  simply  gives  suitable  words  to  each,  and  by  that 
assignment  fixes  each  man’s  standing. 

Thus,  every  man  has  his  place,  a  place  that  fits  the  good  man,  a 
place  that  fits  the  bad :  each  within  the  two  orders  of  men  makes  his  way, 
naturally,  reasonably,  to  the  place,  good  or  bad,  that  suits  him,  and  takes 
the  position  he  has  made  his  own.  There  he  talks  and  acts,  in  blasphemy 
and  crime  or  in  aU  goodness  ;  for  the  actors  bring  to  this  play  what  they 
were  before  it  was  ever  staged. 

In  the  dramas  of  human  art,  the  poet  provides  the  words  but  the 
actors  add  their  own  quality,  good  or  bad — for  they  have  more  to  do 
than  merely  repeat  the  author’s  words — in  the  truer  drama  which 
dramatic  genius  imitates  in  its  degree,  the  Soul  displays  itself  in  a  part 
assigned  by  the  creator  of  the  piece. 

As  the  actors  of  our  stages  get  their  masks  and  their  costume,  robes 
of  state  or  rags,  so  a  Soul  is  allotted  its  fortunes,  and  not  at  haphazard 
but  always  under  a  Reason  :  it  adapts  itself  to  the  fortunes  assigned  to 
it,  attunes  itself,  ranges  itself  rightly  to  the  drama,  to  the  whole  Principle 
of  the  piece  :  then  it  speaks  out  its  business,  exhibiting  at  the  same  time 
all  that  a  Soul  can  express  of  its  own  quality,  as  a  singer  in  a  song.  A 
voice,  a  bearing,  naturally  fine  or  vulgar,  may  increase  the  charm  of  a 
piece  ;  on  the  other  hand,  an  actor  with  his  ugly  voice  may  make  a  sorry 
exhibition  of  himself,  yet  the  drama  stands  as  good  a  work  as  ever  : 
the  dramatist  taking  the  action  which  a  sound  criticism  suggests,  dis¬ 
graces  one,  taking  his  part  from  him,  with  perfect  justice  :  another  man 
he  promotes  to  more  serious  roles  or  to  any  more  important  play  he 
may  have,  while  the  first  is  cast  for  whatever  minor  work  there  may  be. 

Just  so  the  Soul,  entering  this  drama  of  the  Universe,  making  itself 
a  part  of  the  Play,  bringing  to  its  acting  its  personal  excellence  or  defect. 


34 


PLOTINUS 


set  in  a  definite  place  at  the  entry  and  accepting  from  the  author  its 
entire  role — superimposed  upon  its  own  character  and  conduct — just 
so,  it  receives  in  the  end  its  punishment  and  reward. 

But  these  actors.  Souls,  hold  a  peculiar  dignity  :  they  act  in  a  vaster 
place  than  any  stage  :  the  Author  has  made  them  masters  of  all  this 
world ;  they  have  a  wide  choice  of  place  ;  they  themselves  determine 
the  honour  or  discredit  in  which  they  are  agents  since  their  place  and  part 
are  in  keeping  with  their  quality  :  they  therefore  fit  into  the  Reason- 
Principle  of  the  Universe,  each  adjusted,  most  legitimately,  to  the 
appropriate  environment,  as  every  string  of  the  lyre  is  set  in  the  pre¬ 
cisely  right  position,  determined  by  the  Principle  directing  musical 
utterance,  for  the  due  production  of  the  tones  within  its  capacity.  All 
is  just  and  good  in  the  Universe  in  which  every  actor  is  set  in  his  own 
quite  appropriate  place,  though  it  be  to  utter  in  the  Darkness  and  in 
Tartarus  the  dreadful  sounds  whose  utterance  there  is  well. 

This  Universe  is  good  not  when  the  individual  is  a  stone,  but  when 
everyone  throws  in  his  own  voice  towards  a  total  harmony,  singing  out 
^  — thin,  harsh,  imperfect,  though  it  be.  The  Syrinx  does  not  utter 
merely  one  pure  note  ;  there  is  a  thin  obscure  sound  which  blends  in 
to  make  the  harmony  of  Syrinx  music  :  the  harmony  is  made  up  from 
tones  of  various  grades,  all  the  tones  differing,  but  the  resultant  of  all 
forming  one  sound. 

Similarly  the  Reason-Principle  entire  is  One,  but  it  is  broken  into 
unequal  parts  :  hence  the  difference  of  place  found  in  the  Universe, 
better  spots  and  worse  ;  and  hence  the  inequality  of  Souls,  finding  their 
appropriate  surroundings  amid  this  local  inequality.  The  diverse  places 
of  this  sphere,  the  Souls  of  imequal  grade  and  unhke  conduct,  are  well 
exemplified  by  the  distinction  of  parts  in  the  Syrinx  or  any  other  instru¬ 
ment  .  there  is  local  difference,  but  from  every  position  every  string  gives 
forth  its  own  tone,  the  sound  appropriate,  at  once,  to  its  particular  place 
and  to  the  entire  plan. 

What  is  evil  in  the  single  Soul  will  stand  a  good  thing  in  the  universal 
system  ;  what  in  the  unit  offends  nature  will  serve  nature  in  the  total 
event— and  still  remains  the  weak  and  wrong  tone  it  is,  though  its 


III.  2.  l8] 


PROVIDENCE 


35 


sounding  takes  nothing  from  the  worth  of  the  whole,  just  as,  in  another 
order  of  image,  the  executioner’s  ugly  office  does  not  mar  the  well- 
governed  state  :  such  an  officer  is  a  civic  necessity  ;  and  the  correspond¬ 
ing  moral  type  is  often  serviceable  ;  thus,  even  as  things  are,  all  is  well. 

i8. 

Souls  vary  in  worth  ;  and  the  difference  is  due,  among  other  causes, 
to  an  almost  initial  inequality  ;  it  is  in  reason  that,  standing  to  the 
Reason-Principle,  as  parts,  they  should  be  unequal  by  the  fact  of 
becoming  separate. 

We  must  also  remember  that  every  Soul  has  its  second  grade  and 
its  third,  and  that,  therefore,  its  expression  may  take  any  one  of  three 
main  forms.  But  this  point  must  be  dealt  with  here  again  ;  the  matter 
requires  all  possible  elucidation. 

We  may  perhaps  think  of  actors  having  the  right  to  add  something 
to  the  poet’s  words  ;  the  drama  as  it  stands  is  not  perfectly  filled  in, 
and  they  are  to  supply  where  the  Author  has  left  blank  spaces  here  and 
there  ;  the  actors  are  to  be  something  else  as  well ;  they  become  parts 
of  the  poet,  who  on  his  side  has  a  fore-knowledge  of  the  word  they  will 
add,  and  so  is  able  to  bind  into  one  story  what  the  actors  bring  in  and 
what  is  to  follow. 

For,  in  the  All,  the  sequences,  including  what  follows  upon  wicked¬ 
ness,  become  Reason-Principles,  and  therefore  in  right  reason.  Thus  ; 
from  adultery  and  the  violation  of  prisoners  the  process  of  nature  will 
produce  fine  children,  to  grow,  perhaps,  into  fine  men  ;  and  where 
wicked  violence  has  destroyed  cities,  other  and  nobler  cities  may  rise 
in  their  place. 

But  does  not  this  make  it  absurd  to  introduce  Souls  as  responsible 
causes,  some  acting  for  good  and  some  for  evil  ?  If  we  thus  exonerate 
the  Reason-Principle  from  any  part  in  wickedness  do  we  not  also  cancel 
its  credit  for  the  good  ?  Vdiy  not  simply  take  the  doings  of  these  actors 
(in  the  universal  drama)  for  representative  parts  of  the  Reason-Principle 
as  the  doings  of  stage-actors  are  representative  parts  of  the  stage-drama  ? 
Why  not  admit  that  the  Reason-Principle  itself  includes  evil  action  as 


36 


PLOTINUS 


much  as  good  action,  and  inspires  the  precise  conduct  of  all  its  repre¬ 
sentatives  ?  Would  not  this  be  all  the  more  plausible  in  that  the  universal 
drama  is  the  completer  creation  and  that  the  Reason-Principle  is  the 
source  of  all  that  exists  ? 

But  this  raises  the  question,  What  motive  could  lead  the  Logos  to 
produce  evil  ? 

The  explanation,  also,  would  take  away  all  power  in  the  Universe 
from  Souls,  even  those  nearest  to  the  divine  ;  they  would  all  be  mere 
parts  of  a  Reason-Principle. 

And,  further — unless  all  Reason-Principles  are  Souls — why  should 
some  be  souls  and  others  exclusively  Reason-Principles  when  the  All  is 
itself  a  Soul  ? 


THIRD  TRACTATE 
On  Providence  :  Second  Treatise 

I. 

What  is  our  answer  ? 

All  events  and  things,  good  and  evil  alike,  are  included  under  the 
Universal  Reason-Principle  of  which  they  are  parts— strictly  “  included  ” 
for  this  Universal  Idea  does  not  engender  them  but  encompasses 
them. 

The  Reason-Principles  are  acts  or  expressions  of  a  Universal  Soul  ; 
its  parts  (i.e.  events  good  and  evil)  are  expressions  of  these  Soul-parts. 

This  unity,  Soul,  has  different  parts ;  the  Reason-Principles,  corre¬ 
spondingly,  will  also  have  their  parts,  and  so,  too,  will  the  ultimates  of 
the  system,  all  that  they  bring  into  being. 

The  Souls  are  in  harmony  with  each  other  and  so,  too,  are  their 
acts  and  effects  ;  but  it  is  harmony  in  the  sense  of  a  resultant  unity 
built  out  of  contraries.  All  things,  as  they  rise  from  a  unity,  come  back 
to  unity  by  a  sheer  need  of  nature  j  differences  unfold  themselves, 
contraries  are  produced,  but  all  is  drawn  into  one  organised  system  by  the 
unity  at  the  source. 

The  principle  may  be  illustrated  from  the  different  classes  of  animal 


III.  3.  2] 


PROVIDENCE 


37 


life  :  there  is  one  genus,  horse,  though  horses  among  themselves  fight 
and  bite  and  show  malice  and  angry  envy  :  so  all  the  others  within  the 
unity  of  their  Kind  ;  and  so  humanity. 

All  these  types,  again,  can  be  ranged  under  the  one  Kind,  that  of 
living  things  ;  objects  without  life  can  be  thought  of  under  their  specific 
types  and  then  be  resumed  under  the  one  Kind  of  the  “  non-living  ”  ; 
if  we  choose  to  go  further  yet,  living  and  non-living  may  be  included  under 
the  one  Kind,  “  Beings,”  and,  further  still,  under  the  Source  of  Being. 

Having  attached  all  to  this  source,  we  turn  to  move  down  again  in 
continuous  division  ;  we  see  the  Unity  fissuring,  as  it  reaches  out  into 
Universality,  and  yet  embracing  all  in  one  system  so  that  with  all  its 
differentiation  it  is  one  multiple  living  thing — an  organism  in  which  each 
member  executes  the  function  of  its  own  nature  while  it  still  has  its  being 
in  that  One  Whole  ;  fire  burns  ;  horse  does  horse  work  ;  men  give,  each 
the  appropriate  act  of  the  peculiar  personal  quality — and  upon  the  several 
particular  Kinds  to  which  each  belongs  follow  the  acts,  and  the  good 
or  evil  of  the  life. 


2. 

Circumstances  are  not  sovereign  over  the  good  of  life,  for  they  are 
themselves  moulded  by  their  priors  and  come  in  as  members  of  a  sequence. 
The  Leading-Principle  holds  all  the  threads  while  the  minor  agents,  the 
individuals,  serve  according  to  their  own  capacities,  as  in  a  war  the 
generalissimo  lays  down  the  plan  and  his  subordinates  do  their  best 
to  its  furtherance.  The  Universe  has  been  ordered  by  a  Providence  that 
may  be  compared  to  a  general ;  he  has  considered  operations,  conditions 
and  such  practical  needs  as  food  and  drink,  arms  and  engines  of  war ;  all 
the  problem  of  reconciling  these  complex  elements  has  been  worked  out 
beforehand  so  as  to  make  it  probable  that  the  final  event  may  be  success. 
The  entire  scheme  emerges  from  the  general’s  mind  with  a  certain  plau¬ 
sible  promise,  though  it  cannot  cover  the  enemy’s  operations,  and  there 
is  no  power  over  the  disposition  of  the  enemy’s  forces  :  but  where  the 
mighty  general  is  in  question  whose  power  extends  over  all  that  is,  what 
can  pass  unordered,  what  can  fail  to  fit  into  the  plan  ? 


38 

3- 


PLOTINUS 


For,  even  though  the  I  is  sovereign  in  choosing,  yet  by  the  fact  of 
the  choice  the  thing  done  takes  its  place  in  the  ordered  total.  Your 
personality  does  not  come  from  outside  into  the  universal  scheme  ;  you 
are  a  part  of  it,  you  and  your  personal  disposition. 

But  what  is  the  cause  of  this  initial  personality  ? 

This  question  resolves  itself  into  two  :  are  we  to  make  the  Creator, 
if  Creator  there  is,  the  cause  of  the  moral  quality  of  the  individual  or 
does  the  responsibility  lie  with  the  creature  ? 

Or  is  there,  perhaps,  no  responsibility  ?  After  aU,  none  is  charged 
in  the  case  of  plants  brought  into  being  without  the  perceptive  faculties  ; 
no  one  is  blamed  because  animals  are  not  all  that  men  are — which  would 
be  like  complaining  that  men  are  not  all  that  gods  are.  Reason  acquits 
plant  and  animal  and,  their  maker  ;  how  can  it  complain  because  men 
do  not  stand  above  humanity  ? 

If  the  reproach  simply  means  that  Man  might  improve  by  bringing 
from  his  own  stock  something  towards  his  betterment  we  must  allow 
that  the  man  failing  in  this  is  answerable  for  his  own  inferiority  :  but 
if  the  betterment  must  come  not  from  within  the  man  but  from  without, 
from  his  Author,  it  is  folly  to  ask  more  than  has  been  given,  as  foohsh  in 
the  case  of  man  as  in  plant  and  animal. 

The  question  is  not  whether  a  thing  is  inferior  to  something  else  but 
whether  in  its  own  Kind  it  suffices  to  its  own  part ;  universal  equality 
there  cannot  be. 

Then  the  Reason-Principle  has  measured  things  out  with  the  set 
purpose  of  inequality  ? 

Certainly  not :  the  inequality  is  inevitable  by  the  nature  of  things  : 
the  Reason-Principle  of  this  Universe  follows  upon  a  phase  of  the  Soul ; 
the  Soul  itself  follows  upon  an  Intellectual  Principle,  and  this  Intellectual 
Principle  is  not  one  among  the  things  of  the  Universe  but  is  all  things ; 
in  all  things,  there  is  implied  variety  of  things  ;  where  there  is  variety 
and  not  identity  there  must  be  primals,  secondaries,  tertiaries  and  every 
grade  downward.  Forms  of  life,  then,  there  must  be  that  are  not  pure 
Soul  but  the  dwindling  of  Souls  enfeebled  stage  by  stage  of  the  process 


III.  3.  4] 


PROVIDENCE 


39 


There  is,  of  course,  a  Soul  in  the  Reason-Principle  constituting  a  living 
being,  but  it  is  another  Soul  (a  lesser  phase),  not  that  (the  Supreme  Soul) 
from  which  the  Reason-Principle  itself  derives  ;  and  this  combined 
vehicle  of  life  weakens  as  it  proceeds  towards  matter,  and  what  it  en¬ 
genders  is  still  more  deficient.  Consider  how  far  the  engendered  stands 
from  its  origin  and  yet,  what  a  marvel ! 

In  sum  nothing  can  secure  to  a  thing  of  process  the  quality  of  the 
prior  order,  loftier  than  all  that  is  product  and  amenable  to  no  charge  in 
regard  to  it ;  the  wonder  is,  only,  that  it  reaches  and  gives  to  the  lower 
at  all,  and  that  the  traces  of  its  presence  should  be  so  noble.  And  if  its 
outgiving  is  greater  than  the  lower  can  appropriate,  the  debt  is  the  heavier ; 
all  the  blame  must  fall  upon  the  unreceptive  creature,  and  Providence 
be  the  more  exalted. 


4* 

If  man  were  all  of  one  piece — I  mean,  if  he  were  nothing  more  than 
a  made  thing,  acting  and  acted  upon  according  to  a  fixed  nature — ^he 
could  be  no  more  subject  to  reproach  and  punishment  than  the  mere 
animals.  But  as  the  scheme  holds,  man  is  singled  out  for  condemnation 
when  he  does  evil ;  and  this  with  justice.  For  he  is  no  mere  thing  made 
to  rigid  plan  ;  his  nature  contains  a  Principle  apart  and  free. 

This  does  not,  however,  stand  outside  of  Providence  or  of  the  Reason 
of  the  All ;  the  Over-World  cannot  be  dependent  upon  the  World  of 
Sense.  The  higher  shines  down  upon  the  lower,  and  this  illumination  is 
Providence  in  its  highest  aspect :  The  Reason- Principle  has  two  phases, 
one  which  creates  the  things  of  process  and  another  which  links  them 
with  the  higher  beings  :  these  higher  beings  constitute  the  over-provi¬ 
dence  on  which  depends  that  lower  providence  which  is  the  secondary 
Reason-Principle  inseparably  united  with  its  primal :  the  two — the 
Major  and  Minor  Providence — acting  together  produce  the  universal 
woof,  the  one  all-comprehensive  Providence. 

Men  possess,  then,  a  distinctive  Principle  :  but  not  all  men  turn  to 
account  all  that  is  in  their  Nature  ;  there  are  men  that  live  by  one 
Principle  and  men  that  live  by  another  or,  rather,  by  several  others,  the 


PLOTINUS 


40 

least  noble.  For  all  these  Principles  are  present  even  when  not  actmg 
upon  the  man — though  we  cannot  think  of  them  as  lying  idle  ;  everything 
performs  its  function. 

“  But,"  it  will  be  said,  “  what  reason  can  there  be  for  their  not 
acting  upon  the  man  once  they  are  present ;  inaction  must  mean 
absence  ?  ” 

We  maintain  their  presence  always,  nothing  void  of  them. 

But  surely  not  where  they  exercise  no  action  ?  If  they  necessarily 
reside  in  all  men,  surely  they  must  be  operative  in  all— this  Principle  of 
free  action,  especially. 

First  of  all,  this  free  Principle  is  not  an  absolute  possession 
of  the  animal  Kinds  and  is  not  even  an  absolute  possession  to  all 

men. 

So  this  Principle  is  not  the  only  effective  force  in  all  men  ? 

There  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be.  There  are  men  in  whom  it 
alone  acts,  giving  its  character  to  the  life  while  all  else  is  but  Necessity 
(and  therefore  outside  of  blame) . 

For  (in  the  case  of  an  evil  life)  whether  it  is  that  the  constitution  of 
the  man  is  such  as  to  drive  him  down  the  troubled  paths  or  whether  (the 
fault  is  mental  or  spiritual  in  that)  the  desires  have  gained  control,  we 
are  compelled  to  attribute  the  guilt  to  the  substratum  (something  inferior 
to  the  highest  principle  in  Man).  We  would  be  naturally  inclined  to  say 
that  this  substratum  (the  responsible  source  of  evil)  must  be  Matter 
and  not,  as  our  argument  implies,  the  Reason-Principle  ;  it  would  appear 
that  not  the  Reason-Principle  but  Matter  were  the  dominant,  crude  Matter 
at  the  extreme  and  then  Matter  as  shaped  in  the  realised  man  :  but  we 
must  remember  that  to  this  free  Principle  in  man  (which  is  a  phase  of 
the  All  Soul)  the  Substratum  (the  direct  inferior  to  be  moulded)  is  (not 
Matter  but)  the  Reason-Principle  itself  with  whatever  that  produces  and 
moulds  to  its  own  form,  so  that  neither  crude  Matter  nor  Matter  organised 
in  our  human  total  is  sovereign  within  us. 

The  quality  now  manifested  may  be  probably  referred  to  the  con¬ 
duct  of  a  former  life  ;  we  may  suppose  that  previous  actions  have  made 
the  Reason-Principle  now  governing  within  us  inferior  in  radiance  to 


HI.  3.  5] 


PROVIDENCE 


41 


that  which  ruled  before  ;  the  Soul  which  later  will  shine  out  again  is  for 
the  present  at  a  feebler  power. 

And  any  Reason-Principle  may  be  said  to  include  within  itself  the 
Reason- Principle  of  Matter  which  therefore  it  is  able  to  elaborate  to  its 
own  purposes,  either  finding  it  consonant  with  itself  or  bestowing  upon 
it  the  quality  which  makes  it  so.  The  Reason-Principle  of  an  ox  does  not 
occur  except  in  connection  with  the  Matter  appropriate  to  the  ox-Kind. 
It  must  be  by  such  a  process  that  the  transmigration,  of  which  we  read 
(in  Plato)  takes  place  ;  the  Soul  must  lose  its  nature,  the  Reason-Prin¬ 
ciple  be  transformed  ;  thus  there  comes  the  ox-soul  which  once  was  Man. 

The  degradation,  then,  is  just. 

Still,  how  did  the  inferior  Principle  ever  come  into  being,  and  how 
does  the  higher  fall  to  it  ? 

Once  more — not  all  things  are  Firsts  ;  there  are  Secondaries  and 
Tertiaries,  of  a  nature  inferior  to  that  of  their  Priors  ;  and  a  slight  tilt 
is  enough  to  determine  the  departure  from  the  straight  course.  Further, 
the  linking  of  any  one  being  with  any  other  amounts  to  a  blending  such 
as  to  produce  a  distinct  entity,  a  compound  of  the  two  ;  it  is  not  that 
the  greater  and  prior  suffers  any  diminution  of  its  own  nature  ;  the 
lesser  and  secondary  is  such  from  its  very  beginning ;  it  is  in  its  own  nature 
the  lesser  thing  it  becomes,  and  if  it  suffers  the  consequences,  such  suffer¬ 
ing  is  merited  :  all  our  reasonings  on  these  questions  must  take  account 
of  previous  living  as  the  source  from  which  the  present  takes  its  rise. 

5- 

There  is,  then,  a  Providence,  which  permeates  the  Kosmos  from  first 
to  last,  not  everywhere  equal,  as  in  a  numerical  distribution,  but  pro¬ 
portioned,  differing,  according  to  the  grades  of  place — just  as  in  some 
one  animal,  linked  from  first  to  last,  each  member  has  its  own  function, 
the  nobler  organ  the  higher  activity  while  others  successively  concern 
the  lower  degrees  of  the  life,  each  part  acting  of  itself,  and  experiencing 
what  belongs  to  its  own  nature  and  what  comes  from  its  relation  with 
every  other.  Strike,  and  what  is  designed  for  utterance  gives  forth  the 
appropriate  volume  of  sound  while  other  parts  take  the  blow  in  silence 


42 


PLOTINUS 


but  react  in  their  own  especial  movement ;  the  total  of  all  the  utterance 
and  action  and  receptivity  constitutes  what  we  may  call  the  personal 
voice,  life  and  history  of  the  living  form.  The  parts,  distinct  in  Kind, 
have  distinct  functions  :  the  feet  have  their  work  and  the  eyes  theirs ; 
the  understanding  serves  to  one  end,  the  Intellectual  Principle  to  another. 

But  all  sums  to  a  unity,  a  comprehensive  Providence.  From  the 
inferior  grade  downwards  is  Fate  :  the  upper  is  Providence  alone  :  for 
in  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  all  is  Reason-Principle  or  its  Priors — Divine 
Mind  and  unmingled  Soul — and  immediately  upon  these  follows  Provi¬ 
dence  which  rises  from  Divine  Mind,  is  the  content  of  the  Unmingled 
Soul,  and,  through  this  Soul,  is  communicated  to  the  Sphere  of  living 
things. 

This  Reason-Principle  comes  as  a  thing  of  unequal  parts,  and  there¬ 
fore  its  creations  are  unequal,  as,  for  example,  the  several  members  of 
one  Living  Being.  But  after  this  allotment  of  rank  and  function,  all  act 
consonant  with  the  will  of  the  gods  keeps  the  sequence  and  is  included 
under  the  providential  government,  for  the  Reason-Principle  of  provi¬ 
dence  is  god-serving. 

All  such  right-doing,  then,  is  linked  to  Providence  ;  but  it  is  not 
therefore  performed  by  it :  men  or  other  agents,  living  or  lifeless,  are 
causes  of  certain  things  happening,  and  any  good  that  may  result  is  taken 
up  again  by  Providence.  In  the  total,  then,  the  right  rules  and  what  has 
happened  amiss  is  transformed  and  corrected.  Thus,  to  take  an  example 
from  a  single  body,  the  Providence  of  a  living  organism  implies  its 
health  ;  let  it  be  gashed  or  otherwise  wounded,  and  that  Reason-Principle 
which  governs  it  sets  to  work  to  draw  it  together,  knit  it  anew,  heal  it, 
and  put  the  affected  part  to  rights. 

In  sum,  evil  belongs  to  the  sequence  of  things,  but  it  comes  (not 
from  Providence  but)  from  necessity.  It  originates  in  ourselves  ;  it  has 
its  causes  no  doubt,  but  we  are  not,  therefore,  forced  to  it  by  Providence  : 
some  of  these  causes  we  adapt  to  the  operation  of  Providence  and  of  its 
subordinates,  but  with  others  we  fail  to  make  the  connection  ;  the  act 
instead  of  being  ranged  under  the  will  of  Providence  consults  the  desire 
of  the  agent  alone  or  of  some  other  element  in  the  Universe,  something 


III.  3-  6] 


PROVIDENCE 


43 


which  is  either  itself  at  variance  with  Providence  or  has  set  up  some 
such  state  of  variance  in  ourselves. 

The  one  circumstance  does  not  produce  the  same  result  wherever 
it  acts  ;  the  normal  operation  will  be  modified  from  case  to  case  : 
Helen’s  beauty  told  very  differently  on  Paris  and  on  Idomeneus  ;  bring 
together  two  handsome  people  of  loose  character  and  two  living  honour¬ 
ably  and  the  resulting  conduct  is  very  different ;  a  good  man  meeting 
a  libertine  exhibits  a  distinct  phase  of  his  nature  and,  similarly,  the 
dissolute  answer  to  the  society  of  their  betters. 

The  act  of  the  libertine  is  not  done  by  Providence  or  in  accordance 
with  Providence  ;  neither  is  the  action  of  the  good  done  by  Providence 
— it  is  done  by  the  man— but  it  is  done  in  accordance  with  Providence, 
for  it  is  an  act  consonant  with  the  Reason-Principle.  Thus  a  patient 
following  his  treatment  is  himself  an  agent  and  yet  is  acting  in  accordance 
with  the  doctor’s  method  inspired  by  the  art  concerned  with  the  causes 
of  health  and  sickness  :  what  one  does  against  the  laws  of  health  is  one’s 
act,  but  an  act  conflicting  with  the  Providence  of  medicine. 

6. 

But,  if  all  this  be  true,  how  can  evil  fall  within  the  scope  of  seer- 
ship  ?  The  predictions  of  the  seers  are  based  on  observation  of  the 
Universal  Circuit  :  how  can  this  indicate  the  evil  with  the  good  ? 

Clearly  the  reason  is  that  all  contraries  coalesce.  Take,  for  example. 
Shape  and  (its  contrary)  Matter  :  the  living  being  (of  the  lower  order) 
is  a  coalescence  of  these  two  ;  so  that  to  be  aware  of  the  Shape  and  the 
Reason-Principle  is  to  be  aware  of  the  Matter  on  which  the  Shape  has 
been  imposed. 

The  living-being  of  the  compound  order  is  not  present  (as  pure  and 
simple  Idea)  like  the  living  being  of  the  Intellectual  order  :  in  the  com¬ 
pound  entity,  we  are  aware,  at  once,  of  the  Reason-Principle  and  of  the 
inferior  element  brought  under  form.  Now  the  Universe  is  such  a  com¬ 
pound  living  thing :  to  observe,  therefore,  its  content  is  to  be  aware 
not  less  of  its  lower  elements  than  of  the  Providence  which  operates 
within  it. 


44 


PLOTINUS 


This  Providence  reaches  to  all  that  comes  into  being ;  its  scope 
therefore  includes  living  things  with  their  actions  and  states,  the  total 
of  their  history  at  once  overruled  by  the  Reason-Principle  and  yet 
subject  in  some  degree  to  Necessity. 

These,  then,  are  presented  as  mingled  both  by  their  initial  nature 
and  by  the  continuous  process  of  their  existence  ;  and  the  Seer  is  not 
able  to  make  a  perfect  discrimination  setting  on  the  one  side  Providence 
with  all  that  happens  under  Providence  and  on  the  other  side  what  the 
substrate  communicates  to  its  product.  Such  discrimination  is  not  for 
a  man,  not  for  a  wise  man  or  a  divine  man  :  one  may  say  it  is  the  pre¬ 
rogative  of  a  god.  Not  causes  but  facts  lie  in  the  Seer's  province  ;  his 
art  is  the  reading  of  the  scriptures  of  Nature  which  tell  of  the  ordered 
and  never  condescend  to  the  disorderly  ;  the  movement  of  the  Universe 
utters  its  testimony  to  him  and,  before  men  and  things  reveal  themselves, 
brings  to  light  what  severally  and  collectively  they  are. 

Here  conspires  with  There  and  There  with  Here,  elaborating  together 
the  consistency  and  eternity  of  a  Kosmos  and  by  their  correspondences 
revealing  the  sequence  of  things  to  the  trained  observer — for  every  form 
of  divination  turns  upon  correspondences.  Universal  interdependence, 
there  could  not  be,  but  universal  resemblance  there  must.  This  probably 
is  the  meaning  of  the  saying  that  Correspondences  maintain  the  Universe. 

This  is  a  correspondence  of  inferior  with  inferior,  of  superior  with 
superior,  eye  with  eye,  foot  with  foot,  everything  with  its  fellow  and,  in 
another  order,  virtue  with  right  action  and  vice  with  unrighteousness. 
Admit  such  correspondence  in  the  All  and  we  have  the  possibility  of 
prediction.  If  the  one  order  acts  on  the  other,  the  relation  is  not  that 
of  maker  to  thing  made — the  two  are  coeval — it  is  the  interplay  of 
members  of  one  living  being  ;  each  in  its  own  place  and  way  moves  as 
its  own  nature  demands  ;  to  every  organ  its  grade  and  task,  and  to  every 
grade  and  task  its  effective  organ. 

7- 

And  since  the  higher  exists,  there  must  be  the  lower  as  well.  The 
Universe  is  a  thing  of  variety,  and  how  could  there  be  an  inferior 


ni.3-7] 


PROVIDENCE 


45 


without  a  superior  or  a  superior  without  an  inferior  ?  We  cannot  com¬ 
plain  about  the  lower  in  the  higher  ;  rather,  we  must  be  grateful  to  the 
higher  for  giving  something  of  itself  to  the  lower. 

In  a  word,  those  that  would  like  evil  driven  out  from  the  All  would 
drive  out  Providence  itself. 

What  would  Providence  have  to  provide  for  ?  Certainly  not  for 
itself  or  for  the  Good  :  when  we  speak  of  a  Providence  above,  we  mean 
an  act  upon  something  below. 

That  which  resumes  all  under  a  unity  is  a  Principle  in  which  all 
things  exist  together  and  the  single  thing  is  All.  From  this  Principle, 
which  remains  internally  unmoved,  particular  things  push  forth  as  from 
a  single  root  which  never  itself  emerges.  They  are  a  branching  into  part, 
into  multiplicity,  each  single  outgrowth  bearing  its  trace  of  the  common 
source.  Thus,  phase  by  phase,  there  is  finally  the  production  into  this 
world  ;  some  things  close  still  to  the  root,  others  widely  separate  in  the 
continuous  progression  imtil  we  have,  in  our  metaphor,  bough  and  crest, 
foliage  and  fruit.  At  the  one  side  all  is  one  point  of  unbroken  rest,  on  the 
other  is  the  ceaseless  process,  leaf  and  fruit,  all  the  things  of  process 
carrying  ever  within  themselves  the  Reason-Principles  of  the  Upper 
Sphere,  and  striving  to  become  trees  in  their  own  minor  order 
and  producing,  if  at  all,  only  what  is  in  strict  gradation  from 
themselves. 

As  for  the  abandoned  spaces  in  what  corresponds  to  the  branches 
these  too  draw  upon  the  root,  from  which,  despite  all  their  variance, 
they  also  derive  ;  and  the  branches  again  operate  upon  their  own  furthest 
extremities  :  operation  is  to  be  traced  only  from  point  to  next  point, 
but,  in  the  fact,  there  has  been  both  inflow  and  outgo  (of  creative 
or  modifying  force)  at  the  very  root  which,  itself  again,  has  its 
priors. 

The  things  that  act  upon  each  other  are  branchings  from  a  far-off 
beginning  and  so  stand  distinct ;  but  they  derive  initially  from  the  one 
source  :  all  interaction  is  like  that  of  brothers,  resemblant  as  drawing 
life  from  the  same  parents. 


46 


PLOTINUS 


FOURTH  TRACTATE 
Our  Tutelary  Spirit 

1. 

Some  Existents  (Absolute  Unity  and  Intellectual-Principle)  remain 
at  rest  while  their  Hypostases,  or  Expressed-Idea,  come  into  being  ;  but, 
in  our  view,  the  Soul  generates  by  its  motion,  to  which  is  due  the  sensitive 
faculty — that  in  any  of  its  expression-forms — ^Nature  and  all  forms  of 
life  down  to  the  vegetable  order.  Even  as  it  is  present  in  human  beings 
the  Soul  carries  its  Expression-form  (Hypostasis)  with  it,  but  is  not  the 
dominant  since  it  is  not  the  whole  man  (humanity  including  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Principle,  as  well)  :  in  the  vegetable  order  it  is  the  highest  since 
there  is  nothing  to  rival  it ;  but  at  this  phase  it  is  no  longer  reproductive, 
or,  at  least,  what  it  produces  is  of  quite  another  order  ;  here  life  ceases  ; 
all  later  production  is  lifeless. 

What  does  this  imply  ? 

Everything  the  Soul  engenders  down  to  this  point  (of  sheer  lifeless¬ 
ness)  comes  into  being  shapeless,  and  takes  form  by  orientation  towards 
its  author  and  supporter  :  therefore  (and  even  more  certainly)  the  thing 
engendered  on  the  further  side  can  be  no  image  of  the  Soul,  since  it  is 
not  even  alive  ;  it  must  be  an  utter  Indetermination.  No  doubt  even 
in  things  of  the  nearer  order  there  was  indetermination,  but  within  a 
form ;  they  were  undetermined  not  utterly  but  only  in  contrast  with 
their  perfect  state  :  at  this  extreme  point  we  have  the  utter  lack  of 
determination.  Let  it  be  raised  to  its  highest  degree  and  it  becomes 
body  by  taking  such  shape  as  serves  its  scope  ;  then  it  becomes  the 
recipient  of  its  author  and  sustainer  :  this  presence  in  body  is  the  only 
example  of  the  boundaries  of  Higher  Existents  running  into  the  boundary 
of  the  Lower. 

2. 

It  is  of  this  Soul  especially  that  we  read  “  All  Soul  has  care  for  the 
Soulless  ” — though  the  several  Souls  thus  care  in  their  own  degree  and 


III.  4.  2] 


OUR  TUTELARY  SPIRIT 


47 


way.  The  passage  continues — “  Soul  passes  through  the  entire  heavens 
in  forms  varying  with  the  variety  of  place  ” — the  sensitive  form,  the 
reasoning  form,  even  the  vegetative  form — and  this  means  that  in  each 
“  place  ”  the  phase  of  the  soul  there  dominant  carries  out  its  own  ends 
while  the  rest,  not  present  there,  is  idle. 

Now,  in  humanity  the  lower  is  not  supreme  ;  it  is  an  accompaniment; 
but  neither  does  the  better  rule  unfailingly  ;  the  lower  element  also  has 
a  footing,  and  Man,  therefore,  lives  in  part  under  sensation,  for  he  has 
the  organs  of  sensation,  and  in  large  part  even  by  the  merely  vegetative 
principle,  for  the  body  grows  and  propagates  :  all  the  graded  phases  are 
in  a  collaboration,  but  the  entire  form,  man,  takes  rank  by  the  dominant, 
and  when  the  life-principle  leaves  the  body  it  is  what  it  is,  what  it  most 
intensely  lived. 

This  is  why  we  must  break  away  towards  the  High  :  we  dare  not 
keep  ourselves  set  towards  the  sensuous  principle,  following  the  images 
of  sense,  or  towards  the  merely  vegetative,  intent  upon  the  gratifications 
of  eating  and  procreation  ;  our  life  must  be  pointed  towards  the  Intellec¬ 
tive,  towards  the  Intellectual-Principle,  towards  God. 

Those  that  have  maintained  the  human  level  are  men  once  more. 
Those  that  have  lived  wholly  to  sense  become  animals — corresponding 
in  species  to  the  particular  temper  of  the  life — ferocious  animals  where 
the  sensuahty  has  been  accompanied  by  a  certain  measure  of  spirit, 
gluttonous  and  lascivious  animals  where  aU  has  been  appetite  and 
satiation  of  appetite.  Those  who  in  their  pleasures  have  not  even  lived 
by  sensation,  but  have  gone  their  way  in  a  torpid  grossness  become  mere 
growing  things,  for  this  lethargy  is  the  entire  act  of  the  vegetative,  and 
such  men  have  been  busy  be-treeing  themselves.  Those,  we  read,  that, 
otherwise  untainted,  have  loved  song  become  vocal  animals  ;  kings 
ruling  unreasonably  but  with  no  other  vice  are  eagles  ;  futile  and  flighty 
visionaries  ever  soaring  skyward,  become  high-flying  birds  ;  observance 
of  civic  and  secular  virtue  makes  man  again,  or  where  the  merit  is 
less  marked,  one  of  the  animals  of  communal  tendency,  a  bee  or 
the  like. 


48 

3- 


PLOTINUS 


What,  then,  is  the  spirit  (guiding  the  present  life  and  determining 
the  future  ?) 

The  Spirit  of  here  and  now. 

And  the  God  ? 

The  God  of  here  and  now. 

Spirit,  God ;  This  in  act  within  us,  conducts  every  life  ;  for,  even 
here  and  now,  it  is  the  dominant  of  our  Nature. 

That  is  to  say  that  the  dominant  is  the  spirit  which  takes  possession 
of  the  human  being  at  birth  ? 

No  :  the  dominant  is  the  Prior  of  the  individual  spirit ;  it  presides 
inoperative  while  its  secondary  acts  :  so  that  if  the  acting  force  is  that 
of  men  of  the  sense-life,  the  tutelary  spirit  is  the  Rational  Being,  while 
if  we  live  by  that  Rational  Being,  our  tutelary  Spirit  is  the  still  higher 
Being,  not  directly  operative  but  assenting  to  the  working  principle. 
The  words  "You  shall  yourselves  choose  (your  presiding  Spirit)  ”  are 
true,  then  ;  for  by  our  life  we  elect  our  own  loftier. 

But  how  does  this  spirit  come  to  be  the  determinant  of  our  fate  ? 

It  is  not  when  the  life  is  ended  that  it  conducts  us  here  or  there  ; 
it  operates  during  the  lifetime  ;  when  we  cease  to  live,  our  death  hands 
over  to  another  principle  this  energy  of  our  own  personal  career. 

That  principle  (of  the  new  birth)  strives  to  gain  control,  and  if  it 
succeeds  it  also  lives  and  itself,  in  turn,  possesses  a  guiding  spirit  (its 
next  higher)  :  if  on  the  contrary  it  is  weighed  down  by  the  developed 
evil  in  the  character,  the  spirit  of  the  previous  life  pays  the  penalty  : 
the  evil-liver  loses  grade  because  during  his  life  the  active  principle  of 
his  being  took  the  tilt  towards  the  brute  by  force  of  affinity.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Man  is  able  to  follow  the  leading  of  his  higher  Spirit,  he 
rises  :  he  lives  that  Spirit ;  that  noblest  part  of  himself  to  which  he  is 
being  led  becomes  sovereign  in  his  life  ;  this  made  his  own,  he  works 
for  the  next  above  until  he  has  attained  the  height. 

For  the  Soul  is  many  things,  is  all,  is  the  Above  and  the  Beneath 
to  the  totality  of  life  :  and  each  of  us  is  an  Intellectual  Kosmos,  linked  to 
this  world  by  what  is  lowest  in  us,  but,  by  what  is  the  highest,  to  the 


III.  4.  5] 


OUR  TUTELARY  SPIRIT 


49 


Divine  Intellect :  by  all  that  is  intellective  we  are  permanently  in  that 
higher  realm,  but  at  the  fringe  of  the  Intellectual  we  are  fettered  to  the 
lower ;  it  is  as  if  we  gave  forth  from  it  some  emanation  towards  that 
lower,  or,  rather  some  Act,  which  however  leaves  our  diviner  part  not 
in  itself  diminished. 

4- 

But  is  this  lower  extremity  of  our  intellective  phase  fettered  to 
body  for  ever  ? 

No  :  if  we  turn,  this  turns  by  the  same  act. 

And  the  Soul  of  the  All — are  we  to  think  that  when  it  turns  from  this 
sphere  its  lower  phase  similarly  withdraws  ? 

No  :  for  it  never  accompanied  that  lower  phase  of  itself ;  it  never 
knew  any  coming,  and  therefore  never  came  down  ;  it  remains  unmoved 
above,  and  the  material  frame  of  the  Universe  draws  close  to  it,  and, 
as  it  were,  takes  light  from  it,  no  hindrance  to  it,  in  no  way  troubling  it, 
simply  lying  unmoved  before  it. 

But  has  the  Universe,  then,  no  sensation  ?  “It  has  no  Sight,”  we 
read,  since  it  has  no  eyes,  and  obviously  it  has  not  ears,  nostrils,  or  tongue. 
Then  has  it  perhaps  such  a  consciousness  as  we  have  of  our  own  inner 
conditions  ? 

No  :  where  all  is  the  working  out  of  one  nature,  there  is  nothing 
but  still  rest ;  there  is  not  even  enjoyment.  Sensibility  is  present  as 
the  quality  of  growth  is,  unrecognised.  But  the  Nature  of  the  World 
will  be  found  treated  elsewhere  ;  what  stands  here  is  all  that  the  question 
of  the  moment  demands. 

5- 

But  if  the  presiding  Spirit  and  the  conditions  of  life  are  chosen  by 
the  Soul  in  the  over-world,  how  can  anything  be  left  to  our  independent 
action  here  ? 

The  answer  is  that  that  very  choice  in  the  over-world  is  merely  an 
allegorical  statement  of  the  Soul’s  tendency  and  temperament,  a  total 
character  which  it  must  express  wherever  it  operates. 


H 


50 


PLOTINUS 


But  if  the  tendency  of  the  Soul  is  the  master-force  and,  in  the  Soul, 
the  dominant  is  that  phase  which  has  been  brought  to  the  fore  by  a 
previous  history,  then  the  body  stands  acquitted  of  any  bad  influence 
upon  it  ?  The  Soul's  quality  exists  before  any  bodily  life  ;  it  has  exactly 
what  it  chose  to  have  ;  and,  we  read,  it  never  changes  its  chosen  spirit ; 
therefore  neither  the  good  man  nor  the  bad  is  the  product  of  this  life  ? 

Is  the  solution,  perhaps,  that  man  is  potentially  both  good  and  bad 
but  becomes  the  one  or  the  other  by  force  of  act  ? 

But  what  if  a  man  temperamentally  good  happens  to  enter  a  dis¬ 
ordered  body,  or  if  a  perfect  body  falls  to  a  man  naturally  vicious  ? 

The  answer  is  that  the  Soul,  to  whichever  side  it  inclines,  has  in  some 
varying  degree  the  power  of  working  the  forms  of  body  over  to  its  own 
temper,  since  outlying  and  accidental  circumstances  cannot  overrule  the 
entire  decision  of  a  Soul.  Where  we  read  that,  after  the  casting  of  lots, 
the  sample  lives  are  exhibited  with  the  casual  circumstances  attending 
them  and  that  the  choice  is  made  upon  vision,  in  accordance  with  the 
individual  temperament,  we  are  given  to  understand  that  the  real 
determination  lies  with  the  Souls,  who  adapt  the  allotted  conditions  to 
their  own  particular  quality. 

The  Timaeus  indicates  the  relation  of  this  guiding  spirit  to  ourselves  : 
it  is  not  entirely  outside  of  ourselves ;  is  not  bound  up  with  our  nature  ; 
is  not  the  agent  in  our  action  ;  it  belongs  to  us  as  belonging  to  our  Soul, 
but  not  in  so  far  as  we  are  particular  human  beings  living  a  life  to  which 
it  is  superior  :  take  the  passage  in  this  sense  and  it  is  consistent  ;  under¬ 
stand  this  Spirit  otherwise  and  there  is  contradiction.  And  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  Spirit,  moreover,  as  “  the  power  which  consummates  the 
chosen  life,”  is,  also,  in  agreement  with  this  interpretation  ;  for  while 
its  presidency  saves  us  from  falling  much  deeper  into  evil,  the  only 
direct  agent  within  us  is  some  thing  neither  above  it  nor  equal  to  it  but 
under  it :  Man  cannot  cease  to  be  characteristically  Man. 

6. 

What,  then,  is  the  achieved  Sage  ? 

One  whose  Act  is  determined  by  the  higher  phase  of  the  Soul. 


III.  4.  6] 


OUR  TUTELARY  SPIRIT 


51 


It  does  not  suffice  to  perfect  virtue  to  have  only  this  Spirit  (equivalent 
in  all  men)  as  co-operator  in  the  life  :  the  acting  force  in  the  Sage  is  the 
Intellective  Principle  (the  diviner  phase  of  the  human  Soul)  which  there¬ 
fore  is  itself  his  presiding  spirit  or  is  guided  by  a  presiding  spirit  of  its 
own,  no  other  than  the  very  Divinity. 

But  this  exalts  the  Sage  above  the  Intellectual  Principle  as  possess¬ 
ing  for  presiding  spirit  the  Prior  to  the  Intellectual  Principle  :  how  then 
does  it  come  about  that  he  was  not,  from  the  very  beginning,  all  that  he 
now  is  ? 

The  failure  is  due  to  the  disturbance  caused  by  birth— though,  before 
all  reasoning,  there  exists  the  instinctive  movement  reaching  out  towards 
its  own. 

An  instinct  which  the  Sage  finally  rectifies  in  every  respect  ? 

Not  in  every  respect ;  the  Soul  is  so  constituted  that  its  life-history 
and  its  general  tendency  will  answer  not  merely  to  its  own  nature  but  also 
to  the  conditions  among  which  it  acts. 

The  presiding  Spirit,  as  we  read,  conducting  a  Soul  to  the  Under¬ 
world  ceases  to  be  its  guardian — except  when  the  Soul  resumes  (in  its 
later  choice)  the  former  state  of  life. 

But,  meanwhile,  what  happens  to  it  ? 

From  the  passage  (in  the  Phaedo)  which  tells  how  it  presents  the 
Soul  to  judgment  we  gather  that  after  the  death  it  resumes  the  form  it 
had  before  the  birth,  but  that  then,  beginning  again,  it  is  present  to  the 
Souls  in  their  punishment  during  the  period  of  their  renewed  life— a  time 
not  so  much  of  living  as  of  expiation. 

But  the  Souls  that  enter  into  brute  bodies,  are  they  controlled  by 
some  thing  less  than  this  presiding  Spirit  ?  No  :  theirs  is  still  a  Spirit, 
but  an  evil  or  a  foolish  one. 

And  the  Souls  that  attain  to  the  highest  ? 

Of  these  higher  Souls  some  live  in  the  world  of  Sense,  some  above 
it  :  and  those  in  the  world  of  Sense  inhabit  the  Sun  or  another  of  the 
planetary  bodies  ;  the  others  occupy  the  fixed  Sphere  (above  the  plane¬ 
tary)  holding  the  place  they  have  merited  through  having  lived  here 
the  superior  life  of  reason. 


52 


PLOTINUS 


We  must  understand  that,  while  our  Souls  do  contain  an  Intellectual 
Kosmos  they  also  contain  a  subordination  of  various  forms  like  that  of 
the  Kosmic  Soul.  The  world  Soul  is  distributed  so  as  to  produce  the  fixed 
sphere  and  the  planetary  circuits  corresponding  to  its  graded  powers  : 
so  with  our  Souls ;  they  must  have  their  provinces  according  to  their 
different  powers,  parallel  to  those  of  the  World  Soul :  each  must  give 
out  its  own  special  act ;  released,  each  will  inhabit  there  a  star  consonant 
with  the  temperament  and  faculty  in  act  within  and  constituting  the 
principle  of  the  life  ;  and  this  star  or  the  next  highest  power  will  stand 
to  them  as  God  or  more  exactly  as  tutelary  spirit. 

But  here  some  further  precision  is  needed. 

Emancipated  Souls,  for  the  whole  period  of  their  sojourn  there  above, 
have  transcended  the  Spirit-nature  and  the  entire  fatality  of  birth  and 
all  that  belongs  to  this  visible  world,  for  they  have  taken  up  with  them 
that  Hypostasis  of  the  Soul  in  which  the  desire  of  earthly  life  is  vested. 
This  Hypostasis  may  be  described  as  the  distributable  Soul,  for  it  is 
what  enters  bodily  forms  and  multiplies  itself  by  this  division  among 
tnem.  But  its  distribution  is  not  (arithmetical,  not)  a  matter  of  magni¬ 
tudes  ;  wherever  it  is  present,  there  is  the  same  thing  present  entire  ; 
its  unity  can  always  be  reconstructed  :  when  living  things — animal  or 
vegetal — (distribute  themselves  and)  produce  their  constant  succession 
of  new  forms,  they  do  so  in  virtue  of  the  self-distribution  of  this  phase 
of  the  Soul,  for  it  must  be  as  much  distributed  among  the  new  forms  as 
the  propagating  originals  are.  In  some  cases  it  communicates  its  force 
by  permanent  presence — ^the  life  principle  in  plants  for  instance — in 
other  cases  it  withdraws  after  imparting  its  virtue— for  instance  where 
from  the  putridity  of  dead  animal  or  vegetable  matter  a  multitudinous 
birth  is  produced  from  one  organism. 

A  power  corresponding  to  this  in  the  All  must  reach  down  and 
co-operate  in  the  life  of  our  world — ^in  fact  the  very  same  power. 

If  the  Soul  returns  to  this  Sphere  it  finds  itself  under  the  same 
Spirit  or  a  new,  according  to  the  life  it  is  to  live.  With  this  Spirit  it 
embarks  in  the  skiff  of  the  universe  :  the  “  spindle  of  Necessity  ”  then 
takes  control  and  appoints  the  seat  for  the  voyage,  the  seat  of  the  lot  in  life. 


III.  5.  i] 


LOVE 


53 


The  Universal  circuit  is  like  a  breeze,  and  the  voyager,  still  or  stirring, 
is  carried  forward  by  it.  He  has  a  hundred  varied  experiences,  fresh 
sights,  changing  circumstances,  all  sorts  of  events.  The  vessel  itself 
furnishes  incident,  tossing  as  it  drives  on.  And  the  voyager  also  acts  of 
himself  in  virtue  of  that  individuality  which  he  retains  because  he  is  on 
the  vessel  in  his  own  person  and  character.  Under  identical  circumstances 
individuals  answer  very  differently  in  their  movements  and  acts  :  hence 
it  comes  about  that,  be  the  occurrences  and  conditions  of  life  similar  or 
dissimilar,  the  result  may  differ  from  man  to  man,  as  on  the  other  hand 
a  similar  result  may  be  produced  by  dissimilar  conditions  :  this  (personal 
answer  to  incident)  it  is  that  constitutes  destiny. 


FIFTH  TRACTATE 
On  Love 

I. 

What  is  Love  ?  A  God,  a  Celestial  Spirit,  a  state  of  mind  ?  Or  is 
it,  perhaps,  sometimes  to  be  thought  of  as  a  God  or  Spirit  and  sometimes 
merely  as  an  experience  ?  And  what  is  it  essentially  in  each  of  these 
respects  ? 

These  important  questions  make  it  desirable  to  review  prevailing 
opinions  on  the  matter,  the  philosophical  treatment  it  has  received  and, 
especially,  the  theories  of  the  great  Plato  who  has  many  passages  dealing 
with  Love,  from  a  point  of  view  entirely  his  own. 

Plato  does  not  treat  of  it  as  simply  a  state  observed  in  Souls  ;  he 
also  makes  it  a  Spirit-being  so  that  we  read  of  the  birth  of  Eros,  under 
definite  circumstances  and  by  a  certain  parentage. 

Now  everyone  recognises  that  the  emotional  state  for  which  we 
make  this  “  Love  ”  responsible  rises  in  souls  aspiring  to  be  knit  in  the 
closest  union  with  some  beautiful  object,  and  that  this  aspiration  takes 
two  forms,  that  of  the  good  whose  devotion  is  for  beauty  itself,  and  that 
other  which  seeks  its  consummation  in  some  vile  act.  But  this  generally 
admitted  distinction  opens  a  new  question  :  we  need  a  philosophical 
investigation  into  the  origin  of  the  two  phases. 


54 


PLOTINUS 


It  is  sound,  I  think,  to  find  the  primal  source  of  Love  in  a  tendency 
of  the  Soul  towards  pure  beauty,  in  a  recognition,  in  a  kinship,  in  an 
unreasoned  consciousness  of  friendly  relation.  The  vile  and  ugly  is  in 
clash,  at  once,  with  Nature  and  with  God  :  Nature  produces  by  looking 
to  the  Good,  for  it  looks  towards  Order — which  has  its  being  in  the  con¬ 
sistent  total  of  the  good,  while  the  unordered  is  ugly,  a  member  of  the 
system  of  evil— and  besides  Nature  itself,  clearly,  springs  from  the  divine 
realm,  from  Good  and  Beauty ;  and  when  anything  brings  delight  and 
the  sense  of  kinship,  its  very  image  attracts. 

Reject  this  explanation,  and  no  one  can  tell  how  the  mental  state 
rises  and  what  are  its  causes  :  it  is  the  explanation  of  even  copulative 
love  which  is  the  will  to  beget  in  beauty ;  Nature  seeks  to  produce  the 
beautiful  and  therefore  by  all  reason  cannot  desire  to  procreate  in  the 
ugly. 

Those  that  desire  earthly  procreation  are  satisfied  with  the  beauty 
found  on  earth,  the  beauty  of  image  and  of  body  ;  it  is  because  they  are 
strangers  to  the  Archetype,  the  source  of  even  the  attraction  they  feel 
towards  what  is  lovely  here.  There  are  Souls  to  whom  earthly  beauty 
is  a  leading  to  the  memory  of  that  in  the  higher  realm  and  these  love  the 
earthly  as  an  image  ;  those  that  have  not  attained  to  this  memory  do 
not  understand  what  is  happening  within  them,  and  take  the  image  for 
the  reality.  Once  there  is  perfect  self-control,  it  is  no  fault  to  enjoy  the 
beauty  of  earth  ;  where  appreciation  degenerates  into  carnality,  there 
is  sin. 

Pure  Love  seeks  the  beauty  alone,  whether  there  is  Reminiscence  or 
not ;  but  there  are  those  that  feel,  also,  a  desire  of  such  immortality  as 
lies  within  mortal  reach  ;  and  these  are  seeking  Beauty  in  their  demand 
for  perpetuity,  the  desire  of  the  eternal ;  Nature  teaches  them  to  sow 
the  seed  and  to  beget  in  beauty,  to  sow  towards  eternity,  but  in  beauty 
through  their  own  kinship  with  the  beautiful.  And  indeed  the  eternal 
is  of  the  one  stock  with  the  beautiful,  the  Eternal-Nature  is  the  first 
shaping  of  beauty  and  makes  beautiful  all  that  rises  from  it. 

The  less  the  desire  for  procreation,  the  greater  is  the  contentment 
with  beauty  alone,  yet  procreation  aims  at  the  engendering  of  beauty  ; 


III.  5-  2] 


LOVE 


55 


it  is  the  expression  of  a  lack  ;  the  subject  is  conscious  of  insufficiency 
and,  wishing  to  produce  beauty,  feels  that  the  way  is  to  beget  in  a  beautiful 
form.  Where  the  procreative  desire  is  lawless  or  against  the  purposes  of 
nature,  the  first  inspiration  has  been  natural,  but  they  have  diverged 
from  the  way,  they  have  slipped  and  fallen,  and  they  grovel ;  they 
neither  understand  whither  Love  sought  to  lead  them  nor  have  they  any 
instinct  to  production  ;  they  have  not  mastered  the  right  use  of  the 
images  of  beauty  ;  they  do  not  know  what  the  Authentic  Beauty  is. 

Those  that  love  beauty  of  person  without  carnal  desire  love  for 
beauty  s  sake  ;  those  that  have — for  women,  of  course — the  copulative 
love,  have  the  further  purpose  of  self-perpetuation  :  as  long  as  they  are 
led  by  these  motives,  both  are  on  the  right  path,  though  the  first  have 
taken  the  nobler  way.  But,  even  in  the  right,  there  is  the  difference 
that  the  one  set,  worshipping  the  beauty  of  earth,  look  no  further,  while 
the  others,  those  of  recollection,  venerate  also  the  beauty  of  the  other 
world  while  they,  still,  have  no  contempt  for  this  in  which  they  recognise, 
as  it  were,  a  last  outgrowth,  an  attenuation  of  the  higher.  These,  in 
sum,  are  innocent  frequenters  of  beauty,  not  to  be  confused  with  the 
class  to  whom  it  becomes  an  occasion  of  fall  into  the  ugly — for  the 
aspiration  towards  a  good  degenerates  into  an  evil  often. 

So  much  for  love,  the  state. 

Now  we  have  to  consider  Love,  the  God. 


2. 

The  existence  of  such  a  being  is  no  demand  of  the  ordinary  man, 
merely  ;  it  is  supported  by  Theologians  (Orphic  teachers)  and,  over  and 
over  again,  by  Plato  to  whom  Eros  is  child  of  Aphrodite,  minister  of 
beautiful  children,  inciter  of  human  souls  towards  the  supernal  beauty 
or  quickener  of  an  already  existing  impulse  thither.  All  this  requires 
philosophical  examination.  A  cardinal  passage  is  that  in  The  Banquet 
where  we  are  told  Eros  was  not  a  child  of  Aphrodite  but  bom  on  the 
day  of  Aphrodite’s  birth,  Penia,  Poverty,  being  the  mother,  and  Poros, 
Possession,  the  father. 

The  matter  seems  to  demand  some  discussion  of  Aphrodite  since  in 


56 


PLOTINUS 


any  case  Eros  is  described  as  being  either  her  son  or  in  some  association 
with  her.  Who  then  is  Aphrodite,  and  in  what  sense  is  Love  either  her 
child  or  born  with  her  or  in  some  way  both  her  child  and  her  birth- 
fellow  ? 

To  us  Aphrodite  is  twofold ;  there  is  the  heavenly  Aphrodite, 
daughter  of  Ouranos  or  Heaven :  and  there  is  the  other  the  daughter 
of  Zeus  and  Dione,  this  is  the  Aphrodite  who  presides  over  earthly 
unions  ;  the  higher  was  not  born  of  a  mother  and  has  no  part  in  marriages 
for  in  Heaven  there  is  no  marrying. 

The  Heavenly  Aphrodite,  daughter  of  Kronos  (Saturn)  who  is  no 
other  than  the  Intellectual  Principle — must  be  the  Soul  at  its  divinest : 
unmingled  as  the  immediate  emanation  of  the  unmingled  ;  remaining 
ever  Above,  as  neither  desirous  nor  capable  of  descending  to  this  sphere, 
never  having  developed  the  downward  tendency,  a  divine  Hypostasis 
essentially  aloof,  so  unreservedly  an  Authentic  Being  as  to  have  no  part 
with  Matter — and  therefore  mythically  “  the  unmothered  ” — justly 
called  not  Celestial  Spirit  but  God,  as  knowing  no  admixture,  gathered 
cleanly  within  itself. 

Any  Nature  springing  directly  from  the  Intellectual  Principle  must 
be  itself  also  a  clean  thing  :  it  will  derive  a  resistance  of  its  own  from  its 
nearness  to  the  Highest,  for  all  its  tendency,  no  less  than  its  fixity, 
centres  upon  its  author  whose  power  is  certainly  sufficient  to  maintain  it 
Above. 

Soul  then  could  never  fall  from  its  sphere  ;  it  is  closer  held  to  the 
divine  Mind  than  the  very  sun  could  hold  the  light  it  gives  forth  to 
radiate  about  it,  an  outpouring  from  itself  held  firmly  to  it,  still. 

But  following  upon  Kronos— or,  if  you  will,  upon  Heaven,  (Ouranos) 
the  father  of  Kronos— the  Soul  directs  its  Act  towards  him  and  holds 
closely  to  him  and  in  that  love  brings  forth  the  Eros  through  whom  it 
continues  to  look  towards  him.  This  Act  of  the  Soul  has  produced  an 
Hypostasis,  a  Real-Being ;  and  the  mother  and  this  Hypostasis— her 
offspring,  noble  Love — gaze  together  upon  Divine  Mind.  Love,  thus,  is 
ever  intent  upon  that  other  loveliness,  and  exists  to  be  the  medium 
between  desire  and  that  object  of  desire.  It  is  the  eye  of  the  desirer  ; 


in.  5. 3] 


LOVE 


57 


by  its  power  what  loves  is  enabled  to  see  the  loved  thing.  But  it  is 
first ;  before  it  becomes  the  vehicle  of  vision,  it  is  itself  filled  with  the 
sight ;  it  is  first,  therefore,  and  not  even  in  the  same  order — for  desire 
attains  to  vision  only  through  the  efficacy  of  Love,  while  Love,  in  its 
own  Act,  harvests  the  spectacle  of  beauty  playing  immediately  above  it. 


3- 

That  Love  is  a  Hypostasis  (a  “  Person  ”)  a  Real-Being  sprung  from 
a  Real -Being — lower  than  the  parent  but  authentically  existent — is 
beyond  doubt. 

For  the  parent-Soul  was  a  Real-Being  sprung  directly  from  the  Act 
of  the  Hypostasis  that  ranks  before  it :  it  had  life  ;  it  was  a  constituent 
in  the  Real-Being  of  all  that  authentically  is — in  the  Real-Being  which 
looks,  rapt,  towards  the  very  Highest.  That  was  the  first  object  of  its 
vision  ;  it  looked  towards  it  as  towards  its  good,  and  it  rejoiced  in  the 
looking  ;  and  the  quality  of  what  it  saw  was  such  that  the  contemplation 
could  not  be  void  of  effect ;  in  virtue  of  that  rapture,  of  its  position  in 
regard  to  its  object,  of  the  intensity  of  its  gaze,  the  Soul  conceived  and 
brought  forth  an  offspring  worthy  of  itself  and  of  the  vision.  Thus  ; 
there  is  a  strenuous  activity  of  contemplation  in  the  Soul ;  there  is  an 
emanation  towards  it  from  the  object  contemplated  ;  and  Eros  is  bom, 
the  Love  which  is  an  eye  filled  with  its  vision,  a  seeing  that  bears  its 
image  with  it ;  Eros  taking  its  name,  probably,  from  the  fact  that  its 
essential  being  is  due  to  this  horasis,  this  seeing.  Of  course  Love,  as  an 
emotion,  wiU  take  its  name  from  Love,  the  Person,  since  a  Real-Being 
cannot  but  be  prior  to  what  lacks  this  reality.  The  mental  state  will 
be  designated  as  Love,  like  the  Hypostasis,  though  it  is  no  more  than 
a  particular  act  directed  towards  a  particular  object ;  but  it  must  not 
be  confused  with  the  Absolute  Love,  the  Divine  Being.  The  Eros  that 
belongs  to  the  supernal  Soul  must  be  of  one  temper  with  it ;  it  must 
itself  look  aloft  as  being  of  the  household  of  that  Soul,  dependent  upon 
that  Soul,  its  very  offspring ;  and  therefore  caring  for  nothing  but  the 
contemplation  of  the  Gods. 

Once  that  Soul  which  is  the  primal  source  of  light  to  the  heavens  is 

I 


PLOTINUS 


58 

recognised  as  an  Hypostasis  standing  distinct  and  aloof,  it  must  be 
admitted  that  Love  too  is  distinct  and  aloof  though  not,  perhaps,  so 
loftily  celestial  a  being  as  the  Soul.  Our  own  best  we  conceive  as  inside 
ourselves  and  yet  something  apart ;  so,  we  must  think  of  this  Love— as 
essentially  resident  where  the  unmingling  Soul  inhabits. 

But  besides  this  purest  Soul,  there  must  be  also  a  Soul  of  the  All : 
at  once  there  is  another  Love — the  eye  with  which  this  second  Soul 
looks  upwards — ^like  the  supernal  Eros  engendered  by  force  of  desire. 
This  Aphrodite,  the  secondary  Soul,  is  of  this  Universe — ^not  Soul  un¬ 
mingled  alone,  not  Soul,  the  Absolute,  giving  birth,  therefore,  to  the  Love 
concerned  with  the  universal  life  ;  no,  this  is  the  Love  presiding  over 
marriages  ;  but  it,  also,  has  its  touch  of  the  upward  desire  ;  and,  in  the 
degree  of  that  striving,  it  stirs  and  leads  upwards  the  Souls  of  the  young 
and  every  Soul  with  which  it  is  incorporated  in  so  far  as  there  is  a  natural 
tendency  to  remembrance  of  the  divine.  For  every  Soul  is  striving 
towards  The  Good,  even  the  mingling  Soul  and  that  of  particular  beings, 
for  each  holds  directly  from  the  divine  Soul,  and  is  its  offspring. 

4* 

Does  each  individual  Soul,  then,  contain  within  itself  such  a  Love 
in  essence  and  substantial  reality  ? 

Since  not  only  the  pure  All-Soul  but  also  that  of  the  Universe 
contain  such  a  Love,  it  would  be  difficult  to  explain  why  our  personal 
Soul  should  not.  It  must  be  so,  even,  with  aU  that  has  life. 

This  indwelling  love  is  no  other  than  the  Spirit  which,  as  we  are  told, 
walks  with  every  being,  the  affection  dominant  in  each  several  nature. 
It  implants  the  characteristic  desire  ;  the  particular  Soul,  strained 
towards  its  own  natural  objects,  brings  forth  its  own  Eros,  the  guiding 
spirit  realising  its  worth  and  the  quality  of  its  Being. 

As  the  All-Soul  contains  the  Universal  Love,  so  must  the  single 
Soul  be  allowed  its  own  single  Love  :  and  as  closely  as  the  single  Soul 
holds  to  the  AU-Soul,  never  cut  off  but  embraced  within  it,  the  two 
together  constituting  one  principle  of  life,  so  the  single  separate  Love 
holds  to  the  All-Love.  Similarly,  the  individual  love  keeps  with  the  indi- 


ni.  5-  5] 


LOVE 


59 


vidual  Soul  as  that  other,  the  great  Love,  goes  with  the  All-Soul ;  and 
the  Love  within  the  All  permeates  it  throughout  so  that  the  one  Love 
becomes  many,  showing  itself  where  it  chooses  at  any  moment  of  the 
Universe,  taking  definite  shape  in  these  its  partial  phases  and  revealing 
itself  at  its  will. 

In  the  same  way  we  must  conceive  many  Aphrodites  in  the  All, 
Spirits  entering  it  together  with  Love,  all  emanating  from  an  Aphrodite 
of  the  All,  a  train  of  particular  Aphrodites  dependent  upon  the  first, 
and  each  with  the  particular  Love  in  attendance  :  this  multiplicity  cannot 
be  denied,  if  Soul  be  the  mother  of  Love,  and  Aphrodite  mean  Soul,  and 
Love  be  an  act  of  a  Soul  seeking  good. 

This  Love,  then,  leader  of  particular  Souls  to  The  Good,  is  twofold  : 
the  Love  in  the  loftier  Soul  would  be  a  god  ever  linking  the  Soul  to  the 
divine  ;  the  Love  in  the  mingling  Soul  will  be  a  celestial  spirit. 

5- 

But  what  is  the  Nature  of  this  Spirit — of  the  Supernals  in  general  ? 

The  Spirit-Kind  is  treated  in  the  S3miposium  where,  with  much  about 
the  others,  we  learn  of  Eros — Love — bom  to  Penia — Poverty — and  Poros 
— Possession — ^who  is  son  of  Metis— Resource — at  Aphrodite’s  birth  feast. 

But  (the  passage  has  been  misunderstood  for)  to  take  Plato  as  mean¬ 
ing,  by  Eros,  this  Universe — and  not  simply  the  Love  native  within  it — 
involves  much  that  is  self-contradictory. 

For  one  thing,  the  universe  is  described  as  a  blissful  god  and  as  self- 
sufficing,  while  this  "  Love  ”  is  confessedly  neither  divine  nor  self- 
sufficing  but  in  ceaseless  need. 

Again,  this  Kosmos  is  a  compound  of  body  and  soul ;  but  Aphrodite 
to  Plato  is  the  Soul  itself,  therefore  Aphrodite  would  necessarily  be  a 
constituent  part  of  Eros,  (not  mother  but)  dominant  member  !  A  man 
is  the  man’s  Soul,  if  the  world  is,  similarly,  the  world’s  Soul,  then  Aphro¬ 
dite,  the  Soul,  is  identical  with  Love,  the  Kosmos  !  And  why  should  this 
one  spirit.  Love,  be  the  Universe  to  the  exclusion  of  all  the  others,  which 
certainly  are  sprung  from  the  same  Essential-Being  ?  Our  only  escape 
would  be  to  make  the  Kosmos  a  complex  of  Supernals. 


6o 


PLOTINUS 


Love,  again,  is  called  the  Dispenser  of  beautiful  children  ;  does  this 
apply  to  the  Universe  ?  Love  is  represented  as  homeless,  bedless  and 
bare-footed  :  would  not  that  be  a  shabby  description  of  the  Kosmos  and 
quite  out  of  the  truth  ? 

6. 

What  then,  in  sum,  is  to  be  thought  of  Love  and  of  his  “  birth  ” 
as  we  are  told  of  it  ? 

Clearly  we  have  to  establish  the  significance,  here,  of  Poverty  and 
Possession,  and  show  in  what  way  the  parentage  is  appropriate  :  we 
have  also  to  bring  these  two  into  line  with  the  other  Supemals  since 
one  spirit  nature,  one  spirit  essence,  must  characterise  all  unless  they 
are  to  have  merely  a  name  in  common. 

We  must,  therefore,  lay  down  the  grounds  on  which  we  distinguish 
the  Gods  from  the  Celestials — that  is,  when  we  emphasise  the  separate 
nature  of  the  two  orders  and  are  not,  as  often  in  practice,  including 
these  Spirits  under  the  common  name  of  Gods. 

It  is  our  teaching  and  conviction  that  the  Gods  are  immune  to  all 
passion  while  we  attribute  experience  and  emotion  to  the  Celestials 
which,  though  eternal  Beings  and  directly  next  to  the  Gods,  are  already 
a  step  towards  ourselves  and  stand  between  the  divine  and  the 
human. 

But  by  what  process  (of  degeneration)  was  the  immunity  lost  ? 
What  in  their  nature  led  them  downwards  to  the  inferior  ? 

And  other  questions  present  themselves. 

Does  the  Intellectual  Realm  include  no  member  of  this  spirit  order, 
not  even  one  ?  And  does  the  Kosmos  contain  only  these  spirits,  God 
being  confined  to  the  Intellectual  ?  Or  are  there  Gods  in  the  sub-celestial 
too,  the  Kosmos  itself  being  a  God,  the  third,  as  is  commonly  said,  and 
the  Powers  down  to  the  Moon  being  all  Gods  as  well  ? 

It  is  best  not  to  use  the  word  “  Celestial  ”  of  any  Being  of  that 
Realm  ;  the  word  “  God  "  may  be  applied  to  the  Essential-Celestial — the 
auto-daimon — and  even  to  the  Visible  Powers  of  the  Universe  of  Sense 
down  to  the  Moon  ;  Gods,  these  too,  visible,  secondary,  sequent  upon 


TIL  5.  6] 


LOVE 


61 


the  Gods  of  the  Intellectual  Realm,  consonant  with  Them,  held  about 
Them,  as  the  radiance  about  the  star. 

What,  then,  are  these  spirits  ? 

A  Celestial  is  the  representative  generated  by  each  Soul  when  it 
enters  the  Kosmos. 

And  why,  by  a  Soul  entering  the  Kosmos  ? 

Because  Soul  pure  of  the  Kosmos  generates  not  a  Celestial  Spirit 
but  a  God  ;  hence  it  is  that  we  have  spoken  of  Love,  offspring  of 
Aphrodite  the  Pure  Soul,  as  a  God. 

But,  first  what  prevents  every  one  of  the  Celestials  from  being  an 
Eros,  a  Love  ?  And  why  are  they  not  untouched  by  Matter  like  the 
Gods  ? 

On  the  first  question  : — Every  Celestial  bom  in  the  striving  of  the 
Soul  towards  the  good  and  beautiful  is  an  Eros  ;  and  all  the  Souls  within 
the  Kosmos  do  engender  this  Celestial ;  but  other  Spirit-Beings,  equally 
bom  from  the  Soul  of  the  All,  but  by  other  faculties  of  that  Soul,  have 
other  functions  ;  they  are  for  the  direct  service  of  the  All,  and  administer 
particular  things  to  the  purpose  of  the  Universe  entire.  The  Soul  of  the 
All  must  be  adequate  to  all  that  is  and  therefore  must  bring  into  being 
spirit  powers  serviceable  not  merely  in  one  function  but  to  its  entire 
charge. 

But  what  participation  can  the  Celestials  have  in  Matter,  and  in 
what  Matter  ? 

Certainly  none  in  bodily  Matter ;  that  would  make  them  simply 
living  things  of  the  order  of  sense.  And  if,  even,  they  are  to  invest 
themselves  in  bodies  of  air  or  of  fire,  the  nature  must  have  already  been 
altered  before  they  could  have  any  contact  with  the  corporeal.  The 
Pure  does  not  mix,  unmediated,  with  body— though  many  think  that  the 
Celestial-Kind,  of  its  very  essence,  comports  a  body  aerial  or  of  fire. 

But  (since  this  is  not  so)  why  should  one  order  of  Celestial  descend 
to  body  and  another  not  ?  The  difference  implies  the  existence  of  some 
cause  or  medium  working  upon  such  as  thus  descend.  What  would  con¬ 
stitute  such  a  medium  ? 

We  are  forced  to  assume  that  there  is  a  Matter  of  the  Intellectual 


62 


PLOTINUS 


Order,  and  that  Beings  partaking  of  it  are  thereby  enabled  to  enter  into 
the  lower  Matter,  the  corporeal. 

7- 

This  is  the  significance  of  Plato’s  account  of  the  birth  of  Love. 

The  drunkenness  of  the  father  Poros  or  Possession  is  caused  by 
Nectar,  wine  yet  not  existing  ”  ;  Love  is  born  before  the  realm  of 
sense  has  come  into  being  :  Penia  (Poverty)  had  participation  in  the 
Intellectual  before  the  lower  image  of  that  divine  Realm  had  appeared  ) 
she  dwelt  in  that  Sphere,  but  as  a  mingled  being  consisting  partly  of  Form 
but  partly  also  of  that  indetermination  which  belongs  to  the  Soul  before 
she  attains  the  Good  and  when  all  her  knowledge  of  Reality  is  a  fore¬ 
intimation  veiled  by  the  indeterminate  and  unordered  :  in  this  state 

(of  fore-feeling  and  desiring  The  Good)  Poverty  brings  forth  the  Hypos¬ 
tasis,  Love. 

This,  then,  is  a  union  of  Reason  with  something  that  is  not  Reason 
but  a  mere  indeterminate  striving  in  a  being  not  yet  illuminated  :  the 
offspring  Love,  therefore,  is  not  perfect,  not  self-sufficient,  but  unfinished, 
bearing  the  signs  of  its  parentage,  the  undirected  striving  and  the  self- 
sufficient  Reason.  This  offspring  is  a  Reason-Principle  but  not  purely  so  ; 
for  it  includes  within  itself  an  aspiration  ill-defined,  unreasoned,  unlimited 
it  can  never  be  sated  as  long  as  it  contains  within  itself  that  element 
of  the  Indeterminate.  Love,  then,  clings  to  the  Soul,  from  which  it 
sprung  as  from  the  principle  of  its  Being,  but  it  is  lessened  by  including 
an  element  of  the  Reason-Principle  which  did  not  remain  self-concen¬ 
trated  but  blended  with  the  indeterminate,  not,  it  is  true,  by  immediate 
contact  but  through  its  emanation.  Love,  therefore,  is  like  a  goad  ;  it 
is  without  resource  in  itself  ;  even  winning  its  end,  it  is  poor  again. 

It  cannot  be  satisfied  because  a  thing  of  mixture  never  can  be  so : 
true  satisfaction  is  only  for  what  has  its  plenitude  in  its  own  being  ; 
where  craving  is  due  to  an  inborn  deficiency,  there  may  be  satisfaction  at 
some  given  moment  but  it  does  not  last.  Love,  then,  has  on  the  one  side 
the  powerlessness  of  its  native  inadequacy,  on  the  other  the  resource 
inherited  from  the  Reason-Kind. 


in.  5. 7] 


LOVE 


63 


Such  must  be  the  nature  and  such  the  origin  of  the  entire  Spirit 
Order,  each — ^like  its  fellow,  Love — ^has  its  appointed  sphere,  is  powerful 
there,  and  wholly  devoted  to  it,  and,  like  Love,  none  is  ever  complete 
of  itself  but  always  straining  towards  some  good  which  it  sees  in  things 
of  the  partial  sphere. 

We  understand,  now,  why  good  men  have  no  other  Love — no  other 
Eros  of  life — than  that  for  the  Absolute  and  Authentic  Good,  and  never 
follow  the  random  attractions  known  to  those  ranged  under  the  lower 
Spirit  Kind. 

Each  human  being  is  set  under  his  own  Spirit-Guides,  but  this  is 
mere  blank  possession  when  they  ignore  their  own  and  live  by  some 
other  spirit  adopted  by  them  as  more  closely  attuned  to  the  operative 
part  of  the  Soul  in  them.  Those  that  go  after  evil  are  natures  that  have 
merged  all  the  Love-Principles  within  them  in  the  evil  desires  springing 
in  their  hearts  and  allowed  the  right  reason,  which  belongs  to  our  kind, 
to  fall  under  the  spell  of  false  ideas  from  another  source. 

All  the  natural  Loves,  all  that  serve  the  ends  of  Nature,  are  good  ; 
in  a  lesser  Soul,  inferior  in  rank  and  in  scope ;  in  the  greater  Soul,  superior ; 
but  all  belong  to  the  order  of  Being.  Those  forms  of  Love  that  do  not 
serve  the  purposes  of  Nature  are  merely  accidents  attending  on  perver¬ 
sion  :  in  no  sense  are  they  Real-Beings  or  even  manifestations  of  any 
Reality  ;  for  they  are  no  true  issue  of  Soul ;  they  are  merely  accompani¬ 
ments  of  a  spiritual  flaw  which  the  Soul  automatically  exhibits  in  the 
total  of  disposition  and  conduct. 

In  a  word ;  all  that  is  truly  good  in  a  Soul  acting  to  the  purposes 
of  nature  and  within  its  appointed  order,  all  this  is  Real-Being  :  anything 
else  is  alien,  no  act  of  the  Soul,  but  merely  something  that  happens  to  it ; 
a  parallel  may  be  found  in  false  mentation,  notions  behind  which  there 
is  no  reality  as  there  is  in  the  case  of  authentic  ideas,  the  eternal,  the 
strictly  defined,  in  which  there  is  at  once  an  act  of  true  knowing,  a  truly 
knowable  object  and  authentic  existence — and  this  not  merely  in  the 
Absolute,  but  also  in  the  particular  being  that  is  occupied  by  the  authen¬ 
tically  knowable  and  by  the  Intellectual-Principle  manifest  in  every  several 
form. 


64 


PLOTINUS 


In  each  particular  human  being  we  must  admit  the  existence  of  the 
authentic  Intellective  Act  and  of  the  authentically  knowable  object— 
though  not  as  wholly  merged  into  our  being,  since  we  are  not  these  in 
the  absolute  and  not  exclusively  these — and  hence  our  longing  for 
absolute  things  ;  it  is  the  expression  of  our  intellective  activities  :  if  we 
sometimes  care  for  the  partial,  that  affection  is  not  direct  but  accidental, 
like  our  knowledge  that  a  given  triangular  figure  is  made  up  of  two 
right  angles  because  the  absolute  triangle  is  so. 

8. 

But  what  are  we  to  understand  by  this  Zeus  with  the  garden  into 
which,  we  are  told,  Poros  or  Wealth  entered  ?  And  what  is  the  garden  ? 

We  have  seen  that  the  Aphrodite  of  the  Myth  is  the  Soul  and  that 
Poros,  Wealth,  is  the  Reason-Principle  of  the  Universe  :  we  have  still 
to  explain  Zeus  and  his  garden. 

We  cannot  take  Zeus  to  be  the  Soul,  which  we  have  agreed  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  Aphrodite. 

Plato,  who  must  be  our  guide  in  this  question,  speaks  in  the  Phaedrus 
of  this  God,  Zeus,  as  the  Great  Leader — though  elsewhere  he  seems  to 
rank  him  as  one  of  three— but  in  the  Philebus  he  speaks  more  plainly 
when  he  says  that  there  is  in  Zeus  not  only  a  royal  Soul,  but  also  a  royal 
Intellect. 

As  a  mighty  Intellect  and  Soul,  he  must  be  a  principle  of  Cause  ; 
he  must  be  the  highest  for  several  reasons  but  especially  because  to  be 
King  and  Leader  is  to  be  the  chief  cause  :  Zeus  then  is  the  Intellectual 
Principle.  Aphrodite,  his  daughter,  issue  of  him,  dwelling  with  him, 
will  be  Soul,  her  very  name  Aphrodite  (=the  habra,  delicate)  indicating 
the  beauty  and  gleam  and  innocence  and  delicate  grace  of  the  Soul. 

And  if  we  take  the  male  gods  to  represent  the  Intellectual  Powers 
and  the  female  gods  to  be  their  souls— to  every  Intellectual  Principle  its 
companion  Soul— we  are  forced,  thus  also,  to  make  Aphrodite  the  Soul 
of  Zeus  ;  and  the  identification  is  confirmed  by  Priests  and  Theologians 
who  consider  Aphrodite  and  Hera  one  and  the  same  and  call  Aphrodite's 
star  (“  Venus  ”)  the  star  of  Hera. 


111.5.9] 


LOVE 


65 


9- 

This  Poros,  Possession,  then,  is  the  Reason-Principle  of  all  that  exists 
in  the  Intellectual  Realm  and  in  the  supreme  Intellect ;  but  being  more 
diffused,  kneaded  out  as  it  were,  it  must  touch  Soul,  be  in  Soul,  (as  the 
next  lower  principle). 

For,  all  that  lies  gathered  in  the  Intellect  is  native  to  it :  nothing 
enters  from  without ;  but  “  Poros  intoxicated  ”  is  some  Power  deriving 
satisfaction  outside  itself  ;  what,  then,  can  we  understand  by  this 
member  of  the  Supreme  filled  with  Nectar  but  a  Reason-Principle  falling 
from  a  loftier  essence  to  a  lower  ?  This  means  that  the  Reason-Principle 
upon  “  the  birth  of  Aphrodite  ”  left  the  Intellectual  for  the  Soul,  breaking 
into  the  garden  of  Zeus. 

A  garden  is  a  place  of  beauty  and  a  glory  of  wealth  :  all  the  loveli¬ 
ness  that  Zeus  maintains  takes  its  splendour  from  the  Reason-Principle 
within  him  ;  for  all  this  beauty  is  the  radiation  of  the  Divine  Intellect 
upon  the  Divine  Soul,  which  it  has  penetrated.  What  could  the  Garden 
of  Zeus  indicate  but  the  images  of  his  Being  and  the  splendours  of  his 
glory  ?  And  what  could  these  divine  splendours  and  beauties  be  but  the 
Ideas  streaming  from  him  ? 

These  Reason-Principles— this  Poros  who  is  the  lavishness,  the 
abundance  of  Beauty — are  at  one  and  are  made  manifest ;  this  is  the 
Nectar-drunkenness.  For  the  Nectar  of  the  gods  can  be  no  other  than 
what  the  god-nature  essentially  demands ;  and  this  is  the  Reason  pouring 
down  from  the  divine  Mind. 

The  Intellectual  Principle  possesses  Itself  to  satiety,  but  there 
is  no  “  drunken  ”  abandonment  in  this  possession  which  brings 
nothing  alien  to  it.  But  the  Reason-Principle  as  its  offspring,  a 
later  hypostasis — is  already  a  separate  Being  and  established  in 
another  Realm,  and  so  is  said  to  lie  in  the  garden  of  this  Zeus 
who  is  divine  Mind  )  and  this  lying  in  the  garden  takes  place  at  the 
moment  when,  in  our  way  of  speaking.  Aphrodite  enters  the  realm 

of  Being. 


K 


66 


PLOTINUS 


10. 

“  Our  way  of  speaking  " — for  myths,  if  they  are  to  serve  their  pur¬ 
pose,  must  necessarily  import  time-distinctions  into  their  subject  and 
will  often  present  as  separate.  Powers  which  exist  in  unity  but  differ  in 
rank  and  faculty  ;  they  will  relate  the  births  of  the  unbegotten  and  dis¬ 
criminate  where  all  is  one  substance  ;  the  truth  is  conveyed  in  the  only 
manner  possible,  it  is  left  to  our  good  sense  to  bring  all  together  again. 

On  this  principle  we  have,  here.  Soul  (successively)  dwelling  with 
the  divine  Intelligence,  breaking  away  from  it,  and  yet  again  being  filled 
to  satiety  with  the  divine  Ideas — the  beautiful  abounding  in  all  plenty, 
so  that  every  splendour  become  manifest  in  it  with  the  images  of  whatever 
is  lovely — Soul  which,  taken  as  one  all,  is  Aphrodite,  while  in  it  may  be 
distinguished  the  Reason-Principles  summed  under  the  names  of  Plenty 
and  Possession,  produced  by  the  downflow  of  the  Nectar  of  the  over 
realm.  The  splendours  contained  in  Soul  are  thought  of  as  the  garden 
of  Zeus  with  reference  to  their  existing  within  Life  ;  and  Poros  sleeps  in 
this  garden  in  the  sense  of  being  sated  and  heavy  with  its  produce.  Life 
is  eternally  manifest,  an  eternal  existent  among  the  existences,  and  the 
banqueting  of  the  gods  means  no  more  than  that  they  have  their  Being 
in  that  vital  blessedness.  And  Love — ‘  born  at  the  banquet  of  the  gods 
has  of  necessity  been  eternally  in  existence,  for  it  springs  from  the 
intention  of  the  Soul  towards  its  Best,  towards  the  Good  ;  as  long  as  Soul 
has  been.  Love  has  been. 

Still  this  Love  is  of  mixed  quality.  On  the  one  hand  there  is  in  it 
the  lack  which  keeps  it  craving  :  on  the  other,  it  is  not  entirely  destitute  ; 
the  deficient  seeks  more  of  what  it  has,  and  certainly  nothing  absolutely 
void  of  good  would  ever  go  seeking  the  good. 

It  is  said  then  to  spring  from  Poverty  and  Possession  in  the  sense 
that  Lack  and  Aspiration  and  the  Memory  of  the  Ideal  Principles,  all 
present  together  in  the  Soul,  produce  that  Act  towards  The  Good  which 
is  Love.  Its  Mother  is  Poverty,  since  striving  is  for  the  needy ;  and  this 
Poverty  is  Matter,  for  Matter  is  the  wholly  poor  ;  the  very  ambition 
towards  the  good  is  a  sign  of  existing  indetermination  ;  there  is  a  lack 
of  shape  and  of  Reason  in  that  which  must  aspire  towards  the  Good, 


III.  6.1]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


67 


and  the  greater  degree  of  effort  implies  the  lower  depth  of  materiality. 
A  thing  aspiring  towards  the  Good  is  an  Ideal-principle  only  when  the 
striving  (with  attainment)  will  leave  it  still  unchanged  in  Kind  :  when 
it  must  take  in  something  other  than  itself,  its  aspiration  is  the  present¬ 
ment  of  Matter  to  the  incoming  power. 

Thus  Love  is  at  once,  in  some  degree  a  thing  of  Matter  and  at  the 
same  time  a  Celestial,  sprung  of  the  Soul ;  for  Love  lacks  its  Good  but, 
from  its  very  birth,  strives  towards  It. 


SIXTH  TRACTATE 
The  Impassivity  of  the  Unembodied 

I. 

In  our  theory,  feelings  are  not  states  ;  they  are  action  upon  experi¬ 
ence,  action  accompanied  by  judgment :  the  states,  we  hold,  are  seated 
elsewhere  ;  they  may  be  referred  to  the  vitalised  body  ;  the  judgment 
resides  in  the  Soul,  and  is  distinct  from  the  state — for,  if  it  is  not  distinct, 
another  judgment  is  demanded,  one  that  is  distinct,  and,  so,  we  may  be 
sent  back  for  ever. 

Still,  this  leaves  it  undecided  whether  in  the  act  of  judgment  the 
judging  faculty  does  or  does  not  take  to  itself  something  of  its  object. 

If  (as  is  sometimes  asserted)  the  judging  faculty  does  actually 
receive  an  imprint,  then  it  partakes  of  the  state— though  what  are  called 
the  Impressions  may  be  of  quite  another  nature  than  is  supposed  ;  they 
may  be  like  Thought,  that  is  to  say  they  may  be  acts  rather  than  states  ; 
there  may  be,  here  too,  awareness  without  participation. 

For  ourselves,  it  could  never  be  in  our  system — or  in  our  liking 
to  bring  the  Soul  down  to  participation  in  such  modes  and  modifications 
as  the  warmth  and  cold  of  material  frames. 

What  is  known  as  the  Impressionable  faculty  of  the  soul— to  patheti- 
kon— would  need  to  be  identified  :  we  must  satisfy  ourselves  as  to 
whether  this  too,  like  the  Soul  as  a  unity,  is  to  be  classed  as  immune  or, 
on  the  contrary,  as  precisely  the  only  part  susceptible  of  being  affected ; 


68 


PLOTINUS 


this  question,  however,  may  be  held  over  ;  we  proceed  to  examine  its 
preliminaries. 

Even  in  the  superior  phase  of  the  Soul — that  which  precedes  the 
impressionable  faculty  and  any  sensation — how  can  we  reconcile  immunity 
with  the  indwelling  of  vice,  false  notions,  ignorance  ?  Inviolability  ; 
and  yet  likings  and  dislikings,  the  Soul  enjoying,  grieving,  angry,  grudg¬ 
ing,  env3dng,  desiring,  never  at  peace  but  stirring  and  shifting  with  every¬ 
thing  that  confronts  it ! 

If  the  Soul  were  material  and  had  magnitude,  it  would  be  difficult, 
indeed  quite  impossible,  to  make  it  appear  to  be  immune,  unchangeable, 
when  any  of  such  emotions  lodge  in  it.  And  even  considering  it  as  an 
Authentic  Being,  devoid  of  magnitude  and  necessarily  indestructible, 
we  must  be  very  careful  how  we  attribute  any  such  experiences  to  it 
or  we  will  find  ourselves  unconsciously  making  it  subject  to  dissolution. 
If  its  essence  is  a  Number  or  as  we  hold  a  Reason- Principle,  under  neither 
head  could  it  be  susceptible  of  feeling.  We  can  think,  only,  that  it  enter¬ 
tains  unreasoned  reasons  and  experiences  unexperienced,  aU  transmuted 
from  the  material  frames,  foreign  and  recognised  only  by  parallel,  so 
that  it  possesses  in  a  kind  of  non-possession  and  knows  affection  without 
being  affected.  How  this  can  be  demands  enquiry. 


2. 

Let  us  begin  with  virtue  and  vice  in  the  Soul.  What  has  really 
occurred  when,  as  we  say,  vice  is  present  ?  In  speaking  of  extirpating 
evil  and  implanting  goodness,  of  introducing  order  and  beauty  to  replace 
a  former  ugliness,  we  talk  in  terms  of  real  things  in  the  Soul. 

Now  when  we  make  virtue  a  harmony,  and  vice  a  breach  of  harmony, 
we  accept  an  opinion  approved  by  the  ancients  ;  and  the  theory  helps 
us  decidedly  to  our  solution.  For  if  virtue  is  simply  a  natural  concordance 
among  the  phases  of  the  Soul,  and  vice  simply  a  discord,  then  there  is 
no  further  question  of  any  foreign  presence  ;  harmony  would  be  the  result 
of  every  distinct  phase  or  faculty  joining  in,  true  to  itself;  discord 
would  mean  that  not  all  chimed  in  at  their  best  and  truest.  Consider, 
for  example,  the  performers  in  a  choral  dance  ;  they  sing  together 


111.6.2]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


69 


though  each  one  has  his  particular  part,  and  sometimes  one  voice  is 
heard  while  the  others  are  silent ;  and  each  brings  to  the  chorus  some¬ 
thing  of  his  own  ;  it  is  not  enough  that  all  lift  their  voices  together  ; 
each  must  sing,  choicely,  his  own  part  to  the  music  set  for  him.  Exactly 
so  in  the  case  of  the  Soul ;  there  will  be  harmony  when  each  faculty 
performs  its  appropriate  part. 

Yes  :  but  this  very  harmony  constituting  the  virtue  of  the  Soul 
must  depend  upon  a  previous  virtue,  that  of  each  several  faculty  within 
itself  ;  and  before  there  can  be  the  vice  of  discord  there  must  be  the  vice 
of  the  single  parts,  and  these  can  be  bad  only  by  the  actual  presence  of 
vice  as  they  can  be  good  only  by  the  presence  of  virtue.  It  is  true  that 
no  presence  is  affirmed  when  vice  is  identified  with  ignorance  in  the 
reasoning  faculty  of  the  Soul ;  ignorance  is  not  a  positive  thing  ;  but  in 
the  presence  of  false  judgments — ^the  main  cause  of  vice — must  it  not  be 
admitted  that  something  positive  has  entered  into  the  Soul,  something 
perverting  the  reasoning  faculty  ?  So,  the  initiative  faculty  ;  is  it  not, 
itself,  altered  as  one  varies  between  timidity  and  boldness  ?  And  the 
desiring  faculty,  similarly,  as  it  runs  wild  or  accepts  control  ? 

Our  teaching  is  that  when  the  particular  faculty  is  sound  it  performs 
the  reasonable  act  of  its  essential  nature,  obeying  the  reasoning  faculty 
in  it  which  derives  from  the  Intellectual  Principle  and  communicates  to 
the  rest.  And  this  following  of  reason  is  not  the  acceptance  of  an  imposed 
shape  ;  it  is  like  using  the  eyes  ;  the  Soul  sees  by  its  act,  that  of  looking 
towards  reason.  The  faculty  of  sight  in  the  performance  of  its  act  is 
essentially  what  it  was  when  it  lay  latent ,  its  act  is  not  a  change  in  it, 
but  simply  its  entering  into  the  relation  that  belongs  to  its  essential 
character  ;  it  knows— that  is,  sees— without  suffering  any  change  :  so, 
precisely,  the  reasoning  phase  of  the  Soul  stands  towards  the  Intellectual 
Principle  ;  this  it  sees  by  its  very  essence  ;  this  vision  is  its  knowing 
faculty ;  it  takes  in  no  stamp,  no  impression ;  all  that  enters  it  is  the  object 
of  vision — possessed,  once  more,  without  possession  ;  it  possesses  by 
the  fact  of  knowing  but  "  without  possession  in  the  sense  that  there  is 
no  incorporation  of  anything  left  behind  by  the  object  of  vision,  like  the 
impression  of  the  seal  on  sealing-wax. 


70 


PLOTINUS 


And  note  that  we  do  not  appeal  to  stored-up  impressions  to  account 
for  memory  :  we  think  of  the  mind  awakening  its  powers  in  such  a  way 
as  to  possess  something  not  present  to  it. 

Very  good  :  but  is  it  not  different  before  and  after  acquiring  the 
memory  ? 

Be  it  so  ;  but  it  has  suffered  no  change — unless  we  are  to  think  of  the 
mere  progress  from  latency  to  actuality  as  change — nothing  has  been 
introduced  into  the  mind  ;  it  has  simply  achieved  the  Act  dictated  by 
its  nature. 

It  is  universally  true  that  the  characteristic  Act  of  immaterial 
entities  is  performed  without  any  change  in  them — otherwise  they  would 
at  last  be  worn  away — theirs  is  the  Act  of  the  unmoving ;  where  act 
means  suffering  change,  there  is  Matter  :  an  immaterial  Being  would 
have  no  ground  of  permanence  if  its  very  Act  changed  it. 

Thus  in  the  case  of  Sight,  the  seeing  faculty  is  in  act  but  the  material 
organ  alone  suffers  change :  judgements,  (true  or  false,  are  not  changes 
within  the  Soul ;  they)  are  similar  to  visual  experiences. 

But  how  explain  the  alternation  of  timidity  and  daring  in  the  initia¬ 
tive  faculty  ? 

Timidity  would  come  by  the  failure  to  look  towards  the  Reason- 
Principle  or  by  looking  towards  some  inferior  phase  of  it  or  by  some 
defect  in  the  organs  of  action — some  lack  or  flaw  in  the  bodily  equipment 
—or  by  outside  prevention  of  the  natural  act  or  by  the  mere  absence  of 
adequate  stimulus  :  boldness  would  arise  from  the  reverse  conditions  : 
neither  implies  any  change,  or  even  any  experience,  in  the  Soul. 

So  with  the  faculty  of  desire  :  what  we  call  loose  living  is  caused  by 
its  acting  unaccompanied  j  it  has  done  all  of  itself  ,■  the  other  faculties, 
whose  business  it  is  to  make  their  presence  felt  in  control  and  to  point 
the  right  way,  have  lain  in  abeyance  ;  the  Seer  in  the  Soul  was  occupied 
elsewhere,  for,  though  not  always  at  least  sometimes,  it  has  leisure  for  a 
certain  degree  of  contemplation  of  other  concerns. 

Often,  moreover,  the  vice  of  the  desiring  faculty  wiU  be  merely 
some  ill  condition  of  the  body,  and  its  virtue,  bodily  soundness  ;  thus 
there  would  again  be  no  question  of  anything  imported  into  the  Soul. 


111.6.3]  THE  IMPASSIVITY  OF  THE  UNEMBODIED 


71 


3. 

But  how  do  we  explain  likings  and  aversions  ?  Sorrow,  too,  and 
anger  and  pleasure,  desire  and  fear — are  these  not  changes,  affectings, 
present  and  stirring  within  the  Soul  ? 

This  question  cannot  be  ignored.  To  deny  that  changes  take  place 
and  are  intensely  felt  is  in  sharp  contradiction  to  obvious  facts. 
But,  while  we  recognise  this,  we  must  make  very  sure  what  it  is  that 
changes.  To  represent  the  Soul  or  Mind  as  being  the  seat  of  these 
emotions  is  not  far  removed  from  making  it  blush  or  turn  pale  ;  it  is 
to  forget  that  while  the  Soul  or  Mind  is  the  means,  the  effect  takes  place 
in  the  distinct  organism,  the  animated  body. 

At  the  idea  of  disgrace,  the  shame  is  in  the  Soul ;  but  the  body  is 
occupied  by  the  Soul — not  to  trouble  about  words — is,  at  any  rate,  close 
to  it  and  very  different  from  soulless  matter  ;  and  so,  is  affected  in  the 
blood,  mobile  in  its  nature.  Fear  begins  in  the  mind  ;  the  pallor  is  simply 
the  withdrawal  of  the  blood  inwards.  So  in  pleasure,  the  elation  is 
mental,  but  makes  itself  felt  in  the  body  ;  the  purely  mental  phase  has 
not  reached  the  point  of  sensation  :  the  same  is  true  of  pain.  So  desire 
is  ignored  in  the  Soul  where  the  impulse  takes  its  rise  ;  what  comes 
outward  thence,  the  Sensibility  knows. 

When  we  speak  of  the  Soul  or  Mind  being  moved — as  in  desire, 
reasoning,  judging — ^we  do  not  mean  that  it  is  driven  into  its  act ;  these 
movements  are  its  own  acts. 

In  the  same  way  when  we  call  Life  a  movement  we  have  no  idea 
of  a  changing  substance ;  the  naturally  appropriate  act  of  each  member  of 
the  living  thing  makes  up  the  Life,  which  is,  therefore,  not  a  shifting  thing. 

To  bring  the  matter  to  the  point :  put  it  that  life,  tendency,  are  no 
changements  ;  that  memories  are  not  forms  stamped  upon  the  mind, 
that  notions  are  not  of  the  nature  of  impressions  on  sealing-wax  ;  we 
thence  draw  the  general  conclusion  that  in  all  such  states  and  movements 
the  Soul,  or  Mind,  is  unchanged  in  substance  and  in  essence,  that  virtue 
and  vice  are  not  something  imported  into  the  Soul — as  heat  and  cold, 
blackness  or  whiteness  are  importations  into  body — but  that,  in  all  this 
relation,  matter  and  spirit  are  exactly  and  comprehensively  contraries. 


72 


PLOTINUS 


4- 

We  have,  however,  still  to  examine  what  is  called  the  affective  phase 
of  the  Soul.  This  has,  no  doubt,  been  touched  upon  above  where  we  dealt 
with  the  passions  in  general  as  grouped  about  the  initiative  phase  of  the 
Soul  and  the  desiring  faculty  in  its  effort  to  shape  things  to  its  choice  : 
but  more  is  required  ;  we  must  begin  by  forming  a  clear  idea  of  what  is 
meant  by  this  affective  faculty  of  the  Soul. 

In  general  terms  it  means  the  centre  about  which  we  recognise  the 
affections  to  be  grouped  ;  and  by  affections  we  mean  those  states  upon 
which  follow  pleasure  and  pain. 

Now  among  these  affections  we  must  distinguish.  Some  are  pivoted 
upon  judgements  ;  thus,  a  Man  judging  his  death  to  be  at  hand  may  feel 
fear ;  foreseeing  some  fortunate  turn  of  events,  he  is  happy  :  the 
opinion  lies  in  one  sphere  ;  the  affection  is  stirred  in  another.  Some¬ 
times  the  affections  take  the  lead  and  automatically  bring  in  the  notion 
which  thus  becomes  present  to  the  appropriate  faculty  :  but  as  we  have 
explained,  an  act  of  opinion  does  not  introduce  any  change  into  the  Soul 
or  Mind  :  what  happens  is  that  from  the  notion  of  some  impending  evil 
is  produced  the  quite  separate  thing,  fear,  and  this  fear,  in  turn,  becomes 
known  in  that  part  of  the  Mind  which  is  said  under  such  circumstances 
to  harbour  fear. 

But  what  is  the  action  of  this  fear  upon  the  Mind  ? 

The  general  answer  is  that  it  sets  up  trouble  and  confusion  before 
an  evil  anticipated.  It  should,  however,  be  quite  clear  that  the  Soul  or 
Mind  is  the  seat  of  all  imaginative  representation — both  the  higher 
representation  known  as  opinion  or  judgement  and  the  lower  representa¬ 
tion  which  is  not  so  much  a  judgement  as  a  vague  notion  unattended  by 
discrimination,  something  resembling  the  action  by  which,  as  is  believed, 
the  “  Nature  ”  of  common  speech  produces,  unconsciously,  the  objects  of 
the  partial  sphere.  It  is  equally  certain  that  in  all  that  follows  upon 
the  mental  act  or  state,  the  disturbance,  confined  to  the  body,  belongs 
to  the  sense-order  ;  trembling,  pallor,  inability  to  speak,  have  obviously 
nothing  to  do  with  the  spiritual  portion  of  the  being.  The  Soul,  in  fact, 
would  have  to  be  described  as  corporeal  if  it  were  the  seat  of  such 


111.6.5]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


73 


symptoms  :  besides,  in  that  case  the  trouble  would  not  even  reach  the 
body  since  the  only  transmitting  principle,  oppressed  by  sensation, 
jarred  out  of  itself,  would  be  inhibited. 

None  the  less,  there  is  an  affective  phase  of  the  Soul  or  Mind  and 
this  is  not  corporeal ;  it  can  be,  only,  some  kind  of  Ideal-form. 

Now  Matter  is  the  one  field  of  the  desiring  faculty,  as  of  the  principles 
of  nutrition  growth  and  engendering,  which  are  root  and  spring  to  desire 
and  to  every  other  affection  known  to  this  Ideal-form,  No  Ideal-form 
can  be  the  victim  of  disturbance  or  be  in  any  way  affected  :  it  remains 
in  tranquillity ;  only  the  Matter  associated  with  it  can  be  affected  by 
any  state  or  experience  induced  by  the  movement  which  its  mere  presence 
suffices  to  set  up.  Thus  the  vegetal  Principle  induces  vegetal  life  but  it 
does  not,  itself,  pass  through  the  processes  of  vegetation  ;  it  gives  growth 
but  it  does  not  grow  ;  in  no  movement  which  it  originates  is  it  moved 
with  the  motion  it  induces ;  it  is  in  perfect  repose,  or,  at  least,  its 
movement,  really  its  act,  is  utterly  different  from  what  it  causes 
elsewhere. 

The  nature  of  an  Ideal-form  is  to  be,  of  itself,  an  activity  ;  it 
operates  by  its  mere  presence  :  it  is  as  if  Melody  itself  plucked  the  strings. 
The  affective  phase  of  the  Soul  or  Mind  will  be  the  operative  cause  of 
all  affection  ;  it  originates  the  movement  either  under  the  stimulus  of 
some  sense-presentment  or  independently — and  it  is  a  question  to  be 
examined  whether  the  judgement  leading  to  the  movement  operates 
from  above  or  not — but  the  affective  phase  itself  remains  unmoved  like 
Melody  dictating  music.  The  causes  originating  the  movement  may  be 
likened  to  the  musician  ;  what  is  moved  is  like  the  strings  of  his  instru¬ 
ment,  and,  once  more,  the  Melodic  Principle  itself  is  not  affected,  but 
only  the  strings,  though,  however  much  the  musician  desired  it,  he  could 
not  pluck  the  strings  except  under  dictation  from  the  principle  of  Melody. 

5-  ^  . 

But  why  have  we  to  call  in  Philosophy  to  make  the  Soul  immune 

if  it  is  thus  (like  the  Melodic  Principle  of  our  illustration)  immune  from 
the  beginning  ? 


74 


PLOTINUS 


Because  representations  attack  it  at  what  we  call  the  affective  phase 
and  cause  a  resulting  experience,  a  disturbance,  to  which  disturbance  is 
joined  the  image  of  threatened  evil :  this  amounts  to  an  affection  and 
Reason  seeks  to  extinguish  it,  to  ban  it  as  destructive  to  the  well-being 
of  the  Soul  which  by  the  mere  absence  of  such  a  condition  is  immune, 
the  one  possible  cause  of  affection  not  being  present. 

Take  it  that  some  such  affections  have  engendered  appearances 
presented  before  the  Soul  or  Mind  from  without  but  taken  (for  practical 
purposes)  to  be  actual  experiences  within  it — then  Philosophy’s  task  is 
like  that  of  a  man  who  wishes  to  throw  off  the  shapes  presented  in 
dreams,  and  to  this  end  recalls  to  waking  condition  the  mind  that  is 
breeding  them. 

But  what  can  be  meant  by  the  purification  of  a  Soul  that  has  never 
been  stained  and  by  the  separation  of  the  Soul  from  a  body  to  which  it 
is  essentially  a  stranger  ? 

The  purification  of  the  Soul  is  simply  to  allow  it  to  be  alone  ;  it  is 
pure  when  it  keeps  no  company  ;  when  it  looks  to  nothing  without  itself  ; 
when  it  entertains  no  alien  thoughts — be  the  mode  or  origin  of  such 
notions  or  affections  what  they  may,  a  subject  on  which  we  have  already 
touched — when  it  no  longer  sees  in  the  world  of  image,  much  less  elaborates 
images  into  veritable  affections.  Is  it  not  a  true  purification  to  turn  away 
towards  the  exact  contrary  of  earthly  things  ? 

Separation,  in  the  same  way,  is  the  condition  of  a  soul  no  longer 
entering  into  the  body  to  lie  at  its  mercy  ;  it  is  to  stand  as  a  light,  set 
in  the  midst  of  trouble  but  unperturbed  through  all. 

In  the  particular  case  of  the  affective  phase  of  the  Soul,  purification 
is  its  awakening  from  the  baseless  visions  which  beset  it,  the  refusal  to 
see  them  ;  its  separation  consists  in  limiting  its  descent  towards  the 
lower  and  accepting  no  picture  thence,  and  of  course  in  the  banning  for 
its  part  too  of  all  which  the  higher  Soul  ignores  when  it  has  arisen  from 
the  trouble  storm  and  is  no  longer  bound  to  the  flesh  by  the  chains  of 
sensuality  and  of  multiplicity  but  has  subdued  to  itself  the  body  and  its 
entire  surrounding  so  that  it  holds  sovereignity,  tranquilly,  over  aU. 


III.  6. 6]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


75 


6. 

That  the  Intellectual  Essence,  wholly  of  the  order  of  Ideal-form, 
must  be  taken  as  impassive  has  been  already  established. 

But  Matter  also  is  an  incorporeal,  though  after  a  mode  of  its  own  ; 
we  must  examine,  therefore,  how  this  stands,  whether  it  is  passive,  as  is 
commonly  held,  a  thing  that  can  be  twisted  to  every  shape  and  Kind, 
or  whether  it  too  must  be  considered  impassive  and  in  what  sense  and 
fashion  so.  But  in  engaging  this  question  and  defining  the  nature  of 
matter  we  must  correct  certain  prevailing  errors  about  the  nature  of  the 
Authentic  Existent,  about  JEssence,  about  Being. 

The  Existent — rightly  so  called — is  that  which  has  authentic  exist¬ 
ence,  that,  therefore,  which  is  existent  completely,  and  therefore  again, 
that  which  at  no  point  fails  in  existence.  Having  existence  perfectly,  it 
needs  nothing  to  preserve  it  in  being  ;  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  source 
and  cause  from  which  all  that  appears  to  exist  derives  that  appearance. 
This  admitted,  it  must  of  necessity  be  in  life,  in  a  perfect  life  :  if  it  failed 
it  would  be  more  nearly  the  non-existent  than  the  existent.  But : 
The  Being  thus  indicated  is  Intellect,  is  wisdom  unalloyed.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  determined  and  rounded  off ;  it  is  nothing  potentially  that  is  not 
of  the  same  determined  order,  otherwise  (that  is  if  it  contained  even 
potentially  the  undetermined)  it  would  be  in  default. 

Hence  its  eternity,  its  identity,  its  utter  irreceptivity  and  imper¬ 
meability.  If  it  took  in  anything,  it  must  be  taking  in  something  outside 
itself,  that  is  to  say.  Existence  would  at  last  include  non-existence. 
But  it  must  be  Authentic  Existence  all  through ;  it  must,  therefore, 
present  itself  equipped  from  its  own  stores  with  all  that  makes  up 
Existence  so  that  all  stands  together  and  all  is  one  thing.  The  Existent 
(Real  Being)  must  have  thus  much  of  determination  :  if  it  had  not,  then 
it  could  not  be  the  source  of  the  Intellectual  Principle  and  of  Life  which 
would  be  importations  into  it  originating  in  the  sphere  of  non-Being ; 
and  Real  Being  would  be  lifeless  and  mindless  ;  but  mindlessness  and  life¬ 
lessness  are  the  characteristics  of  non-being  and  must  belong  to  the  lower 
order,  to  the  outer  borders  of  the  existent ;  for  Intellect  and  Life  rise 
from  the  Beyond-Existence  (the  Indefinable  Supreme)— though  Itself 


76 


PLOTINUS 


has  no  need  of  them — and  are  conveyed  from  It  into  the  Authentic 
Existent. 

If  we  have  thus  rightly  described  the  Authentic  Existent,  we  see 
that  it  can  not  be  any  kind  of  body  nor  the  under-stuff  of  body  :  in  such 
entities  the  Being  is  simply  the  existing  of  things  outside  of  Being. 

But  body,  a  non-existence  ?  Matter,  on  which  all  this  universe 
rises,  a  non-existence  ?  Mountain  and  rock,  the  wide  solid  earth,  all 
that  resists,  all  that  can  be  struck  and  driven,  surely  all  proclaims  the 
real  existence  of  the  corporeal  ?  And  how,  it  will  be  asked,  can  we,  on 
the  contrary,  attribute  Being,  and  the  only  Authentic  Being,  to  entities 
like  Soul  and  Intellect,  things  having  no  weight  or  pressure,  yielding  to 
no  force,  offering  no  resistance,  things  not  even  visible  ? 

Yet  even  the  corporeal  realm  witnesses  for  us  ;  the  resting  earth 
has  certainly  a  scantier  share  in  Being  than  belongs  to  what  has  more 
motion  and  less  solidity — and  less  than  belongs  to  its  own  most  upward 
element,  for  fire  begins,  already,  to  flit  up  and  away  outside  of  the  body- 
kind. 

In  fact,  it  appears  to  be  precisely  the  most  self-sufficing  that  bear 
least  hardly,  least  painfully,  on  other  things,  while  the  heaviest  and 
earthiest  bodies — deficient,  falling,  unable  to  bear  themselves  upward — 
these,  by  the  very  down-thrust  due  to  their  feebleness,  offer  the  resistance 
which  belongs  to  the  falling  habit  and  to  the  lack  of  buoyancy.  It  is 
lifeless  objects  that  deal  the  severest  blows  ;  they  hit  hardest  and  hurt 
most  ;  where  there  is  life — that  is  to  say  participation  in  Being — there 
is  beneficence  towards  the  environment,  all  the  greater  as  the  measure 
of  Being  is  fuller. 

Again,  Movement,  which  is  a  sort  of  life  within  bodies,  an  imitation 
of  true  Life,  is  the  more  decided  where  there  is  the  least  of  body — a 
sign  that  the  waning  of  Being  makes  the  object  affected  more  distinctly 
corporeal. 

The  changes  known  as  affections  show  even  more  clearly  that 
where  the  bodily  quality  is  most  pronounced  susceptibility  is  at  its 
intensest — earth  more  susceptible  than  other  elements,  and  these  others 
again  more  or  less  so  in  the  degree  of  their  corporeality  :  sever  the  other 


III.  6. 7]  THE  IMPASSIVITY  OF  THE  UNEMBODIED 


77 


elements  and,  failing  some  preventive  force,  they  join  again  ;  but  earthy 
matter  divided  remains  apart  indefinitely.  Things  whose  nature  repre¬ 
sents  a  diminishment  have  no  power  of  recuperation  after  even  a  slight 
disturbance  and  they  perish  ;  thus  what  has  most  definitely  become  body, 
having  most  closely  approximated  to  non-being  lacks  the  strength  to 
reknit  its  unity  ;  the  heavy  and  violent  crash  of  body  against  body 
works  destruction,  and  weak  is  powerful  against  weak,  non-being  against 
its  like. 

Thus  far  we  have  been  meeting  those  who,  on  the  evidence  of  thrust 
and  resistance,  identify  body  with  real  being  and  find  assurance  of  truth 
in  the  phantasms  that  reach  us  through  the  senses,  those,  in  a  word, 
who,  like  dreamers,  take  for  actualities  the  figments  of  their  sleeping 
vision.  The  sphere  of  sense,  the  Soul  in  its  slumber ;  for  all  of  the  Soul 
that  is  in  body  is  asleep  and  the  true  getting-up  is  not  bodily  but  from 
the  body  :  in  any  movement  that  takes  the  body  with  it  there  is  no 
more  than  a  passage  from  sleep  to  sleep,  from  bed  to  bed  ;  the  veritable 
waking  or  rising  is  from  corporeal  things  ;  for  these,  belonging  to  the 
Kind  directly  opposed  to  Soul,  present  to  it  what  is  directly  opposed  to 
its  essential  existence  ;  their  origin,  their  flux,  and  their  perishing  are 
the  warning  of  their  exclusion  from  the  Kind  whose  Being  is  Authentic. 

7- 

We  are  thus  brought  back  to  the  nature  of  that  underlying  matter 
and  the  things  believed  to  be  based  upon  it ;  investigation  will  show  us 
that  Matter  has  no  reality  and  is  not  capable  of  being  affected. 

Matter  must  be  bodiless — for  body  is  a  later  production,  a  compound 
made  by  Matter  in  conjunction  with  some  other  entity.  Thus  it  is  in¬ 
cluded  among  incorporeal  things  in  the  sense  that  body  is  something 

that  is  neither  Real-Being  nor  Matter. 

Matter  is  not  Soul ;  it  is  not  Intellect,  is  not  Life,  is  no  Ideal-Principle, 
no  Reason-Principle  ;  it  is  no  limit  or  bound,  for  it  is  mere  indetermina¬ 
tion  ;  it  is  not  a  power,  for  what  does  it  produce  ? 

It  lives  on  the  farther  side  of  all  these  categories  and  so  has  no 
title  to  the  name  of  Being.  It  will  be  more  plausibly  called  a  non-being. 


78 


PLOTINUS 


and  this  in  the  sense  not  of  movement  (away  from  Being)  or  station  (in 
Not-Being)  but  of  veritable  Not-Being,  so  that  it  is  no  more  than  the 
image  and  phantasm  of  Mass,  a  bare  aspiration  towards  substantial 
existence  ;  it  is  stationary  but  not  in  the  sense  of  having  position,  it  is 
in  itself  invisible,  eluding  all  effort  to  observe  it,  present  where  no  one 
can  look,  unseen  for  all  our  gazing,  ceaselessly  presenting  contraries  in 
the  things  based  upon  it ;  it  is  large  and  small,  more  and  less,  deficient 
and  excessive  ;  a  phantasm  unabiding  and  yet  unable  to  withdraw — 
not  even  strong  enough  to  withdraw,  so  utterly  has  it  failed  to  accept 
strength  from  the  Intellectual  Principle,  so  absolute  its  lack  of  all 
Being. 

Its  every  utterance,  therefore,  is  a  lie ;  it  pretends  to  be  great  and  it 
is  little,  to  be  more  and  it  is  less  ;  and  the  Existence  with  which  it  masks 
itself  is  no  Existence,  but  a  passing  trick  making  trickery  of  aU  that 
seems  to  be  present  in  it,  phantasms  within  a  phantasm  ;  it  is  like  a 
mirror  showing  things  as  in  itself  when  they  are  reaUy  elsewhere,  filled 
in  appearance  but  actually  empty,  containing  nothing,  pretending 
everything.  Into  it  and  out  of  it  move  mimicries  of  the  Authentic  Exis- 
tents,  images  playing  upon  an  image  devoid  of  Form,  visible  against  it 
by  its  very  formlessness  ;  they  seem  to  modify  it  but  in  reality  effect 
nothing,  for  they  are  ghostly  and  feeble,  have  no  thrust  and  meet  none 
in  Matter  either ;  they  pass  through  it  leaving  no  cleavage,  as  through 
water;  or  they  might  be  compared  to  shapes  projected  so  as  to  make 
some  appearance  upon  what  we  can  know  only  as  the  Void. 

Further :  if  visible  objects  were  of  the  rank  of  the  originals  from 
which  they  have  entered  into  Matter  we  might  believe  Matter  to  be 
really  affected  by  them,  for  we  might  credit  them  with  some  share  of 
the  power  inherent  in  their  Senders  :  but  the  objects  of  our  experiences 
are  of  very  different  virtue  than  the  realities  they  represent,  and  we 
deduce  that  the  seeming  modification  of  matter  by  visible  things  is 
unreal  since  the  visible  thing  itself  is  unreal,  having  at  no  point  any 
simfiarity  with  its  source  and  cause.  Feeble,  in  itself,  a  false  thing  and 
projected  upon  a  falsity,  like  an  image  in  dream  or  against  water  or  on 
a  mirror,  it  can  but  leave  Matter  unaffected  ;  and  even  this  is  saying  too 


111.6.9]  THE  IMPASSIVITY  OF  THE  UNEMBODIED  79 

little,  for  water  and  mirror  do  give  back  a  faithful  image  of  what  presents 
itself  before  them. 

8. 

It  is  a  general  principle  that,  to  be  modified,  an  object  must  be 
opposed  in  faculty,  and  in  quality  to  the  forces  that  enter  and  act  upon  it. 

Thus  where  heat  is  present,  the  change  comes  by  something  that 
chills,  where  damp  by  some  drying  agency  :  we  say  a  subject  is  modified 
when  from  warm  it  becomes  cold,  from  dry  wet. 

A  further  evidence  is  in  our  speaking  of  a  fire  being  burned  out, 
when  it  has  passed  over  into  another  element ;  we  do  not  say  that  the 
Matter  has  been  burned  out :  in  other  words,  modification  affects  what 
is  subject  to  dissolution  ;  the  acceptance  of  modification  is  the  path 
towards  dissolution  ;  susceptibility  to  modification  and  susceptibility 
to  dissolution  go  necessarily  together.  But  Matter  can  never  be  dis¬ 
solved.  What  into  ?  By  what  process  ? 

StiU : — Matter  harbours  heat,  cold,  qualities  beyond  all  count ;  by 
these  it  is  differentiated  ;  it  holds  them  as  if  they  were  of  its  very  sub¬ 
stance  and  they  blend  within  it — since  no  quality  is  found  isolated  to 
itself — Matter  lies  there  as  the  meeting  ground  of  all  these  qualities  with 
their  changes  as  they  act  and  react  in  the  blend  :  how,  then,  can  it  fail 
to  be  modified  in  keeping  ?  The  only  escape  would  be  to  declare  Matter 
utterly  and  for  ever  apart  from  the  qualities  it  exhibits ;  but  the  very 
notion  of  Substance  implies  that  any  and  every  thing  present  in  it  has 
some  action  upon  it. 

9- 

In  answer  : — It  must,  first,  be  noted  that  there  are  a  variety  of 
modes  in  which  an  object  may  be  said  to  be  present  to  another  or  to  exist 
in  another.  There  is  a  “  presence  "  which  acts  by  changing  the  object— 
for  good  or  for  ill— as  we  see  in  the  case  of  bodies,  especially  where  there 
is  life.  But  there  is  also  a  “  presence  ”  which  acts,  towards  good  or  ill, 
with  no  modification  of  the  object,  as  we  have  indicated  in  the  case  of  the 
Soul.  Then  there  is  the  case  represented  by  the  stamping  of  a  design 


8o 


PLOTINUS 


upon  wax,  where  the  "  presence  ”  of  the  added  pattern  causes  no  modi¬ 
fication  in  the  substance  nor  does  its  obliteration  diminish  it.  And  there 
is  the  example  of  Light  whose  presence  does  not  even  bring  change  of 
pattern  to  the  object  illuminated.  A  stone  becoming  cold  does  not  change 
its  nature  in  the  process  ;  it  remains  the  stone  it  was.  A  drawing  does 
not  cease  to  be  a  drawing  for  being  coloured. 

The  intermediary  mass  on  which  these  surface  changes  appear  is 
certainly  not  transmuted  by  them  ;  but  might  there  not  be  a  modification 
of  the  underlying  Matter  ? 

No  :  it  is  impossible  to  think  of  Matter  being  modified  by,  for 
instance,  colour — for,  of  course  we  must  not  talk  of  modification  when 
there  is  no  more  than  a  presence,  or  at  most  a  presenting  of  shape. 

Mirrors  and  transparent  objects,  even  more,  offer  a  close  parallel ; 
they  are  quite  unaffected  by  what  is  seen  in  or  through  them  :  material 
things  are  reflections,  and  the  Matter  on  which  they  appear  is  further 
from  being  affected  than  is  a  mirror.  Heat  and  cold  are  present  in 
Matter,  but  the  Matter  itself  suffers  no  change  of  temperature  :  growing 
hot  and  growing  cold  have  to  do  only  with  quality  ;  a  quality  enters 
and  brings  the  impassible  Substance  under  a  new  state — though,  by  the 
way,  research  into  nature  may  show  that  cold  is  nothing  positive  but 
an  absence,  a  mere  negation.  The  qualities  come  together  into  Matter, 
but  in  most  cases  they  can  have  no  action  upon  each  other  ;  certainly 
there  can  be  none  between  those  of  unlike  scope  :  what  effect,  for  example, 
could  fragrance  have  on  sweetness  or  the  colour-quality  on  the  quality 
of  form,  any  quality  on  another  of  some  unrelated  order  ?  The  illus¬ 
tration  of  the  mirror  may  well  indicate  to  us  that  a  given  substratum 
may  contain  something  quite  distinct  from  itself — even  something 
standing  to  it  as  a  direct  contrary — and  yet  remain  entirely  unaffected 
by  what  is  thus  present  to  it  or  merged  into  it. 

A  thing  can  be  hurt  only  by  something  related  to  it,  and  similarly 
things  are  not  changed  or  modified  by  any  chance  presence  :  modification 
comes  by  contrary  acting  upon  contrary  ;  things  merely  different  leave 
each  other  as  they  were.  Such  modification  by  a  direct  contrary  can 
obviously  not  occur  in  an  order  of  things  to  which  there  is  no  contrary  i 


III.  6.  lo]  ^  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied  8i 

Matter,  therefore  (the  mere  absence  of  Reality)  cannot  be  modified  :  any 
modification  that  takes  place  can  occur  only  in  some  compound  of  Matter 
and  reality,  or,  speaking  generally,  in  some  agglomeration  of  actual 
things.  The  Matter  itself — ^isolated,  quite  apart  from  all  else,  utterly 
simplex — must  remain  immune,  untouched  in  the  midst  of  all  the  inter¬ 
acting  agencies ;  just  as  when  people  fight  within  their  four  walls,  the 
house  and  the  air  in  it  remain  without  part  in  the  turmoil. 

We  may  take  it,  then,  that  while  all  the  qualities  and  entities  that 
appear  upon  Matter  group  to  produce  each  the  effect  belonging  to  its 
nature,  yet  Matter  itself  remains  immune,  even  more  definitely  immune 
than  any  of  those  qualities  entering  into  it  which,  not  being  contraries, 
are  not  affected  by  each  other. 


10. 

Further  : — If  Matter  were  susceptible  of  modification,  it  must  acquire 
something  by  the  incoming  of  the  new  state  ;  it  will  either  adopt  that 
state,  or,  at  least,  it  will  be  in  some  way  different  from  what  it  was. 
Now  upon  this  first  incoming  quality  suppose  a  second  to  supervene  ;  the 
recipient  is  no  longer  Matter  but  a  modification  of  Matter  :  this  second 
quality,  perhaps,  departs  but  it  has  acted  and  therefore  leaves  some¬ 
thing  of  itself  after  it ;  the  substratum  is  still  further  altered.  This 
process  proceeding,  the  substratum  ends  by  becoming  something  quite 
different  from  Matter  ;  it  becomes  a  thing  settled  in  many  modes  and 
many  shapes  ;  at  once  it  is  debarred  from  being  the  all-recipient ;  it  will 
have  closed  the  entry  against  many  incomers.  In  other  words,  the 
Matter  is  no  longer  there  :  Matter  is  destructible. 

No  :  if  there  is  to  be  a  Matter  at  all,  it  must  be  always  identically 
as  it  has  been  from  the  beginning  :  to  speak  of  Matter  as  changing  is 
to  speak  of  it  as  not  being  Matter. 

Another  consideration  :  it  is  a  general  principle  that  a  thing  chang¬ 
ing  must  remain  within  its  constitutive  Idea  so  that  the  alteration 
is  only  in  the  accidents  and  not  in  the  essential  thing ;  the  changing 
object  must  retain  this  fundamental  permanence,  and  the  permanent 
substance  cannot  be  the  member  of  it  which  accepts  modification. 


M 


82 


PLOTINUS 


Therefore  there  are  only  two  possibilities  :  the  first,  that  Matter 
itself  changes  and  so  ceases  to  be  itself,  the  second  that  it  never  ceases 
to  be  itself  and  therefore  never  changes. 

We  may  be  answered  that  it  does  not  change  in  its  character  as 
Matter  :  but  no  one  could  tell  us  in  what  other  character  it  changes  ; 
and  we  have  the  admission  that  the  Matter  in  itself  is  not  subject  to 
change. 

Just  as  the  Ideal  Principles  stand  immutably  in  their  essence — 
which  consists  precisely  in  their  permanence — so,  since  the  essence  of 
Matter  consists  in  its  being  Matter  (the  substratum  to  all  material  things) 
it  must  be  permanent  in  this  character  ;  because  it  is  Matter,  it  is  im¬ 
mutable.  In  the  Intellectual  realm  we  have  the  immutable  Idea  ;  here 
we  have  Matter,  itself  similarly  immutable. 


II. 

I  think,  in  fact,  that  Plato  had  this  in  mind  where  he  justly  speaks 
of  the  Images  of  Real  Exist ents  "  entering  and  passing  out  ”  :  these 
particular  words  are  not  used  idly  :  he  wishes  us  to  grasp  the  precise 
nature  of  the  relation  between  Matter  and  the  Ideas. 

The  difficulty  on  this  point  is  not  really  that  which  presented  itself 
to  most  of  our  predecessors — how  the  Ideas  enter  into  Matter — it  is 
rather  the  mode  of  their  presence  in  it. 

It  is  in  fact  strange  at  sight  that  Matter  should  remain  itself  intact, 
unaffected  by  Ideal-forms  present  within  it,  especially  seeing  that  these 
are  affected  by  each  other.  It  is  surprising,  too,  that  the  entrant  Forms 
should  regularly  expel  preceding  shapes  and  qualities,  and  that  the  modi¬ 
fication  (which  cannot  touch  Matter)  should  affect  what  is  a  compound 
(of  Idea  with  Matter)  and  this,  again,  not  at  haphazard  but  precisely 
where  there  is  need  of  the  incoming  or  outgoing  of  some  certain  Ideal- 
form,  the  compound  being  deficient  through  the  absence  of  a  particular 
principle  whose  presence  will  complete  it. 

But  the  reason  is  that  the  fundamental  nature  of  Matter  can  take 
no  increase  by  anything  entering  it,  and  no  decrease  by  any  withdrawal ; 
what  from  the  beginning  it  was,  it  remains.  It  is  not  like  those  things 


111.6. 1 2j  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


83 


whose  lack  is  merely  that  of  arrangement  and  order  which  can  be  supplied 
without  change  of  substance  as  when  we  dress  or  decorate  something 
bare  or  ugly. 

But  where  the  bringing  to  order  must  cut  through  to  the  very 
nature,  the  base  original  must  be  transmuted  :  it  can  leave  ugliness  for 
beauty  only  by  a  change  of  substance.  Matter,  then,  thus  brought  to 
order  must  lose  its  own  nature  in  the  supreme  degree  unless  its  baseness 
is  an  accidental :  if  it  is  base  in  the  sense  of  being  Baseness  the  Absolute, 
it  could  never  participate  in  order,  and  if  evil  in  the  sense  of  being  Evil 
the  Absolute,  it  could  never  participate  in  good. 

We  conclude  that  Matter’s  participation  in  Idea  is  not  by  way  of 
modification  within  itself ;  the  process  is  very  different ;  it  is  a  bare 
seeming.  Perhaps  we  have  here  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  as  to  how 
Matter,  essentially  evil,  can  be  reaching  towards  The  Good  ;  there  would 
be  (in  this  “  seeming  ”)  no  such  participation  as  would  destroy  its 
essential  nature.  Given  this  mode  of  pseudo-participation — in  which 
Matter  would,  as  we  say,  retain  its  nature,  unchanged,  always  being 
what  it  has  essentially  been — there  is  no  longer  any  reason  to  wonder  as 
to  how,  while  essentially  evil,  it  yet  participates  in  Idea  :  for,  by  this 
mode,  it  does  not  abandon  its  own  character  :  participation  is  the  law, 
but  it  participates  only  just  so  far  as  its  essence  allows.  Under  a  mode 
of  participation  which  allows  it  to  remain  on  its  own  footing,  its  essential 
nature  stands  none  the  less,  whatsoever  the  Idea,  within  that  limit,  may 
communicate  to  it :  it  is  by  no  means  the  less  evil  for  remaining  immut¬ 
ably  in  its  own  order.  If  it  had  authentic  participation  in  The  Good 
and  were  veritably  changed,  it  would  not  be  essentially  evil. 

In  a  word,  when  we  call  Matter  evil  we  are  right  only  if  we  mean 
that  it  is  not  amenable  to  modification  by  The  Good  ;  but  that  means 
simply  that  it  is  subject  to  no  modification  whatever. 


12. 

This  is  Plato’s  conception  :  to  him  participation  does  not,  in  the 
case  of  Matter,  comport  any  such  presence  of  an  Ideal  form  in  a  Sub¬ 
stance  to  be  shaped  by  it  as  would  produce  one  compound  thing  made 


84 


PLOTINUS 


up  of  the  two  elements  changing  at  the  same  moment,  merging  into  one 
another,  modified  each  by  the  other. 

In  his  haste  to  his  purpose  he  raises  many  difficult  questions,  but  he 
is  determined  to  disown  that  view  ;  he  labours  to  indicate  in  what  mode 
Matter  can  receive  the  Ideal-forms  without  being,  itself,  modified.  The 
direct  way  is  debarred  since  it  is  not  easy  to  point  to  things  actually 
present  in  a  base  and  yet  leaving  that  base  unaffected  :  he  therefore 
devises  a  metaphor  for  participation  without  modification  (patternless 
wax,  alone  taking  a  clear  impression)  one  which  supports,  also,  his 
thesis  that  all  appearing  to  the  senses  is  void  of  substantial  existence 
and  that  the  region  of  mere  seeming  is  vast. 

Holding,  as  he  does,  that  it  is  the  patterns  displayed  upon  Matter 
that  cause  all  experience  in  living  bodies  while  the  Matter  itself  remains 
unaffected,  he  chooses  this  way  of  stating  its  immutability,  leaving  us  to 
make  out  for  ourselves  that  those  very  patterns  impressed  upon  it  do 
not  comport  any  experience,  any  modification,  in  itself. 

In  the  case,  no  doubt,  of  the  living  bodies  that  take  one  pattern  or 
shape  after  having  borne  another,  it  might  be  said  that  there  was  a  change, 
the  variation  of  shape  being  made  verbally  equivalent  to  a  real  change  : 
but  since  Matter  is  essentially  without  shape  or  magnitude,  the  appearing 
of  shape  upon  it  can  by  no  freedom  of  phrase  be  described  as  a  change 
within  it.  On  this  point  if  one  must  have  “  a  rule  for  thick  and  thin  ” 
one  may  safely  say  that  the  underlying  Kind  contains  nothing  whatever 
in  the  mode  commonly  supposed. 

But  if  we  reject  even  the  idea  of  its  really  containing  at  least  the 
patterns  upon  it,  how  is  it,  in  any  sense,  a  recipient  ? 

The  answer  is  that  in  the  metaphor  cited  we  have  some  reasonably 
adequate  indication  of  the  impassibility  of  Matter  coupled  with  the 
presence  upon  it  of  what  may  be  described  as  images  of  things  not  present. 

But  we  cannot  leave  the  point  of  its  impassibility  without  a  warning 
against  allowing  ourselves  to  be  deluded  by  sheer  custom  of  speech. 

Plato  speaks  of  Matter  as  becoming  dry,  wet,  inflamed,  but  we  must 
remember  the  words  that  follow  :  “  and  taking  the  shape  of  air  and  of 
water  ”  :  this  blunts  the  expressions  “  becoming  wet,  becoming  in- 


III.  6. 12]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


85 


flamed  ”  ;  once  we  have  Matter  thus  admitting  these  shapes,  we  learn 
that  it  has  not  itself  become  a  shaped  thing  but  that  the  shapes  remain 
distinct  as  they  entered.  We  see,  further,  that  the  expression  ”  becoming 
inflamed  ”  is  not  to  be  taken  strictly  :  it  is  rather  a  case  of  becoming 
fire.  Becoming  fire  is  very  different  from  becoming  inflamed  which 
implies  an  outside  agency  and,  therefore,  susceptibility  to  modification. 
Matter,  being  itself  a  portion  of  fire,  cannot  be  said  to  catch  fire.  To  sug¬ 
gest  that  the  fire  not  merely  permeates  the  matter,  but  actually  sets  it 
on  fire  is  like  saying  that  a  statue  permeates  its  bronze  (and  “  statufies 
it). 

Further,  if  what  enters  must  be  an  Ideal-Principle  how  could  it  set 
Matter  aflame  ?  But  what  if  it  is  a  pattern  or  condition  ?  No  :  the 
object  set  aflame  is  so  in  virtue  of  the  combination  of  Matter  and  con¬ 
dition. 

But  how  can  this  follow  on  the  conjunction  when  no  unity  has  been 
produced  by  the  two  ? 

Even  if  such  a  unity  had  been  produced,  it  would  be  a  unity  of 
things  not  mutually  sharing  experiences  but  acting  upon  each  other. 
And  the  question  would  then  arise  whether  each  was  effective  upon  the 
other  or  whether  the  sole  action  was  not  that  of  one  (the  form)  preventing 
the  other  (the  Matter)  from  slipping  away  ? 

But  (another  difficulty)  when  any  material  thing  is  severed,  must 
not  the  Matter  be  divided  with  it  ?  Surely  the  bodily  modification  and 
other  experience  that  have  accompanied  the  sundering,  must  have 
occurred,  identically,  within  the  Matter  ? 

This  reasoning  would  force  the  destructibility  of  Matter  upon  us  : 
“  the  body  is  dissolved  ;  then  the  Matter  is  dissolved.”  We  would  have 
to  allow  Matter  to  be  a  thing  of  quantity,  a  magnitude.  But  since  it  is 
not  a  magnitude  it  could  not  have  the  experiences  that  belong  to  magni¬ 
tude  and,  on  the  larger  scale,  since  it  is  not  body  it  cannot  know  the 
experiences  of  body. 

In  fact  those  that  declare  Matter  subject  to  modification  may  as 
well  declare  it  body  right  out. 


86 


PLOTINUS 


13- 

Further,  they  must  explain  in  what  sense  they  hold  that  Matter 
tends  to  slip  away  from  its  form  (the  Idea) .  Can  we  conceive  it  stealing 
out  from  stones  and  rocks  or  whatever  else  envelops  it  ? 

And  of  course  they  cannot  pretend  that  Matter  in  some  cases  rebels 
and  sometimes  not.  For  if  once  it  makes  away  of  its  own  will,  why  should 
it  not  always  escape  ?  If  it  is  fixed  despite  itself,  it  must  be  enveloped 
by  some  Ideal-Form  for  good  and  all.  This,  however,  leaves  still  the 
question  why  a  given  portion  of  Matter  does  not  remain  constant  to  any 
one  given  form  :  the  reason  lies  mainly  in  the  fact  that  the  Ideas  are 
constantly  passing  into  it. 

In  what  sense,  then,  is  it  said  to  elude  form  ? 

By  very  nature  and  for  ever  ? 

But  does  not  this  precisely  mean  that  it  never  ceases  to  be  itself, 
in  other  words  that  its  one  form  is  an  invincible  formlessness  ?  In  no 
other  sense  has  Plato’s  dictum  any  value  to  those  that  invoke  it. 

Matter  (we  read)  is  “  the  receptacle  and  nurse  of  all  generation,” 

Now  if  Matter  is  such  a  receptacle  and  nurse,  all  generation  is 
distinct  from  it ;  and  since  all  the  changeable  lies  in  the  realm  of  genera¬ 
tion,  Matter,  existing  before  all  generation,  must  exist  before  all  change. 

”  Receptacle  ”  and  “  nurse  ”  ;  then  it  “  retains  its  identit3'' ;  it  is 
not  subject  to  modification.  Similarly  if  it  is”  (as  again  we  read)  “the 
ground  on  which  individual  things  appear  and  disappear,”  and  so,  too, 
if  it  is  a  “  place,  a  base.”  Where  Plato  describes  and  identifies  it  as  “  a 
ground  to  the  ideas  ”  he  is  not  attributing  any  state  to  it ;  he  is  probing 
after  its  distinctive  manner  of  being. 

And  what  is  that  ? 

This  which  we  think  of  as  a  Nature-Kind  cannot  be  included  among 
Existents  but  must  utterly  rebel  from  the  Essence  of  Real  Beings  and 
be  therefore  wholly  something  other  than  they — for  they  are  Reason- 
Principles  and  possess  Authentic  Existence — it  must  inevitably,  by 
virtue  of  that  difference,  retain  its  integrity  to  the  point  of  being  per¬ 
manently  closed  against  them  and,  more,  of  rejecting  close  participation 
in  any  image  of  them. 


III.  6. 13]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


87 


Only  on  these  terms  can  it  be  completely  different :  once  it  took  any 
Idea  to  hearth  and  home,  it  would  become  a  new  thing,  for  it  would 
cease  to  be  the  thing  apart,  the  ground  of  all  else,  the  receptacle  of 
absolutely  any  and  every  form.  If  there  is  to  be  a  ceaseless  coming  into 
it  and  going  out  from  it,  itself  must  be  unmoved  and  immune  in  all  the 
come  and  go.  The  entrant  Idea  will  enter  as  an  image,  the  untrue  entering 
the  untruth. 

But,  at  least,  in  a  true  entry  ? 

No  :  How  could  there  be  a  true  entry  into  that  which,  by  being 
falsity,  is  banned  from  ever  touching  truth  ? 

Is  this  then  a  pseudo-entry  into  a  pseudo-entity — something  merely 
brought  near,  as  faces  enter  the  mirror,  there  to  remain  just  as  long  as 
the  people  look  into  it  ? 

Yes  ;  if  we  eliminated  the  Authentic  Existents  from  this  Sphere 
nothing  of  all  now  seen  in  sense  would  appear  one  moment  longer. 

Here  the  mirror  itself  is  seen,  for  it  is  itself  an  Ideal-Form  of  a  Kind 
(has  some  degree  of  Real  Being)  ;  but  bare  Matter,  which  is  no  Idea,  is 
not  a  visible  thing ;  if  it  were,  it  would  have  been  visible  in  its  own 
character  before  anything  else  appeared  upon  it.  The  condition  of  Matter 
may  be  illustrated  by  that  of  air  penetrated  by  light  and  remaining, 
even  so,  unseen  because  it  is  invisible  whatever  happens. 

The  reflections  in  the  mirror  are  not  taken  to  be  real,  all  the  less 
since  the  appliance  on  which  they  appear  is  seen  and  remains  while  the 
images  disappear,  but  Matter  is  not  seen  either  with  the  images  or  without 
them.  But  suppose  the  reflections  on  the  mirror  remaining  and  the 
mirror  itself  not  seen,  we  would  never  doubt  the  solid  reality  of  all  that 
appears. 

If,  then,  there  is,  really,  something  in  a  mirror,  we  may  suppose 
objects  of  sense  to  be  in  Matter  in  precisely  that  way  :  if  in  the  mirror 
there  is  nothing,  if  there  is  only  a  seeming  of  something,  then  we  may 
judge  that  in  Matter  there  is  the  same  delusion  and  that  the  seeming  is 
to  be  traced  to  the  Substantial-Existence  of  the  Real-Beings,  that  Sub¬ 
stantial-Existence  in  which  the  Authentic  has  the  real  participation 
while  only  an  unreal  participation  can  belong  to  the  unauthentic  since 


88 


PLOTINUS 


their  condition  must  differ  from  that  which  they  would  know  if  the  parts 
were  reversed,  if  the  Authentic  Existents  were  not  and  they  were. 

14. 

But  would  this  mean  that  if  there  were  no  Matter  nothing  would 
exist  ? 

Precisely  as  in  the  absence  of  a  mirror,  or  something  of  similar  power, 
there  would  be  no  reflection. 

A  thing  whose  very  nature  is  to  be  lodged  in  something  else  cannot 
exist  where  the  base  is  lacking — and  it  is  the  character  of  a  reflection  to 
appear  in  something  not  itself. 

Of  course  supposing  anything  to  desert  from  the  Authentic  Beings, 
this  would  not  need  an  alien  base  :  but  these  Beings  are  not  subject  to 
flux,  and  therefore  any  outside  manifestation  of  them  implies  something 
other  than  themselves,  something  offering  a  base  to  what  never  enters, 
something  which  by  its  presence,  in  its  insistence,  by  its  cry  for  help,  in 
its  beggardom,  strives  as  it  were  by  violence  to  acquire  and  is  always 
disappointed  so  that  its  poverty  is  enduring,  its  cry  unceasing. 

This  alien  base  exists  and  the  myth  represents  it  as  a  pauper  to 
exhibit  its  nature,  to  show  that  Matter  is  destitute  of  The  Good.  The 
claimant  does  not  ask  for  all  the  Giver's  store,  but  it  welcomes  whatever 
it  can  get ;  in  other  words,  what  appears  in  Matter  is  not  Reality. 

The  name,  too  (Poverty),  conveys  that  Matter’s  need  is  never  met. 
The  union  with  Poros,  Possession,  is  designed  to  show  that  Matter  does 
not  attain  to  Reality,  to  Plenitude,  but  to  some  bare  sufficiency — in 
point  of  fact  to  imaging  skill. 

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  that  an  outside  thing  belonging  in  any 
degree  to  Real-Being— whose  Nature  is  to  engender  Real-Beings— should 
utterly  fail  of  participation  in  Reality  :  but  here  we  have  something  per¬ 
plexing  ;  we  are  dealing  with  utter  Non-Being,  absolutely  without  part 
in  Reality  ;  what  is  this  participation  by  the  non-participant,  and  how 
does  mere  neighbouring  confer  anything  on  that  which  by  its  own  nature 
is  precluded  from  any  association  ? 

The  answer  is  that  all  that  impinges  upon  this  Non-Being  is  flung 


111.6.15]  THE  IMPASSIVITY  OF  THE  UNEMBODIED 


89 


back  as  from  a  repelling  substance  ;  we  may  think  of  an  Echo  returned 
from  a  repercussive  plane  surface  ;  it  is  precisely  because  of  the  lack  of 
retention  that  the  phenomenon  is  supposed  to  belong  to  that  particular 
place  and  even  to  arise  there. 

If  Matter  were  participant  and  received  Reality  to  the  extent 
which  we  are  apt  to  imagine,  it  would  be  penetrated  by  a  Reality  thus 
sucked  into  its  constitution.  But  we  know  that  the  Entrant  is  not  thus 
absorbed  :  Matter  remains  as  it  was,  taking  nothing  to  itself  :  it  is  the 
check  to  the  forthweUing  of  Authentic  Existence  ;  it  is  a  ground  that 
repels  ;  it  is  a  mere  receptacle  to  the  Realities  as  they  take  their  common 
path  (of  emanation)  and  here  meet  and  mingle.  It  resembles  those 
reflecting  vessels,  filled  with  water,  which  are  often  set  against  the  sun 
to  produce  fire  :  the  heat  rays — prevented,  by  their  contrary  within, 
from  being  absorbed  are  flung  out  as  one  mass. 

It  is  in  this  sense  and  way  that  Matter  becomes  the  cause  of  the 
generated  realm  ;  the  combinations  within  it  hold  together  only  after 
some  such  reflective  mode. 

15- 

Now  the  objects  attracting  the  sun-rays  to  themselves — illuminated 
by  a  fire  of  the  sense-order — are  necessarily  of  the  sense-order  ;  there  is 
perceptibility  because  there  has  been  a  union  of  things  at  once  external  to 
each  other  and  continuous,  contiguous,  in  direct  contact,  two  extremes 
in  one  line.  But  the  Reason-Principle  operating  upon  Matter  is  external 
to  it  only  in  a  very  different  mode  and  sense  ;  exteriority  in  this  case  is 
amply  supplied  by  contrariety  of  essence  and  can  dispense  with  any 
opposite  ends  (any  question  of  lineal  position)  ;  or,  rather,  the  difference 
is  one  that  actually  debars  any  local  extremity  ;  sheer  incongruity  of 
essence,  the  utter  failure  in  relationship,  inhibits  admixture  (between 
Matter  and  any  form  of  Being). 

The  reason,  then,  of  the  immutability  of  Matter  is  that  the  entrant 
principle  neither  possesses  it  nor  is  possessed  by  it.  Consider,  as  an 
example,  the  mode  in  which  an  opinion  or  representation  is  present  in 
the  mind  ;  there  is  no  admixture  ;  the  notion  that  came  goes  in  its  time. 


N 


90 


PLOTINUS 


still  integrally  itself  alone,  taking  nothing  with  it,  leaving  nothing  after 
it,  because  it  has  not  been  blended  with  the  mind  ;  there  is  no  “  outside  ” 
in  the  sense  of  contact  broken,  and  the  distinction  between  base  and 
entrant  is  patent  not  to  the  senses  but  to  the  reason. 

In  that  example,  no  doubt,  the  mental  representation — though  it 
seems  to  have  a  wide  and  unchecked  control — is  an  image,  while  the 
Soul  (Mind)  is  in  its  nature  not  an  image  (but  a  Reality)  :  none  the  less 
the  Soul  or  Mind  certainly  stands  to  the  concept  as  Matter,  or  in  some 
analogous  relation.  The  representation,  however,  does  not  cover  the 
Mind  over  ;  on  the  contrary  it  is  often  expelled  by  some  activity  there  ; 
however  urgently  it  presses  in,  it  never  effects  such  an  obliteration  as  to 
be  taken  for  the  Soul ;  it  is  confronted  there  by  indwelling  powers,  by 
Reason-Principles,  which  repel  all  such  attack. 

Matter  feebler  far  than  the  Soul  for  any  exercise  of  power,  and 
possessing  no  phase  of  the  Authentic  Existents,  not  even  in  possession 
of  its  own  falsity  lacks  the  very  means  of  manifesting  itself,  utter  void 
as  it  is  ,  it  becomes  the  means  by  which  other  things  appear,  but  it 
cannot  annoimce  its  own  presence.  Penetrating  thought  may  arrive  at 
it,  discriminating  it  from  Authentic  Existence  ;  then,  it  is  discerned  as 
something  abandoned  by  all  that  really  is,  by  even  the  dimmest  sem- 
blants  of  being,  as  a  thing  dragged  towards  every  shape  and  property 
and  appearing  to  follow — yet  in  fact  not  even  following. 

i6. 

An  Ideal-Principle  approaches  and  leads  Matter  towards  some 
desired  dimension,  investing  this  non-existent  underlie  with  a  magnitude 
from  itself  which  never  becomes  incorporate—for  Matter,  if  it  really 
incorporated  magnitude,  would  be  a  mass. 

Eliminate  this  Ideal-Form  and  the  substratum  ceases  to  be  a  thing 
of  magnitude,  or  to  appear  so  :  the  mass  produced  by  the  Idea  was,  let 
us  suppose,  a  man  or  a  horse  ;  the  horse-magnitude  came  upon  the 
Matter  when  a  horse  was  produced  upon  it ;  when  the  horse  ceases  to 
exist  upon  the  Matter,  the  magnitude  of  the  horse  departs  also.  If  we 
are  told  that  the  horse  implies  a  certain  determined  bulk  and  that  this 


III.  6. 17]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


91 


bulk  is  a  permanent  thing,  we  answer  that  what  is  permanent  in  this 
case  is  not  the  magnitude  of  the  horse  but  the  magnitude  of  mass  in 
general.  That  same  Magnitude  might  be  fire  or  earth ;  on  their 
disappearance  their  particular  magnitudes  would  disappear  with 
them.  Matter,  then,  can  never  take  to  itself  either  pattern  or  magni¬ 
tude  ;  if  it  did,  it  would  no  longer  be  able  to  turn  from  being  fire,  let 
us  say,  into  being  something  else ;  it  would  become  and  be  fire 
once  for  all. 

In  a  word,  though  Matter  is  far  extended — so  vastly  as  to  appear 
co-extensive  with  all  this  sense-known  Universe — yet  if  the  Heavens  and 
their  content  came  to  an  end,  all  magnitude  would  simultaneously  pass 
from  Matter  with,  beyond  a  doubt,  all  its  other  properties  ;  it  would  be 
abandoned  to  its  own  Kind,  retaining  nothing  of  all  that  which,  in  its 
own  peculiar  mode,  it  had  hitherto  exhibited. 

Where  an  entrant  force  can  effect  modification  it  will  inevitably 
leave  some  trace  upon  its  withdrawal ;  but  where  there  can  be  no  modi¬ 
fication,  nothing  can  be  retained  ;  light  comes  and  goes,  and  the  air  is  as 
it  always  was. 

That  a  thing  essentially  devoid  of  magnitude  should  come  to  a  certain 
size  is  no  more  astonishing  than  that  a  thing  essentially  devoid  of  heat 
should  become  warm  :  Matter’s  essential  existence  is  quite  separate 
from  its  existing  in  bulk,  since,  of  course,  magnitude  is  an  immaterial 
principle  as  pattern  is.  Besides,  if  we  are  not  to  reduce  Matter  to  nothing, 
it  must  be  all  things  by  way  of  participation,  and  Magnitude  is  one  of 
those  all  things. 

In  bodies,  necessarily  compounds.  Magnitude — ^though  not  a  deter¬ 
mined  Magnitude — must  be  present  as  one  of  the  constituents  ;  it  is 
implied  in  the  very  notion  of  body  ;  but  Matter — not  a  Body  excludes 
even  undetermined  Magnitude. 

17* 

Nor  can  we,  on  the  other  hand,  think  that  matter  is  simply  Absolute 
Magnitude. 

Magnitude  is  not,  like  Matter,  a  receptacle  ;  it  is  an  Ideal-Principle  . 


92 


PLOTINUS 


it  is  a  thing  standing  apart  to  itself,  not  some  definite  Mass.  The  fact 
is  that  the  self-gathered  content  of  the  Intellectual  Principle  or  of  the 
All-Soul,  desires  expansion  (and  thereby  engenders  secondaries)  :  in  its 
images — aspiring  and  moving  towards  it  and  eagerly  imitating  its  act — 
is  vested  a  similar  power  of  reproducing  their  states  in  their  own  deriva¬ 
tives.  The  Magnitude  latent  in  the  expansive  tendency  of  the  Image¬ 
making  phase  (of  Intellect  or  All-Soul)  runs  forth  into  the  Absolute 
Magnitude  of  the  Universe  ;  this  in  turn  enlists  into  the  process  the 
spurious  magnitude  of  Matter :  the  content  of  the  Supreme,  thus,  in  virtue 
of  its  own  prior  extension  enables  Matter — which  never  possesses  a  con¬ 
tent  to  exhibit  the  appearance  of  Magnitude.  It  must  be  understood 
that  spurious  Magnitude  consists  in  the  fact  that  a  thing  (Matter)  not 
possessing  actual  Magnitude  strains  towards  it  and  has  the  extension  of 
that  straining.  All  that  is  Real  Being  gives  forth  a  reflection  of  itself 
upon  all  else  ;  every  Reality,  therefore,  has  Magnitude  which  by  this 
process  is  communicated  to  the  Universe. 

The  Magnitude  inherent  in  each  Ideal-Principle— that  of  a  horse  or 
of  anything  else  combines  with  Magnitude  the  Absolute  with  the  result 
that,  irradiated  by  that  Absolute,  Matter  entire  takes  Magnitude  and 
every  particle  of  it  becomes  a  mass  ;  in  this  way,  by  virtue  at  once  of 
the  totality  of  Idea  with  its  inherent  magnitude  and  of  each  several 
specific  Idea,  all  things  appear  under  mass  ;  Matter  takes  on  what  we 
conceive  as  extension  ;  it  is  compelled  to  assume  a  relation  to  the  All 
gathered  under  this  Idea  and  under  Mass,  to  be  all  things — in  the 
degree  in  which  the  operating  power  can  lead  the  really  nothing  to 
become  all. 

By  the  conditions  of  Manifestation,  colour  rises  from  non-colour 
(=from  the  colourless  prototype  of  colour  in  the  Ideal  Realm).  Quality, 
known  by  the  one  name  with  its  parallel  in  the  sphere  of  Primals,  rises, 
similarly,  from  non-quality  :  in  precisely  the  same  mode,  the  Magnitude 
appearing  upon  Matter  rises  from  non-Magnitude  or  from  that  Primal 
which  IS  known  to  us  by  the  same  name  ;  so  that  material  things  become 
visible  through  standing  midway  between  bare  underhe  and  Pure  Idea. 
All  IS  perceptible  by  virtue  of  this  origin  in  the  Intellectual  Sphere  but 


III.6.  i8]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


93 


all  is  falsity  since  the  base  in  which  the  manifestation  takes  place  is  a 
non-existent. 

Particular  entities  thus  attain  their  Magnitude  through  being  drawn 
out  by  the  power  of  the  Existents  which  mirror  themselves  and  make 
space  for  themselves  in  them.  And  no  violence  is  required  to  draw  them 
into  all  the  diversity  of  Shapes  and  Kinds  because  the  phenomenal  All 
exists  by  Matter  (by  Matter’s  essential  all-receptivity)  and  because  each 
several  Idea,  moreover,  draws  Matter  its  own  way  by  the  power  stored 
within  itself,  the  power  it  holds  from  the  Intellectual  Realm.  Matter  is 
manifested  in  this  sphere  as  Mass  by  the  fact  that  it  mirrors  the  Absolute 
Magnitude  ;  Magnitude  here  is  the  reflection  in  the  mirror.  The  Ideas 
meet  all  of  necessity  in  Matter  (the  Ultimate  of  the  emanatory  progress)  : 
and  Matter,  both  as  one  total  thing  and  in  its  entire  scope,  must  submit 
itself,  since  (by  definition)  it  is  the  Material  of  the  entire  Here,  not  of  any 
one  determined  thing  :  what  is,  in  its  own  character,  no  determined 
thing  may  become  determined  by  an  outside  force — though,  in  becoming 
thus  determined,  it  does  not  become  the  definite  thing  in  question,  for 
thus  it  would  lose  its  own  characteristic  indetermination. 

i8. 

The  Ideal  Principle  possessing  the  Intellection  (  =  Idea,  Noesis)  of 
Magnitude — assuming  that  this  Intellection  is  of  such  power  as  not 
merely  to  subsist  within  itself  but  to  be  urged  outward  as  it  were  by  the 
intensity  of  its  life— wiU  necessarily  realise  itself  in  a  Kind  (= Matter) 
not  having  its  being  in  the  Intellective  Principle,  not  previously  possessing 
the  Idea  of  Magnitude  or  any  trace  of  that  Idea  or  any  other. 

What  then  will  it  produce  (in  this  Matter)  by  virtue  of  that  power  ? 

Not  horse  or  cow  :  these  are  the  product  of  other  Ideas. 

No  :  this  Principle  comes  from  the  source  of  Magnitude  ( =  is  primal 
“  Magnitude  ”)  and  therefore  Matter  can  have  no  extension,  in  which  to 
harbour  the  Magnitude  of  the  Principle,  but  can  take  in  only  its  reflected 
appearance. 

To  the  thing  which  does  not  enjoy  Magnitude  in  the  sense  of  having 
mass-extension  in  its  own  substance  and  parts,  the  only  possibility  is 


94 


PLOTINUS 


that  it  present  some  partial  semblance  of  Magnitude,  such  as  being 
continuous,  not  here  and  there  and  ever3rwhere,  that  its  parts  be  related 
within  it  and  ungapped.  An  adequate  reflection  of  a  great  mass  cannot 
be  produced  in  a  small  space — mere  size  prevents — but  the  greater,  pur¬ 
suing  the  hope  of  that  full  self-presentment,  makes  progress  towards  it 
and  brings  about  a  nearer  approach  to  adequate  mirroring  in  the  parallel 
from  which  it  can  never  withhold  its  radiation  :  thus  it  confers  Magnitude 
upon  that  (  =  Matter)  which  has  none  and  cannot  even  muster  up  the 
appearance  of  having  any,  and  the  visible  resultant  exhibits  the  Magnitude 
of  mass. 

Matter,  then,  wears  Magnitude  as  a  dress  thrown  about  it  by  its 
association  with  that  Absolute  Magnitude  to  whose  movement  it  must 
answer ;  but  it  does  not,  for  that,  change  its  Kind  ;  if  the  Idea  which 
has  clothed  it  were  to  withdraw,  it  would  once  again  be  what  it  per¬ 
manently  is,  what  it  is  by  its  own  strength,  or  it  would  have  precisely  the 
Magnitude  lent  to  it  by  any  other  form  that  happens  to  be  present  in  it. 

The  (Universal)  Soul — containing  the  Ideal  Principles  of  Real-Beings, 
and  itself  an  Ideal  Principle— includes  all  in  concentration  within  itself, 
just  as  the  Ideal  Principle  of  each  particular  entity  is  complete  and  self- 
contained  :  it,  therefore,  sees  these  principles  of  sensible  things  because 
they  are  turned,  as  it  were,  towards  it  and  advancing  to  it  :  but  it  cannot 
harbour  them  in  their  plurality,  for  it  cannot  depart  from  its  Kind  ;  it 
sees  them,  therefore,  stripped  of  Mass.  Matter,  on  the  contrary,  destitute 
of  resisting  power  since  it  has  no  Act  of  its  own  and  is  a  mere  shadow, 
can  but  accept  all  that  an  active  power  may  choose  to  send.  In  what  is 
thus  sent,  from  the  Reason-Principle  in  the  Intellectual  Realm,  there  is 
already  contained  a  degree  of  the  partial  object  that  is  to  be  formed  :  in 
the  image-making  impulse  within  the  Reason-Principle  there  is  already 
a  step  (towards  the  lower  manifestation)  or  we  may  put  it  that  the  down¬ 
ward  movement  from  the  Reason-Principle  is  a  first  form  of  the  partial ; 
^tter  absence  of  partition  would  mean  no  movement  but  (sterile)  repose. 
Matter  cannot  be  the  home  of  all  things  in  concentration  as  the  Soul  is  : 
if  it  were  so,  it  would  belong  to  the  Intellective  Sphere.  It  must  be  (like 
the  Soul)  all-recipient  but  not  in  that  partless  mode.  It  is  to  be  the  Place 


III.  6. 19]  the  impassivity  of  the  unembodied 


95 


of  all  things,  and  it  must  therefore  extend  universally,  offer  itself  to  all 
things,  serve  to  all  interval :  thus  it  wiU  be  a  thirg  imconfined  to  any 
moment  (of  space  or  time)  but  laid  out  in  submission  to  all  that  is  to  be. 

But  would  we  not  expect  that  some  one  particularised  form  should 
occupy  Matter  (at  once)  and  so  exclude  such  others  as  are  not  able  to 
enter  into  combination  ? 

No  :  for  there  is  no  first  Idea — except  the  Ideal  Principle  of  the 
Universe — and,  by  this  Idea,  Matter  is  (the  seat  of)  all  things  at  once  and 
of  the  particular  thing  in  its  parts — for  the  Matter  of  a  living  being  is 
disparted  according  to  the  specific  parts  of  the  organism  ;  if  there  were 
no  such  partition  nothing  would  exist  but  the  Reason-Principle. 

19. 

The  Ideal  Principles  entering  into  Matter  as  to  a  Mother  (to  be 
“  bom  into  the  Universe  ”)  affect  it  neither  for  better  nor  for  worse. 

Their  action  is  not  upon  Matter  but  upon  each  other  ;  these  powers 
conflict  with  their  opponent  principles,  not  with  their  substrata  ^which  it 
would  be  foolish  to  confuse  with  the  entrant  forms — Heat  (the  Principle) 
annuls  Cold,  and  Blackness  annuls  Whiteness  ;  or,  the  opponents  blend 
to  form  an  intermediate  quality.  Only  that  is  affected  which  enters  into 
combinations  :  being  affected  is  losing  something  of  self-identity. 

In  beings  of  soul  and  body,  the  affection  occurs  in  the  body,  modified 
according  to  the  qualities  and  powers  presiding  at  the  act  of  change  .  in 
all  such  dissolution  of  constituent  parts,  in  the  new  combinations,  in  all 
variation  from  the  original  structure,  the  affection  is  bodily,  the  Soul 
or  Mind  having  no  more  than  an  accompanying  knowledge  of  the  more 
drastic  changes,  or  perhaps  not  even  that.  (Body  is  modified  .  Mind 
knows)  but  the  Matter  concerned  remains  unaffected  ;  heat  enters,  cold 
leaves  it,  and  it  is  unchanged  because  neither  Principle  is  associated  with 
it  as  friend  or  enemy. 

So  the  appellation  “  Recipient  and  Nurse  ”  is  the  better  description  . 
Matter  is  the  mother  only  in  the  sense  indicated ;  it  has  no  begetting 
power.  But  probably  the  term  Mother  is  used  by  those  who  think  of  a 
Mother  as  Matter  to  the  offspring,  as  a  container  only,  giving  nothing 


96 


PLOTINUS 


to  them,  the  entire  bodily  frame  of  the  child  being  formed  out  of  food. 
But  if  this  Mother  (Matter)  does  give  anything  to  the  offspring  it  does 
so  not  in  its  quality  as  Matter  but  as  being  (in  some  degree)  an  Ideal-Form ; 
for  only  the  Idea  is  generative  ;  the  contrary  Kind  is  sterile. 

This,  I  think,  is  why  the  doctors  of  old,  teaching  through  symbols 
and  mystic  representations,  exhibit  the  ancient  Hermes  with  the  genera¬ 
tive  organ  always  in  active  posture  ;  this  is  to  convey  that  the  generator 
of  things  of  sense  is  the  Intellectual  Reason  Principle  :  the  sterility  of 
Matter,  eternally  immoved,  is  indicated  by  the  eunuchs  surrounding  it 
in  its  representation  as  the  All-Mother. 

This  too  exalting  title  is  conferred  upon  it  in  order  to  indicate  that 
it  is  the  source  of  things  in  the  sense  of  being  their  underlie  :  it  is  an 
approximate  name  chosen  for  a  general  conception  ;  there  is  no  intention 
of  suggesting  a  complete  parallel  with  motherhood  to  those  not  satisfied 
with  a  surface  impression  but  needing  a  precisely  true  presentment ;  by 
a  remote  symbolism,  the  nearest  they  could  find,  they  indicate  that  Matter 
is  sterile,  not  female  to  full  effect,  female  in  receptivity  only,  not  in 
pregnancy  ;  this  they  accomplish  by  exhibiting  Matter  as  approached 
by  what  is  neither  female  nor  effectively  male,  but  castrated  of  that 
impregnating  power  which  belongs  only  to  the  unchangeably  masculine. 


SEVENTH  TRACTATE 
Time  and  Eternity 

I. 

Eternity  and  Time  ;  two  entirely  separate  things,  we  explain  “  the 
one  having  its  being  in  the  everlasting  Kind,  the  other  in  the  realm  of 
Process,  in  our  own  Universe  "  ;  and,  by  continually  using  the  words 
and  assigning  every  phenomenon  to  the  one  or  the  other  category,  we 
come  to  think  that,  both  by  instinct  and  by  the  more  detailed  attack  of 
thought,  we  hold  an  adequate  experience  of  them  in  our  minds  without 
more  ado. 

When,  perhaps,  we  make  the  effort  to  clarify  our  ideas  and  close 


in.  7. 2] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


97 


into  the  heart  of  the  matter  we  are  at  once  unsettled  ;  our  doubts  throw 
us  back  upon  ancient  explanations  ;  we  choose  among  the  various 
theories,  or  among  the  various  interpretations  of  some  one  theory,  and 
so  we  come  to  rest,  satisfied,  if  only  we  can  counter  a  question  with  an 
approved  answer,  and  glad  to  be  absolved  from  further  enquiry. 

Now,  we  must  believe  that  some  of  the  venerable  philosophers  of  old 
discovered  the  truth  ;  but  it  is  important  to  examine  which  of  them  really 
hit  the  mark  and  by  what  guiding  principle  we  can  ourselves  attain  to 
certitude. 

What,  then,  does  Eternity  really  mean  to  those  who  (thus  casually) 
describe  it  as  something  different  from  Time  ?  We  begin  with  Eternity, 
since  when  the  standing  Exemplar  is  known,  its  representation  in  image 
— which  Time  is  understood  to  be — ^wiU  be  clearly  apprehended — ^though 
it  is  of  course  equally  true,  admitting  this  relationship  of  Time  as  image 
to  Eternity  the  original,  that  if  we  chose  to  begin  by  identifying  Time  we 
could  thence  proceed  upwards  by  Recognition  (the  Platonic  Anamnesis) 
and  become  aware  of  the  Kind  which  it  images. 

2. 

What  definition  are  we  to  give  of  Eternity  ? 

Can  it  be  identified  with  the  (divine  or)  Intellectual  Substance 
itself  ? 

This  would  be  like  identifying  Time  with  the  Universe  of  Heavens 
and  Earth — an  opinion,  it  is  true,  which  appears  to  have  had  its  adherents. 
No  doubt  we  conceive,  we  know.  Eternity  as  something  most  august ; 
most  august,  too,  is  the  Intellectual  Kind  ;  and  there  is  no  possibility  of 
saying  that  the  one  is  more  majestic  than  the  other,  since  no  such  degrees 
can  be  asserted  in  the  Above- World  ;  there  is  therefore  a  certain  excuse 
for  the  identification — all  the  more  since  the  Intellectual  Substance  and 

Eternity  have  the  one  scope  and  content. 

Still ;  by  the  fact  of  representing  the  one  as  contained  within  the 
other,  by  making  Eternity  a  predicate  to  the  Intellectual  Existents 
“  the  Nature  of  the  Exemplar,”  we  read,  ”  is  eternal  ”  we  cancel  the 
identification  ]  Eternity  becomes  a  separate  thing,  something  surrounding 


o 


98 


PLOTINUS 


that  Nature  or  lying  within  it  or  present  to  it.  And  the  majestic  quality 
of  both  does  not  prove  them  identical :  it  might  be  transmitted  from  the  one 
to  the  other.  So,  too,  Eternity  and  the  Divine  Nature  envelop  the  same 
entities,  yes  ;  but  not  in  the  same  way  :  the  Divine  may  be  thought  of 
as  enveloping  parts.  Eternity  as  embracing  its  content  in  an  unbroken 
whole,  with  no  implication  of  part,  but  merely  from  the  fact  that  all 
eternal  things  are  so  by  conforming  to  it. 

May  we,  perhaps,  identify  Eternity  with  Repose-There  as  Time  has 
been  identified  with  Movement-Here  ? 

This  would  bring  on  the  counter-question  whether  Eternity  is  pre¬ 
sented  to  us  as  Repose  in  the  general  sense  or  as  the  Repose  that  envelops 
the  Intellectual  Essence. 

On  the  first  supposition  we  can  no  more  talk  of  Repose  being  eternal 
than  of  Eternity  being  eternal :  to  be  eternal  is  to  participate  in  an 
outside  thing.  Eternity. 

Further,  if  Eternity  is  Repose,  what  becomes  of  Eternal  Movement, 
which,  by  this  identification,  would  become  a  thing  of  Repose  ? 

Again,  the  conception  of  Repose  scarcely  seems  to  include  that  of  per¬ 
petuity — I  am  speaking  of  course  not  of  perpetuity  in  the  time-order 
(which  might  follow  on  absence  of  movement)  but  of  that  which  we  have 
in  mind  when  we  speak  of  Eternity. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  Eternity  is  identified  with  the  Repose  of  the 
divine  Essence,  all  species  outside  of  the  divine  are  put  outside  of  Eternity. 

Besides,  the  conception  of  Eternity  requires  not  merely  Repose  but 
also  unity — and,  in  order  to  keep  it  distinct  from  Time,  a  unity  including 
interval — but  neither  that  unity  nor  that  absence  of  interval  enters  into 
the  conception  of  Repose  as  such. 

Lastly,  this  unchangeable  Repose  in  unity  is  a  predicate  asserted 
of  Eternity,  which,  therefore,  is  not  itself  Repose,  the  absolute,  but  a 
participant  in  Repose. 

3- 

What,  then,  can  this  be,  this  something  in  virtue  of  which  we  declare 
the  entire  divine  Realm  to  be  Eternal,  everlasting  ?  We  must  come  to 


in.  7. 3] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


99 


some  understanding  of  this  perpetuity  with  which  Eternity  is  either 
identical  or  in  conformity. 

It  must  at  once,  be  at  once  something  in  the  nature  of  unity  and  yet 
a  notion  compact  of  diversity,  or  (more  exactly)  a  Kind,  a  Nature,  that 
waits  upon  the  Exist ents  of  that  Other  World,  either  associated  with 
them  or  known  in  and  upon  them,  they  collectively  being  this  Nature 
which,  with  all  its  unity,  is  yet  diverse  in  power  and  essence.  Considering 
this  multifarious  power,  we  declare  it  to  be  Essence  in  its  relation  to  this 
sphere  which  is  substratum  or  underlie  to  it ;  where  we  see  life  we  think 
of  it  as  Movement ;  where  all  is  unvaried  self-identity  we  call  it  Repose  ; 
and  we  know  it  as,  at  once.  Difference  and  Identity  when  we  recognise 
that  all  is  unity  with  variety. 

Then  we  reconstruct ;  we  sum  all  into  a  collected  unity  once  more, 
a  sole  Life  in  the  Supreme  ;  we  concentrate  Diversity  and  all  the  endless 
production  of  act '.  thus  we  know  Identity,  a  concept  or,  rather,  a  Life 
never  varying,  not  becoming  what  previously  it  was  not,  the  thing 
immutably  itself,  broken  by  no  interval ;  and  knowing  this,  we  know 
Eternity. 

We  know  it  as  a  Life  changelessly  motionless  and  ever  holding  the 
Universal  content  (time,  space  and  phenomena)  in  actual  presence  ;  not 
this  now  and  now  that  other,  but  always  all ;  not  existing  now  in  one 
mode  and  now  in  another,  but  a  consummation  without  part  or  interval. 
All  its  content  is  in  immediate  concentration  as  at  one  point ;  nothing 
in  it  ever  knows  development :  all  remains  identical  within  itself,  knowing 
nothing  of  change,  for  ever  in  a  Now  since  nothing  of  it  has  passed  away 
or  will  come  into  being,  but  what  it  is  now,  that  it  is  ever. 

Eternity,  therefore — while  not  the  Substratum  (not  the  essential 
foundation  of  the  Divine  or  Intellectual  Principle)— may  be  considered  as 
the  radiation  of  this  Substratum  :  it  exists  as  the  announcement  of  the 
Identity  in  the  Divine,  of  that  state— of  being  thus  and  not  otherwise— 
which  characterises  what  has  no  futurity  but  eternally  is. 

What  future,  in  fact,  could  bring  to  that  Being  anything  which  it 
now  does  not  possess  ;  and  could  it  come  to  be  anything  which  it  is  not 

once  for  all  ? 


100 


PLOTINUS 


There  exists  no  source  or  ground  from  which  anything  could  make  its 
way  into  that  standing  present ;  any  imagined  entrant  will  prove  to  be  not 
alien  but  already  integral.  And  as  it  can  never  come  to  be  anything 
at  present  outside  it,  so,  necessarily,  it  cannot  include  any  past ;  what 
can  there  be  that  once  was  in  it  and  now  is  gone  ?  Futurity,  similarly, 
is  banned  ;  nothing  could  be  yet  to  come  to  it.  Thus  no  ground  is  left 
for  its  existence  but  that  it  be  what  it  is. 

That  which  neither  has  been  nor  will  be,  but  simply  possesses  being  ; 
that  which  enjoys  stable  existence  as  neither  in  process  of  change  nor 
having  ever  changed — that  is  Eternity.  Thus  we  come  to  the  definition  : 
the  Life — instantaneously  entire,  complete,  at  no  point  broken  into 
period  or  part — which  belongs  to  the  Authentic  Existent  by  its  very 
existence,  this  is  the  thing  we  were  probing  for — this  is  Eternity. 


4* 

We  must,  however,  avoid  thinking  of  it  as  an  accidental  from  outside 
grafted  upon  that  Nature  :  it  is  native  to  it,  integral  to  it. 

It  is  discerned  as  present  essentially  in  that  Nature  like  everything 
else  that  we  can  predicate  There — all  immanent,  springing  from  that 
Essence  and  inherent  to  that  Essence.  Eor  whatsoever  has  primal  Being 
must  be  immanent  to  the  Eirsts  and  be  a  Eirst — Eternity  equally  with 
The  Good  that  is  among  them  and  of  them  and  equally  with  the  truth 
that  is  among  them. 

In  one  aspect,  no  doubt.  Eternity  resides  in  a  partial  phase  of  the 
All-Being  ;  but  in  another  aspect  it  is  inherent  in  the  AU  taken  as  a 
totality,  since  that  Authentic  All  is  not  a  thing  patched  up  out  of  external 
parts,  but  is  authentically  an  all  because  its  parts  are  engendered  by  itself. 
It  is  like  the  truthfulness  in  the  Supreme  which  is  not  an  agreement  with 
some  outside  fact  or  being  but  is  inherent  in  each  member  about  which 
it  is  the  truth.  To  an  authentic  All  it  is  not  enough  that  it  be  everything 
that  exists  :  it  must  possess  all-ness  in  the  full  sense  that  nothing  what¬ 
ever  is  absent  from  it.  Then  nothing  is  in  store  for  it  :  if  anything  were 
to  come,  that  thing  must  have  been  lacking  to  it,  and  it  was,  therefore, 
not  All.  And  what,  of  a  Nature  contrary  to  its  own,  could  enter  into  it 


III.  7.4] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


lOI 


when  it  is  (the  Supreme  and  therefore)  immune  ?  Since  nothing  can  accrue 
to  it,  it  cannot  seek  change  or  be  changed  or  ever  have  made  its  way 
into  Being. 

Engendered  things  are  in  continuous  process  of  acquisition  ;  elimi¬ 
nate  futurity,  therefore,  and  at  once  they  lose  their  being  ;  if  the  non- 
engendered  are  made  amenable  to  futurity  they  are  thrown  down  from  the 
seat  of  their  existence,  for,  clearly,  existence  is  not  theirs  by  their  nature  if 
it  appears  only  as  a  being  about  to  be,  a  becoming,  an  advancing  from 
stage  to  stage. 

The  essential  existence  of  generated  things  seems  to  lie  in  their 
existing  from  the  time  of  their  generation  to  the  ultimate  of  time  after 
which  they  cease  to  be  ;  but  such  an  existence  is  compact  of  futurity, 
and  the  annulment  of  that  futurity  means  the  stopping  of  the  life  and 
therefore  of  the  essential  existence. 

Such  a  stoppage  would  be  true,  also,  of  the  (generated)  All  in  so 
far  as  it  is  a  thing  of  process  and  change  ;  for  this  reason  it  keeps  hastening 
towards  its  future,  dreading  to  rest,  seeking  to  draw  Being  to  itself  by  a 
perpetual  variety  of  production  and  action  and  by  its  circling  in  a  sort 
of  ambition  after  Essential  Existence. 

And  here  we  have,  incidentally,  lighted  upon  the  cause  of  the  Circuit 
of  the  All ;  it  is  a  movement  which  seeks  perpetuity  by  way  of  futurity. 

The  Primals,  on  the  contrary,  in  their  state  of  blessedness  have  no 
such  aspiration  towards  anything  to  come  :  they  are  the  whole,  now  ; 
what  life  may  be  thought  of  as  their  due,  they  possess  entire  ;  they, 
therefore,  seek  nothing,  since  there  is  nothing  future  to  them,  nothing 
external  to  them  in  which  any  futurity  could  find  lodgement. 

Thus  the  perfect  and  all-comprehensive  essence  of  the  Authentic 
Existent  does  not  consist  merely  in  the  completeness  inherent  in  its 
members  ;  its  essence  includes,  further,  its  established  immunity  from 
all  lack  with  the  exclusion,  also,  of  all  that  is  without  Being— for  not 
only  must  all  things  be  contained  in  the  All  and  Whole,  but  it  can  contain 
nothing  that  is,  or  was  ever,  non-existent — and  this  State  and  Nature  of 
the  Authentic  Existent  is  Eternity :  in  our  very  word.  Eternity  means 
Ever-Being  (aion=aei  on). 


102 


PLOTINUS 


5- 

This  Ever-Being  is  realised  when  upon  examination  of  an  object  I 
am  able  to  say — or  rather,  to  know — that  in  its  very  Nature  it  is  incapable 
of  increment  or  change  ;  anything  that  fails  by  that  test  is  no  Ever- 
Existent  or,  at  least,  no  Ever- All-Existent. 

But  is  perpetuity  enough  in  itself  to  constitute  an  Eternal  ? 

No  :  the  object  must,  farther,  include  such  a  Nature-Principle  as 
to  give  the  assurance  that  the  actual  state  excludes  all  future  change,  so 
that  it  is  found  at  every  observation  as  it  always  was. 

Imagine,  then,  the  state  of  a  being  which  cannot  fall  away  from  the 
vision  of  this  but  is  for  ever  caught  to  it,  held  by  the  spell  of  its  grandeur, 
kept  to  it  by  virtue  of  a  nature  itself  unfailing — or  even  the  state  of  one 
that  must  labour  towards  Eternity  by  directed  effort,  but  then  to  rest 
in  it,  immoveable  at  any  point,  assimilated  to  it,  co-etemal  with  it,  con¬ 
templating  Eternity  and  the  Eternal  by  what  is  Eternal  within  the  self. 

Accepting  this  as  a  true  account  of  an  eternal,  a  perdurable  Existent 
one  which  never  turns  to  any  Kind  outside  itself,  that  possesses  life 
complete  once  for  all,  that  has  never  received  any  accession,  that  is  now 
receiving  none  and  will  never  receive  any — we  have,  with  the  statement  of 
a  perduring  Being,  the  statement  also  of  perdurance  and  of  Eternity :  per- 
durance  is  the  corresponding  state  arising  from  the  (divine)  substratum 
and  inherent  in  it ;  Eternity  (the  Principle  as  distinguished  from  the 
property  of  everlastingness)  is  that  substratum  carrying  that  state  in 
manifestation. 

Eternity,  thus,  is  of  the  order  of  the  supremely  great ;  it  proves  on 
investigation  to  be  identical  with  God  it  may  fitly  be  described  as  God 
made  manifest,  as  God  declaring  what  He  is,  as  existence  without  jolt 
or  change,  and  therefore  as  also  the  firmly  living. 

And  it  should  be  no  shock  that  we  find  plurality  in  it  ,*  each  of  the 
Beings  of  the  Supreme  is  multiple  by  virtue  of  unlimited  force  ;  for  to 
be  limitless  implies  failing  at  no  point,  and  Eternity  is  pre-eminently  the 
limitless  since  (having  no  past  or  future)  it  spends  nothing  of  its  own 
substance . 


III.  7.  6] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


103 


Thus  a  close  enough  definition  of  Eternity  would  be  that  it  is  a  fife 
limitless  in  the  full  sense  of  being  all  the  life  there  is  and  a  life  which, 
knowing  nothing  of  past  or  future  to  shatter  its  completeness,  possesses 
itself  intact  for  ever.  To  the  notion  of  a  Life  (a  Living-Principle)  all- 
comprehensive  add  that  it  never  spends  itself,  and  we  have  the  statement 
of  a  Life  instantaneously  infinite. 

6. 

Now  the  Principle  this  stated,  all  good  and  beauty,  and  everlasting, 
is  centred  in  The  One,  sprung  from  It,  and  pointed  towards  It,  never 
straying  from  It,  but  ever  holding  about  It  and  in  It  and  living  by  Its 
law  ;  and  it  is  in  this  reference,  as  I  judge,  that  Plato — finely,  and  by 
no  means  inadvertently  but  with  profound  intention — ^wrote  those  words 
of  his  “  Eternity  stable  in  Unity  ” ;  he  wishes  to  convey  that  Eternity 
is  not  merely  something  circhng  on  its  traces  into  a  final  unity  but  has 
(instantaneous)  Being  about  The  One  as  the  unchanging  Life  of  the 
Authentic  Existent.  This  is  certainly  what  we  have  been  seeking  ;  this 
Principle,  at  rest  within  the  One,  is  Eternity ;  possessing  this  stable 
quahty,  being  itself  at  once  the  absolute  self-identical  and  none  the  less 
the  active  manifestation  of  an  unchanging  Life  set  towards  the  Divine 
and  dwelling  within  It,  untrue,  therefore,  neither  on  the  side  of  Being 
nor  on  the  side  of  Life— this  wiU  be  Eternity  (the  Real-Being  we  have 
sought) . 

Truly  to  be  comports  never  lacking  existence  and  never  knowing 
variety  in  the  mode  of  existence  t  Being  is,  therefore,  self-identical 
throughout,  and,  therefore,  again  is  one  undistinguishable  thing.  Being 
can  have  no  this  and  that  j  it  cannot  be  treated  in  terms  of  intervals, 
unfoldings,  progression,  extension  ;  there  is  no  grasping  any  first  or  last 

in  it. 

If,  then,  there  is  no  first  or  last  in  this  Principle,  if  existence  is  its 
most  authentic  possession  and  its  very  self,  and  this  in  the  sense  that  its 
existence  is  Essence  or  Life — then,  once  again,  we  meet  here  what  we 
have  been  discussing.  Eternity. 

Observe  that  such  words  as  *  always,  never,  sometimes  must  be 


104 


PLOTINUS 


taken  as  mere  conveniences  of  exposition  :  thus  “  always  " — used  in  the 
sense  not  of  time  but  of  incorruptibility  and  endlessly  complete  scope — 
might  set  up  the  false  notion  of  stage  and  interval.  We  might  perhaps 
prefer  to  speak  of  “  Being,”  without  any  attribute  ;  but  since  this  term 
is  applicable  to  Essence  and  some  writers  have  used  the  word  Essence 
for  things  of  process,  we  cannot  convey  our  meaning  to  them  without 
introducing  some  word  carrying  the  notion  of  perdurance. 

There  is,  of  course,  no  difference  between  Being  and  Everlasting 
Being ;  just  as  there  is  none  between  a  philosopher  and  a  true  philosopher  : 
the  attribute  “  true  ”  came  into  use  because  there  arose  what  masqueraded 
as  philosophy  ;  and  for  similar  reasons  “  everlasting  ”  was  adjoined  to 
“  Being,”  and  “  Being  ”  to  ”  everlasting,”  and  we  have  (the  tautology 
of)  “  Everlasting  Being.”  We  must  take  this  “  Everlasting  ”  as  express¬ 
ing  no  more  than  Authentic  Being  :  it  is  merely  a  partial  expression  of 
a  potency  which  ignores  all  interval  or  term  and  can  look  forward  to 
nothing  by  way  of  addition  to  the  All  which  it  possesses.  The  Principle 
of  which  this  is  the  statement  will  be  the  AU-Existent,  and,  as  being  all, 
can  have  no  failing  or  deficiency,  cannot  be  at  some  one  point  complete 
and  at  some  other  lacking. 

Things  and  Beings  in  the  Time  order — even  when  to  all  appearance 
complete,  as  a  body  is  when  fit  to  harbour  a  soul — are  still  bound  to 
sequence ;  they  are  deficient  to  the  extent  of  that  thing.  Time,  which 
they  need  :  let  them  have  it,  present  to  them  and  running  side  by  side 
with  them,  and  they  are  by  that  very  fact  incomplete  ;  completeness  is 
attributed  to  them  only  by  an  accident  of  language. 

But  the  conception  of  Eternity  demands  something  which  is  in  its 
nature  complete  without  sequence  ;  it  is  not  satisfied  by  something 
measured  out  to  any  remoter  time  or  even  by  something  limitless,  but, 
in  its  limitless  reach,  still  having  the  progression  of  futurity  :  it  requires 
something  immediately  possessed  of  the  due  fullness  of  Being,  something 
whose  Being  does  not  depend  upon  any  quantity  (such  as  instalments  of 
time)  but  subsists  before  all  quantity. 

Itself  having  no  quantity,  it  can  have  no  contact  with  anything 
quantitative  since  its  Life  cannot  be  made  a  thing  of  fragments,  in  con- 


III.  7- 7]  TIME  AND  ETERNITY  105 

tradiction  to  the  partlessness  which  is  its  character  ;  it  must  be  without 
parts  in  the  Life  as  in  the  essence. 

The  phrase  “  He  was  good  ”  (used  by  Plato  of  the  Demiurge)  refers 
to  the  Idea  of  the  All ;  and  its  very  indefiniteness  signifies  the  utter 
absence  of  relation  to  Time  :  so  that  even  this  Universe  has  had  no 
temporal  beginning;  and  if  we  speak  of  something  "  before  ”  it,  that  is 
only  in  the  sense  of  the  Cause  from  which  it  takes  its  Eternal  Existence. 
Plato  used  the  word  merely  for  the  convenience  of  exposition,  and 
immediately  corrects  it  as  inappropriate  to  the  order  vested  with  the 
Eternity  he  conceives  and  affirms. 

7- 

Now  comes  the  question  whether,  in  all  this  discussion,  we  are  not 
merely  helping  to  make  out  a  case  for  some  other  order  of  Beings  and 
talking  of  matters  alien  to  ourselves. 

But  how  could  that  be  ?  What  understanding  can  there  be  failing 
some  point  of  contact  ?  And  what  contact  could  there  be  with  the 
utterly  alien  ? 

We  must  then  have,  ourselves,  some  part  or  share  in  Eternity. 

Still,  how  is  this  possible  to  us  who  exist  in  Time  ? 

The  whole  question  turns  on  the  distinction  between  being  in  Time 
and  being  in  Eternity,  and  this  will  be  best  realised  by  probing  to  the 
Nature  of  Time.  We  must,  therefore,  descend  from  Eternity  to  the 
investigation  of  Time,  to  the  realm  of  Time  :  till  now  we  have  been 
taking  the  upward  way  ;  we  must  now  take  the  downward — ^not  to  the 
lowest  levels  but  within  the  degree  in  which  Time  itself  is  a  descent  from 
Eternity. 

If  the  venerable  sages  of  former  days  had  not  treated  of  Time,  our 
method  would  be  to  begin  by  linking  to  (the  idea  of)  Eternity  (the  idea 
of)  its  Next  (its  inevitable  downward  or  outgoing  subsequent  in  the 
same  order),  then  setting  forth  the  probable  nature  of  such  a  Next  and 
proceeding  to  show  how  the  conception  thus  formed  tallies  with  our  own 

doctrine. 

But,  as  things  are,  our  best  beginning  is  to  range  over  the  most  note- 


io6 


PLOTINUS 


worthy  of  the  ancient  opinions  and  see  whether  any  of  them  accord  with 
ours. 

Existing  explanations  of  Time  seem  to  fall  into  three  classes  : — 

Time  is  variously  identified  with  what  we  know  as  Movement,  with  a 
moved  object,  and  with  some  phenomenon  of  Movement  :  obviously  it 
cannot  be  Rest  or  a  resting  object  or  any  phenomenon  of  rest,  since,  in 
its  characteristic  idea,  it  is  concerned  with  change. 

Of  those  that  explain  it  as  Movement,  some  identify  it  with  Absolute 
Movement  (or  with  the  total  of  Movement),  others  with  that  of  the  All. 
Those  that  make  it  a  moved  object  would  identify  it  with  the  orb  of  the 
All.  Those  that  conceive  it  as  some  phenomenon,  or  some  period,  of 
Movement  treat  it,  severally,  either  as  a  standard  of  measure  or  as 
something  inevitably  accompanying  Movement,  abstract  or  definite. 

8. 

Movement  Time  cannot  be — whether  a  definite  act  of  moving  is 
meant  or  a  united  total  made  up  of  all  such  acts — since  movement,  in 
either  sense,  takes  place  in  Time.  And,  of  course,  if  there  is  any  move¬ 
ment  not  in  Time,  the  identification  with  Time  becomes  all  the  less 
tenable. 

In  a  word.  Movement  must  be  distinct  from  the  medium  in  which 
it  takes  place. 

And,  with  all  that  has  been  said  or  is  still  said,  one  consideration  is 
decisive  :  Movement  can  come  to  rest,  can  be  intermittent ;  Time  is 
continuous. 

We  will  be  told  that  the  Movement  of  the  All  is  continuous  (and  so 
may  be  identical  with  Time). 

But,  if  the  reference  is  to  the  Circuit  of  the  heavenly  system  (it  is  not 
strictly  continuous,  or  equable,  since)  the  time  taken  in  the  return  path 
is  not  that  of  the  outgoing  movement  ;  the  one  is  twice  as  long  as  the 
other  :  this  Movement  of  the  All  proceeds,  therefore,  by  two  different 
degrees  ;  the  rate  of  the  entire  journey  is  not  that  of  the  first  half. 

Further,  the  fact  that  we  hear  of  the  Movement  of  the  outermost 
sphere  being  the  swiftest  confirms  our  theory.  Obviously,  it  is  the  swiftest 


111.7.8]  TIME  AND  ETERNITY  107 

of  movements  by  taking  the  lesser  time  to  traverse  the  greatei  space 
the  very  greatest — all  other  moving  things  are  slower  by  taking  a  longer 
time  to  traverse  a  mere  segment  of  the  same  extension  ;  in  other  words, 
Time  is  not  this  movement. 

And,  if  Time  is  not  even  the  movement  of  the  Kosmic  Sphere  much 
less  is  it  the  sphere  itself  though  that  has  been  identified  with  Time  on  the 

ground  of  its  being  in  motion. 

Is  it,  then,  some  phenomenon  or  connection  of  Movement  ? 

Let  us,  tentatively,  suppose  it  to  be  extent,  or  duration,  of  Move¬ 
ment. 

Now,  to  begin  with.  Movement,  even  continuous,  has  no  unchanging 
extent  (as  Time  the  equable  has),  since,  even  in  space,  it  may  be  faster 
or  slower  ;  there  must,  therefore,  be  some  unit  of  standard  outside  it, 
by  which  these  differences  are  measurable,  and  this  outside  standard 
would  more  properly  be  called  Time.  And  failing  such  a  measuie,  which 
extent  would  be  Time,  that  of  the  fast  or  of  the  slow— or  rather  which  of 
them  all,  since  these  speed-differences  are  limitless  ? 

Is  it  the  extent  of  the  subordinate  Movement  (  =  movement  of 

things  of  earth)  ? 

Again,  this  gives  us  no  unit  since  the  movement  is  infinitely  variable  ; 
we  would  have,  thus,  not  Time  but  Times. 

The  extent  of  the  Movement  of  the  All,  then  ? 

The  Celestial  Circuit  may,  no  doubt,  be  thought  of  in  terms  of 
quantity.  It  answers  to  measure — in  two  ways.  First  there  is  space, 
the  movement  is  commensurate  with  the  area  it  passes  through,  and  this 
area  is  its  extent.  But  this  gives  us,  still,  space  only,  not  Time.  Secondly, 
the  circuit,  considered  apart  from  distance  traversed,  has  the  extent  of 
its  continuity,  of  its  tendency  not  to  stop  but  to  proceed  indefinitely  : 
but  this  is  merely  amplitude  of  Movement ;  search  it,  tell  its  vastness, 
and,  still.  Time  has  no  more  appeared,  no  more  enters  into  the  matter, 
than  when  one  certifies  a  high  pitch  of  heat  all  we  have  discovered  is 
Motion  in  ceaseless  succession,  like  water  flowing  ceaselessly,  motion  and 

extent  of  motion. 


io8 


PLOTINUS 


Succession  or  repetition  gives  us  Number — dyad,  triad,  etc. — and 
the  extent  traversed  is  a  matter  of  Magnitude  ;  thus  we  have  Quantity 
of  Movement — in  the  form  of  number,  dyad,  triad,  decade,  or  in  the  form 
of  extent  apprehended  in  what  we  may  call  the  amount  of  the  Movement : 
but,  the  idea  of  Time  we  have  not.  That  definite  Quantity  is  (not  Time 
but)  merely  something  occurring  within  Time,  for,  otherwise  Time  is  not 
everywhere  but  is  something  belonging  to  Movement  which  thus  would 
be  its  substratum  or  basic-stuff :  once  more,  then,  we  would  be  making 
Time  identical  with  Movement ;  for  the  extent  of  Movement  is  not  some¬ 
thing  outside  it  but  is  simply  its  continuousness,  and  we  need  not  halt 
upon  the  difference  between  the  momentary  and  the  continuous,  which 
is  simply  one  of  manner  and  degree.  The  extended  movement  and  its 
extent  are  not  Time  ;  they  are  in  Time.  Those  that  explain  Time  as 
extent  of  Movement  must  mean  not  the  extent  of  the  movement  itself 
but  something  which  determines  its  extension,  something  with  which 
the  movement  keeps  pace  in  its  course.  But  what  this  something  is,  we 
are  not  told  ;  yet  it  is,  clearly,  Time,  that  in  which  all  Movement  pro¬ 
ceeds.  This  is  what  our  discussion  has  aimed  at  from  the  first :  “  What, 
essentially,  is  Time  ?  ”  It  comes  to  this  :  we  ask  “  What  is  Time  ?  ” 

and  we  are  answered,  “  Time  is  the  extension  of  Movement  in 
Time  !  ” 

On  the  one  hand  Time  is  said  to  be  an  extension  apart  from  and 
outside  that  of  Movement ;  and  we  are  left  to  guess  what  this  extension 
may  be  :  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  represented  as  the  extension  of  Move¬ 
ment  ,  and  this  leaves  the  difficulty  what  to  make  of  the  extension  of 
Rest— though  one  thing  may  continue  as  long  in  repose  as  another 
in  motion,  so  that  we  are  obliged  to  think  of  one  thing  Time  that 

covers  both  Rest  and  Movements,  and,  therefore,  stands  distinct  from 
either. 

What  then  is  this  thing  of  extension  ?  To  what  order  of  beings 
does  it  belong  ? 

It  obviously  is  not  spatial,  for  place,  too,  is  something  outside  it. 


in.  7.  9]  TIME  AND  ETERNITY  109 

9- 

“  A  Number,  a  Measure,  belonging  to  Movement  ?  ” 

This,  at  least,  is  plausible  since  Movement  is  a  continuous  thing  ; 
but  let  us  consider. 

To  begin  with,  we  have  the  doubt  which  met  us  when  we  probed 
its  identification  with  extent  of  Movement :  is  Time  the  measure  of  any 
and  every  Movement  ? 

Have  we  any  means  of  calculating  disconnected  and  lawless  Move¬ 
ment  ?  What  number  or  measure  would  apply  ?  What  would  be  the 
principle  of  such  a  Measure  ? 

One  Measure  for  movement  slow  and  fast,  for  any  and  every  move¬ 
ment  :  then  that  number  and  measure  would  be  like  the  decade,  by 
which  we  reckon  horses  and  cows,  or  like  some  common  standard  for 
liquids  and  solids.  If  Time  is  this  Kind  of  Measure,  we  learn,  no  doubt, 
of  what  objects  it  is  a  Measure — of  Movements — but  we  are  no  nearer 
understanding  what  it  is  in  itself. 

Or  ;  we  may  take  the  decade  and  think  of  it,  apart  from  the  horses 
or  cows,  as  a  pure  number  ;  this  gives  us  a  measure  which,  even  though 
not  actually  applied,  has  a  definite  nature.  Is  Time,  perhaps,  a  Measure 
in  this  sense  ? 

No  :  to  tell  us  no  more  of  Time  in  itself  than  that  it  is  such  a  number 
is  merely  to  bring  us  back  to  the  decade  we  have  already  rejected,  or  to 
some  similar  collective  figure. 

If,  on  the  other  hand.  Time  is  (not  such  an  abstraction  but)  a 
Measure  possessing  a  continuous  extent  of  its  own,  it  must  have  quantity, 
like  a  foot-rule  ;  it  must  have  magnitude  ;  it  will,  clearly,  be  in  the 
nature  of  a  line  traversing  the  path  of  Movement.  But,  itself  thus  sharing 
in  the  movement,  how  can  it  be  a  Measure  of  Movement  ?  Why  should 
the  one  of  the  two  be  the  measure  rather  than  the  other  ?  Besides  an 
accompanying  measure  is  more  plausibly  considered  as  a  measure  of  the 
particular  movement  it  accompanies  than  of  Movement  in  general. 
Further,  this  entire  discussion  assumes  continuous  movement,  since  the 
accompanying  principle.  Time,  is  itself  unbroken  (but  a  full  explanation 
implies  justification  of  Time  in  repose). 


no 


PLOTINUS 


The  fact  is  that  we  are  not  to  think  of  a  measure  outside  and  apart, 
but  of  a  combined  thing,  a  measured  Movement,  and  we  are  to  discover 
what  measures  it. 

Given  a  Movement  measured,  are  we  to  suppose  the  measure  to  be 
a  magnitude  ? 

If  so,  which  of  these  two  would  be  Time,  the  measured  movement 
or  the  measuring  magnitude  ?  For  Time  (as  measure)  must  be  either  the 
movement  measured  by  magnitude,  or  the  measuring  magnitude  itself 
or  something  using  the  magnitude  like  a  yard-stick  to  appraise  the  move¬ 
ment.  In  all  three  cases,  as  we  have  indicated,  the  application  is  scarcely 
plausible  except  where  continuous  movement  is  assumed  ;  unless  the 
Movement  proceeds  smoothly,  and  even  unintermittently  and  as  embrac¬ 
ing  the  entire  content  of  the  moving  object,  great  difficulties  arise  in  the 
identification  of  Time  with  any  kind  of  measure. 

Let  us,  then,  suppose  Time  to  be  this  “  measured  Movement,” 
measured  by  quantity.  Now  the  Movement  if  it  is  to  be  measured 
requires  a  measure  outside  itself  ;  this  was  the  only  reason  for  raising 
the  question  of  the  accompanying  measure.  In  exactly  the  same  way 
the  measuring  magnitude,  in  turn,  will  require  a  measure,  because  only 
when  the  standard  shows  such  and  such  an  extension  can  the  degree  of 
movement  be  appraised.  Time  then  will  be,  not  the  magnitude  accom¬ 
panying  the  Movement,  but  that  numerical  value  by  which  the  magnitude 
accompanying  the  Movement  is  estimated.  But  that  number  can  be 
only  the  abstract  figure  which  represents  the  magnitude,  and  it  is  difficult 
to  see  how  an  abstract  figure  can  perform  the  act  of  measuring. 

And,  supposing  that  we  discover  a  way  in  which  it  can,  we  still 
have  not  Time,  the  measure,  but  a  particular  quantity  of  Time,  not  at 
all  the  same  thing  :  Time  means  something  very  different  from  any 
definite  period  :  before  all  question  as  to  quantity  is  the  question  as  to 
the  thing  of  which  a  certain  quantity  is  present. 

Time,  we  are  told,  is  the  number  outside  Movement  and  measuring 
it,  like  the  tens  applied  to  the  reckoning  of  the  horses  and  cows  but  not 
inherent  in  them  :  we  are  not  told  what  this  Number  is  ;  yet,  applied  or 
not,  it  must,  like  that  decade,  have  some  nature  of  its  own. 


III.  7. 9] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


III 


Or  “it  is  that  which  accompanies  a  Movement  and  measures  it  by 
its  successive  stages  “  ;  but  we  are  still  left  asking  what  this  thing 
recording  the  stages  may  be. 

In  any  case,  once  a  thing — whether  by  point  or  standard  or  any  other 
means — measures  succession,  it  must  measure  according  to  time .  this 
number  appraising  movement  degree  by  degree  must,  therefore,  if  it  is 
to  serve  as  a  measure  at  all,  be  something  dependent  upon  time  and  in 
contact  with  it '.  for,  either,  degree  is  spatial,  merely  the  beginning  and 
end  of  the  Stadium,  for  example— or  in  the  only  alternative,  it  is  a  pure 
matter  of  Time  *.  the  succession  of  early  and  late  is  stage  of  Time,  Time 
priding  upon  a  certain  Now  or  Time  beginning  from  a  Now. 

Time,  therefore,  is  something  other  than  the  mere  number  measuring 
Movement,  whether  Movement  in  general  or  any  particular  tract  of 
Movement. 

Further  Why  should  the  mere  presence  of  a  number  give  us  Time 
—a  number  measuring  or  measured  ;  for  the  same  number  may  be  either 

_ if  Time  is  not  given  us  by  the  fact  of  Movement  itself,  the  movement 

which  inevitably  contains  in  itself  a  succession  of  stages  ?  To  make  the 
number  essential  to  Time  is  like  saying  that  magnitude  has  not  its  full 
quantity  unless  we  can  estimate  that  quantity. 

Again,  if  Time  is,  admittedly,  endless,  how  can  number  apply 

to  it  ? 

Are  we  to  take  some  portion  of  Time  and  find  its  numerical  state¬ 
ment  ?  That  simply  means  that  Time  existed  before  number  was  applied 

to  it. 

W^e  may,  therefore,  very  well  think  that  it  existed  before  the  Soul 
or  Mind  that  estimates  it — if,  indeed,  it  is  not  to  be  thought  to 
take  its  origin  from  the  Soul— for  no  measurement  by  anything  is 
necessary  to  its  existence  ;  measured  or  not,  it  has  the  full  extent  of 

its  being. 

And  suppose  it  to  be  true  that  the  Soul  is  the  appraiser,  using  Mag¬ 
nitude  as  the  measuring  standard,  how  does  this  help  us  to  the  conception 

of  Time  ? 


II2 


PLOTINUS 


10. 

Time,  again,  has  been  described  as  some  sort  of  a  sequence  upon 
Movement,  but  we  learn  nothing  from  this,  nothing  is  said,  until  we  know 
what  it  is  that  produces  this  sequential  thing  ;  probably  the  cause  and 
not  the  result  would  turn  out  to  be  Time. 

And,  admitting  such  a  thing,  there  would  still  remain  the  question 
whether  it  came  into  being  before  the  movement,  with  it,  or  after  it ; 
and,  whether  we  say  before  or  with  or  after,  we  are  speaking  of  order  in 
Time  :  and  thus  our  definition  is  "  Time  is  a  sequence  upon  movement 
in  Time  !  ” 

Enough.  Our  main  purpose  is  to  show  what  Time  is,  not  to  refute 
false  definition.  To  traverse  point  by  point  the  many  opinions  of  our 
many  predecessors  would  mean  a  history  rather  than  an  identification  ; 
we  have  treated  the  various  theories  as  fully  as  is  possible  in  a  cursory 
review  :  and,  notice,  that  which  makes  Time  the  Measure  of  the  All- 
Movement  is  refuted  by  our  entire  discussion  and,  especially,  by  the 
observations  upon  the  Measurement  of  Movement  in  general,  for  all  the 
argument — except,  of  course,  that  from  irregularity — applies  to  the  All 
as  much  as  to  particular  Movement. 

We  are,  thus,  at  the  stage  where  we  are  to  state  what  Time  really  is. 


II. 

To  this  end  we  must  go  back  to  the  state  we  affirmed  of  Eternity, 
unwavering  Life,  undivided  totality,  limitless,  knowing  no  divagation, 
at  rest  in  unity  and  intent  upon  it.  Time  was  not  yet :  or  at  least  it 
did  not  exist  for  the  Eternal  Beings,  though  its  being  was  implicit  in 
the  Idea  and  Principle  of  progressive  derivation. 

But  from  the  Divine  Beings  thus  at  rest  within  themselves,  how  did 
this  Time  first  emerge  ? 

We  can  scarcely  call  upon  the  Muses  to  recount  its  origin  since  they 
were  not  in  existence  then — perhaps  not  even  if  they  had  been.  The 
engendered  thing.  Time,  itself,  can  best  tell  us  how  it  rose  and  became 
manifest  ;  something  thus  its  story  would  run  : 


III.  7.  II]  TIME  AND  ETERNITY  ii3 

Time  at  first — in  reality  before  that  “  first  ”  was  produced  by  desire 
of  succession — Time  lay,  self-concentrated,  at  rest  within  the  Authentic 
Existent :  it  was  not  yet  Time ;  it  was  merged  in  the  Authentic 
and  motionless  with  it.  But  there  was  an  active  principle  there,  one  set 
on  governing  itself  and  realising  itself  (=the  All-Soul),  and  it  chose  to 
aim  at  something  more  than  its  present :  it  stirred  from  its  rest,  and 
Time  stirred  with  it.  And  we  (i.e.  human  Souls  as  summed  in  the  principle 
of  developing  Life,  the  All-Soul  ?)  we,  stirring  to  a  ceaseless  succession, 
to  a  next,  to  the  discrimination  of  identity  and  the  establishment  of  ever 
new  difference,  traversed  a  portion  of  the  outgoing  path  and  produced  an 

image  of  Eternity,  produced  Time. 

For  the  Soul  contained  an  unquiet  faculty,  always  desirous  of  trans¬ 
lating  elsewhere  what  it  saw  in  the  Authentic  Realm,  and  it  could  not 
bear  to  retain  within  itself  all  the  dense  fullness  of  its  possession. 

A  Seed  is  at  rest ;  the  nature-principle  within,  uncoiling  outwards, 
makes  way  towards  what  seems  to  it  a  large  life  ,  but  by  that  partition 
it  loses  ;  it  was  a  unity  self-gathered,  and  now,  in  going  forth  from  itself, 
it  fritters  its  unity  away  ;  it  advances  into  a  weaker  greatness.  It  is 
so  with  this  faculty  of  the  Soul,  when  it  produces  the  Kosmos  known  to 
sense— the  mimic  of  the  Divine  Sphere,  moving  not  in  the  very  move¬ 
ment  of  the  Divine  but  in  its  similitude,  in  an  effort  to  reproduce  that  of 
the  Divine.  To  bring  this  Kosmos  into  being,  the  Soul  first  laid  aside 
its  eternity  and  clothed  itself  with  Time  ;  this  world  of  its  fashioning  it 
then  gave  over  to  be  a  servant  to  Time,  making  it  at  every  point  a  thing 
of  Time,  setting  all  its  progressions  within  the  bournes  of  Time.  For 
the  Kosmos  moves  only  in  Soul — the  only  Space  within  the  range  of  the 
All  open  to  it  to  move  in— and  therefore  its  Movement  has  always  been 

in  the  Time  which  inheres  in  Soul. 

Putting  forth  its  energy  in  act  after  act,  in  a  constant  progress  of 

novelty,  the  Soul  produces  succession  as  well  as  act;  taking  up  new 
purposes  added  to  the  old  it  brings  thus  into  being  what  had  not  existe 
in  that  former  period  when  its  purpose  was  still  dormant  and  its  i  e 
was  not  as  it  since  became  :  the  life  is  changed  and  that  change  carries 
with  it  a  change  of  Time.  Time,  then,  is  contained  m  differentiation  of 


f 


PLOTINUS 


114 

Life  ;  the  ceaseless  forward  movement  of  Life  brings  with  it  unending 
Time  ;  and  Life  as  it  achieves  its  stages  constitutes  past  Time. 

Would  it,  then,  be  sound  to  define  Time  as  the  Life  of  the  Soul 
in  movement  as  it  passes  from  one  stage  of  act  or  experience  to 
another  ? 

Yes ;  for  Eternity,  we  have  said,  is  Life  in  repose,  unchanging,  self¬ 
identical,  always  endlessly  complete  ;  and  there  is  to  be  an  image  of 
Eternity — Time — such  an  image  as  this  lower  All  presents  of  the  Higher 
Sphere.  Therefore  over  against  that  higher  life  there  must  be  another 
life,  known  by  the  same  name  as  the  more  veritable  life  of  the  Soul ; 
over  against  that  movement  of  the  Intellectual  Soul  there  must  be  the 
movement  of  some  partial  phase  ;  over  against  that  identity,  unchange¬ 
ableness  and  stability  there  must  be  that  which  is  not  constant  in  the  one 
hold  but  puts  forth  multitudinous  acts  ;  over  against  that  oneness 
without  extent  or  interval  there  must  be  an  image  of  oneness,  a  unity 
of  link  and  succession  ;  over  against  the  immediately  infinite  and  all- 
comprehending,  that  which  tends,  yes,  to  infinity  but  by  tending  to  a 
perpetual  futurity  ;  over  against  the  Whole  in  concentration,  there  must 
be  that  which  is  to  be  a  Whole  by  stages  never  final.  The  lesser  must 
always  be  working  towards  the  increase  of  its  Being,  this  will  be  its 
imitation  of  what  is  immediately  complete,  self-realised,  endless  without 
stage  :  only  thus  can  its  Being  reproduce  that  of  the  Higher. 

Time,  however,  is  not  to  be  conceived  as  outside  of  Soul ;  Eternity 
IS  not  outside  of  the  Authentic  Existent :  nor  is  it  to  be  taken  as  a 
sequence  or  succession  to  Soul,  any  more  than  Eternity  is  to  the  Divine. 

It  is  a  thing  seen  upon  Soul,  inherent,  coeval  to  it,  as  Eternity  to  the 
Intellectual  Realm. 


12. 

We  are  brought  thus  to  the  conception  of  a  Natural-Principle— 
Time  a  certain  expanse  (a  quantitative  phase)  of  the  Life  of  the  Soul, 
a  principle  moving  forward  by  smooth  and  uniform  changes  following 
silently  upon  each  other— a  Principle,  then,  whose  Act  is  (not  one  like 
that  of  the  Supreme  but)  sequent. 


III.  7. 12] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


115 

But  let  us  conceive  this  power  of  the  Soul  to  turn  back  and  with¬ 
draw  from  the  life-course  which  it  now  maintains,  from  the  continuous 
and  unending  activity  of  an  ever-existent  soul  not  self-contained  or  self¬ 
intent  but  concerned  about  doing  and  engendering  :  imagine  it  no 
longer  accomplishing  any  Act,  setting  a  pause  to  this  work  it  has  in¬ 
augurated  ;  let  this  outgoing  phase  of  the  Soul  become  once  more, 
equally  with  the  rest,  turned  to  the  Supreme,  to  Eternal  Being,  to  the 
tranquilly  stable. 

What  would  then  exist  but  Eternity  ? 

All  would  remain  in  unity  ;  how  could  there  be  any  diversity  of 
things  ?  What  Earlier  or  Later  would  there  be,  what  long-lasting  or 
short-lasting  ?  What  ground  would  lie  ready  to  the  Soul’s  operation 
but  the  Supreme  in  which  it  has  its  Being  ?  Or,  indeed,  what  operative 
tendency  could  it  have  even  to  That  since  a  prior  separation  is  the  neces¬ 
sary  condition  of  tendency  ? 

The  very  sphere  of  the  Universe  would  not  exist ;  for  it  cannot 
antedate  Time  :  it,  too,  has  its  Being  and  its  Movement  in  Time  ;  and 
if  it  ceased  to  move,  the  Soul-Act  (which  is  the  essence  of  Time)  con¬ 
tinuing,  we  could  measure  the  period  of  its  Repose  by  that  standard 
outside  it. 

If,  then,  the  Soul  withdrew,  sinking  itself  again  into  its  primal  unity. 
Time  would  disappear  ;  the  origin  of  Time,  clearly,  is  to  be  traced  to  the 
first  stir  of  the  Soul’s  tendency  towards  the  production  of  the  sensible 
universe  with  the  consecutive  act  ensuing.  This  is  how  Time  as 
we  read — “  came  into  Being  simultaneously”  with  this  AU :  the  Soul 
begot  at  once  the  Universe  and  Time  ;  in  that  activity  of  the  Soul  this 
Universe  sprang  into  being  ;  the  activity  is  Time,  the  Universe  is  a  con¬ 
tent  of  Time.  No  doubt  it  will  be  urged  that  we  read  also  of  “  the  orbit 
of  the  Stars  being  Times  ”  :  but  do  not  forget  what  follows  ;  “the  stars 
exist,”  we  are  told,  “  for  the  display  and  delimitation  of  Time,”  and 
“  that  there  may  be  a  manifest  Measure.’  No  indication  of  Time  could 
be  derived  from  (observation  of)  the  Soul ;  no  portion  of  it  can  be  seen 
or  handled,  so  it  could  not  be  measured  in  itself,  especially  when  there 
was  as  yet  no  knowledge  of  counting  ;  therefore  the  Soul  brings  into 


ii6 


PLOTINUS 


being  night  and  day  ;  in  their  difference  is  given  Duahty — from  which, 
we  read,  arises  the  concept  of  Number. 

We  observe  the  tract  between  a  sunrise  and  its  return  and,  as  the 
movement  is  uniform,  we  thus  obtain  a  Time-interval  upon  which  to 
support  ourselves,  and  we  use  this  as  a  standard.  We  have  thus  a 
measure  of  Time.  Time  itself  is  not  a  measure.  How  would  it  set  to 
work  ?  And  what  kind  of  thing  is  there  of  which  it  could  say,  “  I  find 
the  extent  of  this  equal  to  such  and  such  a  stretch  of  my  own  extent  ?  ” 
What  is  this  “  I  ”  ?  Obviously  something  by  which  measurement  is 
known.  Time,  then,  serves  towards  measurement  but  is  not  itself  the 
Measure  :  the  Movement  of  the  All  will  be  measured  according  to  Tiitie, 
but  Time  will  not,  of  its  own  Nature,  be  a  Measure  of  Movement  : 
primarily  a  Kind  to  itself,  it  will  incidentally  exhibit  the  magnitudes  of 
that  movement. 

And  the  reiterated  observation  of  Movement — the  same  extent  found 
to  be  traversed  in  such  and  such  a  period — will  lead  to  the  conception 
of  a  definite  quantity  of  Time  past. 

This  brings  us  to  the  fact  that,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  Movement, 
the  orbit  of  the  universe,  may  legitimately  be  said  to  measure  Time — 
in  so  far  as  that  is  possible  at  all — since  any  definite  stretch  of  that 
circuit  occupies  a  certain  quantity  of  Time,  and  this  is  the  only  grasp  we 
have  of  Time,  our  only  understanding  of  it :  what  that  circuit  measures 
— by  indication,  that  is — will  be  Time,  manifested  by  the  Movement  but 
not  brought  into  being  by  it. 

This  means  that  the  measure  of  the  Spheric  Movement  has  itself 
been  measured  by  a  definite  stretch  of  that  Movement  and  therefore  is 
something  different ;  as  measure,  it  is  one  thing  and,  as  the  measured,  it  is 
another ;  (its  being  measure  or)  its  being  measured  cannot  be  of  its  essence. 

We  are  no  nearer  knowledge  than  if  we  said  that  the  foot-rule 
measures  Magnitude  while  we  left  the  concept  Magnitude  undefined  ; 
or,  again,  we  might  as  well  define  Movement — whose  limitlessness  puts  it 
out  of  our  reach — as  the  thing  measured  by  Space  ;  the  definition  would 
be  parallel  since  we  can  mark  off  a  certain  space  which  the  Movement 
has  traversed  and  say  the  one  is  equivalent  to  the  other. 


III.  7.  13] 


TIME  AND  ETERNITY 


117 
13- 

The  Spheral  Circuit,  then,  performed  in  Time,  indicates  it ;  but 
when  we  come  to  Time  itself  there  is  no  question  of  its  being  "  within  ” 
something  else  :  it  must  be  primary,  a  thing  “  within  itself.”  It  is  that 
in  which  all  the  rest  happens,  in  which  all  movement  and  rest  exist 
smoothly  and  under  order  ;  something  following  a  definite  order  is 
necessary  to  exhibit  it  and  to  make  it  a  subject  of  knowledge  ^though 
not  to  produce  it — it  is  known  by  order  whether  in  rest  or  in  motion  ; 
in  motion  especially,  for  Movement  better  moves  Time  into  our  ken  than 
rest  can,  and  it  is  easier  to  estimate  distance  traversed  than  repose 
maintained. 

This  last  fact  has  led  to  Time  being  called  a  measure  of  Movement 
when  it  should  have  been  described  as  something  measured  by  Move¬ 
ment  and  then  defined  in  its  essential  nature  ;  it  is  an  error  to  define  it 
by  a  mere  accidental  concomitant  and  so  to  reverse  the  actual  order  of 
things.  Possibly,  however,  this  reversal  was  not  intended  by  the  authors 
of  the  explanation  :  but,  at  any  rate,  we  do  not  understand  them  ,  they 
plainly  apply  the  term  Measure  to  what  is  in  reality  the  measured  and 
leave  us  unable  to  grasp  their  meaning  :  our  perplexity  may  be  due  to 
the  fact  that  their  writings — addressed  to  disciples  acquainted  with  their 
teaching— do  not  explain  what  this  thing,  measure,  or  measured  object, 
is  in  itself. 

Plato  does  not  make  the  essence  of  Time  consist  in  its  being  either 

a  measure  or  a  thing  measured  by  something  else. 

Upon  the  point  of  the  means  by  which  it  is  known,  he  remarks  that 
the  Circuit  advances  an  infinitesimal  distance  for  every  infinitesimal 
segment  of  Time  so  that  from  that  observation  it  is  possible  to  estimate 
what  the  Time  is,  how  much  it  amounts  to  ;  but  when  his  purpose  is 
to  explain  its  essential  nature  he  tells  us  that  it  sprang  into  Being  simul¬ 
taneously  with  the  Heavenly  system,  a  reproduction  of  Eternity,  its  image 
in  motion.  Time  necessarily  unresting  as  the  Life  with  which  it  must  keep 
pace  :  and  “  coeval  with  the  Heavens  ”  because  it  is  this  same  Life  (of 
the  Divine  Soul)  which  brings  the  Heavens  also  into  being ;  Time  and 
the  Heavens  are  the  work  of  the  one  Life. 


ii8 


PLOTINUS 


Suppose  that  Life,  then,  to  revert — an  impossibility — to  perfect 
unity :  Time,  whose  existence  is  in  that  Life,  and  the  Heavens,  no 
longer  maintained  by  that  Life,  would  end  at  once. 

It  is  the  height  of  absurdity  to  fasten  on  the  succession  of  earlier 
and  later  occurring  in  the  life  and  movement  of  this  sphere  of  ours,  to 
declare  that  it  must  be  some  definite  thing  and  to  call  it  Time,  while 
denying  the  reality  of  the  more  truly  existent  Movement,  that  of  the 
Soul,  which  has  also  its  earlier  and  later  :  it  cannot  be  reasonable  to 
recognise  succession  in  the  case  of  the  Soulless  Movement — and  so  to 
associate  Time  with  that — while  ignoring  succession  and  the  reality  of 
Time  in  the  Movement  from  which  the  other  takes  its  imitative  existence  ; 
to  ignore,  that  is,  the  very  Movement  in  which  succession  first  appears,  a 
self-actuated  movement  which,  engendering  its  own  every  operation,  is 
the  source  of  all  that  follows  upon  itself,  to  all  which,  it  is  the  cause  of 
existence,  at  once,  and  of  every  consequent. 

But : — we  treat  the  Kosmic  Movement  as  overarched  by  that  of  the 
Soul  and  bring  it  under  Time ;  yet  we  do  not  set  under  Time  that 
Soul-Movement  itself  with  all  its  endless  progression  :  what  is  our 
explanation  of  this  paradox  ? 

Simply,  that  the  Soul-Movement  has  for  its  Prior  (not  Time  but) 
Eternity  which  knows  neither  its  progression  nor  its  extension.  The 
descent  towards  Time  begins  with  this  Soul-Movement ;  it  made  Time 
and  harbours  Time  as  a  concomitant  to  its  Act. 

And  this  is  how  Time  is  omnipresent ;  that  Soul  is  absent  from  no 
fragment  of  the  Kosmos  just  as  our  Soul  is  absent  from  no  particle  of 
ourselves.  As  for  those  who  pronounce  Time  a  thing  of  no  substantial 
existence,  of  no  reality,  they  clearly  belie  God  Himself  whenever  they 
say  “  He  was  ”  or  “  He  will  be  ”  :  for  the  existence  indicated  by  the 
was  and  will  be  ”  can  have  only  such  reality  as  belongs  to  that  in 
which  it  is  said  to  be  situated  : — but  this  school  demands  another  style  of 
argument. 

Meanwhile  we  have  a  supplementary  observation  to  make. 

Take  a  man  walking  and  observe  the  advance  he  has  made  ;  that 
advance  gives  you  the  quantity  of  movement  he  is  employing  :  and 


III.  8. 1]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 


119 

when  you  know  that  quantity — represented  by  the  ground  traversed  by 
his  feet,  for,  of  course,  we  are  supposing  the  bodily  movement  to  corre¬ 
spond  with  the  pace  he  has  set  within  himself — you  know  also  the  move¬ 
ment  that  exists  in  the  man  himself  before  the  feet  move. 

You  must  relate  the  body,  carried  forward  during  a  given  period  of 
Time,  to  a  certain  quantity  of  Movement  causing  the  progress  and  to 
the  Time  it  takes,  and  that  again  to  the  Movement,  equal  in  extension, 
within  the  man’s  soul. 

But  the  Movement  within  the  Soul — to  what  are  you  to  (relate) 
refer  that  ? 

Let  your  choice  fall  where  it  may,  from  this  point  there  is  nothing 
but  the  unextended  :  and  this  is  the  primarily  existent,  the  container  to 
all  else,  having  itself  no  container,  brooking  none. 

And,  as  with  Man’s  Soul,  so  with  the  Soul  of  the  All. 

“  Is  Time,  then,  within  ourselves  as  well  ?  ” 

Time  is  in  every  Soul  of  the  order  of  the  All-Soul,  present  in  like  form 
in  all ;  for  all  the  Souls  are  the  one  Soul. 

And  this  is  why  Time  can  never  be  broken  apart,  any  more  than 
Eternity  which,  similarly,  under  diverse  manifestations,  has  its  Being  as 
an  integral  constituent  of  all  the  eternal  Existences. 


EIGHTH  TRACTATE 
Nature  Contemplation  and  the  One 

I. 

Supposing  we  played  a  little  before  entering  upon  our  serious  concern 
and  maintained  that  all  things  are  striving  after  Contemplation,  looking  to 
Vision  as  their  one  end — and  this,  not  merely  beings  endowed  with  reason 
but  even  the  unreasoning  animals,  the  Principle  that  rules  in  growing 
things,  and  the  Earth  that  produces  these — and  that  all  achieve  their 
purpose  in  the  measure  possible  to  their  kind,  each  attaining  Vision  and 
possessing  itself  of  the  End  in  its  own  way  and  degree,  some  things  in 
entire  reality,  others  in  mimicry  and  in  image — we  would  scarcely  find 


120 


PLOTINUS 


anyone  to  endure  so  strange  a  thesis.  But  in  a  discussion  entirely  among 
ourselves  there  is  no  risk  in  a  light  handling  of  our  own  ideas. 

Well — in  the  play  of  this  very  moment  am  I  engaged  in  the  act  of 
Contemplation  ? 

Yes  ;  I  and  all  that  enter  this  play  are  in  Contemplation  :  our  play 
aims  at  Vision  ;  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  child  or  man, 
in  sport  or  earnest,  is  playing  or  working  only  towards  Vision,  that  every 
act  is  an  effort  towards  Vision  ;  the  compulsory  act,  which  tends  rather 
to  bring  the  Vision  down  to  outward  things,  and  the  act  thought  of  as 
voluntary,  less  concerned  with  the  outer,  originate  alike  in  the  effort 
towards  Vision. 

The  case  of  Man  will  be  treated  later  on  :  let  us  speak,  first,  of  the  earth 
and  of  the  trees  and  vegetation  in  general,  asking  ourselves  what  is  the 
nature  of  Contemplation  in  them,  how  we  relate  to  any  Contemplative 
activity  the  labour  and  productiveness  of  the  earth,  how  Nature,  held 
to  be  devoid  of  reason  and  even  of  conscious  representation,  can  either 
harbour  Contemplation  or  produce  by  means  of  the  Contemplation 
which  it  does  not  possess. 


2. 

There  is,  obviously,  no  question  here  of  hands  or  feet,  of  any  imple¬ 
ment  borrowed  or  inherent :  Nature  needs  simply  the  Matter  which  it 
is  to  work  upon  and  bring  under  Form  ;  its  productivity  cannot  depend 
upon  mechanical  operation.  What  driving  or  hoisting  goes  to  produce 
all  that  variety  of  colour  and  pattern  ? 

The  wax-workers,  whose  methods  have  been  cited  as  parallel  to  the 
creative  act  of  Nature,  are  unable  to  make  colours  ;  all  they  can  do  is  to 
impose  upon  their  handicraft  colours  taken  from  elsewhere.  None  the 
less  there  is  a  parallel  which  demands  attention  :  in  the  case  of  workers 
in  such  arts  there  must  be  something  locked  up  within  themselves,  an 
efficacy  not  going  out  from  them  and  yet  guiding  their  hands  in  all  their 
creation  ;  and  this  observation  should  have  indicated  a  similar  phenome¬ 
non  in  Nature ;  it  should  be  clear  that  this  indwelling  efficacy,  which  makes 
without  hands,  must  exist  in  Nature,  no  less  than  in  the  craftsman— 


ni.8.3]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 


I2I 


but,  there,  as  a  thing  completely  inbound.  Nature  need  possess  no 
outgoing  force  as  against  that  remaining  within  ;  the  only  moved  thing 
is  Matter  ;  there  can  be  no  moved  phase  in  this  Nature-Principle  ;  any 
such  moved  phase  could  not  be  the  primal  mover  ;  this  Nature-Principle 
is  no  such  moved  entity  ;  it  is  the  unmoved  Principle  operating  in  the 
Kosmos. 

We  may  be  answered  that  the  Reason-Principle  is,  no  doubt,  un¬ 
moved,  but  that  the  Nature-Principle,  another  being,  operates  by 
motion. 

But,  if  Nature  entire  is  in  question  here,  it  is  identical  with  the  Reason- 
Principle  ;  and  any  part  of  it  that  is  unmoved  is  the  Reason-Principle. 
The  Nature-Principle  must  be  an  Ideal-Form,  not  a  compound  of  Form 
and  Matter  ;  there  is  no  need  for  it  to  possess  (such  a  changeable  element 
as)  Matter,  hot  and  cold  :  the  Matter  that  underhes  it,  on  which  it 
exercises  its  creative  act,  brings  all  that  with  it,  or,  natively  without 
quality,  becomes  hot  and  cold,  and  aU  the  rest,  when  brought  under 
Reason  :  Matter,  to  become  fire,  demands  the  approach  not  of  fire  but 
of  a  Reason-Principle. 

This  is  no  slight  evidence  that  in  the  animal  and  vegetable  realms 
the  Reason-Principles  are  the  makers  and  that  Nature  is  a  Reason- 
Principle  producing  a  second  Reason-Principle,  its  offspring,  which,  in 
turn,  while  itself,  still,  remaining  intact,  communicates  something  to  the 
underlie.  Matter. 

The  Reason-Principle  presiding  over  visible  Shape  is  the  very 
ultimate  of  its  order,  a  dead  thing  unable  to  produce  further  :  that  which 
produces  in  the  created  realm  is  the  living  Reason-Principle  brother, 
no  doubt,  to  that  which  gives  mere  shape,  but  having  life-giving  power. 

3. 

But  if  this  Reason-Principle  (Nature)  is  in  act— and  produces  by 
the  process  indicated — how  can  it  have  any  part  in  Contempla¬ 
tion  ? 

To  begin  with,  since  in  all  its  production  it  is  stationary  and  intact, 
a  Reason-Principle  self-indwelling,  it  is  in  its  own  nature  a  Contemplative 


R 


122 


PLOTINUS 


act.  All  doing  must  be  guided  by  an  Idea,  and  will  therefore  be  distinct 
from  that  Idea  :  the  Reason-Principle  then,  as  accompanying  and 
guiding  the  work,  wiU  be  distinct  from  the  work  ;  not  being  action  but 
Reason-Principle  it  is,  necessarily.  Contemplation.  Taking  the  Reason- 
Principle,  the  Logos,  in  all  its  phases,  the  lowest  and  last  springs  from  a 
mental  act  (in  the  higher  Logos)  and  is  itself  a  contemplation,  though 
only  in  the  sense  of  being  contemplated  (i.e.  of  being  the  conscious  pro¬ 
duct  of  a  Contemplation  ?),  but  above  it  stands  the  total  Logos  with 
its  two  distinguishable  phases,  first,  that  identified  not  as  Nature  but  as 
All-Soul  and,  next,  that  operating  in  Nature  and  being  itself  the  Nature- 
Principle. 

And  does  this  Reason-Principle,  Nature,’  spring  from  a  contempla¬ 
tion  ? 

Wholly  and  solely  ? 

From  self-contemplation,  then  ?  Or  what  are  we  to  think  ?  It 
derives  from  a  Contemplation  and  some  contemplating  Being  ;  how  are 
we  to  suppose  it  to  have  Contemplation  itself  ? 

The  Contemplation  springing  from  the  reasoning  faculty — that,  I 
mean,  of  planning  its  own  content,  it  does  not  possess. 

But  why  not,  since  it  is  a  phase  of  Life,  a  Reason-Principle  and  a 
creative  Power  ? 

Because  to  plan  for  a  thing  is  to  lack  it ;  Nature  does  not  lack  ;  it 
creates  because  it  possesses.  Its  creative  act  is  simply  its  possession  of 
its  own  characteristic  Essence  ;  now  its  Essence,  since  it  is  a  Reason- 
Principle,  is  to  be  at  once  an  act  of  contemplation  and  an  object 
of  contemplation.  In  other  words,  the  Nature- Principle  produces  by 
virtue  of  being  an  act  of  contemplation,  an  object  of  contemplation 
and  a  Reason-Principle  ;  on  this  triple  character  depends  its  creative 
efficacy. 

Thus  the  act  of  production  is  seen  to  be  in  Nature  an  act  of  contem¬ 
plation,  for  creation  is  the  outcome  of  a  contemplation  which  never 
becomes  anything  else,  which  never  does  anything  else,  but  creates  by 
simply  being  a  contemplation. 


111.8.4]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 


123 


And  Nature,  asked  why  it  brings  forth  its  works,  might  answer  if 
it  cared  to  listen  and  to  speak  : — 

“  It  would  have  been  more  becoming  to  put  no  question  but 
to  learn  in  silence  just  as  I  myself  am  silent  and  make  no  habit  of 
talking.  And  what  is  your  lesson  ?  This  ;  that  whatsoever  comes 
into  being  is  my  vision,  seen  in  my  silence,  the  vision  that  belongs 
to  my  character  who,  sprung  from  vision,  am  vision-loving  and 
create  vision  by  the  vision-seeing  faculty  within  me.  The  mathe¬ 
maticians  from  their  vision  draw  their  figures  :  but  I  draw  nothing  : 

I  gaze  and  the  figures  of  the  material  world  take  being  as  if  they 
fell  from  my  contemplation.  As  with  my  Mother  (the  All-Soul)  and 
the  Beings  that  begot  me  so  it  is  with  me  :  they  are  bom  of  a  Con¬ 
templation  and  my  birth  is  from  them,  not  by  their  Act  but  by 
their  Being  ;  they  are  the  loftier  Reason-Principles,  they  contem¬ 
plate  themselves  and  I  am  born.” 

Now  what  does  this  tell  us  ? 

It  teUs  :  that  what  we  know  as  Nature  is  a  Soul,  offspring  of  a  yet 
earlier  Soul  of  more  powerful  life  ;  that  it  possesses,  therefore,  in  its 
repose,  a  vision  within  itself  ;  that  it  has  no  tendency  upward  nor  even 
downward  but  is  at  peace,  steadfast,  in  its  own  Essence  ;  that,  in  this 
immutability  accompanied  by  what  may  be  called  Self-Consciousness, 
it  possesses — ^within  the  measure  of  its  possibility  a  knowledge  of  the 
realm  of  subsequent  things  perceived  in  virtue  of  that  understanding 
and  consciousness  ;  and,  achieving  thus  a  resplendent  and  delicious 
spectacle,  has  no  further  aim. 

Of  course,  while  it  may  be  convenient  to  speak  of  ”  understanding 
or  “  perception  ”  in  the  Nature-Principle,  this  is  not  in  the  full  sense 
applicable  to  other  beings  ;  we  are  applying  to  sleep  a  word  borrowed 
from  the  wake. 

For  the  Vision  on  which  Nature  broods,  inactive,  is  a  self -intuition, 
a  spectacle  laid  before  it  by  virtue  of  its  unaccompanied  self-concentra¬ 
tion  and  by  the  fact  that  in  itself  it  belongs  to  the  order  of  intuition.  It 


124 


PLOTINUS 


is  a  Vision  silent  but  somewhat  blurred,  for  there  exists  another  a  clearer 
of  which  Nature  is  the  image  :  hence  aU  that  Nature  produces  is  weak  ; 
the  weaker  act  of  intuition  produces  the  weaker  object. 

In  the  same  way,  human  beings,  when  weak  on  the  side  of  contem¬ 
plation,  find  in  action  their  trace  of  vision  and  of  reason  :  their  spiritual 
feebleness  unfits  them  for  contemplation  ;  they  are  left  with  a  void, 
because  they  cannot  adequately  seize  the  vision  ;  yet  they  long  for  it ; 
they  are  hurried  into  action  as  their  way  to  the  vision  which  they  cannot 
attain  by  intellection.  They  act  from  the  desire  of  seeing  their  action, 
and  of  making  it  visible  and  sensible  to  others  when  the  result  shall 
prove  fairly  well  equal  to  the  plan.  Everywhere,  doing  and  making  will 
be  found  to  be  either  an  attenuation  or  a  complement  of  vision — attenua¬ 
tion  if  the  doer  was  aiming  only  at  the  thing  done  ;  complement  if  he  is 
to  possess  something  nobler  to  gaze  upon  than  the  mere  work  produced. 

Given  the  power  to  contemplate  the  Authentic,  who  would  run,  of 
choice,  after  its  image  ? 

The  relation  of  action  to  contemplation  is  indicated  in  the  way 
duller  children,  inapt  to  study  and  speculation,  take  to  crafts  and 
manual  labour. 

5- 

This  discussion  of  Nature  has  shown  us  how  the  origin  of  things  is 
a  Contemplation  ;  we  may  now  take  the  matter  up  to  the  higher  Soul ; 
we  find  that  the  Contemplation  pursued  by  this,  its  instinct  towards 
knowing  and  enquiring,  the  birth  pangs  set  up  by  the  knowledge  it  attains, 
its  teeming  fuUness,  have  caused  it — ^in  itself,  all  one  object  of  Vision — to 
produce  another  Vision  (that  of  the  Kosmos) :  it  is  just  as  a  given  science, 
complete  in  itself,  becomes  the  source  and  cause  of  what  might  be  called 
a  minor  science  in  the  student  who  attains  to  some  partial  knowledge 
of  all  its  divisions.  But  the  visible  objects  and  the  objects  of  intellectual 
contemplation  of  this  later  creation  are  dim  and  helpless  by  the  side  of 
the  content  of  the  Soul. 

The  primal  phase  of  the  Soul — inhabitant  of  the  Supreme  and,  by 
its  participation  in  the  Supreme,  filled  and  illuminated — remains  un- 


in.  8. 5]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 


125 


changeably  There  ;  but  in  virtue  of  that  first  participation,  that  of  the 
primal  participant,  a  secondary  phase  also  participates  in  the  Supreme, 
and  this  secondary  goes  forth  ceaselessly  as  Life  streaming  from  Life  ; 
for  energy  runs  through  the  Universe  and  there  is  no  extremity  at  which 
it  dwindles  out.  But,  travel  as  far  as  it  may,  it  never  draws  that  first 
part  of  itself  from  the  place  whence  the  outgoing  began  :  if  it  did,  it 
would  no  longer  be  everywhere  (its  continuous  Being  would  be  broken 
and)  it  would  be  present  at  the  end,  only,  of  its  course. 

None  the  less  that  which  goes  forth  cannot  be  equal  to  that  which 
remains. 

In  sum,  then  : — 

The  Soul  is  to  extend  throughout  the  Universe,  no  spot  void  of  its 
energy  ;  but,  a  prior  is  always  different  from  its  secondary,  and  energy 
is  a  secondary,  rising  as  it  must  from  contemplation  or  act ;  act,  however, 
is  not  at  this  stage  existent  since  it  depends  upon  contemplation  :  there¬ 
fore  the  Soul  while  its  phases  differ  must,  in  all  of  them,  remain  a  con¬ 
templation  and  what  seems  to  be  an  act  done  under  contemplation  must 
be  in  reahty  that  weakened  contemplation  of  which  we  have  spoken  ; 
the  engendered  must  respect  the  Kind,  but  in  weaker  form,  dwindled  in 
the  descent. 

All  goes  softly  since  nothing  here  demands  the  parade  of  thought 
or  act  upon  external  things  ;  it  is  a  Soul  in  vision  and,  by  this  vision, 
creating  its  own  subsequent — ^this  Principle  (of  Nature),  itself  also  con¬ 
templative  but  in  the  feebler  degree  since  it  lies  further  away  and  cannot 
reproduce  the  quality  or  experiences  of  its  prior — a  Vision  creates  the 
Vision. 

(Such  creative  contemplation  is  not  inexplicable)  for  no  limit  exists 
either  to  contemplation  or  to  its  possible  objects,  and  this  explains  how 
the  Soul  is  universal :  where  can  this  thing  fail  to  be,  which  is  one  identical 
thing  in  every  Soul  ?  Vision  is  not  cabined  within  the  bournes  of 

magnitude. 

This,  of  course,  does  not  mean  that  the  Soul  is  present  at  the  same 
strength  in  each  and  every  place  and  thing — any  more  than  that  it  is 
at  the  same  strength  in  each  of  its  own  phases. 


126 


PLOTINUS 


The  Charioteer  (the  Leading  Principle  of  the  Soul,  in  the  Phsedrus 
^yfh)  gives  the  two  horses  (its  two  dissonant  faculties)  what  he  has 
seen  and  they,  taking  that  gift,  showed  that  they  were  hungry  for  what 
made  that  vision  ;  there  was  something  lacking  to  them  :  if  in  their 
desire  they  acted,  their  action  aimed  at  what  they  craved  for — and  that 
was  vision,  and  an  object  of  vision. 

6. 

Action,  thus,  is  set  towards  contemplation  and  an  object  of  contem¬ 
plation,  so  that  even  those  whose  life  is  in  doing  have  seeing  as  their 
object ;  what  they  have  not  been  able  to  achieve  by  the  direct  path, 
they  hope  to  come  at  by  the  circuit. 

Further  :  suppose  they  succeed  ;  they  desired  a  certain  thing  to 
come  about,  not  in  order  to  be  unaware  of  it  but  to  know  it,  to  see  it 
present  before  the  mind  :  their  success  is  the  laying  up  of  a  vision.  We 
act  for  the  sake  of  some  good  ;  this  means  not  for  something  to  remain 
outside  ourselves,  not  in  order  that  we  may  possess  nothing  but  that  we 
may  hold  the  good  of  the  action.  And  hold  it,  where  ?  Where  but  in  the 
mind  ? 

Thus  once  more,  action  is  brought  back  to  contemplation  :  for 
(mind  or)  Soul  is  a  Reason-Principle  and  anything  that  one  lays  up  in 
the  Soul  can  be  no  other  than  a  Reason-Principle,  a  silent  thing, 
the  more  certainly  such  a  principle  as  the  impression  made  is  the 
deeper. 

This  vision  achieved,  the  acting  instinct  pauses  ;  the  mind  is  satisfied 
and  seeks  nothing  further ;  the  contemplation,  in  one  so  conditioned, 
remains  absorbed  within  as  having  acquired  certainty  to  rest  upon. 
The  brighter  the  certainty,  the  more  tranquil  is  the  contemplation  as 
having  acquired  the  more  perfect  unity  ;  and — for  now  we  come  to  the 
serious  treatment  of  the  subject — 

In  proportion  to  the  truth  with  which  the  knowing  faculty  knows, 
it  comes  to  identification  with  the  object  of  its  knowledge. 

As  long  as  duality  persists,  the  two  lie  apart,  parallel  as  it  were  to 
each  other  ;  there  is  a  pair  in  which  the  two  elements  remain  strange  to 


t 


111.8.7J  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE  127 

one  another,  as  when  Ideal-Principles  laid  up  in  the  mind  or  Soul  remain 
idle. 

Hence  the  Idea  must  not  be  left  to  lie  outside  but  must  be  made  one 
identical  thing  with  the  soul  of  the  novice  so  that  he  finds  it  really  his  own. 

The  Soul,  once  domiciled  within  that  Idea  and  brought  to  likeness 
with  it,  becomes  productive,  active  ;  what  it  always  held  by  its  primary 
nature  it  now  grasps  with  knowledge  and  applies  in  deed,  so  becoming, 
as  it  were,  a  new  thing  and,  informed  as  it  now  is  by  the  purely  intellec¬ 
tual,  it  sees  (in  its  outgoing  act)  as  a  stranger  looking  upon  a  strange 
world.  It  was,  no  doubt,  essentially  a  Reason-Principle,  even  an  Intel¬ 
lectual  Principle  ;  but  its  function  is  to  see  a  (lower)  realm  which  these 
do  not  see. 

For,  it  is  not  a  complete  thing  ;  it  has  a  lack  ;  it  is  incomplete  in 
regard  to  its  Prior  ;  yet  it,  also,  has  a  tranquil  vision  of  what  it  produces. 
What  it  has  once  brought  into  being  it  produces  no  more,  for  all  its 
productiveness  is  determined  by  this  lack  :  it  produces  for  the  purpose 
of  Contemplation,  in  the  desire  of  knowing  all  its  content :  when  there 
is  question  of  practical  things  it  adapts  its  content  to  the  outside  order. 

The  Soul  has  a  greater  content  than  Nature  has  and  therefore  it  is 
more  tranquil ;  it  is  more  nearly  complete  and  therefore  more  contem¬ 
plative.  It  is,  however,  not  perfect,  and  is  all  the  more  eager  to  penetrate 
the  object  of  contemplation,  and  it  seeks  the  vision  that  comes  by 
observation.  It  leaves  its  native  realm  and  busies  itself  elsewhere  ;  then 
it  returns,  and  it  possesses  its  vision  by  means  of  that  phase  of  itself 
from  which  it  had  parted.  The  self-indwelling  Soul  inchnes  less  to  such 
experiences. 

The  Sage,  then,  is  the  man  made  over  into  a  Reason-Principle  :  to 
others  he  shows  his  act  but  in  himself  he  is  Vision  :  such  a  man  is  already 
set,  not  merely  in  regard  to  exterior  things  but  also  within  himself, 
towards  what  is  one  and  at  rest  i  all  his  faculty  and  life  are  inward-bent. 

7- 

Certain  Principles,  then,  we  may  take  to  be  established  some  self- 
evident,  others  brought  out  by  our  treatment  above 


128 


PLOTINUS 


All  the  forms  of  Authentic  Existence  spring  from  vision  and  are 
a  vision.  Everything  that  springs  from  these  Authentic  Existences  in 
their  vision  is  an  object  of  vision — manifest  to  sensation  or  to  true 
knowledge  or  to  surface-awareness.  All  act  aims  at  this  knowing  ;  all 
impulse  is  towards  knowledge,  all  that  springs  from  vision  exists  to  pro¬ 
duce  Ideal-Form,  that  is  a  fresh  object  of  vision,  so  that  universally,  as 
images  of  their  engendering  principles,  they  all  produce  objects  of  vision. 
Ideal-forms.  In  the  engendering  of  these  sub-existences,  imitations  of 
the  Authentic,  it  is  made  manifest  that  the  creating  powers  operate  not 
for  the  sake  of  creation  and  action  but  in  order  to  produce  an  object  of 
vision.  This  same  vision  is  the  ultimate  purpose  of  all  the  acts  of  the  mind 
and,  even  further  downward,  of  all  sensation,  since  sensation  also  is  an 
effort  towards  knowledge  ;  lower  still.  Nature,  producing  similarly  its 
subsequent  principle,  brings  into  being  the  vision  and  Idea  that  we  know 
in  it.  It  is  certain,  also,  that  as  the  Firsts  exist  in  vision  all  other  things 

must  be  straining  towards  the  same  condition  ;  the  starting  point  is, 
universally,  the  goal. 

When  living  things  reproduce  their  Kind,  it  is  that  the  Reason- 
Principles  within  stir  them  ;  the  procreative  act  is  the  expression  of  a 
contemplation,  a  travail  towards  the  creation  of  many  forms,  many 
objects  of  contemplation,  so  that  the  universe  may  be  filled  full  with 
Reason-Principles  and  that  contemplation  may  be,  as  nearly  as  possible, 
endless  :  to  bring  anything  into  being  is  to  produce  an  Idea-Form  and 
that  again  is  to  enrich  the  universe  with  contemplation  :  all  the  failures, 
alike  in  being  and  in  doing,  are  but  the  swerving  of  visionaries  from  the 
object  of  vision  :  in  the  end  the  sorriest  craftsman  is  still  a  maker  of 

forms,  ungracefully.  So  Love,  too,  is  vision  with  the  pursuit  of  Ideal- 
Form. 

8. 

From  this  basis  we  proceed  : — 

In  the  advancing  stages  of  Contemplation  rising  from  that  in  Nature, 
to  that  m  the  Soul  and  thence  again  to  that  in  the  Intellectual-Principle 
itself— the  object  contemplated  becomes  progressively  a  more  and  more 


III.  8. 8]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 


129 


intimate  possession  of  the  Contemplating  Beings,  more  and  more  one 
thing  with  them  ;  and  in  the  advanced  Soul  the  objects  of  knowledge, 
well  on  the  way  towards  the  Intellectual-Principle,  are  close  to  identity 
with  their  container. 

Hence  we  may  conclude  that,  in  the  Intellectual-Principle  Itself, 
there  is  complete  identity  of  Knower  and  Known,  and  this  not  by  way  of 
domiciliation,  as  in  the  case  of  even  the  highest  soul,  but  by  Essence,  by 
the  fact  that,  there,  no  distinction  exists  between  Being  and  Knowing  ; 
we  cannot  stop  at  a  principle  containing  separate  parts  ;  there  must 
always  be  a  yet  higher,  a  principle  above  all  such  diversity. 

The  Supreme  must  be  an  entity  in  which  the  two  are  one  ;  it  will, 
therefore,  be  a  Seeing  that  lives,  not  an  object  of  vision  like  things  existing 
in  something  other  than  themselves  :  what  exists  in  an  outside  element 
is  some  mode  of  living-thing  ;  it  is  not  the  Self-Living. 

Now  admitting  the  existence  of  a  living  thing  that  is  at  once  a 
Thought  and  its  object,  it  must  be  a  Life  distinct  from  the  vegetative 
or  sensitive  life  or  any  other  life  determined  by  Soul. 

In  a  certain  sense  no  doubt  all  lives  are  thoughts — but  qualified  as 
thought  vegetative,  thought  sensitive  and  thought  psychic. 

What,  then,  makes  them  thoughts  ? 

The  fact  that  they  are  Reason-Principles.  Every  life  is  some  form 
of  thought,  but  of  a  dwindling  clearness  like  the  degrees  of  life  itself. 
The  first  and  clearest  Life  and  the  first  Intelhgence  are  one  Being. 
The  First  Life,  then,  is  an  Intellection  and  the  next  form  of  Life  is  the 
next  Intellection  and  the  last  form  of  Life  is  the  last  form  of  Intellection. 
Thus  every  Life,  of  the  order  strictly  so  called,  is  an  Intellection. 

But  while  men  may  recognise  grades  in  life  they  reject  grade  in 
thought ;  to  them  there  are  thoughts  (full  and  perfect)  and  anything 
else  is  no  thought. 

This  is  simply  because  they  do  not  seek  to  establish  what  Life  is. 

The  essential  is  to  observe  that,  here  again,  all  reasoning  shows  that 
whatever  exists  is  a  bye-work  of  visioning  :  if,  then,  the  truest  Life  is 
such  by  virtue  of  an  Intellection  and  is  identical  with  the  truest 
Intellection,  then  the  truest  Intellection  is  a  living  being ;  Contempla- 


130  PLOTINUS 

tion  and  its  object  constitute  a  living  thing,  a  Life,  two  inextric¬ 
ably  one. 

The  duality,  thus,  is  a  unity  ;  but  how  is  this  unity  also  a  plurality  ? 

The  explanation  is  that  in  a  unity  there  can  be  no  seeing  (a  pure  unity 
has  no  room  for  vision  and  an  object)  ;  and  in  its  Contemplation  the  One 
is  not  acting  as  a  Unity ;  if  it  were,  the  Intellectual-Principle  cannot 
exist.  The  Highest  began  as  a  unity  but  did  not  remain  as  it  began  ;  all 
unknown  to  itself,  it  became  manifold ;  it  grew,  as  it  were,  pregnant : 
desiring  universal  possession,  it  flung  itself  outward,  though  it  were  better 
had  it  never  known  the  desire  by  which  a  Secondary  came  into  being  : 
it  is  like  a  Circle  (in  the  Idea)  which  in  projection  becomes  a  figure,  a  sur¬ 
face,  a  circumference,  a  centre,  a  system  of  radii,  of  upper  and  lower 
segments.  The  Whence  is  the  better ;  the  Whither  is  less  good  :  the 
Whence  is  not  the  same  as  the  Whence-followed-by-a- Whither  ;  the 
Whence  all  alone  is  greater  than  with  the  Whither  added  to  it. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  on  the  other  hand  was  never  merely  the 
Principle  of  an  inviolable  unity ;  it  was  a  universal  as  well  and,  being 
so,  was  the  InteUectual-Principle  of  all  things.  Being,  thus,  aU  things 
and  the  Principle  of  all,  it  must  essentially  include  this  part  of  itself 
(this  element-of-plurality)  which  is  universal  and  is  all  things  :  otherwise, 
it  contains  a  part  which  is  not  Intellectual- Principle  :  it  will  be  a  juxta¬ 
position  of  non-intellectuals,  a  huddled  heap  waiting  to  be  made  over 
from  the  mass  of  things  into  the  Intellectual-Principle  ! 

We  conclude  that  this  Being  is  limitless  and,  that  in  aU  the  outflow 
from  it  there  is  no  lessening  either  in  its  emanation  since  this  also  is  the 
entire  universe,  nor  in  itself,  the  starting  point,  since  it  is  no  assemblage 
of  parts  (to  be  diminished  by  any  outgo). 

9- 

Clearly  a  Being  of  this  nature  is  not  the  primal  existent ;  there 
must  exist  that  which  transcends  it,  that  Being  (the  Absolute),  to  which 
all  our  discussion  has  been  leading. 

In  the  first  place.  Plurality  is  later  than  Unity.  The  Intellectual- 
Principle  is  a  number  (=the  expression  of  a  plurality)  ;  and  number 


111.8.9]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE  131 

derives  from  unity  :  the  source  of  a  number  such  as  this  must  be  the 
authentically  One.  Further,  it  is  the  sum  of  an  Intellectual-Being  with 
the  object  of  its  Intellection,  so  that  it  is  a  duality  ;  and,  given  this 
duality,  we  must  find  what  exists  before  it. 

What  is  this  ? 

The  Intellectual-Principle  taken  separately,  perhaps  ? 

No  :  an  Intellect  is  always  inseparable  from  an  intelligible  object ; 
eliminate  the  intelligible,  and  the  Intellectual- Principle  disappears  with 
it.  If,  then,  what  we  are  seeking  cannot  be  the  Intellectual-Principle 
but  must  be  something  that  rejects  the  duality  there  present,  then  the 
Prior  demanded  by  that  duality  must  be  something  on  the  further  side 

of  the  Intellectual-Principle. 

But  might  it  not  be  the  Intelligible  object  itself  ? 

No  :  for  the  Intelligible  makes  an  equally  inseparable  duality  with 

the  Intellectual-Principle. 

If,  then,  neither  the  Intellectual-Principle  nor  the  Intelligible  Object 
can  be  the  First  Existent,  what  is  ? 

Our  answer  can  only  be  ; — 

The  source  of  both. 

What  will  This  be ;  under  what  character  can  we  picture  It  ? 

(We  will  be  told  that)  It  must  be  either  Intellective  or  without 
Intellection  :  if  Intellective  it  is  the  Intellectual-Principle  ;  if  not,  it 
will  be  without  even  knowledge  of  itself — so  that,  either  way,  what  is 
there  so  august  about  it  ? 

If  we  define  it  as  The  Good  and  the  wholly  simplex,  we  will,  no 
doubt,  be  telling  the  truth,  but  we  will  not  be  giving  any  certain  and 
lucid  account  of  it  as  long  as  we  have  in  mind  no  entity  m  which  to 

lodge  the  conception  by  which  we  define  it. 

Yet :  our  knowledge  of  everything  else  comes  by  way  of  our  intelli¬ 
gence  ;  our  power  is  that  of  knowing  the  intelligible  by  means  of  the 
intelligence  :  but  this  Entity  transcends  all  of  the  intellectual  nature  ; 
by  what  direct  intuition,  then,  can  it  be  brought  within  our  grasp  ? 

To  this  question  the  answer  is  that  we  can  know  it  only  in  the  degree 
of  human  faculty  :  we  indicate  it  by  virtue  of  what  in  ourselves  is  like  it. 


132 


PLOTINUS 


For  in  us,  also,  there  is  something  of  that  Being  ;  nay,  nothing,  ripe 
for  that  participation,  can  be  void  of  it. 

Wherever  you  be,  you  have  only  to  range  over  against  this  omni¬ 
present  Being  that  in  you  which  is  capable  of  drawing  from  It,  and  you 
have  your  share  in  it  :  imagine  a  voice  sounding  over  a  vast  waste  of 
land,  and  not  only  over  the  emptiness  alone  but  over  human  beings  ; 
wherever  you  be  in  that  great  space  you  have  but  to  listen  and  you  take 
the  voice  entire — entire  though  yet  with  a  difference. 

And  what  do  we  take  when  we  thus  point  the  Intelligence  ? 

The  Intellectual-Principle  in  us  must  mount  to  its  origins  :  essentially 
a  thing  facing  two  ways,  it  must  deliver  itself  over  to  those  powers  within 
it  which  tend  upward  ;  if  it  seeks  the  vision  of  that  Being,  it  must  become 
something  more  than  Intellect. 

For  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  the  earliest  form  of  Life  :  it  is 
the  Activity  presiding  over  the  outflowing  of  the  universal  Order — the 
outflow,  that  is,  of  the  first  moment,  not  that  of  the  continuous  process. 

In  its  character  as  Life,  as  emanation,  as  containing  all  things  in 
their  precise  forms  and  not  merely  in  the  agglomerate  mass — for  this 
would  be  to  contain  them  (against  its  specific  character)  imperfectly  and 
inarticulately — it  must  of  necessity  derive  from  some  other  Being,  from 
one  that  does  not  emanate  but  is  the  Principle  of  Emanation,  of  Life,  of 
Intellect  and  of  the  Universe. 

For  the  Universe  is  not  a  Principle  and  Source  :  it  springs  from  a 
source,  and  that  source  cannot  be  the  All  or  anything  belonging  to  the 
All  since  it  is  to  generate  the  All,  and  must  be  not  a  plurality  but  the 
Source  of  plurality  since  universally  a  begetting  power  is  less  complex 
than  the  begotten.  Thus  the  Being  that  has  engendered  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  must  be  more  simplex  than  the  Intellectual-Principle. 

We  may  be  told  that  this  engendering  Principle  is  the  One-and-All. 

But,  at  that,  it  must  be  either  each  separate  entity  from  among  all 
or  it  will  be  all  things  in  the  one  mass. 

Now  if  it  were  the  massed  total  of  all,  it  must  be  of  later  origin 
than  any  of  the  things  of  which  it  is  the  sum  ;  if  it  precedes  the  total,  it 


133 


III.  8.  lo]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 

differs  from  the  things  that  make  up  the  total  and  they  from  it :  if  it 
and  the  total  of  things  constitute  a  co-existence,  it  is  not  a  Source. 
But  what  we  are  probing  for  must  be  a  Source  ;  it  must  exist  before  all, 
that  all  may  be  fashioned  as  sequel  to  it. 

As  for  the  notion  that  it  may  be  each  separate  entity  of  the  All,  this 
would  make  a  self-identity  into  a  what  you  like,  where  you  like,  in¬ 
differently,  and  would,  besides,  abolish  all  distinction  in  things  them¬ 
selves. 

Once  more  we  see  that  this  can  be  no  thing  among  things  but  must 
be  prior  to  all  things. 


10. 

And  what  will  such  a  Principle  essentially  be  ? 

The  potentiality  of  the  Universe  :  the  potentiality  whose  non¬ 
existence  would  mean  the  non-existence  of  all  the  Universe  and  even  of 
the  Intellectual-Principle  which  is  the  primal  Life  and  all  Life. 

This  Principle  on  the  thither  side  of  Life  is  the  cause  of  Life — for 
that  Manifestation  of  Life  which  is  the  Universe  of  things  is  not  the 
First  Activity ;  it  is  itself  poured  forth,  so  to  speak,  like  water  from  a 
spring. 

Imagine  a  spring  that  has  no  source  outside  itself ;  it  gives  itself 
to  all  the  rivers,  yet  is  never  exhausted  by  what  they  take,  but  remains 
always  integrally  as  it  was  ;  the  tides  that  proceed  from  it  are  at  one 
within  it  before  they  run  their  several  ways,  yet  all,  in  some  sense,  know 
beforehand  down  what  channels  they  will  pour  their  streams. 

Or  ; _ think  of  the  Life  coursing  throughout  some  mighty  tree  while 

yet  it  is  the  stationary  Principle  of  the  whole,  in  no  sense  scattered  over 
all  that  extent  but,  as  it  were,  vested  in  the  root :  it  is  the  giver  of  the 
entire  and  manifold  life  of  the  tree,  but  remains  unmoved  itself,  not 

manifold  but  the  Principle  of  that  manifold  life. 

And  this  surprises  no  one  i  though  it  is  in  fact  astonishing  how  all 
that  varied  vitality  springs  from  the  unvarying,  and  how  that  very 
manifoldness  could  not  be  unless  before  the  multiplicity  there  were 
something  all  singleness  ;  for,  the  Principle  is  not  broken  into  parts  to 


134 


PLOTINUS 


make  the  total ;  on  the  contrary,  such  partition  would  destroy  both  ; 
nothing  would  come  into  being  if  its  cause,  thus  broken  up,  changed 
character. 

Thus  we  are  always  brought  back  to  The  One. 

Every  particular  thing  has  a  One  of  its  own  to  which  it  may  be 
traced ;  the  AU  has  its  One,  its  Prior  but  not  yet  the  Absolute  One  ; 
through  this  we  reach  that  Absolute  One,  where  all  such  reference  comes 
to  an  end. 

Now  when  we  reach  a  One — the  stationary  Principle — in  the  tree,  in 
the  animal,  in  Soul,  in  the  All — we  have  in  every  case  the  most  powerful, 
the  precious  element :  when  we  come  to  the  One  in  the  Authentically 
Existent  Beings— their  Principle  and  source  and  potentiality — shall  we 
lose  confidence  and  suspect  it  of  being — ^nothing  ? 

Certainly  this  Absolute  is  none  of  the  things  of  which  it  is  the  source 
its  nature  is  that  nothing  can  be  affirmed  of  it — not  existence,  not 
essence,  not  life  since  it  is  That  which  transcends  all  these.  But  possess 
yourself  of  it  by  the  very  elimination  of  Being  and  you  hold  a  marvel. 
Thrusting  forward  to  This,  attaining,  and  resting  in  its  content,  seek  to 
grasp  it  more  and  more — understanding  it  by  that  intuitive  thrust  alone, 
but  knowing  its  greatness  by  the  Beings  that  follow  upon  it  and  exist 
by  its  power. 

Another  approach  : — 

The  Intellectual-Principle  is  a  Seeing,  and  a  Seeing  which  itself 
sees  ,  therefore  it  is  a  potentiality  which  has  become  effective. 

This  implies  the  distinction  of  Matter  and  Form  in  it — as  there 
must  be  in  all  actual  seeing — the  Matter  in  this  case  being  the  InteUigibles 
which  the  Intellectual-Principle  contains  and  sees.  All  actual  seeing 
implies  duality ;  before  the  seeing  takes  place  there  is  the  pure  unity 
(of  the  power  of  seeing).  That  unity  (of  principle)  acquires  duality  (in 
the  act  of  seeing),  and  the  duality  is  (always  to  be  traced  back  to)  a 
unity. 

Now  as  our  sight  requires  the  world  of  sense  for  its  satisfaction  and 
realisation,  so  the  vision  in  the  Intellectual-Principle  demands,  for  its 
completion.  The  Good. 


135 


III.  8.  lo]  NATURE  CONTEMPLATION  AND  THE  ONE 

It  cannot  be,  itself,  The  Good,  since  then  it  would  not  need  to  see 
or  to  perform  any  other  Act ;  for  The  Good  is  the  centre  of  aU  else, 
and  it  is  by  means  of  The  Good  that  every  thing  has  Act,  while  the  Good 
is  in  need  of  nothing  and  therefore  possesses  nothing  beyond  itself. 

Once  you  have  uttered  ‘  ‘  The  Good,  add  no  further  thought .  by  any 
addition,  and  in  proportion  to  that  addition,  you  introduce  a  defiaency. 

Do  not  even  say  that  it  has  Intellection  ;  you  would  be  dividing  it ; 
it  wopld  become  a  duality,  Intellect  and  the  Good.  The  Good  has  no 
need  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  which,  on  the  contrary,  needs  it,  and, 
attaining  it,  is  shaped  into  Goodness  and  becomes  perfect  by  it .  the 
Form  thus  received,  sprung  from  the  Good,  brings  it  to  likeness  with  the 

Good. 

Thus  the  traces  of  the  Good  discerned  upon  it  must  be  taken  as 
indication  of  the  nature  of  that  Archetype  ;  we  form  a  conception  of 
its  Authentic  Being  from  its  image  playing  upon  the  Intellectual-Prin¬ 
ciple.  This  image  of  itself,  it  has  communicated  to  the  Intellect  that 
contemplates  it ;  thus  aU  the  striving  is  on  the  side  of  the  Intellect, 
which  is  the  eternal  striver  and  eternally  the  attainer.^  The  Being 
beyond  neither  strives,  since  it  feels  no  lack,  nor  attains,  since  it  has  no 
striving.  And  this  marks  it  off  from  the  InteUectual-Principle,  to  which 
characteristically  belongs  the  striving,  the  concentrated  strain  towards 

its  Form.  . -x  i  f 

Yet:  The  Intellectual-Principle  ;  beautiful;  the  most  beautiful  ot 

all ;  lying  lapped  in  pure  light  and  in  clear  radiance  ;  circumscribing 
the  Nature  of  the  Authentic  Existents  ;  the  original  of  which  this  beau¬ 
tiful  world  is  a  shadow  and  an  image  ;  tranquil  in  the  fullness  of  glory 
since  in  it  there  is  nothing  devoid  of  intellect,  nothing  dark  or  out  of  rule  ; 
a  living  thing  in  a  hfe  of  blessedness :  this,  too,  must  overwhelm  with 
awe  any  that  has  seen  it,  and  penetrated  it,  to  become  a  unit  of  its 

But As  one  that  looks  up  to  the  heavens  and  sees  the  splendour 
of  the  stars  thinks  of  the  Maker  and  searches,  so  whoever  has  contemplated 
the  Intellectual  Universe  and  known  it  and  wondered  for  it  must  search 
after  its  Maker  too.  What  Being  has  raised  so  noble  a  fabric  ?  And 


136 


PLOTINUS 


where  ?  And  how  ?  Who  has  begotten  such  a  child,  this  Intellectual- 
Principle,  this  lovely  abundance  so  abundantly  endowed  ? 

The  Source  of  all  this  cannot  be  an  Intellect ;  nor  can  it  be  an  abun¬ 
dant  power :  it  must  have  been  before  Intellect  and  abundance  were  ; 
these  are  later  and  things  of  lack  ;  abundance  had  to  be  made  abundant 
and  Intellection  needed  to  know. 

These  are  very  near  to  the  un-needing,  to  that  which  has  no  need  of 
Knowing,  they  have  abundance  and  intellection  authentically,  as  being 
the  first  to  possess.  But,  there  is  That  before  them  which  neither  needs 
nor  possesses  anything,  since,  needing  or  possessing  anything  else,  it 
would  not  be  what  it  is — The  Good. 


NINTH  TRACTATE 
Detached  Considerations 

I. 

“The  Intellectual-Principle”  (  =  the  Divine  Mind) — we  read  (in 
the  Timseus) — “  looks  upon  the  Ideas  indwelling  in  that  Being  which 
is  the  Essentially  Living  (  =  according  to  Plotinus,  the  Intellectual 
Realm),  and  then  ” — the  text  proceeds — “  the  Creator  judged  that  aU  the 
content  of  that  essentially  living  Being  must  find  place  in  this  lower 
universe  also.” 

Are  we  meant  to  gather  that  the  Ideas  came  into  being  before  the 
Intellectual-Principle  so  that  it  “  sees  them  ”  as  previously  existent  ? 

The  first  step  is  to  make  sure  whether  the  “  Living  Being  ”  of  the 
text  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  another 
thing  than  it. 

It  might  be  argued  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  the  Contemplator 
and  therefore  that  the  Living-Being  contemplated  is  not  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  but  must  be  described  as  the  Intellectual  Object  so  that  the 

Intellectual-Principle  must  possess  the  Ideal  realm  as  something  outside 
of  itself. 

But  this  would  mean  that  it  possesses  images  and  not  the  realities, 
since  the  realities  are  in  the  Intellectual  Realm  which  it  contemplates  : 


III.9.  i]  DETACHED  CONSIDERATIONS  137 

Reality — we  read — is  in  the  Authentic  Existent  which  contains  the  essen¬ 
tial  form  of  particular  things. 

No  :  even  though  the  Intellectual-Principle  and  the  Intellectual 
Object  are  distinct,  they  are  not  apart  except  for  just  that  distinction. 

Nothing  in  the  statement  cited  is  inconsistent  with  the  conception 
that  these  two  constitute  one  substance — though,  in  a  unity,  admitting 
that  distinction,  of  the  intellectual  act  (as  against  passivity),  without 
which  there  can  be  no  question  of  an  Intellectual-Principle  and  an  Intel¬ 
lectual  Object :  what  is  meant  is  not  that  the  contemplatory  Being 
possesses  its  vision  as  in  some  other  principle,  but  that  it  contains  the 
Intellectual  Realm  within  itself. 

The  Intelligible  Object  is  the  Intellectual-Principle  itself  in  its  repose, 
unity,  immobility :  the  Intellectual-Principle,  contemplator  of  that 
object — of  the  Intellectual-Principle  thus  in  repose — ^is  an  active  mani¬ 
festation  of  the  same  Being,  an  Act  which  contemplates  its  unmoved 
phase  and,  as  thus  contemplating,  stands  as  Intellectual-Principle  to 
that  of  which  it  has  the  intellection  :  it  is  Intellectual-Principle  in  virtue 
of  having  that  intellection,  and  at  the  same  time  is  Intellectual  Object,  by 
assimilation. 

This,  then,  is  the  Being  which  planned  to  create  in  the  lower 
Universe  what  it  saw  existing  in  the  Supreme,  the  four  orders  of  living 
beings. 

No  doubt  the  passage  (of  the  Timaeus)  seems  to  imply  tacitly  that 
this  planning  Principle  is  distinct  from  the  other  two  :  but  the  three — 
the  Essentially-Living,  the  Intellectual-Principle  and  this  planning 
Principle— will,  to  others,  be  manifestly  one  :  the  truth  is  that,  by  a 
common  accident,  a  particular  trend  of  thought  has  occasioned  the 
discrimination. 

We  have  dealt  with  the  first  two  ;  but  the  third  this  Principle 
which  decides  to  work  upon  the  objects  (the  Ideas)  contemplated  by  the 
Intellectual-Principle  within  the  Essentially-Living,  to  create  them,  to 
establish  them  in  their  partial  existence— what  is  this  third  ? 

It  is  possible  that  in  one  aspect  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  the 
principle  of  partial  existence,  while  in  another  aspect  it  is  not. 


138 


PLOTINUS 


The  entities  thus  particularised  from  the  unity  are  products  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle  which  thus  would  be,  to  that  extent,  the  separating 
agent.  On  the  other  hand  it  remains  in  itself,  indivisible  ;  division 
begins  with  its  offspring  which,  of  course,  means  with  Souls  :  and  thus 
a  Soul  with  its  particular  Souls — may  be  the  separative  principle. 

This  is  what  is  conveyed  where  we  are  told  that  the  separation  is 
the  work  of  the  third  Principle  and  begins  within  the  Third  :  for  to  this 
Third  belongs  the  discursive  reasoning  which  is  no  function  of  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  but  characteristic  of  its  secondary,  of  Soul,  to  which 
precisely,  divided  by  its  own  Kind,  belongs  the  Act  of  division. 


2. 

.  .  .  For  in  any  one  science  the  reduction  of  the  total  of  knowledge 
into  its  separate  propositions  does  not  shatter  its  unity,  chipping  it  into 
imrelated  fragments  ;  in  each  distinct  item  is  latent  the  entire  body  of 
the  science,  an  integral  thing  in  its  highest  Principle  and  its  last  detad  : 
and  similarly  a  man  must  so  discipline  himself  that  the  first  Principles 
of  his  Being  are  also  his  completions,  are  totals,  that  all  be  pointed  towards 
the  loftiest  phase  of  the  N ature  :  when  a  man  has  become  this  unity  in 
the  best,  he  is  in  that  other  realm  ;  for  it  is  by  this  highest  within  himself, 
made  his  own,  that  he  holds  to  the  Supreme. 

At  no  point  did  the  All-Soul  come  into  Being  :  it  never  arrived,  for  it 
never  knew  place  ;  what  happens  is  that  body,  neighbouring  with  it, 
participates  in  it :  hence  Plato  does  not  place  Soul  in  body  but  body  in 
Soul.  The  others,  the  secondary  Souls,  have  a  point  of  departure— they 
come  from  the  All-Soul— and  they  have  a  place  into  which  to  descend 
and  m  which  to  change  to  and  fro,  a  place,  therefore,  from  which  to 
ascend  :  but  this  All-Soul  is  for  ever  Above,  resting  in  that  Being  in  which 
It  holds  Its  existence  as  Soul  and  followed,  as  next,  by  the  Universe  or 
at  least,  by  all  beneath  the  sun. 

The  partial  Soul  is  illuminated  by  moving  towards  the  Soul  above 
It ;  for  on  that  path  it  meets  Authentic  Existence.  Movement  towards 
the  lower  is  towards  non-Being  :  and  this  is  the  step  it  takes  when  it  is 
set  on  self;  for  by  willing  towards  itself  it  produces  its  lower,  an 


III.  9.  3] 


DETACHED  CONSIDERATIONS 


139 


image  of  itself — a  non-Being — and  so  is  wandering,  as  it  were,  into  the 
void,  stripping  itself  of  its  own  determined  form.  And  this  image,  this 
undetermined  thing,  is  blank  darkness,  for  it  is  utterly  without  reason, 
untouched  by  the  Intellectual-Principle,  far  removed  from  Authentic 
Being. 

As  long  as  it  remains  at  the  mid-stage  it  is  in  its  own  peculiar  region , 
but  when,  by  a  sort  of  inferior  orientation,  it  looks  downward,  it  shapes 
that  lower  image  and  flings  itself  joyfully  thither. 

3. 

(A)  .  .  .  How,  then,  does  Unity  give  rise  to  Multiplicity  ? 

By  its  omnipresence  ;  there  is  nowhere  where  it  is  not ;  it  occupies, 
therefore,  all  that  is  ;  at  once,  it  is  manifold — or,  rather,  it  is  all  things. 

If  it  were  simply  and  solely  ever5rwhere  all  would  be  this  one  thing 
alone  :  but  it  is,  also,  in  no  place,  and  this  gives  in  the  final  result  that 
while  all  exists  by  means  of  it,  in  virtue  of  its  omnipresence,  all  is  distinct 

from  it  in  virtue  of  its  being  nowhere. 

But  why  is  it  not  merely  present  everywhere  but  in  addition 

nowhere-present  ? 

Because,  universality  demands  a  previous  unity.  It  must,  therefore, 
pervade  aU  things  and  make  aU,  but  not  be  the  universe  which  it  makes. 

(B)  The  Soul  itself  must  exist  as  Seeing — ^with  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  as  the  object  of  its  vision — it  is  undetermined  before  it  sees 
but  is  naturally  apt  to  see  ;  in  other  words.  Soul  is  Matter  to  (its  deter¬ 
minant)  the  Intellectual-Principle. 

(C)  When  we  exercise  intellection  upon  ourselves,  we  are,  obviously, 
observing  an  intellective  nature,  for  otherwise  we  would  not  be  able  to 
have  that  intellection. 

We  know,  and  it  is  ourselves  that  we  know  ;  therefore  we  know  the 
reality  of  a  knowing  nature  ;  therefore,  before  that  intellection  in  Act, 

there  is  another  intellection,  one  at  rest,  so  to  speak. 

Similarly,  that  self-intellection  is  an  act  upon  a  reality  and  upon  a 
life  •  therefore,  before  the  Life  and  Real-Being  concerned  in  the  intellec¬ 
tion  there  must  be  another  Being  and  Life.  In  a  word,  intellection  is 


140 


PLOTINUS 


vested  in  the  activities  themselves  :  since,  then,  the  activities  of  self¬ 
intellection  are  intellective-forms.  We,  the  Authentic  We,  are  the 
Intelligibles  and  self-intellection  conveys  the  Image  of  the  Intellectual 
Sphere. 

(D)  The  Primal  is  a  potentiality  of  Movement  and  of  Repose — 
and  so  is  above  and  beyond  both — its  next  subsequent  has  rest  and  move¬ 
ment  about  the  Primal.  Now  this  subsequent  is  the  Intellectual-Principle 

so  characterised  by  having  intellection  of  something  not  identical  with 
itself  whereas  the  Primal  is  without  intellection.  A  knowing  principle 
has  duality  (that  entailed  by  being  the  knower  of  something)  and, 
moreover,  it  knows  itself  as  deficient  since  its  virtue  consists  in  this 
knowing  and  not  in  its  own  bare  Being. 

(E)  In  the  case  of  everything  which  has  developed  from  possibility 
to  actuality  the  actual  is  that  which  remains  self-identical  for  its  entire 


duration  and  this  it  is  which  makes  perfection  possible  even  in  things 
of  the  corporeal  order,  as  for  instance  in  fire— but  the  actual  of  this  kind 
cannot  be  everlasting  since  (by  the  fact  of  their  having  once  existed 
only  in  potentialit}^)  Matter  has  its  place  in  them.  In  anything,  on  the 
contrary,  not  composite  (=never  touched  by  Matter  or  potentiality) 
and  possessing  actuality,  that  actual  existence  is  eternal.  .  .  .  There  is, 
however,  the  case,  also,  in  which  a  thing,  itself  existing  in  actuality, 
stands  as  potentiality  to  some  other  form  of  Being. 

(F)  .  .  .  But  the  First  is  not  to  be  envisaged  as  made  up  from 
Gods  of  a  transcendent  order :  no ;  the  Authentic  Existents  constitute 
the  Intellectual-Principle  with  Which  motion  and  rest  begin.  The  Primal 
touches  nothing,  but  is  the  centre  round  which  those  other  Beings  lie  in 
repose  and  in  movement.  For  Movement  is  aiming,  and  the  Primal  aims 
at  nothing  ;  what  could  the  Summit  aspire  to  ? 

Has  It,  even,  no  Intellection  of  Itself  ? 

It  possesses  Itself  and  therefore  is  said  in  general  terms  to  know 
itself.  .  .  .  But  intellection  does  not  mean  self-ownership  ;  it  means 
turning  the  gaze  towards  the  Primal:  now  the  act  of  intellection  is 
itself  the  Primal  Act,  and  there  is  therefore  no  place  for  any  earlier  one. 
The  Being  projecting  this  Act  transcends  the  Act  so  that  Intellection  is 


111.9-3]  DETACHED  CONSIDERATIONS  IH 

secondary  to  the  Being  in  which  it  resides.  Intellection  is  not  the 
transcendently  venerable  thing — neither  Intellection  in  general  nor  even 
the  Intellection  of  The  Good.  Apart  from  and  over  any  Intellection  stands 
The  Good  itself. 

The  Good  therefore  needs  no  consciousness. 

What  sort  of  consciousness  can  be  conceived  in  it  ? 

Consciousness  of  the  Good  as  existent  or  non-existent  ? 

If  of  existent  Good,  that  Good  exists  before  and  without  any  such 
consciousness  ;  if  the  act  of  consciousness  produces  that  Good,  then 
The  Good  was  not  previously  in  existence— and,  at  once,  the  very 
consciousness  falls  to  the  ground  since  it  is  no  longer  consciousness  of 
The  Good. 

But  would  not  all  this  mean  that  the  First  does  not  even  live  ? 

The  First  cannot  be  said  to  hve  since  it  is  the  source  of  Life. 

All  that  has  self-consciousness  and  self-intellection  is  derivative  , 
it  observes  itself  in  order,  by  that  activity,  to  become  master  of  its  Being . 
and  if  it  study  itself  this  can  mean  only  that  ignorance  inheres  in  it  and 
that  it  is  of  its  own  nature  lacking  and  to  be  made  perfect  by  Intellection. 

All  thinking  and  knowing  must,  here,  be  eliminated ;  the  addition 
introduces  deprivation  and  deficiency. 


T  iTi- 


/  *  f*  • 


i 


I' 

;  -ji 


j: 

•if  •; 


.■V'  V.-,.::/  'VvK  ?' 'r  :  .'j;''^,!| 

,  *  r  ‘  •  J  B  l^«r  ,  ,  •  '  * 

•  v  -■•  : '  ‘**'^■C:tr  . .. 

t>--  f :  ''iV  /  r*  ’.Tsbt:?  ixifMJ'.diii:^-  la  r  r>  '; 

.rr  .hfw.  , hoa^^mttka  ht  ‘}X.  ,#• '-  f 

•  V.' ■  ..V,.7^^wli 


V 


h^.  *i‘:f  r.tfiprvjii'i  K.ii  l*tt£  -^,' 

*’ ff*:  I  uyssj . Bi/p  ^•J^'tifh  R£.  .  • 

-.  ■  •  .  *'►&■;,  .\.  -l  ^'>:j(l‘..'»:4;2>f ' 

"  '  ’*  ■  '•^*-*  ,/^  -V  ''.UM^JBi  '">  '.  .  -j  ;  r/*'fj;*'’, _' 


.  -y.  ^  . 


J^fiL  '  *  4> 


V . 

». 


I  • 


T-‘2;  vV. 

.  -  T 


•>^V” 


jt  »»^  ^  •  JiiX'c 
•  •  •  .'  •<  .  . 


*  t 


_-^  '  :~;i,  .v  tijt.yjjW' *J  i 

»  I  — "^  ^  ^  _  “V^  t  *1  .  ►  *  k  V  ■  •  liF-^  .  — ■• 


,74.;  .''??'V 


‘  •-.-  ■■  "t  ■’•  -‘it  *■;**  ■"  c  .■ 

•■  .•  '.r.-  s. ,  j.vgy' 

••ti'  If  ■■  ■*'  '•J»-i'^'-i^^ 


■•  ir^ 


'  k' 


^  a 


THE  SECOND  ENNEAD 


FIRST  TRACTATE 

On  the  Kosmos  or  on  the  Heavenly  System 

I. 

We  hold  that  the  ordered  universe,  in  its  material  mass,  has  existed 
for  ever  and  will  for  ever  endure  :  but  simply  to  refer  this  perdurance 
to  the  Will  of  God,  however  true  an  explanation,  is  utterly  inadequate. 

The  elements  of  this  sphere  change  ;  the  living  beings  of  earth  pass 
away  ;  only  the  Ideal-form  (the  species)  persists  :  possibly  a  similar 
process  obtains  in  the  All. 

The  Will  of  God  is  able  to  cope  with  the  ceaseless  flux  and  escape 
of  body  stuff  by  ceaselessly  reintroducing  the  known  forms  in  new  sub¬ 
stances,  thus  ensuring  perpetuity  not  to  the  particular  item  but  to  the 
unity  of  idea  :  now,  seeing  that  objects  of  this  realm  possess  no  more 
than  duration  of  form,  why  should  celestial  objects,  and  the  celestial 
system  itself,  be  distinguished  by  duration  of  the  particular  entity  ? 

Let  us  suppose  this  persistence  to  be  the  result  of  the  all-inclusiveness 
of  the  celestial  and  universal — ^with  its  consequence,  the  absence  of  any 
outlying  matter  into  which  change  could  take  place  or  which  could 
break  in  and  destroy. 

This  explanation  would,  no  doubt,  safeguard  the  integrity  of  the 
Whole,  of  the  All ;  but  our  sun  and  the  individual  being  of  the  other 
heavenly  bodies  would  not  on  these  terms  be  secured  in  perpetuity  : 
they  are  parts  ;  no  one  of  them  is  in  itself  the  whole,  the  all ;  it  would 
still  be  probable  that  theirs  is  no  more  than  that  duration  in  form  which 
belongs  to  fire  and  such  entities. 

This  would  apply  even  to  the  entire  ordered  universe  itself.  For  it 
is  very  possible  that  this  too,  though  not  in  process  of  destruction  from 

143 


144 


PLOTINUS 


outside,  might  have  only  formal  duration  ;  its  parts  may  be  so  wearing 
each  other  down  as  to  keep  it  in  a  continuous  decay  while,  amid  the 
ceaseless  flux  of  the  Kind  constituting  its  base,  an  outside  power  cease¬ 
lessly  restores  the  form  :  in  this  way  the  living  All  may  lie  under  the 
same  conditions  as  man  and  horse  and  the  rest — man  and  horse  persisting 
but  not  the  individual  of  the  type. 

With  this,  we  would  have  no  longer  the  distinction  of  one  order, 
the  heavenly  system,  stable  for  ever,  and  another,  the  earthly,  in  process 
of  decay  :  all  would  be  alike  except  in  the  point  of  time  ;  the  celestial 
would  merely  be  longer  lasting.  If,  then,  we  accepted  this  duration  of 
type  alone  as  a  true  account  of  the  All  equally  with  its  partial  members, 
our  difflculties  would  be  eased — or  indeed  we  should  have  no  further 
problem — once  the  Will  of  God  were  shown  to  be  capable,  under  these 
conditions  and  by  such  communication,  of  sustaining  the  Universe. 

But  if  we  are  obliged  to  allow  individual  persistence  to  any  definite 
entity  within  the  Kosmos  then,  firstly,  we  must  show  that  the  Divine 
Will  is  adequate  to  make  it  so  ;  secondly,  we  have  to  face  the  question. 
What  accounts  for  some  things  having  individual  persistence  and  others 
only  the  persistence  of  type  ?  and,  thirdly,  we  ask  how  the  partial  entities 
of  the  celestial  system  hold  a  real  duration  which  would  thus  appear 
possible  to  aU  partial  things. 


2. 

Supposing  we  accept  this  view  and  hold  that,  while  things  below  the 
moon’s  orb  have  merely  type-persistence,  the  celestial  realm  and  all 
its  several  members  possess  individual  eternity ;  it  remains  to  show 
how  this  strict  permanence  of  the  individual  identity — the  actual  item 
eternally  unchangeable — can  belong  to  what  is  certainly  corporeal,  seeing 
that  bodily  substance  is  characteristically  a  thing  of  flux. 

The  theory  of  bodily  flux  is  held  by  Plato  no  less  than  by  the  other 
philosophers  who  have  dealt  with  physical  matters,  and  is  applied  not 
only  to  ordinary  bodies  but  to  those,  also,  of  the  heavenly  sphere. 

“  How,”  he  asks,  ”  can  these  corporeal  and  visible  entities  continue 
eternally  unchanged  in  identity  ?  ’’—evidently  agreeing,  in  this  matter 


145 


II- 1. 3]  THE  KOSMOS 

also,  with  Herakleitos  who  maintained  that  even  the  sun  is  perpetually 
coming  anew  into  being.  To  Aristotle  there  would  be  no  problem  ;  it 
is  only  accepting  his  theories  of  a  fifth-substance. 

But  to  those  who  reject  Aristotle’s  Quintessence  and  hold  the 
material  mass  of  the  heavens  to  consist  of  the  elements  underlying  the 
living  things  of  this  sphere,  how  is  individual  permanence  possible  ? 
And  the  difficulty  is  still  greater  for  the  parts  (than  for  the  whole),  for 
the  sun  and  the  heavenly  bodies  (than  for  the  celestial  sphere  as  a  unit). 

Every  living  thing  is  a  combination  of  soul  and  body-kind  t  the 
celestial  sphere,  therefore,  if  it  is  to  be  everlasting  as  an  individual 
entity  must  be  so  in  virtue  either  of  both  these  constituents  or  of  one  of 
them,  by  the  combination  of  soul  and  body  or  by  soul  only  or  by  body 
only. 

Of  course  anyone  that  holds  body  to  be  incorruptible  secures  the 
desired  permanence  at  once  ;  no  need,  then,  to  call  on  a  soul  or  on  any 
perdurable  conjunction  to  account  for  the  continued  maintenance  of  a 
living  being. 

But  the  case  is  different  when  one  holds  that  body  is,  of  itself, 
perishable  and  that  Soul  is  the  principle  of  permanence  :  this  view 
obliges  us  to  the  proof  that  the  character  of  body  is  not  in  itself  fatal 
either  to  the  coherence  or  to  the  lasting  stability  which  are  imperative  : 
it  must  be  shown  that  the  two  elements  of  the  union  envisaged  are  not 
inevitably  hostile,  but  that  on  the  contrary  (in  the  heavens)  even  Matter 
must  conduce  to  the  scheme  of  the  standing  result. 


We  have  to  ask,  that  is,  how  Matter,  this  entity  of  ceaseless  flux 
constituting  the  physical  mass  of  the  universe,  could  serve  towards  the 
immortality  of  the  Kosmos. 

And  our  answer  is  “  Because  the  flux  is  not  outgoing  ”  :  where  there 
is  motion  within  but  not  outwards  and  the  total  remains  unchanged, 
there  is  neither  growth  nor  decline,  and  thus  the  Kosmos  never  ages. 

We  have  a  parallel  in  our  earth,  constant  from  eternity  to  pattern 
and  to  mass  ;  the  air,  too,  never  fails  ;  and  there  is  always  water  :  all 


u 


146 


PLOTINUS 


the  changes  of  these  elements  leave  unchanged  the  Principle  of  the  total 
living  thing,  our  world.  In  our  own  constitution,  again,  there  is  a  ceaseless 
shifting  of  particles — and  that  with  outgoing  loss — and  yet  the  individual 
persists  for  a  long  time  :  where  (as  in  the  case  of  the  All)  there  is  no  ques¬ 
tion  of  an  outside  region,  the  body-principle  cannot  clash  with  soul  as 
against  the  identity  and  endless  duration  of  the  living  thing. 

Of  these  material  elements — for  example — fire,  the  keen  and  swift, 
co-operates  by  its  upward  tendency  as  earth  by  its  lingering  below  ;  for 
we  must  not  imagine  that  the  fire,  once  it  finds  itself  at  the  point  where 
its  ascent  must  stop,  settles  down  as  in  its  appropriate  place,  no  longer 
seeking,  like  all  the  rest,  to  expand  in  both  directions.  No  :  but  higher 
is  not  possible  ;  lower  is  repugnant  to  its  Kind  ;  all  that  remains  for  it 
is  to  be  tractable  and,  answering  to  a  need  of  its  nature,  to  be  drawn 
by  the  Soul  to  the  activity  of  life,  and  so  to  move — to  move  in  a  glorious 
place,  in  the  Soul.  Anyone  that  dreads  its  falling  may  take  heart  ;  the 
circuit  of  the  Soul  provides  against  any  declination,  embracing,  sustain- 
ing  ;  and  since  fire  has  of  itself  no  downward  tendency  it  accepts  that 
guiding  without  resistance.  The  partial  elements  constituting  our  persons 
do  not  suffice  for  their  own  cohesion  ;  once  they  are  brought  to  human 
shape,  they  must  borrow  elsewhere  if  the  organism  is  to  be  maintained  : 
but  in  the  upper  spheres  since  there  can  be  no  loss  by  flux  no  such 
replenishment  is  needed. 

Suppose  such  loss,  suppose  fire  extinguished  there,  then  a  new  fire 
must  be  kindled  ;  so  also  if  such  loss  by  flux  could  occur  in  some  of  the 
superiors  from  which  the  celestial  fire  depends,  that  too  must  be  replaced  : 
but  with  such  transmutations,  while  there  might  be  something  con¬ 
tinuously  similar,  there  would  be,  no  longer,  a  Living  All  abidingly  self¬ 
identical. 

4* 

But  matters  are  involved  here  which  demand  specific  investigation 
and  cannot  be  treated  as  incidental  merely  to  our  present  problem.  We 
are  faced  with  several  questions  :  Is  the  heavenly  system  exposed  to 
any  such  flux  as  would  occasion  the  need  of  some  restoration  correspond- 


II.  1.4] 


THE  KOSMOS 


147 


ing  to  nourishment ;  or  do  its  members,  once  set  in  their  due  places, 
suffer  no  loss  of  substance,  permanent  by  Kind  ?  Does  it  consist  of  fire 
only,  or  is  it  mainly  of  fire  with  the  other  elements,  as  well,  taken  up 
and  carried  in  the  circuit  by  the  dominant  Principle  ? 

(For  the  present  we  may  say  that)  Our  doctrine  of  the  immortality 
of  the  heavenly  system  rests  on  the  firmest  foundation  once  we  have 
cited  the  sovereign  agent,  the  soul,  and  considered,  besides,  the  peculiar 
excellence  of  the  bodily  substance  constituting  the  stars,  a  material  so 
pure,  so  entirely  the  noblest,  and  chosen  by  the  soul  as,  in  all  living  beings, 
the  determining  principle  appropriates  to  itself  the  choicest  among  their 
characteristic  parts.  No  doubt  Aristotle  is  right  in  speaking  of  flame  as 
a  turmoil,  fire  insolently  rioting  ;  but  the  celestial  fire  is  equable,  placid, 

docile  to  the  purposes  of  the  stars. 

Still,  the  great  argument  remains,  the  Soul,  moving  in  its  marvellous 
might  second  only  to  the  very  loftiest  Existents  :  how  could  anything 
once  placed  within  this  Soul  break  away  from  it  into  non-being  ?  No 
one  that  understands  this  principle,  the  support  of  all  things,  can  fail  to 
see  that,  sprung  from  God,  it  is  a  stronger  stay  than  any  bonds. 

And  is  it  conceivable  that  the  Soul,  valid  to  sustain  for  a  certain  space 
of  time,  could  not  so  sustain  for  ever  ?  This  would  be  to  assume  that  it 
holds  things  together  by  violence  ;  that  there  is  a  “  natural  course  at 
variance  with  what  actually  exists  in  the  nature  of  the  universe  and  in 
these  exquisitely  ordered  beings  ;  and  that  there  is  some  power  able  to 
storm  the  estabhshed  system  and  destroy  its  ordered  coherence,  some 
kingdom  or  dominion  that  may  shatter  the  order  founded  by  the 

Soul.  ,  .  .  .  , 

Further  :  The  Kosmos  has  had  no  beginning— the  impossibility  has 

been  shown  elsewhere— and  this  is  warrant  for  its  continued  existence. 
Why  should  there  be  in  the  future  a  change  that  has  not  yet  occurred  ? 
The  elements  there  are  not  worn  away  like  beams  and  rafters  :  they  hold 
sound  for  ever,  and  so  the  All  holds  sound.  And  even  supposing  these 
elements  to  be  in  ceaseless  transmutation,  yet  the  All  persists  :  the 
ground  of  all  the  change  must  itself  be  changeless. 

As  to  any  alteration  of  purpose  in  the  Soul  (such  as  might  lead  it  to 


148 


PLOTINUS 


bring  the  Kosmos  to  an  end)  we  have  already  shown  the  emptiness  of 
that  fancy  :  the  administration  of  the  universe  entails  neither  labour 
nor  loss  ;  and,  even  supposing  the  possibility  of  annihilating  all  that  is 
material,  the  Soul  would  be  no  whit  the  better  or  the  worse. 

5. 

But  how  explain  the  permanence  There,  while  the  content  of  this 
sphere — its  elements  and  its  living  things  alike — are  passing  ? 

The  reason  is  given  by  Plato  :  the  celestial  order  is  from  God,  the 
living  things  of  earth  from  the  gods  sprung  from  God  ;  and  it  is  law 
that  the  offspring  of  God  endures. 

In  other  words,  the  celestial  soul — and  our  souls  with  it — springs 
directly  next  from  the  Creator,  while  the  animal  life  of  this  earth  is 
produced  by  an  image  which  goes  forth  from  that  celestial  soul  and  may 
be  said  to  flow  downwards  from  it. 

A  soul,  then,  of  the  minor  degree — ^reproducing,  indeed,  that  of  the 
Divine  sphere  but  lacking  in  power  inasmuch  as  it  must  exercise  its 
creative  act  upon  inferior  stuff  in  an  inferior  region — the  substances  taken 
up  into  the  fabric  being  of  themselves  repugnant  to  duration  ;  with  such 
an  origin  the  living  things  of  this  realm  cannot  be  of  strength  to  last 
for  ever  ;  the  material  constituents  are  not  as  firmly  held  and  con¬ 
trolled  as  if  they  were  ruled  immediately  by  a  Principle  of  higher 
potency. 

The  heavens,  on  the  contrary,  must  have  persistence  as  a  whole, 
and  this  entails  the  persistence  of  the  parts,  of  the  stars  they  contain  : 
we  could  not  imagine  that  whole  to  endure  with  the  parts  in  flux — 
though,  of  course,  we  must  distinguish  things  sub-celestial  from  the 
heavens  themselves  whose  region  does  not  in  fact  extend  so  low  as  to  the 
moon. 

Our  own  case  is  different :  physically  we  are  formed  by  that  (inferior) 
soul,  given  forth  (not  directly  from  God  but)  from  the  divine  beings  in 
the  heavens  and  from  the  heavens  themselves;  it  is  by  way  of  that 
inferior  soul  that  we  are  associated  with  the  body  (which  therefore  will 
not  be  persistent)  ;  for  the  higher  soul  which  constitutes  the  We  is  the 


II.  1.  6] 


THE  KOSMOS 


149 


principle  not  of  our  existence  but  of  our  excellence  or,  if  also  of  our 
existence,  then  only  in  the  sense  that,  when  the  body  is  already  consti¬ 
tuted,  it  enters,  bringing  with  it  some  effluence  from  the  Divine  Reason 
in  support  of  the  existence. 

6. 

We  may  now  consider  the  question  whether  fire  is  the  sole  element 
existing  in  that  celestial  realm  and  whether  there  is  any  outgoing  thence 

with  the  consequent  need  of  renewal. 

Timseus  pronounced  the  material  frame  of  the  All  to  consist  primarily 
of  earth  and  fire— fire  for  visibility,  earth  for  solidity— and  deduced  that 
the  stars  must  be  mainly  composed  of  fire,  but  not  solely  since  there  is 
no  doubt  they  are  solid. 

And  this  is  probably  a  true  account.  Plato  accepts  it  as  indicated 
by  all  the  appearances.  And,  in  fact,  to  all  our  perception— as  we  see 
them  and  derive  from  them  the  impression  of  illumination  the  stars 
appear  to  be  mostly,  if  not  exclusively,  fire  :  but  on  reasoning  into  the 
matter  we  judge  that  since  solidity  cannot  exist  apart  from  earth-matter, 
they  must  contain  earth  as  well. 

But  what  place  could  there  be  for  the  other  elements  ?  It  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  imagine  water  amid  so  vast  a  conflagration  ;  and  if  air  were 

present  it  would  be  continually  changing  into  fire. 

Admitting  (with  Timaeus  ;  as  a  logical  truth)  that  two  self-contained 
entities,  standing  as  extremes  to  each  other  need  for  their  coherence  two 
intermediaries  ;  we  may  still  question  whether  this  holds  good  with 
regard  to  physical  bodies.  Certainly  water  and  earth  can  be  mixed 
without  any  such  intermediate.  It  might  seem  valid  to  object  that  the 
intermediates  are  already  present  in  the  earth  and  the  water  ;  but  a 
possible  answer  would  be,  “  Yes,  but  not  as  agents  whose  meeting  is 

necessary  to  the  coherence  of  those  extremes. 

None  the  less  we  will  take  it  that  the  coherence  of  extremes  is 
produced  by  virtue  of  each  possessing  all  the  intermediates.  It  is  stiU 
not  proven  that  fire  is  necessary  to  the  visibility  of  earth  and  earth  to 

the  solidarity  of  fire. 


150 


PLOTINUS 


On  this  principle,  nothing  possesses  an  essential-nature  of  its  very 
own  ;  every  several  thing  is  a  blend,  and  its  name  is  merely  an  indication 
of  the  dominant  constituent. 

Thus  we  are  told  that  earth  cannot  have  concrete  existence  without 
the  help  of  some  moist  element — the  moisture  in  water  being  the  necessary 
adhesive — but  admitting  that  we  so  find  it,  there  is  still  a  contradiction 
in  pretending  that  any  one  element  has  a  being  of  its  own  and  in  the 
same  breath  denying  its  self-coherence,  making  its  subsistence  depend 
upon  others,  and  so,  in  reality,  reducing  the  specific  element  to  nothing. 
How  can  we  talk  of  the  existence  of  the  definite  Kind,  earth — earth 
essential — if  there  exists  no  single  particle  of  earth  which  actually  is 
earth  without  any  need  of  water  to  secure  its  self-cohesion  ?  What  has 
such  an  adhesive  to  act  upon  if  there  is  absolutely  no  given  magnitude 
of  real  earth  to  which  it  may  bind  particle  after  particle  in  its  business 
of  producing  the  continuous  mass  ?  If  there  is  any  such  given  magnitude, 
large  or  small,  of  pure  earth,  then  earth  can  exist  in  its  own  nature, 
independently  of  water  :  if  there  is  no  such  primary  particle  of  pure 
earth,  then  there  is  nothing  whatever  for  the  water  to  bind.  As  for  air — 
air  unchanged,  retaining  its  distinctive  quality — how  could  it  conduce 
to  the  subsistence  of  a  dense  material  like  earth  ? 

Similarly  with  fire.  No  doubt  Timaeus  speaks  of  it  as  necessary 
not  to  the  existence  but  to  the  visibility  of  earth  and  the  other  elements  ; 
and  certainly  light  is  essential  to  all  visibility — ^we  cannot  say  that  we 
see  darkness,  which  implies,  precisely,  that  nothing  is  seen,  as  silence 
means  nothing  being  heard. 

But  all  this  does  not  assure  us  that  the  earth  to  be  visible  must 
contain  fire  :  light  is  sufficient :  snow,  for  example,  and  other  extremely 
cold  substances  gleam  without  the  presence  of  fire — though  of  course  it 
might  be  said  that  fire  was  once  there  and  communicated  colour  before 
disappearing. 

As  to  the  composition  of  water,  we  must  leave  it  an  open  question 
whether  there  can  be  such  a  thing  as  water  without  a  certain  proportion 
of  earth. 

But  how  can  air,  the  yielding  element,  contain  earth  ? 


II- 1- 7]  THE  KOSMOS  151 

Fire,  again  :  is  earth  perhaps  necessary  there  since  fire  is  by  its  own 
nature  devoid  of  continuity  and  not  a  thing  of  three  dimensions  ? 

Supposing  it  does  not  possess  the  solidity  of  the  three  dimensions,  it 
has  that  of  its  thrust  ;  now,  cannot  this  belong  to  it  by  the  mere  right 
and  fact  of  its  being  one  of  the  corporeal  entities  in  nature  ?  Hardness 
is  another  matter,  a  property  confined  to  earth-stuff.  Remember  that 
gold — which  is  water — becomes  dense  by  the  accession  not  of  earth  but 
of  denseness  or  consolidation  :  in  the  same  way  fire,  with  Soul  present 
within  it,  may  consolidate  itself  upon  the  power  of  the  Soul ;  and  there 
are  living  beings  of  fire  among  the  Celestials. 

But,  in  sum,  do  we  abandon  the  teaching  that  all  the  elements 
enter  into  the  composition  of  every  living  thing  ? 

For  this  sphere,  no  :  but  to  lift  clay  into  the  heavens  is  against 
nature,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  her  ordaining  :  it  is  difficult,  too,  to  think 
of  that  swiftest  of  circuits  bearing  along  earthly  bodies  in  its  course — 
nor  could  such  material  conduce  to  the  splendour  and  white  glint  of  the 
celestial  fire. 

7- 

We  can  scarcely  do  better,  in  fine,  than  follow  Plato. 

Thus  : — 

In  the  universe  as  a  whole  there  must  necessarily  be  such  a  degree 
of  solidity,  that  is  to  say,  of  resistance,  as  will  ensure  that  the  earth,  set 
in  the  centre,  be  a  sure  footing  and  support  to  the  living  beings  moving 
over  it,  and  inevitably  communicate  something  of  its  own  density  to 
them  :  the  earth  will  possess  coherence  by  its  own  unaided  quality,  but 
visibility  by  the  presence  of  fire  :  it  will  contain  water  against  the  dr5mess 
which  would  prevent  the  cohesion  of  its  particles ;  it  will  hold  air  to 
lighten  its  bulky  matters  ;  it  will  be  in  contact  with  the  celestial  fire — 
not  as  being  a  member  of  the  sidereal  system  but  by  the  simple  fact  that 
the  fire  there  and  our  earth  both  belong  to  the  ordered  universe  so  that 
something  of  the  earth  is  taken  up  by  the  fire  as  something  of  the  fire 
by  the  earth  and  something  of  everything  by  ever5rthing  else. 

This  borrowing,  however,  does  not  mean  that  the  one  thing  taking-up 


152 


PLOTINUS 


from  the  other  enters  into  a  composition,  becoming  an  element  in  a  total 
of  both  :  it  is  simply  a  consequence  of  the  kosmic  fellowship  ;  the  par¬ 
ticipant  retains  its  own  being  and  takes  over  not  the  thing  itself  but 
some  property  of  the  thing,  not  air  but  air's  yielding  softness,  not  fire 
but  fire’s  incandescence  :  mixing  is  another  process,  a  complete  surrender 
with  a  resultant  compound  not,  as  in  this  case,  earth — remaining  earth, 
the  solidity  and  density  we  know — with  something  of  fire’s  qualities 
superadded. 

We  have  authority  for  this  where  we  read  : — 

“  At  the  second  circuit  from  the  earth,  God  kindled  a  light  ”  :  he 
is  speaking  of  the  sun  which,  elsewhere,  he  calls  the  all-glowing  and, 
again,  the  all-gleaming  :  thus  he  prevents  us  imagining  it  to  be  anything 
else  but  fire,  though  of  a  peculiar  kind  ;  in  other  words  it  is  light,  which 
he  distinguishes  from  flame  as  being  only  modestly  warm  :  this  light  is 
a  corporeal  substance  but  from  it  there  shines  forth  that  other  “  light  ” 
which,  though  it  carries  the  same  name,  we  pronounce  incorporeal,  given 
forth  from  the  first  as  its  flower  and  radiance,  the  veritable  “  incandescent 
body.”  Plato’s  word  “  earthy  ”  is  commonly  taken  in  too  depreciatory 
a  sense  :  he  is  thinking  of  earth  as  the  principle  of  solidity  ;  we  are  apt 
to  ignore  his  distinctions  and  think  of  the  concrete  clay. 

Fire  of  this  order,  giving  forth  this  purest  light,  belongs  to  the  upper 
realm,  and  there  its  seat  is  fixed  by  nature  ;  but  we  must  not,  on  that 
account,  suppose  the  flame  of  earth  to  be  associated  with  the  beings  of 
that  higher  sphere. 

No  :  the  flame  of  this  world,  once  it  has  attained  a  certain  height, 
is  extinguished  by  the  currents  of  air  opposed  to  it.  Moreover,  as  it  carries 
an  earthy  element  on  its  upward  path,  it  is  weighed  downwards  and 
cannot  reach  those  loftier  regions.  It  comes  to  a  stand  somewhere  below 
the  moon — making  the  air  at  that  point  subtler — and  its  flame,  if  any 
flame  can  persist,  is  subdued  and  softened,  and  no  longer  retains  its  first 
intensity,  but  gives  out  only  what  radiance  it  reflects  from  the  light 
above. 

And  it  is  that  loftier  light— falling  variously  upon  the  stars  ;  to 
each  in  a  certain  proportion — that  gives  them  their  characteristic 


II.  I.  8] 


THE  KOSMOS 


153 


differences,  as  well  in  magnitude  as  in  colour  ;  just  such  light  constitutes 
also  the  still  higher  heavenly  bodies  which,  however,  like  clear  air,  are 
invisible  because  of  the  subtle  texture  and  unresisting  transparency  of 
their  material  substance  and  also  by  their  very  distance. 

8. 

Now  ;  given  a  light  of  this  degree,  remaining  in  the  upper  sphere 
at  its  appointed  station,  pure  light  in  purest  place,  what  mode  of  outflow 
from  it  can  be  conceived  possible  ? 

Such  a  Kind  is  not  so  constituted  as  to  flow  downwards  of  its  own 
accord ;  and  there  exists  in  those  regions  no  power  to  force  it  down. 
Again,  body  in  contact  with  soul  must  always  be  very  different  from 
body  left  to  itself  ;  the  bodily  substance  of  the  heavens  has  that  contact 
and  will  show  that  difference. 

Besides,  the  corporeal  substance  nearest  to  the  heavens  would  be 
air  or  fire  :  air  has  no  destructive  quality  ;  fire  would  be  powerless  there 
since  it  could  not  enter  into  effective  contact :  in  its  very  rush  it  would 
change  before  its  attack  could  be  felt ;  and,  apart  from  that,  it  is  of  the 
lesser  order,  no  match  for  what  it  would  be  opposing  in  those  higher 
regions. 

Again,  fire  acts  by  imparting  heat :  now  it  cannot  be  the  source  of 
heat  to  what  is  already  hot  by  nature  ;  and  anything  it  is  to  destroy 
must  as  a  first  condition  be  heated  by  it,  must  be  brought  to  a  pitch 
of  heat  fatal  to  the  nature  concerned. 

In  sum,  then,  no  outside  body  is  necessary  to  the  heavens  to  ensure 
their  permanence — or  to  produce  their  circular  movement,  for  it  has 
never  been  shown  that  their  natural  path  would  be  the  straight  fine  ; 
on  the  contrary  the  heavens,  by  their  nature,  wiU  either  be  motionless 
or  move  by  circle  ;  all  other  movement  indicates  outside  compulsion. 
We  cannot  think,  therefore,  that  the  heavenly  bodies  stand  in  need  of 
replenishment ;  we  must  not  argue  from  earthly  frames  to  those  of  the 
celestial  system  whose  sustaining  soul  is  not  the  same,  whose  space  is 
not  the  same,  whose  conditions  are  not  those  which  make  restoration 
necessary  in  this  realm  of  composite  bodies  always  in  flux  ;  we  must 


154 


PLOTINUS 


recognise  that  the  changes  that  take  place  in  bodies  here  represent  a 
slipping-away  from  the  being  (a  phenomenon  not  incident  to  the  celestial 
sphere)  and  take  place  at  the  dictate  of  a  Principle  not  dwelling  in  the 
higher  regions,  one  not  powerful  enough  to  ensure  the  permanence  of 
the  existences  in  which  it  is  exhibited,  one  which  in  its  coming  into  being 
and  in  its  generative  act  is  but  an  imitation  of  an  antecedent  Kind,  and, 
as  we  have  shown,  cannot  at  every  point  possess  the  unchangeable 
identity  of  the  Intellectual  Realm. 


SECOND  TRACTATE 
The  Heavenly  Circuit 

I. 

But  whence  that  circular  movement  ? 

In  imitation  of  the  Intellectual-Principle. 

And  does  this  movement  belong  to  the  material  part  or  to  the  Soul  ? 
Can  we  accoimt  for  it  on  the  ground  that  the  Soul  has  itself  at  once  for 
centre  and  for  the  goal  to  which  it  must  be  ceaselessly  moving  ;  or  that, 
being  self-centred  it  is  not  of  unlimited  extension  (and  consequently  must 
move  ceaselessly  to  be  omnipresent),  and  that  its  revolution  carries  the 
material  mass  with  it  ? 

If  the  Soul  had  been  the  moving  power  (by  any  such  semi-physical 
action)  it  would  be  so  no  longer  ;  it  would  have  accomplished  the  act  of 
moving  and  have  brought  the  universe  to  rest ;  there  would  be  an  end 
of  this  endless  revolution. 

In  fact  the  Soul  must  be  in  repose  or  at  least  cannot  have  spatial 
movement ;  how  then,  having  itself  a  movement  of  quite  another  order, 
could  it  communicate  spatial  movement  ? 

But  perhaps  the  circular  movement  (of  the  Kosrnos  as  soul  and  body) 
is  not  spatial  or  is  spatial  not  primarily  but  only  incidentally. 

What,  by  this  explanation,  would  be  the  essential  movement  of  the 
kosmic  soul  ? 

A  movement  towards  itself,  the  movement  of  self-awareness,  of  self¬ 
intellection,  of  the  living,  of  its  life,  the  movement  of  its  reaching  to  all 


II.  2.1]  the  heavenly  circuit  155 

things  so  that  nothing  shall  lie  outside  of  it,  nothing  anywhere  but 
within  its  scope. 

The  dominant  in  a  living  thing  is  what  compasses  it  entirely  and 
makes  it  a  unity. 

If  the  Soul  has  no  motion  of  any  kind,  it  would  not  vitally  compass 
the  Kosmos  nor  would  the  Kosmos,  a  thing  of  body,  keep  its  content 
alive,  for  the  hfe  of  body  is  movement. 

Any  spatial  motion  there  is  will  be  limited  ;  it  will  be  not  that  of 
Soul  untrammelled  but  that  of  a  material  frame  ensouled,  an  animated 
organism  ;  the  movement  will  be  partly  of  body,  partly  of  Soul,  the  body 
tending  to  the  straight  line  which  its  nature  imposes,  the  Soul  restraining 
it ;  the  resultant  will  be  the  compromise  movement  of  a  thing  at  once 
carried  forward  and  at  rest. 

But  supposing  that  the  circular  movement  is  to  be  attributed  to 
the  body,  how  is  it  to  be  explained,  since  all  body,  including  fire  (which 
constitutes  the  heavens)  has  straightforward  motion  ? 

The  answer  is  that  forthright  movement  is  maintained  only  pending 
arrival  at  the  place  for  which  the  moving  thing  is  destined  :  where  a 
thing  is  ordained  to  be,  there  it  seeks,  of  its  nature,  to  come  for  its  rest ; 
its  motion  is  its  tendence  to  its  appointed  place. 

Then,  since  the  fire  of  the  sidereal  system  has  attained  its  goal,  why 
does  it  not  stay  at  rest  ? 

Evidently  because  the  very  nature  of  fire  is  to  be  mobile  :  if  it  did 
not  take  the  curve,  its  straight  line  would  finally  fling  it  outside  the 
universe  :  the  circular  course,  then,  is  imperative. 

But  this  would  imply  an  act  of  providence  ? 

Not  quite  ;  rather  its  own  act  under  providence  ;  attaining  to  that 
realm,  it  must  still  take  the  circular  course  by  its  indwelling  nature  ;  for 
it  seeks  the  straight  path  onwards  but  finds  no  further  space  and  is 
driven  back  so  that  it  recoils  on  the  only  course  left  to  it  :  there  is 
nothing  beyond  ;  it  has  reached  the  ultimate  ;  it  runs  its  course  in  the 
regions  it  occupies,  itself  its  own  sphere,  not  destined  to  come  to  rest  there, 
existing  to  move. 

Further,  the  centre  of  a  circle  (and  therefore  of  the  Kosmos)  is  dis- 


156 


PLOTINUS 


tinctively  a  point  of  rest :  if  the  circumference  outside  were  not  in  motion, 
the  universe  would  be  no  more  than  one  vast  centre.  And  movement 
around  the  centre  is  all  the  more  to  be  expected  in  the  case  of  a  living 
thing  whose  nature  binds  it  within  a  body.  Such  motion  alone  can 
constitute  its  impulse  towards  its  centre  :  it  cannot  coincide  with  the 
centre,  for  then  there  would  be  no  circle  ;  since  this  may  not  be,  it 
whirls  about  it ;  so  only  can  it  indulge  its  tendence. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Kosmic  circuit  is  due  to  the  Soul,  we  are 
not  to  think  of  a  painful  driving  (wearing  it  down  at  last)  ;  the  soul  does 
not  use  violence  or  in  any  way  thwart  nature,  for  “  Nature  ”  is  no  other 
than  the  custom  the  All-Soul  has  established.  Omnipresent  in  its 
entirety,  incapable  of  division,  the  Soul  of  the  universe  communicates 
that  quality  of  universal  presence  to  the  heavens,  too,  in  their 
degree,  the  degree,  that  is,  of  pursuing  universality  and  advancing 
towards  it. 

If  the  Soul  halted  anywhere,  there  the  Kosmos,  too,  brought  so  far, 
would  halt :  but  the  Soul  encompasses  all,  and  so  the  Kosmos  moves, 
seeking  everything. 

Yet  never  to  attain  ? 

On  the  contrary  this  very  motion  is  its  eternal  attainment. 

Or,  better ;  the  Soul  is  ceaselessly  leading  the  Kosmos  towards 
itself  :  the  continuous  attraction  communicates  a  continuous  movement 
— not  to  some  outside  space  but  towards  the  Soul  and  in  the  one  sphere 
with  it,  not  in  the  straight  line  (which  would  ultimately  bring  the  moving 
body  outside  and  below  the  Soul),  but  in  the  curving  course  in  which 
the  moving  body  at  every  stage  possesses  the  Soul  that  is  attracting  it 
and  bestowing  itself  upon  it. 

If  the  soul  were  stationary,  that  is  if  (instead  of  presiding  over  a 
Kosmos)  it  dwelt  wholly  and  solely  in  the  realm  in  which  every  member 
is  at  rest,  motion  would  be  unknown  ;  but,  since  the  Soul  is  not  fixed 
in  some  one  station  There,  the  Kosmos  must  travel  to  every  point  in  quest 
of  it,  and  never  outside  it :  in  a  circle,  therefore. 


II.  2.  2] 


THE  HEAVENLY  CIRCUIT 


157 


2. 

And  what  of  lower  things  ?  (Why  have  they  not  this  motion  ?) 

(Their  case  is  very  different)  :  the  single  thing  here  is  not  an  all 
but  a  part  and  limited  to  a  given  segment  of  space  ;  that  other  realm  is 
all,  is  space,  so  to  speak,  and  is  subject  to  no  hindrance  or  control,  for 
in  itself  it  is  all  that  is. 

And  men  ? 

As  a  self,  each  is  a  personal  whole,  no  doubt ;  but  as  member  of 
the  universe,  each  is  a  partial  thing. 

But  if,  wherever  the  circling  body  be,  it  possesses  the  Soul,  what  need 
of  the  circling  ? 

Because  everywhere  it  finds  something  else  besides  the  Soul  (which 
it  desires  to  possess  alone). 

The  circular  movement  would  be  explained,  too,  if  the  Soul’s  power 
may  be  taken  as  resident  at  its  centre. 

Here,  however,  we  must  distinguish  between  a  centre  in  reference 
to  the  two  different  natures,  body  and  Soul. 

In  body,  centre  is  a  point  of  place  ;  in  Soul  it  is  a  source,  the  source 
of  some  other  nature.  The  word,  which  without  qualification  would  mean 
the  midpoint  of  a  spheric  mass,  may  serve  in  the  double  reference  ;  and, 
as  in  a  material  mass  so  in  the  Soul,  there  must  be  a  centre,  that  around 
which  the  object.  Soul  or  material  mass,  revolves. 

The  Soul  exists  in  revolution  around  God  to  whom  it  clings  in  love, 
holding  itself  to  the  utmost  of  its  power  near  to  Him  as  the  Being  on  which 
all  depends ;  and  since  it  cannot  coincide  with  God  it  circles  about 

Him. 

Why  then  do  not  all  souls  (i.e.  the  lower,  also,  as  those  of  men  and 
animals)  thus  circle  about  the  Godhead  ? 

Every  Soul  does  in  its  own  rank  and  place. 

And  why  not  our  very  bodies,  also  ? 

Because  the  forward  path  is  characteristic  of  body  and  because 
all  the  body’s  impulses  are  to  other  ends  and  because  what  in  us  is  of 
this  circling  nature  (the  soul)  is  hampered  in  its  motion  by  the  clay  it 
bears  with  it,  while  in  the  higher  realm  everything  flows  on  its  course. 


158 


PLOTINUS 


lightly  and  easily,  with  nothing  to  check  it,  once  there  is  any  principle 
of  motion  in  it  at  all. 

And  it  may  very  well  be  that  even  in  us  the  Spirit  which  dwells 
with  the  Soul  does  thus  circle  about  the  divinity.  For  since  God  is 
omnipresent  the  Soul  desiring  perfect  union  must  take  the  circular  course  : 
God  is  not  stationed. 

Similarly  Plato  attributes  to  the  stars  not  only  the  spheric  move¬ 
ment  belonging  to  the  universe  as  a  whole  but  also  to  each  a  revolution 
around  their  common  centre  ;  each — not  by  way  of  thought  but  by 
links  of  natural  necessity — has  in  its  own  place  taken  hold  of  God  and 
exults. 

3. 

The  truth  may  be  resumed  in  this  way  : — 

There  is  a  lowest  power  of  the  Soul,  a  nearest  to  earth,  and  this  is 
interwoven  throughout  the  entire  universe  :  another  phase  possesses 
sensation,  while  yet  another  includes  the  Reason  which  is  concerned 
with  the  objects  of  sensation  :  this  higher  phase  holds  itself  to  the 
spheres,  poised  towards  the  Above  but  hovering  over  the  lesser  Soul 
and  giving  forth  to  it  an  effluence  which  makes  it  more  intensely  vital. 

The  lower  Soul  is  moved  by  the  higher  which,  besides  encirchng  and 
supporting  it,  actually  resides  in  whatsoever  part  of  it  has  thrust  upwards 
and  attained  the  spheres.  The  lower  then,  ringed  round  by  the  higher 
and  answering  its  call,  turns  and  tends  towards  it ;  and  this  upward 
tension  communicates  motion  to  the  material  frame  in  which  it  is  in¬ 
volved  :  for  if  a  single  point  in  a  spheric  mass  is  in  any  degree  moved, 
without  being  drawn  away  from  the  rest,  it  moves  the  whole,  and  the 
sphere  is  set  in  motion.  Something  of  the  same  kind  happens  in  the  case 
of  our  bodies  :  the  unspatial  movement  of  the  Soul — in  happiness,  for 
instance,  or  at  the  idea  of  some  pleasant  event — sets  up  a  spatial  move¬ 
ment  in  the  body  :  the  Soul,  attaining  in  its  own  region  some  good  which 
increases  its  sense  of  life,  moves  towards  what  pleases  it ;  and  so,  by  force 
of  the  union  established  in  the  order  of  nature,  it  moves  the  body,  in  the 
body’s  region,  that  is  in  space. 


II.  3.  t] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


159 


As  for  that  phase  of  the  Soul  in  which  sensation  is  vested,  it,  too, 
(like  the  higher)  takes  its  good  from  the  Supreme  above  itself  and  moves, 
rejoicingly,  in  quest  of  it :  and  since  the  object  of  its  desire  is  every¬ 
where,  it  too  ranges  always  through  the  entire  scope  of  the  universe. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  has  no  such  progress  in  any  region  ;  its 
movement  is  a  stationary  act,  for  it  turns  upon  itself. 

And  this  is  why  the  All,  circling  as  it  does,  is  at  the  same  time  at 

rest. 


THIRD  TRACTATE 
Are  the  Stars  Causes? 

I. 

That  the  circuit  of  the  stars  indicates  definite  events  to  come  but 
without  being  the  cause  direct  (as  the  general  opinion  holds)  of  all  that 
happens,  has  been  elsewhere  affirmed,  and  proved  by  some  modicum  of 
argument :  but  the  subject  demands  more  precise  and  detailed  investi¬ 
gation  for  to  take  the  one  view  rather  than  the  other  is  of  no  small 
moment. 

The  behef  is  that  the  planets  in  their  courses  actually  produce  not 
merely  such  conditions  as  poverty,  wealth,  health  and  sickness  but  even 
ugliness  and  beauty  and,  gravest  of  all,  vices  and  virtue  and  the  very 
acts  that  spring  from  these  qualities,  the  definite  doings  of  each  moment 
of  virtue  or  vice.  We  are  to  suppose  the  stars  to  be  annoyed  with  men — 
and  upon  matters  in  which  men,  moulded  to  what  they  are  by  the  stars 
themselves,  can  surely  do  them  no  wrong. 

They  will  be  distributing  what  pass  for  their  good  gifts,  not  out  of 
kindness  towards  the  recipients  but  as  they  themselves  are  affected 
pleasantly  or  disagreeably  at  the  various  points  of  their  course  ;  so  that 
they  must  be  supposed  to  change  their  plans  as  they  stand  at  their 
zeniths  or  are  dechning. 

More  absurdly  still,  some  of  them  are  supposed  to  be  malicious  and 
others  to  be  helpful,  and  yet  the  evil  stars  will  (in  certain  positions) 
bestow  favours  and  the  benevolent  act  harshly  ;  further,  their  action 
alters  as  they  see  each  other  or  not,  so  that,  after  all,  they  possess  no 


i6o 


PLOTINUS 


definite  nature  but  vary  according  to  their  angles  of  aspect ;  a  star  is 
kindly  when  it  sees  one  of  its  fellows  but  changes  at  sight  of  another  : 
and  there  is  even  a  distinction  to  be  made  in  the  seeing  as  it  occurs  in 
this  figure  or  in  that.  Lastly,  all  acting  together,  the  fused  influence  is 
different  again  from  that  of  each  single  star,  just  as  the  blending  of 
distinct  fluids  gives  a  mixture  unlike  any  of  them. 

Since  these  opinions  and  others  of  the  same  order  are  prevalent,  it 
will  be  well  to  examine  them  carefully  one  by  one,  beginning  with  the 
fundamental  question  : — 


2. 

Are  these  planets  to  be  thought  of  as  soulless  or  unsouled  ? 

Suppose  them,  first,  to  be  without  Soul. 

In  that  case  they  can  purvey  only  heat  or  cold — if  cold  from  the 
stars  can  be  thought  of — that  is  to  say,  any  communication  from  them 
will  affect  only  our  bodily  nature,  since  all  they  have  to  communicate 
to  us  is  merely  corporeal.  This  implies  that  no  considerable  change  can 
be  caused  in  the  bodies  affected  since  emanations  merely  corporeal  cannot 
differ  greatly  from  star  to  star,  and  must,  moreover,  blend  upon  earth 
into  one  collective  resultant :  at  most  the  differences  would  be  such  as 
depend  upon  local  position,  upon  nearness  or  farness  with  regard  to  the 
centre  of  influence.  This  reasoning,  of  course,  is  as  valid  of  any  cold 
emanation  there  may  be  as  of  the  warm. 

Now,  what  is  there  in  such  corporeal  action  to  account  for  the  vari¬ 
ous  classes  and  kinds  of  men,  learned  and  illiterate,  scholars  as  against 
orators,  musicians  as  against  people  of  other  professions  ?  Can  a  power 
merely  physical  make  rich  or  poor  ?  Can  it  bring  about  such  conditions 
as  in  no  sense  depend  upon  the  interaction  of  corporeal  elements  ? 
Could  it,  for  example,  bring  a  man  such  and  such  a  brother,  father,  son, 
or  wife,  give  him  a  stroke  of  good  fortune  at  a  particular  moment,  or 
make  him  generahssimo  or  king  ? 

Next,  suppose  the  stars  to  have  life  and  mind  and  to  be  effective  by 
deliberate  purpose. 

In  that  case,  what  have  they  suffered  from  us  that  they  should,  in 


n.  3. 3] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


161 


free  will,  do  us  hurt,  they  who  are  estabhshed  in  a  divine  place,  them¬ 
selves  divine  ?  There  is  nothing  in  their  nature  of  what  makes  men 
base,  nor  can  our  weal  or  woe  bring  them  the  slightest  good  or  ill. 

3- 

Possibly,  however,  they  act  not  by  choice  but  under  stress  of  their 
several  positions  and  collective  figures  ? 

But  if  position  and  figure  determined  their  action  each  several  one 
would  necessarily  cause  identical  effects  with  every  other  on  entering 
any  given  place  or  pattern. 

And  that  raises  the  question  what  effect  for  good  or  bad  can  be 
produced  upon  any  one  of  them  by  its  transit  in  the  parallel  of  this  or 
that  section  of  the  Zodiac  circle — for  they  are  not  in  the  Zodiacal  figure 
itself  but  considerably  beneath  it — especially  since,  whatever  point  they 
touch,  they  are  always  in  the  heavens. 

It  is  absurd  to  think  that  the  particular  grouping  under  which  a 
star  passes  can  modify  either  its  character  or  its  earthward  influences. 
And  can  we  imagine  it  altered  by  its  own  progression  as  it  rises,  stands 
at  centre,  declines  ?  Exultant  when  at  centre  ;  dejected  or  enfeebled  in 
declension  ;  some  raging  as  they  rise  and  growing  benignant  as  they  set, 
while  declension  brings  cut  the  best  in  one  among  them  ;  surely  this 
cannot  be  ? 

We  must  not  forget  that  invariably  every  star,  considered  in  itself, 
is  at  centre  with  regard  to  some  one  given  group  and  in  decline  with 
regard  to  another  and  vice  versa  ;  and,  very  certamly,  it  is  not  at  once 
happy  and  sad,  angry  and  kindly.  There  is  no  reasonable  escape  in 
representing  some  of  them  as  glad  in  their  setting,  others  in  their  rising  . 
they  would  still  be  grieving  and  glad  at  one  and  the  same  time. 

Further,  why  should  any  distress  of  theirs  work  harm  to  us  ? 

No  :  we  cannot  think  of  them  as  grieving  at  all  or  as  being  cheerful 
upon  occasions  :  they  must  be  continuously  serene,  happy  in  the  good 
they  enjoy  and  the  Vision  before  them.  Each  lives  its  own  free  life  , 
each  finds  its  Good  in  its  own  Act ;  and  this  Act  is  not  directed  towards  us. 

Like  the  birds  of  augury,  the  living  beings  o'  the  heavens,  having  no 


i62 


PLOTINUS 


lot  or  part  with  us,  may  serve  incidentally  to  foreshow  the  future,  but 
they  have  absolutely  no  main  function  in  our  regard. 

4* 

It  is  again  not  in  reason  that  a  particular  star  should  be  gladdened 
by  seeing  this  or  that  other  while,  in  a  second  couple,  such  an  aspect  is 
distressing ;  what  enmities  can  affect  such  beings  ?  what  causes  of  enmity 
can  there  be  among  them  ? 

And  why  should  there  be  any  difference  as  a  given  star  sees  certain 
others  from  the  corner  of  a  triangle  or  in  opposition  or  at  the  angle  of  a 
square  ? 

Why,  again,  should  it  see  its  fellow  from  some  one  given  position 
and  yet,  in  the  next  Zodiacal  figure,  not  see  it,  though  the  two  are  actually 
nearer  ? 

And,  the  cardinal  question ;  by  what  conceivable  process  could 
they  affect  what  is  attributed  to  them  ?  How  explain  either  the  action 
of  any  single  star  independently  or,  still  more  perplexing,  the  effect  of 
their  combined  intentions  ? 

We  cannot  think  of  them  entering  into  compromises,  each  renouncing 
something  of  its  efficiency  and  their  final  action  in  our  regard  amounting 
to  a  concerted  plan. 

No  one  star  would  suppress  the  contribution  of  another,  nor  would 
star  yield  to  star  and  shape  its  conduct  under  suasion. 

As  for  the  fancy  that  while  one  is  glad  when  it  enters  another’s 
region,  the  second  is  vexed  when  in  its  turn  it  occupies  the  place  of  the 
first,  surely  this  is  like  starting  with  the  supposition  of  two  friends  and 
then  going  on  to  talk  of  one  being  attracted  to  the  other  who,  however, 
abhors  the  first. 

5. 

When  they  tell  us  that  a  certain  cold  star  is  more  benevolent  to  us 
in  proportion  as  it  is  further  away,  they  clearly  make  its  harmful  influence 
depend  upon  the  coldness  of  its  nature ;  and  yet  it  ought  (by  this  reason- 
ing)  to  be  beneficent  to  us  when  it  is  in  the  opposed  Zodiacal  figures. 


n.  3-  5]  ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ?  163 

When  the  cold  planet,  we  are  told,  is  in  opposition  to  the  cold,  both 
become  menacing  :  but  the  natural  effect  would  be  a  compromise. 

And  we  are  asked  to  believe  that  one  of  them  is  happy  by  day  and 
grows  kindly  under  the  warmth,  while  another,  of  a  fiery  nature,  is  most 
cheerful  by  night— as  if  it  were  not  always  day  to  them,  light  to  them, 
and  as  if  the  first  one  could  be  darkened  by  night  at  that  great  distance 
above  the  earth’s  shadow. 

Then  there  is  the  notion  that  the  moon,  in  conjunction  with  a  certain 
star,  is  softened  at  her  full  but  is  malignant  in  the  same  conjunction 
when  her  light  has  waned ;  yet,  if  anything  of  this  order  could  be 
admitted,  the  very  opposite  would  be  the  case.  For  when  she  is  full  to 
us  she  must  be  dark  on  the  further  hemisphere,  that  is  to  that  star  which 
stands  above  her  ;  and  when  dark  to  us  she  is  full  to  that  other  star, 
upon  which  only  then,  on  the  contrary,  does  she  look  with  her  light. 
To  the  moon  itself,  in  fact,  it  can  make  no  difference  in  what  aspect  she 
stands,  for  she  is  always  lit  on  the  upper  or  on  the  under  half  ;  to  the 
other  star,  the  warmth  from  the  moon,  of  which  they  speak,  might  make 
a  difference  ;  but  that  warmth  would  reach  it  precisely  when  the  moon 
is  without  light  to  us  ;  at  its  darkest  to  us  it  is  full  to  that  other,  and 
therefore  (by  the  theory)  beneficent.  The  darkness  of  the  moon  to  us  is 
of  moment  to  the  earth,  but  brings  no  trouble  to  the  planet  above. 
That  planet,  it  is  alleged,  can  give  no  help  on  account  of  its  remoteness 
and  therefore  seems  less  well  disposed  ;  but  the  moon  at  its  full  suffices 
to  the  lower  realm  so  that  the  distance  of  the  other  is  of  no  importance. 
When  the  moon,  though  dark  to  us,  is  in  aspect  with  the  Fiery  Star 
she  is  held  to  be  favourable ;  the  reason  alleged  is  that  the  force  of  Mars 
is  all-sufacient  since  it  contains  more  fire  than  it  needs. 

The  truth  is  that  while  the  material  emanations  from  the  living 
beings  of  the  heavenly  system  are  of  various  degrees  of  warmth— planet 
differing  from  planet  in  this  respect — no  cold  comes  from  them  .  the 
nature  of  the  space  in  which  they  have  their  being  is  voucher  for  that. 

The  star  known  as  Jupiter  includes  a  due  measure  of  fire  (and 
warmth),  in  this  resembling  the  Morning-star  and  therefore  seeming  to 
be  in  alliance  with  it.  In  aspect  with  what  is  known  as  the  Fiery  Star, 


164 


PLOTINUS 


Jupiter  is  beneficent  by  virtue  of  the  mixing  of  influences  :  in  aspect 
with  Saturn  unfriendly  by  dint  of  distance.  Mercury,  it  would  seem,  is 
(in  itself)  indifferent  whatever  stars  it  be  in  aspect  with  ;  for  it  adopts 
any  and  every  character. 

But  (again,  the  truth  is  that)  all  the  stars  are  serviceable  to  the 
Universe,  and  therefore  can  stand  to  each  other  only  as  the  service  of 
the  Universe  demands,  in  a  harmony  Hke  that  observed  in  the  members 
of  any  one  animal  form.  They  exist  essentially  for  the  purpose  of  the 
Universe,  just  as  the  gall  exists  for  the  purposes  of  the  body  as  a  whole 
not  less  than  for  its  own  immediate  function  :  it  is  to  be  the  inciter  of 
the  animal  spirits  but  without  allowing  the  entire  organism  and  its  own 
especial  region  to  run  riot.  Some  such  balance  of  function  was  indis¬ 
pensable  in  the  All — bitter  with  sweet.  There  must  be  differentiation — 
eyes  and  so  forth — but  all  the  members  will  be  in  sympathy  with  the 
entire  animal  frame  to  which  they  belong.  Only  so  can  there  be  a 
unity  and  a  total  harmony. 

And  in  such  a  total,  analogy  will  make  every  part  a  Sign. 


6. 

But  that  this  same  Mars,  or  Aphrodite,  in  certain  aspects  should 
cause  adulteries — as  if  they  could  thus,  through  the  agency  of  human 
incontinence,  satisfy  their  own  mutual  desires — is  not  such  a  notion  the 
height  of  unreason  ?  And  who  could  accept  the  fancy  that  their  happiness 
comes  from  their  seeing  each  other  in  this  or  that  relative  position  and 
not  from  their  own  settled  nature  ? 

Again  :  countless  m3Tiads  of  living  beings  are  bom  and  continue  to 
be  :  to  minister  continuously  to  every  separate  one  of  these  ;  to  make 
them  famous,  rich,  poor,  lascivious ;  to  shape  the  active  tendencies  of 
every  single  one — what  kind  of  life  is  this  for  the  stars,  how  could  they 
possibly  handle  a  task  so  huge  ? 

They  are  to  watch,  we  must  suppose,  the  rising  of  each  several 
constellation  and  upon  that  signal  to  act ;  such  a  one,  they  see,  has 
risen  by  so  many  degrees,  representing  so  many  of  the  periods  of  its 
upward  path  ;  they  reckon  on  their  fingers  at  what  moment  they  must 


II-  3-  7] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


165 

take  the  action  which,  executed  prematurely,  would  be  out  of  order  ; 
and  in  the  sum,  there  is  no  One  Being  controlling  the  entire  scheme  ;  all 
is  made  over  to  the  stars  singly,  as  if  there  were  no  Sovereign  Unity, 
standing  as  source  of  all  the  forms  of  Being  in  subordinate  association 
with  it,  and  delegating  to  the  separate  members,  in  their  appropriate 
Kinds,  the  task  of  accomplishing  its  purposes  and  bringing  its  latent 
potentiality  into  act. 

This  is  a  separatist  theory,  tenable  only  by  minds  ignorant  of  the 
nature  of  a  Universe  which  has  a  ruling  principle  and  a  first  cause 
operative  downwards  through  every  member. 

7- 

But,  if  the  stars  announce  the  future — as  we  hold  of  many  other 
things  also — what  explanation  of  the  cause  have  we  to  offer  ?  What 
explains  the  purposeful  arrangement  thus  implied  ?  Obviously,  unless 
the  particular  is  included  under  some  general  principle  of  order,  there 
can  be  no  signification. 

We  may  think  of  the  stars  as  letters  perpetually  being  inscribed  on 
the  heavens  or  inscribed  once  for  all  and  yet  moving  as  they  pursue  the 
other  tasks  allotted  to  them  :  upon  these  main  tasks  will  follow  the 
quality  of  signifying,  just  as  the  one  principle  underlying  any  living  unit 
enables  us  to  reason  from  member  to  member,  so  that  for  example  we 
may  judge  of  character  and  even  of  perils  and  safeguards  by  indications 
in  the  eyes  or  in  some  other  part  of  the  body.  If  these  parts  of  us  are 
members  of  a  whole,  so  are  we  :  in  different  ways  the  one  law  applies. 

All  teems  with  symbol ;  the  wise  man  is  the  man  who  in  any  one  thing 
can  read  another,  a  process  familiar  to  all  of  us  in  not  a  few  examples  of 
everyday  experience. 

But  what  is  the  comprehensive  principle  of  co-ordination  ?  Establish 
this  and  we  have  a  reasonable  basis  for  the  divination,  not  only  by  stars 
but  also  by  birds  and  other  animals,  from  which  we  derive  guidance  in 
our  varied  concerns. 

All  things  must  be  enchained  ;  and  the  sympathy  and  correspond¬ 
ence  obtaining  in  any  one  closely  knit  organism  must  exist,  first,  and  most 


i66 


PLOTINUS 


intensely,  in  the  All.  There  must  be  one  principle  constituting  this  unit 
of  many  forms  of  life  and  enclosing  the  several  members  within  the 
unity,  while  at  the  same  time,  precisely  as  in  each  thing  of  detail  the 
parts  too  have  each  a  definite  function,  so  in  the  All  (the  higher  All)  each 
several  member  must  have  its  own  task — but  more  markedly  so  since  in 
this  case  the  parts  are  not  merely  members  but  themselves  Alls,  members 
of  the  loftier  Kind. 

Thus  each  entity  takes  its  origin  from  one  Principle  and,  therefore, 
while  executing  its  own  function,  works  in  with  every  other  member  of 
that  All  from  which  its  distinct  task  has  by  no  means  cut  it  off :  each 
performs  its  act,  each  receives  something  from  the  others,  every  one  at 
its  own  moment  bringing  its  touch  of  sweet  or  bitter.  And  there  is  nothing 
undesigned,  nothing  of  chance,  in  all  the  process  :  all  is  one  scheme  of 
differentiation,  starting  from  the  Firsts  and  working  itself  out  in  a  con¬ 
tinuous  progression  of  Kinds. 

8. 

Soul,  then,  in  the  same  way,  is  intent  upon  a  task  of  its  own  ;  alike 
in  its  direct  course  (its  tendence  towards  the  divine  ?)  and  in  its  divagation 
(its  activity  towards  the  lower  ?)  it  is  the  cause  of  all  by  its  possession 
of  the  Thought  of  the  First  Principle  :  thus  a  Law  of  Justice  goes  with 
aU  that  exists  in  the  Universe  which,  otherwise,  would  be  dissolved,  and 
is  perdurable  because  the  entire  fabric  is  guided  as  much  by  the  order¬ 
liness  as  by  the  power  of  the  controlling  force.  And  in  this  order  the 
stars,  as  being  no  minor  members  of  the  heavenly  system,  are  co-operators 
contributing  at  once  to  its  stately  beauty  and  to  its  symbolic  quality. 
Their  symbolic  power  extends  to  the  entire  realm  of  sense,  their  efficacy 
only  to  what  they  patently  do. 

For  our  part,  nature  keeps  us  upon  the  work  of  the  Soul  as  long  as 
we  are  not  wrecked  in  the  multiplicity  of  the  Universe  :  once  thus 
sunk  and  held  we  pay  the  penalty,  which  consists  both  in  the  fall  itself 
and  in  the  lower  rank  thus  entailed  upon  us  :  riches  and  poverty  are 
caused  (not  by  the  stars  but)  by  the  combinations  of  external  fact. 

And  what  of  virtue  and  vice  ? 


II-  3-  9]  ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ?  167 

That  question  has  been  amply  discussed  elsewhere  :  in  a  word, 
virtue  is  ours  by  the  ancient  staple  of  the  Soul ;  vice  is  due  to  the 
commerce  of  a  Soul  with  the  outer  world. 

9- 

This  brings  us  to  the  Spindle-destiny,  spun  according  to  the  ancients 
by  the  Fates.  To  Plato  the  Spindle  represents  the  co-operation  of  the 
moving  and  the  stable  elements  of  the  kosmic  circuit :  the  Fates  with 
Necessity,  Mother  of  the  Fates,  manipulate  it  and  spin  at  the  birth  of 
every  being,  so  that  all  comes  into  existence  through  Necessity. 

In  the  Timseus,  the  creating  God  bestows  the  essential  of  the  Soul, 
but  it  is  the  divinities  moving  in  the  kosmos  (the  stars)  that  infuse  the 
powerful  affections  holding  from  Necessity — our  impulse  and  our  desire, 
our  sense  of  pleasure  and  of  pain — and  that  lower  phase  of  the  Soul  in 
which  such  experiences  originate.  By  this  statement  our  personality  is 
bound  up  with  the  stars,  whence  our  Soul  (as  total  of  Principle  and 
affections)  takes  shape ;  and  we  are  set  under  necessity  at  our  very  entrance 
into  the  world  :  our  temperament  wiU  be  of  the  stars’  ordering,  and  so, 
therefore,  the  actions  which  derive  from  temperament,  and  all  the 
experiences  of  a  nature  shaped  to  impressions. 

What,  after  all  this,  remains  to  stand  for  the  “  We  ”  ? 

The  “  We  ”  is  the  actual  resultant  of  a  Being  whose  nature  includes, 
with  certain  sensibilities,  the  power  of  governing  them.  Cut  off  as  we 
are  by  the  nature  of  the  body,  God  has  yet  given  us,  in  the  midst  of  all 
this  evd,  virtue  the  unconquerable,  meaningless  in  a  state  of  tranquil 
safety  but  everything  where  its  absence  would  be  peril  of  fall. 

Our  task,  then,  is  to  work  for  our  liberation  from  this  sphere, 
severing  ourselves  from  all  that  has  gathered  about  us  ;  the  total  man  is 
to  be  something  better  than  a  body  ensouled— the  bodily  element  domi¬ 
nant  with  a  trace  of  Soul  running  through  it  and  a  resultant  life-course 
mainly  of  the  body — for  in  such  a  combination  all  is,  in  fact,  bodily. 
There  is  another  life,  emancipated,  whose  quality  is  progression  towards 
the  higher  realm,  towards  the  good  and  divine,  towards  that  Principle 
which  no  one  possesses  except  by  deliberate  usage  but  so  may  appro- 


i68 


PLOTINUS 


priate,  becoming,  each  personally,  the  higher,  the  beautiful,  the  Godlike, 
and  living,  remote,  in  and  by  It — unless  one  choose  to  go  bereaved  of 
that  higher  Soul  and  therefore,  to  live  fate-bound,  no  longer  profiting, 
merely,  by  the  significance  of  the  sidereal  system  but  becoming  as  it  were 
a  part  sunken  in  it  and  dragged  along  with  the  whole  thus  adopted. 

For  every  human  Being  is  of  twofold  character  ;  there  is  that  com¬ 
promise-total  and  there  is  the  Authentic  Man  :  and  it  is  so  with  the 
Kosmos  as  a  whole  ;  it  is  in  the  one  phase  a  conjunction  of  body  with  a 
certain  form  of  the  Soul  bound  up  in  body  ;  in  the  other  phase  it  is  the 
Universal  Soul,  that  which  is  not  itself  embodied  but  flashes  down  its 
rays  into  the  embodied  Soul :  and  the  same  twofold  quality  belongs  to 
the  Sun  and  the  other  members  of  the  heavenly  system. 

To  the  remoter  Soul,  the  pure,  sun  and  stars  communicate  no  base¬ 
ness.  In  their  efficacy  upon  the  (material)  All,  they  act  as  parts  of  it, 
as  ensouled  bodies  within  it ;  and  they  act  only  upon  what  is  partial ; 
body  is  the  agent  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  becomes  the  vehicle  through 
which  is  transmitted  something  of  the  star’s  wiU  and  of  that  authentic 
Soul  in  it  which  is  steadfastly  in  contemplation  of  the  Highest. 

But  (with  every  allowance  to  the  lower  forces)  aU  follows  either  upon 
that  Highest  or  rather  upon  the  Beings  about  It — we  may  think  of  the 
Divine  as  a  fire  whose  outgoing  warmth  pervades  the  Universe — or 
upon  whatsoever  is  transmitted  by  the  one  Soul  (the  divine  first  Soul)  to 
the  other,  its  Kin  (the  Soul  of  any  particular  being) .  AU  that  is  graceless 
is  admixture.  For  the  Universe  is  in  truth  a  thing  of  blend,  and  if  we 
separate  from  it  that  separable  Soul,  the  residue  is  little.  The  AU  is  a 
God  when  the  divine  Soul  is  counted  in  with  it ;  “  the  rest,”  we  read, 
”  is  a  mighty  spirit  and  its  ways  are  subdivine.” 


10. 

If  all  this  be  true,  we  must  at  once  admit  signification,  though, 
neither  singly  nor  collectively,  can  we  ascribe  to  the  stars  any  efficacy 
except  in  what  concerns  the  (material)  AU  and  in  what  is  of  their  own 
function. 


II.  3.  12] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


169 


We  must  admit  that  the  Soul  before  entering  into  birth  presents 
itself  bearing  with  it  something  of  its  own,  for  it  could  never  touch  body 
except  under  stress  of  a  powerful  inner  impulse  ;  we  must  admit  some 
element  of  chance  around  it  from  its  very  entry,  since  the  moment  and 
conditions  are  determined  by  the  kosmic  circuit :  and  we  must  admit 
some  effective  power  in  that  circuit  itself  ;  it  is  co-operative,  and  com¬ 
pletes  of  its  own  act  the  task  that  belongs  to  the  All  of  which  everything 
in  the  circuit  takes  the  rank  and  function  of  a  part. 


II. 

And  we  must  remember  that  what  comes  from  the  supemals  does 
not  enter  into  the  recipients  as  it  left  the  source  ;  fire,  for  instance,  will 
be  duller  ;  the  loving  instinct  will  degenerate  and  issue  in  ugly  forms  of 
the  passion  ;  the  vital  energy  in  a  subject  not  so  balanced  as  to  display 
the  mean  of  manly  courage,  will  come  out  as  either  ferocity  or  faint¬ 
heartedness  ;  and  ambition  ...  in  love  .  .  . ;  and  the  instinct  towards 
good  sets  up  the  pursuit  of  semblant  beauty ;  intellectual  power  at  its 
lowest  produces  the  extreme  of  wickedness,  for  wickedness  is  a  miscal¬ 
culating  effort  towards  Intelligence  (=towards  the  highest  principle  in 
the  man). 

Any  such  quality,  modified  at  best  from  its  supreme  form,  de¬ 
teriorates  again  within  itself  :  things  of  any  kind  that  approach  from 
above,  altered  by  merely  leaving  their  source  change  further  still  by  their 
blending  with  bodies,  with  Matter,  with  each  other. 


12. 

All  that  thus  proceeds  from  the  supernal  combines  into  a  unity  (in 
the  subject  concerned)  and  every  existing  entity  takes  something  from 
this  blended  infusion  so  that  the  result  is  the  thmg  itself  plus  some 
quality.  The  effluence  does  not  make  the  horse  but  adds  something  to 
it ;  for  horse  comes  by  horse,  and  man  by  man  :  the  sun  plays  its  part 
no  doubt  in  the  shaping,  but  the  man  has  his  origin  in  the  Human- 
Principle.  Outer  things  have  their  effect,  sometimes  to  hurt  and  some¬ 
times  to  help  like  a  father,  they  often  contribute  to  good  but  sometimes 


PLOTINUS 


170 

also  to  harm  ;  but  they  do  not  wrench  the  human  being  from  the  foun¬ 
dations  of  its  nature  ;  though  sometimes  Matter  is  the  dominant,  and 
the  human  principle  takes  the  second  place  so  that  there  is  a  failure  to 
achieve  perfection  ;  the  Ideal  has  been  attenuated. 

13- 

Of  phenomena  of  this  sphere  some  derive  from  the  Kosmic  Circuit  and 
some  not :  we  must  take  them  singly  and  mark  them  off,  assigning  to 
each  its  origin. 

The  gist  of  the  whole  matter  lies  in  the  consideration  that  Soul 
governs  this  All  by  the  plan  contained  in  the  Reason-Principle  and  plays 
in  the  All  exactly  the  part  of  the  particular  principle  which  in  every 
living-thing  forms  the  members  of  the  organism  and  adjusts  them  to  the 
unity  of  which  they  are  portions  ;  the  entire  force  of  the  Soul  is  repre¬ 
sented  in  the  All  but,  in  the  parts,  Soul  is  present  only  in  proportion  to 
the  degree  of  essential  reality  held  by  each  of  such  partial  objects. 
Surrounding  every  separate  entity  there  are  other  entities,  whose  approach 
wiU  sometimes  be  hostile  and  sometimes  helpful  to  the  purpose  of  its 
nature  ;  but  to  the  AU  taken  in  its  length  and  breadth  each  and  every 
separate  existent  is  an  adjusted  part,  holding  its  own  characteristic  and 
yet  contributing  by  its  own  native  tendency  to  the  entire  life-history  of 
the  Universe. 

The  soulless  parts  of  the  All  are  merely  instruments  ;  all  their  action 
is  effected,  so  to  speak,  under  a  compulsion  from  outside  themselves. 

The  ensouled  fall  into  two  classes.  The  one  kind  has  a  motion  of 
its  own,  but  haphazard  like  that  of  horses  between  the  shafts  but  before 
their  driver  sets  the  course  ;  they  are  set  right  by  the  whip.  In  the 
Living-Being  possessed  of  Reason,  the  nature-principle  includes  the  driver ; 
where  the  driver  is  intelligent,  it  takes  in  the  main  a  straight  path  to  a 
set  end.  But  both  classes  are  members  of  the  All  and  co-operate  towards 
the  general  purpose. 

The  greater  and  most  valuable  among  them  have  an  important 
operation  over  a  wide  range  :  their  contribution  towards  the  hfe  of  the 
whole  consists  in  acting,  not  in  being  acted  upon  ;  others,  but  feebly 


II.  3.14] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


171 


equipped  for  action,  are  almost  wholly  passive  ;  there  is  an  intermediate 
order  whose  members  contain  within  themselves  a  principle  of  pro¬ 
ductivity  and  activity  and  make  themselves  very  effective  in  many 
spheres  or  ways  and  yet  serve  also  by  their  passivity. 

Thus  the  All  stands  as  one  all-complete  Life,  whose  members,  to 
the  measure  in  which  each  contains  within  itself  the  Highest,  effect  all 
that  is  high  and  noble  :  and  the  entire  scheme  must  be  subordinate  to 
its  Dirigeant  as  an  army  to  its  general,  "  following  upon  Zeus  ” — it  has 
been  said — “  as  he  proceeds  towards  the  Intelligible  Kind.” 

Secondary  in  the  All  are  those  of  its  parts  which  possess  a  less 
exalted  nature  just  as  in  us  the  members  rank  lower  than  the  Soul ;  and 
so  aU  through,  there  is  a  general  analogy  between  the  things  of  the  All 
and  our  own  members — ^none  of  quite  equal  rank. 

AU  living  things,  then — all  in  the  heavens  and  aU  elsewhere — fall 
under  the  general  Reason-Principle  of  the  AU — they  have  been  made 
parts  with  a  view  to  the  whole  :  not  one  of  these  parts,  however  exalted, 
has  power  to  effect  any  alteration  of  these  Reason-Principles  or  of  things 
shaped  by  them  and  to  them  ;  some  modification  one  part  may  work 
upon  another,  whether  for  better  or  for  worse  ;  but  there  is  no  power 
that  can  wrest  anything  outside  of  its  distinct  nature. 

The  part  effecting  such  a  modification  for  the  worse  may  act  in 
several  ways. 

It  may  set  up  some  weakness  restricted  to  the  material  frame.  Or 
it  may  carry  the  weakness  through  to  the  sympathetic  Soul  which  by  the 
medium  of  the  material  frame,  become  a  power  to  debasement,  has  been 
delivered  over,  though  never  in  its  essence,  to  the  inferior  order  of  being. 
Or,  in  the  case  of  a  material  frame  iU-organised,  it  may  check  aU  such 
action  (of  the  Soul)  upon  the  material  frame  as  demands  a  certain 
coUaboration  in  the  part  acted  upon  ;  thus  a  lyre  may  be  so  ill-strung 
as  to  be  incapable  of  the  melodic  exactitude  necessary  to  musical  effect. 

14. 

What  of  poverty  and  riches,  glory  and  power  ? 

In  the  case  of  inherited  fortune,  the  stars  merely  announce  a  rich 


172 


PLOTINUS 


man,  exactly  as  they  announce  the  high  social  standing  of  the  child 
born  to  a  distinguished  house. 

Wealth  may  be  due  to  personal  activity  :  in  this  case  if  the  body 
has  contributed,  part  of  the  effect  is  due  to  whatever  has  contributed 
towards  the  physical  powers,  first  the  parents  and  then,  if  place  has  had 
its  influence,  sky  and  earth  ;  if  the  body  has  borne  no  part  of  the  burden, 
then  the  success,  and  all  the  splendid  accompaniments  added  by  the 
Recompensers,  must  be  attributed  to  virtue  exclusively.  If  fortune  has 
come  by  gift  from  the  good  then  the  source  of  the  wealth  is,  again,  virtue  ; 
if  by  gift  from  the  evil,  but  to  a  meritorious  recipient,  then  the  credit 
must  be  given  to  the  action  of  the  best  in  them  :  if  the  recipient  is 
himself  unprincipled,  the  wealth  must  be  attributed  primarily  to  the 
very  wickedness  and  to  whatsoever  is  responsible  for  the  wickedness, 
while  the  givers  bear  an  equal  share  in  the  wrong. 

When  the  success  is  due  to  labour,  tillage  for  example,  it  must  be 
put  down  to  the  tiller,  with  all  his  environment  as  contributory.  In 
the  case  of  treasure  trove,  something  from  the  AU  has  entered  into 
action  ;  and  if  this  be  so,  it  will  be  foreshown — since  all  things  make  a 
chain,  so  that  we  can  speak  of  things  universally.  Money  is  lost ;  if  by 
robbery,  the  blame  lies  with  the  robber  and  the  native  principle  guiding 
him  :  if  by  shipwreck,  the  cause  is  the  chain  of  events.  As  for  good 
fame,  it  is  either  deserved  and  then  is  due  to  the  services  done  and  to 
the  merit  of  those  appraising  them,  or  it  is  undeserved,  and  then  must 
be  attributed  to  the  injustice  of  those  making  the  award.  And  the  same 
principle  holds  as  regards  power — for  this  also  may  be  rightly  or  im- 
rightly  placed^ — it  depends  either  upon  the  merit  of  the  dispensers  of 
place  or  upon  the  man  himself  who  has  effected  his  purpose  by  the 
organisation  of  supporters  or  in  many  other  possible  ways.  Marriages, 
similarly,  are  brought  about  either  by  choice  or  by  chance  interplay  of 
circumstance.  And  births  are  determined  by  marriages  :  the  child  is 
moulded  true  to  type  when  all  goes  well ;  otherwise  it  is  marred  by 
some  inner  detriment,  something  due  to  the  mother  personally  or  to  an 
environment  unfavourable  to  that  particular  conception. 


II-  3-  is] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


173 


^5-  ... 

According  to  Plato  lots  and  choice  play  a  part  (in  the  determination 
of  human  conditions)  before  the  Spindle  of  Necessity  is  turned  ,  that 
once  done,  only  the  Spindle-destiny  is  valid  ;  it  fixes  the  chosen  con¬ 
ditions  irretrievably  since  the  elected  guardian-spirit  becomes  accessory 
to  their  accomplishment. 

But  what  is  the  significance  of  the  Lots  ? 

By  the  Lots  (implying  the  unchosen  element)  we  are  to  understand 
birth  into  the  conditions  actually  existent  in  the  AU  at  the  particular 
moment  of  each  entry  into  body,  birth  into  such  and  such  a  physical 
frame,  from  such  and  such  parents,  in  this  or  that  place,  and  generally 
all  that  in  our  phraseology  is  the  External. 

For  Particulars  and  Universal  alike  it  is  established  that  to  the 
first  of  those  known  as  the  Fates,  to  Clotho  the  Spinner,  must  be  due 
the  unity  and  as  it  were  interweaving  of  all  that  exists  .  Lachesis  (the 
Apportioner)  presides  over  the  Lots  ;  to  Atropos  (the  Inflexible)  must 
necessarily  belong  the  conduct  of  mundane  events. 

Of  men,  some  enter  into  life  as  fragments  of  the  All,  bound  to  that 
which  is  external  to  themselves  ;  they  are  victims  of  a  sort  of  fascination, 
and  are  hardly,  or  not  at  all,  themselves  :  but  others  mastering  all  this- 
straining,  so  to  speak,  by  the  head  towards  the  Higher,  to  what  is  outside 
even  the  Soul — preserve  still  the  nobility  and  the  ancient  privilege  of 
the  Soul’s  essential  being. 

For  certainly  we  cannot  think  of  the  Soul  as  a  thing  whose  nature 
is  just  a  sum  of  impressions  from  outside — as  if  it,  alone,  of  all  that 
exists,  had  no  native  character. 

No  :  much  more  than  aU  else,  the  Soul,  possessing  the  Idea  which 
belongs  to  a  Principle,  must  have  as  its  native  wealth  many  powers 
serving  to  the  activities  of  its  Kind.  It  is  an  Essential-Existent  and  with 
this  Existence  must  go  desire  and  act  and  the  tendency  towards  some 

good.  .  .  . 

While  body  and  soul  stand  one  combmed  thing,  there  is  a  jomt 

nature,  a  definite  entity  having  definite  functions  and  employments ;  but 
as  soon  as  any  Soul  is  detached,  its  employments  are  kept  apart,  its  very 


174 


PLOTINUS 


own  :  it  ceases  to  take  the  body’s  concerns  to  itself  :  it  has  vision  now  : 
body  and  soul  stand  widely  apart. 

i6. 

The  question  arises  what  phase  of  the  Soul  enters  into  the  union 
for  the  period  of  embodiment  and  what  phase  remains  distinct,  what  is 
separable  and  what  necessarily  interlinked,  and  in  general  what  the 
Living-Being  is. 

On  aU  this  there  has  been  a  conflict  of  teaching  :  the  matter  must 
be  examined  later  on  from  quite  other  considerations  than  occupy  us 
here.  For  the  present  let  us  explain  in  what  sense  we  have  described 
the  All  as  the  expressed  idea  of  the  Governing  Soul. 

One  theory  might  be  that  the  Soul  creates  the  particular  entities  in 
succession — man  followed  by  horse  and  other  animals  domestic  or  wild  : 
fire  and  earth,  though,  first  of  all — that  it  watches  these  creations  acting 
upon  each  other  whether  to  help  or  to  harm,  observes,  and  no  more,  the 
tangled  web  formed  of  all  these  strands,  and  their  unfailing  sequences ; 
and  that  it  makes  no  concern  of  the  result  beyond  securing  the  repro¬ 
duction  of  the  primal  living-beings,  leaving  them  for  the  rest  to  act 
upon  each  other  according  to  their  definite  natures. 

Another  view  makes  the  soul  answerable  for  all  that  thus  comes 
about,  since  its  first  creations  have  set  up  the  entire  enchainment. 

No  doubt  the  Reason-Principle  (conveyed  by  the  Soul)  covers  all 
the  action  and  experience  of  this  realm  :  nothing  happens,  even  here,  by 
any  form  of  haphazard  ;  all  follows  a  necessary  order. 

Is  everything,  then,  to  be  attributed  to  the  act  of  the  Reason- 
Principles  ? 

To  their  existence,  no  doubt,  but  not  to  their  effective  action  ;  they 
exist  and  they  know  ;  or  better,  the  Soul,  which  contains  the  engendering 
Reason-Principle,  knows  the  results  of  all  it  has  brought  to  pass.  For 
whensoever  similar  factors  meet  and  act  in  relation  to  each  other, 
similar  consequences  must  inevitably  ensue  :  the  Soul  adopting  or  fore¬ 
planning  the  given  conditions  accomplishes  the  due  outcome  and  links 
all  into  a  total. 


II.  3.  i6] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


175 


All,  then,  is  antecedent  and  resultant,  each  sequent  becoming  in 
turn  an  antecedent  once  it  has  taken  its  place  among  things.  And 
perhaps  this  is  a  cause  of  progressive  deterioration  :  men,  for  instance, 
are  not  as  they  were  of  old  ;  by  dint  of  interval  and  of  the  inevitable 
law,  the  Reason-Principles  (constituting  man)  have  ceded  something  to 
the  characteristics  of  the  Matter. 

But : — 

The  Soul  watches  the  ceaselessly  changing  universe  and  follows  all 
the  fate  of  all  its  works  :  this  is  its  life,  and  it  knows  no  respite  from 
this  care,  but  is  ever  labouring  to  bring  about  perfection,  planning  to 
lead  all  to  an  unending  state  of  excellence — like  a  farmer,  first  sowing 
and  planting  and  then  constantly  setting  to  rights  where  rainstorms  and 
long  frosts  and  high  gales  have  played  havoc. 

If  such  a  conception  of  Soul  be  rejected  as  untenable  we  are  obliged 
to  think  that  the  Reason-Principles  themselves  foreknew  or  even  con¬ 
tained  the  ruin  and  all  the  consequences  of  flaw. 

But  then  we  would  be  imputing  the  creation  of  evil  to  the  Reason- 
Principles,  though  (we  ought  to  be  saved  from  this  by  reflecting  that) 
the  arts  and  their  guiding  principle  do  not  include  blundering,  do  not 
cover  the  inartistic,  the  destruction  of  the  work  of  art. 

And  here  it  will  be  objected  that  in  All  there  is  nothing  contrary 
to  nature,  nothing  evil. 

StiU,  by  the  side  of  the  better  there  exists  also  what  is  less  good. 

Well,  perhaps  even  the  less  good  has  its  contributory  value  in  the 
All.  Perhaps  there  is  no  need  that  everything  be  good.  Contraries  may 
co-operate  ;  and  without  opposites  there  could  be  no  ordered  Universe  : 
all  living-beings  of  the  partial  realm  include  contraries.  The  better 
elements  are  compelled  into  existence  and  moulded  to  their  function  by 
the  Reason-Principle  directly ;  the  less  good  are  potentially  present  in 
the  Reason-Principles,  actually  present  in  the  phenomena  themselves  ; 
the  Soul’s  power  had  reached  its  limit,  and  failed  to  bring  the  Reason- 
Principles  into  complete  actuality  since,  amid  the  clash  of  these  ante¬ 
cedent  Principles,  Matter  had  already  from  its  own  stock  produced  the 
less  good. 


176 


PLOTINUS 


Yet,  with  all  this,  Matter  is  continuously  overruled  towards  the 
better  ;  so  that  out  of  the  total  of  things — modified  by  Soul  on  the  one 
hand  and  by  Matter  on  the  other  hand,  and  on  neither  hand  as  sound 
as  in  the  Reason-Principles — ^there  is,  in  the  end,  a  Unity. 

17- 

But  these  Reason-Principles,  contained  in  the  Soul,  are  they 
Thoughts  ? 

And  if  so,  by  what  process  does  the  Soul  create  in  accordance  with 
these  Thoughts  ? 

It  is  upon  Matter  that  this  act  of  the  Reason  is  exercised ;  and  what 
acts  physically  is  not  an  intellectual  operation  or  a  vision,  but  a  power 
modifying  matter,  not  conscious  of  it  but  merely  acting  upon  it :  the 
Reason-Principle,  in  other  words,  acts  much  like  a  force  producing  a 
figure  or  pattern  upon  water— that  of  a  circle,  suppose,  where  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  ring  is  conditioned  by  something  distinct  from  that  force  itself 
(i.e.  by  the  existence  and  nature  of  the  water). 

If  this  is  so,  the  prior  puissance  of  the  Soul  (that  which  conveys  the 
Reason-Principles)  must  act  (not  directly  but)  by  manipulating  the 
other  Soul,  that  which  is  united  with  Matter  and  has  the  generative 
function. 

But  is  this  handling  the  result  of  calculation  ? 

Calculation  implies  reference.  Reference,  then,  to  something  outside 
or  to  something  contained  within  itself  ?  If  to  its  own  content,  there  is 
no  need  of  reasoning,  which  could  not  itself  perform  the  act  of  creation  ; 
creation  is  the  operation  of  that  phase  of  the  Soul  which  contains  Ideal- 
Principles  ;  for  that  is  its  stronger  puissance,  its  creative  part. 

It  creates,  then,  on  the  model  of  the  Ideas  ;  for,  what  it  has  received 
from  the  Intellectual-Principle  it  must  pass  on  in  turn. 

In  sum,  then,  the  Intellectual-Principle  gives  from  itself  to  the  Soul 
of  the  All  which  follows  immediately  upon  it :  this  again  gives  forth  from 
itself  to  its  next,  illuminated  and  imprinted  by  it ;  and  that  secondary 
Soul  at  once  begins  to  create,  as  under  order,  unhindered  in  some  of  its 
creations,  striving  in  others  against  the  repugnance  of  Matter. 


II.  3-  i8] 


ARE  THE  STARS  CAUSES  ? 


177 


It  has  a  creative  power,  derived  ;  it  is  stored  with  Reason-Principles 
not  the  very  originals  ;  therefore  it  creates,  but  not  in  full  accordance 
with  the  Principles  from  which  it  has  been  endowed  :  something  enters 
from  itself  ;  and,  plainly,  this  is  inferior.  The  issue  then  is  something 
living,  3^es  ;  but  imperfect,  hindering  its  own  life,  something  very  poor 
and  reluctant  and  crude,  formed  in  a  Matter  that  is  the  fallen  sediment 
of  the  Higher  Order,  bitter  and  embittering.  This  is  the  Soul’s  contri¬ 
bution  to  the  All. 

18. 

Are  the  evils  in  the  Universe  necessary  because  it  is  of  later  origin 
than  the  Higher  Sphere  ? 

Perhaps  rather  because  without  evil  the  All  would  be  incomplete. 
For  most  or  even  all  forms  of  evil  serve  the  Universe — much  as  the 
poisonous  snake  has  its  use — though  in  most  cases  their  function  is  un¬ 
known.  Vice  itself  has  many  useful  sides  :  it  brings  about  much  that 
is  beautiful,  in  artistic  creations  for  example,  and  it  stirs  us  to  thoughtful 
living,  not  allowing  us  to  drowse  in  security. 

If  all  this  is  so,  then  (the  secret  of  creation  is  that)  the  Soul  of  the 
All  abides  in  contemplation  of  the  Highest  and  Best,  ceaselessly  striving 
towards  the  Intelligible  Kind  and  towards  God  :  but,  thus  absorbing 
and  filled  full,  it  overflows — so  to  speak — and  the  image  it  gives  forth, 
its  last  utterance  towards  the  lower,  will  be  the  creative  puissance. 

This  ultimate  phase,  then,  is  the  Maker,  secondary  to  that  aspect  of 
the  Soul  which  is  primarily  saturated  from  the  Divine  Intelligence.  But 
the  Creator  above  all  is  the  Intellectual-Principle,  as  giver,  to  the  Soul 
that  follows  it,  of  those  gifts  whose  traces  exist  in  the  Third  Kind. 

Rightly,  therefore,  is  this  Kosmos  described  as  an  image  continuously 
being  imaged,  the  First  and  the  Second  Principles  immobile,  the  Third, 
too,  immobile  essentially,  but,  accidentally  and  in  Matter,  having  motion. 

For  as  long  as  divine  Mind  and  Soul  exist,  the  divine  Thought-Forms 
will  pour  forth  into  that  phase  of  the  Soul :  as  long  as  there  is  a  sun  all 
that  streams  from  it  will  be  some  form  of  Light. 


178 


PLOTINUS 


FOURTH  TRACTATE 
Matter  in  its  Two  Kinds 

1. 

By  common  agreement  of  all  that  have  arrived  at  the  conception 
of  such  a  Kind,  what  is  known  as  Matter  is  understood  to  be  a  certain 
base,  a  recipient  of  Form-Ideas.  Thus  far  all  go  the  same  way.  But 
departure  begins  with  the  attempt  to  estabhsh  what  this  basic  Kind  is 
in  itself,  and  how  it  is  a  recipient  and  of  what. 

To  a  certain  school,  body-forms  exclusively  are  the  Real  Beings  ; 
existence  is  limited  to  bodies  ;  there  is  one  only  Matter,  the  stuff  under¬ 
lying  the  primal-constituents  of  the  Universe  :  existence  is  nothing  but 
this  Matter :  everything  is  some  modification  of  this  ;  the  elements  of  the 
Universe  are  simply  this  Matter  in  a  certain  condition. 

The  school  has  even  the  audacity  to  foist  Matter  upon  the  divine 
beings  so  that,  finally,  God  himself  becomes  a  mode  of  Matter — and  this 
though  they  make  it  corporeal,  describing  it  as  a  body  void  of  quality, 
but  a  magnitude. 

Another  school  makes  it  incorporeal :  among  these,  not  all  hold  the 
theory  of  one  only  Matter ;  some  of  them  while  they  maintain  the  one 
Matter,  in  which  the  first  school  believes,  the  foundation  of  bodily 
forms,  admit  another,  a  prior,  existing  in  the  divine-sphere,  the  base  of 
the  Ideas  there  and  of  the  imembodied  Beings. 

2. 

We  are  obliged,  therefore,  at  the  start,  both  to  establish  the  existence 
of  this  other  Kind  and  to  examine  its  nature  and  the  mode  of  its  Being. 

Now  (it  will  be  reasoned)  if  Matter  must  characteristically  be  im- 
determined,  void  of  shape,  while  in  that  sphere  of  the  Highest  there  can 
be  nothing  that  lacks  determination,  nothing  shapeless,  there  can  be  no 
Matter  there.  Further,  if  all  that  order  is  simplex,  there  can  be  no  need 
of  Matter,  whose  function  is  to  join  with  some  other  element  to  form  a 
compound  ;  it  will  be  found  of  necessity  in  things  of  derived  existence 
and  shifting  nature — the  signs  which  lead  us  to  the  notion  of  Matter — 
but  it  is  unnecessary  to  the  primal. 


II.  4.  4] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


179 


And  again,  where  (it  will  be  asked)  could  it  have  come  from  ?  whence 
did  it  take  its  being  ?  If  it  is  derived,  it  has  a  source  :  if  it  is  eternal, 
then  the  Primal-Principles  are  more  numerous  than  we  thought,  the 
Firsts  are  a  meeting-ground.  Lastly,  if  that  Matter  has  been  entered  by 
Idea,  the  union  constitutes  a  body ;  and,  so,  there  is  Body  in  the  Supreme. 

3. 

Now  it  may  be  observed,  first  of  all,  that  we  cannot  hold  utterly 
cheap  either  the  indeterminate,  or  even  a  Kind  whose  very  idea  implies 
absence  of  form,  provided  only  that  it  offer  itself  to  its  Priors  and 
(through  them)  to  the  Highest  Beings.  We  have  the  parallel  of  the  Soul 
itself  in  its  relation  to  the  Intellectual-Principle  and  the  Divine  Reason, 
taking  shape  by  these  and  led  so  to  a  nobler  principle  of  form. 

Further,  a  compound  in  the  Intellectual  order  is  not  to  be  con¬ 
founded  with  a  compound  in  the  realm  of  Matter  ;  the  Divine  Reasons 
are  compoimds  and  their  Act  is  to  produce  a  compound,  namely  that 
(lower)  Nature  which  works  towards  Idea.  And  there  is  not  only  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  function  ;  there  is  a  still  more  notable  difference  of  source.  Then, 
too,  the  Matter  of  the  realm  of  process  ceaselessly  changes  its  form  ;  in 
the  eternal.  Matter  is  immutably  one  and  the  same,  so  that  the  two  are 
diametrically  opposites.  The  Matter  of  this  realm  is  all  things  in  turn, 
a  new  entity  in  every  separate  case,  so  that  nothing  is  permanent  and 
one  thing  ceaselessly  pushes  another  out  of  being  :  Matter  has  no  identity 
here.  In  the  Intellectual  it  is  all  things  at  once  :  and  therefore  has  nothing 
to  change  into  :  it  already  and  ever  contains  all.  This  means  that  not 
even  in  its  own  Sphere  is  the  Matter  there  at  any  moment  shapeless  : 
no  doubt  that  is  true  of  the  Matter  here  as  well ;  but  shape  is  held  by  a 
very  different  right  in  the  two  orders  of  Matter. 

As  to  whether  Matter  is  eternal  or  a  thing  of  process,  this  will  be 

clear  when  we  are  sure  of  its  precise  nature. 


The  present  existence  of  the  Ideal-Forms  has  been  demonstrated 
elsewhere  :  we  take  up  our  argument  from  that  point. 


i8o 


PLOTINUS 


If,  then,  there  is  more  than  one  of  such  forming  Ideas,  there  must  of 
necessity  be  some  character  common  to  all  and  equally  some  peculiar 
character  in  each  keeping  them  distinct. 

This  peculiar  characteristic,  this  distinguishing  difference,  is  the 
individual  shape.  But  if  shape,  then  there  is  the  shaped,  that  in  which 
the  difference  is  lodged. 

There  is,  therefore,  a  Matter  accepting  the  shape,  a  permanent 
substratum. 

Further,  admitting  that  there  is  an  Intelligible  Realm  beyond,  of 
which  this  world  is  an  image,  then,  since  this  world-compound  is  based 
on  Matter,  there  must  be  Matter  there  also. 

And  how  can  you  predicate  an  ordered  system  without  thinking  of 
form,  and  how  think  of  form  apart  from  the  notion  of  something  in 
which  the  form  is  lodged  ? 

No  doubt  that  Realm  is,  in  the  strict  fact,  utterly  without  parts, 
but  in  some  sense  there  is  part  there  too.  And  in  so  far  as  these  parts 
are  really  separate  from  each  other,  any  such  division  and  difference 
can  be  no  other  than  a  condition  of  Matter,  of  a  something  divided  and 
differentiated  :  in  so  far  as  that  realm,  though  without  parts,  yet  consists 
of  a  variety  of  entities,  these  diverse  entities,  residing  in  a  unity  of  which 
they  are  variations,  reside  in  a  Matter  ;  for  this  unity,  since  it  is  also  a 
diversity,  must  be  conceived  of  as  varied  and  multiform  ;  it  must  have 
been  shapeless  before  it  took  the  form  in  which  variation  occurs.  For  if 
we  abstract  from  the  Intellectual-Principle  the  variety  and  the  particular 
shapes,  the  Reason-Principles  and  the  Thoughts,  what  precedes  these  was 
something  shapeless  and  undetermined,  nothing  of  what  is  actually 
present  there. 

5- 

It  may  be  objected  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  possesses  its  con¬ 
tent  in  an  eternal  conjunction  so  that  the  two  make  a  perfect  unity, 
and  that  thus  there  is  no  Matter  there. 

But  that  argument  would  equally  cancel  the  Matter  present  in  the 
bodily  forms  of  this  realm  ;  body  without  shape  has  never  existed, 


n.  4. 5] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


181 


always  body  achieved  and  yet  always  the  two  constituents.  We  discover 
these  two — Matter  and  Idea — ^by  sheer  force  of  our  reasoning  which  dis¬ 
tinguishes  continually  in  pursuit  of  the  simplex,  the  irreducible,  working 
on,  until  it  can  go  no  further,  towards  the  ultimate  in  the  subject  of 
enquiry.  And  the  ultimate  of  every  partial-thing  is  its  Matter,  which, 
therefore,  must  be  aU  darkness  since  light  is  a  Reason-Principle.  The 
Mind,  too,  as  also  a  Reason-Principle,  sees  only  in  each  particular  object 
the  Reason- Principle  lodging  there  ;  anything  lying  below  that  it  declares 
to  lie  below  the  light,  to  be  therefore  a  thing  of  darkness,  just  as  the  eye, 
a  thing  of  hght,  seeks  light  and  colours  which  are  modes  of  light,  and  dis¬ 
misses  all  that  is  below  the  colours  and  hidden  by  them,  as  belonging  to 
the  order  of  the  darkness,  which  is  the  order  of  Matter. 

The  dark  element  in  the  IntelHgible,  however,  differs  from  that  in 
the  sense-world  :  so  therefore  does  the  Matter — as  much  as  the  forming- 
idea  presiding  in  each  of  the  two  realms.  The  Divine  Matter,  though 
(like  the  Matter  here)  it  is  the  object  of  determination  has,  of  its  own 
nature,  a  life  defined  and  intellectual ;  the  Matter  of  this  sphere  while 
it  does  accept  determination  is  not  living  or  intellective,  but  a  dead  thing 
decorated  :  any  shape  it  takes  is  an  image,  exactly  as  the  Base  is  an  image. 
There  on  the  contrary  the  shape  is  a  real-existent  as  is  the  Base.  Those 
that  ascribe  Real  Beuig  to  Matter  must  be  admitted  to  be  right  as  long 
as  they  keep  to  the  Matter  of  the  Intelligible  Realm  :  for  the  Base  there 
is  Being,  or  even,  taken  as  an  entirety  with  the  higher  that  accompanies 
it,  is  illuminated  Being. 

But  does  this  Base,  of  the'' Intellectual  Realm,  possess  eternal  exist¬ 
ence  ? 

The  solution  of  that  question  is  the  same  as  for  the  Ideas. 

Both  are  engendered,  in  the  sense  that  they  have  had  a  beginning, 
but  unengendered  in  that  this  beginning  is  not  in  Time :  they  have  a  derived 
being  but  by  an  eternal  derivation  :  they  are  not,  like  the  Kosmos, 
always  in  process  but,  in  the  character  of  the  Supernal,  have  their  Being 
permanently.  For  that  differentiation  within  the  Intelligible  which  pro¬ 
duces  Matter  has  always  existed  and  it  is  this  cleavage  which  produces 
the  Matter  there  :  it  is  the  first  movement ;  and  movement  and  differen- 


i82 


PLOTINUS 


tiation  are  convertible  terms  since  the  two  things  arose  as  one  :  this 
motion,  this  cleavage,  away  from  the  first  is  indetermination  (= Matter), 
needing  The  First  to  its  determination  which  it  achieves  by  its  Return, 
remaining,  until  then,  an  Alienism,  still  lacking  good  ;  unlit  by  the 
Supernal.  It  is  from  the  Divine  that  all  light  comes,  and,  until  this  be 
absorbed,  no  light  in  any  recipient  of  light  can  be  authentic  ;  any  light 
from  elsewhere  is  of  another  order  than  the  true. 

6. 

We  are  led  thus  to  the  question  of  receptivity  in  things  of 
body. 

An  additional  proof  that  bodies  must  have  some  substratum  different 
from  themselves,  is  found  in  the  changing  of  the  basic-constituents  into 
one  another.  Notice  that  the  destruction  of  the  elements  passing  over 
is  not  complete — if  it  were  we  would  have  a  Principle  of  Being  wrecked 
in  Non-being — nor  does  an  engendered  thing  pass  from  utter  non-being 
into  Being  :  what  happens  is  that  a  new  form  takes  the  place  of  an  old. 
There  is,  then,  a  stable  element,  that  which  puts  off  one  form  to  receive 
the  form  of  the  incoming  entity. 

The  same  fact  is  clearly  established  by  decay,  a  process  implying  a 
compound  object ;  where  there  is  decay  there  is  a  distinction  between 
Matter  and  Form. 

And  the  reasoning  which  shows  the  destructible  to  be  a  compound 
is  borne  out  by  practical  examples  of  reduction  :  a  drinking  vessel  is 
reduced  to  its  gold,  the  gold  to  hquid  ;  ahalogy  forces  us  to  believe  that 
the  liquid  too  is  reducible. 

The  basic-constituents  of  things  must  be  either  their  Form-Idea  or 
that  Primal  Matter  (of  the  Intelligible)  or  a  compound  of  the  Form  and 
Matter. 

Form-Idea,  pure  and  simple,  they  cannot  be  :  for  without  Matter 
how  could  things  stand  in  their  mass  and  magnitude  ? 

Neither  can  they  be  that  Primal  Matter  for  they  are  not  indestruc¬ 
tible. 

They  must,  therefore,  consist  of  Matter  and  Form-Idea — Form  for 


n.4.7]  MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS  183 

quality  and  shape,  Matter  for  the  base,  indeterminate  as  being  other  than 
Idea. 

7- 

Empedokles  in  identifying  his  "  elements  ”  with  Matter  is  refuted 
by  their  decay. 

Anaxagoras,  in  identifying  his  “  primal-combination  ”  with  Matter 
— to  which  he  allots  no  mere  aptness  to  any  and  every  nature  or  quality 
but  the  effective  possession  of  all — ^withdraws  in  this  way  the  very  In¬ 
tellectual-Principle  he  had  introduced  ;  for  this  Mind  is  not  to  him  the 
bestower  of  shape,  of  Forming  Idea  ;  and  it  is  co-aeval  with  Matter,  not 
its  prior.  But  this  simultaneous  existence  is  impossible  :  for  if  the  com¬ 
bination  derives  Being  by  participation,  Being  is  the  prior  ;  if  both  are 
Authentic  Existents,  then  an  additional  Principle,  a  third,  is  imperative 
(a  ground  of  unification) .  And  if  this  Creator,  Mind,  must  pre-exist,  why 
need  Matter  contain  the  Forming-Ideas  parcelwise  for  the  Mind,  with 
unending  labour,  to  assort  and  allot  ?  Surely  the  undetermined  could 
be  brought  to  quality  and  pattern  m  the  one  comprehensive  act  ? 

As  for  the  notion  (of  Anaxagoras)  that  aU  is  in  aU,  this  clearly  is 
impossible. 

Those  who  (with  Anaximander)  make  the  base  to  be  “  the  infinite  " 
must  define  the  term. 

If  this  “  infinite  ”  means  “  of  endless  extension  ”  there  is  no  infinite 
among  beings  ;  there  is  neither  an  infinity-in-itself  (Infinity  Abstract) 
nor  an  infinity  as  an  attribute  to  some  body  ;  for  in  the  first  case  every 
part  of  that  infinity  would  be  infinite  and  in  the  second  an  object  in 
which  the  infinity  was  present  as  an  attribute  could  not  be  infinite  apart 
from  that  attribute,  could  not  be  simplex,  could  not  therefore  be  Matter. 

Atoms  again  (Democritus)  cannot  meet  the  need  of  a  base. 

There  are  no  atoms  ;  all  body  is  divisible  endlessly  :  besides  neither 
the  continuity  nor  the  ductility  of  corporeal  things  is  explicable  apart 
from  Mind,  or  apart  from  the  Soul  which  cannot  be  made  up  of  atoms  ; 
and,  again,  out  of  atoms  creation  could  produce  nothing  but  atoms ;  a 
creative  power  could  produce  nothing  from  a  material  devoid  of  con- 


184 


PLOTINUS 


tinuity.  Any  number  of  reasons  might  be  brought,  and  have  been 
brought,  against  this  hypothesis  and  it  need  detain  us  no  longer. 

8. 

What,  then,  is  this  Kind,  this  Matter,  described  as  one  stuff,  con¬ 
tinuous  and  without  quality  ? 

Clearly  since  it  is  without  quality  it  is  incorporeal ;  bodiliness 
would  be  quality. 

It  must  be  the  basic  stuff  of  all  the  entities  of  the  sense-world  and 
not  merely  base  to  some  while  being  to  others  achieved  form. 

Clay,  for  example,  is  matter  to  the  potter  but  is  not  Matter  pure 
and  simple.  Nothing  of  this  sort  is  our  object  :  we  are  seeking  the  stuff 
which  underlies  all  alike.  We  must  therefore  refuse  to  it  all  that  we  find 
in  things  of  sense — not  merely  such  attributes  as  colour,  heat  or  cold, 
but  weight  or  weightlessness,  thickness  or  thinness,  shape  and  therefore 
magnitude  ;  though  notice  that  to  be  present  within  magnitude  and 
shape  is  very  different  from  possessing  these  qualities. 

It  cannot  be  a  compound,  it  must  be  a  simplex,  one  distinct  thing 
in  its  nature  ;  only  so  can  it  be  void  of  all  quality.  The  Principle  which 
gives  it  form  gives  this  as  something  alien  :  so  with  magnitude  and  all 
really-existent  things  bestowed  upon  it.  If,  for  example,  it  possessed  a 
magnitude  of  its  own,  the  Principle  giving  it  form  would  be  at  the  mercy 
of  that  magnitude  and  must  produce  not  at  will,  but  only  within  the 
limit  of  the  Matter’s  capacity  ;  to  imagine  that  Will  keeping  step  with  its 
material  is  fantastic. 

The  Matter  must  be  of  later  origin  than  the  forming-power,  and  there¬ 
fore  must  be  at  its  disposition  throughout,  ready  to  become  anything, 
ready  therefore  to  any  bulk  ;  besides,  if  it  possessed  magnitude,  it  would 
necessarily  possess  shape  also  :  it  would  be  doubly  inductile. 

No  :  all  that  ever  appears  upon  it  is  brought  in  by  the  Idea  ;  the 
Idea  alone  possesses  :  to  it  belongs  the  magnitude  and  all  else  that  goes 
with  the  Reason-Principle  or  follows  upon  it.  Quantity  is  given  with  the 
Ideal-Form  in  all  the  particular  species — man,  bird,  and  particular  kind 
of  bird. 


II.  4.  lo] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


185 


The  imaging  of  Quantity  upon  Matter  by  an  outside  power  is  not 
more  surprising  than  the  imaging  of  Quality ;  Quahty  is  no  doubt  a 
Reason-Principle,  but  Quantity  also — ^being  measure,  number — is 
equally  so. 

9- 

But  how  can  we  conceive  a  thing  having  existence  without  having 
magnitude  ? 

We  have  only  to  think  of  things  whose  identity  does  not  depend 
on  their  quantity — for  certainly  magnitude  can  be  distinguished  from 
existence  as  can  many  other  forms  and  attributes. 

In  a  word,  every  unembodied  Kind  must  be  classed  as  without 
quantity,  and  Matter  is  imembodied. 

Besides  quantitativeness  itself  (the  Absolute-Principle)  does  not 
possess  quantity,  which  belongs  only  to  things  participating  in  it,  a  con¬ 
sideration  which  shows  that  Quantitativeness  is  an  Idea-Principle.  A 
white  object  becomes  white  by  the  presence  of  whiteness  ;  what  makes 
an  organism  white  or  of  any  other  variety  of  colour  is  not  itself  a  specific 
colour  but,  so  to  speak,  a  specific  Reason-Principle  :  in  the  same  way 
what  gives  an  organism  a  certain  bulk  is  not  itself  a  thing  of  magnitude 
but  is  Magnitude  itself,  the  abstract  Absolute,  or  the  Reason-Principle. 

This  Magnitude-Absolute,  then,  enters  and  beats  the  Matter  out 
into  Magnitude  ? 

Not  at  all :  the  Matter  was  not  previously  shrunken  small ;  there 
was  no  littleness  or  bigness  :  the  Idea  gives  Magnitude  exactly  as  it 
gives  every  quality  not  previously  present. 


10. 

But  how  can  I  form  the  conception  of  the  sizelessness  of  Matter  ? 
How  dg  you  form  the  concept  of  any  absence  of  quality  ?  What 
is  the  Act  of  the  Intellect,  what  is  the  mental  approach,  in  such 
a  case  ? 

The  secret  is  Indetermination. 

Likeness  knows  its  like  :  the  indeterminate  knows  the  indeterminate. 


i86 


PLOTINUS 


Around  this  indefinite  a  definite  conception  will  be  realised,  but  the  way 
lies  through  indefiniteness. 

All  knowledge  comes  by  Reason  and  the  Intellectual  Act ;  in  this 
case  Reason  conveys  information  in  any  account  it  gives,  but  the  act 
which  aims  at  being  intellectual  is,  here,  not  intellection  but  rather  its 
failure  :  therefore  (in  this  crippled  approach)  the  representation  of 
Matter  must  be  spurious,  unreal,  something  sprung  of  the  Alien,  of  the 
unreal,  and  bound  up  with  the  alien  reason. 

This  is  Plato’s  meaning  where  he  says  that  Matter  is  apprehended 
by  a  sort  of  spurious  reasoning. 

What,  then,  is  this  indetermination  in  the  Soul  ?  Does  it  amount 
to  an  utter  absence  of  Knowledge,  as  if  the  Soul  or  Mind  had  withdrawn  ? 

No  :  the  indeterminate  has  some  footing  in  the  sphere  of  affirmation. 
The  eye  is  aware  of  darkness  as  a  base  capable  of  receiving  any  colour 
not  yet  seen  against  it  :  so  the  Mind,  putting  aside  all  attributes  per¬ 
ceptible  to  sense — all  that  corresponds  to  light — comes  upon  a  residuum 
which  it  cannot  bring  under  determination  :  it  is  thus  in  the  state  of 
the  eye  which,  when  directed  towards  darknesr,  has  become  in  some  way 
identical  with  the  object  of  its  spurious  vision. 

There  is  vision,  then,  in  this  approach  of  the  Mind  towards 
Matter  ? 

Some  vision,  yes  ;  of  shapelessness,  of  colourlessness,  of  the  unfit, 
and  therefore  of  the  sizeless.  More  than  this  would  mean  that  the  Soul 
is  already  bestowing  Form. 

But  is  not  such  a  void  precisely  what  the  Soul  experiences  when  it 
has  no  intellection  whatever  ? 

No  :  in  that  case  it  affirms  nothing,  or  rather  has  no  experience  : 
but  in  knowing  Matter,  it  has  an  experience,  what  may  be  described  as 
the  impact  of  the  shapeless  ;  for  in  its  very  consciousness  of  objects 
that  have  taken  shape  and  size  it  knows  them  as  compounds  (i.e.  as 
possessing  with  these  forms  a  formless  base)  for  they  appear  as  things 
that  have  accepted  colour  and  other  quality. 

It  knows,  therefore,  a  whole  which  includes  two  components  ;  it 
has  a  clear  Knowledge  or  perception  of  the  overlie  (the  Ideas)  but  only 


II- 4.  II]  MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS  187 

a  dim  awareness  of  the  underlie,  the  shapeless  which  is  not  an  Ideal- 
Principle. 

With  what  is  perceptible  to  it  there  is  presented  something  else  ; 
what  it  can  directly  apprehend  it  sets  on  one  side  as  its  own  ;  but  the 
something  else  which  Reason  rejects,  this,  the  dim,  it  knows  dimly,  this, 
the  dark,  it  knows  darkly,  this  it  knows  in  a  sort  of  non-knowing. 

And  just  as  even  Matter  itself  is  not  stably  shapeless  but,  in  things, 
is  always  shaped,  the  Soul  also  is  eager  to  throw  over  it  the  thing-form  ; 
for  the  Soul  recoils  from  the  indefinite,  dreads,  almost,  to  be  outside  of 
reality,  does  not  endure  to  linger  about  Non-Being. 


II. 

“  But,  given  Magnitude  and  the  properties  we  know,  what  else  can 
be  necessary  to  the  existence  of  body  ?  ” 

Some  base  to  be  the  container  of  all  the  rest. 

“  A  certain  mass  then  ;  and  if  mass,  then  Magnitude  ?  Obviously 
if  your  Base  has  no  Magnitude  it  offers  no  footing  to  any  entrant.  And 
suppose  it  sizeless  ;  then,  what  end  does  it  serve  ?  It  never  helped  Idea 
or  quality  ;  now  it  ceases  to  account  for  differentiation  or  for  magnitude, 
though  the  last,  wheresoever  it  resides,  seems  to  find  its  way  into  embodied 
entities  by  way  of  Matter.” 

“  Or,  taking  a  larger  view,  observe  that  actions,  productive  opera¬ 
tions,  periods  of  time,  movements,  none  of  these  have  any  such  sub¬ 
stratum  and  yet  are  real  things  ;  in  the  same  way  the  most  elementary 
body  has  no  need  of  Matter  ;  things  may  be,  all,  what  they  are,  each  after 
its  own  kind,  in  their  great  variety,  deriving  the  coherence  of  their  being 
from  the  blending  of  the  various  Ideal-Forms.  This  Matter  with  its 
sizelessness  seems,  then,  to  be  a  name  without  a  content.” 

Now,  to  begin  with  :  extension  is  not  an  imperative  condition  of 
being  a  recipient ;  it  is  necessary  only  where  it  happens  to  be  a  property 
inherent  to  the  recipient’s  peculiar  mode  of  being.  The  Soul,  for  example, 
contains  all  things  but  holds  them  all  in  an  unextended  unity  ;  if  mag- 
nitilde  were  one  of  its  attributes  it  would  contain  things  in  extension. 
Matter  does  actually  contain  in  spatial  extension  what  it  takes  in  ;  but 


i88 


PLOTINUS 


this  is  because  itself  is  a  potential  recipient  of  spatial  extension  :  animals 
and  plants,  in  the  same  way,  as  they  increase  in  size,  take  quality  in 
parallel  development  with  quantity,  and  they  lose  in  the  one  as  the  other 
lessens. 

No  doubt  in  the  case  of  things  as  we  know  them  there  is  a  certain 
mass  lying  ready  beforehand  to  the  shaping  power  :  but  that  is  no  reason 
for  expecting  bulk  in  Matter  strictly  so  called  ;  for  in  such  cases  Matter 
is  not  the  absolute ;  it  is  that  of  some  definite  object ;  the  Absolute 
Matter  must  take  its  magnitude,  as  every  other  property,  from  outside 
itself. 

A  thing  then  need  not  have  magnitude  in  order  to  receive  form  : 
it  may  receive  mass  with  everything  else  that  comes  to  it  at  the  moment 
of  becoming  what  it  is  to  be  :  a  phantasm  of  mass  is  enough,  a  primary 
aptness  for  extension,  a  magnitude  of  no  content — whence  the  identifica¬ 
tion  that  has  been  made  of  Matter  with  The  Void. 

But  I  prefer  to  use  the  word  phantasm  as  hinting  the  indefiniteness 
into  which  the  Soul  spills  itself  when  it  seeks  to  communicate  with 
Matter,  finding  no  possibility  of  delimiting  it,  neither  encompassing  it 
nor  able  to  penetrate  to  any  fixed  point  of  it,  either  of  which  achievements 
would  be  an  act  of  delimitation. 

In  other  words  we  have  something  which  is  to  be  described  not  as 
small  or  great  but  as  the  great-and-small :  for  it  is  at  once  a  mass  and 
a  thing  without  magnitude,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  Matter  on  which 
Mass  is  based  and  that,  as  it  changes  from  great  to  small  and  small  to 
great,  it  traverses  magnitude.  Its  very  undeterminateness  is  a  mass  in 
the  same  sense — that  of  being  a  recipient  of  Magnitude — ^though  of 
course  only  in  the  visible  object. 

In  the  order  of  things  without  Mass,  all  that  is  Ideal-Principle 
possesses  delimitation,  each  entity  for  itself,  so  that  the  conception  of 
Mass  has  no  place  in  them  :  Matter,  not  delimited,  having  in  its  own 
nature  no  stability,  swept  into  any  or  every  form  by  turns,  ready  to  go 
here,  there  and  everywhere,  becomes  a  thing  of  multiplicity  :  driven 
into  all  shapes,  becoming  all  things,  it  has  that  much  of  the  character 
of  mass. 


II.  4-  12] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


189 


12. 

It  is  the  corporeal,  then,  that  demands  magnitude  :  the  Ideal- 
Forms  of  body  are  Ideas  installed  in  Mass. 

But  these  Ideas  enter,  not  into  Magnitude  itself  but  into  some 
subject  that  has  been  brought  to  Magnitude.  For  to  suppose  them 
entering  into  Magnitude — and  not  into  Matter — ^is  to  represent  them  as 
being  either  without  Magnitude  and  without  Real-Existence  (and 
therefore  undistinguishable  from  the  Matter)  or  not  Ideal-Forms  (apt  to 
body)  but  Reason-Principles  (utterly  removed)  whose  sphere  could  only 
be  Soul ;  at  this,  there  would  be  no  such  thing  as  body  (i.e.  instead  of 
Ideal-Forms  shaping  Matter  and  so  producing  body,  there  would  be 
merely  Reason-Principles  dwelling  remote  in  Soul.) 

The  multiplicity  here  must  be  based  upon  some  unity  which,  since 
it  has  been  brought  to  Magnitude,  must  be,  itself,  distinct  from  Magni¬ 
tude.  Matter  is  the  base  of  Identity  to  aU  that  is  composite  ;  once  each 
of  the  constituents  comes  bringing  its  own  Matter  with  it,  there  is  no  need 
of  any  other  base.  No  doubt  there  must  be  a  container,  as  it  were  a  place, 
to  receive  what  is  to  enter,  but  Matter  and  even  body  precede  place 
and  space  ;  the  primal  necessity,  in  order  to  the  existence  of  body,  is 
Matter. 

There  is  no  force  in  the  suggestion  that  since  production  and  act 
are  immaterial,  corporeal  entities  also  must  be  immaterial. 

Bodies  are  compound,  actions  not.  Further,  Matter  does  in  some 
sense  underlie  action  ;  it  supplies  the  substratum  to  the  doer  ;  it  is 
permanently  within  him  though  it  does  not  enter  as  a  constituent  into 
the  act  where,  indeed,  it  would  be  a  hindrance.  Doubtless,  one  act  does 
not  change  into  another — as  would  be  the  case  if  there  were  a  specific 
Matter  of  actions — but  the  doer  directs  himself  from  one  act  to  another 
so  that  he  is  the  Matter,  himself,  to  his  varying  actions. 

Matter,  in  sum,  is  necessary  to  quality  and  to  quantity,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  to  body. 

It  is,  thus,  no  name  void  of  content ;  we  know  there  is  such  a  base, 

invisible  and  without  bulk  though  it  be. 

If  we  reject  it,  we  must  by  the  same  reasoning  reject  qualities  and 


PLOTINUS 


190 

mass  :  for  quality,  or  mass,  or  any  such  entity,  taken  by  itself  apart, 
might  be  said  not  to  exist.  But  these  do  exist,  though  in  an  obscure 
existence :  there  is  much  less  ground  for  rejecting  Matter,  however  it  lurk, 
discerned  by  none  of  the  senses. 

It  eludes  the  eye,  for  it  is  utterly  outside  of  colour  :  it  is  not  heard, 
for  it  is  no  sound  :  it  is  no  flavour  or  savour  for  nostrils  or  palate  :  can 
it,  perhaps,  be  known  to  touch  ?  No  :  for  neither  is  it  corporeal ;  and 
touch  deals  with  body,  which  is  known  by  being  solid,  fragile,  soft,  hard, 
moist,  dry — all  properties  utterly  lacking  in  Matter. 

It  is  grasped  only  by  a  mental  process,  though  that  not  an  act  of  the 
intellective  mind  but  a  reasoning  that  finds  no  subject ;  and  so  it  stands 
revealed  as  the  spurious  thing  it  has  been  called.  No  bodiliness  belongs 
to  it ;  bodiliness  is  itself  a  phase  of  Reason-Principle  and  so  is  something 
different  from  Matter,  as  Matter,  therefore,  from  it  :  bodiliness  already 
operative  and  so  to  speak  made  concrete  would  be  body  manifest  and 
not  Matter  unelaborated. 

13- 

Are  we  asked  to  accept  as  the  substratum  some  attribute  or  quality 
present  to  all  the  elements  in  common  ? 

Then,  first,  we  must  be  told  what  precise  attribute  this  is  and,  next, 
how  an  attribute  can  be  a  substratum. 

The  elements  are  sizeless,  and  how  conceive  an  attribute  where  there 
is  neither  base  nor  bulk  ? 

Again,  if  the  quality  possesses  determination,  it  is  not  Matter  the 
undetermined  ;  and  anything  without  determination  is  not  a  quality 
but  is  the  substratum — the  very  Matter  we  are  seeking. 

It  may  be  suggested  that  perhaps  this  absence  of  quahty  means 
simply  that,  of  its  own  nature,  it  has  no  participation  in  any  of  the  set 
and  famihar  properties,  but  takes  quality  by  this  very  non-participation, 
holding  thus  an  absolutely  individual  character,  marked  off  from  every- 
thing  else,  being  as  it  were  the  negation  of  those  others.  Deprivation 
we  will  be  told  comports  quality  :  a  blind  man  has  the  quality  of  his  lack 
of  sight.  If  then— it  will  be  urged— Matter  exhibits  such  a  negation. 


n.  4.13] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


191 


surely  it  has  a  quality,  all  the  more  so,  assuming  any  deprivation  to  be 
a  quality,  in  that  here  the  deprivation  is  all  comprehensive. 

But  this  notion  reduces  all  existence  to  qualified  things  or  qualities : 
Quantity  itself  becomes  a  Quality  and  so  does  even  Existence.  Now 
this  cannot  be  :  if  such  things  as  Quantity  and  Existence  are  quahfied, 
they  are,  by  that  very  fact,  not  qualities  :  Quality  is  an  addition  to 
them  ;  we  must  not  commit  the  absurdity  of  giving  the  name  Quality 
to  something  distinguishable  from  Quality,  something  therefore  that  is 
not  Quality. 

Is  it  suggested  that  its  mere  Alienism  is  a  quality  in  Matter  ? 

If  this  Ahenism  is  difference-absolute  (the  abstract  entity)  it 
possesses  no  Quality  :  absolute  Quahty  cannot  be  itself  a  qualified 
thing. 

If  the  Alienism  is  to  be  understood  as  meaning  only  that  Matter  is 
differentiated,  then  it  is  different  not  by  itself  (since  it  is  certainly  not 
an  absolute)  but  by  this  Difference,  just  as  all  identical  objects  are  so 
(not  by  themselves  but)  by  virtue  of  Identicalness  (the  Absolute  principle 
of  Identity). 

An  absence  is  neither  a  Quality  nor  a  qualified  entity ;  it  is  the 
negation  of  a  Quahty  or  of  something  else,  as  noiselessness  is  the  negation 
of  noise  and  so  on.  A  lack  is  negative  ;  Quality  demands  something 
positive.  The  distinctive  character  of  Matter  is  unshape,  the  lack  of 
qualification  and  of  form  ;  surely  then  it  is  absurd  to  pretend  that  it 
has  Quality  in  not  being  qualified ;  that  is  like  saying  that  sizelessness 
constitutes  a  certain  size. 

The  distinctive  character  of  Matter,  then,  is  simply  its  manner  of 
being — not  something  definite  inserted  in  it  but,  rather  a  relation  towards 
other  things,  the  relation  of  being  distinct  from  them. 

Other  things  possess  something  besides  this  relation  of  Alienism  : 
their  form  makes  each  an  entity.  Matter  may  with  propriety  be  de¬ 
scribed  as  merely  alien  ;  perhaps,  even,  we  might  describe  it  as  "  The 
Aliens,”  for  the  singular  suggests  a  certain  definiteness  while  the  plural 
would  indicate  the  absence  of  any  determination. 


192 


PLOTINUS 


14- 

But  is  Absence  this  privation  itself,  or  something  in  which  this 
Privation  is  lodged  ? 

Anyone  maintaining  that  Matter  and  Privation  are  one  and  the  same 
in  substratum  but  stand  separable  in  reason  cannot  be  excused  from 
assigning  to  each  the  precise  principle  which  distinguishes  it  in  reason 
from  the  other  :  that  which  defines  Matter  must  be  kept  quite  apart 
from  that  defining  the  Privation  and  vice  versa. 

There  are  three  possibilities  :  Matter  is  not  in  Privation  and  Priva¬ 
tion  is  not  in  Matter  ;  or  each  is  in  each  ;  or  each  is  in  itself  alone. 

Now  if  they  should  stand  quite  apart,  neither  calling  for  the  other, 
they  are  two  distinct  things  :  Matter  is  something  other  than  Privation 
even  though  Privation  always  goes  with  it :  into  the  principle  of  the  one, 
the  other  cannot  enter  even  potentially. 

If  their  relation  to  each  other  is  that  of  a  snubnose  to  snubness, 
here  also  there  is  a  double  concept ;  we  have  two  things. 

If  they  stand  to  each  other  as  fire  to  heat — ^heat  in  fire,  but  fire  not 
included  in  the  concept  of  heat — if  Matter  is  Privation  in  the  way  in  which 
fire  is  heat,  then  the  Privation  is  a  form  under  which  Matter  appears 
but  there  remains  a  base  distinct  from  the  Privation  and  this  base  must 
be  the  Matter.  Here,  too,  they  are  not  one  thing. 

Perhaps  the  identity  in  substance  with  differentiation  in  reason  will 
be  defended  on  the  ground  that  Privation  does  not  point  to  something 
present  but  precisely  to  an  absence,  to  something  absent,  to  the  negation 
or  lack  of  Real-being  :  the  case  would  be  like  that  of  the  affirmation  of 
non-existence,  where  there  is  no  real  predication  but  simply  a  denial. 

Is,  then,  this  Privation  simply  a  non-existence  ? 

If  a  non-existence  in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  a  thing  of  Real-being, 
but  belongs  to  some  other  Kind  of  existent,  we  have  still  two  Principles, 
one  referring  directly  to  the  substratum,  the  other  merely  exhibiting  the 
relation  of  the  Privation  to  other  things  (as  their  potentiality) . 

Or  we  might  say  that  the  one  concept  defines  the  relation  of  sub¬ 
stratum  to  what  is  not  substratum  (but  realised  entity)  while  that  of 
Privation,  in  bringing  out  the  indeterminateness  of  Matter,  applies  to 


II.  4.15] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


193 

the  Matter  in  itself  (and  not  in  its  relationships)  :  but  this  still  makes 
Privation  and  Matter  two  in  reason  though  one  in  substratum. 

Now  if  Matter  possesses  an  identity — though  only  the  identity  of 
being  indeterminate,  unfixed  and  without  quality — how  can  we  bring  it 
so  under  two  principles  ? 

15- 

The  further  question,  therefore,  is  raised  whether  boundlessness 
and  indetermination  are  things  lodging  in  something  other  than  them¬ 
selves  as  a  sort  of  attribute  and  whether  Privation  (or  Negation  of 
quality)  is  also  an  attribute  residing  in  some  separate  substratum. 

Now  all  that  is  Number  and  Reason-Principle  is  outside  of  bound¬ 
lessness  (is  fully  dehmited)  :  these  (Number  and  Reason)  bestow  bound 
and  settlement  and  order  in  general  upon  aU  else  :  neither  anything  that 
has  been  brought  under  order  nor  any  Order-Absolute  (apart  from  . 
themselves)  is  needed  to  bring  them  under  order.  The  thing  that  has 
to  be  brought  under  order  (e.g.  Matter)  is  other  than  the  Ordering 
Principle  which  is  Limit  and  Definiteness  and  Reason-Principle.  There¬ 
fore,  necessarily,  the  thing  to  be  brought  under  order  and  to  definiteness 
must  be  in  itself  a  thing  lacking  delimitation. 

Now  Matter  is  a  thing  that  is  brought  under  order — like  aU  that 
shares  its  nature  by  participation  or  by  possessing  the  same  principle — 
therefore,  necessarily.  Matter  is  The  Undelimited  (the  Absolute,  the 
“  thing  ”  Indefiniteness)  and  not  merely  the  recipient  of  a  non-essential 
quahty  of  Indefiniteness  entering  as  an  attribute. 

For,  first,  any  attribute  to  any  subject  must  be  a  Reason-Principle  ; 
and  Indefiniteness  is  not  a  Reason-Principle. 

Secondly,  what  must  a  thing  be  to  take  Indefiniteness  as  an  attribute? 
Obviously  it  must,  beforehand,  be  either  Definiteness  (the  Principle)  or  a 
defined  thing.  But  Matter  is  neither. 

Then  again  Indefiniteness  entering  as  an  attribute  into  the  definite 
must  cease  to  be  indefinite  :  but  (since  Matter  remains  true  to  its  Kind, 
i.e.  is  indefinite  as  long  as  it  is  Matter)  Indefiniteness  has  not  entered  as 
an  attribute  into  Matter  ;  that  is.  Matter  is  essentially  Indefiniteness. 


194 


PLOTINUS 


The  Matter  even  of  the  Intellectual  Realm  is  the  Indefinite,  (the 
undelimited)  ;  it  must  be  a  thing  generated  by  the  undefined  nature, 
the  illimitable  nature,  of  the  Eternal  Being,  The  One — an  illimitableness, 
however,  not  possessing  native  existence  There  (not  inherent)  but 
engendered  by  The  One. 

But  how  can  Matter  be  common  to  both  spheres,  be  here  and  be 
There  ? 

Because  even  Indefiniteness  has  two  phases. 

But  what  difference  can  there  be  between  phase  and  phase  of  In¬ 
definiteness  ? 

The  difference  of  archetype  and  image. 

So  that  Matter  here  (as  only  an  image  of  Indefiniteness)  would  be 
less  indefinite  ? 

On  the  contrary,  more  indefinite  as  an  Image-thing  remote  from 
true  being.  Indefiniteness  is  the  greater  in  the  less  ordered  object ;  the 
less  deep  in  good,  the  deeper  in  evil.  The  Indeterminate  in  the  Intellectual 
Realm,  where  there  is  truer  being,  might  almost  be  called  merely  an 
Image  of  Indefiniteness  :  in  this  lower  Sphere  where  there  is  less  Being, 
where  there  is  a  refusal  of  the  Authentic,  and  an  adoption  of  the  Image- 
Kind,  Indefiniteness  is  more  authentically  indefinite. 

But  this  argument  seems  to  make  no  difference  between  the  indefinite 
object  and  Indefiniteness-essential.  Is  there  none  ? 

In  any  object  in  which  Reason  and  Matter  co-exist  we  distinguish 
between  Indeterminateness  and  the  Indeterminate  subject :  but  where 
Matter  stands  alone  we  make  them  identical,  or,  better,  we  would 
say  right  out  that  in  that  case  essential  Indeterminateness  is  not 
present;  for  it  is  a  Reason-Principle  and  could  not  lodge  in  the 
indeterminate  object  without  at  once  annulling  the  indetermin¬ 
ateness. 

Matter,  then,  must  be  described  as  Indefinite  of  itself,  by  its  natural 
opposition  to  Reason-Principle.  Reason  is  Reason  and  nothing  else  ; 
just  so  Matter,  opposed  by  its  indeterminateness  to  Reason,  is  Indeter¬ 
minateness  and  nothing  else. 


II.  4.  1 6] 


MATTER  IN  ITS  TWO  KINDS 


195 


16. 

Then  Matter  is  simply  Alienism  (the  Principle  of  Difference)  ? 

No  :  it  is  merely  that  part  of  Alienism  which  stands  in  contradiction 
with  the  Authentic  Existents  which  are  Reason-Principles.  So  under¬ 
stood,  this  non-existent  has  a  certain  measure  of  existence ;  for  it  is 
identical  with  Privation,  which  also  is  a  thing  standing  in  opposition 
to  the  things  that  exist  in  Reason. 

But  must  not  Privation  cease  to  have  existence,  when  what  has  been 
lacking  is  present  at  last  ? 

By  no  means  ;  the  recipient  of  a  state  or  character  is  not  a  state 
but  the  (negation  or)  Privation  of  the  state  ;  and  that  into  which  deter¬ 
mination  enters  is  neither  a  determined  object  nor  determination  itself, 
but  simply  the  wholly  or  partly  undetermined. 

Still,  must  not  the  nature  of  this  Undetermined  be  annulled  by  the 
entry  of  Determination,  especially  where  (as  in  Matter)  this  is  no  mere 
attribute  (but  the  very  nature  of  the  recipient)  ? 

No  doubt  to  introduce  quantitative  determination  into  an  undeter¬ 
mined  object  would  annul  the  original  state  ;  but  in  the  particular  case, 
the  introduction  of  determination  only  confirms  the  original  state,  bring¬ 
ing  it  into  actuality,  into  full  effect,  as  sowing  brings  out  the  natural 
quality  of  land  or  as  a  female  organism  impregnated  by  the  male  is  not 
defeminised  but  becomes  more  decidedly  of  its  sex  ;  the  thing  becomes 
more  emphatically  itself. 

But  on  this  reasoning  must  not  Matter  owe  its  evil  to  having  in  some 
degree  participated  in  good  ? 

No  :  its  evil  is  in  its  first  lack  :  it  was  not  a  possessor  (as  the  land 
or  the  female  organism  are,  of  some  specific  character) . 

To  lack  one  thing  and  to  possess  another,  in  something  like  equal 
proportions,  is  to  hold  a  middle  state  of  good  and  evil :  but  whatsoever 
(like  this  substratum)  possesses  nothing  and  so  is  in  destitution  and 
especially  what  is  essentially  destitution — must  be  evil  in  its  own 
Kind. 

For  in  Matter  we  have  no  mere  absence  of  means  or  of  strength  ; 
it  is  utter  destitution — of  sense,  of  virtue,  of  beauty,  of  pattern,  of  Ideal 


196 


PLOTINUS 


principle,  of  quality.  This  is  surely  ugliness,  utter  disgracefulness, 
unredeemed  evil. 

The  Matter  in  the  Intellectual  Realm  is  an  Existent,  for  there  is 
nothing  previous  to  it  except  the  Beyond-Existence  ;  but  what  precedes 
the  Matter  of  this  sphere  is  Existence  ;  by  its  alienism  in  regard  to  the 
beauty  and  good  of  Existence,  Matter  is  therefore  a  non-existent. 


FIFTH  TRACTATE 
On  Potentiality  and  Actuality 

I. 

A  distinction  is  made  between  things  existing  actually  and  things 
existing  potentially ;  a  certain  Actuality,  also,  is  spoken  of  as  a  really 
existent  entity.  We  must  consider  what  content  there  is  in  these 
terms. 

Can  we  distinguish  between  Actuality  (an  absolute,  abstract  Prin¬ 
ciple)  and  the  state  of  being-in-act  ?  And  if  there  is  such  an  Actuality, 
is  this  itself  in  Act,  or  are  the  two  quite  distinct  so  that  this  actually 
existent  thing  need  not  be,  itself,  an  Act  ? 

It  is  indubitable  that  Potentiality  exists  in  the  Realm  of  Sense : 
but  does  the  Intellectual  Realm  similarly  include  the  potential  or  only 
the  actual  ?  and  if  the  potential  exists  there,  does  it  remain  merely 
potential  for  ever  ?  And,  if  so,  is  this  resistance  to  actualisation  due 
to  its  being  precluded  (as  a  member  of  the  Divine  or  Intellectual  world) 
from  time-processes  ? 

First  we  must  make  clear  what  potentiality  is. 

We  cannot  think  of  potentiality  as  standing  by  itself  ;  there  can  be 
no  potentiality  apart  from  something  which  a  given  thing  may  be  or 
become.  Thus  bronze  is  the  potentiality  of  a  statue  :  but  if  nothing  could 
be  made  out  of  the  bronze,  nothing  wrought  upon  it,  if  it  could  never 
be  anything  as  a  future  to  what  it  has  been,  if  it  rejected  all  change,  it 
would  be  bronze  and  nothing  else :  its  own  character  it  holds  already  as 
a  present  thing,  and  that  would  be  the  full  of  its  capacity  :  it  would 
be  destitute  of  potentiality.  Whatsoever  has  a  potentiality  must  first 


II.  5-  2] 


POTENTIALITY  AND  ACTUALITY 


197 

have  a  (definite)  character  of  its  own  ;  and  its  potentiality  will  consist 
in  its  having  a  reach  beyond  that  character  to  some  other. 

Sometimes  after  it  has  turned  its  potentiality  into  actuality  it  will 
remain  what  it  was  ;  sometimes  it  will  sink  itself  to  the  fullest  extent 
in  the  new  form  and  itself  disappear :  these  two  different  modes  are 
exemplified  in  (i)  bronze  as  potentially  a  statue  and  (2)  water  (= primal- 
liquid)  as  potentially  bronze  or,  again,  air  as  potentially  fire. 

But  if  this  be  the  significance  of  potentiality,  may  we  describe  it  as 
a  Power  towards  the  thing  that  is  to  be  ?  Is  the  Bronze  a  power  towards 
a  statue  ? 

Not  in  the  sense  of  an  effectively  productive  force  ;  such  a  power 
could  not  be  called  a  potentiality.  Of  course  Potentiality  may  be  a  power, 
as,  for  instance,  when  we  are  referring  not  merely  to  a  thing  which  may 
be  brought  into  actualisation  but  to  Actuality  itself  (the  Principle  or 
Abstract  in  which  potentiality  and  the  power  of  realising  potentiahty 
may  be  thought  of  as  identical)  :  but  it  is  better,  as  more  conducive  to 
clarity,  to  use  “  Potentiality  ”  in  regard  to  the  process  of  Actualisation 
and  “  Power  ”  in  regard  to  the  Principle,  Actuality. 

Potentiality  may  be  thought  of  as  a  Substratum  to  states  and  shapes 
and  forms  which  are  to  be  received,  which  it  welcomes  by  its  nature  and 
even  strives  for— sometimes  in  gain  but  sometimes,  also,  to  loss,  to  the 
annulling  of  some  distinctive  manner  of  Being  already  actually  achieved. 


2. 

Then  the  question  rises  whether  Matter— potentially  what  it  becomes 
by  receiving  shape — is  actually  something  else  or  whether  it  has  no 
actuality  at  all.  In  general  terms  ;  When  a  potentiality  has  taken  a 
definite  form,  does  it  retain  its  being  ?  Is  the  potentiality,  itself,  in 
actualisation  ?  The  alternative  is  that,  when  we  speak  of  the  “  Actual 
Statue  ”  and  of  the  “  Potential  Statue,”  the  Actuality  is  not  predicated 
of  the  same  subject  as  the  “  Potentiality.”  If  we  have  really  two 
different  subjects,  then  the  potential  does  not  really  become  the 
actual :  all  that  happens  is  that  an  actual  entity  takes  the  place  of  a 
potential. 


198 


PLOTINUS 


The  actualised  entity  is  not  the  Matter  (the  Potentiality,  merely) 
but  a  combination,  including  the  Form-Idea  upon  the  Matter. 

This  is  certainly  the  case  when  a  quite  different  thing  results  from 
the  actualisation— the  statue,  for  example,  the  combination,  is  distinctly 
different  from  the  bronze,  the  base  ;  where  the  resultant  is  something 
quite  new,  the  Potentiality  has  clearly  not,  itself,  become  what  is  now 
actualised.  But  take  the  case  where  a  person  with  a  capacity  for  educa¬ 
tion  becomes  in  fact  educated  :  is  not  potentiality,  here,  identical  with 
actualisation  ?  Is  not  the  potentially  wise  Socrates  the  same  man  as 
the  Socrates  actually  wise  ? 

But  is  an  ignorant  man  a  being  of  knowledge  because  he  is  so 
potentially  ?  Is  he,  in  virtue  of  his  non-essential  ignorance,  potentially 
an  instructed  being  ? 

It  is  not  because  of  his  accidental  ignorance  that  he  is  a  being  of 
Knowledge  :  it  is  because,  ignorant  though  he  be  by  accident,  his  mind, 
apt  to  knowledge,  is  the  potentiality  through  which  he  may  become  so. 
Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  potentially  instructed  who  have  become  so  in 
fact,  the  potentiality  is  taken  up  into  the  actual ;  or,  if  we  prefer  to  put 
it  so,  there  is  on  the  one  side  the  potentiality  while,  on  the  other,  there 
is  the  power  in  actual  possession  of  the  form. 

If,  then,  the  Potentiality  is  the  Substratum  while  the  thing  in  actuali¬ 
sation — the  Statue  for  example — ^is  a  combination,  how  are  we  to  describe 
the  form  that  has  entered  the  bronze  ? 

There  will  be  nothing  unsound  in  describing  this  shape,  this  Form 
which  has  brought  the  entity  from  potentiality  to  actuality,  as  the 
actualisation  ;  but  of  course  as  the  actualisation  of  the  definite  particular 
entity,  not  as  Actuality  the  abstract :  we  must  not  confuse  it  with  the 
other  actualisation,  strictly  so  called,  that  which  is  contrasted  with  the 
power  producing  actualisation.  The  potential  is  led  out  into  realisation 
by  something  other  than  itself ;  power  accomplishes,  of  itself,  what  is 
within  its  scope,  but  by  virtue  of  Actuality  (the  abstract) :  the  relation 
is  that  existing  between  a  temperament  and  its  expression  in  act,  between 
courage  and  courageous  conduct.  So  far  so  good  : — 


n.  5-  3] 


POTENTIALITY  AND  ACTUALITY 


199 


3- 

We  come  now  to  the  purpose  of  all  this  discussion ;  to  make  clear 
in  what  sense  or  to  what  degree  Actuahsation  is  predicable  in  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Realm  and  whether  all  is  in  Actuahsation  there,  each  and  every 
member  of  that  realm  being  an  Act,  or  whether  Potentiality  also  has 
place  there. 

Now :  if  there  is  no  Matter  there  to  harbour  potentiality  :  if 
nothing  there  has  any  future  apart  from  its  actual  mode  :  if  nothing  there 
generates,  whether  by  changes  or  in  the  permanence  of  its  identity ;  if 
nothing  goes  outside  of  itself  to  give  being  to  what  is  other  than  itself ; 
then,  potentiahty  has  no  place  there  :  the  Beings  there  possess  actuality 
as  belonging  to  eternity,  not  to  time. 

Those,  however,  who  (with  us)  assert  Matter  in  the  Intellectual 
Realm  wiU  be  asked  whether  the  existence  of  that  Matter  does  not  imply 
the  potential  there  too  ;  for  even  if  Matter  there  exists  in  another  mode 
than  here,  every  Being  there  will  have  its  Matter,  its  form  and  the  union 
of  the  two  (and  therefore  the  potential,  separable  from  the  actual). 
What  answer  is  to  be  made  ? 

Simply,  that  even  the  Matter  there  is  Idea,  just  as  the  Soul,  an  Idea, 
is  Matter  to  another  (a  higher)  Being. 

But  relatively  to  that  higher,  the  Soul  is  a  potentiahty  ? 

No  :  for  the  Idea  (to  which  it  is  Matter)  is  integral  to  the  Soul 
and  does  not  look  to  a  future  ;  the  distinction  between  the  Soul  and  its 
Idea  is  purely  mental :  the  Idea  and  the  Matter  it  includes  are  conceived 
as  a  conjunction  but  are  essentiaUy  one  Kind  :  remember  that  Aristotle 
makes  his  Fifth  Body  immaterial. 

But  surely  Potentiahty  exists  in  the  Soul  ?  Surely  the  Soul  is 
potentially  the  hving-being  of  this  world  before  it  has  become  so  ?  Is 
it  not  potentially  musical,  and  everything  else  that  it  has  not  been  and 
becomes  ?  Does  not  this  imply  potentiahty  even  in  the  InteUectual 
Existences  ? 

No :  the  Soul  is  not  potentiahy  these  things ;  it  is  a  Power  towards  them. 

But  after  what  mode  does  Actuahsation  exist  in  the  InteUectual 
Realm  ? 


200 


PLOTINUS 


Is  it  the  Actualisation  of  a  statue,  where  the  combination  is  realised 
because  the  Form-Idea  has  mastered  each  separate  constituent  of  the 
total ? 

No  ;  it  is  that  every  constituent  there  is  a  Form-Idea  and,  thus, 
is  perfect  in  its  Being. 

There  is  in  the  Intellectual  Principle  no  progression  from  some 
power  capable  of  intellection  to  the  Actuality  of  intellection  :  such  a 
progression  would  send  us  in  search  of  a  Prior  Principle  not  progressing 
from  Power  to  Act ;  there  all  stands  ever  realised.  Potentiahty  requires 
an  intervention  from  outside  itself  to  bring  it  to  the  actualisation  which 
otherwise  cannot  be  ;  but  what  possesses,  of  itself,  identity  unchangeable 
for  ever  is  an  actualisation  :  all  the  Firsts  then  are  actualisations, 
simply  because  eternally  and  of  themselves  they  possess  all  that  is 
necessary  to  their  completion. 

This  applies  equally  to  the  Soul,  not  to  that  in  Matter  but  to  that 
in  the  Intellectual  Sphere  ;  and  even  that  in  Matter,  the  Soul  of  Growth, 
is  an  actualisation  in  its  difference  ;  it  possesses  actually  (and  not,  Hke 
material  things,  merely  in  image)  the  Being  that  belongs  to  it. 

Then,  everything,  in  the  intellectual  is  in  actuahsation  and  so  all 
There  is  Actuality  ? 

Why  not  ?  If  that  Nature  is  rightly  said  to  be  “  Sleepless,”  and  to 
be  Life  and  the  noblest  mode  of  Life,  the  noblest  Activities  must  be  there  ; 
all  then  is  actualisation  there,  everything  is  an  Actuality,  for  every¬ 
thing  is  a  Life,  and  all  Place  there  is  the  Place  of  Life,  in  the  true  sense 
the  ground  and  spring  of  Soul  and  of  the  Intellectual  Principle. 

4- 

Now,  in  general  anything  that  has  a  potentiality  is  actually  some¬ 
thing  else,  and  this  potentiality  of  the  future  mode  of  being  is  an  existing 
mode. 

But  what  we  think  of  as  Matter,  what  we  assert  to  be  the  poten¬ 
tiality  of  all  things,  cannot  be  said  to  be  actually  any  one  being 
among  beings  :  if  it  were  of  itself  any  definite  being,  it  could  not  be 
potentially  all. 


n.  5. 5] 


POTENTIALITY  AND  ACTUALITY 


201 


If,  then,  it  is  not  among  existences,  it  must  necessarily  be  without 
existence. 

How,  therefore,  can  it  be  actually  anything  ? 

The  answer  is  that  while  Matter  can  not  be  any  of  the  things  which 
are  founded  upon  it,  it  may  quite  well  be  something  else,  admitting  that 
all  existences  are  not  rooted  in  Matter. 

But  once  more,  if  it  is  excluded  from  the  entities  founded  upon  it 
and  all  these  are  Beings,  it  must  itself  be  a  Non-Being. 

It  is,  further,  by  definition,  formless  and  therefore  not  an  Idea  :  it 
cannot  then  be  classed  among  things  of  the  Intellectual  Realm,  and  so 
is,  once  more,  a  Non-Being.  Falling,  as  regards  both  worlds,  under 
Non-Being,  it  is  all  the  more  decidedly  the  Non-Being. 

It  has  eluded  the  Nature  of  the  Authentic  Existences  ;  it  has  even 
failed  to  come  up  with  the  things  to  which  a  spurious  existence  can  be 
attributed — for  it  is  not  even  a  phantasm  of  Reason  as  these  are — ^how 
is  it  possible  to  include  it  under  any  mode  of  Being  ? 

And  if  it  falls  under  no  mode  of  Being,  what  can  it  actually  be  ? 


5- 

How  can  we  talk  of  it  ?  How  can  it  be  the  Matter  of  real 
things  ? 

It  is  talked  of,  and  it  serves,  precisely,  as  a  Potentiality. 

And,  as  being  a  Potentiality,  it  is  not  of  the  order  of  the  thing  it 
is  to  become  :  its  existence  is  no  more  than  an  announcement  of  a  future, 
as  it  were  a  thrust  forward  to  what  is  to  come  into  existence. 

As  Potentiality  then,  it  is  not  any  definite  thing  but  the  potentiality 
of  everything :  being  nothing  in  itself — ^beyond  what  being  Matter 
amounts  to — it  is  not  in  actualisation.  For  if  it  were  actually  something, 
that  actualised  something  would  not  be  Matter,  or  at  least  not  Matter 
out  and  out,  but  merely  Matter  in  the  limited  sense  in  which  bronze  is 
the  matter  of  the  statue. 

And  its  Non-Being  must  be  no  mere  difference  from  Being. 

Motion,  for  example,  is  different  from  Being,  but  plays  about  it, 
springing  from  it  and  living  within  it :  Matter  is,  so  to  speak,  the  out- 

2  D 


202 


PLOTINUS 


cast  of  Being,  it  is  utterly  removed,  irredeemably  what  it  was  from  the 
beginning  :  in  origin  it  was  Non-Being  and  so  it  remains. 

Nor  are  we  to  imagine  that,  standing  away  at  the  very  beginning 
from  the  universal  circle  of  Beings,  it  was  thus  necessarily  an  active 
Something  or  that  it  became  a  Something.  It  has  never  been  able  to 
annex  for  itself  even  a  visible  outline  from  all  the  forms  under  which  it 
has  sought  to  creep  :  it  has  always  pursued  something  other  than  itself  ; 
it  was  never  more  than  a  Potentiality  towards  its  next :  where  all  the 
circle  of  Being  ends,  there  only  is  it  manifest ;  discerned  underneath 
things  produced  after  it,  it  is  remoter  (from  Real-Being)  even  than 
they. 

Grasped,  then,  as  an  underhe  in  each  order  of  Being,  it  can  be  no 
actualisation  of  either  :  all  that  is  allowed  to  it  is  to  be  a  Potentiality, 
a  weak  and  blurred  phantasm,  a  thing  incapable  of  a  Shape  of  its 
own. 

Its  actuality  is  that  of  being  a  phantasm,  the  actuahty  of  being  a 
falsity  ;  and  the  false  in  actualisation  is  the  veritably  false,  which  again 
is  Authentic  Non-Existence. 

So  that  Matter,  as  the  Actuahsation  of  Non-Being,  is  all  the  more 
decidedly  Non-Being,  is  Authentic  Non-Existence. 

Thus,  since  the  very  reality  of  its  Nature  is  situated  in  Non-Being, 
it  is  in  no  degree  the  Actualisation  of  any  definite  Being. 

If  it  is  to  be  present  at  all,  it  cannot  be  an  Actualisation,  for  then 
it  would  not  be  the  stray  from  Authentic  Being  which  it  is,  the  thing 
having  its  Being  in  Non-Beingness  :  for,  note,  in  the  case  of  things 
whose  Being  is  a  falsity,  to  take  away  the  falsity  is  to  take  away  what 
Being  they  have,  and  if  we  introduce  actualisation  into  things  whose 
Being  and  Essence  is  Potentiality,  we  destroy  the  foundation  of  their 
nature  since  their  Being  is  Potentiality. 

If  Matter  is  to  be  kept  as  the  unchanging  substratum,  we  must  keep 
it  as  Matter  :  that  means— does  it  not  ?— that  we  must  define  it  as  a 
Potentiality  and  nothing  more — or  refute  these  considerations. 


II.  6.  i] 


QUALITY  AND  FORM-IDEA 


203 


SIXTH  TRACTATE 
Quality  and  Form-Idea 

I. 

Are  not  Being  and  Reality  (to  on  and  he  ousia)  distinct ;  must  we 
not  envisage  Being  as  the  substance  stripped  of  all  else,  while  Reality 
is  this  same  thing,  Being,  accompanied  by  the  others — Movement,  Rest, 
Identity,  Difference — ^so  that  these  are  the  specific  constituents  of 
Reality  ? 

The  universal  fabric,  then,  is  Reality  in  which  Being,  Movement, 
and  so  on  are  separate  constituents. 

Now  Movement  has  Being  (not  essentially  but)  as  an  accident  and 
therefore  should  have  Reality  as  an  accident ;  or  is  it  something  serving 
to  the  completion  of  Reality  ? 

No  :  Movement  is  a  Reality  ;  everything  in  the  Supreme  is  a  Reality. 

Why,  then,  does  not  Reality  reside,  equally,  in  this  sphere  ? 

In  the  Supreme  there  is  Reality  because  all  things  are  one  ;  ours  is 
the  sphere  of  images  whose  separation  produces  grades  of  difference. 
Thus  in  the  spermatic  unity  all  the  human  members  are  present  undis- 
tinguishably ;  there  is  no  separation  of  head  and  hand  :  their  distinct 
existence  begins  in  the  life  here,  whose  content  is  image,  not  Authentic 
Existence. 

And  are  the  distinct  Qualities  in  the  Authentic  Realm  to  be  explained 
in  the  same  way  ?  Are  they  differing  Realities  centred  in  one  Reahty 
or  gathered  round  Being — differences  which  constitute  Realities  distinct 
from  each  other  within  the  common  fact  of  Reality  ? 

This  is  sound  enough  ;  but  it  does  not  apply  to  all  the  qualities  of 
this  sphere,  some  of  which,  no  doubt,  are  differentiations  of  Reality- 
such  as  the  quality  of  two-footedness  or  four-footedness — but  others  are 
not  such  differentiations  of  Reality  and,  because  they  are  not  so,  must 
be  called  qualities  and  nothing  more. 

On  the  other  hand,  one  and  the  same  thing  may  be  sometimes  a 
differentiation  of  Reality  and  sometimes  not— a  differentiation  when  it 


204 


PLOTINUS 


is  a  constitutive  element,  and  no  differentiation  in  some  other  thing, 
where  it  is  not  a  constitutive  element  but  an  accidental.  The  distinction 
may  be  seen  in  the  (constitutive)  whiteness  of  a  swan  or  of  ceruse  and 
the  whiteness  which  in  a  man  is  an  accidental. 

Where  whiteness  belongs  to  the  very  Reason-Form  of  the  thing  it 
is  a  constitutive  element  and  not  a  quality ;  where  it  is  a  superficial 
appearance  it  is  a  quality. 

In  other  words,  qualification  may  be  distinguished.  We  may  think 
of  a  qualification  that  is  of  the  very  substance  of  the  thing,  something 
exclusively  belonging  to  it.  And  there  is  a  qualifying  that  is  nothing  more 
(not  constituting  but  simply)  giving  some  particular  character  to  the 
real  thing ;  in  this  second  case  the  qualification  does  not  produce  any 
alteration  towards  Reality  or  away  from  it ;  the  Reality  has  existed  fully 
constituted  before  the  incoming  of  the  qualification  which — ^whether  in 
soul  or  body — ^merely  introduces  some  state  from  outside,  and  by  this 
addition  elaborates  the  Reality  into  the  particular  thing. 

But  what  if  (the  superficial  appearance  such  as)  the  visible  white¬ 
ness  in  ceruse  is  constitutive  ?  In  the  swan  the  whiteness  is  not  con¬ 
stitutive  since  a  swan  need  not  be  white  :  it  is  constitutive  in  ceruse, 
just  as  warmth  is  constitutive  of  the  Reality,  fire. 

No  doubt  we  may  be  told  that  the  Reality  in  fire  is  (not  warmth 
but)  fieriness  and  in  ceruse  an  analogous  abstraction  :  yet  the  fact  remains 
that  in  visible  fire  warmth  or  fieriness  is  constitutive  and  in  the  ceruse 
whiteness. 

Thus  the  same  entities  (warmness,  whiteness  and  fieriness)  are 
represented  at  once  as  being  not  qualities  but  constituents  of  Reality 
and  not  constituents  but  qualities. 

Now  it  is  absurd  to  talk  as  if  one  identical  thing — (warmth,  whiteness 
or  the  like)  changed  its  own  nature  according  to  whether  it  is  present  as 
a  constituent  or  as  an  accidental. 

The  truth  is  that  while  the  Reason-Principles  producing  these 
entities  contain  nothing  but  what  is  of  the  nature  of  Reality,  yet  only 
in  the  Intellectual  Realm  do  the  produced  things  possess  real  existence  : 
here  they  are  not  real ;  they  are  qualified. 


11.6.2]  QUALITY  AND  FORM-IDEA  205 

And  this  is  the  starting-point  of  an  error  we  constantly  make  :  in 
onr  enquiries  into  things  we  let  realities  escape  us  and  fasten  on  what 
is  mere  quality.  Thus  fire  is  not  the  thing  we  so  name  from  the  obser¬ 
vation  of  certain  qualities  present ;  fire  is  a  Reality  (not  a  combination 
of  material  phenomena)  ;  the  phenomena  observed  here  and  leading  us 
to  name  fire  call  us  away  from  the  authentic  thing  ;  a  quality  is  erected 
into  the  very  matter  of  definition — a  procedure,  however,  reasonable 
enough  in  regard  to  things  of  the  realm  of  sense  which  are  in  no  case 
realities  but  accidents  of  Reality. 

And  this  raises  the  question  how  Reality  can  ever  spring  from  what 
are  not  Realities. 

It  has  been  shown  that  a  thing  coming  into  being  cannot  be  identical 
with  its  origins  :  it  must  here  be  added  that  nothing  thus  coming  into 
being  (no  “  thing  of  process  ”)  can  be  a  Reality. 

Then  how  do  we  assert  the  rising  in  the  Supreme  of  what  we  have 
called  Reality  from  what  is  not  Reality  (i.e.  from  the  pure  Being  which 
is  above  Reality)  ? 

The  Reality  there— possessing  Authentic  Being  in  the  strictest  sense, 
with  the  least  admixture — is  Reality  (not  so  much  by  being  produced  as) 
by  existing  among  the  differentiations  of  the  Authentic  Being ;  or, 
better.  Reality  is  affirmed  in  the  sense  that  with  the  existence  of  the 
Supreme  is  included  its  Act  so  that  Reality  seems  to  be  a  perfectionment 
of  the  Authentic  Being,  though  in  the  truth  it  is  a  diminution  ;  the 
produced  thing  is  deficient  by  the  very  addition,  by  being  less  simplex,  by 
standing  one  step  away  from  the  Authentic. 


2. 

But  we  must  enquire  into  Quality  in  itself  :  to  know  its  nature  is 
certainly  the  way  to  settle  our  general  question. 

The  first  point  is  to  assure  ourselves  whether  or  not  one  and  the 
same  thing  may  be  held  to  be  sometimes  a  mere  qualification  and 
sometimes  a  constituent  of  Reality — ^not  staying  on  the  point  that 
qualification  could  not  be  constitutive  of  a  Reality  but  of  a  qualified 
Reality  only. 


206 


PLOTINUS 


Now  in  a  Reality  possessing  a  determined  quality,  the  Reality  and 
the  fact  of  existence  precede  the  qualified  Reality. 

What,  then,  in  the  case  of  fire  is  the  Reality  which  precedes  the 
qualified  Reality  ? 

Its  mere  body,  perhaps  ?  If  so,  body  being  the  Reality,  fire  is  a 
warmed  body  ;  and  the  total  thing  is  not  the  Reality  ;  and  the  fire  has 
warmth  (not  essentially  but)  as  a  man  might  have  a  snub  nose. 

Rejecting  its  warmth,  its  glow,  its  lightness — all  which  certainly  do 
seem  to  be  qualities — and  its  resistance,  there  is  left  only  its  extension 
by  three  dimensions  :  in  other  words,  its  Matter  is  its  Reality. 

But  that  cannot  be  held  ;  surely  the  form  is  much  more  likely  than 
the  Matter  to  be  the  Reality. 

But  is  not  the  Form  a  Quality  (and  not  therefore  a  Reality)  ? 

No,  the  Form  is  not  a  Quality  :  it  is  a  Reason-Principle. 

And  the  outcome  of  this  Reason-Principle  entering  into  the  under¬ 
lying  Matter,  what  is  that  ? 

Certainly  not  what  is  seen  and  burns,  for  that  is  the  something  in 
which  these  qualities  inhere. 

We  might  define  the  burning  as  an  Act  springing  from  the 
Reason-Principle  :  then  the  warming  and  lighting  and  other  effects 
of  fire  will  be  its  Acts  and  we  still  have  found  no  foothold  for  its 
quality. 

Such  completions  of  a  Reality  cannot  be  called  qualities  since  they 
are  its  Acts  emanating  from  the  Reason-Principles  and  from  the  essential 
powers.  A  quality  is  something  persistently  outside  Reality  ;  it  cannot 
appear  as  Reality  in  one  place  after  having  figured  in  another  as  quality  ; 
its  function  is  to  bring  in  the  something  more  after  the  Reality  is  estab¬ 
lished,  such  additions  as  virtue,  vice,  ugliness,  beauty,  health,  a  certain 
shape.  On  ^is  last,  however,  it  may  be  remarked  that  triangularity 
and  quadrangularity  are  not  in  themselves  qualities,  but  there  is  quality 
when  a  thing  is  triangular  by  having  been  brought  to  that  shape  ,*  the 
quality  is  not  the  triangularity  but  the  patterning  to  it.  The  case  is  the 
same  with  the  arts  and  avocations  (by  which  human  beings  take  the 
quality  of  being  instructed,  etc.) . 


n.6.3]  QUALITY  AND  FORM-IDEA  207 

Thus  ;  Quality  is  a  condition  superadded  to  a  Reality  whose  exist¬ 
ence  does  not  depend  upon  it,  whether  this  something  more  be  a  later 
acquirement  or  an  accompaniment  from  the  first ;  it  is  something  in  whose 
absence  the  Reality  would  still  be  complete.  It  will  sometimes  come  and 
go,  sometimes  be  inextricably  attached,  so  that  there  are  two  forms  of 
Quality,  the  moveable  and  the  fixed. 

3- 

The  Whiteness,  therefore,  in  a  human  being  is,  clearly,  to  be  classed 
not  as  a  quality  but  as  an  activity — the  act  of  a  power  which  can  make 
white  ;  and  similarly  what  we  think  of  as  qualities  in  the  Intellectual 
Realm  should  be  known  as  activities  ;  they  are  activities  which  to  our 
minds  take  the  appearance  of  quality  from  the  fact  that,  differing  in 
character  among  themselves,  each  of  them  is  a  particularity  which,  so 
to  speak,  distinguishes  those  Realities  from  each  other. 

What,  then,  distinguishes  Quahty  in  the  Intellectual  Realm  from 
that  here,  if  both  are  Acts  ? 

The  difference  is  that  these  (“  Quality-Activities  ”)  in  the  Supreme 
do  not  indicate  the  very  nature  of  the  Reality  (as  do  the  corresponding 
Activities  here)  nor  do  they  indicate  variations  of  substance  or  of  (essen¬ 
tial)  character  ;  they  merely  indicate  what  we  think  of  as  Quality  but 
in  the  Intellectual  Realm  must  still  be  Activity. 

In  other  words  this  thing,  considered  in  its  aspect  as  possessing  the 
characteristic  property  of  Reality  is  by  that  alone  recognised  as  no 
mere  Quality.  But  when  our  reason  separates  what  is  distinctive  in 
these  (“  Quality-Activities  ”)— not  in  the  sense  of  abolishing  them  but 
rather  as  taking  them  to  itself  and  making  something  new  of  them— 
this  new  something  is  Quality  *.  reason  has,  so  to  speak,  appropriated  a 
portion  of  Reality,  that  portion  manifest  to  it  on  the  surface. 

By  this  analogy,  warmth,  as  a  concomitant  of  the  specific  nature  of 
fire,  may  very  well  be  no  quality  in  fire  but  an  Idea-Form  belonging  to  it, 
one  of  its  activities,  while  being  merely  a  Quality  in  other  things  than 
fire  :  as  it  is  manifested  in  any  warm  object,  it  is  not  a  mode  of  Reality 
but  merely  a  trace,  a  shadow,  an  image,  something  that  has  gone  forth 


208 


PLOTINUS 


from  its  own  Reality — where  it  was  an  Act — and  in  the  warm  object  is  a 
quality. 

All,  then,  that  is  accident  and  not  Act ;  aU  but  what  is  Idea-form  of 
the  Reality  ;  all  that  merely  confers  pattern  ;  all  this  is  Quality  :  quali¬ 
ties  are  characteristics  and  modes  other  than  those  constituting  the 
substratum  of  a  thing. 

But  the  Archetypes  of  all  such  qualities,  the  foundation  in  which 
they  exist  primarily,  these  are  (not  qualities  but)  Activities  of  the  In¬ 
tellectual  Beings. 

And ;  one  and  the  same  thing  cannot  be  both  Quality  and  non- 
quahty  :  the  thing  void  of  Real-Existence  is  Quality ;  but  the  thing 
accompanying  Reality  is  either  Form  or  Activity  :  there  is  no  longer 
self-identity  when,  from  having  its  being  in  itself,  anything  comes  to  be 
in  something  else  with  a  fall  from  its  standing  as  Form  and  Activity. 

Finally,  anything  which  is  never  Form  but  always  accidental  to 
something  else  is  Quality  unmixed  and  nothing  more. 


SEVENTH  TRACTATE 
On  Complete  Transfusion 

I. 

Some  enquiry  must  be  made  into  what  is  known  as  the  complete 
transfusion  of  material  substances. 

Is  it  possible  that  fluid  be  blended  with  fluid  in  such  a  way  that  each 
penetrate  the  other  through  and  through  ?  or — a  difference  of  no  import¬ 
ance  if  any  such  penetration  occurs — that  one  of  them  pass  completely 
through  the  other  ? 

Those  that  admit  only  contact  need  not  detain  us.  They  are  dealing 
with  mixture,  not  with  the  coalescence  which  makes  the  total  a  thing  of 
like  parts,  each  minutest  particle  being  composed  of  all  the  combined 
elements. 

But  there  are  those  who,  admitting  coalescence,  confine  it  to  the 
qualities  :  to  them  the  material  substances  of  two  bodies  are  in  contact 


II- 7-1]  ON  COMPLETE  TRANSFUSION  209 

merely,  but  in  this  contact  of  the  matter  they  find  footing  for  the  qualities 
of  each. 

Their  view  is  plausible  because  it  rejects  the  notion  of  total  admixture 
and  because  it  recognises  that  the  masses  of  the  mixing  bodies  must  be 
whittled  away  if  there  is  to  be  mixture  without  any  gap,  if,  that  is  to 
say,  each  substance  must  be  divided  within  itself  through  and  through 
for  complete  interpenetration  with  the  other.  Their  theory  is  confirmed 
by  the  cases  in  which  two  mixed  substances  occupy  a  greater  space  than 
either  singly,  especially  a  space  equal  to  the  conjoined  extent  of  each  : 
for,  as  they  point  out,  in  an  absolute  interpenetration  the  infusion  of  the 
one  into  the  other  would  leave  the  occupied  space  exactly  what  it  was 
before  and,  where  the  space  occupied  is  not  increased  by  the  juxta¬ 
position,  they  explain  that  some  expulsion  of  air  has  made  room  for  the 
incoming  substance.  They  ask  further,  how  a  minor  quantity  of  one 
substance  can  be  spread  out  so  as  to  interpenetrate  (speck  by  speck  or 
drop  by  drop)  a  major  quantity  of  another.  In  fact  they  have  a  multitude 
of  arguments. 

Those,  on  the  other  hand,  that  accept  “  complete  transfusion,”  might 
object  that  it  does  not  require  the  reduction  of  the  mixed  things  to  frag¬ 
ments,  a  certain  cleavage  being  sufiicient :  thus,  for  instance,  sweat  does 
not  split  up  the  body  or  even  pierce  holes  in  it.  And  if  it  is  answered 
that  this  may  well  be  a  special  decree  of  Nature  to  allow  of  the  sweat 
exuding,  there  is  the  case  of  those  manufactured  articles,  slender  but 
without  puncture,  in  which  we  can  see  a  liquid  wetting  them  through 
and  through  so  that  it  runs  down  from  the  upper  to  the  under  surface. 
How  can  this  fact  be  explained,  since  both  the  liquid  and  the  solid  are 
bodily  substances  ?  Interpenetration  without  disintegration  is  difficult 
to  conceive,  and  if  there  is  such  mutual  disintegration  the  two  must 
obviously  destroy  each  other. 

When  they  urge  that  often  there  is  a  mixing  without  augmentation 
their  adversaries  can  counter  at  once  with  the  exit  of  air. 

When  there  is  an  increase  in  the  space  occupied,  nothing  refutes 
the  explanation — however  unsatisfying — that  this  is  a  necessary  con¬ 
sequence  of  two  bodies  bringing  to  a  common  stock  their  magnitude 


210 


PLOTINUS 


equally  with  their  other  attributes  :  size  is  as  permanent  as  any  other 
property ;  and,  exactly  as  from  the  blending  of  qualities  there  results 
a  new  form  of  thing,  the  combination  of  the  two,  so  we  find  a  new  mag¬ 
nitude  ;  the  blending  gives  us  a  magnitude  representing  each  of  the  two. 
But  at  this  point  the  others  will  answer,  "  If  you  mean  that  substance 
lies  side  by  side  with  substance  and  mass  with  mass,  each  carrying  its 
quantum  of  magnitude,  you  are  at  one  with  us  :  if  there  were  complete 
transfusion,  one  substance  sinking  its  original  magnitude  in  the  other, 
we  would  have  no  longer  the  case  of  two  lines  joined  end  to  end  by  their 
terminal  points  and  thus  producing  an  increased  extension  ;  we  would 
have  line  superimposed  upon  line  with,  therefore,  no  increase.” 

But  a  lesser  quantity  permeates  the  entire  extent  of  a  larger ;  the 
smallest  is  sunk  in  the  greatest ;  transfusion  is  exhibited  unmistakeably. 
In  certain  cases  it  is  possible  to  pretend  that  there  is  no  total  penetration 
but  there  are  manifest  examples  leaving  no  room  for  the  pretence.  In 
what  they  say  of  the  spreading  out  of  masses  they  cannot  be  thought 
very  plausible  ;  the  extension  would  have  to  be  considerable  indeed  in 
the  case  of  a  very  small  quantity  (to  be  in  true  mixture  with  a  very  large 
mass)  ;  for  they  do  not  suggest  any  such  extension  by  change  as  that  of 
water  into  air. 


2. 

This,  however,  raises  a  problem  deserving  investigation  in  itself  : 
what  has  happened  when  a  definite  magnitude  of  water  becomes  air, 
and  how  do  we  explain  the  increase  of  volume  ?  But  for  the  present  we 
must  be  content  with  the  matter  thus  far  discussed  out  of  all  the  varied 
controversy  accumulated  on  either  side. 

It  remains  for  us  to  make  out  on  our  own  account  the  true  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  phenomenon  of  mixing,  without  regard  to  the  agreement  or 
disagreement  of  that  theory  with  any  of  the  current  opinions  mentioned. 

When  water  runs  through  wool  or  when  papyrus-pulp  gives  up  its 
moisture  why  is  not  the  moist  content  expressed  to  the  very  last  drop 
or  even,  without  question  of  outflow,  how  can  we  possibly  think  that  in 
a  mixture  the  relation  of  matter  with  matter,  mass  with  mass,  is  contact 


II.  7.  2] 


ON  COMPLETE  TRANSFUSION 


2II 


and  that  only  the  qualities  are  fused  ?  The  pulp  is  not  merely  in  touch 
with  water  outside  it  or  even  in  its  pores  ;  it  is  wet  through  and  through 
so  that  every  particle  of  its  matter  is  drenched  in  that  quality.  Now  if 
the  matter  is  soaked  all  through  with  the  quality,  then  the  water  is  every¬ 
where  in  the  pulp. 

"Not  the  water  ;  the  quality  of  the  water.” 

But  then,  where  is  the  water  ?  and  (if  only  a  quality  has  entered) 
why  is  there  a  change  of  volume  ?  The  pulp  has  been  expanded  by  the 
addition ;  that  is  to  say  it  has  received  magnitude  from  the  incoming 
substance — ^but  if  it  has  received  the  magnitude,  magnitude  has  been 
added  ;  and  a  magnitude  added  has  not  been  absorbed  ;  therefore  the 
combined  matter  must  occupy  two  several  places.  And  as  the  two 
mixing  substances  communicate  quality  and  receive  matter  in  mutual 
give  and  take  so  they  may  give  and  take  magnitude.  Indeed  when  a 
quality  meets  another  quality  it  suffers  some  change  ;  it  is  mixed,  and 
by  that  admixture  it  is  no  longer  pure  and  therefore  no  longer  itself  but 
a  blunter  thing,  whereas  magnitude  joining  magnitude  retains  its  full 
strength. 

But  let  it  be  understood  how  we  came  to  say  that  body  passing 
through  and  through  another  body  must  produce  disintegration,  while 
we  make  qualities  pervade  their  substances  without  producing  disin¬ 
tegration  ;  the  bodilessness  of  qualities  is  the  reason.  Matter,  too,  is 
bodiless  ;  it  may,  then,  be  supposed  that  as  Matter  pervades  everything 
so  the  bodiless  qualities  associated  with  it — as  long  as  they  are  few 
have  the  power  of  penetration  without  disintegration.  Anything  solid 
would  be  stopped  either  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  a  solid  has  the  precise 
quality  which  forbids  it  to  penetrate  or  in  that  the  mere  coexistence  of 
too  many  qualities  in  Matter  (constitutes  density  and  so)  produces 
the  same  inhibition. 

If,  then,  what  we  call  a  dense  body  is  so  by  reason  of  the  presence 
of  many  qualities,  that  plenitude  of  qualities  will  be  the  cause  (of  the 
inhibition) . 

If  on  the  other  hand  density  is  itself  a  quality  like  what  they  call 
corporeity,  then  the  cause  will  be  that  particular  quality. 


212 


PLOTINUS 


This  would  mean  that  the  qualities  of  two  substances  do  not  bring 
about  the  mixing  by  merely  being  qualities  but  by  being  apt  to  mixture  ; 
nor  does  Matter  refuse  to  enter  into  a  mixing  as  Matter  but  as  being 
associated  with  a  quality  repugnant  to  mixture ;  and  this  all  the  more 
since  it  has  no  magnitude  of  its  own  but  only  does  not  reject  magnitude. 

3- 

We  have  thus  covered  our  main  ground,  but  since  corporeity  has 
been  mentioned,  we  must  consider  its  nature  :  is  it  the  conjunction  of 
all  the  qualities  or  is  it  an  Idea,  or  Reason-Principle,  whose  presence  in 
Matter  constitutes  a  body  ? 

Now  if  body  is  the  compound,  the  thing  made  up  of  all  the  required 
qualities  plus  Matter,  then  corporeity  is  nothing  more  than  their  con¬ 
junction. 

And  if  it  is  a  Reason-Principle,  one  whose  incoming  constitutes  the 
body,  then  clearly  this  Principle  contains  embraced  within  itself  all  the 
qualities.  If  this  Reason-Principle  is  to  be  no  mere  principle  of  definition 
exhibiting  the  nature  of  a  thing  but  a  veritable  Reason  constituting  the 
thing,  then  it  cannot  itself  contain  Matter  but  must  encircle  Matter, 
and  by  being  present  to  Matter  elaborate  the  body  :  thus  the  body  will 
be  Matter  associated  with  an  indwelling  Reason- Principle  which  will  be 
in  itself  immaterial,  pure  Idea,  even  though  irremoveably  attached  to  the 
body.  It  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  that  other  Principle  in  man — 
treated  elsewhere — which  dwells  in  the  Intellectual  World  by  right  of 
being  itself  an  Intellectual  Principle. 


EIGHTH  TRACTATE 
Why  Distant  Objects  Appear  Small 

I. 

Seen  from  a  distance,  objects  appear  reduced  and  close  together, 
however  far  apart  they  be  :  within  easy  range,  their  sizes  and  the 
distances  that  separate  them  are  observed  correctly. 

Distant  objects  show  in  this  reduction  because  they  must  be  drawn 


II.  8.  i]  WHY  DISTANT  OBJECTS  APPEAR  SMALL  213 

together  for  vision  and  the  light  must  be  concentrated  to  suit  the  size 
of  the  pupil ;  besides,  as  we  are  placed  further  and  further  away  from  the 
material  mass  under  observation,  it  is  more  and  more  the  bare  form  that 
reaches  us,  stripped,  so  to  speak,  of  magnitude  as  of  all  other  quality. 

Or  it  may  be  that  we  appreciate  the  magnitude  of  an  object  by 
observing  the  salience  and  recession  of  its  several  parts,  so  that  to 
perceive  its  true  size  we  must  have  it  close  at  hand. 

Or  again,  it  may  be  that  magnitude  is  known  incidentally  (as  a 
deduction)  from  the  observation  of  colour.  With  an  object  at  hand  we 
know  how  much  space  is  covered  by  the  colour ;  at  a  distance,  only 
that  something  is  coloured,  for  the  parts,  quantitatively  distinct  among 
themselves,  do  not  give  us  the  precise  knowledge  of  that  quantity,  the 
colours  themselves  reaching  us  only  in  a  blurred  impression. 

What  wonder,  then,  if  size  be  like  sound— reduced  when  the  form 
reaches  us  but  faintly — for  in  sound  the  hearing  is  concerned  only  about 
the  form  ;  magnitude  is  not  discerned  except  incidentally. 

Well,  in  hearing  magnitude  is  known  incidentally  ;  but  how  ? 
Touch  conveys  a  direct  impression  of  a  visible  object ;  what  gives  us  the 
same  direct  impression  of  an  object  of  hearing  ? 

The  magnitude  of  a  sound  is  known  not  by  actual  quantity  but  by 
degree  of  impact,  by  intensity — and  this  in  no  indirect  knowledge  ;  the 
ear  appreciates  a  certain  degree  of  force,  exactly  as  the  palate  perceives 
by  no  indirect  knowledge,  a  certain  degree  of  sweetness.  But  the  true 
magnitude  of  a  soimd  is  its  extension  ;  this  the  hearing  may  define  to 
itself  incidentally  by  deduction  from  the  degree  of  intensity  but  not  to 
the  point  of  precision.  The  intensity  is  merely  the  definite  effect  at  a 
particular  spot ;  the  magnitude  is  a  matter  of  totality,  the  sum  of  space 
occupied. 

Still  (it  will  be  objected)  the  colours  seen  from  a  distance  are  faint ; 
but  they  are  not  small  as  the  masses  are. 

True  ;  but  there  is  the  common  fact  of  diminution.  There  is  colour 
with  its  diminution,  faintness  ;  there  is  magnitude  with  its  diminution, 
smallness  ;  and  magnitude  follows  colour  diminishing  stage  by  stage 
with  it. 


214 


PLOTINUS 


But,  the  phenomenon  is  more  easily  explained  by  the  example  of 
things  of  wide  variety.  Take  mountains  dotted  with  houses,  woods 
and  other  land-marks ;  the  observation  of  each  detail  gives  us  the 
means  of  calculating,  by  the  single  objects  noted,  the  total  extent 
covered  :  but,  where  no  such  detail  of  form  reaches  us,  our  vision,  which 
deals  with  detail,  has  not  the  means  towards  the  knowledge  of  the  whole 
by  measurement  of  any  one  clearly  discerned  magnitude.  This  applies 
even  to  objects  of  vision  close  at  hand  :  where  there  is  variety  and  the 
eye  sweeps  over  all  at  one  glance  so  that  the  forms  are  not  all  caught, 
the  total  appears  the  less  in  proportion  to  the  detail  which  has  escaped 
the  eye  ;  observe  each  single  point  and  then  you  can  estimate  the 
volume  precisely.  Again,  magnitudes  of  one  colour  and  unbroken  form 
trick  the  sense  of  quantity  :  the  vision  can  no  longer  estimate  by  the 
particular ;  it  slips  away,  not  finding  the  stand-by  of  the  difference 
between  part  and  part. 

It  was  the  detail  that  prevented  a  near  object  deceiving  our  sense 
of  magnitude  :  in  the  case  of  the  distant  object,  because  the  eye  does 
not  pass  stage  by  stage  through  the  stretch  of  intervening  space  so  as 
to  note  its  forms,  therefore  it  cannot  report  the  magnitude  of  that  space. 


2. 

The  explanation  by  lesser  angle  of  vision  has  been  elsewhere  dis¬ 
missed  ;  one  point,  however,  we  may  urge  here. 

Those  attributing  the  reduced  appearance  to  the  lesser  angle  occupied 
allow  by  their  very  theory  that  the  unoccupied  portion  of  the  eye  still 
sees  something  beyond  or  something  quite  apart  from  the  object  of 
vision,  if  only  air-space. 

Now  consider  some  very  large  object  of  vision,  that  mountain  for 
example.  No  part  of  the  eye  is  unoccupied  ;  the  mountain  adequately 
fills  it  so  that  it  can  take  in  nothing  beyond,  for  the  mountain  as  seen 
either  corresponds  exactly  to  the  eye-space  or  stretches  away  out  of  range 
to  right  and  to  left.  How  does  the  explanation  by  lesser  angle  of  vision 
hold  good  in  thisjcase,  where  the  object  still  appears  smaller,  far,  than  it 
is  and  yet  occupies  the  eye  entire  ? 


II.  9.  i] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS’* 


215 


Or  look  up  to  the  sky  and  no  hesitation  can  remain.  Of  course  we 
cannot  take  in  the  entire  hemisphere  at  one  glance  ;  the  eye  directed 
to  it  could  not  cover  so  vast  an  expanse.  But  suppose  the  possibility  : 
the  entire  eye,  then,  embraces  the  hemisphere  entire  ;  but  the  expanse 
of  the  heavens  is  far  greater  than  it  appears  ;  how  can  its  appearing  far 
less  than  it  is  be  explained  by  a  lessening  of  the  angle  of  vision  ? 


NINTH  TRACTATE 

Against  Those  that  Affirm  the  Creator  of  the  Kosmos  and 

THE  Kosmos  Itself  to  be  Evil  ;  [Generally  Quoted  as 

“Against  the  Gnostics’’] 

I. 

We  have  seen  elsewhere  that  the  Good,  the  Principle,  is  simplex, 
and,  correspondingly,  primal — for  the  secondary  can  never  be  simplex — 
that  it  contains  nothing  :  that  it  is  an  integral  Unity. 

Now  the  same  Nature  belongs  to  the  Principle  we  know  as  The  One. 
Just  as  the  goodness  of  The  Good  is  essential  and  not  the  outgrowth  of 
some  prior  substance  so  the  Unity  of  The  One  is  its  essential. 

Therefore  : — 

When  we  speak  of  The  One  and  when  we  speak  of  The  Good  we  must 
recognise  an  Identical  Nature  ;  we  must  affirm  that  they  are  the  same — ■ 
not,  it  is  true,  as  venturing  any  predication  with  regard  to  that  (un¬ 
knowable)  Hypostasis  but  simply  as  indicating  it  to  ourselves  in  the  best 
terms  we  find. 

Even  in  calling  it  The  First  we  mean  no  more  than  to  express  that 
it  is  the  most  absolutely  simplex  :  it  is  the  Self-Sufficing  only  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  not  of  that  compound  nature  which  would  make  it  dependent 
upon  any  constituent ;  it  is  “  the  Self-Contained  ’’  because  everything 
contained  in  something  alien  must  also  exist  by  that  alien. 

Deriving  then,  from  nothing  alien,  entering  into  nothing  alien,  in 
no  way  a  made-up  thing,  there  can  be  nothing  above  it. 


2i6 


PLOTINUS 


We  need  not,  then,  go  seeking  any  other  Principles  ;  this — the  One 
and  the  Good — is  our  First,  next  to  it  follows  the  Intellectual  Principle, 
the  Primal  Thinker,  and  upon  this  follows  Soul.  Such  is  the  order  in 
nature.  The  Intellectual  Realm  allows  no  more  than  these  and  no  fewer. 

Those  who  hold  to  fewer  Principles  must  hold  the  identity  of  either 
Intellectual-Principle  and  Soul  or  of  Intellectual-Principle  and  The 
First ;  but  we  have  abundantly  shown  that  these  are  distinct. 

It  remains  for  us  to  consider  whether  there  are  more  than  these  Three. 

Now  what  other  (Divine)  Kinds  could  there  be  ?  No  Principles  of 
the  universe  could  be  found  at  once  simpler  and  more  transcendent  than 
this  whose  existence  we  have  affirmed  and  described. 

They  will  scarcely  urge  upon  us  the  doubling  of  the  Principle  in  Act 
by  a  Principle  in  Potentiality.  It  is  absurd  to  seek  such  a  plurality  by 
distinguishing  between  potentiality  and  actuality  in  the  case  of  im¬ 
material  beings  whose  existence  is  in  Act — even  in  lower  forms  no  such 
division  can  be  made — and  we  cannot  conceive  a  duality  in  the  Intellec¬ 
tual-Principle,  one  phase  in  some*  vague  calm,  another  all  astir.  Under 
what  form  can  we  think  of  repose  in  the  Intellectual  Principle  as  con¬ 
trasted  with  its  movement  or  utterance  ?  What  would  the  quiescence 
of  the  one  phase  be  as  against  the  energy  of  the  other  ? 

No  :  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  continuously  itself,  unchangeably 
constituted  in  stable  Act.  With  movement — towards  it  or  within  it — we 
are  in  the  realm  of  the  Soul’s  operation  :  such  act  is  a  Reason-Principle 
emanating  from  it  and  entering  into  Soul,  thus  made  an  Intellectual  Soul, 
but  in  no  sense  creating  an  intermediate  Principle  to  stand  between  the 
two. 

Nor  are  we  warranted  in  affirming  a  plurality  of  Intellectual  Prin¬ 
ciples  on  the  ground  that  there  is  one  that  knows  and  thinks  and  another 
knowing  that  it  knows  and  thinks.  For  whatever  distinction  be  possible 
in  the  Divine  between  its  Intellectual  Act  and  its  Consciousness  of  that 
Act,  still  all  must  be  one  projection  not  unaware  of  its  own  operation : 
it  would  be  absurd  to  imagine  any  such  unconsciousness  in  the  Authentic 
Intelligence  ;  the  knowing  principle  must  be  one  and  the  selfsame  with 
that  which  knows  of  the  knowing. 


II.  9-  2] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


217 


The  contrary  supposition  would  give  us  two  beings,  one  that  merely 
knows,  and  another — a  separate  being — that  knows  of  the  act  of  knowing. 

If  we  are  answered  that  the  distinction  is  merely  a  process  of  our 
thought,  then,  at  once,  the  theory  of  a  plurality  in  the  Divine  Hypostasis 
is  abandoned  :  further,  the  question  is  opened  whether  our  thought  can 
entertain  a  knowing  principle  so  narrowed  to  its  knowing  as  not  to 
know  that  it  knows — a  limitation  which  would  be  charged  as  imbecility 
even  in  ourselves,  who  if  but  of  very  ordinary  moral  force  are  always 
master  of  our  emotions  and  mental  processes. 

No  :  The  Divine  Mind  in  its  mentation  thinks  itself  ;  the  object  of 
the  thought  is  nothing  external :  Thinker  and  Thought  are  one  ;  there¬ 
fore  in  its  thinking  and  knowing  it  possesses  itself,  observes  itself  and 
sees  itself  not  as  something  unconscious  but  as  knowing  :  in  this  Primal 
Knowing  it  must  include,  as  one  and  the  same  Act,  the  knowledge  of 
the  knowing ;  and  even  the  logical  distinction  mentioned  above  cannot 
be  made  in  the  case  of  the  Divine  ;  the  very  eternity  of  its  self-thinking 
precludes  any  such  separation  between  that  intellective  act  and  the 
consciousness  of  the  act. 

The  absurdity  becomes  still  more  blatant  if  we  introduce  yet  a 
further  distinction — after  that  which  affirms  the  knowledge  of  the  know¬ 
ing,  a  third  distinction  affirming  the  knowing  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
knowing  :  yet  there  is  no  reason  against  carrying  on  the  division  for 
ever  and  ever. 

To  increase  the  Primals  by  making  the  Supreme  Mind  engender 
the  Reason-Principle,  and  this  again  engender  in  the  Soul  a  distinct 
power  to  act  as  mediator  between  Soul  and  the  Supreme  Mind,  this  is 
to  deny  intellection  to  the  Soul,  which  would  no  longer  derive  its  Reason 
from  the  Intellectual- Principle  but  from  an  intermediate  :  the  Soul  then 
would  possess  not  the  Reason-Principle  but  an  image  of  it :  the  Soul 
could  not  know  the  Intellectual- Principle  ;  it  could  have  no  intellection. 


2. 

Therefore  we  must  affirm  no  more  than  these  three  Primals  :  we 
are  not  to  introduce  superfluous  distinctions  which  their  nature  rejects. 


2I8 


PLOTINUS 


We  are  to  proclaim  one  Intellectual-Principle  unchangeably  the  same, 
in  no  way  subject  to  decline,  acting  in  imitation,  as  true  as  its  nature 
allows,  of  the  Father. 

And  as  to  our  own  Soul  we  are  to  hold  that  it  stands,  in  part, 
always  in  the  presence  of  The  Divine  Beings,  while  in  part  it  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  things  of  this  sphere  and  in  part  occupies  a  middle 
ground.  It  is  one  nature  in  graded  powers  ;  and  sometimes  the  Soul  in  its 
entirety  is  borne  along  by  the  loftiest  in  itself  and  in  the  Authentic  Existent ; 
sometimes,  the  less  noble  part  is  dragged  down  and  drags  the  mid-soul 
with  it,  though  the  law  is  that  the  Soul  may  never  succumb  entire. 

The  Soul's  disaster  falls  upon  it  when  it  ceases  to  dwell  in  the  perfect 
Beauty — the  appropriate  dwelling-place  of  that  Soul  which  is  no  part 
and  of  which  we  too  are  no  part — thence  to  pour  forth  into  the  frame 
of  the  All  whatsoever  the  All  can  hold  of  good  and  beauty.  There  that 
Soul  rests,  free  from  all  solicitude,  not  ruling  by  plan  or  policy,  not 
redressing,  but  establishing  order  by  the  marvellous  efficacy  of  its  con¬ 
templation  of  the  things  above  it. 

For  the  measure  of  its  absorption  in  that  vision  is  the  measure  of 
its  grace  and  power,  and  what  it  draws  from  this  contemplation  it  com¬ 
municates  to  the  lower  sphere,  illuminated  and  illuminating  always. 

3- 

Ever  illuminated,  receiving  light  unfailing,  the  All-Soul  imparts  it 
to  the  entire  series  of  later  Being  which  by  this  light  is  sustained  and 
fostered  and  endowed  with  the  fullest  measure  of  life  that  each  can 
absorb.  It  may  be  compared  with  a  central  fire  warming  every  receptive 
body  within  range. 

Our  fire,  however,  is  a  thing  of  limited  scope  :  given  powers  that 
have  no  limitation  and  are  never  cut  off  from  the  Authentic  Existences, 
how  imagine  anything  existing  and  yet  failing  to  receive  from  them  ? 

It  is  of  the  essence  of  things  that  each  gives  of  its  being  to  another  : 
without  this  communication.  The  Good  would  not  be  Good,  nor  the 
Intellectual-Principle  an  Intellective  Principle,  nor  would  Soul  itself  be 
what  it  is  :  the  law  is,  “  some  life  after  the  Primal  Life,  a  second  where 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS”  219 

there  is  a  first ;  all  linked  in  one  unbroken  chain  ;  all  eternal ;  divergent 
types  being  engendered  only  in  the  sense  of  being  secondary.” 

In  other  words,  things  commonly  described  as  generated  have  never 
known  a  beginning  :  all  has  been  and  will  be.  Nor  can  anything  dis¬ 
appear  unless  where  a  later  form  is  possible  :  without  such  a  future 
there  can  be  no  dissolution. 

If  we  are  told  that  there  is  always  Matter  as  a  possible  term,  we  ask 
why  then  should  not  Matter  itself  come  to  nothingness.  If  we  are  told 
it  may,  then  we  ask  why  it  should  ever  have  been  generated.  If  the 
answer  comes  that  it  had  its  necessary  place  as  the  ultimate  of  the  series, 
we  return  that  the  necessity  still  holds. 

With  Matter  left  aside  as  wholly  isolated,  the  Divine  Beings  are  not 
everywhere  but  in  some  bounded  place,  walled  off,  so  to  speak  ;  if  that 
is  not  possible.  Matter  itself  must  receive  the  Divine  light  (and  so  cannot 
be  annihilated). 

4‘ 

To  those  who  assert  that  creation  is  the  work  of  the  Soul  after  the 
failing  of  its  wings,  we  answer  that  no  such  disgrace  could  overtake  the 
Soul  of  the  All.  If  they  tell  us  of  its  falling,  they  must  tell  us  also  what 
caused  the  fall.  And  when  did  it  take  place  ?  If  from  eternity,  then  the 
Soul  must  be  essentially  a  fallen  thing :  if  at  some  one  moment,  why 
not  before  that  ? 

We  assert  its  creative  act  to  be  a  proof  not  of  decline  but  rather  of 
its  steadfast  hold.  Its  decline  could  consist  only  in  its  forgetting  the 
Divine  :  but  if  it  forgot,  how  could  it  create  ?  Whence  does  it  create  but 
from  the  things  it  knew  in  the  Divine  ?  If  it -creates  from  the  memory 
of  that  vision,  it  never  fell.  Even  supposing  it  to  be  in  some  dim  inter¬ 
mediate  state,  it  need  not  be  supposed  more  likely  to  decline  ;  any 
inclination  would  be  towards  its  Prior,  in  an  effort  to  the  clearer  vision. 
If  any  memory  at  all  remained,  what  other  desire  could  it  have  than  to 
retrace  the  way  ? 

What  could  it  have  been  planning  to  gain  by  world-creating  ?  Glory  ? 
That  would  be  absurd — a  motive  borrowed  from  the  sculptors  of  our  earth. 


220 


PLOTINUS 


Finally,  if  the  Soul  created  by  policy  and  not  by  sheer  need  of  its 
nature,  by  being  characteristically  the  creative  power— how  explain  the 
making  of  this  universe  ? 

And  when  will  it  destroy  the  work  ?  If  it  repents  of  its  work,  what 
is  it  waiting  for  ?  If  it  has  not  yet  repented,  then  it  will  never  repent : 
it  must  be  already  accustomed  to  the  world,  must  be  growing  more 
tender  towards  it  with  the  passing  of  time. 

Can  it  be  waiting  for  certain  souls  still  here  ?  Long  since  would  these 
have  ceased  returning  for  such  re-birth,  having  known  in  former  life  the 
evils  of  this  sphere  ;  long  since  would  they  have  foreborne  to  come. 

Nor  may  we  grant  that  this  world  is  of  unhappy  origin  because 
there  are  many  jarring  things  in  it.  Such  a  judgement  would  rate  it  too 
high,  treating  it  as  the  same  with  the  Intelligible  Realm  and  not  merely 
its  reflection. 

And  yet — what  reflection  of  that  world  could  be  conceived  more 
beautiful  than  this  of  ours  ?  What  fire  could  be  a  nobler  reflection  of  the 
fire  there  than  the  fire  we  know  here  ?  Or  what  other  earth  than  this 
could  have  been  modelled  after  that  earth  ?  And  what  globe  more 
minutely  perfect  than  this,  or  more  admirably  ordered  in  its  course  could 
have  been  conceived  in  the  image  of  the  self-centred  circhng  of  the 
World  of  Intelligibles  ?  And  for  a  sun  figuring  the  Divine  sphere,  if  it 
is  to  be  more  splendid  than  the  sun  visible  to  us,  what  a  sun  it  must  be. 

5- 

Still  more  unreasonably  : — 

There  are  men,  bound  to  human  bodies  and  subject  to  desire,  grief, 
anger,  who  think  so  generously  of  their  own  faculty  that  they  declare 
themselves  in  contact  with  the  Intelligible  World,  but  deny  that  the 
sun  possesses  a  similar  faculty  less  subject  to  influence,  to  disorder,  to 
change  ;  they  deny  that  it  is  any  wiser  than  we,  the  late  bom,  hindered 
by  so  many  cheats  on  the  way  towards  truth. 

Their  own  soul,  the  soul  of  the  least  of  mankind,  they  declare 
deathless,  divine  ;  but  the  entire  heavens  and  the  stars  within  the 
heavens  have  had  no  communion  with  the  Immortal  Principle,  though 


n.  9-  s] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


221 


these  are  far  purer  and  lovelier  than  their  own  souls — yet  they  are  not 
blind  to  the  order,  the  shapely  pattern,  the  discipline  prevailing  in  the 
heavens,  since  they  are  the  loudest  in  complaint  of  the  disorder  that 
troubles  our  earth.  We  are  to  imagine  the  deathless  Soul  choosing  of 
design  the  less  worthy  place,  and  preferring  to  abandon  the  nobler  to 
the  Soul  that  is  to  die. 

Equally  unreasonable  is  their  introduction  of  that  other  Soul  which 
they  piece  together  from  the  elements. 

How  could  any  form  or  degree  of  life  come  about  by  a  blend  of  the 
elements  ?  Their  conjunction  could  produce  only  a  warm  or  cold  or  an 
intermediate  substance,  something  dry  or  wet  or  intermediate. 

Besides,  how  could  such  a  soul  be  a  bond  holding  the  four  elements 
together  when  (by  the  hypothesis)  it  is  a  later  thing  and  rises  from  them  ? 
And  this  element-soul  is  described  as  possessing  consciousness  and  will 
and  the  rest — what  can  we  think  ? 

Furthermore,  these  teachers,  in  their  contempt  for  this  creation  and 
this  earth,  proclaim  that  another  earth  has  been  made  for  them  into 
which  they  are  to  enter  when  they  depart.  Now  this  new  earth  is  the 
Reason-Form  (the  Logos)  of  our  world.  Why  should  they  desire  to  live 
in  the  archetype  of  a  world  abhorrent  to  them  ? 

Then  again,  what  is  the  origin  of  that  pattern  world  ?  It  would 
appear,  from  the  theory,  that  the  Maker  had  already  declined  towards 
the  things  of  this  sphere  before  that  pattern  came  into  being. 

Now  let  us  suppose  the  Maker  craving  to  construct  such  an  Inter¬ 
mediate  World — though  what  motive  could  He  have  ?— in  addition  to 
the  Intellectual  world  which  He  eternally  possesses.  If  He  made  the 
mid-world  first,  what  end  was  it  to  serve  ? 

To  be  a  dwelling-place  for  Souls  ? 

How  then  did  they  ever  fall  from  it  ?  It  exists  in  vain. 

If  He  made  it  later  than  this  world — abstracting  the  formal-idea  of 
this  world  and  leaving  the  Matter  out — the  Souls  that  have  come  to 
know  that  intermediate  sphere  would  have  experienced  enough  to  keep 
them  from  entering  this.  If  the  meaning  is  simply  that  Souls  exhibit 
the  Ideal-Form  of  the  Universe,  what  is  there  distinctive  in  the  teaching  ? 


222 


PLOTINUS 


6. 

And,  what  are  we  to  think  of  the  new  forms  of  being  they  introduce 
— their  “  Exiles  ”  and  “  Impressions  ”  and  "  Repentings  ”  ? 

If  all  comes  to  states  of  the  Soul — “  Repentance  "  when  it  has  under¬ 
gone  a  change  of  purpose  ;  “  Impressions  ”  when  it  contemplates  not 
the  Authentic  Existences  but  their  simulacra — there  is  nothing  here 
but  a  jargon  invented  to  make  a  case  for  their  school :  all  this 
terminology  is  piled  up  only  to  conceal  their  debt  to  the  ancient 
Greek  philosophy  which  taught,  clearly  and  without  bombast,  the 
ascent  from  the  cave  and  the  gradual  advance  of  souls  to  a  truer  and 
truer  vision. 

For,  in  sum,  a  part  of  their  doctrine  comes  from  Plato  ;  all  the 
novelties  through  which  they  seek  to  establish  a  philosophy  of  their 
own  have  been  picked  up  outside  of  the  truth. 

From  Plato  come  their  punishments,  their  rivers  of  the  underworld 
and  the  changing  from  body  to  body ;  as  for  the  plurality  they  assert  in 
the  Intellectual  Realm — the  Authentic  Existent,  the  Intellectual- Prin¬ 
ciple,  the  Second  Creator  and  the  Soul — all  this  is  taken  over  from  the 
Timaeus,  where  we  read  : — 

“  As  many  Ideal-Forms  as  the  Divine  Mind  beheld  dwelling  within 
the  Veritably  Living  Being,  so  many  the  Maker  resolved  should  be 
contained  in  this  All.” 

Misunderstanding  their  text,  they  conceived  one  Mind  passively 
including  within  itself  all  that  has  being,  another  mind,  a  distinct 
existence,  having  vision,  and  a  third  planning  the  Universe— though 
often  they  substitute  Soul  for  this  planning  Mind  as  the  creating  Prin¬ 
ciple  and  they  think  that  this  third  being  is  the  Creator  according  to 
Plato. 

They  are  in  fact  quite  outside  of  the  truth  in  their  identification  of 
the  Creator. 

In  every  way  they  misrepresent  Plato’s  theory  as  to  the  method  of 
creation  as  in  many  other  respects  they  dishonour  his  teaching :  they,  we 
are  to  understand,  have  penetrated  the  Intellectual  Nature,  while  Plato 
and  all  those  other  illustrious  teachers  have  failed. 


11.  9.  5] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS 


223 


}  f 


They  hope  to  get  the  credit  of  minute  and  exact  identification  by 
setting  up  a  plurality  of  intellectual  Essences  ;  but  in  reality  this  multi¬ 
plication  lowers  the  Intellectual  Nature  to  the  level  of  the  Sense-Kind  : 
their  true  course  is  to  seek  to  reduce  number  to  the  least  possible  in  the 
Supreme,  simply  referring  all  things  to  the  Second  Hypostasis — which  is 
all  that  exists  as  it  is  Primal  Intellect  and  Reality  and  is  the  only  thing 
that  is  good  except  only  for  the  first  Nature — and  to  recognise  Soul  as 
the  third  Principle,  accounting  for  the  difference  among  souls  merely 
by  diversity  of  experience  and  character.  Instead  of  insulting  those 
venerable  teachers  they  should  receive  their  doctrine  with  the  respect  due 
to  the  older  thought  and  honour  all  that  noble  system — an  immortal 
soul,  an  Intellectual  and  Intelligible  Realm,  the  Supreme  God,  the 
Soul’s  need  of  emancipation  from  all  intercourse  with  the  body,  the 
fact  of  separation  from  it,  the  escape  from  the  world  of  process  to  the 
world  of  essential-being.  These  doctrines,  all  emphatically  asserted  by 
Plato,  they  do  well  to  adopt :  where  they  differ,  they  are  at  full  liberty 
to  speak  their  minds,  but  not  to  procure  assent  for  their  own  theories 
by  fla3dng  and  flouting  the  Greeks  :  where  they  have  a  divergent  theory 
to  maintain  they  must  establish  it  by  its  own  merits,  declaring  their 
own  opinions  with  courtesy  and  with  philosophical  method  and  stating 
the  controverted  opinion  fairly ;  they  must  point  their  minds  towards 
the  truth  and  not  hunt  fame  by  insult,  reviling  and  seeking  in  their  own 
persons  to  replace  men  honoured  by  the  fine  intelligences  of  ages  past. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  ancient  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Essences  was 
far  the  sounder  and  more  instructed,  and  must  be  accepted  by  all 
not  caught  in  the  delusions  that  beset  humanity :  it  is  easy  also  to 
identify  what  has  been  conveyed  in  these  later  times  from  the  ancients 
with  incongruous  novelties — how  for  example,  where  they  must  set  up  a 
contradictory  doctrine,  they  introduce  a  medley  of  generation  and  destruc¬ 
tion,  how  they  cavil  at  the  Universe,  how  they  make  the  Soul  blameable 
for  the  association  with  body,  how  they  revile  the  Administrator  of  this 
All,  how  they  ascribe  to  the  Creator,  identified  with  the  Soul,  the  character 
and  experiences  appropriate  to  partial  beings. 


224 


PLOTINUS 


7- 

That  this  world  has  neither  beginning  nor  end  but  exists  for  ever 
as  long  as  the  Supreme  stands  is  certainly  no  novel  teaching.  And  before 
this  school  rose  it  had  been  urged  that  commerce  with  the  body  is  no 
gain  to  a  Soul. 

But  to  treat  the  human  Soul  as  a  fair  presentment  of  the  Soul  of  the 
Universe  is  like  picking  out  potters  and  blacksmiths  and  making  them 
warrant  for  discrediting  an  entire  well-ordered  city. 

We  must  recognise  how  different  is  the  governance  exercised  by  the 
All-Soul ;  the  relation  is  not  the  same  :  it  is  not  in  fetters.  Among  the 
very  great  number  of  differences  it  should  not  have  been  overlooked 
that  the  We  (the  human  Soul)  lies  under  fetter ;  and  this  in  a  second 
limitation,  for  the  Body-Kind,  already  fettered  within  the  All-Soul, 
imprisons  all  that  it  grasps. 

But  the  Soul  of  the  Universe  cannot  be  in  bond  to  what  itself  has 
bound :  it  is  sovereign  and  therefore  immune  of  the  lower  things,  over 
which  we  on  the  contrary  are  not  masters.  That  in  it  which  is  directed 
to  the  Divine  and  Transcendent  is  ever  unmingled,  knows  no  encumbering ; 
that  in  it  which  imparts  life  to  the  body  admits  nothing  bodily  to  itself. 
It  is  the  general  fact  that  an  inset  (as  the  Body),  necessarily  shares  the 
conditions  of  its  containing  principle  (as  the  Soul),  and  does  not  com¬ 
municate  its  own  conditions  where  that  principle  has  an  independent 
life  :  thus  a  graft  will  die  if  the  stock  dies,  but  the  stock  will  live  on 
by  its  proper  life  though  the  graft  wither.  The  fire  within  your  own  self 
may  be  quenched,  but  the  thing,  fire,  will  exist  still ;  and  if  fire  itself 
were  annihilated  that  would  make  no  difference  to  the  Soul,  the  Soul  in 
the  Supreme,  but  only  to  the  plan  of  the  material  world  ;  and  if  the  other 
elements  sufficed  to  maintain  a  Kosmos,  the  Soul  in  the  Supreme  would 
be  unconcerned. 

The  constitution  of  the  All  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  single, 
separate  forms  of  life  :  there,  the  established  rule  commanding  to  per¬ 
manence  is  sovereign  ;  here  things  are  like  deserters  kept  to  their  own 
place  and  duty  by  a  double  bond  ;  there  is  no  outlet  from  the  All, 
and  therefore  no  need  of  restraining  or  of  driving  errants  back  to 


^^•9-8]  “AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS”  225 

bounds .  all  remains  where  from  the  beginning  the  Soul’s  nature 
appointed. 

The  natural  movement  within  the  plan  will  be  injurious  to  anything 
whose  natural  tendency  it  opposes  :  one  group  will  sweep  bravely  onward 
with  the  great  total  to  which  it  is  adapted  ;  the  others,  not  able  to 
comply  with  the  larger  order,  are  destroyed.  A  great  choral  is  moving  to 
its  concerted  plan  ;  midway  in  the  march,  a  tortoise  is  intercepted ; 
unable  to  get  away  from  the  choral  line  it  is  trampled  under  foot ;  but 
if  it  could  only  range  itself  within  the  greater  movement  it  too  would 
suffer  nothing. 

8. 

To  ask  why  the  Soul  has  created  the  Kosmos,  is  to  ask  why  there 
is  a  Soul  and  why  a  Creator  creates.  The  question,  also,  implies  a  begin¬ 
ning  in  the  eternal  and,  further,  represents  creation  as  the  act  of  a 
changeful  Being  who  turns  from  this  to  that. 

Those  that  so  think  must  be  instructed — if  they  would  but  bear 
with  correction — in  the  nature  of  the  Supernals,  and  brought  to  desist 
from  that  blasphemy  of  majestic  powers  which  comes  so  easily  to  them, 
where  all  should  be  reverent  scruple. 

Even  in  the  administration  of  the  Universe  there  is  no  ground  for 
such  attack,  for  it  affords  manifest  proof  of  the  greatness  of  the  Intellectual 
Kind. 

This  All  that  has  emerged  into  life  is  no  amorphous  structure — like 
those  lesser  forms  within  it  which  are  born  night  and  day  out  of  the 
lavishness  of  its  vitality — the  Universe  is  a  life  organised,  effective, 
complex,  aU-comprehensive,  displaying  an  unfathomable  wisdom.  How, 
then,  can  anyone  deny  that  it  is  a  clear  image,  beautifully  formed,  of  the 
Intellectual  Divinities  ?  No  doubt  it  is  copy,  not  original ;  but  that  is 
its  very  nature  ;  it  cannot  be  at  once  symbol  and  reality.  But  to  say 
that  it  is  an  inadequate  copy  is  false  ;  nothing  has  been  left  out  which 
a  beautiful  representation  within  the  physical  order  could  include. 

Such  a  reproduction  there  must  necessarily  be — though  not  by 
deliberation  and  contrivance — for  the  Intellectual  could  not  be  the  last 


226 


PLOTINUS 


of  things,  but  must  have  a  double  Act,  one  within  itself  and  one  out¬ 
going  ;  there  must,  then,  be  something  later  than  the  Divine  ;  for  only 
the  thing  with  which  all  power  ends  fails  to  pass  downwards  something 
of  itself.  In  the  Supreme  there  flourishes  a  marvellous  vigour  and  there¬ 
fore  it  produces. 

Since  there  is  no  Universe  nobler  than  this,  is  it  not  clear  what  this 
must  be  ?  A  representation  carrying  down  the  features  of  the  Intellectual 
Realm  is  necessary  ;  there  is  no  other  Kosmos  than  this  ;  therefore  this 
is  such  a  representation. 

This  earth  of  ours  is  full  of  varied  life-forms  and  of  immortal  beings  ; 
to  the  very  heavens  it  is  crowded.  And  the  stars,  those  of  the  upper 
and  the  under  spheres,  moving  in  their  ordered  path,  fellow  travellers  with 
the  universe,  how  can  they  be  less  than  gods  ?  Surely  they  must  be  morally 
good  :  what  could  prevent  them  ?  All  that  occasions  vice  here  below 
is  unknown  there — no  evil  of  body,  perturbed  and  perturbing. 

Knowledge,  too  ;  in  their  unbroken  peace,  what  hinders  them  from 
the  intellectual  grasp  of  the  God-Head  and  the  Intellectual  Gods  ? 
What  can  be  imagined  to  give  us  a  wisdom  higher  than  belongs  to  the 
Supemals  ?  Could  anyone,  not  fallen  to  utter  folly,  bear  with  such  an 
idea  ? 

Admitting  that  human  Souls  have  descended  under  constraint  of 
the  All-Soul,  are  we  to  think  the  constrained  the  nobler  ?  Among  Souls, 
what  commands  must  be  higher  than  what  obeys.  And  if  the  coming 
was  unconstrained,  why  find  fault  with  a  world  you  have  chosen  and  can 
quit  if  you  dislike  it  ? 

And  further,  if  the  order  of  this  Universe  is  such  that  we  are  able, 
within  it,  to  practise  wisdom  and  to  live  our  earthly  course  by  the 
Supernal,  does  not  that  prove  it  a  dependency  of  the  Divine  ? 


9- 

Wealth  and  poverty,  and  all  inequalities  of  that  order  are  made 
ground  of  complaint.  But  this  is  to  ignore  that  the  Sage  demands  no 
equality  in  such  matters  :  he  cannot  think  that  to  own  many  things  is 
to  be  richer  or  that  the  powerful  have  the  better  of  the  simple  ;  he  leaves 


11.  9.  9] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


227 


all  such  preoccupations  to  another  kind  of  man.  He  has  learned  that  life 
on  earth  has  two  distinct  forms,  the  way  of  the  Sage  and  the  way  of  the 
mass,  the  Sage  intent  upon  the  sublimest,  upon  the  realm  above,  while 
those  of  the  more  strictly  human  type  fall,  again,  under  two  classes, 
the  one  reminiscent  of  virtue  and  therefore  not  without  touch  with  good, 
the  other  mere  populace,  serving  to  provide  necessaries  to  the  better 
sort. 

But  what  of  murder  ?  What  of  the  feebleness  that  brings  men  under 
slavery  to  the  passions  ? 

Is  it  any  wonder  that  there  should  be  failing  and  error,  not  in  the 
highest,  the  intellectual,  Principle  but  in  Souls  that  are  like  undeveloped 
children  ?  And  is  not  life  justified  even  so  if  it  is  a  training  ground  with 
its  victors  and  its  vanquished  ? 

You  are  wronged  ;  need  that  trouble  an  immortal  ?  You  are  put 
to  death  ;  you  have  attained  your  desire.  And  from  the  moment  your 
citizenship  of  the  world  becomes  irksome  you  are  not  bound  to  it. 

Our  adversaries  do  not  deny  that  even  here  there  is  a  system  of  law 
and  penalty  :  and  surely  we  cannot  in  justice  blame  a  dominion  which 
awards  to  every  one  his  due,  where  virtue  has  its  honour,  and  vice  comes 
to  its  fitting  shame,  in  which  there  are  not  merely  representations  of  the 
gods,  but  the  gods  themselves,  watchers  from  above,  and— as  we  read — 
easily  rebutting  human  reproaches,  since  they  lead  all  things  in  order 
from  a  beginning  to  an  end,  allotting  to  each  human  being,  as  life  follows 
life,  a  fortune  shaped  to  all  that  has  preceded— the  destiny  which,  to 
those  that  do  not  penetrate  it,  becomes  the  matter  of  boorish  insolence 
upon  things  divine. 

A  man’s  one  task  is  to  strive  towards  making  himself  perfect— 
though  not  in  the  idea — ^really  fatal  to  perfection  that  to  be  perfect  is 
possible  to  himself  alone. 

We  must  recognise  that  other  men  have  attained  the  heights  of 
goodness  ;  we  must  admit  the  goodness  of  the  celestial  spirits,  and 
above  all  of  the  gods— those  whose  presence  is  here  but  their  contempla¬ 
tion  in  the  Supreme,  and  loftiest  of  them,  the  lord  of  this  All,  the  most 
blessed  Soul.  Rising  still  higher,  we  hymn  the  divinities  of  the  Intel- 


228 


PLOTINUS 


lectual  Sphere,  and,  above  all  these,  the  mighty  King  of  that  dominion, 
whose  majesty  is  made  patent  in  the  very  multitude  of  the  gods. 

It  is  not  by  crushing  the  divine  unto  a  unity  but  by  displaying  its 
exuberance  as  the  Supreme  himself  has  displayed  it — that  we  show 
knowledge  of  the  might  of  God,  who,  abidingly  what  He  is,  yet  creates 
that  multitude,  all  dependent  on  Him,  existing  by  Him  and  from 
Him. 

This  Universe,  too,  exists  by  Him  and  looks  to  Him — the  Universe 
as  a  whole  and  every  God  within  it— and  tells  of  Him  to  men,  all  alike 
reveahng  the  plan  and  will  of  the  Supreme. 

These,  in  the  nature  of  things,  cannot  be  what  He  is,  but  that  does 

not  justify  you  in  contempt  of  them,  in  pushing  yourself  forward  as  not 
inferior  to  them. 

The  more  perfect  the  man,  the  more  comphant  he  is,  even  towards 
his  fellows  ;  we  must  temper  our  importance,  not  thrusting  insolently 
beyond  what  our  nature  warrants  ;  we  must  allow  other  beings,  also, 
their  place  in  the  presence  of  the  Godhead ;  we  may  not  set  ourselves 
alone  next  after  the  First  in  a  dream-flight  which  deprives  us  of  our  power 
of  attaining  identity  with  the  Godhead  in  the  measure  possible  to  the 
human  Soul,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  point  of  likeness  to  which  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  leads  us ;  to  exalt  ourselves  above  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  is  to  fall  from  it. 

Yet  imbeciles  are  found  to  accept  such  teaching  at  the  mere  sound 
of  the  words  “  You  yourself  are  to  be  nobler  than  all  else,  nobler  than 
men,  nobler  than  even  gods.”  Human  audacity  is  very  great :  a  man 
once  modest,  restrained  and  simple  hears,  “You,  yourself,  are  the  child 
of  God ;  those  men  whom  you  used  to  venerate,  those  beings  whose 
worship  they  inherit  from  antiquity,  none  of  these  are  His  children  ; 
you  without  lifting  hand  are  nobler  than  the  very  heavens  ”  ;  others 
take  up  the  cry :  the  issue  will  be  much  as  if  in  a  crowd  all  equally 
Ignorant  of  figures,  one  man  were  told  that  he  stands  a  thousand  cubic 
feet ;  he  will  naturally  accept  his  thousand  cubits  even  though  the  others 
present  are  said  to  measure  only  five  cubits  ;  he  will  merely  tell  himself 
that  the  thousand  indicates  a  considerable  figure. 


II.  9-  lo] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS 


229 


Another  point : — (you  hold  that)  God  has  care  for  you  ;  how  then 
can  He  be  indifferent  to  the  entire  Universe  in  which  you  exist  ? 

We  may  be  told  that  He  is  too  much  occupied  to  look  upon  the 
Universe,  and  that  it  would  not  be  right  for  Him  to  do  so  ;  yet  when  He 
looks  down  and  upon  these  people,  is  He  not  looking  outside  Himself 
and  upon  the  Universe  in  which  they  exist  ?  If  He  cannot  look  outside 
Himself  so  as  to  survey  the  Kosmos,  then  neither  does  He  look  upon  them. 

But  they  have  no  need  of  Him  ? 

The  Universe  has  need  of  Him,  and  He  knows  its  ordering  and  its 
indwellers  and  how  far  they  belong  to  it  and  how  far  to  the  Supreme, 
and  which  of  the  men  upon  it  are  friends  of  God,  mildly  acquiescing 
with  the  Kosmic  dispensation  when  in  the  total  course  of  things  some 
pain  must  be  brought  to  them — for  we  are  to  look  not  to  the  single  will 
of  any  man  but  to  the  universe  entire,  regarding  every  one  according  to 
worth  but  not  stopping  for  such  things  where  all  that  may  is  hastening 
onward. 

Not  one  only  kind  of  being  is  bent  upon  this  quest,  which  brings 
bliss  to  whatsoever  achieves,  and  earns  for  the  others  a  future  destiny  in 
accord  with  their  power.  No  man,  therefore,  may  flatter  himself  that 
he  alone  is  competent ;  a  pretension  is  not  a  possession  ;  many  boast 
though  fully  conscious  of  their  lack  and  many  imagine  themselves  to 
possess  what  was  never  theirs  and  even  to  be  alone  in  possessing  what 
they  alone  of  men  never  had. 


10. 

Under  detailed  investigation,  many  other  tenets  of  this  school — 
indeed  we  might  say  all — could  be  corrected  with  an  abundance  of  proof. 
But  I  am  withheld  by  regard  for  some  of  our  own  friends  who  fell  in 
with  this  doctrine  before  joining  our  circle  and,  strangely,  still  cling  to  it. 

The  school,  no  doubt,  is  free-spoken  enough— whether  in  the  set 
purpose  of  giving  its  opinions  a  plausible  colour  of  verity  or  in  honest  belief 
— but  we  are  addressing  here  our  own  acquaintances,  not  those  people 
with  whom  we  could  make  no  way.  We  have  spoken  in  the  hope  of 
preventing  our  friends  from  being  perturbed  by  a  party  which  brings. 


230 


PLOTINUS 


not  proof — how  could  it  ? — but  arbitrary,  tyrannical  assertion  ;  another 
style  of  address  would  be  applicable  to  such  as  have  the  audacity  to 
flout  the  noble  and  true  doctrines  of  the  august  teachers  of  antiquity. 

That  method  we  will  not  apply  ;  anyone  that  has  fully  grasped  the 
preceding  discussion  will  know  how  to  meet  every  point  in  the  system. 

Only  one  other  tenet  of  theirs  will  be  mentioned  before  passing  the 
matter ;  it  is  one  which  surpasses  all  the  rest  in  sheer  folly,  if  that  is 
the  word. 

They  first  maintain  that  the  Soul  and  a  certain  “  Wisdom  ”  (Sophia) 
declined  and  entered  this  lower  sphere — though  they  leave  us  in  doubt 
of  whether  the  movement  originated  in  Soul  or  in  this  Sophia  of  theirs, 
or  whether  the  two  are  the  same  to  them — then  they  tell  us  that  the  other 
Souls  came  down  in  the  descent  and  that  these  members  of  Sophia  took 
to  themselves  bodies,  human  bodies,  for  example. 

Yet  in  the  same  breath,  that  very  Soul  which  was  the  occasion  of 
descent  to  the  others  is  declared  not  to  have  descended.  “  It  knew  no 
decline,”  but  merely  illuminated  the  darkness  in  such  a  way  that  an  image 
of  it  was  formed  upon  the  Matter.  Then,  they  shape  an  image  of  that 
image  somewhere  below — through  the  medium  of  Matter  or  of  Materiality 
or  whatever  else  of  many  names  they  choose  to  give  it  in  their  frequent 
change  of  terms,  invented  to  darken  their  doctrine — and  so  they  bring 
into  being  what  they  call  the  Creator  or  Demiurge,  then  this  lower  is 
severed  from  his  Mother  (Sophia)  and  becomes  the  author  of  the  Kosmos 
down  to  the  latest  of  the  succession  of  images  constituting  it. 

Such  is  the  blasphemy  of  one  of  their  writers. 


II. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  if  the  Soul  has  not  actually  come  down  but 
has  illuminated  the  darkness,  how  can  it  truly  be  said  to  have  declined  ? 
The  outflow  from  it  of  something  in  the  nature  of  light  does  not  justify 
the  assertion  of  its  decline ;  for  that,  it  must  make  an  actual  movement 
towards  the  object  lying  in  the  lower  realm  and  illuminate  it  by  contact. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Soul  keeps  to  its  own  place  and  illuminates 
the  lower  without  directing  any  act  towards  that  end,  why  should  it 


II.  9.  12] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


231 


alone  be  the  illuminant  ?  Why  should  not  the  Kosmos  draw  light  also 
from  the  yet  greater  powers  contained  in  the  total  of  existence  ? 

Again,  if  the  Soul  possesses  the  plan  of  a  Universe,  and  by  virtue  of 
this  plan  illuminates  it,  why  do  not  that  illumination  and  the  creating 
of  the  world  take  place  simultaneously  ?  Why  must  the  Soul  wait  till 
the  representations  of  the  plan  be  made  actual  ? 

Then  again  this  Plan — ^the  “Far  Country  ”  of  their  terminology — 
brought  into  being,  as  they  hold,  by  the  greater  powers,  could  not  have 
been  the  occasion  of  decline  to  the  creators. 

Further,  how  explain  that  under  this  illumination  the  Matter  of 
the  Kosmos  produces  images  of  the  order  of  Soul  instead  of  mere  bodily- 
nature  ?  An  image  of  Soul  could  not  demand  darkness  or  Matter,  but 
wherever  formed  it  would  exhibit  the  character  of  the  producing  element 
and  remain  in  close  union  with  it. 

Next,  is  this  image  a  real-being,  or,  as  they  say,  an  Intellection  ? 

If  it  is  a  reality,  in  what  way  does  it  differ  from  its  original  ?  By 
being  a  distinct  form  of  the  Soul  ?  But  then,  since  the  original  is  the 
reasoning  Soul,  this  secondary  form  must  be  the  vegetative  and  genera¬ 
tive  Soul ;  and  then,  what  becomes  of  the  theory  that  it  is  produced 
for  glory’s  sake,  what  becomes  of  the  creation  in  arrogance  and  self- 
assertion  ?  The  theory  puts  an  end  also  to  creation  by  representation 
and,  still  more  decidedly,  to  any  thinking  in  the  act ;  and  what  need  is 
left  for  a  creator  creating  by  way  of  Matter  and  Image  ? 

If  it  is  an  Intellection,  then  we  ask  first  What  justifies  the  name  ? 
and  next.  How  does  anything  come  into  being  unless  the  Soul  give  this 
Intellection  creative  power  and  how,  after  all,  can  creative  power  reside 
in  a  created  thing  ?  Are  we  to  be  told  that  it  is  a  question  (not  so  much 
of  creation  as)  of  a  first  Image  followed  by  a  second  ? 

But  this  is  quite  arbitrary. 

And  why  is  fire  the  first  creation  ? 


12. 

And  how  does  this  image  set  to  its  task  immediately  after  it  comes 
into  being  ? 


232 


PLOTINUS 


By  memory  of  what  it  has  seen  ? 

But  it  was  utterly  non-existent,  it  could  have  no  vision,  either  it  or 
the  Mother  they  bestow  upon  it. 

Another  difficulty  :  These  people  (tell  us  that  they)  come  upon 
earth  not  as  Soul-Images  but  as  veritable  Souls  ;  yet,  by  great  stress  and 
strain,  one  or  two  of  them  are  able  to  stir  beyond  the  limits  of  the  world, 
and  when  they  do  attain  Reminiscence  barely  carry  with  them  some 
slight  recollection  of  the  Sphere  they  once  knew  :  on  the  other  hand, 
this  Image,  a  new-comer  into  being,  is  able,  they  tell  us — as  also  is  its 
Mother — to  form  at  least  some  dim  representation  of  the  celestial  world. 
It  is  an  Image,  stamped  in  Matter,  yet  it  not  merely  has  the  conception 
of  the  Supreme  and  adopts  from  that  world  the  plan  of  this,  but  knows 
what  elements  serve  the  purpose.  How,  for  instance,  did  it  come  to  make 
fire  before  anything  else  ?  What  made  it  judge  fire  a  better  first  than 
some  other  object  ? 

Again,  if  it  created  the  fire  of  the  Universe  by  thinking  of  fire,  why 
did  it  not  make  the  Universe  at  a  stroke  by  thinking  of  the  Universe  ? 
It  must  have  conceived  the  product  complete  from  the  first ;  the  con¬ 
stituent  elements  would  be  embraced  in  that  general  conception. 

The  creation  must  have  been  in  all  respects  more  according  to  the 
way  of  Nature  than  to  that  of  the  arts— for  the  arts  are  of  later  origin 
than  Nature  and  the  Universe,  and  even  at  the  present  stage  the  partial 
things  brought  into  being  by  the  natural  Kinds  do  not  follow  any  such 
order— first  fire,  then  the  several  other  elements,  then  the  various  blends 
of  these — on  the  contrary  the  living  organism  entire  is  encompassed 
and  rounded  off  within  the  uterine  germ.  Why  should  not  the  material 
of  the  Universe  be  similarly  embraced  in  a  Kosmic  Type  in  which  earth, 
fire  and  the  rest  would  be  included  ?  We  can  only  suppose  that  these 
people  themselves,  acting  by  their  more  authentic  Soul,  would  have 
produced  the  world  by  such  a  process,  but  that  the  Creator  had  not  wit 
to  do  so. 

And  yet  to  conceive  the  vast  span  of  the  Heavens— to  be  great  in 
that  degree— to  devise  the  obliquity  of  the  Zodiac  and  the  circling  path 
of  all  the  celestial  bodies  beneath  it,  and  this  earth  of  ours — and  all  in 


"AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS"  233 

such  a  way  that  reason  can  be  given  for  the  plan — this  could  never  be 
the  work  of  an  Image  ;  it  tells  of  that  Power  (the  All-Soul)  next  to  the 
very  Highest  Beings. 

Against  their  will,  they  themselves  admit  this  :  their  "  outshining 
upon  the  darkness,”  if  the  doctrine  is  sifted,  makes  it  impossible  to 
deny  the  true  origins  of  the  Kosmos. 

Why  should  this  down-shining  take  place  unless  such  a  process 
belonged  to  a  universal  law  ? 

Either  the  process  is  in  the  order  of  Nature  or  against  that  order. 
If  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things,  it  must  have  taken  place  from  eternity ; 
if  it  is  against  the  nature  of  things,  then  the  breach  of  natural  right 
exists  in  the  Supreme  also  ;  evil  antedates  this  world  ;  the  cause  of  evil 
is  not  the  world  ;  on  the  contrary  the  Supreme  is  the  evil  to  us  ;  instead 
of  the  Soul’s  harm  coming  from  this  sphere,  we  have  this  Sphere  harmed 
by  the  Soul. 

In  fine,  the  theory  amounts  to  making  the  world  one  of  the  Primals, 
and  with  it  the  Matter  from  which  it  emerges. 

The  Soul  that  declined,  they  tell  us,  saw  and  illuminated  the  already 
existent  Darkness.  Now  whence  came  that  Darkness  ? 

If  they  tell  us  that  the  Soul  created  the  Darkness  by  its  Decline, 
then,  obviously,  there  was  nowhere  for  the  Soul  to  decline  to  ;  the 
cause  of  the  decline  was  not  the  Darkness  but  the  very  nature  of  the  Soul. 
The  theory,  therefore,  refers  the  entire  process  to  pre-existing  compul¬ 
sions  :  the  guilt  inheres  in  the  Primal  Beings. 

13- 

Those, _  then,  that  censure  the  constitution  of  the  Kosmos  do  not 
understand  what  they  are  doing  or  where  this  audacity  leads  them.  They 
do  not  understand  that  there  is  a  successive  order  of  Primals,  Secondaries, 
Tertiaries  and  so  on  continuously  to  the  Ultimates  ;  that  nothing  is  to 
be  blamed  for  being  inferior  to  the  First ;  that  we  can  but  accept, 
meekly,  the  constitution  of  the  total,  and  make  our  best  way  towards  the 
Primals,  withdrawing  from  the  tragic  spectacle,  as  they  see  it,  of  the 
Kosmic  spheres — which  in  reality  are  all  suave  graciousness. 


2  H 


234 


PLOTINUS 


And  what,  after  all,  is  there  so  terrible  in  these  Spheres  with  which 
it  is  sought  to  frighten  people  unaccustomed  to  thinking,  never  trained 
in  an  instructive  and  coherent  gnosis  ? 

Even  the  fact  that  their  material  frame  is  of  fire  does  not  make  them 
dreadful ;  their  Movements  are  in  keeping  with  the  All  and  with  the 
Earth  :  but  what  we  must  consider  in  them  is  the  Soul,  that  on  which 
these  people  base  their  own  title  to  honour. 

And,  yet,  again,  their  material  frames  are  pre-eminent  in  vastness 
and  beauty,  as  they  co-operate  in  act  and  in  influence  with  the  entire 
order  of  Nature,  and  can  never  cease  to  exist  as  long  as  the  Primals 
stand ;  they  enter  into  the  completion  of  the  All  of  which  they  are 
major  parts. 

If  men  rank  highly  among  other  living  Beings,  much  more  do  these, 
whose  office  in  the  All  is  not  to  play  the  tyrant  but  to  serve  towards 
beauty  and  order.  The  action  attributed  to  them  must  be  understood  as 
a  foretelling  of  coming  events,  while  the  causing  of  all  the  variety  is  due, 
in  part  to  diverse  destinies — for  there  cannot  be  one  lot  for  the  entire 
body  of  men — in  part  to  the  birth  moment,  in  part  to  wide  divergencies 
of  place,  in  part  to  states  of  the  Souls. 

Once  more,  we  have  no  right  to  ask  that  all  men  shall  be  good,  or  to 
rush  into  censure  because  such  universal  virtue  is  not  possible  :  this 
would  be  repeating  the  error  of  confusing  our  sphere  with  the  Supreme 
and  treating  evil  as  a  nearly  negligeable  failure  in  wisdom — as  good 
lessened  and  dwindling  continuously,  a  continuous  fading  out :  it 
would  be  like  calling  the  Nature-Principle  evil  because  it  is  not  Sense- 
Perception  and  the  thing  of  sense  evil  for  not  being  a  Reason-Principle. 
If  evil  is  no  more  than  that,  we  will  be  obliged  to  admit  evil  in  the 
Supreme  also,  for  there,  too.  Soul  is  less  exalted  than  the  Intellectual- 
Principle,  and  That  too  has  its  Superior. 

14. 

In  yet  another  way  they  infringe  still  more  gravely  upon  the  in¬ 
violability  of  the  Supreme. 

In  the  sacred  formulas  they  inscribe,  purporting  to  address  the 


II.  9.  14] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


235 


Supernal  Beings — not  merely  the  Soul  but  even  the  Transcendents — 
they  are  simply  uttering  spells  and  appeasements  and  evocations  in  the 
idea  that  these  Powers  will  obey  a  call  and  be  led  about  by  a  word 
from  any  of  us  who  is  in  some  degree  trained  to  use  the  appropriate 
forms  in  the  appropriate  way — certain  melodies,  certain  sounds,  specially 
directed  breathings,  sibilant  cries,  and  all  else  to  which  is  ascribed 
magic  potency  upon  the  Supreme.  Perhaps  they  would  repudiate  any 
such  intention  :  still  they  must  explain  how  these  things  act  upon  the 
unembodied  :  they  do  not  see  that  the  power  they  attribute  to  their 
own  words  is  so  much  taken  away  from  the  majesty  of  the  divine. 

They  tell  us  they  can  free  themselves  of  diseases. 

If  they  meant,  by  temperate  living  and  an  appropriate  regime,  they 
would  be  right  and  in  accordance  with  all  sound  knowledge.  But  they 
assert  diseases  to  be  Spirit-Beings  and  boast  of  being  able  to  expel  them 
by  formula  :  this  pretension  may  enhance  their  importance  with  the 
crowd,  gaping  upon  the  powers  of  magicians  ;  but  they  can  never  per¬ 
suade  the  intelligent  that  disease  arises  otherwise  than  from  such  causes 
as  overstrain,  excess,  deficiency,  putrid  decay,  in  a  word  some  variation 
whether  from  within  or  from  without. 

The  nature  of  illness  is  indicated  by  its  very  cure.  A  motion,  a  medi¬ 
cine,  the  letting  of  blood,  and  the  disease  shifts  down  and  away  ;  some¬ 
times  scantiness  of  nourishment  restores  the  system  :  presumably  the 
Spiritual  power  gets  hungry  or  is  debilitated  by  the  purge.  Either  this 
Spirit  makes  a  hasty  exit  or  it  remains  within.  If  it  stays,  how  does  the 
disease  disappear,  with  the  cause  still  present  ?  If  it  quits  the  place, 
what  has  driven  it  out  ?  Has  anything  happened  to  it  ?  Are  we  to  sup¬ 
pose  it  throve  on  the  disease  ?  In  that  case  the  disease  existed  as  some¬ 
thing  distinct  from  the  Spirit-Power.  Then  again,  if  it  steps  in  where 
no  cause  of  sickness  exists,  why  should  there  be  anything  else  but  illness  ? 
If  there  must  be  such  a  cause,  the  Spirit  is  unnecessary  :  that  cause  is 
sufficient  to  produce  that  fever.  As  for  the  notion,  that  just  when  the 
cause  presents  itself,  the  watchful  Spirit  leaps  to  incorporate  itself  with 
it,  this  is  simply  amusing. 

But  the  manner  and  motive  of  their  teaching  have  been  sufficiently 


236 


PLOTINUS 


exhibited ;  and  this  was  the  main  purpose  of  the  discussion  here  upon  their 
Spirit-Powers.  I  leave  it  to  yourselves  to  read  the  books  and  examine 
the  rest  of  the  doctrine  :  you  will  note  all  through  how  our  form  of 
philosophy  inculcates  simplicity  of  character  and  honest  thinking  in 
addition  to  all  other  good  qualities,  how  it  cultivates  reverence  and  not 
arrogant  self-assertion,  how  its  boldness  is  balanced  by  reason,  by  careful 
proof,  by  cautious  progression,  by  the  utmost  circumspection — and  you 
will  compare  those  other  systems  to  one  proceeding  by  this  method. 
You  will  find  that  the  tenets  of  their  school  have  been  huddled  together 
under  a  very  different  plan  ;  they  do  not  deserve  any  further  examination 
here. 

15- 

There  is,  however,  one  matter  which  we  must  on  no  account  overlook 
— the  effect  of  these  teachings  upon  the  hearers  led  by  them  into  despising 
the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it. 

There  are  two  theories  as  to  the  attainment  of  the  End  of  life.  The 
one  proposes  pleasure,  bodily  pleasure,  as  the  term  ;  the  other  pro¬ 
nounces  for  good  and  virtue,  the  desire  of  which  comes  from  God  and 
moves,  by  ways  to  be  studied  elsewhere,  towards  God. 

Epicurus  denies  a  Providence  and  recommends  pleasure  and  its 
enjoyment,  all  that  is  left  to  us  :  but  the  doctrine  under  discussion  is 
still  more  wanton  ;  it  carps  at  Providence  and  the  Lord  of  Providence  ; 
it  scorns  every  law  known  to  us ;  immemorial  virtue  and  all  restraint  it 
makes  into  a  laughing  stock,  lest  any  loveliness  be  seen  on  earth  ;  it 
cuts  at  the  root  of  all  orderly  living,  and  of  the  righteousness  which,  innate 
in  the  moral  sense,  is  made  perfect  by  thought  and  by  self-disciphne  :  all 
that  would  give  us  a  noble  human  being  is  gone.  What  is  left  for  them — 
except  where  the  pupil  by  his  own  character  betters  the  teaching — comes 
to  pleasure,  self-seeking,  the  grudge  of  any  share  with  one’s  fellows,  the 
pursuit  of  advantage. 

Their  error  is  that  they  know  nothing  good  here  :  all  they  care  for 
is  something  else  to  which  they  will  at  some  future  time  apply  themselves  : 
yet,  this  world,  to  those  that  have  known  it  once,  must  be  the  starting- 


II.  9‘  i6] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


237 


point  of  the  pursuit :  arrived  here  from  out  of  the  divine  nature,  they 
must  inaugurate  their  effort  by  some  earthly  correction.  The  under¬ 
standing  of  beauty  is  not  given  except  to  a  nature  scorning  the  delight 
of  the  body,  and  those  that  have  no  part  in  well-doing  can  make  no  step 
towards  the  Supernal. 

This  school,  in  fact,  is  convicted  by  its  neglect  of  all  mention  of 
virtue  :  any  discussion  of  such  matters  is  missing  utterly  :  we  are  not 
told  what  virtue  is  or  under  what  different  kinds  it  appears  ;  there  is 
no  word  of  all  the  numerous  and  noble  reflections  upon  it  that  have  come 
down  to  us  from  the  ancients  ;  we  do  not  learn  what  constitutes  it  or 
how  it  is  acquired,  how  the  Soul  is  tended,  how  it  is  cleaned.  For  to  say 
“  Look  to  God  ”  is  not  helpful  without  some  instruction  as  to  what  this 
looking  imports  :  it  might  very  well  be  said  that  one  can  “  look  ”  and 
still  sacrifice  no  pleasure,  still  be  the  slave  of  impulse,  repeating  the  word 
God  but  held  in  the  grip  of  every  passion  and  making  no  effort  to 
master  any.  Virtue,  advancing  towards  the  Term  and,  linked  with 
thought,  occupying  a  Soul  makes  God  manifest :  God  on  the  lips  without 
a  good  conduct  of  life,  is  a  word. 

16. 

On  the  other  hand,  to  despise  this  Sphere,  and  the  Gods  within  it  or 
anything  else  that  is  lovely,  is  not  the  way  to  goodness. 

Every  evil-doer  began  by  despising  the  Gods  ;  and  one  not  previously 
corrupt,  taking  to  this  contempt,  even  though  in  other  respects  not 
wholly  bad,  becomes  an  evil-doer  by  the  very  fact. 

Besides,  in  this  slighting  of  the  Mundane  Gods  and  the  world,  the 
honour  they  profess  for  the  gods  of  the  Intellectual  Sphere  becomes  an 
inconsistency ;  Where  we  love,  our  hearts  are  warm  also  to  the  Kin 
of  the  beloved ;  we  are  not  indifferent  to  the  children  of  our  friend. 
Now  every  Soul  is  a  child  of  that  Father  ;  but  in  the  heavenly  bodies 
there  are  Souls,  intellective,  holy,  much  closer  to  the  Supernal  Beings 
than  are  ours  ;  for  how  can  this  Kosmos  be  a  thing  cut  off  from  That 
and  how  imagine  the  gods  in  it  to  stand  apart  ? 

But  of  this  matter  we  have  treated  elsewhere  :  here  we  urge  that 


238 


PLOTINUS 


where  there  is  contempt  for  the  Kin  of  the  Supreme  the  knowledge  of 
the  Supreme  itself  is  merely  verbal. 

What  sort  of  piety  can  make  Providence  stop  short  of  earthly 
concerns  or  set  any  limit  whatsoever  to  it  ? 

And  what  consistency  is  there  in  this  school  when  they  proceed  to 
assert  that  Providence  cares  for  them,  though  for  them  alone  ? 

And  is  this  Providence  over  them  to  be  understood  of  their  existence 
in  that  other  world  only  or  of  their  lives  here  as  well  ?  If  in  the  other 
world,  how  came  they  to  this  ?  If  in  this  world,  why  are  they  not 
already  raised  from  it  ? 

Again,  how  can  they  deny  that  the  Lord  of  Providence  is  here  ? 
How  else  can  He  know  either  that  they  are  here,  or  that  in  their  sojourn 
here  they  have  not  forgotten  Him  and  fallen  away  ?  And  if  He  is  aware 
of  the  goodness  of  some.  He  must  know  of  the  wickedness  of  others,  to 
distinguish  good  from  bad.  That  means  that  He  is  present  to  all,  is, 
by  whatever  mode,  within  this  Universe.  The  Universe,  therefore,  must 
be  participant  in  Him. 

If  He  is  absent  from  the  Universe,  He  is  absent  from  yourselves,  and 
you  can  have  nothing  to  tell  about  Him  or  about  the  powers  that  come 
after  Him. 

But,  allowing  that  a  Providence  reaches  to  you  from  the  world 
beyond — making  any  concession  to  your  liking — ^it  remains  none  the  less 
certain  that  this  world  holds  from  the  Supernal  and  is  not  deserted  and 
will  not  be  :  a  Providence  watching  entires  is  even  more  likely  than  one 
over  fragments  only  ;  and  similarly.  Participation  is  more  perfect  in  the 
case  of  the  All-Soul — as  is  shown,  further,  by  the  very  existence  of  things 
and  the  wisdom  manifest  in  their  existence.  Of  those  that  advance 
these  wild  pretensions,  who  is  so  well  ordered,  so  wise,  as  the  Universe  ? 
The  comparison  is  laughable,  utterly  out  of  place  ;  to  make  it,  except 
as  a  help  towards  truth,  would  be  impiety. 

The  very  question  can  be  entertained  by  no  intelligent  being  but 
only  by  one  so  blind,  so  utterly  devoid  of  perception  and  thought,  so  far 
from  any  vision  of  the  Intellectual  Universe  as  not  even  to  see  this 
world  of  our  own. 


II.  9.17] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


239 


For  who  that  truly  perceives  the  harmony  of  the  Intellectual  Realm 
could  fail,  if  he  has  any  bent  towards  music,  to  answer  to  the  harmony 
in  sensible  sounds  ?  What  geometrician  or  arithmetician  could  fail  to 
take  pleasure  in  the  symmetries,  correspondences  and  principles  of  order 
observed  in  visible  things  ?  Consider,  even,  the  case  of  pictures  ;  those 
seeing  by  the  bodily  sense  the  productions  of  the  art  of  painting  do  not 
see  the  one  thing  in  the  one  only  way  ;  they  are  deeply  stirred  by  recog¬ 
nising  in  the  objects  depicted  to  the  eyes  the  presentation  of  what  lies 
in  the  idea,  and  so  are  called  to  recollection  of  the  truth — ^the  very  experi¬ 
ence  out  of  which  Love  rises.  Now,  if  the  sight  of  Beauty  excellently 
reproduced  upon  a  face  hurries  the  mind  to  that  other  Sphere,  surely 
no  one  seeing  the  loveliness  lavish  in  the  world  of  sense — ^this  vast 
orderliness,  the  Form  which  the  stars  even  in  their  remoteness  display — 
no  one  could  be  so  dull-witted,  so  immoveable,  as  not  to  be  carried  by  all 
this  to  recollection,  and  gripped  by  reverent  awe  in  the  thought  of  all  this, 
so  great,  sprung  from  that  greatness.  Not  to  answer  thus  could  only 
be  to  have  neither  fathomed  this  world  nor  had  any  vision  of  that 
other. 

17- 

Perhaps  the  hate  of  this  school  for  the  corporeal  is  due  to  their 
reading  of  Plato  who  inveighs  against  body  as  a  grave  hindrance  to  Soul 
and  pronounces  the  corporeal  to  be  characteristically  the  inferior. 

Then  let  them  for  the  moment  pass  over  the  corporeal  element 
in  the  Universe  and  study  all  that  stiU  remains. 

They  will  think  of  the  Intellectual  Sphere  which  includes  within 
itself  the  Ideal-Form  realised  in  the  Kosmos.  They  will  think  of  the  Souls, 
in  their  ordered  rank,  that  produce  incorporeal  magnitude  and  lead  the 
Intelligible  out  towards  spatial  extension,  so  that  finally  the  thing  of 
process  becomes,  by  its  magnitude,  as  adequate  a  representation  as 
possible  of  the  principle  void  of  parts  which  is  its  model — ^the  greatness 
of  power  there  being  translated  here  into  greatness  of  bulk.  Then  whether 
they  think  of  the  Kosmic  Sphere  (the  All-Soul)  as  already  in  movement 
under  the  guidance  of  that  power  of  God  which  holds  it  through  and 


240 


PLOTINUS 


through,  beginning  and  middle  and  end,  or  whether  they  consider 
it  as  in  rest  and  exercising  as  yet  no  outer  governance :  either 
approach  will  lead  to  a  true  appreciation  of  the  Soul  that  conducts 
this  Universe. 

Now  let  them  set  body  within  it — ^not  in  the  sense  that  Soul  suffers 
any  change  but  that,  since  “  In  the  Gods  there  can  be  no  grudging,”  it 
gives  to  ks  inferior  all  that  any  partial  thing  has  strength  to  receive — 
and  at  once  their  conception  of  the  Kosmos  must  be  revised  ;  they 
cannot  deny  that  the  Soul  of  the  Kosmos  has  exercised  such  a  weight  of 
power  as  to  have  brought  the  corporeal-principle,  in  itself  unlovely,  to 
partake  of  good  and  beauty  to  the  utmost  of  its  receptivity — and  to  a 
pitch  which  stirs  Souls,  beings  of  the  divine  order. 

These  people  may  no  doubt  say  that  they  themselves  feel  no  such 
stirring,  and  that  they  see  no  difference  between  beautiful  and  ugly 
forms  of  body  ;  but,  at  that,  they  can  make  no  distinction  between  the 
ugly  and  the  beautiful  in  conduct ;  sciences  can  have  no  beauty  ;  there 
can  be  none  in  thought ;  and  none,  therefore,  in  God.  This  world 
descends  from  the  Firsts  :  if  this  world  has  no  beauty,  neither  has  its 
Source  ;  springing  thence,  this  world,  too,  must  have  its  beautiful  things. 
And  while  they  proclaim  their  contempt  for  earthly  beauty,  they  would 
do  well  to  ignore  that  of  youths  and  women  so  as  not  to  be  overcome  by 
incontinence. 

In  fine,  we  must  consider  that  their  self-satisfaction  could  not  turn 
upon  a  contempt  for  anything  indisputably  base  ;  theirs  is  the  perverse 
pride  of  despising  what  was  once  admired. 

We  must  always  keep  in  mind  that  the  beauty  in  a  partial  thing 
cannot  be  identical  with  that  in  a  whole  ;  nor  can  any  several  objects 
be  as  stately  as  the  total. 

And  we  must  recognise,  that  even  in  the  world  of  sense  and  part, 
there  are  things  of  a  loveliness  comparable  to  that  of  the  Celestials — 
forms  whose  beauty  must  fill  us  with  veneration  for  their  creator  and  con¬ 
vince  us  of  their  origin  in  the  divine,  forms  which  show  how  ineffable  is 
the  beauty  of  the  Supreme  since  they  cannot  hold  us  but  we  must, 
though  in  all  admiration,  leave  these  for  those.  Further,  wherever  there 


II.  9-  i8] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


241 


is  interior  beauty,  we  may  be  sure  that  inner  and  outer  correspond; 
where  the  interior  is  vile,  all  is  brought  low  by  that  flaw  in  the 
dominants. 

Nothing  base  within  can  be  beautiful  without — at  least  not  with 
an  authentic  beauty,  for  there  are  examples  of  a  good  exterior  not 
sprung  from  a  beauty  dominant  within  ;  people  passing  as  handsome 
but  essentially  base  have  that,  a  spurious  and  superficial  beauty  :  if 
anyone  tells  me  he  has  seen  people  reaUy  fine-looking  but  interiorly  vile, 
I  can  only  deny  it ;  we  have  here  simply  a  false  notion  of  personal 
beauty  ;  unless,  indeed,  the  inner  vileness  were  an  accident  in  a  nature 
essentially  fine ;  in  this  Sphere  there  are  many  obstacles  to  self- 
realisation. 

In  any  case  the  All  is  beautiful,  and  there  can  be  no  obstacle  to  its 
inner  goodness  :  where  the  nature  of  a  thing  does  not  comport  perfection 
from  the  beginning,  there  may  be  a  failure  in  complete  expression  ; 
there  may  even  be  a  fall  to  vileness,  but  the  All  never  knew  a  childlike 
immaturity ;  it  never  experienced  a  progress  bringing  novelty  into  it ; 
it  never  had  bodily  growth  :  there  was  nowhere  from  whence  it  could 
take  such  increment ;  it  was  always  the  All-Container. 

And  even  for  its  Soul  no  one  could  imagine  any  such  a  path  of  pro¬ 
cess  ;  or,  if  this  were  conceded,  certainly  it  could  not  be  towards  evil. 

18. 

But  perhaps  this  school  will  maintain  that,  while  their  teaching 
leads  to  a  hate  and  utter  abandonment  of  the  body,  ours  binds  the  Soul 
down  in  it. 

In  other  words  :  two  people  inhabit  the  one  stately  house  ;  one  of 
them  declaims  against  its  plan  and  against  its  Architect,  but  none  the 
less  maintains  his  residence  in  it;  the  other  makes  no  complaint, 
asserts  the  entire  competency  of  the  Architect  and  waits  cheerfully  for 
the  day  when  he  may  leave  it,  having  no  further  need  of  a  house  :  the 
malcontent  imagines  himself  to  be  the  wiser  and  to  be  the  readier  to 
leave  because  he  has  learned  to  repeat  that  the  walls  are  of  soulless 
stone  and  timber  and  that  the  place  falls  far  short  of  a  true  home  ;  he 


242 


PLOTINUS 


does  not  see  that  his  only  distinction  is  in  not  being  able  to  bear  with 
necessity — assuming  that  his  conduct,  his  grumbling,  does  not  cover  a 
secret  admiration  for  the  beauty  of  those  same  “  stones.”  As  long  as  we 
have  bodies  we  must  inhabit  the  dwellings  prepared  for  us  by  our  good 
sister  the  Soul  in  her  vast  power  of  labourless  creation. 

Or  would  this  school  reject  the  word  Sister  ?  They  are  willing  to 
address  the  lowest  of  men  as  brothers  ;  are  they  capable  of  such  raving 
as  to  disown  the  tie  with  the  Sun  and  the  powers  of  the  Heavens  and 
the  very  Soul  of  the  Kosmos  ?  Such  kinship,  it  is  true,  is  not  for  the  vile  ; 
it  may  be  asserted  only  of  those  that  have  become  good  and  are  no  longer 
body  but  embodied  Soul  and  of  a  quality  to  inhabit  the  body  in  a  mode 
very  closely  resembling  the  indwelling  of  the  All-Soul  in  the  universal 
frame.  And  this  means  continence,  self-restraint,  holding  staunch  against 
outside  pleasure  and  against  outer  spectacle,  allowing  no  hardship  to 
disturb  the  mind.  The  All-Soul  is  immune  from  shock  ;  there  is  nothing 
that  can  affect  it :  but  we,  in  our  passage  here,  must  call  on  virtue  in 
repelling  these  assaults,  reduced  for  us  from  the  beginning  by  a  great 
conception  of  life,  annulled  by  matured  strength. 

Attaining  to  something  of  this  immunity,  we  begin  to  reproduce 
within  ourselves  the  Soul  of  the  vast  All  and  of  the  heavenly  bodies  : 
when  we  are  come  to  the  very  closest  resemblance,  all  the  effort  of  our 
fervid  pursuit  will  be  towards  that  goal  to  which  they  also  tend ;  their 
contemplative  vision  becomes  ours,  prepared  as  we  are,  first  by  natural 
disposition  and  afterwards  by  all  this  training,  for  that  state  which  is 
theirs  by  the  Principle  of  their  Being. 

This  school  may  lay  claim  to  vision  as  a  dignity  reserved  to  them¬ 
selves,  but  they  are  not  any  the  nearer  to  vision  by  the  claim — or  by  the 
boast  that  while  the  celestial  powers,  bound  for  ever  to  the  ordering  of 
the  Heavens,  can  never  stand  outside  the  material  universe,  they  them¬ 
selves  have  their  freedom  in  their  death.  This  is  a  failure  to  grasp  the 
very  notion  of  “  standing  outside,”  a  failure  to  appreciate  the  mode  in 
which  the  All-Soul  cares  for  the  unensouled. 

No  ;  it  is  possible  to  go  free  of  love  for  the  body  ;  to  be  clean-living, 
to  disregard  death  ;  to  know  the  Highest  and  aim  at  that  other  world  ; 


II.  9-  i8] 


“AGAINST  THE  GNOSTICS” 


243 


not  to  slander,  as  negligent  in  the  quest,  others  who  are  able  for  it  and 
faithful  to  it ;  and  not  to  err  with  those  that  deny  vital  motion  to  the 
stars  because  to  our  sense  they  stand  still — the  error  which  in  another 
form  leads  this  school  to  deny  outer  vision  to  the  Star-Nature,  only 
because  they  do  not  see  the  Star-Soul  in  outer  manifestation. 


.  ‘l  -  t  •/  *  '  '  i'  t  ■  ,j 


4%.-. 


^  t 


8-'5:'>fc»' 

*  -  ■  . ••- . 


w-  6  |fi4l 


«;-:■  5- , ;.r^- ^  /•,■  ■  /  ■/?■.'  ^"i 


■■'^  fi 


V.. 


:-;,J  ♦/«.., yi,  ,;•.-} 

.  ' ,' SjPBif.i- ~'''U.t< itr  -  rsKyi^ii tv>-^  v^. 

^V-'  '.rtr^ 


MlNkur^i'  \  ‘*  It- 


•  •  _  ;  ■---.  I  i\  K' :: .  ‘V^:i)i-H.  p'^L 


t’  <  ,■  ,>uc.  \nai‘-”  %■ 


'  'i^:r  'i 


NOTE  ON  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  TRACTATES  OF  THE 
THIRD  AND  SECOND  ENNEADS 


It  has  been  pointed  out  by  several  exponents  and  commentators  (for  example 
Whittaker,  pp.  31-32)  that  the  logical  order  of  the  Enneads  is  roughly  IV.,  V.,  VI., 

II.,  III.,  I.  Starting  from  I.,  therefore,  it  is  best  to  read  in  the  order  I.,  III.,  II. 

Since  it  happens  that  the  second  and  third  tractates  fall  together  in  this 
volume  it  has  been  judged  advisable  to  open  with  the  Third  as  the  most  natural 
sequent  to  the  First. 

The  order  in  which  Porph5ay  knew  the  tractates  of  the  Second  and  Third 
Enneads  is  as  follows  (see  volume  i.) : — 


III.  I.  Third. 

4.  Fifteenth. 

7.  Forty-fifth. 

II.  I.  Fortieth. 

4.  Twelfth. 

7.  Thirty-seventh. 


2  and  3.  Forty-seventh  and  Forty-eighth. 


5.  Fiftieth. 

8.  Thirtieth. 

2.  Second. 

5.  Twenty-fifth. 
8.  Thiity-fifth. 


6.  Twenty-sixth. 
9.  Thirteenth. 

3.  Forty-second. 
6.  Seventeenth, 
g.  Thirty-third. 


Approximately,  therefore,  the  chronological  order  of  the  tractates  in  this 


volume  runs : — 

I.  (Second)  II.  2. 

III.  (Twelfth)  II.  4. 

V.  (Fifteenth)  III.  4. 
VII.  (Twenty-fifth)  II.  5. 
IX.  (Thirtieth)  III.  8. 
XI.  (Thirty-fifth)  II.  8. 
XIII.  (Fortieth)  II.  i. 

XV.  (Forty-fifth)  III.  7. 
XVII.  (Forty-eighth)  III.  3 


II.  (Third)  III.  i. 

IV.  (Thirteenth)  III.  9. 

VI.  (Seventeenth)  II.  6. 
VIII.  (Twenty-sixth)  III.  6. 

X.  (Thirty-third)  II.  9. 
XII.  (Thirty-seventh)  II.  7. 
XIV.  (Forty-first)  II.  3. 
XVI.  (Forty-seventh)  III.  2. 
XVIII.  (Fiftieth)  III.  5. 


In  simple  honesty  to  such  readers  as  do  not  consult  the  original,  the  translator 
feels  obliged  to  state  that  he  does  not  pretend  to  be  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  has 
himself  understood  every  passage  of  which  he  has  been  obliged  to  present  a  render¬ 
ing  :  he  has  in  no  case  passed  for  publication  any  passage  or  phrase  which  does 

245 


246 


PLOTINUS 


not  appear  to  him  to  carry  a  clear  sense  in  English  and  a  sense  possible  in  view 
at  once  of  the  text  and  of  Plotinus’  general  thought ;  he  has  been  scrupulous  in 
frankly  committing  himself  ;  but  there  are  at  least  three  or  four  places  in  which 
he  feels  himself  to  be  as  probably  wrong  as  right,  places  in  which  either  the  text 
is  disordered  or  Plotinus,  as  often,  was  inattentive  to  the  normal  sequence,  or  even 
— verbally  at  least — to  the  general  consistency,  of  his  thought. 

For  the  present  it  appears  that  the  best  service  to  Plotinian  studies  is  to  dare 
to  be  tentative  and  to  beg  critics  to  collaborate  in  the  clearing  of  dark  passages  : 
the  notices  the  first  volume  of  this  series  received  were  more  flattering  than  helpful. 
Modifications  suggested  by  such  comment  will  be  noted  in  the  final  volume. 

Readers  are  reminded  that  “  we  read  ”  translates  "  he  says  ”  of  the  text,  and 
always  indicates  a  reference  to  Plato,  whose  name  does  not  appear  in  the  translation 
except  where  it  was  written  by  Plotinus :  and  that  all  matter  shown  in  brackets  is 
added  by  the  translator  for  clearness’  sake,  and  therefore  is  not  canonical.  Nothing 
but  what  is  judged  to  be  quite  obviously  present  in  the  text  appears  without  this 
warning  sign. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The  translator  desires  to  acknowledge  invaluable  help  derived  from  repeated 
study  of  "  The  Philosophy  of  Plotinus,”  by  William  Ralph  Inge,  C.V.O., 
D.D.,  etc..  Dean  of  St.  Paul’s  (Longmans,  Green  and  Co.,  1918) — a  work  fascinating 
in  detail  and  henceforth  the  necessary  foundation  to  English  speakers  of  all  serious 
study  of  Plotinus. 

In  several  cases  of  perplexity,  the  translator  consulted  Mr.  E.  R.  Dodds,  of 
University  College,  Reading,  and  profited  greatly  by  his  advice  :  in  at  least  two 
cases  he  has  adopted  readings  from  a  revised  text  projected  by  Mr.  Dodds. 

Dr.  Kenneth  Sylvan  Guthrie’s  translation,  ”  Plotinus’  Complete 
Works  ”  (Comparative  Literature  Press  ;  Alpine,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.,  and  George  BeU, 
London),  came  to  hand  too  late  to  serve  in  the  preparation  of  this  second  volume  : 
it  will  be  carefully  consulted  in  the  revision  of  the  three  Enneads  remaining  to  the 
completion  of  this  work. 

The  translator  finds  that  in  his  first  volume  he  inadvertently  made  far  too 
little  of  the  kindly  oflices  of  Mr.  Ernest  R.  Debenham,  who  most  generously 
undertook  the  entire  financial  burden  of  the  work  :  his  deepest  thanks  are  here 
offered  for  the  service  by  which  he  is  enabled  to  realise  the  dominant  desire  of 
his  life. 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  at 
The  Mayflower  Press,  Plymouth, 
William  Brendon  &  Son,  Ltd, 


4 


I  I  ) 


II 


'  iW'*  .V*! 


--r^J  ■ 

'*'^  j%fl9l  *: 


’»cf  ■'  -f  »*•’  -  '.•'ifife 

*  “•  i.:  ‘  .*•  ^  -iv  ;  4  ,  ,  ^  .  -  ■‘^C 


.4.,^.  VW  -rf 


»  t 


KSSSXrJ?, ’??*•'''  •-  *  •• 

!gP=5S?i  ’I.  '  ■’^'.  -. 

,K.-.,..  ;"'Vgi  S 

•-f  .tfc^  . tt*. 

,,1*5.^  *. ,,'  -  ■•  .•  ...  b 

i4''j'>-  l,^-.'  -  .'WiiSf'  .  t 

’-V  .  ' 


¥  ' 

,'  ■  : 


1  ’^l.v 

•■■■V 


•  \  .  4 


i-*  ‘  *4i 


1  f' 


^.,1 .5 ' 


t"  '  ■  ^ '  ■r;*-  -, 
a.,:. 

M  «* .  Tk-  s  jt .  i  *. 

«S  ‘'S  •  fv  t  V'  •If^^  <  •  •  ■. 

4^  4  'V  “■ 


•  ■* 

'-  :  ,  . 

*  -  4 


■!..>  -rs^X  T*  *,  1'* 

f(i./i»-  , ^-jii- j«i,,  K?  .  '»y}. 

Hl  .  "H  '»^  ■•  ‘  *..  r,  ,  *..  ■  .'\  I 


4 


■  -•  i*.  -  •  "V  "  *4^“  t 

•ii:  4^'*^.' '  ‘  ■:  ;  -,tS'T.^  »* 


BT-T.-i-wSfri-  tlif  not '  t..'  " 

"  .A.i-.---:  ,Vv  .  • 

■  i  I  '  ■K'..-',  . 

i-i;  *“■  ■  ' .  •  ■ 

jt"  V***”  1  ' 

|6'  ’  . .  ‘'  *..  ;',  r  .  k'y'^ ’*  X  * 


•  -t 


f*--^  -x 


O  ^ 


.  Ti". 

•  0  .  __  ^ 


-ij* 

'.^'-r .  ,  ,-j5 


"^k4wt  'JM** 


xTj3! 


•  -fc * 

*’  Jf! 

f-  .H-t 

i  •%-  y- 


'4-»  »  ■•.(.  >0  "! 

^’1  «•  _ J'.;'- 


> 

■"i , 


in 


'^■ 


,•  IS  J  s 

.  ^A„..- 


V'  ‘’^r  ■ 


'■4^ ' 

^  ;^v 


;  . 


,•:.'  v  -  ■t-i.''  ^-'  t. 'Tj  .  .r 


r:r£:,r.  '  ’■  r'i;r;..&<SEH 

I^.  ■■ .  ^•.  •*  •  ‘  '■  vs- 


Date  Due 


— AM- 

- 3 — 

- - 

l  INI 

! 

i 

; 

j 

CAT.  NO.  23  233  PRINTE 

D  IN  U.S.A.  ! 

a. 


B  693  .A4  E6  v.  2 

Plotinus.  ,  .  _  ^ 

Psychic  and  physical  t  eahs®®, 


010101  000 


0 


163 


02 


0294  6 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


URENTANO’S 

Bo<>k<;eHers  &  Stationers 

^  !Vew  York 


■ 


