THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS:  ON  THE 
NATURE  OF  THE  SOUL,  VOLUME  III. 
TRANSLATED  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


NUNC  COGNOSCO  EX  PARTE 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


. 


' 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/onnatureofsoulbe0003plot 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS  :  ON  THE 
NATURE  OF  THE  SOUL,  VOLUME  III. 


“Do  Cum  £l<5ifie  X)6  ^  onOp-A  nA  ti-6ife^nn, 

Scfop-An  m^c*enn4. 


LOTINUS 

ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THE 

SOUL,  BEING  THE  FOURTH 
ENNEAD,  TRANSLATED 
FROM  THE  GREEK  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


THE  MEDICI  SOCIETY,  LIMITED 
7  GRAFTON  ST.  LONDON,  W.  1 
ALSO  AT  BOSTON,  U.S.A.  1924 


73  3  ?3  ■  /tV  7L  d.  3 

/ 


j 


Of  this  Edition  1000  copies  have 
been  printed  on  pure  rag  paper 


PRINTED  IN  ENGLAND 


CONTENTS 

THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  FOURTH  ENNEAD 


PAGE 


I. 

On  the  Essence  of  the  Soul  (I) 

1 

II. 

On  the  Essence  of  the  Soul  (II) 

2 

III. 

Problems  of  the  Soul  (I) 

7 

IV. 

Problems  of  the  Soul  (II) 

47 

V. 

Problems  of  the  Soul  (III) 

102 

VI. 

Perception  and  Memory 

II 7 

VII. 

The  Immortality  of  the  Soul 

122 

VIII. 

The  Soul’s  Descent  into  Body 

143 

IX. 

Are  all  Souls  One? 

153 

Acknowledgement 

159 

-a  9Gor:f} 

JL  fit,;  O'  O 


THE  FOURTH  ENNEAD 


FIRST  TRACTATE 

On  the  Essence  of  the  Soul  (I) 

i. 

In  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  dwells  Authentic  Essence,  with  the 
Intellectual-Principle  (Divine  Mind)  as  the  noblest  of  its  content,  but 
containing  also  souls,  since  every  soul  in  this  lower  sphere  has  come 
thence  :  that  is  the  world  of  unembodied  spirits  while  to  our  world  belong 
those  that  have  entered  body  and  undergone  bodily  division. 

There  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  a  concentrated  all — nothing  of  it 
distinguished  or  divided — and  in  that  kosmos  of  unity  all  souls  are 
concentrated  also,  with  no  spatial  discrimination. 

But  there  is  a  difference  : — 

The  Intellectual-Principle  is  for  ever  repugnant  to  distinction  and 
to  partition.  Soul,  there  without  distinction  and  partition,  has  yet  a 
nature  lending  itself  to  divisional  existence  :  its  division  is  secession, 
entry  into  body. 

In  view  of  this  seceding  and  the  ensuing  partition  we  may  legiti¬ 
mately  speak  of  it  as  a  partible  thing. 

But  if  so,  how  can  it  still  be  described  as  indivisible  ? 

In  that  the  secession  is  not  of  the  soul  entire  ;  something  of  it  holds 
its  ground,  that  in  it  which  recoils  from  separate  existence. 

The  entity,  therefore,  described  as  “  consisting  of  the  undivided 
soul  and  of  the  soul  divided  among  bodies,”  contains  a  soul  which  is  at 
once  above  and  below,  attached  to  the  Supreme  and  yet  reaching  down 
to  this  sphere,  like  a  radius  from  a  centre. 

Thus  it  is  that,  entering  this  realm,  it  possesses  still  the  vision 
inherent  to  that  superior  phase  in  virtue  of  which  it  unchangingly  main- 


B 


2 


PLOTINUS 


tains  its  integral  nature.  Even  here  it  is  not  exclusively  the  partible 
soul :  it  is  still  the  impartible  as  well :  what  in  it  knows  partition  is 
parted  without  partibility  ;  undivided  as  giving  itself  to  the  entire 
body,  a  whole  to  a  whole,  it  is  divided  as  being  effective  in  every  part. 

SECOND  TRACTATE 
On  the  Essence  of  the  Soul  (II) 

i. 

In  our  attempt  to  elucidate  the  Essence  of  the  soul,  we  show  it  to 
be  neither  a  material  fabric  nor,  among  immaterial  things,  a  harmony. 
The  theory  that  it  is  some  final  development,  some  entelechy,  we 
pass  by,  holding  this  to  be  neither  true  as  presented  nor  practically 
definitive. 

No  doubt  we  make  a  very  positive  statement  about  it  when  we 
declare  it  to  belong  to  the  Intellectual  Kind,  to  be  of  the  divine  order ; 
but  a  deeper  penetration  of  its  nature  is  demanded. 

In  that  allocation  we  were  distinguishing  things  as  they  fall  under 
the  Intellectual  or  the  sensible,  and  we  placed  the  soul  in  the  former 
class ;  now,  taking  its  membership  of  the  Intellectual  for  granted,  we 
must  investigate  by  another  path  the  more  specific  characteristics  of  its 
nature. 

There  are,  we  hold,  things  primarily  apt  to  partition,  tending  by 
sheer  nature  towards  separate  existence  :  they  are  things  in  which  no 
part  is  identical  either  with  another  part  or  with  the  whole,  while,  also 
their  part  is  necessarily  less  than  the  total  and  whole  :  these  are  magni¬ 
tudes  of  the  realm  of  sense,  masses,  each  of  which  has  a  station  of  its 
own  so  that  none  can  be  identically  present  in  entirety  at  more  than 
one  point  at  one  time. 

But  to  that  order  is  opposed  Essence  (Real-Being)  ;  this  is  in  no 
degree  susceptible  of  partition  ;  it  is  unparted  and  impartible  ;  interval 
is  foreign  to  it,  cannot  enter  into  our  idea  of  it :  it  has  no  need  of  place 
and  is  not,  in  diffusion  or  as  an  entirety,  situated  within  any  other  being  : 
it  is  poised  over  all  beings  at  once,  and  this  is  not  in  the  sense  of  using 


IV.  2.  I] 


ON  THE  ESSENCE  OF  THE  SOUL 


3 


them  as  a  base  but  in  their  being  neither  capable  nor  desirous  of  existing 
independently  of  it ;  it  is  an  essence  eternally  unvaried  :  it  is  common 
to  all  that  follows  upon  it :  it  is  like  the  circle’s  centre  to  which  all  the 
radii  are  attached  while  leaving  it  unbrokenly  in  possession  of  itself,  the 
starting  point  of  their  course  and  of  their  essential  being,  the  ground  in 
which  they  all  participate  :  thus  the  indivisible  is  the  principle  of  these 
divided  existences  and  in  their  very  outgoing  they  remain  enduringly 
in  contact  with  that  stationary  essence. 

So  far  we  have  the  primarily  indivisible — supreme  among  the 
Intellectual  and  Authentically  Existent — and  we  have  its  contrary,  the 
Kind  definitely  divisible  in  things  of  sense  ;  but  there  is  also  another 
Kind,  of  earlier  rank  than  the  sensible  yet  near  to  it  and  resident  within 
it — an  order,  not,  like  body,  primarily  a  thing  of  part,  but  becoming  so 
upon  incorporation.  The  bodies  are  separate,  and  the  ideal  form  which 
enters  them  is  correspondingly  sundered  while,  still,  it  is  present  as  one 
whole  in  each  of  its  severed  parts,  since  amid  that  multiplicity  in  which 
complete  individuality  has  entailed  complete  partition,  there  is  a  per¬ 
manent  identity ;  we  may  think  of  colour,  qualities  of  all  kinds,  some 
particular  shape,  which  can  be  present  in  many  unrelated  objects  at 
the  one  moment,  each  entire  and  yet  with  no  community  of  experience 
among  the  various  manifestations.  In  the  case  of  such  ideal-forms  we 
may  affirm  complete  partibility. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  that  first  utterly  indivisible  Kind  must  be 
accompanied  by  a  subsequent  Essence,  engendered  by  it  and  holding 
indivisibility  from  it  but,  in  virtue  of  the  necessary  outgo  from  source, 
tending  firmly  towards  the  contrary,  the  wholly  partible  ;  this  secondary 
Essence  will  take  an  intermediate  place  between  the  first  substance, 
the  undivided,  and  that  which  is  divisible  in  material  things  and  resides 
in  them.  Its  presence,  however,  will  differ  in  one  respect  from  that  of 
colour  and  quantity  ;  these,  no  doubt,  are  present  identically  and  entire 
throughout  diverse  material  masses,  but  each  several  manifestation  of 
them  is  as  distinct  from  every  other  as  the  mass  is  from  the  mass. 

The  magnitude  present  in  any  mass  is  definitely  one  thing,  yet  its 
identity  from  part  to  part  does  not  imply  any  such  community  as  would 


4 


PLOTINUS 


entail  common  experience  ;  within  that  identity  there  is  diversity,  for 
it  is  a  condition  only,  not  (as  in  the  case  of  soul)  the  actual  Essence. 

The  Essence,  very  near  to  the  impartible,  which  we  assert  to  belong 
to  the  Kind  we  are  now  dealing  with,  is  at  once  an  Essence  and  an 
entrant  into  body  ;  upon  embodiment,  it  experiences  a  partition  unknown 
before  it  thus  bestowed  itself. 

In  whatsoever  bodies  it  occupies — even  the  vastest  of  all,  that  in 
which  the  entire  universe  is  included — it  gives  itself  to  the  whole  without 
abdicating  its  unity. 

This  unity  of  an  Essence  is  not  like  that  of  body,  which  is  a  unit 
by  the  mode  of  continuous  extension,  the  mode  of  distinct  parts  each 
occupying  its  own  space.  Nor  is  it  such  a  unity  as  we  have  dealt  with 
in  the  case  of  quality. 

The  nature,  at  once  divisible  and  indivisible,  which  we  affirm  to  be 
soul  has  not  the  unity  of  an  extended  thing  :  it  does  not  consist  of 
separate  sections  ;  its  divisibility  lies  in  its  presence  at  every  point  of 
the  recipient,  but  it  is  indivisible  as  dwelling  entire  in  the  total  and 
entire  in  any  part. 

To  have  penetrated  this  idea  is  to  know  the  greatness  of  the  soul 
and  its  power,  the  divinity  and  wonder  of  its  being,  as  a  nature  trans¬ 
cending  the  sphere  of  Things. 

Itself  devoid  of  mass,  it  is  present  to  all  mass  :  it  exists  here  and 
yet  is  There,  and  this  not  in  distinct  phases  but  with  unsundered  identity  : 
thus  it  is  "  parted  and  not  parted,”  or,  better,  it  has  never  known  parti¬ 
tion,  never  become  a  parted  thing,  but  remains  a  self-gathered  integral, 
and  is  "  parted  among  bodies  ”  merely  in  the  sense  that  bodies,  in  virtue 
of  their  own  sundered  existence,  cannot  receive  it  unless  in  some  parti¬ 
tive  mode ;  the  partition,  in  other  words,  is  an  occurrence  in  body  not 
in  soul. 


2. 

It  can  be  demonstrated  that  soul  must  necessarily  be  of  just  this 
nature,  and  that  there  can  be  no  other  soul  than  such  a  being,  one 
neither  wholly  partible  but  both  at  once. 


IV.  2.  2] 


ON  THE  ESSENCE  OF  THE  SOUL 


5 


If  it  had  the  nature  of  body  it  would  consist  of  isolated  members 
each  unaware  of  the  conditions  of  every  other ;  there  would  be  a  par¬ 
ticular  soul — say  a  soul  of  the  finger — answering  as  a  distinct  and  inde¬ 
pendent  entity  to  every  local  experience  ;  in  general  terms,  there  would 
be  a  multiplicity  of  souls  administering  each  individual ;  and,  moreover, 
the  universe  would  be  governed  not  by  one  soul  but  by  an  incalculable 
number,  each  standing  apart  to  itself.  But  without  a  dominant  unity, 
continuity  is  meaningless. 

The  theory  that  “  Impressions  reach  the  leading-principle  by  pro¬ 
gressive  stages  ”  must  be  dismissed  as  mere  illusion. 

In  the  first  place,  it  affirms  without  investigation  a  “  leading  ” 
phase  of  the  soul. 

What  can  justify  this  assigning  of  parts  to  the  soul,  and  distin¬ 
guishing  one  part  from  another  ?  What  quantity,  or  what  difference 
of  quality,  can  apply  to  a  thing  defined  as  a  self-consistent  whole  of 
unbroken  unity  ? 

Again,  would  perception  be  vested  in  that  leading  principle  alone, 
or  in  the  other  phases  as  well  ? 

If  a  given  experience  bears  only  on  that  "  leading  principle,”  it 
would  not  be  felt  as  lodged  in  any  particular  members  of  the  organism ; 
if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  fastens  on  some  other  phase  of  the  soul — one 
not  constituted  for  sensation — that  phase  cannot  transmit  any  ex¬ 
perience  to  the  leading  principle,  and  there  can  be  no  sensation. 

Again,  suppose  sensation  vested  in  the  “  leading-principle  ”  itself  : 
then,  a  first  alternative,  it  will  be  felt  in  some  one  part  of  that  (some 
specifically  sensitive  phase),  the  other  part  excluding  a  perception  which 
could  serve  no  purpose  ;  or,  in  the  second  alternative,  there  will  be 
many  distinct  sensitive  phases,  an  infinite  number,  with  difference  from 
one  to  another.  In  that  second  case,  one  sensitive  phase  will  declare 
“  I  had  this  sensation  primarily  ”  ;  others  will  have  to  say  “  I  felt  the 
sensation  that  rose  elsewhere  ”  ;  but  either  the  site  of  the  experience 
will  be  a  matter  of  doubt  to  every  phase  except  the  first,  or  each  of  the 
parts  of  the  soul  will  be  deceived  into  allocating  the  occurrence  within 
its  own  particular  sphere. 


6 


PLOTINUS 


If,  on  the  contrary,  the  sensation  is  vested  not  merely  in  the 
“  leading  principle,”  but  in  any  and  every  part  of  the  soul,  what  special 
function  raises  the  one  rather  than  the  other  into  that  leading  rank,  or 
why  is  the  sensation  to  be  referred  to  it  rather  than  elsewhere  ?  And 
how,  at  this,  account  for  the  unity  of  the  knowledge  brought  in  by 
diverse  senses,  by  eyes,  by  ears  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  soul  is  a  perfect  unity — utterly  strange  to 
part,  a  self -gathered  whole — if  it  continuously  eludes  all  touch  of  multi¬ 
plicity  and  divisibility — then,  no  whole  taken  up  into  it  can  ever  be 
ensouled  ;  soul  will  stand  as  circle-centre  to  every  object  (remote  on 
the  circumference),  and  the  entire  mass  of  a  living  being  is  soulless  still. 

There  is,  therefore,  no  escape  :  soul  is,  in  the  degree  indicated,  one 
and  many,  parted  and  impartible.  We  cannot  question  the  possibility 
of  a  thing  being  at  once  a  unity  and  multi-present,  since  to  deny  this 
would  be  to  abolish  the  principle  which  sustains  and  administers  the 
universe  :  there  must  be  a  Kind  which  encircles  and  supports  all  and 
conducts  all  with  wisdom,  a  principle  which  is  multiple  since  existence 
is  multiple,  and  yet  is  one  soul  always  since  a  container  must  be  a  unity  : 
by  the  multiple  unity  of  its  nature,  it  will  furnish  life  to  the  multiplicity 
of  the  series  of  an  all ;  by  its  impartible  unity,  it  will  conduct  a  total 
to  wise  ends. 

In  the  case  of  things  not  endowed  with  intelligence,  the  “  leading- 
principle  ”  is  their  mere  unity — a  lower  reproduction  of  the  soul’s 
efficiency. 

This  is  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  profound  passage  (in  the  Timaeus), 
where  we  read  “  By  blending  the  impartible,  eternally  unchanging 
essence  with  that  in  division  among  bodies,  he  produced  a  third  form 
of  essence  partaking  of  both  qualities.” 

Soul,  therefore,  is,  in  this  definite  sense,  one  and  many  ;  the  Ideal- 
Form  resident  in  body  is  many  and  one  ;  bodies  themselves  are  exclu¬ 
sively  many  ;  the  Supreme  is  exclusively  one. 


IV.  3.  I] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


7 


THIRD  TRACTATE 
Problems  of  the  Soul  (I) 

i. 

The  soul :  what  dubious  questions  concerning  it  admit  of  solution,  or 
where  we  must  abide  our  doubt — with,  at  least,  the  gain  of  recognising 
the  problem  that  confronts  us— this  is  matter  well  worth  attention. 
On  what  subject  can  we  more  reasonably  expend  the  time  required  by 
minute  discussion  and  investigation  ?  Apart  from  much  else,  it  is 
enough  that  such  an  enquiry  illuminates  two  grave  questions  : — of  what 
sphere  the  soul  is  the  principle  and  whence  the  soul  itself  springs. 
Moreover,  we  will  be  only  obeying  the  ordinance  of  the  God  who  bade 
us  know  ourselves. 

Our  general  instinct  to  seek  and  learn,  our  longing  to  possess  our¬ 
selves  of  whatsoever  is  lovely  in  the  vision  will,  in  all  reason,  set  us 
enquiring  into  the  nature  of  the  instrument  with  which  we  search. 

Now  even  in  the  universal  Intellect  (Divine  Mind)  there  was  duality, 
so  that  we  would  expect  differences  of  condition  in  things  of  part :  how 
some  things  rather  than  others  come  to  be  receptacles  of  the  divine 
beings  will  need  to  be  examined ;  but  all  this  we  may  leave  aside  until 
we  are  considering  the  mode  in  which  soul  comes  to  occupy  body.  For 
the  moment  we  return  to  our  argument  against  those  who  maintain  our 
souls  to  be  offshoots  from  the  soul  of  the  universe  (parts  and  not  an 
identity  modally  parted). 

Our  opponents  will  probably  deny  the  validity  of  our  arguments 
against  the  theory  that  the  human  soul  is  a  mere  segment  of  the  All-Soul 
— the  considerations,  namely,  that  it  is  of  identical  scope,  and  that  it  is 
intellective  in  the  same  degree,  supposing  them,  even,  to  admit  that 
equality  of  intellection. 

They  will  object  that  parts  must  necessarily  fall  under  one  ideal- 
form  with  their  wholes.  And  they  will  adduce  Plato  as  expressing  their 
view  where,  in  demonstrating  that  the  All  is  ensouled,  he  says  “  As  our 
body  is  a  portion  of  the  body  of  the  All,  so  our  soul  is  a  portion  of  the 


8 


PLOTINUS 


soul  of  the  All.”  It  is  admitted  on  clear  evidence  that  vve  are  borne 
along  by  the  Circuit  of  the  All ;  we  will  be  told  that— taking  character 
and  destiny  from  it,  strictly  inbound  with  it — we  must  derive  our  souls, 
also,  from  what  thus  bears  us  up,  and  that  as  within  ourselves  every 
part  absorbs  from  our  soul  so,  analogically,  we,  standing  as  parts  to  the 
universe,  absorb  from  the  Soul  of  the  All  as  parts  of  it.  They  will  urge 
also  that  the  dictum  “  The  collective  soul  cares  for  all  the  unensouled,” 
carries  the  same  implication  and  could  be  uttered  only  in  the  belief 
that  nothing  whatever  of  later  origin  stands  outside  the  soul  of  the 
universe,  the  only  soul  there  can  be  there  to  concern  itself  with  the 
unensouled. 


2. 

To  this  our  first  answer  is  that  to  place  certain  things  under  one 
identical  class — by  admitting  an  identical  range  of  operation — is  to 
make  them  of  one  common  species,  and  puts  an  end  to  all  mention  of 
part ;  the  reasonable  conclusion  would  be,  on  the  contrary,  that  there 
is  one  identical  soul,  every  separate  manifestation  being  that  soul 
complete. 

Our  opponents  after  first  admitting  the  unity  go  on  to  make  our  soul 
dependent  on  something  else,  something  in  which  we  have  no  longer 
the  soul  of  this  or  that,  even  of  the  universe,  but  a  soul  of  nowhere,  a 
soul  belonging  neither  to  the  kosmos,  nor  to  anything  else,  and  yet 
vested  with  all  the  function  inherent  to  the  kosmic  soul  and  to  that  of 
every  ensouled  thing. 

The  soul  considered  as  an  entirety  cannot  be  a  soul  of  any  one  given 
thing — since  it  is  an  Essence  (a  divine  Real-Being) — or,  at  least,  there 
must  be  a  soul  which  is  not  exclusively  the  soul  of  any  particular  thing, 
and  those  attached  to  particulars  must  so  belong  merely  in  some  mode 
of  accident. 

In  such  questions  as  this  it  is  important  to  clarify  the  significance 
of  “  part.” 

Part,  as  understood  of  body — uniform  or  varied — need  not  detain 
us  ;  it  is  enough  to  indicate  that,  when  part  is  mentioned  in  respect  of 


IV.  3.  2] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


9 


things  whose  members  are  alike,  it  refers  to  mass  and  not  to  ideal-form 
(specific  idea)  :  take  for  example,  whiteness  :  the  whiteness  in  a  portion 
of  milk  is  not  a  part  of  the  whiteness  of  milk  in  general :  we  have  the 
whiteness  of  a  portion  not  a  portion  of  whiteness  ;  for  whiteness  is 
utterly  without  magnitude  ;  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  quantity. 

That  is  all  we  need  say  with  regard  to  part  in  material  things  ; 
but  part  in  the  unembodied  may  be  taken  in  various  ways.  We  may 
think  of  it  in  the  sense  familiar  in  numbers,  “  two  ”  a  part  of  the  standard 
“  ten  ” — in  abstract  numbers  of  course — or  as  we  think  of  a  segment  of 
a  circle,  or  line  (abstractly  considered),  or,  again,  of  a  section  or  branch 
of  knowledge. 

In  the  case  of  the  units  of  reckoning  and  of  geometrical  figure,  exactly 
as  in  that  of  corporeal  masses,  partition  must  diminish  the  total ;  the 
part  must  be  less  than  the  whole  ;  for  these  are  things  of  quantity,  and 
have  their  being  as  things  of  quantity ;  and — since  they  are  not  the 
ideal-form  Quantity — they  are  subject  to  increase  and  decrease. 

Now  in  such  a  sense  as  this,  part  cannot  be  affirmed  of  the  soul. 

The  soul  is  not  a  thing  of  quantity ;  we  are  not  to  conceive  of  the 
All-Soul  as  some  standard  ten  with  particular  souls  as  its  constituent 
units. 

Such  a  conception  would  entail  many  absurdities  : — 

The  Ten  could  not  be  (essentially)  a  unity  (the  Soul  would  be  an 
aggregation,  not  a  self-standing  Real-Being)  and,  further — unless  every 
one  of  the  single  constituents  were  itself  an  All-Soul — the  All-Soul  would 
be  formed  of  non-souls. 

Again,  it  is  admitted  that  the  particular  soul — this  “  part  of  the 
All-Soul  ” — is  of  one  ideal-form  with  it,  but  this  does  not  entail  the 
relation  of  part  to  whole,  since  in  objects  formed  of  continuous  parts 
there  is  nothing  inevitably  making  any  portion  uniform  with  the  total : 
take,  for  example,  the  parts  of  a  circle  or  square  ;  we  may  divide  it  in 
different  ways  so  as  to  get  our  part ;  a  triangle  need  not  be  divided  into 
triangles  ;  all  sorts  of  different  figures  are  possible  :  yet  an  absolute 
uniformity  is  admitted  to  reign  throughout  soul. 

In  a  line,  no  doubt,  the  part  is  inevitably  a  line  ;  but  even  here 


10 


PLOTINUS 


there  is  a  necessary  difference  in  size  ;  and  if,  in  the  case  of  the  soul  we 
similarly  called  upon  magnitude  as  the  distinction  between  constituents 
and  collective  soul,  then  soul,  thus  classed  by  magnitude  becomes 
quantitative,  and  is  simply  body. 

But  it  is  admitted  that  all  souls  are  alike,  and  are  entireties  ;  clearly, 
soul  is  not  subject  to  part  in  the  sense  in  which  magnitudes  are  :  our 
opponents  themselves  would  not  consent  to  the  notion  of  the  All-Soul 
being  whittled  down  into  fragments,  yet  this  is  what  they  would  be 
doing,  annulling  the  All-Soul — if  any  collective  soul  existed  at  all — 
making  it  a  mere  piece  of  terminology,  thinking  of  it  like  wine  separated 
into  many  portions,  each  portion,  in  its  jar,  being  described  as  a  portion 
of  the  total  thing,  wine. 

Next  there  is  the  conception  of  the  individual  soul  as  a  part  in  the 
sense  in  which  we  speak  of  some  single  proposition  as  a  part  of  the  science 
entire. 

The  theorem  is  separate,  but  the  science  stands  as  one  undivided 
thing,  the  expression  and  summed  efficiency  (energy)  of  each  constituent 
notion  :  this  is  partition  without  severance  ;  each  item  potentially 
includes  the  whole  science,  which  itself  remains  an  unbroken  total. 

Is  this  the  appropriate  parallel  ? 

No ;  in  such  a  relationship  the  All-Soul,  of  which  the  particular 
souls  are  to  be  a  part,  would  not  be  the  soul  of  any  definite  thing,  but  an 
entity  standing  aloof ;  that  means  that  it  would  not  even  be  the  soul 
of  the  Kosmos ;  it  would,  in  fact,  be,  itself,  one  of  those  partial  souls ; 
thus  all  alike  (kosmic  soul  and  particular  souls)  would  be  partial  and  of 
one  nature  ;  and,  at  that,  there  would  be  no  reason  for  making  any  such 
distinction. 

3- 

Is  it  a  question  of  part  in  the  sense  that,  taking  one  living  being, 
the  soul  in  a  finger  might  be  called  a  part  of  the  soul  entire  ? 

This  would  carry  the  alternative  that  either  there  is  no  soul  outside 
of  body,  or  that — no  soul  being  within  body — the  thing  described  as 
the  soul  of  the  universe  is,  none  the  less,  outside  the  body  of  the  universe. 


IV.  3.  3] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


ii 


That  is  a  point  to  be  investigated,  but  for  the  present  we  must  consider 
what  kind  of  soul  this  parallel  would  give  us. 

If  the  particular  soul  is  a  part  of  the  All-Soul  only  in  the  sense  that 
this  bestows  itself  upon  all  living  things  of  the  partial  sphere,  such  a 
self-bestowal  does  not  imply  division  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  identical 
soul  that  is  present  everywhere,  the  one  complete  thing,  multi-present 
at  the  one  moment :  there  is  no  longer  question  of  a  soul  that  is  a  part 
against  a  soul  that  is  an  all — especially  where  an  identical  power  is 
present.  Even  difference  of  function,  as  in  eyes  and  ears,  cannot  warrant 
the  assertion  of  distinct  parts  concerned  in  each  separate  act — with 
other  parts  again  making  allotment  of  faculty — all  is  met  by  the  notion 
of  one  identical  thing,  but  a  thing  in  which  a  distinct  power  operates  in 
each  separate  function.  All  the  powers  are  present  either  in  seeing  or 
in  hearing  ;  the  difference  in  impression  received  is  due  to  the  difference 
in  the  organs  concerned ;  all  the  varying  impressions  are  our  various 
responses  to  Ideal-forms  that  can  be  taken  in  a  variety  of  modes. 

A  further  proof  (of  the  unity  of  soul)  is  that  perception  demands  a 
common  gathering  place  ;  every  organ  has  its  distinct  function,  and  is 
competent  only  upon  its  own  material,  and  must  interpret  each  several 
experience  in  its  own  fashion ;  the  judgement  upon  these  impressions 
must,  then,  be  vested  in  some  one  principle,  a  judge  informed  upon  all 
that  is  said  and  done. 

But  again  :  “  Everywhere,  Unity  ”  :  in  the  variety  of  functions  if 
each  “  part  of  the  soul  ”  were  as  distinct  as  are  the  entrant  sensations, 
none  of  those  parts  could  have  knowledge  ;  awareness  would  belong  only 
to  that  judging  faculty — or,  if  local,  every  such  act  of  awareness  would 
stand  quite  unrelated  to  any  other.  But  since  the  soul  is  a  rational 
soul,  by  the  very  same  title  by  which  it  is  an  All-Soul,  and  is  called  the 
rational  soul,  in  the  sense  of  being  a  whole  (and  so  not  merely  “  reasoning 
locally  *’),  then  what  is  thought  of  as  a  part  must  in  reality  be  no  part 
but  the  identity  of  an  unparted  thing. 


12 


PLOTINUS 


But  if  this  is  the  true  account  of  the  unity  of  soul,  we  must  be  able 
to  meet  the  problems  that  ensue  ;  firstly,  the  difficulty  of  one  thing 
being  present  at  the  same  moment  in  all  things  ;  and,  secondly,  the 
difficulty  of  soul  in  body  as  against  soul  not  embodied. 

We  might  be  led  to  think  that  all  soul  must  always  inhabit  body ; 
this  would  seem  especially  plausible  in  the  case  of  the  soul  of  the  universe, 
not  thought  of  as  ever  leaving  its  body  as  the  human  soul  does  :  there 
exists,  no  doubt,  an  opinion  that  even  the  human  soul,  while  it  must 
leave  the  body,  can  not  become  an  utterly  disembodied  thing  ;  but, 
assuming  its  complete  disembodiment,  how  comes  it  that  the  human 
soul  can  go  free  of  the  body  but  the  All-Soul  not,  though  they  are  one 
and  the  same  ? 

There  is  no  such  difficulty  in  the  case  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  ; 
by  the  primal  differentiation,  this  separates,  no  doubt,  into  partial 
things  of  widely  varying  nature,  but  eternal  unity  is  secured  by  virtue 
of  the  eternal  identity  of  that  Essence  :  it  is  not  so  easy  to  explain  how, 
in  the  case  of  the  soul  described  as  separate  among  bodies,  such  differen¬ 
tiated  souls  can  still  remain  one  thing. 

A  possible  solution  may  be  offered  : — 

The  unit  soul  (it  may  be  conceived)  holds  aloof,  not  actually  falling 
into  body  ;  the  differentiated  souls — the  All-Soul,  with  the  others — 
issue  from  the  unity  while  still  constituting,  within  certain  limits,  an 
association.  They  are  one  soul  by  the  fact  that  they  do  not  belong 
unreservedly  to  any  particular  being  ;  they  meet,  so  to  speak,  fringe  to 
fringe  ;  they  strike  out  here  and  there,  but  are  held  together  at  the 
source  much  as  light  is  a  divided  thing  upon  earth,  shining  in  this  house, 
and  that,  and  yet  remains  uninterruptedly  one  identical  substance. 

The  All-Soul  would  always  remain  above,  since  essentially  it  has 
nothing  to  do  with  descent  or  with  the  lower,  or  with  any  tendency 
towards  this  sphere :  the  other  souls  would  become  ours  (become 
“  partial,”  individual  in  us)  because  their  lot  is  cast  for  this  sphere,  and 
because  they  are  solicited  by  a  thing  (the  body)  which  invites  their 


care. 


IV.  3.  5] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


13 


The  one — the  lowest  soul  in  the  total  of  the  All-Soul — would  corre¬ 
spond  to  that  in  some  great  growth,  silently,  unlaboriously  conducting 
the  whole  ;  our  own  lowest  soul  might  be  compared  to  the  insect  life 
in  some  rotted  part  of  the  growth — for  this  is  the  ratio  of  the  animated 
body  to  the  universe — while  the  other  soul  in  us,  of  one  ideal  nature 
with  the  higher  parts  of  the  All-Soul,  may  be  imaged  as  the  gardener 
concerned  about  the  insects  lodged  in  the  tree  and  anxiously  working  to 
amend  what  is  wrong  ;  or  we  may  contrast  a  healthy  man  living  with 
the  healthy  and,  by  his  thought  or  by  his  act,  lending  himself  to  the 
service  of  those  about  him,  with,  on  the  other  side,  a  sick  man  intent 
upon  his  own  care  and  cure,  and  so  living  for  the  body,  body-bound. 

5- 

But  what  place  is  left  for  the  particular  souls,  yours  and  mine  and 
another’s  ? 

May  we  suppose  the  Soul  to  be  appropriated  on  the  lower  ranges  to 
some  individual,  but  to  belong  on  the  higher  to  that  other  sphere  ? 

At  this  there  would  be  a  Socrates  as  long  as  Socrates’  soul  remained 
in  body;  but  Socrates  ceases  to  exist,  precisely  on  attainment  of  the 
highest. 

Now  nothing  of  Real  Being  is  ever  annulled. 

In  the  Supreme,  the  Intellectual-Principles  are  not  annulled,  for 
in  their  differentiation  there  is  no  bodily  partition,  no  passing  of  each 
separate  phase  into  a  distinct  unity  ;  every  such  phase  remains  in  full 
possession  of  that  identical  being.  It  is  exactly  so  with  the  souls. 

By  their  succession  they  are  linked  to  the  several  Intellectual- 
Principles,  for  they  are  the  expression,  the  Logos,  of  the  Intellectual- 
Principles,  of  which  they  are  the  unfolding ;  brevity  has  opened  out  to 
multiplicity ;  by  that  point  of  their  being  which  least  belongs  to  the 
partial  order,  they  are  attached  each  to  its  own  Intellectual  original : 
they  have  already  chosen  the  way  of  division  ;  but  to  the  extreme  they 
cannot  go  ;  thus  they  keep,  at  once,  identification  and  difference  ;  each 
soul  is  permanently  a  unity  (a  self)  and  yet  all  are,  in  their  total,  one 
being. 


14 


PLOTINUS 


Thus  the  gist  of  the  matter  is  established  :  one  soul  the  source  of 
all ;  those  others,  as  a  many  founded  in  that  one,  are,  on  the  analogy  of 
the  Intellectual-Principle,  at  once  divided  and  undivided  ;  that  Soul 
which  abides  in  the  Supreme  is  the  one  expression  or  Logos  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle,  and  from  it  spring  other  Reason-Principles, 
partial  but  immaterial,  exactly  as  in  the  differentiation  of  the  Supreme. 

6. 

But  how  comes  it  that  while  the  All-Soul  has  produced  a  kosmos, 
the  soul  of  the  particular  has  not,  though  it  is  of  the  one  ideal  Kind  and 
contains,  it  too,  all  things  in  itself  ? 

We  have  indicated  that  a  thing  may  enter  and  dwell  at  the  same 
time  in  various  places  ;  this  ought  to  be  explained,  and  the  enquiry 
would  show  how  an  identity  resident  simultaneously  here  and  there 
may,  in  its  separate  appearances,  act  or  react — or  both — after  distinct 
modes  ;  but  the  matter  deserves  to  be  examined  in  a  special  discussion. 

To  return,  then  :  how  and  why  has  the  All-Soul  produced  a  kosmos, 
while  the  particular  souls  simply  administer  some  one  part  of  it  ? 

In  the  first  place,  we  are  not  surprised  when  men  of  identical  know¬ 
ledge  differ  greatly  in  effective  power. 

But  the  reason,  we  will  be  asked. 

The  answer  might  be  that  there  is  an  even  greater  difference  among 
these  souls,  the  one  never  having  fallen  away  from  the  All-Soul,  but 
dwelling  within  it  and  assuming  body  therein,  while  the  others  received 
their  allotted  spheres  when  the  body  was  already  in  existence,  when 
their  sister  soul  was  already  in  rule  and,  as  it  were,  had  already  prepared 
habitations  for  them.  Again,  the  reason  may  be  that  the  one  (the 
creative  All-Soul)  looks  towards  the  universal  Intellectual-Principle  (the 
exemplar  of  all  that  can  be)  while  the  others  are  more  occupied  with 
the  Intellectual  within  themselves,  that  which  is  already  of  the  sphere 
of  part ;  perhaps,  too,  these  also  could  have  created,  but  that  they 
were  anticipated  by  that  originator — the  work  accomplished  before 
them — an  impediment  inevitable  whichsoever  of  the  souls  were  first  to 
operate. 


IV.  3.  73 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


15 


But  it  is  safer  to  account  for  the  creative  act  by  nearer  connection 
with  the  over-world ;  the  souls  whose  tendency  is  exercised  within  the 
Supreme  have  the  greater  power  ;  immune  in  that  pure  seat  they  create 
securely  ;  for  the  greater  power  takes  the  least  hurt  from  the  material 
within  which  it  operates  ;  and  this  power  remains  enduringly  attached 
to  the  over-world  :  it  creates,  therefore,  self  gathered  and  the  created 
things  gather  round  it ;  the  other  souls,  on  the  contrary,  themselves  go 
forth  ;  that  can  mean  only  that  they  have  deserted  towards  the  abyss  ; 
a  main  phase  in  them  is  drawn  downward  and  pulls  them  with  it  in 
the  desire  towards  the  lower. 

The  “  secondary  and  tertiary  souls,"  of  which  we  hear,  must  be 
understood  in  the  sense  of  closer  or  remoter  position  :  it  is  much  as  in 
ourselves  the  relation  to  the  Supreme  is  not  identical  from  soul  to  soul ; 
some  of  us  are  capable  of  becoming  Uniate,  others  of  striving  and  almost 
attaining,  while  a  third  rank  is  much  less  apt ;  it  is  a  matter  of  the 
degree  or  powers  of  the  soul  by  which  our  expression  is  determined — the 
first  degree  dominant  in  the  one  person,  the  second,  the  third  (the  merely 
animal  life)  in  others  while,  still,  all  of  us  contain  all  the  powers. 


7- 

So  far,  so  good  :  but  what  of  the  passage  in  the  Philebus  taken  to 
imply  that  the  other  souls  are  parts  of  the  All-Soul  ? 

The  statement  there  made  does  not  bear  the  meaning  read  into  it ; 
it  expresses  only,  what  the  author  was  then  concerned  with,  that  the 
heavens  are  ensouled — a  teaching  which  he  maintains  in  the  observation 
that  it  is  preposterous  to  make  the  heavens  soulless  when  we,  who 
contain  a  part  of  the  body  of  the  All,  have  a  soul ;  how,  he  asks,  could 
there  be  soul  in  the  part  and  none  in  the  total. 

He  makes  his  teaching  quite  clear  in  the  Timaeus,  where  he  shows 
us  the  other  souls  brought  into  existence  after  the  All-Soul,  but  “  com¬ 
pounded  from  the  same  mixing  bowl "  ;  secondary  and  tertiary  are 
duly  marked  off  from  the  primal  but  every  form  of  soul  is  presented  as 
being  of  identical  ideal-nature  with  the  All-Soul. 

As  for  the  saying  of  the  Phaedrus,  “  All  that  is  soul  cares  for  all 


i6 


PLOTINUS 


that  is  soulless,”  this  simply  tells  us  that  the  corporeal  kind  cannot  be 
controlled— fashioned,  set  in  place  or  brought  into  being— by  anything 
but  the  Soul.  And  we  cannot  think  that  there  is  one  soul  whose  nature 
includes  this  power  and  another  without  it.  “  The  perfect  soul,  that  of 
the  All,”  we  read,  “  going  its  lofty  journey,  operates  upon  the  kosmos 
not  by  sinking  into  it,  but,  as  it  were,  by  brooding  over  it  ”  ;  and  “  every 
perfect  soul  exercises  this  governance  ”  ;  he  distinguishes  the  other,  the 
soul  in  this  sphere  (not  as  a  part,  or  as  a  different  being,  but)  as  "  the 
soul  when  its  wing  is  broken.” 

As  for  our  souls  being  entrained  in  the  kosmic  circuit,  and  taking 
character  and  condition  thence  ;  this  is  no  indication  that  they  are 
parts  :  soul-nature  may  very  well  take  some  tincture  from  even  the 
qualities  of  place,  from  water  and  from  air ;  residence  in  this  city  or 
in  that,  and  the  varying  make-up  of  the  body  may  have  their  influence 
(upon  our  human  souls  which,  yet,  are  no  parts  of  place  or  of 
body) . 

We  have  always  admitted  that  as  members  of  the  universe  we  take 
over  something  from  the  All-Soul ;  we  do  not  deny  the  influence  of  the 
Kosmic  Circuit ;  but  against  all  this  we  oppose  another  soul  in  us  (the 
Intellectual  as  distinguished  from  the  merely  vitalising)  proven  to  be 
distinct  by  that  power  of  opposition. 

As  for  our  being  begotten  children  of  the  kosmos,  we  answer  that 
in  motherhood  the  entrant  soul  is  distinct,  is  not  the  mother’s. 

8. 

These  considerations,  amounting  to  the  settlement  of  the  question, 
are  not  countered  by  the  phenomenon  of  sympathy ;  the  response 
between  soul  and  soul  is  due  to  the  mere  fact  that  all  spring  from  that 
self-same  soul  (the  next  to  Divine  Mind)  from  which  springs  the  Soul 
of  the  All. 

We  have  already  stated  that  the  one  soul  is  also  multiple  ;  and  we 
have  dealt  with  the  different  forms  of  relationship  between  part  and 
whole  :  we  have  investigated  the  different  degrees  existing  within  soul ; 
we  may  now  add,  briefly,  that  differences  might  be  induced,  also,  by  the 


IV.  3.  8] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


1 7 


bodies  with  which  the  soul  has  to  do,  and,  even  more,  by  the  character 
and  mental  operations  carried  over  from  the  conduct  of  the  previous 
lives.  “  The  life-choice  made  by  a  soul  has  a  correspondence  ” — we 
read — “  with  its  former  lives.” 

As  regards  the  nature  of  soul  in  general,  the  differences  have  been 
defined  in  the  passage  in  which  we  mentioned  the  secondary  and  tertiary 
orders  and  laid  down  that,  while  all  souls  are  all-comprehensive,  each 
ranks  according  to  its  operative  phase — one  becoming  Uniate  in  the 
achieved  fact,  another  in  knowledge,  another  in  desire,  according  to  the 
distinct  orientation  by  which  each  is,  or  tends  to  become,  what  it  looks 
upon.  The  very  fulfilment  and  perfectionment  attainable  by  souls 
cannot  but  be  different. 

But,  if  in  the  total  the  organisation  in  which  they  have  their  being 
is  compact  of  variety — as  it  must  be  since  every  Reason-Principle  is  a 
unity  of  multiplicity  and  variety,  and  may  be  thought  of  as  a  psychic 
animated  organism  having  many  shapes  at  its  command — if  this  is  so 
and  all  constitutes  a  system  in  which  being  is  not  cut  adrift  from  being, 
if  there  is  nothing  chance-borne  among  beings  as  there  is  none  even  in 
bodily  organisms,  then  it  follows  that  Number  must  enter  into  the  scheme ; 
for,  once  again.  Being  must  be  stable  ;  the  members  of  the  Intellectual 
must  possess  identity,  each  numerically  one  ;  this  is  the  condition  of 
individuality.  Where,  as  in  bodily  masses,  the  Idea  is  not  essentially 
native,  and  the  individuality  is  therefore  in  flux,  existence  under  ideal 
form  can  rise  only  out  of  imitation  of  the  Authentic  Existences  ;  these 
last,  on  the  contrary,  not  rising  out  of  any  such  conjunction  (as  the 
duality  of  Idea  and  dead  Matter)  have  their  being  in  that  which  is 
numerically  one,  that  which  was  from  the  beginning,  and  neither  becomes 
what  it  has  not  been  nor  can  cease  to  be  what  it  is. 

Even  supposing  Real-Beings  (such  as  soul)  to  be  produced  by  some 
other  principle,  they  are  certainly  not  made  from  Matter ;  or,  if  they 
were,  the  creating  principle  must  infuse  into  them,  from  within  itself, 
something  of  the  nature  of  Real-Being ;  but,  at  this,  it  would  itself 
suffer  change,  as  it  created  more  or  less.  And,  after  all,  why  should  it 
thus  produce  at  any  given  moment  rather  than  remain  for  ever  stationary  ? 


i8 


PLOTINUS 


Moreover  the  produced  total,  variable  from  more  to  less,  could  not 
be  an  eternal :  yet  the  soul,  it  stands  agreed,  is  eternal. 

But  what  becomes  of  the  soul's  infinity  if  it  is  thus  fixed  ? 

The  infinity  is  a  matter  of  power  :  there  is  question,  not  of  the 
soul’s  being  divisible  into  an  infinite  number  of  parts,  but  of  an  infinite 
possible  effectiveness  :  it  is  infinity  in  the  sense  in  which  the  Supreme 
God,  also,  is  free  of  all  bound. 

This  means  that  it  is  no  external  limit  that  defines  the  individual 
being  or  the  extension  of  souls  any  more  than  of  God  ;  on  the  contrary 
each  in  right  of  its  own  power  is  all  that  it  chooses  to  be  :  and  we  are  not 
to  think  of  it  as  going  forth  from  itself  (losing  its  unity  by  any  partition)  : 
the  fact  is  simply  that  the  element  within  it,  which  is  apt  to  entrance 
into  body,  has  the  power  of  immediate  projection  any  whither :  the 
soul  is  certainly  not  wrenched  asunder  by  its  presence  at  once  in  foot  and 
in  finger.  Its  presence  in  the  All  is  similarly  unbroken  ;  over  its  entire 
range  it  exists  in  every  several  part  of  everything  having  even  vegeta 
life,  even  in  a  part  cut  off  from  the  main  ;  in  any  possible  segment  it  is 
as  it  is  at  its  source.  For  the  body  of  the  All  is  a  unit,  and  soul  is  every¬ 
where  present  to  it  as  to  one  thing. 

When  some  animal  rots  and  a  multitude  of  others  spring  from  it, 
the  Life-Principle  now  present  is  not  the  particular  soul  that  was  in  the 
larger  body  ;  that  body  has  ceased  to  be  receptive  of  soul,  or  there  would 
have  been  no  death ;  what  happens  is  that  whatsoever  in  the  product 
of  the  decay  is  apt  material  for  animal  existence  of  one  kind  or  another 
becomes  ensouled  by  the  fact  that  soul  is  nowhere  lacking,  though  a 
recipient  of  soul  may  be.  This  new  ensouling  does  not  mean  however 
an  increase  in  the  number  of  souls  :  all  depend  from  the  one  or,  rather, 
all  remains  one  :  it  is  as  with  ourselves  ;  some  elements  are  shed,  others 
grow  in  their  place  ;  the  soul  abandons  the  discarded  and  flows  into  the 
newcoming  as  long  as  the  one  soul  of  the  man  holds  its  ground  ;  in  the 
All  the  one  soul  holds  its  ground  for  ever ;  its  distinct  contents  now 
retain  soul  and  now  reject  it,  but  the  total  of  spiritual  beings  is  unaffected. 


IV.  3.  9] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


19 


9- 

But  we  must  examine  how  soul  comes  to  inhabit  the  body — the 
manner  and  the  process — a  question  certainly  of  no  minor  interest. 

The  entry  of  soul  into  body  takes  place  under  two  forms. 

Firstly,  there  is  the  entry — metensomatosis— -of  a  soul  present  in 
body  by  change  from  one  (wholly  material)  frame  to  another  or  the 
entry  not  known  as  metensomatosis,  since  the  nature  of  the  earlier 
habitacle  is  not  certainly  definable — of  a  soul  leaving  an  aerial  or  fiery 
body  for  one  of  earth. 

Secondly,  there  is  the  entry  from  the  wholly  bodiless  into  any  kind 
of  body  ;  this  is  the  earliest  form  of  any  dealing  between  body  and  soul, 
and  this  entry  especially  demands  investigation. 

What  then  can  be  thought  to  have  happened  when  soul,  utterly 
clean  from  body,  first  comes  into  commerce  with  the  bodily  nature  ? 

It  is  reasonable,  necessary  even,  to  begin  with  the  Soul  of  the  All. 
Notice  that  if  we  are  to  explain  and  to  be  clear,  we  are  obliged  to  use  such 
words  as  “  entry  ”  and  "  ensoulment/’  though  never  was  this  All 
unensouled,  never  did  body  subsist  with  soul  away,  never  was  there 
Matter  unelaborate  ;  we  separate,  the  better  to  understand  ;  there  is 
nothing  illegitimate  in  the  verbal  and  mental  sundering  of  things  which 
must  in  fact  be  co-existent. 

The  true  doctrine  may  be  stated  as  follows  : — 

In  the  absence  of  body,  soul  could  not  have  gone  forth,  since  there 
is  no  other  place  to  which  its  nature  would  allow  it  to  descend.  Since 
go  forth  it  must,  it  will  generate  a  place  for  itself ;  at  once  body,  also, 
exists. 

While  the  Soul  (as  an  eternal,  a  Divine  Being)  is  at  rest — in  rest 
firmly  based  on  Repose,  the  Absolute — yet,  as  we  may  put  it,  that  huge 
illumination  of  the  Supreme  pouring  outwards  comes  at  last  to  the 
extreme  bourne  of  its  light  and  dwindles  to  darkness  ;  this  darkness, 
now  lying  there  beneath,  the  soul  sees  and  by  seeing  brings  to  shape  ; 
for  in  the  law  of  things  this  ultimate  depth,  neighbouring  with  soul, 
may  not  go  void  of  whatsoever  degree  of  that  Reason-Principle  it  can 
absorb,  the  dimmed  reason  of  reality  at  its  faintest. 


20 


PLOTINUS 


Imagine  that  a  stately  and  varied  mansion  has  been  built ,  it  has 
never  been  abandoned  by  its  Architect,  who,  yet,  is  not  tied  down  to  it , 
he  has  judged  it  worthy  in  all  its  length  and  breadth  of  all  the  care  that 
can  serve  to  its  Being — as  far  as  it  can  share  in  Being — or  to  its  beauty, 
but  a  care  without  burden  to  its  director,  who  never  descends,  but 
presides  over  it  from  above  :  this  gives  the  degree  in  which  the  kosmos 
is  ensouled,  not  by  a  soul  belonging  to  it,  but  by  one  present  to  it  ,  it  is 
mastered  not  master ;  not  possessor  but  possessed.  The  soul  bears  it 
up,  and  it  lies  within,  no  fragment  of  it  unsharing. 

The  kosmos  is  like  a  net  which  takes  all  its  life,  as  far  as  ever  it 
stretches,  from  being  wet  in  the  water,  and  has  no  act  of  its  own  ;  the 
sea  rolls  away  and  the  net  with  it,  precisely  to  the  full  of  its  scope,  for 
no  mesh  of  it  can  strain  beyond  its  set  place  :  the  soul  is  of  so  far-reaching 
a  nature — a  thing  unbounded — as  to  embrace  the  entire  body  of  the  All 
in  the  one  extension  ;  so  far  as  the  universe  extends,  there  soul  is  ;  and 
if  the  universe  had  no  existence,  the  extent  of  soul  would  be  the  same  ; 
it  is  eternally  what  it  is.  The  universe  spreads  as  broad  as  the  presence 
of  soul ;  the  bound  of  its  expansion  is  the  point  at  which,  in  its  downward 
egression  from  the  Supreme,  it  still  has  soul  to  bind  it  in  one  :  it  is  a 
shadow  as  broad  as  the  Reason-Principle  proceeding  from  soul ;  and  that 
Reason-Principle  is  of  scope  to  generate  a  kosmic  bulk  as  vast  as  lay  in 
the  purposes  of  the  Idea  (the  Divine  forming  power)  which  it  conveys. 

io. 

In  view  of  all  this  we  must  now  work  back  from  the  items  to  the 
unit,  and  consider  the  entire  scheme  as  one  enduring  thing. 

We  ascend  from  air,  light,  sun — or,  moon  and  light  and  sun — in 
detail,  to  these  (and  such)  things  as  constituting  a  total — though  a  total 
of  degrees,  primary,  secondary,  tertiary.  Thence  we  come  to  the 
(kosmic)  Soul,  always  the  one  undiscriminated  entity.  At  this  point 
in  our  survey  we  have  before  us  the  over-world  and  all  that  follows  upon 
it.  That  suite  (the  lower  and  material  world)  we  take  to  be  the  very 
last  effect  that  has  penetrated  to  its  furthest  reach. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  first  is  gained  from  the  ultimate  of  all,  from 


IV.  3-  io] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


21 


the  very  shadow  cast  by  the  fire,  because  this  ultimate  (the  material 
world)  itself  receives  its  share  of  the  general  light,  something  of  the 
nature  of  the  Forming-Idea  hovering  over  the  outcast  that  at  first  lay 
in  blank  obscurity.  It  is  brought  under  the  scheme  of  reason  by  the 
efficacy  of  soul  whose  entire  extension  latently  holds  this  rationalising 
power.  As  we  know,  the  Reason-Principles  carried  in  animal  seed  fashion 
and  shape  living  beings  into  so  many  universes  in  the  small.  For  what¬ 
soever  touches  soul  is  moulded  to  the  nature  of  soul’s  own  Real-Being. 

We  are  not  to  think  that  the  Soul  acts  upon  the  object  by  conformity 
to  any  external  judgement;  there  is  no  pause  for  willing  or  planning: 
any  such  procedure  would  not  be  an  act  of  sheer  nature,  but  one  of 
applied  art  :  but  art  is  of  later  origin  than  soul ;  it  is  an  imitator,  pro¬ 
ducing  dim  and  feeble  copies — toys,  things  of  no  great  worth — and  it  is 
dependent  upon  all  sorts  of  mechanism  by  which  alone  its  images  can  be 
produced.  The  soul,  on  the  contrary,  is  sovran  over  material  things  by 
might  of  Real-Being  ;  their  quality  is  determined  by  its  lead,  and  those 
elementary  things  cannot  stand  against  its  will.  On  the  later  level, 
things  are  hindered  one  by  the  other,  and  thus  often  fall  short  of  the 
characteristic  shape  at  which  their  unextended  Reason-Principle  must 
be  aiming  ;  in  that  other  world  (under  the  soul  but  above  the  material) 
the  entire  shape  (as  well  as  the  idea)  comes  from  soul,  and  all  that  is 
produced  takes  and  keeps  its  appointed  place  in  a  unity,  so  that  the 
engendered  thing,  without  labour  as  without  clash,  becomes  all  that  it 
should  be.  In  that  world  the  soul  has  elaborated  its  creation,  the  images 
of  the  gods,  dwellings  for  men,  each  existing  to  some  peculiar  purpose. 

Soul  could  produce  none  but  the  things  which  truly  represent  its 
powers  :  fire  produces  warmth  ;  another  source  produces  cold  ;  soul 
has  a  double  efficacy,  its  act  within  itself,  and  its  act  from  within  outwards 
towards  the  new  production. 

In  soulless  entities,  the  outgo  (natural  to  everything)  remains 
dormant,  and  any  efficiency  they  have  is  to  bring  to  their  own  likeness 
whatever  is  amenable  to  their  act.  All  existence  has  this  tendency  to 
bring  other  things  to  likeness ;  but  the  soul  has  the  distinction  of  possess¬ 
ing  at  once  an  action  of  conscious  attention  within  itself,  and  an  action 


22 


PLOTINUS 


towards  the  outer.  It  has  thus  the  function  of  giving  life  to  all  that  does 
not  live  by  prior  right,  and  the  life  it  gives  is  commensurate  with  its 
own  ;  that  is  to  say,  living  in  reason,  it  communicates  reason  to  the 
body — an  image  of  the  reason  within  itself,  just  as  the  life  given  to  the 
body  is  an  image  of  Real-Being — and  it  bestows,  also,  upon  that  material 
the  appropriate  shapes  of  which  it  contains  the  Reason-Forms. 

The  content  of  the  creative  soul  includes  the  Ideal  shapes  of  gods 
and  of  all  else  :  and  hence  it  is  that  the  kosmos  contains  all. 


II. 

I  think,  therefore,  that  those  ancient  sages,  who  sought  to  secure  the 
presence  of  divine  beings  by  the  erection  of  shrines  and  statues,  showed 
insight  into  the  nature  of  the  All ;  they  perceived  that,  though  this 
Soul  is  everywhere  tractable,  its  presence  will  be  secured  all  the  more 
readily  when  an  appropriate  receptacle  is  elaborated,  a  place  especially 
capable  of  receiving  some  portion  or  phase  of  it,  something  reproducing 
it,  or  representing  it,  and  serving  like  a  mirror  to  catch  an  image  of  it. 

It  belongs  to  the  nature  of  the  All  to  make  its  entire  content  repro¬ 
duce,  most  felicitously,  the  Reason-Principles  in  which  it  participates  ; 
every  particular  thing  is  the  image  within  matter  of  a  Reason-Principle 
which  itself  images  a  pre-material  Reason-Principle  :  thus  every  par¬ 
ticular  entity  is  linked  to  that  Divine  Being  in  whose  likeness  it  is  made, 
the  divine  principle  which  the  soul  contemplated  and  contained  in  the 
act  of  each  creation.  Such  mediation  and  representation  there  must  have 
been  since  it  was  equally  impossible  for  the  created  to  be  without  share 
in  the  Supreme,  and  for  the  Supreme  to  descend  into  the  created. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  in  the  Supreme  has  ever  been  the  sun  of 
that  sphere — let  us  accept  that  as  the  type  of  the  creative  Logos — and 
immediately  upon  it  follows  the  Soul  depending  from  it,  stationary  Soul 
from  stationary  Intelligence.  But  the  Soul  borders  also  upon  the  sun 
of  this  sphere,  and  it  becomes  the  medium  by  which  all  is  linked  to  the 
over-world  ;  it  plays  the  part  of  an  interpreter  between  what  emanates 
from  that  sphere  down  to  this  lower  universe,  and  what  rises — as  far  as, 
through  soul,  anything  can — from  the  lower  to  the  highest. 


IV.  3.  12] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


23 


Nothing,  in  fact,  is  far  away  from  anything  ;  things  are  not  remote  : 
there  is,  no  doubt,  the  aloofness  of  difference  and  of  mingled  natures 
as  against  the  unmingled  ;  but  selfhood  has  nothing  to  do  with  spatial 
position,  and  in  unity  itself  there  may  still  be  distinction. 

These  Beings  (the  Reason-Principles  of  this  sphere)  are  divine  in 
virtue  of  cleaving  to  the  Supreme,  because,  by  the  medium  of  the  Soul 
thought  of  as  descending,  they  remain  linked  with  the  Primal  Soul, 
and  through  it  are  veritably  what  they  are  called  and  possess  the  vision 
of  the  Intellectual  Principle,  the  single  object  of  contemplation  to  that 
soul  in  which  they  have  their  being. 


12. 

The  souls  of  men,  seeing  their  images  in  the  mirror  of  Dionysus  as 
it  were,  have  entered  into  that  realm  in  a  leap  downward  from  the 
Supreme  :  yet  even  they  are  not  cut  off  from  their  origin,  from  the 
divine  Intellect ;  it  is  not  that  they  have  come  bringing  the  Intellectual 
Principle  down  in  their  fall ;  it  is  that  though  they  have  descended  even 
to  earth,  yet  their  higher  part  holds  for  ever  above  the  heavens. 

Their  initial  descent  is  deepened  since  that  mid-part  of  theirs  is 
compelled  to  labour  in  care  of  the  care-needing  thing  into  which  they 
have  entered.  But  Zeus,  the  father,  takes  pity  on  their  toils  and  makes 
the  bonds  in  which  they  labour  soluble  by  death  and  gives  respite  in 
due  time,  freeing  them  from  the  body,  that  they  too  may  come  to  dwell 
there  where  the  Universal  Soul,  unconcerned  with  earthly  needs,  has 
ever  dwelt. 

For  the  container  of  the  total  of  things  must  be  a  self-sufficing 
entity  and  remain  so  :  in  its  periods  it  is  wrought  out  to  purpose  under 
its  Reason-Principles  which  are  perdurably  valid  ;  by  these  periods  it 
reverts  unfailingly,  in  the  measured  stages  of  defined  life-duration,  to 
its  established  character  ;  it  is  leading  the  things  of  this  realm  to  be  of 
one  voice  and  plan  with  the  Supreme.  And  thus  the  kosmic  content  is 
carried  forward  to  its  purpose,  everything  in  its  co-ordinate  place,  under 
one  only  Reason-Principle  operating  alike  in  the  descent  and  return  of 
souls  and  to  every  purpose  of  the  system. 


24 


PLOTINUS 


We  may  know  this  also  by  the  concordance  of  the  Souls  with  the 
ordered  scheme  of  the  kosmos  ;  they  are  not  independent,  but,  by  their 
descent,  they  have  put  themselves  in  contact,  and  they  stand  henceforth 
in  harmonious  association  with  the  kosmic  circuit — to  the  extent  that 
their  fortunes,  their  life  experiences,  their  choosing  and  refusing,  are 
announced  by  the  patterns  of  the  stars — and  out  of  this  concordance 
rises  as  it  were  one  musical  utterance  :  the  music,  the  harmony,  by 
which  all  is  described  is  the  best  witness  to  this  truth. 

Such  a  consonance  can  have  been  procured  in  one  only  way  : — 

The  All  must,  in  every  detail  of  act  and  experience,  be  an  expression 
of  the  Supreme,  which  must  dominate  alike  its  periods  and  its  stable 
ordering  and  the  life-careers  varying  with  the  movement  of  the  souls 
as  they  are  sometimes  absorbed  in  that  highest,  sometimes  in  the  heavens, 
sometimes  turned  to  the  things  and  places  of  our  earth.  All  that  is 
Divine  Intellect  will  rest  eternally  above,  and  could  never  fall  from  its 
sphere  but,  poised  entire  in  its  own  high  place,  will  communicate  to 
things  here  through  the  channel  of  Soul.  Soul  in  virtue  of  neighbourhood 
is  more  closely  modelled  upon  the  Idea  uttered  by  the  Divine  Intellect, 
and  thus  is  able  to  produce  order  in  the  movement  of  the  lower  realm, 
one  phase  (the  World-Soul)  maintaining  the  unvarying  march  (of  the 
kosmic  circuit)  the  other  (the  soul  of  the  Individual)  adopting  itself  to 
times  and  season. 

The  depth  of  the  descent,  also,  will  differ — sometimes  lower,  some¬ 
times  less  low — and  this  even  in  its  entry  into  any  given  Kind  :  all 
that  is  fixed  is  that  each  several  soul  descends  to  a  recipient  indicated 
by  affinity  of  condition ;  it  moves  towards  the  thing  which  it  There 
resembled,  and  enters,  accordingly,  into  the  body  of  man  or  animal. 

13- 

The  Ineluctable,  the  Kosmic  Law  is,  thus,  rooted  in  a  natural 
principle  under  which  each  several  entity  is  overruled  to  go,  duly  and 
in  order,  towards  that  place  and  Kind  to  which  it  characteristically 
tends,  that  is  towards  the  image  of  its  primal  choice  and  constitution. 

In  that  archetypal  world  every  form  of  soul  is  near  to  the  image 


IV.  3.  14] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


25 


(the  thing  in  the  world  of  copy)  to  which  its  individual  constitution 
inclines  it  ;  there  is  therefore  no  need  of  a  sender  or  leader  acting  at  the 
right  moment  to  bring  it  at  the  right  moment  whether  into  body  or  into 
a  definitely  appropriate  body  :  of  its  own  motion  it  descends  at  the 
precisely  true  time  and  enters  where  it  must.  To  every  Soul  its  own 
hour ;  when  that  strikes  it  descends  and  enters  the  body  suitable  to  it 
as  at  the  cry  of  a  herald ;  thus  all  is  set  stirring  and  advancing  as  by  a 
magician’s  power  or  by  some  mighty  traction  ;  it  is  much  as,  in  any 
living  thing,  the  soul  itself  effects  the  fulfilment  of  the  natural  career, 
stirring  and  bringing  forth,  in  due  season,  every  element — beard,  horn, 
and  all  the  successive  stages  of  tendency  and  of  output — or,  as  it  leads 
a  tree  through  its  normal  course  within  set  periods. 

The  Souls  go  forth  neither  under  compulsion  nor  of  freewill ;  or, 
at  least,  freedom,  here,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  action  upon  preference  ; 
it  is  more  like  such  a  leap  of  the  nature  as  moves  men  to  the  instinctive 
desire  of  sexual  union,  or,  in  the  case  of  some,  to  fine  conduct ;  the 
motive  lies  elsewhere  than  in  the  reason  :  like  is  destined  unfailingly 
to  like,  and  each  moves  hither  or  thither  at  its  fixed  moment. 

Even  the  Intellectual-Principle,  which  is  before  all  the  kosmos,  has, 
it  also,  its  destiny,  that  of  abiding  intact  above,  and  of  giving  down¬ 
wards  :  what  it  sends  down  is  the  particular  whose  existence  is  implied 
in  the  law  (or  decreed  system)  of  the  universal ;  for  the  universal  broods 
closely  over  the  particular ;  it  is  not  from  without  that  the  law  derives 
the  power  by  which  it  is  executed  ;  on  the  contrary  the  law  is  given  in 
the  entities  upon  whom  it  falls  ;  these  bear  it  about  with  them.  Let 
but  the  moment  arrive,  and  what  it  decrees  will  be  brought  to  act  by 
those  beings  in  whom  it  resides  ;  they  fulfil  it  because  they  contain  it ; 
it  prevails  because  it  is  within  them ;  it  becomes  like  a  heavy  burden, 
and  sets  up  in  them  a  painful  longing  to  enter  the  realm  to  which  they 
are  bidden  from  within. 


14. 

Thus  it  comes  about  that  this  kosmos,  lit  with  many  lights,  gleaming 
in  its  souls,  receives  still  further  graces,  gifts  from  here  and  from  there, 


E 


PLOTINUS 


26 

from  the  gods  of  the  Supreme,  and  from  those  other  Intellectual- 
Principles  whose  nature  it  is  to  ensoul.  This  is  probably  the  secret  of 
the  myth  in  which,  after  Prometheus  had  moulded  woman,  the  other 
gods  heaped  gifts  upon  her,  Hephaistos  “  blending  the  clay  with  moisture 
and  bestowing  the  human  voice  and  the  form  of  a  goddess  ;  Aphrodite 
bringing  her  gifts,  and  the  Graces  theirs,  and  other  gods  other  gifts,  and 
finally  calling  her  by  the  name  (Pandora)  which  tells  of  gift  and  of  all 
giving— for  all  have  added  something  to  this  formation  brought  to  being 
by  a  Promethean,  a  fore-thinking  power.  As  for  the  rejection  of  Prome¬ 
theus’  gift  by  after-thought,  Epimetheus,  what  can  this  signify  but 
that  the  wiser  choice  is  to  remain  in  the  Intellectual  realm  ?  Pandora  s 
creator  is  fettered,  to  signify  that  he  is  in  some  sense  held  by  his  own 
creation  ;  such  a  fettering  is  external  and  the  release  by  Hercules  tells 
that  there  is  power  in  Prometheus,  so  that  he  need  not  remain  in  bonds. 

Take  the  myth  as  we  may,  it  is  certainly  such  an  account  of  the 
bestowal  of  gifts  upon  the  kosmos  as  harmonises  with  our  explanation 
of  the  universal  system. 

15. 

The  souls  peering  forth  from  the  Intellectual  Realm  descend  first 
to  the  heavens  and  there  put  on  a  body ;  this  becomes  at  once  the 
medium  by  which  as  they  reach  out  more  and  more  towards  magnitude 
(physical  extension)  they  proceed  to  bodies  progressively  more  earthy. 
Some  even  plunge  from  heaven  to  the  very  lowest  of  corporeal  forms  ; 
others  pass,  stage  by  stage,  too  feeble  to  lift  towards  the  higher  the 
burden  they  carry,  weighed  downwards  by  their  heaviness  and  forget¬ 
fulness. 

As  for  the  differences  among  them,  these  are  due  to  variation  in  the 
bodies  entered,  or  to  the  accidents  of  life,  or  to  upbringing,  or  to  inherent 
peculiarities  of  temperament,  or  to  all  these  influences  together,  or  to 
specific  combinations  of  them. 

Then  again  some  have  fallen  unreservedly  into  the  power  of  the 
destiny  ruling  here  *.  some  yielding  betimes  are  betimes  too  their  own  . 
there  are  those  who,  while  they  accept  what  must  be  borne,  have  the 


IV.  3.  16] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


27 


strength  of  self-mastery  in  all  that  is  left  to  their  own  act ;  they  have 
given  themselves  to  another  dispensation  :  they  live  by  the  code  of  the 
aggregate  of  beings,  the  code  which  is  woven  out  of  the  Reason-Principles 
and  all  the  other  causes  ruling  in  the  kosmos,  out  of  soul-movements 
and  out  of  laws  springing  in  the  Supreme ;  a  code,  therefore,  consonant 
with  those  higher  existences,  founded  upon  them,  linking  their  sequents 
back  to  them,  keeping  unshakeably  true  all  that  is  capable  of  holding 
itself  set  towards  the  divine  nature,  and  leading  round  by  all  appro¬ 
priate  means  whatsoever  is  less  natively  apt. 

In  fine  all  diversity  of  condition  in  the  lower  spheres  is  determined 
by  the  descendent  beings  themselves. 

16. 

The  punishment  justly  overtaking  the  wicked  must  therefore  be 
ascribed  to  the  kosmic  order  which  leads  all  in  accordance  with  the  right. 

But  what  of  chastisements,  poverty,  illness,  falling  upon  the  good 
outside  of  all  justice  ?  These  events,  we  will  be  told,  are  equally  inter¬ 
woven  into  the  world  order  and  fall  under  prediction,  and  must  conse¬ 
quently  have  a  cause  in  the  general  reason  :  are  they  therefore  to  be 
charged  to  past  misdoing  ? 

No  :  such  misfortunes  do  not  answer  to  reasons  established  in  the 
nature  of  things  ;  they  are  not  laid  up  in  the  master-facts  of  the  universe, 
but  were  merely  accidental  sequents  :  a  house  falls,  and  anyone  that 
chances  to  be  underneath  is  killed,  no  matter  what  sort  of  man  he  be  : 
two  objects  are  moving  in  perfect  order — or  one  if  you  like — but  anything 
getting  in  the  way  is  wounded  or  trampled  down.  Or  we  may  reason 
that  the  undeserved  stroke  can  be  no  evil  to  the  sufferer  in  view  of  the 
beneficent  interweaving  of  the  All  or  again,  no  doubt,  that  nothing  is 
unjust  that  finds  justification  in  a  past  history. 

We  may  not  think  of  some  things  being  fitted  into  a  system  with 
others  abandoned  to  the  capricious  ;  if  things  must  happen  by  cause, 
by  natural  sequences,  under  one  Reason-Principle  and  a  single  set  scheme, 
we  must  admit  that  the  minor  equally  with  the  major  is  fitted  into  that 
order  and  pattern. 


28 


PLOTINUS 


Wrong-doing  from  man  to  man  is  wrong  in  the  doer  and  must  be 
imputed,  but,  as  belonging  to  the  established  order  of  the  universe  is 
not  a  wrong  even  as  regards  the  innocent  sufferer  ;  it  is  a  thing  that  had 
to  be,  and,  if  the  sufferer  is  good,  the  issue  is  to  his  gain.  For  we  cannot 
think  that  this  ordered  combination  proceeds  without  God  and  justice  ; 
we  must  take  it  to  be  precise  in  the  distribution  of  due,  while,  yet,  the 
reasons  of  things  elude  us,  and  to  our  ignorance  the  scheme  presents 
matter  of  censure. 

17* 

Various  considerations  explain  why  the  Souls  going  forth  from  the 
Intellectual  proceed  first  to  the  heavenly  regions.  The  heavens,  as  the 
noblest  portion  of  sensible  space,  would  border  with  the  least  exalted 
of  the  Intellectual,  and  will,  therefore,  be  first  ensouled,  first  to  partici¬ 
pate  as  most  apt ;  while  what  is  of  earth  is  at  the  very  extremity  of 
progression,  least  endowed  towards  participation,  remotest  from  the 
unembodied. 

All  the  souls,  then,  shine  down  upon  the  heavens  and  spend  there 
the  main  of  themselves  and  the  best ;  only  their  lower  phases  illuminate 
the  lower  realms  ;  and  those  souls  which  descend  deepest  show  their 
light  furthest  down — not  themselves  the  better  for  the  depth  to  which 
they  have  penetrated. 

There  is,  we  may  put  it,  something  that  is  centre  ;  about  it,  a 
circle  of  light  shed  from  it ;  round  centre  and  first  circle  alike,  another 
circle,  light  from  light ;  outside  that  again,  not  another  circle  of  light 
but  one  which,  lacking  light  of  its  own,  must  borrow. 

The  last  we  may  figure  to  ourselves  as  a  revolving  circle,  or  rather 
a  sphere,  of  a  nature  to  receive  light  from  that  third  realm,  its  next 
higher,  in  proportion  to  the  light  which  that  itself  receives.  Thus  all 
begins  with  the  great  light,  shining  self-centred  ;  in  accordance  with  the 
reigning  plan  (that  of  emanation)  this  gives  forth  its  brilliance  ;  the 
later  (divine)  existents  (souls)  add  their  radiation — some  of  them  remain¬ 
ing  above,  while  there  are  some  that  are  drawn  further  downward, 
attracted  by  the  splendour  of  the  object  they  illuminate.  These  last 


IV.  3.  i8] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


29 


find  that  their  charges  need  more  and  more  care  :  the  steersman  of  a 
storm-tossed  ship  is  so  intent  on  saving  it  that  he  forgets  his  own  interest 
and  never  thinks  that  he  is  recurrently  in  peril  of  being  dragged  down 
with  the  vessel ;  similarly  the  souls  are  intent  upon  contriving  for 
their  charges  and  finally  come  to  be  pulled  down  by  them  ;  they  are 
fettered  in  bonds  of  sorcery,  gripped  and  held  by  their  concern  for  the 
realm  of  Nature. 

If  every  living  being  were  of  the  character  of  the  All-perfect,  self- 
sufficing,  in  peril  from  no  outside  influence — the  soul  now  spoken  of  as 
indwelling  would  not  occupy  the  body  ;  it  would  infuse  life  while  clinging, 
entire,  within  the  Supreme. 

18. 

There  remains  still  something  to  be  said  on  the  question  whether 
the  soul  uses  deliberate  reason  before  its  descent  and  again  when  it  has 
left  the  body. 

Reasoning  is  for  this  sphere  ;  it  is  the  act  of  the  soul  fallen  into 
perplexity,  distracted  with  cares,  diminished  in  strength  :  the  need  of 
deliberation  goes  with  the  less  self-sufficing  intelligence ;  craftsmen 
faced  by  a  difficulty  stop  to  consider ;  where  there  is  no  problem  their 
art  works  on  by  its  own  forthright  power. 

But  if  souls  in  the  Supreme  operate  without  reasoning,  how  can 
they  be  called  reasoning  souls  ? 

One  answer  might  be  that  they  have  the  power  of  deliberating  to 
happy  issue,  should  occasion  arise  :  but  all  is  met  by  repudiating  the 
particular  kind  of  reasoning  intended  (the  earthly  and  discursive  type)  ; 
we  may  represent  to  ourselves  a  reasoning  that  flows  uninterruptedly 
from  the  Intellectual-Principle  in  them,  an  inherent  state,  an  enduring 
activity,  an  assertion  that  is  real ;  in  this  way  they  would  be  users  of 
reason  even  when  in  that  over-world.  We  certainly  cannot  think  of 
them,  it  seems  to  me,  as  employing  words  when,  though  they  may 
occupy  bodies  in  the  heavenly  region,  they  are  essentially  in  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  :  and  very  surely  the  deliberation  of  doubt  and  difficulty  which 
they  practise  here  must  be  unknown  to  them  There  ;  all  their  act  must 


PLOTINUS 


30 

fall  into  place  by  sheer  force  of  their  nature  ;  there  can  be  no  question 
of  commanding  or  of  taking  counsel ;  they  will  know,  each,  what  is  to  be 
communicated  from  another,  by  present  consciousness.  Even  in  our 
own  case  here,  eyes  often  know  what  is  not  spoken  ;  and  There  all  is 
pure,  every  being  is,  as  it  were,  an  eye,  nothing  is  concealed  or  sophisti¬ 
cated,  there  is  no  need  of  speech,  everything  is  seen  and  known.  As  for 
the  Celestials  (the  Daimones)  and  souls  in  the  air,  they  may  well  use 
speech  ;  for  all  such  are  simply  Animate = Beings. 

J9- 

Are  we  to  think  of  the  indivisible  phase  of  the  soul  and  the  divided 
as  making  one  thing  in  a  coalescence  ;  or  is  the  indivisible  in  a  place  of 
its  own  and  under  conditions  of  its  own,  the  divisible  being  a  sequent 
upon  it,  a  separate  part  of  it,  as  distinct  as  the  reasoning  phase  is  from 
the  unreasoning  ? 

The  answer  to  this  question  will  emerge  when  we  make  plain  the 
nature  and  function  to  be  attributed  to  each. 

The  indivisible  phase  is  mentioned  (in  the  passage  of  Plato)  without 
further  qualification  ;  but  not  so  the  divisible  ;  “  that  soul”  we  read 
“  which  becomes  divisible  in  bodies  ” — and  even  this  last  is  presented 
as  becoming  partible,  not  as  being  so  once  for  all. 

“  In  bodies  ”  :  we  must,  then,  satisfy  ourselves  as  to  what  form  of 
soul  is  required  to  produce  life  in  the  corporeal,  and  what  there  must  be 
of  soul  present  throughout  such  a  body,  such  a  completed  organism. 

Now,  every  sensitive  power — by  the  fact  of  being  sensitive  through¬ 
out — tends  to  become  a  thing  of  parts  :  present  at  every  distinct  point 
of  sensitiveness,  it  may  be  thought  of  as  divided.  In  the  sense,  however, 
that  it  is  present  as  a  whole  at  every  such  point,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be 
wholly  divided  ;  it  “  becomes  divisible  in  body.”  We  may  be  told  that 
no  such  partition  is  implied  in  any  sensations  but  those  of  touch  ;  but 
this  is  not  so  ;  where  the  participant  is  body  (of  itself  insensitive  and 
non-transmitting)  that  divisibility  in  the  sensitive  agent  will  be  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  all  other  sensations,  though  in  less  degree  than  in  the  case  of  touch. 
Similarly  the  vegetative  function  in  the  soul,  with  that  of  growth. 


IV.  3-  2o] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


3i 


indicates  divisibility  ;  and,  admitting  such  locations  as  that  of  desire 
at  the  liver  and  emotional  activity  at  the  heart,  we  have  the  same  result. 
It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  as  regards  these  (the  less  corporeal)  sensations, 
that  the  body  may  possibly  not  experience  them  as  a  fact  of  the  conjoint 
thing  but  in  another  mode,  as  rising  within  some  one  of  the  elements  of 
which  it  has  been  participant  (as  inherent,  purely,  in  some  phase  of  the 
associated  soul)  :  reasoning  and  the  act  of  the  intellect,  for  instance, 
are  not  vested  in  the  body  ;  their  task  is  not  accomplished  by  means  of 
the  body  which  in  fact  is  detrimental  to  any  thinking  on  which  it  is 
allowed  to  intrude. 

Thus  the  indivisible  phase  of  the  soul  stands  distinct  from  the 
divisible  ;  they  do  not  form  a  unity,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  whole  con¬ 
sisting  of  parts,  each  part  a  self -standing  thing  having  its  own  peculiar 
virtue.  None  the  less,  if  that  phase  which  becomes  divisible  in  body 
holds  indivisibility  by  communication  from  the  superior  power,  then 
this  one  same  thing  (the  soul  in  body)  may  be  at  once  indivisible  and 
divisible  ;  it  will  be,  as  it  were,  a  blend,  a  thing  made  up  of  its  own 
divisible  self  with,  in  addition,  the  quality  that  it  derives  from  above 
itself. 


20. 

Here  a  question  rises  to  which  we  must  find  an  answer : — whether 
these  and  the  other  powers  which  we  call  “  parts  ”  of  the  Soul  are 
situated,  all,  in  place  ;  or  whether  some  have  place  and  standpoint, 
others  not ;  or  whether  again  none  are  situated  in  place. 

The  matter  is  difficult  :  if  we  do  not  allot  to  each  of  the  parts  of  the 
Soul  some  form  of  place,  but  leave  all  unallocated — no  more  within 
the  body  than  outside  it — we  leave  the  body  soulless,  and  are  at  a  loss 
to  explain  plausibly  the  origin  of  acts  performed  by  means  of  the  bodily 
organs  :  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  some  of  those  phases  to  be 
(capable  of  situation)  in  place  but  others  not  so,  we  will  be  supposing 
that  those  parts  to  which  we  deny  place  are  ineffective  in  us,  or,  in  other 
words,  that  we  do  not  possess  our  entire  soul. 

This  simply  shows  that  neither  the  soul  entire  nor  a 


32 


PLOTINUS 


may  be  considered  to  be  within  the  body  as  in  a  space  :  space  is  a  con¬ 
tainer,  a  container  of  body ;  it  is  the  home  of  such  things  as  consist  of 
isolated  parts,  things,  therefore,  in  which  at  no  point  is  there  an  entirety  ; 
now,  the  soul  is  not  a  body  and  is  no  more  contained  than  containing. 

Neither  is  it  in  body  as  in  some  vessel :  whether  as  vessel  or  as 
place  of  location,  the  body  would  remain,  in  itself,  unensouled.  If  we 
are  to  think  of  some  passing-over  from  the  soul — that  self-gathered 
thing — to  the  containing  vessel,  then  soul  is  diminished  by  just  as  much 
as  the  vessel  takes. 

Space,  again,  in  the  strict  sense  is  unembodied,  and  is  not,  itself, 
body  ;  why,  then,  should  it  need  soul  ? 

Besides  (if  the  soul  were  contained  as  in  space)  contact  would  be 
only  at  the  surface  of  the  body,  not  throughout  the  entire  mass. 

Many  other  considerations  equally  refute  the  notion  that  the  soul 
is  in  body  as  (an  object)  in  space  ;  for  example,  this  space  would  be 
shifted  with  every  movement,  and  a  thing  itself  would  carry  its  own 
space  about. 

Of  course  if  by  space  we  understand  the  interval  separating  objects, 
it  is  still  less  possible  that  the  soul  be  in  body  as  in  space  :  such  a  separating 
interval  must  be  a  void  ;  but  body  is  not  a  void  ;  the  void  must  be  that 
in  which  body  is  placed  ;  body  (not  soul)  will  be  in  the  void. 

Nor  can  it  be  in  the  body  as  in  some  substratum  :  anything  in  a 
substratum  is  a  condition  affecting  that — a  colour,  a  form — but  the  soul 
(is  no  condition  of  something  else),  is  a  separate  existence. 

Nor  is  it  present  as  a  part  in  the  whole  ;  soul  is  no  part  of  body. 
If  we  are  asked  to  think  of  soul  as  a  part  in  the  living  total  we  are  faced 
with  the  old  difficulty  : — How  it  is  in  that  whole.  It  is  certainly  not 
there  as  the  wine  is  in  the  wine  jar,  or  as  the  jar  in  the  jar,  or  as  some 
absolute  is  self-present. 

Nor  can  the  presence  be  that  of  a  whole  in  its  part :  It  would  be 
absurd  to  think  of  the  soul  as  a  total  of  which  the  body  should  represent 
the  parts. 

It  is  not  present  as  Form  is  in  Matter ;  for  the  Form  as  in  Matter  is 
inseparable,  and,  further,  is  something  superimposed  upon  an  already 


IV.  3-  21] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


33 


existent  thing  ;  soul,  on  the  contrary,  is  that  which  engenders  the  Form 
residing  within  the  Matter  and  therefore  is  not  the  Form.  If  the  reference 
is  not  to  the  Form  actually  present,  but  to  Form  as  a  thing  existing  apart 
from  all  formed  objects,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  such  an  entity  has  found 
its  way  into  body,  and  at  any  rate  this  makes  the  soul  separable. 

How  comes  it  then  that  everyone  speaks  of  soul  as  being  in 
body  ? 

Because  the  soul  is  not  seen  and  the  body  is  :  we  perceive  the  body, 
and  by  its  movement  and  sensation  we  understand  that  it  is  ensouled, 
and  we  say  that  it  possesses  a  soul ;  to  speak  of  residence  is  a  natural 
sequence.  If  the  soul  were  visible,  an  object  of  the  senses,  radiating 
throughout  the  entire  life,  if  it  were  manifest  in  full  force  to  the  very 
outermost  surface,  we  would  no  longer  speak  of  soul  as  in  body  ;  we 
would  say  the  minor  was  within  the  major,  the  contained  within  the 
container,  the  fleeting  within  the  perdurable. 

21. 

What  does  all  this  come  to  ?  What  answer  do  we  give  to  any  who, 
with  no  opinion  of  his  own  to  assert,  asks  us  to  explain  this  presence  ? 
And  what  do  we  say  to  the  question  whether  there  is  one  only  mode  of 
presence  of  the  entire  soul  or  different  modes,  phase  and  phase  ? 

Of  the  modes  currently  accepted  for  the  presence  of  one  thing  in 
another,  none  really  meets  the  case  of  the  soul’s  relation  to  the  body. 
Thus  we  are  given  as  a  parallel  the  steersman  in  the  ship  ;  this  serves 
adequately  to  indicate  that  the  soul  is  potentially  separable,  but  the 
mode  of  presence,  which  is  what  we  are  seeking,  it  does  not  exhibit. 

We  can  imagine  it  within  the  body  in  some  incidental  way — for 
example,  as  a  voyager  in  a  ship— but  scarcely  as  the  steersman  :  and,  of 
course,  too,  the  steersman  is  not  omnipresent  to  the  ship  as  the  soul  is 
to  the  body. 

May  we,  perhaps,  compare  it  to  the  science  or  skill  that  acts  through 
its  appropriate  instruments — through  a  helm,  let  us  say,  which  should 
happen  to  be  a  live  thing— so  that  the  soul  effecting  the  movements 
dictated  by  seamanship  is  an  indwelling  directive  force  ? 


34 


PLOTINUS 


No  :  the  comparison  breaks  down,  since  the  science  is  something 
outside  of  helm  and  ship. 

Is  it  any  help  to  adopt  the  illustration  of  the  steersman  taking  the 
helm,  and  to  station  the  soul  within  the  body  as  the  steersman  may  be 
thought  to  be  within  the  material  instrument  through  which  he  works  ? 
Soul,  whenever  and  wherever  it  chooses  to  operate,  does  in  much  that 
way  move  the  body. 

No  ;  even  in  this  parallel  we  have  no  explanation  of  the  mode  of 
presence  within  the  instrument  ;  we  cannot  be  satisfied  without  further 
search,  a  closer  approach. 


22. 

May  we  think  that  the  mode  of  the  soul’s  presence  to  body  is  that 
of  the  presence  of  light  to  the  air  ? 

This  certainly  is  presence  with  distinction  :  the  light  penetrates 
through  and  through,  but  nowhere  coalesces  ;  the  light  is  the  stable 
thing,  the  air  flows  in  and  out ;  when  the  air  passes  beyond  the  lit  area 
it  is  dark  ;  under  the  light  it  is  lit  :  we  have  a  true  parallel  to  what  we 
have  been  saying  of  body  and  soul,  for  the  air  is  in  the  light  quite  as 
much  as  the  light  in  the  air. 

Plato  therefore  is  wise  when,  in  treating  of  the  All  he  puts  the  body 
in  its  soul  and  not  its  soul  in  the  body,  and  says  that  while  there  is  a 
region  of  that  soul  which  contains  body,  there  is  another  region  to  which 
body  does  not  enter — certain  powers,  that  is,  with  which  body  has  no 
concern.  And  what  is  true  of  the  All-Soul  is  true  of  the  others. 

There  are,  therefore,  certain  soul-powers  whose  presence  to  body 
must  be  denied. 

The  phases  present  are  those  which  the  nature  of  body  demands  : 
they  are  present  without  being  resident — either  in  any  parts  of  the  body 
or  in  the  body  as  a  whole. 

For  the  purposes  of  sensation  the  sensitive  phase  of  the  soul  is 
present  to  the  entire  sensitive  being  :  for  the  purposes  of  act,  differen¬ 
tiation  begins  ;  every  soul  phase  operates  at  a  point  peculiar  to  itself. 


IV.  3-  23] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


35 


23- 

I  explain  : — A  living  body  is  illuminated  by  soul :  each  organ  and 
member  participates  in  soul  after  some  manner  peculiar  to  itself ;  the 
organ  is  adapted  to  a  certain  function,  and  this  fitness  is  the  vehicle 
of  the  soul-faculty  under  which  the  function  is  performed ;  thus  the 
seeing  faculty  acts  through  the  eyes,  the  hearing  faculty  through  the 
ears,  the  tasting  faculty  through  the  tongue,  the  faculty  of  smelling 
through  the  nostrils,  and  the  faculty  of  sentient  touch  is  present  through¬ 
out,  since  in  this  particular  form  of  perception  the  entire  body  is  an 
instrument  in  the  soul's  service. 

The  vehicles  of  touch  are  mainly  centred  in  the  nerves — which 
moreover  are  vehicles  of  the  faculty  by  which  the  movements  of  the 
living  being  are  affected — in  them  the  soul-faculty  concerned  makes 
itself  present ;  the  nerves  start  from  the  brain.  The  brain  therefore  has 
been  considered  as  the  centre  and  seat  of  the  principle  which  determines 
feeling  and  impulse  and  the  entire  act  of  the  organism  as  a  living  thing  ; 
where  the  instruments  are  found  to  be  linked,  there  the  operating  faculty 
is  assumed  to  be  situated.  But  it  would  be  wiser  to  say  only  that  there 
is  situated  the  first  activity  of  the  operating  faculty :  the  power  to  be 
exercised  by  the  operator — in  keeping  with  the  particular  instrument — 
must  be  considered  as  concentrated  at  the  point  at  which  the  instru¬ 
ment  is  to  be  first  applied  ;  or,  since  the  soul’s  faculty  is  of  universal 
scope  the  sounder  statement  is  that  the  point  of  origin  of  the  instrument 
is  the  point  of  origin  of  the  act. 

Now,  the  faculty  presiding  over  sensation  and  impulse  is  vested  in 
the  sensitive  and  representative  soul ;  it  draws  upon  the  Reason-Prin¬ 
ciple  immediately  above  itself ;  downward,  it  is  in  contact  with  an 
inferior  of  its  own  :  on  this  analogy  the  uppermost  member  of  the  living 
being  was  taken  by  the  ancients  to  be  obviously  its  seat ;  they  lodged 
it  in  the  brain,  or  not  exactly  in  the  brain  but  in  that  sensitive  part 
which  is  the  medium  through  which  the  Reason-Principle  impinges  upon 
the  brain.  They  saw  that  something  must  be  definitely  allocated  to 
body — at  the  point  most  receptive  of  the  act  of  reason — while  something, 
utterly  isolated  from  body  must  be  in  contact  with  that  superior  thing 


PLOTINUS 


36 

which  is  a  form  of  soul  (and  not  merely  of  the  vegetative  or  other  quasi- 
corporeal  forms  but)  of  that  soul  apt  to  the  appropriation  of  the  percep¬ 
tions  originating  in  the  Reason-Principle. 

Such  a  linking  there  must  be,  since  in  perception  there  is  some 
element  of  judging,  in  representation  something  intuitional,  and  since 
impulse  and  appetite  derive  from  representation  and  reason.  The 
reasoning  faculty,  therefore,  is  present  where  these  experiences  occur, 
present  not  as  in  a  place  but  in  the  fact  that  what  is  there  draws  upon  it. 
As  regards  perception  we  have  already  explained  in  what  sense  it  is  local. 

But  every  living  being  includes  the  vegetal  principle,  that  principle 
of  growth  and  nourishment  which  maintains  the  organism  by  means  of 
the  blood  ;  this  nourishing  medium  is  contained  in  the  veins  ;  the  veins 
and  blood  have  their  origin  in  the  liver  :  from  observation  of  these  facts 
the  power  concerned  was  assigned  a  place  ;  the  phase  of  the  soul,  which 
has  to  do  with  desire,  was  allocated  to  the  liver.  Certainly  what  brings 
to  birth  and  nourishes  and  gives  growth  must  have  the  desire  of  these 
functions.  Blood — subtle,  light,  swift,  pure — is  the  vehicle  most  apt  to 
animal  spirit :  the  heart,  then,  its  well-spring,  the  place  where  such 
blood  is  sifted  into  being,  is  taken  as  the  fixed  centre  of  the  ebullition 
of  the  passionate  nature. 

24. 

Now  comes  the  question  of  the  soul  leaving  the  body  ;  where  does 
itgo? 

It  cannot  remain  in  this  world  where  there  is  no  natural  recipient 
for  it ;  and  it  cannot  remain  attached  to  anything  not  of  a  character 
to  hold  it :  it  can  be  held  here  when  only  it  is  less  than  wise,  containing 
within  itself  something  of  that  which  lures  it. 

If  it  does  contain  any  such  alien  element  it  gives  itself,  with  increasing 
attachment,  to  the  sphere  to  which  that  element  naturally  belongs  and 
tends. 

The  space  open  to  the  soul’s  resort  is  vast  and  diverse  ;  the  difference 
will  come  by  the  double  force  of  the  individual  condition  and  of  the 
justice  reigning  in  things.  No  one  can  ever  escape  the  suffering  entailed 


IV.  3-  25] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


37 


by  ill  deeds  done  :  the  divine  law  is  ineluctable,  carrying  bound  up, 
as  one  with  it,  the  fore-ordained  execution  of  its  doom.  The  sufferer, 
all  unaware,  is  swept  onward  towards  his  due,  hurried  always  by  the 
restless  driving  of  his  errors,  until  at  last  wearied  out  by  that  against 
which  he  struggled,  he  falls  into  his  fit  place  and,  by  self-chosen  move¬ 
ment,  is  brought  to  the  lot  he  never  chose.  And  the  law  decrees,  also, 
the  intensity  and  the  duration  of  the  suffering  while  it  carries  with  it, 
too,  the  lifting  of  chastisement  and  the  faculty  of  rising  from  those 
places  of  pain — all  by  power  of  the  harmony  that  maintains  the  universal 
scheme. 

Souls,  body-bound,  are  apt  to  body-punishment ;  clean  souls  no 
longer  drawing  to  themselves  at  any  point  any  vestige  of  body  are,  by 
their  very  being,  outside  the  bodily  sphere  ;  body-free,  containing  nothing 
of  body — there  where  Essence  is,  and  Being,  and  the  Divine  within  the 
Divinity,  among  Those,  within  That,  such  a  soul  must  be. 

If  you  still  ask  Where,  you  must  ask  where  those  Beings  are — and 
in  your  seeking,  seek  otherwise  than  with  the  sight,  and  not  as  one 
seeking  for  body. 

25- 

Now  comes  the  question,  equally  calling  for  an  answer,  whether 
those  souls  that  have  quitted  the  places  of  earth  retain  memory  of  their 
lives — all  souls  or  some,  of  all  things,  or  of  some  things,  and,  again,  for 
ever  or  merely  for  some  period  not  very  long  after  their  withdrawal. 

A  true  investigation  of  this  matter  requires  us  to  establish  first 
what  a  remembering  principle  must  be — I  do  not  mean  what  memory  is, 
but  in  what  order  of  beings  it  can  occur.  The  nature  of  memory  has  been 
indicated,  laboured  even,  elsewhere  ;  we  still  must  try  to  understand 
more  clearly  what  characteristics  are  present  where  memory  exists. 

Now  a  memory  has  to  do  with  something  brought  into  ken  from 
without,  something  learned  or  something  experienced  ;  the  Memory- 
Principle,  therefore,  cannot  belong  to  such  beings  as  are  immune  from 
experience  and  from  time. 

No  memory,  therefore,  can  be  ascribed  to  any  divine  being,  or  to 


PLOTINUS 


38 

the  Authentic-Existent  or  the  Intellectual-Principle  :  these  are  intan¬ 
gibly  immune  ;  time  does  not  approach  them  ;  they  possess  eternity 
centred  around  Being  ;  they  know  nothing  of  past  and  sequent ;  all 
is  an  unbroken  state  of  identity,  not  receptive  of  change.  Now  a  being 
rooted  in  unchanging  identity  cannot  entertain  memory,  since  it  has 
not  and  never  had  a  state  differing  from  any  previous  state,  or  any  new 
intellection  following  upon  a  former  one,  so  as  to  be  aware  of  contrast 
between  a  present  perception  and  one  remembered  from  before. 

But  what  prevents  such  a  being  (from  possessing  memory  in  the 
sense  of)  perceiving,  without  variation  in  itself,  such  outside  changes 
as,  for  example,  the  kosmic  periods  ? 

Simply  the  fact  that  following  the  changes  of  the  revolting  kosmos 
it  would  have  perception  of  earlier  and  later :  intuition  and  memory 
are  distinct. 

We  cannot  hold  its  self-intellections  to  be  acts  of  memory ;  this 
is  no  question  of  something  entering  from  without,  to  be  grasped  and 
held  in  fear  of  an  escape  ;  if  its  intellections  could  slip  away  from  it 
(as  a  memory  might)  its  very  Essence  (as  the  Hypostasis  of  inherent 
Intellection)  would  be  in  peril. 

For  the  same  reason  memory,  in  the  current  sense,  cannot  be 
attributed  to  the  soul  in  connection  with  the  ideas  inherent  in  its  essence  : 
these  it  holds  not  as  a  memory  but  as  a  possession,  though,  by  its  very 
entrance  into  this  sphere,  they  are  no  longer  the  mainstay  of  its  Act. 

The  Soul-action  which  is  to  be  observed  seems  to  have  induced 
the  Ancients  to  ascribe  memory,  and  “  Recollection,”  (the  Platonic 
Anamnesis)  to  souls  bringing  into  outward  manifestation  the  ideas  they 
contain  :  we  see  at  once  that  the  memory  here  indicated  is  another 
kind  ;  it  is  a  memory  outside  of  time. 

But,  perhaps,  this  is  treating  too  summarily  a  matter  which  demands 
minute  investigation.  It  might  be  doubted  whether  that  recollection, 
that  memory,  really  belongs  to  the  highest  soul  and  not  rather  to  another, 
a  dimmer,  or  even  to  the  Couplement,  the  Living-Being.  And  if  to  that 
dimmer  soul,  when  and  how  has  it  come  to  be  present ;  if  to  the  Couple¬ 
ment,  again  when  and  how  ? 


IV.  3-  26] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


39 


We  are  driven  thus  to  enquire  into  these  several  points  :  in  which 
of  the  constituents  of  our  nature  is  memory  vested — the  question  with 
which  we  started — if  in  the  soul,  then  in  what  power  or  part  ;  if  in  the 
Animate  or  Couplement — which  has  been  supposed,  similarly  to  be  the 
seat  of  sensation  then  by  what  mode  it  is  present,  and  how  we  are  to 
define  the  Couplement ;  finally  whether  sensation  and  intellectual  acts 
may  be  ascribed  to  one  and  the  same  agent,  or  imply  two  distinct 
principles. 


26. 

Now  if  sensations  of  the  active  order  depend  upon  the  Couplement 
of  soul  and  body,  sensation  must  be  of  that  double  nature.  Hence  it  is 
classed  as  one  of  the  shared  acts  :  the  soul,  in  the  feeling,  may  be  com¬ 
pared  to  the  workman  in  such  operations  as  boring  or  weaving,  the  body 
to  the  tool  employed  :  the  body  is  passive  and  menial ;  the  soul  is  active, 
reading  such  impressions  as  are  made  upon  the  body  or  discerned  by 
means  of  the  body,  perhaps  entertaining  only  a  judgement  formed  as  the 
result  of  the  bodily  experiences. 

In  such  a  process  it  is  at  once  clear  that  the  sensation  is  a  shared 
task  ;  but  the  memory  is  not  thus  made  over  to  the  Couplement,  since 
the  soul  has  from  the  first  taken  over  the  impression,  either  to  retain 
or  to  reject. 

It  might  be  ventured  that  memory,  no  less  than  sensation,  is  a 
function  of  the  Couplement,  on  the  ground  that  bodily  constitution 
determines  our  memories  good  or  bad ;  but  the  answer  would  come 
that,  whether  the  body  happens  or  not  to  be  a  hindrance,  the  act  of 
remembering  would  still  be  an  act  of  the  soul.  And  in  the  case  of  matters 
learned  (and  not  merely  felt,  as  corporeal  experiences),  how  can  we 
think  of  the  Couplement  of  soul  and  body  as  the  remembering  principle  ? 
Here,  surely,  it  must  be  soul  alone  ? 

We  may  be  told  that  the  living-being  is  a  Couplement  in  the  sense 
of  something  entirely  distinct  formed  from  the  two  elements  (so  that  it 
might  have  memory  though  neither  soul  nor  body  had  it).  But,  to 
begin  with,  it  is  absurd  to  class  the  living-being  as  neither  body  nor 


PLOTINUS 


40 

soul ;  these  two  things  cannot  so  change  as  to  make  a  distinct  third, 
nor  can  they  blend  so  utterly  that  the  soul  shall  become  a  mere  faculty 
of  the  animate  whole.  And,  further,  supposing  they  could  so  blend, 
memory  would  still  be  due  to  the  soul  just  as  in  honey-wine  all  the 

sweetness  will  be  due  to  the  honey. 

It  may  be  suggested  the  while  the  soul  is  perhaps  not  in  itself  a 
remembering  principle,  yet  that,  having  lost  its  purity  and  acquired 
some  degree  of  modification  by  its  presence  in  body,  it  becomes  capable 
of  reproducing  the  imprints  of  sensible  objects  and  experiences,  and  that, 
seated,  as  roughly  speaking  it  is,  within  the  body — it  may  reasonably 
be  thought  capable  of  accepting  such  impressions,  and  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  retain  them  (thus  in  some  sense  possessing  memory.) 

But,  to  begin  with,  these  imprints  are  not  magnitudes  (are  not  of 
corporeal  nature  at  all) ;  there  is  no  resemblance  to  seal  impressions,  no 
stamping  of  a  resistant  matter,  for  there  is  neither  the  down-thrust  (as  of 
the  seal)  nor  (the  acceptance)  as  in  the  wax  :  the  process  is  entirely  of 
the  intellect,  though  exercised  upon  things  of  sense  ;  and  what  kind  of 
resistance  (or  other  physical  action)  can  be  affirmed  in  matters  of  the 
intellectual  order,  or  what  need  can  there  be  of  body  or  bodily  quality 
as  a  means  ? 

Further  there  is  one  order  of  which  the  memory  must  obviously 
belong  to  the  soul ;  it  alone  can  remember  its  own  movements,  for 
example  its  desires  and  those  frustrations  of  desire  in  which  the  coveted 
thing  never  came  to  the  body  :  the  body  can  have  nothing  to  tell  about 
things  which  never  approached  it,  and  the  soul  cannot  use  the  body 
as  a  means  to  the  remembrance  of  what  the  body  by  its  nature  cannot 
know. 

If  the  soul  is  to  have  any  significance — to  be  a  definite  principle 
with  a  function  of  its  own — we  are  forced  to  recognise  two  orders  of 
fact,  an  order  in  which  the  body  is  a  means  but  all  culminates  in  soul, 
and  an  order  which  is  of  the  soul  alone.  This  being  admitted,  aspiration 
will  belong  to  soul,  and  so,  as  a  consequence,  will  that  memory  of  the 
aspiration  and  of  its  attainment  or  frustration,  without  which  the  soul’s 
nature  would  fall  into  the  category  of  the  unstable  (that  is  to  say  of  the 


IV.  3-  27] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


4i 


undivine,  unreal).  Deny  this  character  of  the  soul  and  at  once  we  refuse 
it  perception,  consciousness,  any  power  of  comparison,  almost  any 
understanding.  Yet  these  powers  of  which,  embodied,  it  becomes  the 
source  cannot  be  absent  from  its  own  nature.  On  the  contrary  ;  it 
possesses  certain  activities  to  be  expressed  in  various  functions  whose 
accomplishment  demands  bodily  organs  ;  at  its  entry  it  brings  with  it 
(as  vested  in  itself  alone)  the  powers  necessary  for  some  of  these  func¬ 
tions,  while  in  the  case  of  others  it  brings  the  very  activities  themselves. 

Memory,  in  point  of  fact,  is  impeded  by  the  body  :  even  as  things 
are,  addition  often  brings  forgetfulness  ;  with  thinning  and  clearing 
away,  memory  will  often  revive.  The  soul  is  a  stability  ;  the  shifting 
and  fleeting  thing  which  body  is  can  be  a  cause  only  of  its  forgetting  not 
of  its  remembering — Lethe  stream  may  be  understood  in  this  sense — 
and  memory  is  a  fact  of  the  soul. 

27. 

But  of  what  soul ;  of  that  which  we  envisage  as  the  more  divine,  by 
which  we  are  human  beings,  or  that  other  which  springs  from  the  All  ? 

Memory  must  be  admitted  in  both  of  these,  personal  memories  and 
shared  memories ;  and  when  the  two  souls  are  together,  the  memories 
also  are  as  one  ;  when  they  stand  apart,  assuming  that  both  exist  and 
endure,  each  soon  forgets  the  other’s  affairs,  retaining  for  a  longer  time 
its  own.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Shade  of  Hercules  in  the  lower  regions — 
this  “  Shade,”  as  I  take  it,  being  the  characteristically  human  part — 
remembers  all  the  action  and  experience  of  the  life,  since  that  career 
was  mainly  of  the  hero’s  personal  shaping  ;  the  other  souls  (soul-phases) 
going  to  constitute  the  joint-being  could,  for  all  their  different  standing, 
have  nothing  to  recount  but  the  events  of  that  same  life,  doings  which 
they  knew  from  the  time  of  their  association  :  perhaps  they  would  add 
also  some  moral  judgement. 

What  the  Hercules  standing  outside  the  Shade  spoke  of  we  are  not 
told  :  what  can  we  think  that  other,  the  freed  and  isolated,  soul  would 
recount  ? 

The  soul,  still  a  dragged  captive,  will  tell  of  all  the  man  did  and 


PLOTINUS 


42 

felt ;  but  upon  death  there  will  appear,  as  time  passes,  memories  of  the 
lives  lived  before,  some  of  the  events  of  the  most  recent  life  being  dis¬ 
missed  as  trivial.  As  it  grows  away  from  the  body,  it  will  revive  things 
forgotten  in  the  corporeal  state,  and  if  it  passes  in  and  out  of  one  body 
after  another,  it  will  tell  over  the  events  of  the  discarded  life,  it  will 
treat  as  present  that  which  it  has  just  left,  and  it  will  remember  much 
from  the  former  existence.  But  with  lapse  of  time  it  will  come  to 
forgetfulness  of  many  things  that  were  mere  accretion. 

Then,  free  and  alone  at  last,  what  will  it  have  to  remember  ? 

The  answer  to  that  question  depends  on  our  discovering  in  what 
faculty  of  the  soul  memory  resides. 

28. 

Is  memory  vested  in  the  faculty  by  which  we  perceive  and  learn  ? 
Or  does  it  reside  in  the  faculty  by  which  we  set  things  before  our  minds 
as  objects  of  desire  or  of  anger,  the  passionate  faculty  ? 

This  will  be  maintained  on  the  ground  that  there  could  scarcely  be 
both  a  first  faculty  in  direct  action  and  a  second  to  remember  what  that 
first  experiences.  It  is  certain  that  the  desiring  faculty  is  apt  to  be 
stirred  by  what  it  has  once  enjoyed ;  the  object  presents  itself  again  ; 
evidently,  memory  is  at  work  ;  why  else,  the  same  object  with  the  same 
attraction  ? 

But,  at  that,  we  might  reasonably  ascribe  to  the  desiring  faculty  the 
very  perception  of  the  desired  objects  and  then  the  desire  itself  to  the 
perceptive  faculty,  and  so  on  all  through,  and  in  the  end  conclude  that 
the  distinctive  names  merely  indicate  the  function  which  happens  to  be 
uppermost. 

Yet  the  perception  is  very  different  from  faculty  to  faculty  ;  cer¬ 
tainly  it  is  sight  and  not  desire  that  sees  the  object ;  desire  is  stirred 
merely  as  a  result  of  the  seeing,  by  a  transmission  ;  its  act  is  not  in  the 
nature  of  an  identification  of  an  object  seen  ;  all  is  simply  blind  response 
(automatic  reaction).  Similarly  with  rage  ;  sight  reveals  the  offender 
and  the  passion  leaps  ;  we  may  think  of  a  shepherd  seeing  a  wolf  at  his 
flock,  and  a  dog,  seeing  nothing,  who  springs  to  the  scent  or  the  sound. 


IV.  3-  29] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


43 


In  other  words  the  desiring  faculty  has  had  the  emotion,  but  the 
trace  it  keeps  of  the  event  is  not  a  memory  ;  it  is  a  condition,  something 
passively  accepted  :  there  is  another  faculty  that  was  aware  of  the 
enjoyment  and  retains  the  memory  of  what  has  happened.  This  is 
confirmed  by  the  fact  that  many  satisfactions  which  the  desiring  faculty 
has  enjoyed  are  not  retained  in  the  memory  :  if  memory  resided  in  the 
desiring  faculty,  such  forgetfulness  could  not  be. 

29- 

Are  we,  then,  to  refer  memory  to  the  perceptive  faculty  and  so 
make  one  principle  of  our  nature  the  seat  of  both  awareness  and 
remembrance  ? 

Now  supposing  the  very  Shade,  as  we  were  saying  in  the  case  of 
Hercules,  has  memory,  then  the  perceptive  faculty  is  twofold. 

[(And  if  (on  the  same  supposition)  the  faculty  that  remembers  is 
not  the  faculty  that  perceives,  but  some  other  thing,  then  the  remem¬ 
bering  faculty  is  two-fold.)] 

And  further  if  the  perceptive  faculty  (=the  memory)  deals  with 
matters  learned  (as  well  as  with  matters  of  observation  and  feeling)  it 
will  be  the  faculty  for  the  processes  of  reason  also  :  but  these  two  orders 
certainly  require  two  separate  faculties. 

Must  we  then  suppose  a  common  faculty  of  apprehension  (one 
covering  both  sense  perceptions  and  ideas)  and  assign  memory  in  both 
orders  to  this  ? 

The  solution  might  serve  if  there  were  one  and  the  same  percipient 
for  objects  of  sense  and  objects  of  the  Intellectual-Kind ;  but  if  these 
stand  in  definite  duality,  then,  for  all  we  can  say  or  do,  we  are  left  with 
two  separate  principles  of  memory ;  and,  supposing  each  of  the  two 
orders  of  soul  to  possess  both  principles,  then  we  have  four. 

And,  on  general  grounds,  what  compelling  reason  is  there  that  the 
principle  by  which  we  perceive  should  be  the  principle  by  which  we 
remember,  that  these  two  acts  should  be  vested  in  the  one  faculty  ? 
Why  must  the  seat  of  our  intellectual  action  be  also  the  seat  of  our 
remembrance  of  that  action  ?  The  most  powerful  thought  does  not 


PLOTINUS 


44 

always  go  with  the  readiest  memory  ;  people  of  equal  perception  are 
not  equally  good  at  remembering  ;  some  are  especially  gifted  in  percep¬ 
tion,  others,  never  swift  to  grasp,  are  strong  to  retain. 

But,  once  more,  admitting  two  distinct  principles,  something  quite 
separate  remembering  what  sense-perception  has  first  known  still 
this  something  must  have  felt  what  it  is  required  to  remember  ? 

No  \  we  may  well  conceive  that  where  there  is  to  be  memory  of  a 
sense-perception,  this  perception  becomes  a  mere  presentment,  and  that 
to  this  image-grasping  power,  a  distinct  thing,  belongs  the  memory, 
the  retention  of  the  object  :  for  in  this  imaging  faculty  the  perception 
culminates  ;  the  impression  passes  away  but  the  vision  remains  present 
to  the  imagination. 

By  the  fact  of  harbouring  the  presentment  of  an  object  that  has 
disappeared,  the  imagination  is,  at  once,  a  seat  of  memory  :  where  the 
persistence  of  the  image  is  brief,  the  memory  is  poor ;  people  of  powerful 
memory  are  those  in  whom  the  image-holding  power  is  firmer,  not  easily 
allowing  the  record  to  be  jostled  out  of  its  grip. 

Remembrance,  thus,  is  vested  in  the  imaging  faculty  ;  and  memory 
deals  with  images.  Its  differing  quality  or  degree  from  man  to  man,  we 
would  explain  by  difference  or  similarity  in  the  strength  of  the  individual 
powers,  by  conduct  like  or  unlike,  by  bodily  conditions  present  or  absent, 
producing  change  and  disorder  or  not — a  point  this,  however,  which 
need  not  detain  us  here. 


30. 

But  what  of  the  memory  of  mental  acts  :  do  these  also  fall  under 
the  imaging  faculty  ? 

If  every  mental  act  is  accompanied  by  an  image  we  may  well  believe 
that  this  image,  fixed  and  like  a  picture  of  the  thought,  would  explain 
how  we  remember  the  object  of  knowledge  once  entertained.  But  if 
there  is  no  such  necessary  image,  another  solution  must  be  sought. 
Perhaps  memory  would  be  the  reception,  into  the  image-making  faculty, 
of  the  Reason-Principle  which  accompanies  the  mental  conception  : 
this  mental  conception — an  indivisible  thing,  and  one  that  never  rises 


IV.  3-  31] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


45 


to  the  exterior  of  the  consciousness — lies  unknown  below  ;  the  Reason- 
Principle — the  revealer,  the  bridge  between  the  concept  and  the  image¬ 
taking  faculty — exhibits  the  concept  as  in  a  mirror ;  the  apprehension 
by  the  image-taking  faculty  would  thus  constitute  the  enduring  presence 
of  the  concept,  would  be  our  memory  of  it. 

This  explains,  also,  another  fact : — the  soul  is  unfailingly  intent  upon 
intellection ;  only  when  it  acts  upon  this  image-making  faculty  does  its 
intellection  become  a  human  perception  :  intellection  is  one  thing, 
the  perception  of  an  intellection  is  another  :  we  are  continuously  intuitive 
but  we  are  not  unbrokenly  aware  :  the  reason  is  that  the  recipient  in 
us  receives  from  both  sides,  absorbing  not  merely  intellections  but  also 
sense-percept  ions . 

31. 

But  if  each  of  the  two  phases  of  the  soul,  as  we  have  said,  possesses 
memory,  and  memory  is  vested  in  the  imaging  faculty,  there  must  be 
two  such  faculties.  Now  that  is  all  very  well  as  long  as  the  two  souls 
stand  apart ;  but,  when  they  are  at  one  in  us,  what  becomes  of  the  two 
faculties,  and  in  which  of  them  is  the  imaging  faculty  vested  ? 

If  each  soul  has  its  own  imaging  faculty  the  images  must  in  all 
cases  be  duplicated,  since  we  cannot  think  that  one  faculty  deals  only 
with  intellectual  objects,  and  the  other  with  objects  of  sense,  a  distinc¬ 
tion  which  inevitably  implies  the  co-existence  in  man  of  two  life-principles 
utterly  unrelated. 

And  if  both  orders  of  image  act  upon  both  orders  of  soul,  what 
difference  is  there  in  the  souls  ;  and  how  does  the  fact  escape  our 
knowledge  ? 

The  answer  is  that,  when  the  two  souls  chime  each  with  each,  the 
two  imaging  faculties  no  longer  stand  apart ;  the  union  is  dominated 
by  the  more  powerful  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  and  thus  the  image 
perceived  is  as  one  ;  the  less  powerful  is  like  a  shadow  attending  upon 
the  dominant,  like  a  minor  light  merging  into  a  greater  :  when  they  are 
in  conflict,  in  discord,  the  minor  is  distinctly  apart,  a  self -standing  thing 


PLOTINUS 


46 

— though  its  isolation  is  not  perceived,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the 
separate  being  of  the  two  souls  escapes  observation. 

The  two  have  run  into  a  unity  in  which,  yet,  one  is  the  loftier  : 
this  loftier  knows  all ;  when  it  breaks  from  the  union,  it  retains  some  of 
the  experiences  of  its  companion,  but  dismisses  others  ;  thus  we  accept 
the  talk  of  our  less  valued  associates,  but,  on  a  change  of  company, 
we  remember  little  from  the  first  set  and  more  from  those  in  whom  we 
recognise  a  higher  quality. 


32* 

But  the  memory  of  friends,  children,  wife  ?  Country  too,  and  all 
that  the  better  sort  of  man  may  reasonably  remember  ? 

All  these,  the  one  (the  lower  man)  retains  with  emotion,  the  authen¬ 
tic  man  passively  :  for  the  experience,  certainly,  was  first  felt  in  that 
lower  phase  from  which,  however,  the  best  of  such  impressions  pass 
over  to  the  graver  soul  in  the  degree  in  which  the  two  are  in  communica¬ 
tion. 

The  lower  soul  must  be  always  striving  to  attain  to  memory  of 
the  activities  of  the  higher :  this  will  be  especially  so  when  it  is  itself 
of  a  fine  quality,  for  there  will  always  be  some  that  are  better  from  the 
beginning  and  bettered  here  by  the  guidance  of  the  higher. 

The  loftier,  on  the  contrary,  must  desire  to  come  to  a  happy  forget¬ 
fulness  of  all  that  has  reached  it  through  the  lower  :  for  one  reason,  there 
is  always  the  possibility  that  the  very  excellence  of  the  lower  prove 
detrimental  to  the  higher,  tending  to  keep  it  down  by  sheer  force  of 
vitality.  In  any  case  the  more  urgent  the  intention  towards  the  Supreme, 
the  more  extensive  will  be  the  soul’s  forgetfulness,  unless  indeed,  when 
the  entire  living  has,  even  here,  been  such  that  memory  has  nothing 
but  the  noblest  to  deal  with  :  in  this  world  itself,  all  is  best  when  human 
interests  have  been  held  aloof  ;  so,  therefore,  it  must  be  with  the  memory 
of  them.  In  this  sense  we  may  truly  say  that  the  good  soul  is  the  forgetful. 
It  flees  multiplicity ;  it  seeks  to  escape  the  unbounded  by  drawing  all 
to  unity,  for  only  thus  is  it  free  from  entanglement,  light-footed,  self- 
conducted.  Thus  it  is  that  even  in  this  world  the  soul  which  has  the 


IV.  4.  I] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


47 


desire  of  the  other  is  putting  away,  amid  its  actual  life,  all  that  is  foreign 
to  that  order.  It  brings  there  very  little  of  what  it  has  gathered  here ;  as 
long  as  it  is  in  the  heavenly  regions  only,  it  will  have  more  than  it  can  retain. 

The  Hercules  of  the  heavenly  regions  would  still  tell  of  his  feats : 
but  there  is  the  other  man  to  whom  all  of  that  is  trivial ;  he  has  been 
translated  to  a  holier  place  ;  he  has  won  his  way  to  the  Intellectual 
Realm ;  he  is  more  than  Hercules,  proven  in  the  combats  in  which  the 
combatants  are  the  wise. 


FOURTH  TRACTATE 

Problems  of  the  Soul  (II) 

i. 

What,  then,  will  be  the  Soul’s  discourse,  what  its  memories  in  the 
Intellectual  Realm,  when  at  last  it  has  won  its  way  to  that  Essence  ? 

Obviously  from  what  we  have  been  saying,  it  will  be  in  contempla¬ 
tion  of  that  order,  and  have  its  Act  upon  the  things  among  which  it  now 
is  ;  failing  such  Contemplation  and  Act,  its  being  is  not  there.  Of  things 
of  earth  it  will  know  nothing ;  it  will  not,  for  example,  remember  an 
act  of  philosophic  virtue,  or  even  that  in  its  earthly  career  it  had 
contemplation  of  the  Supreme. 

When  we  seize  anything  in  the  direct  intellectual  act  there  is  room 
for  nothing  else  than  to  know  and  to  contemplate  the  object  ;  and  in 
the  knowing  there  is  not  included  any  previous  knowledge  ;  all  such 
assertion  of  stage  and  progress  belongs  to  the  lower  and  is  a  sign  of  the 
altered  ;  this  means  that,  once  purely  in  the  Intellectual,  no  one  of  us 
can  have  any  memory  of  our  experience  here.  Further ;  if  all  intellec¬ 
tion  is  timeless — as  appears  from  the  fact  that  the  Intellectual  beings 
are  of  eternity  not  of  time — there  can  be  no  memory  in  the  intellectual 
world,  not  merely  none  of  earthly  things  but  none  whatever:  all  is 
presence  There  ;  for  nothing  passes  away,  there  is  no  change  from 
old  to  new. 

This,  however,  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  distinction  exists  in 


PLOTINUS 


48 

that  realm — downwards  from  the  Supreme  to  the  Ideas,  upward  from 
the  Ideas  to  the  Universal  and  to  the  Supreme.  Admitting  that  the 
Highest,  as  a  self-contained  unity,  has  no  outgoing  effect,  that  does  not 
prevent  the  soul  which  has  attained  to  the  Supreme  from  exerting  its 
own  characteristic  Act :  it  certainly  may  have  the  intuition,  not  by 
stages  and  parts,  of  that  Being  which  is  without  stage  and  part. 

But  that  would  be  in  the  nature  of  grasping  a  pure  unity  ? 

No  :  in  the  nature  of  grasping  all  the  intellectual  facts  of  a  many 
that  constitutes  a  unity.  For  since  the  object  of  vision  has  variety 
(distinction  within  its  essential  oneness)  the  intuition  must  be  multiple 
and  the  intuitions  various,  just  as  in  a  face  we  see  at  the  one  glance  eyes 
and  nose  and  all  the  rest. 

But  is  not  this  impossible  when  the  object  to  be  thus  divided  and 
treated  as  a  thing  of  grades,  is  a  pure  unity  ? 

No  :  there  has  already  been  discrimination  within  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  ;  the  Act  of  the  soul  is  little  more  than  a  reading  of  this. 

First  and  last  is  in  the  Ideas  not  a  matter  of  time,  and  so  does  not 
bring  time  into  the  soul’s  intuition  of  earlier  and  later  among  them. 
There  is  a  grading  by  order  as  well :  the  ordered  disposition  of  some 
growing  thing  begins  with  root  and  reaches  to  topmost  point,  but,  to 
one  seeing  the  plant  as  a  whole,  there  is  no  other  first  and  last  than  simply 
that  of  the  order. 

Still,  the  soul  (in  this  intuition  within  the  divine)  looks  to  what 
is  a  unity  ;  next  it  entertains  multiplicity,  all  that  is  :  how  explain  this 
grasping  first  of  the  unity  and  later  of  the  rest  ? 

The  explanation  is  that  the  unity  of  this  power  (the  Supreme)  is 
such  as  to  allow  of  its  being  multiple  to  another  principle  (the  soul),  to 
which  it  is  all  things  and  therefore  does  not  present  itself  as  one 
indivisible  object  of  intuition  :  its  activities  do  not  (like  its  essence) 
fall  under  the  rule  of  unity ;  they  are  for  ever  multiple  in  virtue  of 
that  abiding  power,  and  in  their  outgoing  they  actually  become  all  things. 

For  with  the  Intellectual  or  Supreme — considered  as  distinct  from 
the  One — there  is  already  the  power  of  harbouring  that  Principle  of 
Multiplicity,  the  source  of  things  not  previously  existent  in  its  superior. 


IV.  4-  2] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


49 


2. 

Enough  on  that  point :  we  come  now  to  the  question  of  memory 
of  the  personality  ? 

There  will  not  even  be  memory  of  the  personality ;  no  thought 
that  the  contemplator  is  the  self — Socrates,  for  example — or  that  it  is 
Intellect  or  Soul.  In  this  connection  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that, 
in  contemplative  vision,  especially  when  it  is  vivid,  we  are  not  at  the 
time  aware  of  our  own  personality ;  we  are  in  possession  of  ourselves, 
but  the  activity  is  towards  the  object  of  vision  with  which  the  thinker 
becomes  identified  ;  he  has  made  himself  over  as  matter  to  be  shaped  ; 
he  takes  ideal  form  under  the  action  of  the  vision  while  remaining, 
potentially,  himself.  This  means  that  he  is  actively  himself  when  he 
has  intellection  of  nothing. 

Or,  if  he  is  himself  (pure  and  simple),  he  is  empty  of  all :  if,  on  the 
contrary,  he  is  himself  (by  the  self-possession  of  contemplation)  in  such 
a  way  as  to  be  identified  with  what  is  all,  then  by  the  act  of  self¬ 
intellection  he  has  the  simultaneous  intellection  of  all :  in  such  a  case 
self-intuition  by  personal  activity  brings  the  intellection,  not  merely 
of  the  self,  but  also  of  the  total  therein  embraced ;  and  similarly  the 
intuition  of  the  total  of  things  brings  that  of  the  personal  self  as  included 
among  all. 

But  such  a  process  would  appear  to  introduce  into  the  Intellectual 
that  element  of  change  against  which  we  ourselves  have  only  now  been 
protesting  ? 

The  answer  is  that,  while  unchangeable  identity  is  essential  to  the 
Intellectual-Principle,  the  soul,  lying  so  to  speak  on  the  borders  of  the 
Intellectual  Realm,  is  amenable  to  change  ;  it  has,  for  example,  its 
inward  advance,  and  obviously  anything  that  attains  position  near  to 
something  motionless  does  so  by  a  change  directed  towards  that  un¬ 
changing  goal  and  is  not  itself  motionless  in  the  same  degree.  Nor  is 
it  really  change  to  turn  from  the  self  to  the  constituents  of  self  or  from 
those  constituents  to  the  self ;  and  in  this  case  the  contemplator  is  the 
total ;  the  duality  has  become  unity. 


H 


50 


PLOTINUS 


None  the  less  the  soul,  even  in  the  Intellectual  Realm,  is  under 
the  dispensation  of  a  variety  confronting  it  and  a  content  of  its  own  ? 

No  :  once  pure  in  the  Intellectual,  it  too  possesses  that  same  un¬ 
changeableness  :  for  it  possesses  identity  of  essence  ;  when  it  is  in  that 
region  it  must  of  necessity  enter  into  oneness  with  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  by  the  sheer  fact  of  its  self-orientation,  for  by  that  intention 
all  interval  disappears  ;  the  soul  advances  and  is  taken  into  unison,  and 
in  that  association  becomes  one  with  the  Intellectual-Principle  but 
not  to  its  own  destruction  :  the  two  are  one,  and  two.  In  such  a  state 
there  is  no  question  of  stage  and  change  :  the  soul,  without  motion  (but 
by  right  of  its  essential  being)  would  be  intent  upon  its  intellectual 
act,  and  in  possession,  simultaneously,  of  its  self-awareness  ;  for  it  has 
become  one  simultaneous  existence  with  the  Supreme. 

3- 

But  it  leaves  that  conjunction  ;  it  cannot  suffer  that  unity  ;  it 
falls  in  love  with  its  own  powers  and  possessions,  and  desires  to  stand 
apart  ;  it  leans  outward  so  to  speak  :  then,  it  appears  to  acquire  a 
memory  of  itself. 

In  this  self-memory  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  ;  the  memory  dealing 
with  the  Intellectual  Realm  upbears  the  soul,  not  to  fall ;  the  memory 
of  things  here  bears  it  downwards  to  this  universe  ;  the  intermediate 
memory  dealing  with  the  heavenly  sphere  holds  it  there  too ;  and,  in  all 
its  memory,  the  thing  it  has  in  mind  it  is  and  grows  to  ;  for  this  bearing- 
in -mind  must  be  either  intuition  (i.e.  knowledge  with  identity)  or  repre¬ 
sentation  by  image  :  and  the  imaging  in  the  case  of  the  soul  is  not  a 
taking  in  of  something  (as  of  an  impression)  but  is  vision  and  condition — 
so  much  so,  that,  in  its  very  sense-sight,  it  is  the  lower  in  the  degree  in 
which  it  penetrates  the  object.  Since  its  possession  of  the  total  of  things 
is  not  primal  but  secondary,  it  does  not  become  all  things  perfectly  (in 
becoming  identical  with  the  All  in  the  Intellectual)  ;  it  is  of  the  boundary 
order,  situated  between  two  regions,  and  has  tendency  to  both. 


IV.  4.  53 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


5i 


4* 

In  that  realm  it  has  also  vision,  through  the  Intellectual-Principle, 
of  The  Good  which  does  not  so  hold  to  itself  as  not  to  reach  the  soul ; 
what  intervenes  between  them  is  not  body  and  therefore  is  no  hindrance 
— and,  indeed,  where  bodily  forms  do  intervene  there  is  still  access  in 
many  ways  from  the  primal  to  the  tertiaries. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  soul  gives  itself  to  the  inferior,  the  same 
principle  of  penetration  comes  into  play,  and  it  possesses  itself,  by 
memory  and  imagination,  of  the  thing  it  desired  :  and  hence  the  memory, 
even  dealing  with  the  highest,  is  not  the  highest.  Memory,  of  course, 
must  be  understood  not  merely  of  what  might  be  called  the  sense  of 
remembrance,  but  so  as  to  include  a  condition  induced  by  the  past 
experience  or  vision.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  possessing  more  powerfully 
without  consciousness  than  in  full  knowledge ;  with  full  awareness  the 
possession  is  of  something  quite  distinct  from  the  self ;  unconscious 
possession  runs  very  close  to  identity,  and  any  such  approach  to  identifi¬ 
cation  with  the  lower  means  the  deeper  fall  of  the  soul. 

If  the  soul,  on  abandoning  its  place  in  the  Supreme,  revives  its 
memories  of  the  lower,  it  must  have  in  some  form  possessed  them  even 
there  though  the  activity  of  the  beings  in  that  realm  kept  them  in 
abeyance  :  they  could  not  be  in  the  nature  of  impressions  permanently 
adopted — a  notion  which  would  entail  absurdities — but  were  no  more 
than  a  potentiality  realised  after  return.  When  that  energy  of  the 
Intellectual  world  ceases  to  tell  upon  the  soul,  it  sees  what  it  saw  in  the 
earlier  state  before  it  revisited  the  Supreme. 

5* 

But  this  power  which  determines  memory,  is  it  also  the  principle 
by  which  the  Supreme  becomes  effective  in  us  ? 

At  any  time  when  we  have  not  been  in  direct  vision  of  that  sphere, 
memory  is  the  source  of  its  activity  within  us  ;  when  we  have  possessed 
that  vision,  its  presence  is  due  to  the  principle  by  which  we  enjoyed  it : 
this  principle  awakens  where  it  wakens  ;  and  it  alone  has  vision  in  that 
order ;  for  this  is  no  matter  to  be  brought  to  us  by  way  of  analogy,  or 


PLOTINUS 


52 

by  the  syllogistic  reasoning  whose  grounds  lie  elsewhere  ;  the  power 
which,  even  here,  we  possess  of  discoursing  upon  the  Intellectual  Beings 
is  vested,  as  we  show,  in  that  principle  which  alone  is  capable  of  their 
contemplation.  That,  we  must  awaken,  so  to  speak,  and  thus  attain 
the  vision  of  the  Supreme,  as  one,  standing  on  some  lofty  height  and 
lifting  his  eyes,  sees  what  to  those  that  have  not  mounted  with  him 

is  invisible. 

Memory,  by  this  account,  commences  after  the  soul  has  left  the 
higher  spheres  ;  it  is  first  known  in  the  celestial  period. 

A  soul  that  has  descended  from  the  Intellectual  region  to  the  celes¬ 
tial  and  there  comes  to  rest,  may  very  well  be  understood  to  recognise 
many  other  souls  known  in  its  former  state — supposing  that,  as  we  have 
said,  it  retains  recollection  of  much  that  it  knew  here.  This  recognition 
would  be  natural  if  the  bodies  with  which  those  souls  are  vested  in  the 
celestial  must  reproduce  the  former  appearance  ;  supposing  the  spherical 
form  (of  the  stars  inhabited  by  souls  in  the  mid-realm)  means  a  change 
of  appearance,  recognition  would  go  by  character,  by  the  distinctive 
quality  of  personality  ;  this  is  not  fantastic  ;  conditions  changing  need 
not  mean  a  change  of  character.  If  the  souls  have  mutual  conversation, 
this  too  would  mean  recognition. 

But  those  whose  descent  from  the  Intellectual  is  complete,  how  is  it 
with  them  ? 

They  will  recall  their  memories,  of  the  same  things,  but  with  less 
force  than  those  still  in  the  celestial,  since  they  have  had  other  ex¬ 
periences  to  remember,  and  the  lapse  of  time  will  have  utterly  obliterated 
much  of  what  was  formerly  present  to  them. 

But  what  way  of  remembering  the  Supreme  is  left  if  the  souls  have 
turned  to  the  sense-known  kosmos,  and  are  to  fall  into  this  sphere  of 
process  ? 

They  need  not  fall  to  the  ultimate  depth  :  their  downward  move¬ 
ment  may  be  checked  at  some  one  moment  of  the  way  ;  and  as  long  as 
they  have  not  touched  the  lowest  of  the  region  of  process  (the  point  at 
which  non-being  begins)  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  them  rising  once 


more. 


IV.  4.  7] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


53 


6. 

Souls  that  descend,  souls  that  change  their  state — these,  then,  may 
be  said  to  have  memory ;  which  deals  with  what  has  come  and  gone  ; 
but  what  subjects  of  remembrance  can  there  be  for  souls  whose  lot  is  to 
remain  unchanged  ? 

The  question  touches  memory  in  the  stars  in  general,  and  also  in 
the  sun  and  moon  and  ends  by  dealing  with  the  soul  of  the  All,  even  by 
audaciously  busying  itself  with  the  memories  of  Zeus  himself.  The 
enquiry  entails  the  examination  and  identification  of  acts  of  under¬ 
standing  and  of  reasoning  in  these  beings,  if  such  acts  take  place. 

Now  if,  immune  from  all  lack,  they  neither  seek  nor  doubt,  and  never 
learn,  nothing  being  absent  at  any  time  from  their  knowledge — what 
reasonings,  what  processes  of  rational  investigation,  can  take  place  in 
them,  what  acts  of  the  understanding  ? 

Even  as  regards  human  concerns  they  have  no  need  for  observation 
or  method  ;  their  administration  of  our  affairs  and  of  earth’s  in  general 
does  not  go  so  ;  the  right  ordering,  which  is  their  gift  to  the  universe,  is 
effected  by  methods  very  different. 

In  other  words,  they  have  seen  God  and  they  do  not  remember  ? 

Ah,  no  :  it  is  that  they  see  God  still  and  always,  and  that  as  long  as 
they  see,  they  cannot  tell  themselves  they  have  had  the  vision  ;  such 
reminiscence  is  for  souls  that  have  lost  it. 

7- 

Well  but  can  they  not  tell  themselves  that  yesterday,  or  last  year, 
they  moved  round  the  earth,  that  they  lived  yesterday  or  at  any  given 
moment  in  their  lives  ? 

Their  living  is  eternal,  and  eternity  is  an  unchanging  unity.  To 
identify  a  yesterday  or  a  last  year  in  their  movement  would  be  like 
isolating  the  movement  of  one  of  the  feet,  and  finding  a  this  or  a  that 
and  an  entire  series  in  what  is  a  single  act.  The  movement  of  the  celestial 
beings  is  one  movement :  it  is  our  measuring  that  presents  us  with  many 
movements,  and  with  distinct  days  determined  by  intervening  nights  : 
There  all  is  one  day  ;  series  has  no  place  ;  no  yesterday,  no  last  year. 


54 


PLOTINUS 


Still :  the  space  traversed  is  different ;  there  are  the  various  sections 
of  the  Zodiac  :  why,  then,  should  not  the  soul  say  “  I  have  traversed 
that  section  and  now  I  am  in  this  other  ?  ”  If,  also,  it  looks  down  over 
the  concerns  of  men,  must  it  not  see  the  changes  that  befall  them,  that 
they  are  not  as  they  were,  and,  by  that  observation,  that  the  beings 
and  the  things  concerned  were  otherwise  formerly  ?  And  does  not  that 
mean  memory  ? 

8. 

But,  we  need  not  record  in  memory  all  we  see  ;  mere  incidental 
concomitants  need  not  occupy  the  imagination  ;  when  things  vividly 
present  to  intuition,  or  knowledge,  happen  to  occur  in  concrete  form, 
it  is  not  necessary — unless  for  purposes  of  a  strictly  practical  adminis¬ 
tration — to  pass  over  that  direct  acquaintance,  and  fasten  upon  the 
partial  sense-presentation,  which  is  already  known  in  the  larger  know¬ 
ledge,  that  of  the  Universe. 

I  will  take  this  point  by  point : — 

First :  it  is  not  essential  that  everything  seen  should  be  laid  up  in 
the  mind  ;  for  when  the  object  is  of  no  importance,  or  of  no  personal 
concern,  the  sensitive  faculty,  stimulated  by  the  differences  in  the  objects 
present  to  vision,  acts  without  accompaniment  of  the  will,  and  is  alone 
in  entertaining  the  impression.  The  soul  does  not  take  into  its  deeper 
recesses  such  differences  as  do  not  meet  any  of  its  needs,  or  serve  any  of 
its  purposes.  Above  all,  when  the  soul’s  act  is  directed  towards  another 
order,  it  must  utterly  reject  the  memory  of  such  things,  things  over  and 
done  with  now,  and  not  even  taken  into  knowledge  when  they  were 
present. 

On  the  second  point :  circumstances,  purely  accidental,  need  not 
be  present  to  the  imaging  faculty,  and  if  they  do  so  appear  they  need 
not  be  retained  or  even  observed,  and  in  fact  the  impression  of  any  such 
circumstance  does  not  entail  awareness.  Thus  in  local  movement,  if 
there  is  no  particular  importance  to  us  in  the  fact  that  we  pass  through 
first  this  and  then  that  portion  of  air,  or  that  we  proceed  from  some 


IV.  4.  8] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


55 


particular  point,  we  do  not  take  notice,  or  even  know  it  as  we  walk. 
Similarly,  if  it  were  of  no  importance  to  us  to  accomplish  any  given 
journey,  mere  movement  in  the  air  being  the  main  concern,  we  would 
not  trouble  to  ask  at  what  particular  point  of  place  we  were,  or  what 
distance  we  had  traversed  ;  if  we  have  to  observe  only  the  act  of  move¬ 
ment  and  not  its  duration,  nothing  to  do  which  obliges  us  to  think  of 
time,  the  minutes  are  not  recorded  in  our  minds. 

And  finally,  it  is  of  common  knowledge  that,  when  the  understanding 
is  possessed  of  the  entire  act  undertaken  and  has  no  reason  to  foresee 
any  departure  from  the  normal,  it  will  no  longer  observe  the  detail ; 
in  a  process  unfailingly  repeated  without  variation,  attention  to  the 
unvarying  detail  is  idleness. 

So  it  is  with  the  stars.  They  pass  from  point  to  point,  but  they  move 
on  their  own  affairs  and  not  for  the  sake  of  traversing  the  space  they 
actually  cover  ;  the  vision  of  the  things  that  appear  on  the  way,  the 
journey  by,  nothing  of  this  is  their  concern  ;  their  passing  this  or  that 
is  of  accident  not  of  essence,  and  their  intention  is  to  greater  objects  : 
moreover  each  of  them  journeys,  unchangeably,  the  same  unchanging 
way  ;  and  again,  there  is  no  question  to  them  of  the  time  they  spend  in 
any  given  section  of  the  journey,  even  supposing  time  division  to  be 
possible  in  the  case.  All  this  granted,  nothing  makes  it  necessary  that 
they  should  have  any  memory  of  places  or  times  traversed.  Besides 
this  life  of  the  ensouled  stars  is  one  identical  thing  (since  they  are  one 
in  the  All-Soul)  so  that  their  very  spatial  movement  is  pivoted  upon 
identity  and  resolves  itself  into  a  movement  not  spatial  but  vital,  the 
movement  of  a  single  living  being  whose  act  is  directed  to  itself,  a  being 
which  to  anything  outside  is  at  rest,  but  is  in  movement  by  dint  of  the  inner 
life  it  possesses,  the  eternal  life.  Or  we  may  take  the  comparison  of  the 
movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies  to  a  choral  dance  ;  if  we  think  of  it 
as  a  dance  which  comes  to  rest  at  some  given  period,  the  entire  dance, 
accomplished  from  beginning  to  end,  will  be  perfect  while  at  each  partial 
stage  it  was  imperfect  :  but  if  the  dance  is  a  thing  of  eternity,  it  is  in 
eternal  perfection.  And  if  it  is  in  eternal  perfection,  it  has  no  points  of 
time  and  place  at  which  it  will  achieve  perfection  ;  it  will,  therefore, 


PLOTINUS 


56 

have  no  concern  about  attaining  to  any  such  points  .  it  will,  therefore, 
make  no  measurements  of  time  or  place  ;  it  will  have,  therefore,  no 
memory  of  time  and  place. 

If  the  stars  live  a  blessed  life  in  their  vision  of  the  life  inherent  in 
their  souls,  and  if,  by  force  of  their  souls  tendency  to  become  one,  and 
by  the  light  they  cast  from  themselves  upon  the  entire  heavens,  they  are 
like  the  strings  of  a  lyre  which,  being  struck  in  tune,  sing  a  melody  in 
some  natural  scale  ...  if  this  is  the  way  the  heavens,  as  one,  are  moved, 
and  the  component  parts  in  their  relation  to  the  whole  the  sidereal 
system  moving  as  one,  and  each  part  in  its  own  way,  to  the  same  purpose, 
though  each  too  hold  its  own  place— then  our  doctrine  is  all  the  more 
surely  established  ;  the  life  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  the  more  clearly  an 
unbroken  unity. 

9*  .  . 

But  Zeus — ordering  all,  governor,  guardian  and  disposer,  possessor 

for  ever  of  the  kingly  soul  and  the  kingly  intellect,  bringing  all  into  being 
by  his  providence,  and  presiding  over  all  things  as  they  come,  adminis¬ 
tering  all  under  plan  and  system,  unfolding  the  periods  of  the  kosmos, 
many  of  which  stand  already  accomplished — would  it  not  seem  inevitable 
that,  in  this  multiplicity  of  concern,  Zeus  should  have  memory  of  all 
the  periods,  their  number  and  their  differing  qualities  ?  Contriving  the 
future,  co-ordinating,  calculating  for  what  is  to  be,  must  he  not  surely 
be  the  chief  of  all  in  remembering,  as  he  is  chief  in  producing  ? 

Even  this  matter  of  Zeus’  memory  of  the  kosmic  periods  is  difficult  ; 
it  is  a  question  of  their  being  numbered,  and  of  his  knowledge  of  their 
number.  A  determined  number  would  mean  that  the  All  had  a  beginning 
in  time  (which  is  not  so)  ;  if  the  periods  are  unlimited,  Zeus  cannot 
know  the  number  of  his  works. 

The  answer  is  that  he  will  know  all  to  be  one  thing  existing  in  virtue 
of  one  life  for  ever  :  it  is  in  this  sense  that  the  All  is  unlimited,  and  thus 
Zeus’  knowledge  of  it  will  not  be  as  of  something  seen  from  outside  but 
as  of  something  embraced  in  true  knowledge,  for  this  unlimited  thing 
is  an  eternal  indweller  within  himself — or,  to  be  more  accurate,  eternally 


IV.  4-  io] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


57 


follows  upon  him — and  is  seen  by  an  indwelling  knowledge  ;  Zeus  knows 
his  own  unlimited  life,  and,  in  that  knowledge,  knows  the  activity  that 

flows  from  him  to  the  kosmos  ;  but  he  knows  it  in  its  unity  not  in  its 
process. 


io. 

The  ordering  principle  is  twofold  ;  there  is  the  principle  known  to 
us  as  the  Demiurge  and  there  is  the  Soul  of  the  All ;  we  apply  the  appella¬ 
tion  Zeus  sometimes  to  the  Demiurge  and  sometimes  to  the  principle 
conducting  the  universe. 

When  under  the  name  of  Zeus  we  are  considering  the  Demiurge 
we  must  leave  out  all  notions  of  stage  and  progress,  and  recognise  one 
unchanging  and  timeless  life. 

But  the  life  in  the  kosmos,  the  life  which  carries  the  leading  principle 
of  the  universe,  still  needs  elucidation  ;  does  it  operate  without  calcula¬ 
tion,  without  searching  into  what  ought  to  be  done  ? 

Yes  :  for  what  must  be  stands  shaped  before  the  kosmos,  and  is 
ordered  without  any  setting  in  order :  the  ordered  things  are  merely 
the  things  that  come  to  be  ;  and  the  principle  that  brings  them  into 
being  is  Order  itself  ;  this  production  is  an  act  of  a  soul  linked  with  an 
unchangeably  established  wisdom  whose  reflection  in  that  soul  is  Order. 
It  is  an  unchanging  wisdom,  and  there  can  therefore  be  no  changing  in 
the  soul  which  mirrors  it,  not  sometimes  turned  towards  it,  and  some¬ 
times  away  from  it — and  in  doubt  because  it  has  turned  away — but  an 
unremitting  soul  performing  an  unvarying  task. 

The  leading  principle  of  the  universe  is  a  unity — and  one  that  is 
sovran  without  break,  not  sometimes  dominant  and  sometimes  dominated. 
What  source  is  there  for  any  such  multiplicity  of  leading  principles  as 
might  result  in  contest  and  hesitation  ?  And  this  governing  unity  must 
always  desire  the  one  thing  :  what  could  bring  it  to  wish  now  for  this 
and  now  for  that,  to  its  own  greater  perplexing  ?  But  observe  :  no 
perplexity  need  follow  upon  any  development  of  this  soul  essentially 
a  unity.  The  All  stands  a  multiple  thing  no  doubt,  having  parts,  and 
parts  clashing  with  parts,  but  that  does  not  imply  that  it  need  be  in 


PLOTINUS 


58 

doubt  as  to  its  conduct :  that  soul  does  not  take  its  essence  from  its 
ultimates  or  from  its  parts,  but  from  the  Primals  ,  it  has  its  source  in 
the  First  and  thence,  along  an  unhindered  path,  it  flows  into  a  total  of 
things,  conferring  grace,  and,  because  it  remains  one  same  thing  occupied 
in  one  task,  dominating.  To  suppose  it  pursuing  one  new  object  after 
another  is  to  raise  the  question  whence  that  novelty  comes  into  being  : 
the  soul,  besides,  would  be  in  doubt  as  to  its  action  ;  its  very  work,  the 
kosmos,  would  be  the  less  well  done  by  reason  of  the  hesitancy  which 
such  calculations  would  entail. 


11. 

The  administration  of  the  kosmos  is  to  be  thought  of  as  that 
of  a  living  unit :  there  is  the  action  determined  by  what  is  external, 
and  has  to  do  with  the  parts,  and  there  is  that  determined  by  the  internal 
and  by  the  principle  :  thus  a  doctor  basing  his  treatment  on  externals 
and  on  the  parts  directly  affected  will  often  be  baffled  and  obliged  to 
all  sorts  of  calculation,  while  Nature  will  act  on  the  basis  of  principle  and 
need  no  deliberation.  And  in  so  far  as  the  kosmos  is  a  conducted  thing, 
its  administration  and  its  administrator  will  follow  not  the  way  of  the 
doctor  but  the  way  of  Nature. 

And  in  the  case  of  the  universe,  the  administration  is  all  the  less 
complicated  from  the  fact  that  the  soul  actually  circumscribes,  as  parts 
of  a  living  unity,  all  the  members  which  it  conducts.  For  all  the  Kinds 
included  in  the  universe  are  dominated  by  one  Kind,  upon  which  they 
follow,  fitted  into  it,  developing  from  it,  growing  out  of  it,  just  as  the 
Kind  manifested  in  the  bough  is  related  to  the  Kind  in  the  tree  as  a 
whole. 

What  place,  then,  is  there  for  reasoning,  for  calculation,  what  place 
for  memory,  where  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  eternal,  unfailingly 
present,  effective,  dominant,  administering  in  an  identical  process  ? 

The  fact  that  the  product  contains  diversity  and  difference  does  not 
warrant  the  notion  that  the  producer  must  be  subject  to  corresponding 
variations.  On  the  contrary,  the  more  varied  the  product,  the  more 
certain  the  unchanging  identity  of  the  producer :  even  in  the  single 


IV.  4-  12] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


59 


animal  the  events  produced  by  Nature  are  many  and  not  simultaneous  ; 
there  are  the  age  periods,  the  developments  at  fixed  epochs — horns, 
beard,  maturing  breasts,  the  acme  of  life,  procreation — but  the  prin¬ 
ciples  which  initially  determined  the  nature  of  the  being  are  not  thereby 
annulled  ;  there  is  process  of  growth,  but  no  diversity  in  the  initial 
principle.  The  identity  underlying  all  the  multiplicity  is  confirmed  by 
the  fact  that  the  principle  constituting  the  parent  is  exhibited  unchanged, 
un diminished,  in  the  offspring.  We  have  reason,  then,  for  thinking 
that  one  and  the  same  wisdom  envelops  both,  and  that  this  is  the  un¬ 
alterable  wisdom  of  the  kosmos  taken  as  a  whole  ;  it  is  manifold,  diverse 
and  yet  simplex,  presiding  over  the  most  comprehensive  of  living  beings, 
and  in  no  wise  altered  within  itself  by  this  multiplicity,  but  stably  one 
Reason-Principle,  the  concentrated  totality  of  things  :  if  it  were  not  thus 
all  things,  it  would  be  a  wisdom  of  the  later  and  partial,  not  the  wisdom 
of  the  Supreme. 


12. 

It  may  be  urged  that  all  the  multiplicity  and  development  are  the 
work  of  Nature,  but  that,  since  there  is  wisdom  within  the  All,  there 
must  be  also,  by  the  side  of  such  natural  operation,  acts  of  reasoning  and 
of  memory. 

But  this  is  simply  a  human  error  which  assumes  wisdom  to  be  what 
in  fact  is  unwisdom,  taking  the  search  for  wisdom  to  be  wisdom  itself. 
For  what  can  reasoning  be  but  a  struggle,  the  effort  to  discover  the  wise 
course,  to  attain  the  principle  which  is  true  and  derives  from  real-being  ? 
To  reason  is  like  playing  the  cithara  for  the  sake  of  achieving  the  art, 
like  practising  with  a  view  to  mastery7,  like  any  learning  that  aims  at 
knowing.  What  reasoners  seek,  the  wise  hold  :  wisdom,  in  a  word,  is 
a  condition  in  a  being  that  possesses  repose.  Think  what  happens 
when  one  has  accomplished  the  reasoning  process  :  as  soon  as  we  have 
discovered  the  right  course,  we  cease  to  reason  :  we  rest  because  we  have 
come  to  wisdom.  If  then  we  are  to  range  the  leading  principle  of  the 
All  among  learners,  we  must  allow  it  reasonings,  perplexities  and  those 
acts  of  memory  which  link  the  past  with  the  present  and  the  future  : 


6o  PLOTINUS 

if  it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  knower,  then  the  wisdom  within  it  consists 
in  a  rest  possessing  the  object  (absolved,  therefore,  from  search  and 
from  remembrance). 

Again,  if  the  leading  principle  of  the  universe  knows  the  future 
as  it  must — then  obviously  it  will  know  by  what  means  that  future  is 
to  come  about  ;  given  this  knowledge,  what  further  need  is  there  of  its 
reasoning  towards  it,  or  confronting  past  with  present  ?  And,  of  course, 
this  knowledge  of  things  to  come — admitting  it  to  exist  is  not  like  that 
of  the  diviners  ;  it  is  that  of  the  actual  causing  principles  holding  the 
certainty  that  the  thing  will  exist,  the  certainty  inherent  in  the  all¬ 
disposers,  above  perplexity  and  hesitancy  ;  the  notion  is  constituent 
and  therefore  unvarying.  The  knowledge  of  future  things  is,  in  a  word, 
identical  with  that  of  the  present ;  it  is  a  knowledge  in  repose  and  thus 
a  knowledge  transcending  the  processes  of  cogitation. 

If  the  leading  principle  of  the  universe  does  not  know  the  future 
which  it  is  of  itself  to  produce,  it  cannot  produce  with  knowledge  or  to 
purpose  ;  it  will  produce  just  what  happens  to  come,  that  is  to  say  by 
haphazard.  As  this  cannot  be,  it  must  create  by  some  stable  principle  ; 
its  creations,  therefore,  will  be  shaped  in  the  model  stored  up  in  itself  ; 
there  can  be  no  varying,  for,  if  there  were,  there  could  also  be  failure. 

The  produced  universe  will  contain  difference,  but  its  diversities 
spring  not  from  its  own  action  but  from  its  obedience  to  superior  prin¬ 
ciples  which,  again,  spring  from  the  creating  power,  so  that  all  is  guided 
by  Reason-Principles  in  their  series ;  thus  the  creating  power  is  in  no 
sense  subjected  to  experimenting,  to  perplexity,  to  that  preoccupation 
which  to  some  minds  makes  the  administration  of  the  All  seem  a  task 
of  difficulty.  Preoccupation  would  obviously  imply  the  undertaking 
of  alien  tasks,  some  business — that  would  mean — not  completely  within 
the  powers  ;  but  where  the  power  is  sovran  and  sole,  it  need  take  thought 
of  nothing  but  itself  and  its  own  will,  which  means  its  own  wisdom,  since 
in  such  a  being  the  will  is  wisdom.  Here,  then,  creating  makes  no  demand, 
since  the  wisdom  that  goes  to  it  is  not  sought  elsewhere,  but  is  the  creator’s 
very  self,  drawing  on  nothing  outside — not,  therefore,  on  reasoning  or  on 
memory,  which  are  handlings  of  the  external. 


IV.  4.  13] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


61 


13- 

But  what  is  the  difference  between  the  Wisdom  thus  conducting  the 
universe  and  the  principle  known  as  Nature  ? 

This  Wisdom  is  a  first  (within  the  All-Soul)  while  Nature  is  a  last : 
for  Nature  is  an  image  of  that  Wisdom,  and,  as  a  last  in  the  soul,  possesses 
only  the  last  of  the  Reason-Principle  :  we  may  imagine  a  thick  waxen 
seal,  in  which  the  imprint  has  penetrated  to  the  very  uttermost  film 
so  as  to  show  on  both  sides,  sharp  cut  on  the  upper  surface,  faint  on  the 
under.  Nature,  thus,  does  not  know,  it  merely  produces  :  what  it  holds 
it  passes,  automatically,  to  its  next ;  and  this  transmission  to  the 
corporeal  and  material  constitutes  its  making  power :  it  acts  as  a  thing 
warmed  communicating  to  what  lies  in  next  contact  to  it  the  principle 
of  which  it  is  the  vehicle  so  as  to  make  that  also  warm  in  some  less  degree. 

Nature  being  thus  a  mere  communicator,  does  not  possess  even  the 
imaging  act.  There  is  (within  the  Soul)  intellection,  superior  to  imagina¬ 
tion  ;  and  there  is  imagination  standing  midway  between  that  intellection 
and  the  impression  of  which  alone  Nature  is  capable.  For  Nature  has  no 
perception  or  consciousness  of  anything ;  imagination  (the  imaging 
faculty)  has  consciousness  of  the  external,  for  it  enables  that  which 
entertains  the  image  to  have  knowledge  of  the  experience  encountered, 
while  Nature’s  function  is  to  engender — of  itself  though  in  an  act  derived 
from  the  active  principle  (of  the  soul) . 

Thus  the  Intellectual-Principle  possesses :  the  Soul  of  the  All 
eternally  receives  from  it ;  this  is  the  soul’s  life  ;  its  consciousness  is 
its  intellection  of  what  is  thus  eternally  present  to  it ;  what  proceeds 
from  it  into  Matter  and  is  manifested  there  is  Nature,  with  which — or 
even  a  little  before  it — the  series  of  real  being  comes  to  an  end,  for  all 
in  this  order  are  the  ultimates  of  the  intellectual  order  and  the  beginnings 
of  the  imitative. 

There  is  also  the  decided  difference  that  Nature  operates  toward 
soul,  and  receives  from  it :  soul,  near  to  Nature  but  superior,  operates 
towards  Nature  but  without  receiving  in  turn  ;  and  there  is  the  still 
higher  phase  (the  purely  Intellectual)  with  no  action  whatever  upon 
body  or  upon  Matter. 


62 


PLOTINUS 


x4-  , 

Of  the  corporeal  thus  brought  into  being  by  Nature  the  elemental 

materials  of  things  are  its  very  produce,  but  how  do  animal  and  vege¬ 
table  forms  stand  to  it  ? 

Are  we  to  think  of  them  as  containers  of  Nature  present  within 
them  ? 

Light  goes  away  and  the  air  contains  no  trace  of  it,  for  light  and  air 
remain  each  itself,  never  coalescing  :  is  this  the  relation  of  Nature  to 
the  formed  object  ? 

It  is  rather  that  existing  between  fire  and  the  object  it  has  warmed  : 
the  fire  withdrawn,  there  remains  a  certain  warmth,  distinct  from  that 
in  the  fire,  a  property,  so  to  speak,  of  the  object  warmed.  For  the  shape 
which  Nature  imparts  to  what  it  has  moulded  must  be  recognised  as  a 
form  quite  distinct  from  Nature  itself,  though  it  remains  a  question  to 
be  examined  whether  besides  this  (specific)  form  there  is  also  an  inter¬ 
mediary,  a  link  connecting  it  with  Nature,  the  general  principle. 

The  difference  between  Nature  and  the  Wisdom  described  as  dwelling 
in  the  All  has  been  sufficiently  dealt  with. 

I5* 

But  there  is  a  difficulty  affecting  this  entire  settlement  :  Eternity 
is  characteristic  of  the  Intellectual-Principle,  time  of  the  soul — for  we 
hold  that  time  has  its  substantial  being  in  the  activity  of  the  soul,  and 
springs  from  soul — and,  since  time  is  a  thing  of  division  and  (unlike 
eternity)  comports  a  past,  it  would  seem  that  the  activity  producing  it 
must  also  be  a  thing  of  division,  and  that  its  attention  to  that  past  must 
imply  that  even  the  All-Soul  has  memory  ?  We  repeat,  identity  belongs 
to  the  eternal,  time  must  be  the  medium  of  diversity  ;  otherwise  there 
is  nothing  to  distinguish  them,  especially  since  we  deny  that  the  activities 
of  the  soul  can  themselves  experience  change. 

Can  we  escape  by  the  theory  that,  while  human  souls — receptive 
of  change,  even  to  the  change  of  imperfection  and  lack — are  in  time,  yet 
the  Soul  of  the  All,  as  the  author  of  time,  is  itself  timeless  ?  But  if  it  is 
not  in  time,  what  causes  it  to  engender  time  rather  than  eternity  ? 


IV- 4- 16]  PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL  63 

The  answer  must  be  that  the  realm  it  engenders  is  not  that  of 
eternal  things  but  a  realm  of  things  enveloped  in  time  :  it  is  just  as  the 
souls  (under,  or  included  in,  the  All-Soul)  are  not  in  time,  but  some  of 
their  experiences  and  productions  are.  For  a  soul  is  eternal,  and  is  before 
time  ;  and  what  is  in  time  is  of  a  lower  order  than  time  itself  :  time  is 
folded  around  what  is  in  time  exactly  as— we  read— it  is  folded  about 
what  is  in  place  and  in  number. 

16. 

But  if  in  the  soul  thing  follows  thing,  if  there  is  earlier  and  later  in 
its  productions,  if  it  engenders  or  creates  in  time,  then  it  must  be  looking 
towards  the  future  ;  and  if  towards  the  future,  then  towards  the  past  as 
well  ? 

No  :  prior  and  past  are  in  the  things  it  produces  ;  in  itself  nothing 
is  past ;  all,  as  we  have  said,  is  one  simultaneous  grouping  of  Reason- 
Principles.  In  the  engendered,  dissimilarity  is  not  compatible  with 
unity,  though  in  the  Reason-Principles  supporting  the  engendered  such 
unity  of  dissimilars  does  occur — hand  and  foot  are  in  unity  in  the  Reason- 
Principle  (of  man),  but  apart  in  the  realm  of  sense.  Of  course,  even  in 
that  ideal  realm  there  is  apartness,  but  in  a  characteristic  mode,  just 
as  in  a  mode,  there  is  priority. 

Now,  apartness  may  be  explained  as  simply  differentiation  :  but 
how  account  for  priority  unless  on  the  assumption  of  some  ordering 
principle  arranging  from  above,  and  in  that  disposal  necessarily  affirming 
a  serial  order  ? 

There  must  be  such  a  principle,  or  all  would  exist  simultaneously ; 
but  the  indicated  conclusion  does  not  follow  unless  order  and  ordering 
principle  are  distinct ;  if  the  ordering  principle  is  Primal  Order,  there 
is  no  such  affirmation  of  series  ;  there  is  simply  making,  the  making  of 
this  thing  after  that  thing.  The  affirmation  would  imply  that  the  ordering 
principle  looks  away  towards  Order  and  therefore  is  not,  itself.  Order. 

But  how  are  Order  and  this  orderer  one  and  the  same  ? 

Because  the  ordering  principle  is  no  conjoint  of  matter  and  idea 
but  is  soul,  pure  idea,  the  power  and  energy  second  only  to  the  Intellectual- 


PLOTINUS 


64 

Principle  :  and  because  the  succession  is  a  fact  of  the  things  themselves, 
inhibited  as  they  are  from  this  comprehensive  unity.  The  ordering  soul 
remains  august,  a  circle,  as  we  may  figure  it,  in  complete  adaptation 
to  its  centre,  widening  outward,  but  fast  upon  it  still,  an  outspreading 

without  interval. 

The  total  scheme  may  be  summarised  in  the  illustration  of  The 
Good  as  a  centre,  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  an  unmoving  circle,  the 
Soul  as  a  circle  in  motion,  its  moving  being  its  aspiration :  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  possesses  and  has  ever  embraced  that  which  is  beyond  being  , 
the  soul  must  seek  it  still :  the  sphere  of  the  universe,  by  its  possession 
of  the  soul  thus  aspirant,  is  moved  to  the  aspiration  which  falls  within 
its  own  nature  ;  this  is  no  more  than  such  power  as  body  may  have,  the 
mode  of  pursuit  possible  where  the  object  pursued  is  debarred  from 
entrance  j  it  is  the  motion  of  coiling  about,  with  ceaseless  return  upon 
the  same  path — in  other  words,  it  is  circuit. 

T7*  „  .  .  .  , 

But  how  comes  it  that  the  intuitions  and  the  Reason- Principles  ot 

the  soul  are  not  in  the  same  timeless  fashion  within  ourselves,  but  that 

here  the  later  of  order  is  converted  into  a  later  of  time — bringing  in  all 

these  doubts  ? 

Is  it  because  in  us  the  governing  and  the  answering  principles  are 

many  and  there  is  no  sovran  unity  ? 

That  condition  ;  and,  further,  the  fact  that  our  mental  acts  fall 
into  a  series  according  to  the  succession  of  our  needs,  being  not  self- 
determined  but  guided  by  the  variations  of  the  external :  thus  the 
will  changes  to  meet  every  incident  as  each  fresh  need  arises  and  as  the 
external  impinges  in  its  successive  things  and  events. 

A  variety  of  governing  principles  must  mean  variety  in  the  images 
formed  upon  the  representative  faculty,  images  not  issuing  from  one 
internal  centre,  but,  by  difference  of  origin  and  of  acting-point,  strange 
to  each  other,  and  so  bringing  compulsion  to  bear  upon  the  movements 
and  efficiencies  of  the  self. 

When  the  desiring  faculty  is  stirred,  there  is  a  presentment  of  the 


IV.  4-  1 8] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL  65 

object  a  sort  of  sensation,  in  announcement  and  in  picture,  of  the 
experience  calling  us  to  follow  and  to  attain  :  the  personality,  whether 
it  resists  or  follows  and  procures,  is  necessarily  thrown  out  of  equilibrium. 
The  same  disturbance  is  caused  by  passion  urging  revenge  and  by  the 
needs  of  the  body ;  every  other  sensation  or  experience  effects  its  own 
change  upon  our  mental  attitude  ;  then  there  is  the  ignorance  of  what  is 
good  and  the  indecision  of  a  soul  (a  human  soul)  thus  pulled  in  every 
direction  ;  and,  again,  the  interaction  of  all  these  perplexities  gives  rise 
to  yet  others. 

But  do  variations  of  judgement  affect  that  very  highest  in  us  ? 

No  :  the  doubt  and  the  change  of  standard  are  of  the  Conjoint  (of 
the  soul-phase  in  contact  with  body)  ;  still,  the  right  reason  of  that 
highest  is  weaker  by  being  given  over  to  inhabit  this  mingled  mass  : 
not  that  it  sinks  in  its  own  nature  :  it  is  much  as  amid  the  tumult  of  a 
public  meeting  the  best  adviser  speaks  but  fails  to  dominate  ;  assent 
goes  to  the  roughest  of  the  brawlers  and  roarers,  while  the  man  of  good 
counsel  sits  silent,  ineffectual,  overwhelmed  by  the  uproar  of  his  inferiors. 

The  lowest  human  type  exhibits  the  baser  nature ;  the  man  is  a 
compost  calling  to  mind  some  inferior  political  organisation  :  in  the 
mid-type  we  have  a  citizenship  in  which  some  better  section  sways  a 
demotic  constitution  not  out  of  control :  in  the  superior  type  the  life  is 
aristocratic  ;  it  is  the  career  of  one  emancipated  from  what  is  base  in 
humanity  and  tractable  to  the  better  ;  in  the  finest  type,  where  the  man 
has  brought  himself  to  detachment,  the  ruler  is  one  only,  and  from  this 
master  principle  order  is  imposed  upon  the  rest,  so  that  we  may  think  of 
a  municipality  in  two  sections,  the  superior  city  and,  kept  in  hand  by 
it,  the  city  of  the  lower  elements. 

18. 

There  remains  the  question  whether  the  body  possesses  any  force 
of  its  own — so  that,  with  the  incoming  of  the  soul,  it  lives  in  some 
individuality — or  whether  all  it  has  is  this  Nature  we  have  been  speaking 
of,  the  superior  principle  which  enters  into  relations  with  it. 

Certainly  the  body,  container  of  soul  and  of  nature,  cannot  even  in 

K 


66 


PLOTINUS 


itself  be  as  a  soulless  form  would  be  :  it  cannot  even  be  like  air  traversed 
by  light ;  it  must  be  like  air  storing  heat  :  the  body  holding  animal  or 
vegetive  life  must  hold  also  some  shadow  of  soul ;  and  it  is  body  thus 
modified  that  is  the  seat  of  corporeal  pains  and  pleasures  which  appear 
before  us,  the  true  human  being,  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  knowledge 
without  emotion.  By  “  us,  the  true  human  being  ”  I  mean  the  higher 
soul  for,  in  spite  of  all,  the  modified  body  is  not  alien  but  attached  to 
our  nature  and  is  a  concern  to  us  for  that  reason :  “  attached,  for  this  is 
not  ourselves  nor  yet  are  we  free  of  it  ;  it  is  an  accessory  and  dependent 
of  the  human  being  ;  “  we  ”  means  the  master-principle  ;  the  conjoint, 
similarly  is  in  its  own  way  an  “  ours  ”  ;  and  it  is  because  of  this  that  we 
care  for  its  pain  and  pleasure,  in  proportion  as  we  are  weak  rather  than 
strong,  gripped  rather  than  working  towards  detachment. 

The  other,  the  most  honourable  phase  of  our  being,  is  what  we  think 
of  as  the  true  man  and  into  this  we  are  penetrating. 

Pleasure  and  pain  and  the  like  must  not  be  attributed  to  the  soul 
alone,  but  to  the  modified  body  and  to  something  intermediary  between 
soul  and  body  and  made  up  of  both.  A  unity  is  independent :  thus  body 
alone,  a  lifeless  thing,  can  suffer  no  hurt— in  its  dissolution  there  is  no 
damage  to  the  body,  but  merely  to  its  unity — and  soul  in  similar  isolation 
cannot  even  suffer  dissolution,  and  by  its  very  nature  is  immune  from  evil. 

But  when  two  distinct  things  become  one  in  an  artificial  unity, 
there  is  a  probable  source  of  pain  to  them  in  the  mere  fact  that  they 
were  inapt  to  partnership.  This  does  not,  of  course,  refer  to  two  bodies  ; 
that  is  a  question  of  one  nature  ;  and  I  am  speaking  of  two  natures. 
When  one  distinct  nature  seeks  to  associate  itself  with  another,  a  different, 
order  of  being — the  lower  participating  in  the  higher,  but  unable  to  take 
more  than  a  faint  trace  of  it — then  the  essential  duality  becomes  also  a 
unity,  but  a  unity  standing  midway  between  what  the  lower  was  and 
what  it  cannot  absorb,  and  therefore  a  troubled  unity  ;  the  association 
is  artificial  and  uncertain,  inclining  now  to  this  side  and  now  to  that  in 
ceaseless  vacillation  ;  and  the  total  hovers  between  high  and  low,  telling, 
downward  bent,  of  misery  but,  directed  to  the  above,  of  longing  for 


unison. 


IV.  4.  I9l 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


67 


19. 

Thus  what  we  know  as  pleasure  and  pain  may  be  identified  :  pain 
is  our  perception  of  a  body  despoiled,  deprived  of  the  image  of  the  soul ; 
pleasure  our  perception  of  the  living  frame  in  which  the  image  of  the 
soul  is  brought  back  to  harmonious  bodily  operation.  The  painful 
experience  takes  place  in  that  living  frame  ;  but  the  perception  of  it 
belongs  to  the  sensitive  phase  of  the  soul,  which,  as  neighbouring  the 
living  body,  feels  the  change  and  makes  it  known  to  the  principle,  the 
imaging  faculty,  into  which  the  sensations  finally  merge  ;  then  the  body 
feels  the  pain,  or  at  least  the  body  is  affected  :  thus  in  an  amputation, 
when  the  flesh  is  cut  the  cutting  is  an  event  within  the  material  mass ; 
but  the  pain  felt  in  that  mass  is  there  felt  because  it  is  not  a  mass  pure 
and  simple,  but  a  mass  under  certain  (non-material)  conditions  ;  it  is 
to  that  modified  substance  that  the  sting  of  the  pain  is  present,  and  the 
soul  feels  it  by  an  adoption  due  to  what  we  think  of  as  proximity. 

And,  itself  unaffected,  it  feels  the  corporeal  conditions  at  every 
point  of  its  being,  and  is  thereby  enabled  to  assign  every  condition  to 
the  exact  spot  at  which  the  wound  or  pain  occurs.  Being  present  as  a 
whole  at  every  point  of  the  body,  if  it  were  itself  affected  the  pain  would 
take  it  at  every  point,  and  it  would  suffer  as  one  entire  being,  so  that  it 
could  not  know,  or  make  known,  the  spot  affected ;  it  could  say  only 
that  at  the  place  of  its  presence  there  existed  pain — and  the  place  of  its 
presence  is  the  entire  human  being.  As  things  are,  when  the  finger  pains 
the  man  is  in  pain  because  one  of  his  members  is  in  pain ;  we  class  him 
as  suffering,  from  his  finger  being  painful,  just  as  we  class  him  as  fair 
from  his  eyes  being  blue. 

But  the  pain  itself  is  in  the  part  affected  unless  we  include  in  the 
notion  of  pain  the  sensation  following  upon  it,  in  which  case  we  are 
saying  only  that  distress  implies  the  perception  of  distress.  But  (this 
does  not  mean  that  the  soul  is  affected)  we  cannot  describe  the  percep¬ 
tion  itself  as  distress  ;  it  is  the  knowledge  of  the  distress  and,  being 
knowledge,  is  not  itself  affected,  or  it  could  not  know  and  convey  a  true 
message  :  a  messenger,  affected,  overwhelmed  by  the  event,  would 
either  not  convey  the  message  or  not  convey  it  faithfully. 


68 


PLOTINUS 


20. 

As  with  bodily  pain  and  pleasure  so  with  the  bodily  desires  ;  their 
origin,  also,  must  be  attributed  to  what  thus  stands  midway,  to  that 

Nature  we  described  as  the  corporeal. 

Body  undetermined  cannot  be  imagined  to  give  rise  to  appetite 
and  purpose,  nor  can  pure  soul  be  occupied  about  sweet  and  bitter  : 
all  this  must  belong  to  what  is  specifically  body  but  chooses  to  be  some¬ 
thing  else  as  well,  and  so  has  acquired  a  restless  movement  unknown 
to  the  soul  and  by  that  acquisition  is  forced  to  aim  at  a  variety  of  objects, 
to  seek,  as  its  changing  states  demand,  sweet  or  bitter,  water  or  warmth, 
with  none  of  which  it  could  have  any  concern  if  it  remained  untouched 
by  life. 

In  the  case  of  pleasure  and  pain  we  showed  how  upon  distress  follows 
the  knowledge  of  it,  and  that  the  soul,  seeking  to  alienate  what  is  causing 
the  condition,  inspires  a  withdrawal  which  the  member  primarily  affected 
has  itself  indicated,  in  its  own  mode,  by  its  contraction.  Similarly  in 
the  case  of  desire  :  there  is  the  knowledge  in  the  sensation  (the  sensitive 
phase  of  the  soul)  and  in  the  next  lower  phase,  that  described  as  the 
“  Nature  ”  which  carries  the  imprint  of  the  soul  to  the  body  ;  that 
Nature  knows  the  fully  formed  desire  which  is  the  culmination  of  the 
less  formed  desire  in  body  ;  sensation  knows  the  image  thence  imprinted 
upon  the  Nature  ;  and  from  the  moment  of  the  sensation  the  soul,  which 
alone  is  competent,  acts  upon  it,  sometimes  procuring,  sometimes  on 
the  contrary  resisting,  taking  control  and  paying  heed  neither  to  that 
which  originated  the  desire  nor  to  that  which  subsequently  entertained  it. 

But  why,  thus,  two  phases  of  desire  ;  why  should  not  the  body  as  a 
determined  entity  (the  living  total)  be  the  sole  desirer  ? 

Because  there  are  (in  man)  two  distinct  things,  this  Nature  and 
the  body,  which,  through  it,  becomes  a  living  being  :  the  Nature  precedes 
the  determined  body  which  is  its  creation,  made  and  shaped  by  it ;  it 
cannot  originate  the  desires  ;  they  must  belong  to  the  living  body  meeting 
the  experiences  of  this  life  and  seeking  in  its  distress  to  alter  its  state, 
to  substitute  pleasure  for  pain,  sufficiency  for  want :  this  Nature  must 
be  like  a  mother  reading  the  wishes  of  a  suffering  child,  and  seeking  to 


IV.  4-  22] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


69 


set  it  right  and  to  bring  it  back  to  herself  ;  in  her  search  for  the  remedy 
she  attaches  herself  by  that  very  concern  to  the  sufferer’s  desire  and 
makes  the  child’s  experience  her  own. 

In  sum,  the  living  body  may  be  said  to  desire  of  its  own  motion  in 
a  fore-desiring  with,  perhaps,  purpose  as  well;  Nature  desires  for,  and 
because  of,  that  living  body  ;  granting  or  withholding  belongs  to  another 
again,  the  higher  soul. 


21. 

That  this  is  the  phase  of  the  human  being  in  which  desire  takes  its 
origin  is  shown  by  observation  of  the  different  stages  of  life  :  in  childhood, 
youth,  maturity,  the  bodily  desires  differ;  health  or  sickness  also  may 
change  them,  while  the  (psychic)  faculty  is  of  course  the  same  through  all : 
the  evidence  is  clear  that  the  variety  of  desire  in  the  human  being  results 
from  the  fact  that  he  is  a  corporeal  entity,  a  living  body  subject  to  every 
sort  of  vicissitude. 

The  total  movement  of  desire  is  not  always  stirred  simultaneously 
with  what  we  call  the  impulses  to  the  satisfaction  even  of  the  lasting 
bodily  demands  ;  it  may  refuse  assent  to  the  idea  of  eating  or  drinking 
until  reason  gives  the  word  :  this  shows  us  desire — the  degree  of  it 
existing  in  the  living  body — advancing  towards  some  object,  with  Nature 
(the  lower  soul-phase)  refusing  its  co-operation  and  approval,  and  as 
sole  arbiter  between  what  is  naturally  fit  and  unfit,  rejecting  what  does 
not  accord  with  the  natural  need. 

We  may  be  told  that  the  changing  state  of  the  body  is  sufficient 
explanation  of  the  changing  desires  in  the  faculty ;  but  that  would 
require  the  demonstration  that  the  changing  condition  of  a  given  entity 
could  effect  a  change  of  desire  in  another,  in  one  which  cannot  itself 
gain  by  the  gratification  ;  for  it  is  not  the  desiring  faculty  that  profits 
by  food,  liquid,  warmth,  movement,  or  by  any  relief  from  over-plenty 
or  any  filling  of  a  void  ;  all  such  services  touch  the  body  only. 


22. 

And  as  regards  vegetal  forms  ?  Are  we  to  imagine  beneath  the 
leading  principle  (the  “  Nature  ”  phase)  some  sort  of  corporeal  echo  of 


70 


PLOTINUS 


it,  something  that  would  be  tendency  or  desire  in  us  and  is  growth  in 
them  ?  Or  are  we  to  think  that,  while  the  earth  (which  nourishes  them) 
contains  the  principle  of  desire  by  virtue  of  containing  soul,  the  vegetal 
realm  possesses  only  this  latter  reflection  of  desire  ? 

The  first  point  to  be  decided  is  what  soul  is  present  in  the  earth. 

Is  it  one  coming  from  the  sphere  of  the  All,  a  radiation  upon  earth 
from  that  which  Plato  seems  to  represent  as  the  only  thing  possessing 
soul  primarily  ?  Or  are  we  to  go  by  that  other  passage  where  he  describes 
earth  as  the  first  and  oldest  of  all  the  gods  within  the  scope  of  the  heavens, 
and  assigns  to  it,  as  to  the  other  stars,  a  soul  peculiar  to  itself  ? 

It  is  difficult  to  see  how  earth  could  be  a  god  if  it  did  not  possess  a 
soul  thus  distinct  :  but  the  whole  matter  is  obscure  since  Plato’s  state¬ 
ments  increase  or  at  least  do  not  lessen  the  perplexity.  It  is  best  to 
begin  by  facing  the  question  as  a  matter  of  reasoned  investigation. 

That  earth  possesses  the  vegetal  soul  may  be  taken  as  certain  from 
the  vegetation  upon  it.  But  we  see  also  that  it  produces  animals  ; 
why  then  should  we  not  argue  that  it  is  itself  animated  ?  And,  animated, 
no  small  part  of  the  All,  must  it  not  be  plausible  to  assert  that  it  possesses 
an  Intellectual-Principle  by  which  it  holds  its  rank  as  a  god  ?  If  this  is 
true  of  every  one  of  the  stars,  why  should  it  not  be  so  of  the  earth,  a 
living  part  of  the  living  All  ?  We  cannot  think  of  it  as  sustained  from 
without  by  an  alien  soul  and  incapable  of  containing  one  appropriate 
to  itself. 

Why  should  those  fiery  globes  be  receptive  of  soul  and  the  earthly 
globe  not  ?  The  stars  are  equally  corporeal,  and  they  lack  the  flesh, 
blood,  muscle,  and  pliant  material  of  earth,  which  besides,  is  of  more 
varied  content  and  includes  every  form  of  body.  If  the  earth’s  immobility 
is  urged  in  objection,  the  answer  is  that  this  refers  only  to  spatial  move¬ 
ment. 

But  how  can  perception  and  sensation  (implied  in  ensoulment)  be 
supposed  to  occur  in  the  earth  ? 

How  (we  return)  do  they  occur  in  the  stars  ?  Feeling  does  not 
belong  to  fleshy  matter  :  soul  to  have  perception  does  not  require  body  ; 
body,  on  the  contrary,  requires  soul  to  maintain  its  being  and  its 


IV.  4-  23] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


7i 


efficiency,  judgement  (the  foundation  of  perception)  belongs  to  the  soul 
which  overlooks  the  body,  and,  from  what  is  experienced  there,  forms 
its  decisions. 

But,  we  will  be  asked  to  say  what  are  the  experiences,  within  the 
earth,  upon  which  the  earth-soul  is  thus  to  form  its  decisions  :  certainly 
vegetal  forms,  in  so  far  as  they  belong  to  earth  have  no  sensation  or 
perception  :  in  what  then,  and  through  what,  does  such  sensation  take 
place,  for  (we  will  be  told)  sensation  without  organs  is  too  rash  a  notion. 
Besides,  what  would  this  sense-perception  profit  the  soul  ?  It  could  not 
be  necessary  to  knowledge  :  surely  the  consciousness  of  wisdom  suffices 
to  beings  which  have  nothing  to  gain  from  sensation  ? 

This  argument  is  not  to  be  accepted  :  it  ignores  the  consideration 
that,  apart  from  all  question  of  practical  utility,  objects  of  sense  provide 
occasion  for  a  knowing  which  brings  pleasure  :  thus  we  ourselves  take 
delight  in  looking  upon  sun,  stars,  sky,  landscape,  for  their  own  sake. 
But  we  will  deal  with  this  point  later :  for  the  present  we  ask  whether 
the  earth  has  perceptions  and  sensations,  and  if  so  through  what  vital 
members  these  would  take  place  and  by  what  method  :  this  requires  us 
to  examine  certain  difficulties,  and  above  all  to  decide  whether  earth 
could  have  sensation  without  organs,  and  whether  this  would  be  directed 
to  some  necessary  purpose  even  when  incidentally  it  might  bring  other 
results  as  well. 


23- 

A  first  principle  is  that  the  knowing  of  sensible  objects  is  an  act  of 
the  soul,  or  of  the  living  conjoint,  becoming  aware  of  the  quality  of 
certain  corporeal  entities,  and  appropriating  the  ideas  present  in  them. 

This  apprehension  must  belong  either  to  the  soul  isolated,  self¬ 
acting,  or  to  soul  in  conjunction  with  some  other  entity. 

Isolated,  self-acting,  how  is  it  possible  ?  Self-acting,  it  has  know¬ 
ledge  of  its  own  content,  and  this  is  not  perception  but  intellection  :  if 
it  is  also  to  know  things  outside  itself  it  can  grasp  them  only  in  one  of 
two  ways  :  either  it  must  assimilate  itself  to  the  external  objects,  or  it 
must  enter  into  relations  with  something  that  has  been  so  assimilated. 


72 


PLOTINUS 


Now  as  long  as  it  remains  self-centred  it  cannot  assimilate  :  a 
single  point  cannot  assimilate  itself  to  an  external  line  :  even  line  cannot 
adapt  itself  to  line  in  another  order,  line  of  the  intellectual  to  line  of  the 
sensible,  just  as  fire  of  the  intellectual  and  man  of  the  intellectual  remain 
distinct  from  fire  and  man  of  the  sensible.  Even  Nature,  the  soul-phase 
which  brings  man  into  being,  does  not  come  to  identity  with  the  man  it 
shapes  and  informs  :  it  has  the  faculty  of  dealing  with  the  sensible,  but 
it  remains  isolated,  and,  its  task  done,  ignores  all  but  the  intellectual 
as  it  is  itself  ignored  by  the  sensible  and  utterly  without  means  of 
grasping  it. 

Suppose  something  visible  lying  at  a  distance  :  the  soul  sees  it ; 
now,  admitting  to  the  full  that  at  first  only  the  pure  idea  of  the  thing  is 
seized — a  total  without  discerned  part — yet  in  the  end  it  becomes  to 
the  seeing  soul  an  object  whose  complete  detail  of  colour  and  form  is 
known  :  this  shows  that  there  is  something  more  here  than  the  outlying 
thing  and  the  soul ;  for  the  soul  is  immune  from  experience  ;  there 
must  be  a  third,  something  not  thus  exempt  ;  and  it  is  this  intermediate 
that  accepts  the  impressions  of  shape  and  the  like. 

This  intermediate  must  be  able  to  assume  the  modifications  of  the 
material  object  so  as  to  be  an  exact  reproduction  of  its  states,  and  it 
must  be  of  the  one  elemental-stuff :  it,  thus,  will  exhibit  the  condition 
which  the  higher  principle  is  to  perceive  ;  and  the  condition  must  be 
such  as  to  preserve  something  of  the  originating  object,  and  yet  not  be 
identical  with  it :  the  essential  vehicle  of  knowledge  is  an  intermediary 
which,  as  it  stands  between  the  soul  and  the  originating  object,  will, 
similarly,  present  a  condition  midway  between  the  two  spheres,  of 
sense  and  the  intellectual — linking  the  extremes,  receiving  from  one 
side  to  exhibit  to  the  other,  in  virtue  of  being  able  to  assimilate  itself 
to  each.  As  an  instrument  by  which  something  is  to  receive  knowledge, 
it  cannot  be  identical  with  either  the  knower  or  the  known  :  but  it 
must  be  apt  to  likeness  with  both — akin  to  the  external  object  by  its 
power  of  being  affected,  and  to  the  internal,  the  knower,  by  the  fact 
that  the  modification  it  takes  becomes  an  idea. 

If  this  theory  of  ours  is  sound,  bodily  organs  are  necessary  to  sense- 


IV.  4.  24] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


73 


perception,  as  is  further  indicated  by  the  reflection  that  the  soul  entirely 
freed  of  body  can  apprehend  nothing  in  the  order  of  sense. 

The  organ  must  be  either  the  body  entire  or  some  member  set  apart 
for  a  particular  function  ;  thus  touch  for  one,  vision  for  another.  The 
tools  of  craftsmanship  will  be  seen  to  be  intermediaries  between  the 
judging  worker  and  the  judged  object,  disclosing  to  the  experimenter 
the  particular  character  of  the  matter  under  investigation  :  thus  a  ruler, 
representing  at  once  the  straightness  which  is  in  the  mind  and  the 
straightness  of  a  plank,  is  used  as  an  intermediary  by  which  the  operator 
proves  his  work. 

Some  questions  of  detail  remain  for  consideration  elsewhere  :  Is  it 
necessary  that  the  object  upon  which  judgement  or  perception  is  to  take 
place  should  be  in  contact  with  the  organ  of  perception,  or  can  the 
process  occur  across  space  upon  an  object  at  a  distance  ?  Thus,  is  the 
heat  of  a  fire  really  at  a  distance  from  the  flesh  it  warms,  the  inter¬ 
mediate  space  remaining  unmodified  ;  is  it  possible  to  see  colour  over  a 
sheer  blank  intervening  between  the  colour  and  the  eye,  the  organ  of 
vision  reaching  to  its  object  by  its  own  power  ? 

For  the  moment  we  have  one  certainty,  that  perception  of  things 
of  sense  belongs  to  the  embodied  soul  and  takes  place  through  the  body. 


24- 

The  next  question  is  whether  perception  is  concerned  only  with 
need. 

The  soul,  isolated,  has  no  sense-perception  ;  sensations  go  with 
the  body ;  sensation  itself  therefore  must  occur  by  means  of  the  body 
to  which  the  sensations  are  due  ;  it  must  be  something  brought  about 
by  association  with  the  body. 

Thus  either  sensation  occurs  in  a  soul  compelled  to  follow  upon 
bodily  states — since  every  graver  bodily  experience  reaches  at  last 
to  soul — or  sensation  is  a  device  by  which  a  cause  is  dealt  with  before 
it  becomes  so  great  as  actually  to  injure  us  or  even  before  it  has  begun 
to  make  contact. 

At  this,  sense-impressions  would  aim  at  utility.  They  may  serve  also 


PLOTINUS 


74 

to  knowledge,  but  that  could  be  service  only  to  some  being  not  living  in 
knowledge  but  stupefied  as  the  result  of  a  disaster,  and  the  victim  of  a 
Lethe  calling  for  constant  reminding  :  they  would  be  useless  to  any 
being  free  from  either  need  or  forgetfulness.  This  reflection  enlarges 
the  enquiry  :  it  is  no  longer  a  question  of  earth  alone,  but  of  the  whole 
star-system,  all  the  heavens,  the  kosmos  entire.  For  it  would  follow 
that,  in  the  sphere  of  things  not  exempt  from  modification,  sense- 
perception  would  occur  in  every  part  having  relation  to  any  other  part  : 
in  a  whole,  however — having  relation  only  to  itself,  immune,  universally 
self-directed  and  self-possessing — what  perception  could  there  be  ? 

Granted  that  the  percipient  must  act  through  an  organ  and  that 
this  organ  must  be  different  from  the  object  perceived,  then  the  universe, 
as  an  All,  can  have  (no  sensation  since  it  has)  no  organ  distinct  from 
object  :  it  can  have  self-awareness,  as  we  have  ;  but  sense-perception, 
the  constant  attendant  of  another  order,  it  cannot  have. 

Our  own  apprehension  of  any  bodily  condition  apart  from  the 
normal  is  the  sense  of  something  intruding  from  without :  but  besides 
this,  we  have  the  apprehension  of  one  member  by  another  ;  why  then 
should  not  the  All,  by  means  of  what  is  stationary  in  it,  perceive  that 
region  of  itself  which  is  in  movement,  that  is  to  say  the  earth  and  the 
earth's  content  ? 

Things  of  earth  are  certainly  affected  by  what  passes  in  other  regions 
of  the  All ;  what,  then,  need  prevent  the  All  from  having,  in  some  appro¬ 
priate  way,  the  perception  of  those  changes  ?  In  addition  to  that  self- 
contemplating  vision  vested  in  its  stationary  part,  may  it  not  have  a 
seeing  power  like  that  of  an  eye  able  to  announce  to  the  All-Soul  what 
has  passed  before  it  ?  Even  granted  that  it  is  entirely  unaffected  by  its 
lower,  why,  still,  should  it  not  see  like  an  eye,  ensouled  as  it  is,  all 
lightsome  ? 

Still :  “  eyes  were  not  necessary  to  it,”  we  read.  If  this  meant 
simply  that  nothing  is  left  to  be  seen  outside  of  the  All,  still  there  is  the 
inner  content,  and  there  can  be  nothing  to  prevent  it  seeing  what  con¬ 
stitutes  itself  :  if  the  meaning  is  that  such  self-vision  could  serve  to  no 
use,  we  may  think  that  it  has  vision  not  as  a  main  intention  for  vision's 


IV.  4-  26] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


75 


sake  but  as  a  necessary  concomitant  of  its  characteristic  nature  :  it 
is  difficult  to  conceive  why  such  a  body  should  be  incapable  of 
seeing. 


25- 

But  the  organ  is  not  the  only  requisite  to  vision  or  to  perception 
of  any  kind  :  there  must  be  a  state  of  the  soul  inclining  it  towards  the 
sphere  of  sense. 

Now  it  is  the  soul’s  character  to  be  ever  in  the  Intellectual  sphere, 
and  even  though  it  were  apt  to  sense-perception,  this  could  not  accom¬ 
pany  that  intention  towards  the  highest ;  to  ourselves  when  absorbed 
in  the  Intellectual,  vision  and  the  other  acts  of  sense  are  in  abeyance 
for  the  time  ;  and,  in  general,  any  special  attention  blurs  every  other. 
The  desire  of  apprehension  from  part  to  part — a  subject  examining 
itself — is  merely  curiosity  even  in  beings  of  our  own  standing,  and, 
unless  for  some  definite  purpose,  is  waste  of  energy  :  and  the  desire  to 
apprehend  something  external — for  the  sake  of  a  pleasant  sight — is  the 
sign  of  suffering  or  deficiency. 

Smelling,  tasting  flavours  (and  such  animal  perceptions)  may 
perhaps  be  described  as  mere  accessories,  distractions  of  the  soul,  while 
seeing  and  hearing  would  belong  to  the  sun  and  the  other  heavenly 
bodies  as  incidentals  to  their  being.  This  would  not  be  unreasonable 
if  seeing  and  hearing  are  means  by  which  they  apply  themselves  to 
their  function. 

But  if  they  so  apply  themselves,  they  must  have  memory ;  it  is 
impossible  that  they  should  have  no  remembrance  if  they  are  to  be 
benefactors,  their  service  could  not  exist  without  memory. 

26. 

Their  knowledge  of  our  prayers  is  due  to  what  we  may  call  an 
enlinking,  a  determined  relation  of  things  fitted  into  a  system  ;  so,  too, 
the  fulfilment  of  the  petitions  ;  in  the  art  of  magic  all  looks  to  this 
enlinkment :  prayer  and  its  answer,  magic  and  its  success,  depend  upon 
the  sympathy  of  enchained  forces. 


76  PLOTINUS 

This  seems  to  oblige  us  to  accord  sense-perception  to  the  earth. 

But  what  perception  ? 

Why  not,  to  begin  with,  that  of  contact-feeling,  the  apprehension 
of  part  by  part,  the  apprehension  of  fire  by  the  rest  of  the  entire  mass 
in  a  sensation  transmitted  upwards  to  the  earth’s  leading  principle  ?  A 
corporeal  mass  (such  as  that  of  the  earth)  may  be  sluggish  but  is  not 
utterly  inert.  Such  perceptions,  of  course,  would  not  be  of  trifles,  but 
of  the  graver  movement  of  things. 

But  why  even  of  them  ? 

Because  those  gravest  movements  could  not  possibly  remain  unknown 
where  there  is  an  immanent  soul. 

And  there  is  nothing  against  the  idea  that  sensation  in  the  earth 
exists  for  the  sake  of  the  human  interests  furthered  by  the  earth.  They 
would  be  served  by  means  of  the  sympathy  that  has  been  mentioned  ; 
petitioners  would  be  heard  and  their  prayers  met,  though  in  a  way  not 
ours.  And  the  earth,  both  in  its  own  interest  and  in  that  of  beings 
distinct  from  itself,  might  have  the  experiences  of  the  other  senses  also 
— for  example,  smell  and  taste  where,  perhaps,  the  scent  of  juices  or 
sap  might  enter  into  its  care  for  animal  life,  as  in  the  constructing  or 
restoring  of  their  bodily  part. 

But  we  need  not  demand  for  earth  the  organs  by  which  we,  ourselves, 
act :  not  even  all  the  animals  have  these  ;  some,  without  ears  perceive 
sound. 

For  sight  it  would  not  need  eyes — though  if  light  is  indispensable 
how  can  it  see  ? 

That  the  earth  contains  the  principle  of  growth  must  be  admitted  ; 
it  is  difficult  not  to  allow  in  consequence  that,  since  this  vegetal  principle 
is  a  member  of  spirit,  the  earth  is  primarily  of  the  spiritual  order  ;  and 
how  can  we  doubt  that  in  a  spirit  all  is  lucid  ?  This  becomes  all  the 
more  evident  when  we  reflect  that,  besides  being  as  a  spirit  light¬ 
some,  it  is  physically  illuminated  moving  in  the  light  of  the  kosmic 
revolution. 

There  is,  thus,  no  longer  any  absurdity  or  impossibility  in  the  notion 
that  the  soul  in  the  earth  has  vision  :  we  must,  further,  consider  that 


IV.  4-  28] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


77 

it  is  the  soul  of  no  mean  body ;  that  in  fact  it  is  a  god  since  certainly 
soul  must  be  everywhere  good. 

27. 

If  the  earth  transmits  the  generative  soul  to  growing  things — or 
retains  it  while  allowing  a  vestige  of  it  to  constitute  the  vegetal  principle 
in  them — at  once  the  earth  is  ensouled,  as  our  flesh  is,  and  any  generative 
power  possessed  by  the  plant  world  is  of  its  bestowing  :  this  phase  of 
the  soul  is  immanent  in  the  body  of  the  growing  thing,  and  transmits 
to  it  that  better  element  by  which  it  differs  from  the  broken  off  part 
no  longer  a  thing  of  growth  but  a  mere  lump  of  material. 

But  does  the  entire  body  of  the  earth  similarly  receive  anything 
from  the  soul  ? 

Yes  :  for  we  must  recognise  that  earthly  material  broken  off  from 
the  main  body  differs  from  the  same  remaining  continuously  attached ; 
thus  stones  increase  as  long  as  they  are  embedded,  and,  from  the  moment 
they  are  separated,  stop  at  the  size  attained. 

We  must  conclude,  then,  that  every  part  and  member  of  the  earth 
carries  its  vestige  of  this  principle  of  growth,  an  under-phase  of  that 
entire  principle  which  belongs  not  to  this  or  that  member  but  to  the 
earth  as  a  whole  :  next  in  order  is  the  nature  (the  soul-phase),  concerned 
with  sensation,  this  not  interfused  (like  the  vegetal  principle)  but  in 
contact  from  above  :  then  the  higher  soul  and  the  Intellectual-Principle, 
constituting  together  the  being  known  as  Hestia  (Earth-Mind)  and 
Demeter  (Earth-Soul) — a  nomenclature  indicating  the  human  intuition 
of  these  truths,  asserted  in  the  attribution  of  a  divine  name  and  nature. 

28. 

Thus  much  established,  we  may  return  on  our  path  :  we  have  to 
discuss  the  seat  of  the  passionate  element  in  the  human  being. 

Pleasures  and  pains — the  conditions,  that  is,  not  the  perception 
of  them — and  the  nascent  stage  of  desire,  we  assigned  to  the  body  as 
a  determined  thing,  the  body  brought,  in  some  sense,  to  life  :  are  we 
entitled  to  say  the  same  of  the  nascent  stage  of  passion  ?  Are  we  to 


PLOTINUS 


78 

consider  passion  in  all  its  forms  as  vested  in  the  determined  body  or  in 
something  belonging  to  it,  for  instance  in  the  heart  or  the  bile  necessarily 
taking  condition  within  a  body  not  dead  ?  Or  are  we  to  think  that 
just  as  that  which  bestows  the  vestige  of  the  soul  is  a  distinct  entity, 
so  we  may  reason  in  this  case — the  passionate  element  being  one  distinct 
thing,  itself,  and  not  deriving  from  any  passionate  or  percipient  faculty  ? 

Now  in  the  first  case  the  soul-principle  involved,  the  vegetal,  pervades 
the  entire  body,  so  that  pain  and  pleasure  and  nascent  desire  for  the 
satisfaction  of  need  are  present  all  over  it — there  is  possibly  some  doubt 
as  to  the  sexual  impulse,  which,  however,  it  may  suffice  to  assign  to  the 
organs  by  which  it  is  executed — but  in  general  the  region  about  the 
liver  may  be  taken  to  be  the  starting  point  of  desire,  since  it  is  the  main 
acting  point  of  the  vegetal  principle  which  transmits  the  vestige  phase 
of  the  soul  to  the  liver  and  body — the  seat,  because  the  spring. 

But  in  this  other  case,  of  passion,  we  have  to  settle  what  it  is,  what 
form  of  soul  it  represents  :  does  it  act  by  communicating  a  lower  phase 
of  itself  to  the  regions  round  the  heart,  or  is  it  set  in  motion  by  the 
higher  soul-phase  impinging  upon  the  Conjoint  (the  animate-total), 
or  is  there,  in  such  conditions  no  question  of  soul-phase,  but  simply 
passion  itself  producing  the  act  or  state  of  (for  example)  anger  ? 

Evidently  the  first  point  for  enquiry  is  what  passion  is. 

Now  we  all  know  that  we  feel  anger  not  only  over  our  own  bodily 
suffering,  but  also  over  the  conduct  of  others,  as  when  some  of  our  asso¬ 
ciates  act  against  our  right  and  due,  and  in  general  over  any  unseemly 
conduct.  It  is  at  once  evident  that  anger  implies  some  subject  capable  of 
sensation  and  of  judgement :  and  this  consideration  suffices  to  show  that 
the  vegetal  nature  is  not  its  source,  that  we  must  look  for  its  origin 
elsewhere. 

On  the  other  hand,  anger  follows  closely  upon  bodily  states  ;  people 
in  whom  the  blood  and  the  bile  are  intensely  active  are  as  quick  to  anger 
as  those  of  cool  blood  and  no  bile  are  slow  ;  animals  grow  angry  though 
they  pay  attention  to  no  outside  combinations  except  where  they  recog¬ 
nise  physical  danger  ;  all  this  forces  us  again  to  place  the  seat  of  anger 
in  the  strictly  corporeal  element,  the  principle  by  which  the  animal 


IV.  4.  28] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


79 


organism  is  held  together.  Similarly,  that  anger  or  its  first  stirring 
depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  body  follows  from  the  consideration 
that  the  same  people  are  more  irritable  ill  than  well,  fasting  than  after 
food  :  it  would  seem  that  the  bile  and  the  blood,  acting  as  vehicles  of 
life,  produce  these  emotions. 

Our  conclusion  (reconciling  with  these  corporeal  facts  the  psychic 
or  mental  element  indicated)  will  identify,  first,  some  suffering  in  the 
body  answered  by  a  movement  in  the  blood  or  in  the  bile  :  sensation 
ensues  and  the  soul,  brought  by  means  of  the  representative  faculty  to 
partake  in  the  condition  of  the  affected  body,  is  directed  towards  the 
cause  of  the  pain  :  the  reasoning  soul,  in  turn,  from  its  place  above — 
the  phase  not  inbound  with  body — acts  in  its  own  mode  when  the  breach 
of  order  has  become  manifest  to  it  :  it  calls  in  the  alliance  of  that  ready 
passionate  faculty  which  is  the  natural  combatant  of  the  evil  disclosed. 

Thus  anger  has  two  phases  ;  there  is  firstly  that  which,  rising  apart 
from  all  process  of  reasoning,  draws  reason  to  itself  by  the  medium  of 
the  imaging  faculty,  and  secondly  that  which,  rising  in  reason,  touches 
finally  upon  the  specific  principle  of  the  emotion.  Both  these  depend 
upon  the  existence  of  that  principle  of  vegetal  life  and  generation  by 
which  the  body  becomes  an  organism  aware  of  pleasure  and  pain  :  this 
principle  it  was  that  made  the  body  a  thing  of  bile  and  bitterness  and 
thus  it  leads  the  indwelling  soul-phase  to  corresponding  states — churlish 
and  angry  under  stress  of  environment — so  that  being  wronged  itself, 
it  tries,  as  we  may  put  it,  to  return  the  wrong  upon  its  surroundings,  and 
bring  them  to  the  same  condition. 

That  this  soul- vestige,  which  determines  the  movements  of  passion 
is  of  one  essence  (consubstantial)  with  the  other  is  evident  from  the 
consideration  that  those  of  us  less  avid  of  corporeal  pleasures,  especially 
those  that  wholly  repudiate  the  body,  are  the  least  prone  to  anger  and 
to  all  experiences  not  rising  from  reason. 

That  this  vegetal  principle,  underlying  anger,  should  be  present  in 
trees  and  yet  passion  be  lacking  in  them  cannot  surprise  us  since  they 
are  not  subject  to  the  movements  of  blood  and  bile.  If  the  occasions  of 
anger  presented  themselves  where  there  is  no  power  of  sensation  there 


8o 


PLOTINUS 


could  be  no  more  than  a  physical  ebullition  with  something  approaching 
to  resentment  (an  unconscious  reaction)  ;  where  sensation  exists  there 
is  at  once  something  more  ;  the  recognition  of  wrong  and  of  the  necessary 
defence  carries  with  it  the  intentional  act. 

But  the  division  of  the  unreasoning  phase  of  the  soul  into  a  desiring 
faculty  and  a  passionate  faculty — the  first  identical  with  the  vegetal 
principle,  the  second  being  a  lower  phase  of  it  acting  upon  the  blood  or 
bile  or  upon  the  entire  living  organism — such  a  division  would  not  give 
us  a  true  opposition,  for  the  two  would  stand  in  the  relation  of  earlier 
phase  to  derivative. 

This  difficulty  is  reasonably  met  by  considering  that  both  faculties 
are  derivatives  and  making  the  division  apply  to  them  in  so  far  as  they 
are  new  productions  from  a  common  source  ;  for  the  division  applies 
to  movements  of  desire  as  such,  not  to  the  essence  from  which  they  rise. 

That  essence  is  not,  of  its  own  nature,  desire ;  it  is,  however,  the  force 
which  by  consolidating  itself  with  the  active  manifestation  proceeding 
from  it  makes  the  desire  a  completed  thing.  And  that  derivative  which 
culminates  in  passion  may  not  unreasonably  be  thought  of  as  a  vestige- 
phase  lodged  about  the  heart,  since  the  heart  is  not  the  seat  of  the  soul, 
but  merely  the  centre  to  that  portion  of  the  blood  which  is  concerned 
in  the  movements  of  passion. 

29. 

But — keeping  to  our  illustration,  by  which  the  body  is  warmed  by 
soul  and  not  merely  illuminated  by  it — how  is  it  that  when  the  higher 
soul  withdraws  there  is  no  further  trace  of  the  vital  principle  ? 

For  a  brief  space  there  is  ;  and,  precisely,  it  begins  to  fade  away 
immediately  upon  the  withdrawal  of  the  other,  as  in  the  case  of  warmed 
objects  when  the  fire  is  no  longer  near  them  :  similarly  hair  and  nails 
still  grow  on  the  dead ;  animals  cut  to  pieces  wriggle  for  a  good  time 
after  ;  these  are  signs  of  a  life  force  still  indwelling. 

Besides,  simultaneous  withdrawal  would  not  prove  the  identity  of 
the  higher  and  lower  phases  :  when  the  sun  withdraws  there  goes  with 
it  not  merely  the  light  emanating  from  it,  guided  by  it,  attached  to  it, 


IV.  4-  29] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


81 


but  also  at  once  that  light  seen  upon  obliquely  situated  objects,  a  light 
secondary  to  the  sun’s  and  cast  upon  things  outside  of  its  path  (reflected 
light  showing  as  colour  ) ;  the  two  are  not  identical  and  yet  they  disappear 
together. 

But  is  this  simultaneous  withdrawal  or  frank  obliteration  ? 

The  question  applies  equally  to  this  secondary  light  and  to  the 
corporeal  life,  that  life  which  we  think  of  as  being  completely  sunk  into 
body. 

No  light  whatever  remains  in  the  objects  once  illuminated ;  that 
much  is  certain  :  but  we  have  to  ask  whether  it  has  sunk  back  into  its 
source  or  is  simply  no  longer  in  existence. 

How  could  it  pass  out  of  being,  a  thing  that  once  has  been  ? 

But  what  really  was  it  ?  We  must  remember  that  what  we  know 
as  colour  belongs  to  bodies  by  the  fact  that  they  throw  off  light,  yet 
when  corruptible  bodies  are  transformed  the  colour  disappears  and  we 
no  more  ask  where  the  colour  of  a  burned-out  fire  is  than  where  its 
shape  is. 

Still :  the  shape  is  merely  a  configuration,  like  the  he  of  the  hands 
clenched  or  spread  ;  the  colour  is  no  such  accidental  but  is  more  like, 
for  example,  sweetness  :  when  a  material  substance  breaks  up,  the 
sweetness  of  what  was  sweet  in  it,  and  the  fragrance  of  what  was  fragrant 
may  very  well  not  be  annihilated,  but  enter  into  some  other  substance, 
passing  unobserved  there  because  the  new  habitat  is  not  such  that  the 
entrant  qualities  now  offer  anything  solid  to  perception. 

May  we  not  think  that,  similarly,  the  light  belonging  to  bodies 
that  have  been  dissolved  remains  in  being  while  the  solid  total,  made  up 
of  all  that  is  characteristic,  disappears  ? 

It  might  be  said  that  the  seeing  is  merely  the  sequel  to  some  law 
(of  our  own  nature),  so  that  what  we  call  qualities  do  not  actually  exist 
in  the  substances. 

But  this  is  to  make  the  qualities  indestructible  and  not  dependent 
upon  the  composition  of  the  body ;  it  would  no  longer  be  the  Reason- 
Principles  within  the  sperm  that  produce,  for  instance,  the  colours  of  a 
bird’s  variegated  plumage  ;  these  principles  would  merely  blend  and 


M 


82 


PLOTINUS 


place  them,  or  if  they  produced  them  would  draw  also  on  the  full  store 
of  colours  in  the  sky,  producing  in  the  sense,  minly,  of  showing  m 
the  formed  bodies  something  very  different  from  what  appears  in  the 

heavens. 

But  whatever  we  may  think  on  this  doubtful  point,  if,  as  long  as 
the  bodies  remain  unaltered,  the  light  is  constant  and  unsevered,  then 
it  would  seem  natural  that,  on  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  the  light 
both  that  in  immediate  contact  and  any  other  attached  to  that— should 
pass  away  at  the  same  moment,  unseen  in  the  going  as  in  the 

coming. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  soul  it  is  a  question  whether  the  secondary 
phases  follow  their  priors— the  derivatives  their  sources— or  whether 
every  phase  is  self-governing,  isolated  from  its  predecessors  and  able  to 
stand  alone  ;  in  a  word,  whether  no  part  of  the  soul  is  sundered  from 
the  total,  but  all  the  souls  are  simultaneously  one  soul  and  many,  and, 
if  so,  by  what  mode  ;  this  question,  however,  is  treated  elsewhere. 

Here  we  have  to  enquire  into  the  nature  and  being  of  that  vestige 
of  the  soul  actually  present  in  the  living  body  :  if  there  is  truly  a  soul, 
then,  as  a  thing  never  cut  off  from  its  total,  it  will  go  with  soul  as  soul 
must :  if  it  is  rather  to  be  thought  of  as  belonging  to  the  body,  as  the 
life  of  the  body,  we  have  the  same  question  that  rose  in  the  case  of  the 
vestige  of  light ;  we  must  examine  whether  life  can  exist  without  the 
presence  of  soul,  except  of  course  in  the  sense  of  soul  living  above  and 
acting  upon  the  remote  object. 

30. 

We  have  declared  acts  of  memory  unnecessary  to  the  stars,  but  we 
allow  them  perceptions,  hearing  as  well  as  seeing  ;  for  we  said  that 
prayers  to  them  were  heard — our  supplications  to  the  sun,  and  those, 
even,  of  certain  other  men  to  the  stars.  It  has  moreover  been  the  belief 
that  in  answer  to  prayer  they  accomplish  many  human  wishes,  and  this 
so  light-heartedly  that  they  become  not  merely  helpers  towards  good 
but  even  accomplices  in  evil.  Since  this  matter  lies  in  our  way  it  must 
be  considered,  for  it  carries  with  it  grave  difficulties  that  very  much 


IV-4-3i]  PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL  83 

trouble  those  who  cannot  think  of  divine  beings  as,  thus,  authors  or 
auxiliaries  in  unseemliness  even  including  the  connections  of  loose 
carnality. 

In  view  of  all  this  it  is  especially  necessary  to  study  the  question 
with  which  we  began,  that  of  memory  in  the  heavenly  bodies. 

It  is  obvious  that,  if  they  act  on  our  prayers  and  if  this  action  is 
not  immediate,  but  with  delay  and  after  long  periods  of  time,  they 
remember  the  prayers  men  address  to  them.  This  is  something  that 
our  former  argument  did  not  concede  ;  though  it  appeared  plausible 
that,  for  their  better  service  of  mankind,  they  might  have  been  endowed 
with  such  a  memory  as  we  ascribed  to  Demeter  and  Hestia — or  to  the 
latter  alone  if  only  the  earth  is  to  be  thought  of  as  beneficent  to  man. 

We  have,  then,  to  attempt  to  show :  firstly,  how  acts  implying 
memory  in  the  heavenly  bodies  are  to  be  reconciled  with  our  system  as 
distinguished  from  those  others  which  allow  them  memory  as  a  matter 
of  course  ;  secondly,  what  vindication  of  those  gods  of  the  heavenly 
spheres  is  possible  in  the  matter  of  seemingly  anomalous  acts — a  question 
which  philosophy  cannot  ignore — then  too,  since  the  charge  goes  so 
far,  we  must  ask  whether  credence  is  to  be  given  to  those  who  hold  that 
the  entire  heavenly  system  can  be  put  under  spell  by  man’s  skill  and 
audacity  :  our  discussion  will  also  deal  with  the  spirit-beings  and  how 
they  may  be  thought  to  minister  to  these  ends — unless  indeed  the  part 
played  by  the  Celestials  prove  to  be  settled  by  the  decision  upon  the 
first  questions. 

31* 

Our  problem  embraces  all  act  and  all  experience  throughout  the 
entire  kosmos — whether  due  to  nature,  in  the  current  phrase,  or  effected 
by  art.  The  natural  proceeds,  we  must  hold,  from  the  All  towards  its 
members  and  from  the  members  to  the  All,  or  from  member  to  other 
member  :  the  artificial  either  remains,  as  it  began,  within  the  limit  of 
the  art — attaining  finality  in  the  artificial  product  alone — or  is  the 
expression  of  an  art  which  calls  to  its  aid  natural  forces  and  agencies, 
and  so  sets  up  act  and  experience  within  the  sphere  of  the  natural. 


84 


PLOTINUS 


When  I  speak  of  the  act  and  experience  of  the  All  I  mean  the  total 
effect  of  the  entire  kosmic  circuit  upon  itself  and  upon  its  members  . 
for  by  its  motion  it  sets  up  certain  states  both  within  itself  and  upon 
its  parts,  upon  the  bodies  that  move  within  it,  and  upon  all  that  it 
communicates  to  those  other  parts  of  it,  the  things  of  our  earth. 

The  action  of  part  upon  part  is  manifest ;  there  are  the  relations 
and  operations  of  the  sun,  both  towards  the  other  spheres  and  towards 
the  things  of  earth ;  and  again  relations  among  elements  of  the  sun 
itself,  of  other  heavenly  bodies,  of  earthly  things  and  of  things  in  the 
other  stars,  demand  investigation. 

As  for  the  arts  :  Such  as  look  to  house  building  and  the  like  are 
exhausted  when  that  object  is  achieved  ;  there  are  again  those  medicine, 
farming,  and  other  serviceable  pursuits — which  deal  helpfully  with 
natural  products,  seeking  to  bring  them  to  natural  efficiency  ,  and  there 
is  a  class — rhetoric,  music  and  every  other  method  of  swaying  mind  or 
soul,  with  their  power  of  modifying  for  better  or  for  worse  and  we 
have  to  ascertain  what  these  arts  come  to  and  what  kind  of  power  lies 
in  them. 

On  all  these  points,  in  so  far  as  they  bear  on  our  present  purpose, 
we  must  do  what  we  can  to  work  out  some  approximate  explanation. 

It  is  abundantly  evident  that  the  Circuit  is  a  cause  ;  it  modifies, 
firstly,  itself  and  its  own  content,  and  undoubtedly  also  it  tells  on  the 
terrestrial,  not  merely  in  accordance  with  bodily  conditions  but  also  by 
the  states  of  the  soul  it  sets  up  ;  and  each  of  its  members  has  an  operation 
upon  the  terrestrial  and  in  general  upon  all  the  lower. 

Whether  there  is  a  return  action  of  the  lower  upon  the  higher  need 
not  trouble  us  now  :  for  the  moment  we  are  to  seek,  as  far  as  discussion 
can  exhibit  it,  the  method  by  which  action  takes  place  ;  and  we  do  not 
challenge  the  opinions  universally  or  very  generally  entertained. 

We  take  the  question  back  to  the  initial  act  of  causation.  It  cannot 
be  admitted  that  either  heat  or  cold  and  the  like — what  are  known  as 
the  primal  qualities  of  the  elements — or  any  admixture  of  these  qualities, 
should  be  the  first  causes  we  are  seeking  ;  equally  inacceptable,  that 
while  the  sun’s  action  is  all  by  heat,  there  is  another  member  of  the 


IV.  4.  32] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


85 

Circuit  operating  wholly  by  cold — incongruous  in  the  heavens  and  in  a 
fiery  body — nor  can  we  think  of  some  other  star  operating  by  liquid 
fire. 

Such  explanations  do  not  account  for  the  differences  of  things,  and 
there  are  many  phenomena  which  cannot  be  referred  to  any  of  these 
causes.  Suppose  we  allow  them  to  be  the  occasion  of  moral  differences — 
determined,  thus,  by  bodily  composition  and  constitution  under  a 
reigning  heat  or  cold — does  that  give  us  a  reasonable  explanation  of 
envy,  jealousy,  acts  of  violence  ?  Or,  if  it  does,  what,  at  any  rate,  are 
we  to  think  of  good  and  bad  fortune,  rich  men  and  poor,  gentle  blood, 
treasure  trove  ? 

An  immensity  of  such  examples  might  be  adduced,  all  leading  far 
from  any  corporeal  quality  that  could  enter  the  body  and  soul  of  a  living 
thing  from  the  elements  :  and  it  is  equally  impossible  that  the  will  of 
the  stars,  a  doom  from  the  All,  any  deliberation  among  them,  should 
be  held  responsible  for  the  fate  of  each  and  all  of  their  inferiors.  It  is 
not  to  be  thought  that  such  beings  engage  themselves  in  human  affairs 
in  the  sense  of  making  men  thieves,  slave-dealers,  burglars,  temple- 
strippers,  or  debased  effeminates  practising  and  lending  themselves  to 
disgusting  actions  :  that  is  not  merely  unlike  gods  ;  it  is  unlike  mediocre 
men  ;  it  is,  perhaps,  beneath  the  level  of  any  existing  being  where  there 
is  not  the  least  personal  advantage  to  be  gained. 

32. 

If  we  can  trace  neither  to  material  agencies  (blind  elements)  nor  to 
any  deliberate  intention  the  influences  from  without  which  reach  to  us 
and  to  the  other  forms  of  life  and  to  the  terrestrial  in  general,  what  cause 
satisfactory  to  reason  remains  ? 

The  secret  is  :  firstly,  that  this  All  is  one  universally  comprehensive 
living  being,  encircling  all  the  living  beings  within  it,  and  having  a  soul, 
one  soul,  which  extends  to  all  its  members  in  the  degree  of  participant 
membership  held  by  each  ;  secondly,  that  every  separate  thing  is  an 
integral  part  of  this  All  by  belonging  to  the  total  material  fabric — 
unrestrictedly  a  part  by  bodily  membership,  while,  in  so  far  as  it  has  also 


86 


PLOTINUS 


some  participation  in  the  All-Soul,  it  possesses  in  that  degree  spiritual 
membership  as  well,  perfect  where  participation  is  in  the  All-Soul  alone, 
partial  where  there  is  also  a  union  with  a  lower  soul. 

But,  with  all  this  gradation,  each  several  thing  is  affected  by  all 
else  in  virtue  of  the  common  participation  in  the  All,  and  to  the  degree 
of  its  own  participation. 

This  One-All,  therefore,  is  a  sympathetic  total  and  stands  as  one 
living  being  ;  the  far  is  near ;  it  happens  as  in  one  animal  with  its 
separate  parts  :  talon,  horn,  finger,  and  any  other  member  are  not 
continuous  and  yet  are  effectively  near  ;  intermediate  parts  feel  nothing, 
but  at  a  distant  point  the  local  experience  is  known.  Correspondent 
things  not  side  by  side  but  separated  by  others  placed  between,  the 
sharing  of  experience  by  dint  of  like  condition — this  is  enough  to  ensure 
that  the  action  of  any  distant  member  be  transmitted  to  its  distant 
fellow.  Where  all  is  a  living  thing  summing  to  a  unity  there  is  nothing 
so  remote  in  point  of  place  as  not  to  be  near  by  virtue  of  a  nature  which 
makes  of  the  one  living  being  a  sympathetic  organism. 

Where  there  is  similarity  between  a  thing  affected  and  the  thing 
affecting  it,  the  affection  is  not  alien  ;  where  the  affecting  cause  is  dis¬ 
similar  the  affection  is  alien  and  unpleasant. 

Such  hurtful  action  of  member  upon  member  within  one  living 
being  need  not  seem  surprising  :  within  ourselves,  in  our  own  activities, 
one  constituent  can  be  harmed  by  another ;  bile  and  animal  spirit  seem 
to  press  and  goad  other  members  of  the  human  total :  in  the  vegetal 
realm  one  part  hurts  another  by  sucking  the  moisture  from  it.  And 
in  the  All  there  is  something  analogous  to  bile  and  animal  spirit,  as  to 
other  such  constituents.  For  visibly  it  is  not  merely  one  living  organism  ; 
it  is  also  a  manifold.  In  virtue  of  the  unity  the  individual  is  preserved 
by  the  All :  in  virtue  of  the  multiplicity  of  things  having  various  contacts, 
difference  often  brings  about  mutual  hurt  ;  one  thing,  seeking  its  own 
need,  is  detrimental  to  another ;  what  is  at  once  related  and  different 
is  seized  as  food  ;  each  thing,  following  its  own  natural  path,  wrenches 
from  something  else  what  is  serviceable  to  itself,  and  destroys  or  checks  in 
its  own  interest  whatever  is  becoming  a  menace  to  it :  each,  occupied  with 


IV.  4-  33] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


87 


its  peculiar  function,  assists  no  doubt  anything  able  to  profit  by  that,  but 
harms  or  destroys  what  is  too  weak  to  withstand  the  onslaught  of  its 
action,  like  fire  withering  things  round  it  or  greater  animals  in  their 
march  thrusting  aside  or  trampling  under  foot  the  smaller. 

The  rise  of  all  these  forms  of  being  and  their  modification,  whether 
to  their  loss  or  gain,  all  goes  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  natural  unhindered 
life  of  that  one  living  being  :  for  it  was  not  possible  for  the  single  thing 
to  be  as  if  it  stood  alone  ;  the  final  purpose  could  not  serve  to  that  only 
end,  intent  upon  the  partial :  the  concern  must  be  for  the  whole  to 
which  each  item  is  member  :  things  are  different  both  from  each  other 
and  in  their  own  stages,  therefore  cannot  be  complete  in  one  unchanging 
form  of  life  ;  nor  could  anything  remain  utterly  without  modification  if  the 
All  is  to  be  durable ;  for  the  permanence  of  an  All  demands  varying  forms. 


33- 

The  Circuit  does  not  go  by  chance  but  under  the  Reason-Principle 
of  the  living  whole  ;  therefore  there  must  be  a  harmony  between  cause 
and  caused  ;  there  must  be  some  order  ranging  things  to  each  other's 
purpose,  or  in  due  relation  to  each  other :  every  several  configuration 
within  the  Circuit  must  be  accompanied  by  a  change  in  the  position 
and  condition  of  things  subordinate  to  it,  which  thus  by  their  varied 
rhythmic  movement  make  up  one  total  dance-play. 

In  our  dance-plays  there  are  outside  elements  contributing  to  the 
total  effect — fluting,  singing,  and  other  linked  accessories — and  each 
of  these  changes  in  each  new  movement :  there  is  no  need  to  dwell  on 
these  ;  their  significance  is  obvious.  But  besides  this  there  is  the  fact 
that  the  limbs  of  the  dancer  cannot  possibly  keep  the  same  positions  in 
every  figure  ;  they  adapt  themselves  to  the  plan,  bending  as  it  dictates, 
one  lowered,  another  raised,  one  active,  another  resting  as  the  set  pattern 
changes.  The  dancer's  mind  is  on  his  own  purpose  ;  his  limbs  are 
submissive  to  the  dance-movement  which  they  accomplish  to  the  end, 
so  that  the  connoisseur  can  explain  that  this  or  that  figure  is  the  motive 
for  the  lifting,  bending,  concealment,  effacing,  of  the  various  members 
of  the  body  ;  and  in  all  this  the  executant  does  not  choose  the  particular 


88 


PLOTINUS 


motions  for  their  own  sake  ;  the  whole  play  of  the  entire  person  dictates 
the  necessary  position  to  each  limb  and  member  as  it  serves  to  the  plan. 

Now  this  is  the  mode  in  which  the  heavenly  beings  (the  diviner 
members  of  the  All)  must  be  held  to  be  causes  wherever  they  have  any 
action,  and,  when  they  do  not  act,  to  indicate. 

Or,  a  better  statement :  the  entire  kosmos  puts  its  entire  life  into 
act,  moving  its  major  members  with  its  own  action  and  unceasingly 
setting  them  in  new  positions  ;  by  the  relations  thus  established,  of  these 
members  to  each  other  and  to  the  whole,  and  by  the  different  figures 
they  make  together,  the  minor  members  in  turn  are  brought  under  the 
system  as  in  the  movements  of  some  one  living  being,  so  that  they  vary 
according  to  the  relations,  positions,  configurations  :  the  beings  thus 
co-ordinated  are  not  the  causes  ;  the  cause  is  the  co-ordinating  All ; 
at  the  same  time  it  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  seeking  to  do  one  thing  and 
actually  doing  another,  for  there  is  nothing  external  to  it  since  it  is  the 
cause  by  actually  being  all :  on  the  one  side  the  configurations,  on  the 
other  the  inevitable  effects  of  those  configurations  upon  a  living  being 
moving  as  a  unit  and,  again,  upon  a  living  being  (an  All)  thus  by  its 
nature  conjoined  and  concomitant  and,  of  necessity,  at  once  subject  and 
object  to  its  own  activities. 


34- 

For  ourselves,  while  whatever  in  us  belongs  to  the  body  of  the  All 
should  be  yielded  to  its  action,  we  ought  to  make  sure  that  we  submit 
only  within  limits,  realising  that  the  entire  man  is  not  thus  bound  to  it  : 
intelligent  servitors  yield  a  part  of  themselves  to  their  masters  but  in 
part  retain  their  personality,  and  are  thus  less  absolutely  at  beck  and 
call,  as  not  being  slaves,  not  utterly  chattels. 

The  changing  configurations  within  the  All  could  not  fail  to  be 
produced  as  they  are,  since  the  moving  bodies  are  not  of  equal  speed. 

Now  the  movement  is  guided  by  a  Reason-Principle  ;  the  relations 
of  the  living  whole  are  altered  in  consequence  ;  here  in  our  own  realm 
all  that  happens  reacts  in  sympathy  to  the  events  of  that  higher  sphere  : 
it  becomes,  therefore,  advisable  to  ask  whether  we  are  to  think  of  this 


IV.  4.  35] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


89 


realm  as  following  upon  the  higher  by  agreement,  or  to  attribute  to 
the  configurations  the  powers  underlying  the  events,  and  whether  such 
powers  would  be  vested  in  the  configurations  simply  or  in  the  relations 
of  the  particular  items. 

It  will  be  said  that  one  position  of  one  given  thing  has  by  no  means 
an  identical  effect — whether  of  indication  or  of  causation — in  its  relation 
to  another  and  still  less  to  any  group  of  others,  since  each  several  being 
seems  to  have  a  natural  tendency  (or  receptivity)  of  its  own. 

The  truth  is  that  the  configuration  of  any  given  group  means  merely 
the  relationship  of  the  several  parts,  and,  changing  the  members,  the 
relationship  remains  the  same. 

But,  this  being  so,  the  power  will  belong,  not  to  the  positions  but 
to  the  beings  holding  those  positions  ? 

To  both  taken  together.  For  as  things  change  their  relations,  and 
as  any  one  thing  changes  place,  there  is  a  change  of  power. 

But  what  power  ?  That  of  causation  or  of  indication  ? 

To  this  double  thing— the  particular  configuration  of  particular 
beings — -there  accrues  often  the  two-fold  power,  that  of  causation  and 
that  of  indication,  but  sometimes  only  that  of  indication.  Thus  we  are 
obliged  to  attribute  powers  both  to  the  configuration  and  to  the  beings 
entering  into  them.  In  mime  dancers  each  of  the  hands  has  its  own 
power,  and  so  with  all  the  limbs  ;  the  relative  positions  have  much 
power ;  and,  for  a  third  power,  there  is  that  of  the  accessories  and 
concomitants  ;  underlying  the  action  of  the  performers’  limbs,  there  are 
such  items  as  the  clutched  fingers  and  the  muscles  and  veins  following  suit. 


35- 

But  we  must  give  some  explanation  of  these  powers.  The  matter 
requires  a  more  definite  handling.  How  can  there  be  a  difference  of 
power  between  one  triangular  configuration  and  another  ? 

How  can  there  be  the  exercise  of  power  from  man  to  man  ;  under 
what  law,  and  within  what  limits  ? 

The  difficulty  is  that  we  are  unable  to  attribute  causation  either  to 
the  bodies  of  the  heavenly  beings  or  to  their  wills  :  their  bodies  are 


N 


PLOTINUS 


90 

excluded  because  the  product  transcends  the  causative  power  of  body , 
their  will  because  it  would  be  unseemly  to  suppose  divine  beings  to 
produce  unseemliness. 

Let  us  keep  in  mind  what  we  have  laid  down  : — 

The  being  we  are  considering  is  a  living  unity,  and  therefore 
necessarily  self-sympathetic :  it  is  under  a  law  of  reason  and  therefore 
the  unfolding  process  of  its  life  must  be  self-accordant  :  that  life  has  no 
haphazard,  but  knows  only  harmony  and  ordinance  :  all  the  groupings 
follow  reason  :  all  single  beings  within  it,  all  the  members  of  this  living 
whole  in  their  choral  dance  are  under  a  rule  of  Number. 

Holding  this  in  mind  we  are  forced  to  certain  conclusions  :  in  the 
expressive  act  of  the  All  are  comprised  equally  the  configurations  of  its 
members  and  these  members  themselves,  minor  as  well  as  major  entering 
into  the  configurations.  This  is  the  mode  of  life  of  the  All ;  and  its 
powers  work  together  to  this  end  under  the  Nature  in  which  the  producing 
agency  within  the  Reason-Principles  has  brought  them  into  being.  The 
groupings  (within  the  All)  are  themselves  in  the  nature  of  Reason- 
Principles  since  they  are  the  out-spacing  of  a  living-being,  its  reason- 
determined  rhythms  and  conditions,  and  the  entities  thus  spaced-out  and 
grouped  to  pattern  are  its  various  members  :  then  again  there  are  the 
powers  of  the  living  being — distinct  these,  too — which  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  parts  of  it,  always  excluding  deliberate  will  which  is  external 
to  it,  not  contributory  to  the  nature  of  the  living  All. 

The  will  of  any  organic  thing  is  one  ;  but  the  distinct  powers  which 
go  to  constitute  it  are  far  from  being  one  :  yet  all  the  several  wills  look 
to  the  object  aimed  at  by  the  one  will  of  the  whole  :  for  the  desire  which 
the  one  member  entertains  for  another  is  a  desire  within  the  All :  a  part 
seeks  to  acquire  something  outside  itself,  but  that  external  is  another 
part  of  which  it  feels  the  need  :  the  anger  of  a  moment  of  annoyance  is 
directed  to  something  alien,  growth  draws  on  something  outside,  all 
birth  and  becoming  has  to  do  with  the  external ;  but  all  this  external  is 
inevitably  something  included  among  fellow  members  of  the  system  : 
through  these  its  limbs  and  members,  the  All  is  bringing  this  activity 
into  being  while  in  itself  it  seeks — or  better,  contemplates — The  Good. 


IV.  4.  35] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


9i 


Right  will,  then,  the  will  which  stands  above  accidental  experience, 
seeks  The  Good  and  thus  acts  to  the  same  end  with  it.  When  men  serve 
another,  many  of  their  acts  are  done  under  order,  but  the  good  servant 
is  the  one  whose  purpose  is  in  union  with  his  master’s. 

In  all  the  efficacy  of  the  sun  and  other  stars  upon  earthly  matters 
we  can  but  believe  that  though  the  heavenly  body  is  intent  upon  the 
Supreme  yet — to  keep  to  the  sun — its  warming  of  terrestrial  things, 
and  every  service  following  upon  that,  all  springs  from  itself,  its  own 
act  transmitted  in  virtue  of  soul,  the  vastly  efficacious  soul  of  Nature. 
Each  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  similarly,  gives  forth  a  power,  involun¬ 
tary,  by  its  mere  radiation  :  all  things  become  one  entity,  grouped  by 
this  diffusion  of  power,  and  so  bring  about  wide  changes  of  condition ; 
thus  the  very  groupings  have  power  since  their  diversity  produces  diverse 
conditions  ;  that  the  grouped  beings  themselves  have  also  their  efficiency 
is  clear  since  they  produce  differently  according  to  the  different  member¬ 
ship  of  the  groups. 

That  configuration  has  power  in  itself  is  within  our  own  observation 
here.  Why  else  do  certain  groupments,  in  contradistinction  to  others, 
terrify  at  sight  though  there  has  been  no  previous  experience  of  evil 
from  them  ?  If  some  men  are  alarmed  by  a  particular  groupment  and 
others  by  quite  a  different  one,  the  reason  can  be  only  that  the  con¬ 
figurations  themselves  have  efficacy,  each  upon  a  certain  type — an 
efficacy  which  cannot  fail  to  reach  anything  naturally  disposed  to  be 
impressed  by  it,  so  that  in  one  groupment  things  attract  observation 
which  in  another  pass  without  effect. 

If  we  are  told  that  beauty  is  the  motive  of  attraction,  does  not  this 
mean  simply  that  the  power  of  appeal  to  this  or  that  mind  depends  upon 
pattern,  configuration  ?  How  can  we  allow  power  to  colour  and  none 
to  configuration  ?  It  is  surely  untenable  that  an  entity  should  have 
existence  and  yet  have  no  power  to  effect :  existence  carries  with  it 
either  acting  or  answering  to  action,  some  beings  having  action  alone, 
others  both. 

At  the  same  time  there  are  powers  apart  from  pattern  :  and,  in 
things  of  our  realm,  there  are  many  powers  dependent  not  upon  heat 


PLOTINUS 


92 

and  cold  but  upon  forces  due  to  differing  properties,  forces  which  have 
been  shaped  to  ideal-quality  by  the  action  of  Reason-Principles  and 
communicate  in  the  power  of  Nature  :  thus  the  natural  properties  of 
stones  and  the  efficacy  of  plants  produce  many  astonishing  results. 

36- 

The  Universe  is  immensely  varied,  the  container  of  all  the  Reason- 
Principles  and  of  infinite  and  diverse  efficacies.  In  man,  we  are  told,  the 
eye  has  its  power,  and  the  bones  have  their  varied  powers,  and  so  with 
each  separate  part  of  hand  and  of  foot ;  and  there  is  no  member  or 
organ  without  its  own  definite  function,  some  separate  power  of  its  own — 
a  diversity  of  which  we  can  have  no  notion  unless  our  studies  take  that 
direction.  What  is  true  of  man  must  be  true  of  the  universe,  and  much 
more,  since  all  this  order  is  but  a  representation  of  the  higher  :  it  must 
contain  an  untellably  wonderful  variety  of  powers,  with  which,  of  course, 
the  bodies  moving  through  the  heavens  will  be  most  richly  endowed. 

We  cannot  think  of  the  universe  as  a  soulless  habitation,  however 
vast  and  varied,  a  thing  of  materials  easily  told  off,  kind  by  kind — wood 
and  stone  and  whatever  else  there  be,  all  blending  into  a  kosmos  :  it 
must  be  alert  throughout,  every  member  living  by  its  own  life,  nothing 
that  can  have  existence  failing  to  exist  within  it. 

And  here  we  have  the  solution  of  the  problem,  “  How  an  ensouled 
living  form  can  include  the  soulless  ”  :  for  this  account  allows  grades  of 
living  within  the  whole,  grades  to  some  of  which  we  deny  life  only  because 
they  are  not  perceptibly  self -moved  :  in  the  truth,  all  of  these  have  a 
hidden  life  ;  and  the  thing  whose  life  is  patent  to  sense  is  made  up  of 
things  which  do  not  live  to  sense,  but,  none  the  less,  confer  upon  their 
resultant  total  wonderful  powers  towards  living.  Man  would  never  have 
reached  to  his  actual  height  if  the  powers  by  which  he  acts  were  the 
completely  soulless  elements  of  his  being  ;  similarly  the  All  could  not 
have  its  huge  life  unless  its  every  member  had  a  life  of  its  own  ;  this 
however  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  deliberate  intention ;  the  All  has 
no  need  of  intention  to  bring  about  its  acts  :  it  is  older  than  intention, 
and  therefore  its  powers  have  many  servitors. 


IV.  4.  37] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


93 


37- 

We  mast  not  rob  the  universe  of  any  factor  in  its  being.  If  any 
of  our  theorists  of  to-day  seek  to  explain  the  action  of  fire — or  of  any 
other  such  form,  thought  of  as  an  agent — they  will  find  themselves  in 
difficulties  unless  they  recognise  the  act  to  be  the  object’s  function  in 
the  All,  and  give  a  like  explanation  of  other  natural  forces  in  common 
use. 

We  do  not  habitually  examine  or  in  any  way  question  the  normal : 
we  set  to  doubting  and  working  out  identifications  when  we  are  con¬ 
fronted  by  any  display  of  power  outside  everyday  experience  :  we 
wonder  at  a  novelty  and  we  wonder  at  the  customary  when  anyone 
brings  forward  some  single  object  and  explains  to  our  ignorance  the 
efficacy  vested  in  it. 

Some  such  power,  not  necessarily  accompanied  by  reason,  every 
single  item  possesses  ;  for  each  has  been  brought  into  being  and  into 
shape  within  a  universe  ;  each  in  its  kind  has  partaken  of  soul  through 
the  medium  of  the  ensouled  All,  as  being  embraced  by  that  definitely 
constituted  thing  :  each  then  is  a  member  of  an  animate  being  which 
can  include  nothing  that  is  less  than  a  full  member  (and  therefore  a 
sharer  in  the  total  of  power) — though  one  thing  is  of  mightier  efficacy 
than  another,  and,  especially  members  of  the  heavenly  system  than  the 
objects  of  earth,  since  they  draw  upon  a  purer  nature — and  these  powers 
are  widely  productive.  But  productivity  does  not  comport  intention 
in  what  appears  to  be  the  source  of  the  thing  accomplished:  there  is 
efficacy,  too,  where  there  is  no  will:  even  attention  is  not  necessary 
to  the  communication  of  power;  the  very  transmission  of  soul  may 
proceed  without  either. 

A  living  being,  we  know,  may  spring  from  another  without  any 
intention,  and  as  without  loss  so  without  consciousness  in  the  begetter  : 
in  fact  any  intention  the  animal  exercised  could  be  a  cause  of  propagation 
only  on  condition  of  being  identical  with  the  animal  (i.e.  the  theory 
would  make  intention  a  propagative  animal,  not  a  mental  act  ?) 

And,  if  intention  is  unnecessary  to  the  propagation  of  life,  much 
more  so  is  attention. 


94 

38- 


PLOTINUS 


Whatever  springs  automatically  from  the  All  out  of  that  distinctive 
life  of  its  own,  and,  in  addition  to  that  self-moving  activity,  whatever 
is  due  to  some  specific  agency — for  example,  to  prayers,  simple  or  taking 
the  form  of  magic  incantations — this  entire  range  of  production  is  to 
be  referred,  not  to  each  such  single  cause,  but  to  the  nature  of  the  thing 
produced  (i.e.  to  a  certain  natural  tendency  in  the  product  to  exist  with 
its  own  quality). 

All  that  forwards  life  or  some  other  useful  purpose  is  to  be  ascribed 
to  the  transmission  characteristic  of  the  All ;  it  is  something  flowing 
from  the  major  of  an  integral  to  its  minor.  Where  we  think  we  see  the 
transmission  of  some  force  unfavourable  to  the  production  of  living 
beings,  the  flaw  must  be  found  in  the  inability  of  the  subject  to  take  in 
what  would  serve  it :  for  what  happens  does  not  happen  upon  a  void  ; 
there  is  always  specific  form  and  quality  ;  anything  that  could  be  affected 
must  have  an  underlying  nature  definite  and  characterised.  The  inevi¬ 
table  blendings,  further,  have  their  constructive  effect,  every  element 
adding  something  contributory  to  the  life.  Then  again  some  influence 
may  come  into  play  at  the  time  when  the  forces  of  a  beneficent  nature 
are  not  acting  :  the  co-ordination  of  the  entire  system  of  things  does 
not  always  allow  to  each  several  entity  everything  that  it  needs  :  and 
further  we  ourselves  add  a  great  deal  to  what  is  transmitted  to  us. 

None  the  less  all  entwines  into  a  unity :  and  there  is  something 
wonderful  in  the  agreement  holding  among  these  various  things  of 
varied  source,  even  of  sources  frankly  opposite  ;  the  secret  lies  in  a 
variety  within  a  unity.  When  by  the  standard  of  the  better  kind  among 
things  of  process  anything  falls  short — the  reluctance  of  its  material 
substratum  having  prevented  its  perfect  shaping  under  idea — it  may 
be  thought  of  as  being  deficient  in  that  noble  element  whose  absence 
brings  to  shame  :  the  thing  is  a  blend,  something  due  to  the  high  beings, 
an  alloy  from  the  underlying  nature,  something  added  by  the  self. 

Because  all  is  ever  being  knit,  all  brought  to  culmination  in  unity, 
therefore  all  events  are  indicated  ;  but  this  does  not  make  virtue  a 
matter  of  compulsion ;  its  spontaneity  is  equally  inwoven  into  the 


IV.  4.  39] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


95 


ordered  system  by  the  general  law  that  the  things  of  this  sphere  are 
pendant  from  the  higher,  that  the  content  of  our  universe  lies  in  the 
hands  of  the  diviner  beings  in  whom  our  world  is  participant. 


39- 

We  cannot,  then,  refer  all  that  exists  to  Reason-Principles  inherent 
in  the  seed  of  things  (Spermatic  Reasons) ;  the  universe  is  to  be  traced 
further  back,  to  the  more  primal  forces,  to  the  principles  by  which  that 
seed  itself  takes  shape.  Such  spermatic  principles  cannot  be  the  con¬ 
tainers  of  things  which  arise  independently  of  them,  such  as  what  enters 
from  Matter  (the  reasonless)  into  membership  of  the  All,  or  what  is  due 
to  the  mere  interaction  of  existences. 

No  :  the  Reason-Principle  of  the  universe  would  be  better  envisaged 
as  a  wisdom  uttering  order  and  law  to  a  state,  in  full  knowledge  of  what 
the  citizens  will  do  and  why,  and  in  perfect  adaptation  of  law  to  custom  ; 
thus  the  code  is  made  to  thread  its  way  in  and  out  through  all  their 
conditions  and  actions  with  the  honour  or  infamy  earned  by  their  con¬ 
duct  ;  and  all  coalesces  by  a  kind  of  automatism. 

The  signification  which  exists  is  not  a  first  intention  ;  it  arises 
incidentally  by  the  fact  that  in  a  given  collocation  the  members  will 
tell  something  of  each  other  :  all  is  unity  sprung  of  unity  and  therefore 
one  thing  is  known  by  way  of  another  other,  a  cause  in  the  light  of  the 
caused,  the  sequent  as  rising  from  its  precedent,  the  compound  from  the 
constituents  which  must  make  themselves  known  in  the  linked  total. 

If  all  this  is  sound,  at  once  our  doubts  fall  and  we  need  no  longer 
ask  whether  the  transmission  of  any  evil  is  due  to  the  gods. 

For,  in  sum  :  Firstly,  intentions  are  not  to  be  considered  as  the 
operative  causes  ;  necessities  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things  account 
for  all  that  comes  from  the  other  realm  ;  it  is  a  matter  of  the  inevitable 
relation  of  parts,  and,  besides,  all  is  the  sequence  to  the  living  existence 
of  a  unity.  Secondly,  there  is  the  large  contribution  made  by  the  indi¬ 
vidual.  Thirdly,  each  several  communication,  good  in  itself,  takes 
another  quality  in  the  resultant  combination.  Fourthly,  the  life  in  the 
kosmos  does  not  look  to  the  individual  but  to  the  whole.  Finally,  there 


PLOTINUS 


96 

is  Matter,  the  under-lie,  which  being  given  one  thing  receives  it  as  some¬ 
thing  else,  and  is  unable  to  make  the  best  of  what  it  takes. 

40. 

But  magic  spells  ;  how  can  their  efficacy  be  explained  ? 

By  the  reigning  sympathy  and  by  the  fact  in  Nature  that  there  is 
an  agreement  of  like  forces  and  an  opposition  of  unlike,  and  by  the 
diversity  of  those  multitudinous  powers  which  converge  in  the  one 
living  universe. 

There  is  much  drawing  and  spell-binding  dependent  on  no  inter¬ 
fering  machination  ;  the  true  magic  is  internal  to  the  All,  its  attractions 
and,  not  less,  its  repulsions.  Here  is  the  primal  mage  and  sorcerer — 
discovered  by  men  who  thenceforth  turn  those  same  ensorcellations  and 
magic  arts  upon  one  another. 

Love  is  given  in  Nature  ;  the  qualities  inducing  love  induce  mutual 
approach  :  hence  there  has  arisen  an  art  of  magic  love-drawing  whose 
practitioners,  by  the  force  of  contact  implant  in  others  a  new  tem¬ 
perament,  one  favouring  union  as  being  informed  with  love  ;  they 
knit  soul  to  soul  as  they  might  train  two  separate  trees  towards  each 
other.  The  magician  too  draws  on  these  patterns  of  power,  and  by 
ranging  himself  also  into  the  pattern  is  able  tranquilly  to  possess  him¬ 
self  of  these  forces  with  whose  nature  and  purpose  he  has  become 
identified.  Supposing  the  mage  to  stand  outside  the  All,  his  evocations 
and  invocations  would  no  longer  avail  to  draw  up  or  to  call  down  ;  but 
as  things  are  he  operates  from  no  outside  standground,  he  pulls  knowing 
the  pull  of  everything  towards  any  other  thing  in  the  living  system. 

The  tune  of  an  incantation,  a  significant  cry,  the  mien  of  the  operator, 
these  too  have  a  natural  leading  power  over  the  soul  upon  which  they 
are  directed,  drawing  it  with  the  force  of  mournful  patterns  or  tragic 
sounds — for  it  is  the  reasonless  soul,  not  the  will  or  wisdom,  that  is 
beguiled  by  music,  a  form  of  sorcery  which  raises  no  question,  whose 
enchantment,  indeed,  is  welcomed,  exacted,  from  the  performers. 
Similarly  with  regard  to  prayers  ;  there  is  no  question  of  a  will  that 
grants  ;  the  powers  that  answer  to  incantations  do  not  act  by  will ;  a 


IV.  4.  42] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


97 


human  being  fascinated  by  a  snake  has  neither  perception  nor  sensation 
of  what  is  happening  ;  he  knows  only  after  he  has  been  caught,  and  his 
highest  mind  is  never  caught.  In  other  words,  some  influence  falls  from 
the  being  addressed  upon  the  petitioner — or  upon  someone  else — but 
that  being  itself,  sun  or  star,  perceives  nothing  of  it  all. 


41- 

The  prayer  is  answered  by  the  mere  fact  that  part  and  other  part 
are  wrought  to  one  tone  like  a  musical  string  which,  plucked  at  one  end, 
vibrates  at  the  other  also.  Often,  too,  the  sounding  of  one  string  awakens 
what  might  pass  for  a  perception  in  another,  the  result  of  their  being  in 
harmony  and  tuned  to  one  musical  scale  ;  now,  if  the  vibration  in  a 
lyre  affects  another  by  virtue  of  the  sympathy  existing  between  them, 
then  certainly  in  the  All — even  though  it  is  constituted  in  contraries — 
there  must  be  one  melodic  system  ;  for  it  contains  its  unisons  as  well, 
and  its  entire  content,  even  to  those  contraries,  is  a  kinship. 

Thus,  too,  whatever  is  hurtful  to  man — the  passionate  spirit,  for 
example,  drawn  by  the  medium  of  the  gall  into  the  principle  seated  in 
the  liver — comes  with  no  intention  of  hurt ;  it  is  simply  as  one  trans¬ 
ferring  fire  to  another  might  innocently  bum  him  :  no  doubt,  since  he 
actually  set  the  other  on  fire  he  is  a  cause,  but  only  as  the  attacking 
fire  itself  is  a  cause,  that  is  by  the  merely  accidental  fact  that  the  person 
to  whom  the  fire  was  being  brought  blundered  in  taking  it. 

42. 

It  follows  that,  for  the  purposes  which  have  induced  this  discussion, 
the  stars  have  no  need  of  memory  or  of  any  sense  of  petitions  addressed 
to  them  ;  they  give  no  such  voluntary  attention  to  prayers  as  some  have 
thought :  it  is  sufficient  that,  in  virtue  simply  of  the  nature  of  parts  and 
of  parts  within  a  whole,  something  proceeds  from  them  whether  in  answer 
to  prayer  or  without  prayer.  We  have  the  analogy  of  many  powers — as 
in  some  one  living  organism — which,  independently  of  plan  or  as  the 
result  of  applied  method,  act  without  any  collaboration  of  the  will :  one 

member  or  function  is  helped  or  hurt  by  another  in  the  mere  play  of 
o 


PLOTINUS 


98 

natural  forces  ;  and  the  art  of  doctor  or  magic  healer  will  compel  some 
one  centre  to  purvey  something  of  its  own  power  to  another  centre. 
Just  so  the  All :  it  purveys  spontaneously,  but  it  purveys  also  under 
spell ;  some  entity  (acting  like  the  healer)  is  concerned  for  a  member 
situated  within  itself  and  summons  the  All  which,  then,  pours  in  its 
gift ;  it  gives  to  its  own  part  by  the  natural  law  we  have  cited  since  the 
petitioner  is  no  alien  to  it.  Even  though  the  suppliant  be  a  sinner, 
the  answering  need  not  shock  us  ;  sinners  draw  from  the  brooks  ;  and 
the  giver  does  not  know  of  the  gift  but  simply  gives — though  we  must 
remember  that  all  is  one  woof  and  the  giving  is  always  consonant  with 
the  order  of  the  universe.  There  is,  therefore,  no  necessity  by  ineluctable 
law  that  one  who  has  helped  himself  to  what  lies  open  to  all  should  receive 
his  deserts  then  and  there. 

In  sum,  we  must  hold  that  the  All  cannot  be  affected  ;  its  leading 
principle  remains  for  ever  immune  whatsoever  happens  to  its  members  ; 
the  affection  is  really  present  to  them,  but  since  nothing  existent  can  be 
at  strife  with  the  total  of  existence,  no  such  affection  conflicts  with  its 
impassivity. 

Thus  the  stars,  in  so  far  as  they  are  parts,  can  be  affected  and  yet 
are  immune  on  various  counts ;  their  will,  like  that  of  the  All,  is  untouched, 
just  as  their  bodies  and  their  characteristic  natures  are  beyond  all  reach 
of  harm ;  if  they  give  by  means  of  their  souls,  their  souls  lose  nothing ; 
their  bodies  remain  unchanged  or,  if  there  is  ebb  or  inflow,  it  is  of  some¬ 
thing  going  unfelt  and  coming  unawares. 


43- 

And  the  Proficient  (the  Sage),  how  does  he  stand  with  regard  to 
magic  and  philtre-spells  ? 

In  the  soul  he  is  immune  from  magic  ;  his  reasoning  part  cannot 
be  touched  by  it,  he  cannot  be  perverted.  But  there  is  in  him  the 
unreasoning  element  which  comes  from  the  (material)  All,  and  in  this  he 
can  be  affected,  or  rather  this  can  be  affected  in  him.  Philtre-Love, 
however,  he  will  not  know,  for  that  would  require  the  consent  of  the 
higher  soul  to  the  trouble  stirred  in  the  lower.  And,  just  as  the 


IV.  4.  44] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


99 


unreasoning  element  responds  to  the  call  of  incantation,  so  the  adept 
himself  will  dissolve  those  horrible  powers  by  counter-incantations. 
Death,  disease,  any  experience  within  the  material  sphere,  these  may 
result,  yes  ;  for  anything  that  has  membership  in  the  All  may  be  affected 
by  another  member,  or  by  the  universe  of  members  ;  but  the  essential 
man  is  beyond  harm. 

That  the  effects  of  magic  should  be  not  instantaneous  but  developed 
is  only  in  accord  with  Nature’s  way. 

Even  the  Celestials,  the  Daimones,  are  not  on  their  unreasoning 
side  immune  :  there  is  nothing  against  ascribing  acts  of  memory  and 
experiences  of  sense  to  them,  in  supposing  them  to  accept  the  traction 
of  methods  laid  up  in  the  natural  order,  and  to  give  hearing  to  peti¬ 
tioners  ;  this  is  especially  true  of  those  of  them  that  are  closest  to  this 
sphere,  and  in  the  degree  of  their  concern  about  it. 

For  everything  that  looks  to  another  is  under  spell  to  that :  what 
we  look  to,  draws  us  magically.  Only  the  self-intent  go  free  of  magic. 
Hence  every  action  has  magic  as  its  source,  and  the  entire  life  of  the 
practical  man  is  a  bewitchment :  we  move  to  that  only  which  has  wrought 
a  fascination  upon  us.  This  is  indicated  where  we  read  ”  for  the  burgher 
of  great-hearted  Erechtheus  has  a  pleasant  face  (but  you  should  see  him 
naked  ;  then  you  would  be  cautious).”  For  what  conceivably  turns  a 
man  to  the  external  ?  He  is  drawn,  drawn  by  the  arts  not  of  magicians 
but  of  the  natural  order  which  administers  the  deceiving  draught  and 
links  this  to  that,  not  in  local  contact  but  in  the  fellowship  of  the  philtre. 


44- 

Contemplation  alone  stands  untouched  by  magic  ;  no  man  self- 
gathered  falls  to  a  spell ;  for  he  is  one,  and  that  unity  is  all  he  perceives, 
so  that  his  reason  is  not  beguiled  but  holds  the  due  course,  fashioning 
its  own  career  and  accomplishing  its  task. 

In  the  other  way  of  life,  it  is  not  the  essential  man  that  gives  the 
impulse  ;  it  is  not  the  reason  ;  the  unreasoning  also  acts  as  a  principle, 
and  this  is  the  first  condition  of  the  misfortune.  Caring  for  children, 
planning  marriage — everything  that  works  as  bait,  taking  value  by 


100 


PLOTINUS 


dint  of  desire — these  all  tug  obviously  :  so  it  is  with  our  action,  some¬ 
times  stirred,  not  reasonably,  by  a  certain  spirited  temperament,  some¬ 
times  as  foolishly  by  greed  ;  political  interests,  the  siege  of  office,  all 
betray  a  forth-summoning  lust  of  power  ;  action  for  security  springs 
from  fear  ;  action  for  gain,  from  desire  ;  action  undertaken  for  the  sake 
of  sheer  necessities — that  is,  for  supplying  the  insufficiency  of  nature — 
indicates,  manifestly,  the  cajoling  force  of  nature  to  the  safeguarding 
of  life. 

We  may  be  told  that  no  such  magic  underlies  good  action,  since, 
at  that,  Contemplation  itself,  certainly  a  good  action,  implies  a  magic 
attraction. 

The  answer  is  that  there  is  no  magic  when  actions  recognised  as 
good  are  performed  upon  sheer  necessity  with  the  recollection  that  the 
veritable  good  is  elsewhere  ;  this  is  simply  knowledge  of  need  ;  it  is  not 
a  bewitchment  binding  the  life  to  this  sphere  or  to  any  thing  alien  ;  all 
is  permissible  under  duress  of  human  nature,  and  in  the  spirit  of  adapta¬ 
tion  to  the  needs  of  existence  in  general — or  even  to  the  needs  of  the 
individual  existence,  since  it  certainly  seems  reasonable  to  fit  oneself 
into  life  rather  than  to  withdraw  from  it. 

When,  on  the  contrary,  the  agent  falls  in  love  with  what  is  good  in 
those  actions,  and,  cheated  by  the  mere  track  and  trace  of  the  Authentic 
Good  makes  them  his  own,  then,  in  his  pursuit  of  a  lower  good,  he  is  the 
victim  of  magic.  For  all  dalliance  with  what  wears  the  mask  of  the 
authentic,  all  attraction  towards  that  mere  semblance,  tells  of  a  mind 
misled  by  the  spell  of  forces  pulling  towards  unreality. 

The  sorcery  of  Nature  is  at  work  in  this  ;  to  pursue  the  non-good 
as  a  good,  drawn  in  unreasoning  impulse  by  its  specious  appearance  : 
it  is  to  be  led  unknowing  down  paths  unchosen  ;  and  what  can  we  call 
that  but  magic  ? 

Alone  in  immunity  from  magic  is  he  who,  though  drawn  by  the 
alien  parts  of  his  total  being,  withholds  his  assent  to  their  standards  of 
worth,  recognising  the  good  only  where  his  authentic  self  sees  and  knows 
it,  neither  drawn  nor  pursuing,  but  tranquilly  possessing  and  so  never 
charmed  away. 


IV.  4-  45] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


IOI 


45- 

From  this  discussion  it  becomes  perfectly  clear  that  the  individual 
member  of  the  All  contributes  to  that  All  in  the  degree  of  its  kind  and 
condition  ;  thus  it  acts  and  is  acted  upon.  In  any  particular  animal 
each  of  the  limbs  and  organs,  in  the  measure  of  its  kind  and  purpose,  aids 
the  entire  being  by  service  performed  and  counts  in  rank  and  utility  : 
it  gives  what  is  in  it  its  gift  and  takes  from  its  fellows  in  the  degree  of 
receptive  power  belonging  to  its  kind  ;  there  is  something  like  a  common 
sensitiveness  linking  the  parts,  and  in  the  orders  in  which  each  of  the 
parts  is  also  animate,  each  will  have,  in  addition  to  its  rank  as  part,  the 
very  particular  functions  of  a  living  being. 

We  have  learned,  further,  something  of  our  human  standing  ;  we 
know  that  we  too  accomplish  within  the  All  a  work  not  confined  to  the 
activity  and  receptivity  of  body  in  relation  to  body  ;  we  know  that  we 
bring  to  it  that  higher  nature  of  ours,  linked  as  we  are  by  affinities  within 
us  towards  the  answering  affinities  outside  us  ;  becoming  by  our  soul 
and  the  conditions  of  our  kind  thus  linked — or,  better,  being  linked  by 
Nature — with  our  next  highest  in  the  celestial  or  daemonic  realm,  and 
thence  onwards  with  those  above  the  Celestials,  we  cannot  fail  to  manifest 
our  quality.  Still,  we  are  not  all  able  to  offer  the  same  gifts  or  to  accept 
identically  :  if  we  do  not  possess  good,  we  cannot  bestow  it ;  nor  can 
we  ever  purvey  any  good  thing  to  one  that  has  no  power  of  receiving 
good.  Anyone  that  adds  his  evil  to  the  total  of  things  is  known  for 
what  he  is  and,  in  accordance  with  his  kind,  is  pressed  down  into 
the  evil  which  he  has  made  his  own,  and  hence,  upon  death,  goes  to 
whatever  region  fits  his  quality — and  all  this  happens  under  the  pull  of 
natural  forces. 

For  the  good  man,  the  giving  and  the  taking  and  the  changes  of 
state  go  quite  the  other  way ;  the  particular  tendencies  of  the  nature, 
we  may  put  it,  transpose  the  cords  (so  that  we  are  moved  by  that  only 
which,  in  Plato’s  metaphor  of  the  puppets,  draws  towards  the  best). 

Thus  this  universe  of  ours  is  a  wonder  of  power  and  wisdom,  every¬ 
thing  by  a  noiseless  road  coming  to  pass  according  to  a  law  which  none 
may  elude — which  the  base  man  never  conceives  though  it  is  leading 


102 


PLOTINUS 


him,  all  unknowingly,  to  that  place  in  the  All  where  his  lot  must  be 
cast — which  the  just  man  knows,  and,  knowing,  sets  out  to  the  place  he 
must,  understanding,  even  as  he  begins  the  journey,  where  he  is  to  be 
housed  at  the  end,  and  having  the  good  hope  that  he  will  be  with  gods. 

In  a  living  being  of  small  scope  the  parts  vary  but  slightly,  and  have 
but  a  faint  individual  consciousness,  and,  unless  possibly  in  a  few  and 
for  a  short  time,  are  not  themselves  alive.  But  in  a  living  universe,  of 
high  expanse,  where  every  entity  has  vast  scope  and  many  of  the  members 
have  life,  there  must  be  wider  movement  and  greater  changes.  We  see 
the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  other  stars  shifting  place  and  course  in 
an  ordered  progression.  It  is  therefore  within  reason  that  the  souls, 
also,  of  the  All  should  have  their  changes,  not  retaining  unbrokenly  the 
same  quality,  but  ranged  in  some  analogy  with  their  action  and  experience 
— some  taking  rank  as  head  and  some  as  foot  in  a  disposition  consonant 
with  the  Universal  Being  which  has  its  degrees  in  better  and  less  good. 
A  soul,  which  neither  chooses  the  highest  that  is  here,  nor  has  lent  itself 
to  the  lowest,  is  one  which  has  abandoned  another,  a  purer,  place,  taking 
this  sphere  in  free  election. 

The  punishments  of  wrong-doing  are  like  the  treatment  of  diseased 
parts  of  the  body — here,  medicines  to  knit  sundered  flesh  ;  there, 
amputations ;  elsewhere,  change  of  environment  and  condition — and  the 
penalties  are  planned  to  bring  health  to  the  All  by  settling  every  member 
in  the  fitting  place  :  and  this  health  of  the  All  requires  that  one  man 
be  made  over  anew  and  another,  sick  here,  be  taken  hence  to  where  he 
shall  be  weakly  no  longer. 

FIFTH  TRACTATE 

Problems  of  the  Soul  (III) 

(Also  entitled  ON  Sight) 

i. 

We  undertook  to  discuss  the  question  whether  sight  is  possible  in 
the  absence  of  any  intervening  medium,  such  as  air  or  some  other  form 
of  what  is  known  as  transparent  body  :  this  is  the  time  and  place. 

It  has  been  explained  that  seeing  and  all  sense-perception  can  occur 


IV.  5. 1] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL  103 

only  through  the  medium  of  some  bodily  substance,  since  in  the  absence 
of  body  the  soul  is  utterly  absorbed  in  the  Intellectual  Sphere.  Sense- 
perception  being  the  gripping  not  of  the  Intellectual  but  of  the  sensible 
alone,  the  soul,  if  it  is  to  form  any  relationship  of  knowledge,  or  of  im¬ 
pression,  with  objects  of  sense,  must  be  brought  in  some  kind  of  contact 
with  them  by  means  of  whatever  may  bridge  the  gap. 

The  knowledge,  then,  is  realised  by  means  of  bodily  organs  :  through 
these,  which  (in  the  embodied  soul)  are  almost  of  one  growth  with  it, 
being  at  least  its  continuations,  it  comes  into  something  like  unity  with 
the  alien,  since  this  mutual  approach  brings  about  a  certain  degree  of 
identity  (which  is  the  basis  of  knowledge). 

Admitting,  then,  that  some  contact  with  an  object  is  necessary  for 
knowing  it,  the  question  of  a  medium  falls  to  the  ground  in  the  case  of 
things  identified  by  any  form  of  touch  ;  but  in  the  case  of  sight — we 
leave  hearing  over  for  the  present — we  are  still  in  doubt ;  is  there  need 
of  some  bodily  substance  between  the  eye  and  the  illumined  object  ? 

No  :  such  an  intervening  material  may  be  a  favouring  circumstance, 
but  essentially  it  adds  nothing  to  seeing  power. 

Dense  bodies,  such  as  clay,  actually  prevent  sight ;  the  less  material 
the  intervening  substance  is,  the  more  clearly  we  see  ;  the  intervening 
substance,  then,  is  a  hindrance,  or,  if  not  that,  at  least  not  a  help. 

It  will  be  objected  that  vision  implies  that  whatever  intervenes 
between  seen  and  seer  must  first  (and  progressively)  experience  the 
object  and  be,  as  it  were,  shaped  to  it ;  we  will  be  reminded  that  (vision 
is  not  a  direct  and  single  relation  between  agent  and  object,  but  is  the 
perception  of  something  radiated  since)  anyone  facing  to  the  object 
from  the  side  opposite  to  ourselves  sees  it  equally ;  we  will  be  asked  to 
deduce  that  if  all  the  space  intervening  between  seen  and  seer  did  not 
carry  the  impression  of  the  object  we  could  not  receive  it. 

But  all  the  need  is  met  when  the  impression  reaches  that  which  is 
adapted  to  receive  it ;  there  is  no  need  for  the  intervening  space  to  be 
impressed.  If  it  is,  the  impression  will  be  of  quite  another  order  :  the 
rod  between  the  fisher’s  hand  and  the  torpedo  fish  is  not  affected  in  the 
same  way  as  the  hand  that  feels  the  shock.  And  yet  there  too,  if  rod 


104 


PLOTINUS 


and  line  did  not  intervene,  the  hand  would  not  be  affected — though 
even  that  may  be  questioned,  since  after  all  the  fisherman,  we  are  told, 
is  numbed  if  the  torpedo  merely  lies  in  his  net. 

The  whole  matter  seems  to  bring  us  back  to  that  sympathy  of  which 
we  have  treated.  If  a  certain  thing  is  of  a  nature  to  be  sympathetically 
affected  by  another  in  virtue  of  some  similitude  between  them,  then 
anything  intervening,  not  sharing  in  that  similitude,  will  not  be  affected, 
or  at  least  not  similarly.  If  this  be  so,  anything  naturally  disposed  to 
be  affected  will  take  the  impression  more  vividly  in  the  absence  of  inter¬ 
vening  substance,  even  of  some  substance  capable,  itself,  of  being 
affected. 


2. 

If  sight  depends  upon  the  linking  of  the  light  of  vision  with  the  fight 
leading  progressively  to  the  illumined  object,  then  by  the  very  hypothesis 
one  intervening  substance,  the  fight,  is  indispensable  :  but  if  the  illu¬ 
minated  body,  which  is  the  object  of  vision,  serves  as  an  agent  operating 
certain  changes,  some  such  change  might  very  well  impinge  immediately 
upon  the  eye,  requiring  no  medium  ;  this  all  the  more,  since  as  things 
are  the  intervening  substance,  which  actually  does  exist,  is  in  some 
degree  changed  at  the  point  of  contact  with  the  eye  (and  so  cannot  be 
in  itself  a  requisite  to  vision). 

Those  who  have  made  vision  a  forth-going  act  (and  not  an  in-coming 
from  the  object)  need  not  postulate  an  intervening  substance — unless, 
indeed,  to  provide  against  the  ray  from  the  eye  failing  on  its  path — but 
this  is  a  ray  of  fight  and  fight  flies  straight.  Those  who  make  vision 
depend  upon  resistance  are  obliged  to  postulate  an  intervening  substance. 

The  champions  of  the  image,  with  its  transit  through  a  void,  are 
seeking  the  way  of  least  resistance  ;  but  since  the  entire  absence  of 
intervenient  gives  a  still  easier  path  they  will  not  oppose  that  hypothesis. 

So,  too,  those  that  explain  vision  by  sympathy  must  recognise  that 
an  intervening  substance  will  be  a  hindrance  as  tending  to  check  or 
block  or  enfeeble  that  sympathy  ;  this  theory,  especially,  requires  the 
admission  that  any  intervenient,  and  particularly  one  of  kindred  nature, 


iv.  5.  2] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


105 


must  blunt  the  perception  by  itself  absorbing  part  of  the  activity.  Apply 
fire  to  a  body  continuous  through  and  through,  and  no  doubt  the  core 
will  be  less  affected  than  the  surface  :  but  where  we  are  dealing  with  the 
sympathetic  parts  of  one  living  being,  there  will  scarcely  be  less  sensation 
because  of  the  intervening  substance,  or,  if  there  should  be,  the  degree 
of  sensation  will  still  be  proportionate  to  the  nature  of  the  separate  part, 
with  the  intervenient  acting  merely  as  a  certain  limitation  ;  this,  though, 
will  not  be  the  case  where  the  element  introduced  is  of  a  kind  to  overleap 
the  bridge. 

But  this  is  saying  that  the  sympathetic  quality  of  the  universe  depends 
upon  its  being  one  living  thing,  and  that  our  amenability  to  experience 
depends  upon  our  belonging  integrally  to  that  unity  ;  would  it  not 
follow  that  continuity  is  a  condition  of  any  perception  of  a  remote 
object  ? 

The  explanation  is  that  continuity  and  its  concomitant,  the  bridging 
substance,  come  into  play  because  a  living  being  must  be  a  continuous 
thing,  but  that,  none  the  less,  the  receiving  of  impression  is  not  an  essen¬ 
tially  necessary  result  of  continuity  ;  if  it  were,  everything  would  receive 
such  impression  from  everything  else,  and  if  thing  is  affected  by  thing 
in  various  separate  orders,  there  can  be  no  further  question  of  any 
universal  need  of  intervening  substance. 

Why  it  should  be  specially  requisite  in  the  act  of  seeing  would  have 
to  be  explained  :  in  general,  an  object  passing  through  the  air  does  not 
affect  it  beyond  dividing  it ;  when  a  stone  falls,  the  air  simply  yields  ; 
nor  is  it  reasonable  to  explain  the  natural  direction  of  movement  by 
resistance  ;  to  do  so  would  bring  us  to  the  absurdity  that  resistance 
accounts  for  the  upward  movement  of  fire,  which,  on  the  contrary, 
overcomes  the  resistance  of  the  air  by  its  own  essentially  quick  energy. 
If  we  are  told  that  the  resistance  is  brought  more  swiftly  into  play  by 
the  very  swiftness  of  the  ascending  body,  that  would  be  a  mere  accidental 
circumstance,  not  a  cause  of  the  upward  motion  :  in  trees  the  upthrust 
from  the  root  depends  on  no  such  external  propulsion  ;  we,  too,  in  our 
movements  cleave  the  air  and  are  in  no  wise  forwarded  by  its  resistance  ; 
it  simply  flows  in  from  behind  to  fill  the  void  we  make. 


io6 


PLOTINUS 


If  the  severance  of  the  air  by  such  bodies  leaves  it  unaffected,  why 
must  there  be  any  severance  before  the  images  of  sight  can  reach  us  ? 

And,  further,  once  we  reject  the  theory  that  these  images  reach  us 
by  way  of  some  outstreaming  from  the  objects  seen,  there  is  no  reason 
to  think  of  the  air  being  affected  and  passing  on  to  us,  in  a  progression  of 
impression,  what  has  been  impressed  upon  itself. 

If  our  perception  is  to  depend  upon  previous  impressions  made  upon 
the  air,  then  we  have  no  direct  knowledge  of  the  object  of  vision,  but 
know  it  only  as  through  an  intermediary,  in  the  same  way  as  we  are 
aware  of  warmth  where  it  is  not  the  distant  fire  itself  that  warms  us, 
but  the  warmed  intervening  air.  That  is  a  matter  of  contact ;  but  sight 
is  not  produced  by  contact :  the  application  of  an  object  to  the  eye  would 
not  produce  sight ;  what  is  required  is  the  illumination  of  the  intervening 
medium  ;  for  the  air  in  itself  is  a  dark  substance.  If  it  were  not  for  this 
dark  substance  there  would  probably  be  no  reason  for  the  existence  of 
light :  the  dark  intervening  matter  is  a  barrier,  and  vision  requires  that 
it  be  overcome  by  light.  Perhaps  also  the  reason  why  an  object  brought 
close  to  the  eye  cannot  be  seen  is  that  it  confronts  us  with  a  double 
obscuration,  its  own  and  that  of  the  air. 

3- 

For  the  most  convincing  proof  that  vision  does  not  depend  upon  the 
transmission  of  impressions  of  any  kind  made  upon  the  air,  we  have  only 
to  consider  that  in  the  darkness  of  night  we  can  see  a  fire  and  the  stars 
and  their  very  shapes. 

No  one  will  pretend  that  these  forms  are  reproduced  upon  the 
darkness  and  come  to  us  in  linked  progression  ;  if  the  fire  thus  rayed  out 
its  own  form,  there  would  be  an  end  to  the  darkness.  In  the  blackest 
night,  when  the  very  stars  are  hidden  and  show  no  gleam  of  their 
light,  we  can  see  the  fire  of  the  beacon-stations  and  of  maritime 
signal-towers. 

Now  if,  in  defiance  of  all  that  the  senses  tell  us,  we  are  to  believe 
that  in  these  examples  the  fire  (as  light)  traverses  the  air,  then,  in  so  far 
as  anything  is  visible,  it  must  be  that  dimmed  reproduction  in  the  air, 


IV.  5.  3] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


107 


not  the  fire  itself.  But  if  an  object  can  be  seen  on  the  other  side  of  some 
intervening  darkness,  much  more  would  it  be  visible  with  nothing 
intervening. 

We  may  hold  one  thing  certain  :  the  impossibility  of  vision  without 
an  intervening  substance  does  not  depend  upon  that  absence  in  itself : 
the  sole  reason  is  that,  with  that  absence,  there  would  be  an  end  to  the 
sympathy  reigning  in  the  living  whole  and  relating  the  parts  to  each 
other  in  an  existent  unity. 

Perception  of  every  kind  seems  to  depend  on  the  fact  that  our 
universe  is  a  whole  sympathetic  to  itself  :  that  it  is  so,  appears  from  the 
universal  participation  in  power  from  member  to  member,  and  especially 
in  remote  power. 

No  doubt  it  would  be  worth  enquiry — though  we  pass  it  for  the 
present — what  would  take  place  if  there  were  another  kosmos,  another 
living  whole  having  no  contact  with  this  one,  and  the  far  ridges  of 
our  heavens  had  sight :  would  our  sphere  see  that  other  as  from  a 
mutually  present  distance,  or  could  there  be  no  dealing  at  all  from  this 
to  that  ? 

To  return  ;  there  is  a  further  consideration  showing  that  sight  is 
not  brought  about  by  this  alleged  modification  of  the  intervenient. 

Any  modification  of  the  air  substance  would  necessarily  be  cor¬ 
poreal  :  there  must  be  such  an  impression  as  is  made  upon  sealing  wax. 
But  this  would  require  that  each  part  of  the  object  of  vision  be  impressed 
on  some  corresponding  portion  of  the  intervenient :  the  intervenient, 
however,  in  actual  contact  with  the  eye  would  be  just  that  portion  whose 
dimensions  the  pupil  is  capable  of  receiving.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact 
the  entire  object  appears  before  the  pupil ;  and  it  is  seen  entire  by  all 
within  that  air  space  for  a  great  extent,  in  front,  sideways,  close  at  hand, 
from  the  back,  as  long  as  the  line  of  vision  is  not  blocked.  This  shows 
that  any  given  portion  of  the  air  contains  the  object  of  vision,  in  face 
view  so  to  speak,  and,  at  once,  we  are  confronted  by  no  merely  corporeal 
phenomena  ;  the  facts  are  explicable  only  as  depending  upon  the  greater 
laws,  the  spiritual,  of  a  living  being  one  and  self -sensitive. 


io8 


PLOTINUS 


4- 

But  there  is  the  question  of  the  linked  light  that  must  relate  the 
visual  organ  to  its  object. 

Now,  firstly  :  since  the  intervening  air  is  not  necessary — unless  in 
the  purely  accidental  sense  that  air  may  be  necessary  to  light — the  light 
that  acts  as  intermediate  in  vision  will  be  unmodified  :  vision  depends 
upon  no  modification  whatever.  This  one  intermediate,  light,  would 
seem  to  be  necessary,  but,  unless  light  is  corporeal,  no  intervening  body 
is  requisite  :  and  we  must  remember  that  intervenient  and  borrowed 
light  is  essential  not  to  seeing  in  general  but  to  distant  vision  ;  the 
question  whether  light  absolutely  requires  the  presence  of  air  we  will 
discuss  later.  For  the  present  one  matter  must  occupy  us  : — 

If  in  the  act  of  vision  that  linked  light  becomes  ensouled,  if  the 
soul  or  mind  permeates  it  and  enters  into  union  with  it,  as  it  does  in  its 
more  inward  acts  such  as  understanding — which  is  what  vision  really 
is — then  the  intervening  light  is  not  a  necessity  :  the  process  of  seeing 
will  be  like  that  of  touch  ;  the  visual  faculty  of  the  soul  will  perceive 
by  the  fact  of  having  entered  into  the  light  ;  all  that  intervenes 
remains  unaffected,  serving  simply  as  the  field  over  which  the  vision 
ranges. 

This  brings  up  the  question  whether  the  sight  is  made  active  over 
its  field  by  the  sheer  presence  of  a  distance  spread  before  it,  or  by  the 
presence  of  a  body  of  some  kind  within  that  distance. 

If  by  the  presence  of  such  a  body,  then  there  will  be  vision  though 
there  be  no  intervenient ;  if  the  intervenient  is  the  sole  attractive  agent, 
then  we  are  forced  to  think  of  the  visible  object  as  being  a  Kind  utterly 
without  energy,  performing  no  act.  But  so  inactive  a  body  cannot  be  : 
touch  tells  us  that,  for  it  does  not  merely  announce  that  something  is 
by  and  is  touched  :  it  is  acted  upon  by  the  object  so  that  it  reports 
distinguishing  qualities  in  it,  qualities  so  effective  that  even  at  a  distance 
touch  itself  would  register  them  but  for  the  accidental  that  it  demands 
proximity. 

We  catch  the  heat  of  a  fire  just  as  soon  as  the  intervening  air  does  ; 
no  need  to  wait  for  it  to  be  warmed  :  the  denser  body,  in  fact,  takes  in 


IV.  5.  41 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


109 

more  warmth  than  the  air  has  to  give  ;  in  other  words,  the  air  transmits 
the  heat  but  is  not  the  source  of  our  warmth. 

When  on  the  one  side,  that  of  the  object,  there  is  the  power  in  any 
degree  of  an  outgoing  act,  and  on  the  other,  that  of  the  sight,  the  capa¬ 
bility  of  being  acted  upon,  surely  the  object  needs  no  medium  through 
which  to  be  effective  upon  what  it  is  fully  equipped  to  affect :  this  would 
be  needing  not  a  help  but  a  hindrance. 

Or,  again,  consider  the  Dawn  :  there  is  no  need  that  the  light  first 
flood  the  air  and  then  come  to  us  ;  the  event  is  simultaneous  to  both  : 
often,  in  fact,  we  see  (in  the  distance)  when  the  light  is  not  as  yet  round 
our  eyes  at  all  but  very  far  off,  before,  that  is,  the  air  has  been  acted  upon  : 
here  we  have  vision  without  any  modified  intervenient,  vision  before  the 
organ  has  received  the  light  with  which  it  is  to  be  linked. 

It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  this  theory  the  fact  of  seeing  stars 
or  any  fire  by  night. 

If  (as  by  the  theory  of  an  intervenient)  the  percipient  mind  or  soul 
remains  within  itself  and  needs  the  light  only  as  one  might  need  a  stick 
in  the  hand  to  touch  something  at  a  distance,  then  the  perception  will 
be  a  sort  of  tussle  :  the  light  must  be  conceived  as  something  thrusting, 
something  aimed  at  a  mark,  and  similarly,  the  object,  considered  as  an 
illuminated  thing,  must  be  conceived  to  be  resistant ;  for  this  is  the 
normal  process  in  the  case  of  contact  by  the  agency  of  an  intervenient. 

Besides,  even  on  this  explanation,  the  mind  must  have  previously 
been  in  contact  with  the  object  in  the  entire  absence  of  intervenient  ; 
only  if  that  has  happened  could  contact  through  an  intervenient  bring 
knowledge,  a  knowledge  by  way  of  memory,  and,  even  more  emphatically, 
by  way  of  reasoned  comparison  (ending  in  identification)  :  but  this 
process  of  memory  and  comparison  is  excluded  by  the  theory  of  first 
knowledge  through  the  agency  of  a  medium. 

Finally,  we  may  be  told  that  the  impinging  light  is  modified  by 
the  thing  to  be  seen  and  so  becomes  able  to  present  something  perceptible 
before  the  visual  organ  ;  but  this  simply  brings  us  back  to  the  theory 
of  an  intervenient  changed  midway  by  the  object,  an  explanation  whose 
difficulties  we  have  already  indicated. 


no 


PLOTINUS 


But  some  doubt  arises  when  we  consider  the  phenomena  of  hearing. 

Perhaps  we  are  to  understand  the  process  thus  :  the  air  is  modified 
by  the  first  movement ;  layer  by  layer  it  is  successively  acted  upon  by 
the  object  causing  the  sound ;  it  finally  impinges  in  that  modified 
form  upon  the  sense,  the  entire  progression  being  governed  by  the 
fact  that  all  the  air  from  starting  point  to  hearing  point  is  similarly 
affected. 

Perhaps,  on  the  other  hand,  the  intervenient  is  modified  only  by 
the  accident  of  its  midway  position,  so  that,  failing  any  intervenient, 
whatsoever  sound  two  bodies  in  clash  might  make  would  impinge  without 
medium  upon  our  sense  ? 

Still  air  is  necessary  ;  there  could  be  no  sound  in  the  absence  of  the 
air  set  vibrating  in  the  first  movement,  however  different  be  the  case 
with  the  intervenient  from  that  onwards  to  the  perception  point. 

The  air  would  thus  appear  to  be  the  dominant  in  the  production  of 
sound  :  two  bodies  would  clash  without  even  an  incipient  sound,  but 
that  the  air,  struck  in  their  rapid  meeting  and  hurled  outward,  passes 
on  the  movement  successively  till  it  reaches  the  ears  and  the  sense  of 
hearing. 

But  if  the  determinant  is  the  air,  and  the  impression  is  simply 
of  air-movements,  what  accounts  for  the  differences  among  voices  and 
other  sounds  ?  The  sound  of  bronze  against  bronze  is  different  from 
that  of  bronze  against  some  other  substance  :  and  so  on  ;  the  air  and 
its  vibration  remain  the  one  thing,  yet  the  difference  in  sounds  is  much 
more  than  a  matter  of  greater  or  less  intensity. 

If  we  decide  that  sound  is  caused  by  a  percussion  upon  the  air,  then 
obviously  nothing  turning  upon  the  distinctive  nature  of  air  is  in  question  : 
it  sounds  at  a  moment  in  which  it  is  simply  a  solid  body,  until  (by  its 
distinctive  character)  it  is  sent  pulsing  outwards  :  thus  air  in  itself  is 
not  essential  to  the  production  of  sound  ;  all  is  done  by  clashing  solids 
as  they  meet  and  that  percussion,  reaching  the  sense,  is  the  sound.  This 
is  shown  also  by  the  sounds  formed  within  living  beings  not  in  air  but 
by  the  friction  of  parts  ;  for  example,  the  grinding  of  teeth  and  the 


iv.  5.  6] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


hi 


crunching  of  bones  against  each  other  in  the  bending  of  the  body,  cases 
in  which  the  air  does  not  intervene. 

But  all  this  may  now  be  left  over ;  we  are  brought  to  the  same 
conclusion  as  in  the  case  of  sight ;  the  phenomena  of  hearing  arise 
similarly  in  a  certain  co-sensitiveness  inherent  in  a  living  whole. 

6. 

We  return,  then,  to  the  question  whether  there  could  be  light  if 
there  were  no  air,  the  sun  illuminating  corporeal  surfaces  across  an 
intermediate  void  which,  as  things  are,  takes  the  light  accidentally  by 
the  mere  fact  of  being  in  the  path.  Supposing  air  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
rest  of  things  being  thus  affected,  the  substantial  existence  of  light  is 
due  to  the  air ;  light  becomes  a  modification  of  the  air,  and  of  course  if 
the  thing  to  be  modified  did  not  exist  neither  could  the  modification. 

The  fact  is  that  primarily  light  is  no  appanage  of  air,  and  does  not 
depend  upon  the  existence  of  air :  it  belongs  to  every  fiery  and  shining 
body,  it  constitutes  even  the  gleaming  surface  of  certain  stones. 

Now  if,  thus,  it  enters  into  other  substances  from  something  gleaming, 
could  it  exist  in  the  absence  of  its  container  ? 

There  is  a  distinction  to  be  made  :  if  it  is  a  quality,  some  quality 
of  some  substance,  then  light,  equally  with  other  qualities,  will  need  a 
body  in  which  to  lodge  :  if,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  an  activity  rising  from 
something  else,  we  can  surely  conceive  it  existing,  though  there  be  no 
neighbouring  body  but,  if  that  is  possible,  a  blank  void  which  it  will 
overleap  and  so  appear  on  the  further  side  :  it  is  powerful,  and  may  very 
well  pass  over  unhelped.  If  it  were  of  a  nature  to  fall,  nothing  would 
keep  it  up,  certainly  not  the  air  or  anything  that  takes  its  light ;  there 
is  no  reason  why  they  should  draw  the  light  from  its  source  and  speed  it 
onwards. 

Light  is  not  an  accidental  to  something  else,  requiring  therefore  to 
be  lodged  in  a  base  ;  nor  is  it  a  modification,  demanding  a  base  in  which 
the  modification  occurs  :  if  this  were  so,  it  would  vanish  when  the  object 
or  substance  disappeared  ;  but  it  does  not ;  it  strikes  onward  ;  so,  too 
(requiring  neither  air  nor  object)  it  would  always  have  its  movement. 


112 


PLOTINUS 


But  movement,  where  ? 

Is  space,  pure  and  simple,  all  that  is  necessary  ? 

With  unchecked  motion  of  the  light  outward,  the  material  sun  will 
be  losing  its  energy,  for  the  light  is  its  expression. 

Perhaps  ;  and  (from  this  untenable  consequence)  we  may  gather 
that  the  light  never  was  an  appanage  of  anything,  but  is  the  expressive 
Act  proceeding  from  a  base  (the  sun)  but  not  seeking  to  enter  into  a 
base,  though  having  some  operation  upon  any  base  that  may  be  present. 

Life  is  also  an  Act,  the  Act  of  the  soul,  and  it  remains  so  when 
anything — the  human  body,  for  instance — comes  in  its  path  to  be 
affected  by  it  ;  and  it  is  equally  an  Act  though  there  be  nothing  for  it  to 
modify  :  surely  this  may  be  true  of  light,  one  of  the  Acts  of  whatever 
luminary  source  there  be  (i.e.  light,  affecting  things,  may  be  quite 
independent  of  them  and  require  no  medium,  air  or  other).  Certainly 
light  is  not  brought  into  being  by  the  dark  thing,  air,  which  on  the  con¬ 
trary  tends  to  gloom  it  over  with  some  touch  of  earth  so  that  it  is  no 
longer  the  brilliant  reality  :  as  reasonable  to  talk  of  some  substance 
being  sweet  because  it  is  mixed  with  something  bitter. 

If  we  are  told  that  light  is  a  mode  of  the  air,  we  answer  that  this 
would  necessarily  imply  that  the  air  itself  is  changed  to  produce  the  new 
mode  ;  in  other  words,  its  characteristic  darkness  must  change  into 
non-darkness ;  but  we  know  that  the  air  maintains  its  character,  in  no 
wise  affected  :  the  modification  of  a  thing  is  an  experience  within  that 
thing  itself  :  light  therefore  is  not  a  modification  of  the  air,  but  a  self- 
existent  in  whose  path  the  air  happens  to  be  present. 

On  this  point  we  need  dwell  no  longer ;  but  there  remains  still  a 
question. 

7- 

Our  investigation  may  be  furthered  by  enquiring  :  Whether  light 
finally  perishes  or  simply  returns  to  its  source. 

If  it  be  a  thing  requiring  to  be  caught  and  kept,  domiciled  within 
a  recipient,  we  might  think  of  it  finally  passing  out  of  existence  :  if  it 
be  an  Act  not  flowing  out  and  away — but  in  circuit,  with  more  of  it 


IV.  5.  7] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


ii3 

within  than  is  in  outward  progress  from  the  luminary  of  which  it  is  the 
Act — then  it  will  not  cease  to  exist  as  long  as  that  centre  is  in  being. 
And  as  the  luminary  moves,  the  light  will  reach  new  points — not  in 
virtue  of  any  change  of  course  in  or  out  or  around,  but  simply  because 
the  act  of  the  luminary  exists  and  where  there  is  no  impediment  is 
effective.  Even  if  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  us  were  far  greater  than 
it  is,  the  light  would  be  continuous  all  that  further  way,  as  long  as 
nothing  checked  or  blocked  it  in  the  interval. 

We  distinguish  two  forms  of  activity ;  one  is  gathered  within  the 
luminary  and  is  comparable  to  the  life  of  the  shining  body ;  this  is  the 
vaster  and  is,  as  it  were,  the  foundation  or  wellspring  of  all  the  act ;  the 
other  lies  next  to  the  surface,  the  outer  image  of  the  inner  content,  a 
secondary  activity  though  inseparable  from  the  former.  For  every 
existent  has  an  Act  which  is  in  its  likeness  :  as  long  as  the  one  exists, 
so  does  the  other  ;  yet  while  the  original  is  stationary  the  activity  reaches 
forth,  in  some  things  over  a  wide  range,  in  others  less  far.  There  are 
weak  and  faint  activities,  and  there  are  some,  even,  that  do  not  appear ; 
but  there  are  also  things  whose  activities  are  great  and  far-going  ;  in 
the  case  of  these  the  activity  must  be  thought  of  as  being  lodged,  both 
in  the  active  and  powerful  source  and  in  the  point  at  which  it  settles. 
This  may  be  observed  in  the  case  of  an  animal’s  eyes  where  the  pupils 
gleam  :  they  have  a  light  which  shows  outside  the  orbs.  Again  there 
are  living  things  which  have  an  inner  fire  that  in  darkness  shines  out 
when  they  expand  themselves  and  ceases  to  ray  outward  when  they 
contract :  the  fire  has  not  perished  ;  it  is  a  mere  matter  of  it  being  rayed 
out  or  not. 

But  has  the  light  gone  inward  ? 

No  :  it  is  simply  no  longer  on  the  outside  because  the  fire  (of  which 
it  is  the  activity)  is  no  longer  outward  going  but  has  withdrawn  towards 
the  centre. 

But  surely  the  light  has  gone  inward  too  ? 

No  :  only  the  fire,  and  when  that  goes  inward  the  surface  consists 
only  of  the  non-luminous  body ;  the  fire  can  no  longer  act  towards  the 
outer. 


Q 


PLOTINUS 


114 

The  light,  then,  raying  from  bodies  is  an  outgoing  activity  of  a 
luminous  body ;  the  light  within  luminous  bodies— understand,  such  as 
are  primarily  luminous— is  the  essential  being  embraced  under  the  idea 
of  that  body.  When  such  a  body  is  brought  into  association  with  Matter, 
its  activity  produces  colour  :  when  there  is  no  such  association  it  does 
not  give  colour— it  gives  merely  an  incipient  on  which  colour  might  be 
formed — for  it  belongs  to  another  being  (primal  light)  with  which  it 
retains  its  link,  unable  to  desert  from  it,  or  from  its  (inner)  activity. 

And  light  is  incorporeal  even  when  it  is  the  light  of  a  body  ;  there 
is  therefore  no  question,  strictly  speaking,  of  its  withdrawal  or  of  its 
being  present — these  terms  do  not  apply  to  its  modes — and  its  essential 
existence  is  to  be  an  activity.  As  an  example  :  the  image  upon  a  mirror 
may  be  described  as  an  activity  exercised  by  the  reflected  object  upon 
the  potential  recipient :  there  is  no  outgoing  from  the  object  (or  ingoing 
into  the  reflecting  body)  ;  it  is  simply  that,  as  long  as  the  object  stands 
there,  the  image  also  is  visible,  in  the  form  of  colour  shaped  to  a  certain 
pattern,  and  when  the  object  is  not  there,  the  reflecting  surface  no  longer 
holds  what  it  held  when  the  conditions  were  favourable. 

So  it  is  with  the  soul  considered  as  the  activity  of  another  and  prior 
soul :  as  long  as  that  prior  retains  its  place,  its  next,  which  is  its  activity, 
abides. 

But  what  of  a  soul  which  is  not  an  activity  but  the  derivative  of  an 
activity — as  we  maintained  the  life-principle  domiciled  in  the  body  to 
be — is  its  presence  similar  to  that  of  the  light  caught  and  held  in  material 
things  ? 

No  ;  for  in  those  things  the  colour  is  due  to  an  actual  intermixture 
of  the  active  element  (the  light  being  alloyed  with  Matter)  ;  whereas 
the  life-principle  of  the  body  is  something  that  holds  from  another  soul 
closely  present  to  it. 

But  when  the  body  perishes — by  the  fact  that  nothing  without 
part  in  soul  can  continue  in  being — when  the  body  is  perishing,  no  longer 
supported  by  that  primal  life-giving  soul,  or  by  the  presence  of  any 
secondary  phase  of  it,  it  is  clear  that  the  life-principle  can  no  longer 
remain  ;  but  does  this  mean  that  the  life  perishes  ? 


IV.  5.  8] 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  SOUL 


ii5 


No  :  not  even  it ;  for  it,  too,  is  an  image  of  that  first  out-shining ; 
it  is  merely  no  longer  where  it  was. 


8. 

Imagine  that  beyond  the  heavenly  system  there  existed  some  solid 
mass,  and  that  from  this  sphere  there  was  directed  to  it  a  vision  utterly 
unimpeded  and  unrestricted  :  it  is  a  question  whether  that  solid  form 
could  be  perceived  by  what  has  no  sympathetic  relation  with  it,  since 
we  have  held  that  sympathetic  relation  comes  about  in  virtue  of  the 
nature  inherent  in  some  one  living  being. 

Obviously,  if  the  sympathetic  relationship  depends  upon  the  fact 
that  percipients  and  things  perceived  are  all  members  of  one  living 
being,  no  acts  of  perception  could  take  place  :  that  far  body  could  be 
known  only  if  it  were  a  member  of  this  living  universe  of  ours — which 
condition  being  met,  it  certainly  would  be.  But  what  if,  without  being 
thus  in  membership,  it  were  a  corporeal  entity,  exhibiting  light  and 
colour  and  the  qualities  by  which  we  perceive  things,  and  belonging  to 
the  same  ideal  category  as  the  organ  of  vision  ? 

If  our  supposition  (of  perception  by  sympathy)  is  true,  there  would 
still  be  no  perception — though  we  may  be  told  that  the  hypothesis  is 
clearly  untenable  since  there  is  absurdity  in  supposing  that  sight  can 
fail  in  grasping  an  illuminated  object  lying  before  it,  and  that  the  other 
senses  in  the  presence  of  their  particular  objects  remain  unresponsive. 


(The  following  passage,  to  nearly  the  end,  is  offered  tentatively  as  a 
possible  help  to  the  interpretation  of  an  obscure  and  corrupt  place.) 

[But  why  does  such  a  failing  appear  impossible  to  us  ?  We  answer, 
because  here  and  now  in  all  the  act  and  experience  of  our  senses,  we  are 
within  a  unity,  and  members  of  it.  What  the  conditions  would  be 
otherwise,  remains  to  be  considered  :  if  living  sympathy  suffices  the 
theory  is  established  ;  if  not,  there  are  other  considerations  to  support  it. 

That  every  living  being  is  self -sensitive  allows  of  no  doubt ;  if  the 


PLOTINUS 


116 

universe  is  a  living  being,  no  more  need  be  said  ;  and  what  is  true  of  the 
total  must  be  true  of  the  members,  as  inbound  in  that  one  life. 

But  what  if  we  are  invited  to  accept  the  theory  of  knowledge  by 
likeness  (rejecting  knowledge  by  the  self-sensitiveness  of  a  living  unity  ?) 

Awareness  must  be  determined  by  the  nature  and  character  of  the 
living  being  in  which  it  occurs  ;  perception,  then,  means  that  the  likeness 
demanded  by  the  hypothesis  is  within  this  self-identical  living  being 
(and  not  in  the  object)— for  the  organ  by  which  the  perception  takes 
place  is  in  the  likeness  of  the  living  being  (is  merely  the  agent  adequately 
expressing  the  nature  of  the  living  being)  :  thus  perception  is  reduced 
to  a  mental  awareness  by  means  of  organs  akin  to  the  object. 

If,  then,  something  that  is  a  living  whole  perceives  not  its  own 
content  but  things  like  to  its  content,  it  must  perceive  them  under  the 
conditions  of  that  living  whole  ;  this  means  that,  in  so  far  as  it  has 
perception,  the  objects  appear  not  as  its  content  but  as  related  to  its 
content. 

And  the  objects  are  thus  perceived  as  related  because  the  mind 
itself  has  related  them  in  order  to  make  them  amenable  to  its  handling  : 
in  other  words  the  causative  soul  or  mind  in  that  other  sphere  is  utterly 
alien,  and  the  things  there,  supposed  to  be  related  to  the  content  of  this 
living  whole,  can  be  nothing  to  our  minds.] 

This  absurdity  shows  that  the  hypothesis  contains  a  contradiction 
which  naturally  leads  to  untenable  results.  In  fact,  under  one  and  the 
same  heading,  it  presents  mind  and  no  mind,  it  makes  things  kin  and 
no  kin,  it  confuses  similar  and  dissimilar  :  containing  these  irreconcilable 
elements,  it  amounts  to  no  hypothesis  at  all.  At  one  and  the  same 
moment  it  postulates  and  denies  a  soul,  it  tells  of  an  All  that  is  partial, 
of  a  something  which  is  at  once  distinct  and  not  distinct,  of  a  nothingness 
which  is  no  nothingness,  of  a  complete  thing  that  is  incomplete  :  the 
hypothesis  therefore  must  be  dismissed  ;  no  deduction  is  possible  where 
a  thesis  cancels  its  own  propositions. 


IV.  6.  i] 


PERCEPTION  AND  MEMORY 


n  7 


SIXTH  TRACTATE 


Perception  and  Memory 

i. 

Perceptions  are  no  imprints,  we  have  said,  are  not  to  be  thought 
of  as  seal-impressions  on  soul  or  mind  :  accepting  this  statement,  there 
is  one  theory  of  memory  which  must  be  definitely  rejected. 

Memory  is  not  to  be  explained  as  the  retaining  of  information  in 
virtue  of  the  lingering  of  an  impression  which  in  fact  was  never  made  ; 
the  two  things  stand  or  fall  together ;  either  an  impression  is  made 
upon  the  mind  and  lingers  when  there  is  remembrance,  or,  denying  the 
impression,  we  cannot  hold  that  memory  is  its  lingering.  Since  we 
reject  equally  the  impression  and  the  retention  we  are  obliged  to  seek 
for  another  explanation  of  perception  and  memory,  one  excluding  the 
notions  that  the  sensible  object  striking  upon  soul  or  mind  makes  a 
mark  upon  it,  and  that  the  retention  of  this  mark  is  memory. 

If  we  study  what  occurs  in  the  case  of  the  most  vivid  form  of  per¬ 
ception,  we  can  transfer  our  results  to  the  other  cases,  and  so  solve  our 
problem. 

In  any  perception  we  attain  by  sight,  the  object  is  grasped  there 
where  it  lies  in  the  direct  line  of  vision  ;  it  is  there  that  we  attack  it  ; 
there,  then,  the  perception  is  formed ;  the  mind  looks  outward ;  this 
is  ample  proof  that  it  has  taken  and  takes  no  inner  imprint,  and  does 
not  see  in  virtue  of  some  mark  made  upon  it  like  that  of  the  ring  on  the 
wax ;  it  need  not  look  outward  at  all  if,  even  as  it  looked,  it  already 
held  the  image  of  the  object,  seeing  by  virtue  of  an  impression  made 
upon  itself.  It  includes  with  the  object  the  interval,  for  it  tells  at  what 
distance  the  vision  takes  place  :  how  could  it  see  as  outlying  an  impres¬ 
sion  within  itself,  separated  by  no  interval  from  itself  ?  Then,  the  point 
of  magnitude  :  how  could  the  mind,  on  this  hypothesis,  define  the 
external  size  of  the  object  or  perceive  that  it  has  any — the  magnitude 
of  the  sky,  for  instance,  whose  stamped  imprint  would  be  too  vast  for 
it  to  contain  ?  And,  most  convincing  of  all,  if  to  see  is  to  accept  imprints 


n8 


PLOTINUS 


of  the  objects  of  our  vision,  we  can  never  see  these  objects  themselves  ; 
we  see  only  vestiges  they  leave  within  us,  shadows  :  the  things  them¬ 
selves  would  be  very  different  from  our  vision  of  them.  And,  for  a  con¬ 
clusive  consideration,  we  cannot  see  if  the  living  object  is  in  contact 
with  the  eye  ;  we  must  look  from  a  certain  distance  ;  this  must  be 
more  applicable  to  the  mind  ;  supposing  the  mind  to  be  stamped  with 
an  imprint  of  the  object,  it  could  not  grasp  as  an  object  of  vision  what 
is  stamped  upon  itself.  For  vision  demands  a  duality,  of  seen  and 
seeing  :  the  seeing  agent  must  be  distinct  and  act  upon  an  impression 
outside  it,  not  upon  one  occupying  the  same  point  with  it :  sight  can 
deal  only  with  an  object  not  inset  but  outlying. 

2. 

But  if  perception  does  not  go  by  impression,  what  is  the  process  ? 

The  mind  affirms  something  not  contained  within  it :  this  is  pre¬ 
cisely  the  characteristic  of  a  power — not  to  accept  impression  but, 
within  its  allotted  sphere,  to  act. 

Besides,  the  very  condition  of  the  mind  being  able  to  exercise 
discrimination  upon  what  it  is  to  see  and  hear  is  not,  of  course,  that 
these  objects  be  equally  impressions  made  upon  it ;  on  the  contrary, 
there  must  be  no  impressions,  nothing  to  which  the  mind  is  passive  ; 
there  can  be  only  acts  of  that  in  which  the  objects  become  known. 

Our  tendency  is  to  think  of  any  of  the  faculties  as  unable  to  know 
its  appropriate  object  by  its  own  uncompelled  act ;  to  us  it  seems  to 
submit  to  its  environment  rather  than  simply  to  perceive  it,  though  in 
reality  it  is  the  master,  not  the  victim. 

As  with  sight,  so  with  hearing.  It  is  the  air  which  takes  the  impres¬ 
sion,  a  kind  of  articulated  stroke  which  may  be  compared  to  letters 
traced  upon  it  by  the  object  causing  the  sound  ;  but  it  belongs  to  the 
faculty,  and  the  soul-essence,  to  read  the  imprints  thus  appearing 
before  it,  as  they  reach  the  point  at  which  they  become  matter  of  its 
knowledge. 

In  taste  and  smell  also  we  distinguish  between  the  impressions 
received  and  the  sensations  and  judgements ;  these  last  are  mental  acts, 


IV.  6.  3] 


PERCEPTION  AND  MEMORY 


ii9 


and  belong  to  an  order  apart  from  the  experiences  upon  which  they  are 
exercised. 

The  knowing  of  the  things  belonging  to  the  Intellectual  is  not  in 
any  such  degree  attended  by  impact  or  impression  :  they  come  forward, 
on  the  contrary,  as  from  within,  unlike  the  sense-objects  known  as  from 
without :  they  have  more  emphatically  the  character  of  acts  ;  they 
are  acts  in  the  stricter  sense,  for  their  origin  is  in  the  soul,  and  every 
concept  of  this  Intellectual  order  is  the  soul  about  its  Act. 

Whether,  in  this  self-vision,  the  soul  is  a  duality  and  views  itself 
as  from  the  outside — while  seeing  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  a  unity, 
and  itself  with  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  a  unity — this  question  is 
investigated  elsewhere. 


3- 

With  this  prologue  we  come  to  our  discussion  of  Memory. 

That  the  soul,  or  mind,  having  taken  no  imprint,  yet  achieves 
perception  of  what  it  in  no  way  contains  need  not  surprise  us  ;  or  rather, 
surprising  though  it  is,  we  cannot  refuse  to  believe  in  this  remarkable 
power. 

The  Soul  is  the  Reason-Principle  of  the  universe,  ultimate  among 
the  Intellectual  Beings — its  own  essential  Nature  is  one  of  the  Beings 
of  the  Intellectual  Realm — but  it  is  the  primal  Reason-Principle  of  the 
entire  realm  of  sense. 

Thus  it  has  dealings  with  both  orders — benefited  and  quickened  by 
the  one,  but  by  the  other  beguiled,  falling  before  resemblances,  and  so 
led  downwards  as  under  spell.  Poised  midway,  it  is  aware  of  both 
spheres. 

Of  the  Intellectual  it  is  said  to  have  intuition  by  memory  upon 
approach,  for  it  knows  them  by  a  certain  natural  identity  with  them  ; 
its  knowledge  is  not  attained  by  besetting  them,  so  to  speak,  but  by 
in  a  definite  degree  possessing  them  ;  they  are  its  natural  vision  ;  they 
are  itself  in  a  more  radiant  mode,  and  it  rises  from  its  duller  pitch  to  that 
greater  brilliance  in  a  sort  of  awakening,  a  progress  from  its  latency  to 
its  act. 


120 


PLOTINUS 


To  the  sense-order  it  stands  in  a  similar  nearness  and  to  such  things 
it  gives  a  radiance  out  of  its  own  store  and,  as  it  were,  elaborates  them  to 
visibility  :  the  power  is  always  ripe  and,  so  to  say,  in  travail  towards 
them,  so  that,  whenever  it  puts  out  its  strength  in  the  direction  of  what 
has  once  been  present  in  it,  it  sees  that  object  as  present  still ;  and  the 
more  intent  its  effort  the  more  durable  is  the  presence.  This  is  why, 
it  is  agreed,  children  have  long  memory  ;  the  things  presented  to  them 
are  not  constantly  withdrawn  but  remain  in  sight ;  in  their  case  the 
attention  is  limited  but  not  scattered  :  those  whose  faculty  and  mental 
activity  are  busied  upon  a  multitude  of  subjects  pass  quickly  over  all, 
lingering  on  none. 

Now,  if  memory  were  a  matter  of  seal-impressions  retained,  the 
multiplicity  of  objects  would  have  no  weakening  effect  on  the  memory. 
Further,  on  the  same  hypothesis,  we  would  have  no  need  of  thinking 
back  to  revive  remembrance  ;  nor  would  we  be  subject  to  forgetting 
and  recalling  ;  all  would  lie  engraved  within. 

The  very  fact  that  we  train  ourselves  to  remember  shows  that  what 
we  get  by  the  process  is  a  strengthening  of  the  mind  :  just  so,  exercises 
for  feet  and  hands  enable  us  to  do  easily  acts  which  are  in  no  sense  con¬ 
tained  or  laid  up  in  those  members,  but  to  which  they  may  be  fitted  by 
persevering  effort. 

How  else  can  it  be  explained  that  we  forget  a  thing  heard  once  or 
twice  but  remember  what  is  often  repeated,  and  that  we  recall  a  long 
time  afterwards  what  at  first  hearing  we  failed  to  hold  ? 

It  is  no  answer  to  say  that  the  parts  present  themselves  sooner  than 
the  entire  imprint — why  should  they  too  be  forgotten  ? — (there  is  no 
question  of  parts,  for)  the  last  hearing,  or  our  effort  to  remember,  brings 
the  thing  back  to  us  in  a  flash. 

All  these  considerations  testify  to  an  evocation  of  that  faculty 
of  the  soul,  or  mind,  in  which  remembrance  is  vested  :  the  mind  is 
strengthened,  either  generally  or  to  this  particular  purpose. 

Observe  these  facts  :  memory  follows  upon  attention  ;  those  who 
have  memorised  much,  by  dint  of  their  training  in  the  use  of  leading 
indications  (suggestive  words  and  the  like),  reach  the  point  of  being 


iv.  6.  3] 


PERCEPTION  AND  MEMORY  I2I 

easily  able  to  retain  without  such  aid :  must  we  not  conclude  that  the 
basis  of  memory  is  the  soul-power  brought  to  full  strength  ? 

The  lingering  imprints  of  the  other  explanation  would  tell  of  weak¬ 
ness  rather  than  power  ;  for  to  take  imprint  easily  is  to  be  yielding.  An 
impression  is  something  received  passively ;  the  strongest  memory, 
then,  would  go  with  the  least  active  nature.  But  what  happens  is  the 
very  reverse  :  in  no  pursuit  do  technical  exercises  tend  to  make  a  man 
less  the  master  of  his  acts  and  states.  It  is  as  with  sense-perception  ; 
the  advantage  is  not  to  the  weak,  the  weak  eye  for  example,  but  to  that 
which  has  the  fullest  power  towards  its  exercise.  In  the  old,  it  is  sig¬ 
nificant,  the  senses  are  dulled  and  so  is  the  memory. 

Sensation  and  memory,  then,  are  not  passivity  but  power. 

And,  once  it  is  admitted  that  sensations  are  not  impressions,  the 
memory  of  a  sensation  cannot  consist  in  the  retention  of  an  impression 
that  was  never  made. 

Yes  :  but  if  it  is  an  active  power  of  the  mind,  a  fitness  towards  its 
particular  purpose,  why  does  it  not  come  at  once — and  not  with  delay — 
to  the  recollection  of  its  unchanging  objects  ? 

Simply  because  the  power  needs  to  be  poised  and  prepared  :  in 
this  it  is  only  like  all  the  others,  which  have  to  be  readied  for  the  task 
to  which  their  power  reaches,  some  operating  very  swiftly,  others  only 
after  a  certain  self-concentration. 

Quick  memory  does  not  in  general  go  with  quick  wit :  the  two 
do  not  fall  under  the  same  mental  faculty ;  runner  and  boxer  are  not 
often  united  in  one  person  ;  the  dominant  idea  differs  from  man  to  man. 

Yet  there  could  be  nothing  to  prevent  men  of  superior  faculty  from 
reading  impressions  on  the  mind ;  why  should  one  thus  gifted  be  in¬ 
capable  of  what  would  be  no  more  than  a  passive  taking  and  holding  ? 

That  memory  is  a  power  of  the  Soul  (not  a  capacity  for  taking 
imprint)  is  established  at  a  stroke  by  the  consideration  that  the  soul  is 
without  magnitude. 

And — one  general  reflection — it  is  not  extraordinary  that  everything 
concerning  soul  should  proceed  in  quite  other  ways  than  appears  to 
people  who  either  have  never  enquired,  or  have  hastily  adopted  delusive 


122 


PLOTINUS 


analogies  from  the  phenomena  of  sense,  and  persist  in  thinking  of  per 
ception  and  remembrance  in  terms  of  characters  inscribed  on  plates 
or  tablets  ;  the  impossibilities  that  beset  this  theory  escape  those  that 
make  the  soul  incorporeal  equally  with  those  to  whom  it  is  corporeal. 


SEVENTH  TRACTATE 
The  Immortality  of  the  Soul 

Whether  every  human  being  is  immortal  or  we  are  wholly  destroyed, 
or  whether  something  of  us  passes  over  to  dissolution  and  destruction, 
while  something  else,  that  which  is  the  true  man,  endures  for  ever  this 
question  will  be  answered  here  for  those  willing  to  investigate  our  nature. 

We  know  that  man  is  not  a  thing  of  one  only  element ;  he  has  a 
soul  and  he  has,  whether  instrument  or  adjunct  in  some  other  mode,  a 
body  :  this  is  the  first  distinction  ;  it  remains  to  investigate  the  nature 
and  essential  being  of  these  two  constituents. 

Reason  tells  us  that  the  body  as,  itself  too,  a  composite,  cannot  for 
ever  hold  together  ;  and  our  senses  show  us  it  breaking  up,  wearing  out, 
the  victim  of  destructive  agents  of  many  kinds,  each  of  its  constituents 
going  its  own  way,  one  part  working  against  another,  perverting,  wreck¬ 
ing,  and  this  especially  when  the  material  masses  are  no  longer  presided 
over  by  the  reconciling  soul. 

And  when  each  single  constituent  is  taken  as  a  thing  apart,  it  is 
still  not  a  unity ;  for  it  is  divisible  into  shape  and  matter,  the  duality 
without  which  bodies  at  their  very  simplest  cannot  cohere. 

The  mere  fact  that,  as  material  forms,  they  have  bulk  means  that 
they  can  be  lopped  and  crushed  and  so  come  to  destruction. 

If  this  body,  then,  is  really  a  part  of  us,  we  are  not  wholly  immortal ; 
if  it  is  an  instrument  of  ours,  then,  as  a  thing  put  at  our  service  for  a 
certain  time,  it  must  be  in  its  nature  passing. 

The  sovran  principle,  the  authentic  man,  will  be  as  Form  to  this 
Matter  or  as  agent  to  this  instrument,  and  thus,  whatever  that  relation 
be,  the  soul  is  the  man. 


IV.  7-  2] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 


123 


2. 

But  of  what  nature  is  this  sovran  principle  ? 

If  material,  then  definitely  it  must  fall  apart ;  for  every  material 
entity,  at  least,  is  something  put  together. 

If  it  is  not  material  but  belongs  to  some  other  Kind,  that  new 
substance  must  be  investigated  in  the  same  way  or  by  some  more 
suitable  method. 

But  our  first  need  is  to  discover  into  what  this  material  form,  since 
such  the  soul  is  to  be,  can  dissolve. 

Now  :  of  necessity  life  is  inherent  to  soul :  this  material  entity, 
then,  which  we  call  soul  must  have  life  ingrained  within  it ;  but  (being 
a  composite  as  by  hypothesis,  material)  it  must  be  made  up  of  two  or 
more  bodies  ;  that  life,  then,  will  be  vested,  either  in  each  and  all  of 
those  bodies  or  in  one  of  them  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  or  others  ; 
if  this  be  not  so,  then  there  is  no  life  present  anywhere. 

If  any  one  of  them  contains  this  ingrained  life,  that  one  is  the  soul. 
But  what  sort  of  an  entity  have  we  there  ;  what  is  this  body  which  of 
its  own  nature  possesses  soul  ? 

Fire,  air,  water,  earth,  are  in  themselves  soulless — whenever  soul 
is  in  any  of  them,  that  life  is  borrowed — and  there  are  no  other  forms 
of  body  than  these  four :  even  the  school  that  believes  there  are  has 
always  held  them  to  be  bodies,  not  souls,  and  to  be  without  life. 

None  of  these,  then,  having  life,  it  would  be  extraordinary  if  life 
came  about  by  bringing  them  together ;  it  is  impossible,  in  fact,  that 
the  collocation  of  material  entities  should  produce  life,  or  mindless 
entities  mind. 

No  one,  moreover,  would  pretend  that  a  mere  chance  mixing  could 
give  such  results  :  some  regulating  principle  would  be  necessary,  some 
Cause  directing  the  admixture  :  that  guiding  principle  would  be— soul. 

Body — not  merely  because  it  is  a  composite,  but  even  were  it 
simplex — could  not  exist  unless  there  were  soul  in  the  universe,  for 
body  owes  its  being  to  the  entrance  of  a  Reason-Principle  into  Matter, 
and  only  from  soul  can  a  Reason-Principle  come. 


124 


PLOTINUS 


Anyone  who  rejects  this  view,  and  holds  that  either  atoms  or  some 
entities  void  of  part  coming  together  produce  soul,  is  refuted  by  the 
very  unity  of  soul  and  by  the  prevailing  sympathy  as  much  as  by  the 
very  coherence  of  the  constituents.  Bodily  materials,  in  nature  repug¬ 
nant  to  unification  and  to  sensation,  could  never  produce  unity  or  self¬ 
sensitiveness,  and  soul  is  self-sensitive.  And,  again,  constituents  void 
of  part  could  never  produce  body  or  bulk. 

Perhaps  we  will  be  asked  to  consider  body  as  a  simple  entity  (dis¬ 
regarding  the  question  of  any  constituent  elements)  :  they  will  tell  us, 
then,  that  no  doubt,  as  purely  material,  it  cannot  have  a  self-springing 
life — since  matter  is  without  quality — but  that  life  is  introduced  by 
the  fact  that  the  Matter  is  brought  to  order  under  Forming-Idea.  But 
if  by  this  Forming-Idea  they  mean  an  essential,  a  real  being,  then  it  is 
not  the  conjoint  of  body  and  idea  that  constitutes  soul :  it  must  be  one 
of  the  two  items  and  that  one,  being  (by  hypothesis)  outside  of  the 
Matter,  cannot  be  body  :  to  make  it  body  would  simply  force  us  to 
repeat  our  former  analysis. 

If  on  the  contrary  they  do  not  mean  by  this  Forming-Idea  a  real 
being,  but  some  condition  or  modification  of  the  Matter,  they  must  tell 
us  how  and  whence  this  modification,  with  resultant  life,  can  have 
found  the  way  into  the  Matter :  for  very  certainly  Matter  does  not 
mould  itself  to  pattern  or  bring  itself  to  life. 

It  becomes  clear  that  since  neither  Matter  nor  body  in  any  mode 
has  this  power,  life  must  be  brought  upon  the  stage  by  some  directing 
principle  external  and  transcendent  to  all  that  is  corporeal. 

In  fact,  body  itself  could  not  exist  in  any  form  if  soul-power  did 
not :  body  passes  ;  dissolution  is  in  its  very  nature  ;  all  would  disappear 
in  a  twinkling  if  all  were  body.  It  is  no  help  to  erect  some  one  mode  of 
body  into  soul ;  made  of  the  same  Matter  as  the  rest,  this  soul-body 
would  fall  under  the  same  fate  :  of  course  it  could  never  really  exist  : 
the  universe  of  things  would  halt  at  the  material,  failing  something  to 
bring  Matter  to  shape. 

Nay  more  :  Matter  itself  could  not  exist :  the  totality  of  things  in 


IV.  7.  4] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 


125 


this  sphere  is  dissolved  if  it  be  made  to  depend  upon  the  coherence  of  a 
body  which,  though  elevated  to  the  nominal  rank  of  “  soul,”  remains 
air,  fleeting  breath  (the  Stoic  pneuma,  rarefied  matter,  “  spirit  ”  in  the 
lower  sense),  whose  very  unity  is  not  drawn  from  itself. 

All  bodies  are  in  ceaseless  process  of  dissolution  ;  how  can  the 
kosmos  be  made  over  to  any  one  of  them  without  being  turned  into  a 
senseless  haphazard  drift  ?  This  pneuma — orderless  except  under  soul — 
how  can  it  contain  order,  reason,  intelligence  ?  But :  given  soul,  all 
these  material  things  become  its  collaborators  towards  the  coherence  of 
the  kosmos  and  of  every  living  being,  all  the  qualities  of  all  the  separate 
objects  converging  to  the  purposes  of  the  universe  :  failing  soul  in  the 
things  of  the  universe,  they  could  not  even  exist,  much  less  play  their 
ordered  parts. 

4- 

Our  opponents  themselves  are  driven  by  stress  of  fact  to  admit  the 
necessity  of  a  prior  to  body,  a  higher  thing,  some  phase  or  form  of  soul  ; 
their  “  pneuma  ”  (finer-body  or  spirit)  is  intelligent,  and  they  speak 
of  an  “  intellectual  fire  ”  ;  this  “  fire  ”  and  “  spirit  "  they  imagine  to  be 
necessary  to  the  existence  of  the  higher  order  which  they  conceive  as 
demanding  some  base,  though  the  real  difficulty,  under  their  theory,  is 
to  find  a  base  for  material  things  whose  only  possible  base  is,  precisely, 
the  powers  of  soul. 

Besides,  if  they  make  life  and  soul  no  more  than  this  “  pneuma,” 
what  is  the  import  of  that  repeated  qualification  of  theirs  “  in  a  certain 
state,”  their  refuge  when  they  are  compelled  to  recognise  some  acting 
principle  apart  from  body  ?  If  not  every  pneuma  is  a  soul,  but  thou¬ 
sands  of  them  soulless,  and  only  the  pneuma  in  this  “  certain  state  ”  is 
soul,  what  follows  ?  Either  this  “  certain  state,”  this  shaping  or  con¬ 
figuration  of  things,  is  a  real  being  or  it  is  nothing. 

If  it  is  nothing,  only  the  pneuma  exists,  the  “  certain  state  ”  being 
no  more  than  a  word  ;  this  leads  imperatively  to  the  assertion  that 
Matter  alone  exists,  Soul  and  God  mere  words,  the  lowest  alone  is. 

If  on  the  contrary  this  “  configuration  ”  is  really  existent — some- 


126 


PLOTINUS 


thing  distinct  from  the  underlie  or  Matter,  something  residing  in  Matter 
but  itself  immaterial  as  not  constructed  out  of  Matter,  then  it  must 
be  a  Reason-Principle,  incorporeal,  a  separate  Nature. 

There  are  other  equally  cogent  proofs  that  the  soul  cannot  be  any 

form  of  body. 

Body  is  either  warm  or  cold,  hard  or  soft,  liquid  or  solid,  black  or 
white,  and  so  on  through  all  the  qualities  by  which  one  is  different  from 
another  ;  and  again  if  a  body  is  warm  it  diffuses  only  warmth,  if  cold  it 
can  only  chill,  if  light  its  presence  tells  against  the  total  weight  which 
if  heavy  it  increases  ;  black,  it  darkens  ;  white,  it  lightens  ;  fire  has 
not  the  property  of  chilling  or  a  cold  body  that  of  warming. 

Soul,  on  the  contrary,  operates  diversely  in  different  living  beings, 
and  has  quite  contrary  effects  in  any  one  :  its  productions  contain  the 
solid  and  the  soft,  the  dense  and  the  sparse,  bright  and  dark,  heavy  and 
light.  If  it  were  material,  its  quality — and  the  colour  it  must  have — 
would  produce  one  invariable  effect  and  not  the  variety  actually  observed. 

5- 

Again,  there  is  movement :  all  bodily  movement  is  uniform  ;  failing 
an  incorporeal  soul,  how  account  for  diversity  of  movement  ?  Predi¬ 
lections,  reasons,  they  will  say ;  that  is  all  very  well,  but  these  already 
contain  that  variety  and  therefore  cannot  belong  to  body  which  is  one 
and  simplex,  and,  besides,  is  not  participant  in  reason — that  is,  not  in 
the  sense  here  meant,  but  only  as  it  is  influenced  by  some  principle  which 
confers  upon  it  the  qualities  of,  for  instance,  being  warm  or  cold. 

Then  there  is  growth  under  a  time-law,  and  within  a  definite  limit : 
how  can  this  belong  strictly  to  body  ?  Body  can  indeed  be  brought 
to  growth,  but  does  not  itself  grow  except  in  the  sense  that  in  the  material 
mass  a  capacity  for  growing  is  included  as  an  accessory  to  some  prin¬ 
ciple  whose  action  upon  the  body  causes  growth. 

Supposing  the  soul  to  be  at  once  a  body  and  the  cause  of  growth, 
then,  if  it  is  to  keep  pace  with  the  substance  it  augments,  it  too  must 
grow  ;  that  means  it  must  add  to  itself  a  similar  bodily  material.  For 
the  added  material  must  be  either  soul  or  soulless  body  :  if  soul,  whence 


IV.  7.  5] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 


127 


and  how  does  it  enter,  and  by  what  process  is  it  adjoined  (to  the  soul 
which  by  hypothesis  is  body)  ;  if  soulless,  how  does  such  an  addition 
become  soul,  falling  into  accord  with  its  precedent,  making  one  thing 
with  it,  sharing  the  stored  impressions  and  notions  of  that  initial  soul 
instead,  rather,  of  remaining  an  alien  ignoring  all  the  knowledge  laid  up 
before  ? 

Would  not  such  a  soulless  addition  be  subject  to  just  such  loss  and 
gain  of  substance,  in  fact  to  the  non-identity,  which  marks  the  rest  of 
our  material  mass  ? 

And  if  this  were  so  how  explain  our  memories  or  our  recognition  of 
familiar  things  when  we  have  no  stably  identical  soul  ? 

Assume  soul  to  be  a  body :  now  in  the  nature  of  body,  characteris¬ 
tically  divisible,  no  one  of  the  parts  can  be  identical  with  the  entire  being  ; 
soul,  then,  is  a  thing  of  defined  size,  and  if  curtailed  must  cease  to  be 
what  it  is  ;  in  the  nature  of  a  quantitative  entity  this  must  be  so,  for  if 
a  thing  of  magnitude  on  diminution  retains  its  identity  in  virtue  of  its 
quality,  this  is  only  saying  that  bodily  and  quantitatively  it  is  different 
even  if  its  identity  consists  in  a  quality  quite  independent  of  quantity. 

What  answer  can  be  made  by  those  declaring  soul  to  be  corporeal  ? 
Is  every  part  of  the  soul,  in  any  one  body,  soul  entire,  soul  perfectly 
true  to  its  essential  being  ?  and  may  the  same  be  said  of  every  part  of 
the  part  ?  If  so,  the  magnitude  makes  no  contribution  to  the  soul’s 
essential  nature,  as  it  must  if  soul  (as  corporeal)  were  a  definite  magnitude  : 
it  is,  as  body  cannot  be,  an  “  all-everywhere,”  a  complete  identity  present 
at  each  and  every  point,  the  part  all  that  the  whole  is. 

To  deny  that  every  part  is  soul  is  to  make  soul  a  compound  from 
soulless  elements.  Further,  if  a  definite  magnitude,  the  double  limit  of 
larger  or  smaller,  is  to  be  imposed  upon  each  separate  soul,  then  anything 
outside  those  Emits  is  no  soul. 

Now,  a  single  coition  and  a  single  sperm  suffice  to  a  twin  birth  or 
in  the  animal  order  to  a  litter ;  there  is  a  splitting  and  diverging  of  the 
seed,  every  diverging  part  being  obviously  a  whole  :  surely  no  honest 
mind  can  fail  to  gather  that  a  thing  in  which  part  is  identical  with  whole 
has  a  nature  which  transcends  quantity,  and  must  of  necessity  be  without 


128 


PLOTINUS 


quantity  :  only  so  could  it  remain  identical  when  quantity  is  filched 
from  it,  only  by  being  indifferent  to  amount  or  extension,  by  being  in 
essence'  something  apart.  Thus  the  Soul  and  the  Reason-Principles 
are  without  quantity. 

6. 

It  is  easy  to  show  that  if  the  Soul  were  a  corporeal  entity,  there 
could  be  no  sense-perception,  no  mental  act,  no  knowledge,  no  moral 
excellence,  nothing  of  all  that  is  noble. 

There  can  be  no  perception  without  a  unitary  percipient  whose 
identity  enables  it  to  grasp  an  object  as  an  entirety. 

The  several  senses  will  each  be  the  entrance  point  of  many  diverse 
perceptions  \  in  any  one  object  there  may  be  many  characteristics  , 
any  one  organ  may  be  the  channel  of  a  group  of  objects,  as  for  instance 
a  face  is  known  not  by  a  special  sense  for  separate  features,  nose,  eyes, 
etc.,  but  by  one  sense  observing  all  in  one  act. 

When  sight  and  hearing  gather  their  varying  information,  there 
must  be  some  central  unity  to  which  both  report.  How  could  there  be 
any  statement  of  difference  unless  all  sense-impressions  appeared  before 
a  common  identity  able  to  take  the  sum  of  all  ? 

This  there  must  be,  as  there  is  a  centre  to  a  circle  ;  the  sense-impres¬ 
sions  converging  from  every  point  of  occurrence  will  be  as  lines  striking 
from  a  circumference  to  what  will  be  a  true  centre  of  perception  as  being 
a  veritable  unity. 

If  this  centre  were  to  break  into  separate  points — so  that  the  sense- 
impressions  fell  upon  the  two  ends  of  a  line — then,  either  it  must  reknit 
itself  to  unity  and  identity,  perhaps  at  the  mid-point  of  the  line,  or  all 
remains  unrelated,  every  end  receiving  the  report  of  its  particular  field 
exactly  as  you  and  I  have  our  distinct  sense  experiences. 

Suppose  the  sense-object  be  such  a  unity  as  a  face  :  all  the  points 
of  observation  must  be  brought  together  in  one  visual  total,  as  is  obvious 
since  there  could  be  no  panorama  of  great  expanses  unless  the  detail 
were  compressed  to  the  capacity  of  the  pupils. 

Much  more  must  this  be  true  in  the  case  of  thoughts,  partless  entities 


IV.  7-  6] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL  129 

as  they  are,  impinging  upon  the  centre  of  consciousness  which  (to  receive 
them)  must  itself  be  void  of  part. 

Either  this  or — supposing  the  centre  of  consciousness  to  be  a  thing 
of  quantity  and  extension  the  sensible  object  will  coincide  with  it  point 
by  point  of  their  co-expansion  so  that  any  given  point  in  the  faculty 
will  perceive  solely  what  coincides  with  it  in  the  object :  and  thus  nothing 
in  us  could  perceive  any  thing  as  a  whole. 

This  cannot  be  :  the  faculty  entire  must  be  a  unity  ;  no  such  dividing 
is  possible  ;  this  is  no  matter  in  which  we  can  think  of  equal  sections 
coinciding  ;  the  centre  of  consciousness  has  no  such  relation  of  equality 
with  any  sensible  object.  The  only  possible  ratio  of  divisibility  would 
be  that  of  the  number  of  diverse  elements  in  the  impinging  sensation  : 
are  we  then  to  suppose  that  each  part  of  the  soul,  and  every  part  of 
each  part,  will  have  perception  ?  Or  will  the  part  of  the  parts  have 
none  ?  That  is  impossible :  every  part,  then,  has  perception ;  the 
(hypothetical)  magnitude,  of  soul  and  each  part  of  soul,  is  infinitely 
divisible  ;  there  will  therefore  be  in  each  part  an  infinite  number  of 
perceptions  of  the  object,  and  therefore  an  infinitude  of  representations 
of  it  at  our  centre  of  consciousness. 

If  the  sentient  be  a  material  entity  (as  we  are  invited  to  believe) 
sensation  could  only  be  of  the  order  of  seal-impressions  struck  by  a  ring 
on  wax,  in  this  case  by  sensible  objects  on  the  blood  or  on  the  inter- 
venient  air. 

If,  at  this,  the  impression  is  like  one  made  in  liquids — as  would  be 
reasonable — it  will  be  confused  and  wavering  as  upon  water,  and  there 
can  be  no  memory.  If  the  impressions  are  permanent  then  either  no 
fresh  ones  can  be  stamped  upon  the  occupied  ground — and  there  can 
be  no  change  of  sensations — or,  others  being  made,  the  former  will  be 
obliterated  ;  and  all  record  of  the  past  is  done  away  with. 

If  memory  implies  fresh  sensations  imposed  upon  former  ones,  the 
earlier  not  barring  their  way,  the  soul  cannot  be  a  material  entity. 


130 


PLOTINUS 


We  come  to  the  same  result  by  examining  the  sense  of  pain.  We 
say  there  is  pain  in  the  finger  :  the  trouble  is  doubtless  in  the  finger, 
but  our  opponents  must  admit  that  the  sensation  of  the  pain  is  in  the 
centre  of  consciousness.  The  suffering  member  is  one  thing,  the  sense 
of  suffering  is  another  :  how  does  this  happen  ? 

By  transmission,  they  will  say  :  the  psychic  pneuma  (=  the  semi¬ 
material  principle  of  life)  stationed  at  the  finger  suffers  first ;  and  stage 
by  stage  the  trouble  is  passed  on  until  at  last  it  reaches  the  centre  of 

consciousness. 

But  on  this  theory,  there  must  be  a  sensation  in  the  spot  first 
suffering  pain,  and  another  sensation  at  a  second  point  of  the  line  of 
transmission,  another  in  the  third  and  so  on  ;  many  sensations,  in  fact 
an  unlimited  series,  to  deal  with  one  pain  ;  and  at  the  last  moment  the 
centre  of  consciousness  has  the  sensation  of  all  these  sensations  and  of 
its  own  sensation  to  boot.  Or  to  be  exact,  these  serial  sensations  will 
not  be  of  the  pain  in  the  finger  :  the  sensation  next  in  succession  to  the 
suffering  finger  will  be  of  pain  at  the  joint,  a  third  will  tell  of  a  pain  still 
higher  up  :  there  will  be  a  series  of  separate  pains  :  The  centre  of  con¬ 
sciousness  will  not  feel  the  pain  seated  at  the  finger,  but  only  that 
impinging  upon  itself :  it  will  know  this  alone,  ignore  the  rest  and  so 
have  no  notion  that  the  finger  is  in  pain. 

Thus  :  Transmission  would  not  give  sensation  of  the  actual  condition 
at  the  affected  spot :  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  body  that  where  one  part 
suffers  there  should  be  knowledge  in  another  part — for  body  is  a  magni¬ 
tude,  and  the  parts  of  every  magnitude  are  distinct  parts - ;  therefore 

we  need,  as  the  sentient,  something  of  a  nature  to  be  identical  to  itself 
at  any  and  every  spot ;  this  property  can  belong  only  to  some  other 
form  of  being  than  body. 

8. 

It  can  be  shown  also  that  the  intellectual  act  would  similarly  be 
impossible  if  the  soul  were  any  form  of  body. 

If  sensation  is  apprehension  by  means  of  the  soul’s  employment  of 


IV.  7.  8] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 


131 


the  body,  intellection  cannot  be  a  similar  use  of  the  body  or  it  would 
be  identical  with  sensation.  If  then  intellection  is  apprehension  apart 
from  body,  much  more  must  there  be  a  distinction  between  the  body 
and  the  intellective  principle  :  sensation  for  objects  of  sense,  intellection 
for  the  intellectual  object.  And  even  if  this  be  rejected,  it  must  still  be 
admitted  that  there  do  exist  intellections  of  intellectual  objects  and 
perceptions  of  objects  not  possessing  magnitude  :  how,  we  may  then 
ask,  can  a  thing  of  magnitude  know  a  thing  that  has  no  magnitude,  or 
how  can  the  partless  be  known  by  means  of  what  has  parts  ?  We  will 
be  told  “  By  some  partless  part.”  But,  at  this,  the  intellective  will 
not  be  body:  for  contact  does  not  need  a  whole;  one  point  suffices. 
If  then  it  be  conceded — and  it  cannot  be  denied — that  the  primal 
intellections  deal  with  objects  completely  incorporeal,  the  principle  of 
intellection  itself  must  know  by  virtue  of  being,  or  becoming,  free  from 
body.  Even  if  they  hold  that  all  intellection  deals  with  the  ideal  forms 
in  Matter,  still  it  always  takes  place  by  abstraction  from  the  bodies  (in 
which  these  forms  appear)  and  the  separating  agent  is  the  Intellectual- 
Principle.  For  assuredly  the  process  by  which  we  abstract  circle, 
triangle,  line  or  point,  is  not  carried  through  by  the  aid  of  flesh  or  Matter 
of  any  kind  ;  in  all  such  acts  the  soul  or  mind  must  separate  itself  from 
the  material :  at  once  we  see  that  it  cannot  be  itself  material.  Similarly 
it  will  be  agreed  that,  as  beauty  and  justice  are  things  without  magni¬ 
tude,  so  must  be  the  intellective  act  that  grasps  them. 

When  such  non-magnitudes  come  before  the  soul,  it  receives  them 
by  means  of  its  partless  phase  and  they  will  take  position  there  in  partless 
wise. 

Again  :  if  the  Soul  is  a  body,  how  can  we  account  for  its  virtues — 
moral  excellence  (Sophrosyne) ,  justice,  courage  and  so  forth?  All  these 
could  be  only  some  kind  of  rarefied  body  (pneuma),  or  blood  in  some 
form  ;  or  we  might  see  courage  as  a  certain  resisting  power  in  that 
pneuma;  moral  quality  would  be  its  happy  blending;  beauty  would 
lie  wholly  in  the  agreeable  form  of  impressions  received,  such  comeliness 
as  leads  us  to  describe  people  as  attractive  and  beautiful  from  their 
bodily  appearance.  No  doubt  strength  and  grace  of  form  go  well  enough 


PLOTINUS 


132 

with  the  idea  of  rarefied  body  j  but  what  can  this  rarefied  body  want 
with  moral  excellence  ?  On  the  contrary  its  interest  would  lie  in  being 
comfortable  in  its  environments  and  contacts,  in  being  warmed  or 
pleasantly  cool,  in  bringing  everything  smooth  and  caressing  and  soft 
around  it :  what  could  it  care  about  a  just  distribution  ? 

Then  consider  the  objects  of  the  soul’s  contemplation,  virtue  and 
the  other  Intellectual  forms  with  which  it  is  occupied ;  are  these  eternal 
or  are  we  to  think  that  virtue  rises  here  or  there,  helps,  then  perishes  ? 
These  things  must  have  an  author  and  a  source  and  there,  again,  we  are 
confronted  by  something  perdurable  :  the  soul’s  contemplation,  then, 
must  be  of  the  eternal  and  unchanging,  like  the  concepts  of  geometry  : 
if  eternal  and  unchanging,  these  objects  are  not  bodies  :  and  that  which 
is  to  receive  them  must  be  of  equivalent  nature  :  it  cannot  therefore 
be  body,  since  all  body-nature  lacks  permanence,  is  a  thing  of  flux. 


8,  A.  (sometimes  appearing  as  9.) 

There  are  those  who  insist  on  the  activities  observed  in  bodies — 
warming,  chilling,  thrusting,  pressing — and  class  soul  with  body,  as  it 
were  to  assure  its  efficacy.  This  ignores  the  double  fact  that  the  very 
bodies  themselves  exercise  such  efficiency  by  means  of  the  incorporeal 
powers  operating  in  them,  and  that  these  are  not  the  powers  we  attribute 
to  soul :  intellection,  perception,  reasoning,  desire,  wise  and  effective 
action  in  all  regards,  these  point  to  a  very  different  form  of  being. 

In  transferring  to  bodies  the  powers  of  the  unembodied,  this  school 
leaves  nothing  to  that  higher  order.  And  yet  that  it  is  precisely  in 
virtue  of  bodiless  powers  that  bodies  possess  their  efficiency  is  clear  from 
certain  reflections  : — 

It  will  be  admitted  that  quality  and  quantity  are  two  different 
things,  that  body  is  always  a  thing  of  quantity  but  not  always  a  thing 
of  quality  :  matter  is  not  qualified.  This  admitted,  it  will  not  be  denied 
that  quality,  being  a  different  thing  from  quantity,  is  a  different  thing 
from  body.  Obviously  quality  could  not  be  body  when  it  has  not  quantity 
as  (by  the  admission)  all  body  must ;  and,  again,  as  we  have  said,  body, 


IV.  7.8,  B]  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL  133 

any  thing  of  mass,  on  being  reduced  to  fragments  ceases  to  be  what  it 
was,  but  the  quality  it  possessed  remains  intact  in  every  particle — for 
instance  the  sweetness  of  honey  is  still  sweetness  in  each  speck — this 
shows  that  sweetness  and  all  other  qualities  are  not  body. 

Further  :  if  the  powers  in  question  were  bodies,  then  necessarily 
the  stronger  powers  would  be  large  masses  and  those  less  efficient  small 
masses  :  but  if  there  are  large  masses  with  small  powers  while  not  a 
few  of  the  smaller  masses  manifest  great  powers,  then  the  efficiency 
must  be  vested  in  something  other  than  magnitude  ;  efficacy,  thus, 
belongs  to  non-magnitude.  Again  ;  Matter,  they  tell  us,  remains  un¬ 
changed  as  long  as  it  is  body,  but  produces  variety  upon  accepting 
qualities  ;  is  not  this  proof  enough  that  the  entrants  (with  whose  arrival 
the  changes  happen)  are  Reason-Principles  and  not  of  the  bodily  order  ? 

They  must  not  remind  us  that  when  pneuma  and  blood  are  no 
longer  present,  animals  die  :  these  are  necessary  no  doubt  to  life,  but  so 
are  many  other  things  of  which  none  could  possibly  be  soul :  and  neither 
pneuma  nor  blood  is  present  throughout  the  entire  being  ;  but  soul  is. 

8,  B.  (10.) 

If  the  soul  is  body  and  permeates  the  entire  body-mass,  still  even 
in  this  entire  permeation  the  blending  must  be  in  accord  with  what 
occurs  in  all  cases  of  bodily  admixing. 

Now  :  if  in  the  admixing  of  bodies  neither  constituent  can  retain 
its  efficacy,  the  soul  too  could  no  longer  be  effective  within  the  bodies  ; 
it  could  but  be  latent  ;  it  will  have  lost  that  by  which  it  is  soul,  just 
as  in  an  admixture  of  sweet  and  bitter  the  sweet  disappears  :  we  have, 
thus,  no  soul. 

Two  bodies  (i.e.  by  hypothesis,  the  soul  and  the  human  body)  are 
blended,  each  entire  through  the  entirety  of  the  other ;  where  the  one 
is,  the  other  is  also  ;  each  occupies  an  equal  extension  and  each  the  whole 
extension  ;  no  increase  of  size  has  been  caused  by  the  juncture  :  the 
one  body  thus  in  blended  can  have  left  in  the  other  nothing  undivided. 
This  is  no  case  of  mixing  in  the  sense  of  considerable  portions  alternating  ; 
that  would  be  described  as  collocation :  no ;  the  incoming  entity  goes 


PLOTINUS 


134 

through  the  other  to  the  very  minutest  point — an  impossibility,  of  course  ; 
the  less  becoming  equal  to  the  greater  ;  still,  all  is  traversed  throughout 
and  divided  throughout.  Now  if,  thus,  the  inblending  is  to  occur  point 
by  point,  leaving  no  undivided  material  anywhere,  the  division  of  the 
body  concerned  must  have  been  a  division  into  (geometrical)  points  . 
an  impossibility.  The  division  is  an  infinite  series  any  material  particle 
may  be  cut  in  two — and  the  infinities  are  not  merely  potential,  they 
are  actual. 

Therefore  body  cannot  traverse  anything  as  a  whole  traversing  a 
whole.  But  soul  does  this.  It  is  therefore  incorporeal. 

8,  c.  (n.) 

We  come  to  the  theory  that  this  pneuma  is  an  earlier  form,  one 
which  on  entering  the  cold  and  being  tempered  by  it  develops  into  soul 
by  growing  finer  under  that  new  condition.  This  is  absurd  at  the  start, 
since  many  living  beings  rise  in  warmth  and  have  a  soul  that  has  been 
tempered  by  cold  :  still  that  is  the  theory— the  soul  has  an  earlier  form, 
and  develops  its  true  nature  by  force  of  external  accidents.  Thus  these 
teachers  make  the  inferior  precede  the  higher,  and  before  that  inferior 
they  put  something  still  lower,  their  “  Habitude.”  It  is  obvious  that 
the  Intellectual-Principle  is  last  and  has  sprung  from  the  soul,  for  if  it 
were  first  of  all,  the  order  of  the  series  must  be,  second  the  soul,  then 
the  nature-principle,  and  always  the  later  inferior,  as  the  system  actually 
stands. 

If  they  treat  God  as  they  do  the  Intellectual-Principle— as  later, 
engendered  and  deriving  intellection  from  without — soul  and  intellect 
and  God  may  prove  to  have  no  existence  :  this  would  follow  if  a  poten¬ 
tiality  could  not  come  to  existence,  or  does  not  become  actual,  unless 
the  corresponding  actuality  exists.  And  what  could  lead  it  onward 
if  there  were  no  separate  being  in  previous  actuality  ?  Even  on  the 
absurd  supposition  that  the  potentially  existent  brings  itself  to  actuality, 
it  must  be  looking  to  some  Term,  and  that  must  be  no  potentiality  but 
actual. 

No  doubt  the  eternally  self-identical  may  have  potentiality  and  be 


IV.  7-  8,  d] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 


135 


self-led  to  self-realisation,  but  even  in  this  case  the  being  considered  as 
actualised  is  of  higher  order  than  the  being  considered  as  merely  capable 
of  actualisation  and  moving  towards  a  desired  Term. 

Thus  the  higher  is  the  earlier,  and  it  has  a  nature  other  than  body, 
and  it  exists  always  in  actuality :  Intellectual-Principle  and  Soul  precede 
Nature  :  thus,  Soul  does  not  stand  at  the  level  of  pneuma  or  of  body. 

These  arguments  are  sufficient  in  themselves,  though  many  others 
have  been  framed,  to  show  that  the  soul  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  a 
body. 

8,  d.  (12.) 

Soul  belongs,  then,  to  another  Nature  :  What  is  this  ?  Is  it  some¬ 
thing  which,  while  distinct  from  body,  still  belongs  to  it,  for  example  a 
harmony  or  accord  ? 

The  Pythagorean  school  holds  this  view  thinking  that  the  soul  is, 
with  some  difference,  comparable  to  the  accord  in  the  strings  of  a  lyre. 
When  the  lyre  is  strung  a  certain  condition  is  produced  upon  the  strings, 
and  this  is  known  as  accord  :  in  the  same  way  our  body  is  formed  of 
distinct  constituents  brought  together,  and  the  blend  produces  at  once 
life  and  that  soul  which  is  the  condition  existing  upon  the  bodily  total. 

That  this  opinion  is  untenable  has  already  been  shown  at  length. 
The  soul  is  a  prior  (to  body),  the  accord  is  a  secondary  to  the  lyre.  Soul 
rules,  guides  and  often  combats  the  body  ;  as  an  accord  of  body  it  could 
not  do  these  things.  Soul  is  a  real  being,  accord  is  not.  That  due 
blending  (or  accord)  of  the  corporeal  materials  which  constitute  our 
frame  would  be  simply  health.  Each  separate  part  of  the  body,  entering 
as  a  distinct  entity  into  the  total,  would  require  a  distinct  soul  (its  own 
accord  or  note),  so  that  there  would  be  many  souls  to  each  person. 
Weightiest  of  all ;  before  this  soul  there  would  have  to  be  another  soul 
to  bring  about  the  accord  as,  in  the  case  of  the  musical  instrument,  there 
is  the  musician  who  produces  the  accord  upon  the  strings  by  his  own 
possession  of  the  principle  on  which  he  tunes  them  :  neither  musical 
strings  nor  human  bodies  could  put  themselves  in  tune. 

Briefly,  the  soulless  is  treated  as  ensouled,  the  unordered  becomes 


i36  PLOTINUS 

orderly  by  accident,  and  instead  of  order  being  due  to  soul,  soul  itself 
owes  its  substantial  existence  to  order — which  is  self-caused.  Neither 
in  the  sphere  of  the  partial,  nor  in  that  of  Wholes  could  this  be  true. 
The  soul,  therefore,  is  not  a  harmony  or  accord. 


8,  e.  (13.) 

We  come  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Entelechy,  and  must  enquire  how  it 
is  applied  to  soul. 

It  is  thought  that  in  the  Conjoint  of  body  and  soul  the  soul  holds 
the  rank  of  Form  to  the  Matter  which  here  is  the  ensouled  body— not, 
then.  Form  to  every  example  of  body  or  to  body  as  merely  such,  but  to 
a  natural  organic  body  having  the  potentiality  of  life. 

Now  ;  if  the  soul  has  been  so  injected  as  to  be  assimilated  into  the 
body  as  the  design  of  a  statue  is  worked  into  the  bronze,  it  will  follow 
that,  upon  any  dividing  of  the  body,  the  soul  is  divided  with  it,  and  if 
any  part  of  the  body  is  cut  away  a  fragment  of  soul  must  go  with  it. 
Since  an  Entelechy  must  be  inseparable  from  the  being  of  which  it  is 
the  accomplished  actuality,  the  withdrawal  of  the  soul  in  sleep  cannot 
occur ;  in  fact  sleep  itself  cannot  occur.  Moreover  if  the  soul  is  an 
Emtelechy,  there  is  an  end  to  the  resistance  offered  by  reason  to  the 
desires  ;  the  total  (of  body  and  Entelechy-Soul)  must  have  one  uniform 
experience  throughout,  and  be  aware  of  no  internal  contradiction. 
Sense-perception  might  occur ;  but  intellection  would  be  impossible. 
The  very  upholders  of  the  Entelechy  are  thus  compelled  to  introduce 
another  soul,  the  Intellect,  to  which  they  ascribe  immortality.  The 
reasoning  soul,  then,  must  be  an  Entelechy — if  the  word  is  to  be  used 
at  all — in  some  other  mode. 

Even  the  sense-perceiving  soul,  in  its  possession  of  the  impressions 
of  absent  objects,  msut  hold  these  without  aid  from  the  body ;  for 
otherwise  the  impression  must  be  present  in  it  like  shape  and  images, 
and  that  would  mean  that  it  could  not  take  in  fresh  impressions  :  the 
perceptive  soul,  then,  cannot  be  described  as  this  Entelechy  inseparable 
from  the  body.  Similarly  the  desiring  principle,  dealing  not  only  with 


IV.  y.  8,  e] 


137 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 

food  and  drink  but  with  things  quite  apart  from  body;  this  also  is  no 
inseparable  Entelechy. 

There  remains  the  vegetal  principle  which  might  seem  to  suggest 
the  possibility  that,  in  this  phase,  the  soul  may  be  the  inseparable 
Entelechy  of  the  doctrine.  But  it  is  not  so.  The  principle  of  every 
growth  lies  at  the  root ;  in  many  plants  the  new  springing  takes  place 
at  the  root  or  just  above  it  :  it  is  clear  that  the  life-principle,  the  vegetal 
soul,  has  abandoned  the  upper  portions  to  concentrate  itself  at  that  one 
spot  :  it  was  therefore  not  present  in  the  whole  as  an  inseparable 
Entelechy.  Again,  before  the  plant's  development  the  life-principle  is 
situated  in  that  small  beginning  :  if,  thus,  it  passes  from  large  growth 
to  small  and  from  the  small  to  the  entire  growth,  why  should  it  not  pass 
outside  altogether  ? 

An  Entelechy  is  not  a  thing  of  parts  ;  how  then  could  it  be  present 
partwise  in  the  partible  body  ? 

An  identical  soul  is  now  the  soul  of  one  living  being  now  of  another  : 
how  could  the  soul  of  the  first  become  the  soul  of  the  latter  if  soul  were 
the  Entelechy  of  one  particular  being  ?  Yet  that  this  transference  does 
occur  is  evident  from  the  facts  of  animal  metasomatosis. 

The  substantial  existence  of  the  soul,  then,  does  not  depend  upon 
serving  as  Form  to  anything  :  it  is  an  Essence  which  does  not  come  into 
being  by  finding  a  seat  in  body  ;  it  exists  before  it  becomes  also  the  soul 
of  some  particular,  for  example,  of  a  living  being,  whose  body  would 
by  this  doctrine  be  the  author  of  its  soul. 

What,  then,  is  the  soul’s  Being  ?  If  it  is  neither  body  nor  a  state 
or  experience  of  body,  but  is  act  and  creation  :  if  it  holds  much  and 
gives  much,  and  is  an  existence  outside  of  body ;  of  what  order  and 
character  must  it  be  ?  Clearly  it  is  what  we  describe  as  Veritable  Essence. 
The  other  order,  the  entire  corporeal  Kind,  is  process ;  it  appears  and 
it  perishes  ;  in  reality  it  never  possesses  Being,  but  is  merely  protected, 
in  so  far  as  it  has  the  capacity,  by  participating  in  what  authentically  is. 


PLOTINUS 


138 
9- 

Over  against  that  body,  stands  the  principle  which  is  self-caused, 
which  is  all  that  neither  enters  into  being  nor  passes  away,  the  principle 
whose  dissolution  would  mean  the  end  of  all  things  never  to  be  restored 
if  once  this  had  ceased  to  be,  the  sustaining  principle  of  things  indi¬ 
vidually,  and  of  this  kosmos,  which  owes  its  maintenance  and  its  ordered 
system  to  the  soul. 

This  is  the  starting  point  of  motion  and  becomes  the  leader  and 
provider  of  motion  to  all  else  :  it  moves  by  its  own  quality,  and  every 
living  material  form  owes  life  to  this  principle,  which  of  itself  lives  in  a 
life  that,  being  essentially  innate,  can  never  fail. 

Not  all  things  can  have  a  life  merely  at  second  hand  ;  this  would 
give  an  infinite  series  :  there  must  be  some  nature  which,  having  life 
primally,  shall  be  of  necessity  indestructible,  immortal,  as  the  source 
of  life  to  all  else  that  lives.  This  is  the  point  at  which  all  that  is  divine 
and  blessed  must  be  situated,  living  and  having  being  of  itself,  possessing 
primal  being  and  primal  life,  and  in  its  own  essence  rejecting  all  change, 
neither  coming  to  be  nor  passing  away. 

Whence  could  such  a  being  arise  or  into  what  could  it  disappear  : 
the  very  word,  strictly  used,  means  that  the  thing  is  perdurable.  Similarly 
white,  the  colour,  cannot  be  now  white  and  now  not  white  :  if  this 
“  white  ”  were  a  real  being  it  would  be  eternal  as  well  as  being  white  : 
the  colour  is  merely  white  but  whatsoever  possesses  being,  indwelling 
by  nature  and  primal,  will  possess  also  eternal  duration.  In  such  an 
entity  this  primal  and  eternal  Being  cannot  be  dead  like  stone  or  plank  : 
it  must  be  alive,  and  that  with  a  life  unalloyed  as  long  as  it  remains  self- 
gathered  :  when  the  primal  Being  blends  with  an  inferior  principle,  it 
is  hampered  in  its  relation  to  the  highest,  but  without  suffering  the  loss 
of  its  own  nature  since  it  can  always  recover  its  earliest  state  by  turning 
its  tendency  back  to  its  own. 

10.  (15.) 

That  the  soul  is  of  the  family  of  the  diviner  nature,  the  eternal,  is 
clear  from  our  demonstration  that  it  is  not  material :  besides  it  has 
neither  shape  or  colour  nor  is  it  tangible.  But  there  are  other  proofs. 


IV.  7-  io] 


THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL 


139 


Assuming  that  the  divine  and  the  authentically  existent  possesses 
a  life  beneficent  and  wise,  we  take  the  next  step  and  begin  with  working 
out  the  nature  of  our  own  soul. 

Let  us  consider  a  soul,  not  one  that  has  appropriated  the  unreasoned 
desires  and  impulses  of  the  bodily  life,  or  any  other  such  emotion  and 
experience,  but  one  that  has  cast  all  this  aside,  and  as  far  as  possible 
has  no  commerce  with  the  bodily.  Such  a  soul  demonstrates  that  all 
evil  is  accretion,  alien,  and  that  in  the  purged  soul  the  noble  things  are 
immanent,  wisdom  and  all  else  that  is  good,  as  its  native  store. 

If  this  is  the  soul  once  it  has  returned  to  its  self,  how  deny  that  it 
is  of  the  nature  we  have  identified  with  all  the  divine  and  eternal  ? 
Wisdom  and  authentic  virtue  are  divine,  and  could  not  be  found  in  the 
chattel  mean  and  mortal :  what  possesses  these  must  be  divine  by  its 
very  capacity  of  the  divine,  the  token  of  kinship  and  of  identical  substance. 

Hence,  too,  any  one  of  us  that  exhibits  these  qualities  will  differ 
but  little  as  far  as  soul  is  concerned  from  the  Supemals  ;  he  will  be  less 
than  they  only  to  the  extent  in  which  the  soul  is,  in  him,  associated  with 
body. 

This  is  so  true  that,  if  every  human  being  were  at  that  stage,  or  if  a 
great  number  lived  by  a  soul  of  that  degree,  no  one  would  be  so  incredulous 
as  to  doubt  that  the  soul  in  man  is  immortal.  It  is  because  we  see  every¬ 
where  the  spoiled  souls  of  the  great  mass  that  it  becomes  difficult  to 
recognise  their  divinity  and  immortality. 

To  know  the  nature  of  a  thing  we  must  observe  it  in  its  unalloyed 
state,  since  any  addition  obscures  the  reality.  Clear,  then  look  :  or, 
rather,  let  a  man  first  purify  himself  and  then  observe  :  he  will  not  doubt 
his  immortality  when  he  sees  himself  thus  entered  into  the  pure,  the 
Intellectual.  For,  what  he  sees  is  an  Intellectual-Principle  looking  on 
nothing  of  sense,  nothing  of  this  mortality,  but  by  its  own  eternity 
having  intellection  of  the  eternal :  he  will  see  all  things  in  this  Intellec¬ 
tual  substance,  himself  having  become  an  Intellectual  Kosmos  and  all 
lightsome,  illuminated  by  the  truth  streaming  from  The  Good,  which 
radiates  truth  upon  all  that  stands  within  that  realm  of  the  divine. 

Thus  he  will  often  feel  the  beauty  of  that  word  “  Farewell :  I  am 


PLOTINUS 


140 

to  you  an  immortal  God,”  for  he  has  ascended  to  the  Supreme,  and  is 
all  one  strain  to  enter  into  likeness  with  it. 

If  the  purification  puts  the  human  into  knowledge  of  the  highest, 
then,  too,  the  science  latent  within  becomes  manifest,  the  only  authentic 
knowing.  For  it  is  not  by  running  hither  and  thither  outside  of  itself 
that  the  soul  understands  morality  and  right  conduct :  it  learns  them 
of  its  own  nature,  in  its  contact  with  itself,  in  its  intellectual  grasp  of 
itself,  seeing  deeply  impressed  upon  it  the  images  of  its  primal  state  ; 
what  was  one  mass  of  rust  from  long  neglect  it  has  restored  to  purity. 

Imagine  living  gold  :  it  files  away  all  that  is  earthy  about  it,  all 
that  kept  it  in  self-ignorance  preventing  it  from  knowing  itself  as  gold  ; 
seen  now  unalloyed  it  is  at  once  filled  with  admiration  of  its  worth  and 
knows  that  it  has  no  need  of  any  other  glory  than  its  own,  triumphant 
if  only  it  be  allowed  to  remain  purely  to  itself. 

11.  (16.) 

What  intelligent  mind  can  doubt  the  immortality  of  such  a  value, 
one  in  which  there  is  a  life  self-springing  and  therefore  not  to  be  destroyed  ? 

This  is  at  any  rate  a  life  not  imported  from  without,  not  present  in 
the  mode  of  the  heat  in  fire — for  if  heat  is  characteristic  of  the  fire  proper, 
it  certainly  is  adventitious  to  the  Matter  underlying  the  fire  ;  or  fire, 
too,  would  be  everlasting — it  is  not  in  any  such  mode  that  the  soul  has 
life  :  this  is  no  case  of  a  Matter  underlying  and  a  life  brought  into  that 
Matter  and  making  it  into  soul  (as  heat  comes  into  matter  and  makes 
it  fire). 

Either  life  is  Essential  Reality,  and  therefore  self-living — the  very 
thing  we  have  been  seeking — and  undeniably  immortal :  or  it,  too, 
is  a  compound  and  must  be  traced  back  through  all  the  constituents 
until  an  immortal  substance  is  reached,  something  deriving  movement 
from  itself,  and  therefore  debarred  from  accepting  death. 

Even  supposing  life  could  be  described  as  a  condition  imposed  upon 
Matter,  still  the  source  from  which  this  condition  entered  the  Matter 
must  necessarily  be  admitted  to  be  immortal  simply  by  being  unable 
to  take  into  itself  the  opposite  of  the  life  which  it  conveys. 


IV-7-i3]  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE 

Of  course,  life  is  no  such  mere  condition, 
principle,  effectively  living. 

12.  (17.) 

A  further  consideration  is  that  if  every  soul  is  to  be  held  dissoluble 
the  universe  must  long  since  have  ceased  to  be  :  if  it  is  pretended  that 
one  kind  of  soul,  our  own  for  example,  is  mortal,  and  another,  that  of 
the  All,  let  us  suppose,  is  immortal,  we  demand  to  know  the  reason  of 
the  difference  alleged. 

Each  is  a  principle  of  motion,  each  is  self-living,  each  touches  the 
same  sphere  by  the  same  tentacles,  each  has  intellection  of  the  celestial 
order  and  of  the  super-celestial,  each  is  seeking  to  win  to  what  has 
essential  being,  each  is  moving  upwards  to  the  primal  source. 

Again  :  the  soul’s  understanding  of  the  Absolute  Forms  by  means 
of  the  visions  stored  up  in  it  is  effected  within  itself  ;  such  perception  is 
reminiscence  ;  the  soul  then  must  have  its  being  before  embodiment, 
and  drawing  on  an  eternal  science,  must  itself  be  eternal. 

Every  dissoluble  entity,  that  has  come  to  be  by  way  of  groupment, 
must  in  the  nature  of  things  be  broken  apart  by  that  very  mode  which 
brought  it  together :  but  the  soul  is  one  and  simplex,  living  not  in  the 
sense  of  potential  reception  of  life  but  by  its  own  energy ;  and  this  can 
be  no  cause  of  dissolution. 

But,  we  will  be  told,  it  tends  to  destruction  by  having  been  divided 
(in  the  body)  and  so  becoming  fragmentary. 

No  :  the  soul,  as  we  have  shown,  is  not  a  mass,  not  a  quantity. 

May  not  it  change  and  so  come  to  destruction  ? 

No  :  the  change  that  destroys  annuls  the  form  but  leaves  the  under¬ 
lying  substance  :  and  that  could  not  happen  to  anything  except  a 
compound. 

If  it  can  be  destroyed  in  no  such  ways  it  is  necessarily  indestructible. 

13.  (18.) 

But  how  does  the  soul  enter  into  body  from  the  aloofness  of  the 
Intellectual  ? 


SOUL  141 

but  an  independent 


142 


PLOTINUS 


There  is  the  Intellectual-Principle  which  remains  among  the  intel¬ 
lectual  beings,  living  the  purely  intellective  life  ;  and  this,  knowing  no 
impulse  or  appetite,  is  for  ever  stationary  in  that  Realm.  But  imme¬ 
diately  following  upon  it,  there  is  that  which  has  acquired  appetite  and, 
by  this  accruement,  has  already  taken  a  great  step  outward  ;  it  has  the 
desire  of  elaborating  order  on  the  model  of  what  it  has  seen  in  the 
Intellectual-Principle  :  pregnant  by  those  Beings,  and  in  pain  to  the 
birth,  it  is  eager  to  make,  to  create.  In  this  new  zest  it  strains  towards 
the  realm  of  sense  :  thus,  while  this  primal  soul  in  union  with  the  Soul 
of  the  All  transcends  the  sphere  administered,  it  is  inevitably  turned 
outward,  and  has  added  the  universe  to  its  concern  :  yet  in  choosing 
to  administer  the  partial  and  exiling  itself  to  enter  the  place  in  which  it 
finds  its  appropriate  task,  it  still  is  not  wholly  and  exclusively  held  by 
body  :  it  is  still  in  possession  of  the  unembodied  ;  and  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  in  it  remains  immune.  As  a  whole  it  is  partly  in  body,  partly 
outside  :  it  has  plunged  from  among  the  primals  and  entered  this  sphere 
of  tertiaries  :  the  process  has  been  an  activity  of  the  Intellectual-Prin¬ 
ciple,  which  thus,  while  itself  remaining  in  its  identity,  operates  through¬ 
out  the  soul  to  flood  the  universe  with  beauty  and  penetrant  order — 
immortal  mind,  eternal  in  its  unfailing  energy,  acting  through  immortal 
soul. 

14-  (I9-) 

As  for  the  souls  of  the  other  living  beings,  fallen  to  the  degree  of 
entering  brute  bodies,  these  too  must  be  immortal.  And  if  there  is  in 
the  animal  world  any  other  phase  of  soul,  its  only  possible  origin,  since 
it  is  the  life-giver,  is,  still,  that  one  principle  of  life  :  so  too  with  the 
soul  in  the  vegetal  order. 

All  have  sprung  from  one  source,  all  have  life  as  their  own,  all  are 
incorporeal,  indivisible,  all  are  real-beings. 

If  we  are  told  that  man’s  soul  being  tripartite  must  as  a  compound 
entity  be  dissolved,  our  answer  shall  be  that  pure  souls  upon  their  eman¬ 
cipation  will  put  away  all  that  has  fastened  to  them  at  birth,  all  that 
increment  which  the  others  will  long  retain. 


IV.  8.  I] 


THE  SOUL’S  DESCENT  INTO  BODY 


143 


But  even  that  inferior  phase  thus  laid  aside  will  not  be  destroyed 
as  long  as  its  source  continues  to  exist,  for  nothing  from  the  realm  of 
real  being  shall  pass  away. 

15.  (20.) 

Thus  far  we  have  offered  the  considerations  appropriate  to  those 
asking  for  demonstration  :  those  whose  need  is  conviction  by  evidence 
of  the  more  material  order  are  best  met  from  the  abundant  records 
relevant  to  the  subject  :  there  are  also  the  oracles  of  the  Gods  ordering 
the  appeasing  of  wronged  souls  and  the  honouring  of  the  dead  as  still 
sentient,  a  practice  common  to  all  mankind  :  and  again,  not  a  few  souls, 
once  among  men,  have  continued  to  serve  them  after  quitting  the  body 
and  by  revelations,  practically  helpful,  make  clear,  as  well,  that  the  other 
souls,  too,  have  not  ceased  to  be. 


EIGHTH  TRACTATE 

The  Soul’s  Descent  Into  Body 

1. 

Many  times  it  has  happened :  Lifted  out  of  the  body  into  myself ; 
becoming  external  to  all  other  things  and  self-encentered  ;  beholding  a 
marvellous  beauty ;  then,  more  than  ever,  assured  of  community  with 
the  loftiest  order ;  enacting  the  noblest  life,  acquiring  identity  with 
the  divine  ;  stationing  within  It  by  having  attained  that  activity ; 
poised  above  whatsoever  within  the  Intellectual  is  less  than  the  Supreme  : 
yet,  there  comes  the  moment  of  descent  from  intellection  to  reasoning, 
and  after  that  sojourn  in  the  divine,  I  ask  myself  how  it  happens  that 
I  can  now  be  descending,  and  how  did  the  soul  ever  enter  into  my  body, 
the  soul  which,  even  within  the  body,  is  the  high  thing  it  has  shown 
itself  to  be. 

Heraclitus,  who  urges  the  examination  of  this  matter,  tells  of  com¬ 
pulsory  alternation  from  contrary  to  contrary,  speaks  of  ascent  and 
descent,  says  that  “  change  reposes,”  and  that  “  it  is  weariness  to  keep 
toiling  at  the  same  things  and  always  beginning  again  ”  ;  but  he  seems 


PLOTINUS 


144 

to  teach  by  metaphor,  not  concerning  himself  about  making  his  doctrine 
clear  to  us,  probably  with  the  idea  that  it  is  for  us  to  seek  within  ourselves 

as  he  sought  for  himself  and  found. 

Empedocles— where  he  says  that  it  is  law  for  faulty  souls  to  descend 
to  this  sphere,  and  that  he.  himself  was  here  because  he  turned  a  deserter , 
wandered  from  God,  in  slavery  to  a  raving  discord — reveals  neither 
more  nor  less  than  Pythagoras  and  his  school  seem  to  me  to  convey  on 
this  as  on  many  other  matters ;  but  in  his  case,  versification  has  some 
part  in  the  obscurity. 

We  have  to  fall  back  on  the  illustrious  Plato,  who  uttered  many 
noble  sayings  about  the  soul,  and  has  in  many  places  dwelt  upon  its 
entry  into  body  so  that  we  may  well  hope  to  get  some  light  from  him. 

What  do  we  learn  from  this  philosopher  ? 

We  will  not  find  him  so  consistent  throughout  that  it  is  easy  to 
discover  his  mind. 

Everywhere,  no  doubt,  he  expresses  contempt  for  all  that  is  of 
sense,  blames  the  commerce  of  soul  with  body  as  an  enchainment,  an 
entombment,  and  upholds  as  a  great  truth  the  saying  of  the  Mysteries 
that  the  soul  is  here  a  prisoner.  In  the  Cavern  of  Plato  and  in  the  Cave 
of  Empedocles,  I  discern  this  universe,  where  the  breaking  of  the  fetters 
and  the  ascent  from  the  depths  are  figures  of  the  wayfaring  toward  the 
Intellectual  Realm. 

In  the  Phaidros  he  makes  a  failing  of  the  wings  the  cause  of  the 
entry  to  this  realm  :  and  there  are  Periods  which  send  back  the  soul 
after  it  has  risen ;  there  are  judgements  and  lots  and  fates  and  necessities 
driving  other  souls  down  to  this  order. 

In  all  these  explanations  he  finds  guilt  in  the  arrival  of  the  soul  at 
body.  But  treating,  in  the  Timaeus,  of  our  universe  he  exalts  the  kosmos 
and  entitles  it  a  blessed  god,  and  holds  that  the  soul  was  given  by  the 
goodness  of  the  creator  to  the  end  that  the  total  of  things  might  be 
possessed  of  intellect,  for  thus  intellectual  it  was  planned  to  be,  and 
thus  it  cannot  be  except  through  soul.  There  is  a  reason,  then,  why  the 
soul  of  this  All  should  be  sent  into  it  from  God  :  in  the  same  way  the 
soul  of  each  single  one  of  us  is  sent,  that  the  universe  may  be  complete  ; 


IV.  8.  2] 


THE  SOUL’S  DESCENT  INTO  BODY  145 

it  was  necessary  that  all  beings  of  the  Intellectual  should  be  tallied  by 
just  so  many  forms  of  living  creatures  here  in  the  realm  of  sense. 

2. 

Enquiring,  then,  of  Plato  as  to  our  own  soul,  we  find  ourselves  forced 
to  enquire  into  the  nature  of  soul  in  general — to  discover  what  there 
can  be  in  its  character  to  bring  it  into  partnership  with  body,  and,  again, 
what  this  kosmos  must  be  in  which,  willing  unwilling  or  in  any  way  at 
all,  soul  has  its  activity. 

We  have  to  face  also  the  question  as  to  whether  the  Creator  has 

planned  well  or  ill . like  our  souls,  which  it  may  be,  are  such 

that  governing  their  inferior,  the  body,  they  must  sink  deeper  and  deeper 
into  it  if  they  are  to  control  it. 

No  doubt  the  individual  body — though  in  all  cases  appropriately 
placed  within  the  universe — is  of  itself  in  a  state  of  dissolution,  always 
on  the  way  to  its  natural  terminus,  demanding  much  irksome  forethought 
to  save  it  from  every  kind  of  outside  assailant,  always  gripped  by  need, 
requiring  every  help  against  constant  difficulty  :  but  the  body  inhabited 
by  the  World-Soul — complete,  competent,  self-sufficing,  exposed  to 
nothing  contrary  to  its  nature — this  needs  no  more  than  a  brief  word 
of  command,  while  the  governing  soul  is  undeviatingly  what  its  nature 
makes  it  wish  to  be,  and,  amenable  neither  to  loss  nor  to  addition,  knows 
neither  desire  nor  distress. 

This  is  how  we  come  to  read  that  our  soul,  entering  into  association 
with  that  complete  soul  and  itself  thus  made  perfect,  walks  the  lofty 
ranges,  administering  the  entire  kosmos,  and  that  as  long  as  it  does  not 
secede  and  is  neither  inbound  to  body  nor  held  in  any  sort  of  servitude, 
so  long  it  tranquilly  bears  its  part  in  the  governance  of  the  All,  exactly 
like  the  world-soul  itself ;  for  in  fact  it  suffers  no  hurt  whatever  by 
furnishing  body  with  the  power  to  existence,  since  not  every  form  of 
care  for  the  inferior  need  wrest  the  providing  soul  from  its  own  sure 
standing  in  the  highest. 

The  soul’s  care  for  the  universe  takes  two  forms  :  there  is  the  super¬ 
vising  of  the  entire  system,  brought  to  order  by  deedless  command  in  a 


PLOTINUS 


146 

kingly  presidence,  and  there  is  that  over  the  individual,  implying  direct 
action,  the  hand  to  the  task,  one  might  say,  in  immediate  contact :  in  the 
second  kind  of  care  the  agent  absorbs  much  of  the  nature  of  its  object. 

Now  in  its  comprehensive  government  of  the  heavenly  system,  the 
soul’s  method  is  that  of  an  unbroken  transcendence  in  its  highest  phases, 
with  penetration  by  its  lower  power  :  at  this,  God  can  no  longer  be 
charged  with  lowering  the  All-Soul,  which  has  not  been  deprived  of  its 
natural  standing  and  from  eternity  possesses  and  will  unchangeably 
possess  that  rank  and  habit  which  could  never  have  been  intruded  upon 
it  against  the  course  of  nature  but  must  be  its  characteristic  quality, 
neither  failing  ever  nor  ever  beginning. 

Where  we  read  that  the  souls  or  stars  stand  to  their  bodily  forms 
as  the  All  to  the  material  forms  within  it — for  these  starry  bodies  are 
declared  to  be  members  of  the  soul’s  circuit — we  are  given  to  understand 
that  the  star-souls  also  enjoy  the  blissful  condition  of  transcendence  and 
immunity  that  becomes  them. 

And  so  we  might  expect :  commerce  with  the  body  is  repudiated 
for  two  only  reasons,  as  hindering  the  soul’s  intellective  act  and  as 
filling  it  with  pleasure,  desire,  pain  ;  but  neither  of  these  misfortunes 
can  befall  a  soul  which  has  never  deeply  penetrated  into  the  body,  is 
not  a  slave  but  a  sovereign  ruling  a  body  of  such  an  order  as  to  have  no 
need  and  no  shortcoming  and  therefore  to  give  ground  for  neither  desire 
nor  fear. 

There  is  no  reason  why  it  should  be  expectant  of  evil  with  regard 
to  such  a  body  nor  is  there  any  such  preoccupied  concern,  bringing  about 
a  veritable  descent,  as  to  withdraw  it  from  its  noblest  and  most  blessed 
vision  ;  it  remains  always  intent  upon  the  Supreme,  and  its  governance 
of  this  universe  is  effected  by  a  power  not  calling  upon  act. 

3- 

The  Human  Soul,  next : — 

Everywhere  we  hear  of  it  as  in  bitter  and  miserable  durance  in  body, 
a  victim  to  troubles  and  desires  and  fears  and  all  forms  of  evil,  the  body 
its  prison  or  its  tomb,  the  kosmos  its  cave  or  cavern. 


IV.  8.  3] 


THE  SOUL’S  DESCENT  INTO  BODY  147 

Now  this  does  not  clash  with  the  first  theory  (that  of  the  impassivity 
of  soul  as  in  the  All)  ;  for  the  descent  of  the  human  Soul  has  not  been 
due  to  the  same  causes  (as  that  of  the  All-Soul). 

All  that  is  Intellectual-Principle  has  its  being — whole  and  all — in 
the  place  of  Intellection,  what  we  call  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  :  but  there 
exist,  too,  the  intellective  powers  included  in  its  being,  and  the  separate 
intelligences  for  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  not  merely  one  ;  it  is  one 
and  many.  In  the  same  way  there  must  be  both  many  souls  and  one, 
the  one  being  the  source  of  the  differing  many  just  as  from  one  genus 
there  rise  various  species,  better  and  worse,  some  of  the  more  intellectual 
order,  others  less  effectively  so. 

In  the  Intellectual-Principle  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  :  there  is 
the  Intellectual-Principle  itself,  which  like  some  huge  living  organism 
contains  potentially  all  the  other  forms ;  and  there  are  the  forms  thus 
potentially  included  now  realised  as  individuals.  We  may  think  of  it 
as  a  city  which  itself  has  soul  and  life,  and  includes,  also,  other  forms 
of  fife  ;  the  living  city  is  the  more  perfect  and  powerful,  but  those  lesser 
forms,  in  spite  of  all,  share  in  the  one  same  living  quality :  or,  another 
illustration,  from  fire,  the  universal,  proceed  both  the  great  fire  and  the 
minor  fires  ;  yet  all  have  the  one  common  essence,  that  of  fire  the 
universal,  or,  more  exactly,  participate  in  that  from  which  the  essence 
of  the  universal  fire  proceeds. 

No  doubt  the  task  of  the  soul,  in  its  more  emphatically  reasoning 
phase,  is  intellection  :  but  it  must  have  another  as  well,  or  it  would  be 
undisting uishable  from  the  Intellectual-Principle.  To  its  quality  of  being 
intellective  it  adds  the  quality  by  which  it  attains  its  particular  manner 
of  being :  remaining,  therefore,  an  Intellectual-Principle,  it  has  thence¬ 
forth  its  own  task  too,  as  everything  must  that  exists  among  real  beings. 

It  looks  towards  its  higher  and  has  intellection ;  towards  itself  and 
conserves  its  peculiar  being  ;  towards  its  lower  and  orders,  administers, 
governs. 

The  total  of  things  could  not  have  remained  stationary  in  the 
Intellectual  Kosmos,  once  there  was  the  possibility  of  continuous  variety, 
of  beings  inferior  but  as  necessarily  existent  as  their  superiors. 


PLOTINUS 


148 
4- 

So  it  is  with  the  individual  souls  ;  the  appetite  for  the  divine  Intel¬ 
lect  urges  them  to  return  to  their  source,  but  they  have,  too,  a  power 
apt  to  administration  in  this  lower  sphere  ;  they  may  be  compared  to 
the  light  attached  upwards  to  the  sun,  but  not  grudging  its  presidency 
to  what  lies  beneath  it.  In  the  Intellectual,  then,  they  remain  with 
soul-entire,  and  are  immune  from  care  and  trouble  ;  in  the  heavenly 
sphere,  absorbed  in  the  soul-entire,  they  are  administrators  with  it  just 
as  kings,  associated  with  the  supreme  ruler  and  governing  with  him, 
do  not  descend  from  their  kingly  stations  :  the  souls  indeed  (as  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  kosmos)  are  thus  far  in  the  one  place  with  their  over- 
lord  ;  but  there  comes  a  stage  at  which  they  descend  from  the  universal 
to  become  partial  and  self-centred  ;  in  a  weary  desire  of  standing  apart 
they  find  their  way,  each  to  a  place  of  its  very  own.  This  state  long 
maintained,  the  soul  is  a  deserter  from  the  All ;  its  differentiation  has 
severed  it ;  its  vision  is  no  longer  set  in  the  Intellectual ;  it  is  a  partial 
thing,  isolated,  weakened,  full  of  care,  intent  upon  the  fragment ;  severed 
from  the  whole,  it  nestles  in  one  form  of  being  ;  for  this,  it  abandons 
all  else,  entering  into  and  caring  for  only  the  one,  for  a  thing  buffeted 
about  by  a  worldful  of  things  :  thus  it  has  drifted  away  from  the  universal 
and,  by  an  actual  presence,  it  administers  the  particular ;  it  is  caught 
into  contact  now,  and  tends  to  the  outer  to  which  it  has  become  present 
and  into  whose  inner  depths  it  henceforth  sinks  far. 

With  this  comes  what  is  known  as  the  casting  of  the  wings,  the 
enchaining  in  body  :  the  soul  has  lost  that  innocency  of  conducting  the 
higher  which  it  knew  when  it  stood  with  the  All-Soul,  that  earlier  state 
to  which  all  its  interest  would  bid  it  hasten  back. 

It  has  fallen  :  it  is  at  the  chain  :  debarred  from  expressing  itself 
now  through  its  intellectual  phase,  it  operates  through  sense  ;  it  is  a 
captive  ;  this  is  the  burial,  the  encavemment,  of  the  Soul. 

But  in  spite  of  all  it  has,  for  ever,  something  transcendent  :  by  a 
conversion  towards  the  intellective  act,  it  is  loosed  from  the  shackles 
and  soars — when  only  it  makes  its  memories  the  starting  point  of  a  new 
vision  of  essential  being.  Souls  that  take  this  way  have  place  in  both 


IV.  8.  5] 


THE  SOUL’S  DESCENT  INTO  BODY 


149 


spheres,  living  of  necessity  the  life  there  and  the  life  here  by  turns,  the 
upper  life  reigning  in  those  able  to  consort  more  continuously  with  the 
divine  Intellect,  the  lower  dominant  where  character  or  circumstances 
are  less  favourable. 

All  this  is  indicated  by  Plato,  without  emphasis,  where  he  distin¬ 
guishes  those  of  the  second  mixing-bowl,  describes  them  as  “  parts,” 
and  goes  on  to  say  that,  having  in  this  way  become  partial,  they  must  of 
necessity  experience  birth. 

Of  course,  where  he  speaks  of  God  sowing  them,  he  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  as  when  he  tells  of  God  speaking  and  delivering  orations  ;  what 
is  rooted  in  the  nature  of  the  All  is  figuratively  treated  as  coming  into 
being  by  generation  and  creation  :  stage  and  sequence  are  transferred, 
for  clarity  of  exposition,  to  things  whose  being  and  definite  form  are 
eternal. 

5- 

It  is  possible  to  reconcile  all  these  apparent  contradictions — the 
divine  sowing  to  birth,  as  opposed  to  a  voluntary  descent  aiming  at  the 
completion  of  the  universe  ;  the  judgement  and  the  cave;  necessity  and 
free  choice — in  fact  the  necessity  includes  the  choice — embodiment  as 
an  evil ;  the  Empedoclean  teaching  of  a  flight  from  God,  a  wandering 
away,  a  sin  bringing  its  punishment ;  the  “  solace  by  flight  ”  of  Herac¬ 
litus  ;  in  a  word  a  voluntary  descent  which  is  also  involuntary. 

All  degeneration  is  no  doubt  involuntary,  yet  when  it  has  been 
brought  about  by  an  inherent  tendency,  that  submission  to  the  inferior 
may  be  described  as  the  penalty  of  an  act. 

On  the  other  hand  these  experiences  and  actions  are  determined 
by  an  external  law  of  nature,  and  they  are  due  to  the  movement  of  a 
being  which  in  abandoning  its  superior  is  running  out  to  serve  the  needs 
of  another  :  hence  there  is  no  inconsistency  or  untruth  in  saying  that 
the  soul  is  sent  down  by  God  ;  final  results  are  always  to  be  referred 
to  the  starting  point  even  across  many  intervening  stages. 

Still  there  is  a  two-fold  flaw  :  the  first  lies  in  the  motive  of  the 
Soul’s  descent  (its  audacity,  its  Tolma),  and  the  second  in  the  evil  it 


PLOTINUS 


150 

does  when  actually  here  :  the  first  is  punished  by  what  the  soul  has 
suffered  by  its  descent :  for  the  faults  committed  here,  the  lesser  penalty 
is  to  enter  into  body  after  body — and  soon  to  return — by  judgement 
according  to  desert,  the  word  judgement  indicating  a  divine  ordinance ; 
but  any  outrageous  form  of  ill-doing  incurs  a  proportionately  greater 
punishment  administered  under  the  surveillance  of  chastising  daimons. 

Thus,  in  sum,  the  soul,  a  divine  being  and  a  dweller  in  the  loftier 
realms,  has  entered  body  :  it  is  a  god,  a  later  phase  of  the  divine  :  but, 
under  stress  of  its  powers  and  of  its  tendency  to  bring  order  to  its  next 
lower,  it  penetrates  to  this  sphere  in  a  voluntary  plunge  :  if  it  turns 
back  quickly  all  is  well ;  it  will  have  taken  no  hurt  by  acquiring  the 
knowledge  of  evil  and  coming  to  understand  what  sin  is,  by  bringing  its 
forces  into  manifest  play,  by  exhibiting  those  activities  and  productions 
which,  remaining  merely  potential  in  the  unembodied,  might  as  well 
never  have  been  even  there,  if  destined  never  to  come  into  actuality, 
so  that  the  soul  itself  would  never  have  known  that  suppressed  and 
inhibited  total. 

The  act  reveals  the  power,  a  power  hidden,  and  we  might  almost 
say  obliterated  or  non-existent,  unless  at  some  moment  it  became  effec¬ 
tive  :  in  the  world  as  it  is,  the  richness  of  the  outer  stirs  us  all  to  the 
wonder  of  the  inner  whose  greatness  is  displayed  in  acts  so  splendid. 

6. 

Something  besides  a  unity  there  must  be  or  all  would  be  indis- 
cemibly  buried,  shapeless  within  that  unbroken  whole  :  none  of  the 
real  beings  (of  the  Intellectual  Kosmos)  would  exist  if  that  unity  remained 
at  halt  within  itself  :  the  plurality  of  these  beings,  offspring  of  the  unity, 
could  not  exist  without  their  own  nexts  taking  the  outward  path  ;  these 
are  the  beings  holding  the  rank  of  souls. 

In  the  same  way  the  outgoing  process  could  not  end  with  the  souls, 
their  issue  stifled  :  every  Kind  must  produce  its  next ;  it  must  unfold 
from  some  concentrated  central  principle  as  from  a  seed,  and  so  advance 
to  its  term  in  the  varied  forms  of  sense.  The  prior  in  its  being  will  remain 
unalterably  in  the  native  seat ;  but  there  is  the  lower  phase,  begotten 


IV.  8.  7]  THE  SOUL’S  DESCENT  INTO  BODY  151 

to  it  by  an  ineffable  faculty  of  its  being,  native  to  soul  as  it  exists  in 
the  Supreme. 

To  this  power  we  cannot  impute  any  halt,  any  limit  of  jealous 
grudging ;  it  must  move  for  ever  outward  until  the  universe  stands 
accomplished  to  the  ultimate  possibility.  All,  thus,  is  produced  by  an 
inexhaustible  power  giving  its  gift  to  the  universe,  no  part  of  which  it 
can  endure  to  see  without  some  share  in  its  being. 

There  is,  besides,  no  principle  that  can  prevent  anything  from 
partaking,  to  the  extent  of  its  own  individual  receptivity,  in  the  Nature 
of  Good.  If  therefore  Matter  has  always  existed,  that  existence  is  enough 
to  ensure  its  participation  in  the  being  which,  according  to  each  recep¬ 
tivity,  communicates  the  supreme  good  universally  :  if  on  the  contrary, 
Matter  has  come  into  being  as  a  necessary  sequence  of  the  causes  pre¬ 
ceding  it,  that  origin  would  similarly  prevent  it  standing  apart  from  the 
scheme  as  though  it  were  out  of  reach  of  the  principle  to  whose  grace 
it  owes  its  existence. 

In  sum  :  The  loveliness  that  is  in  the  sense-realm  is  an  index  of  the 
nobleness  of  the  Intellectual  sphere,  displaying  its  power  and  its  goodness 
alike  :  and  all  things  are  for  ever  linked  ;  the  one  order  Intellectual  in 
its  being,  the  other  of  sense  ;  one  self -existent,  the  other  eternally  taking 
its  being  by  participation  in  that  first,  and  to  the  full  of  its  power  repro¬ 
ducing  the  Intellectual  nature. 

7- 

The  Kind,  then,  with  which  we  are  dealing  is  twofold,  the  Intellectual 
against  the  sensible  :  better  for  the  soul  to  dwell  in  the  Intellectual, 
but,  given  its  proper  nature,  it  is  under  compulsion  to  participate  in 
the  sense-realm  also.  There  is  no  grievance  in  its  not  being,  through 
and  through,  the  highest  ;  it  holds  mid-rank  among  the  authentic 
existences,  being  of  divine  station  but  at  the  lowest  extreme  of  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  and  skirting  the  sense-known  nature  ;  thus,  while  it  communi¬ 
cates  to  this  realm  something  of  its  own  store,  it  absorbs  in  turn  whenever 
— instead  of  employing  in  its  government  only  its  safeguarded  phase — 
it  plunges  in  an  excessive  zeal  to  the  very  midst  of  its  chosen  sphere  ; 


152 


PLOTINUS 


then  it  abandons  its  status  as  whole  soul  with  whole  soul,  though  even 
thus  it  is  always  able  to  recover  itself  by  turning  to  account  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  what  it  has  seen  and  suffered  here,  learning,  so,  the  greatness 
of  rest  in  the  Supreme,  and  more  clearly  discerning  the  finer  things  by 
comparison  with  what  is  almost  their  direct  antithesis.  Where  the 
faculty  is  incapable  of  knowing  without  contact,  the  experience  of  evil 
brings  the  clearer  perception  of  Good. 

The  outgoing  that  takes  place  in  the  Intellectual- Principle  is  a 
descent  to  its  own  downward  ultimate  :  it  cannot  be  a  movement  to  the 
transcendent ;  operating  necessarily  outwards  from  itself,  wherein  it 
may  not  stay  inclosed,  the  need  and  law  of  Nature  bring  it  to  its  extreme 
term,  to  soul — to  which  it  entrusts  all  the  later  stages  of  being  while 
itself  turns  back  on  its  course. 

The  soul’s  operation  is  similar  :  its  next  lower  act  is  this  universe  : 
its  immediate  higher  is  the  contemplation  of  the  Authentic  Existences. 
To  individual  souls  such  divine  operation  takes  place  only  at  one  of  their 
phases  and  by  a  temporal  process  when  from  the  lower  in  which  they 
reside  they  turn  towards  the  noblest ;  but  that  soul,  which  we  know  as 
the  All-Soul,  has  never  entered  the  lower  activity,  but,  immune  from 
evil,  has  the  property  of  knowing  its  lower  by  inspection,  while  it  still 
cleaves  continuously  to  the  beings  above  itself ;  thus  its  double  task 
becomes  possible  ;  it  takes  thence  and,  since  as  soul  it  cannot  escape 
touching  this  sphere,  it  gives  hither. 

8. 

And — if  it  is  desirable  to  venture  the  more  definite  statement  of  a 
personal  conviction  clashing  with  the  general  view — even  our  human 
soul  has  not  sunk  entire  ;  something  of  it  is  continuously  in  the  Intellec¬ 
tual  Realm,  though  if  that  part,  which  is  in  this  sphere  of  sense,  hold 
the  mastery,  or  rather  be  mastered  here  and  troubled,  it  keeps  us  blind 
to  what  the  upper  phase  holds  in  contemplation. 

The  object  of  the  Intellectual  Act  comes  within  our  ken  only  when 
it  reaches  downward  to  the  level  of  sensation  :  for  not  all  that  occurs 
at  any  part  of  the  soul  is  immediately  known  to  us ;  a  thing  must,  for 


IV.  9. 1] 


ARE  ALL  SOULS  ONE? 


153 


that  knowledge,  be  present  to  the  total  soul ;  thus  desire  locked  up 
within  the  desiring  faculty  remains  unknown  except  when  we  make  it 
fully  ours  by  the  central  faculty  of  perception,  or  by  the  individual 
choice  or  by  both  at  once.  Once  more,  every  soul  has  something  of  the 
lower  on  the  body  side  and  something  of  the  higher  on  the  side  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle . 

The  Soul  of  the  All,  as  an  entirety,  governs  the  universe  through 
that  part  of  it  which  leans  to  the  body  side,  but  since  it  does  not  exercise 
a  will  based  on  calculation  as  we  do — but  proceeds  by  purely  intellectual 
act  as  in  the  execution  of  an  artistic  conception — its  ministrance  is  that 
of  a  labourless  overpoising,  only  its  lowest  phase  being  active  upon  the 
universe  it  embellishes. 

The  souls  that  have  gone  into  division  and  become  appropriated 
to  some  thing  partial  have  also  their  transcendent  phase,  but  are  pre¬ 
occupied  by  sensation,  and  in  the  mere  fact  of  exercising  perception 
they  take  in  much  that  clashes  with  their  nature  and  brings  distress  and 
trouble  since  the  object  of  their  concern  is  partial,  deficient,  exposed  to 
many  alien  influences,  filled  with  desires  of  its  own  and  taking  its  pleasure, 
that  pleasure  which  is  its  lure. 

But  there  is  always  the  other,  that  which  finds  no  savour  in  passing 
pleasure,  but  holds  its  own  even  way. 


NINTH  TRACTATE 

Are  all  Souls  One  ? 

1. 

That  the  Soul  of  every  individual  is  one  thing  we  deduce  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  present  entire  at  every  point  of  the  body — the  sign  of 
veritable  unity — not  some  part  of  it  here  and  another  part  there.  In 
all  sensitive  beings  the  sensitive  soul  is  an  omnipresent  unity,  and  so 
in  the  forms  of  vegetal  life  the  vegetal  soul  is  entire  at  each  several  point 
throughout  the  organism. 

Now  are  we  to  hold  similarly  that  your  soul  and  mine  and  all  are 
one,  and  that  the  same  thing  is  true  of  the  universe,  the  soul  in  all  the 


i54  PLOTINUS 

several  forms  of  life  being  one  soul,  not  parcelled  out  in  separate  items, 
but  an  omnipresent  identity  ? 

If  the  soul  in  me  is  a  unity,  why  need  that  in  the  universe  be  other¬ 
wise  seeing  that  there  is  no  longer  any  question  of  bulk  or  body  ?  And 
if  that,  too,  is  one  soul  and  yours,  and  mine,  belongs  to  it,  then  yours 
and  mine  must  also  be  one :  and  if,  again,  the  soul  of  the  universe  and 
mine  depend  from  one  soul,  once  more  all  must  be  one. 

What  then  in  itself  is  this  one  soul  ? 

First  we  must  assure  ourselves  of  the  possibility  of  all  souls  being 
one  as  that  of  any  given  individual  is. 

It  must,  no  doubt,  seem  strange  that  my  soul  and  that  of  any  and 
everybody  else  should  be  one  thing  only  :  it  might  mean  my  feelings 
being  felt  by  someone  else,  my  goodness  another’s  too,  my  desire,  his 
desire,  all  our  experience  shared  with  each  other  and  with  the  (one- 
souled)  universe,  so  that  the  very  universe  itself  would  feel  whatever 
I  felt. 

Besides  how  are  we  to  reconcile  this  unity  with  the  distinction  of 
reasoning  soul  and  unreasoning,  animal  soul  and  vegetal  ? 

Yet  if  we  reject  that  unity,  the  universe  itself  ceases  to  be  one 
thing  and  souls  can  no  longer  be  included  under  any  one  principle. 


2. 

Now  to  begin  with,  the  unity  of  soul,  mine  and  another’s,  is  not 
enough  to  make  the  two  totals  of  soul  and  body  identical.  An  identical 
thing  in  different  recipients  will  have  different  experiences  ;  the  identity 
Man,  in  me  as  I  move  and  you  at  rest,  moves  in  me  and  is  stationary 
in  you  :  there  is  nothing  stranger,  nothing  impossible,  in  any  other  form 
of  identity  between  you  and  me  ;  nor  would  it  entail  the  transference 
of  my  emotion  to  any  outside  point :  when  in  any  one  body  a  hand  is 
in  pain,  the  distress  is  felt  not  in  the  other  but  in  the  hand  as  represented 
in  the  centralising  unity. 

In  order  that  my  feelings  should  of  necessity  be  yours,  the  unity 
would  have  to  be  corporeal :  only  if  the  two  recipient  bodies  made  one, 
would  the  souls  feel  as  one. 


IV.  9.  3] 


ARE  ALL  SOULS  ONE? 


155 


We  must  keep  in  mind,  moreover,  that  many  things  that  happen 
even  in  one  same  body  escape  the  notice  of  the  entire  being,  especially 
when  the  bulk  is  large  :  thus  in  huge  sea-beasts,  it  is  said,  the  animal 
as  a  whole  will  be  quite  unaffected  by  some  membral  accident  too  slight 
to  traverse  the  organism. 

Thus  unity  in  the  subject  of  any  experience  does  not  imply  that 
the  resultant  sensation  will  be  necessarily  felt  with  any  force  upon  the 
entire  being  and  at  every  point  of  it :  some  transmission  of  the  experience 
may  be  expected,  and  is  indeed  undeniable,  but  a  full  impression  on  the 
sense  there  need  not  be. 

That  one  identical  soul  should  be  virtuous  in  me  and  vicious  in 
someone  else  is  not  strange  :  it  is  only  saying  that  an  identical  thing 
may  be  active  here  and  inactive  there. 

We  are  not  asserting  the  unity  of  soul  in  the  sense  of  a  complete 
negation  of  multiplicity — only  of  the  Supreme  can  that  be  affirmed — 
we  are  thinking  of  soul  as  simultaneously  one  and  many,  participant 
in  the  nature  divided  in  body,  but  at  the  same  time  a  unity  by  virtue 
of  belonging  to  that  Order  which  suffers  no  division. 

In  myself  some  experience  occurring  in  a  part  of  the  body  may 
take  no  effect  upon  the  entire  man  but  anything  occurring  in  the  higher 
reaches  would  tell  upon  the  partial :  in  the  same  way  any  influx  from 
the  All  upon  the  individual  will  have  manifest  effect  since  the  points 
of  sympathetic  contact  are  numerous — but  as  to  any  operation  from 
ourselves  upon  the  All  there  can  be  no  certainty. 

3* 

Yet,  looking  at  another  set  of  facts,  reflection  tells  us  that  we  are  in 
sympathetic  relation  to  each  other,  suffering,  overcome,  at  the  sight  of 
pain,  naturally  drawn  to  forming  attachments  ;  and  all  this  can  be  due 
only  to  some  unity  among  us. 

Again,  if  spells  and  other  forms  of  magic  are  efficient  even  at  a 
distance  to  attract  us  into  sympathetic  relations,  the  agency  can  be  no 
other  than  the  one  soul. 

A  quiet  word  induces  changes  in  a  remote  object,  and  makes  itself 


156  PLOTINUS 

heard  at  vast  distances— proof  of  the  oneness  of  all  things  within  the 
one  soul. 

But  how  reconcile  this  unity  with  the  existence  of  a  reasoning  soul, 
an  unreasoning,  even  a  vegetal  soul  ? 

(It  is  a  question  of  powers)  :  the  indivisible  phase  is  classed  as 
reasoning  because  it  is  not  in  division  among  bodies,  but  there  is  the 
later  phase,  divided  among  bodies,  but  still  one  thing  and  distinct  only 
so  as  to  secure  sense-perception  throughout ;  this  is  to  be  classed  as 
yet  another  power ;  and  there  is  the  forming  and  making  phase  which 
again  is  a  power.  But  a  variety  of  powers  does  not  conflict  with  unity  ; 
seed  contains  many  powers  and  yet  it  is  one  thing,  and  from  that  unity 
rises,  again,  a  variety  which  is  also  a  unity. 

But  why  are  not  all  the  powers  of  this  unity  present  everywhere  ? 

The  answer  is  that  even  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul  described, 
similarly,  as  permeating  its  body,  sensation  is  not  equally  present  in 
all  the  parts,  reason  does  not  operate  at  every  point,  the  principle  of 
growth  is  at  work  where  there  is  no  sensation — and  yet  all  these  powers 
join  in  the  one  soul  when  the  body  is  laid  aside. 

The  nourishing  faculty  as  dependent  from  the  All  belongs  also  to 
the  All-Soul :  why  then  does  it  not  come  equally  from  ours  ? 

Because  what  is  nourished  by  the  action  of  this  power  is  a  member 
of  the  All,  which  itself  has  sensation  passively ;  but  the  perception, 
which  is  an  intellectual  judgement,  is  individual  and  has  no  need  to 
create  what  already  exists,  though  it  would  have  done  so  had  the  power 
not  been  previously  included,  of  necessity,  in  the  nature  of  the  All. 

4- 

These  reflections  should  show  that  there  is  nothing  strange  in  that 
reduction  of  all  souls  to  one.  But  it  is  still  necessary  to  enquire  into  the 
mode  and  conditions  of  the  unity. 

Is  it  the  unity  of  origin  in  a  unity  ?  And  if  so,  is  the  one  divided 
or  does  it  remain  entire  and  yet  produce  variety  ?  and  how  can  an 
essential  being,  while  remaining  its  one  self,  bring  forth  others  ? 

Invoking  God  to  become  our  helper,  let  us  assert,  that  the  very 


IV-9-5l  ARE  ALL  SOULS  ONE?  i57 

existence  of  many  souls  makes  certain  that  there  is  first  one  from  which 
the  many  rise. 

Let  us  suppose,  even,  the  first  soul  to  be  corporeal. 

Then  (by  the  nature  of  body)  the  many  souls  could  result  only  from 
the  splitting  up  of  that  entity,  each  an  entirely  different  substance  :  if 
this  body-soul  be  uniform  in  kind,  each  of  the  resultant  souls  must  be 
of  the  one  kind  ;  they  will  all  carry  the  one  Form  undividedly  and  will 
differ  only  in  their  volumes.  Now,  if  their  being  souls  depended  upon 
their  volumes  they  would  be  distinct ;  but  if  it  is  ideal-form  that  makes 
them  souls,  then  all  are,  in  virtue  of  this  Idea,  one. 

But  this  is  simply  saying  that  there  is  one  identical  soul  dispersed 
among  many  bodies,  and  that,  preceding  this,  there  is  yet  another  not 
thus  dispersed,  the  source  of  the  soul  in  dispersion  which  may  be  thought 
of  as  a  widely  repeated  image  of  the  soul  in  unity— much  as  a  multitude 
of  seals  bear  the  impression  of  one  ring.  By  that  first  mode  the  soul 
is  a  unit  broken  up  into  a  variety  of  points  :  in  the  second  mode  it  is 
incorporeal.  Similarly  if  the  soul  were  a  condition  or  modification  of 
body,  we  could  not  wonder  that  this  quality  (the  condition  or  modifica¬ 
tion) — this  one  thing  from  one  source — should  be  present  in  many 
objects.  The  same  reasoning  would  apply  if  soul  were  an  effect  (or 
manifestation)  of  the  Conjoint. 

We,  of  course,  hold  it  to  be  bodiless,  an  essential  existence. 

5- 

How  then  can  a  multitude  of  essential  beings  be  really  one  ? 

Obviously  either  the  one  essence  will  be  entire  in  all,  or  the  many  will 
rise  from  a  one  which  remains  unaltered  and  yet  includes  the  one-many 
in  virtue  of  giving  itself,  without  self-abandonment,  to  its  own  multipli¬ 
cation. 

It  is  competent  thus  to  give  and  remain,  because  while  it  penetrates 
all  things  it  can  never  itself  be  sundered  :  this  is  an  identity  in  variety. 

There  is  no  reason  for  dismissing  this  explanation  :  we  may  think 
of  a  science  with  its  constituents  standing  as  one  total,  the  source  of  all 
those  various  elements  :  again,  there  is  the  seed,  a  whole,  producing 


i58  PLOTINUS 

those  new  parts  in  which  it  comes  to  its  division  ;  each  of  the  new  growths 
is  a  whole  while  the  whole  remains  undiminished  :  only  the  material 
element  is  under  the  mode  of  part,  and  all  the  multiplicity  remains  an 
entire  identity  still. 

It  may  be  objected  that  in  the  case  of  science  the  constituents  are 
not  each  the  whole. 

But  even  in  the  science,  while  the  constituent  selected  for  handling 
to  meet  a  particular  need  is  present  actually  and  takes  the  lead,  still 
all  the  other  constituents  accompany  it  in  a  potential  presence,  so  that 
the  whole  is  in  every  part :  only  in  this  sense  (of  particular  attention)  is 
the  whole  science  distinguished  from  the  part :  all,  we  may  say,  is  here 
simultaneously  effected  :  each  part  is  at  your  disposal  as  you  choose 
to  take  it ;  the  part  invites  the  immediate  interest,  but  its  value  consists 
in  its  approach  to  the  whole. 

The  detail  cannot  be  considered  as  something  separate  from  the 
entire  body  of  speculation  :  so  treated  it  would  have  no  technical  or 
scientific  value  ;  it  would  be  childish  divagation.  The  one  detail,  when 
it  is  matter  of  science,  potentially  includes  all.  Grasping  one  such 
constituent  of  his  science,  the  expert  deduces  the  rest  by  force  of  sequence. 

(As  a  further  illustration  of  unity  in  plurality)  the  geometrician, 
in  his  analysis,  shows  that  the  single  proposition  includes  all  the  items 
that  go  to  constitute  it  and  all  the  propositions  which  can  be  developed 
from  it. 

It  is  our  feebleness  that  leads  to  doubt  in  these  matters  ;  the  body 
obscures  the  truth,  but  There  all  stands  out  clear  and  separate. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The  translator  desires  to  acknowledge  the  generous  help 
afforded  him  by  Mr.  E.  R.  Dodds,  Lecturer  in  Classics  at 
University  College,  Reading,  and  author  of  “  Select 
Passages  Illustrating  Neo- Platonism,”  who  has  examined 
and  criticised  the  translation  of  this  Fourth  Ennead 
throughout.  In  a  very  large  number  of  passages  the 
translator  has  adopted  interpretations  originally  proposed 
by  Mr.  Dodds.  At  the  same  time  he  wishes  to  make  it 
clear  that  Mr.  Dodds  is  in  no  sense  responsible  for  the 
accuracy  of  the  rendering  as  a  whole. 


PRINTED  BY  WILLIAM  BRENDON  AND  SON,  LTD. 
PLYMOUTH,  ENGLAND 


Date  Due 

1; 

4?* 

f  m 

CyT  CAT.  NO.  23  233  PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

B  693  ,A4  E6  v.  3 

Plotinus.  ,  .  .  .  . 

On  the  nature  of  the  soul  be 


010101  000 


163  0210295  3 

TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


B693  .A4E6  v.3 

Plotinus 


On 

the  nature  of  the  soul 

DATE 

ISSUE"  129253 

129253 


fFEJSrt- 


IMiS 


■  i 

mm 


'P&ip4®z$, 

$$$££% 


Mm 

HHM 

\-  •<*.:.* ■  ■•■  :•  ■*  - ■-:•  ;  i  s  :‘3 


itpiil 

ii«Sl 
;:  . 
IH 


■i 


•  sVK  .vW 


