THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS:  ON 
THE  ONE  AND  GOOD,  VOLUME  V. 
TRANSLATED  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 
AND  B.  S.  PAGE 


>A.  V'tV  ■ 


■  A. 


kt  ■.'»  hptr,  r  '  i'  j 

Lf •;  XH'Vv ^  kS-  :  k 

! 

•  •' /$b.  T;V''kv^‘V;.M;  ‘M  ,v.V:  -  -  ■  M - 

Ik  , 11  1 rj'  •'>'•  .  '  $d  -i  vv\' »  "*!  •  i .  «\*D  C  .•.w  ;  '\.  •  *  .  •  •.'■*  "  »• ;  :.v 

. 

Lf.  V-',.  v£v. ,  ft'W '^o-'  ,Y’fc P  yV  V.-'ii' 

L  •  ,,  ,  .  '  .  K  -V  ,r->  i  **V’^  ,r; .  ■  •  * v  '  'v  ■  ‘  '  "r  ■'  f  ■•*  ■  ,Vv  ■•■  •  !,v  ^  “  •  v 

■  ■  1  ’  "  '  >-.•'■  1  -■ 

!  ......  ■  ,  .  •"  '*■ 

L'  ’V-v  .  v%,J'  i:\  V  ’  •  •:  '  -  .  V  .  •  ;  ’ 

* 

t.  :  ;,V  '  ‘ 'V'  b‘ 

'  ■  '<<& K:  Vi  V  f*.  '  Ax'-  'V-'V  "“V", 

....  • 


s  .  ■  /f  >.  * 


jyVdb 


,W'fi 


■  -KmA  •  « 


;ro: 

•'A  >  * 


4 


f 


NUNC  COCNOSCO  EX  PARTE 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
I  IBRARY 


r 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/ononegoodbeingtr0005plot 


Of  this  Edition  1000  copies  have 
been  printed  on  pure  rag  paper 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS:  ON 
THE  ONE  AND  GOOD.  VOLUME  V. 


t>0  <H,m  St-<3ipe  T)6  *j  ontfjui  n.d  n-6ipe.Atm, 

Sciopdn  mac-erma. 


LOTI  N  US 

ON  THE  ONE  AND  GOOD 

BEING  THE  TREATISES  OF 
THE  SIXTH  ENNEAD,  TRANS¬ 
LATED  FROM  THE  GREEK 
BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA  AND  B.  S.  PAGE 


LONDON:  THE  MEDICI  SOCIETY,  LTD. 
BOSTON:  HALE,  CUSHMAN  &  FLINT 

MCMXXX 


PRINTED  IN  ENGLAND 


CONTENTS 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  SIXTH  ENNEAD 

PAGE 

I.  On  the  Kinds  of  Being  (i)  1 

II.  On  the  Kinds  of  Being  (2)  4° 

III.  On  the  Kinds  of  Being  (3)  68 

IV.  On  the  Integral  Omnipresence  of  the  Authentic  Existent  (i)  106 

V.  On  the  Integral  Omnipresence  of  the  Authentic  Existent  (2)  125 

VI.  On  Numbers  i38 

VII.  On  the  Origin  of  Multiplicity  in  the  Ideal  Realm  and  on  the 

Good  1^2 

VIII.  On  Free-Will  and  the  Will  of  the  One  212 

IX.  On  the  Good,  or  The  One  237 

Acknowledgements  254 


12S255 


. 


' 


THE  SIXTH  ENNEAD 


FIRST  TRACTATE 

On  the  Kinds  of  Being  :  First  Treatise 

i. 

Philosophy  at  a  very  early  stage  investigated  the  number  and 
character  of  the  Existents.  Various  theories  resulted  :  some  declared 
for  one  Existent,  others  for  a  finite  number,  others  again  for  an  infinite 
number,  while  as  regards  the  nature  of  the  Existents — one,  numerically 
finite,  or  numerically  infinite — there  was  a  similar  disagreement.  These 
theories,  in  so  far  as  they  have  been  adequately  examined  by  later  workers, 
may  be  passed  over  here  ;  our  attention  must  be  directed  upon  the 
results  of  those  whose  examination  has  led  them  to  posit  on  their  own 
account  certain  well-defined  genera. 

These  thinkers  rejected  pure  unity  on  the  ground  of  the  plurality 
observed  even  in  the  Intellectual  world  ;  they  rejected  an  infinite  number 
as  not  reconcilable  with  the  facts  and  as  defying  knowledge  :  considering 
the  foundations  of  being  to  be  “  genera  ”  rather  than  elements  strictly 
so  called,  they  concluded  for  a  finite  number.  Of  these  “genera”  some 
found  ten,  others  less,  others  no  doubt  more. 

But  here  again  there  is  a  divergence  of  views.  To  some  the  genera 
are  first-principles  ;  to  others  they  indicate  only  a  generic  classification 
of  the  Existents  themselves. 

Let  us  begin  with  the  well-known  tenfold  division  of  the  Existents, 
and  consider  whether  we  are  to  understand  ten  genera  ranged  under 
the  common  name  of  Being,  or  ten  categories.  That  the  term  Being 
has  not  the  same  sense  in  all  ten  is  rightly  maintained. 

But  a  graver  problem  confronts  us  at  the  outset : — Are  the  ten 
found  alike  in  the  Intellectual  and  in  the  Sensible  realms  ?  Or  are  all 

B 


2 


PLOTINUS 


found  in  the  Sensible  and  some  only  in  the  Intellectual  ?  All  in  the 
Intellectual  and  some  in  the  Sensible  is  manifestly  impossible. 

At  this  point  it  would  be  natural  to  investigate  which  of  the  ten 
belong  to  both  spheres,  and  whether  the  Existents  of  the  Intellectual 
are  to  be  ranged  under  one  and  the  same  genus  with  the  Existents  in  the 
Sensible,  or  whether  the  term  “  Existence  ”  (or  Substance)  is  equivocal 
as  applied  to  both  realms.  If  the  equivocation  exists,  the  number  of 
genera  will  be  increased  :  if  there  is  no  equivocation,  it  is  strange  to  find 
the  one  same  “  Existence  ”  applying  to  the  primary  and  to  the  derivative 
Existents  when  there  is  no  common  genus  embracing  both  primal  and 
secondary. 

These  thinkers  are  however  not  considering  the  Intellectual  realm 
in  their  division,  which  was  not  intended  to  cover  all  the  Existents  ; 
the  Supreme  they  overlooked. 

2. 

But  are  we  really  obliged  to  posit  the  existence  of  such  genera  ? 

Take  Substance — for  Substance  must  certainly  be  our  starting- 
point  :  what  are  the  grounds  for  regarding  Substance  as  one  single 
genus  ? 

It  has  been  remarked  that  Substance  cannot  be  a  single  entity 
common  to  both  the  Intellectual  and  the  Sensible  worlds.  We  may  add 
that  such  community  would  entail  the  existence  of  something  prior  to 
Intellectual  and  Sensible  Substance  alike,  something  distinct  from  both 
as  predicated  of  both  ;  and  this  prior  would  be  neither  body  nor  un¬ 
embodied  ;  for  if  it  were  one  or  the  other,  body  would  be  unembodied, 
or  the  unembodied  would  be  the  body. 

This  conclusion  must  not  however  prevent  our  seeking  in  the  actual 
substances  of  the  Sensible  world  an  element  held  in  common  by  Matter, 
by  Form  and  by  their  Composite,  all  of  which  are  designated  as  substances, 
though  it  is  not  maintained  that  they  are  Substance  in  an  equal  degree  ; 
Form  is  usually  held  to  be  Substance  in  a  higher  degree  than  Matter, 
and  rightly  so,  in  spite  of  those  who  would  have  Matter  to  be  the  more 
truly  real. 


VI.  I.  3] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


3 


There  is  further  the  distinction  drawn  between  what  are  known  as 
First  and  Second  Substances.  But  what  is  their  common  basis,  seeing 
that  the  First  are  the  source  from  which  the  Second  derive  their  right 
to  be  called  substances  ? 

But,  in  sum,  it  is  impossible  to  define  Substance  :  determine  its 
property,  and  still  you  have  not  attained  to  its  essence.  Even  the  defini¬ 
tion,  “  That  which,  numerically  one  and  the  same,  is  receptive  of 
contraries,”  will  hardly  be  applicable  to  all  substances  alike. 

3- 

But  perhaps  we  should  rather  speak  of  some  single  category  (as 
distinct  from  a  genus),  embracing  Intellectual  Substance,  Matter,  Form, 
and  the  Composite  of  Matter  and  Form.  One  might  refer  to  the  family 
of  the  Heraclids  as  a  unity  in  the  sense,  not  of  a  common  element  in  all 
its  members,  but  of  a  common  origin  :  similarly,  Intellectual  Substance 
would  be  Substance  in  the  first  degree,  the  others  being  substances  by 
derivation  and  in  a  lower  degree. 

But  (pursuing  this  principle)  what  is  the  objection  to  including 
everything  in  a  single  category,  all  else  of  which  existence  is  predicated 
being  derived  from  that  one  thing,  Existence  or  Substance  ?  Because, 
granted  that  things  be  no  more  than  modifications  of  Substance,  there 
is  a  distinct  grading  of  substances  themselves.  Moreover,  the  single 
category  does  not  put  us  in  a  position  to  build  on  Substance,  or  to  grasp 
it  in  its  very  truth  as  the  plausible  source  of  the  other  substances. 

Supposing  we  grant  that  all  things  known  as  substances  are  homo¬ 
geneous  as  possessing  something  denied  to  the  other  genera,  what  precisely 
is  this  something,  this  individuality,  this  subject  which  is  never  a  predicate, 
this  thing  not  present  in  any  thing  as  in  a  subject,  this  thing  which  does 
not  owe  its  essential  character  to  any  other  thing,  as  a  quality  takes 
character  from  a  body  and  a  quantity  from  a  substance,  as  time  is 
related  to  motion  and  motion  to  the  moved  ? 

The  Second  Substance  is,  it  is  true,  a  predicate.  But  predication 
in  this  case  signifies  a  different  relation  from  that  just  considered  ;  it 
reveals  the  genus  inherent  in  the  subject  and  the  subject’s  essential 


4 


PLOTINUS 


character,  whereas  whiteness  is  predicated  of  a  thing  in  the  sense  of 
being  present  in  the  thing. 

The  properties  adduced  may  indeed  be  allowed  to  distinguish 
Substance  from  the  other  Existents.  They  afford  a  means  of  grouping 
substances  together  and  calling  them  by  a  common  name.  They  do  not 
however  establish  the  unity  of  a  genus,  and  they  do  not  bring  to  light 
the  concept  and  the  nature  of  Substance. 

These  considerations  are  sufficient  for  our  purpose  :  let  us  now  proceed 
to  investigate  the  nature  of  Quantity. 

4- 

We  are  told  that  number  is  Quantity  in  the  primary  sense,  number 
together  with  all  continuous  magnitude,  space  and  time  :  these  are 
the  standards  to  which  all  else  that  is  considered  as  Quantity  is  referred, 
including  motion  which  is  Quantity  because  its  time  is  quantitative — 
though  perhaps,  conversely,  the  time  takes  its  continuity  from  the 
motion. 

If  it  is  maintained  that  the  continuous  is  a  Quantity  by  the  fact  of 
its  continuity,  then  the  discrete  will  not  be  a  Quantity.  If,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  continuous  possesses  Quantity  as  an  accident,  what  is  there 
common  to  both  continuous  and  discrete  to  make  them  quantities  ? 

Suppose  we  concede  that  numbers  are  quantities  :  we  are  merely 
allowing  them  the  name  of  quantity ;  the  principle  which  gives  them 
this  name  remains  obscure. 

On  the  other  hand,  line  and  surface  and  body  are  not  called  quan¬ 
tities  ;  they  are  called  magnitudes  :  they  become  known  as  quantities 
only  when  they  are  rated  by  number — two  yards,  three  yards.  Even 
the  natural  body  becomes  a  quantity  when  measured,  as  does  the  space 
which  it  occupies  ;  but  this  is  quantity  accidental,  not  quantity  essential ; 
what  we  seek  to  grasp  is  not  accidental  quantity  but  Quantity  independent 
and  essential,  Quantity- Absolute.  Three  oxen  is  not  a  quantity ;  it  is 
their  number,  the  three,  that  is  Quantity ;  for  in  three  oxen  we  are 
dealing  with  two  categories.  So  too  with  a  line  of  a  stated  length,  a  surface 
of  a  given  area  ;  the  area  will  be  a  quantity  but  not  the  surface,  which 


5 


vr.  I.  4]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 

only  comes  under  that  category  when  it  constitutes  a  definite  geometric 
figure. 

Are  we  then  to  consider  numbers,  and  numbers  only,  as  constituting 
the  category  of  Quantity  ?  If  we  mean  numbers  in  themselves,  they  are 
(not  quantities  but)  substances,  for  the  very  good  reason  that  they  exist 
independently.  If  we  mean  numbers  displayed  in  the  objects  participant 
in  number,  the  numbers  which  give  the  count  of  the  objects — ten  horses 
or  ten  oxen,  and  not  ten  units — then  we  have  a  paradoxical  result : 
first,  the  numbers  in  themselves,  it  would  appear,  are  substances  but  the 
numbers  in  objects  are  not ;  and  secondly,  the  numbers  inhere  in  the 
objects  as  measures  (of  extension  or  weight),  yet  as  standing  outside 
the  objects  they  have  no  measuring  power,  as  do  rulers  and  scales.  If 
however  their  existence  is  independent,  and  they  do  not  inhere  in  the 
objects,  but  are  simply  called  in  for  the  purpose  of  measurement,  the 
objects  will  be  quantities  only  to  the  extent  of  participating  in  Quantity. 

So  with  the  numbers  themselves  :  how  can  they  (in  these  circum¬ 
stances)  constitute  the  category  of  Quantity  ?  They  are  measures  ;  but 
how  do  measures  come  to  be  quantities  or  Quantity  ?  Doubtless  in  that, 
existing  as  they  do  among  the  Existents  and  not  being  adapted  to  any 
of  the  other  categories,  they  find  their  place  under  the  influence  of  verbal 
suggestion  and  so  are  referred  to  the  so-called  category  of  Quantity.  We 
see  the  unit  mark  off  one  measurement  and  then  proceed  to  another ; 
and  number  thus  reveals  the  amount  of  a  thing,  and  the  mind  measures 
by  availing  itself  of  the  total  figure. 

It  follows  that  in  measuring  it  is  not  measuring  essence  ;  it  pro¬ 
nounces  its  “  one  ”  or  “  two,”  whatever  the  character  of  the  objects, 
even  summing  contraries.  It  does  not  take  count  of  condition — hot, 
handsome  ;  it  simply  notes  how  many. 

Number  then,  whether  regarded  in  itself  or  in  the  participant  objects, 
belongs  to  the  category  of  Quantity,  but  the  participant  objects  do  not. 
“  Three  yards  long  ”  does  not  fall  under  the  category  of  Quantity,  but 
only  the  three. 

Why  then  are  magnitudes  classed  as  quantities  ?  Not  because  they 
are  so  in  the  strict  sense,  but  because  they  approximate  to  Quantity, 


6 


PLOTINUS 


and  because  objects  in  which  magnitudes  inhere  are  themselves  designated 
as  quantities.  We  call  a  thing  great  or  small  from  its  participation  in  a 
high  number  or  a  low.  True,  greatness  and  smallness  are  not  claimed 
to  be  quantities,  but  relations  :  but  it  is  by  their  apparent  possession 
of  quantity  that  they  are  thought  of  as  relations.  All  this,  however, 
needs  more  careful  examination. 

In  sum,  we  hold  that  there  is  no  single  genus  of  Quantity.  Only 
number  is  Quantity,  the  rest  (magnitudes,  space,  time,  motion)  quantities 
only  in  a  secondary  degree.  We  have  therefore  not  strictly  one  genus, 
but  one  category  grouping  the  approximate  with  the  primary  and  the 
secondary. 

We  have  however  to  enquire  in  what  sense  the  abstract  numbers 
are  substances.  Can  it  be  that  they  are  also  in  a  manner  quantitative  ? 
Into  whatever  category  they  fall,  the  other  numbers  (those  inherent  in 
objects)  can  have  nothing  in  common  with  them  but  the  name. 

5- 

Speech,  time,  motion — in  what  sense  are  these  quantities  ? 

Let  us  begin  with  speech.  It  is  subject  to  measurement,  but  only 
in  so  far  as  it  is  sound  ;  it  is  not  a  quantity  in  its  essential  nature,  which 
nature  is  that  it  be  significant,  as  noun  and  verb  are  significant.  The 
air  is  (not  its  essence  but)  its  Matter,  as  it  is  Matter  to  verb  and  noun, 
the  components  of  speech. 

To  be  more  precise,  we  may  define  speech  as  an  impact  (made  upon 
the  outer  air  by  the  breath),  though  it  is  not  so  much  the  impact  as  the 
impression  which  the  impact  produces  and  which  as  it  were  imposes 
Form  (upon  the  air).  Speech,  thus,  is  rather  an  action  than  a  quantity 
— an  action  with  a  significance.  Though  perhaps  it  would  be  truer  to 
say  that  while  this  motion,  this  impact,  is  an  action,  the  counter-motion 
is  an  experience  (or  Passion)  ;  or  each  may  be  from  different  points  of 
view  either  an  action  or  an  experience  :  or  we  may  think  of  speech  as 
action  upon  a  substrate  (air)  and  experience  within  that  substrate. 

If  however  voice  is  not  characteristically  impact,  but  is  simply  air, 
two  categories  will  be  involved  :  voice  is  significant,  and  the  one  category 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


vr.  i.  6] 


7 


will  not  be  sufficient  to  account  for  this  significance  without  associating 
with  a  second. 

With  regard  to  time,  if  it  is  to  be  thought  of  as  a  measure,  we  must 
determine  what  it  is  that  applies  this  measure.  It  must  clearly  be  either 
Soul  or  the  Present  Moment.  If  on  the  contrary  we  take  time  to  be 
something  measured  and  regard  it  as  being  of  such  and  such  extension — 
a  year,  for  example — then  we  may  consider  it  as  a  quantity :  essentially 
however  time  is  of  a  different  nature  ;  the  very  fact  that  we  can 
attribute  this  or  that  length  to  it  shows  us  that  it  is  not  length  :  in  other 
words,  time  is  not  Quantity.  Quantity  in  the  strict  sense  is  the  Quantity 
not  inbound  with  things  ;  if  things  became  quantities  by  mere  partici¬ 
pation  in  Quantity,  then  (not  only  time  but)  Substance  itself  would  be 
identical  with  Quantity. 

Equality  and  inequality  must  be  regarded  as  properties  of  Quantity- 
Absolute,  not  of  the  participants,  or  of  them  not  essentially  but  only 
accidentally  :  such  participants  as  “  three  yards’  length,”  which  becomes 
a  quantity,  not  as  belonging  to  a  single  genus  of  Quantity,  but  by  being 
subsumed  under  the  one  head,  the  one  category. 


6. 

In  considering  Relation  we  must  enquire  whether  it  possesses  the 
community  of  a  genus,  or  whether  it  may  on  other  grounds  be  treated 
as  a  unity. 

Above  all,  has  Relation — for  example,  that  of  right  and  left,  double 
and  half — any  actuality  ?  Has  it,  perhaps,  actuality  in  some  cases  only, 
as  for  instance  in  what  is  termed  “posterior”  but  not  in  what  is 
termed  “  prior  ”  ?  Or  is  its  actuality  in  no  case  conceivable  ? 

What  meaning,  then,  are  we  to  attach  to  double  and  half  and  all 
other  cases  of  less  and  more  ;  to  habit  and  disposition,  reclining,  sitting, 
standing  ;  to  father,  son,  master,  slave  ;  to  like,  unlike,  equal,  unequal ; 
to  active  and  passive,  measure  and  measured  ;  or  again  to  knowledge 
and  sensation,  as  related  respectively  to  the  knowable  and  the  sensible  ? 

Knowledge,  indeed,  may  be  supposed  to  entail  in  relation  to  the 
known  object  some  actual  entity  corresponding  to  that  object’s  Ideal  Form, 


8 


PLOTINUS 


and  similarly  with  sensation  as  related  to  the  sense-object.  The  active 
will  perform  some  constant  function  in  relation  to  the  passive,  as  will 
the  measure  in  relation  to  the  measured. 

But  what  will  emerge  from  the  relation  of  like  to  like  ?  Nothing 
will  emerge.  Likeness  is  the  inherence  of  qualitative  identity  ;  its 
entire  content  is  the  quality  present  in  the  two  objects. 

From  equality,  similarly,  nothing  emerges.  The  relation  merely 
presupposes  the  existence  of  a  quantitative  identity  ;  it  is  nothing  but 
our  judgment  comparing  objects  essentially  independent  and  concluding, 
“  This  and  that  have  the  same  magnitude,  the  same  quality  ;  this  has 
produced  that ;  this  is  superior  to  that.” 

Again,  what  meaning  can  sitting  and  standing  have  apart  from 
sitter  and  stander  ?  The  term  “  habit  ”  either  implies  a  having,  in  which 
case  it  signifies  possession,  or  else  it  arises  from  something  had,  and  so 
denotes  quality ;  and  similarly  with  disposition. 

What  then  in  these  instances  can  be  the  meaning  of  correlatives 
apart  from  our  conception  of  their  juxtaposition?  “Greater”  may 
refer  to  very  different  magnitudes  ;  “  different  ”  to  all  sorts  of  objects  : 
the  comparison  is  ours  ;  it  does  not  lie  in  the  things  themselves. 

Right  and  left,  before  and  behind,  would  seem  to  belong  less  to  the 
category  of  Relation  than  to  that  of  Situation.  Right  means  “  situated 
at  one  point,”  left  means  “  situated  at  another.”  But  the  right  and  left 
are  in  our  conception,  nothing  of  them  in  the  things  themselves. 

Before  and  after  are  merely  two  times  ;  the  relation  is  again  of 
our  making. 

7- 

Now  if  we  do  not  mean  anything  by  Relation  but  are  victims  of 
words,  none  of  the  relations  mentioned  can  exist :  Relation  will  be  a 
notion  void  of  content. 

Suppose  however  that  we  do  possess  ourselves  of  objective  truth 
when  in  comparing  two  points  of  time  we  pronounce  one  prior, 
or  posterior,  to  the  other,  that  priority  does  entail  something  distinct 
from  the  objects  to  which  it  refers  ;  admit  an  objective  truth  behind 


VI.  I.  7] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


9 


the  relation  of  left  and  right :  does  this  apply  also  to  magnitudes,  and 
is  the  relation  exhibiting  excess  and  deficiency  also  something  distinct 
from  the  quantities  involved  ? 

Now  one  thing  is  double  of  another  quite  apart  from  our  speech  or 
thought ;  one  thing  possesses  and  another  is  possessed  before  we  notice 
the  fact ;  equals  do  not  await  our  comparison  but — and  this  applies  to 
Quality  as  well  as  Quantity — rest  upon  an  identity  existing  between 
the  objects  compared  :  in  all  the  conditions  in  which  we  assert  Relation 
the  mutual  relation  exists  over  and  above  the  objects  ;  we  perceive  it 
as  already  existent ;  our  knowledge  is  directed  upon  a  thing,  there  to 
be  known — a  clear  testimony  to  the  reality  of  Relation. 

In  these  circumstances  we  can  no  longer  put  the  question  of  its 
existence.  We  have  simply  to  distinguish :  sometimes  the  relation 
subsists  while  the  objects  remain  unaltered  and  even  apart ;  sometimes 
it  depends  upon  their  combination ;  sometimes,  while  they  remain 
unchanged,  the  relation  utterly  ceases,  or,  as  happens  with  right  and 
near,  becomes  different.  These  are  the  facts  which  chiefly  account  for 
the  notion  that  Relation  has  no  reality  in  such  circumstances. 

Our  task,  thus,  is  to  give  full  value  to  this  elusive  character  of 
Relation,  and  then  to  enquire  what  there  is  that  is  constant  in  all  these 
particular  cases  and  whether  this  constant  is  generic  or  accidental ; 
and  having  found  this  constant,  we  must  discover  what  sort  of  actuality 
it  possesses. 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  we  are  not  to  affirm  Relation  where  one 
thing  is  simply  an  attribute  of  another,  as  a  habit  is  an  attribute  of  a 
soul  or  of  a  body  ;  it  is  not  Relation  when  a  soul  belongs  to  this  individual 
or  dwells  in  that  body.  Relation  enters  only  when  the  actuality  of  the 
relationships  is  derived  from  no  other  source  than  Relation  itself ;  the 
actuality  must  be,  not  that  which  is  characteristic  of  the  substances 
in  question,  but  that  which  is  specifically  called  relative.  Thus  double 
with  its  correlative  half  gives  actuality  neither  to  two  yards’  length 
or  the  number  two,  nor  to  one  yard’s  length  or  the  number  one  ;  what 
happens  is  that  when  these  quantities  are  viewed  in  their  relation,  they 
are  found  to  be  not  merely  two  and  one  respectively,  but  to  produce 


10 


PLOTINUS 


the  assertion  and  to  exhibit  the  fact  of  standing  one  to  the  other  in  the 
condition  of  double  and  half.  Out  of  the  objects  in  a  certain  conjunction 
this  condition  of  being  double  and  half  has  issued  as  something  distinct 
from  either  ;  double  and  half  have  emerged  as  correlatives,  and  their 
being  is  precisely  this  of  mutual  dependence  ;  the  double  exists  by  its 
superiority  over  the  half,  and  the  half  by  its  inferiority ;  there  is  no 
priority  to  distinguish  double  from  half ;  they  arise  simultaneously. 

It  is  another  question  whether  they  endure  simultaneously.  Take 
the  case  of  father  and  son,  and  such  relationships  ;  the  father  dies,  but 
the  other  is  still  his  son,  and  so  with  brothers.  Moreover,  we  see  likeness 
where  one  of  the  like  people  is  dead. 

8. 

But  we  are  digressing  :  we  must  resume  our  enquiry  into  the  cause 
of  dissimilarity  among  relations.  Yet  we  must  first  be  informed  what 
reality,  common  to  all  cases,  is  possessed  by  this  Existence  derived  from 
mutual  conditions. 

Now  the  common  principle  in  question  cannot  be  a  body.  The 
only  alternative  is  that,  if  it  does  exist,  it  be  something  bodiless,  either 
in  the  objects  thus  brought  together  or  outside  of  them. 

Further,  if  Relation  always  takes  the  same  form,  the  term  is  uni  vocal 
(and  specific  differentiation  is  impossible)  ;  if  not,  that  is  if  it  differs 
from  case  to  case,  the  term  is  equivocal,  and  the  same  reality  will  not 
necessarily  be  implied  by  the  mere  use  of  the  term  Relation. 

How  then  shall  we  distinguish  relations  ?  We  may  observe  that 
some  things  have  an  inactive  or  dormant  relation,  with  which  their 
actuality  is  entirely  simultaneous  ;  others,  combining  power  and  function 
with  their  relation,  have  the  relation  in  some  mode  always  even  though 
the  mode  be  merely  that  of  potentiality,  but  attain  to  actual  being  only 
in  contact  with  their  correlatives.  Or  perhaps  all  distinctions  may  be 
reduced  to  that  between  producer  and  product,  where  the  product  merely 
gives  a  name  to  the  producer  of  its  actuality  :  an  example  of  this  is  the 
relation  of  father  to  son,  though  here  both  producer  and  product  have 
a  sort  of  actuality,  which  we  call  life. 


VI.  i.  9] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


ii 


Are  we  thus,  then,  to  divide  Relation,  and  thereby  reject  the  notion 
of  an  identical  common  element  in  the  different  kinds  of  Relation,  making 
it  a  universal  rule  that  the  relation  takes  a  different  character  in  either 
correlative  ?  We  must  in  this  case  recognise  that  in  our  distinction 
between  productive  and  non-productive  relations  we  are  overlooking 
the  equivocation  involved  in  making  the  terms  cover  both  action  and 
passion  as  though  these  two  were  one,  and  ignoring  the  fact  that  produc¬ 
tion  takes  a  different  form  in  the  two  correlatives.  Take  the  case  of 
equality,  producing  equals  :  nothing  is  equal  without  equality,  nothing 
identical  without  identity.  Greatness  and  smallness  both  entail  a  presence 
— the  presence  of  greatness  and  smallness  respectively.  When  we  come 
to  greater  and  smaller,  the  participants  in  these  relations  are  greater 
and  smaller  only  when  greatness  and  smallness  are  actually  observed 
in  them. 

9- 

It  follows  that  in  the  cases  specified  above — agent,  knowledge  and 
the  rest — the  relation  must  be  considered  as  in  actual  operation,  and 
the  Act  and  the  Reason-Principle  in  the  Act  must  be  assumed  to  be 
real :  in  all  other  cases  there  will  be  simply  participation  in  an  Ideal- 
Form,  in  a  Reason-Principle. 

If  Reality  implied  embodiment,  we  should  indeed  be  forced  to  deny 
Reality  to  these  conditions  called  relative  ;  if  however  we  accord  the 
pre-eminent  place  to  the  unembodied  and  to  the  Reason-Principles, 
and  at  the  same  time  maintain  that  relations  are  Reason-Principles  and 
participate  in  Ideal-Forms,  we  are  bound  to  seek  their  causes  in  that 
higher  sphere.  Doubleness,  it  is  clear,  is  the  cause  of  a  thing  being  double, 
and  from  it  is  derived  half  ness. 

Some  correlatives  owe  their  designations  to  the  same  Form,  others 
to  opposite  Forms  ;  it  is  thus  that  two  objects  are  simultaneously  double 
and  half  of  each  other,  and  one  great  and  the  other  small.  It  may  happen 
that  both  correlatives  exist  in  one  object — likeness  and  unlikeness,  and, 
in  general,  identity  and  difference,  so  that  the  same  thing  will  be  at  once 
like  and  unlike,  identical  and  different. 


12 


PLOTINUS 


The  question  arises  here  whether  sharing  in  the  same  Form  could 
make  one  man  depraved  and  another  more  depraved.  In  the  case  of 
total  depravity,  clearly  the  two  are  made  equal  by  the  absence  of  a  Form. 
Where  there  is  a  difference  of  degree,  the  one  has  participated  in  a  Form 
which  has  failed  to  predominate,  the  other  in  a  Form  which  has  failed 
still  more  :  or,  if  we  choose  the  negative  aspect,  we  may  think  of  them 
both  as  failing  to  participate  in  a  Form  which  naturally  belonged  to 
them. 

Sensation  may  be  regarded  as  a  Form  of  double  origin  (determined 
both  by  the  sense-organ  and  by  the  sensible  object)  ;  and  similarly  with 
knowledge. 

Habit  is  an  Act  directed  upon  something  had  (some  experience 
produced  by  habit)  and  binding  it  as  it  were  with  the  subject  having 
(experiencing),  as  the  Act  of  production  binds  producer  and  product. 

Measurement  is  an  Act  of  the  measurer  upon  the  measured  object : 
it  too  is  therefore  a  kind  of  Reason-Principle. 

Now  if  the  condition  of  being  related  is  regarded  as  a  Form  having 
a  generic  unity,  Relation  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  single  genus  owing  its 
reality  to  a  Reason-Principle  involved  in  all  instances.  If  however  the 
Reason-Principles  (governing  the  correlatives)  stand  opposed  and  have 
the  differences  to  which  we  have  referred,  there  may  perhaps  not  be  a 
single  genus,  but  this  will  not  prevent  all  relatives  being  expressed  in 
terms  of  a  certain  likeness,  and  falling  under  a  single  category. 

But  even  if  the  cases  of  which  we  have  spoken  can  be  subsumed 
under  a  single  head,  it  is  nevertheless  impossible  to  include  in  a  single 
genus  all  that  goes  with  them  in  the  one  common  category :  for  the 
category  includes  negations  and  derivatives — not  only,  for  example, 
double  but  also  its  negative,  the  resultant  doubleness  and  the  act  of 
doubling.  But  we  cannot  include  in  one  genus  both  the  thing  and  its 
negative — double  and  not-double,  relative  and  not-relative — any  more 
than  in  dealing  with  the  genus  animal  we  can  insert  in  it  the  non-animal. 
Moreover,  doubleness  and  doubling  have  only  the  relation  to  double 
that  whiteness  has  to  white ;  they  cannot  be  classed  as  identical 
with  it. 


VI.  i.  io] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


13 


10. 

As  regards  Quality,  the  source  of  what  we  call  a  “  quale,”  we  must 
in  the  first  place  consider  what  nature  it  possesses  in  accordance  with 
which  it  produces  the  “  qualia,”  and  whether,  remaining  one  and  the 
same  in  virtue  of  that  common  ground,  it  has  also  differences  whereby 
it  produces  the  variety  of  species.  If  there  is  no  common  ground  and 
the  term  Quality  involves  many  connotations,  there  cannot  be  a  single 
genus  of  Quality. 

What  then  will  be  the  common  ground  in  habit,  disposition,  passive 
quality,  figure,  shape  ?  In  light,  thick  and  lean  ? 

If  we  hold  this  common  ground  to  be  a  power  adapting  itself  to  the 
forms  of  habits,  dispositions  and  physical  capacities,  a  power  which 
gives  the  possessor  whatever  capacities  he  has,  we  have  no  plausible 
explanation  of  incapacities.  Besides,  how  are  figure  and  the  shape  of 
a  given  thing  to  be  regarded  as  a  power  ? 

Moreover,  at  this.  Being  will  have  no  power  qua  Being  but  only 
when  Quality  has  been  added  to  it ;  and  the  activities  of  those  substances 
which  are  activities  in  the  highest  degree,  will  be  traceable  to  Quality, 
although  they  are  autonomous  and  owe  their  essential  character  to 
powers  wholly  their  own  ! 

Perhaps,  however,  qualities  are  conditioned  by  powers  which  are 
posterior  to  the  substances  as  such  (and  so  do  not  interfere  with  their 
essential  activities).  Boxing,  for  example,  is  not  a  power  of  man  qua 
man  ;  reasoning  is  :  therefore  reasoning,  on  this  hypothesis,  is  not 
quality  but  a  natural  possession  of  the  mature  human  being  ;  it  therefore 
is  called  a  quality  only  by  analogy.  Thus,  Quality  is  a  power  which 
adds  the  property  of  being  qualia  to  substances  already  existent. 

The  differences  distinguishing  substances  from  each  other  are  called 
qualities  only  by  analogy ;  they  are,  more  strictly,  Acts  and  Reason- 
Principles,  or  parts  of  Reason-Principles,  and  though  they  may  appear 
merely  to  qualify  the  substance,  they  in  fact  indicate  its  essence. 

Qualities  in  the  true  sense — those,  that  is,  which  determine  qualia — 
being  in  accordance  with  our  definition  powers,  will  in  virtue  of  this 
common  ground  be  a  kind  of  Reason-Principle  ;  they  will  also  be  in  a 


14 


PLOTINUS 


sense  Forms,  that  is,  excellences  and  imperfections  whether  of  .soul 
or  of  body. 

But  how  can  they  all  be  powers  ?  Beauty  or  health  of  soul  or  body, 
very  well :  but  surely  not  ugliness,  disease,  weakness,  incapacity.  In 
a  word,  is  powerlessness  a  power  ? 

It  may  be  urged  that  these  are  qualities  in  so  far  as  qualia  are  also 
named  after  them  :  but  may  not  the  qualia  be  so  called  by  analogy, 
and  not  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  single  principle  ?  Not  only  may  the 
term  be  understood  in  the  four  ways  (of  Aristotle),  but  each  of  the  four 
may  have  at  least  a  twofold  significance. 

In  the  first  place.  Quality  is  not  merely  a  question  of  action  and 
passion,  involving  a  simple  distinction  between  the  potentially  active 
(quality)  and  the  passive  :  health,  disposition  and  habit,  disease,  strength 
and  weakness  are  also  classed  as  qualities.  It  follows  that  the  common 
ground  is  not  power,  but  something  we  have  still  to  seek. 

Again,  not  all  qualities  can  be  regarded  as  Reason-Principles : 
chronic  disease  cannot  be  a  Reason-Principle.  Perhaps,  however,  we  must 
speak  in  such  cases  of  privations,  restricting  the  term  Quantities  to 
Ideal-Forms  and  powers.  Thus  we  shall  have,  not  a  single  genus,  but 
reference  only  to  the  unity  of  a  category.  Knowledge  will  be  regarded 
as  a  Form  and  a  power,  ignorance  as  a  privation  and  powerlessness. 

On  the  other  hand,  powerlessness  and  disease  are  a  kind  of  Form  ; 
disease  and  vice  have  many  powers  though  looking  to  evil. 

But  how  can  a  mere  failure  be  a  power  ?  Doubtless  the  truth  is 
that  every  quality  performs  its  own  function  independently  of  a  standard  ; 
for  in  no  case  could  it  produce  an  effect  outside  of  its  power. 

Even  beauty  would  seem  to  have  a  power  of  its  own.  Does  this 
apply  to  triangularity  ? 

Perhaps,  after  all,  it  is  not  a  power  we  must  consider,  but  a  disposition. 
Thus,  qualities  will  be  determined  by  the  forms  and  characteristics  of 
the  object  qualified  :  their  common  element,  then,  will  be  Form  and 
ideal  type,  imposed  upon  Substance  and  posterior  to  it. 

But  then,  how  do  we  account  for  the  powers  ?  We  may  doubtless 
remark  that  even  the  natural  boxer  is  so  by  being  constituted  in  a 


VI.  I.  II] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


15 


particular  way  ;  similarly,  with  the  man  unable  to  box  :  to  generalise, 
the  quality  is  a  characteristic  non-essential.  Whatever  is  seen  to  apply 
alike  to  Being  and  to  non-Being,  as  do  heat  and  whiteness  and  colours 
generally,  is  either  different  from  Being — is,  for  example,  an  Act  of 
Being — or  else  is  some  secondary  of  Being,  derived  from  it,  contained 
in  it,  its  image  and  likeness. 

But  if  Quality  is  determined  by  formation  and  characteristic  and 
Reason-Principle,  how  explain  the  various  cases  of  powerlessness  and 
deformity  ?  Doubtless  we  must  think  of  Principles  imperfectly  present, 
as  in  the  case  of  deformity.  And  disease — how  does  that  imply  a  Reason- 
Principle  ?  Here,  no  doubt,  we  must  think  of  a  principle  disturbed, 
the  Principle  of  health. 

But  it  is  not  necessary  that  all  qualities  involve  a  Reason-Principle  ; 
it  suffices  that  over  and  above  the  various  kinds  of  disposition  there 
exist  a  common  element  distinct  from  Substance,  and  it  is  what  comes 
after  the  substance  that  constitutes  Quality  in  an  object. 

But  triangularity  is  a  quality  of  that  in  which  it  is  present ;  it  is 
however  no  longer  triangularity  as  such,  but  the  triangularity  present 
in  that  definite  object  and  modified  in  proportion  to  its  success  in  shaping 
that  object. 


II. 

But  if  these  considerations  are  sound,  why  has  Quality  more  than 
one  species  ?  What  is  the  ground  for  distinguishing  between  habit  and 
disposition,  seeing  that  no  differentia  of  Quality  is  involved  in  permanence 
and  non-permanence  ?  A  disposition  of  any  kind  is  sufficient  to  con¬ 
stitute  a  quality ;  permanence  is  a  mere  external  addition.  It  might 
however  be  urged  that  dispositions  are  but  incomplete  “  forms  ” — if 
the  term  may  pass — habits  being  complete  ones.  But  incomplete, 
they  are  not  qualities  ;  if  already  qualities,  the  permanence  is  an  external 
addition. 

How  do  physical  powers  form  a  distinct  species  ?  If  they  are  classed 
as  qualities  in  virtue  of  being  powers,  power,  we  have  seen,  is  not  a 
necessary  concomitant  of  qualities.  If,  however,  we  hold  that  the  natural 


i6 


PLOTINUS 


boxer  owes  his  quality  to  a  particular  disposition,  power  is  something 
added  and  does  not  contribute  to  the  quality,  since  power  is  found  in 
habits  also. 

Another  point  :  why  is  natural  ability  to  be  distinguished  from 
that  acquired  by  learning  ?  Surely,  if  both  are  qualities,  they  cannot 
be  differentiae  of  Quality  :  gained  by  practice  or  given  in  nature,  it  is 
the  same  ability ;  the  differentia  will  be  external  to  Quality  ;  it  cannot 
be  deduced  from  the  Ideal  Form  of  (say)  boxing.  Whether  some  qualities 
as  distinguished  from  others  are  derived  from  experience  is  immaterial ; 
the  source  of  the  quality  makes  no  difference — none,  I  mean,  pointing  to 
variations  and  differences  of  Quality. 

A  further  question  would  seem  to  be  involved  : — If  certain  qualities 
are  derived  from  experience  but  there  is  a  discrepancy  in  the  manner 
and  source  of  the  experience,  how  are  they  to  be  included  in  the  same 
species  ?  And  again,  if  some  create  the  experience,  others  are  created 
by  it,  the  term  Quality  as  applied  to  both  classes  will  be  equivocal. 

And  what  part  is  played  by  the  individual  form  ?  If  it  constitutes 
the  individual’s  specific  character,  it  is  not  a  quality ;  if,  however,  it  is 
what  makes  an  object  beautiful  or  ugly  after  the  specific  form  has  been 
determined,  then  it  involves  a  Reason-Principle. 

Rough  and  smooth,  tenuous  and  dense  may  rightly  be  classed  as 
qualities.  It  is  true  that  they  are  not  determined  by  distances  and 
approximations,  or  in  general  by  even  or  uneven  dispositions,  of  parts  ; 
though,  were  they  so  determined,  they  might  well  even  then  be  qualities. 

Knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  light  and  heavy  will  reveal  their  place 
in  the  classification.  An  ambiguity  will  however  be  latent  in  the  term 
“  light,”  unless  it  be  determined  by  comparative  weight :  it  would  then 
implicate  leanness  and  fineness,  and  involve  another  species  distinct 
from  the  four  (of  Aristotle). 


12. 

If  then  we  do  not  propose  to  divide  Quality  in  this  (fourfold)  manner, 
what  basis  of  division  have  we  ? 

We  must  examine  whether  qualities  may  not  prove  to  be  divisible 


VI.  I.  12] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


17 


on  the  principle  that  some  belong  to  the  body  and  others  to  the  soul. 
Those  of  the  body  would  be  subdivided  according  to  the  senses,  some 
being  attributed  to  sight,  others  to  hearing  and  taste,  others  to  smell 
and  touch.  Those  of  the  soul  would  presumably  be  allotted  to  appetite, 
emotion,  reason  ;  though,  again,  they  may  be  distinguished  by  the 
differences  of  the  activities  they  condition,  in  so  far  as  activities  are 
engendered  by  these  qualities  ;  or  according  as  they  are  beneficial  or 
injurious,  the  benefits  and  injuries  being  duly  classified.  This  last  is 
applicable  also  to  the  classification  of  bodily  qualities,  which  also  produce 
differences  of  benefit  and  injury :  these  differences  must  be  regarded 
as  distinctively  qualitative  ;  for  either  the  benefit  and  injury  are  held 
to  be  derived  from  Quality  and  the  quale,  or  else  some  other  explanation 
must  be  found  for  them. 

A  point  for  consideration  is  how  the  quale,  as  conditioned  by  Quality, 
can  belong  to  the  same  category  :  obviously  there  can  be  no  single  genus 
embracing  both. 

Further,  if  “  boxer  ”  is  in  the  category  of  Quality,  why  not  “  agent  ” 
as  well  ?  And  with  agent  goes  “  active.”  Thus  “  active  ”  need  not  go 
into  the  category  of  Relation  ;  nor  again  need  “passive,”  if  “  patient  ” 
is  a  quale.  Moreover,  "  agent  ”  is  perhaps  better  assigned  to  the  category 
of  Quality  for  the  reason  that  the  term  implies  power  and  power  is 
Quality.  But  if  power  as  such  were  determined  by  Substance  (and  not 
by  Quality),  the  agent,  though  ceasing  to  be  a  quale,  would  not  necessarily 
become  a  relative.  Besides,  “  active  ”  is  not  like  “  greater  ”  :  the 
greater,  to  be  the  greater,  demands  a  less,  whereas  “  active  ”  stands 
complete  by  the  mere  possession  of  its  specific  character. 

It  may  however  be  urged  that  while  the  possession  of  that  character 
makes  it  a  quale,  it  is  a  relative  in  so  far  as  it  directs  upon  an  external 
object  the  power  indicated  by  its  name.  Why,  then,  is  not  “  boxer  ” 
a  relative,  and  “  boxing  ”  as  well  ?  Boxing  is  entirely  related  to  an 
external  object ;  its  whole  theory  pre-supposes  this  external.  And  in 
the  case  of  the  other  arts — or  most  of  them — investigation  would  probably 
warrant  the  assertion  that  in  so  far  as  they  affect  the  soul  they  are 
qualities,  while  in  so  far  as  they  look  outward  they  are  active  and  as 


i8 


PLOTINUS 


being  directed  to  an  external  object  are  relatives.  They  are  relatives 
in  the  other  sense  also  that  they  are  thought  of  as  habits. 

Can  it  then  be  held  that  there  is  any  distinct  reality  implied  in 
activity,  seeing  that  the  active  is  something  distinct  only  according  as  it 
is  a  quale  ?  It  may  perhaps  be  held  that  the  tendency  towards 
action  of  living  beings,  and  especially  of  those  having  freewill,  implies  a 
reality  of  activity  (as  well  as  a  reality  of  Quality). 

But  what  is  the  function  of  the  active  in  connection  with  those 
non-living  powers  which  we  have  classed  as  qualities  ?  Doubtless  to 
recruit  any  object  it  encounters,  making  the  object  a  participant  in 
its  content. 

But  if  one  same  object  both  acts  and  is  acted  upon,  how  do  we  then 
explain  the  active  ?  Observe  also  that  the  greater— in  itself  perhaps 
a  fixed  three  yards’  length— will  present  itself  as  both  greater  and  less 
according  to  its  external  contacts. 

It  will  be  objected  that  greater  and  less  are  due  to  participation 
in  greatness  and  smallness  ;  and  it  might  be  inferred  that  a  thing  is 
active  or  passive  by  participation  in  activity  or  passivity. 

This  is  the  place  for  enquiring  also  whether  the  qualities  of  the  Sensible 
and  Intellectual  realms  can  be  included  under  one  head, — a  question 
intended  only  for  those  who  ascribe  qualities  to  the  higher  realm  as 
well  as  the  lower.  And  even  if  Ideal  Forms  of  qualities  are  not  posited, 
yet  once  the  term  “  habit  ”  is  used  in  reference  to  Intellect,  the  question 
arises  whether  there  is  anything  common  to  that  habit  and  the  habit  we 
know  in  the  lower. 

Wisdom  too  is  generally  admitted  to  exist  There.  Obviously,  if  it 
shares  only  its  name  with  our  wisdom,  it  is  not  to  be  reckoned  among 
things  of  this  sphere  ;  if,  however,  the  import  is  in  both  cases  the 
same,  then  Quality  is  common  to  both  realms — unless,  of  course,  it 
be  maintained  that  everything  There,  including  even  intellection,  is 
Substance. 

This  question,  however,  applies  to  all  the  categories  :  are  the  two 
spheres  irreconcilable,  or  can  they  be  co-ordinated  within  a  unity  ? 


VI.  I.  13] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


19 


13- 

Wit  h  regard  to  Date  : — 

If  “  yesterday,”  “  to-morrow,”  “  last  year  ”  and  similar  terms 
denote  parts  of  time,  why  should  they  not  be  included  in  the  same  genus 
as  time  ?  It  would  seem  only  reasonable  to  range  under  time  the  past, 
present  and  future,  which  are  its  species.  But  time  is  referred  to 
Quantity ;  what  then  is  the  need  for  a  separate  category  of  Date  ? 

If  we  are  told  that  past  and  future — including  under  past  such 
definite  dates  as  yesterday  and  last  year  which  must  clearly  be  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  past  time' — and  even  the  present  “  now  ”  are  not  merely 
time  but  time-when,  we  reply,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  notion  of 
time- when  involves  time  ;  that,  further,  if  “  yesterday  ”  is  time- 
gone-by,  it  will  be  a  composite,  since  time  and  gone-by  are  distinct 
notions  :  we  have  two  categories  instead  of  the  single  one  required. 

But  suppose  that  Date  is  defined  not  as  time  but  as  that  which  is 
in  time  ;  if  by  that  which  is  in  time  is  meant  the  subject — Socrates  in 
the  proposition  “  Socrates  existed  last  year” — that  subject  is  external  to 
the  notion  of  time,  and  we  have  again  a  duality. 

Consider,  however,  the  proposition  “  Socrates — or  some  action — 
exists  at  this  time  ”  ;  what  can  be  the  meaning  here  other  than  "in  a 
part  of  time  ”  ?  But  if,  admitted  that  Date  is  “  a  part  of  time,”  it  be 
felt  that  the  part  requires  definition  and  involves  something  more  than 
mere  time,  that  we  must  say  (for  example)  the  part  of  time  gone  by, 
several  notions  are  massed  in  the  proposition  :  we  have  the  part  which 
qua  part  is  a  relative  ;  and  we  have  “  gone-by  ”  which,  if  it  is  to  have 
any  import  at  all,  must  mean  the  past :  but  this  “  past,”  we  have  shown, 
is  a  species  of  time. 

It  may  be  urged  that  “  the  past  ”  is  in  its  nature  indefinite,  while 
'*  yesterday  ”  and  “  last  year  ”  are  definite.  We  reply,  first,  that 
we  demand  some  place  in  our  classification  for  the  past :  secondly, 
that  “  yesterday,”  as  definite  past,  is  necessarily  definite  time.  But 
definite  time  implies  a  certain  quantity  of  time  :  therefore,  if  time  is 
quantitative,  each  of  the  terms  in  question  must  signify  a  definite 
quantity. 


20 


PLOTINUS 


Again,  if  by  “  yesterday  ”  we  are  expected  to  understand  that  this 
or  that  event  has  taken  place  at  a  definite  time  gone  by,  we  have  more 
notions  than  ever.  Besides,  if  we  must  introduce  fresh  categories  because 
one  thing  acts  in  another — as  in  this  case  something  acts  in  time — we 
have  more  again  from  its  acting  upon  another  in  another.  This  point 
will  be  made  plain  by  what  follows  in  our  discussion  of  Place. 

14. 

The  Academy  and  the  Lyceum  are  places,  and  parts  of  Place,  just 
as  "  above,”  “  below,”  “  here  ”  are  species  or  parts  of  Place  ;  the 
difference  is  of  minuter  delimitation. 

If  then  “  above,”  “  below,”  “  the  middle  ”  are  places — Delphi, 
for  example,  is  the  middle  (of  the  earth) — and  “  near-the-middle  ” 
is  also  a  place — Athens,  and  of  course  the  Lyceum  and  the  other  places 
usually  cited,  are  near  the  middle — what  need  have  we  to  go  further 
and  seek  beyond  Place,  admitting  as  we  do  that  we  refer  in  every  instance 
to  a  place  ? 

If,  however,  we  have  in  mind  the  presence  of  one  thing  in  another, 
we  are  not  speaking  of  a  single  entity,  we  are  not  expressing  a  single 
notion. 

Another  consideration  :  when  we  say  that  a  man  is  here,  we  present 
a  relation  of  the  man  to  that  in  which  he  is,  a  relation  of  the  container 
to  the  contained.  Why  then  do  we  not  class  as  a  relative  whatever 
may  be  produced  from  this  relation  ? 

Besides,  how  does  “  here  ”  differ  from  “  at  Athens  ”  ?  The  demon¬ 
strative  “  here  ”  admittedly  signifies  place  ;  so,  then,  does  “  at  Athens  ”  : 
“  at  Athens  ”  therefore  belongs  to  the  category  of  Place. 

Again,  if  “at  Athens  ”  means  “is  at  Athens,”  then  the  “  is  ”  as 
well  as  the  place  belongs  to  the  predicate  ;  but  this  cannot  be  right  : 
we  do  not  regard  “  is  a  quality  ”  as  predicate,  but  “  a  quality.” 

Furthermore,  if  “  in  time,”  “  in  place  ”  are  to  be  ranged  under  a 
category  other  than  that  applying  to  time  and  place,  why  not  a  separate 
category  for  “  in  a  vessel  ”  ?  Why  not  distinct  categories  for  “in  Matter,” 
“  in  a  subject,”  “  a  part  in  a  whole,”  “  a  whole  in  its  parts,”  “  a  genus 


VI.  i.  1 6] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


21 


in  its  species/’  “  a  species  in  a  genus  ”  ?  We  are  certainly  on  the  way 
to  a  goodly  number  of  categories. 

15* 

The  “  category  of  Action  ”  : — 

The  quantum  has  been  regarded  as  a  single  genus  on  the  ground 
that  Quantity  and  Number  are  attributes  of  Substance  and  posterior 
to  it ;  the  quale  has  been  regarded  as  another  genus  because  Quality 
is  an  attribute  of  Substance  :  on  the  same  principle  it  is  maintained 
that  since  activity  is  an  attribute  of  Substance,  Action  constitutes  yet 
another  genus. 

Does  then  the  action  constitute  the  genus,  or  the  activity  from  which 
the  action  springs,  in  the  same  way  as  Quality  is  the  genus  from  which 
the  quale  is  derived  ?  Perhaps  activity,  action  and  agent  should  all  be 
embraced  under  a  single  head  ?  But,  on  the  one  hand,  the  action — 
unlike  activity — tends  to  comport  the  agent ;  and  on  the  other,  it 
signifies  being  in  some  activity  and  therefore  Being-in-Act  (actual  as 
distinct  from  potential  Being).  Consequently  the  category  will  be 
one  of  Act  rather  than  of  Action. 

Act  moreover  incontestably  manifests  itself  in  Substance,  as  was 
found  to  be  the  case  with  Quality  :  it  is  connected  with  Substance  as 
being  a  form  of  motion.  But  Motion  is  a  distinct  genus  :  for,  seeing 
that  Quality  is  a  distinct  attribute  of  Substance,  and  Quantity  a  distinct 
attribute,  and  Relative  takes  its  being  from  the  relation  of  one  substance 
to  another,  there  can  be  no  reason  why  Motion,  also  an  attribute  of 
Substance,  should  not  also  constitute  a  distinct  genus. 

16. 

If  it  be  urged  that  Motion  is  but  imperfect  Act,  there  would  be 
no  objection  to  giving  priority  to  Act  and  subordinating  to  it  Motion 
with  its  imperfection  as  a  species  :  Act  would  thus  be  predicated  of 
Motion,  but  with  the  qualification  “  imperfect.” 

Motion  is  thought  of  as  imperfect,  not  because  it  is  not  an  Act, 
but  because,  entirely  an  Act,  it  yet  entails  repetition  (lacks  finality). 


22 


PLOTINUS 


It  repeats,  not  in  order  that  it  may  achieve  actuality — it  is  already 
actual, — but  that  it  may  attain  a  goal  distinct  from  itself  and  posterior  : 
it  is  not  the  motion  itself  that  is  then  consummated  but  the  result  at 
which  it  aims.  Walking  is  walking  from  the  outset ;  when  one  should 
traverse  a  racecourse  but  has  not  yet  done  so,  the  deficiency  lies  not  in 
the  walking — not  in  the  motion — but  in  the  amount  of  walking  accom¬ 
plished  ;  no  matter  what  the  amount,  it  is  walking  and  motion  already  : 
a  moving  man  has  motion  and  a  cutter  cuts  before  there  is  any  question 
of  Quantity.  And  just  as  we  can  speak  of  Act  without  implying  time, 
so  we  can  of  Motion,  except  in  the  sense  of  motion  over  a  defined  area  ; 
Act  is  timeless,  and  so  is  Motion  pure  and  simple. 

Are  we  told  that  Motion  is  necessarily  in  time,  inasmuch  as  it  involves 
continuity  ?  But,  at  this,  sight,  never  ceasing  to  see,  will  also  be  con¬ 
tinuous  and  in  time.  Our  critic,  it  is  true,  may  find  support  in  that 
principle  of  proportion  which  states  that  you  may  make  a  division  of  no 
matter  what  motion,  and  find  that  neither  the  motion  nor  its  duration  has 
any  beginning  but  that  the  division  may  be  continued  indefinitely  in  the 
direction  of  the  motion’s  origin  :  this  would  mean  that  a  motion  just  begun 
has  been  in  progress  from  an  infinity  of  time,  that  it  is  infinite  as  regards 
its  beginning. 

Such  then  is  the  result  of  separating  Act  from  Motion  :  Act,  we 
aver,  is  timeless  ;  yet  we  are  forced  to  maintain  not  only  that  time 
is  necessary  to  quantitative  motion,  but,  unreservedly,  that  Motion  is 
quantitative  in  its  very  nature  ;  though  indeed,  if  it  were  a  case  of 
motion  occupying  a  day  or  some  other  quantity  of  time,  the  exponents 
of  this  view  would  be  the  first  to  admit  that  Quantity  is  present  to 
Motion  only  by  way  of  accident. 

In  sum,  just  as  Act  is  timeless,  so  there  is  no  reason  why  Motion  also 
should  not  primarily  be  timeless,  time  attaching  to  it  only  in  so  far  as 
it  happens  to  have  such  and  such  an  extension. 

Timeless  change  is  sanctioned  in  the  expression,  “as. if  change 
could  not  take  place  all  at  once  ”  ;  if  then  change  is  timeless,  why  not 
Motion  also  ? — Change,  be  it  noted,  is  here  distinguished  from  the  result 
of  change,  the  result  being  unnecessary  to  establish  the  change  itself. 


VI.  i.  1 8] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


23 


17. 

We  may  be  told  that  neither  Act  nor  Motion  requires  a  genus  for 
itself,  but  that  both  revert  to  Relation,  Act  belonging  to  the  potentially 
active,  Motion  to  the  potentially  motive.  Our  reply  is  that  Relation 
produces  relatives  as  such,  and  not  the  mere  reference  to  an  external 
standard  ;  given  the  existence  of  a  thing,  whether  attributive  or  relative, 
it  holds  its  essential  character  prior  to  any  relationship  :  so  then  must 
Act  and  Motion,  and  even  such  an  attribute  as  habit ;  they  are  not 
prevented  from  being  prior  to  any  relationship  they  may  occupy,  or 
from  being  conceivable  in  themselves.  Otherwise,  everything  will  be 
relative  ;  for  anything  you  think  of — even  Soul — bears  some  relation¬ 
ship  to  something  else. 

But,  to  return  to  activity  proper  and  the  action,  is  there  any  reason 
why  these  should  be  referred  to  Relation  ?  They  must  in  every  instance 
be  either  Motion  or  Act. 

If  however  activity  is  referred  to  Relation  and  the  action  made 
a  distinct  genus,  why  is  not  Motion  referred  to  Relation  and  the  move¬ 
ment  made  a  distinct  genus  ?  Why  not  bisect  the  unity,  Motion,  and 
so  make  Action  and  Passion  two  species  of  the  one  thing,  ceasing  to 
consider  Action  and  Passion  as  two  genera  ? 

18. 

There  are  other  questions  calling  for  consideration  : — 

First  :  Are  both  Acts  and  motions  to  be  included  in  the  category 
of  Action,  with  the  distinction  that  Acts  are  momentary  while  Motions, 
such  as  cutting,  are  in  time  ?  Or  will  both  be  regarded  as  motions  or 
(at  least)  as  involving  Motion  ? 

Secondly  :  Will  all  activities  be  related  to  passivity,  or  will  some 
— for  example,  walking  and  speaking — be  considered  as  independent 
of  it  ?  . 

Thirdly  :  Will  all  those  related  to  passivity  be  classed  as  motions 
and  the  independent  as  Acts,  or  will  the  two  classes  overlap  ?  Walking, 
for  instance,  which  is  an  independent,  would,  one  supposes,  be  a  motion  ; 
thinking,  which  also  does  not  essentially  involve  “  passivity,”  an  Act : 


24 


PLOTINUS 


otherwise  we  must  hold  that  thinking  and  walking  are  not  even 
actions.  But  if  they  are  not  in  the  category  of  Action,  where  then  in 
our  classification  must  they  fall  ? 

It  may  perhaps  be  urged  that  the  act  of  thinking,  together  with 
the  faculty  of  thought,  should  be  regarded  as  relative  to  the  thought 
object  ;  for  is  not  the  faculty  of  sensation  treated  as  relative  to  the 
sensible  object  ?  If  then,  we  may  ask,  in  the  analogue  the  faculty  of 
sensation  is  treated  as  relative  to  the  sensible  object,  why  not  the  sensory 
act  as  well  ?  The  fact  is  that  even  sensation,  though  related  to  an  external 
object,  has  something  besides  that  relation  :  it  has,  namely,  its  own 
status  of  being  either  an  Act  or  a  Passion.  Now  the  Passion  is  separable 
from  the  condition  of  being  attached  to  some  object  and  caused  by 
some  object :  so,  then,  is  the  Act  a  distinct  entity.  Walking  is  similarly 
attached  and  caused,  and  yet  has  besides  the  status  of  being  a  motion. 
It  follows  that  thought,  in  addition  to  its  relationship,  will  have  the 
status  of  being  either  a  motion  or  an  Act. 

I9- 

We  have  to  ask  ourselves  whether  there  are  not  certain  Acts  which 
without  the  addition  of  a  time-element  will  be  thought  of  as  imperfect 
and  therefore  classed  with  motions.  Take  for  instance  living  and  life. 
The  life  of  a  definite  person  implies  a  certain  adequate  period,  just  as 
his  happiness  is  no  merely  instantaneous  thing.  Life  and  happiness 
are,  in  other  words,  of  the  nature  ascribed  to  Motion  :  both  therefore 
must  be  treated  as  motions,  and  Motion  must  be  regarded  as  a  unity, 
a  single  genus  ;  besides  the  quantity  and  quality  belonging  to  Substance 
we  must  take  count  of  the  motion  manifested  in  it. 

We  may  further  find  desirable  to  distinguish  bodily  from  psychic 
motions,  or  spontaneous  motions  from  those  induced  by  external 
forces,  or  the  original  from  the  derivative,  the  original  motions  being 
activities  whether  externally  related  or  independent,  while  the 
derivative  will  be  Passions. 

But  surely  the  motions  having  external  tendency  are  actually 
identical  with  those  of  external  derivation  :  the  cutting  issuing  from 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


VI.  i.  19] 


25 


the  cutter  and  that  effected  in  the  object  are  one,  though  to  cut  is  not 
the  same  as  to  be  cut. 

Perhaps  however  the  cutting  issuing  from  the  cutter  and  that  which 
takes  place  in  the  cut  object  are  in  fact  not  one,  but  “  to  cut  ”  implies 
that  from  a  particular  Act  and  motion  there  results  a  different  motion 
in  the  object  cut.  Or  perhaps  the  difference  (between  Action  and  Passion) 
lies  not  in  the  fact  of  being  cut,  but  in  the  distinct  emotion  supervening, 
pain  for  example  :  passivity  has  this  connotation  also. 

But  when  there  is  no  pain,  what  occurs  ?  Nothing,  surely,  but 
the  Act  of  the  agent  upon  the  patient  object :  this  is  all  that  is  meant 
in  such  cases  by  Action.  Action,  thus,  becomes  twofold  :  there  is  that 
which  occurs  in  the  external,  and  that  which  does  not.  The  duality 
of  Action  and  Passion,  suggested  by  the  notion  that  Action  (always) 
takes  place  in  an  external,  is  abandoned. 

Even  writing,  though  taking  place  upon  an  external  object,  does 
not  call  for  passivity,  since  no  effect  is  produced  upon  the  tablet  beyond 
the  Act  of  the  writer,  nothing  like  pain  ;  we  may  be  told  that  the  tablet 
has  been  inscribed,  but  this  does  not  suffice  for  passivity. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  walking  there  is  the  earth  trodden  upon,  but 
no  one  thinks  of  it  as  having  experienced  Passion  (or  suffering).  Treading 
on  a  living  body,  we  think  of  suffering,  because  we  reflect  not  upon  the 
walking  but  upon  the  ensuing  pain  :  otherwise  we  should  think  of 
suffering  in  the  case  of  the  tablet  as  well. 

It  is  so  in  every  case  of  Action  :  we  cannot  but  think  of  it  as  knit 
into  a  unity  with  its  opposite,  Passion.  Not  that  this  later  “  Passion  ” 
is  the  opposite  of  Action  in  the  way  in  which  being  burned  is  the  opposite 
of  burning :  by  Passion  in  this  sense  we  mean  the  effect  supervening 
upon  the  combined  facts  of  the  burning  and  the  being  burned,  whether 
this  effect  be  pain  or  some  such  process  as  withering. 

Suppose  this  Passion  to  be  treated  as  of  itself  producing  pain :  have 
we  not  still  the  duality  of  agent  and  patient,  two  results  from  the  one 
Act  ?  The  Act  may  no  longer  include  the  will  to  cause  pain  ;  but  it 
produces  something  distinct  from  itself,  a  pain-causing  medium  which 
enters  into  the  object  about  to  experience  pain :  this  medium, 


E 


26 


PLOTINUS 


while  retaining  its  individuality,  produces  something  yet  different, 
the  feeling  of  pain. 

What  does  this  suggest  ?  Surely  that  the  very  medium — the  act 
of  hearing,  for  instance- — is,  even  before  it  produces  pain  or  without 
producing  pain  at  all,  a  Passion  of  that  into  which  it  enters. 

But  hearing,  with  sensation  in  general,  is  in  fact  not  a  Passion. 
Yet  to  feel  pain  is  to  experience  a  Passion — a  Passion  however  which 
is  not  opposed  to  Action. 


20. 

But  though  not  opposed,  it  is  still  different  from  Action  and  cannot 
belong  to  the  same  genus  as  activity ;  though  if  they  are  both  Motion, 
it  will  so  belong,  on  the  principle  that  alteration  must  be  regarded  as 
qualitative  motion. 

Does  it  follow  that  whenever  alteration  proceeds  from  Quality,  it 
will  be  activity  and  Action,  the  quale  remaining  impassive  ?  It  may  be 
that  if  the  quale  remains  impassive,  the  alteration  will  be  in  the  category 
of  Action  ;  whereas  if,  while  its  energy  is  directed  outwards,  it  also 
suffers — as  in  beating — it  will  cease  to  belong  to  that  category  :  or 
perhaps  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  being  in  both  categories  at  one 
and  the  same  moment. 

If  then  an  alteration  be  conditioned  by  Passivity  alone,  as  is  the 
case  with  rubbing,  on  what  ground  is  it  assigned  to  Action  rather  than 
to  Passivity  ?  Perhaps  the  Passivity  arises  from  the  fact  that  a  counter¬ 
rubbing  is  involved.  But  are  we,  in  view  of  this  counter-motion,  to 
recognise  the  presence  of  two  distinct  motions  ?  No  :  one  only. 

How  then  can  this  one  motion  be  both  Action  and  Passion  ?  We 
must  suppose  it  to  be  Action  in  proceeding  from  an  object,  and 
Passion  in  being  directed  upon  another — though  it  remains  the  same 
motion  throughout. 

Suppose  however  Passion  to  be  a  different  motion  from  Action  : 
how  then  does  its  modification  of  the  patient  object  change  that 
patient’s  character  without  the  agent  being  affected  by  the  patient  ? 
For  obviously  an  agent  cannot  be  passive  to  the  operation  it  performs 


VI.  I.  21] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


27 

upon  another.  Can  it  be  that  the  fact  of  motion  existing  elsewhere 
creates  the  Passion,  which  was  not  Passion  in  the  agent  ?, 

If  the  whiteness  of  the  swan,  produced  by  its  Reason-Principle,  is 
given  at  its  birth,  are  we  to  affirm  Passion  of  the  swan  on  its  passing 
into  being  ?  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  swan  grows  white  after  birth,  and 
if  there  is  (as  before)  a  cause  of  that  growth  and  the  corresponding  result, 
are  we  to  say  that  the  growth  is  a  Passion  ?  Or  must  we  confine  Passion 
to  purely  qualitative  change  ? 

One  thing  confers  beauty  and  another  takes  it  :  is  that  which  takes 
beauty  to  be  regarded  as  patient  ?  If  then  the  source  of  beauty — tin, 
suppose — should  deteriorate  or  actually  disappear,  while  the  recipient 
— copper — improves,  are  we  to  think  of  the  copper  as  passive  and  the 
tin  active  ? 

Take  the  learner  :  how  can  he  be  regarded  as  passive,  seeing  that 
the  Act  of  the  agent  passes  into  him  (and  becomes  his  Act)  ?  How 
can  the  Act,  necessarily  a  simple  entity,  be  both  Act  and  Passion  ?  No 
doubt  the  Act  is  not  in  itself  a  Passion  ;  nonetheless,  the  learner  coming 
to  possess  it  will  be  a  patient  by  the  fact  of  his  appropriation  of  an 
experience  from  outside  :  he  will  not,  of  course,  be  a  patient  in  the  sense 
of  having  himself  performed  no  Act ;  learning — like  seeing — is  not 
analogous  to  being  struck,  since  it  involves  the  acts  of  apprehension 
and  recognition. 


21. 

How  then  are  we  to  recognise  Passivity,  since  clearly  it  is  not  to  be 
found  in  the  Act  from  outside  which  the  recipient  in  turn  makes  his 
own  ?  Surely  we  must  look  for  it  in  cases  where  the  patient  remains 
without  Act,  the  passivity  pure. 

Imagine  a  case  where  an  agent  improves,  though  its  Act  tends 
towards  deterioration.  Or,  say,  a  man’s  activity  is  guided  by  evil 
and  is  allowed  to  dominate  another’s  without  restraint.  In  these  cases 
the  Act  is  clearly  wrong,  the  Passion  blameless. 

What  then  is  the  real  distinction  between  Action  and  Passion  ? 
Is  it  that  Action  starts  from  within  and  is  directed  upon  an  outside 


28 


PLOTINUS 


object,  while  Passion  is  derived  from  without  and  fulfilled  within  ? 
What,  then,  are  we  to  say  of  such  cases  as  thought  and  opinion  which 
originate  within  but  are  not  directed  outwards  ?  Again,  the 
Passion  “  being  heated  ”  rises  within  the  self,  when  that  self  is  provoked 
by  an  opinion  to  reflection  or  to  anger,  without  the  intervention  of  any 
external.  Still  it  remains  true  that  Action,  whether  self-centred  or 
with  external  tendency,  is  a  motion  rising  in  the  self. 

How  then  do  we  explain  desire  and  other  forms  of  aspiration  ? 
Aspiration  must  be  a  motion  having  its  origin  in  the  object  aspired 
to, — though  some  might  disallow  “  origin  ”  and  be  content  with  saying 
that  the  motion  aroused  is  subsequent  to  the  object ;  in  what  respect, 
then,  does  aspiring  differ  from  taking  a  blow  or  being  borne  down  by 
a  thrust  ? 

Perhaps,  however,  we  should  divide  aspirations  into  two  classes, 
those  which  follow  intellect  being  described  as  Actions,  the  merely 
impulsive  being  Passions.  Passivity  now  will  not  turn  on  origin,  without 
or  within — within  there  can  only  be  deficiency ;  but  whenever  a  thing, 
without  itself  assisting  in  the  process,  undergoes  an  alteration  not 
directed  to  the  creation  of  Being  but  changing  the  thing  for  the  worse 
or  not  for  the  better,  such  an  alteration  will  be  regarded  as  a  Passion 
and  as  entailing  passivity. 

If  however  “  being  heated  ”  means  acquiring  heat,  and  is  some¬ 
times  found  to  contribute  to  the  production  of  Being  and  sometimes 
not,  passivity  will  be  identical  with  impassivity :  besides,  “  being 
heated  ”  must  then  have  a  double  significance  (according  as  it  does 
or  does  not  contribute  to  Being). 

The  fact  is,  however,  that  “  being  heated,”  even  when  it  contributes 
to  Being,  involves  the  presence  of  a  patient  (distinct  from  the  being 
produced).  Take  the  case  of  the  bronze  which  has  to  be  heated  and 
so  is  a  patient ;  the  being  is  a  statue,  which  is  not  heated  except 
accidentally  (by  the  accident  of  being  contained  in  the  bronze).  If 
then  the  bronze  becomes  more  beautiful  as  a  result  of  being  heated  and 
in  the  same  proportion,  it  certainly  becomes  so  by  passivity ;  for  pas¬ 
sivity  must,  clearly,  take  twTo  forms  :  there  is  the  passivity  which  tends 


VI.  I.  22] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


29 


to  alteration  for  better  or  for  worse,  and  there  is  the  passivity  which 
has  neither  tendency. 


22. 

Passivity,  thus,  implies  the  existence  within  of  a  motion  functioning 
somehow  or  other  in  the  direction  of  alteration.  Action  too  implies 
motion  within,  whether  the  motion  be  aimless  or  whether  it  be  driven 
by  the  impulse  comported  by  the  term  “  Action  ”  to  find  its  goal  in  an 
external  object.  There  is  Motion  in  both  Action  and  Passion,  but  the 
differentia  distinguishing  Action  from  Passion  keeps  Action  impassive, 
while  Passion  is  recognised  by  the  fact  that  a  new  state  replaces  the  old, 
though  nothing  is  added  to  the  essential  character  of  the  patient ;  when¬ 
ever  Being  (essential  Being)  is  produced,  the  patient  remains  distinct. 

Thus,  what  is  Action  in  one  relation  may  be  Passion  in  another. 
One  same  motion  will  be  Action  from  the  point  of  view  of  A,  Passion 
from  that  of  B  ;  for  the  two  are  so  disposed  that  they  might  well  be 
consigned  to  the  category  of  Relation — at  any  rate  in  the  cases  where 
the  Action  entails  a  corresponding  Passion  :  neither  correlative  is  found 
in  isolation ;  each  involves  both  Action  and  Passion,  though  A  acts 
as  mover  and  B  is  moved  :  each  then  involves  two  categories. 

Again,  A  gives  motion  to  B,  B  receives  it,  so  that  we  have  a  giving 
and  a  receiving — in  a  word,  a  relation. 

But  a  recipient  must  possess  what  it  has  received.  A  thing  is 
admitted  to  possess  its  natural  colour :  why  not  its  motion  also  ? 
Besides,  independent  motions  such  as  walking  and  thought  do,  in  fact, 
involve  the  possession  of  the  powers  respectively  to  walk  and  to  think. 

We  are  reminded  to  enquire  whether  (thought  in  the  form  of)  provi¬ 
dence  constitutes  Action  ;  to  be  subject  to  providence  is  apparently 
Passion,  for  such  thought  is  directed  to  an  external,  the  object  of  the 
providential  arrangement.  But  it  may  well  be  that  neither  is  the  exercise 
of  providence  an  action,  even  though  the  thought  is  concerned  with  an 
external,  nor  subjection  to  it  a  Passion.  Thought  itself  need  not  be  an 
action,  for  it  does  not  go  outward  towards  its  object  but  remains  self- 
gathered.  It  is  not  always  an  activity ;  all  Acts  need  not  be  definable 


30 


PLOTINUS 


as  activities,  for  they  need  not  produce  an  effect ;  activity  belongs  to 
Act  only  accidentally. 

Does  it  follow  (conversely)  that  if  a  man  as  he  walks  produces  foot¬ 
prints,  he  cannot  be  considered  to  have  performed  an  action  ?  Certainly 
as  a  result  of  his  existing  something  distinct  from  himself  has  come  into 
being.  Yet  perhaps  we  should  regard  both  action  and  Act  as  merely 
accidental,  because  he  did  not  aim  at  this  result :  it  would  be  as  we  speak 
of  Action  even  in  things  inanimate — ■“  fire  heats,"  “the  drug  worked." 

So  much  for  Action  and  Passion. 


23- 

As  for  Possession,  if  the  term  is  used  comprehensively,  why  are 
not  all  its  modes  to  be  brought  under  one  category  ?  Possession,  thus, 
would  include  the  quantum  as  possessing  magnitude,  the  quale  as 
possessing  colour ;  it  would  include  fatherhood  and  the  complementary 
relationships,  since  the  father  possesses  the  son  and  the  son  possesses 
the  father  :  in  short,  it  would  include  all  belongings. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  category  of  Possession  comprises  only  the 
things  of  the  body,  such  as  weapons  and  shoes,  we  first  ask  why  this 
should  be  so,  and  why  their  possession  produces  a  single  category,  while 
burning,  cutting,  burying  or  casting  them  out  do  not  give  another  or 
others.  If  it  is  because  these  things  are  carried  on  the  person,  then  one’s 
mantle  lying  on  a  couch  will  come  under  a  different  category  from  that 
of  the  mantle  covering  the  person.  If  the  ownership  of  possession  suffices, 
then  clearly  one  must  refer  to  the  one  category  of  Possession  all  objects 
identified  by  being  possessed,  every  case  in  which  possession  can  be 
established  ;  the  character  of  the  possessed  object  will  make  no  difference. 

If  however  Possession  is  not  to  be  predicated  of  Quality  because 
Quality  stands  recognised  as  a  category,  nor  of  Quantity  because  the 
category  of  Quantity  has  been  received,  nor  of  parts  because  they  have 
been  assigned  to  the  category  of  Substance,  why  should  we  predicate 
Possession  of  weapons,  when  they  too  are  comprised  in  the  accepted 
category  of  Substance  ?  Shoes  and  weapons  are  clearly  substances. 

How,  further,  is  “  He  possesses  weapons,"  signifying  as  it  does 


VI.  1. 25] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


3i 


that  the  action  of  arming  has  been  performed  by  a  subject,  to  be  regarded 
as  an  entirely  simple  notion,  assignable  to  a  single  category  ? 

Again,  is  Possession  to  be  restricted  to  an  animate  possessor,  or 
does  it  hold  good  even  of  a  statue  as  possessing  the  objects  above  men¬ 
tioned  ?  Ihe  animate  and  inanimate  seem  to  possess  in  different  ways, 
and  the  term  is  perhaps  equivocal.  Similarly,  “  standing  ”  has  not  the 
same  connotation  as  applied  to  the  animate  and  the  inanimate. 

Besides,  how  can  it  be  reasonable  for  what  is  found  only  in  a  limited 
number  of  cases  to  form  a  distinct  generic  category  ? 

24. 

There  remains  Situation,  which  like  Possession  is  confined  to  a 
few  instances  such  as  reclining  and  sitting. 

Even  so,  the  term  is  not  used  without  qualification  :  we  say  “  they 
are  placed  in  such  and  such  a  manner,”  “he  is  situated  in  such  and 
such  a  position.”  The  position  is  added  from  outside  the  genus. 

In  short.  Situation  signifies  “  being  in  a  place  ”  ;  there  are  two  things 
involved,  the  position  and  the  place  :  why  then  must  two  categories 
be  combined  into  one  ? 

Moreover,  if  sitting  signifies  an  Act,  it  must  be  classed  among  Acts  ; 
if  a  Passion,  it  goes  under  the  category  to  which  belong  Passions  complete 
and  incomplete. 

Reclining  is  surely  nothing  but  “  lying  up,”  and  tallies  with  “  lying 
down  ”  and  "  lying  midway.”  But  if  the  reclining  belongs  thus  to  the 
category  of  Relation,  why  not  the  recliner  also  ?  For  as  “  on  the  right  ” 
belongs  to  the  Relations,  so  does  “  the  thing  on  the  right  ”  ;  and  similarly 
with  “  the  thing  on  the  left.” 

25- 

There  are  those  who  lay  down  four  categories  and  make  a  fourfold 
division  into  Substrates,  Qualities,  States,  and  Relative  States,  and  find 
in  these  a  common  Something,  and  so  include  everything  in  one  genus. 

Against  this  theory  there  is  much  to  be  urged,  but  particularly 
against  this  posing  of  a  common  Something  and  a  single  all-embracing 


32 


PLOTINUS 


genus.  This  Something,  it  may  be  submitted,  is  unintelligible  to  them¬ 
selves,  is  indefinable,  and  does  not  account  either  for  bodies  or  for 
the  bodiless.  Moreover,  no  room  is  left  for  a  differentia  by  which  this 
Something  may  be  distinguished.  Besides,  this  common  Something  is 
either  existent  or  non-existent :  if  existent,  it  must  be  one  or  other  of 
its  (four)  species  ;  if  non-existent,  the  existent  is  classed  under  the  non¬ 
existent. — But  the  objections  are  countless;  we  must  leave  them  for 
the  present  and  consider  the  several  heads  of  the  division. 

To  the  first  genus  are  assigned  Substrates,  including  Matter,  to 
which  is  given  a  priority  over  the  others  ;  so  that  what  is  ranked  as 
the  first  principle  comes  under  the  same  head  with  things  which  must 
be  posterior  to  it  since  it  is  their  principle. 

First,  then :  the  prior  is  made  homogeneous  with  the  subsequent. 
Now  this  is  impossible  :  in  this  relation  the  subsequent  owes  its  existence 
to  the  prior,  whereas  among  things  belonging  to  one  same  genus  each 
must  have,  essentially,  the  equality  implied  by  the  genus  ;  for  the  very 
meaning  of  genus  is  to  be  predicated  of  the  species  in  respect  of  their 
essential  character.  And  that  Matter  is  the  basic  source  of  all  the  rest 
of  things,  this  school,  we  may  suppose,  would  hardly  deny. 

Secondly :  since  they  treat  the  Substrate  as  one  thing,  they  do 
not  enumerate  the  Existents ;  they  look  instead  for  principles  of  the 
Existents.  There  is  however  a  difference  between  speaking  of  the  actual 
Existents  and  of  their  principles. 

If  Matter  is  taken  to  be  the  only  Existent,  and  all  other  things 
as  modifications  of  Matter,  it  is  not  legitimate  to  set  up  a  single  genus 
to  embrace  both  the  Existent  and  the  other  things  ;  consistency  requires 
that  Being  (Substance)  be  distinguished  from  its  modifications  and 
that  these  modifications  be  duly  classified. 

Even  the  distinction  which  this  theory  makes  between  Substrates 
and  the  rest  of  things  is  questionable.  The  Substrate  is  (necessarily) 
one  thing  and  admits  of  no  differentia — except  perhaps  in  so  far  as  it  is  split 
up  like  one  mass  into  its  various  parts ;  and  yet  not  even  so,  since  the  notion 
of  Being  implies  continuity :  it  would  be  better,  therefore,  to  speak 
of  the  Substrate,  in  the  singular. 


VI.  i.  26] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


33 


26. 

But  the  error  in  this  theory  is  fundamental.  To  set  Matter  the 
potential  above  everything,  instead  of  recognising  the  primacy  of 
actuality,  is  in  the  highest  degree  perverse.  If  the  potential  holds  the 
primacy  among  the  Existents,  its  actualisation  becomes  impossible  ; 
it  certainly  cannot  bring  itself  into  actuality  :  either  the  actual  exists 
previously,  and  so  the  potential  is  not  the  first-principle,  or,  if  the  two 
are  to  be  regarded  as  existing  simultaneously,  the  first-principles  must 
be  attributed  to  hazard.  Besides,  if  they  are  simultaneous,  why  is  not 
actuality  given  the  primacy  ?  Why  is  the  potential  more  truly  real 
than  the  actual  ? 

Supposing  however  that  the  actual  does  come  later  than  the 
potential,  how  must  the  theory  proceed  ?  Obviously  Matter  does  not 
produce  Form :  the  unqualified  does  not  produce  Quality,  nor  does 
actuality  take  its  origin  in  the  potential ;  for  that  would  mean  that 
the  actual  was  inherent  in  the  potential,  which  at  once  becomes  a  dual 
thing. 

Furthermore,  God  becomes  a  secondary  to  Matter,  inasmuch  as 
even  he  is  regarded  as  a  body  composed  of  Matter  and  Form — though 
how  he  acquires  the  Form  is  not  revealed.  If  however  he  be  admitted 
to  exist  apart  from  Matter  in  virtue  of  his  character  as  a  principle  and 
a  rational  law  (logos),  God  will  be  bodiless,  the  Creative  Power  bodiless. 
If  we  are  told  that  he  is  without  Matter  but  is  composite  in  essence  by 
the  fact  of  being  a  body,  this  amounts  to  introducing  another  Matter, 
the  Matter  of  God. 

Again,  how  can  Matter  be  a  first-principle,  seeing  that  it  is  body  ? 
Body  must  necessarily  be  a  plurality,  since  all  bodies  are  composite 
of  Matter  and  Quality.  If  however  body  in  this  case  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  in  some  different  way,  then  Matter  is  identified  with  body  only 
by  an  equivocation. 

If  the  possession  of  three  dimensions  is  given  as  the  characteristic 
of  body,  then  we  are  dealing  simply  with  mathematical  body.  If  resis¬ 
tance  is  added,  we  are  no  longer  considering  a  unity  :  besides,  resistance 
is  a  quality  or  at  least  derived  from  Quality. 


34 


PLOTINUS 


And  whence  is  this  resistance  supposed  to  come  ?  Whence  the 
three  dimensions  ?  What  is  the  source  of  their  existence  ?  Matter  is 
not  comprised  in  the  concept  of  the  three-dimensional,  nor  the  three- 
dimensional  in  the  concept  of  Matter ;  if  Matter  partakes  thus  of 
extension,  it  can  no  longer  be  a  simplex. 

Again,  whence  does  Matter  derive  its  unifying  power  ?  It  is  assuredly 
not  the  Absolute  Unity,  but  has  only  that  of  participation  in  Unity. 

We  inevitably  conclude  that  Mass  or  Extension  cannot  be  ranked 
as  the  first  of  things  ;  Non-Extension  and  Unity  must  be  prior.  We 
must  begin  with  the  One  and  conclude  with  the  Many,  proceed  to  mag¬ 
nitude  from  that  which  is  free  from  magnitude  :  a  One  is  necessary 
to  the  existence  of  a  Many,  Non-Magnitude  to  that  of  Magnitude. 
Magnitude  is  a  unity  not  by  being  Unity-Absolute,  but  by  participa¬ 
tion  and  in  an  accidental  mode :  there  must  be  a  primary  and 
absolute  preceding  the  accidental,  or  the  accidental  relation  is  left 
unexplained. 

The  manner  of  this  relation  demands  investigation.  Had  this 
been  undertaken,  the  thinkers  of  this  school  would  probably  have  lighted 
upon  that  Unity  which  is  not  accidental  but  essential  and  underived. 

27. 

On  other  grounds  also  it  is  indefensible  not  to  have  reserved  the 
high  place  for  the  true  first-principle  of  things  but  to  have  set  up  in  its 
stead  the  formless,  passive  and  lifeless,  the  irrational,  dark  and  indeter- 
minate,  and  to  have  made  this  the  source  of  Being.  In  this  theory  God 
is  introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of  appearance  :  deriving  existence 
from  Matter  he  is  a  composite,  a  derivative,  or  worse,  a  mere  state  of 
Matter. 

Another  consideration  is  that  if  Matter  is  a  substrate,  there  must 
be  something  outside  it,  which,  acting  on  it  and  distinct  from  it,  makes 
it  the  substrate  of  what  is  poured  into  it.  But  if  God  is  lodged  in  Matter 
and  by  being  involved  in  Matter  is  himself  no  more  than  a  substrate, 
he  will  no  longer  make  Matter  a  substrate  nor  be  himself  a  substrate 
in  conjunction  with  Matter.  For  of  what  will  they  be  substrates,  when 


1 


VI  i.  27] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


35 


that  which  could  make  them  substrates  is  eliminated  ?  This  so-called 
substrate  turns  out  to  have  swallowed  up  all  that  is  ;  but  a  substrate 
must  be  relative,  and  relative  not  to  its  content  but  to  something  which 
acts  upon  it  as  upon  a  datum. 

Again,  the  substrate  comports  a  relation  to  that  which  is  not  sub¬ 
strate;  hence,  to  something  external  to  it  :  there  must,  then,  be  something 
apart  from  the  substrate.  If  nothing  distinct  and  external  is  considered 
necessary,  but  the  substrate  itself  can  become  everything  and  adopt  every 
character  like  the  versatile  dancer  in  the  pantomime,  it  ceases  to  be  a 
substrate  :  it  is,  essentially,  everything.  The  mime  is  not  a  substrate  of  the 
characters  he  puts  on  ;  these  are  in  fact  the  realisation  of  his  own 
personality  :  similarly,  if  the  Matter  with  which  this  theory  presents  us 
comports  in  its  own  being  all  the  realities,  it  is  no  longer  the  substrate  of 
all :  on  the  contrary,  the  other  things  can  have  no  reality  whatever,  if 
they  are  no  more  than  states  of  Matter  in  the  sense  that  the  poses  of  the 
mime  are  states  through  which  he  passes. 

Then,  those  other  things  not  existing,  Matter  will  not  be  a  substrate, 
nor  will  it  have  a  place  among  the  Existents ;  it  will  be  Matter 
bare,  and  for  that  reason  not  even  Matter,  since  Matter  is  a  relative. 
The  relative  is  relative  to  something  else :  it  must,  further,  be  homo¬ 
geneous  with  that  something  else  :  double  is  relative  to  half,  but  not 
Substance  to  double. 

How  then  can  an  Existent  be  relative  to  a  Non-existent,  except 
accidentally  ?  But  (by  this  theory)  the  True-Existent,  or  Matter,  is 
related  (to  what  emerges  from  it)  as  Existent  to  Non-existent.  For 
if  potentiality  is  that  which  holds  the  promise  of  existence  and  that 
promise  does  not  constitute  Reality,  the  potentiality  cannot  be  a  Reality. 
In  sum,  these  very  teachers  who  deprecate  the  production  of  Realities 
from  Non-realities,  themselves  produce  Non-reality  from  Reality ;  for 
to  them  the  universe  as  such  is  not  a  Reality. 

But  is  it  not  a  paradox  that  while  Matter,  the  Substrate,  is  to  them 
an  existence,  bodies  should  not  have  more  claim  to  existence,  the  universe 
yet  more,  and  not  merely  a  claim  grounded  on  the  reality  of  one  of  its 
parts  ? 


36 


PLOTINUS 


It  is  no  less  paradoxical  that  the  living  form  should  owe  existence 
not  to  its  soul  but  to  its  Matter  only,  the  soul  being  but  an  affection 
of  Matter  and  posterior  to  it.  From  what  source  then  did  Matter  receive 
ensoulment  ?  Whence,  in  short,  is  soul’s  entity  derived  ?  How  does  it 
occur  that  Matter  sometimes  turns  into  bodies,  while  another  part  of 
it  turns  into  Soul  ?  Even  supposing  that  Form  might  come  to  it  from 
elsewhere,  that  accession  of  Quality  to  Matter  would  account  not  for 
Soul,  but  simply  for  organised  body  soulless.  If,  on  the  contrary,  there 
is  something  which  both  moulds  Matter  and  produces  Soul,  then  prior 
to  the  produced  there  must  be  Soul  the  producer. 

28. 

Many  as  are  the  objections  to  this  theory,  we  pass  on  for  fear  of 
the  ridicule  we  might  incur  by  arguing  against  a  position  itself  so  mani¬ 
festly  ridiculous.  We  may  be  content  with  pointing  out  that  it  assigns 
the  primacy  to  the  Non-existent  and  treats  it  as  the  very  summit  of 
Existence  :  in  short,  it  places  the  last  thing  first.  The  reason  for  this 
procedure  lies  in  the  acceptance  of  sense-perception  as  a  trustworthy 
guide  to  first-principles  and  to  all  other  entities. 

This  philosophy  began  by  identifying  the  Real  with  body  ;  then, 
viewing  with  apprehension  the  transmutations  of  bodies,  decided  that 
Reality  was  that  which  is  permanent  beneath  the  superficial  changes — 
which  is  much  as  if  one  regarded  space  as  having  more  title  to  Reality 
than  the  bodies  within  it,  on  the  principle  that  the  space  does  not  perish 
with  them.  They  found  a  permanent  in  space,  but  it  was  a  fault  to 
take  mere  permanence  as  in  itself  a  sufficient  definition  of  the  Real ; 
the  right  method  would  have  been  to  consider  what  properties  must 
characterise  Reality,  by  the  presence  of  which  properties  it  has  also 
that  of  unfailing  permanence.  Thus  if  a  shadow  had  permanence, 
accompanying  an  object  through  every  change,  that  would  not  make 
it  more  real  than  the  object  itself.  The  sensible  universe,  as  including 
the  Substrate  and  a  multitude  of  attributes,  will  thus  have  more  claim 
to  be  Reality  entire  than  has  any  one  of  its  component  entities  (such 
as  Matter)  :  and  if  the  sensible  were  in  very  truth  the  whole  of 


VI.  i.  29] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


37 

Reality,  Matter,  the  mere  base  and  not  the  total,  could  not  be  that 
whole. 

Most  surprising  of  all  is  that,  while  they  make  sense-perception 
their  guarantee  of  everything,  they  hold  that  the  Real  cannot  be  grasped 
by  sensation  ;  for  they  have  no  right  to  assign  to  Matter  even  so  much 
as  resistance,  since  resistance  is  a  quality.  If  however  they  profess  to 
grasp  Reality  by  Intellect,  is  it  not  a  strange  Intellect  which  ranks 
Matter  above  itself,  giving  Reality  to  Matter  and  not  to  itself  ?  And 
as  their  "  Intellect  ”  has,  thus,  no  Real-Existence,  how  can  it  be  trust¬ 
worthy  when  it  speaks  of  things  higher  than  itself,  things  to  which  it 
has  no  affinity  whatever  ? 

But  an  adequate  treatment  of  this  entity  (Matter)  and  of  substrates 
will  be  found  elsewhere. 

29. 

Qualities  must  be  for  this  school  distinct  from  Substrates.  This 
in  fact  they  acknowledge  by  counting  them  as  the  second  category. 
If  then  they  form  a  distinct  category,  they  must  be  simplex  ;  that  is 
to  say  they  are  not  composite  ;  that  is  to  say  that  as  qualities,  pure 
and  simple,  they  are  devoid  of  Matter :  hence  they  are  bodiless  and  active, 
since  Matter  is  their  substrate — a  relation  of  passivity. 

If  however  they  hold  Qualities  to  be  composite,  that  is  a  strange 
classification  which  first  contrasts  simple  and  composite  qualities,  then 
proceeds  to  include  them  in  one  genus,  and  finally  includes  one  of  the 
two  species  (simple)  in  the  other  (composite)  ;  it  is  like  dividing  know¬ 
ledge  into  two  species,  the  first  comprising  grammatical  knowledge, 
the  second  made  up  of  grammatical  and  other  knowledge. 

Again,  if  they  identify  Qualities  with  qualifications  of  Matter,  then 
in  the  first  place  even  their  Seminal  Principles  (Logoi)  will  be  material, 
and  will  not  have  to  reside  in  Matter  to  produce  a  composite,  but  prior 
to  the  composite  thus  produced  they  will  themselves  be  composed  of 
Matter  and  Form  :  in  other  words,  they  will  not  be  Forms  or  Principles. 
Further,  if  they  maintain  that  the  Seminal  Principles  are  nothing  but 
Matter  in  a  certain  state,  they  evidently  identify  Qualities  with  States, 


38 


PLOTINUS 


and  should  accordingly  classify  them  in  their  fourth  genus.  If  this  is 
a  state  of  some  peculiar  kind,  what  precisely  is  its  differentia  ?  Clearly 
the  state  by  its  association  with  Matter  receives  (on  this  theory)  an 
accession  of  Reality  :  yet  if  that  means  that  when  divorced  from  Matter 
it  is  not  a  Reality,  how  can  State  be  treated  as  a  single  genus  or 
species  ?  Certainly  one  genus  cannot  embrace  the  Existent  and  the 
Non-existent. 

And  what  is  this  state  implanted  in  Matter  ?  It  is  either  real,  or 
unreal :  if  real,  absolutely  bodiless  :  if  unreal,  it  is  introduced  to  no 
purpose  ;  Matter  is  all  there  is  ;  Quality  therefore  is  nothing.  The 
same  is  true  of  State,  for  that  is  even  more  unreal ;  the  alleged  Fourth 
Category  more  so. 

Matter  then  is  the  sole  Reality.  But  how  do  we  come  to  know 
this  ?  Certainly  not  from  Matter  itself.  How,  then  ?  From  Intellect  ? 
But  Intellect  is  merely  a  state  of  Matter,  and  even  the  “  state  ”  is  an 
empty  qualification.  We  are  left  after  all  with  Matter  alone  competent 
to  make  these  assertions,  to  fathom  these  problems.  And  if  its  assertions 
were  intelligent,  we  must  wonder  how  it  thinks  and  performs  the  functions 
of  Soul  without  possessing  either  Intellect  or  Soul.  If,  then,  it  were  to 
make  foolish  assertions,  affirming  itself  to  be  what  it  is  not  and  cannot 
be,  to  what  should  we  ascribe  this  folly  ?  Doubtless  to  Matter,  if  it  was 
in  truth  Matter  that  spoke.  But  Matter  does  not  speak  ;  anyone  who 
says  that  it  does  proclaims  the  predominance  of  Matter  in  himself;  he 
may  have  a  soul,  but  he  is  utterly  devoid  of  Intellect,  and  lives 
in  ignorance  of  himself  and  of  the  faculty  alone  capable  of  uttering 
the  truth  in  these  things. 

30. 

With  regard  to  States  : — 

It  may  seem  strange  that  States  should  be  set  up  as  a  third  class — 
or  whatever  class  it  is, — since  all  States  are  referable  to  Matter.  We 
shall  be  told  that  there  is  a  difference  among  States,  and  that  a  State 
as  in  Matter  has  definite  characteristics  distinguishing  it  from  all 
other  States  and  further  that,  whereas  Qualities  are  States  of  Matter, 


VI.  i.  30] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


39 


States  properly  so-called  belong  to  Qualities.  But  if  Qualities  are 
nothing  but  States  of  Matter,  States  (in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term) 
are  ultimately  reducible  to  Matter,  and  under  Matter  they  must  be 
classed. 

Further,  how  can  States  constitute  a  single  genus,  when  there  is 
such  manifold  diversity  among  them  ?  How  can  we  group  together 
“  three  yards  long  ”  and  “  white  ”— Quantity  and  Quality  respectively  ? 
Or  again  Time  and  Place  ?  How  can  “  yesterday,”  “  last  year,”  “  in 
the  Lyceum,”  “  in  the  Academy,”  be  States  at  all  ?  How  can  Time  be  in 
any  sense  a  State  ?  Neither  is  Time  a  State  nor  the  events  in  Time, 
neither  the  objects  in  Space  nor  Space  itself. 

And  how  can  Action  be  a  State  ?  One  acting  is  not  in  a  state  of 
being  but  in  a  state  of  Action,  or  rather  in  Action  simply  :  no  state 
is  involved.  Similarly,  what  is  predicated  of  the  patient  is  not  a  state 
of  being  but  a  state  of  Passion,  or,  strictly.  Passion  unqualified  by 
state. 

But  it  would  seem  that  State  was  the  right  category  at  least  for 
cases  of  Situation  and  Possession  :  yet  Possession  does  not  imply  posses¬ 
sion  of  some  particular  state,  but  is  Possession  absolute. 

As  for  the  Relative  State,  if  the  theory  does  not  include  it  in  the 
same  genus  as  the  other  States,  another  question  arises  :  we  must  enquire 
whether  any  actuality  is  attributed  to  this  particular  type  of  relation, 
for  to  many  types  actuality  is  denied. 

It  is,  moreover,  absurd  that  an  entity  which  depends  upon  the 
prior  existence  of  other  entities  should  be  classed  in  the  same  genus 
with  those  priors  :  one  and  two  must,  clearly,  exist,  before  half  and 
double  can. 

The  various  speculations  on  the  subject  of  the  Existents  and  the 
principles  of  the  Existents,  whether  they  have  entailed  an  infinite  or 
a  finite  number,  bodily  or  bodiless,  or  even  supposed  the  Composite 
to  be  the  Authentic  Existent,  may  well  be  considered  separately  with 
the  help  of  the  criticisms  made  by  the  ancients  upon  them. 


40 


PLOTINUS 


SECOND  TRACTATE 

On  the  Kinds  of  Being  :  Second  Treatise 

i. 

We  have  examined  the  proposed  “  ten  genera  ”  :  we  have  discussed 
also  the  theory  which  gathers  the  total  of  things  into  one  genus  and 
to  this  subordinates  what  may  be  thought  of  as  its  four  species.  The 
next  step  is,  naturally,  to  expound  our  own  views  and  to  try  to  show 
the  agreement  of  our  conclusions  with  those  of  Plato. 

Now  if  we  were  obliged  to  consider  Being  as  a  unity,  the  following 
questions  would  be  unnecessary  : — 

Is  there  one  genus  embracing  everything,  or  are  there  genera  which 
cannot  be  subsumed  under  such  a  unity  ?  Are  there  first-principles  ? 
Are  first-principles  to  be  identified  with  genera,  or  genera  with  first- 
principles  ?  Or  is  it  perhaps  rather  the  case  that  while  not  all  genera 
are  first-principles,  all  first-principles  are  at  the  same  time  genera  ? 
Or  is  the  converse  true  ?  Or  again,  do  both  classes  overlap,  some  prin¬ 
ciples  being  also  genera,  and  some  genera  also  principles  ?  And  do  both 
the  sets  of  categories  we  have  been  examining  imply  that  only  some 
principles  are  genera  and  some  genera  principles  ?  or  does  one  of  them 
presuppose  that  all  that  belongs  to  the  class  of  genera  belongs  also  to 
the  class  of  principles  ? 

Since,  however,  we  affirm  that  Being  is  not  a  unity — the  reason 
for  this  affirmation  is  stated  by  Plato  and  others — these  questions  become 
imperative,  once  we  are  satisfied  as  to  the  number  of  genera  to  be 
posited  and  the  grounds  for  our  choice. 

The  subject  of  our  enquiry,  then,  is  the  Existent  or  Existents, 
and  it  presents  immediately  two  problems  demanding  separate  analysis: — 

What  do  we  mean  by  the  Existent  ? — This  is  naturally  the  first 
question  to  be  examined. 

What  is  that  which,  often  taken  for  Being  (for  the  Existent),  is 
in  our  view  Becoming  and  never  really  Being  ? — Note  however  that 
these  concepts  are  not  to  be  taken  as  distinguished  from  each  other 


VI.  2.  2] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


in  the  sense  of  belonging  to  a  genus.  Something,  divided  into  Being 
and  Becoming ;  and  we  must  not  suppose  that  Plato  took  this  view. 
It  would  be  absurd  to  assign  Being  to  the  same  genus  as  non-Being  : 
this  would  be  to  make  one  genus  of  Socrates  and  his  portrait.  The 
division  here  (between  what  has  Being  and  what  is  in  Becoming)  means 
a  definite  marking-off,  a  setting  asunder,  leading  to  the  assertion  that 
what  takes  the  appearance  of  Being  is  not  Being  and  implying  that 
the  nature  of  True  Being  has  been  quite  misapprehended.  Being,  we 
are  taught,  must  have  the  attribute  of  eternity,  must  be  so  constituted 
as  never  to  belie  its  own  nature. 


This,  then,  is  the  Being  of  which  we  shall  treat,  and  in  our  investi¬ 
gation  we  shall  assume  that  it  is  not  a  unity  :  subsequently  we  ask 
leave  to  say  something  on  the  nature  of  Becoming  and  on  what  it  is 
that  comes  to  be,  that  is,  on  the  nature  of  the  world  of  Sense. 


2. 

In  asserting  that  Being  is  not  a  unity  we  do  not  mean  to  imply  a 
definite  number  of  existences  ;  the  number  may  well  be  infinite  :  we 
mean  simply  that  it  is  many  as  well  as  one,  that  it  is,  so  to  speak,  a 
diversified  unity,  a  plurality  in  unity. 

It  follows  that  either  the  unity  so  regarded  is  a  unity  of  genus  under 
which  the  Existents,  involving  as  they  do  plurality  as  well  as  unity, 
stand  as  species  ;  or  that  while  there  are  more  genera  than  one,  yet 
all  are  subordinate  to  a  unity ;  or  there  may  be  more  genera  than  one, 
though  no  one  genus  is  subordinate  to  any  other,  but  all  with  their  own 
subordinates — whether  these  be  lesser  genera,  or  species  with  individuals 
for  their  subordinates— all  are  elements  in  one  entity,  and  from  their 
totality  the  Intellectual  realm — that  which  we  know  as  Being — derives 
its  constitution. 

If  this  last  is  the  truth,  we  have  here  not  merely  genera,  but  genera 
which  are  at  the  same  time  principles  of  Being.  They  are  genera  because 
they  have  subordinates — other  genera,  and  successively  species  and 
individuals  ;  they  are  also  principles,  since  from  this  plurality  Being 
takes  its  rise,  constituted  in  its  entirety  from  these  its  elements. 


42 


PLOTINUS 


Suppose,  however,  a  greater  number  of  origins  which  by  their  mere 
totality  comprised,  without  possessing  any  subordinates,  the  whole  of 
Being ;  these  would  be  first-principles  but  not  genera  :  it  would  be  as 
if  one  constructed  the  sensible  world  from  the  four  elements — fire  and 
the  others;  these  elements  would  be  first  principles,  but  they  would 
not  be  genera,  unless  the  term  “  genus  is  to  be  used  equivocally. 

But  does  this  assertion  of  certain  genera  which  are  at  the  same 
time  first-principles  imply  that  by  combining  the  genera,  each  with 
its  subordinates,  we  find  the  whole  of  Being  in  the  resultant  combination  ? 
But  then,  taken  separately,  their  existence  will  not  be  actual  but  only 
potential,  and  they  will  not  be  found  in  isolation. 

Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  we  ignore  the  genera  and  combine 
the  particulars:  what  then  becomes  of  the  ignored  genera?  They 
will,  surely,  exist  in  the  purity  of  their  own  isolation,  and  the  mixtures 
will  not  destroy  them.  The  question  of  how  this  result  is  achieved 
may  be  postponed. 

For  the  moment  we  take  it  as  agreed  that  there  are  genera  as  dis¬ 
tinct  from  principles  of  Being  and  that,  on  another  plane,  principles 
(elements)  are  opposed  to  compounds.  We  are,  thus,  obliged  to  show 
in  what  relation  we  speak  of  genera  and  why  we  distinguish  them  instead 
of  summing  them  under  a  unity  ;  for  otherwise  we  imply  that  their 
coalescence  into  a  unity  is  fortuitous,  whereas  it  would  be  more  plausible 

to  dispense  with  their  separate  existence. 

If  all  the  genera  could  be  species  of  Being,  all  individuals  without 
exception  being  immediately  subordinate  to  these  species,  then  such  a 
unification  becomes  feasible.  But  that  supposition  bespeaks  annihilation 
for  the  genera :  the  species  will  no  longer  be  species ;  plurality  will 
no  longer  be  subordinated  to  unity;  everything  must  be  the  unity, 
unless  there  exist  some  thing  or  things  outside  the  unity.  The  One 
never  becomes  many — as  the  existence  of  species  demands  unless 
there  is  something  distinct  from  it :  it  cannot  of  itself  assume  plurality, 
unless  we  are  to  think  of  it  as  being  broken  into  pieces  like  some  extended 
body  :  but  even  so,  the  force  which  breaks  it  up  must  be  distinct  from 


VI.  2.  3] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


43 

it  :  if  it  is  itself  to  effect  the  breaking  up — or  whatever  form  the  division 
may  take — then  it  is  itself  previously  divided. 

For  these  and  many  other  reasons  we  must  abstain  from  positing 
a  single  genus,  and  especially  because  neither  Being  nor  Substance  can 
be  the  predicate  of  any  given  thing.  If  we  do  predicate  Being,  it  is  only 
as  an  accidental  attribute  ;  just  as  when  we  predicate  whiteness  of  a 
substance,  we  are  not  predicating  the  Absolute  Whiteness. 

3- 

We  assert,  then,  a  plurality  of  Existents,  but  a  plurality  not  for¬ 
tuitous  and  therefore  a  plurality  deriving  from  a  unity. 

But  even  admitting  this  derivation  from  a  unity — a  unity  however 
not  predicated  of  them  in  respect  of  their  essential  being, — there  is, 
surely,  no  reason  why  each  of  these  Existents,  distinct  in  character 
from  every  other,  should  not  in  itself  stand  as  a  separate  genus. 

Is,  then,  this  unity  external  to  the  genera  thus  produced,  this 
unity  which  is  their  source  though  it  cannot  be  predicated  of  them  in 
respect  of  their  essence  ?  It  is  indeed  external ;  the  One  is  beyond  ;  it 
cannot,  therefore,  be  included  among  the  genera  :  it  is  the  (transcendent) 
source,  while  they  stand  side  by  side  as  genera.  Yet  surely  the  one 
must  somehow  be  included  (among  the  genera)  ?  No  :  it  is  the  Exis¬ 
tents  we  are  investigating,  not  that  which  is  beyond  Existence. 

We  pass  on,  then,  to  consider  that  which  is  included,  and  find  to 
our  surprise  the  cause  included  with  the  things  it  causes :  it  is  surely 
strange  that  causes  and  effects  should  be  brought  into  the  same  genus. 

But  if  the  cause  is  included  with  its  effects  only  in  the  sense  in 
which  a  genus  is  included  with  its  subordinates,  the  subordinates  being 
of  a  different  order,  so  that  it  cannot  be  predicated  of  them  whether 
as  their  genus  or  in  any  other  relation,  these  subordinates  are  obviously 
themselves  genera  with  subordinates  of  their  own  :  you  may,  for  example, 
be  the  cause  of  the  operation  of  walking,  but  the  walking  is  not  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  you  in  the  relation  of  species  to  genus  ;  and  if  walking  had 
nothing  prior  to  it  as  its  genus,  but  had  posteriors,  then  it  would  be  a 
(primary)  genus  and  rank  among  the  Existents. 


44 


PLOTINUS 


Perhaps,  however,  it  must  be  utterly  denied  that  unity  is  even  the 
cause  of  other  things  ;  they  should  be  considered  rather  as  its  parts 
or  elements — if  the  terms  may  be  allowed, — their  totality  constituting 
a  single  entity  which  our  thinking  divides.  All  unity  though  it  be,  it 
goes  by  a  wonderful  power  out  into  everything  ;  it  appears  as  many 
and  becomes  many  \yhen  there  is  motion  ;  the  fecundity  of  its  nature 
causes  the  One  to  be  no  longer  one,  and  we,  displaying  what  we  call  its 
parts,  consider  them  each  as  a  unity  and  make  them  into  “  genera,” 
unaware  of  our  failure  to  see  the  whole  at  once.  We  display  it,  then, 
in  parts,  though,  unable  to  restrain  their  natural  tendency  to  coalesce,  we 
bring  these  parts  together  again,  resign  them  to  the  whole  and  allow 
them  to  become  a  unity,  or  rather  to  be  a  unity. 

All  this  will  become  clearer  in  the  light  of  further  consideration — 
when,  that  is  to  say,  we  have  ascertained  the  number  of  the  genera  ; 
for  thus  we  shall  also  discover  their  causes.  It  is  not  enough  to  deny  ; 
we  must  advance  by  dint  of  thought  and  comprehension.  The  way 
is  clear : — 

4- 

If  we  had  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  body  and  the  place  it  holds 
in  the  universe,  surely  we  should  take  some  sample  of  body,  say  stone, 
and  examine  into  what  constituents  it  may  be  divided.  There  would 
be  what  we  think  of  as  the  substrate  of  stone,  its  quantity — in  this 
case,  a  magnitude  ;  its  quality — for  example,  the  colour  of  stone.  As 
with  stone,  so  with  every  other  body  :  we  should  see  that  in  this  thing, 
body,  there  are  three  distinguishable  characteristics — the  pseudo¬ 
substance,  the  quantity,  the  quality — though  they  all  make  one  and 
are  only  logically  trisected,  the  three  being  found  to  constitute  the 
unit  thing,  body.  If  motion  were  equally  inherent  in  its  constitution, 
we  should  include  this  as  well,  and  the  four  would  form  a  unity,  the 
single  body  depending  upon  them  all  for  its  unity  and  characteristic 
nature. 

The  same  method  must  be  applied  in  examining  the  Intellectual 
Substance  and  the  genera  and  first-principles  of  the  Intellectual  sphere. 


VI.  2.  5] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


45 


But  we  must  begin  by  subtracting  what  is  peculiar  to  body,  its  coming- 
to-be,  its  sensible  nature,  its  magnitude — that  is  to  say,  the  charac¬ 
teristics  which  produce  isolation  and  mutual  separation.  It  is  an 
Intellectual  Being  we  have  to  consider,  an  Authentic  Existent,  possessed  of 
a  unity  surpassing  that  of  any  sensible  thing. 

Now  the  wonder  comes  how  a  unity  of  this  type  can  be  many  as 
well  as  one.  In  the  case  of  body  it  was  easy  to  concede  unity-with- 
plurality  ;  the  one  body  is  divisible  to  infinity  ;  its  colour  is  a  different 
thing  from  its  shape,  since  in  fact  they  are  separated.  But  if  we  take 
Soul,  single,  continuous,  without  extension,  of  the  highest  simplicity — 
as  the  first  effort  of  the  mind  makes  manifest, — how  can  we  expect  to 
find  multiplicity  here  too  ?  We  believed  that  the  division  of  the  living 
being  into  body  and  soul  was  final :  body  indeed  was  manifold,  com¬ 
posite,  diversified  ;  but  in  soul  we  imagined  we  had  found  a  simplex, 
and  boldly  made  a  halt,  supposing  that  we  had  come  to  the  limit  of 
our  course. 

Let  us  examine  this  soul,  presented  to  us  from  the  Intellectual 
realm  as  body  from  the  Sensible.  How  is  its  unity  a  plurality  ?  How 
is  its  plurality  a  unity  ?  Clearly  its  unity  is  not  that  of  a  composite 
formed  from  diverse  elements,  but  that  of  a  single  nature  comprising  a 
plurality. 

This  problem  attacked  and  solved,  the  truth  about  the  genera 
comprised  in  Being  will  thereby,  as  we  asserted,  be  elucidated  also. 

5- 

A  first  point  demanding  consideration  : — 

Bodies — those,  for  example,  of  animals  and  plants — are  each  a 
multiplicity  founded  on  colour  and  shape  and  magnitude,  and  on  the 
forms  and  arrangement  of  parts  :  yet  all  these  elements  spring  from 
a  unity.  Now  this  unity  must  be  either  Unity- Absolute  or  some  unity 
less  thorough-going  and  complete,  but  necessarily  more  complete  than 
that  which  emerges,  so  to  speak,  from  the  body  itself  ;  this  will  be  a 
unity  having  more  claim  to  reality  than  the  unity  produced  from  it, 
for  divergence  from  unity  involves  a  corresponding  divergence  from 


PLOTINUS 


46 

Reality.  Since,  thus,  bodies  take  their  rise  from  unity,  but  not  “  unity  ” 
in  the  sense  of  the  complete  unity  or  Unity-Absolute — for  this  could 
never  yield  discrete  plurality — it  remains  that  they  be  derived  from  a 
unity  pluralised.  But  the  creative  principle  (in  bodies)  is  Soul :  Soul 
therefore  is  a  pluralised  unity. 

We  then  ask  whether  the  plurality  here  consists  of  the  Reason- 
Principles  of  the  things  of  process.  Or  is  this  unity  not  something  dif¬ 
ferent  from  the  mere  sum  of  these  Principles  ?  Certainly  Soul  itself  is 
one  Reason-Principle,  the  chief  of  the  Reason-Principles,  and  these  are 
its  Act  as  it  functions  in  accordance  with  its  essential  being  ;  this  essential 
being,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  potentiality  of  the  Reason-Principles. 
This  is  the  mode  in  which  this  unity  is  a  plurality,  its  plurality  being 
revealed  by  the  effect  it  has  upon  the  external. 

But,  to  leave  the  region  of  its  effect,  suppose  we  take  it  at  the  higher 
non-effecting  part  of  Soul ;  is  not  plurality  of  powers  to  be  found  in 
this  part  also  ?  The  existence  of  this  higher  part  will,  we  may  presume, 
be  at  once  conceded. 

But  is  this  existence  to  be  taken  as  identical  with  that  of  the  stone  ? 
Surely  not.  Being  in  the  case  of  the  stone  is  not  Being  pure  and  simple, 
but  stone-being :  so  here  ;  Soul’s  being  denotes  not  merely  Being  but 
Soul-being. 

Is  then  that  “  being  ”  distinct  from  what  else  goes  to  complete 
the  essence  (or  substance)  of  Soul  ?  Is  it  to  be  identified  with  Being 
(the  Absolute),  while  to  some  differentia  of  Being  is  ascribed  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  Soul  ?  No  doubt  Soul  is  in  a  sense  Being,  and  this  not  as  a 
man  “  is  ”  white,  but  from  the  fact  of  its  being  purely  an  essence  :  in 
other  words,  the  being  it  possesses  it  holds  from  no  source  external  to 
its  own  essence. 

6. 

But  must  it  not  draw  on  some  source  external  to  its  essence,  if  it 
is  to  be  conditioned,  not  only  by  Being,  but  by  being  an  entity  of  a 
particular  character  ?  But  if  it  is  conditioned  by  a  particular  character, 
and  this  character  is  external  to  its  essence,  its  essence  does  not  comprise 


VI.  2.  7]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  47 

all  that  makes  it  Soul ;  its  individuality  will  determine  it ;  a  part  of 
Soul  will  be  essence,  but  not  Soul  entire. 

Furthermore,  what  being  will  it  have  when  we  separate  it  from  its 
other  components  ?  The  being  of  a  stone  ?  No  :  the  being  must  be  a 
form  of  Being  appropriate  to  a  source,  so  to  speak,  and  a  first-principle, 
or  rather  must  take  the  forms  appropriate  to  all  that  is  comprised  in 
Soul’s  being  :  the  being  here  must,  that  is,  be  life,  and  the  life  and  the 
being  must  be  one. 

One,  in  the  sense  of  being  one  Reason-Principle  ?  No  ;  it  is  the 
substrate  of  Soul  that  is  one,  though  one  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  also 
two  or  more — as  many  as  are  the  Primaries  which  constitute  Soul. 
Either,  then,  it  is  life  as  well  as  Substance,  or  else  it  possesses  life. 

But  if  life  is  a  thing  possessed,  the  essence  of  the  possessor  is  not 
inextricably  bound  up  with  life.  If,  on  the  contrary,  this  is  not  possession, 
the  two,  life  and  Substance,  must  be  a  unity. 

Soul,  then,  is  one  and  many — as  many  as  are  manifested  in  that 
oneness, — one  in  its  nature,  many  in  those  other  things.  A  single  Existent, 
it  makes  itself  many  by  what  we  may  call  its  motion  :  it  is  one  entire, 
but  by  its  striving,  so  to  speak,  to  contemplate  itself,  it  is  a  plurality  ; 
for  we  may  imagine  that  it  cannot  bear  to  be  a  single  Existent,  when 
it  has  the  power  to  be  all  that  it  in  fact  is.  The  cause  of  its  appearing 
as  many  is  this  contemplation,  and  its  purpose  is  the  Act  of  the  Intellect ; 
if  it  were  manifested  as  a  bare  unity,  it  could  have  no  intellection,  since 
in  that  simplicity  it  would  already  be  identical  with  the  object  of  its 
thought. 

7- 

What,  then,  are  the  several  entities  observable  in  this  plurality  ? 

We  have  found  Substance  (Essence)  and  life  simultaneously  present 
in  Soul.  Now,  this  Substance  is  a  common  property  of  Soul,  but  life, 
common  to  all  souls,  differs  in  that  it  is  a  property  of  Intellect  also. 

Having  thus  introduced  Intellect  and  its  life  we  make  a  single  genus 
of  what  is  common  to  all  life,  namely,  Motion.  Substance  and  the  Motion 
which  constitutes  the  highest  life  we  must  consider  as  two  genera  ; 


48 


PLOTINUS 


for  even  though  they  form  a  unity,  they  are  separable  to  thought 
which  finds  their  unity  not  a  unity ;  otherwise,  it  could  not  distinguish 
them. 

Observe  also  how  in  other  things  Motion  or  life  is  clearly  separated 
from  Being — a  separation  impossible,  doubtless,  in  True  Being,  but 
possible  in  its  shadow  and  namesake.  In  the  portrait  of  a  man  much 
is  left  out,  and  above  all  the  essential  thing,  life  :  the  “  Being  ”  of  sensible 
things  is  just  such  a  shadow  of  True  Being,  an  abstraction  from  that 
Being  complete  which  was  life  in  the  Archetype  ;  it  is  because  of  this 
incompleteness  that  we  are  able  in  the  Sensible  world  to  separate  Being 
from  life  and  life  from  Being. 

Being,  then,  containing  many  species,  has  but  one  genus.  Motion, 
however,  is  to  be  classed  as  neither  a  subordinate  nor  a  supplement 
of  Being  but  as  its  concomitant ;  for  we  have  not  found  Being  serving 
as  substrate  to  Motion.  Motion  is  Being’s  Act ;  neither  is  separated 
from  the  other  except  in  thought ;  the  two  natures  are  one  ;  for  Being 
is  inevitably  actual,  not  potential. 

No  doubt  we  observe  Motion  and  Being  separately.  Motion  as 
contained  in  Being  and  Being  as  involved  in  Motion,  and  in  the  indivi¬ 
dual  they  may  be  mutually  exclusive  ;  but  the  dualism  is  an  affirmation 
of  our  thought  only,  and  that  thought  sees  either  form  as  a  duality 
within  a  unity. 

Now  Motion,  thus  manifested  in  conjunction  with  Being,  does  not 
alter  Being’s  nature — unless  to  complete  its  essential  character — and 
it  does  retain  for  ever  its  own  peculiar  nature  :  at  once,  then,  we  are 
forced  to  introduce  Stability.  To  reject  Stability  would  be  more  un¬ 
reasonable  than  to  reject  Motion  ;  for  Stability  is  associated  in  our 
thought  and  conception  with  Being  even  more  than  with  Motion  ;  un¬ 
alterable  condition,  unchanging  mode,  single  Reason-Principle — these 
are  characteristics  of  the  higher  sphere. 

Stability,  then,  may  also  be  taken  as  a  single  genus.  Obviously 
distinct  from  Motion  and  perhaps  even  its  contrary,  that  it  is  also  distinct 
from  Being  may  be  shown  by  many  considerations.  We  may  especially 
observe  that  if  Stability  were  identical  with  Being,  so  also  would  Motion 


VL  2-  g]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  49 

be,  with  equal  right.  Why  identity  in  the  case  of  Stability  and  not 
in  that  of  Motion,  when  Motion  is  virtually  the  very  life  and  Act  both 
of  Substance  and  of  Absolute  Being  ?  However,  on  the  very  same  prin¬ 
ciple  on  which  wTe  separated  Motion  from  Being  wdth  the  understanding 
that  it  is  the  same  and  not  the  same — that  they  are  two  and  yet  one — 
we  also  separate  Stability  from  Being,  holding  it,  yet,  inseparable; 
it  is  only  a  logical  separation  entailing  the  inclusion  among  the  Existents 
of  this  other  genus.  To  identify  Stability  with  Being,  with  no  difference 
between  them,  and  to  identify  Being  with  Motion,  would  be  to  identify 
Stability  with  Motion  through  the  mediation  of  Being,  and  so  to  make 
Motion  and  Stability  one  and  the  same  thing. 

8. 

We  cannot  indeed  escape  positing  these  three.  Being,  Motion, 
Stability,  once  it  is  the  fact  that  the  Intellect  discerns  them  as  separates  ; 
and  if  it  thinks  of  them  at  all,  it  posits  them  by  that  very  thinking  ; 
if  they  are  thought,  they  exist.  Things  whose  existence  is  bound  up 
with  Matter  have  no  being  in  the  Intellect :  these  three  principles  are 
however  free  of  Matter ;  and  in  that  which  goes  free  of  Matter  to  be 
thought  is  to  be. 

W  e  are  in  the  presence  of  Intellect  undefiled.  Fix  it  firmly,  but 
not  with  the  eyes  of  the  body.  You  are  looking  upon  the  hearth  of 
Reality,  within  it  a  sleepless  light :  you  see  how  it  holds  to  itself,  and 
how  it  puts  apart  things  that  were  together,  how  it  fives  a  fife  that  endures 
and  keeps  a  thought  acting  not  upon  any  future  but  upon  that  which 
already  is,  upon  an  eternal  present — a  thought  self-centred,  bearing 
on  nothing  outside  of  itself. 

Now  in  the  Act  of  Intellect  there  are  energy  and  motion  ;  in  its 
self-intellection  Substance  and  Being.  In  virtue  of  its  Being  it  thinks, 
and  it  thinks  of  itself  as  Being,  and  of  that  as  Being,  upon  which  it  is, 
so  to  speak,  pivoted.  Not  that  its  Act  self-directed  ranks  as  Substance, 
but  Being  stands  as  the  goal  and  origin  of  that  Act,  the  object  of  its 
contemplation  though  not  the  contemplation  itself :  and  yet  this  Act 
too  involves  Being,  which  is  its  motive  and  its  term.  By  the  fact  that 


50 


PLOTINUS 


its  Being  is  actual  and  not  merely  potential,  Intellect  bridges  the  dualism 
(of  agent  and  patient)  and  abjures  separation :  it  identifies  itself  with 
Being  and  Being  with  itself. 

Being,  the  most  firmly  set  of  all  things,  that  in  virtue  of  which  all 
other  things  receive  Stability,  possesses  this  Stability  not  as  from  with¬ 
out  but  as  springing  within,  as  inherent.  Stability  is  the  goal  of  intellec¬ 
tion,  a  Stability  which  had  no  beginning,  and  the  state  from  which 
intellection  was  impelled  was  Stability,  though  Stability  gave  it  no 
impulsion  ;  for  Motion  neither  starts  from  Motion  nor  ends  in  Motion. 
Again,  the  Form-Idea  has  Stability,  since  it  is  the  goal  of  Intellect  : 
intellection  is  the  Form’s  Motion. 

Thus  all  the  Existents  are  one,  at  once  Motion  and  Stability  ;  Motion 
and  Stability  are  genera  all-pervading,  and  every  subsequent  is  a  par¬ 
ticular  being,  a  particular  stability  and  a  particular  motion. 

We  have  caught  the  radiance  of  Being,  and  beheld  it  in  its  three 
manifestations  :  Being,  revealed  by  the  Being  within  ourselves  ;  the 
Motion  of  Being,  revealed  by  the  motion  within  ourselves  ;  and  its 
Stability  revealed  by  ours.  We  accommodate  our  being,  motion,  stability 
to  those  (of  the  Archetypal),  unable  however  to  draw  any  distinction 
but  finding  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  entities  inseparable  and,  as  it 
were,  interfused.  We  have,  however,  in  a  sense,  set  them  a  little  apart, 
holding  them  down  and  viewing  them  in  isolation  ;  and  thus  we  have 
observed  Being,  Stability,  Motion — these  three,  of  which  each  is  a  unity 
to  itself  ;  in  so  doing,  have  we  not  regarded  them  as  being  different 
from  each  other  ?  By  this  posing  of  three  entities,  each  a  unity,  we  have, 
surely,  found  Being  to  contain  Difference. 

Again,  inasmuch  as  we  restore  them  to  an  all-embracing  unity, 
identifying  all  with  unity,  do  we  not  see  in  this  amalgamation  Identity 
emerging  as  a  Real  Existent  ? 

Thus,  in  addition  to  the  other  three  (Being,  Motion,  Stability),  we 
are  obliged  to  posit  the  further  two.  Identity  and  Difference,  so  that 
we  have  in  all  five  genera.  In  so  doing,  we  shall  not  withhold  Identity 
and  Difference  from  the  subsequents  of  the  Intellectual  order :  the 
thing  of  Sense  has,  it  is  clear,  a  particular  identity  and  a  particular 


VI-  2-  9]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  51 

difference,  but  Identity  and  Difference  have  the  generic  status  independ¬ 
ently  of  the  particular. 

They  will,  moreover,  be  primary  genera,  because  nothing  can  be 
predicated  of  them  as  denoting  their  essential  nature.  Nothing,  of 
course  we  mean,  but  Being  *  but  this  Being  is  not  their  genus,  since 
they  cannot  be  identified  with  any  particular  being  as  such.  Similarly, 
Being  will  not  stand  as  genus  to  Motion  or  Stability,  for  these  also  are 
not  its  species.  Beings  (or  Existents)  comprise  not  merely  what  are  to 
be  regarded  as  species  of  the  genus  Being,  but  also  participants  in  Being. 
On  the  other  hand,  Being  does  not  participate  in  the  other  four  prin¬ 
ciples  as  its  genera  :  they  are  not  prior  to  Being ;  they  do  not  even 
attain  to  its  level. 

9- 

The  above  considerations — to  which  others,  doubtless,  might  be 
added — suffice  to  show  that  these  five  are  primary  genera.  But  that 
they  are  the  only  primary  genera,  that  there  are  no  others,  how  can  we 
be  confident  of  this  ?  Why  do  we  not  add  unity  to  them  ?  Quantity  ? 
Quality  ?  Relation,  and  all  else  included  by  our  various  forerunners  ? 

As  for  unity  : — If  the  term  is  to  mean  a  unity  in  which  nothing 
else  is  present,  neither  Soul  nor  Intellect  nor  anything  else,  this  can  be 
predicated  of  nothing,  and  therefore  cannot  be  a  genus.  If  it  denotes 
the  unity  present  in  Being,  in  which  case  we  predicate  Being  of  unity, 
this  unity  is  not  primal. 

Besides,  unity,  containing  no  differences,  cannot  produce  species, 
and  not  producing  species,  cannot  be  a  genus.  You  cannot  so  much  as 
divide  unity  :  to  divide  it  would  be  to  make  it  many.  Unity,  aspiring 
to  be  a  genus,  becomes  a  plurality  and  annuls  itself. 

Again,  you  must  add  to  it  to  divide  it  into  species  ;  for  there  can 
be  no  differentiae  in  unity  as  there  are  in  Substance.  The  mind  accepts 
differences  of  Being,  but  differences  within  unity  there  cannot  be.  Every 
differentia  introduces  a  duality  destroying  the  unity ;  for  the  addition 
of  any  one  thing  always  does  away  with  the  previous  quantity. 

It  may  be  contended  that  the  unity  which  is  implicit  in  Being  and 


52 


PLOTINUS 


in  Motion  is  common  to  all  other  things,  and  that  therefore  Being  and 
unity  are  inseparable.  But  we  rejected  the  idea  that  Being  is  a  genus 
comprising  all  things,  on  the  ground  that  these  things  are  not  beings 
in  the  sense  of  the  Absolute  Being,  but  beings  in  another  mode  :  in  the 
same  way,  we  assert,  unity  is  not  a  genus,  the  Primary  Unity  having 
a  character  distinct  from  all  other  unities. 

Admitted  that  not  everything  suffices  to  produce  a  genus,  it  may 
yet  be  urged  that  there  is  an  Absolute  or  Primary  Unity  corresponding 
to  the  other  primaries.  But  (we  reply)  if  Being  and  unity  are  identified, 
then  since  Being  has  already  been  included  among  the  genera,  it  is  but 
a  name  that  is  introduced  in  unity :  if,  however,  they  are  both  unity, 
some  principle  is  implied  :  if  there  is  anything  in  addition  (to  this  prin¬ 
ciple),  unity  is  predicated  of  this  added  thing  ;  if  there  is  nothing  added, 
the  reference  is  again  to  that  unity  predicated  of  nothing.  If  however 
the  unity  referred  to  is  that  which  accompanies  Being,  we  have  already 
decided  that  it  is  not  unity  in  the  primary  sense. 

But  is  there  any  reason  why  this  less  complete  unity  should  not 
still  possess  Primary  Being,  seeing  that  even  its  posterior  we  rank  as 
Being,  and  “  Being  ”  in  the  sense  of  the  Primary  Being  ?  The  reason  is 
that  the  prior  of  this  Being  cannot  itself  be  Being — or  else,  if  the  prior  is 
Being,  this  is  not  Primary  Being  :  but  the  prior  is  unity  ;  (therefore 
unity  is  not  Being). 

Furthermore,  unity,  abstracted  from  Being,  has  no  differentiae. 

Again,  even  taking  it  as  bound  up  with  Being  : — If  it  is  a  consequent 
of  Being,  then  it  is  a  consequent  of  everything,  and  therefore  the  latest 
of  things  :  but  the  genus  takes  priority.  If  it  is  simultaneous  with 
Being,  it  is  simultaneous  with  everything :  but  a  genus  is  not  thus 
simultaneous.  If  it  is  prior  to  Being,  it  is  of  the  nature  of  a  Principle, 
and  therefore  will  belong  only  to  Being ;  but  if  it  serves  as  Principle 
to  Being,  it  is  not  its  genus  :  if  it  is  not  genus  to  Being,  it  is  equally 
not  a  genus  of  anything  else ;  for  that  would  make  Being  a  genus  of 
all  other  things. 

In  sum,  the  unity  exhibited  in  Being  on  the  one  hand  approximates 
to  Unity-Absolute  and  on  the  other  tends  to  identify  itself  with  Being  : 


VI.  2.  10] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


53 


Being  is  a  unity  in  relation  to  the  Absolute,  is  Being  by  virtue  of  its 
sequence  upon  that  Absolute  :  it  is  indeed  potentially  a  plurality,  and 
yet  it  remains  a  unity  and  rejecting  division  refuses  thereby  to  become 
a  genus. 


io. 

In  what  sense  is  the  particular  manifestation  of  Being  a  unity  ? 
Clearly,  in  so  far  as  it  is  one  thing,  it  forfeits  its  unity ;  with  one  and  thing 
we  have  already  plurality.  No  species  can  be  a  unity  in  more  than  an 
equivocal  sense  :  a  species  is  a  plurality,  so  that  the  “  unity  ”  here  is 
that  of  an  army  or  a  chorus.  The  unity  of  the  higher  order  does  not 
belong  to  species ;  unity  is,  thus,  ambiguous,  not  taking  the  same  form 
in  Being  and  in  particular  beings.  * 

It  follows  that  unity  is  not  a  genus.  For  a  genus  is  such  that  where- 
ever  it  is  affirmed  its  opposites  cannot  also  be  affirmed ;  anything  of 
which  unity  and  its  opposites  are  alike  affirmed — and  this  implies  the 
whole  of  Being — cannot  have  unity  as  a  genus.  Consequently  unity 
can  be  affirmed  as  a  genus  neither  of  the  primary  genera — since  the  unity 
of  Being  is  as  much  a  plurality  as  a  unity,  and  none  of  the  other  (primary) 
genera  is  a  unity  to  the  entire  exclusion  of  plurality — nor  of  things 
posterior  to  Being,  for  these  most  certainly  are  a  plurality.  In  fact, 
no  genus  with  all  its  items  can  be  a  unity ;  so  that  unity  to  become  a 
genus  must  forfeit  its  unity.  The  unit  is  prior  to  number  ;  yet  number 
it  must  be,  if  it  is  to  be  a  genus. 

Again,  the  unit  is  a  unit  from  the  point  of  view  of  number :  if  it 
is  a  unit  generically,  it  will  not  be  a  unit  in  the  strict  sense. 

Again,  just  as  the  unit,  as  appearing  in  numbers,  is  not  regarded 
as  a  genus  predicated  of  them,  but  is  thought  of  as  inherent  in  them, 
so  also  unity,  though  present  in  Being,  cannot  stand  as  genus  to  Being 
or  to  the  other  genera  or  to  anything  whatever. 

Further,  as  the  simplex  must  be  the  principle  of  the  non-simplex, 
though  not  its  genus — for  then  the  non-simplex  too  would  be  simplex, — 
so  it  stands  with  unity  ;  if  unity  is  a  Principle,  it  cannot  be  a  genus  to 
its  subsequents,  and  therefore  cannot  be  a  genus  of  Being  or  of  other 


54 


PLOTINUS 


things.  If  it  is  nevertheless  to  be  a  genus,  everything  of  which  it  is  a 
genus  must  be  taken  as  a  unit — a  notion  which  implies  the  separation 
of  unity  from  substance  :  it  will  not,  therefore,  be  all-embracing.  Just 
as  Being  is  not  a  genus  of  everything  but  only  of  species  each  of  which 
is  a  being,  so  too  unity  will  be  a  genus  of  species  each  of  which  is  a  unity. 
But  that  raises  the  question  of  what  difference  there  is  between  one 
thing  and  another  in  so  far  as  they  are  both  units,  corresponding  to 
the  difference  between  one  being  and  another. 

Unity,  it  may  be  suggested,  is  divided  in  its  conjunction  with  Being 
and  Substance  ;  Being  because  it  is  so  divided  is  considered  a  genus — 
the  one  genus  manifested  in  many  particulars  ;  why  then  should  not 
unity  be  similarly  a  genus,  inasmuch  as  its  manifestations  are  as  many 
as  those  of  Substance  and  it  is  divided  into  as  many  particulars  ? 

In  the  first  place,  the  mere  fact  that  an  entity  inheres  in  many 
things  is  not  enough  to  make  it  a  genus  of  those  things  or  of  anything 
else  :  in  a  word,  a  common  property  need  not  be  a  genus.  The  point 
inherent  in  a  line  is  not  a  genus  of  lines,  or  a  genus  at  all ;  nor  again, 
as  we  have  observed,  is  the  unity  latent  in  numbers  a  genus  either  of 
the  numbers  or  of  anything  else  :  genus  demands  that  the  common 
property  of  diverse  objects  involve  also  differences  arising  out  of  its  own 
character,  that  it  form  species,  and  that  it  belong  to  the  essence  of  the 
objects.  But  what  differences  can  there  be  in  unity  ?  What  species 
does  it  engender  ?  If  it  produces  the  same  species  as  we  find  in  connection 
with  Being,  it  must  be  identical  with  Being  :  only  the  name  will  differ, 
and  the  term  Being  may  well  suffice. 


ii. 

We  are  bound  however  to  enquire  under  what  mode  unity  is  con¬ 
tained  in  Being.  How  is  what  is  termed  the  “  dividing  ”  effected — 
especially  the  dividing  of  the  genera  Being  and  unity  ?  Is  it  the  same 
division,  or  is  it  different  in  the  two  cases  ? 

First  then  : — In  what  sense,  precisely,  is  any  given  particular  called 
and  known  to  be  a  unity  ?  Secondly : — Does  unity  as  used  of  Being 
carry  the  same  connotation  as  in  reference  to  the  Absolute  ? 


VI.  2.  II] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


55 


Unity  is  not  identical  in  all  things ;  it  has  a  different  significance 
according  as  it  is  applied  to  the  Sensible  and  the  Intellectual  realms — 
Being  too,  of  course,  comports  such  a  difference — and  there  is  a  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  unity  affirmed  among  sensible  things  as  compared  with 
each  other ;  the  unity  is  not  the  same  in  the  cases  of  chorus,  camp, 
ship,  house ;  there  is  a  difference  again  as  between  such  discrete  things 
and  the  continuous.  Nevertheless,  all  are  representations  of  the  one 
exemplar,  some  quite  remote,  others  more  effective  :  the  truer  likeness 
is  in  the  Intellectual ;  Soul  is  a  unity,  and  still  more  is  Intellect  a  unity 
and  Being  a  unity. 

When  we  predicate  Being  of  a  particular,  do  we  thereby  predicate 
of  it  unity,  and  does  the  degree  of  its  unity  tally  with  that  of  its  being  ? 
Such  correspondence  is  accidental :  unity  is  not  proportionate  to  Being  ; 
less  unity  need  not  mean  less  Being.  An  army  or  a  choir  has  no  less 
Being  than  a  house,  though  less  unity. 

It  would  appear,  then,  that  the  unity  of  a  particular  is  related  not 
so  much  to  Being  as  to  a  standard  of  perfection  :  in  so  far  as  the  par¬ 
ticular  attains  perfection,  so  far  it  is  a  unity ;  and  the  degree  of  unity 
depends  on  this  attainment.  The  particular  aspires  not  simply  to  Being, 
but  to  Being-in-perfection  :  it  is  in  this  strain  towards  their  perfection 
that  such  beings  as  do  not  possess  unity  strive  their  utmost  to  achieve  it. 

Things  of  nature  tend  by  their  very  nature  to  coalesce  with  each 
other  and  also  to  unify  each  within  itself ;  their  movement  is  not  away  from 
but  towards  each  other  and  inwards  upon  themselves.  Souls,  moreover, 
seem  to  desire  always  to  pass  into  a  unity  over  and  above  the  unity 
of  their  own  substance.  Unity  in  fact  confronts  them  on  two  sides  : 
their  origin  and  their  goal  alike  are  unity  ;  from  unity  they  have  arisen, 
and  towards  unity  they  strive.  Unity  is  thus  identical  with  Goodness 
(is  the  universal  standard  of  perfection)  ;  for  no  being  ever  came  into 
existence  without  possessing,  from  that  very  moment,  an  irresistible 
tendency  towards  unity. 

From  natural  things  we  turn  to  the  artificial.  Every  art  in  all  its 
operation  aims  at  whatsoever  unity  its  capacity  and  its  models  permit, 
though  Being  most  achieves  unity  since  it  is  closer  at  the  start. 


56 


PLOTINUS 


That  is  why  in  speaking  of  other  entities  we  assert  the  name  only, 
for  example  man  ;  when  we  say  “  one  man,”  we  have  in  mind  more 
than  one  ;  and  if  we  affirm  unity  of  him  in  any  other  connection,  we 
regard  it  as  supplementary  (to  his  essence)  :  but  when  we  speak  of 
Being  as  a  whole  we  say  it  is  one  Being  without  presuming  that  it  is 
anything  but  a  unity ;  we  thereby  show  its  close  association  with 
Goodness. 

Thus  for  Being,  as  for  the  others,  unity  turns  out  to  be,  in  some 
sense.  Principle  and  Term,  not  however  in  the  same  sense  as  for  things 
of  the  physical  order — a  discrepancy  leading  us  to  infer  that  even  in 
unity  there  are  degrees  of  priority. 

How,  then,  do  we  characterise  the  unity  (thus  diverse)  in  Being  ? 
Are  we  to  think  of  it  as  a  common  property  seen  alike  in  all  its  parts  ? 
In  the  first  place  (we  observe)  the  point  is  common  to  lines  and  yet  is 
not  their  genus,  and  this  unity  we  are  considering  may  also  be  common 
to  numbers  and  not  be  their  genus — though,  we  need  hardly  say,  the 
unity  of  Unity-Absolute  is  not  that  of  the  numbers,  one,  two  and  the 
rest.  Secondly,  in  Being  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  existence  of 
prior  and  posterior,  simple  and  composite  :  but  unity,  even  if  it  be 
identical  in  all  the  manifestations  of  Being,  having  no  differentiae  can 
produce  no  species  ;  but  producing  no  species  it  cannot  be  a  genus. 


12. 

Enough  upon  that  side  of  the  question.  But  how  does  the  per¬ 
fection  (goodness)  of  numbers,  lifeless  things,  depend  upon  their 
particular  unity  ?  Just  as  all  other  inanimates  find  their  perfection  in 
their  unity. 

If  it  should  be  objected  that  numbers  are  simply  non-existent,  we 
should  point  out  that  our  discussion  is  concerned  (not  with  units  as 
such,  but)  with  beings  considered  from  the  aspect  of  their  unity. 

We  may  again  be  asked  how  the  point — supposing  its  independent 
existence  granted — participates  in  perfection.  If  the  point  is  chosen 
as  an  inanimate  object,  the  question  applies  to  all  such  objects  :  but 
perfection  does  exist  in  such  things,  for  example  in  a  circle  :  the 


VI-  2-  J3]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  57 

perfection  of  the  circle  will  be  perfection  for  the  point ;  it  will  aspire 
to  this  perfection  and  strive  to  attain  it,  as  far  as  it  can,  through 
the  circle. 

But  how  are  the  five  genera  to  be  regarded  ?  Do  they  form  particulars 
by  being  broken  up  into  parts  ?  No  ;  the  genus  exists  as  a  whole  in 
each  of  the  things  whose  genus  it  is. 

But  how,  at  that,  can  it  remain  a  unity  ?  The  unity  of  a  genus 
must  be  considered  as  a  whole-in-many. 

Does  it  exist  then  only  in  the  things  participating  in  it  ?  No  ;  it 
has  an  independent  existence  of  its  own  as  well. — But  this  will,  no  doubt, 
become  clearer  as  we  proceed. 

13- 

\\  e  turn  to  ask  why  Quantity  is  not  included  among  the  primary 
genera,  and  Quality  also. 

Quantity  is  not  among  the  primaries,  because  these  are  permanently 
associated  with  Being.  Motion  is  bound  up  with  Actual  Being  (Being- 
in- Act),  since  it  is  its  life  ;  with  Motion  Stability  too  gained  its  foothold 
in  Reality ;  with  these  are  associated  Difference  and  Identity,  so  that 
they  also  are  seen  in  conjunction  with  Being.  But  number  (the  basis 
of  Quantity)  is  a  posterior.  It  is  posterior  not  only  with  regard  to  these 
genera  but  also  within  itself ;  in  number  the  posterior  is  divided  from 
the  prior  ;  this  is  a  sequence  in  which  the  posteriors  are  latent  in  the 
priors  (and  do  not  appear  simultaneously).  Number  therefore  cannot 
be  included  among  the  primary  genera  ;  whether  it  constitutes  a  genus 
at  all  remains  to  be  examined. 

Magnitude  (extended  quantity)  is  in  a  still  higher  degree  posterior 
and  composite,  for  it  contains  within  itself  number,  line  and  surface. 
Now  if  continuous  magnitude  derives  its  quantity  from  number,  and 
number  is  not  a  genus,  how  can  magnitude  hold  that  status  ?  Besides, 
magnitudes,  like  numbers,  admit  of  priority  and  posteriority. 

If,  then.  Quantity  be  constituted  by  a  common  element  in  both 
number  and  magnitude,  we  must  ascertain  the  nature  of  this  common 

element,  and  consider  it,  once  discovered,  as  a  posterior  genus,  not  as 

1 


58 


PLOTINUS 


one  of  the  Primaries :  thus  failing  of  primary  status,  it  must  be  related, 
directly  or  indirectly,  to  one  of  the  Primaries. 

We  may  take  it  as  clear  that  it  is  the  nature  of  Quantity  to  indicate 
a  certain  quantum,  and  to  measure  the  quantum  of  the  particular  ; 
Quantity  is  moreover,  in  a  sense,  itself  a  quantum.  But  if  the  quantum 
is  the  common  element  in  number  and  magnitude,  either  we  have  number 
as  a  primary  with  magnitude  derived  from  it,  or  else  number  must 
consist  of  a  blending  of  Motion  and  Stability,  while  magnitude  will  be 
a  form  of  Motion  or  will  originate  in  Motion,  Motion  going  forth  to  in¬ 
finity  and  Stability  creating  the  unit  by  checking  that  advance. 

But  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  number  and  magnitude,  or  rather 
of  how  they  subsist  and  are  conceived,  must  be  held  over.  It  may,  thus, 
be  found  that  number  is  among  the  primary  genera,  while  magnitude 
is  posterior  and  composite  ;  or  that  number  belongs  to  the  genus  Stability, 
while  magnitude  must  be  consigned  to  Motion. — But  we  propose  to  discuss 
all  this  at  a  later  stage. 

14- 

Why  is  Quality,  again,  not  included  among  the  Primaries  ?  Because 
like  Quantity  it  is  a  posterior,  subsequent  to  Substance.  Primary  Sub¬ 
stance  must  necessarily  contain  Quantity  and  Quality  as  its  consequents  ; 
it  cannot  owe  its  subsistence  to  them,  or  require  them  for  its  completion  : 
that  would  make  it  posterior  to  Quality  and  Quantity. 

Now  in  the  case  of  composite  substances — those  constituted  from 
diverse  elements — number  and  qualities  provide  a  means  of  differen¬ 
tiation  :  the  qualities  may  be  detached  from  the  common  core  around 
which  they  are  found  to  group  themselves.  But  in  the  primary  genera 
there  is  no  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  simples  and  composites ; 
the  difference  is  between  simples  and  those  entities  which  complete  not 
a  particular  substance  but  Substance  as  such.  A  particular  substance 
may  very  well  receive  completion  from  Quality,  for  though  it  already 
has  Substance  before  the  accession  of  Quality,  its  particular  character 
is  external  to  Substance.  But  in  Substance  itself  all  the  elements  are 
substantial. 


VI.  2.  15] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


59 


Nevertheless,  we  ventured  to  assert  elsewhere  that  while  the  com¬ 
plements  of  Substance  are  only  by  analogy  called  qualities,  yet  accessions 
of  external  origin  and  subsequent  to  Substance  are  really  qualities  ; 
that,  further,  the  properties  which  inhere  in  substances  are  their  activities 
(Acts),  while  those  which  are  subsequent  are  merely  modifications  (or 
Passions)  :  we  now  affirm  that  the  attributes  of  the  particular  substance 
are  never  complementary  to  Substance  (as  such)  ;  an  accession  of  Sub¬ 
stance  does  not  come  to  the  substance  of  man  qua  man  ;  he  is,  on  the 
contrary.  Substance  in  a  higher  degree  before  he  arrives  at  differentiation, 
just  as  he  is  already  “  living  being"  before  he  passes  into  the  rational 
species. 

15- 

How  then  do  the  four  genera  (we  have  posited)  complete  Substance 
without  qualifying  it  or  even  particularising  it  ? 

It  has  been  observed  that  Being  is  primary,  and  it  is  clear  that 
none  of  the  four — Motion,  Stability,  Difference,  Identity — is  distinct 
from  it.  That  this  Motion  does  not  produce  Quality  is  doubtless  also 
clear,  but  a  word  or  two  will  make  it  clearer  still. 

If  Motion  is  the  Act  of  Substance,  and  Being  and  the  Primaries  in 
general  are  its  Act,  then  Motion  is  not  an  accidental  attribute  :  as  the 
Act  of  what  is  necessarily  actual  (what  necessarily  involves  Act),  it  is 
no  longer  to  be  considered  as  the  complement  of  Substance  but  as  Sub¬ 
stance  itself.  For  this  reason,  then,  it  has  not  been  assigned  to  a  posterior 
class,  or  referred  to  Quality,  but  has  been  made  contemporary  with 
Being. 

The  truth  is  not  that  Being  first  is  and  then  takes  Motion,  first 
is  and  then  acquires  Stability :  neither  Stability  nor  Motion  is  a  mere 
modification  of  Being.  Similarly,  Identity  and  Difference  are  not  later 
additions  :  Being  did  not  grow  into  plurality ;  its  very  unity  was  a 
plurality ;  but  plurality  implies  Difference,  and  unity-in-plurality 
involves  Identity. 

Substance  (Real  Being)  requires  no  more  than  these  five  constituents  ; 
but  when  we  have  to  turn  to  the  lower  sphere,  we  find  other  principles 


6o 


PLOTINUS 


giving  rise  no  longer  to  Substance  (as  such)  but  to  quantitative  Substance 
and  qualitative  :  these  other  principles  may  be  regarded  as  genera  but 
not  primary  genera. 

m 

16. 

As  for  Relation,  manifestly  an  offshoot,  how  can  it  be  included 
among  primaries  ?  Relation  is  of  thing  ranged  against  thing  ;  it  is  not 
self-pivoted,  but  looks  outward. 

Place  and  Date  are  still  more  remote  from  Being.  Place  denotes 
the  presence  of  one  entity  within  another,  so  that  it  involves  a  duality ; 
but  a  genus  must  be  a  unity,  not  a  composite.  Besides,  Place  does  not 
exist  in  the  higher  sphere,  and  the  present  discussion  is  concerned  with 
the  realm  of  True  Being. 

Whether  time  is  There,  remains  to  be  considered.  Apparently  it 
has  less  claim  than  even  Place.  If  it  is  a  measurement,  and  that  a  measure¬ 
ment  of  Motion,  we  have  two  entities  ;  the  whole  is  a  composite  and 
posterior  to  Motion  ;  therefore  it  is  not  on  an  equal  footing  with  Motion 
in  our  classification. 

Action  and  Passivity  presuppose  Motion  ;  if,  then,  they  exist  in 
the  higher  sphere,  they  each  involve  a  duality  ;  neither  is  a  simplex. 

Possession  is  a  duality,  while  Situation,  as  signifying  one  thing 
situated  in  another,  is  a  threefold  conception. 

Why  are  not  beauty,  goodness  and  the  virtues,  together  with  know¬ 
ledge  and  intelligence,  included  among  the  primary  genera  ? 

If  by  goodness  we  mean  The  First — what  we  call  the  Principle  of 
Goodness,  the  Principle  of  which  we  can  predicate  nothing,  giving  it 
this  name  only  because  we  have  no  other  means  of  indicating  it, — then 
goodness,  clearly,  can  be  the  genus  of  nothing :  this  principle  is  not 
affirmed  of  other  things ;  if  it  were,  each  of  these  would  be  Goodness 
itself.  The  truth  is  that  it  is  prior  to  Substance,  not  contained  in  it. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  we  mean  goodness  as  a  quality,  no  quality  can  be 
ranked  among  the  primaries. 


VI.  2.  18] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


61 


Does  this  imply  that  the  nature  of  Being  is  not  good  ?  Not  good, 
to  begin  with,  in  the  sense  in  which  The  First  is  good,  but  in  another 
sense  of  the  word  :  moreover.  Being  does  not  possess  its  goodness  as  a 
quality  but  as  a  constituent. 

But  the  other  genera  too,  we  said,  are  constituents  of  Being,  and 
are  regarded  as  genera  because  each  is  a  common  property  found  in 
many  things.  If  then  goodness  is  similarly  observed  in  every  part  of 
Substance  or  Being,  or  in  most  parts,  why  is  goodness  not  a  genus,  and 
a  primary  genus  ?  Because  it  is  not  found  identical  in  all  the  parts  of 
Being,  but  appears  in  degrees,  first,  second  and  subsequent,  whether 
it  be  because  one  part  is  derived  from  another — posterior  from  prior — 
or  because  all  are  posterior  to  the  transcendent  Unity,  different  parts 
of  Being  participating  in  it  in  diverse  degrees  corresponding  to  their 
characteristic  natures. 

If  however  we  must  make  goodness  a  genus  as  well  (as  a  trans¬ 
cendent  source),  it  will  be  a  posterior  genus,  for  goodness  is  posterior 
to  Substance  and  posterior  to  what  constitutes  the  generic  notion  of 
Being,  however  unfailingly  it  be  found  associated  with  Being :  but  the 
Primaries,  we  decided,  belong  to  Being  as  such,  and  go  to  form  Substance. 

This  indeed  is  why  we  posit  that  which  transcends  Being,  since 
Being  and  Substance  cannot  but  be  a  plurality,  necessarily  comprising 
the  genera  enumerated  and  therefore  forming  a  one-and-many. 

It  is  true  that  we  do  not  hesitate  to  speak  of  “  the  goodness  inherent 
in  Being  ”  when  we  are  thinking  of  that  Act  by  which  Being  tends,  of 
its  nature,  towards  the  One  :  thus,  we  affirm  goodness  of  it  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  thereby  moulded  into  the  likeness  of  The  Good.  But  if  this 
‘‘  goodness  inherent  in  Being  ”  is  an  Act  directed  toward  The  Good,  it 
is  the  life  of  Being :  but  this  life  is  Motion,  and  Motion  is  already  one 
of  the  genera. 

18. 

To  pass  to  the  consideration  of  beauty : — 

If  by  beauty  we  mean  the  primary  Beauty,  the  same  or  similar 
arguments  will  apply  here  as  to  goodness  :  and  if  the  beauty  in  the 


62 


PLOTINUS 


Ideal-Form  is,  as  it  were,  an  effulgence  (from  that  primary  Beauty), 
we  may  observe  that  it  is  not  identical  in  all  participants  and  that  an 
effulgence  is  necessarily  a  posterior. 

If  we  mean  the  beauty  which  identifies  itself  with  Substance,  this 
has  been  covered  in  our  treatment  of  Substance. 

If,  again,  we  mean  beauty  in  relation  to  ourselves  as  spectators 
in  whom  it  produces  a  certain  experience,  this  Act  (of  production)  is 
Motion, — and  none  the  less  Motion  by  being  directed  towards  Absolute 
Beauty. 

Knowledge,  again,  is  Motion  originating  in  the  self  ;  it  is  the  obser¬ 
vation  of  Being — an  Act,  not  a  State :  hence  it  too  falls  under  Motion, 
or  perhaps  more  suitably  under  Stability,  or  even  under  both  ;  if  under 
both,  knowledge  must  be  thought  of  as  a  complex,  and  if  a  complex, 
is  posterior. 

Intelligence,  since  it  connotes  intelligent  Being  and  comprises  the 
total  of  existence,  cannot  be  one  of  the  genera  :  the  true  Intelligence 
(or  Intellect)  is  Being  taken  with  all  its  concomitants  (with  the  other 
four  genera)  ;  it  is  actually  the  sum  of  all  the  Existents  :  Being  on  the 
contrary,  stripped  of  its  concomitants,  may  be  counted  as  a  genus  and 
held  to  be  an  element  in  Intelligence. 

Justice  and  self-control  (sophrosyny),  and  virtue  in  general — these 
are  all  various  Acts  of  Intelligence  :  they  are  consequently  not  primary 
genera ;  they  are  posterior  to  a  genus,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  species. 

19- 

Having  established  our  four  primary  genera,  it  remains  for  us 
to  enquire  whether  each  of  them  of  itself  alone  produces  species.  And 
especially,  can  Being  be  divided  independently,  that  is  without  drawing 
upon  the  other  genera  ?  Surely  not :  the  differentiae  must  come  from 
outside  the  genus  differentiated  :  they  must  be  differentiae  of  Being 
proper,  but  cannot  be  identical  with  it. 

Where  then  is  it  to  find  them  ?  Obviously  not  in  non-beings.  If 
then  in  beings,  and  the  three  genera  are  all  that  is  left,  clearly  it  must 


VI.  2.  20]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  63 

find  them  in  these,  by  conjunction  and  couplement  with  these,  which 
will  come  into  existence  simultaneously  with  itself. 

But  if  all  come  into  existence  simultaneously,  what  else  is  produced 
but  that  amalgam  of  all  the  Existents  which  we  have  just  considered 
(Intellect)  ?  How  can  other  things  exist  over  and  above  this  all-including 
amalgam  ?  And  if  all  the  constituents  of  this  amalgam  are  genera,  how  do 
they  produce  species  ?  How  does  Motion  produce  species  of  Motion  ? 
Similarly  with  Stability  and  the  other  genera. 

A  word  of  warning  must  here  be  given  against  sinking  the  various 
genera  in  their  species  ;  and  also  against  reducing  the  genus  to  a  mere 
predicate,  something  merely  seen  in  the  species.  The  genus  must  exist 
at  once  in  itself  and  in  its  species ;  it  blends,  but  it  must  also  be  pure  ; 
in  contributing  along  with  other  genera  to  form  Substance,  it  must  not 
destroy  itself. — There  are  problems  here  that  demand  investigation. 

But  since  we  identified  the  amalgam  of  the  Existents  (or  primary 
genera)  with  the  particular  intellect,  Intellect  as  such  being  found  iden¬ 
tical  with  Being  or  (in  the  sense  of)  Substance,  and  therefore  prior  to 
all  the  Existents,  which  may  be  regarded  as  its  species  or  members, 
we  may  infer  that  the  intellect,  considered  as  completely  unfolded,  is 
a  subsequent. 

Our  treatment  of  this  problem  may  serve  to  promote  our  investi¬ 
gation  ;  we  will  take  it  as  a  kind  of  example,  and  with  it  embark  upon 
our  enquiry. 


20. 

We  may  thus  distinguish  two  phases  of  Intellect,  in  one  of  which 
it  may  be  taken  as  having  no  contact  whatever  with  particulars  and  no 
Act  upon  anything ;  thus  it  is  kept  apart  from  being  a  particular  intellect. 
In  the  same  way  science  is  prior  to  any  of  its  constituent  species,  and 
the  specific  science  is  prior  to  any  of  its  component  parts  :  being  none 
of  its  particulars  it  is  the  potentiality  of  all ;  each  particular,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  actually  itself,  but  potentially  the  sum  of  all  the  par¬ 
ticulars  :  and  as  with  the  specific  science,  so  with  science  as  a  whole. 
The  specific  sciences  lie  in  potentiality  in  science  the  total ;  even  in 


04 


PLOTINUS 


their  specific  character  they  are  potentially  the  whole  ;  they  have  the 
whole  predicated  of  them  and  not  merely  a  part  of  the  whole.  At  the 
same  time,  science  must  exist  as  a  thing  in  itself,  unharmed  by  its  divisions. 

So  with  Intellect.  Intellect  as  a  whole  must  be  thought  of  as  prior 
to  the  intellects  actualised  as  individuals  j  but  when  we  come  to  the 
particular  intellects,  we  find  that  what  subsists  in  the  particulars  must 
be  maintained  from  the  totality.  I  he  Intellect  subsisting  in  the  totality 
is  a  provider  for  the  particular  intellects,  is  the  potentiality  of  them  : 
it  involves  them  as  members  of  its  universality,  while  they  in  turn  involve 
the  universal  Intellect  in  their  particularity,  just  as  the  particular  science 
involves  science  the  total. 

The  great  Intellect,  we  maintain,  exists  in  itself  and  the  particular 
intellects  in  themselves  ;  yet  the  particulars  are  embraced  in  the  whole, 
and  the  whole  in  the  particulars.  1  he  particular  intellects  exist  by 
themselves  and  in  another,  the  universal  by  itself  and  in  those.  All  the 
paiticulars  exist  potentially  in  that  self-existent  universal,  which  actually 
is  the  totality,  potentially  each  isolated  member  :  on  the  other  hand, 
each  particular  is  actually  what  it  is  (its  individual  self),  potentially  the 
totality.  In  so  far  as  what  is  predicated  of  them  is  their  essence,  they 
are  actually  what  is  predicated  of  them  ;  but  where  the  predicate  is  a 
genus,  they  aie  that  only  potentially.  On  the  other  hand,  the  universal 
in  so  far  as  it  is  a  genus  is  the  potentiality  of  all  its  subordinate  species, 
though  none  of  them  in  actuality ;  all  are  latent  in  it,  but  because  its 
essential  nature  exists  in  actuality  before  the  existence  of  the  species, 
it  does  not  submit  to  be  itself  particularised.  If  then  the  particulars  are 
to  exist  in  actuality  to  exist,  for  example,  as  species — the  cause  must 
lie  in  the  Act  radiating  from  the  universal. 


21. 

How  then  does  the  universal  Intellect  produce  the  particulars 
while,  in  virtue  of  its  Reason-Principle,  remaining  a  unity  ?  In  other 
words,  how  do  the  various  grades  of  Being,  as  we  call  them,  arise  from 
the  four  primaries  ?  Here  is  this  great,  this  infinite  Intellect,  not  given 
to  idle  utterance  but  to  sheer  intellection,  all-embracing,  integral,  no 


VI.  2.  21]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  65 

part,  no  individual :  how,  we  ask,  can  it  possibly  be  the  source  of  all 
this  plurality  ? 

Number  at  all  events  it  possesses  in  the  objects  of  its  contemplation  : 
it  is  thus  one  and  many,  and  the  many  are  powers,  wonderful  powers, 
not  weak  but,  being  pure,  supremely  great  and,  so  to  speak,  full  to 
overflowing — powers  in  very  truth,  knowing  no  limit,  so  that  they  are 
infinite,  infinity,  Magnitude- Absolute. 

As  we  survey  this  Magnitude  with  the  beauty  of  Being  within  it 
and  the  glory  and  light  around  it,  all  contained  in  Intellect,  we  see, 
simultaneously.  Quality  already  in  bloom,  and  along  with  the  continuity 
of  its  Act  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  Magnitude  at  Rest.  Then,  with  one, 
two  and  three  in  Intellect,  Magnitude  appears  as  of  three  dimensions,  with 
Quantity  entire.  Quantity  thus  given  and  Quality,  both  merging  into 
one  and,  we  may  almost  say,  becoming  one,  there  is  at  once  shape. 
Difference  slips  in  to  divide  both  Quantity  and  Quality,  and  so  we  have 
variations  in  shape  and  differences  of  Quality.  Identity,  coming  in  with 
Difference,  creates  equality,  Difference  meanwhile  introducing  into 
Quantity  inequality,  whether  in  number  or  in  magnitude  :  thus  are 
produced  circles  and  squares,  and  irregular  figures,  with  number  like 
and  unlike,  odd  and  even. 

The  life  of  Intellect  is  intelligent,  and  its  activity  (Act)  has  no 
failing-point :  hence  it  excludes  none  of  the  constituents  we  have  dis¬ 
covered  within  it,  each  one  of  which  we  now  see  as  an  intellectual  function, 
and  all  of  them  possessed  by  virtue  of  its  distinctive  power  and  in  the 
mode  appropriate  to  Intellect. 

But  though  Intellect  possesses  them  all  by  way  of  thought,  this 
is  not  discursive  thought  :  nothing  it  lacks  that  is  capable  of  serving 
as  Reason-Principle,  while  it  may  itself  be  regarded  as  one  great  and 
perfect  Reason-Principle,  holding  all  the  Principles  as  one  and  proceeding 
from  its  own  Primaries,  or  rather  having  eternally  proceeded,  so  that 
“  proceeding  ”  is  never  true  of  it.  It  is  a  universal  rule  that  whatever 
reasoning  discovers  to  exist  in  Nature  is  to  be  found  in  Intellect  apart 
from  all  ratiocination  :  we  conclude  that  Being  has  so  created  Intellect 
that  its  reasoning  is  after  a  mode  similar  to  that  of  the  Principles  which 

K 


66 


PLOTINUS 


produce  living  beings  ;  for  the  Reason-Principles,  prior  to  reasoning 
though  they  are,  act  invariably  in  the  manner  which  the  most  careful 
reasoning  would  adopt  in  order  to  attain  the  best  results. 

What  conditions,  then,  are  we  to  think  of  as  existing  in  that  realm 
which  is  prior  to  Nature  and  transcends  the  Principles  of  Nature  ?  In 
a  sphere  in  which  Substance  is  not  distinct  from  Intellect,  and  neither 
Being  nor  Intellect  is  of  alien  origin,  it  is  obvious  that  Being  is  best 
served  by  the  domination  of  Intellect,  so  that  Being  is  what  Intellect 
wills  and  is  :  thus  alone  can  it  be  authentic  and  primary  Being  ;  for  if 
Being  is  to  be  in  any  sense  derived,  its  derivation  must  be  from  Intellect. 

Being,  thus,  exhibits  every  shape  and  every  quality ;  it  is  not  seen 
as  a  thing  determined  by  some  one  particular  quality ;  there  could  not 
be  one  only,  since  the  principle  of  Difference  is  there  ;  and  since  Identity 
is  equally  there,  it  must  be  simultaneously  one  and  many.  And  so 
Being  is  ;  such  it  always  was  :  unity-with-plurality  appears  in  all  its 
species,  as  witness  all  the  variations  of  magnitude,  shape  and  quality. 
Clearly  nothing  may  legitimately  be  excluded  (from  Being),  for  the 
whole  must  be  complete  in  the  higher  sphere  which,  otherwise,  would 
not  be  the  whole. 

Life  too  burst  upon  Being,  or  rather  was  inseparably  bound  up 
with  it ;  and  thus  it  was  that  all  living  things  of  necessity  came  to  be. 
Body  too  was  there,  since  Matter  and  Quality  were  present. 

Everything  exists  forever,  unfailing,  involved  by  very  existence  in 
eternity.  Individuals  have  their  separate  entities,  but  are  at  one  in  the 
(total)  unity.  The  complex,  so  to  speak,  of  them  all,  thus  combined, 
is  Intellect ;  and  Intellect,  holding  all  existence  within  itself,  is  a  complete 
living  being,  and  the  essential  Idea  of  Living  Being.  In  so  far  as  Intellect 
submits  to  contemplation  by  its  derivative,  becoming  an  Intelligible, 
it  gives  that  derivative  the  right  also  to  be  called  “  living  being.” 


22. 

We  may  here  adduce  the  pregnant  words  of  Plato  :  “  Inasmuch  as 
Intellect  perceives  the  variety  and  plurality  of  the  Forms  present  in 
the  complete  Living  Being.  .  .  .”  The  words  apply  equally  to  Soul; 


VI.  2.  22] 


ON  THE  -KINDS  OF  BEING 


67 


Soul  is  subsequent  to  Intellect,  yet  by  its  very  nature  it  involves  Intellect 
in  itself  and  perceives  more  clearly  in  that  prior.  There  is  Intellect  in 
our  intellect  also,  which  again  perceives  more  clearly  in  its  prior,  for 
while  of  itself  it  merely  perceives,  in  the  prior  it  also  perceives  its  own 
perception. 

This  intellect,  then,  to  which  we  ascribe  perception,  though  not 
divorced  from  the  prior  in  which  it  originates,  evolves  plurality  out  of 
unity  and  has  bound  up  with  it  the  principle  of  Difference  :  it  therefore 
takes  the  form  of  a  plurality-in-unity.  A  plurality-in-unity,  it  produces 
the  many  intellects  by  the  dictate  of  its  very  nature. 

It  is  certainly  no  numerical  unity,  no  individual  thing  ;  for  what¬ 
ever  you  find  in  that  sphere  is  a  species,  since  it  is  divorced  from  Matter. 
This  may  be  the  import  of  the  difficult  words  of  Plato,  that  Substance 
is  broken  up  into  an  infinity  of  parts.  So  long  as  the  division  proceeds 
from  genus  to  species,  infinity  is  not  reached  ;  a  limit  is  set  by  the  species 
generated  :  the  lowest  species,  however, — that  which  is  not  divided  into 
further  species — may  be  more  accurately  regarded  as  infinite.  And  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  words  :  “to  relegate  them  once  and  for  all  to 
infinity  and  there  abandon  them.”  As  for  particulars,  they  are,  con¬ 
sidered  in  themselves,  infinite,  but  come  under  number  by  being  embraced 
by  the  (total)  unity. 

Now  Soul  has  Intellect  for  its  prior,  is  therefore  circumscribed  by 
number  down  to  its  ultimate  extremity ;  at  that  point  infinity  is 
reached.  The  particular  intellect,  though  all-embracing,  is  a  partial 
thing,  and  the  collective  Intellect  and  its  various  manifestations  (all 
the  particular  intellects)  are  in  actuality  parts  of  that  part.  Soul  too 
is  a  part  of  a  part,  though  in  the  sense  of  being  an  Act  (actuality) 
derived  from  it.  When  the  Act  of  Intellect  is  directed  upon  itself,  the 
result  is  the  manifold  (particular)  intellects  ;  when  it  looks  outwards, 
Soul  is  produced. 

If  Soul  acts  as  a  genus  or  a  species,  the  various  (particular)  souls 
must  act  as  species.  Their  activities  (Acts)  will  be  twofold  :  the  activity 
upward  is  Intellect ;  that  which  looks  downward  constitutes  the  other 
powers  imposed  by  the  particular  Reason-Principle  (the  Reason-Principle 


68 


PLOTINUS 


of  the  being  ensouled)  ;  the  lowest  activity  of  Soul  is  in  its  contact  with 
Matter  to  which  it  brings  Form. 

This  lower  part  of  Soul  does  not  prevent  the  rest  from  being  entirely 
in  the  higher  sphere  :  indeed  what  we  call  the  lower  part  is  but  an  image 
of  Soul :  not  that  it  is  cut  off  from  Soul ;  it  is  like  the  reflection  in  the 
mirror,  depending  upon  the  original  which  stands  outside  of  it. 

But  we  must  keep  in  mind  what  this  “  outside  ”  means.  Up  to 
the  production  of  the  image,  the  Intellectual  realm  is  wholly  and  ex¬ 
clusively  composed  of  Intellectual  Beings  :  in  the  same  way  the  Sensible 
world,  representing  that  in  so  far  as  it  is  able  to  retain  the  likeness  of 
a  living  being,  is  itself  a  living  being  :  the  relation  is  like  that  of  a  por¬ 
trait  or  reflection  to  the  original  which  is  regarded  as  prior  to  the  water 
or  the  painting  reproducing  it. 

The  representation,  notice,  in  the  portrait  or  on  the  water  is  not 
of  the  dual  being,  but  of  the  one  element  (Matter)  as  formed  by  the 
other  (Soul).  Similarly,  this  likeness  of  the  Intellectual  realm  carries 
images,  not  of  the  creative  element,  but  of  the  entities  contained  in 
that  creator,  including  Man  with  every  other  living  being  :  creator  and 
created  are  alike  living  beings,  though  of  a  different  life,  and  both  coexist 
in  the  Intellectual  realm. 


THIRD  TRACTATE 

On  the  Kinds  of  Being  :  Third  Treatise 

i. 

We  have  now  explained  our  conception  of  Reality  (True  Being) 
and  considered  how  far  it  agrees  with  the  teaching  of  Plato.  We  have 
still  to  investigate  the  opposed  principle  (the  principle  of  Becoming). 

There  is  the  possibility  that  the  genera  posited  for  the  Intellectual 
sphere  will  suffice  for  the  lower  also  ;  possibly  with  these  genera  others 
will  be  required  ;  again,  the  two  series  may  differ  entirely  ;  or  perhaps 
some  of  the  sensible  genera  will  be  identical  with  their  intellectual 
prototypes,  and  others  different — “  identical,”  however,  being  understood 


VI.  3.  2]  ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING  69 

to  mean  only  analogous  and  in  possession  of  a  common  name,  as  our 
results  will  make  clear. 

We  must  begin  on  these  lines  : — 

The  subject  of  our  discussion  is  the  Sensible  realm :  Sensible 
Existence  is  entirely  embraced  by  what  we  know  as  the  Universe  :  our 
duty,  then,  would  seem  to  be  clear  enough — to  take  this  Universe  and 
analyse  its  nature,  classifying  its  constituent  parts  and  arranging  them 
by  species.  Suppose  that  we  were  making  a  division  of  speech  :  we 
should  reduce  its  infinity  to  finite  terms,  and  from  the  identity  appearing 
in  many  instances  evolve  a  unity,  then  another  and  another,  until  we 
arrived  at  some  definite  number  ;  each  such  unit  we  should  call  a  species 
if  imposed  upon  individuals,  a  genus  if  imposed  upon  species.  Thus, 
every  species  of  speech — and  similarly  all  phenomena — might  be  referred 
to  a  unity  ;  speech — or  element — might  be  predicated  of  them  all. 

This  procedure  however  is,  as  we  have  already  shown,  impossible 
in  dealing  with  the  subject  of  our  present  enquiry.  New  genera  must 
be  sought  for  this  Universe — genera  distinct  from  those  of  the  Intellectual, 
inasmuch  as  this  realm  is  different  from  that,  analogous  indeed  but  never 
identical,  a  mere  image  of  the  higher.  True,  it  involves  the  parallel 
existence  of  Body  and  Soul,  for  the  Universe  is  a  living  form  :  essen¬ 
tially  however  Soul  is  of  the  Intellectual  and  does  not  enter  into  the 
structure  of  what  is  called  Sensible  Being. 

Remembering  this  fact,  we  must — however  great  the  difficulty — 
exclude  Soul  from  the  present  investigation,  just  as  in  a  census  of  citizens, 
taken  in  the  interests  of  commerce  and  taxation,  we  should  ignore  the 
alien  population.  As  for  the  experiences  to  which  Soul  is  indirectly 
subject  in  its  conjunction  with  Body  and  by  reason  of  Body’s  presence, 
their  classification  must  be  attempted  at  a  later  stage,  when  we  enquire 
into  the  details  of  Sensible  Existence. 


2. 

Our  first  observations  must  be  directed  to  what  passes  in  the  Sensible 
realm  for  Substance.  It  is,  we  shall  agree,  only  by  analogy  that  the 
nature  manifested  in  bodies  is  designated  as  Substance,  and  by  no 


70 


PLOTINUS 


means  because  such  terms  as  Substance  or  Being  tally  with  the  notion 
of  bodies  in  flux ;  the  proper  term  would  be  Becoming. 

But  Becoming  is  not  a  uniform  nature  ;  bodies  comprise  under 
the  single  head  simples  and  composites,  together  with  accidentals  or 
consequents,  these  last  themselves  capable  of  separate  classification. 

Alternatively,  Becoming  may  be  divided  into  Matter  and  the  Form 
imposed  upon  Matter.  These  may  be  regarded  each  as  a  separate  genus, 
or  else  both  may  be  brought  under  a  single  category  and  receive  alike 
the  name  of  Substance. 

But  what,  we  may  ask,  have  Matter  and  Form  in  common  ?  In 
what  sense  can  Matter  be  conceived  as  a  genus,  and  what  will  be  its 
species  ?  What  is  the  differentia  of  Matter  ?  In  which  genus,  Matter 
or  Form,  are  we  to  rank  the  composite  of  both  ?  It  may  be  this  very 
composite  which  constitutes  the  Substance  manifested  in  bodies,  neither 
of  the  components  by  itself  answering  to  the  conception  of  Body :  how, 
then,  can  we  rank  them  in  one  and  the  same  genus  as  the  composite  ? 
How  can  the  elements  of  a  thing  be  brought  within  the  same  genus  as 
the  thing  itself  ?  Yet  if  we  begin  with  bodies,  our  first-principles  will 
be  compounds. 

Why  not  resort  to  analogy  ?  Admitted  that  the  classification  of 
the  Sensible  cannot  proceed  along  the  identical  lines  marked  out  for  the 
Intellectual :  is  there  any  reason  why  we  should  not  for  Intellectual- 
Being  substitute  Matter,  and  for  Intellectual  Motion  substitute  Sensible 
Form,  which  is  in  a  sense  the  life  and  consummation  of  Matter  ?  The 
inertia  of  Matter  would  correspond  with  Stability,  while  the  Identity 
and  Difference  of  the  Intellectual  would  find  their  counterparts  in  the 
similarity  and  diversity  which  obtain  in  the  Sensible  realm. 

But,  in  the  first  place,  Matter  does  not  possess  or  acquire  Form  as 
its  life  or  its  Act ;  Form  enters  it  from  without,  and  remains  foreign  to 
its  nature.  Secondly,  Form  in  the  Intellectual  is  an  Act  and  a  motion  ; 
in  the  Sensible  Motion  is  different  from  Form  and  accidental  to  it : 
Form  in  relation  to  Matter  approximates  rather  to  Stability  than  to 
Motion  ;  for  by  determining  Matter’s  indetermination  it  confers  upon  it 
a  sort  of  repose. 


VI.  3-  3] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


7i 


In  the  higher  realm  Identity  and  Difference  presuppose  a  unity  at 
once  identical  and  different :  a  thing  in  the  lower  is  different  only  by 
participation  in  Difference  and  in  relation  to  some  other  thing  ;  Identity 
and  Difference  are  here  predicated  of  the  particular,  which  is  not,  as  in  that 
realm,  a  posterior. 

As  for  Stability,  how  can  it  belong  to  Matter,  which  is  distorted 
into  every  variety  of  mass,  receiving  its  forms  from  without,  and  even 
with  the  aid  of  these  forms  incapable  of  offspring  ? 

This  mode  of  division  must  accordingly  be  abandoned. 


3- 

How  then  do  we  go  to  work  ? 

Let  us  begin  by  distinguishing  Matter,  Form,  the  Mixture  of  both, 
and  the  Attributes  of  the  Mixture.  The  Attributes  may  be  subdivided 
into  those  which  are  mere  predicates,  and  those  serving  also  as  accidents. 
The  accidents  may  be  either  inclusive  or  included  ;  they  may,  further, 
be  classified  as  activities,  experiences,  consequents. 

Matter  will  be  found  common  to  all  substances,  not  however  as  a 
genus,  since  it  has  no  differentiae — unless  indeed  differentiae  be  ascribed 
to  it  on  the  ground  of  its  taking  such  various  forms  as  fire  and  air. 

It  may  be  held  that  Matter  is  sufficiently  constituted  a  genus  by 
the  fact  that  the  things  in  which  it  appears  hold  it  in  common,  or  in 
that  it  presents  itself  as  a  whole  of  parts.  In  this  sense  Matter  will 
indeed  be  a  genus,  though  not  in  the  accepted  sense  of  the  term.  Matter, 
we  may  remark,  is  also  a  single  element,  if  the  element  as  such  is  able 
to  constitute  a  genus. 

Further,  if  to  a  Form  be  added  the  qualification  “  bound  up  with, 
involved  in  Matter,”  Matter  separates  that  Form  from  other  Forms  : 
it  does  not  however  embrace  the  whole  of  Substantial  Form  (as,  to  be 
the  genus  of  Form,  it  must). 

We  may,  again,  regard  Form  as  the  creator  of  Substance  and  make 
the  Reason-Principle  of  Substance  dependent  upon  Form  :  yet  we  do 
not  come  thereby  to  an  understanding  of  the  nature  of  Substance. 

We  may,  also,  restrict  Substance  to  the  Composite.  Matter  and 


7  2 


PLOTINUS 


Form  then  cease  to  be  substances.  If  they  are  Substance  equally  with 
the  Composite,  it  remains  to  enquire  what  there  is  common  to  all  three. 

The  “  mere  predicates  ”  fall  under  the  category  of  Relation  :  such 
are  cause  and  element.  The  accidents  included  in  the  composite  sub¬ 
stances  are  found  to  be  either  Quality  or  Quantity  ;  those  which  are 
inclusive  are  of  the  nature  of  Space  and  Time.  Activities  and  experiences 
comprise  Motions  ;  consequents  Space  and  Time,  which  are  consequents 
respectively  of  the  Composites  and  of  Motion. 

The  first  three  entities  (Matter,  Form,  Composite)  go,  as  we  have 
discovered,  to  make  a  single  common  genus,  the  Sensible  counterpart  of 
Substance.  Then  follow  in  order  Relation,  Quantity,  Quality,  Time- 
during-which,  Place-in-which,  Motion  ;  though,  with  Time  and  Space 
already  included  (under  Relation) ,  Time-during-which  and  Place-in-which 
become  superfluous. 

Thus  we  have  five  genera,  counting  the  first  three  entities  as  one. 
If  the  first  three  are  not  massed  into  a  unity,  the  series  will  be  Matter, 
Form,  Composite,  Relation,  Quantity,  Quality,  Motion.  The  last  three 
may,  again,  be  included  in  Relation,  which  is  capable  of  bearing  this 
wider  extension. 

4* 

What,  then,  we  have  to  ask,  is  the  constant  element  in  the  first  three 
entities  ?  What  is  it  that  identifies  them  with  their  inherent  Substance  ? 

Is  it  the  capacity  to  serve  as  a  base  ?  But  Matter,  we  maintain, 
serves  as  the  base  and  seat  of  Form  :  Form,  thus,  will  be  excluded  from 
the  category  of  Substance.  Again,  the  Composite  is  the  base  and  seat 
of  attributes :  hence.  Form  combined  with  Matter  will  be  the  basic 
ground  of  Composites,  or  at  any  rate  of  all  posteriors  of  the  Composite — 
Quantity,  Quality,  Motion,  and  the  rest. 

But  perhaps  we  may  think  Substance  validly  defined  as  that  which 
is  not  predicated  of  anything  else.  White  and  black  are  predicated  of  an 
object  having  one  or  other  of  these  qualities  ;  double  presupposes  some¬ 
thing  distinct  from  itself — we  refer  not  to  the  half,  but  to  the  length  of 
wood  of  which  doubleness  is  affirmed  ;  father  qua  father  is  a  predicate  ; 


VI.  3.  4] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


73 


knowledge  is  predicated  of  the  subject  in  whom  the  knowledge  exists  ; 
space  is  the  limit  of  something,  time  the  measure  of  something.  Fire, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  predicated  of  nothing  ;  wood  as  such  is  predicated 
of  nothing  ;  and  so  with  man,  Socrates,  and  the  composite  substance 
in  general. 

Equally  the  Substantial  Form  is  never  a  predicate,  since  it  never 
acts  as  a  modification  of  anything.  Form  is  not  an  attribute  of  Matter 
(hence,  is  not  predicable  of  Matter)  ;  it  is  simply  a  constituent  of  the 
Couplement.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Form  of  a  man  is  not  different  from 
the  man  himself  (and  so  does  not  “  modify”  the  Couplement). 

Matter,  similarly,  is  part  of  a  whole,  and  belongs  to  something  else 
only  as  to  a  whole  and  not  as  to  a  separate  thing  of  which  it  is  predicated. 
White,  on  the  contrary,  essentially  belongs  to  something  distinct  from 
itself. 

We  conclude  that  nothing  belonging  to  something  else  and  pre¬ 
dicated  of  it  can  be  Substance.  Substance  is  that  which  belongs  essenti¬ 
ally  to  itself,  or,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  part  of  the  differentiated  object,  serves 
only  to  complete  the  Composite.  Each  or  either  part  of  the  Composite 
belongs  to  itself,  and  is  only  affirmed  of  the  Composite  in  a  special  sense  : 
only  qua  part  of  the  whole  is  it  predicated  of  something  else  ;  qua 
individual  it  is  never  in  its  essential  nature  predicated  of  an  external. 

It  may  be  claimed  as  a  common  element  in  Matter,  Form  and  the 
Couplement  that  they  are  all  substrates.  But  the  mode  in  which  Matter 
is  the  substrate  of  Form  is  different  from  that  in  which  Form  and  the 
Couplement  are  substrates  of  their  modifications. 

And  is  it  strictly  true  to  say  that  Matter  is  the  substrate  of  Form  ? 
Form  is  rather  the  completion  which  Matter’s  nature  as  pure  potentiality 
demands. 

Moreover,  Form  cannot  be  said  to  reside  in  Matter  (as  in  a  substrate). 
When  one  thing  combines  with  another  to  form  a  unity,  the  one  does 
not  reside  in  the  other  ;  both  alike  are  substrates  of  a  third  :  thus,  Man 
(the  Form)  and  a  man  (the  Composite)  are  substrates  of  their  experiences, 
and  are  prior  to  their  activities  and  consequents. 

Substance,  then,  is  that  from  which  all  other  things  proceed  and  to 


74 


PLOTINUS 


which  they  owe  their  existence  ;  it  is  the  centre  of  passivity  and  the 
source  of  action. 

5- 

These  are  incontrovertible  facts  in  regard  to  the  pseudo-substance 
of  the  Sensible  realm  :  if  they  apply  also  in  some  degree  to  the  True 
Substance  of  the  Intellectual,  the  coincidence  is,  doubtless,  to  be  attri¬ 
buted  to  analogy  and  ambiguity  of  terms. 

We  are  aware  that  “  the  first  ”  is  so  called  only  in  relation  to  the 
things  which  come  after  it  v  “  first  ”  has  no  absolute  significance  ;  the 
first  of  one  series  is  subsequent  to  the  last  of  another.  “  Substrate,” 
similarly,  varies  in  meaning  (as  applied  to  the  higher  and  to  the  lower), 
while  as  for  passivity  its  very  existence  in  the  Intellectual  is  question¬ 
able  ;  if  it  does  exist  there,  it  is  not  the  passivity  of  the  Sensible. 

It  follows  that  the  fact  of  “  not  being  present  in  a  subject  (or 
substrate)  ”  is  not  universally  true  of  Substance,  unless  presence  in  a 
subject  be  stipulated  as  not  including  the  case  of  the  part  present  in  the 
whole  or  of  one  thing  combining  with  another  to  form  a  distinct  unity  ; 
a  thing  will  not  be  present  as  in  a  subject  in  that  with  which  it  co¬ 
operates  in  the  formation  of  a  composite  substance.  Form,  therefore, 
is  not  present  in  Matter  as  in  a  subject,  nor  is  Man  so  present  in  Socrates, 
since  Man  is  part  of  Socrates. 

Substance,  then,  is  that  which  is  not  present  in  a  subject.  But  if 
we  adopt  the  definition  "  neither  present  in  a  subject  nor  predicated  of  a 
subject,”  we  must  add  to  the  second  “  subject  ”  the  qualification 
“  distinct,”  in  order  that  we  may  not  exclude  the  case  of  Man  predicated 
of  a  particular  man.  When  I  predicate  Man  of  Socrates,  it  is  as  though 
I  affirmed,  not  that  a  piece  of  wood  is  white,  but  that  whiteness  is  white  ; 
for  in  asserting  that  Socrates  is  a  man,  I  predicate  Man  (the  universal) 
of  a  particular  man,  I  affirm  Man  of  the  manhood  in  Socrates  ;  I  am 
really  saying  only  that  Socrates  is  Socrates,  or  that  this  particular 
rational  animal  is  an  animal. 

It  may  be  objected  that  non-presence  in  a  subject  is  not  peculiar 
to  Substance,  inasmuch  as  the  differentia  of  a  substance  is  no  more 


VI.  3.  6] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


75 


present  in  a  subject  than  the  substance  itself  ;  but  this  objection  results 
from  taking  a  part  of  the  whole  substance,  such  as  “  two-footed  ”  in  our 
example,  and  asserting  that  this  part  is  not  present  in  a  subject :  if 
we  take,  not  “  two-footed  ”  which  is  merely  an  aspect  of  Substance, 
but  “  two-footedness  ”  by  which  we  signify  not  Substance  but  Quality, 
we  shall  find  that  this  “  two-footedness  ”  is  indeed  present  in  a  subject. 

We  may  be  told  that  neither  Time  nor  Place  is  present  in  a  subject. 
But  if  the  definition  of  Time  as  the  measure  of  Motion  be  regarded  as 
denoting  something  measured,  the  “  measure  ”  will  be  present  in  Motion 
as  in  a  subject,  while  Motion  will  be  present  in  the  moved  :  if,  on  the 
contrary,  it  be  supposed  to  signify  a  principle  of  measurement,  the 
“  measure  ”  will  be  present  in  the  measurer. 

Place  is  the  limit  of  the  surrounding  space,  and  thus  is  present  in 
that  space. 

The  truth  is,  however,  that  the  “  Substance  ”  of  our  enquiry  may 
be  apprehended  in  directly  opposite  ways  :  it  may  be  determined  by 
one  of  the  properties  we  have  been  discussing,  by  more  than  one,  by 
all  at  once,  according  as  they  answer  to  the  notions  of  Matter,  Form 
and  the  Couplement. 

6. 

Granted,  it  may  be  urged,  that  these  observations  upon  the  nature 
of  Substance  are  sound,  we  have  not  yet  arrived  at  a  statement  of  its 
essence.  Our  critic  doubtless  expects  to  see  this  “  Sensible  ”  :  but  its 
essence,  its  characteristic  being,  cannot  be  seen. 

Do  we  infer  that  fire  and  water  (being  visible)  are  not  Substance  ? 
They  certainly  are  not  Substance  because  they  are  visible.  Why,  then  ? 
Because  they  possess  Matter  ?  No.  Or  Form  ?  No.  Nor  because  they 
involve  a  Couplement  of  Matter  and  Form.  Then  why  are  they 
Substance  ?  By  existing.  But  does  not  Quantity  exist,  and  Quality  ? 
This  anomaly  is  to  be  explained  by  an  equivocation  in  the  term 
“  existence.” 

What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  “  existence  ”  as  applied  to  fire,  earth 
and  the  other  elements  ?  What  is  the  difference  between  this  existence 


PLOTINUS 


76 

and  existence  in  the  other  categories  ?  It  is  the  difference  between  being 
simply — that  which  merely  is — and  being  white.  But  surely  the  being 
qualified  by  “  white  ”  is  the  same  as  that  having  no  qualification  ?  It 
is  not  the  same  :  the  latter  is  Being  in  the  primary  sense,  the  former  is 
Being  only  by  participation  and  in  a  secondary  degree.  Whiteness  added 
to  Being  produces  a  being  white  ;  Being  added  to  whiteness  produces 
a  white  being  :  thus,  whiteness  becomes  an  accident  of  Being,  and 
Being  an  accident  of  whiteness. 

The  case  is  not  equivalent  to  predicating  white  of  Socrates  and 
Socrates  of  white  ;  for  Socrates  remains  the  same,  though  white  would 
appear  to  have  a  different  meaning  in  the  two  propositions,  since  in  pre¬ 
dicating  Socrates  of  white  we  include  Socrates  in  the  (whole)  sphere  of 
whiteness,  whereas  in  the  proposition  “  Socrates  is  white  ”  whiteness  is 
plainly  an  attribute  of  Socrates. 

“  Being  is  white  ”  implies,  similarly,  that  Being  possesses  whiteness 
as  an  attribute,  while  in  the  proposition  “whiteness  is  Being  (or,  is  a 
being)  ”  Being  is  regarded  as  comprising  whiteness  in  its  own  extension. 

In  sum,  whiteness  has  existence  because  it  is  bound  up  with  Being 
and  present  in  it :  Being  is,  thus,  the  source  of  its  existence.  Being  is 
Being  on  its  own  account,  but  the  white  is  due  to  whiteness — not  because 
it  is  “  present  in  ”  whiteness,  but  because  whiteness  is  present  in  it. 

The  Being  of  the  Sensible  resembles  the  white  in  not  originating  in 
itself.  It  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  dependent  for  its  being  upon 
the  Authentic  Being,  as  white  is  dependent  upon  the  Authentic  White¬ 
ness,  and  the  Authentic  Whiteness  dependent  for  its  whiteness  upon 
participation  in  that  Supreme  Being  whose  existence  is  underived. 

7- 

But  Matter,  it  may  be  contended,  is  the  source  of  existence  to  the 
Sensible  things  implanted  in  it.  From  what  source,  then,  we  retort,  does 
Matter  itself  derive  existence  and  being  ? 

That  Matter  is  not  a  Primary  we  have  established  elsewhere.  If 
it  be  urged  that  other  things  can  have  no  subsistence  without  being 
implanted  in  Matter,  we  admit  the  claim  for  Sensible  things.  But  though 


VI.  3.  7] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


77 


Matter  be  prior  to  these,  it  is  not  thereby  precluded  from  being  posterior 
to  many  things — posterior,  in  fact,  to  all  the  beings  of  the  Intellectual 
sphere.  Its  existence  is  but  a  pale  reflection,  and  less  complete  than  that 
of  the  things  implanted  in  it.  These  are  Reason-Principles  and  more 
directly  derived  from  Being  :  Matter  has  of  itself  no  Reason-Principle 
whatever  ;  it  is  but  a  shadow  of  a  Principle,  a  vain  attempt  to  achieve 
a  Principle. 

But,  our  critic  may  pursue,  Matter  gives  existence  to  the  things 
implanted  in  it,  just  as  Socrates  gives  existence  to  the  whiteness  implanted 
in  himself  ?  We  reply  that  the  higher  being  gives  existence  to  the  lower, 
the  lower  to  the  higher  never. 

But  once  concede  that  Form  is  higher  in  the  scale  of  Being  than 
Matter,  and  Matter  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a  common  ground  of 
both,  nor  Substance  as  a  genus  embracing  Matter,  Form  and  the  Couple- 
ment.  True,  these  will  have  many  common  properties,  to  which  we  have 
already  referred,  but  their  being  (or  existence)  will  nonetheless  be 
different.  When  a  higher  being  comes  into  contact  with  a  lower,  the 
lower,  though  first  in  the  natural  order,  is  yet  posterior  in  the  scale  of 
Reality  :  consequently,  if  Being  does  not  belong  in  equal  degrees  to 
Matter,  to  Form  and  to  the  Couplement,  Substance  can  no  longer  be 
common  to  all  three  in  the  sense  of  being  their  genus  :  to  their  posteriors 
it  will  bear  a  still  different  relation,  serving  them  as  a  common  base  by 
being  bound  up  with  all  alike.  Substance,  thus,  resembles  life,  dim  here, 
clearer  there,  or  portraits  of  which  one  is  an  outline,  another  more 
minutely  worked.  By  measuring  Being  by  its  dim  manifestation  and 
neglecting  a  fuller  revelation  elsewhere,  we  may  come  to  regard  this 
dim  existence  as  a  common  ground. 

But  this  procedure  is  scarcely  permissible.  Every  being  is  a  distinct 
whole.  The  dim  manifestation  is  in  no  sense  a  common  ground,  just 
as  there  is  no  common  ground  in  the  vegetal,  the  sensory  and  the 
intellectual  forms  of  life. 

We  conclude  that  the  term  “  Being  ”  must  have  different  con¬ 
notations  as  applied  to  Matter,  to  Form  and  to  both  conjointly,  in  spite 
of  the  single  source  pouring  into  the  different  streams. 


78 


PLOTINUS 


Take  a  second  derived  from  a  first  and  a  third  from  the  second  : 
it  is  not  merely  that  the  one  will  rank  higher  and  its  successor  be  poorer 
and  of  lower  worth  ;  there  is  also  the  consideration  that,  even  deriving 
from  the  same  source,  one  thing,  subjected  in  a  certain  degree  to  fire, 
will  give  us  an  earthen  jar,  while  another,  taking  less  of  the  heat,  does 
not  produce  the  jar. 

Perhaps  we  cannot  even  maintain  that  Matter  and  Form  are  derived 
from  a  single  source  ;  they  are  clearly  in  some  sense  different. 

8. 

The  division  into  elements  must,  in  short,  be  abandoned,  especially 
in  regard  to  Sensible  Substance,  known  necessarily  by  sense  rather  than 
by  reason.  We  must  no  longer  look  for  help  in  constituent  parts,  since 
such  parts  will  not  be  substances,  or  at  any  rate  not  sensible  substances. 

Our  plan  must  be  to  apprehend  what  is  constant  in  stone,  earth, 
water  and  the  entities  which  they  compose — the  vegetal  and  animal 
forms,  considered  purely  as  sensibles — and  to  confine  this  constant 
within  a  single  genus.  Neither  Matter  nor  Form  will  thus  be  overlooked, 
for  Sensible  Substance  comports  them ;  fire  and  earth  and  the  two 
intermediaries  consist  of  Matter  and  Form,  while  composite  things  are 
actually  many  substances  in  one.  They  all,  moreover,  have  that  common 
property  which  distinguishes  them  from  other  things :  serving  as 
subjects  to  these  others,  they  are  never  themselves  present  in  a  subject 
nor  predicated  of  any  other  thing.  Similarly,  all  the  characteristics 
which  we  have  ascribed  to  Substance  find  a  place  in  this  classification. 

But  Sensible  Substance  is  never  found  apart  from  magnitude  and 
quality :  how  then  do  we  proceed  to  separate  these  accidents  ?  If  we 
subtract  them — magnitude,  figure,  colour,  dryness,  moistness — what 
is  there  left  to  be  regarded  as  Substance  itself  ?  All  the  substances  under 
consideration  are,  of  course,  qualified. 

There  is,  however,  something  in  relation  to  which  whatever  turns 
Substance  into  qualified  Substance  is  accidental :  thus,  the  whole  of 
fire  is  not  Substance,  but  only  a  part  of  it — if  the  term  “  part  ”  be 
allowed. 


VI.  3.  9] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


79 


What  then  can  this  “  part  ”  be  ?  Matter  may  be  suggested.  But 
are  we  actually  to  maintain  that  the  particular  sensible  substance  con¬ 
sists  of  a  conglomeration  of  qualities  and  Matter,  while  Sensible  Substance 
as  a  whole  is  merely  the  sum  of  these  coagulations  in  the  uniform  Matter, 
each  one  separately  forming  a  quale  or  a  quantum  or  else  a  thing  of 
many  qualities  ?  Is  it  true  to  say  that  everything  whose  absence  leaves 
subsistence  incomplete  is  a  part  of  the  particular  substance,  while  all  that 
is  accidental  to  the  substance  already  existent  takes  independent  rank 
and  is  not  submerged  in  the  mixture  which  constitutes  this  so-called 
substance  ? 

I  decline  to  allow  that  whatever  combines  in  this  way  with  anything 
else  is  Substance  if  it  helps  to  produce  a  single  mass  having  quantity 
and  quality,  whereas  taken  by  itself  and  divorced  from  this  comple¬ 
mentary  function  it  is  a  quality  :  not  everything  which  composes  the 
amalgam  is  Substance,  but  only  the  amalgam  as  a  whole. 

And  let  no  one  take  exception  on  the  ground  that  we  produce 
Sensible  ^Substance  from  non-substances.  The  whole  amalgam  itself  is 
not  True  Substance ;  it  is  merely  an  imitation  of  that  True  Substance 
which  has  Being  apart  from  its  concomitants,  these  indeed  being  derived 
from  it  as  the  possessor  of  True  Being.  In  the  lower  realm  the  case  is 
different  :  the  underlying  ground  is  sterile,  and  from  its  inability  to 
produce  fails  to  attain  to  the  status  of  Being  ;  it  remains  a  shadow,  and 
on  this  shadow  is  traced  a  sketch — the  world  of  Appearance. 

9- 

So  much  for  one  of  the  genera — the  “  Substance,”  so  called,  of  the 
Sensible  realm. 

But  what  are  we  to  posit  as  its  species  ?  how  divide  this  genus  ? 

The  genus  as  a  whole  must  be  identified  with  body.  Bodies  may  be 
divided  into  the  characteristically  material  and  the  organic  :  the  material 
bodies  comprise  fire,  earth,  water,  air ;  the  organic  the  bodies  of  plants 
and  animals,  these  in  turn  admitting  of  formal  differentiation. 

The  next  step  is  to  find  the  species  of  earth  and  of  the  other  elements, 
and  in  the  case  of  organic  bodies  to  distinguish  plants  according  to  their 


8o 


PLOTINUS 


forms,  and  the  bodies  of  animals  either  by  their  habitations — on  the 
earth,  in  the  earth,  and  similarly  for  the  other  elements — or  else  as  light, 
heavy  and  intermediate.  Some  bodies,  we  shall  observe,  stand  in  the 
middle  of  the  universe,  others  circumscribe  it  from  above,  others  occupy 
the  middle  sphere  :  in  each  case  we  shall  find  bodies  different  in  shape, 
so  that  the  bodies  of  the  living  beings  of  the  heavens  may  be  differentiated 
from  those  of  the  other  elements. 

Once  we  have  classified  bodies  into  the  four  species,  we  are  ready 
to  combine  them  on  a  different  principle,  at  the  same  time  intermingling 
their  differences  of  place,  form  and  constitution  ;  the  resultant  com¬ 
binations  will  be  known  as  fiery  or  earthy  on  the  basis  of  the  excess  or 
predominance  of  some  one  element. 

The  distinction  between  First  and  Second  Substances,  between  Fire 
and  a  given  example  of  fire,  entails  a  difference  of  a  peculiar  kind — the 
difference  between  universal  and  particular.  This  however  is  not  a 
difference  characteristic  of  Substance  ;  there  is  also  in  Quality  the 
distinction  between  whiteness  and  the  white  object,  between  grammar 
and  some  particular  grammar. 

The  question  may  here  be  asked  :  what  deficiency  has  grammar 
compared  with  a  particular  grammar,  and  science  as  a  whole  in  com¬ 
parison  with  a  science  ?  Grammar  is  certainly  not  posterior  to  the 
particular  grammar  :  on  the  contrary,  the  grammar  as  in  you  depends 
upon  the  prior  existence  of  grammar  as  such  :  the  grammar  as  in  you 
becomes  a  particular  by  the  fact  of  being  in  you  ;  it  is  otherwise  identical 
with  grammar  the  universal. 

Turn  to  the  case  of  Socrates  :  it  is  not  Socrates  who  bestows  man¬ 
hood  upon  what  previously  was  not  Man,  but  Man  upon  Socrates  ;  the 
individual  man  exists  by  participation  in  the  universal. 

Besides,  Socrates  is  merely  a  particular  instance  of  Man  ;  this 
particularity  can  have  no  effect  whatever  in  adding  to  his  essential 
manhood. 

We  may  be  told  that  Man  (the  universal)  is  Form  alone,  Socrates 
Form  in  Matter.  But  on  this  very  ground  Socrates  will  be  less  fully 
Man  than  the  universal ;  for  the  Reason-Principle  will  be  less  effectual 


VI.  3-  10] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


81 


in  Matter.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Man  is  not  determined  by  Form  alone, 
but  presupposes  Matter,  what  deficiency  has  Man  in  comparison  with 
the  material  manifestation  of  Man,  or  the  Reason-Principle  in  isolation 
as  compared  with  its  embodiment  in  a  unit  of  Matter  ? 

Besides,  the  more  general  is  by  nature  prior  ;  hence,  the  Form-Idea 
is  prior  to  the  individual :  but  what  is  prior  by  nature  is  prior  uncon¬ 
ditionally.  How  then  can  the  Form  take  a  lower  rank  ?  The  individual, 
it  is  true,  is  prior  in  the  sense  of  being  more  readily  accessible  to  our 
cognisance  ;  this  fact,  however,  entails  no  objective  difference. 

Moreover,  such  a  difference,  if  established,  would  be  incompatible 
with  a  single  Reason-Principle  of  Substance  ;  First  and  Second  Sub¬ 
stances  could  not  have  the  same  Principle,  nor  be  brought  under  a 
single  genus. 


io. 

Another  method  of  division  is  possible  :  substances  may  be  classed 
as  hot-dry,  dry-cold,  cold-moist,  or  however  we  choose  to  make  the 
coupling.  We  may  then  proceed  to  the  combination  and  blending  of 
these  couples,  either  halting  at  that  point  and  going  no  further  than  the 
compound,  or  else  subdividing  by  habitation — on  the  earth,  in  the  earth 
— or  by  form  and  by  the  differences  exhibited  by  living  beings,  not  qua 
living,  but  in  their  bodies  viewed  as  instruments  of  life. 

Differentation  by  form  or  shape  is  no  more  out  of  place  than  a 
division  based  on  qualities — heat,  cold  and  the  like.  If  it  be  objected 
that  qualities  go  to  make  bodies  what  they  are,  then,  we  reply,  so  do 
blendings,  colours,  shapes.  Since  our  discussion  is  concerned  with 
Sensible  Substance,  it  is  not  strange  that  it  should  turn  upon  distinctions 
related  to  sense-perception  :  this  Substance  is  not  Being  pure  and 
simple,  but  the  Sensible  Being  which  we  call  the  Universe. 

We  have  remarked  that  its  apparent  subsistence  is  in  fact  an 
assemblage  of  Sensibles,  their  existence  guaranteed  to  us  by  sense- 
perception.  But  since  their  combination  is  unlimited,  our  division  must 
be  guided  by  the  Form-Ideas  of  living  beings,  as  for  example  the  Form- 
Idea  of  Man  implanted  in  Body ;  the  particular  Form  acts  as  a 

M 


82 


PLOTINUS 


qualification  of  Body,  but  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  using 
qualities  as  a  basis  of  division. 

We  may  be  told  that  we  have  distinguished  between  simple  and 
composite  bodies,  even  ranking  them  as  opposites.  But  our  distinction, 
we  reply,  was  between  material  and  organic  bodies,  and  raised  no  question 
of  the  composite.  In  fact,  there  exists  no  means  of  opposing  the  com¬ 
posite  to  the  simple  ;  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the  simples  in  the  first 
stage  of  division,  and  then,  combining  them  on  the  basis  of  a  distinct 
underlying  principle,  to  differentiate  the  composites  in  virtue  of  their 
places  and  shapes,  distinguishing  for  example  the  heavenly  from  the 
earthly. 

These  observations  will  suffice  for  the  Being  (Substance),  or  rather 
the  Becoming,  which  obtains  in  the  Sensible  realm. 


ii. 

Passing  to  Quantity  and  the  quantum,  we  have  to  consider  the  view 
which  identifies  them  with  number  and  magnitude  on  the  ground  that 
everything  quantitative  is  numbered  among  Sensible  things  or  rated 
by  the  extension  of  its  substrate  :  we  are  here,  of  course,  discussing  not 
Quantity  in  isolation,  but  that  which  causes  a  piece  of  wood  to  be  three 
yards  long  and  gives  the  five  in  “  five  horses.” 

Now  we  have  often  maintained  that  number  and  magnitude  are 
to  be  regarded  as  the  only  true  qualities,  and  that  Space  and  Time  have 
no  right  to  be  conceived  as  quantitative :  Time  as  the  measure  of  Motion 
should  be  assigned  to  Relation,  while  Space,  being  that  which  circum¬ 
scribes  Body,  is  also  a  relative  and  falls  under  the  same  category  ;  though 
continuous,  it  is,  like  Motion,  not  included  in  Quantity. 

On  the  other  hand,  why  do  we  not  find  in  the  category  of  Quantity 
great  ”  and  “  small  ?  It  is  some  kind  of  Quantity  which  gives 
greatness  to  the  great ;  greatness  is  not  a  relative,  though  greater  and 
smaller  are  relatives,  since  these,  like  doubleness,  imply  an  external 
correlative. 

What  is  it,  then,  which  makes  a  mountain  small  and  a  grain  of 
millet  large  ?  Surely,  in  the  first  place,  “  small  ”  is  equivalent  to 


VI.  3-  12] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


83 

"  smaller.”  It  is  admitted  that  the  term  is  applied  only  to  things  of 
the  same  kind,  and  from  this  admission  we  may  infer  that  the  mountain 
is  “  smaller  ”  rather  than  “  small,”  and  that  the  grain  of  millet  is  not 
large  in  any  absolute  sense  but  large  for  a  grain  of  millet.  In  other  words, 
since  the  comparison  is  between  things  of  the  same  kind,  the  natural 
predicate  would  be  a  comparative. 

Again,  why  is  not  beauty  classed  as  a  relative  ?  Beauty,  unlike 
greatness,  we  regard  as  absolute  and  as  a  quality ;  “  more  beautiful  ” 
is  the  relative.  Yet  even  the  term  “beautiful”  may  be  attached  to 
something  which  in  a  given  relation  may  appear  ugly :  the  beauty  of 
man,  for  example,  is  ugliness  when  compared  with  that  of  the  gods  ; 
“  the  most  beautiful  of  monkeys,”  we  may  quote,  “  is  ugly  in  comparison 
with  any  other  type.”  Nonetheless,  a  thing  is  beautiful  in  itself ;  as 
related  to  something  else  it  is  either  more  or  less  beautiful. 

Similarly,  an  object  is  great  in  itself,  and  its  greatness  is  due,  not  to 
any  external,  but  to  its  own  participation  in  the  Absolute  Great. 

Are  we  actually  to  eliminate  the  beautiful  on  the  pretext  that  there 
is  a  more  beautiful  ?  No  more  then  must  we  eliminate  the  great  because 
of  the  greater :  the  greater  can  obviously  have  no  existence  whatever 
apart  from  the  great,  just  as  the  more  beautiful  can  have  no  existence 
without  the  beautiful. 


12. 

It  follows  that  we  must  allow  contrariety  to  Quantity :  whenever 
we  speak  of  great  and  small  our  notions  acknowledge  this  contrariety 
by  evolving  opposite  images,  as  also  when  we  refer  to  many  and  few ; 
indeed,  “  few  ”  and  “  many  ”  call  for  similar  treatment  to  “  small  ”  and 
“  great.” 

"  Many,”  predicated  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  house,  does  duty  for 
“  more  ”  :  "  few  ”  people  are  said  to  be  in  the  theatre  instead  of 
“  less.” 

“  Many,”  again,  necessarily  involves  a  large  numerical  plurality. 
This  plurality  can  scarcely  be  a  relative  ;  it  is  simply  an  expansion  of 
number,  its  contrary  being  a  contraction. 


84 


PLOTINUS 


The  same  applies  to  the  continuous  (magnitude),  the  notion  of 
which  entails  prolongation  to  a  distant  point. 

Quantity,  then,  appears  whenever  there  is  a  progression  from  the 
unit  or  the  point  :  if  either  progression  comes  to  a  rapid  halt,  we  have 
respectively  “  few  ”  and  “  small  ”  ;  if  it  goes  forward  and  does  not 
quickly  cease,  “  many  ”  and  “  great.” 

What,  we  may  be  asked,  is  the  limit  of  this  progression  ?  What, 
we  retort,  is  the  limit  of  beauty,  or  of  heat  ?  Whatever  limit  you  impose, 
there  is  always  a  “  hotter  ”  ;  yet  “  hotter  ”  is  accounted  a  relative, 
“  hot  ”  a  pure  quality. 

In  sum,  just  as  there  is  a  Reason-Principle  of  Beauty,  so  there  must 
be  a  Reason-Principle  of  greatness,  participation  in  which  makes  a  thing 
great,  as  the  Principle  of  beauty  makes  it  beautiful. 

To  judge  from  these  instances,  there  is  contrariety  in  Quantity. 
Place  we  may  neglect  as  not  strictly  coming  under  the  category  of 
Quantity  ;  if  it  were  admitted,  “  above  ”  could  only  be  a  contrary  if 
there  were  something  in  the  universe  which  was  “  below  ”  :  as  referring 
to  the  partial,  the  terms  “  above  ”  and  “  below  ”  are  used  in  a  purely 
relative  sense,  and  must  go  with  “  right  ”  and  “  left  ”  into  the  category 
of  Relation. 

Syllable  and  discourse  are  only  indirectly  quantities  or  substrates 
of  Quantity  ;  it  is  voice  that  is  quantitative  :  but  voice  is  a  kind  of 
Motion  ;  it  must  accordingly  in  any  case  (quantity  or  no  quantity)  be 
referred  to  Motion,  as  must  activity  also. 

I3- 

It  has  been  remarked  that  the  continuous  is  effectually  distinguished 
from  the  discrete  by  their  possessing  the  one  a  common,  the  other  a 
separate  limit. 

The  same  principle  gives  rise  to  the  numerical  distinction  between 
odd  and  even  ;  and  it  holds  good  that  if  there  are  differentiae  found  in 
both  contraries,  they  are  either  to  be  abandoned  to  the  objects  numbered, 
or  else  to  be  considered  as  differentiae  of  the  abstract  numbers,  and  not 
of  the  numbers  manifested  in  the  sensible  objects.  If  the  numbers  are 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


VI.  3.  14] 


85 


logically  separable  from  the  objects,  that  is  no  reason  why  we  should 
not  think  of  them  as  sharing  the  same  differentiae. 

But  how  are  we  to  differentiate  the  continuous,  comprising  as  it 
does  line,  surface  and  solid  ?  The  line  may  be  rated  as  of  one  dimension, 
the  surface  as  of  two  dimensions,  the  solid  as  of  three,  if  we  are  only 
making  a  calculation  and  do  not  suppose  that  we  are  dividing  the  con¬ 
tinuous  into  its  species  ;  for  it  is  an  invariable  rule  that  numbers,  thus 
grouped  as  prior  and  posterior,  cannot  be  brought  into  a  common  genus  ; 
there  is  no  common  basis  in  first,  second  and  third  dimensions.  Yet 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  they  would  appear  to  be  equal — namely,  as 
pure  measures  of  Quantity  :  of  higher  and  lower  dimensions,  they  are 
not  however  more  or  less  quantitative. 

Numbers  have  similarly  a  common  property  in  their  being  numbers 
all ;  and  the  truth  may  well  be,  not  that  One  creates  two,  and  two 
creates  three,  but  that  all  have  a  common  source. 

Suppose,  however,  that  they  are  not  derived  from  any  source 
whatever,  but  merely  exist ;  we  at  any  rate  conceive  them  as  being 
derived,  and  so  may  be  assumed  to  regard  the  smaller  as  taking  priority 
over  the  greater  :  yet,  even  so,  by  the  mere  fact  of  their  being  numbers 
they  are  reducible  to  a  single  type. 

What  applies  to  numbers  is  equally  true  of  magnitudes  ;  though 
here  we  have  to  distinguish  between  line,  surface  and  solid — the  last 
also  referred  to  as  “  body  ” — on  the  ground  that,  while  all  are  magnitudes, 
they  differ  specifically. 

It  remains  to  enquire  whether  these  species  are  themselves  to  be 
divided :  the  line  into  straight,  circular,  spiral ;  the  surface  into 
rectilinear  and  circular  figures  ;  the  solid  into  the  various  solid  figures — 
sphere  and  polyhedra  :  whether  these  last  should  be  subdivided,  as  by 
the  geometers,  into  those  contained  by  triangular  and  quadrilateral 
planes  :  and  whether  a  further  division  of  the  latter  should  be  performed. 


14- 

How  are  we  to  classify  the  straight  line  ?  Shall  we  deny  that  it  is 
a  magnitude  ? 


86 


PLOTINUS 


The  suggestion  may  be  made  that  it  is  a  qualified  magnitude.  May 
we  not,  then,  consider  straightness  as  a  differentia  of  "  line  ”  ?  We  at 
any  rate  draw  on  Quality  for  differentiae  of  Substance. 

The  straight  line  is,  thus,  a  quantity  plus  a  differentia  ;  but  it  is 
not  on  that  account  a  composite  made  up  of  straightness  and  line  :  if 
it  be  a  composite,  the  composite  possesses  a  differentia  of  its  own. 

But  (if  the  line  is  a  quantity)  why  is  not  the  product  of  three  lines 
included  in  Quantity  ?  The  answer  is  that  a  triangle  consists  not  merely 
of  three  lines  but  of  three  lines  in  a  particular  disposition,  a  quadrilateral 
of  four  lines  in  a  particular  disposition  :  even  the  straight  line  involves 
disposition  as  well  as  quantity. 

Holding  that  the  straight  line  is  not  mere  quantity,  we  should 
naturally  proceed  to  assert  that  the  line  as  limited  is  not  mere  quantity, 
but  for  the  fact  that  the  limit  of  a  line  is  a  point,  which  is  in  the  same 
category.  Quantity.  Similiarly,  the  limited  surface  will  be  a  quantity, 
since  lines,  which  have  a  far  better  right  than  itself  to  this  category, 
constitute  its  limits.  With  the  introduction  of  the  limited  surface- 
rectangle,  hexagon,  polygon— into  the  category  of  Quantity,  this  category 
will  be  brought  to  include  every  figure  whatsoever. 

If  however  by  classing  the  triangle  and  the  rectangle  as  qualia  we 
propose  to  bring  figures  under  Quality,  we  are  not  thereby  precluded 
from  assigning  the  same  object  to  more  categories  than  one  :  in  so  far 
as  it  is  a  magnitude— a  magnitude  of  such  and  such  a  size— it  will  belong 
to  Quantity ;  in  so  far  as  it  presents  a  particular  shape,  to  Quality. 

It  may  be  urged  that  the  triangle  is  essentially  a  particular  shape. 
Then  what  prevents  our  ranking  the  sphere  also  as  a  quality  ? 

To  proceed  on  these  lines  would  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that 
geometry  is  concerned  not  with  magnitudes  but  with  Quality.  But  this 
conclusion  is  untenable ;  geometry  is  the  study  of  magnitudes.  The 
differences  of  magnitudes  do  not  eliminate  the  existence  of  magnitudes 
as  such,  any  more  than  the  differences  of  substances  annihilate  the 
substances  themselves. 

Moreover,  every  surface  is  limited  ;  it  is  impossible  for  any  surface 
to  be  infinite  in  extent. 


VI.  3.  15] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


87 

Again,  when  I  find  Quality  bound  up  with  Substance,  I  regard  it  as 
substantial  quality  :  I  am  not  less,  but  far  more,  disposed  to  see  in 
figures  or  shapes  (qualitative)  varieties  of  Quantity.  Besides,  if  we  are 
not  to  regard  them  as  varieties  of  magnitude,  to  what  genus  are  we  to 
assign  them  ? 

Suppose,  then,  that  we  allow  differences  of  magnitude  ;  we  commit 
ourselves  to  a  specific  classification  of  the  magnitudes  so  differentiated. 

15- 

How  far  is  it  true  that  equality  and  inequality  are  characteristic  of 
Quantity  ? 

Triangles,  it  is  significant,  are  said  to  be  similar  rather  than  equal. 
But  we  also  refer  to  magnitudes  as  similar,  and  the  accepted  connotation 
of  similarity  does  not  exclude  similarity  or  dissimilarity  in  Quantity. 
It  may,  of  course,  be  the  case  that  the  term  “  similarity  "  has  a  different 
sense  here  from  that  understood  in  reference  to  Quality. 

Furthermore,  if  we  are  told  that  equality  and  inequality  are 
characteristic  of  Quantity,  that  is  not  to  deny  that  similarity  also  may 
be  predicated  of  certain  quantities.  If,  on  the  contrary,  similarity  and 
dissimilarity  are  to  be  confined  to  Quality,  the  terms  as  applied  to 
Quantity  must,  as  we  have  said,  bear  a  different  meaning. 

But  suppose  similarity  to  be  identical  in  both  genera ;  Quantity  and 
Quality  must  then  be  expected  to  reveal  other  properties  held  in  common. 

May  the  truth  be  this  :  that  similarity  is  predicable  of  Quantity 
only  in  so  far  as  Quantity  possesses  (qualitative)  differences  ?  But  as 
a  general  rule  differences  are  grouped  with  that  of  which  they  are  differ¬ 
ences,  especially  when  the  difference  is  a  difference  of  that  thing  alone. 
If  in  one  case  the  difference  completes  the  substance  and  not  in  another, 
we  inevitably  class  it  with  that  which  it  completes,  and  only  consider 
it  as  independent  when  it  is  not  complementary  :  when  we  say  “  com¬ 
pletes  the  substance,"  we  refer  not  to  Substance  as  such  but  to  the 
differentiated  substance  ;  the  particular  object  is  to  be  thought  of  as 
receiving  an  accession  which  is  non-substantial. 

We  must  not  however  fail  to  observe  that  we  predicate  equality 


88 


PLOTINUS 


of  triangles,  rectangles,  and  figures  generally,  whether  plane  or  solid  : 
this  may  be  given  as  a  ground  for  regarding  equality  and  inequality  as 
characteristic  of  Quantity. 

It  remains  to  enquire  whether  similarity  and  dissimilarity  are 
characteristic  of  Quality. 

We  have  spoken  of  Quality  as  combining  with  other  entities,  Matter 
and  Quantity,  to  form  the  complete  Sensible  Substance  ;  this  Substance, 
so  called,  may  be  supposed  to  constitute  the  manifold  world  of  Sense, 
which  is  not  so  much  an  essence  as  a  quale.  Thus,  for  the  essence  of  fire 
we  must  look  to  the  Reason-Principle  ;  what  produces  the  visible  aspect 
is,  properly  speaking,  a  quale. 

Man’s  essence  will  lie  in  his  Reason-Principle  ;  that  which  is  per¬ 
fected  in  the  corporeal  nature  is  a  mere  image  of  the  Reason-Principle, 
a  quale  rather  than  an  essence. 

Consider :  the  visible  Socrates  is  a  man,  yet  we  give  the  name  of 
Socrates  to  that  likeness  of  him  in  a  portrait,  which  consists  of  mere 
colours,  mere  pigments  :  similarly,  it  is  a  Reason-Principle  which  con¬ 
stitutes  Socrates,  but  we  apply  the  name  Socrates  to  the  Socrates  we 
see  :  in  truth,  however,  the  colours  and  shapes  which  make  up  the 
visible  Socrates  are  but  reproductions  of  those  in  the  Reason-Principle, 
while  this  Reason-Principle  itself  bears  a  corresponding  relation  to  the 
truest  Reason-Principle  of  Man. — But  we  need  not  elaborate  this  point. 

16. 

When  each  of  the  entities  bound  up  with  the  pseudo-substance  is 
taken  apart  from  the  rest,  the  name  of  Quality  is  given  to  that  one 
among  them,  by  which  without  pointing  to  essence  or  quantity  or  motion 
we  signify  the  distinctive  mark,  the  type  or  aspect  of  a  thing — for  example, 
the  beauty  or  ugliness  of  a  body.  This  beauty — need  we  say  ? — is 
identical  in  name  only  with  Intellectual  Beauty :  it  follows  that  the  term 
“  Quality  ”  as  applied  to  the  Sensible  and  the  Intellectual  is  necessarily 
equivocal ;  even  blackness  and  whiteness  are  different  in  the  two  spheres. 

But  the  beauty  in  the  germ,  in  the  particular  Reason-Principle — is 
this  the  same  as  the  manifested  beauty,  or  do  they  coincide  only  in 


VI.  3-  16] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


89 


name  ?  Are  we  to  assign  this  beauty— and  the  same  question  applies 
to  deformity  in  the  soul— to  the  Intellectual  order,  or  to  the  Sensible  ?— 
That  beauty  is  different  in  the  two  spheres  is  by  now  clear. — If  it  be 
embraced  in  Sensible  Quality,  then  virtue  must  also  be  classed  among 
the  qualities  of  the  lower.  But  surely  some  virtues  will  take  rank  as 
Sensible,  others  as  Intellectual,  qualities. 

It  may  even  be  doubted  whether  the  arts,  as  Reason-Principles,  can 
fairly  be  classed  among  Sensible  qualities  ;  Reason-Principles,  it  is  true, 
may  reside  in  Matter,  but  “  matter  ”  for  them  means  Soul.  On  the 
other  hand,  their  being  found  in  company  with  Matter  commits  them  in 
some  degree  to  the  lower  sphere.  Take  the  case  of  lyrical  music  :  it  is  per¬ 
formed  upon  strings  ;  melody,  which  may  be  termed  a  part  of  the  art, 
is  sensuous  sound — though,  perhaps,  we  should  speak  here  not  of  parts 
but  of  manifestations  (Acts)  :  yet,  called  manifestations,  they 
are  nonetheless  sensuous.  The  beauty  inherent  in  body  is  similarly 
bodiless  ;  but  we  have  assigned  it  to  the  order  of  things  bound  up  with 
body  and  subordinate  to  it. 

Geometry  and  arithmetic  are,  we  shall  maintain,  of  a  twofold 
character  :  in  their  earthly  types  they  rank  with  Sensible  Quality,  but 
in  so  far  as  they  are  functions  of  pure  Soul,  they  necessarily  belong  to 
that  other  world  in  close  proximity  to  the  Intellectual.  This,  too,  is  in 
Plato’s  view  the  case  with  music  and  astronomy. 

The  arts  concerned  with  material  objects  and  making  use  of 
perceptible  instruments  and  sense-perception  must  be  classed  with 
Sensible  Quality,  even  though  they  are  dispositions  of  the  Soul,  attendant 
upon  its  apostasy. 

There  is  also  every  reason  for  consigning  to  this  category  the 
practical  virtues  whose  function  is  directed  to  a  social  end :  these  do 
not  isolate  Soul  by  inclining  it  towards  the  higher  ;  their  manifestation 
makes  for  beauty  in  this  world,  a  beauty  regarded  not  as  necessary  but 
as  desirable. 

On  this  principle,  the  beauty  in  the  germ,  and  still  more  the  black¬ 
ness  and  whiteness  in  it,  will  be  included  among  Sensible  Qualities. 

Are  we,  then,  to  rank  the  individual  soul,  as  containing  these  Reason- 

N 


9o 


PLOTINUS 


Principles,  with  Sensible  Substance  ?  But  we  do  not  even  identify  the 
Principles  (much  less  Soul)  with  body ;  we  merely  include  them  in 
Sensible  Quality  on  the  ground  that  they  are  connected  with  body  and 
are  activities  of  body.  The  constituents  of  Sensible  Substance  have 
already  been  specified ;  we  have  no  intention  whatever  of  adding  to  them 
Substance  bodiless. 

As  for  Qualities,  we  hold  that  they  are  invariably  bodiless,  being 
affections  arising  within  Soul ;  but,  like  the  Reason-Principles  of  the 
individual  soul,  they  are  associated  with  Soul  in  its  apostasy,  and  are 
accordingly  counted  among  the  things  of  the  lower  realm :  such 
affections,  tom  between  two  worlds  by  their  objects  and  their  abode, 
we  have  assigned  to  Quality,  which  is  indeed  not  bodily  but  manifested 
in  body. 

But  we  refrain  from  assigning  Soul  to  Sensible  Substance,  on  the 
ground  that  we  have  already  referred  to  Quality  (which  is  Sensible)  those 
affections  of  Soul  which  are  related  to  body.  On  the  contrary,  Soul, 
conceived  apart  from  affection  and  Reason-Principle,  we  have  restored 
to  its  origin,  leaving  in  the  lower  realm  no  substance  which  is  in  any 
sense  Intellectual. 


17- 

This  procedure,  if  approved,  will  entail  a  distinction  between 
psychic  and  bodily  qualities,  the  latter  belonging  specifically  to  body. 

If  we  decide  to  refer  all  souls  to  the  higher,  we  are  still  at  liberty 
to  perform  for  Sensible  qualities  a  division  founded  upon  the  senses 
themselves — the  eyes,  the  ears,  touch,  taste,  smell ;  and  if  we  are  to 
look  for  further  differences,  colours  may  be  subdivided  according  to 
varieties  of  vision,  sounds  according  to  varieties  of  hearing,  and  so  with 
the  other  senses  :  sounds  may  also  be  classified  qualitatively  as  sweet, 
harsh,  soft. 

Here  a  difficulty  may  be  raised  :  we  divide  the  varieties  of  Substance 
and  their  functions  and  activities,  fair  or  foul  or  indeed  of  any  kind 
whatsoever,  on  the  basis  of  Quality,  Quantity  rarely,  if  ever,  entering 
into  the  differences  which  produce  species ;  Quantity,  again,  we  divide 


VI.  3.  18] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


9i 


in  accordance  with  qualities  of  its  own  :  how  then  are  we  to  divide 
Quality  itself  into  species  ?  what  differences  are  we  to  employ,  and 
from  what  genus  shall  we  take  them  ?  To  take  them  from  Quality  itself 
would  be  no  less  absurd  than  setting  up  substances  as  differences  of 
substances. 

How,  then,  are  we  to  distinguish  black  from  white  ?  how  differentiate 
colours  in  general  from  tastes  and  tangible  qualities  ?  By  the  variety  of 
sense-organs  ?  Then  there  will  be  no  difference  in  the  objects  themselves. 

But,  waiving  this  objection,  how  deal  with  qualities  perceived  by 
the  same  sense-organ  ?  We  may  be  told  that  some  colours  integrate, 
others  disintegrate  the  vision,  that  some  tastes  integrate,  others  dis¬ 
integrate  the  tongue  :  we  reply  that,  first,  it  is  the  actual  experiences 
(of  colour  and  taste,  and  not  the  sense-organs)  that  we  are  discussing 
and  it  is  to  these  that  the  notions  of  integration  and  disintegration  must 
be  applied ;  secondly,  a  means  of  differentiating  these  experiences  has 
not  been  offered. 

It  may  be  suggested  that  we  divide  them  by  their  powers,  and  this 
suggestion  is  so  far  reasonable  that  we  may  well  agree  to  divide  the  non- 
sensuous  qualities,  the  sciences  for  example,  on  this  basis  ;  but  we  see 
no  reason  for  resorting  to  their  effects  for  the  division  of  qualities  sensuous. 
Even  if  we  divide  the  sciences  by  their  powers,  founding  our  division  of 
their  processes  upon  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  we  can  only  grasp  their 
differences  in  a  rational  manner  if  we  look  not  only  to  their  subject- 
matter  but  also  to  their  Reason-Principles. 

But,  granted  that  we  may  divide  the  arts  by  their  Reason-Principles 
and  theorems,  this  method  will  hardly  apply  to  embodied  qualities. 
Even  in  the  arts  themselves  an  explanation  would  be  required  for  the 
differences  between  the  Reason-Principles  themselves.  Besides,  we 
have  no  difficulty  in  seeing  that  white  differs  from  black  ;  to  account 
for  this  difference  is  the  purpose  of  our  enquiry. 

18. 

These  problems  at  any  rate  all  serve  to  show  that,  while  in  general 
it  is  necessary  to  look  for  differences  by  which  to  separate  things  from 


92 


PLOTINUS 


each  other,  to  hunt  for  differences  of  the  differences  themselves  is  both 
futile  and  irrational.  We  cannot  have  substances  of  substances,  quan¬ 
tities  of  quantities,  qualities  of  qualities,  differences  of  differences  ; 
differences  must,  where  possible,  be  found  outside  the  genus,  in  creative 
powers  and  the  like  :  but  where  no  such  criteria  are  present,  as  in  dis¬ 
tinguishing  dark-green  from  pale-green,  both  being  regarded  as  derived 
from  white  and  black,  what  expedient  may  be  suggested  ? 

Sense-perception  and  intelligence  may  be  trusted  to  indicate 
diversity  but  not  to  explain  it :  explanation  is  outside  the  province  of 
sense-perception,  whose  function  is  merely  to  produce  a  variety  of 
information ;  while,  as  for  intelligence,  it  works  exclusively  with 
intuitions  and  never  resorts  to  explanations  to  justify  them  ;  there  is 
in  the  movements  of  intelligence  a  diversity  which  separates  one  object 
from  another,  making  further  differentiation  unnecessary. 

Do  all  qualities  constitute  differentiae,  or  not  ?  Granted  that  white¬ 
ness  and  colours  in  general  and  the  qualities  dependent  upon  touch  and 
taste  can,  even  while  they  remain  species  (of  Quality),  become  differentiae 
of  other  things,  how  can  grammar  and  music  serve  as  differentiae  ? 
Perhaps  in  the  sense  that  minds  may  be  distinguished  as  grammatical 
and  musical,  especially  if  the  qualities  are  innate,  in  which  case  they  do 
become  specific  differentiae. 

It  remains  to  decide  whether  there  can  be  any  differentia  derived 
from  the  genus  to  which  the  differentiated  thing  belongs,  or  whether 
it  must  of  necessity  belong  to  another  genus  ?  The  former  alternative 
would  produce  differentiae  of  things  derived  from  the  same  genus  as  the 
differentiae  themselves — for  example,  qualities  of  quadities.  Virtue 
and  vice  are  two  states  differing  in  quality  :  the  states  are  qualities, 
aind  their  differentiae  qualities — unless  indeed  it  be  maintained  that  the 
state  undifferentiated  is  not  a  quality,  that  the  differentia  creates  the 
quality. 

But  consider  the  sweet  as  beneficial,  the  bitter  as  injurious  :  then 
bitter  and  sweet  are  distinguished,  not  by  Quality,  but  by  Relation. 
We  might  also  be  disposed  to  identify  the  sweet  with  the  thick,  and  the 
pungent  with  the  thin:  “  thick  "  however  hardly  reveals  the  essence 


VI.  3-  19] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


93 

but  merely  the  cause  of  sweetness — an  argument  which  applies  equally 
to  pungency. 

We  must  therefore  reflect  whether  it  may  be  taken  as  an  invariable 
rule  that  Quality  is  never  a  differentia  of  Quality,  any  more  than 
Substance  is  a  differentia  of  Substance,  or  Quantity  of  Quantity. 

Surely,  it  may  be  interposed,  five  differs  from  three  by  two.  No  : 
it  exceeds  it  by  two  ;  we  do  not  say  that  it  differs  :  how  could  it  differ 
by  a  “  two  ”  in  the  “  three  ”  ?  We  may  add  that  neither  can  Motion 
differ  from  Motion  by  Motion.  There  is,  in  short,  no  parallel  in  any  of 
the  other  genera. 

In  the  case  of  virtue  and  vice,  whole  must  be  compared  with  whole, 
and  the  differentiation  conducted  on  this  basis.  As  for  the  differentia 
being  derived  from  the  same  genus  as  themselves,  namely,  Quality,  and 
from  no  other  genus,  if  we  proceed  on  the  principle  that  virtue  is  bound 
up  with  pleasure,  vice  with  lust,  virtue  again  with  the  acquisition  of  food, 
vice  with  idle  extravagance,  and  accept  these  definitions  as  satisfactory, 
then  clearly  we  have,  here  too,  differentiae  which  are  not  qualities. 

19. 

With  Quality  we  have  undertaken  to  group  the  dependent  qualia, 
in  so  far  as  Quality  is  bound  up  with  them  ;  we  shall  not  however 
introduce  into  this  category  the  qualified  objects  {qua  objects),  that  we 
may  not  be  dealing  with  two  categories  at  once  ;  we  shall  pass  over  the 
objects  to  that  which  gives  them  their  (specific)  name. 

But  how  are  we  to  classify  such  terms  as  “  not  white  ”  ?  If  “  not 
white  ”  signifies  some  other  colour,  it  is  a  quality.  But  if  it  is  merely  a 
negation  or  an  enumeration  of  things  not  white,  it  will  be  either  a 
meaningless  sound,  or  else  a  name  or  definition  of  something  actual : 
if  a  sound,  it  is  a  kind  of  motion  ;  if  a  name  or  definition,  it  is  a  relative, 
inasmuch  as  names  and  definitions  are  significant.  But  if  not  only  the 
things  enumerated  are  in  some  one  genus,  but  also  the  propositions  and 
terms  in  question  must  be  each  of  them  significative  of  some  genus, 
then  we  shall  assert  that  negative  propositions  and  terms  posit  certain 
things  within  a  restricted  field  and  deny  others.  Perhaps,  however,  it 


94 


PLOTINUS 


would  be  better,  in  view  of  their  composite  nature,  not  to  include  the 
negations  in  the  same  genus  as  the  affirmations. 

What  view,  then,  shall  we  take  of  privations  ?  If  they  are  privations 
of  qualities,  they  will  themselves  be  qualities :  “  toothless  ”  and 

“  blind,”  for  example,  are  qualities.  “  Naked  ”  and  “  clothed,”  on  the 
other  hand,  are  neither  of  them  qualities  but  states  :  they  therefore 
comport  a  relation  to  something  else. 

(With  regard  to  passive  qualities  :) 

Passivity,  while  it  lasts,  is  not  a  quality  but  a  motion ;  when  it  is 
a  past  experience  remaining  in  one’s  possession,  it  is  a  quality  ;  if  one 
ceases  to  possess  the  experience  then  regarded  as  a  finished  occurrence, 
one  is  considered  to  have  been  moved — in  other  words,  to  have  been  in 
Motion.  (Such  is  the  theory.)  But  in  none  of  these  cases  is  it  necessary 
to  conceive  of  anything  but  Motion ;  the  idea  of  time  should  be 
excluded  ;  even  present  time  has  no  right  to  be  introduced. 

“  Well  ”  and  similar  adverbial  expressions  are  to  be  referred  to  the 
single  generic  notion  (of  Quality). 

It  remains  to  consider  whether  blushing  should  be  referred  to 
Quality,  even  though  the  person  blushing  is  not  included  in  this  category. 
The  fact  of  becoming  flushed  is  rightly  not  referred  to  Quality  ;  for 
it  involves  passivity — in  short,  Motion.  But  if  one  has  ceased  to  become 
flushed  and  is  actually  red,  this  is  surely  a  case  of  Quality,  which  is 
independent  of  time.  How  indeed  are  we  to  define  Quality  but  by  the 
aspect  which  a  substance  presents  ?  By  predicating  of  a  man  redness,  we 
clearly  ascribe  to  him  a  quality. 

We  shall  accordingly  maintain  that  states  alone,  and  not  dispositions, 
constitute  qualities  :  thus,  “  hot  ”  is  a  quality  but  not  “  growing  hot,” 
“  ill  ”  but  not  “  turning  ill.” 


20. 

We  have  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  not  to  every  quality  a  con¬ 
trary.  In  the  case  of  virtue  and  vice  even  the  mean  appears  to  be 
contrary  to  the  extremes. 

But  when  we  turn  to  colours,  we  do  not  find  the  intermediates  so 


VI.  3-  20] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


95 


related.  If  we  regard  the  intermediates  as  blendings  of  the  extremes,  we 
must  not  posit  any  contrariety  other  than  that  between  black  and  white, 
but  must  show  that  all  other  colours  are  combinations  of  these  two. 
Contrariety  however  demands  that  there  be  some  one  distinct  quality 
in  the  intermediates,  though  this  quality  may  be  seen  to  arise  from  a 
combination. 

It  may  further  be  suggested  that  contraries  not  only  differ  from 
each  other,  but  also  entail  the  greatest  possible  difference.  But  “  the 
greatest  possible  difference  ”  would  seem  to  presuppose  that  inter¬ 
mediates  have  already  been  established  :  eliminate  the  series,  and  how 
will  you  define  “  the  greatest  possible  ”  ?  Sight,  we  may  be  told,  will 
reveal  to  us  that  grey  is  nearer  than  black  to  white  ;  and  taste  may  be 
our  judge  when  we  have  hot,  cold  and  no  intermediate. 

That  we  are  accustomed  to  act  upon  these  assumptions  is  obvious 
enough ;  but  the  following  considerations  may  perhaps  commend 
themselves  : — 

White  and  yellow  are  entirely  different  from  each  other — a  state¬ 
ment  which  applies  to  any  colour  whatsoever  as  compared  with  any 
other  ;  they  are  accordingly  contrary  qualities.  Them  contrariety  is 
independent  of  the  presence  of  intermediates  :  between  health  and 
disease  no  intermediate  intrudes,  and  yet  they  are  contraries. 

It  may  be  urged  that  the  products  of  a  contrariety  exhibit  the 
greatest  diversity.  But  “  the  greatest  diversity  ”  is  clearly  meaningless, 
unless  we  can  point  to  lower  degrees  of  diversity  in  the  means.  Thus,  we 
cannot  speak  of  “  the  greatest  diversity  ”  in  reference  to  health  and 
disease.  This  definition  of  contrariety  is  therefore  inadmissible. 

Suppose  that  we  say  “  great  diversity  ”  instead  of  “  the  greatest  "  : 
if  “  great  ”  is  equivalent  to  greater  and  implies  a  less,  immediate  con¬ 
traries  will  again  escape  us ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  mean  strictly 
“  great  "  and  assume  that  every  quality  shows  a  great  divergence  from 
every  other,  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  divergence  can  be  measured 
by  a  comparative. 

Nonetheless,  we  must  endeavour  to  find  a  meaning  for  the  term 
“  contrary.”  Can  we  accept  the  principle  that  when  things  have  a 


96 


PLOTINUS 


certain  similarity  which  is  not  generic  nor  in  any  sense  due  to  admixture, 
but  a  similarity  residing  in  their  forms — if  the  term  be  permitted — they 
differ  in  degree  but  are  not  contraries  ;  contraries  being  rather  those 
things  which  have  no  specific  identity  ?  It  would  be  necessary  to 
stipulate  that  they  belong  to  the  same  genus,  Quality,  in  order  to  cover 
those  immediate  contraries  which  (apparently)  have  nothing  conducing 
to  similarity,  inasmuch  as  there  are  no  intermediates  looking  both  ways, 
as  it  were,  and  having  a  mutual  similarity  to  each  other ;  some  con¬ 
traries  are  precluded  by  their  isolation  from  similarity. 

If  these  observations  be  sound,  colours  which  have  a  common 
ground  will  not  be  contraries.  But  there  will  be  nothing  to  prevent,  not 
indeed  every  colour  from  being  contrary  to  every  other,  but  any  one 
colour  from  being  contrary  to  any  other ;  and  similarly  with  tastes. — 
This  will  serve  as  a  statement  of  the  problem. 

As  for  Degree  (subsisting  in  Quality),  it  was  given  as  our  opinion 
that  it  exists  in  the  objects  participating  in  Quality,  though  whether  it 
enters  into  qualities  as  such — into  health  and  justice — was  left 
open  to  question.  If  indeed  these  qualities  possess  an  extension  quite 
apart  from  their  participants,  we  must  actually  ascribe  to  them  degrees  : 
but  in  truth  they  belong  to  a  sphere  where  each  entity  is  the  whole  and 
does  not  admit  of  degree. 


21. 

The  claim  of  Motion  to  be  established  as  a  genus  will  depend  upon 
three  conditions :  first,  that  it  cannot  rightly  be  referred  to  any  other 
genus  ;  second,  that  nothing  higher  than  itself  can  be  predicated  of  it 
in  respect  of  its  essence  ;  third,  that  by  assuming  differences  it  will 
produce  species.  These  conditions  satisfied,  we  may  consider  the  nature 
of  the  genus  to  which  we  shall  refer  it. 

Clearly  it  cannot  be  identified  with  either  the  Substance  or  the 
Quality  of  the  things  which  possess  it.  It  cannot,  further,  be  consigned 
to  Action,  for  Passivity  also  comprises  a  variety  of  motions ;  nor  again 
to  Passivity  itself,  because  many  motions  are  actions  :  on  the  contrary, 
actions  and  passions  are  to  be  referred  to  Motion. 


VI.  3-  21] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


97 


Furthermore,  it  cannot  lay  claim  to  the  category  of  Relation  on  the 
mere  ground  that  it  has  an  attributive  and  not  a  self-centred  existence  : 
on  this  ground  Quality  too  would  find  itself  in  that  same  category  ;  for 
Quality  is  an  attribute  and  contained  in  an  external :  and  the  same  is 
true  of  Quantity. 

If  we  are  agreed  that  Quality  and  Quantity,  though  attributive,  are 
real  entities,  and  on  the  basis  of  this  reality  distinguishable  as  Quality 
and  Quantity  respectively  :  then,  on  the  same  principle,  since  Motion, 
though  an  attribute,  has  a  reality  prior  to  its  attribution,  it  is  incumbent 
upon  us  to  discover  the  intrinsic  nature  of  this  reality.  We  must  never 
be  content  to  regard  as  a  relative  something  which  exists  prior  to  its 
attribution,  but  only  that  which  is  engendered  by  Relation  and  has  no 
existence  apart  from  the  relation  to  which  it  owes  its  name  :  the  double, 
strictly  so  called,  takes  birth  and  actuality  in  juxtaposition  with  a  yard’s 
length,  and  by  this  very  process  of  being  juxtaposed  with  a  correlative 
acquires  the  name  and  exhibits  the  fact  of  being  double. 

What,  then,  is  that  entity,  called  Motion,  which,  though  attributive, 
has  an  independent  reality,  which  makes  its  attribution  possible — the 
entity  corresponding  to  Quality,  Quantity  and  Substance  ? 

But  first,  perhaps,  we  should  make  sure  that  there  is  nothing  prior 
to  Motion  and  predicated  of  it  as  its  genus. 

Change  may  be  suggested  as  a  prior.  But,  in  the  first  place,  either 
it  is  identical  with  Motion,  or  else,  if  change  be  claimed  as  a  genus,  it  will 
stand  distinct  from  the  genera  so  far  considered  :  secondly,  Motion  will 
evidently  take  rank  as  a  species  and  have  some  other  species  opposed 
to  it — becoming,  say — which  will  be  regarded  as  a  change  but  not  as  a 
motion. 

What,  then,  is  the  ground  for  denying  that  becoming  is  a  motion  ? 
The  fact,  perhaps,  that  what  comes  to  be  does  not  yet  exist,  whereas 
Motion  has  no  dealings  with  the  non-existent.  But,  on  that  ground, 
becoming  will  not  be  a  change  either.  If  however  it  be  alleged  that 
becoming  is  merely  a  type  of  alteration  or  growth  since  it  takes  place 
when  things  alter  and  grow,  the  antecedents  of  becoming  are  being 
confused  with  becoming  itself.  Yet  becoming,  entailing  as  it  does  these 


PLOTINUS 


98 

antecedents,  must  necessarily  be  a  distinct  species  ;  for  the  event  and 
process  of  becoming  cannot  be  identified  with  merely  passive  alteration, 
like  turning  hot  or  white  :  it  is  possible  for  the  antecedents  to  take  place 
without  becoming  as  such  being  accomplished,  except  in  so  far  as  the 
actual  alteration  (implied  in  the  antecedents)  has  “  come  to  be  ”  ;  where, 
however,  an  animal  or  a  vegetal  life  is  concerned,  becoming  (or  birth) 
takes  place  only  upon  its  acquisition  of  a  Form. 

The  contrary  might  be  maintained  :  that  change  is  more  plausibly 
ranked  as  a  species  than  is  Motion,  because  change  signifies  merely  the 
substitution  of  one  thing  for  another,  whereas  Motion  involves  also  the 
removal  of  a  thing  from  the  place  to  which  it  belongs,  as  is  shown  by 
locomotion.  Even  rejecting  this  distinction,  we  must  accept  as  types 
of  Motion  knowledge  and  musical  performance — in  short,  changes  of 
condition  :  thus,  alteration  will  come  to  be  regarded  as  a  species  of 
Motion — namely,  motion  displacing. 


22. 

But  suppose  that  we  identify  alteration  with  Motion  on  the  ground 
that  Motion  itself  results  in  difference  :  how  then  do  we  proceed  to  define 
Motion  ? 

It  may  roughly  be  characterised  as  the  passage  from  the  potentiality 
to  its  realisation.  That  is  potential  which  can  either  pass  into  a  Form 
for  example,  the  potential  statue — or  else  pass  into  actuality — such  as  the 
ability  to  walk :  whenever  progress  is  made  towards  the  statue,  this 
progress  is  Motion  ;  and  when  the  ability  to  walk  is  actualised  in  walking, 
this  walking  is  itself  Motion  :  dancing  is,  similarly,  the  motion  produced 
by  the  potential  dancer  taking  his  steps. 

In  the  one  type  of  Motion  a  new  Form  comes  into  existence  created 
by  the  motion  ;  the  other  constitutes,  as  it  were,  the  pure  Form  of  the 
potentiality,  and  leaves  nothing  behind  it  when  once  the  motion  has 
ceased.  Accordingly,  the  view  would  not  be  unreasonable  which,  taking 
some  Forms  to  be  active,  others  inactive,  regarded  Motion  as  a  dynamic 
Form  in  opposition  to  the  other  Forms  which  are  static,  and  further  as 
the  cause  of  whatever  new  Form  ensues  upon  it.  To  proceed  to  identify 


VI.  3.  22; 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


99 


this  bodily  motion  with  life  would  however  be  unwarrantable  ;  it  must 
be  considered  as  identical  only  in  name  with  the  motions  of  Intellect 
and  Soul. 

That  Motion  is  a  genus  we  may  be  all  the  more  confident  in  virtue 
of  the  difficulty — the  impossibility  even — of  confining  it  within  a 
definition. 

But  how  can  it  be  a  Form  in  cases  where  the  motion  leads  to  deterior¬ 
ation,  or  is  purely  passive  ?  Motion,  we  may  suggest,  is  like  the  heat 
of  the  sun  causing  some  things  to  grow  and  withering  others.  In  so 
far  as  Motion  is  a  common  property,  it  is  identical  in  both  conditions  ; 
its  apparent  difference  is  due  to  the  objects  moved. 

Is,  then,  becoming  ill  identical  with  becoming  well  ?  As  motions 
they  are  identical.  In  what  respect,  then,  do  they  differ  ?  In  their 
substrates  ?  or  is  there  some  other  criterion  ? 

This  question  may  however  be  postponed  until  we  come  to  consider 
alteration  :  at  present  we  have  to  discover  what  is  the  constant  element 
in  every  motion,  for  only  on  this  basis  can  we  establish  the  claim  of 
Motion  to  be  a  genus. 

Perhaps  the  one  term  covers  many  meanings  ;  its  claim  to  generic 
status  would  then  correspond  to  that  of  Being. 

As  a  solution  of  the  problem  we  may  suggest  that  motions  conducing 
to  the  natural  state  or  functioning  in  natural  conditions  should  perhaps, 
as  we  have  already  asserted,  be  regarded  as  being  in  a  sense  Forms, 
while  those  whose  direction  is  contrary  to  nature  must  be  supposed  to 
be  assimilated  to  the  results  towards  which  they  lead. 

But  what  is  the  constant  element  in  alteration,  in  growth  and  birth 
and  their  opposites,  in  local  change  ?  What  is  that  which  makes  them 
all  motions  ?  Surely  it  is  the  fact  that  in  every  case  the  object  is  never 
in  the  same  state  before  and  after  the  motion,  that  it  cannot  remain  still 
and  in  complete  inactivity  but,  so  long  as  the  motion  is  present,  is  con¬ 
tinually  urged  to  take  a  new  condition,  never  acquiescing  in  Identity 
but  always  courting  Difference  ;  deprived  of  Difference,  Motion  perishes. 

Thus,  Difference  may  be  predicated  of  Motion,  not  merely  in  the  sense 
that  it  arises  and  persists  in  a  difference  of  conditions,  but  in  the  sense  of 


100 


PLOTINUS 


being  itself  perpetual  difference.  It  follows  that  Time,  as  being  created  by 
Motion,  also  entails  perpetual  difference :  Time  is  the  measure  of 
unceasing  Motion,  accompanying  its  course  and,  as  it  were,  carried 
along  its  stream. 

In  short,  the  common  basis  of  all  Motion  is  the  existence  of  a  pro¬ 
gression  and  an  urge  from  potentiality  and  the  potential  to  actuality 
and  the  actual :  everything  which  has  any  kind  of  motion  whatsoever 
derives  this  motion  from  a  pre-existent  potentiality  within  itself  of 
activity  or  passivity. 

23- 

The  Motion  which  acts  upon  Sensible  objects  enters  from  without, 
and  so  shakes,  drives,  rouses  and  thrusts  its  participants  that  they  may 
neither  rest  nor  preserve  their  identity, — and  all  to  the  end  that  they 
may  be  caught  into  that  restlessness,  that  flustering  excitability  which 
is  but  an  image  of  Life. 

We  must  avoid  identifying  Motion  with  the  objects  moved  :  by 
walking  we  do  not  mean  the  feet  but  the  activity  springing  from  a 
potentiality  in  the  feet.  Since  the  potentiality  is  invisible,  we  see  of 
necessity  only  the  active  feet, — that  is  to  say,  not  feet  simply,  as  would 
be  the  case  if  they  were  at  rest,  but  something  besides  feet,  something 
invisible  but  indirectly  seen  as  an  accompaniment  by  the  fact  that  we 
observe  the  feet  to  be  in  ever-changing  positions  and  no  longer  at  rest. 
We  infer  alteration,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  qualitative  change  in 
the  thing  altered. 

Where,  then,  does  Motion  reside,  when  there  is  one  thing  that  moves 
and  another  that  passes  from  an  inherent  potentiality  to  actuality  ? 
In  the  mover  ?  How  then  will  the  moved,  the  patient,  participate  in 
the  motion  ?  In  the  moved  ?  Then  why  does  not  Motion  remain  in  it, 
once  having  come  ?  It  would  seem  that  Motion  must  neither  be  separated 
from  the  active  principle  nor  allowed  to  reside  in  it ;  it  must  proceed 
from  agent  to  patient  without  so  inhering  in  the  latter  as  to  be  severed 
from  the  former,  passing  from  one  to  the  other  like  a  breath  of  wind. 

Now,  when  the  potentiality  of  Motion  consists  in  an  ability  to  walk, 


VI.  3-  24] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


IOI 


it  may  be  imagined  as  thrusting  a  man  forward  and  causing  him  to  be 
continually  adopting  a  different  position  ;  when  it  lies  in  the  capacity 
to  heat,  it  heats  ;  when  the  potentiality  takes  hold  of  Matter  and  builds 
up  the  organism,  we  have  growth  ;  and  when  another  potentiality 
demolishes  the  structure,  the  result  is  decay,  that  which  has  the 
potentiality  of  demolition  experiencing  the  decay.  Where  the  birth¬ 
giving  principle  is  active,  we  find  birth  ;  where  it  is  impotent  and  the 
power  to  destroy  prevails,  destruction  takes  place — not  the  destruction 
of  what  already  exists,  but  that  which  intervenes  upon  the  road  to 
existence. 

Health  comes  about  in  the  same  way — when  the  power  which 
produces  health  is  active  and  predominant ;  sickness  is  the  result  of  the 
opposite  power  working  in  the  opposite  direction. 

Thus,  Motion  is  conditioned,  not  only  by  the  objects  in  which  it 
occurs,  but  also  by  its  origins  and  its  course,  and  it  is  a  distinctive  mark 
of  Motion  to  be  always  qualified  and  to  take  its  quality  from  the  moved. 

24. 

With  regard  to  locomotion  :  if  ascending  is  to  be  held  contrary  to 
descending,  and  circular  motion  different  (in  kind)  from  motion  in  a 
straight  line,  we  may  ask  how  this  difference  is  to  be  defined — the 
difference,  for  example,  between  throwing  over  the  head  and  under  the 
feet. 

The  driving  power  is  one, — though  indeed  it  might  be  maintained 
that  the  upward  drive  is  different  from  the  downward,  and  the  downward 
passage  of  a  different  character  from  the  upward,  especially  if  it  be  a 
natural  motion,  in  which  case  the  up-motion  constitutes  lightness,  the 
down-motion  heaviness. 

But  in  all  these  motions  alike  there  is  the  common  tendency  to  seek 
an  appointed  place,  and  in  this  tendency  we  seem  to  have  the  differentia 
which  separates  locomotion  from  the  other  species. 

As  for  motion  in  a  circle  and  motion  in  a  straight  line,  if  the  former 
is  in  practice  indistinguishable  from  the  latter,  how  can  we  regard  them 
as  different  ?  The  only  difference  lies  in  the  shape  of  the  course,  unless 


102 


PLOTINUS 


the  view  be  taken  that  circular  motion  is  “  impure,”  as  not  being  entirely 
a  motion,  not  involving  a  complete  surrender  of  identity. 

However,  it  appears  in  general  that  locomotion  is  a  definite  unity, 
taking  its  differences  from  externals. 

25- 

The  nature  of  integration  and  disintegration  calls  for  scrutiny. 
Are  they  different  from  the  motions  above  mentioned,  from  coming-to-be 
and  passing-away,  from  growth  and  decay,  from  change  of  place  and 
from  alteration  ?  or  must  they  be  referred  to  these  ?  or,  again,  must 
some  of  these  be  regarded  as  types  of  integration  and  disintegration  ? 

If  integration  implies  that  one  element  proceeds  towards  another, 
implies  in  short  an  approach,  and  disintegration,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
retreat  into  the  background,  such  motions  may  be  termed  local ;  we 
have  clearly  a  case  of  two  things  moving  in  the  direction  of  unity,  or 
else  making  away  from  each  other. 

If  however  the  things  achieve  a  sort  of  fusion,  mixture,  blending,  and 
if  a  unity  comes  into  being,  not  when  the  process  of  combination  is  already 
complete,  but  in  the  very  act  of  combining,  to  which  of  our  specified 
motions  shall  we  refer  this  type  ?  There  will  certainly  be  locomotion 
at  first,  but  it  will  be  succeeded  by  something  different  ;  just  as  in  growth 
locomotion  is  found  at  the  outset,  though  later  it  is  supplanted  by 
quantitative  motion.  The  present  case  is  similar  :  locomotion  leads 
the  way,  but  integration  or  disintegration  does  not  inevitably  follow  ; 
integration  takes  place  only  when  the  impinging  elements  become 
intertwined,  disintegration  only  when  they  are  rent  asunder  by  the 
contact. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  often  happens  that  locomotion  follows  dis¬ 
integration,  or  else  occurs  simultaneously,  though  the  experience  of  the 
disintegrated  is  not  conceived  in  terms  of  locomotion  :  so  too  in  integra¬ 
tion  a  distinct  experience,  a  distinct  unification,  accompanies  the 
locomotion  and  remains  separate  from  it. 

Are  we  then  to  posit  a  new  species  for  these  two  motions,  adding  to 
them,  perhaps,  alteration  ?  A  thing  is  altered  by  becoming  dense — in 


VI.  3-  26] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


103 


other  words,  by  integration  ;  it  is  altered  again  by  being  rarefied — that 
is,  by  disintegration.  When  wine  and  water  are  mixed,  something  is 
produced  different  from  either  of  the  pre-existing  elements :  thus, 
integration  takes  place,  resulting  in  alteration. 

But  perhaps  we  should  recall  a  previous  distinction,  and  while 
holding  that  integrations  and  disintegrations  precede  alterations,  should 
maintain  that  alterations  are  nonetheless  distinct  from  either  ;  that, 
further,  not  every  alteration  is  of  this  type  (presupposing,  that  is  to  say, 
integration  or  disintegration),  and,  in  particular,  rarefaction  and  con¬ 
densation  are  not  identical  with  disintegration  and  integration,  nor  in 
any  sense  derived  from  them  :  to  suppose  that  they  were  would  involve 
the  admission  of  a  vacuum. 

Again,  can  we  use  integration  and  disintegration  to  explain  black¬ 
ness  and  whiteness  ?  But  to  doubt  the  independent  existence  of  these 
qualities  means  that,  beginning  with  colours,  we  may  end  by  annihilating 
almost  all  qualities,  or  rather  all  without  exception  ;  for  if  we  identify 
every  alteration,  or  qualitative  change,  with  integration  and  disintegration, 
we  allow  nothing  whatever  to  come  into  existence  ;  the  same  elements 
persist,  nearer  or  farther  apart. 

Finally,  how  is  it  possible  to  class  learning  and  being  taught  as 
integrations  ? 

26. 

We  may  now  take  the  various  specific  types  of  Motion,  such  as 
locomotion,  and  once  again  enquire  for  each  one  whether  it  is  not  to  be 
divided  on  the  basis  of  direction,  up,  down,  straight,  circular — a  question 
already  raised  ;  whether  the  organic  motion  should  be  distinguished 
from  the  inorganic — they  are  clearly  not  alike ;  whether,  again, 
organic  motions  should  be  subdivided  into  walking,  swimming  and 
flight. 

Perhaps  we  should  also  distinguish  in  each  species  natural  from 
unnatural  motions  :  this  distinction  would  however  imply  that  .motions 
have  differences  which  are  not  external.  It  may  indeed  be  the 
case  that  motions  create  these  differences  and  cannot  exist  without 


104 


PLOTINUS 


them  ;  but  Nature  may  be  supposed  to  be  the  ultimate  source  of  motions 
and  differences  alike. 

Motions  may  also  be  classed  as  natural,  artificial  and  purposive  : 
“  natural  ”  embracing  growth  and  decay  ;  “  artificial  ”  architecture  and 
shipbuilding ;  “  purposive  ”  enquiry,  learning,  government,  and,  in 

general,  all  speech  and  action. 

Again,  with  regard  to  growth,  alteration  and  birth,  the  division 
may  proceed  from  the  natural  and  unnatural,  or,  speaking  generally, 
from  the  characters  of  the  moved  objects. 

27* 

What  view  are  we  to  take  of  that  which  is  opposed  to  Motion, 
whether  it  be  Stability  or  Rest  ?  Are  we  to  consider  it  as  a  distinct 
genus,  or  to  refer  it  to  one  of  the  genera  already  established  ?  We  should, 
no  doubt,  be  well  advised  to  assign  Stability  to  the  Intellectual,  and  to 
look  in  the  lower  sphere  for  Rest  alone. 

First,  then,  we  have  to  discover  the  precise  nature  of  this  Rest. 
If  it  presents  itself  as  identical  with  Stability,  we  have  no  right  to  expect 
to  find  it  in  the  sphere  where  nothing  is  stable  and  the  apparently  stable 
has  merely  a  less  strenuous  motion. 

Suppose  the  contrary :  we  decide  that  Rest  is  different  from 
Stability,  inasmuch  as  Stability  belongs  to  the  utterly  immobile, 
Rest  to  the  stationary  which,  though  of  a  nature  to  move,  does  not  move. 
Now,  if  Rest  means  coming  to  rest,  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  motion 
which  has  not  yet  ceased  but  still  continues  ;  but  if  we  suppose  it  to  be 
incompatible  with  Motion,  we  have  first  to  ask  whether  there  is  in  the 
Sensible  world  anything  without  motion. 

Yet  nothing  can  experience  every  type  of  motion  ;  certain  motions 
must  be  ruled  out  in  order  that  we  may  speak  of  the  moving  object  as 
existing :  may  we  not,  then,  say  of  that  which  has  no  locomotjcxn  and 
is  at  rest  as  far  as  pertains  to  that  specific  type  of  motion,  simply  that  it 
does  not  move  ? 

Rest,  accordingly,  is  the  negation  of  Motion  :  in  other  words,  it 
has  no  generic  status.  It  is  in  fact  related  only  to  one  type  of  motion, 


VI.  3-  27] 


ON  THE  KINDS  OF  BEING 


105 


namely,  locomotion  ;  it  is  therefore  the  negation  of  this  motion  that  is 
meant. 

But,  it  may  be  asked,  why  not  regard  Motion  as  the  negation  of 
Stability  ?  We  reply  that  Motion  does  not  appear  alone  ;  it  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  a  force  which  actualises  its  object,  forcing  it  on,  as  it  were, 
giving  it  a  thousand  forms  and  destroying  them  all :  Rest,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  comports  nothing  but  the  object  itself,  and  signifies  merely  that  the 
object  has  no  motion. 

Why,  then,  did  we  not  in  discussing  the  Intellectual  realm  assert 
that  Stability  was  the  negation  of  Motion  ?  Because  it  is  not  indeed 
possible  to  consider  Stability  as  an  annulling  of  Motion,  for  when  Motion 
ceases  Stability  does  not  exist,  but  requires  for  its  own  existence  the 
simultaneous  existence  of  Motion ;  and  what  is  of  a  nature  to 
move  is  not  stationary  because  the  Stability  of  that  realm  is  motion¬ 
less,  but  because  Stability  has  taken  hold  of  it ;  in  so  far  as  it  has 
Motion,  it  will  never  cease  to  move  :  thus,  it  is  stationary  under 
the  influence  of  Stability,  and  moves  under  the  influence  of  Motion. 
In  the  lower  realm,  too,  a  thing  moves  in  virtue  of  Motion,  but 
its  Rest  is  caused  by  a  deficiency ;  it  has  been  deprived  of  its  due 
motion. 

What  we  have  to  observe  is  the  essential  character  of  this  Sensible 
counterpart  of  Stability. 

Consider  sickness  and  health.  The  convalescent  moves  in  the  sense 
that  he  passes  from  sickness  to  health.  What  species  of  rest  are  we  to 
oppose  to  this  convalescence  ?  If  we  oppose  the  condition  from  which 
he  departs,  that  condition  is  sickness,  not  Stability ;  if  that  into  which 
he  passes,  it  is  health,  again  not  the  same  as  Stability. 

It  may  be  declared  that  health  or  sickness  is  indeed  some  form  of 
Stability  :  we  are  to  suppose,  then,  that  Stability  is  the  genus  of  which 
health  and  sickness  are  species  ;  which  is  absurd. 

Stability  may,  again,  be  regarded  as  an  attribute  of  health  :  according 
to  this  view  health  will  not  be  health  before  possessing  Stability. 

These  questions  may  however  be  left  to  the  judgment  of  the 
individual. 


io6 


PLOTINUS 


28. 

We  have  already  indicated  that  Activity  and  Passivity  are  to  be 
regarded  as  motions,  and  that  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  absolute 
motions,  actions,  passions. 

As  for  the  remaining  so-called  genera,  we  have  shown  that  they  are 
reducible  to  those  which  we  have  posited. 

With  regard  to  the  relative,  we  have  maintained  that  Relation 
belongs  to  one  object  as  compared  with  another,  that  the  two  objects 
coexist  simultaneously,  and  that  Relation  is  found  whenever  a  substance 
is  in  such  a  condition  as  to  produce  it ;  not  that  the  substance  is  a 
relative,  except  in  so  far  as  it  constitutes  part  of  a  whole — a  hand,  for 
example,  or  head  or  cause  or  principle  or  element. 

We  may  also  adopt  the  ancient  division  of  relatives  into  creative 
principles,  measures,  excesses  and  deficiencies,  and  those  which  in 
general  separate  objects  on  the  basis  of  similarities  and  differences. 

Our  investigation  into  the  kinds  of  Being  is  now  complete. 


FOURTH  TRACTATE 

On  the  Integral  Omnipresence  of  the  Authentic  Existent  (i) 

1. 

How  are  we  to  explain  the  omnipresence  of  the  soul  ?  Does  it 
depend  upon  the  definite  magnitude  of  the  material  universe  coupled 
with  some  native  tendency  in  soul  to  distribute  itself  over  material  mass, 
or  is  it  a  characteristic  of  soul  apart  from  body  ? 

In  the  latter  case,  soul  will  not  appear  just  where  body  may  bring 
it ;  body  will  meet  soul  awaiting  it  everywhere  ;  wheresoever  body  finds 
place,  there  soul  lay  before  ever  body  was ;  the  entire  material  mass  of 
the  universe  has  been  set  into  an  existent  soul. 

But  if  soul  spread  thus  wide  before  material  extension  existed,  then 
as  covering  all  space  it  would  seem  to  be  of  itself  a  thing  of  magnitude, 
and  in  what  mode  could  it  exist  in  the  All  before  the  All  was  in  being, 


VI.  4.  2]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


107 


before  there  was  any  All  ?  And  who  can  accept  a  soul  described  as 
partless  and  massless  and  yet,  for  all  that  absence  of  extension,  extend¬ 
ing  over  a  universe  ?  We  may  perhaps  be  told  that,  though  extended  over 
the  corporeal,  it  does  not  itself  become  so  :  but  thus  to  give  it  magnitude 
as  an  accidental  attribute  leaves  the  problem  still  unsolved  :  precisely 
the  same  question  must  in  all  reason  arise  :  How  can  the  soul  take 
magnitude  even  in  the  move  of  accident  ? 

We  cannot  think  of  soul  being  diffused  as  a  quality  is,  say  sweetness 
or  colour,  for  while  these  are  actual  states  of  the  masses  affected  so  that 
they  show  that  quality  at  every  point,  none  of  them  has  an  independent 
existence  ;  they  are  attributes  of  body  and  known  only  as  in  body ; 
such  quality  is  necessarily  of  a  definite  extension.  Further,  the  colour 
at  any  point  is  independent  of  that  at  any  other  ;  no  doubt  the  Form, 
White,  is  the  same  all  over,  but  there  is  not  arithmetical  identity  ;  in 
soul  there  is  ;  it  is  one  soul  in  foot  and  in  hand,  as  the  facts  of  perception 
show.  And  yet  in  the  case  of  qualities  the  one  is  observably  distributed 
part  for  part ;  in  the  soul  the  identity  is  undistributed  ;  what  we  some¬ 
times  call  distribution  is  simply  omnipresence. 

Obviously,  we  must  take  hold  of  the  question  from  the  very  beginning 
in  the  hope  of  finding  some  clear  and  convincing  theory  as  to  how  soul, 
immaterial  and  without  magnitude,  can  be  thus  broad-spread,  whether 
before  material  masses  exist  or  as  enveloping  them.  Of  course,  should 
it  appear  that  this  omnipresence  may  occur  apart  from  material  things, 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  accepting  its  occurrence  within  the  material. 

2. 

Side  by  side  exist  the  Authentic  All  and  its  counterpart,  the  visible 
universe.  The  Authentic  is  contained  in  nothing,  since  nothing  existed 
before  it ;  of  necessity  anything  coming  after  it  must,  as  a  first  condition 
of  existence,  be  contained  by  this  All,  especially  since  it  depends  upon 
the  Authentic  and  without  that  could  have  neither  stability  nor 
movement. 

We  may  be  reminded  that  the  universe  cannot  be  contained  in  the 
Authentic  as  in  a  place,  where  place  would  mean  the  boundaries  of 


io8 


PLOTINUS 


some  surrounding  extension  considered  as  an  envelope,  or  some  space 
formerly  a  part  of  the  Void  and  still  remaining  unoccupied  even  after 
the  emergence  of  the  universe,  that  it  can  only  support  itself,  as  it  were, 
upon  the  Authentic  and  rest  in  the  embrace  of  its  omnipresence  ;  but 
this  objection  is  merely  verbal  and  will  disappear  if  our  meaning  is 
grasped  ;  we  mention  it  for  another  purpose  ;  it  goes  to  enforce  our 
real  assertion,  that  the  Authentic  All,  at  once  primal  and  veritable, 
needs  no  place  and  is  in  no  way  contained.  The  All,  as  being  an  integral, 
cannot  fall  short  of  itself  ;  it  must  ever  have  fulfilled  its  own  totality, 
ever  reached  to  its  own  equivalence  ;  as  far  as  the  sum  of  entities  extends, 
there  this  is  ;  for  this  is  the  All. 

Inevitably,  also,  anything  other  than  this  All  that  may  be  stationed 
therein  must  have  part  in  the  All,  merge  into  it,  and  hold  by  its  strength  ; 
it  is  not  that  the  thing  detaches  a  portion  of  the  All  but  that  within 
itself  it  finds  the  All  which  has  entered  into  it  while  still  unbrokenly 
self-abiding,  since  Being  cannot  lodge  in  non-Being,  but,  if  anything, 
non-Being  within  Being. 

Being,  then,  is  present  to  all  Being  ;  an  identity  cannot  tear  itself 
asunder  ;  the  omnipresence  asserted  of  it  must  be  presence  within  the 
realm  of  Being  ;  that  is,  it  must  be  a  self-presence.  And  it  is  in  no  way 
strange  that  the  omnipresence  should  be  at  once  self-abiding  and 
universal ;  this  is  merely  saying  omnipresence  within  a  unity. 

It  is  our  way  to  limit  Being  to  the  sense-known  and  therefore  to 
think  of  omnipresence  in  terms  of  the  concrete  ;  in  our  overestimate 
of  the  sensible,  we  question  how  that  other  Nature  can  reach  over  such 
vastness  ;  but  our  great  is  small,  and  this,  small  to  us,  is  great ;  it 
reaches  integrally  to  every  point  of  our  universe — or,  better,  our 
universe,  moving  from  every  side  and  in  all  its  members  towards 
this,  meets  it  everywhere  as  the  omnipresent  All  ever  stretching 
beyond. 

The  universe  in  all  its  reach  can  attain  nothing  further — that  would 
mean  overpassing  the  total  of  Being — and  therefore  is  content  to  circle 
about  it ;  not  able  to  encompass  or  even  to  fill  the  All,  it  is  content  to 
accept  place  and  subordination,  for  thus  it  preserves  itself  in  neighbouring 


VI.  4-  3]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


109 

the  higher  present  to  it — present  and  yet  absent ;  self-holding,  whatever 
may  seek  its  presence. 

Wherever  the  body  of  the  universe  may  touch,  there  it  finds  this  All ; 
it  strives  for  no  further  advance,  willing  to  revolve  in  that  one  circle, 
since  to  it  that  is  the  All  and  in  that  movement  its  every  part  embraces 
the  All. 

If  that  higher  were  itself  in  place  there  would  be  the  need  of  seeking 
that  precise  place  by  a  certain  right  path  ;  part  of  seeker  must  touch 
part  of  sought,  and  there  would  be  far  and  near.  But  since  there  is  no 
far  and  near  there  must  be,  if  presence  at  all,  presence  entire.  And 
presence  there  indubitably  is  ;  this  highest  is  present  to  every  being 
of  those  that,  free  of  far  and  near,  are  of  power  to  receive. 

3- 

But  are  we  to  think  of  this  Authentic  Being  as,  itself,  present,  or 
does  it  remain  detached,  omnipresent  in  the  sense  only  that  powers  from 
it  enter  everywhere  ? 

Under  the  theory  of  presence  by  powers,  souls  are  described  as  rays  ; 
the  source  remains  self-locked  and  these  are  flung  forth  to  impinge  upon 
particular  living  things. 

Now,  in  beings  whose  unity  does  not  reproduce  the  entire  nature 
of  that  principle,  any  presence  is  presence  of  an  emanant  power  :  even 
this,  however,  does  not  mean  that  the  principle  is  less  than  integrally 
present ;  it  is  not  sundered  from  the  power  which  it  has  uttered  ;  all 
is  offered,  but  the  recipient  is  able  to  take  only  so  much.  But  in  Beings 
in  which  the  plenitude  of  these  powers  is  manifested,  there  clearly  the 
Authentic  itself  is  present,  though  still  as  remaining  distinct  ;  it  is  distinct 
in  that,  becoming  the  informing  principle  of  some  definite  thing,  it  would 
abdicate  from  its  standing  as  the  total  and  from  its  uttermost  self- 
abiding  and  would  belong,  in  some  mode  of  accident,  to  another  thing 
as  well.  Still  it  is  not  the  property  of  what  may  seek  to  join  with  it ; 
it  chooses  where  it  will  and  enters  as  the  participant’s  power  may  allow, 
but  it  does  not  become  a  chattel ;  it  remains  the  quested  and  so  in  another 
sense  never  passes  over.  There  is  nothing  disquieting  in  omnipresence 


no 


PLOTINUS 


after  this  mode  where  there  is  no  appropriation  :  in  the  same  accidental 
way,  we  may  reasonably  put  it,  soul  concurs  with  body,  but  it  is  soul 
self-holding,  not  inbound  with  Matter,  free  even  of  the  body  which  it  has 
illuminated  through  and  through. 

Nor  does  the  placelessness  of  Being  make  it  surprising  that  it  be 
present  universally  to  things  of  place  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  wonder 
would  be— the  more  than  wonder,  the  impossibility— if  from  a  place  of 
its  own  it  were  present  to  other  things  in  their  place,  or  if  having  place 
it  were  present  at  all— and,  especially  present,  as  we  assert,  integrally. 

But  set  it  outside  of  place,  and  reason  tells  us  that  it  will  be  present 
entire  where  it  is  present  at  all  and  that,  present  to  the  total,  it  must  be 
present  in  the  same  completeness  to  every  several  unity  ;  otherwise 
something  of  it  is  here  and  something  there  and  at  once  it  is  fragmentary, 
it  is  body. 

How  can  we  so  dispart  Being  ?  We  cannot  break  Life  into  parts  ; 
if  the  total  was  Life,  the  fragment  is  not.  But  do  we  not  thus  sunder 
Intelligence,  one  intelligence  in  this  man,  another  in  that  ?  No  ;  such 
a  fragment  would  not  be  Intelligence.  But  the  Being  of  the  individual  ? 
Once  more,  if  the  total  thing  is  Being,  then  a  fragment  could  not  be. 
Are  we  told  that  in  a  body,  a  total  of  parts,  every  member  is  also  a  body  ? 
But  here  we  are  dividing  not  body  but  a  particular  quantity  of  body,  each 
of  those  divisions  being  described  as  body  in  virtue  of  possessing  the 
Form  or  Idea  that  constitutes  body  ;  and  this  Idea  has  no  magnitude, 
is  incapable  of  magnitude. 

4  • 

But  how  explain  beings  by  the  side  of  Being,  and  the  variety  of 
intelligences  and  of  souls,  when  Being  has  the  unity  of  omnipresent 
identity  and  not  merely  that  of  a  species,  and  when  intellect  and  soul 
are  likewise  numerically  one  ?  We  certainly  distinguish  between  the 
soul  of  the  All  and  the  particular  souls. 

This  seems  to  conflict  with  our  view  which,  moreover,  for  all  its 
logical  necessity,  scarcely  carries  conviction  against  our  mental  reluctance 
to  the  notion  of  unity  identically  omnipresent.  It  would  appear  more 


VI.  4- 4]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


hi 


plausible  to  suppose  a  partition  of  the  All — the  original  remaining 
undiminished — or,  in  a  more  legitimate  phrase,  an  engendering  from 
the  All. 

Thus  the  Authentic  would  be  left  self-gathered,  while  what  we  think 
of  as  the  parts — the  separate  souls — would  come  into  being  to  produce 
the  multiple  total  of  the  universe. 

But  if  the  Authentic  Being  is  to  be  kept  unattached  in  order  to 
remove  the  difficulty  of  integral  omnipresence,  the  same  considerations 
must  apply  equally  to  the  souls  ;  we  would  have  to  admit  that  they 
cannot  be  integrally  omnipresent  in  the  bodies  they  are  described  as 
occupying  ;  either,  soul  must  be  distributed,  part  to  body’s  part,  or  it  is 
lodged  entire  at  some  one  point  in  the  body  giving  forth  some  of  its 
powers  to  the  other  points  ;  and  these  very  powers,  again,  present  the 
same  difficulty. 

A  further  objection  is  that  some  one  spot  in  the  body  will  hold  the 
soul,  the  others  no  more  than  a  power  from  it. 

Still,  how  account  for  the  many  souls,  many  intelligences,  the  beings 
by  the  side  of  Being  ? 

No  doubt  the  beings  proceed  from  the  Priors  in  the  mode  only  of 
numerical  distinction  and  not  as  concrete  masses,  but  the  difficulty 
remains  as  to  how  they  come  to  constitute  the  plenitude  of  the  material 
universe. 

This  explanation  by  progression  does  not  clear  the  problem. 

We  are  agreed  that  diversity  within  the  Authentic  depends  not 
upon  spatial  separation  but  sheerly  upon  differentiation  ;  all  Being, 
despite  this  plurality,  is  a  unity  still ;  “  Being  neighbours  Being  ”  ; 
all  holds  together ;  and  thus  the  Intellectual- Principle  (which  is  Being 
and  the  Beings)  remains  an  integral,  multiple  by  differentiation,  not  by 
spatial  distinction. 

Soul  too  ?  Souls  too.  That  principle  distributed  over  material 
masses  we  hold  to  be  in  its  own  nature  incapable  of  distribution  ;  the 
magnitude  belongs  to  the  masses  ;  when  this  soul-principle  enters  into 
them — or  rather  they  into  it — it  is  thought  of  as  distributable  only 
because,  within  the  discrimination  of  the  corporeal,  the  animating  force 


112 


PLOTINUS 


is  to  be  recognised  at  any  and  every  point.  For  soul  is  not  articulated, 
section  of  soul  to  section  of  body  ;  there  is  integral  omnipresence  mani¬ 
festing  the  unity  of  that  principle,  its  veritable  partlessness. 

Now  as  in  soul  unity  does  not  debar  variety,  so  with  Being  and  the 
Beings  ;  in  that  order  multiplicity  does  not  conflict  with  unity.  Multi¬ 
plicity.  This  is  not  due  to  the  need  of  flooding  the  universe  with  life ; 
nor  is  the  extension  of  the  corporeal  the  cause  of  the  multiplicity  of 
souls ;  before  body  existed,  soul  was  one  and  many  ;  the  many  souls 
fore-existed  in  the  All  not  potentially  but  each  effectively ;  that  one 
collective  soul  is  no  bar  to  the  variety ;  the  variety  does  not  abrogate 
the  unity  ;  the  souls  are  apart  without  partition,  present  each  to  all  as 
never  having  been  set  in  opposition  ;  they  are  no  more  hedged  off  by 
boundaries  than  are  the  multiple  items  of  knowledge  in  one  mind  ;  the 
one  soul  so  exists  as  to  include  all  souls  ;  the  nature  of  such  a  principle 
must  be  utterly  free  of  boundary. 

5- 

Herein  lies  its  greatness,  not  in  mass  ;  mass  is  limited  and  may  be 
whittled  down  to  nothingness  ;  in  that  order  no  such  paring  off  is  possible 
— nor,  if  it  were,  could  there  be  any  falling  short.  Where  limitation  is 
unthinkable,  what  fear  can  there  be  of  absence  at  any  point  ?  Nowhere 
can  that  principle  fail  which  is  the  unfailing,  the  everlasting,  the  un¬ 
dwindling  ;  suppose  it  in  flux  and  it  must  at  some  time  flow  to  its  end  ; 
since  it  is  not  in  flux — and,  besides  (as  the  All),  it  has  nowhere  to  flow  to 
— it  lies  spread  over  the  universe  ;  in  fact  it  is  the  universe,  too  great  to 
be  held  by  body,  giving,  therefore,  to  the  material  universe  but  little 
of  itself,  the  little  which  that  participant  can  take. 

We  may  not  make  this  principle  the  lesser,  or  if  in  the  sense  of  mass 
we  do,  we  must  not  begin  to  mistrust  the  power  of  that  less  to  stretch 
to  the  greater.  Of  course,  we  have  in  fact  no  right  to  affirm  it  less  or  to 
measure  the  thing  of  magnitude  against  that  which  has  none  ;  as  well 
talk  of  a  doctor’s  skill  being  smaller  than  his  body.  This  greatness  is 
not  to  be  thought  of  in  terms  of  quantity ;  the  greater  and  less  of  body 
have  nothing  to  do  with  soul. 


VI.  4.  7]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


The  nature  of  the  greatness  of  soul  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  as 
the  body  grows,  the  larger  mass  is  held  by  the  same  soul  that  sufficed 
to  the  smaller ;  it  would  be  in  many  ways  absurd  to  suppose  a 
corresponding  enlargement  in  the  soul. 

6. 

But  why  does  not  one  same  soul  enter  more  than  one  body  ? 

Because  any  second  body  must  approach,  if  it  might ;  but  the  first 
has  approached  and  received  and  keeps. 

Are  we  to  think  that  this  second  body,  in  keeping  its  soul  with  a 
like  care,  is  keeping  the  same  soul  as  the  first  ? 

Why  not :  what  difference  is  there  ?  Merely  some  additions  (from 
the  experiences  of  life,  none  in  the  soul  itself). 

We  ask  further  why  one  soul  in  foot  and  hand  and  not  one  soul  in 
the  distinct  members  of  the  universe. 

Sensations  no  doubt  differ  from  soul  to  soul  but  only  as  do  the 
conditions  and  experiences  ;  this  is  difference  not  in  the  judging  principle 
but  in  the  matters  coming  to  judgement ;  the  judge  is  one  and  the  same 
soul  pronouncing  upon  various  events,  and  these  not  its  own  but  belong¬ 
ing  to  a  particular  body  ;  it  is  only  as  a  man  pronounces  simultaneously 
upon  a  pleasant  sensation  in  his  finger  and  a  pain  in  his  head. 

But  why  is  not  the  soul  in  one  man  aware,  then,  of  the  judgement 
passed  by  another  ? 

Because  it  is  a  judgement  made,  not  a  state  set  up  ;  besides,  the  soul 
that  has  passed  the  judgement  does  not  pronounce  but  simply  judges : 
similarly  a  man’s  sight  does  not  report  to  his  hearing,  though  both  have 
passed  judgement ;  it  is  the  reason  above  both  that  reports,  and  this  is 
a  principle  distinct  from  either.  Often,  as  it  happens,  reason  does 
become  aware  of  a  verdict  formed  in  another  reason  and  takes  to  itself 
an  alien  experience  :  but  this  has  been  dealt  with  elsewhere. 

7- 

Let  us  consider  once  more  how  it  is  possible  for  an  identity  to 
extend  over  a  universe.  This  comes  to  the  question  how  each  variously 

Q 


PLOTINUS 


114 

placed  entity  in  the  multiplicity  of  the  sense  order  can  have  its  share 
in  "one  identical  Principle. 

The  solution  is  in  the  reasons  given  for  refusing  to  distribute  that 
principle  ;  we  are  not  to  parcel  it  out  among  the  entities  of  the  multiple  ; 
on  the  contrary,  we  bring  the  distributed  multiples  to  the  unity.  The 
unity  has  not  gone  forth  to  them  :  from  their  dispersion  we  are  led  to 
think  of  it  as  broken  up  to  meet  them,  but  this  is  to  distribute  the  con¬ 
troller  and  container  equally  over  the  material  handled. 

A  hand  may  very  well  control  an  entire  mass,  a  long  plank,  or 
anything  of  that  sort ;  the  control  is  effective  throughout  and  yet  is  not 
distributed,  unit  for  unit,  over  the  object  of  control :  the  power  is  felt 
to  reach  over  the  whole  area,  though  the  hand  is  only  hand-long,  not 
taking  the  extension  of  the  mass  it  wields  ;  lengthen  the  object  and, 
provided  that  the  total  is  within  the  strength,  the  power  handles  the  new 
load  with  no  need  of  distributing  itself  over  the  increased  area.  Now  let 
us  eliminate  the  corporeal  mass  of  the  hand,  retaining  the  power  it  exerted : 
is  not  that  power,  the  impartible,  present  integrally  over  the  entire  area 
of  control ? 

Or  imagine  a  small  luminous  mass  serving  as  centre  to  a  transparent 
sphere,  so  that  the  light  from  within  shows  upon  the  entire  outer  surface, 
otherwise  unlit :  we  surely  agree  that  the  inner  core  of  light,  intact  and 
immobile,  reaches  over  the  entire  outer  extension ;  the  single  light  of  that 
small  centre  illuminates  the  whole  field.  The  diffused  light  is  not  due  to  any 
bodily  magnitude  of  that  central  point  which  illuminates  not  as  body  but  as 
body  lit,  that  is  by  another  kind  of  power  than  corporeal  quality :  let  us 
then  abstract  the  corporeal  mass,  retaining  the  light  as  power :  we  can  no 
longer  speak  of  the  light  in  any  particular  spot ;  it  is  equally  diffused  within 
and  throughout  the  entire  sphere.  We  can  no  longer  even  name  the  spot 
it  occupied  so  as  to  say  whence  it  came  or  how  it  is  present ;  we  can  but 
seek,  and  wonder  as  the  search  shows  us  the  light  simultaneously  present 
at  each  and  every  point  in  the  sphere.  So  with  the  sunlight :  looking 
to  the  corporeal  mass  you  are  able  to  name  the  source  of  the  light  shining 
through  all  the  air,  but  what  you  see  is  one  identical  light  in  integral 
omnipresence.  Consider  too  the  refraction  of  light  by  which  it  is  thrown 


VI.  4.  8]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


ii5 

away  from  the  line  of  incidence  ;  yet,  direct  or  refracted,  it  is  one  and  the 
same  light.  And  supposing,  as  before,  that  the  sun  were  simply  an 
unembodied  illuminant,  the  light  would  no  longer  be  fixed  to  any  one 
definite  spot :  having  no  starting  point,  no  centre  of  origin,  it  would  be 
an  integral  unity  omnipresent. 

8. 

The  light  of  our  world  can  be  allocated  because  it  springs  from  a 
corporeal  mass  of  known  position,  but  conceive  an  immaterial  entity, 
independent  of  body  as  being  of  earlier  nature  than  all  body,  a  nature 
firmly  self-based  or,  better,  without  need  of  base  :  such  a  principle, 
incorporeal,  autonomous,  having  no  source  for  its  rising,  coming  from 
no  place,  attached  to  no  material  mass,  this  cannot  be  allotted  part  here 
and  part  there :  that  would  be  to  give  it  both  a  previous  position  and  a 
present  attachment.  Finally,  anything  participating  in  such  a  principle 
can  participate  only  as  entirety  with  entirety  ;  there  can  be  no  allotment 
and  no  partition. 

A  principle  attached  to  body  might  be  exposed,  at  least  by  way 
of  accident,  to  such  partition  and  so  be  definable  as  passive  and  partible 
in  view  of  its  close  relationship  with  the  body  of  which  it  is  so  to  speak 
a  state  or  a  Form  ;  but  that  which  is  not  inbound  with  body,  which  on 
the  contrary  body  must  seek,  will  of  necessity  go  utterly  free  of  every 
bodily  modification  and  especially  of  the  very  possibility  of  partition 
which  is  entirely  a  phenomenon  of  body,  belonging  to  its  very  essence. 
As  partibility  goes  with  body,  so  impartibility  with  the  bodiless  :  what 
partition  is  possible  where  there  is  no  magnitude  ?  If  a  thing  of  mag¬ 
nitude  participates  to  any  degree  in  what  has  no  magnitude,  it  must  be 
by  a  participation  without  division  ;  divisibility  implies  magnitude. 

When  we  affirm  unity  in  multiplicity  we  do  not  mean  that  the  unity 
has  become  the  multiples  ;  we  link  the  variety  in  the  multiples  with  the 
unity  which  we  discern,  undivided,  in  them  ;  and  the  unity  must  be 
understood  as  for  ever  distinct  from  them,  from  separate  item  and  from 
total ;  that  unity  remains  true  to  itself,  remains  itself,  and  so  long  as  it 
remains  itself  cannot  fail  within  its  own  scope  (and  therefore  does  reach 


n6 


PLOTINUS 


over  the  multiple),  yet  it  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  coextensive  with  the 
material  universe  or  with  any  member  of  the  All ;  utterly  outside  of  the 
quantitative,  it  cannot  be  coextensive  with  anything. 

Extension  is  of  body  ;  what  is  not  of  body,  but  of  the  opposed  order, 
must  be  kept  free  of  extension  ;  but  where  there  is  no  extension  there  is 
no  spatial  distinction,  nothing  of  the  here  and  there  which  would  end  its 
freedom  of  presence.  Since,  then,  partition  goes  with  place — each  part 
occupying  a  place  of  its  own — how  can  the  placeless  be  parted  ?  The 
unity  must  remain  self-concentrated,  immune  from  part,  however  much 
the  multiple  aspire  or  attain  to  contact  with  it.  This  means  that  any 
movement  towards  it  is  movement  towards  its  entirety,  and  any  partici¬ 
pation  attained  is  participation  in  its  entirety.  Its  participants,  then, 
link  with  it  as  with  something  unparticipated,  something  never  appro¬ 
priated  :  thus  only  can  it  remain  intact  within  itself  and  within  the 
multiples  in  which  it  is  manifested.  And  if  it  did  not  remain  thus  intact, 
it  would  cease  to  be  itself  ;  any  participation,  then,  would  not  be  in  the 
object  of  quest  but  in  something  never  quested. 

9- 

If  in  such  a  partition  of  the  unity,  that  which  entered  into  each 
participant  were  an  entire — always  identical  with  the  first — then,  in  the 
progressive  severance,  the  firsts  would  become  numerous,  each  particular 
becoming  a  first :  and  then  what  prevents  these  many  firsts  from  re¬ 
constituting  the  collective  unity  ?  Certainly  not  the  bodies  they  have 
entered,  for  those  firsts  cannot  be  present  in  the  material  masses  as  their 
Forms  if  they  are  to  remain  identical  with  the  First  from  which  they 
come.  On  the  other  hand,  taking  the  part  conceived  as  present  in  the 
multiple  to  be  simply  a  power  (emanating  from  the  First),  at  once  such 
a  part  ceases  to  be  the  unity ;  we  have  then  to  ask  how  these  powers 
come  to  be  cut  off,  to  have  abandoned  their  origin  ;  they  certainly  have 
not  moved  away  with  no  purpose  in  their  movement. 

Again,  are  those  powers,  entering  the  universe  of  sense,  still  within 
the  First  or  not  ? 

If  they  are  not,  we  have  the  absurdity  that  the  First  has  been 


VI.  4-  10]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


ii  7 


lessened,  disempowered,  stripped  of  power  originally  possessed.  Besides, 
how  could  powers  thus  cut  off  subsist  apart  from  the  foundations  of 
their  being  ?  Suppose  these  powers  to  be  at  once  within  the  First  and 
elsewhere  ;  then  the  universe  of  sense  contains  either  the  entire  powers 
or  parts  of  them  ;  if  parts  of  powers,  the  other  parts  are  There  ;  if  entires, 
then  either  the  powers  There  are  present  here  also  undivided — and  this 
brings  us  back  to  an  identity  omnipresent  in  integral  identity — or  they 
are  each  an  entire  which  has  taken  division  into  a  multiplicity  of  similars 
so  that  attached  to  every  essence  there  is  one  power  only' — that  par¬ 
ticularly  appropriated  to  it — the  other  powers  remaining  powers  un¬ 
attached  :  yet  power  apart  from  Being  is  as  impossible  as  Being  apart 
from  power  ;  for  There  power  is  Being  or  something  greater  than  Being. 

Or,  again,  suppose  the  powers  coming  Thence  are  other  than  their 
source — lesser,  fainter,  as  a  bright  light  dwindles  to  a  dim — but  each 
attached  to  its  essence  as  a  power  must  always  be  :  such  secondary  powers 
would  be  perfectly  uniform  and  at  once  we  are  forced  to  admit  the  omni¬ 
presence  of  the  one  same  power  or  at  the  least  the  presence — as  in  one 
and  the  same  body — of  some  undivided  identity  integral  at  every  point. 

And  if  this  is  the  case  with  a  particular  body,  why  not  with  the  entire 
universe  ? 

If  we  think  of  the  single  power  as  being  endlessly  divided,  it  is  no 
longer  a  power  entire  ;  partition  means  lessening  of  power ;  and,  with 
part  of  power  for  part  of  body,  the  conditions  of  consciousness  cease. 

Further,  a  vestigial  cut  off  from  its  source  disappears — for  example, 
a  reflected  light — and  in  general  an  emanant  loses  its  quality  once  it  is 
severed  from  the  original  which  it  reproduces  :  just  so  the  powers  derived 
from  that  source  must  vanish  if  they  do  not  remain  attached  to  it. 

This  being  so,  where  these  powers  appear,  their  source  must  be 
present  with  them  ;  thus,  once  more,  that  source  must  itself  be  omni¬ 
present  as  an  undivided  whole. 


io. 

We  may  be  told  that  an  image  need  not  be  thus  closely  attached  to 
its  archetype,  that  we  know  images  holding  in  the  absence  of  their 


ii8 


PLOTINUS 


archetype  and  that  a  warmed  object  may  retain  its  heat  when  the  fire 
is  withdrawn. 

To  begin  with  the  image  and  archetype  : — If  we  are  reminded  of  an 
artist's  picture  we  observe  that  here  the  image  was  produced  by  the 
artist,  not  by  his  subject ;  even  in  the  case  of  a  self-portrait,  the  picture 
is  no  “  image  of  archetype,"  since  it  is  not  produced  by  the  painter’s 
body,  the  original  represented  :  the  reproduction  is  due  to  the  effective 
laying  on  of  the  colours. 

Nor  is  there  strictly  any  such  making  of  image  as  we  see  in  water  or 
in  mirrors  or  in  a  shadow  ;  in  these  cases  the  original  is  the  cause  of  the 
image  which,  at  once,  springs  from  it  and  cannot  exist  apart  from  it. 
Now,  it  is  in  this  sense  that  we  are  to  understand  the  weaker  powers 
to  be  images  of  the  Priors.  As  for  the  illustration  from  the  fire  and 
the  warmed  object,  the  warmth  cannot  be  called  an  image  of  the  fire 
unless  we  think  of  warmth  as  containing  fire  so  that  the  two  are  separate 
things.  Besides,  the  fire  removed,  the  warmth  does  sooner  or  later 
disappear,  leaving  the  object  cold. 

If  we  are  told  that  these  powers  fade  out  similarly,  we  are  left  with 
only  one  imperishable  :  the  souls,  the  Intellectual-Principle,  become 
perishable  ;  then  since  Being  (identical  with  the  Intellectual-Principle) 
becomes  transitory,  so  also  must  the  Beings,  its  productions.  Yet  the 
sun,  so  long  as  it  holds  its  station  in  the  universe,  will  pour  the  same 
light  upon  the  same  places  ;  to  think  its  light  may  be  lessened  is  to  hold 
its  mass  perishable.  But  it  has  been  abundantly  stated  that  the  emanants 
of  the  First  are  not  perishable,  that  the  souls,  and  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  with  all  its  content,  cannot  perish. 


II. 

Still,  this  integral  omnipresence  admitted,  why  do  not  all  things 
participate  in  the  Intellectual  Order  in  its  entirety  ?  Why  has  it  a  first 
participant,  a  second,  and  so  on  ? 

We  can  but  see  that  presence  is  determined  by  the  fitness  of  the 
participant  so  that,  while  Being  is  omnipresent,  to  the  realm  of  Being, 
never  falling  short  of  itself,  yet  only  the  competent  possess  themselves 


VI.  4-  12]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


119 

of  that  presence  which  depends  not  upon  situation  but  upon  adequacy  ; 
the  transparent  object  and  the  opaque  answer  very  differently  to  the 
light.  These  firsts,  seconds,  thirds,  of  participance  are  determined  by 
rank,  by  power,  not  by  place  but  by  differentiation  ;  and  difference  is 
no  bar  to  coexistence,  witness  soul  and  Intellectual-Principle  :  similarly 
our  own  knowledge,  the  trivial  next  the  gravest ;  one  and  the  same 
object  yields  colour  to  our  sight,  fragrance  to  smell,  to  every  sense  a 
particular  experience,  all  presented  simultaneously. 

But  would  not  this  indicate  that  the  Authentic  is  diverse, 
multiple  ? 

That  diversity  is  simplex  still ;  that  multiple  is  one  ;  for  it  is  a 
Reason-Principle,  which  is  to  say  a  unity  in  variety  :  all  Being  is  one  ; 
the  differing  being  is  still  included  in  Being  ;  the  differentiation  is  within 
Being,  obviously  not  within  non-Being.  Being  is  bound  up  with  the 
unity  which  is  never  apart  from  it ;  wheresoever  Being  appears,  there 
appears  its  unity ;  and  the  unity  of  Being  is  self-standing,  for  presence 
in  the  sensible  does  not  abrogate  independence  :  things  of  sense  are 
present  to  the  Intellectual — where  this  occurs — otherwise  than  as  the 
Intellectual  is  present  within  itself  ;  so  too  body’s  presence  to  soul  differs 
from  that  of  knowledge  to  soul ;  one  item  of  knowledge  is  present  in  a 
different  way  than  another  ;  a  body's  presence  to  body  is,  again,  another 
form  of  relation. 


12. 

Think  of  a  sound  passing  through  the  air  and  carrying  a  word ;  an 
ear  within  range  catches  and  comprehends  ;  and  the  sound  and  word 
wall  strike  upon  any  other  ear  you  may  imagine  within  the  intervening 
void,  upon  any  that  attends  ;  from  a  great  distance  many  eyes  look 
to  the  one  object  and  all  take  it  fully  ;  all  this,  because  eye  and  ear 
exist.  In  the  same  way  what  is  apt  for  soul  will  possess  itself  of  soul, 
while  from  the  one  identical  presence  another  will  derive  something 
else. 

Now  the  sound  was  diffused  throughout  the  air  not  in  sections  but 
as  one  sound,  entire  at  every  point  of  that  space.  So  with  sight :  if  the 


120 


PLOTINUS 


air  carries  a  shape  impressed  upon  it  this  is  one  undivided  whole ;  for, 
wherever  there  be  an  eye,  there  the  shape  will  be  grasped;  even  to 
such  as  reject  this  particular  theory  of  sight,  the  facts  of  vision  still 
stand  as  an  example  of  participation  determined  by  an  identical  unity. 

The  sound  is  the  clearer  illustration  :  the  form  conveyed  is  an 
entirety  over  all  the  air  space,  for  unless  the  spoken  word  were  entire  at 
every  point,  for  every  ear  to  catch  the  whole  alike,  the  same  effect  could 
not  be  made  upon  every  listener  ;  the  sound,  evidently,  is  not  strung 
along  the  air,  section  to  section.  Why,  then,  need  we  hesitate,  to  think 
of  soul  as  a  thing  not  extended  in  broken  contact,  part  for  part,  but 
omnipresent  within  the  range  of  its  presence,  indwelling  in  totality  at 
every  point  throughout  the  All  ? 

Entered  into  such  bodies  as  are  apt  to  it,  the  soul  is  like  the  spoken 
sound  present  in  the  air,  before  that  entry,  like  the  speaker  about  to 
speak — though  even  embodied  it  remains  at  once  the  speaker  and  the 
silent. 

No  doubt  these  illustrations  are  imperfect,  but  they  carry  a  service¬ 
able  similitude  :  the  soul  belongs  to  that  other  Kind,  and  we  must  not 
conceive  a  part  of  it  embodied  and  a  part  intact ;  it  is  at  once  a  self- 
enclosed  unity  and  a  principle  manifested  in  diversity. 

Further,  any  newcoming  entity  achieving  soul  receives  mysteriously 
that  same  principle  which  was  equally  in  the  previously  ensouled  ;  for 
it  is  not  in  the  dispensation  that  a  given  part  of  soul  situate  at  some 
given  point  should  enter  here  and  there  ;  what  is  thought  of  as  entering 
was  always  a  self-enclosed  entire  and,  for  all  the  seeming  entry,  so 
remains :  no  real  entry  is  conceivable.  If,  then,  the  soul  never  entered  and 
yet  is  now  seen  to  be  present — present  without  waiting  upon  the  partici¬ 
pant — clearly  it  is  present,  here  too,  without  breach  of  its  self-inclusion. 
This  can  mean  only  that  the  participant  came  to  soul ;  it  lay  outside  the 
veritable  reality  but  advanced  towards  it  and  so  established  itself  in  the 
kosmos  of  life.  But  this  kosmos  of  life  is  a  self-gathered  entire,  not 
divisible  into  constituent  masses  but  prior  to  mass  ;  in  other  words,  the 
participation  is  of  entire  in  entire.  Any  newcomer  into  that  kosmos  of 
life  will  participate  in  it  entire.  Admitting,  then,  that  this  kosmos  of 


VI.  4.  13]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


121 


life  is  present  entire  in  the  universe,  it  must  be  similarly  entire  in  each 
several  entity  ;  an  identity  numerically  one,  it  must  be  an  undivided 
entire,  omnipresent. 

13- 

But  how  account,  at  this,  for  its  extension  over  all  the  heavens  and 
all  living  beings  ? 

There  is  no  such  extension.  Sense-perception,  by  insistence  upon 
which  we  doubt,  tells  of  Here  and  There  ;  but  reason  certifies  that  the 
Here  and  There  do  not  attach  to  that  principle  ;  the  extended  has 
participated  in  that  kosmos  of  life  which  itself  has  no  extension. 

Clearly  no  participant  can  participate  in  itself ;  self-participation 
would  be  merely  identity.  Body,  then,  as  participant  does  not  par¬ 
ticipate  in  body  ;  body  it  has  ;  its  participation  must  be  in  what  is  not 
body.  So  too  magnitude  does  not  participate  in  magnitude  ;  it  has  it  : 
not  even  in  addition  of  quantity  does  the  initial  magnitude  participate 
in  magnitude  :  the  two  cubits  do  not  themselves  become  three  cubits  ; 
what  occurs  is  that  an  object  totalling  to  a  certain  quantity  now  totals  to 
another  :  for  magnitude  to  participate  in  magnitude  the  actual  two 
cubits  must  themselves  become  the  new  three  (which  cannot  occur). 

If,  then,  the  divided  and  quantitatively  extended  is  to  participate 
in  another  Kind,  is  to  have  any  sort  of  participation,  it  can  participate 
only  in  something  undivided,  unextended,  wholly  outside  of  quantity. 
Therefore,  that  which  is  to  be  introduced  by  the  participation  must  enter 
as  itself  an  omnipresent  indivisible. 

This  indivisibility  must,  of  course,  not  be  taken  in  any  sense  of 
littleness  :  littleness  would  be  still  divisible,  could  not  cover  the  extension 
of  the  participant  and  could  not  maintain  integral  presence  against  that 
expansion.  Nor  is  it  the  indivisibility  of  a  geometric  point  :  the  par¬ 
ticipant  mass  is  no  single  point  but  includes  an  infinity  of  points  ;  so 
that  on  the  theory  this  principle  must  be  an  infinity  of  points,  not  a 
simultaneous  entire,  and  so,  again,  will  fail  to  cover  the  participant. 

If,  then,  the  participant  mass  in  its  entirety  is  to  contain  that  prin¬ 
ciple  entire,  the  universe  must  hold  that  one  soul  present  at  its  every  point. 


122 


PLOTINUS 


I4- 

But,  admitting  this  one  soul  at  every  point,  how  is  there  a  particular 
soul  of  the  individual  and  how  the  good  soul  and  the  bad  ? 

The  one  soul  reaches  to  the  individual  but  nonetheless  contains  all 
souls  and  all  intelligences  ;  this,  because  it  is  at  once  a  unity  and  an 
infinity  ;  it  holds  all  its  content  as  one  yet  with  each  item  distinct, 
though  not  to  the  point  of  separation.  Except  by  thus  holding  all  its 
content  as  one — life  entire,  soul  entire,  all  intelligence — it  could  not  be 
infinite  ;  since  the  individualities  are  not  fenced  off  from  each  other, 
it  remains  still  one  thing.  It  was  to  hold  life  not  single  but  infinite  and 
yet  one  life,  one  in  the  sense  not  of  an  aggregate  built  up  but  of  the 
retention  of  the  unity  in  which  all  rose.  Strictly,  of  course,  it  is  a  matter 
not  of  the  rising  of  the  individuals  but  of  their  being  eternally  what  they 
are  ;  in  that  order,  as  there  is  no  beginning,  so  there  is  no  apportioning 
except  as  an  interpretation  by  the  recipient.  What  is  of  that  realm  is 
the  ancient  and  primal ;  the  relation  to  it  of  the  thing  of  process  must  be 
that  of  approach  and  apparent  merging  with  always  dependence. 

But  we  ourselves,  what  are  We  ? 

Are  we  that  higher  or  the  participant  newcomer,  the  thing  of 
beginnings  in  time  ? 

Before  we  had  our  becoming  Here  we  existed  There,  men  other  than 
now,  some  of  us  gods  :  we  were  pure  souls,  Intelligence  inbound  with  the 
entire  of  reality,  members  of  the  Intellectual,  not  fenced  off,  not  cut 
away,  integral  to  that  All.  Even  now,  it  is  true,  we  are  not  put  apart  ; 
but  upon  that  primal  Man  there  has  intruded  another,  a  man  seeking  to 
come  into  being  and  finding  us  there,  for  we  were  not  outside  of  the 
universe.  This  other  has  wound  himself  about  us,  foisting  himself  upon 
the  Man  that  each  of  us  was  at  first.  Then  it  was  as  if  one  voice  sounded, 
one  word  was  uttered,  and  from  every  side  an  ear  attended  and  received 
and  there  was  an  effective  hearing,  possessed  through  and  through  of 
what  was  present  and  active  upon  it :  now  we  have  lost  that  first  sim¬ 
plicity  ;  we  are  become  the  dual  thing,  sometimes  indeed  no  more  than 
that  later  foisting,  with  the  primal  nature  dormant  and  in  a  sense 
no  longer  present. 


VI.  4.  15]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


123 


15- 

But  how  did  this  intruder  find  entrance  ? 

It  had  a  certain  aptitude  and  it  grasped  at  that  to  which  it  was  apt. 
In  its  nature  it  was  capable  of  soul :  but  what  is  unfitted  to  receive  soul 
entire — present  entire  but  not  for  it — takes  what  share  it  may  ;  such  are 
the  members  of  the  animal  and  vegetal  order.  Similarly,  of  a  significant 
sound  some  forms  of  being  take  sound  and  significance  together,  others 
only  the  sound,  the  blank  impact. 

A  living  thing  comes  into  existence  containing  soul,  present  to  it 
from  the  Authentic,  and  by  soul  is  inbound  with  Reality  entire  ;  it 
possesses  also  a  body  ;  but  this  body  is  not  a  husk  having  no  part  in  soul, 
not  a  thing  that  earlier  lay  away  in  the  soulless  ;  the  body  had  its 
aptitude  and  by  this  draws  near  :  now  it  is  not  body  merely,  but  living 
body.  By  this  neighbouring  it  is  enhanced  with  some  impress  of  soul' — 
not  in  the  sense  of  a  portion  of  soul  entering  into  it,  but  that  it  is  warmed 
and  lit  by  soul  entire  :  at  once  there  is  the  ground  of  desire,  pleasure, 
pain  :  the  body  of  the  living  form  that  has  come  to  be  was  certainly 
no  unrelated  thing. 

The  soul,  sprung  from  the  divine,  lay  self-enclosed  at  peace,  true  to 
its  own  quality  ;  but  its  neighbour,  in  uproar  through  weakness,  instable 
of  its  own  nature  and  beaten  upon  from  without,  cries,  at  first  to  itself 
and  afterwards  upon  the  living  total,  spreading  the  disorder  at  large. 
Thus,  at  an  assembly  the  Elders  may  sit  in  tranquil  meditation,  but  an 
unruly  populace,  crying  for  food  and  casting  up  a  host  of  grievances, 
will  bring  the  whole  gathering  into  ugly  turmoil ;  when  this  sort  of  people 
hold  their  peace  so  that  a  word  from  a  man  of  sense  may  reach  them, 
some  passable  order  is  restored  and  the  baser  part  ceases  to  prevail ; 
otherwise  the  silence  of  the  better  allows  the  rabble  to  rule,  the  distracted 
assembly  unable  to  take  the  word  from  above. 

This  is  the  evil  of  state  and  of  council :  and  this  is  the  evil 
of  man  ;  man  includes  an  inner  rabble — pleasures,  desires,  fears — 
and  these  become  masters  when  the  man,  the  manifold,  gives  them 
play. 

But  one  that  has  reduced  his  rabble  and  gone  back  to  the  Man  he 


124 


PLOTINUS 


was,  lives  to  that  and  is  that  Man  again,  so  that  what  he  allows  to  the 
body  is  allowed  as  to  something  separate. 

There  is  the  man,  too,  that  lives  partly  in  the  one  allegiance  and 
partly  in  the  other  ;  he  is  a  blend  of  the  good  that  is  himself  with  the 
evil  that  is  alien. 

16. 

But  if  that  Principle  can  never  fall  to  evil  and  we  have  given  a  true 
account  of  the  soul’s  entry  or  presence  to  body,  what  are  we  to  say  of  the 
periodic  Descents  and  Returns,  the  punishments,  the  banishment  into 
animal  forms  ?  That  teaching  we  have  inherited  from  those  ancient 
philosophers  who  have  best  probed  into  soul  and  we  must  try  to  show 
that  our  own  doctrine  is  accordant  with  it,  or  at  least  not  conflicting. 

We  have  seen  that  the  participation  of  things  here  in  that  higher 
means  not  that  the  soul  has  gone  outside  of  itself  to  enter  the  corporeal, 
but  that  the  corporeal  has  approached  soul  and  is  now  participant  in  it  ; 
the  coming  affirmed  by  the  ancients  can  be  only  that  approach  of  the 
body  to  the  higher  by  which  it  partakes  of  life  and  of  soul ;  this  has 
nothing  to  do  with  local  entry  but  is  some  form  of  communion  ;  by  the 
descent  and  embodiment  of  current  phrasing  must  be  understood  not 
that  soul  becomes  an  appanage  of  body  but  that  it  gives  out  to  it  some¬ 
thing  of  itself ;  similarly,  the  soul’s  departure  is  the  complete  cessation 
of  that  communion. 

The  various  rankings  of  the  universe  will  determine  various  degrees 
of  the  communion  ;  soul,  ultimate  of  the  Intellectual,  will  give  forth 
freely  to  body  as  being  more  nearly  of  the  one  power  and  standing  closer, 
as  distance  holds  in  that  order. 

The  soul's  evil  will  be  this  association,  its  good  the  release.  Why  ? 
Because,  even  unmerged,  a  soul  in  any  way  to  be  described  as  attached 
to  this  universe  is  in  some  degree  fallen  from  the  All  into  a  state  of 
partition  ;  essentially  belonging  to  the  All,  it  no  longer  directs  its  act 
Thither  :  thus,  a  man’s  knowledge  is  one  whole,  but  he  may  guide  himself 
by  no  more  than  some  single  item  of  it,  where  his  good  would  lie  in  living 
not  by  some  such  fragment  but  by  the  total  of  his  knowing. 


VI.  5.  I]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT  125 

That  One  Soul — member  of  the  Intellectual  kosmos  and  there 
merging  what  it  has  of  partial  into  the  total — has  broken  away,  so  to 
speak,  from  the  All  to  the  part  and  to  that  devotes  itself  becoming  partial 
with  it ;  thus  fire  that  might  consume  everything  may  be  set  to  ply  its 
all-power  upon  some  trifle.  So  long  as  the  soul  remains  utterly  unattached 
it  is  soul  not  singled  out ;  when  it  has  accepted  separation — not  that  of 
place  but  that  of  act  determining  individualities — it  is  a  part,  no  longer 
the  soul  entire,  or  at  least  not  entire  in  the  first  sense  ;  when,  on  the 
contrary,  it  exercises  no  such  outward  control  it  is  perfectly  the  All-Soul, 
the  partial  in  it  latent. 

As  for  the  entry  into  the  World  of  the  Shades,  if  this  means  into  the 
unseen  that  is  its  release  ;  if  into  some  lower  place,  there  is  nothing 
strange  in  that,  since  even  here  the  soul  is  taken  to  be  where  the  body  is, 
in  place  with  the  body. 

But  on  the  dissolution  of  the  body  ? 

So  long  as  the  image-soul  has  not  been  discarded,  clearly  the  higher 
will  be  where  that  is  ;  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  higher  has  been  completely 
emancipated  by  philosophic  discipline,  the  image-soul  may  very  well  go 
alone  to  that  lower  place,  the  authentic  passing  uncontaminated  into  the 
Intellectual,  separated  from  that  image  but  nonetheless  the  soul  entire. 

Let  the  image — offspring  of  the  individuality — fare  as  it  may,  the 
true  soul  when  it  turns  its  light  upon  itself,  chooses  the  higher  and  by 
that  choice  blends  into  the  All,  neither  acting  now  nor  extinct. 

But  it  is  time  to  return  to  our  main  theme  : — 


FIFTH  TRACTATE 

On  the  Integral  Omnipresence  of  the  Authentic  Existent  (2) 


1. 

The  integral  omnipresence  of  a  unity  numerically  identical  is  in  fact 
universally  received  ;  for  all  men  instinctively  affirm  the  god  in  each  of 
us  to  be  one,  the  same  in  all.  It  would  be  taken  as  certain  if  no  one 


126 


PLOTINUS 


asked  How  or  sought  to  bring  the  conviction  to  the  test  of  reasoning  ; 
with  this  effective  in  their  thought,  men  would  be  at  rest,  finding  their 
stay  in  that  oneness  and  identity,  so  that  nothing  would  wrench  them 
from  this  unity.  This  principle,  indeed,  is  the  most  solidly  established 
of  all,  proclaimed  by  our  very  souls  ;  we  do  not  piece  it  up  item  by  item, 
but  find  it  within  beforehand  ;  it  precedes  even  the  principle  by  which 
we  affirm  unquestionably  that  all  things  seek  their  good ;  for  this 
universal  quest  of  good  depends  on  the  fact  that  all  aim  at  unity  and 
possess  unity  and  that  universally  effort  is  towards  unity. 

Now  this  unity  in  going  forth,  so  far  as  it  may,  towards  the  Other 
Order  must  become  manifest  as  multiplicity  and  in  some  sense  become 
multiple  ;  but  the  primal  nature  and  the  appetition  of  the  good,  which 
is  appetition  of  unity,  lead  back  to  what  is  authentically  one  ;  to  this 
every  form  of  Being  is  urged  in  a  movement  towards  its  own  reality. 
For  the  good  to  every  nature  possessing  unity  is  to  be  self -belonging,  to 
be  itself,  and  that  means  to  be  a  unity. 

In  virtue  of  that  unity  the  Good  may  be  regarded  as  truly  inherent. 
Hence  the  Good  is  not  to  be  sought  outside  ;  it  could  not  have  fallen 
outside  of  what  is ;  it  cannot  possibly  be  found  in  non-Being ;  within 
Being  the  Good  must  lie,  since  it  is  never  a  non-Being. 

If  that  Good  has  Being  and  is  within  the  realm  of  Being,  then  it  is 
present,  self-contained,  in  everything :  we,  therefore,  need  not  look 
outside  of  Being ;  we  are  in  it ;  yet  that  Good  is  not  exclusively  ours  : 
therefore  all  beings  are  one. 


2. 

Now  the  reasoning  faculty  which  undertakes  this  problem  is  not 
a  unity  but  a  thing  of  parts  ;  it  brings  the  bodily  nature  into  the  enquiry, 
borrowing  its  principles  from  the  corporeal :  thus  it  thinks  of  the 
Essential  Existence  as  corporeal  and  as  a  thing  of  parts  ;  it  baulks  at  the 
unity  because  it  does  not  start  from  the  appropriate  principles.  We,  how¬ 
ever,  must  be  careful  to  bring  the  appropriately  convincing  principles  to  the 
discussion  of  the  Unity,  of  perfect  Being  :  we  must  hold  to  the  Intellectual 
principles  which  alone  apply  to  the  Intellectual  Order  and  to  Real  Being. 


VI.  5-  3]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


127 


On  the  one  hand  there  is  the  unstable,  exposed  to  all  sorts  of  change, 
distributed  in  place,  not  so  much  Being  as  Becoming  :  on  the  other, 
there  is  that  which  exists  eternally,  not  divided,  subject  to  no  change 
of  state,  neither  coming  into  being  nor  falling  from  it,  set  in  no  region  or 
place  or  support,  emerging  from  nowhere,  entering  into  nothing,  fast 
within  itself. 

In  dealing  with  that  lower  order  we  would  reason  from  its  own 
nature  and  the  characteristics  it  exhibits ;  thus,  on  a  plausible  foundation, 
we  achieve  plausible  results  by  a  plausible  system  of  deduction  :  similarly, 
in  dealing  with  the  Intellectual,  the  only  way  is  to  grasp  the  nature  of 
the  essence  concerned  and  so  lay  the  sure  foundations  of  the  argument, 
not  forgetfully  straying  over  into  that  other  order  but  basing  our  treat¬ 
ment  on  what  is  essential  to  the  Nature  with  which  we  deal. 

In  every  entity  the  essential  nature  is  the  governing  principle  and, 
as  we  are  told,  a  sound  definition  brings  to  light  many  even  of  the  con¬ 
comitants  :  where  the  essential  nature  is  the  entire  being,  we  must  be 
all  the  more  careful  to  keep  to  that,  to  look  to  that,  to  refer  all  to  that. 

3- 

If  this  principle  is  the  Authentic  Existent  and  holds  unchanging 
identity,  does  not  go  forth  from  itself,  is  untouched  by  any  process  of 
becoming  or,  as  we  have  said,  by  any  situation  in  place,  then  it  must  be 
always  self-gathered,  never  in  separation,  not  partly  here  and  partly 
there,  not  giving  forth  from  itself  :  any  such  instability  would  set  it  in 
thing  after  thing  or  at  least  in  something  other  than  itself  :  then  it  would 
no  longer  be  self-gathered  ;  nor  would  it  be  immune,  for  anything  within 
which  it  were  lodged  would  affect  it ;  immune,  it  is  not  in  anything.  If, 
then,  not  standing  away  from  itself,  not  distributed  by  part,  not  taking 
the  slightest  change,  it  is  to  be  in  many  things  while  remaining  a  self¬ 
concentrated  entire,  there  is  some  way  in  which  it  has  multipresence  ; 
it  is  at  once  self-enclosed  and  not  so  :  the  only  way  is  to  recognise  that 
while  this  principle  itself  is  not  lodged  in  anything,  all  other  things 
participate  in  it — all  that  are  apt  and  in  the  measure  of  their  aptitude. 

Thus,  we  either  cancel  all  that  we  have  affirmed  and  the  principles 


128 


PLOTINUS 


laid  down,  and  deny  the  existence  of  any  such  Nature,  or,  that  being 
impossible,  we  return  to  our  first  position  : — 

The  One,  numerically  identical,  undistributed,  an  unbroken  entire, 
yet  stands  remote  from  nothing  that  exists  by  its  side  ;  but  it  does  not, 
for  that,  need  to  pour  itself  forth  :  there  is  no  necessity  either  that  certain 
portions  of  it  enter  into  things  or  again  that,  while  it  remains  self-abiding, 
something  produced  and  projected  from  it  enter  at  various  points  into 
that  other  order.  Either  would  imply  something  of  it  remaining  there 
while  the  emanant  is  elsewhere  :  thus  separated  from  what  has  gone  forth, 
it  would  experience  local  division.  And  would  those  emanants  be,  each 
in  itself,  whole  or  part  ?  If  part,  the  One  has  lost  its  nature,  that  of  an 
entire,  as  we  have  already  indicated  ;  if  whole,  then  either  the  whole 
is  broken  up  to  coincide  point  for  point  with  that  in  which  it  is  become 
present  or  we  are  admitting  that  an  unbroken  identity  can  be  omni¬ 
present. 

This  is  a  reasoning,  surely,  founded  on  the  thing  itself  and  its 
essential  nature,  not  introducing  anything  foreign,  anything  belonging 
to  the  Other  Order. 

4* 

Then  consider  this  god  (in  man)  whom  we  cannot  think  to  be  absent 
at  some  point  and  present  at  another.  All  that  have  insight  into  the 
nature  of  the  divine  beings  hold  the  omnipresence  of  this  god  and  of  all 
the  gods,  and  reason  assures  us  that  so  it  must  be. 

Now  all-pervasion  is  inconsistent  with  partition  ;  that  would  mean 
no  longer  the  god  throughout  but  part  of  the  god  at  one  point  and  part 
at  another ;  the  god  ceases  to  be  one  god,  just  as  a  mass  cut  up  ceases 
to  be  a  mass,  the  parts  no  longer  giving  the  first  total.  Further,  the  god 
becomes  corporeal. 

If  all  this  is  impossible,  the  disputed  doctrine  presents  itself  again  ; 
holding  the  god  to  pervade  the  Being  of  man,  we  hold  the  omnipresence 
of  an  integral  identity. 

Again,  if  we  think  of  the  divine  nature  as  infinite — and  certainly  it 
is  confined  by  no  bounds — this  must  mean  that  it  nowhere  fails  ;  its 


vr.  5.  5]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT  129 

presence  must  reach  to  everything;  at  the  point  to  which  it  does 

not  reach,  there  it  has  failed ;  something  exists  in  which  it  is 
not. 

Now,  admitting  any  sequent  to  the  absolute  unity,  that  sequent 
must  be  bound  up  with  the  absolute  ;  any  third  will  be  about  that  second 
and  move  towards  it,  linked  to  it  as  its  offspring.  In  this  way  all  par¬ 
ticipants  in  the  Later  will  have  share  in  the  First.  The  Beings  of  the 
Intellectual  are  thus  a  plurality  of  firsts  and  seconds  and  thirds  attached 
like  one  sphere  to  one  centre,  not  separated  by  interval  but  mutually 
present;  where,  therefore,  the  Intellectual  tertiaries  are  present  the 
secondaries  and  firsts  are  present  too. 

5* 

Often  for  the  purpose  of  exposition — as  a  help  towards  stating  the 
nature  of  the  produced  multiplicity — we  use  the  example  of  many  lines 
radiating  from  one  centre  ;  but  while  we  provide  for  individualisation 
we  must  carefully  preserve  mutual  presence.  Even  in  the  case  of  our 
circle  we  need  not  think  of  separated  radii ;  all  may  be  taken  as  forming 
one  surface  .  where  there  is  no  distinction  even  upon  the  one  surface 
but  all  is  power  and  reality  undifferentiated,  all  the  beings  may  be  thought 
of  as  centres  uniting  at  one  central  centre  :  we  ignore  the  radial  lines  and 
think  of  their  terminals  at  that  centre,  where  they  are  at  one.  Restore 
the  radii ;  once  more  we  have  lines,  each  touching  a  generating  centre 
of  its  own,  but  that  centre  remains  coincident  with  the  one  first  centre  ; 
the  centres  all  unite  in  that  first  centre  and  yet  remain  what  they  were, 
so  that  they  are  as  many  as  are  the  lines  to  which  they  serve  as  terminals  ; 
the  centres  themselves  appear  as  numerous  as  the  lines  starting  from 
them  and  yet  all  those  centres  constitute  a  unity. 

Thus  we  may  liken  the  Intellectual  Beings  in  their  diversity  to 
many  centres  coinciding  with  the  one  centre  and  themselves  at  one  in 
it  but  appearing  multiple  on  account  of  the  radial  lines — lines  which 
do  not  generate  the  centres  but  merely  lead  to  them.  The  radii,  thus, 
afford  a  serviceable  illustration  for  the  mode  of  contact  by  which  the 
Intellectual  Unity  manifests  itself  as  multiple  and  multipresent. 


130 

6. 


PLOTINUS 


The  Intellectual  Beings,  thus,  are  multiple  and  one  ;  in  virtue  of 
their  infinite  nature  their  unity  is  a  multiplicity,  many  in  one  and  one 
over  many,  a  unit-plurality.  They  act  as  entire  upon  entire  ;  even  upon 
the  partial  thing  they  act  as  entire  ;  but  there  is  the  difference  that  at 
first  the  partial  accepts  this  working  only  partially  though  the  entire 
enters  later.  Thus,  when  Man  enters  into  human  form  there  exists  a 
particular  man  who,  however,  is  still  Man.  From  the  one  thing  Man- 
man  in  the  Idea— material  man  has  come  to  constitute  many  individual 
men  :  the  one  identical  thing  is  present  in  multiplicity,  in  multi- 
impression,  so  to  speak,  from  the  one  seal. 

This  does  not  mean  that  Man  Absolute,  or  any  Absolute,  or  the 
Universe  in  the  sense  of  a  Whole,  is  absorbed  by  multiplicity  ;  on  the 
contrary,  the  multiplicity  is  absorbed  by  the  Absolute,  or  rather  is  bound 
up  with  it.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  mode  in  which  a  colour 
may  be  absorbed  by  a  substance  entire  and  that  in  which  the  soul  of  the 
individual  is  identically  present  in  every  part  of  the  body  :  it  is  in  this 
latter  mode  that  Being  is  omnipresent. 

7- 

To  Real  Being  we  go  back,  all  that  we  have  and  are  ;  to  that  we 
return  as  from  that  we  came.  Of  what  is  There  we  have  direct  knowledge, 
not  images  or  even  impressions ;  and  to  know  without  image  is  to  be  ; 
by  our  part  in  true  knowledge  we  are  those  Beings ;  we  do  not  need  to 
bring  them  down  into  ourselves,  for  we  are  There  among  them.  Since 
not  only  ourselves  but  all  other  things  also  are  those  Beings,  we  all  are 
they ;  we  are  they  while  we  are  also  one  with  all :  therefore  we  and  all 
things  are  one. 

When  we  look  outside  of  that  on  which  we  depend  we  ignore  our 
unity  ;  looking  outward  we  see  many  faces  ;  look  inward  and  all  is  the 
one  head.  If  a  man  could  but  be  turned  about — by  his  own  motion  or 
by  the  happy  pull  of  Athene — he  would  see  at  once  God  and  himself  and 
the  All.  At  first  no  doubt  all  will  not  be  seen  as  one  whole,  but  when  we 
find  no  stop  at  which  to  declare  a  limit  to  our  being  we  cease  to  rule 


VI.  5.  8]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT  131 

ourselves  out  from  the  total  of  reality ;  we  reach  to  the  All  as  a  unity— 
and  this  not  by  any  stepping  forward,  but  by  the  fact  of  being  and 
abiding  there  where  the  All  has  its  being. 

8. 

For  my  part  I  am  satisfied  that  anyone  considering  the  mode  in 
which  Matter  participates  in  the  Ideas  will  be  ready  enough  to  accept 
this  tenet  of  omnipresence  in  identity,  no  longer  rejecting  it  as  incredible 
or  e\en  difficult.  This  because  it  seems  reasonable  and  imperative  to 
dismiss  any  notion  of  the  Ideas  lying  apart  with  Matter  illumined  from 
them  as  from  somewhere  above — a  meaningless  conception,  for  what 
have  distance  and  separation  to  do  here  ? 

This  participation  cannot  be  thought  of  as  elusive  or  very  perplex¬ 
ing  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  obvious,  accessible  in  many  examples. 

Note,  however,  that  when  we  sometimes  speak  of  the  Ideas  illuminat¬ 
ing  Matter  this  is  not  to  suggest  the  mode  in  which  material  light  pours 
down  on  a  material  object ;  we  use  the  phrase  in  the  sense  only  that, 
the  material  being  image  while  the  Ideas  are  archetypes,  the  two  orders 
are  distinguished  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  illuminant  and  illuminated. 
But  it  is  time  to  be  more  exact. 

we  do  not  mean  that  the  Idea,  locally  separate,  shows  itself  in 
Matter  like  a  reflection  in  water  ;  the  Matter  touches  the  Idea  at  every 
point,  though  not  in  a  physical  contact,  and,  by  dint  of  neighbourhood 
—nothing  to  keep  them  apart— is  able  to  absorb  thence  all  that  lies 
within  its  capacity,  the  Idea  itself  not  penetrating,  not  approaching,  the 
Matter,  but  remaining  self-locked. 

\\  e  take  it,  then,  that  the  Idea,  say  of  Fire — for  we  had  best  deal 
with  Matter  as  underlying  the  elements— is  not  in  the  Matter.  The  Ideal 
Fire,  then,  remaining  apart,  produces  the  form  of  fire  throughout  the 
entire  enfired  mass.  Now  let  us  suppose — and  the  same  method  will 
apply  to  all  the  so-called  elements — that  this  Fire  in  its  first  material 
manifestation  is  a  multiple  mass.  That  single  Fire  is  seen  producing  an 
image  of  itself  in  all  the  sensible  fires  ;  yet  it  is  not  spatially  separate  ; 
it  does  not,  then,  produce  that  image  in  the  manner  of  our  visible  light ; 


PLOTINUS 


132 

for  in  that  case  all  this  sensible  lire,  supposing  that  it  were  a  whole  of 
parts  (as  the  analogy  would  necessitate),  must  have  generated  spatial 
positions  out  of  itself,  since  the  Idea  or  Form  remains  in  a  non-spatial 
world  ;  for  a  principle  thus  pluralised  must  first  have  departed  from  its 
own  character  in  order  to  be  present  in  that  many  and  participate  many 
times  in  the  one  same  Form. 

The  Idea,  impartible,  gives  nothing  of  itself  to  the  Matter  ;  its 
unbreaking  unity,  however,  docs  not  prevent  it  shaping  that  multiple  by 
its  own  unity  and  being  present  to  the  entirety  of  the  multiple,  bringing 
it  to  pattern  not  by  acting  part  upon  part  but  by  presence  entire  to  the 
object  entire.  It  would  be  absurd  to  introduce  a  multitude  of  Ideas  of 
Fire,  each  several  fire  being  shaped  by  a  particular  idea ;  the  Ideas  of 
fire  would  be  infinite.  Besides,  how  would  these  resultant  fires  be  distinct, 
when  fire  is  a  continuous  unity  ?  and  if  we  apply  yet  another  fire  to 
certain  matter  and  produce  a  greater  fire,  then  the  same  Idea  must  be 
allowed  to  have  functioned  in  the  same  way  in  the  new  matter  as  in  the 
old  ;  obviously  there  is  no  other  Idea. 


9. 

The  elements  in  their  totality,  as  they  stand  produced,  may  be 
thought  of  as  one  spheric  figure  ;  this  cannot  be  the  piecemeal  product  of 
many  makers  each  working  from  some  one  point  on  some  one  portion. 
There  must  be  one  cause  ;  and  this  must  operate  as  an  entire,  not  by 
part  executing  part  ;  otherwise  we  are  brought  back  to  a  plurality  of 
makers.  The  making  must  be  referred  to  a  partless  unity,  or,  more 
precisely,  the  making  principle  must  be  a  partlcss  unity  not  permeating 
the  sphere  but  holding  it  as  one  dependent  thing.  In  this  way  the  sphere 
is  enveloped  by  one  identical  lift'  in  which  it  is  inset  \  its  entire  content 
looks  to  the  one  life  :  thus  all  the  souls  are  one,  a  one,  however,  which 
yet  is  infinite. 

It  is  in  this  understanding  that  the  soul  has  been  taken  to  be  a 
numerical  principle,  while  others  think  of  it  as  in  its  nature  a  sell- 
increasing  number ;  this  latter  notion  is  probably  designed  to  meet  the 
consideration  that  the  soul  at  no  point  fails  but,  retaining  its  distinctive 


VI.  5.  9]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


133 


character,  is  ample  for  all,  so  much  so  that  were  the  kosmos  vaster  yet 
the  virtue  of  soul  would  still  compass  it — or  rather  the  kosmos  still  be  sunk 
in  soul  entire. 

Of  course,  we  must  understand  this  adding  of  extension  not  as  a 
literal  increase  but  in  the  sense  that  the  soul,  essentially  a  unity,  becomes 
adequate  to  omnipresence  ;  its  unity  sets  it  outside  of  quantitative 
measurement,  the  characteristic  of  that  other  order  which  has  but  a 
counterfeit  unity,  an  appearance  by  participation. 

The  essential  unity  is  no  aggregate  to  be  annulled  upon  the  loss  of 
some  one  of  the  constituents  ;  nor  is  it  held  within  any  allotted  limits, 
for  so  it  would  be  the  less  for  a  set  of  things,  more  extensive  than  itself, 
outside  its  scope  ;  or  it  must  wrench  itself  asunder  in  the  effort  to  reach 
to  all ;  besides,  its  presence  to  things  would  be  no  longer  as  whole  to  all 
but  by  part  to  part ;  in  vulgar  phrase,  it  does  not  know  where  it  stands  ; 
dismembered,  it  no  longer  performs  any  one  single  function. 

Now  if  this  principle  is  to  be  a  true  unity — where  the  unity  is  of  the 
essence — it  must  in  some  way  be  able  to  manifest  itself  as  including  the 
contrary  nature,  that  of  potential  multiplicity,  while  by  the  fact  that 
this  multiplicity  belongs  to  it  not  as  from  without  but  as  from  and  by 
itself,  it  remains  authentically  one,  possessing  boundlessness  and 
multiplicity  within  that  unity  ;  its  nature  must  be  such  that  it  can  appear 
as  a  whole  at  every  point ;  this,  as  encircled  by  a  single  self-embracing 
Reason-Principle,  which  holds  fast  about  that  unity,  never  breaking 
with  itself  but  over  all  the  universe  remaining  what  it  must  be. 

The  unity  is  in  this  way  saved  from  the  local  division  of  the  things 
in  which  it  appears  ;  and,  of  course,  existing  before  all  that  is  in  place, 
it  could  never  be  founded  upon  anything  belonging  to  that  order  of  which, 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  foundation  ;  yet,  for  all  that  they  are  based 
upon  it,  it  does  not  cease  to  be  wholly  self-gathered  ;  if  its  fixed  seat 
were  shaken,  all  the  rest  would  fall  with  the  fall  of  their  foundation  and 
stay  ;  nor  could  it  be  so  unintelligent  as  to  tear  itself  apart  by  such  a 
movement  and,  secure  within  its  own  being,  trust  itself  to  the  insecurity 
of  place  which,  precisely,  looks  to  it  for  safety. 


134 


PLOTINUS 


io. 

It  remains,  then,  poised  in  wisdom  within  itself  ;  it  could  not  enter 
into  any  other  ;  those  others  look  to  it  and  in  their  longing  find  it  where 
it  is.  This  is  that  “  Love  Waiting  at  the  Door,”  ever  coming  up  from 
without,  striving  towards  the  beautiful,  happy  when  to  the  utmost  of 
its  power  it  attains.  Even  here  the  lover  does  not  so  much  possess 
himself  of  the  beauty  he  has  loved  as  wait  before  it ;  that  Beauty  is 
abidingly  self-enfolded  but  its  lovers,  the  Many,  loving  it  as  an  entire, 
possess  it  as  an  entire  when  they  attain,  for  it  was  an  entire  that  they 
loved.  This  seclusion  does  not  prevent  it  sufficing  to  all,  but  is  the  very 
reason  for  its  adequacy;  because  it  is  thus  entire  for  all  it  can  be  The 
Good  to  all. 

Similarly  wisdom  is  entire  to  all ;  it  is  one  thing  ;  it  is  not  distributed 
parcelwise  ;  it  cannot  be  fixed  to  place ;  it  is  not  spread  about  like  a 
colouring,  for  it  is  not  corporeal ;  in  any  true  participation  in  wisdom 
there  must  be  one  thing  acting  as  unit  upon  unit.  So  must  it  be  in  our 
participation  in  the  One  ;  we  shall  not  take  our  several  portions  of  it, 
nor  you  some  separate  entire  and  I  another.  Think  of  what  happens 
in  Assemblies  and  all  kinds  of  meetings  ;  the  road  to  sense  is  the  road  to 
unity  ;  singly  the  members  are  far  from  wise  ;  as  they  begin  to  grow 
together,  each,  in  that  true  growth,  generates  wisdom  while  he  recognises 
it.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  our  intelligences  meeting  at  one  centre 
from  their  several  positions  ;  all  one,  they  seem  apart  to  us  as  when 
without  looking  we  touch  one  object  or  sound  one  string  with  different 
fingers  and  think  we  feel  several.  Or  take  our  souls  in  their  possession 
of  good  ;  it  is  not  one  good  for  me  and  another  for  you  ;  it  is  the  same 
for  both  and  not  in  the  sense  merely  of  distinct  products  of  an  identical 
source,  the  good  somewhere  above  with  something  streaming  from  it 
into  us  ;  in  any  real  receiving  of  good,  giver  is  in  contact  with  taker  and 
gives  not  as  to  a  recipient  outside  but  to  one  in  ntimate  contact. 

The  Intellectual  giving  is  not  an  act  of  transmission  ;  even  in 
the  case  of  corporeal  objects,  with  their  local  separation,  the  mutual 
giving  (and  taking)  is  of  things  of  one  order  and  their  communication, 
every  effect  they  produce,  is  upon  their  like  ;  what  is  corporeal  in 


VI.  5.  II]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT 


135 


the  All  acts  and  is  acted  upon  within  itself,  nothing  external  impinging 
upon  it.  Now  if  in  body,  whose  very  nature  is  partition,  there  is  no 
incursion  of  the  alien,  how  can  there  be  any  in  the  order  in  which  no 
partition  exists  ? 

It  is  therefore  by  identification  that  we  see  the  good  and  touch  it, 
brought  to  it  by  becoming  identical  with  what  is  of  the  Intellectual 
within  ourselves.  In  that  realm  exists  what  is  far  more  truly  a  kosmos 
of  unity  ;  otherwise  there  will  be  two  sensible  universes,  divided  into 
correspondent  parts  ;  the  Intellectual  sphere,  if  a  unity  only  as  this 
sphere  is,  will  be  undistinguishable  from  it — except,  indeed,  that  it  will 
be  less  worthy  of  respect  since  in  the  nature  of  things  extension  is  appro¬ 
priate  in  the  lower  while  the  Intellectual  will  have  wrought  out  its  own 
extension  with  no  motive,  in  a  departure  from  its  very  character. 

And  what  is  there  to  hinder  this  unification  ?  There  is  no  question 
of  one  member  pushing  another  out  as  occupying  too  much  space,  any 
more  than  happens  in  our  own  minds  where  we  take  in  the  entire  fruit 
of  our  study  and  observation,  all  uncrowded. 

We  may  be  told  that  this  unification  is  not  possible  in  Real  Beings  ; 
it  certainly  would  not  be  possible,  if  the  Reals  had  extension. 


II. 

But  how  can  the  unextended  reach  over  the  defined  extension  of  the 
corporeal  ?  How  can  it,  so,  maintain  itself  as  a  unity,  an  identity  ? 

This  is  a  problem  often  raised  and  reason  calls  vehemently  for  a 
solution  of  the  difficulties  involved.  The  fact  stands  abundantly  evident 
but  there  is  still  the  need  of  intellectual  satisfaction. 

We  have,  of  course,  no  slight  aid  to  conviction,  indeed  the  very 
strongest,  in  the  exposition  of  the  character  of  that  principle.  It  is  not 
like  a  stone,  some  vast  block  lying  where  it  lies,  covering  the  space  of  its  own 
extension,  held  within  its  own  limits,  having  a  fixed  quantity  of  mass 
and  of  assigned  stone-power.  It  is  a  First  Principle,  measureless,  not 
bounded  within  determined  size — such  measurement  belongs  to  another 
order — and  therefore  it  is  all-power,  nowhere  under  limit.  Being  so,  it 
is  outside  of  Time. 


136 


PLOTINUS 


Time  in  its  ceaseless  onward  sliding  produces  parted  interval ; 
Eternity  stands  in  identity,  pre-eminent,  vaster  by  unending  power  than 
Time  with  all  the  vastness  of  its  seeming  progress  ;  Time  is  like  a  radial 
line  running  out  apparently  to  infinity  but  dependent  upon  that,  its  centre, 
which  is  the  pivot  of  all  its  movement ;  as  it  goes  it  tells  of  that  centre, 
but  the  centre  itself  is  the  unmoving  principle  of  all  the  movement. 

Time  stands,  thus,  in  analogy  with  the  principle  which  holds  fast 
in  unchanging  identity  of  essence  :  but  that  principle  is  infinite  not  only 
in  duration  but  also  in  power  :  this  infinity  of  power  must  also  have  its 
counterpart,  a  principle  springing  from  that  infinite  power  and  dependent 
upon  it ;  this  counterpart  will,  after  its  own  mode,  run  a  course — 
corresponding  to  the  course  of  Time — in  keeping  with  that  stationary 
power  which  is  its  greater  as  being  its  source  :  and  in  this  too  the  source 
is  present  throughout  the  full  extension  of  its  lower  correspondent. 

This  secondary  of  Power,  participating  as  far  as  it  may  in  that 
higher,  must  be  identified. 

Now  the  higher  power  is  present  integrally  but,  in  the  weakness  of 
the  recipient  material,  is  not  discerned  at  every  point  ;  it  is  present  as 
an  identity  everywhere  not  in  the  mode  of  the  material  triangle — 
identical  though,  in  many  representations,  numerically  multiple,  but  in 
the  mode  of  the  immaterial,  ideal  triangle  which  is  the  source  of  the 
material  figures.  If  we  are  asked  why  the  omnipresence  of  the  immaterial 
triangle  does  not  entail  that  of  the  material  figure,  we  answer  that  not 
all  Matter  enters  into  the  participation  necessary ;  Matter  accepts 
various  forms  and  not  all  Matter  is  apt  for  all  form ;  the  First  Matter, 
for  example,  does  not  lend  itself  to  all  but  is  for  the  First  Kinds  first  and 
for  the  others  in  due  order,  though  these,  too,  are  omnipresent. 

12. 

To  return  :  How  is  that  Power  present  to  the  universe  ? 

As  a  One  Life. 

Consider  the  life  in  any  living  thing  ;  it  does  not  reach  only  to  some 
fixed  point,  unable  to  permeate  the  entire  being  ;  it  is  omnipresent.  If 
on  this  again  we  are  asked  How,  we  appeal  to  the  character  of  this  power, 


VI.  5-  12]  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  AUTHENTIC  EXISTENT  137 

not  subject  to  quantity  but  such  that  though  you  divide  it  mentally  for 
e\er  you  still  have  the  same  power,  infinite  to  the  core  ;  in  it  there  is  no 
Matter  to  make  it  grow  less  and  less  according  to  the  measured  mass. 

Conceive  it  as  a  power  of  an  ever-fresh  infinity,  a  principle  unfailing, 
inexhaustible,  at  no  point  giving  out,  brimming  over  with  its  own 
vitality.  If  you  look  to  some  definite  spot  and  seek  to  fasten  on  some 
definite  thing,  you  will  not  find  it.  The  contrary  is  your  only  way  ;  you 
cannot  pass  on  to  where  it  is  not ;  you  will  never  halt  at  a  dwindling 
point  where  it  fails  at  last  and  can  no  longer  give  ;  you  will  always  be 
able  to  move  with  it — better,  to  be  in  its  entirety — and  so  seek  no  further  ; 
denying  it,  you  have  strayed  away  to  something  of  another  order  and  you 
fall ;  looking  elsewhere  you  do  not  see  what  stands  there  before  you. 

But  supposing  you  do  thus  “  seek  no  further,”  how  do  you  experi¬ 
ence  it  ? 

In  that  you  have  entered  into  the  All,  no  longer  content  with  the 
part ;  you  cease  to  think  of  yourself  as  under  limit  but,  laying  all  such 
determination  aside,  you  become  an  All.  No  doubt  you  were  always 
that,  but  there  has  been  an  addition  and  by  that  addition  you  are 
diminished  ;  for  the  addition  was  not  from  the  realm  of  Being — you  can 
add  nothing  to  Being — but  from  non-Being.  It  is  not  by  some  admixture 
of  non-Being  that  one  becomes  an  entire,  but  by  putting  non-Being  away. 
By  the  lessening  of  the  alien  in  you,  you  increase.  Cast  it  aside  and 
there  is  the  All  within  you  ;  engaged  in  the  alien,  you  will  not  find  the 
All.  Not  that  it  has  to  come  and  so  be  present  to  you  ;  it  is  you  that  have 
turned  from  it.  And  turn  though  you  may,  you  have  not  severed  your¬ 
self  ;  it  is  there  ;  you  are  not  in  some  far  region  :  still  there  before  it, 
you  have  faced  to  its  contrary. 

It  is  so  with  the  lesser  gods  ;  of  many  standing  in  their  presence  it 
is  often  one  alone  that  sees  them  ;  that  one  alone  was  alone  in  the  power 
to  see.  These  are  the  gods  who  “  in  many  guises  seek  our  cities  ”  ;  but 
there  is  That  Other  whom  the  cities  seek,  and  all  the  earth  and  heaven, 
everywhere  with  God  and  in  Him,  possessing  through  Him  their  Being 
and  the  Real  Beings  about  them,  down  to  soul  and  life,  all  bound  to  Him 
and  so  moving  to  that  unity  which  by  its  very  lack  of  extension  is  infinite. 


138 


PLOTINUS 


SIXTH  TRACTATE 

On  Numbers 

i. 

It  is  suggested  that  multiplicity  is  a  falling  away  from  The  Unity, 
infinity  (limitlessness)  being  the  complete  departure,  an  innumerable 
multiplicity,  and  that  this  is  why  unlimit  is  an  evil  and  we  evil  at  the 
stage  of  multiplicity. 

A  thing,  in  fact,  becomes  a  manifold  when,  unable  to  remain  self- 
centred,  it  flows  outward  and  by  that  dissipation  takes  extension  : 
utterly  losing  unity  it  becomes  a  manifold  since  there  is  nothing  to  bind 
part  to  part  ;  when,  with  all  this  outflowing,  it  becomes  something 
definite,  there  is  a  magnitude. 

But  what  is  there  so  grievous  in  magnitude  ? 

Given  consciousness,  there  will  be,  since  the  thing  must  feel  its 
exile,  its  sundrance  from  its  essence.  Everything  seeks  not  the  alien  but 
itself  ;  in  that  outward  moving  there  is  frustration  or  compulsion  ;  a 
thing  most  exists  not  when  it  takes  multiplicity  or  extension  but  when 
it  holds  to  its  own  being,  that  is  when  its  movement  is  inward.  Desire 
towards  extension  is  ignorance  of  the  authentically  great,  a  movement 
not  on  the  appropriate  path  but  towards  the  strange ;  to  the  possession 
of  the  self  the  way  is  inward. 

Consider  the  thing  that  has  taken  extension  ;  broken  into  so  many 
independent  items,  it  is  now  those  several  parts  and  not  the  thing  it 
was  ;  if  that  original  is  to  persist,  the  members  must  stand  collected  to 
their  total ;  in  other  words,  a  thing  is  itself  not  by  being  extended  but 
by  remaining,  in  its  degree,  a  unity  :  through  expansion  and  in  the 
measure  of  the  expansion,  it  is  less  itself  ;  retaining  unity,  it  retains  its 
essential  being. 

Yet  the  universe  has  at  once  extension  and  beauty  ? 

Yes  ;  because  it  has  not  been  allowed  to  slip  away  into  the  limitless 
but  is  held  fast  by  unity  ;  and  it  has  beauty  in  virtue  of  Beauty  not  of 
Magnitude  ;  it  needed  Beauty  to  parry  that  magnitude  ;  in  the  degree 


VI.  6.  3] 


ON  NUMBERS 


139 


of  its  extension  it  was  void  of  beauty  and  to  that  degree  ugly.  Thus 
extension  serves  as  Matter  to  Beauty  since  what  calls  for  its  ordering 
is  a  multiplicity.  The  greater  the  expansion,  the  greater  the  disorder 
and  ugliness. 


2. 

What,  then,  of  the  “  Number  of  the  Infinite  ”  ? 

To  begin  with,  how  is  Number  consistent  with  infinity  ? 

Objects  of  sense  are  not  unlimited  and  therefore  the  Number  applying 
to  them  cannot  be  so.  Nor  is  an  enumerator  able  to  number  to  infinity  ; 
though  we  double,  multiply  over  and  over  again,  we  still  end  with  a 
finite  number  ;  though  we  range  over  past  and  future,  and  consider 
them,  even,  as  a  totality,  we  still  end  with  the  finite. 

Are  we  then  to  dismiss  absolute  limitlessness  and  think  merely  that 
there  is  always  something  beyond  ? 

No  ;  that  more  is  not  in  the  reckoner’s  power  to  produce  ;  the  total 
stands  already  defined. 

In  the  Intellectual  the  Beings  are  determined  and  with  them  Number, 
the  number  corresponding  to  their  total ;  in  this  sphere  of  our  own — 
as  we  make  a  man  a  multiple  by  counting  up  his  various  characteristics, 
his  beauty  and  the  rest — we  take  each  image  of  Being  and  form  a 
corresponding  image  of  number ;  we  multiply  a  non-existent  in  and  so 
produce  multiple  numbers ;  if  we  number  years  we  draw  on  the  numbers 
in  our  own  minds  and  apply  them  to  the  years  ;  these  numbers  are  still 
our  possession. 

3- 

And  there  is  the  question  How  can  the  infinite  (the  limitless)  have 
existence  and  remain  unlimited  :  whatever  is  in  actual  existence  is  by 
that  very  fact  determined  numerically. 

But,  first,  if  multiplicity  holds  a  true  place  among  Beings,  how  can 
it  be  an  evil  ? 

As  existent  it  possesses  unity ;  it  is  a  unit-multiple,  saved  from 
stark  multiplicity ;  but  it  is  of  a  lessened  unity  and,  by  that  inwoven 


140 


PLOTINUS 


multiplicity,  it  is  evil  in  comparison  with  unity  pure.  No  longer  steadfast 
in  that  nature,  but  fallen,  it  is  the  less,  while  in  virtue  of  the  unity  thence 
retained  it  keeps  some  value ;  multiplicity  has  value  in  so  far  as  it  tends 
to  return  to  unity. 

But  how  explain  the  unlimited  ?  It  would  seem  that  either  it  is 
among  beings  and  so  is  limited  or,  if  unlimited,  is  not  among  beings  but, 
at  best,  among  things  of  process  such  as  Time.  To  be  brought  to  limit 
it  must  be  unlimited  ;  not  the  limited  but  the  unlimited  is  the  subject 
of  limitation,  since  between  the  limited  and  the  unlimited  there  is  no 
intermediate  to  accept  the  principle  of  limitation.  The  unlimited  recoils 
by  very  nature  from  the  Idea  of  limit,  though  it  may  be  caught  and  held 
by  it  from  without :  the  recoil,  of  course,  is  not  from  one  place  to  another  ; 
the  limitless  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  place  which  arises  only  with  the 
limiting  of  the  unlimited.  Hence  what  is  known  as  the  flux  of  the 
unlimited  is  not  to  be  understood  as  local  change  ;  nor  does  any  other 
sort  of  recognisable  motion  belong  to  it  in  itself  ;  therefore  the  limitless 
cannot  move  :  neither  can  it  be  at  rest  :  in  what,  since  all  place  is 
later  ?  Its  movement  means  little  more  than  that  it  is  not  fixed  in 
rest. 

Is  it,  then,  suspended  at  some  one  point,  or  rocking  to  and 

fro  ? 

No  ;  any  such  poising,  with  or  without  side  motion,  could  be  known 
only  by  place  (which  Matter  precedes). 

How,  then,  are  we  to  form  any  conception  of  its  being  ? 

We  must  fasten  on  the  bare  notion  and  take  what  that  gives  us — 
opposites  that  still  are  not  opposed :  we  think  of  large  and  small  and 
the  unlimited  becomes  either,  of  stationary  and  moving,  and  it  will  be 
either  of  these.  But  primarily  it  can  be  neither  in  any  defined  degree,  or 
at  once  it  is  under  limit.  Limitless  in  this  unlimited  and  undefined  way, 
it  is  able  to  appear  as  either  of  a  pair  of  opposites  :  draw  near,  taking 
care  to  throw  no  net  of  limit  over  it,  and  you  have  something  that  slips 
away ;  you  come  upon  no  unity  for  so  it  would  be  defined  ;  approach 
the  thing  as  a  unit  and  you  find  it  manifold  ;  call  it  a  manifold  and  again 
you  falsify,  for  when  the  single  thing  is  not  a  unity  neither  is  the  total 


VI-  6-  4]  ON  NUMBERS  141 

a  manifold.  In  one  manifestation  it  takes  the  appearance  of  movement, 
in  another  of  rest,  as  the  mind  envisages  it. 

And  there  is  movement  in  its  lack  of  consciousness  ;  it  has  passed 
out  of  Intellectual-Principle,  slid  away.  That  it  cannot  break  free  but 
is  under  compulsion  from  without  to  keep  to  its  circling  with  no  possibility 
of  advance,  in  this  would  be  its  rest.  Thus  it  is  not  true  to  speak  of 
Matter  as  being  solely  in  flux. 

4* 

We  have  to  enquire  into  the  existence  of  the  Numbers  in  the 
Intellectual.  Are  they  Ideas  added  to  the  other  Ideas  ?  Or  are  they  no 
more  than  necessary  concomitants  to  the  Ideas  ? 

In  the  latter  case,  Being,  as  the  first  (in  the  Intellectual)  would  give 
us  the  conception  of  the  Monad  ;  then  since  Being  produces  motion  and 
rest.  Three  exists  ;  and  so  on  for  all  the  other  members  of  the  realm  of 
Being.  Or  perhaps  there  is  one  monad  for  each  member,  or  a  monad  for 
the  first,  with  a  dyad  for  its  next,  since  there  exists  a  series,  and  a  corre¬ 
sponding  number  for  every  successive  total,  dekad  for  ten,  and  so  on. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  Number  is  a  direct  production  of  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  (an  Idea  in  itself),  there  is  the  question  whether  it  preceded  or 
followed  the  other  Ideas. 

Plato,  where  he  says  that  men  arrived  at  the  conception  of  Number 
by  way  of  the  changes  of  day  and  night — thus  making  the  concept 
depend  upon  variation  among  things— seems  to  hold  that  the  things 
numerable  precede  and  by  their  differences  produce  number  :  Number 
then  would  consist  in  a  process  within  the  human  mind  passing  onwards 
from  thing  to  thing  ;  it  results  by  the  fact  that  the  mind  takes  count, 
that  is  when  the  mind  traverses  things  and  reports  their  differences  ; 
observing  pure  identity  unbroken  by  difference,  it  says  One.  But  there 
is  the  passage  where  he  tells  us  that  the  veritable  Number  has  Being, 
is  a  Being  ;  this  is  the  opposed  view  that  Number  is  no  product  of  the 
reckoning  mind  but  a  reality  in  itself,  the  concept  of  which  is  reawakened 
in  the  mind  by  changes  in  things  of  sense. 


142 


PLOTINUS 


5- 

What  then  is  the  veritable  nature  of  Number  ? 

Is  it  an  accompaniment  upon  each  substance,  something  seen  in 
the  things  as  in  a  man  we  see  one  man,  in  a  being  one  being  and  in  the 
total  of  presentations  the  total  of  number  ? 

But  how  explain  the  dyad  and  triad  ?  How  comes  the  total  to  be 
unitary  and  any  particular  number  to  be  brought  under  unity  ?  The  theory 
offers  a  multiplicity  of  units,  and  no  number  is  reducible  to  unity  but 
the  simple  “  one.”  It  might  be  suggested  that  a  dyad  is  that  thing— 
or  rather  what  is  observed  upon  that  thing — which  has  two  powers 
combined,  a  compound  thing  related  to  a  unity  :  or  numbers  might  be 
what  the  Pythagoreans  seem  to  hold  them  in  their  symbolic  system  in 
which  Justice,  for  example,  is  a  Tetrad  :  but  this  is  rather  to  add  the 
number,  a  number  of  manifold  unity  like  the  dekad,  to  the  multiplicity 
of  the  thing  which  yet  is  one  thing.  Now  it  is  not  so  that  we  treat  the 
ten  things  ;  we  bring  them  together  and  apply  the  figure  ten  to  the 
several  items.  Or  rather  in  that  case  we  say  ten,  but  when  the  several 
items  form  a  unity  we  say  dekad.  This  would  apply  in  the  Intellectual 
as  in  the  sensible. 

But  how  then  can  number,  observed  upon  things,  rank  among 
Real  Beings  ? 

One  answer  might  be  that  whiteness  is  similarly  observed  upon 
things  and  yet  is  real,  just  as  movement  is  observed  upon  things  and 
there  is  still  a  real  existence  of  movement.  But  movement  is  not  on  a 
par  with  number :  it  is  because  movement  is  an  entity  that  unity  can 
be  observed  upon  it.  Besides,  the  kind  of  real  existence  thus  implied 
annuls  the  reality  of  number,  making  it  no  more  than  an  attribute ; 
but  that  cannot  be  since  an  attribute  must  exist  before  it  can  be  at¬ 
tributed  ;  it  may  be  inseparable  from  the  subject  but  still  must  in  itself 
be  something,  some  entity  as  whiteness  is  ;  to  be  a  predicate  it  must 
be  that  which  is  to  be  predicated.  Thus  if  unity  is  observed  in  every 
subject,  and  “  one  man  ”  says  more  than  “  man  ” — the  oneness  being 
different  from  the  manness  and  common  to  all  things — then  this  oneness 
must  be  something  prior  to  man  and  to  all  the  rest :  only  so  can  the 


VI.  6.  6] 


ON  NUMBERS 


143 


unity  come  to  apply  to  each  and  to  all :  it  must  therefore  be  prior  also 
to  even  movement,  prior  to  Being,  since  without  unity  these  could  not 
be  each  one  thing  :  of  course  what  is  here  meant  is  not  the  unity  postu¬ 
lated  as  transcending  Being  but  the  unity  predicable  of  the  Ideas  which 
constitute  each  several  thing.  So  too  there  is  a  dekad  prior  to  the  subject 
in  which  we  affirm  it ;  this  prior  would  be  the  dekad  absolute,  for  certainly 
the  thing  in  which  the  dekad  is  observed  is  not  that  absolute. 

Is  this  unity,  then,  connate  and  coexistent  to  the  Beings  ?  Suppose 
it  coexistent  merely  as  an  accidental  like  health  in  man  it  still  must 
exist  of  itself ;  suppose  it  present  as  an  element  in  a  compound,  there 
must  first  exist  unity  and  the  unity  absolute  that  can  thus  enter  into 
composition  ;  moreover  if  it  were  compounded  with  an  object  brought 
into  being  by  its  agency  it  would  make  that  object  only  spuriously  a 
unity  ;  its  entry  would  produce  a  duality. 

But  what  of  the  dekad  ?  Where  lies  the  need  of  dekad  to  a  thing 
which,  by  totalling  to  that  power,  is  dekad  already  ? 

The  need  may  be  like  that  of  Form  to  Matter  ;  ten  and  dekad  may 
exist  by  its  virtue  ;  and,  once  more,  the  dekad  must  previously  exist 
of  its  own  existence,  dekad  unattached. 

6. 

Granted,  then,  that  there  exist,  apart  from  things,  a  unity  absolute 
and  a  dekad  absolute — in  other  words,  that  the  Intellectual  beings, 
together  with  their  characteristic  essence  have  also  their  order,  Henads, 
Dyads,  Triads,  what  is  the  nature  of  these  numerical  entities  and  how 
does  it  come  into  being  ?  We  cannot  but  think  that  some  reason  accounts 
for  their  origin. 

As  a  beginning,  what  is  the  origin  of  the  Ideas  in  general  ?  It  is 
not  that  the  thinking  principle  thought  of  each  Idea  and  by  that  act 
of  thought  procured  their  several  existences  ;  not  because  Justice  and 
Movement  were  thus  thought  did  they  come  to  be  ;  that  would  imply 
that  while  the  thought  is  later  than  the  thing — the  concept  of  Justice 
must  be  later  than  Justice  itself — yet  the  thought  precedes  what,  as 
founded  on  the  thinking,  owes  its  existence  to  it.  Besides,  if  Justice 


144 


PLOTINUS 


is  only  a  certain  definite  thought  we  have  the  absurdity  that  Justice  is 
nothing  more  than  a  definition  of  Justice.  Thinking  of  Justice  or  Move¬ 
ment  is  but  grasping  their  nature  ;  this  would  mean  grasping  the  non¬ 
existent,  an  impossibility. 

We  may  be  reminded  that  in  immaterial  objects  the  knowledge  is 
identical  with  the  thing  ;  but  we  must  not  misapply  that  statement  ; 
it  does  not  say  that  the  knowledge  is  the  thing  known,  or  that  the  reason 
surveying  the  thing  is  the  thing,  but  that  the  immaterial  thing,  being 
an  Intellectual  object  is  also  a  thought  ;  this  does  not  imply  a  definition 
or  conception  of  the  object  ;  the  thing  itself,  as  belonging  to  the  Intel¬ 
lectual,  can  be  nothing  else  than  Intellect  or  knowledge.  This  is  not  a 
case  of  knowledge  self-directed  ;  it  is  that  the  thing  in  the  Intellectual 
transmutes  the  knowledge,  which  is  not  fixed  like  the  knowledge  of 
material  things  ;  in  other  words  it  makes  it  true  knowledge,  that  is  to 
say  no  image  of  the  thing  but  the  thing  directly. 

Thus  it  is  not  the  conception  of  movement  that  brings  movement 
to  be  ;  movement  absolute  produces  that  conception  ;  it  produces  itself 
as  at  once  movement  and  the  concept  of  movement,  for  movement  as 
it  exists  There,  bound  up  with  Being,  is  a  concept.  It  is  movement 
absolute  because  it  is  the  first  movement — there  can  be  none  till  this 
exist — and  it  is  the  authentic  Movement  since  it  is  not  accidental  to 
something  else  but  is  the  activity  of  actual  Being  in  motion.  Thus  it 
is  a  real  existent  though  the  notion  of  Being  is  different. 

Justice  therefore  is  not  the  thought  of  Justice  but,  as  we  may  put 
it,  a  state  of  the  Intellectual-Principle,  or  rather  an  activity  of  it — an 
appearance  so  lovely  that  neither  evening  nor  dawn  is  so  fair,  nor  any¬ 
thing  else  in  all  the  realm  of  sense,  an  Intellectual  manifestation  self-rising, 
self-seen,  or,  rather,  self-being. 

7- 

It  is  inevitably  necessary  to  think  of  all  as  contained  within  one 
nature  ;  one  nature  must  hold  and  encompass  all ;  there  cannot  be  as 
in  the  realm  of  sense  thing  apart  from  thing,  here  a  sun  and  elsewhere 
something  else  ;  all  must  be  mutually  present  within  a  unity.  This  is 


VI.  6.  8] 


ON  NUMBERS 


145 


the  very  nature  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  we  may  know  from  soul 
which  reproduces  it  and  from  what  we  call  Nature  under  which  and  by 
which  the  things  of  process  are  brought  into  their  disjointed  being  while 
that  Nature  itself  remains  indissolubly  one. 

But  within  the  unity  There,  the  several  entities  have  each  its  own 
distinct  existence  ;  the  all-embracing  Intellect  sees  what  is  in  it,  what 
is  within  Being  ;  it  need  not  look  out  upon  them  since  it  contains  them, 
need  not  separate  them  since  they  stand  for  ever  distinct  within  it. 

Against  doubters  we  cite  the  fact  of  participation  ;  the  greatness 
and  beauty  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  we  know  by  the  soul’s  longing 
towards  it ;  the  longing  of  the  rest  towards  soul  is  set  up  by  its  likeness 
to  its  higher  and  to  the  possibility  open  to  them  of  attaining  resemblance 
through  it. 

It  is  surely  inconceivable  that  any  living  thing  be  beautiful  failing 
a  Life-Absolute  of  a  wonderful,  an  ineffable,  beauty :  this  must  be  the 
Collective  Life,  made  up  of  all  living  things,  or  embracing  all,  forming 
a  unity  coextensive  with  all,  as  our  universe  is  a  unity  embracing  all 
the  visible. 


8. 

As  then  there  is  a  Life-Form  primal — which  therefore  is  the  Life- 
Form  Absolute — and  there  is  Intellectual-Principle  or  Being,  Authentic 
Being,  these,  we  affirm,  contain  all  living  things  and  all  Number, 
and  Absolute  Justice  and  Beauty  and  all  of  that  order  ;  for  we  ascribe 
an  existence  of  their  own  to  Absolute  Man,  Absolute  Number,  Absolute 
Justice.  It  remains  to  discover,  in  so  far  as  such  knowledge  is  possible, 
how  these  distinct  entities  come  to  be  and  what  is  the  manner  of  their 
being. 

At  the  outset  we  must  lay  aside  all  sense-perception  ;  by  Intellectual- 

Principle  we  know  Intellectual-Principle.  We  reflect  that  within  ourselves 

there  is  life,  there  is  intellect,  not  in  extension  but  as  power  without 

magnitude,  issue  of  Authentic  Being  which  is  power  self-existing,  no 

vacuity  but  a  thing  most  living  and  intellective, — nothing  more  living, 

more  intelligent,  more  real — and  producing  its  effect  by  contact  and 
u 


146 


PLOTINUS 


in  the  ratio  of  the  contact,  closely  to  the  close,  more  remotely  to  the 
remote.  If  Being  is  to  be  sought,  then  most  to  be  sought  is  Being  at 
its  intensest  ;  so  too  the  intensest  of  Intellect  if  the  Intellectual  act 
has  worth  ;  and  so,  too,  of  Life. 

First,  then,  we  take  Being  as  first  in  order  ;  then  Intellectual-Prin¬ 
ciple  ;  then  the  Living-Form  considered  as  containing  all  things  : 
Intellectual-Principle,  as  the  Act  of  Real  Being,  is  a  second. 

Thus  it  is  clear  that  Number  cannot  be  dependent  upon  the  Living- 
Form  since  unity  and  duality  existed  before  that  ;  nor  does  it  rise  in 
the  Intellectual-Principle  since  before  that  there  existed  Real  Being 
which  is  both  one  and  numerous. 

9- 

It  remains  then  to  consider  whether  Being  by  its  distinction  produced 
Number  or  Number  produced  that  distinction.  It  is  certain  that  either 
Number  was  the  cause  of  Being,  movement,  rest,  identity  and  difference, 
or  these  the  cause  of  Number. 

The  first  question  is  whether  Number  can  exist  in  and  of  itself  or 
is  dependent  upon  things — Two  being  something  observed  in  two  things, 
Three  in  three  ;  and  so  of  the  arithmetical  One,  for  if  this  could  exist 
apart  from  numbered  objects  it  could  exist  also  before  the  divisions 
of  Being. 

But  could  it  precede  Being  itself  ? 

For  the  present  we  must  take  it  that  Being  precedes  Number,  is 
its  source.  But  if  One  means  one  being  and  the  duality  two  beings, 
then  unity  precedes  Being,  and  Number  precedes  the  Beings. 

Mentally,  to  our  approach  ?  Yes  :  and  in  reality  of  existence  as 

well. 

Let  us  consider : — When  we  think  of  the  existence  and  the  fine 
appearance  of  a  man  as  forming  one  thing,  that  unity  is  certainly  thought 
of  as  subsequent  to  a  precedent  duality  ;  when  we  group  a  horse  with  a 
dog,  the  duality  is  obviously  the  subsequent.  But  think  of  that  which 
brings  man  or  horse  or  dog  into  being  or  produces  them,  with  full  intention 
from  where  they  lie  latent  within  itself :  the  producer  must  say  “  I 


VI.  6.  10] 


ON  NUMBERS 


147 


begin  with  a  first,  I  pass  on  to  a  second  ;  that  makes  two  ;  counting 
myself  there  are  three.  Of  course  there  was  no  such  numbering  even 
of  Beings  for  their  production  since  the  due  number  was  known  from 
the  very  beginning ;  but  this  consideration  serves  to  show  that  all  Number 
precedes  the  very  Beings  themselves. 

But  if  Number  thus  preceded  the  Beings,  then  it  is  not  included 
among  them  ? 

The  truth  is  that  it  existed  within  the  Authentic  Being  but  not  as 
applying  to  it,  for  Being  was  still  unparted  ;  the  potentiality  of  Number 
existed  and  so  produced  the  division  within  Being,  put  in  travail  with 
multiplicity;  Number  must  be  either  the  substance  of  Being  or  its 
Activity  ;  the  Life-Form  as  such  and  the  Intellectual-Principle  must 
be  Number.  Clearly  Being  is  to  be  thought  of  as  Number  Collective, 
while  the  Beings  are  Number  unfolded:  the  Intellectual-Principle  is 
Number  moving  within  itself,  while  the  Living-Form  is  Number  container 
of  the  universe.  Even  Being  is  the  outcome  of  the  Unity  and  since  the 
prior  is  unity  the  secondary  must  be  Number. 

Hence  it  is  that  the  Forms  have  been  described  as  Henads  and 
Numbers.  This  is  the  authentic  Number;  the  other,  the  “monadic” 
is  its  image.  The  Authentic  is  that  made  manifest  in  the  Forms  and 
helping  to  bring  them  to  be  ;  primally  it  is  the  Number  in  the  Authentic 
Being,  inherent  to  it  and  preceding  the  Beings,  serving  to  them  as 
root,  fount,  first  principle. 

For  the  Unity  is  source  to  Being  ;  Being’s  Being  is  stayed  upon  the 
Unity  as  its  safeguard  from  dissolution  ;  the  Unity  cannot  rest  upon 
Being  which  at  that  would  be  a  unity  before  possessing  unity ;  and  so 
with  the  dekad  before  possessing  dekadhood. 


10. 

W  hen  it  takes  lot  with  multiplicity,  Being  becomes  Number  by  the 
fact  of  awakening  to  manifoldness  ;  before,  it  was  a  preparation,  so  to 
speak,  of  the  Beings,  their  fore-promise,  a  total  of  henads  offering  a  stay 
for  what  was  to  be  based  upon  them. 

Here  with  us  a  man  will  say  “  I  wish  I  had  such  and  such  a  quantity 


148 


PLOTINUS 


of  gold  ” — or  “  such  and  such  a  number  of  houses."  Gold  is  one  thing  : 
the  wish  is  not  to  bring  the  numerical  quantity  into  gold  but  to  bring 
the  gold  to  quantity  ;  the  quantity,  already  present  in  the  mind,  is  to 
be  passed  on  to  the  gold  so  that  it  acquire  that  numerical  value. 

If  the  Beings  preceded  the  number  and  this  were  discerned  upon 
them  at  the  stirring,  to  such  and  such  a  total,  of  the  numbering  principle, 
then  the  actual  number  of  the  Beings  would  be  a  chance  not  a  choice  ; 
since  that  total  is  not  a  matter  of  chance,  Number  is  a  causing  principle 
preceding  that  determined  total. 

Number  then  preexists  and  is  the  cause  by  which  produced  things 
participate  in  quantity. 

The  single  thing  derives  its  unity  by  participation  in  Unity- Absolute  ; 
its  being  it  derives  from  Being-Absolute,  which  holds  its  Being  from 
itself  alone  ;  a  unity  is  a  unity  in  virtue  of  Being  ;  the  particular  unity — 
where  the  unity  is  a  multiple  unity — is  one  thing  only  as  the  Triad  is  ; 
the  collective  Being  is  a  unity  of  this  kind,  the  unity  not  of  the  monad 
but  of  the  myriad  or  any  such  collective  number. 

Take  a  man  affirming  the  presence  of  ten  thousand  things  ;  it  is  he 
that  produces  the  number ;  he  does  not  tell  us  that  the  ten  thousand 
have  uttered  it  ;  they  merely  exhibit  their  several  forms  ;  the  enumer¬ 
ator’s  mind  supplies  the  total  which  would  never  be  known  if  the  mind 
kept  still. 

How  does  the  mind  pronounce  ? 

By  being  able  to  enumerate  ;  that  is  by  knowing  Number  :  but 
in  order  to  this.  Number  must  be  in  existence  and  that  that  Principle 
should  not  know  its  own  total  content  is  absurd,  impossible. 

It  is  with  Number  as  with  Good.  When  we  pronounce  things  to 
be  good  either  we  mean  that  they  are  in  their  own  nature  so  or  we  affirm 
goodness  as  an  accidental  in  them.  Dealing  with  the  primals,  the  good¬ 
ness  we  have  in  mind  is  that  First  Hypostasis  ;  where  the  goodness 
is  an  accidental  we  imply  the  existence  of  a  Principle  of  Good  as  a  neces¬ 
sary  condition  of  the  accidental  presence  ;  there  must  be  some  source 
of  that  good  which  is  observed  elsewhere,  whether  this  source  be  an 
Absolute  Good  or  something  that  of  its  own  nature  produces  the  good. 


VI.  6.  II] 


ON  NUMBERS 


149 

Similarly  with  number  ;  in  attributing  the  dekad  to  things  we  affirm 
either  the  truly  existent  dekad  or,  where  the  dekadhood  is  accidental, 
we  necessarily  posit  the  self-subsistent  dekad,  dekad  not  associated  ;  if 
things  are  to  be  described  as  forming  a  dekad,  then  either  they  must 
be  of  themselves  the  dekad  or  be  preceded  by  that  which  has  no  other 
being  than  that  of  dekadhood. 

It  must  be  urged  as  a  general  truth  that  anything  affirmed  of  a 
subject  not  itself  either  found  its  way  in  from  outside  or  is  the  charac¬ 
teristic  Act  of  that  subject ;  and  supposing  the  predicated  attribute 
to  show  no  variation  of  presence  and  absence  but  to  be  always  present, 
then,  if  the  subject  is  a  Real  Being  so  also  is  the  accidental  in  an  equal 
degree  ;  or,  failing  Real  Being,  it  at  least  belongs  to  the  existents,  it 
exists.  In  the  case  when  the  subject  can  be  thought  of  as  remaining 
without  its  Act,  yet  that  Act  is  inbound  with  it  even  though  to  our 
minds  it  appears  as  a  later ;  when  on  the  contrary  the  subject  cannot 
be  conceived  without  the  attribute — man,  for  example,  without  unity — 
then  the  attribute  is  either  not  later  but  concomitant  or,  being  essential 
to  the  existence,  is  precedent.  In  our  view,  Unity  and  Number  are 
precedent. 

i'i. 

It  may  be  suggested  that  the  dekad  is  nothing  more  than  so  many 
henads  ;  admitting  the  one  henad  why  should  we  reject  the  ten  ?  As 
the  one  is  a  real  existence  why  not  the  rest  ?  We  are  certainly  not  com¬ 
pelled  to  attach  that  one  henad  to  some  one  thing  and  so  deprive  all 
the  rest  of  the  means  to  unity  :  since  every  existent  must  be  one  thing, 
the  unity  is  obviously  common  to  all.  This  means  one  principle  applying 
to  many,  the  principle  whose  existence  within  itself  we  affirmed  to  be 
presupposed  by  its  manifestation  outside. 

But  if  a  henad  exists  in  some  given  object  and  further  is  observed 
in  something  else,  then  that  first  henad  being  real,  there  cannot  be  only 
one  henad  in  existence  ;  there  must  be  a  multiplicity  of  henads. 

Supposing  that  first  henad  alone  to  exist,  it  must  obviously  be  lodged 
either  in  the  thing  of  completest  Being  or  at  all  events  in  the  thing  most 


PLOTINUS 


150 

completely  a  unity.  If  in  the  thing  of  completest  Being,  then  the  other 
henads  are  but  nominal  and  cannot  be  ranked  with  the  first  henad,  or 
else  Number  becomes  a  collection  of  unlike  monads  and  there  are  differ¬ 
ences  among  monads  (an  impossibility).  If  that  first  henad  is  to  be 
taken  as  lodged  in  the  thing  of  completest  unity,  there  is  the  question 
why  that  most  perfect  unity  should  require  the  first  henad  to  give  it  unity. 

Since  all  this  is  impossible,  then,  before  any  particular  can  be  thought 
of  as  a  unit,  there  must  exist  a  unity  bare,  unrelated  by  very  essence. 
If  in  that  realm  also  there  must  be  a  unity  apart  from  anything  that 
can  be  called  one  thing,  why  should  there  not  exist  another  unity  as 
well  ? 

Each  particular,  considered  in  itself,  would  be  a  manifold  of  monads, 
totalling  to  a  collective  unity.  If  however  Nature  produces  continuously 
— or  rather  has  produced  once  for  all — not  halting  at  the  first  production 
but  bringing  a  sort  of  continuous  unity  into  being,  then  it  produces 
the  minor  numbers  by  the  sheer  fact  of  setting  an  early  limit  to  its  advance  : 
outgoing  to  a  greater  extent — not  in  the  sense  of  moving  from  point 
to  point  but  in  its  inner  changes — it  would  produce  the  larger  numbers  ; 
to  each  number  so  emerging  it  would  attach  the  due  quantities  and  the 
appropriate  thing,  knowing  that  without  this  adaptation  to  Number 
the  thing  could  not  exist  or  would  be  a  stray,  something  outside,  at 
once,  of  both  Number  and  Reason. 


12. 

We  may  be  told  that  unity  and  monad  have  no  real  existence,  that 
the  only  unity  is  some  definite  object  that  is  one  thing,  so  that  all  comes 
to  an  attitude  of  the  mind  towards  things  considered  singly. 

But,  to  begin  with,  why  at  this  should  not  the  affirmation  of  Being 
pass  equally  as  an  attitude  of  mind  so  that  Being  too  must  disappear  ? 
No  doubt  Being  strikes  and  stings  and  gives  the  impression  of  reality  ; 
but  we  find  ourselves  just  as  vividly  struck  and  impressed  in  the  presence 
of  unity.  Besides,  is  this  attitude,  this  concept  itself,  a  unity  or  a  mani¬ 
fold  ?  When  we  deny  the  unity  of  an  object,  clearly  the  unity  mentioned 
is  not  supplied  by  the  object  since  we  are  saying  it  has  none  ;  the  unity 


VI.  6.  1 3] 


ON  NUMBERS 


151 


therefore  is  within  ourselves,  something  latent  in  our  minds  independently 
of  any  concrete  one  thing. 

[An  objector  speaks  : — ]  “  But  the  unity  we  thus  possess  comes  by 
our  acceptance  of  a  certain  idea  or  impression  from  things  external ; 
it  is  a  notion  derived  from  an  object.  Those  that  take  the  notion  of 
numbers  and  of  unity  to  be  but  one  species  of  the  notions  held  to  be 
inherent  in  the  mind  must  allow  to  numbers  and  to  unity  the  reality 
they  ascribe  to  any  of  the  others  and  upon  occasion  they  must  be  met ; 
but  no  such  real  existence  can  be  posited  when  the  concept  is  taken  to 
be  an  attitude  or  notion  rising  in  us  as  a  by-product  of  the  objects  ; 
this  happens  when  we  say  This,  What,  and  still  more  obviously  in  the 
affirmations  Crowd,  Festival,  Army,  Multiplicity.”  As  multiplicity  is 
nothing  apart  from  certain  constituent  items  and  the  festival  nothing 
apart  from  the  people  gathered  happily  at  the  rites,  so  when  we  affirm 
unity  we  are  not  thinking  of  some  Oneness  self-standing,  unrelated. 
And  there  are  many  other  such  cases  ;  for  instance  “  on  the  right,” 
“  Above  ”  and  their  opposites  ;  what  is  there  of  reality  about  this  "  On- 
the-right-ness  ”  but  the  fact  that  two  different  positions  are  occupied  ? 
So  with  Above  ”  :  “  Above  ”  and  “  Below  ”  are  a  mere  matter  of  position 
and  have  no  significance  outside  of  this  sphere. 

Now  in  answer  to  this  series  of  objections  our  first  remark  is  that 
there  does  exist  an  actuality  implicit  in  each  one  of  the  relations  cited  ; 
though  this  is  not  the  same  for  all  or  the  same  for  correlatives  or  the 
same  for  every  reference  to  unity. 

But  these  objections  must  be  taken  singly. 


13- 

It  cannot  reasonably  be  thought  that  the  notion  of  unity  is  derived 
from  the  object  since  this  is  physical — man,  animal,  even  stone,  a  presen¬ 
tation  of  that  order  is  something  very  different  from  unity  (which  must 
be  a  thing  of  the  Intellectual)  ;  if  that  presentation  were  unity,  the 
mind  could  never  affirm  unity  unless  of  that  given  thing,  man,  for 
example. 

Then  again,  just  as  in  the  case  of  “On  the  right  ”  or  other  such 


152 


PLOTINUS 


affirmation  of  relation,  the  mind  does  not  affirm  in  some  caprice  but 
from  observation  of  contrasted  position,  so  here  it  affirms  unity  in  virtue 
of  perceiving  something  real ;  assuredly  the  assertion  of  unity  is  not  a 
bare  attitude  towards  something  non-existent.  It  is  not  enough  that  a 
thing  be  alone  and  be  itself  and  not  something  else  :  and  that  very 
“  something  else  ”  tells  of  another  unity.  Besides  Otherness  and  Differ¬ 
ence  are  later  ;  unless  the  mind  has  first  rested  upon  unity  it  cannot 
affirm  Otherness  or  Difference  ;  when  it  affirms  Aloneness  it  affirms 
unity-with-aloneness  ;  thus  unity  is  presupposed  in  Aloneness. 

Besides,  that  in  us  which  asserts  unity  of  some  object  is  first  a 
unity,  itself  ;  and  the  object  is  a  unity  before  any  outside  affirmation 
or  conception. 

A  thing  must  be  either  one  thing  or  more  than  one,  manifold  :  and 
if  there  is  to  be  a  manifold  there  must  be  a  precedent  unity.  To  talk 
of  a  manifold  is  to  talk  of  what  has  something  added  to  unity  ;  to  think 
of  an  army  is  to  think  of  a  multitude  under  arms  and  brought  to  unity. 
In  refusing  to  allow  the  manifold  to  remain  manifold,  the  mind  makes 
the  truth  clear  ;  it  draws  a  separate  many  into  one,  either  supplying 
a  unity  not  present  or  keen  to  perceive  the  unity  brought  about  by  the 
ordering  of  the  parts  ;  in  an  army,  even,  the  unity  is  not  a  fiction  but 
as  real  as  that  of  a  building  erected  from  many  stones,  though  of  course 
the  unity  of  the  house  is  more  compact. 

If,  then,  unity  is  more  pronounced  in  the  continuous,  and  more 
again  where  there  is  no  separation  by  part,  this  is  clearly  because  there 
exists,  in  real  existence,  something  which  is  a  Nature  or  Principle  of 
Unity.  There  cannot  be  a  greater  and  less  in  the  non-existent :  as  we 
predicate  Substance  of  everything  in  sense,  but  predicate  it  also  of  the 
Intellectual  order  and  more  strictly  there — since  we  hold  that  the  greater 
and  more  sovran  substantiality  belongs  to  the  Real  Beings  and  that 
Being  is  more  marked  in  Substance,  even  sensible  Substance,  than  in 
the  other  Kinds — so,  finding  unity  to  exhibit  degree  of  more  and  less, 
differing  in  sense-things  as  well  as  in  the  Intellectual,  we  must  similarly 
admit  that  Unity  exists  under  all  forms  though  still  by  reference,  only, 
to  that  primal  Unity. 


VI-  6-  Ml  ON  NUMBERS  I53 

As  Substance  and  Real  Being,  despite  the  participation  of  the 
sensible,  are  still  of  the  Intellectual  and  not  the  sensible  order,  so  too 
the  unity  observed  present  in  things  of  sense  by  participation  remains 
still  an  Intellectual  and  to  be  grasped  by  an  Intellectual  Act.  The 
mind,  from  a  thing  present  to  it,  comes  to  knowledge  of  something  else, 
a  thing  not  presented ;  that  is,  it  has  a  prior  knowledge.  By  this  prior 
knowledge  it  recognises  Being  in  a  particular  being ;  similarly  when 
a  thing  is  one  it  can  affirm  unity  as  it  can  affirm  also  duality  and 
multiplicity. 

It  is  impossible  to  name  or  conceive  anything  not  making  one  or 
two  or  some  number;  equally  impossible  that  the  thing  should  not 
exist  without  which  nothing  can  possibly  be  named  or  conceived  ;  im¬ 
possible  to  deny  the  reality  of  that  whose  existence  is  a  necessary  condition 
of  naming  or  affirming  anything ;  what  is  a  first  need,  universally,  to 
the  formation  of  every  concept  and  every  proposition  must  exist  before 
reasoning  and  thinking ;  only  as  an  existent  can  it  be  cited  to  account 
for  the  stirring  of  thought.  If  Unity  is  necessary  to  the  substantial 
existence  of  all  that  really  is — and  nothing  exists  which  is  not  one — 
Unity  must  precede  Reality  and  be  its  author.  It  is,  therefore,  an 
existent  Unity,  not  an  existent  that  develops  Unity;  considered  as 
Being- with-Unity  it  would  be  a  manifold,  whereas  in  the  pure  Unity 
there  is  no  Being  save  in  so  far  as  Unity  attends  to  producing  it.  As 
regards  the  word  This,  it  is  not  a  bare  word  ;  it  affirms  an  indicated 
existence  without  using  the  name,  it  tells  of  a  certain  presence  whether 
a  substance  or  some  other  existent ;  any  This  must  be  significant  ; 
it  is  no  attitude  of  the  mind  applying  itself  to  a  non-existent ;  the  This 
shows  a  thing  present,  as  much  as  if  we  used  the  strict  name  of  the 
object. 

14. 

To  the  argument  touching  relation  we  have  an  answer  surely  legiti¬ 
mate  : — 

The  Unity  is  not  of  a  nature  to  lose  its  own  manner  of  being  only 
because  something  else  stands  in  a  state  which  it  does  not  itself  share  ; 


154 


PLOTINUS 


to  stray  from  its  unity  it  must  itself  suffer  division  into  duality  or  the 
still  wider  plurality. 

If  by  division  the  one  identical  mass  can  become  a  duality  without 
loss  of  quantity,  clearly  the  unity  it  possessed  and  by  this  destructive 
division  lost  was  something  distinct.  What  may  be  alternatively  present 
and  absent  to  the  same  subject  must  be  classed  among  Real-Beings, 
regardless  of  position  ;  an  accidental  elsewhere,  it  must  have  reality  in 
itself  whether  it  be  manifested  in  things  of  sense  or  in  the  Intellectual — 
an  accidental  in  the  Laters  but  self-existent  in  the  higher,  especially 
in  the  First  in  its  aspect  of  Unity  developing  into  Being.  We  may  be 
told  that  Unity  may  lose  that  character  without  change  in  itself,  becoming 
duality  by  association  with  something  else  ;  but  this  is  not  true  ;  unity 
does  not  become  two  things  ;  neither  the  added  nor  what  takes  the 
addition  becomes  two  ;  each  remains  the  one  thing  it  was  ;  the  duality 
is  predicable  of  the  group  only,  the  unity  remaining  unchanged  in  each 
of  those  unchanged  constituents. 

Two  and  the  Dyad  are  not  essentially  relative  :  if  the  only  condition 
to  the  construction  of  duality  were  meeting  and  association  such  a 
relation  might  perhaps  constitute  Twoness  and  Duality ;  but  in  fact 
we  see  Duality  produced  by  the  very  opposite  process,  by  the  splitting 
apart  of  a  unity.  This  shows  that  duality — or  any  other  such  numerical 
form — is  no  relation  produced  either  by  scission  or  association.  If  one 
configuration  produces  a  certain  thing  it  is  impossible  that  the  opposite 
should  produce  the  same  so  that  the  thing  may  be  identified  with  the 
relation. 

What  then  is  the  actual  cause  ? 

Unity  is  due  to  the  presence  of  Unity  ;  duality  to  that  of  Duality  ; 
it  is  precisely  as  things  are  white  by  Whiteness,  just  by  Justice,  beautiful 
by  Beauty.  Otherwise  we  must  reject  these  universals  and  call  in  relation 
here  also  :  Justice  would  arise  from  a  certain  attitude  in  a  given  situ¬ 
ation,  Beauty  from  a  certain  pattern  of  the  person  with  nothing  present 
able  to  produce  the  beauty,  nothing  coming  from  without  to  effect 
that  agreeable  appearance. 

You  see  something  which  you  pronounce  to  be  a  unity ;  that  thing 


VI.  6.  i5] 


ON  NUMBERS 


155 


possesses  also  size,  form,  and  a  host  of  other  characteristics  you  might 
name  ;  size,  bulk,  sweetness,  bitterness  and  other  Ideas  are  actually 
present  in  the  thing  ;  it  surely  cannot  be  thought  that,  while  every  con¬ 
ceivable  quality  has  Real-Being,  quantity  (Number)  has  not  and  that 
while  continuous  quantity  exists,  discrete  quantity  does  not — and  this 
though  continuous  quantity  is  measured  by  the  discrete.  No  :  as  size 
by  the  presence  of  Magnitude,  and  Oneness  by  the  presence  of  Unity, 
so  with  Duality  and  all  the  other  numerical  modes. 

As  to  the  How  of  participation,  the  enquiry  is  that  of  all  partici¬ 
pation  in  Ideal  Forms  ;  we  must  note,  however,  that  the  presence  of 
the  Dekad  (for  instance)  in  the  looser  totals  is  different  from  its  presence 
in  the  continuous  ;  there  is  difference  again  in  its  presence  within  many 
powers  where  multiplicity  is  concentred  in  unity ;  arrived  at  the  In¬ 
tellectuals,  there  too  we  discover  Number,  the  Authentic  Number,  no 
longer  entering  the  alien,  Dekad-Absolute  not  Dekad  of  some  particular 
Intellectual  group. 


15. 

We  must  repeat The  Collective  Being,  the  Authentic,  There,  is 
at  once  Being  and  Intellectual-Principle  and  the  Complete  Living  Form  ; 
ihus  it  includes  the  total  of  living  things  *  the  Unity  There  is  reproduced 
by  the  unity  of  this  living  universe  in  the  degree  possible  to  it — for  the 
sense-nature  as  such  cannot  compass  that  transcendental  unity — thus 
that  Living-All  is  inevitably  Number-Entire  :  if  the  Number  were  not 
complete,  the  All  would  be  deficient  to  the  extent  of  some  number, 
and  if  every  number  applicable  to  living  things  were  not  contained 
in  it,  it  would  not  be  the  all-comprehending  Life-Form.  Therefore, 
Number  exists  before  every  living  thing,  before  the  collective  Life- 
Form. 

Again  : — Man  exists  in  the  Intellectual  and  with  him  all  other 
living  things,  both  by  possession  of  Real-Being  and  because  that  is  the 
Life-Form  Complete.  Even  the  man  of  this  sphere  is  a  member  of  the 
Intellectual  since  that  is  the  Life-Form  Complete  ;  every  living  thing 
by  virtue  of  having  life,  is  There,  There  in  the  Life-form,  and  man  is 


PLOTINUS 


156 

There  also,  in  the  Intellectual,  in  so  far  as  he  is  intellect,  for  all  intelli¬ 
gences  are  severally  members  of  That.  Now  all  this  means  Number 
There.  Yet  even  in  Intellect  Number  is  not  present  primally  ;  its 
presence  There  is  the  reckoning  of  the  Acts  of  Intellectual-Principle  ; 
it  tallies  with  the  Justice  in  Intellectual-Principle,  its  moral  wisdom, 
its  virtues,  its  knowledge,  all  whose  possession  makes  That  Principle 
what  it  is. 

But  knowledge — must  not  this  imply  presence  to  the  alien  ?  No  ; 
knowledge,  known  and  knower  are  an  identity  ;  so  with  all  the  rest  ; 
every  member  of  Intellectual-Principle  is  therefore  present  to  it  primally ; 
justice,  for  example,  is  not  accidental  to  it  as  to  soul  in  its  character  as 
soul,  where  these  virtues  are  mainly  potential  becoming  actual  by  the 
intention  towards  Intellectual-Principle  and  association  with  it. 

Next  we  come  to  Being,  fully  realised,  and  this  is  the  seat  of  Number  ; 
by  Number  Being  brings  forth  the  Beings  ;  its  movement  is  planned 
to  Number  ;  it  establishes  the  numbers  of  its  offspring  before  bringing 
them  to  be,  in  the  same  way  as  it  establishes  its  own  unity  by  linking 
pure  Being  to  the  First  :  the  numbers  do  not  link  the  lower  to  the  First ; 
it  suffices  that  Being  is  so  linked  ;  for  Being,  in  taking  form  as  Number, 
binds  its  members  to  itself.  As  a  unity,  it  suffers  no  division,  remaining 
self-constant ;  as  a  thing  of  division,  containing  its  chosen  total  of 
members,  it  knows  that  total  and  so  brings  forth  Number,  a  phase  there¬ 
fore  of  its  content  :  its  development  of  part  is  ruled  by  the  powers  of 
Number,  and  the  Beings  it  produces  sum  to  that  Number.  Thus  Number, 
the  primal  and  true,  is  Principle  and  source  of  actuality  to  the  Beings. 

Hence  it  is  that  in  our  sphere,  also.  Number  accompanies  the  coming 
to  be  of  particular  things  and  to  suppose  another  number  than  the  actual 
is  to  suppose  the  production  of  something  else  or  of  nothing. 

These  then  are  the  primal  numbers  ;  they  are  numerable  ;  the 
numbers  of  the  other  order  are  of  a  double  character  ;  as  derived  from 
the  first  numbers  they  are  themselves  numerable  but  as  acting  for  those 
first  they  are  measures  of  the  rest  of  things,  numbering  numbers  and 
numerables.  For  how  could  they  declare  a  Dekad  save  in  the  light  of 
numbers  within  themselves  ? 


VI.  6.  16] 


ON  NUMBERS 


157 


16. 

But  here  we  may  be  questioned  about  these  numbers  which  we 
describe  as  the  primal  and  authentic  : — 

“  Where  do  you  place  these  numbers,  in  what  genus  among 
Beings  ?  To  everyone  they  seem  to  come  under  Quantity  and  you  have 
certainly  brought  Quantity  in,  where  you  say  that  discrete  Quantity 
equally  with  the  continuous  holds  place  among  Beings  ;  but  you  go 
on  to  say  that  there  are  the  numbers  belonging  to  the  Firsts  and  then 
talk  of  other  numbers  quite  distinct,  those  of  reckoning ;  tell  us  how 
you  arrange  all  this,  for  there  is  difficulty  here.  And  then,  the  unity 
in  sense-things — is  that  a  quantity  or  is  quantity  here  just  so  many 
units  brought  together,  the  unity  being  the  starting-point  of  quantity 
but  not  quantity  itself  ?  And,  if  the  starting-point,  is  it  a  kindred  thing 
or  of  another  genus  ?  All  this  you  owe  it  to  us  to  make  clear." 

Be  it  so  ;  we  begin  by  pointing  out  a  distinction  : — 

You  take  one  thing  with  another — for  we  must  first  deal  with  objects 
of  sense — a  dog  and  a  man,  or  two  men  ;  or  you  take  a  group  and  affirm 
ten,  a  dekad  of  men  :  in  this  case  the  number  affirmed  is  not  a  Reality,  even 
as  Reality  goes  in  the  sphere  of  sense,  but  is  purely  Quantity :  similarly 
when  you  resolve  into  units,  breaking  up  the  dekad,  those  units  are  your 
principle  of  Quantity  since  the  single  individual  is  not  a  unity  absolute. 

But  the  case  is  different  when  you  consider  one  man  in  himself 
and  affirm  a  certain  number,  duality,  for  example,  in  that  he  is  at  once 
living  and  reasoning. 

By  this  analysis  and  totalling  you  get  quantity ;  but  there  are 
two  objects  under  consideration  and  each  of  these  is  one  ;  each  of  the 
unities  contributes  to  the  complete  being  and  the  oneness  is  inherent 
in  each  ;  this  is  another  kind  of  number,  number  essential ;  even  the 
duality  so  formed  is  no  posterior  ;  it  does  not  signify  a  quantity  apart 
from  the  thing  but  the  quantity  in  the  essence  which  holds  the  thing 
together.  The  number  here  is  no  mere  result  of  your  detailing ;  the 
things  exist  of  themselves  and  are  not  brought  together  by  your  reckon¬ 
ing,  but  what  has  it  to  do  with  essential  reality  that  you  count  one  man 
in  with  another  ?  There  is  here  no  resultant  unity  such  as  that  of  a 


158 


PLOTINUS 


choir  ;  the  dekad  is  real  only  to  yon  who  count  the  ten  ;  in  the  ten  of 
your  reckoning  there  cannot  be  a  dekad  without  a  unitary  basis  ;  it 
is  you  that  make  the  ten  by  your  counting,  by  fixing  that  tenness  down 
to  quantity  ;  in  choir  and  army  there  is  something  more  than  that, 
something  not  of  your  placing. 

But  how  do  you  come  to  have  a  number  to  place  ? 

The  Number  inherent  apart  from  any  enumeration  has  its  own 
manner  of  being,  but  the  other,  that  resulting  upon  the  appearance 
of  an  external  to  be  appraised  by  the  Number  within  yourself,  is  either 
an  Act  of  these  inherent  numbers  or  an  Act  in  accordance  with  them  ; 
in  counting  we  produce  number  and  so  bring  quantity  into  being  just 
as  in  walking  we  bring  a  certain  movement  into  being. 

But  what  of  that  “  Number  within  us  having  its  own  manner  of 
being  ?  ” 

It  is  the  Number  of  our  essence.  “  Our  essence  ”  we  read  “  partakes 
of  Number  and  harmony  and,  also,  is  Number  and  harmony.”  “  Neither 
body  nor  magnitude,”  someone  says  :  soul,  then,  is  Number  since  it 
is  essence.  The  number  belonging  to  body  is  an  essence  of  the  order 
of  body  ;  the  number  belonging  to  soul  constitutes  the  essences  of  souls. 

In  the  Intellectuals,  all,  if  the  Absolute  Living-Form,  there  is  a 
multiple — a  triad,  let  us  say — that  Triad  of  the  Living-Form  is  of  the 
nature  of  essence  :  and  the  Triad  prior  to  any  living  thing,  Triad  in  the 
realm  of  Being,  is  a  principle  of  essence. 

When  you  enumerate  two  things — say,  animal  and  beauty — each  of 
these  remains  one  thing  ;  the  number  is  your  production  ;  it  lay  within 
yourself ;  it  is  you  that  elaborate  quantity,  here  the  dyad.  But  when 
you  declare  virtue  to  be  a  Tetrad,  you  are  affirming  a  Tetrad  which 
does  actually  exist ;  the  parts,  so  to  speak,  make  one  thing ;  you  are 
taking  as  the  object  of  your  act  a  Unity-Tetrad  to  which  you  accommo¬ 
date  the  Tetrad  within  yourself. 

*7- 

But  what  of  the  Infinite  Number  we  hear  of  ;  does  not  all  this 
reasoning  set  it  under  limit  ? 


VI.  6. 17]  ON  NUMBERS  159 

And  rightly  so  if  the  thing  is  to  be  a  number  ;  limitlessness  and 
number  are  in  contradiction. 

How,  then,  do  we  come  to  use  the  term  ?  Is  it  that  we  think  of 
Number  as  we  think  of  an  infinite  line,  not  with  the  idea  that  any  such 
line  exists  but  that  even  the  very  greatest, — that  of  the  (path  of  the) 
universe,  for  example — may  be  thought  of  as  still  greater  ?  So  it  might 
be  with  number  ;  let  it  be  fixed,  yet  we  still  are  free  to  think  of  its  double, 
though  not  of  course  to  produce  the  doubled  quantity  since  it  is  impossible 
to  join  to  the  actual  what  is  no  more  than  a  conception,  a  phantasm, 
private  to  ourselves. 

It  is  our  view  that  there  does  exist  an  infinite  line,  among  the  In¬ 
tellectual  Beings  :  for  There  a  line  would  not  be  quantitative  and  being 
without  quantity  could  be  numerically  infinite.  This  however  would 
be  in  another  mode  than  that  of  limitless  extension.  In  what  mode, 
then  ?  In  that  the  conception  of  the  Absolute  Line  does  not  include 
the  conception  of  limit. 

But  what  sort  of  thing  is  the  Line  in  the  Intellectual  and  what 
place  does  it  hold  ? 

It  is  later  than  Number  since  unity  is  observed  in  it ;  it  rises  at 
one  point  and  traverses  one  course  and  simply  lacks  the  quantity  that 
would  be  the  measure  of  the  distance. 

But  where  does  this  thing  lie  ?  Is  it  existent  only  in  the  defining 
thought,  so  to  speak  ? 

No  ;  it  is  also  a  thing,  though  a  thing  of  the  Intellectual.  All  that 
belongs  to  that  order  is  at  once  an  Intellectual  and  in  some  degree  the 
concrete  thing.  There  is  a  position,  as  well  as  a  manner  of  being,  for 
all  configurations,  for  surface,  for  solid.  And  certainly  the  configurations 
are  not  of  our  devising ;  for  example,  the  configurations  of  the  universe 
are  obviously  antecedent  to  ourselves  ;  so  it  must  be  with  all  the  con¬ 
figurations  of  the  things  of  nature  ;  before  the  bodily  reproductions 
all  must  exist  There,  without  configuration,  primal  configurations.  For 
these  primals  are  not  shapes  in  something ;  self-belonging  they  are 
perfect  without  extension  ;  only  the  extended  needs  the  external.  In 
the  sphere  of  Real-Being  the  configuration  is  always  a  unity  ;  it  becomes 


i6o 


PLOTINUS 


discrete  either  in  the  Living-Form  or  immediately  before  :  I  say  becomes 
discrete  not  in  the  sense  that  it  takes  magnitude  There  but  that  it  is 
broken  apart  for  the  purposes  of  the  Living-Form  and  is  allotted  to  the 
bodies  within  that  Form — for  instance,  to  Fire  There,  the  Intellectual 
Pyramid.  And  because  the  Ideal-Form  is  There,  the  fire  of  this  sphere 
seeks  to  produce  that  configuration  against  the  check  of  Matter  :  and 
so  of  all  the  rest  as  we  read  in  the  account  of  the  realm  of  sense. 

But  does  the  Life-Form  contain  the  configurations  by  the  mere 
fact  of  its  life  ? 

They  are  in  the  Intellectual-Principle  previously  but  they  also 
exist  in  the  Living-Form;  if  this  be  considered  as  including  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle,  then  they  are  primally  in  the  Life-Form,  but  if  that 
Principle  comes  first  than  they  are  previously  in  that.  And  if  the  Life- 
Form  entire  contains  also  souls,  it  must  certainly  be  subsequent  to  the 
Intellectual-Principle. 

No  doubt  there  is  the  passage  “  Whatever  Intellect  sees  in  the 
entire  Life-Form  ”  ;  thus  seeing,  must  not  the  Intellectual- Principle 
be  the  later  ? 

No  ;  the  seeing  may  imply  merely  that  the  reality  comes  into 
being  by  the  fact  of  that  seeing ;  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  not  external 
to  the  Life-Form ;  all  is  one  ;  the  Act  of  the  Intellectual-Principle 
possesses  itself  of  bare  sphere,  while  the  Life-Form  holds  the  sphere 
as  sphere  of  a  living  total. 

18. 

It  appears  then  that  Number  in  that  realm  is  definite  ;  it  is  we 
that  can  conceive  the  “  More  than  is  present  ”  ;  the  infinity  lies  in  our 
counting :  in  the  Real  is  no  conceiving  more  than  has  been  conceived  ; 
all  stands  entire ;  no  number  has  been  or  could  be  omitted  to  make 
addition  possible.  It  might  be  described  as  infinite  in  the  sense  that  it 
has  not  been  measured — who  is  there  to  measure  it  ? — but  it  is  solely 
its  own,  a  concentrated  unit,  entire,  not  ringed  round  by  any  boundary  ; 
its  manner  of  being  is  settled  for  it  by  itself  alone.  None  of  the  Real- 
Beings  is  under  limit ;  what  is  limited,  measured,  is  what  needs  measure 


VI.  6.  1 8] 


ON  NUMBERS 


161 


to  prevent  it  running  away  into  the  unbounded.  There  every  being  is 
Measure  ;  and  therefore  it  is  that  all  is  beautiful.  Because  that  is  a 
living  thing  it  is  beautiful,  holding  the  highest  life,  the  complete,  a  life 
not  tainted  towards  death,  nothing  mortal  there,  nothing  dying.  Nor 
is  the  life  of  that  Absolute  Living-Form  some  feeble  flickering ;  it  is 
primal,  the  brightest,  holding  all  that  life  has  of  radiance  ;  it  is  that 
first  light  which  the  souls  There  draw  upon  for  their  life  and  bring  with 
them  when  they  come  here.  It  knows  for  what  purpose  it  lives,  towards 
\\  hat  it  lives,  from  Whence  it  lives  ;  for  the  Whence  of  its  life  is  the 
Whither.  .  .  .  and  close  above  it  stands  the  wisdom  of  all,  the  collective 
Intellectual-Principle,  knit  into  it,  one  with  it,  colouring  it  to  a  higher 
goodness,  by  kneading  wisdom  into  it,  making  its  beauty  still  more 
august.  Even  here  the  august  and  veritably  beautiful  life  is  the  life  in 
wisdom,  here  dimly  seen.  There  purely.  For  There  wisdom  gives  sight 
to  the  seer  and  power  for  the  fuller  living  and  in  that  tenser  life  both 
to  see  and  to  become  what  is  seen. 

Here  attention  is  set  for  the  most  part  upon  the  unliving  and,  in 
the  living,  upon  what  is  lifeless  in  them  ;  the  inner  life  is  taken  only 
with  alloy  :  There,  all  are  Living  Beings,  living  wholly,  unalloyed ; 
howrever  you  may  choose  to  study  one  of  them  apart  from  its  life,  in  a 
moment  that  life  is  flashed  out  upon  you  :  once  you  have  known  the 
Essence  that  pervades  them,  conferring  that  unchangeable  life  upon 
them,  once  you  perceive  the  judgement  and  wisdom  and  knowledge 
that  are  theirs,  you  can  but  smile  at  all  the  lower  nature  with  its  pretention 
to  Reality. 

In  virtue  of  this  Essence  it  is  that  life  endures,  that  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  endures,  that  the  Beings  stand  in  their  eternity ;  nothing 
alters  it,  turns  it,  moves  it ;  nothing,  indeed,  is  in  being  beside  it  to 
touch  it ;  anything  that  is  must  be  its  product ;  anything  opposed  to 
it  could  not  affect  it.  Being  itself  could  not  make  such  an  opposite  into 
Being  ;  that  would  require  a  prior  to  both  and  that  prior  would  then  be 
Being  ;  so  that  Parmenides  was  right  when  he  taught  the  identity  of 
Being  and  Unity.  Being  is  thus  beyond  contact  not  because  it  stands 
alone  but  because  it  is  Being.  For  Being  alone  has  Being  in  its  own  right. 


i62 


PLOTINUS 


How  then  can  we  deny  to  it  either  Being  or  anything  at  all  that 
may  exist  effectively,  anything  that  may  derive  from  it  ? 

As  long  as  it  exists  it  produces  :  but  it  exists  for  ever  ;  so,  therefore, 
do  its  products.  And  so  great  is  it  in  power  and  beauty  that  it  remains 
the  allurer,  all  things  of  the  universe  depending  from  it  and  rejoicing 
to  hold  their  trace  of  it  and  through  that  to  seek  their  good.  To  us 
existence  is  before  the  good  ;  all  this  world  desires  life  and  wisdom  in 
order  to  Being  ;  every  soul  and  every  intellect  seeks  to  be  its  Being 
but  Being  is  sufficient  to  itself. 


SEVENTH  TRACTATE 

How  the  Multiplicity  of  the  Ideal-Forms  came  into  Being  and 

Upon  The  Good 

i. 

God,  or  some  one  of  the  gods,  in  sending  the  souls  to  their  birth, 
placed  eyes  in  the  face  to  catch  the  light  and  allotted  to  each  sense  the 
appropriate  organ,  providing  thus  for  the  safety  which  comes  by  seeing 
and  hearing  in  time  and  seeking  or  avoiding  under  guidance  of  touch. 

But  what  led  to  this  provision  ? 

It  cannot  be  that  other  forms  of  being  were  produced  first  and  that, 
these  perishing  in  the  absence  of  the  senses,  the  maker  at  last  supplied 
the  means  by  which  men  and  other  living  beings  might  avert  disaster. 

We  may  be  told  that  it  lay  within  the  divine  knowledge  that  animal 
life  would  be  exposed  to  heat  and  cold  and  other  such  experiences  in¬ 
cident  to  body  and  that  in  this  knowledge  he  provided  the  senses  and 
the  organs  apt  to  their  activity  in  order  that  the  living  total  might  not 
fall  an  easy  prey. 

Now,  either  he  gave  these  organs  to  souls  already  possessing  the 
sensitive  powers  or  he  gave  senses  and  organs  alike. 

But  if  the  souls  were  given  the  powers  as  well  as  the  organs,  then, 
souls  though  they  were,  they  had  no  sensation  before  that  giving.  If 
they  possessed  these  powers  from  the  moment  of  being  souls  and  became 


VI.  7.  I] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  163 


souls  in  order  to  their  entry  into  process,  then  it  is  of  their  very  nature 
to  belong  to  process,  unnatural  to  them  to  be  outside  of  process  and 
within  the  Intellectual :  they  were  made  in  the  intent  that  they  should 
belong  to  the  alien  and  have  their  being  amid  evil ;  the  divine  provision 
would  consist  in  holding  them  to  their  disaster  ;  this  is  God's  reasoned 
purpose,  this  the  plan  entire. 

Now  what  is  the  foundation  of  reasoned  plan  ? 

Precedent  planning,  it  may  be  ;  but  still  we  are  forced  back  to 
some  thing  or  things  determining  it.  What  would  these  be  here  ? 

Either  sense-perception  or  intellect.  But  sense-perception  it  cannot 
in  this  case  be  :  intellect  is  left ;  yet,  starting  from  intellect,  the  con¬ 
clusion  will  be  knowledge,  not  therefore  the  handling  of  the  sensible  ; 
what  begins  with  the  intellectual  and  proceeds  to  the  intellectual  can 
certainly  not  end  in  dealings  with  the  sensible.  Providence,  then,  whether 
over  living  beings  or  over  any  part  of  the  universe  was  never  the  out¬ 


come  of  plan. 

There  is  in  fact  no  planning  There  ;  we  speak  of  reasoned  purpose 
in  the  world  of  things  only  to  convey  that  the  universe  is  of  the  character 
which  in  the  later  order  woul^  point  to  a  wise  purposing ;  Providence 
implies  that  things  are  as  in  the  later  order  a  competent  foreplanning 


would  produce  them.  Reasoning  serves,  in  beings  not  of  the  order  above 
that  need,  to  supply  for  the  higher  power ;  foresight  is  necessary  in 
the  lack  of  power  which  could  dispense  with  it ;  it  labours  towards 
some  one  occurrence  in  preference  to  another  and  it  goes  in  a  sort  of 
dread  of  the  unfitting  ;  where  only  the  fitting  can  occur,  there  is  no 
foreseeing.  So  with  planning ;  where  one  only  of  two  things  can  be, 
what  place  is  there  for  plan  ?  The  alone  and  one  and  utterly  simplex  cannot 
involve  a  “  this  to  avert  that  ”  :  if  the  “  this  ”  could  not  be,  the  “  that  ” 
must ;  the  serviceable  thing  appeared  and  at  once  approved  itself  so. 

But  surely  this  is  foreseeing,  deliberating :  are  we  not  back  at 
what  was  said  at  the  beginning,  that  God  did  to  this  end  give  both  the 
senses  and  the  powers,  however  perplexing  that  giving  be  ? 

No  :  all  turns  on  the  necessary  completeness  of  Act ;  we  cannot 
think  anything  belonging  to  God  to  be  other  than  a  whole  and  all  and 


1 


164 


PLOTINUS 


therefore  in  anything  of  God’s  that  all  must  be  contained  ;  God  there¬ 
fore  must  take  in  the  future,  present  beforehand.  Certainly  there  is 
no  later  in  the  divine  ;  what  is  There  as  present  is  future  for  elsewhere. 
If  then  the  future  is  present,  it  must  be  present  as  having  been  fore- 
conceived  for  later  coming  to  be  ;  at  that  divine  stage  therefore  it  lacks 
nothing  and  therefore  can  never  lack  ;  all  existed,  eternally  and  in 
such  a  way  that  at  the  later  stage  any  particular  thing  may  be  said  to 
exist  for  this  or  that  purpose  ;  the  All,  in  its  extension  and  so  to  speak 
unfolding,  is  able  to  present  succession  while  yet  it  is  simultaneous ; 
this  is  because  it  contains  the  cause  of  all  as  inherent  to  itself. 


2. 

Thus  we  have  even  here  the  means  of  knowing  the  nature  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle,  though,  seeing  it  more  closely  than  anything 
else,  we  still  see  it  at  less  than  its  worth.  We  know  that  it  exists  but 
its  cause  we  do  not  see,  or,  if  we  do,  we  see  that  cause  as  something 
apart.  We  see  a  man — or  an  eye,  if  you  like — but  this  is  an  image  or 
part  of  an  image  ;  what  is  in  that  Principle  is  at  once  Man  and  the  reason 
of  his  being  ;  for  There  man — or  eye — must  be,  itself,  an  intellective 
thing  and  a  cause  of  its  being  ;  it  could  not  exist  at  all  unless  it  were 
that  cause,  whereas  here,  everything  partial  is  separate  and  so  is  the 
cause  of  each.  In  the  Intellectual  all  is  at  one  so  that  the  thing  is  identical 
with  the  cause. 

Even  here  the  thing  and  its  cause  are  often  identical — an  eclipse 
furnishes  an  example — what  then  is  there  to  prevent  other  things  too 
being  identical  with  their  cause  and  this  cause  being  the  essence  of  the 
thing  ?  It  must  be  so  ;  and  by  this  search  after  the  cause  the  thing's 
essence  is  reached,  for  the  essence  of  a  thing  is  its  cause.  I  am  not  here 
saying  that  the  informing  Idea  is  the  cause  of  the  thing — though  this 
is  true — but  that  the  Idea  itself,  unfolded,  reveals  the  cause  inherent 
in  it. 

A  thing  of  inactivity,  even  though  alive,  cannot  include  its  own 
cause  ;  but  where  could  a  Forming-Idea,  a  member  of  the  Intellectual- 
Principle,  turn  in  quest  of  its  cause  ?  We  may  be  answered  “  In  the 


VI.  7-  2] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


165 


Intellectual-Principle  ”  ;  but  the  two  are  not  distinct ;  the  Idea  is  the 
Intellectual-Principle;  and  if  that  Principle  must  contain  the  Ideas 
complete,  their  cause  must  be  contained  in  them.  The  Intellectual- 
Principle  itself  contains  every  cause  of  the  things  of  its  content  ;  but 
these  of  its  content  are  identically  Intellectual-Principle,  each  of  them 
Intellectual-Principle  ;  none  of  them,  thus,  can  lack  its  own  cause  ; 
each  springs  into  being  carrying  with  it  the  reason  of  its  being.  No 
result  of  chance,  each  must  rise  complete  with  its  cause  ;  it  is  an  integral 
and  so  includes  the  excellence  bound  up  with  the  cause.  This  is  how 
all  participants  in  the  Idea  are  put  into  possession  of  their  cause. 

In  our  universe,  a  coherent  total  of  multiplicity,  the  several  items 
are  linked  each  to  the  other,  and  by  the  fact  that  it  is  an  all  every  cause 
is  included  in  it :  even  in  the  particular  thing  the  part  is  discernibly 
related  to  the  whole,  for  the  parts  do  not  come  into  being  separately 
and  successively  but  are  mutually  cause  and  caused  at  one  and  the 
same  moment.  Much  more  in  the  higher  realm  must  all  the  singles 
exist  for  the  whole  and  each  for  itself  :  if  then  that  world  is  the  conjoint 
reality  of  all,  of  an  all  not  chance-ruled  and  not  sectional,  the  caused 
There  must  include  the  causes  :  every  item  must  hold,  in  its  very  nature, 
the  uncaused  possession  of  its  cause  ;  uncaused,  independent  and  standing 
apart  from  cause,  they  must  be  self-contained,  cause  and  all. 

Further,  since  nothing  There  is  chance-sprung,  and  the  multiplicity 
in  each  comprehends  the  entire  content,  then  the  cause  of  every  member 
can  be  named  ;  the  cause  was  present  from  the  beginning,  inherent, 
not  a  cause  but  a  fact  of  the  being  ;  or,  rather,  cause  and  manner  of 
being  were  one.  What  could  an  Idea  have,  as  cause,  over  and  above 
the  Intellectual-Principle  ?  It  is  a  thought  of  that  Principle  and  cannot, 
at  that,  be  considered  as  anything  but  a  perfect  product.  If  it  is  thus 
perfect  we  cannot  speak  of  anything  in  which  it  is  lacking  nor  cite  any 
reason  for  such  lack.  That  thing  must  be  present  and  we  can  say  why. 
The  why  is  inherent,  therefore,  in  the  entity,  that  is  to  say  in  every 
thought  and  activity  of  the  Intellectual-Principle.  Take  for  example 
the  Idea  of  Man  ;  Man  entire  is  found  to  contribute  to  it ;  he  is  in  that 
Idea  in  all  his  fulness  including  everything  that  from  the  beginning 


i66 


PLOTINUS 


belonged  to  Man.  If  Man  were  not  complete  There,  so  that  there  were 
something  to  be  added  to  the  Idea,  that  additional  must  belong  to  a 
derivative  :  but  Man  exists  from  eternity  and  must  therefore  be  complete  ; 
the  man  bom  is  the  derivative. 

3- 

What  then  is  there  to  prevent  man  having  been  the  object  of  planning 
There  ? 

No  :  all  stands  in  that  likeness,  nothing  to  be  added  or  taken  away  ; 
this  planning  and  reasoning  is  based  only  on  an  assumption  ;  things  are 
taken  to  be  in  process  and  this  suggests  planning  and  reasoning  ;  insist 
on  the  eternity  of  the  process  and  planning  falls  to  the  ground.  There 
can  be  no  planning  over  the  eternal ;  that  would  imply  forgetfulness 
cf  a  first  state  ;  further,  if  the  second  state  were  better,  things  stood 
ill  at  first  ;  if  they  stood  well,  so  they  must  remain. 

Only  in  conjunction  with  their  causes  are  things  good  ;  even  in 
this  sphere  a  thing  is  good  in  virtue  of  being  complete ;  form 
means  that  the  thing  is  complete,  the  Matter  duly  controlled  ;  this 
control  means  that  nothing  has  been  left  crude  ;  but  something  is  so 
left  if  anything  belonging  to  the  shape  be  missing — eye,  or  other  part. 
Thus  to  state  cause  is  to  state  the  thing  complete.  Why  eyes  or  eye¬ 
brows  ?  For  completion  :  if  you  say  For  preservation,  you  affirm  an 
indwelling  safeguard  of  the  essence,  something  contributory  to  the 
being  :  the  essence,  then,  preceded  the  safeguard  and  the  cause  was 
inbound  with  the  essence  ;  distinct,  this  cause  is  in  its  nature  a  part 
of  the  essence. 

All  parts,  thus,  exist  in  regard  to  each  other  :  the  essence  is  all- 
embracing,  complete,  entire  ;  the  excellency  is  inbound  with  the  cause 
and  embraced  by  it ;  the  being,  the  essence,  the  cause,  all  are  one. 

But,  at  this,  sense-perception — even  in  its  particular  modes — is 
involved  in  the  Idea  by  eternal  necessity,  in  virtue  of  the  completeness 
of  the  Idea  ;  Intellectual-Principle,  as  all-inclusive,  contains  in  itself 
all  by  which  we  are  brought,  later,  to  recognise  this  perfection  in  its 
nature ;  the  cause,  There,  was  one  total,  all-inclusive ;  thus  Man  in  the 


VI.  7-  4] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


167 

Intellectual  was  not  purely  intellect,  sense-perception  being  an  addition 
made  upon  his  entry  into  birth  :  all  this  would  seem  to  imply  a  tendance 
in  that  great  Principle  towards  the  lower,  towards  this  sphere. 

But  how  could  that  Principle  have  such  perception,  be  aware  of 
things  of  sense  ?  Surely  it  is  untenable  on  the  one  hand  that  sense- 
perception  should  exist  There,  from  eternity,  and  on  the  other  that  only 
upon  the  debasement  of  the  soul  should  there  be  sense-perception  here 
and  the  accomplishment  in  this  realm  of  the  Act  of  what  was  always 
a  power  in  that  ? 

4- 

To  meet  the  difficulty  we  must  make  a  close  examination  of  the  nature 
of  Man  in  the  Intellectual ;  perhaps,  though  it  is  better  to  begin  with 
the  man  of  this  plane  lest  we  be  reasoning  to  Man  There  from  a  mis¬ 
conception  of  Man  here.  There  may  even  be  some  who  deny  the  difference. 

We  ask  first  whether  man  as  here  is  a  Reason-Principle  different 
to  that  soul  which  produces  him  as  here  and  gives  him  life  and  thought  ; 
or  is  he  that  very  soul  or,  again,  the  (yet  lower)  soul  using  the  human 
body  ? 

Now  if  man  is  a  reasonable  living  being  and  by  living  being  is  meant 
a  conjoint  of  soul  and  body,  the  Reason-Principle  of  man  is  not  identical 
with  soul.  But  if  the  conjoint  of  soul  and  body  is  the  reason-principle 
of  man,  how  can  man  be  an  eternal  reality,  seeing  that  it  is  only  when 
soul  and  body  have  come  together  that  the  Reason-Principle  so  con¬ 
stituted  appears  ? 

That  Reason-Principle  will  be  the  foreteller  of  the  man  to  be,  not 
the  Man  Absolute  with  which  we  are  dealing  but  more  like  his  definition, 
and  not  at  that  indicating  his  nature  since  what  is  indicated  is  not  the 
Idea  that  is  to  enter  Matter  but  only  that  of  the  known  thing,  the  con¬ 
joint.  We  have  not  yet  found  the  Man  we  are  seeking,  the  equivalent 
of  the  Reason-Principle. 

But — it  may  be  said — the  Reason-Principle  of  such  beings  must  be 
some  conjoint,  one  element  in  another. 

This  does  not  define  the  principle  of  either.  If  we  are  to  state  with 


1 68 


PLOTINUS 


entire  accuracy  the  Reason-Principles  of  the  Forms  in  Matter  and  asso¬ 
ciated  with  Matter,  we  cannot  pass  over  the  generative  Reason- Principle, 
in  this  case  that  of  Man,  especially  since  we  hold  that  a  complete  definition 
must  cover  the  essential  manner  of  being. 

What,  then,  is  this  essential  of  Man  ?  What  is  the  indwelling,  in¬ 
separable  something  which  constitutes  Man  as  here  ?  Is  the  Reason- 
Principle  itself  a  reasoning  living  being  or  merely  a  maker  of  that  reasoning 
life-form  ?  and  what  is  it  apart  from  that  act  of  making  ? 

The  living  being  corresponds  to  a  reasoning  life  in  the  Reason- 
Principle  ;  man  therefore  is  a  reasoning  life :  but  there  is  no  life  without 
soul ;  either,  then,  the  soul  supplies  the  reasoning  life — and  man  therefore 
is  not  an  essence  but  simply  an  activity  of  the  soul — or  the  soul  is  the 
man. 

But  if  reasoning  soul  is  the  man,  why  does  it  not  constitute  man 
upon  its  entry  into  some  other  animal  form  ? 

5- 

Man,  thus,  must  be  some  Reason-Principle  other  than  soul.  But 
why  should  he  not  be  some  conjoint — a  soul  in  a  certain  Reason-Principle 
— the  Reason-Principle  being,  as  it  were,  a  definite  activity  which  how¬ 
ever  could  not  exist  without  that  which  acts  ? 

This  is  the  case  with  the  Reason-Principles  in  seed  which  are  neither 
soulless  nor  entirely  soul.  For  these  productive  principles  cannot  be 
devoid  of  soul  and  there  is  nothing  surprising  in  such  essences  being 
Reason-Principles . 

But  these  principles  producing  other  forms  than  man,  of  what 
phase  of  soul  are  they  activities  ?  Of  the  vegetal  soul  ?  Rather  of  that 
which  produces  animal  life,  a  brighter  soul  and  therefore  one  more 
intensely  living. 

The  soul  of  that  order,  the  soul  that  has  entered  into  Matter  of 
that  order,  is  man  by  having,  apart  from  body,  a  certain  disposition  ; 
within  body  it  shapes  all  to  its  own  fashion,  producing  another  form  of 
Man,  man  reduced  to  what  body  admits,  just  as  an  artist  may  make  a 
reduced  image  of  that  again. 


VI.  7-6]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  169 

It  is  soul,  then,  that  holds  the  pattern  and  Reason-Principles  of 
Man,  the  natural  tendencies,  the  dispositions  and  powers — all  feeble 
since  this  is  not  the  Primal  Man— and  it  contains  also  the  Ideal-Forms 
of  other  senses.  Forms  which  themselves  are  senses,  bright  to  all  seeming 
but  images,  and  dim  in  comparison  with  those  of  the  earlier  order. 

The  higher  Man,  above  this  sphere,  rises  from  the  more  godlike 
soul,  a  soul  possessed  of  a  nobler  humanity  and  brighter  perceptions. 
This  must  be  the  Man  of  Plato  s  definition  (“  Man  is  Soul/’)  where  the 
addition  “  Soul  as  using  body  ”  marks  the  distinction  between  the  soul 
which  uses  body  directly  and  the  soul,  poised  above,  which  touches 
body  only  through  that  intermediary. 

The  Man  of  the  realm  of  birth  has  sense-perception  :  the  higher 
soul  enters  to  bestow  a  brighter  life,  or  rather  does  not  so  much  enter 
as  simply  impart  itself ;  for  soul  does  not  leave  the  Intellectual  but 
maintaining  that  contact  holds  the  lower  life  as  pendant  from  it,  blending 
with  it  by  the  natural  link  of  Reason-Principle  to  Reason-Principle  ."  and 
man,  the  dimmer,  brightens  under  that  illumination. 

6. 

But  how  can  that  higher  soul  have  sense-perception  ? 

It  is  the  perception  of  what  falls  under  perception  There,  sensation 
in  the  mode  of  that  realm  :  it  is  the  source  of  the  soul’s  perception  of 
the  sense-realm  in  its  correspondence  with  the  Intellectual.  Man  as 
sense-percipient  becomes  avrare  of  that  correspondence  and  accomodates 
the  sense-realm  to  the  lowest  extremity  of  its  counterpart  There,  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  fire  Intellectual  to  the  fire  here  which  becomes  perceptible 
by  its  analogy  with  that  of  the  higher  sphere.  If  material  things  existed 
There,  the  soul  would  perceive  them  ;  Man  in  the  Intellectual,  Man  as 
Intellectual  soul,  would  be  aware  of  the  terrestrial.  This  is  how  the 
secondary  Man,  copy  of  Man  in  the  Intellectual,  contains  the  Reason- 
Principles  in  copy ;  and  Man  in  the  Intellectual-Principle  contained 
the  Man  that  existed  before  any  man.  The  diviner  shines  out  upon  the 
secondary7  and  the  secondary  upon  the  tertiary ;  and  even  the  latest 
possesses  them  all — not  in  the  sense  of  actually  living  by  them  all  but 


170 


PLOTINUS 


as  standing  in  under-parallel  to  them.  Some  of  us  act  by  this  lowest  ; 
in  another  rank  there  is  a  double  activity,  a  trace  of  the  higher  being 
included  ;  in  yet  another  there  is  a  blending  of  the  third  grade  with 
the  others  :  each  is  that  Man  by  which  he  acts  while  each  too  contains 
all  the  grades,  though  in  some  sense  not  so.  On  the  separation  of  the 
third  life  and  third  Man  from  the  body,  then  if  the  second  also  departs — 
of  course  not  losing  hold  on  the  Above — the  two,  as  we  are  told,  will 
occupy  the  same  place.  No  doubt  it  seems  strange  that  a  soul  which 
has  been  the  Reason-Principle  of  a  man  should  come  to  occupy  the  body 
of  an  animal :  but  the  soul  has  always  been  all,  and  will  at  different  times 
be  this  and  that. 

Pure,  not  yet  fallen  to  evil,  the  soul  chooses  man  and  is  man,  for 
this  is  the  higher  and  it  produces  the  higher.  It  produces  also  the 
still  loftier  beings,  the  Celestials  (Daimons),  who  are  of  one  Form  with 
the  soul  that  makes  Man  :  higher  still  stands  that  Man  more  entirely 
of  the  Celestial  rank,  almost  a  god,  reproducing  God,  a  Celestial  closely 
bound  to  God  as  a  man  is  to  Man.  For  that  Being  into  which  man  develops 
is  not  to  be  called  a  god  ;  there  remains  the  difference  which  distinguishes 
souls,  all  of  the  same  race  though  they  be.  This  is  taking  “  Celestial  ” 
(“  Daimon  ”)  in  the  sense  of  Plato. 

When  a  soul  which  in  the  human  state  has  been  thus  attached 
chooses  animal  nature  and  descends  to  that,  it  is  giving  forth  the  Reason- 
Principle — necessarily  in  it — of  that  particular  animal :  this  lower  it  con¬ 
tained  and  the  activity  has  been  to  the  lower. 

1 

7- 

But  if  it  is  by  becoming  evil  and  inferior  that  the  soul  produces 
the  animal  nature,  the  making  of  ox  or  horse  was  not  at  the  outset  in 
its  character ;  the  reason-principle  of  the  animal,  and  the  animal  itself, 
must  lie  outside  of  the  natural  plan  ? 

Inferior,  yes  ;  but  outside  of  nature,  no.  The  thing  There  (Soul 
in  the  Intellectual)  was  in  some  sense  horse  and  dog  from  the  beginning  ; 
given  the  condition,  it  produces  the  higher  kind ;  let  the  condition 
fail,  then  since  produce  it  must  it  produces  what  it  may  :  it  is  like  a 


VI-  7-  8J  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  171 

skilful  craftsman  competent  to  create  all  kinds  of  works  of  art  but  reduced 
to  maidng  what  is  ordered  and  what  the  aptitude  of  his  material  indicates. 

The  power  of  the  All-Soul,  as  Reason-Principle  of  the  universe,  may 
be  considered  as  laying  down  a  pattern  before  the  effective  separate 
powers  go  forth  from  it  :  this  plan  wTould  be  something  like  a  tentative 
illumining  of  Matter ;  the  elaborating  soul  would  give  minute  articu¬ 
lation  to  these  representations  of  itself  ;  every  separate  effective  soul 
would  become  that  towards  which  it  tended,  assuming  that  particular 
form  as  the  choral  dancer  adapts  himself  to  the  action  set  down  for  him. 

But  this  is  to  anticipate  :  our  enquiry  w'as  How  there  can  be  sense- 
perception  in  man  without  the  implication  that  the  Divine  addresses 
itself  to  the  realm  of  process.  We  maintained,  and  proved,  that  the 
Divine  does  not  look  to  this  realm  but  that  things  here  are  dependent 
upon  those  and  represent  them  and  that  man  here  holding  his  powers 
from  Thence  is  directed  Thither,  so  that,  while  sense  makes  the  environ¬ 
ment  of  what  is  of  sense  in  him,  the  Intellectual  in  him  is  linked  to  the 
Intellectual. 

What  we  have  called  the  perceptibles  of  that  realm  enter  into  cognis¬ 
ance  in  a  way  of  their  own,  since  they  are  not  material,  while  the  sensible 
sense  here — so  distinguished  as  dealing  with  corporeal  objects — is  fainter 
tnan  the  perception  belonging  to  that  higher  world ;  the  man  of  this 
sphere  has  sense-perception  because  existing  in  a  less  true  degree  and 
tasing  only  enfeebled  images  of  things  There — perceptions  here  are 
Intellections  of  the  dimmer  order,  and  the  Intellections  There  are  vivid 
perceptions. 

8. 

So  much  for  the  thing  of  sense  ;  but  it  would  appear  that  the  proto- 
type  i  it  ere  of  the  living  form,  the  universal  horse,  must  look  deliberately 
towards  this  sphere  ;  and,  that  being  so,  the  idea  of  horse  must  have 
been  worked  out  in  order  there  be  a  horse  here  ? 

Tet  what  was  that  there  to  present  the  idea  of  the  horse  it  was 
desired  to  produce  ?  Obviously  the  idea  of  horse  must  exist  before  there 
was  any  planning  to  make  a  horse  ;  it  could  not  be  thought  of  in  order 


172 


PLOTINUS 


to  be  made  ;  there  must  have  been  horse  unproduced  before  that  which 
was  later  to  come  into  being.  If  then  the  thing  existed  before  it  was 
produced — if  it  cannot  have  been  thought  of  in  order  to  its  production 
— the  Being  that  held  the  horse  as  There  held  it  in  presence  without 
any  looking  to  this  sphere  ;  it  was  not  with  intent  to  set  horse  and  the 
rest  in  being  here  that  they  were  contained  There  ;  it  is  that,  the  uni¬ 
versal  existing,  the  reproduction  followed  of  necessity  since  the  total 
of  things  was  not  to  halt  at  the  Intellectual.  Who  was  there  to  call  a 
halt  to  a  power  capable  at  once  of  self-concentration  and  of  outflow  ? 

But  how  come  these  animals  of  earth  to  be  There  ?  What  have  they 
to  do  within  God  ?  Reasoning  beings,  all  very  well ;  but  this  host  of  the 
unreasoning,  what  is  there  august  in  them  ?  Surely  the  very  contrary  ? 

The  answer  is  that  obviously  the  unity  of  our  universe  must  be 
that  of  a  manifold  since  it  is  subsequent  to  that  unity-absolute  ;  other¬ 
wise  it  would  be  not  next  to  that  but  the  very  same  thing.  As  a  next 
it  could  not  hold  the  higher  rank  of  being  more  perfectly  a  unity  ;  it 
must  fall  short :  since  the  best  is  a  unity,  inevitably  there  must  be  some¬ 
thing  more  than  unity,  for  deficiency  involves  plurality. 

But  why  should  it  not  be  simply  a  dyad  ? 

Because  neither  of  the  constituents  could  ever  be  a  pure  unity,  but 
at  the  very  least  a  duality  and  so  progressively  (in  an  endless  dualisation) . 
Besides,  in  that  first  duality  of  the  hypothesis  there  would  be  also  move¬ 
ment  and  rest,  Intellect  and  the  life  included  in  Intellect,  all-embracing 
Intellect  and  life  complete.  That  means  that  it  could  not  be  one  Intellect ; 
it  must  be  Intellect  agglomerate  including  all  the  particular  intellects, 
a  thing  therefore  as  multiple  as  all  the  Intellects  and  more  so  ;  and  the 
life  in  it  would  not  be  that  of  one  soul  but  of  all  the  souls  with  the  further 
power  of  producing  the  single  souls  :  it  would  be  the  entire  living  universe 
containing  much  besides  man  ;  for  if  it  contained  only  man,  man  would 
be  alone  here. 

9- 

Admitted,  then — it  will  be  said — for  the  nobler  forms  of  life  ;  but 
how  can  the  divine  contain  the  mean,  the  unreasoning  ?  The  mean  is 


vi.  7-  9]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  173 

the  unreasoning  since  value  depends  upon  reason  and  the  worth  of  the 
intellective  implies  worthlessness  where  intellection  is  lacking.  Yet 
how  can  there  be  question  of  the  unreasoning  or  unintellective  when 
all  particulars  exist  in  the  divine  and  come  forth  from  it  ? 

In  taking  up  the  refutation  of  these  objections,  we  must  insist 
upon  the  consideration  that  neither  man  nor  animals  here  can  be  thought 
of  as  identical  with  the  counterparts  in  the  higher  realm  ;  those  ideal 
forms  must  be  taken  in  a  larger  way.  And  again  the  reasoning  thing 
is  not  of  that  realm  :  here  the  reasoning,  There  the  pre-reasoning. 

Why  then  does  man  alone  reason  here,  the  others  remaining 
reasonless  ? 

Degrees  of  reasoning  here  correspond  to  degrees  of  Intellection 
in  that  other  sphere,  as  between  man  and  the  other  living  beings  There  ; 
and  those  others  do  in  some  measure  act  by  understanding. 

But  why  are  they  not  at  man’s  level  of  reason  :  why  also  the  difference 
from  man  to  man  ? 

W  e  must  reflect  that  since  the  many  forms  of  lives  are  movements — 
and  so  with  the  Intellections — they  cannot  be  identical :  there  must 
be  different  lives,  distinct  intellections,  degrees  of  lightsomeness  and 
clarity  :  there  must  be  firsts,  seconds,  thirds,  determined  by  nearness 
to  the  Firsts.  This  is  how  some  of  the  Intellections  are  gods,  others  of 
a  secondary  order  having  what  is  here  known  as  reason,  while  others 
again  belong  to  the  so-called  unreasoning  :  but  what  we  know  here 
as  unreasoning  was  There  a  Reason-Principle ;  the  unintelligent  was  an 
Intellect ;  the  Thinker  of  Horse  was  Intellect  and  the  Thought,  Horse, 
was  an  Intellect. 

But  (it  will  be  objected)  if  this  were  a  matter  of  mere  thinking  we 
might  well  admit  that  the  intellectual  concept,  remaining  concept, 
should  take  in  the  unintellectual,  but  where  concept  is  identical  with 
thing  how  can  the  one  be  an  Intellection  and  the  other  without  intelli¬ 
gence  ?  Would  not  this  be  Intellect  making  itself  unintelligent  ? 

No  :  the  thing  is  not  unintelligent  ;  it  is  Intelligence  in  a  particular 
mode,  corresponding  to  a  particular  aspect  of  Life ;  and  just  as  life  in 
whatever  form  it  may  appear  remains  always  life,  so  Intellect  is  not 


174 


PLOTINUS 


annulled  by  appearing  in  a  certain  mode.  Intellectual-Principle  adapted 
to  some  particular  living  being  does  not  cease  to  be  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  of  all,  including  man  :  take  it  where  you  will,  every  mani¬ 
festation  is  the  whole,  though  in  some  special  mode  ;  the  particular 
is  produced  but  the  possibility  is  of  all.  In  the  particular  we  see  the 
the  Intellectual-Principle  in  realisation  ;  the  realised  is  its  latest  phase  ; 
in  one  case  the  last  aspect  is  horse  ;  at  horse  ended  the  progressive 
outgoing  towards  the  lesser  forms  of  life,  as  in  another  case  it  will  end  at 
something  lower  still.  The  unfolding  of  the  powers  of  this  Principle 
is  always  attended  by  some  abandonment  in  regard  to  the  highest  ;  the 
outgoing  is  by  loss  and  by  this  loss  the  powers  become  one  thing  or  another 
according  to  the  deficiency  of  the  life-form  produced  by  the  failing 
principle  ;  it  is  then  that  they  find  the  means  of  adding  various  requisites  ; 
the  safeguards  of  the  life  becoming  inadequate,  there  appear  nail,  talon, 
fang,  horn.  Thus  the  Intellectual-Principle  by  its  very  descent  is  directed 
towards  the  perfect  sufficiency  of  the  natural  constitution,  finding  there 
within  itself  the  remedy  of  the  failure. 


io. 

But  failure  There  ?  What  can  defensive  horns  serve  to  There  ? 
To  sufficiency  as  living  form,  to  completeness.  That  principle  must 
be  complete  as  living  form,  complete  as  Intellect,  complete  as  life  so 
that  if  it  is  not  to  be  one  thing  it  may  be  another.  Its  characteristic 
difference  is  in  this  power  of  being  now  this,  now  that,  so  that,  summing 
all,  it  may  be  the  completest  life-form,  Intelligence  complete,  life  in  the 
greatest  fulness  with  each  of  the  particulars  complete  in  its  degree  while 
yet,  over  all  that  multiplicity,  unity  reigns. 

If  all  were  one  identity,  the  total  could  not  contain  this  variety  of 
forms  ;  there  would  be  nothing  but  a  self-sufficing  unity.  Like  every 
compound  it  must  consist  of  things  progressively  differing  in  form  and 
safeguarded  in  that  form.  This  is  in  the  very  nature  of  shape  and  Reason- 
Principle  ;  a  shape,  that  of  man  let  us  suppose,  must  include  a  certain 
number  of  differences  of  part  but  all  dominated  by  a  unity  ;  there  will 
be  the  noble  and  the  inferior,  eye  and  finger,  but  all  within  a  unity  ; 


VI.  7-  n] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


175 


the  part  will  be  inferior  in  comparison  with  the  total  but  best  in  its  place. 
The  Reason-Principle,  too,  is  at  once  the  living  form  and  something 
else,  something  distinct  from  the  being  of  that  form.  It  is  so  with  virtue 
also  ;  it  contains  at  once  the  universal  and  the  particular ;  and  the  total 
is  good  because  the  universal  is  not  differentiated. 


11. 

The  very  heavens,  patently  multiple,  cannot  be  thought  to  disdain 
any  form  of  life  since  this  universe  holds  everything.  Now  how  do  these 
things  come  to  be  here  ?  Does  the  higher  realm  contain  all  of  the  lower  ? 

All  that  has  been  shaped  by  Reason-Principle  and  conforms  to 
Idea. 

But,  having  fire  (warmth)  and  water,  it  will  certainly  have  vegetation ; 
how  does  vegetation  exist  There  ?  Earth,  too  ?  either  these  are  alive 
or  they  are  There  as  dead  things  and  then  not  everything  There  has 
life.  How  in  sum  can  the  things  of  this  realm  be  also  There  ? 

Vegetal  life  we  can  well  admit,  for  the  plant  is  a  Reason-Principle 
established  in  life.  If  in  the  plant  the  Reason-Principle,  entering  Matter 
and  constituting  the  plant,  is  a  certain  form  of  life,  a  definite  soul,  then, 
since  every  Reason-Principle  is  a  unity,  then  either  this  of  plant-life  is  the 
primal  or  before  it  there  is  a  primal  plant,  source  of  its  being  :  that 
first  plant  would  be  a  unity  ;  those  here,  being  multiple,  must  derive 
from  a  unity.  This  being  so,  that  primal  must  have  much  the  truer 
life  and  be  the  veritable  plant,  the  plants  here  deriving  from  it  in  the 
secondary  and  tertiary  degree  and  living  by  a  vestige  of  its  life. 

But  earth  ;  how  is  there  earth  There  :  what  is  the  being  of  earth 
and  how  are  we  to  represent  to  ourselves  the  living  earth  of  that  realm  ? 

First,  what  is  it,  what  the  mode  of  its  being  ? 

Earth,  here  and  There  alike,  must  possess  shape  and  a  Reason- 
Principle.  Now  in  the  case  of  the  vegetal,  the  Reason-Principle  of  the 
plant  here  was  found  to  be  living  in  that  higher  realm  :  is  there  such  a 
Reason-Principle  in  our  earth  ? 

Take  the  most  earthy  of  things  found  shaped  in  earth  and  they 
exhibit,  even  they,  the  indwelling  earth-principle.  The  growing  and 


176 


PLOTINUS 


shaping  of  stones,  the  internal  moulding  of  mountains  as  they  rise, 
reveal  the  working  of  an  ensouled  Reason-Principle  fashioning  them 
from  within  and  bringing  them  to  that  shape  :  this,  we  must  take  it, 
is  the  creative  earth-principle  corresponding  to  what  we  call  the  specific 
principle  of  a  tree  ;  what  we  know  as  earth  is  like  the  wood  of  the  tree  ; 
to  cut  out  a  stone  is  like  lopping  a  twig  from  a  tree,  except  of  course 
that  there  is  no  hurt  done,  the  stone  remaining  a  member  of  the  earth 
as  the  twig,  uncut,  of  the  tree. 

Realising  thus  that  the  creative  force  inherent  in  our  earth  is  life 
within  a  Reason-Principle,  we  are  easily  convinced  that  the  earth  There 
is  much  more  primally  alive,  that  it  is  a  reasoned  Earth-Livingness, 
the  earth  of  Real-Being,  earth  primally,  the  source  of  ours. 

Fire,  similarly,  with  other  such  things,  must  be  a  Reason-Principle 
established  in  Matter  :  fire  certainly  does  not  originate  in  the  friction 
to  which  it  may  be  traced ;  the  friction  merely  brings  out  a  fire  already 
existent  in  the  scheme  and  contained  in  the  materials  rubbed  together. 
Matter  does  not  in  its  own  character  possess  this  fire-power  :  the  true 
cause  is  something  informing  the  Matter,  that  is  to  say,  a  Reason-Principle, 
obviously  therefore  a  soul  having  the  power  of  bringing  fire  into  being ; 
that  is,  a  life  and  a  Reason-Principle  in  one. 

It  is  with  this  in  mind  that  Plato  says  there  is  soul  in  everything 
of  this  sphere.  That  soul  is  the  cause  of  the  fire  of  the  sense-world  ; 
the  cause  of  fire  here  is  a  certain  Life  of  fiery  character,  the  more  authentic 
fire.  That  transcendent  fire  being  more  truly  fire  will  be  more  veritably 
alive  ;  the  fire  absolute  possesses  life.  And  the  same  principles  apply 
to  the  other  elements,  water  and  air. 

Why,  then,  are  water  and  air  not  ensouled  as  earth  is  ? 

Now,  it  is  quite  certain  that  these  are  equally  within  the  living 
total,  parts  of  the  living  all ;  life  does  not  appear  visibly  in  them  ;  but 
neither  does  it  in  the  case  of  the  earth  where  its  presence  is  inferred  by 
what  earth  produces  :  but  there  are  living  things  in  fire  and  still  more 
manifestly  in  water  and  there  are  systems  of  life  in  the  air.  The  particular 
fire,  rising  only  to  be  quenched,  eludes  the  soul  animating  the  universe  ; 
it  slips  away  from  the  magnitude  which  would  manifest  the  soul  within 


VI.  7.  12]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  177 

it  ,  so  with  air  and  water.  If  these  Kinds  could  somehow  be  fastened 
down  to  magnitude  they  would  exhibit  the  soul  within  them,  now  con¬ 
cealed  by  the  fact  that  their  function  requires  them  to  be  loose  or  flowing. 
It  is  much  as  in  the  case  of  the  fluids  within  ourselves  ;  the  flesh  and 
all  that  is  formed  out  of  the  blood  into  flesh  show  the  soul  within,  but 
the  blood  itself,  not  bringing  us  any  sensation,  seems  not  to  have  soul ; 
yet  it  must ,  the  blood  is  not  subject  to  blind  force  )  its  nature  obliges 
it  to  abstain  from  the  soul  which  nonetheless  is  indwelling  in  it.  This 
must  be  the  case  with  the  three  elements  ;  it  is  the  fact  that  the  living 
beings  formed  from  the  close  conglomeration  of  air  (the  stars)  are  not 
susceptible  to  suffering.  But  just  as  air,  so  long  as  it  remains  itself, 
eludes  the  light  which  is  and  remains  unyielding,  so  too,  by  the  effect 
of  its  circular  movement,  it  eludes  soul — and,  in  another  sense,  does 
not.  And  so  with  fire  and  water. 


12. 

Or  take  it  another  way  : — Since  in  our  view  this  universe  stands 
to  that  as  copy  to  original,  the  living  total  must  exist  There  beforehand  ; 
that  is  the  realm  of  complete  Being  and  everything  must  exist  There. 

The  sky  There  must  be  living  and  therefore  not  bare  of  stars,  here 
known  as  the  heavens — for  stars  are  included  in  the  very  meaning  of 
the  word.  Earth  too  will  be  There,  and  not  void  but  even  more  intensely 
living  and  containing  all  that  lives  and  moves  upon  our  earth  and  the 
plants  obviously  rooted  in  life  )  sea  will  be  There  and  all  waters  with 
the  movement  of  their  unending  life  and  all  the  living  things  of  the 
water  ;  air  too  must  be  a  member  of  that  universe  with  the  living  things 
of  air  as  here. 

The  content  of  that  living  thing  must  surely  be  alive — as  in  this 
sphere  and  all  that  lives  must  of  necessity  be  There.  The  nature  of 
the  major  parts  determines  that  of  the  living  forms  they  comprise  ; 
by  the  being  and  content  of  the  heaven  There  are  determined  all  the 
heavenly  forms  of  life  ;  if  those  lesser  forms  were  not  There,  that  heaven 
itself  would  not  be. 

To  ask  how  those  forms  of  life  come  to  be  There  is  simply  asking 

2A 


178 


PLOTINUS 


how  that  heaven  came  to  be  ;  it  is  asking  whence  comes  life,  whence 
the  All-Life,  whence  the  All-soul,  whence  collective  Intellect :  and  the 
answer  is  that  There  no  indigence  or  impotence  can  exist  but  all  must 
be  teeming,  seething,  with  life.  All  flows,  so  to  speak,  from  one  fount 
not  to  be  thought  of  as  some  one  breath  or  warmth  but  rather  as  one 
quality  englobing  and  safeguarding  all  qualities — sweetness  with  frag¬ 
rance,  wine-quality  and  the  savours  of  everything  that  may  be  tasted, 
all  colours  seen,  everything  known  to  touch,  all  that  ear  may  hear,  all 
melodies,  every  rhythm. 

13- 

For  Intellectual-Principle  is  not  a  simplex,  nor  is  the  soul  that 
proceeds  from  it  :  on  the  contrary  things  include  variety  in  the  degree 
of  their  simplicity,  that  is  to  say  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  compounds 
but  Principles  and  Activities  ;  the  activity  of  the  lowest  is  simple  in 
the  sense  of  being  a  fading-out,  that  of  the  First  as  the  total  of  all  activity. 
Intellectual-Principle  is  moved  in  a  movement  unfailingly  true  to  one 
course  but  its  unity  and  identity  are  not  those  of  the  partial ;  they  are 
those  of  its  universality  ;  and  indeed  the  partial  itself  is  not  a  unity 
but  divides  to  infinity. 

We  know  that  Intellectual-Principle  has  a  source  and  advances 
to  some  term  as  its  ultimate  ;  now,  is  the  intermediate  between  source 
and  term  to  be  thought  of  as  a  line  or  as  some  distinct  kind  of  body 
uniform  and  unvaried  ? 

Where  at  that  would  be  its  worth  ?  it  had  no  change,  if  no  differen¬ 
tiation  woke  it  into  life,  it  would  not  be  a  Force  ;  that  condition  would 
in  no  way  differ  from  mere  absence  of  power  and,  even  calling  it  movement, 
it  would  still  be  the  movement  of  a  life  not  all- varied  but  indiscriminate  ; 
now  it  is  of  necessity  that  life  be  all-embracing,  covering  all  the  realms, 
and  that  nothing  fail  of  life.  Intellectual-Principle  therefore  must  move 
in  every  direction  upon  all,  or  more  precisely  must  ever  have  so  moved. 

A  simplex  moving  retains  its  character  ;  either  there  is  no  change, 
movement  has  been  null,  or  if  there  has  been  advance  it  still  remains 
a  simplex  and  at  once  there  is  a  permanent  duality  :  if  the  one  member 


VI.  7-  13] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


179 


of  this  duality  is  identical  with  the  other,  then  it  is  still  as  it  was,  there 
has  been  no  advance  ;  if  one  member  differs  from  the  other,  it  has 
advanced  with  differentiation,  and,  out  of  a  certain  identity  and  difference, 
it  has  produced  a  third  unity.  This  production,  based  on  Identity  and 
Difference,  must  be  in  its  nature  identical  and  different ;  it  will  be  not 
some  particular  different  thing  but  Collective  Difference,  as  its  Identity 
is  Collective  Identity. 

Being,  thus,  at  once  Collective  Identity  and  Collective  Difference, 
Intellectual-Principle  must  reach  over  all  different  things  ;  its  very 
nature  then  is  to  modify  itself  into  a  universe.  If  the  realm  of  different 
things  existed  before  it,  these  different  things  must  have  modified  it 
from  the  beginning  ;  if  they  did  not,  this  Intellectual-Principle  produced 
all,  or  rather  was  all. 

Beings  could  not  exist  save  by  the  activity  of  Intellectual-Principle  ; 
wandering  down  every  way  it  produces  thing  after  thing,  but  wandering 
always  within  itself  in  such  self-bound  wandering  as  authentic  Intellect 
may  know  ;  this  wandering  permitted  to  its  nature  is  among  real  beings 
which  keep  pace  with  its  movement ;  but  it  is  always  itself ;  this  is 
a  stationary  wandering,  a  wandering  within  the  Meadow  of  Truth  from 
which  it  does  not  stray. 

It  holds  and  covers  the  universe  which  it  has  made  the  space,  so 
to  speak,  of  its  movement,  itself  being  also  that  universe  which  is  space 
to  it.  And  this  Meadow  of  Truth  is  varied  so  that  movement  through 
it  may  be  possible  ;  suppose  it  not  always  and  everywhere  varied,  the 
failing  of  diversity  is  a  failure  of  movement  ;  failure  in  movement  would 
mean  a  failing  of  the  Intellectual  Act ;  halting,  it  has  ceased  to  exercise 
its  Intellectual  Act ;  this  ceasing,  it  ceases  to  be. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  is  the  Intellectual  Act ;  its  movement  is 
complete,  filling  Being  complete  ;  And  the  entire  of  Being  is  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Act  entire,  comprehending  all  life  and  the  unfailing  succession 
of  things.  Because  this  Principle  contains  Identity  and  Difference  its 
division  is  ceaselessly  bringing  the  different  things  to  light.  Its  entire 
movement  is  through  life  and  among  living  things.  To  a  traveller  over 
land  all  is  earth  but  earth  abounding  in  difference  :  so  in  this  journey 


i8o 


PLOTINUS 


the  life  through  which  Intellectual-Principle  passes  is  one  life  but,  in 
its  ceaseless  changing,  a  varied  life. 

Throughout  this  endless  variation  it  maintains  the  one  course 
because  it  is  not,  itself,  subject  to  change  but  on  the  contrary  is  present 
as  identical  and  unvarying  Being  to  the  rest  of  things.  For  if  there  be 
no  such  principle  of  unchanging  identity  to  things,  all  is  dead,  activity 
and  actuality  exist  nowhere.  These  “  other  things  ”  through  which  it 
passes  are  also  Intellectual-Principle  itself ;  otherwise  it  is  not  the  all- 
comprehending  principle  :  if  it  is  to  be  itself,  it  must  be  all-embracing  ; 
failing  that,  it  is  not  itself.  If  it  is  complete  in  itself,  complete  because 
all-embracing,  and  there  is  nothing  which  does  not  find  place  in  this 
total,  then  there  can  be  nothing  belonging  to  it  which  is  not  different  ; 
only  by  difference  can  there  be  such  co-operation  towards  a  total.  If 
it  knew  no  otherness  but  was  pure  identity  its  essential  Being  would  be 
the  less  for  that  failure  to  fulfil  the  specific  nature  which  its  completion 
requires. 

I4* 

On  the  nature  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  we  get  light  from  its 
manifestations  ;  they  show  that  it  demands  such  diversity  as  is  com¬ 
patible  with  its  being  a  monad.  Take  what  principle  you  will,  that 
of  plant  or  animal :  if  this  principle  were  a  pure  unity  and  not  a  speci¬ 
fically  varied  thing,  it  could  not  so  serve  as  principle  ;  its  product  would 
be  Matter,  the  principle  not  having  taken  all  those  forms  necessary  if 
Matter  is  to  be  permeated  and  utterly  transformed.  A  face  is  not  one 
mass  ;  there  are  nose  and  eyes  ;  and  the  nose  is  not  a  unity  but  has  the 
differences  which  make  it  a  nose  ;  as  bare  unity  it  would  be  mere  mass. 

There  is  infinity  in  Intellectual-Principle  since,  of  its  very  nature, 
it  is  a  multiple  unity,  not  with  the  unity  of  a  house  but  with  that  of  a 
Reason-Principle,  multiple  in  itself  :  in  the  one  Intellectual  design  it 
includes  within  itself,  as  it  were  in  outline,  all  the  outlines,  all  the  pat¬ 
terns.  All  is  within  it,  all  the  powers  and  intellections  ;  the  division 
is  not  determined  by  a  boundary  but  goes  ever  inward ;  this  content 
is  held  as  the  living  universe  holds  the  natural  forms  of  the  living  creatures 


VI.  7.  15]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  181 

in  it  from  the  greatest  to  the  least,  down  even  to  the  minutest  powers 
where  there  is  a  halt  at  the  individual  form.  The  discrimination  is  not 
of  items  huddled  within  a  sort  of  unity ;  this  is  what  is  known  as  the 
Universal  Sympathy,  not  of  course  the  sympathy  known  here  which 
is  a  copy  and  prevails  amongst  things  in  separation  ;  that  authentic 
Sympathy  consists  in  all  being  a  unity  and  never  discriminate. 


15- 

That  LLe,  the  various,  the  all-including,  the  primal  and  one,  who 
can  consider  it  without  longing  to  be  of  it,  disdaining  all  the  other  ? 

All  other  life  is  darkness,  petty  and  dim  and  poor ;  it  is  unclean 
and  polluting  the  clean  for  if  you  do  but  look  upon  it  you  no  longer  see 
nor  li\  e  this  life  which  includes  all  living,  in  which  there  is  nothing  that 
does  not  live  and  live  in  a  life  of  purity  void  of  all  that  is  ill.  For  evil 
is  here  where  life  is  in  copy  and  Intellect  in  copy  ;  There  is  the  archetype, 
that  which  is  good  in  the  very  Idea— we  read— as  holding  The  Good  in 
the  pure  Idea.  That  Archetype  is  good  ;  Intellectual-Principle  is  good 
as  holding  its  life  by  contemplation  of  the  archetype  ;  and  it  sees  also 
as  good  the  objects  of  its  contemplation  because  it  holds  them  in  its 
act  of  contemplating  the  Principle  of  Good.  But  these  objects  come 
to  it  not  as  they  are  There  but  in  accord  with  its  own  condition,  for  it 
is  their  source  ;  they  spring  thence  to  be  here,  and  Intellectual-Principle 
it  is  that  has  produced  them  by  its  vision  There.  In  the  very  law,  never, 
looking  to  That,  could  it  fail  of  Intellectual  Act ;  never,  on  the  other 
hand,  could  it  produce  wiiat  is  There  ;  of  itself  it  could  not  produce  ; 
Thence  it  must  draw  its  power  to  bring  forth,  to  teem  with  offspring 
of  itself ;  from  the  Good  it  takes  what  itself  did  not  possess.  From 
that  Unity  came  multiplicity  to  Intellectual-Principle;  it  could  not 
sustain  the  power  poured  upon  it  and  therefore  broke  it  up ;  it  turned 
that  one  power  into  variety  so  as  to  carry  it  piecemeal. 

Ah  its  production,  effected  in  the  power  of  The  Good  contains 
goodness ;  it  is  good,  itself,  since  it  is  constituted  by  these  things  of 
good  ;  it  is  Good  made  diverse.  It  might  be  likened  to  a  living  sphere 
teeming  with  variety,  to  a  globe  of  faces  radiant  with  faces  all  living, 


i82 


PLOTINUS 


to  a  unity  of  souls,  all  the  pure  souls,  not  the  faulty  but  the  perfect, 
with  Intellect  enthroned  over  all  so  that  the  place  entire  glows  with 
Intellectual  splendour. 

But  this  would  be  to  see  it  from  without,  one  thing  seeing  another  ; 
the  true  way  is  to  become  Intellectual-Principle  and  be,  our  very  selves, 
what  we  are  to  see. 

16. 

But  even  there  we  are  not  to  remain  always,  in  that  beauty  of  the 
multiple  ;  we  must  make  haste  yet  higher,  above  this  heaven  of  ours 
and  even  that ;  leaving  all  else  aside  we  ask  in  awe  Who  produced  that 
realm  and  how.  Everything  There  is  a  single  Idea  in  an  individual 
impression  and,  informed  by  The  Good,  possesses  the  universal  good 
transcendent  over  all.  Each  possessing  that  Being  above,  possesses 
also  the  total  Living-Form  in  virtue  of  that  transcendent  life,  possesses, 
no  doubt,  much  else  as  well. 

But  what  is  the  Nature  of  this  Transcendent  in  view  of  which  and 
by  way  of  which  the  Ideas  are  good  ? 

The  best  way  of  putting  the  question  is  to  ask  whether  when  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  looked  towards  The  Good  it  had  Intellection  of  that 
unity  as  a  multiplicity  and,  itself  a  unity,  applied  its  Act  by  breaking 
into  parts  what  it  was  too  feeble  to  know  as  a  whole. 

No :  that  would  not  be  Intellection  looking  upon  the  Good ;  it 
would  be  a  looking  void  of  Intellection.  We  must  think  of  it  not  as 
looking  but  as  living ;  dependent  upon  That,  it  kept  itself  turned  Thither  ; 
all  the  tendance  taking  place  There  and  upon  That  must  be  a  movement 
teeming  with  life  and  must  so  fill  the  looking  Principle  ;  there  is  no 
longer  bare  Act,  there  is  a  filling  to  saturation.  Forthwith  Intellectual- 
Principle  becomes  all  things,  knows  that  fact  in  virtue  of  its  self-knowing 
and  at  once  becomes  Intellectual-Principle,  filled  so  as  to  hold  within 
itself  that  object  of  its  vision,  seeing  all  by  the  light  from  the  Giver  and 
bearing  that  Giver  with  it. 

In  this  way  the  Supreme  may  be  understood  to  be  the  cause  at  once 
of  essential  reality  and  of  the  knowing  of  reality.  The  sun,  cause  of  the 


VI.  7.  1 7]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  183 

existence  of  sense-things  and  of  their  being  seen,  is  indirectly  the  cause 
of  sight,  without  being  either  the  faculty  or  the  object  :  similarly  this 
Principle,  The  Good,  cause  of  Being  and  Intellectual-Principle,  is  a  light 
appropriate  to  what  is  to  be  seen  There  and  to  their  seer ;  neither  the 
Beings  nor  the  Intellectual-Principle,  it  is  their  source  and  by  the  light 
it  sheds  upon  both  makes  them  objects  of  Intellection.  This  filling 
procures  the  existence  ;  after  the  filling  the  being  ;  the  existence  achieved, 
the  seeing  followed  :  the  beginning  is  that  state  of  not  yet  having  been 
filled,  though  there  is,  also,  the  beginning  which  means  that  the  Filling 
Principle  was  outside  and  by  that  act  of  filling  gave  shape  to  the  filled. 

17- 

But  in  what  mode  are  these  secondaries,  and  Intellectual-Principle 
itself,  within  the  First  ?  They  are  not  in  the  Filling  Principle  ;  they 
are  not  in  the  filled  since  before  that  moment  it  did  not  contain  them. 

Giving  need  not  comport  possessing ;  in  this  order  we  are  to  think 
of  a  giver  as  a  greater  and  of  a  gift  as  a  lower  ;  this  is  the  meaning  of 
origin  among  real  Beings.  First  there  must  be  an  actualised  thing  ; 
its  laters  must  be  potentially  their  own  priors  ;  a  first  must  transcend 
its  derivatives  ;  the  giver  transcends  the  given,  as  a  superior.  If  there¬ 
fore  there  is  a  prior  to  actuality,  that  prior  transcends  Activity  and  so 
transcends  Life.  Our  sphere  containing  life,  there  is  a  Giver  of 
Life,  a  principle  of  greater  good,  of  greater  worth  than  Life  ;  this  possessed 
Life  and  had  no  need  to  look  for  it  to  any  giver  in  possession  of  Life’s 
variety. 

But  the  Life  was  a  vestige  of  that  Primal  not  a  life  lived  by  it ; 
Life,  then,  as  it  looked  towards  That  was  undetermined  ;  having  looked 
it  had  determination  though  That  had  none.  Life  looks  to  unity  and 
is  determined  by  it,  taking  bound,  limit,  form.  But  this  form  is  in  the 
shaped,  the  shaper  had  none  ;  the  limit  was  not  external  as  something 
drawn  about  a  magnitude  ;  the  limit  was  that  of  the  multiplicity  of 
the  Life  1  here,  limitless  itself  as  radiated  from  its  great  Prior ;  the 
Life  itself  was  not  that  of  some  determined  being,  or  it  would  be  nc 
more  than  the  life  of  an  individual.  Yet  it  is  defined ;  it  must  then 


PLOTINUS 


184 

have  been  defined  as  the  Life  of  a  unity  including  multiplicity  ;  certainly 
too  each  item  of  the  multiplicity  is  determined,  determined  as  multiple 
by  the  multiplicity  of  Life  but  as  a  unity  by  the  fact  of  limit. 

As  what,  then,  is  its  unity  determined  ? 

As  Intellectual-Principle  :  determined  Life  is  Intellectual-Principle. 
And  the  multiplicity  ? 

As  the  multiplicity  of  Intellectual-Principles  :  all  its  multiplicity 
resolves  itself  into  Intellectual-Principles — on  the  one  hand  the  collective 
Principle,  on  the  other  the  particular  Principles. 

But  does  this  collective  Intellectual-Principle  include  each  of  the 
particular  Principles  as  identical  with  itself  ? 

No  :  it  would  be  thus  the  container  of  only  the  one  thing  ;  since 
there  are  many  Intellectual-Principles  within  the  collective,  there  must 
be  differentiation. 

Once  more,  how  does  the  particular  Intellect  come  to  this  differen¬ 
tiation  ? 

It  takes  its  characteristic  difference  by  becoming  entirely  a  unity 
within  the  collective  whose  totality  could  not  be  identical  with  any 
particular. 

Thus  the  Life  in  the  Supreme  was  the  collectivity  of  power ;  the 
vision  taking  place  There  was  the  potentiality  of  all ;  Intellectual-Prin¬ 
ciple,  thus  arising,  is  manifested  as  this  universe  of  Being.  It  stands 
over  the  Beings  not  as  itself  requiring  base  but  that  it  may  serve  as 
base  to  the  Form  of  the  Firsts,  the  Formless  Form.  And  it  takes  position 
towards  the  soul,  becoming  a  light  to  the  soul  as  itself  finds  its  light 
in  the  First ;  whenever  Intellectual-Principle  becomes  the  determinant 
of  soul  it  shapes  it  into  Reasoning  Soul,  by  communicating  a  trace  of 
what  itself  has  come  to  possess. 

Thus  Intellectual-Principle  is  a  vestige  of  the  Supreme  ;  but  since 
the  vestige  is  a  Form  going  out  into  extension,  into  plurality,  that  Prior, 
as  the  source  of  Form,  must  be  itself  without  shape  and  Form  :  if  the 
Prior  were  a  Form,  the  Intellectual-Principle  itself  could  be  only  a  Reason- 
Principle.  It  was  necessary  that  The  First  be  utterly  without  multi¬ 
plicity,  for  otherwise  it  must  be  again  referred  to  a  prior. 


i«5 


VI.  7-  IS]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 

18. 

But  in  what  way  is  the  content  of  Intellectual-Principle  participant 
in  good  ?  Is  it  because  each  member  of  it  is  an  Idea  or  because  of  their 
beauty  or  how  ? 

Anything  coming  from  The  Good  carries  the  image  and  type  belong¬ 
ing  to  that  original  or  deriving  from  it,  as  anything  going  back  to  warmth 
or  sweetness  carries  the  memory  of  those  originals  :  Life  entered  into 
Intellectual-Principle  from  The  Supreme,  for  its  origin  is  in  the  Activity 
streaming  Thence  ;  Intellectual-Principle  springs  from  the  Supreme,  and 
with  it  the  beauty  of  the  Ideas  ;  at  once  all  these,  Life,  Intellectual- 
Principle,  Idea,  must  inevitably  have  goodness. 

But  what  is  the  common  element  in  them  ?  Derivation  from  the 
First  is  not  enough  to  procure  identical  quality  ;  there  must  be  some 
element  held  in  common  by  the  things  derived  :  one  source  may  produce 
many  differing  things  as  also  one  outgoing  thing  may  take  difference 
in  various  recipients  :  what  enters  into  the  First  Act  is  different  from 
what  that  Act  transmits  and  there  is  difference,  again,  in  the  effect  here. 
Nonetheless  every  item  may  be  good  in  a  degree  of  its  own.  To  what, 
then,  is  the  highest  degree  due  ? 

But  first  we  must  ask  wrhether  Life  is  a  good,  bare  Life,  or 
only  the  Life  streaming  Thence,  very  different  from  the  Life 
known  here  ?  Once  more,  then,  what  constitutes  the  goodness  of 
Life? 

The  Life  of  The  Good,  or  rather  not  its  Life  but  that  given  forth 
from  it. 

But  if  in  that  higher  Life  there  must  be  something  from  That, 
something  which  is  the  Authentic  Life,  we  must  admit  that  since  nothing 
worthless  can  come  Thence  Life  in  itself  is  good  ;  so  too  we  must  admit 
in  the  case  of  Authentic  Intellectual-Principle  that  its  Life  because  good 
derives  from  that  First ;  thus  it  becomes  clear  that  every  Idea  is  good 
and  informed  by  the  Good.  The  Ideas  must  have  something  of  good 
whether  as  a  common  property  or  as  a  distinct  attribution  or  as  held 
in  some  distinct  measure. 

Thus  it  is  established  that  the  particular  Idea  contains  in  its  essence 

2B 


i86 


PLOTINUS 


something  of  good  and  thereby  becomes  a  good  thing  ;  for  Life  we 
found  to  be  good  not  in  the  bare  being  but  in  its  derivation  from  the 
Authentic,  the  Supreme  whence  it  sprung  :  and  the  same  is  true  of 
Intellectual-Principle  :  we  are  forced  therefore  to  admit  a  certain  identity. 

When,  with  all  their  differences,  things  may  be  affirmed  to  have  a 
measure  of  identity,  the  matter  of  the  identity  may  very  well  be  estab¬ 
lished  in  their  very  essence  and  yet  be  mentally  abstracted  ;  thus  life 
in  man  or  horse  yields  the  notion  of  animal ;  from  wTater  or  fire  we  may 
get  that  of  warmth  ;  the  first  case  is  a  definition  of  Kind,  the  other 
two  cite  qualities,  primary  and  secondary  respectively.  Both  or  one 
part  of  Intellect,  then,  would  be  called  by  the  one  term  good. 

Is  The  Good,  then,  inherent  in  the  Ideas  essentially  ?  Each  of  them 
is  good  but  the  goodness  is  not  that  of  the  Unity-Good.  How,  then, 
is  it  present  ? 

By  the  mode  of  parts. 

But  The  Good  is  without  parts  ? 

No  doubt  The  Good  is  a  unity  ;  but  here  it  has  become  particularised. 
The  First  Activity  is  good  and  anything  determined  in  accord  with  it 
is  good  as  also  is  any  resultant.  There  is  the  good  that  is  good  by  origin 
in  The  First,  the  good  that  is  an  ordered  system  derived  from  that  earlier, 
and  the  good  that  is  in  the  actualisation  (in  the  thing  participant). 
Derived,  then,  not  identical — like  the  speech  and  walk  and  other  charac¬ 
teristics  of  one  man,  each  playing  its  due  part. 

Here,  it  is  obvious,  goodness  depends  upon  order,  rhythm,  but 
what  equivalent  exists  There  ? 

We  might  answer  that  in  the  case  of  the  sense-order,  too,  the  good 
is  imposed  since  the  ordering  is  of  things  different  from  the  Orderer 
but  that  There  the  very  things  are  good. 

But  why  are  they  thus  good  in  themselves  ?  We  cannot  be  content 
with  the  conviction  of  their  goodness  on  the  ground  of  their  origin  in 
that  realm :  we  do  not  deny  that  things  deriving  Thence  are  good  but 
our  subject  demands  that  we  discover  the  mode  by  which  they  come  to 
possess  that  goodness. 


VI.  7-  20] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


187 


19. 

Are  we  to  rest  all  on  pursuit  and  on  the  soul  ?  Is  it  enough  to  put 
faith  in  the  soul’s  choice  and  call  that  good  which  the  soul  pursues, 
never  asking  ourselves  the  motive  of  its  choice  ?  We  marshal  demon¬ 
stration  as  to  the  nature  of  everything  else  ;  is  the  good  to  be  dismissed 
as  choice  ? 

Several  absurdities  would  be  entailed.  The  good  becomes  a  mere 
attribute  of  things  ;  objects  of  pursuit  are  many  and  different  so  that 
mere  choice  gives  no  assurance  that  the  thing  chosen  is  the  best ;  in 
fact  we  cannot  know  the  best  until  we  know  the  good. 

Are  we  to  determine  the  good  by  the  respective  values  of 
things  ? 

This  is  to  make  Idea  and  Reason-Principle  the  test :  all  very  well ; 
but  arrived  at  these,  what  explanation  have  we  to  give  as  to  why 
Idea  and  Reason-Principle  themselves  are  good  ?  In  the  lower  we  recog¬ 
nise  goodness — in  its  less  perfect  form — by  comparison  with  what  is 
poorer  still ;  we  are  without  a  standard  There  where  no  evil  exists,  the 
Bests  holding  the  field,  alone.  Reason  demands  to  know  what  con¬ 
stitutes  goodness  ;  those  principles  are  good  in  their  own  nature  and 
we  are  left  in  perplexity  because  cause  and  fact  are  identical :  and  even 
though  we  should  state  a  cause,  the  doubt  still  remains  until  our  reason 
claims  its  rights  There.  But  we  need  not  abandon  the  search  ;  another 
path  may  lead  to  the  light. 


20. 

Since  we  are  not  entitled  to  make  desire  the  test  by  which  to  decide 
on  the  nature  and  quality  of  the  good,  we  may  perhaps  have  recourse 
to  judgement. 

We  would  apply  the  opposition  of  things — order,  disorder  ;  symmetry, 
irregularity  ;  health,  illness  ;  form,  shapelessness  ;  real-being,  decay  : 
in  a  word  continuity  against  dissolution.  The  first  in  each  pair,  no  one 
could  doubt,  belong  to  the  concept  of  good  and  therefore  whatever  tends 
to  produce  them  must  be  ranged  on  the  good  side. 

Thus  virtue  and  Intellectual-Principle  and  life  and  soul — reasoning 


i88 


PLOTINUS 


soul,  at  least — belong  to  the  idea  of  good  and  so  therefore  does  all  that 
a  reasoned  life  aims  at. 

Why  not  halt,  then — it  will  be  asked — at  Intellectual-Principle 
and  make  that  The  Good  ?  Soul  and  life  are  traces  of  Intellectual- 
Principle  ;  that  principle  is  the  Term  of  Soul  which  on  judgement 
sets  itself  towards  Intellectual-Principle,  pronouncing  right  preferable 
to  wrong  and  virtue  in  every  form  to  vice,  and  thus  ranking  by  its 
choosing. 

The  soul  aiming  only  at  that  Principle  would  need  a  further  lesson¬ 
ing  ;  it  must  be  taught  that  Intellectual-Principle  is  not  the  ultimate, 
that  not  all  things  look  to  that  while  all  do  look  to  the  good.  Not  all 
that  is  outside  of  Intellectual-Principle  seeks  to  attain  it ;  what  has 
attained  it  does  not  halt  there  but  looks  still  towards  good.  Besides, 
Intellectual-Principle  is  sought  upon  motives  of  reasoning,  the  good 
before  all  reason.  And  in  any  striving  towards  life  and  continuity  of 
existence  and  activity,  the  object  is  aimed  at  not  as  Intellectual-Principle 
but  as  good,  as  rising  from  good  and  leading  to  it  :  life  itself  is  desirable 
only  in  view  of  good. 


21. 

Now  what  in  all  these  objects  of  desire  is  the  fundamental  making 
them  good  ? 

We  must  be  bold  : — 

Intellectual-Principle  and  that  life  are  of  the  order  of  good  and 
hold  their  desirability,  even  they,  in  virtue  of  belonging  to  that  order  ; 
they  have  their  goodness,  I  mean,  because  Life  is  an  Activity  in  The  Good, 
— or  rather,  streaming  from  The  Good — while  Intellectual-Principle  is 
an  Activity  already  defined  Therein  ;  both  are  of  radiant  beauty  and, 
because  they  come  Thence  and  lead  Thither,  they  are  sought  after  by 
the  soul — sought,  that  is,  as  things  congenial  though  not  veritably  good 
while  yet,  as  belonging  to  that  order  not  to  be  rejected ;  the  related 
if  not  good  is  shunned  in  spite  of  that  relationship  and  even  remote 
and  ignobler  things  may  at  times  prove  attractive. 

The  intense  love  called  forth  by  Life  and  Intellectual-Principle 


vi.  7-  22]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  189 

is  due  not  to  what  they  are  but  to  the  consideration  of  their  nature  as 
something  apart,  received  from  above  themselves. 

Material  forms  containing  light  incorporated  in  them  need  still  a 
light  apart  from  them  that  their  own  light  may  be  manifest ;  just  so  the 
Beings  of  that  sphere,  all  lightsome,  need  another  and  a  lordlier  light 
or  even  they  would  not  be  visible  to  themselves  and  beyond. 


22. 

That  light  known,  then  indeed  we  are  stirred  towards  those  Beings 
in  longing  and  rejoicing  over  the  radiance  about  them,  just  as  earthly 
love  is  not  for  the  material  form  but  for  the  Beauty  manifested  upon  it. 
Every  one  of  those  Beings  exists  for  itself  but  becomes  an  object  of 
desire  by  the  colour  cast  upon  it  from  The  Good,  source  of  those  graces 
and  of  the  love  they  evoke.  The  soul  taking  that  outflow  from  the 
divine  is  stirred  ,  seized  with  a  Bacchic  passion,  goaded  by  these  goads, 
it  becomes  Love.  Before  that,  even  Intellectual-Principle  with  all  its 
loveliness  did  not  stir  the  soul ;  for  that  beauty  is  dead  until  it  take 
the  light  of  The  Good,  and  the  soul  lies  supine,  cold  to  all,  unquickened 
even  to  Intellectual-Principle  there  before  it.  But  when  there  enters 
into  it  a  glow  from  the  divine,  it  gathers  strength,  awakens,  spreads 
true  wings,  and  however  urged  by  its  nearer  environing,  speeds  its  buoyant 
way  elsewhere,  to  something  greater  to  its  memory :  so  long  as  there 
exists  anything  loftier  than  the  near,  its  very  nature  bears  it  upwards, 
lifted  by  the  giver  of  that  love.  Beyond  Intellectual-Principle  it  passes 
but  beyond  The  Good  it  cannot,  for  nothing  stands  above  That.  Let  it 
remain  in  Intellectual-Principle  and  it  sees  the  lovely  and  august,  but 
it  is  not  there  possessed  of  all  it  sought ;  the  face  it  sees  is  beautiful  no 
doubt  but  not  of  power  to  hold  its  gaze  because  lacking  in  the  radiant 
grace  which  is  the  bloom  upon  beauty. 

Even  here  we  have  to  recognise  that  beauty  is  that  which  irradiates 
symmetry  rather  than  symmetry  itself  and  is  that  which  truly  calls  out 
our  love. 

Why  else  is  there  more  of  the  glory  of  beauty  upon  the  living  and 
only  some  faint  trace  of  it  upon  the  dead  though  the  face  yet  retains  all 


190 


PLOTINUS 


its  fulness  and  symmetry?  Why  are  the  most  living  portraits  the  most 
beautiful,  even  though  the  others  happen  to  be  more  symmetric  ?  Why 
is  the  living  ugly  more  attractive  than  the  sculptured  handsome  ?  It 
is  that  the  one  is  more  nearly  what  we  are  looking  for,  and  this  because 
there  is  soul  there,  because  there  is  more  of  the  Idea  of  The  Good, 
because  there  is  some  glow  of  the  light  of  The  Good  and  this  illumination 
awakens  and  lifts  the  soul  and  all  that  goes  with  it  so  that  the  whole 
man  is  won  over  to  goodness,  and  in  the  fullest  measure  stirred  to  life. 

23- 

That  which  soul  must  quest,  that  which  sheds  its  light  upon  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle,  leaving  its  mark  wherever  it  falls,  surely  we  need  net 
wonder  that  it  be  of  power  to  draw  to  itself,  calling  back  from  every 
wandering  to  rest  before  it.  From  it  came  all  and  so  there  is  nothing 
mightier  ;  all  is  feeble  before  it.  Of  all  things  the  best,  must  it  not  be 
The  Good  ?  If  by  The  Good  we  mean  the  principle  most  wholly  self- 
sufficing,  utterly  without  need  of  any  other,  what  can  it  be  but  this  ? 
Before  all  the  rest  it  was  what  it  was,  when  evil  had  yet  no  place  in 
things. 

If  evil  is  a  Later,  there  found  where  there  is  no  trace  of  This — 
among  the  very  ultimates,  so  that  on  the  downward  side  evil  has  no 
beyond — then  to  This  evil  stands  full  contrary  with  no  linking  inter¬ 
mediate  :  This  therefore  is  The  Good :  either  good  there  is  none,  or  if 
there  must  be,  This  and  no  other  is  it. 

And  to  deny  the  good  would  be  to  deny  evil  also ;  there  can  then  be 
no  difference  in  objects  coming  up  for  choice  :  but  that  is  untenable. 

To  This  looks  all  else  that  passes  for  good  ;  This,  to  nothing. 

What  then  does  it  effect  out  of  its  greatness  ? 

It  has  produced  Intellectual-Principle,  it  has  produced  Life,  the 
souls  which  Intellectual-Principle  sends  forth  and  everything  else  that 
partakes  of  Reason,  of  Intellectual-Principle  or  of  Life.  Source  and  spring 
of  so  much,  how  describe  its  goodness  and  greatness  ? 

But  what  does  it  effect  now  ? 

Even  now  it  is  preserver  of  what  it  produced  ;  by  it  the  Intellectual 


VI.  7.  24]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  191 

Beings  have  their  Intellection  and  the  living  their  life  ;  it  breathes 
Intellect  in,  breathes  Life  in  and,  where  life  is  impossible,  existence. 

24. 

But  ourselves — how  does  it  touch  us  ? 

We  may  recall  what  we  have  said  of  the  nature  of  the  light  shining 
from  it  into  Intellectual-Principle  and  so  by  participation  into  the  soul. 
But  for  the  moment  let  us  leave  that  aside  and  put  another  question  : — 

Does  The  Good  hold  that  nature  and  name  because  some  outside  thing 
finds  it  desirable  ?  May  we  put  it  that  a  thing  desirable  to  one  is  good  to  that 
one  and  that  what  is  desirable  to  all  is  to  be  recognised  as  The  Good  ? 

No  doubt  this  universal  questing  would  make  the  goodness  evident 
but  still  there  must  be  in  the  nature  something  to  earn  that  name. 

Further,  is  the  questing  determined  by  the  hope  of  some  acquisition 
or  by  sheer  delight  ?  If  there  is  acquisition,  what  is  it  ?  If  it  is  a  matter 
of  delight,  why  here  rather  than  in  something  else  ? 

The  question  comes  to  this  : — Is  goodness  in  the  appropriate  or 
in  something  apart,  and  is  The  Good  good  as  regards  itself  also  or  good 
only  as  possessed  ? 

Any  good  is  such,  necessarily,  not  for  itself  but  for  something  outside. 

But  to  what  nature  is  This  good  ?  There  is  a  nature  to  which  nothing 
is  good. 

And  we  must  not  overlook  what  some  surly  critic  will  surely  bring 
up  against  us  : — 

What’s  all  this  :  you  scatter  praises  here,  there  and  everywhere  : 
Life  is  good,  Intellectual-Principle  is  good  :  and  yet  The  Good  is  above 
them  ;  how  then  can  Intellectual-Principle  itself  be  good  ?  Or  what 
do  we  gain  by  seeing  the  Ideas  themselves  if  we  see  only  a  particular 
Idea  and  nothing  else  (nothing  “  substantial  ”)  ?  If  we  are  happy  here 
we  may  be  deceived  into  thinking  life  a  good  when  it  is  merely  pleasant ; 
but  suppose  our  lot  unhappy,  why  should  we  speak  of  good  ?  Is  mere 
personal  existence  good  ?  What  profit  is  there  in  it  ?  What  is  the  advan¬ 
tage  in  existence  over  utter  non-existence — unless  goodness  is  to  be 
founded  upon  our  love  of  self  ?  It  is  the  deception  rooted  in  the  nature 


192 


PLOTINUS 


of  things  and  our  dread  of  dissolution  that  lead  to  all  the  “  goods  ” 
of  your  positing. 

25- 

It  is  in  view,  probably,  of  this  difficulty  that  Plato  in  the  Philebus 
makes  pleasure  an  element  in  the  Term  ;  the  good  is  not  defined  as  a 
simplex  or  set  in  Intellectual-Principle  alone  ;  while  he  rightly  refrains 
from  identifying  the  good  with  the  pleasant,  yet  he  does  not  allow  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle,  foreign  to  pleasure,  to  be  The  Good,  since  he  sees  no 
attractive  power  in  it.  He  may  also  have  had  in  mind  that  the  good,  to 
answer  to  its  name,  must  be  a  thing  of  delight  and  that  an  object  of 
pursuit  must  at  least  hold  some  pleasure  for  those  that  acquire  and  possess 
it,  so  that  where  there  is  no  joy  the  good  too  is  absent,  further  that 
pleasure,  implying  pursuit,  cannot  pertain  to  the  First  and  that  therefore 
good  cannot. 

All  this  was  very  well ;  there  the  enquiry  was  not  as  to  the  Primal 
Good  but  as  to  ours  ;  the  good  dealt  with  in  that  passage  pertains  to 
very  different  beings  and  therefore  is  a  different  good ;  it  is  a  good 
falling  short  of  that  higher  ;  it  is  a  mingled  thing  ;  we  are  to  understand 
that  good  does  not  hold  place  in  the  One  and  Alone  whose  being  is  too 
great  and  different  for  that. 

The  good  must,  no  doubt,  be  a  thing  pursued,  not,  however,  good 
because  it  is  pursued  but  pursued  because  it  is  good. 

The  solution,  it  would  seem,  lies  in  priority : — 

To  the  lowest  of  things  the  good  is  its  immediate  higher  ;  each 
step  represents  the  good  to  what  stands  lower  so  long  as  the  movement 
does  not  tend  awry  but  advances  continuously  towards  the  superior  :  thus 
there  is  a  halt  at  the  Ultimate,  beyond  which  no  ascent  is  possible  : 
that  is  the  First  Good,  the  authentic,  the  supremely  sovran,  the  source 
of  good  to  the  rest  of  things. 

Matter  would  have  Forming-Idea  for  its  good,  since  were  it  conscious 
it  would  welcome  that ;  body  would  look  to  soul,  without  which  it  could 
not  be  or  endure  ;  soul  must  look  to  virtue  ;  still  higher  stands  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  ;  above  that  again  is  the  principle  we  call  the  Primal. 


VI.  7-  27j  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  193 

Each  of  these  progressive  priors  must  have  act  upon  those  minors  to 
which  they  are,  respectively,  the  good  :  some  will  confer  order  and  place, 
others  life,  others  wisdom  and  the  good  life  :  Intellectual-Principle 
will  draw  upon  the  Authentic  Good  which  we  hold  to  be  coterminous 
with  it,  both  as  being  an  Activity  put  forth  from  it  and  as  even  now 
taking  light  from  it.  This  good  we  will  define  later. 

26. 

Any  conscious  being  if  the  good  come  to  him  will  know  the  good 
and  affirm  his  possession  of  it. 

But  what  if  one  be  deceived  ? 

In  that  case  there  must  be  some  resemblance  to  account  for  the 
error  :  the  good  will  be  the  original  which  the  delusion  counterfeited 
and  whenever  the  true  presents  itself  we  turn  from  the  spurious. 

All  the  striving,  all  the  pain,  show  that  to  everything  something 
is  a  good  :  the  lifeless  finds  its  share  in  something  outside  itself ;  where 
there  is  life  the  longing  for  good  sets  up  pursuit  ;  the  very  dead  are 
cared  for  and  mourned  for  by  the  living ;  the  living  plan  for  their  own 
good.  The  witness  of  attainment  is  betterment,  cleaving  to  state,  satis¬ 
faction,  settlement,  suspension  of  pursuit.  Here  pleasure  shows  itself 
inadequate  :  its  choice  does  not  hold  ;  repeated,  it  is  no  longer  the  same  ; 
it  demands  endless  novelty.  The  good,  worthy  of  the  name,  can  be  no 
such  tasting  of  the  casual ;  anyone  that  takes  this  kind  of  thing  for  the 
good  goes  empty,  carrying  away  nothing  but  an  emotion  which  the 
good  might  have  produced.  No  one  could  be  content  to  take  his  pleasure 
thus  in  an  emotion  over  a  thing  not  possessed  any  more  than  over  a 
child  not  there  ;  I  cannot  think  that  those  setting  their  good  in  bodily 
satisfactions  find  table-pleasure  without  the  meal  or  love-pleasure  with¬ 
out  intercourse  with  their  chosen  or  any  pleasure  where  nothing  is  done. 

27. 

But  what  is  that  whose  entry  supplies  every  such  need  ? 

Some  Idea,  we  maintain.  There  is  a  Form  to  which  Matter  aspires  : 
to  soul  moral  excellence  is  this  Form. 


2C 


194 


PLOTINUS 


But  is  this  Form  a  good  to  the  thing  as  being  apt  to  it,  does  the 
striving  aim  at  the  apt  ? 

No  :  the  aptest  would  be  the  most  resemblant  to  the  thing  itself, 
but  that,  however  sought  and  welcomed,  does  not  suffice  for  the  good  : 
the  good  must  be  something  more  :  to  be  a  good  to  another  a  thing 
must  have  something  beyond  aptness  ;  that  only  can  be  adopted  as  the 
good  which  represents  the  apt  in  its  better  form  and  is  best  to  what 
is  best  in  the  quester’s  self,  to  that  which  the  quester  tends  potentially 
to  be. 

A  thing  is  potentially  that  to  which  its  nature  looks  ;  this,  obviously, 
it  lacks  ;  what  it  lacks,  of  its  better,  is  its  good.  Matter  is  of  all  the 
most  in  need  ;  its  next  is  the  lowest  Form  ;  Form  at  lowest  is  just  one 
grade  higher  than  Matter.  If  a  thing  is  a  good  to  itself,  much  more 
must  its  perfection,  its  Form,  its  better,  be  a  good  to  it  ;  this  better, 
good  in  its  own  nature,  must  be  good  also  to  the  quester  whose  good 
it  procures. 

But  why  should  the  Form  which  makes  a  thing  good  be  a  good  to 
that  thing  ?  As  being  most  appropriate  ? 

No  :  but  because  it  is,  itself,  a  portion  of  the  Good.  This  is  why 
the  least  alloyed  and  nearest  to  the  good  are  most  at  peace  within  them¬ 
selves. 

It  is  surely  out  of  place  to  ask  why  a  thing  good  in  its  own  nature 
should  be  a  good  ;  we  can  hardly  suppose  it  dissatisfied  with  its  own 
goodness  so  that  it  must  strain  outside  its  essential  quality  to  the  good 
which  it  effectually  is. 

There  remains  the  question  with  regard  to  the  Simplex  :  where 
there  is  utter  absence  of  distinction  does  this  self-aptness  constitute 
the  good  to  that  Simplex  ? 

If  thus  far  we  have  been  right,  the  striving  of  the  lower  possesses 
itself  of  the  good  as  of  a  thing  resident  in  a  certain  Kind  and  it  is  not 
the  striving  that  constitutes  the  good  but  the  good  that  calls  out  the 
striving  :  where  the  good  is  attained  something  is  acquired  and  on  this 
acquisition  there  follows  pleasure.  But  the  thing  must  be  chosen  even 
though  no  pleasure  ensued  ;  it  must  be  desirable  for  its  own  sake. 


VI.  7.  28] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


J95 


28. 

Now  to  see  what  all  this  reasoning  has  established 
Universally  what  approaches  as  a  good  is  a  Form  ;  Matter  itself 
contains  this  good  which  is  Form  :  are  we  to  conclude  that  if  Matter 
had  will  it  would  desire  to  be  Form  unalloyed  ? 

No  :  that  would  be  desiring  its  own  destruction  for  the  good  seeks 
to  subject  everything  to  itself.  But  perhaps  Matter  would  not  wish 
to  remain  at  its  own  level  but  would  prefer  to  attain  Being  and,  this 
acquired,  to  lay  aside  its  evil. 

If  we  are  asked  how  the  evil  thing  can  have  tendency  towards  the 
good,  we  answer  that  we  have  not  attributed  tendency  to  Matter  ;  our 
argument  needed  the  hypothesis  of  sensation  in  Matter— in  so  far  as 
possible  consistently  with  retention  of  its  character— and  we  asserted 
that  the  entry  of  Form,  that  dream  of  the  Good,  must  raise  it  to  a  nobler 
order.  If  then  Matter  is  Evil,  there  is  no  more  to  be  said  ;  if  it  is  some¬ 
thing  else— a  wrong  thing,  let  us  say— then  in  the  hypothesis  that  its 
essence  acquire  sensation  would  not  the  appropriate  upon  the  next 
or  higher  plane  be  its  good,  as  in  the  other  cases  ?  But  not  what  is  evil 
in  Matter  would  be  the  quester  of  good  but  that  element  in  it 
(lowest  Form)  which  in  it  is  associated  with  evil. 

But  if  Matter  by  very  essence  is  evil  how  could  it  choose  the  good  ? 
i  his  question  implies  that  if  Evil  were  self-conscious  it  would  admire 
itself  :  but  how  can  the  unadmirable  be  admired  ;  and  did  we  not  discover 
that  the  good  must  be  apt  to  the  nature  ? 

there  that  question  may  rest.  But  if  universally  the  good  is  Form 
and  the  higher  the  ascent  the  more  there  is  of  Form — Soul  more  truly 
Form  than  body  is  and  phases  of  soul  progressively  of  higher  Form  and 
Intellectual-Principle  standing  as  Form  to  soul  collectively — then  the 
Good  advances  by  the  opposite  of  Matter  and,  therefore,  by  a  cleansing  and 
casting  away  to  the  utmost  possible  at  each  stage  :  and  the  greatest  good 
must  be  there  where  all  that  is  of  Matter  has  disappeared.  The  Principle 
of  Good  rejecting  Matter  entirely — or  rather  never  having  come  near 
it  at  any  point  or  in  any  way— must  hold  itself  aloft  with  that  Formless 
in  which  Primal  Form  takes  its  origin.  But  we  will  return  to  this. 


196 

29- 


PLOTINUS 


Suppose,  however,  that  pleasure  did  not  result  from  the  good  but 
there  were  something  preceding  pleasure  and  accounting  for  it,  would 
not  this  be  a  thing  to  be  embraced  ? 

But  when  we  say  “to  be  embraced  ”  we  say  “  pleasure.” 

But  what  if  accepting  its  existence,  we  think  of  that  existence 
as  leaving  still  the  possibility  that  it  were  not  a  thing  to  be  embraced  ? 

This  would  mean  the  good  being  present  and  the  sentient  possessor 
failing,  nonetheless,  to  perceive  it. 

It  would  seem  possible,  however,  to  perceive  and  yet  be  unmoved 
by  the  possession  ;  this  is  quite  likely  in  the  case  of  the  wiser  and  least 
dependent — and  indeed  it  is  so  with  the  First,  immune  not  merely  because 
simplex,  but  because  pleasure  by  acquisition  implies  lack. 

But  all  this  will  become  clear  on  the  solution  of  our  remaining 
difficulties  and  the  rebuttal  of  the  argument  brought  up  against  us. 
This  takes  the  form  of  the  question  :  What  gain  is  there  in  the  Good 
to  one  who,  fully  conscious,  feels  nothing  when  he  hears  of  these  things, 
whether  because  he  has  no  grasp  of  them  but  takes  merely  the  words 
or  because  he  holds  to  false  values,  perhaps  being  all  in  search  of  sense, 
finding  his  good  in  money  or  such  things. 

The  answer  is  that  even  in  his  disregard  of  the  good  proposed  he 
is  with  us  in  setting  a  good  before  him  but  fails  to  see  how  the  good  we 
define  fits  into  his  own  conception.  It  is  impossible  to  say  “  Not  that  ” 
if  one  is  utterly  without  experience  or  conception  of  the  “  That  ”  ; 
there  will  generally  have  been,  even,  some  inkling  of  the  good  beyond 
Intellection.  Besides,  one  attaining  or  approaching  the  good  but  not 
recognising  it  may  assure  himself  in  the  light  of  its  contraries  ;  otherwise 
he  will  not  even  hold  ignorance  an  evil  though  everyone  prefers  to  know 
and  is  proud  of  knowing  so  that  our  very  sensations  seek  to  ripen  into 
knowledge. 

If  the  knowing  principle — and  specially  primal  Intellectual-Principle 
— is  valuable  and  beautiful,  what  must  be  present  to  those  of  power  to 
see  the  Author  and  Father  of  Intellect  ?  Anyone  thinking  slightingly 
of  this  principle  of  Life  and  Being  brings  evidence  against  himself  and 


VI.  7-  30] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


197 

all  his  state  :  of  course  distaste  for  the  life  that  is  mingled  with  death 
does  not  touch  that  Life  Authentic. 

30. 

Whether  pleasure  must  enter  into  the  good,  so  that  life  in  the  con¬ 
templation  of  the  divine  things  and  especially  of  their  source  remains 
still  imperfect,  is  a  question  not  to  be  ignored  in  any  enquiry  into  the 
nature  of  the  good. 

Now  to  found  the  good  upon  the  Intellect  and  upon  that  state  of 
soul  or  mind  which  springs  from  wisdom  does  not  imply  that  the  end 
or  the  absolute  good  is  the  conjunction  (of  Intellect  and  state)  :  it  would 
follow  merely  that  Intellect  is  the  good  and  that  wre  feel  happy  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  that  good.  That  is  one  theory  ;  another  associates  pleasure 
with  Intellect  in  the  sense  that  the  Good  is  taken  to  be  some  one  thing 
founded  upon  both  but  depending  upon  our  attaining  or  at  least  contem¬ 
plating  an  Intellect  so  modified  ;  this  theory  would  maintain  that  the 
isolated  and  unrelated  could  be  the  good,  could  be  an  object  of  desire. 

But  how  could  Intellect  and  pleasure  combine  into  one  mutually 
complementary  nature  ? 

Bodily  pleasure  no  one,  certainly,  would  think  capable  of  blending 
in  with  Intellect  ;  the  unreasoning  satisfactions  of  soul  (or  lower  mind) 
are  equally  incompatible  with  it. 

Every  activity,  state  and  life,  will  be  followed  and  as  it  were  escorted 
by  the  overdwelling  consciousness ;  sometimes  as  these  take  their 
natural  course  they  will  be  met  by  hindrance  and  by  intrusion  of  the 
conflicting  so  that  the  life  is  the  less  self-guided ;  sometimes  the  natural 
activity  is  unmixed,  wholly  free,  and  then  the  life  goes  brilliantly ;  this 
last  state  is  judged  the  pleasantest,  the  most  to  be  chosen ;  so,  for  lack 
of  an  accurate  expression,  we  hear  of  “  Intellect  in  conjunction  with 
pleasure.”  But  this  is  no  more  than  metaphor,  like  a  hundred  others 
drawn  by  the  poets  from  our  natural  likings — “  Drunk  with  nectar,” 
“  To  banquet  and  feast,”  “  The  Father  smiled.”  No  :  the  veritably 
pleasant  lies  away  in  that  other  realm,  the  most  to  be  loved  and  sought 
for,  not  something  brought  about  and  changing  but  the  very  principle  of 


PLOTINUS 


198 

all  the  colour  and  radiance  and  brightness  found  here.  This  is  why  we  read 
of  “  Truth  introduced  into  the  Mixture  ”  and  of  the  “  measuring  standard 
as  a  prior  condition  ”  and  are  told  that  the  symmetry  and  beauty  neces¬ 
sary  to  the  Mixture  come  Thence  into  whatever  has  beauty  ;  it  is  in 
this  way  that  we  have  our  share  in  Beauty  ;  but  in  another  way,  also, 
we  achieve  the  truly  desirable,  that  is  by  leading  our  selves  up  to  what 
is  best  within  us  ;  this  best  is  what  is  symmetry,  beauty,  collective 
Idea,  life  clear,  Intellective  and  good. 

31- 

But  since  Thence  come  the  beauty  and  light  in  all,  it  is  Thence 
that  Intellectual-Principle  took  the  brilliance  of  the  Intellectual  Energy 
which  flashed  Nature  into  being ;  Thence  soul  took  power  towards 
life,  in  virtue  of  that  fuller  life  streaming  into  it.  Intellectual-Principle 
was  raised  thus  to  that  Supreme  and  remains  with  it,  happy  in  that 
presence.  Soul  too,  that  soul  which  as  possessing  knowledge  and  vision 
was  capable,  clung  to  what  it  saw ;  and  as  its  vision  so  its  rapture  ; 
it  saw  and  was  stricken  ;  but  having  in  itself  something  of  that  principle 
it  felt  its  kinship  and  was  moved  to  longing  like  those  stirred  by  the 
image  of  the  beloved  to  desire  of  the  veritable  presence.  Lovers  here 
mould  themselves  to  the  beloved  ;  they  seek  to  increase  their  attraction 
of  person  and  their  likeness  of  mind  ;  they  are  unwilling  to  fall  short 
in  moral  quality  or  in  other  graces  lest  they  be  distasteful  to  those  posses¬ 
sing  such  merit — and  only  among  such  can  true  love  be.  In  the  same 
way  the  soul  loves  the  Supreme  Good,  from  its  very  beginnings  stirred 
by  it  to  love.  The  soul  which  has  never  strayed  from  this  love  waits 
for  no  reminding  from  the  beauty  of  our  world  :  holding  that  love — 
perhaps  unawares — it  is  ever  in  quest,  and,  in  its  longing  to  be  borne 
Thither,  passes  over  what  is  lovely  here  and  with  one  glance  at  the  beauty 
of  the  universe  dismisses  all ;  for  it  sees  that  all  is  put  together  of  flesh 
and  Matter,  befouled  by  its  housing,  made  fragmentary  by  corporal 
extension,  not  the  Authentic  Beauty  which  could  never  venture  into 
the  mud  of  body  to  be  soiled,  annulled. 

By  only  noting  the  flux  of  things  it  knows  at  once  that  from  elsewhere 


vi.  7. 32]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  199 

comes  the  beauty  that  floats  upon  them  and  so  it  is  urged  Thither, 
passionate  in  pursuit  of  what  it  loves  :  never — unless  someone  robs  it 
of  that  love — never  giving  up  till  it  attain. 

There  indeed  all  it  saw  was  beautiful  and  veritable  ;  it  grew  in 
strength  by  being  thus  filled  with  the  life  of  the  True  ;  itself  becoming 
veritable  Being  and  attaining  veritable  knowledge,  it  enters  by  that 
neighbouring  into  conscious  possession  of  what  it  has  long  been  seeking. 

32. 

Where,  then  ?  where  exists  the  author  of  this  beauty  and  life, 
the  begetter  of  the  veritable  ? 

You  see  the  splendour  over  the  things  of  the  universe  with  all  the 
variety  begotten  of  the  Ideas  ;  well  might  we  linger  here  :  but  amid 
all  these  things  of  beauty  we  cannot  but  ask  whence  they  come  and 
whence  the  beauty.  This  source  can  be  none  of  the  beautiful  objects  ; 
were  it  so,  it  too  would  be  a  thing  of  parts.  It  can  be  no  shape,  no  power, 
nor  the  total  of  powers  and  shapes  that  have  had  the  becoming  that  has 
set  them  here  ,  it  must  stand  above  all  the  powers,  all  the  patterns. 
The  origin  of  all  this  must  be  the  formless — formless  not  as  lacking 
shape  but  as  the  very  source  of  even  shape  Intellectual. 

In  the  realm  of  process  anything  coming  to  be  must  come  to  be 
something ;  to  every  thing  its  distinctive  shape  :  but  what  shape  can 
that  have  which  no  one  has  shaped  ?  It  can  be  none  of  existing  things  ; 
yet  it  is  all :  none,  in  that  beings  are  later  ;  all,  as  the  wellspring  from 
which  they  flow.  That  which  can  make  all  can  have,  itself,  no  extension  ; 
it  must  be  limitless  and  so  without  magnitude  ;  magnitude  itself  is  of 
the  Later  and  cannot  be  an  element  in  that  which  is  to  bring  it  into  being. 
The  greatness  of  the  Authentic  cannot  be  a  greatness  of  quantity ;  all 
extension  must  belong  to  the  subsequent :  the  Supreme  is  great  in  the 
sense  only  that  there  can  be  nothing  mightier,  nothing  to  equal  it,  nothing 
with  anything  in  common  with  it :  how  then  could  anything  be  equal 
to  any  part  of  its  content  ?  Its  eternity  and  universal  reach  entail  neither 
measure  nor  measurelessness  ;  given  either,  how  could  it  be  the  measure 
of  things  ?  So  with  shape  :  granted  beauty,  the  absence  of  shape  or 


200 


PLOTINUS 


form  to  be  grasped  is  but  enhancement  of  desire  and  love  ;  the  love 
will  be  limitless  as  the  object  is,  an  infinite  love. 

Its  beauty,  too,  will  be  unique,  a  beauty  above  beauty  :  it  cannot 
be  beauty  since  it  is  not  a  thing  among  things.  It  is  lovable  and  the 
author  of  beauty  ;  as  the  powrer  to  all  beautiful  shape,  it  will  be  the 
ultimate  of  beauty,  that  which  brings  all  loveliness  to  be  ;  it  begets 
beauty  and  makes  it  yet  more  beautiful  by  the  excess  of  beauty  streaming 
from  itself,  the  source  and  height  of  beauty.  As  the  source  of  beauty 
it  makes  beautiful  whatsoever  springs  from  it.  And  this  conferred 
beauty  is  not  itself  in  shape  ;  the  thing  that  comes  to  be  is  without 
shape,  though  in  another  sense  shaped  ;  what  is  denoted  by  shape  is, 
in  itself,  an  attribute  of  something  else,  shapeless  at  first.  Not  the 
beauty  but  its  participant  takes  the  shape. 

33- 

When  therefore  we  name  beauty,  all  such  shape  must  be  dismissed  ; 
nothing  visible  is  to  be  conceived,  or  at  once  we  descend  from  beauty 
to  wThat  but  bears  the  name  in  virtue  of  some  faint  participation.  This 
formless  Form  is  beautiful  as  Form,  beautiful  in  proportion  as  we  strip 
away  all  shape  even  that  given  in  thought  to  mark  difference,  as  for 
instance  the  difference  between  Justice  and  Sophrosyny,  beautiful  in 
their  difference. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  is  the  less  for  seeing  things  as  distinct 
even  in  its  act  of  grasping  in  unity  the  multiple  content  of  its  Intellectual 
realm  ;  in  its  knowing  of  the  particular  it  possesses  itself  of  one  Intel¬ 
lectual  shape  ;  but,  even  thus,  in  this  dealing  with  variety  as  unity, 
it  leaves  us  still  with  the  question  how  wre  are  to  envisage  that  which 
stands  beyond  this  all-lovely,  beyond  this  principle  at  once  multiple 
and  above  multiplicity,  the  Supreme  for  which  the  soul  hungers  though 
unable  to  tell  why  such  a  being  should  stir  its  longing — reason,  however, 
urging  that  This  at  last  is  the  Authentic  Term  because  the  Nature  best 
and  most  to  be  loved  may  be  found  there  only  where  there  is  no  least 
touch  of  Form.  Bring  something  under  Form  and  present  it  so  before 
the  mind  ;  immediately  we  ask  wdiat  Beyond  imposed  that  shape  ; 


VI.  7-  34] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


201 


reason  answers  that  while  there  exists  the  giver  having  shape  to  give — 
a  giver  that  is  shape,  idea,  an  entirely  measured  thing — yet  this  is  not 
alone,  is  not  adequate  in  itself,  is  not  beautiful  in  its  own  right  but  is  a 
mingled  thing.  Shape  and  idea  and  measure  will  always  be  beautiful, 
but  the  Authentic  Beauty  and  the  Beyond-Beauty  cannot  be  under 
measure  and  therefore  cannot  have  admitted  shape  or  be  Idea  :  the 
primal  existent,  The  First,  must  be  without  Form  ;  the  beauty  in  it 
must  be,  simply,  the  Nature  of  the  Intellectual  Good. 

Take  an  example  from  love  :  so  long  as  the  attention  is  upon  the 
visible  form,  love  has  not  entered  :  when  from  that  outward  form  the 
lover  elaborates  within  himself,  in  his  own  partless  soul,  an  immaterial 
image,  then  it  is  that  love  is  bom,  then  the  lover  longs  for  the  sight  of 
the  beloved  to  make  that  fading  image  live  again.  If  he  could  but  learn 
to  look  elsewhere,  to  the  more  nearly  formless,  his  longing  would  be 
for  that  :  his  first  experience  was  loving  a  great  luminary  by  way  of 
some  thin  gleam  from  it. 

Shape  is  an  impress  from  the  unshaped  ;  it  is  the  unshaped  that 
produces  shape  not  shape  the  unshaped  ;  and  Matter  is  needed  for  the 
producing  ;  Matter,  in  the  nature  of  things,  is  the  furthest  away,  since 
of  itself  it  has  not  even  the  lowest  degree  of  shape.  Thus  lovableness 
does  not  belong  to  Matter  but  to  that  which  draws  upon  Form  :  the 
Form  upon  Matter  comes  by  way  of  soul ;  soul  is  more  nearly  Form 
and  therefore  more  lovable ;  Intellectual  Principle,  nearer  still,  is 
even  more  to  be  loved  :  by  these  steps  we  are  led  to  know  that  the  First 
Principle,  principle  of  Beauty,  must  be  formless. 


34- 

No  longer  can  we  wonder  that  the  principle  evoking  such  longing 
should  be  utterly  free  from  shape.  The  very  soul,  once  it  has  conceived 
the  straining  love  towards  this,  lays  aside  all  the  shape  it  has  taken, 
even  to  the  Intellectual  shape  that  has  informed  it.  There  is  no  vision, 
no  union,  for  those  handling  or  acting  by  any  thing  other  ;  the  soul 
must  see  before  it  neither  evil  nor  good  nor  anything  else,  that  alone 
it  may  receive  the  Alone. 


2D 


202 


PLOTINUS 


Suppose  the  soul  to  have  attained  :  the  highest  has  come  to  her, 
or  rather  has  revealed  its  presence  ;  she  has  turned  away  from  all  about 
her  and  made  herself  apt,  beautiful  to  the  utmost,  brought  into  likeness 
with  the  divine — by  those  preparings  and  adomings  which  come  unbidden 
to  those  growing  ready  for  the  vision — she  has  seen  that  presence  suddenly 
manifesting  within  her,  for  there  is  nothing  between  :  here  is  no  longer 
a  duality  but  a  two  in  one  ;  for,  so  long  as  the  presence  holds,  all  distinc¬ 
tion  fades  :  it  is  as  lover  and  beloved  here,  in  a  copy  of  that  union,  long 
to  blend  ;  the  soul  has  now  no  further  awareness  of  being  in  body  and 
will  give  herself  no  foreign  name,  not  man,  not  living  being,  not  being, 
not  all ;  any  observation  of  such  things  falls  away  ;  the  soul  has  neither 
time  nor  taste  for  them  ;  This  she  sought  and  This  she  has  found  and 
on  This  she  looks  and  not  upon  herself  ;  and  who  she  is  that  looks  she 
has  not  leisure  to  know.  Once  There  she  will  barter  for  This  nothing 
the  universe  holds  ;  not  though  one  would  make  over  the  heavens  entire 
to  her  ;  than  This  there  is  nothing  higher,  nothing  of  more  good  ;  above 
This  there  is  no  passing  ;  all  the  rest  however  lofty  lies  on  the  down¬ 
going  path  :  she  is  of  perfect  judgement  and  knows  that  This  was 
her  quest,  that  nothing  higher  is.  Here  can  be  no  deceit ;  where 
could  she  come  upon  truer  than  the  truth  ?  and  the  truth  she  affirms, 
that  she  is,  herself  ;  but  all  the  affirmation  is  later  and  is  silent.  In 
this  happiness  she  knows  beyond  delusion  that  she  is  happy  ;  for  this  is 
no  affirmation  of  an  excited  body  but  of  a  soul  become  again  what  she 
was  in  the  time  of  her  early  joy.  All  that  she  had  welcomed  of  old, — 
office,  power,  wealth,  beauty,  knowledge — of  all  she  tells  her  scorn  as 
she  never  could  had  she  not  found  their  better  ;  linked  to  This  she  can 
fear  no  disaster  nor  even  know  it ;  let  all  about  her  fall  to  pieces,  so 
she  would  have  it  that  she  may  be  wholly  with  This,  so  huge  the  happiness 
she  has  won  to. 


35- 

Such  in  this  union  is  the  soul’s  temper  that  even  the  act  of  Intellect 
once  so  intimately  loved  she  now  dismisses  ;  Intellection  is  movement 
and  she  has  no  wish  to  move  she  has  nothing  to  say  of  this  very 


VI.  7-  35]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  203 

Intellectual-Principle  by  means  of  which  she  has  attained  the  vision,  her¬ 
self  made  over  into  Intellectual-Principle  and  becoming  that  principle  so 
as  to  be  able  to  take  stand  in  that  Intellectual  space.  Entered  there 
and  making  herself  over  to  that,  she  at  first  contemplates  that  realm, 
but  once  she  sees  that  higher  still  she  leaves  all  else  aside.  Thus  when 
a  man  enters  a  house  rich  in  beauty  he  might  gaze  about  and  admire 
the  varied  splendour  before  the  master  appears  ;  but,  face  to  face  with 
that  great  person — no  thing  of  ornament  but  calling  for  the  truest  atten¬ 
tion— he  would  ignore  everything  else  and  look  only  to  the  master. 
In  this  state  of  absorbed  contemplation  there  is  no  longer  question  of 
holding  an  object :  the  vision  is  continuous  so  that  seeing  and  seen  are 
one  thing ;  object  and  act  of  vision  have  become  identical ;  of  all  that 
until  then  filled  the  eye  no  memory  remains.  And  our  comparison 
would  be  closer  if  instead  of  a  man  appearing  to  the  visitor  who  had 
been  admiring  the  house  it  were  a  god,  and  not  a  god  manifesting  to  the 
eyes  but  one  filling  the  soul. 

Intellectual-Principle,  thus,  has  two  powers,  first  that  of  grasping 
intellectively  its  own  content,  the  second  that  of  an  advancing  and 
receiving  whereby  to  know  its  transcendent ;  at  first  it  sees,  later  by 
that  seeing  it  takes  possession  of  Intellectual-Principle,  becoming  one 
only  thing  with  that :  the  first  seeing  is  that  of  Intellect  knowing, 
the  second  that  of  Intellect  loving ;  stripped  of  its  wisdom  in  the  intoxi¬ 
cation  ox  the  nectar,  it  comes  to  love  ;  by  this  excess  it  is  made  simplex 
and  is  happy ;  and  to  be  drunken  is  better  for  it  than  to  be  too  staid 
for  these  revels. 

But  is  its  vision  parcelwise,  thing  here  and  thing  there  ? 

No  ;  reason  unravelling  gives  process  ;  Intellectual-Principle  has 
unbroken  knowledge  and  has,  moreover,  an  Act  unattended  by  knowing, 
a  vision  by  another  approach.  In  this  seeing  of  the  Supreme  it  becomes 
pregnant  and  at  once  knows  what  has  come  to  be  within  it ;  its  know¬ 
ledge  of  its  content  is  what  is  designated  by  its  Intellection  ;  its  knowing 
of  the  Supreme  is  the  virtue  of  that  power  within  it  by  which,  in  a  later 
(lower)  stage  it  is  to  become  “  Intellective.” 

As  for  soul,  it  attains  that  vision  by — so  to  speak — confounding 


PLOTINUS 


204 

and  annulling  the  Intellectual-Principle  within  it ;  or  rather  that  Prin¬ 
ciple  immanent  in  soul  sees  first  and  thence  the  vision  penetrates  to 

soul  and  the  two  visions  become  one. 

The  Good  spreading  out  above  them  and  adapting  itself  to  that 
union  which  it  hastens  to  confirm  is  present  to  them  as  giver  of  a  blessed 
sense  and  sight  ;  so  high  it  lifts  them  that  they  are  no  longer  in  space 
or  in  that  realm  of  difference  where  everything  is  rooted  in  some  other 
thing  ;  for  The  Good  is  not  in  place  but  is  the  container  of  the  Intellectual 
place  ;  The  Good  is  in  nothing  but  itself. 

The  soul  now  knows  no  movement  since  the  Supreme  knows  none  ; 
it  is  now  not  even  soul  since  the  Supreme  is  not  in  life  but  above  life  ; 
it  is  no  longer  Intellectual-Principle  for  the  Supreme  has  not  Intellection 
and  the  likeness  must  be  perfect ;  this  grasping  is  not  even  by  Intellection 
for  the  Supreme  is  not  known  Intellectively. 

36. 

We  need  not  carry  this  matter  further  ;  we  turn  to  a  question 
already  touched  but  demanding  still  some  brief  consideration. 

Knowledge  of  The  Good  or  contact  with  it,  is  the  all-important : 
this — we  read — is  the  grand  learning,  the  learning  we  are  to  understand, 
not  of  looking  towards  it  but  attaining,  first,  some  knowledge  of  it.  We 
come  to  this  learning  by  analogies,  by  abstractions,  by  our  understanding 
of  its  subsequents,  of  all  that  is  derived  from  The  Good,  by  the  upward 
steps  towards  it.  Purification  has  The  Good  for  goal ;  so  the  virtues, 
all  right  ordering,  ascent  within  the  Intellectual,  settlement  therein, 
banqueting  upon  the  divine — by  these  methods  one  becomes,  to  self 
and  to  all  else,  at  once  seen  and  seer  ;  identical  with  Being  and  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  and  the  entire  living  all,  we  no  longer  see  the  Supreme 
as  an  external ;  we  are  near  now,  the  next  is  That  and  it  is  close  at  hand, 
radiant  above  the  Intellectual. 

Here,  we  put  aside  all  the  learning  ;  disciplined  to  this  pitch,  estab¬ 
lished  in  beauty,  the  quester  holds  knowledge  still  of  the  ground  he 
rests  on  but,  suddenly,  swept  beyond  it  all  by  the  very  crest  of  the  wave 
of  Intellect  surging  beneath,  he  is  lifted  and  sees,  never  knowing  how ; 


VI.  7-  37] 


MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 


205 


the  vision  floods  the  eyes  with  light,  but  it  is  not  a  light  showing  some 
other  object,  the  light  is  itself  the  vision.  No  longer  is  there  thing  seen 
and  light  to  show  it,  no  longer  Intellect  and  object  of  Intellection  ;  this 
is  the  very  radiance  that  brought  both  Intellect  and  Intellectual  object 
into  being  for  the  later  use  and  allowed  them  to  occupy  the  quester’s 
mind.  With  This  he  himself  becomes  identical,  with  that  radiance 
whose  Act  is  to  engender  Intellectual-Principle,  not  losing  in  that  en¬ 
gendering  but  for  ever  unchanged,  the  engendered  coming  to  be  simply 
because  that  Supreme  exists.  If  there  were  no  such  principle  above 
change  no  derivative  could  rise. 


37- 

Those  ascribing  Intellection  to  the  First  have  not  supposed  him 
to  know  the  lesser,  the  emanant — though,  indeed,  some  have  thought 
it  impossible  that  he  should  not  know  everything.  But  those  denying 
his  knowing  of  the  lesser  have  still  attributed  self-knowing  to  him, 
because  they  find  nothing  nobler  ;  we  are  to  suppose  that  so  he  is  the 
more  august,  as  if  Intellection  were  something  nobler  than  his  own 
manner  of  being  not  something  whose  value  derives  from  him. 

But  we  ask  in  what  must  his  grandeur  lie,  in  his  Intellection  or 
in  himself.  If  in  the  Intellection,  he  has  no  worth  or  the  less  worth  ; 
if  in  himself,  he  is  perfect  before  the  Intellection  not  perfected  by  it. 
We  may  be  told  that  he  must  have  Intellection  because  he  is  an  Act, 
not  a  potentiality.  Now  if  this  means  that  he  is  an  essence  eternally 
intellective,  he  is  represented  as  a  duality — essence  and  Intellective 
Act — he  ceases  to  be  a  simplex ;  an  external  has  been  added  :  it  is  just 
as  the  eyes  are  not  the  same  as  their  sight  though  the  two  are  inseparable. 
If  on  the  other  hand  by  this  actualisation  it  is  meant  that  he  is  Act  and 
Intellection,  then  as  being  Intellection  he  does  not  exercise  it,  just  as 
movement  is  not  itself  in  motion. 

But  do  not  we  ourselves  assert  that  the  Beings  There  are  essence 
and  Act  ? 

The  Beings,  yes,  but  they  are  to  us  manifold  and  differentiated  : 
the  First  we  make  a  simplex  ;  to  us  Intellection  begins  with  the  emanant 


206 


PLOTINUS 


in  its  seeking  of  its  essence,  of  itself,  of  its  author  ;  bent  inward  for  this 
vision  and  having  a  present  thing  to  know,  there  is  every  reason  why 
it  should  be  a  principle  of  Intellection  ;  but  that  which,  never  coming 
into  being,  has  no  prior  but  is  ever  what  it  is,  how  could  that  have  motive 
to  Intellection  ?  As  Plato  rightly  says  it  is  above  Intellect. 

An  Intelligence  not  exercising  Intellection  would  be  unintelligent ; 
where  the  nature  demands  knowing,  not  to  know  is  to  fail  of  in¬ 
telligence  ;  but  where  there  is  no  function,  why  import  one  and  declare 
a  defect  because  it  is  not  performed  ?  We  might  as  well  complain  because 
the  Supreme  does  not  act  as  a  physician.  He  has  no  task,  we  hold, 
because  nothing  can  present  itself  to  him  to  be  done  ;  he  is  sufficient ; 
he  need  seek  nothing  beyond  himself,  he  who  is  over  all ;  to  himself 
and  to  all  he  suffices  by  simply  being  what  he  is. 

38. 

And  yet  this  “He  Is  ”  does  not  truly  apply  :  the  Supreme  has  no 
need  of  Being  :  even  “He  is  good  ”  does  not  apply  since  it  indicates 
Being  :  the  “  is  ”  should  not  suggest  something  predicated  of  another 
thing  ;  it  is  to  state  identity.  The  word  “  good  ”  used  of  him  is  not  a 
predicate  asserting  his  possession  of  goodness  ;  it  conveys  an  identi¬ 
fication.  It  is  not  that  we  think  it  exact  to  call  him  either  good  or  The 
Good  :  it  is  that  sheer  negation  does  not  indicate  ;  we  use  the  term 
The  Good  to  assert  identity  without  the  affirmation  of  Being. 

But  how  admit  a  Principle  void  of  self-knowledge,  self-awareness  ; 
surely  the  First  must  be  able  to  say  “  I  possess  Being  ?  ” 

But  he  does  not  possess  Being. 

Then,  at  least  he  must  say  “  I  am  good  ?  ” 

No  :  once  more,  that  would  be  an  affirmation  of  Being. 

But  surely  he  may  affirm  merely  the  goodness,  adding  nothing  : 
the  goodness  would  be  taken  without  the  being  and  all  duality  avoided  ? 

No  :  such  self-awareness  as  good  must  inevitably  carry  the  affir¬ 
mation  "I  am  the  Good  ”  ;  otherwise  there  would  be  merely  the  un¬ 
attached  conception  of  goodness  with  no  recognition  of  identity ;  any 
such  intellection  would  inevitably  include  the  affirmation  “I  am.” 


VI.  7. 39]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  207 

If  that  intellection  were  the  Good,  then  the  intellection  would  not 
be  self-intellection  but  intellection  of  the  Good  ;  not  the  Supreme  but 
that  intellection  would  be  the  Good  :  if  on  the  contrary  that  intellection 
of  the  Good  is  distinct  from  the  Good,  at  once  the  Good  exists  before 
its  knowing  ,  all-sufficiently  good  in  itself,  it  needs  none  of  that  knowing 
of  its  own  nature. 

Thus  the  Supreme  does  not  know  itself  as  Good. 

As  what  then  ? 

No  such  foreign  matter  is  present  to  it  :  it  can  have  only  an  immediate 
intuition  self-directed. 


39- 

Since  the  Supreme  has  no  interval,  no  self-differentiation,  what 
can  have  this  intuitional  approach  to  it  but  itself  ?  Therefore  it  quite 
naturally  assumes  difference  at  the  point  where  Intellectual-Principle 
and  Being  are  differentiated. 

Intellect,  to  act  at  all,  must  inevitably  comport  difference  with 
identity ;  otherwise  it  could  not  distinguish  itself  from  its  object  by 
standing  apart  from  it,  nor  could  it  ever  be  aware  of  the  realm  of  things 
whose  existence  demands  otherness,  nor  could  there  be  so  much  as  a 
duality. 

Again,  if  the  Supreme  is  to  have  intellection  it  cannot  know  only 
itself ;  that  would  not  be  intellection,  for,  if  it  did  know  itself,  nothing 
could  prevent  it  knowing  all  things;  but  this  is  impossible.  With 
self-intellection  it  would  no  longer  be  simplex  ;  any  intellection,  even 
in  the  Supreme,  must  be  aware  of  something  distinct ;  as  we  have  been 
saying,  the  inability  to  see  the  self  as  external  is  the  negation  of  intel¬ 
lection.  That  act  requires  a  manifold — agent,  object,  movement  and 
all  the  other  conditions  of  a  thinking  principle.  Further  we  must  remem¬ 
ber  what  has  been  indicated  elsewhere  that,  since  every  intellectual 
act  in  order  to  be  what  it  must  be  requires  variety,  every  movement 
simple  and  the  same  throughout,  though  it  may  comport  some  form  of 
contact,  is  devoid  of  the  intellective. 

It  follows  that  the  Supreme  will  know  neither  itself  nor  anything 


208 


PLOTINUS 


else  but  will  hold  an  august  repose.  All  the  rest  is  later  ;  before  them  all, 
This  was  what  This  was  ;  any  awareness  of  that  other  would  be  acquired, 
the  shifting  knowledge  of  the  instable.  Even  in  knowing  the  stable 
he  would  be  manifold  for  it  is  not  possible  that,  while  in  the  act  of  knowing 
the  laters  possess  themselves  of  their  object,  the  Supreme  should  know 
only  in  some  unpossessing  observation. 

As  regards  Providence,  that  is  sufficiently  saved  by  the  fact  that 
This  is  the  source  from  which  all  proceeds  ;  the  dependent  he  cannot 
know  when  he  has  no  knowledge  of  himsplf  but  keeps  that  august  repose. 
Plato  dealing  with  essential  Being  allows  it  intellection  but  not  this 
august  repose :  intellection  then  belongs  to  Essential  Being  ;  this  august 
repose  to  the  Principle  in  which  there  is  no  intellection.  Repose,  of 
course,  is  used  here  for  want  of  a  fitter  word  ;  we  are  to  understand 
that  the  most  august,  the  truly  so,  is  That  which  transcends  (the  move¬ 
ment  of)  Intellection. 

40. 

That  there  can  be  no  intellection  in  the  First  will  be  patent  to  those 
that  have  had  such  contact ;  but  some  further  confirmation  is  desirable, 
if  indeed  words  can  carry  the  matter  ;  we  need  overwhelming  persuasion. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  all  intellection  rises  in  some  principle 
and  takes  cognisance  of  an  object.  But  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  : — 

There  is  the  intellection  that  remains  within  its  place  of  origin  ;  it 
has  that  source  as  substratum  but  becomes  a  sort  of  addition  to  it  in 
that  it  is  an  activity  of  that  source  perfecting  the  potentiality  there, 
not  by  producing  anything  but  as  being  a  completing  power  to  the 
principle  in  which  it  inheres.  There  is  also  the  intellection  inbound 
with  Being — Being’s  very  author — and  this  could  not  remain  confined 
to  the  source  since  there  it  could  produce  nothing  ;  it  is  a  power  to 
production  ;  it  produces  therefore  of  its  own  motion  and  its  act  is  Real- 
Being  and  there  it  has  its  dwelling.  In  this  mode  the  intellection  is 
identical  with  Being  ;  even  in  its  self-intellection  no  distinction  is  made 
save  the  logical  distinction  of  thinker  and  thought  with,  as  we  have 
often  observed,  the  implication  of  plurality. 


VI.  7.  40]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS  209 

This  is  a  first  activity  and  the  substance  it  produces  is  Essential 
Being  ;  it  is  an  image,  but  of  an  original  so  great  that  the  very  copy 
stands  a  reality.  If  instead  of  moving  outward  it  remained  with  the 
First,  it  would  be  no  more  than  some  appurtenance  of  that  First,  not  a 
self-standing  existent. 

As  the  earliest  activity  and  earliest  intellection  it  can  be  preceded 
by  no  act  or  intellection  :  if  we  pass  beyond  this  being  and  this  intel¬ 
lection  we  come  not  to  more  being  and  more  intellection  but  to  what 
overpasses  both,  to  the  wonderful  which  has  neither,  asking  nothing 
of  these  products  and  standing  its  unaccompanied  self. 

that  all-transcending  cannot  have  had  an  activity  by  which  to 
produce  this  activity — acting  before  act  existed — or  have  had  thought 
m  order  to  produce  thinking— applying  thought  before  thought  exists 
—all  intellection,  even  of  the  Good,  is  beneath  it. 

In  sum,  this  intellection  of  the  Good  is  impossible  :  I  do  not  mean 
that  it  is  impossible  to  have  intellection  of  the  Good— we  may  admit 
the  possibility  but  there  can  be  no  intellection  by  The  Good  itself,  for 
this  would  be  to  include  the  inferior  with  the  Good. 

If  intellection  is  the  lower,  then  it  will  be  bound  up  with  Being  ; 
if  intellection  is  the  higher,  its  object  is  lower.  Intellection,  then,  does 
not  exist  in  the  Good  ;  as  a  lesser,  taking  its  worth  through  that  Good, 
it  must  stand  apart  from  it,  leaving  the  Good  unsoiled  by  it  as  by  all 
else.  Immune  from  intellection  the  Good  remains  incontaminably 
what  it  is,  not  impeded  by  the  presence  of  the  intellectual  act  which 
would  annul  its  purity  and  unity. 

Anyone  making  the  Good  at  once  Thinker  and  Thought  identifies 
it  with  Being  and  with  the  Intellection  vested  in  Being  so  that  it  must 
perform  that  act  of  intellection  :  at  once  it  becomes  necessary  to  find 
another  principle,  one  superior  to  that  Good:  for  either  this  act,  this 
intellection,  is  a  completing  power  of  some  such  principle,  serving  as 
its  ground,  or  it  points,  by  that  duality,  to  a  prior  principle  having 
intellection  as  a  characteristic.  It  is  because  there  is  something  before 
it  that  it  has  an  object  of  intellection  ;  even  in  its  self-intellection  it 
may  be  said  to  know  its  content  by  its  vision  of  that  prior. 

2E 


210 


PLOTINUS 


What  has  no  prior  and  no  external  accompaniment  could  have  no 
intellection,  either  of  itself  or  of  anything  else.  What  could  it  aim  at, 
what  desire  ?  To  essay  its  power  of  knowing  ?  But  this  would  make 
the  power  something  outside  itself  ;  there  would  be,  I  mean,  the  power 
it  grasped  and  the  power  by  which  it  grasped  :  if  there  is  but  the  one 
power,  what  is  there  to  grasp  at  ? 

4I- 

Intellection  seems  to  have  been  given  as  an  aid  to  the  diviner  but 
weaker  beings,  an  eye  to  the  blind.  But  the  eye  itself  need  not  see 
Being  since  it  is  itself  the  light  ;  what  must  take  the  light  through  the 
eye  needs  the  light  because  of  its  darkness.  If  then  intellection  is  the 
light  and  light  does  not  need  the  light,  surely  that  brilliance  (The  First) 
which  does  not  need  light  can  have  no  need  of  intellection,  will  not  add 
this  to  its  nature. 

What  could  it  do  with  intellection  ?  What  could  even  intellection 
need  and  add  to  itself  for  the  purpose  of  its  act  ?  It  has  no  self-awareness  ; 
there  is  no  need.  It  is  no  duality  but,  rather,  a  manifold,  consisting  of 
itself,  its  intellective  act,  distinct  from  itself,  and  the  inevitable  third, 
the  object  of  intellection.  No  doubt  since  knower,  knowing  and  known 
are  identical,  all  merges  into  a  unity :  but  the  distinction  has  existed 
and,  once  more,  such  a  unity  cannot  be  the  First  ;  we  must  put  away 
all  otherness  from  the  Supreme  which  can  need  no  such  support ;  any¬ 
thing  we  add  is  so  much  lessening  of  what  lacks  nothing. 

To  us  intellection  is  a  boon  since  the  soul  needs  it ;  to  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  it  is  appropriate  as  being  one  thing  with  the  very  essence 
of  the  principle  constituted  by  the  Intellectual  Act  so  that  principle 
and  act  coincide  in  a  continuous  self-consciousness  carrying  the  assurance 
of  identity,  of  the  unity  of  the  two.  But  pure  unity  must  be  independent, 
in  need  of  no  such  assurance. 

“  Know  yourself  ”  is  a  precept  for  those  who,  being  manifold,  have 
the  task  of  appraising  themselves  so  as  to  become  aware  of  the  number 
and  nature  of  their  constituents,  some  or  all  of  which  they  ignore  as 
they  ignore  their  very  principle  and  their  manner  of  being.  The  First 


211 


VI.  7-  42]  MULTIPLICITY  OF  THE  IDEAL-FORMS 

on  the  contrary  if  it  have  content  must  exist  in  a  way  too  great  to  have 
any  knowledge,  intellection,  perception  of  it.  To  itself  it  is  nothing  ; 
accepting  nothing,  self-sufficing,  it  is  not  even  a  good  to  itself  :  to  others 
it  is  good  for  they  have  need  of  it ;  but  it  could  not  lack  itself  :  it  would 
be  absurd  to  suppose  The  Good  standing  in  need  of  goodness. 

It  does  not  see  itself  :  seeing  aims  at  acquisition  :  all  this  it  abandons 
to  the  subsequent  :  in  fact  nothing  found  elsewhere  can  be  There  ; 
even  Being  cannot  be  There.  Nor  therefore  has  it  intellection  which 
is  a  thing  of  the  lower  sphere  where  the  first  intellection,  the  only  true, 
is  identical  with  Being.  Reason,  perception,  intelligence,  none  of  these 
can  have  place  in  that  Principle  in  which  no  presence  can  be  affirmed. 


42. 

Faced  by  the  difficulty  of  placing  these  powers,  you  must  in  reason 
allocate  to  the  secondaries  what  you  count  august :  secondaries  must  not  be 
foisted  upon  the  First  or  tertiaries  upon  the  secondaries.  Secondaries  are  to 
be  ranged  under  the  First,  tertiaries  under  the  secondaries  :  this  is  giving 
everything  its  place,  the  later  dependent  on  their  priors,  those  priors  free. 

This  is  included  in  that  true  saying  “  About  the  King  of  AH,  ah 
has  being  and  in  view  of  Him  all  is  ”  :  we  are  to  understand  from  the 
attribution  of  all  things  to  Him,  and  from  the  words  “  in  view  of  Him  ” 
that  He  is  their  cause  and  they  reach  to  Him  as  to  something  differing  from 
them  all  and  containing  nothing  that  they  contain  :  for  certainly  His 
very  nature  requires  that  nothing  of  the  later  be  in  Him. 

Thus,  Intellectual-Principle,  finding  place  in  the  universe,  cannot 
have  place  in  Him.  Where  we  read  that  He  is  the  cause  of  all  beauty  we 
are  clearly  to  understand  that  beauty  depends  upon  the  Forms,  He  being  set 
above  all  that  is  beautiful  here.  The  Forms  are  in  that  passage  secondaries, 
their  sequels  being  attached  to  them  as  dependent  thirds :  it  is  clear  thus 
that  by  the  products  of  the  thirds  is  meant  this  world,  dependent  upon  soul. 

Soul  dependent  upon  Intellectual-Principle  and  Intellectual-Principle 
upon  the  Good,  all  is  linked  to  the  Supreme  by  intermediaries,  some 
close,  some  nearing  those  of  the  closer  attachment,  while  the  order  of 
sense  stands  remotest,  dependent  upon  soul. 


212 


PLOTINUS 


EIGHTH  TRACTATE 

On  Free-Will  and  the  Will  of  The  One 

i. 

Can  there  be  question  as  to  whether  the  gods  have  voluntary  action  ? 
Or  are  we  to  take  it  that  while  we  may  well  enquire  in  the  case  of  men 
with  their  combination  of  powerlessness  and  hesitating  power,  the  gods 
must  be  declared  omnipotent,  not  merely  some  things  but  all  lying  at 
their  nod  ?  Or  is  power  entire,  freedom  of  action  in  all  things,  to  be 
reserved  to  one  alone,  of  the  rest  some  being  powerful,  others  powerless, 
others  again  a  blend  of  power  and  impotence  ? 

All  this  must  come  to  the  test :  we  must  dare  it  even  of  the  Firsts 
and  of  the  All-Transcendent  and  if  we  find  omnipotence  possible  work 
out  how  far  freedom  extends.  The  very  notion  of  power  must  be  scruti¬ 
nised  lest  in  this  ascription  we  be  really  making  power  identical  with 
Essential  Act,  and  even  with  Act  not  yet  achieved. 

But  for  the  moment  we  may  pass  over  these  questions  to  deal  with 
the  traditional  problem  of  freedom  of  action  in  ourselves. 

To  begin  with,  what  must  be  intended  when  we  assert  that  some¬ 
thing  is  in  our  power  ;  what  is  the  conception  here  ? 

To  establish  this  will  help  to  show  whether  we  are  to  ascribe  freedom 
to  the  gods  and  still  more  to  God,  or  to  refuse  it,  or  again,  while  asserting 
it,  to  question  still,  in  regard  both  to  the  higher  and  lower,  the  mode 
of  its  presence. 

What  then  do  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  freedom  in  ourselves 
and  why  do  we  question  it  ? 

My  own  reading  is  that,  moving  as  we  do  amid  adverse  fortunes, 
compulsions,  violent  assaults  of  passion  crushing  the  soul,  feeling  ourselves 
mastered  by  these  experiences,  playing  slave  to  them,  going  where 
they  lead,  we  have  been  brought  by  all  this  to  doubt  whether  we  are 
anything  at  all  and  dispose  of  ourselves  in  any  particular. 

This  would  indicate  that  we  think  of  our  free  act  as  one  which  we 
execute  of  our  own  choice,  in  no  servitude  to  chance  or  necessity  or 


vi.  8.  2]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE  213 

overmastering  passion,  nothing  thwarting  our  will;  the  voluntary  is 
conceived  as  an  event  amenable  to  will  and  occurring  or  not  as  our  will 
dictates.  Everything  will  be  voluntary  that  is  produced  under  no  com¬ 
pulsion  and  with  knowledge  ;  our  free  act  is  what  we  are  masters  to 
perform. 

Differing  conceptually,  the  two  conditions  will  often  coincide  but 
sometimes  will  clash.  Thus  a  man  would  be  master  to  kill  but  the  act 
will  not  oe  \oluntary  if  in  the  victim  he  had  failed  to  recognise  his  own 
father.  Perhaps  however  that  ignorance  is  not  compatible  with  real 
freedom  .  for  the  knowledge  necessary  to  a  voluntary  act  cannot  be 
limited  to  certain  particulars  but  must  cover  the  entire  field.  Why 
for  example  should  killing  be  involuntary  in  the  failure  to  recognise 
a  fathei  and  not  so  in  the  failure  to  recognise  the  wickedness  of 
murder  ?  If  because  the  killer  ought  to  have  learned,  still  ignorance  of 
the  duty  of  learning  and  the  cause  of  that  ignorance  remain  alike 
involuntary. 


2. 

-t.  cardinal  question  is  where  are  we  to  place  the  freedom  of  action 
ascribed  to  us. 

It  must  be  founded  in  impulse  or  in  some  appetite,  as  when  we 
act  or  omit  in  lust  or  rage  or  upon  some  calculation  of  advantage  accom¬ 
panied  by  desire. 

But  if  rage  or  desire  implied  freedom  we  must  allow  freedom  to 
animals,  infants,  maniacs,  the  distraught,  the  victims  of  malpractice 
producing  incontrollable  delusions.  And  if  freedom  turns  on  calculation 
with  desire,  does  this  include  faulty  calculation  ?  Sound  calculation, 
no  doubt,  and  sound  desire  ;  but  then  comes  the  question  whether  the 
appetite  stirs  the  calculation  or  the  calculation  the  appetite. 

Where  the  appetites  are  dictated  by  the  very  nature  they  are  the 
desires  of  the  conjoint  of  soul  and  body  and  then  soul  lies  under  physical 
compulsions  :  if  they  spring  in  the  soul  as  an  independent,  then  much 
that  we  take  to  be  voluntary  is  in  reality  outside  of  our  free  act.  Further, 
every  emotion  is  preceded  by  some  meagre  reasoning ;  how  then  can 


214 


PLOTINUS 


a  compelling  imagination,  an  appetite  drawing  us  where  it  will,  be  sup¬ 
posed  to  leave  us  masters  in  the  ensuing  act  ?  Need,  inexorably  craving 
satisfaction,  is  not  free  in  face  of  that  to  which  it  is  forced  :  and  how 
at  all  can  a  thing  have  efficiency  of  its  own  when  it  rises  from  an  extern, 
has  an  extern  for  very  principle,  thence  taking  its  Being  as  it  stands  ? 
It  lives  by  that  extern,  lives  as  it  has  been  moulded  :  if  this  be  freedom, 
there  is  freedom  in  even  the  soulless  ;  fire  acts  in  accordance  with  its 
characteristic  being. 

We  may  be  reminded  that  the  Living  Form  and  the  soul  know 
what  they  do.  But  if  this  is  knowledge  by  perception  it  does  not  help 
towards  the  freedom  of  the  act ;  perception  gives  awareness,  not  mastery  : 
if  true  knowing  is  meant,  either  this  is  the  knowing  of  something  happen¬ 
ing — once  more  awareness — with  the  motive-force  still  to  seek,  or  the 
reasoning  and  knowledge  have  acted  to  quell  the  appetite  ;  then  we 
have  to  ask  to  what  this  repression  is  to  be  referred  and  where  it  has 
taken  place.  If  it  is  that  the  mental  process  sets  up  an  opposing  desire 
we  must  assure  ourselves  how  ;  if  it  merely  stills  the  appetite  with  no 
further  efficiency  and  this  is  our  freedom,  then  freedom  does  not  depend 
upon  act  but  is  a  thing  of  the  mind — and  in  truth  all  that  has  to  do  with 
act,  the  very  most  reasonable,  is  still  of  mixed  value  and  cannot  carry 
freedom. 

3- 

All  this  calls  for  examination  ;  the  enquiry  must  bring  us  close  to 
the  solution  as  regards  the  gods. 

We  have  traced  self-disposal  to  will,  will  to  reasoning  and,  next 
step,  to  right  reasoning  ;  perhaps  to  right  reasoning  we  must  add  know¬ 
ledge,  for  however  sound  opinion  and  act  may  be  they  do  not  yield  true 
freedom  when  the  adoption  of  the  right  course  is  the  result  of  hazard  or 
of  some  presentment  from  the  fancy  with  no  knowledge  of  the  foundations 
of  that  rightness. 

Taking  it  that  the  presentment  of  fancy  is  not  a  matter  of  our  will 
and  choice,  how  can  we  think  those  acting  at  its  dictation  to  be  free 
agents  ?  Fancy  strictly,  in  our  use,  takes  it  rise  from  conditions  of  the 


VI.  8.  4]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE  215 

body  ;  lack  of  food  and  drink  sets  up  presentments  and  so  does  the 
meeting  of  these  needs  ;  similarly  with  seminal  abundance  and  other 
humours  of  the  body.  We  refuse  to  range  under  the  principle  of  freedom 
those  whose  conduct  is  directed  by  such  fancy  :  the  baser  sort,  there¬ 
fore,  mainly  so  guided,  cannot  be  credited  with  self-disposal  or  voluntary 
act.  Self-disposal,  to  us,  belongs  to  those  who,  through  the  activities 
of  the  Intellectual-Principle,  live  above  the  states  of  the  body.  The 
spring  of  freedom  is  the  activity  of  Intellectual-Principle,  the  highest 
in  our  being  ;  the  proposals  emanating  thence  are  freedom  ;  such  desires 
as  are  formed  in  the  exercise  of  the  Intellectual  act  cannot  be  classed 
as  involuntary ;  the  gods,  therefore,  that  live  in  this  state,  living  by 
Intellectual-Principle  and  by  desire  conformed  to  it,  possess  freedom. 

4- 

It  will  be  asked  how  act  rising  from  desire  can  be  voluntary  since 
desire  pulls  outward  and  implies  need  ;  to  desire  is  still  to  be  drawn, 
even  though  towards  the  good. 

Intellectual-Principle  itself  comes  under  the  doubt ;  having  a  certain 
nature  and  acting  by  that  nature  can  it  be  said  to  have  freedom  and 
self-disposal — in  an  act  which  it  cannot  leave  unenacted  ?  It  may 
be  asked,  also,  whether  freedom  may  strictly  be  affirmed  of  such  beings 
as  are  not  engaged  in  action. 

However  that  may  be,  where  there  is  such  act  there  is  compulsion 
from  without,  since  failing  motive,  act  will  not  be  performed.  These 
higher  beings,  too,  obey  their  own  nature  ;  where  then  is  their  freedom  ? 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  can  there  be  talk  of  constraint  where  there 
is  no  compulsion  to  obey  an  extern  ;  and  how  can  any  movement  towards 
a  good  be  counted  compulsion  ?  Effort  is  free  once  it  is  towards  a  fully 
recognised  good  ;  the  involuntary  is,  precisely,  motion  away  from  a 
good  and  towards  the  enforced,  towards  something  not  recognised  as  a 
good  ;  servitude  lies  in  being  powerless  to  move  towards  one’s  good, 
being  debarred  from  the  preferred  path  in  a  menial  obedience.  Hence 
the  shame  of  slavedom  is  incurred  not  when  one  is  held  from  the  hurtful 
but  when  the  personal  good  must  be  yielded  in  favour  of  another’s. 


2l6 


PLOTINUS 


Further,  this  objected  obedience  to  the  characteristic  nature  would 
imply  a  duality,  master  and  mastered  ;  but  an  undivided  Principle, 
a  simplex  Activity,  where  there  can  be  no  difference  of  potentiality  and 
act,  must  be  free  ;  there  can  be  no  thought  of  “  action  according  to  the 
nature,”  in  the  sense  of  any  distinction  between  the  being  and  its  effi¬ 
ciency,  there  where  being  and  act  are  identical.  Where  act  is  performed 
neither  because  of  another  nor  at  another’s  will,  there  surely  is  freedom. 
Freedom  may  of  course  be  an  inappropriate  term  :  there  is  something 
greater  here  :  it  is  self-disposal  in  the  sense,  only,  that  there  is  no  disposal 
by  the  extern,  no  outside  master  over  the  act. 

In  a  principle,  act  and  essence  must  be  free.  No  doubt  Intellectual- 
Principle  itself  is  to  be  referred  to  a  yet  higher  ;  but  this  higher  is  not 
extern  to  it ;  Intellectual-Principle  is  within  the  Good  ;  possessing  its 
own  good  in  virtue  of  that  indwelling,  much  more  will  it  possess  freedom 
and  self-disposal  which  are  sought  only  for  the  sake  of  the  good.  Acting 
towards  the  good,  it  must  all  the  more  possess  self-disposal  for  by  that 
Act  it  is  directed  towards  the  Principle  from  which  it  proceeds,  and 
this  its  act  is  self-centred  and  must  entail  its  very  greatest  good. 

5- 

Are  we,  however,  to  make  freedom  and  self-disposal  exclusive  to 
Intellectual-Principle  as  engaged  in  its  characteristic  Act,  Intellectual- 
Principle  unassociated,  or  do  they  belong  also  to  soul  acting  under 
that  guidance  and  performing  act  of  virtue  ? 

If  freedom  is  to  be  allowed  to  soul  in  its  Act,  it  certainly  cannot 
be  allowed  in  regard  to  issue,  for  we  are  not  master  of  events  :  if  in 
regard  to  fine  conduct  and  all  inspired  by  Intellectual-Principle,  that 
may  very  well  be  freedom  ;  but  is  the  freedom  ours  ? 

Because  there  is  war,  we  perform  some  brave  feat ;  how  is  that 
our  free  act  since  had  there  been  no  war  it  could  not  have  been  performed  ? 
So  in  all  cases  of  fine  conduct ;  there  is  always  some  impinging  event 
leading  out  our  quality  to  show  itself  in  this  or  that  act.  And  suppose 
virtue  itself  given  the  choice  whether  to  find  occasion  for  its  exercise — 
war  evoking  courage  ;  wrong,  so  that  it  may  establish  justice  and  good 


217 


VI.  8.  6]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE 

order  ;  poverty  that  it  may  show  independence — or  to  remain  inactive 
everything  going  well,  it  would  choose  the  peace  of  inaction,  nothing 
calling  for  its  intervention,  just  as  a  physician  like  Hippocrates  would 
prefer  no  one  to  stand  in  need  of  his  skill. 

If  thus  virtue  whose  manifestation  requires  action  becomes  in¬ 
evitably  a  collaborator  under  compulsion,  how  can  it  have  untrammelled 
self-disposal  ? 

Should  we,  perhaps,  distinguish  between  compulsion  in  the  act 
and  freedom  in  the  preceding  will  and  reasoning  ? 

But  in  setting  freedom  in  those  preceding  functions,  we  imply 
that  virtue  has  a  freedom  and  self-disposal  apart  from  all  act ;  then 
we  must  state  what  is  the  reality  of  the  self-disposal  attributed  to  virtue 
as  state  or  disposition.  Are  we  to  put  it  that  virtue  comes  in  to  restore 
the  disordered  soul,  taming  passions  and  appetites  ?  In  what  sense, 
at  that,  can  we  hold  our  goodness  to  be  our  own  free  act,  our  fine  conduct 
to  be  uncompelled  ?  In  that  we  will  and  adopt,  in  that  this  entry  of 
virtue  prepares  freedom  and  self-disposal,  ending  our  slavery  to  the 
masters  we  have  been  obeying.  If  then  virtue  is,  as  it  were,  a  second 
Intellectual-Principle,  and  heightens  the  soul  to  Intellectual  quality, 
then,  once  more,  our  freedom  is  found  to  lie  not  in  act  but  in  Intellectual- 
Principle  immune  from  act. 

6. 

How  then  did  we  come  to  place  freedom  in  the  will  when  we  made 

out  free  action  to  be  that  produced — or  as  we  also  indicated,  suppressed _ 

at  the  dictate  of  will  ? 

If  what  we  have  been  saying  is  true  and  our  former  statement  is 
consistent  with  it,  the  case  must  stand  thus  : — 

Virtue  and  Intellectual-Principle  are  sovran  and  must  be  held  the 
sole  foundation  of  our  self-disposal  and  freedom  ;  both  then  are  free  ;  In¬ 
tellectual-Principle  is  self-confined  :  Virtue  in  its  government  of  the  soul 
which  it  seeks  to  lift  into  goodness  w’ould  wish  to  be  free  ;  in  so  far  as 
it  does  so  it  is  free  and  confers  freedom  ;  but  inevitably  experiences 
and  actions  are  forced  upon  it  by  its  governance  :  these  it  has  not  planned 

2F 


2l8 


PLOTINUS 


for,  yet  when  they  do  arise  it  will  watch  still  for  its  sovranty  calling 
these  also  to  judgement.  Virtue  does  not  follow  upon  occurrences  as  a 
saver  of  the  emperilled  ;  at  its  discretion  it  sacrifices  a  man  ;  it  may 
decree  the  jettison  of  life,  means,  children,  country  even  ;  it  looks  to 
its  own  high  aim  and  not  to  the  safeguarding  of  anything  lower.  Thus 
our  freedom  of  act,  our  self-disposal,  must  be  referred  not  to  the  doing, 
not  to  the  external  thing  done  but  to  the  inner  activity,  to  the  Intellection, 
to  virtue’s  own  vision. 

So  understood,  virtue  is  a  mode  of  Intellectual-Principle,  a  mode 
not  involving  any  of  the  emotions  or  passions  controlled  by  its  reasonings, 
since  such  experiences,  amenable  to  morality  and  discipline,  touch 
closely — we  read — on  body. 

This  makes  it  all  the  more  evident  that  the  unembodied  is  the  free  ; 
to  this  our  self-disposal  is  to  be  referred  ;  herein  lies  our  will  which 
remains  free  and  self-disposing  in  spite  of  any  orders  which  it  may  neces¬ 
sarily  utter  to  meet  the  external.  All  then  that  issues  from  will  and 
is  the  effect  of  will  is  our  free  action  ;  and  in  the  highest  degree  all  that 
lies  outside  of  the  corporeal  is  purely  within  the  scope  of  will,  all  that 
will  adopts  and  brings,  unimpeded,  into  existence. 

The  contemplating  Intellect,  the  first  or  highest,  has  self-disposal 
to  the  point  that  its  operation  is  utterly  independent  ;  it  turns  wholly 
upon  itself ;  its  very  action  is  itself ;  at  rest  in  its  good  it  is  without 
need,  complete,  and  may  be  said  to  live  to  its  wall ;  there  the  will  is 
intellection  :  it  is  called  will  because  it  expresses  the  Intellectual-Principle 
in  the  willing-phase  and,  besides,  what  we  know  as  will  imitates  this 
operation  taking  place  within  the  Intellectual-Principle.  Will  strives 
towards  the  good  which  the  act  of  Intellectual-Principle  realises.  Thus 
that  principle  holds  what  will  seeks,  that  good  whose  attainment  makes 
will  identical  with  Intellection. 

But  if  self-disposal  is  founded  thus  on  the  will  aiming  at  the  good, 
how  can  it  possibly  be  denied  to  that  principle  permanently  possessing 
the  good,  sole  object  of  the  aim  ? 

Any  one  scrupulous  about  setting  self-disposal  so  high  may  find 
some  loftier  word. 


219 


VI.  8.  7]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE 
7- 

Soul  becomes  free  when  it  moves,  through  Intellectual-Principle, 
towards  The  Good ;  what  it  does  in  that  spirit  is  its  free  act ;  Intellectual- 
nnciple  is  free  in  its  own  right.  That  principle  of  Good  is  the  sole 
object  of  desire  and  the  source  of  self-disposal  to  the  rest,  to  soul  when 
it  fully  attains,  to  Intellectual-Principle  by  connate  possession. 

How  then  can  the  sovran  of  all  that  august  sequence— the  first  in 
place,  that  to  which  all  else  strives  to  mount,  all  dependent  upon  it 
and  taking  from  it  their  powers  even  to  this  power  of  self-disposal— 
how  can  This  be  brought  under  the  freedom  belonging  to  you  and  me, 
a  conception  applicable  only  by  violence  to  Intellectual-Principle  itself  ? 

It  is  rash  thinking  drawn  from  another  order  that  would  imagine 
a  First  Principle  to  be  chance-made  what  it  is,  controlled  by  a  manner 
of  being  imposed  from  without,  void  therefore  of  freedom  or  self-disposal, 
acting  or  refraining  under  compulsion.  Such  a  statement  is  untrue 
to  its  subject  and  introduces  much  difficulty ;  it  utterly  annuls  the 
principle  of  free-will  with  the  very  conception  of  our  own  voluntary 
action,  so  that  there  is  no  longer  any  sense  in  discussion  upon  these 
terms,  empty  names  for  the  non-existent.  Anyone  upholding  this  opinion 
would  be  obliged  to  say  not  merely  that  free  act  exists  nowhere  but 
that  the  very  word  conveys  nothing  to  him.  To  admit  understanding 
the  word  is  to  be  easily  brought  to  confess  that  the  conception  of  freedom 
does  apply  where  it  is  denied.  No  doubt  a  concept  leaves  the  reality 
untouched  and  unappropriated,  for  nothing  can  produce  itself,  bring 
itself  into  being ;  but  thought  insists  upon  distinguishing  between  what 

is  subject  to  others  and  what  is  independent,  bound  under  no  allegiance 
lord  of  its  own  act. 

This  state  of  freedom  belongs  in  the  absolute  degree  to  the  Eternals 
m  right  of  that  eternity  and  to  other  beings  in  so  far  as  without  hindrance 
they  possess  or  pursue  The  Good  which,  standing  above  them  all,  must 
manifestly  be  the  only  good  they  can  reasonably  seek. 

To  say  that  The  Good  exists  by  chance  must  be  false  ;  chance  belongs 
to  the  later,  to  the  multiple  ;  since  the  First  has  never  come  to  be  we 
cannot  speak  of  it  either  as  coming  by  chance  into  being  or  as  not  master 


220 


PLOTINUS 


of  its  being.  Absurd  also  the  objection  that  it  acts  in  accordance  with 
its  being  if  this  is  to  suggest  that  freedom  demands  act  or  other  expression 
against  the  nature.  Neither  does  its  nature  as  the  unique  annul  its 
freedom  when  this  is  the  result  of  no  compulsion  but  means  only  that 
The  Good  is  no  other  than  itself,  is  self-complete  and  has  no  higher. 

The  objection  would  imply  that  where  there  is  most  good  there 
is  least  freedom.  If  this  is  absurd,  still  more  absurd  to  deny  freedom 
to  The  Good  on  the  ground  that  it  is  good  and  self-concentred,  not  needing 
to  lean  upon  anything  else  but  actually  being  the  Term  to  which  all 
tends,  itself  moving  to  none. 

Where — since  we  must  use  such  words — the  essential  act  is  identical 
with  the  being — and  this  identity  must  obtain  in  The  Good  since  it  holds 
even  in  Intellectual-Principle — there  the  act  is  no  more  determined 
by  the  Being  than  the  Being  by  the  Act.  Thus  “  acting  according  to 
its  nature  ”  does  not  apply  ;  the  Act,  the  Life,  so  to  speak,  cannot  be 
held  to  issue  from  the  Being  ;  the  Being  accompanies  the  Act  in  an 
eternal  association  :  from  the  two  (Being  and  Act)  it  forms  itself  into 
The  Good,  self-springing  and  unspringing. 

8. 

But  it  is  not,  in  our  view,  as  an  attribute  that  this  freedom  is  present 
in  the  First.  In  the  light  of  free  acts,  from  which  we  eliminate  the  con¬ 
traries,  we  recognise  There  self-determination  self-directed  and,  failing 
more  suitable  terms,  we  apply  to  it  the  lesser  terms  brought  over  from 
lesser  things  and  so  tell  it  as  best  we  may  :  no  words  could  ever  be 
adequate  or  even  applicable  to  that  from  which  all  else  the  noble, 
the  august — is  derived.  For  This  is  principle  of  all,  or,  more  strictly  , 
unrelated  to  all  and,  in  this  consideration,  cannot  be  made  to  possess 
such  laters  as  even  freedom  and  self-disposal,  which  in  fact  indicate 
manifestation  upon  the  extern — unhindered  but  implying  the  existence 
of  other  beings  whose  opposition  proves  ineffective. 

We  cannot  think  of  the  First  as  moving  towards  any  other  ;  He 
holds  his  own  manner  of  being  before  any  other  was  ;  even  Being  we 
withhold  and  therefore  all  relation  to  beings. 


221 


VI.  8.  9]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE 

Nor  may  we  speak  of  any  “  conforming  to  the  nature  ”  ;  this  again 
is  of  the  later  ;  if  the  term  be  applicable  at  all  in  that  realm  it  applies 
only  to  the  secondaries — primally  to  Essential  Existence  as  next  to  this 
First.  And  if  a  nature  belongs  only  to  things  of  time,  this  conformity 
to  nature  does  not  apply  even  to  Essential  Existence.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  are  not  to  deny  that  it  is  derived  from  Essential  Existence 
for  that  would  be  to  take  away  its  existence  and  would  imply  derivation 
from  something  else. 

Does  this  mean  that  the  First  is  to  be  described  as  happening  to  be  ? 

No  ;  that  would  be  just  as  false  ;  nothing  "  happens  ”  to  the  First  ; 
it  stands  in  no  such  relationship  ;  happening  belongs  only  to  the  multiple 
where,  first,  existence  is  given  and  then  something  is  added.  And  how 
could  the  Source  “  happen  to  be  ?  ”  There  has  been  no  coming  so  that 
you  can  put  it  to  the  question  "  How  does  this  come  to  be  ?  What 
chance  brought  it  here,  gave  it  being?”  Chance  did  not  yet  exist ;  there 
was  no  “  automatic  action  ”  :  these  imply  something  before  themselves 
and  occur  in  the  realm  of  process. 

9- 

If  we  cannot  but  speak  of  Happening  we  must  not  halt  at  the  word 
but  look  to  the  intention.  And  what  is  that  ?  That  the  Supreme  by 
possession  of  a  certain  nature  and  power  is  the  Principle.  Obviously 
if  its  nature  were  other  it  would  be  that  other  and  if  the  difference  were 
for  the  worse  it  would  manifest  itself  as  that  lesser  being.  But  we  must 
add  in  correction  that  as  Principle  of  All,  it  could  not  be  some  chance 
product  ;  it  is  not  enough  to  say  that  it  could  not  be  inferior  ;  it  could  not 
even  be  in  some  other  way  good,  for  instance  in  some  less  perfect  degree  ; 
the  Principle  of  All  must  be  of  higher  quality  than  anything  that  follows 
it.  It  is  therefore  in  a  sense  determined — determined,  I  mean,  by  its 
uniqueness  and  not  in  any  sense  of  being  under  compulsion  ;  compulsion 
did  not  co-exist  with  the  Supreme  but  has  place  only  among  secondaries 
and  even  there  can  exercise  no  tyranny  ;  this  uniqueness  is  not  from 
outside. 

This,  then,  it  is  ;  This  and  no  other ;  simply  what  it  must  be  ; 


222 


PLOTINUS 


it  has  not  “  happened  ”  but  is  what  by  a  necessity  prior  to  all  necessities 
it  must  be.  We  cannot  think  of  it  as  a  chance  existence  ;  it  is  not  what 
it  chanced  to  be  but  what  it  must  be— and  yet  without  a  “  Must.” 

All  the  rest  waits  for  the  appearing  of  the  king  to  hail  him  for  him¬ 
self,  not  a  being  of  accident  and  happening  but  authentically  king, 
authentically  Principle,  The  Good  authentically,  not  a  being  that  acts 
in  conformity  with  goodness— and  so,  recognisably,  a  secondary— but 
the  total  unity  that  he  is,  no  moulding  upon  goodness  but  the  very 
Good  itself. 

Even  Being  is  exempt  from  happening  :  of  course  anything  happen¬ 
ing  happens  to  Being,  but  Being  itself  has  not  happened  nor  is  the  manner 
of  its  Being  a  thing  of  happening,  of  derivation  ;  it  is  the  very  nature 
of  Being  to  be  ;  how  then  can  we  think  that  this  happening  can  attach 
to  the  Transcendent  of  Being,  That  in  whose  power  lay  the  very  engender¬ 
ing  of  Being  ? 

Certainly  this  Transcendent  never  happened  to  be  what  it  is  ;  it 
is  so,  just  as  Being  exists  in  complete  identity  with  its  own  essential 
nature  and  that  of  Intellectual-Principle.  Certainly  that  which  has  never 
passed  outside  of  its  own  orbit,  unbendingly  what  it  is,  its  own  unchange¬ 
ably,  is  that  which  may  most  strictly  be  said  to  possess  its  own  being : 
what  then  are  we  to  say  when  we  mount  and  contemplate  that  which 
stands  yet  higher  ;  can  we  conceivably  say  “  Thus,  as  we  see  it,  thus 
has  it  happened  to  be  ?  ”  Neither  thus  nor  in  any  mode  did  it  happen 
to  be  ;  there  is  no  happening  ;  there  is  only  a  “  Thus  and  No  Otherwise 
than  Thus.”  And  even  “  Thus  ”  is  false  ;  it  would  imply  limit,  a  defined 
form  :  to  know  This  is  to  be  able  to  reject  both  the  “  Thus  ”  and  the 
“  Not-Thus,”  either  of  which  classes  among  Beings  to  which  alone 
Manner  of  Being  can  attach. 

A  “  Thus  ”  is  something  that  attaches  to  everything  in  the  world 
of  things  :  standing  before  the  indefinable  you  may  name  any  of  these 
sequents  but  you  must  say  This  is  none  of  them  :  at  most  it  is  to  be 
conceived  as  the  total  power  towards  things,  supremely  self-concentred, 
being  what  it  wills  to  be  or  rather  projecting  into  existence  what  it 
wills,  itself  higher  than  all  will,  will  a  thing  beneath  it.  In  a  word  it 


VI.  8.  10]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE 


223 


neither  willed  its  own  “  Thus  ” — as  something  to  conform  to — nor  did 
any  other  make  it  "  Thus.” 


10. 

The  upholder  of  Happening  must  be  asked  how  this  false  happen¬ 
ing  can  be  supposed  to  have  come  about,  taking  it  that  it  did,  and  how 
the  happening,  then,  is  not  universally  prevalent.  If  there  is  to  be  a 
natural  scheme  at  all,  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  happening  does 
not  and  cannot  exist  :  for  if  we  attribute  to  chance  the  Principle 
which  is  to  eliminate  chance  from  all  the  rest,  how  can  there  ever  be 
anything  independent  of  chance  ?  And  this  Nature  does  take  away 
the  chanced  from  the  rest,  bringing  in  form  and  limit  and  shape.  In 
the  case  of  things  thus  conformed  to  reason  the  cause  cannot  be  identified 
with  chance  but  must  lie  in  that  very  reason  ;  chance  must  be  kept 
for  wrhat  occurs  apart  from  choice  and  sequence  and  is  purely  concurrent. 
When  wre  come  to  the  source  of  all  reason,  order  and  limit,  how  can  we 
attribute  the  reality  there  to  chance  ?  Chance  is  no  doubt  master  of 
many  things  but  is  not  master  of  Intellectual-Principle,  of  reason,  of 
order,  so  as  to  bring  them  into  being.  How  could  chance,  recognised 
as  the  very  opposite  of  reason,  be  its  Author  ?  And  if  it  does  not  produce 
Intellectual-Principle,  then  certainly  not  that  which  precedes  and  sur¬ 
passes  that  Principle.  Chance,  besides,  has  no  means  of  producing, 
has  no  being  at  all,  and,  assuredly,  none  in  the  Eternal. 

Since  there  is  nothing  before  Him  who  is  the  First,  we  must  call  a 
halt  ;  there  is  nothing  to  say ;  we  may  enquire  into  the  origin  of  his 
sequents  but  not  of  Himself  who  has  no  origin. 

But  perhaps,  never  having  come  to  be  but  being  as  He  is,  He  is 
still  not  master  of  his  owm  essence  :  not  master  of  his  essence  but  being 
as  He  is,  not  self-originating  but  acting  out  of  his  nature  as  He  finds 
it,  must  He  not  be  of  necessity  what  He  is,  inhibited  from  being  other¬ 
wise  ? 

No  :  What  He  is,  He  is  not  because  He  could  not  be  otherwise  but 
because  so  is  best.  Not  everything  has  power  to  move  towards  the 
better  though  nothing  is  prevented  by  any  external  from  moving  towards 


224 


PLOTINUS 


the  worse.  But  that  the  Supreme  has  not  so  moved  is  its  own  doing  : 
there  has  been  no  inhibition  ;  it  has  not  moved  simply  because  it  is 
That  which  does  not  move  ;  in  this  stability  the  inability  to  degenerate 
is  not  powerlessness  ;  here  permanence  is  very  Act,  a  self-determination. 
This  absence  of  declination  comports  the  fulness  of  power  ;  it  is  not 
the  yielding  of  a  being  held  and  controlled  but  the  Act  of  one  who  is 
necessity,  law,  to  all. 

Does  this  indicate  a  Necessity  which  has  brought  itself  into  existence  ? 
No  :  there  has  been  no  coming  into  being  in  any  degree  ;  This  is  that 
by  which  being  is  brought  to  all  the  rest,  its  sequents.  Above  all  origins, 
This  can  owe  being  neither  to  an  extern  nor  to  itself. 

II. 

But  this  Unoriginating,  what  is  it  ? 

We  can  but  withdraw,  silent,  hopeless,  and  search  no  further.  What 
can  we  look  for  when  we  have  reached  the  furthest  ?  Every  enquiry 
aims  at  a  first  and,  that  attained,  rests. 

Besides,  we  must  remember  that  all  questioning  deals  with  the 
nature  of  a  thing,  its  quality,  its  cause  or  its  essential  being.  In  this 
case  the  being — in  so  far  as  we  can  use  the  word — is  knowable  only  by 
its  sequents  :  the  question  as  to  cause  asks  for  a  principle  beyond,  but 
the  principle  of  all  has  no  principle  ;  the  question  as  to  quality  would 
be  looking  for  an  attribute  in  that  which  has  none  :  the  question  as  to 
nature  shows  only  that  we  must  ask  nothing  about  it  but  merely  take 
it  into  the  mind  if  we  may,  with  the  knowledge  gained  that  nothing  can 
be  permissibly  connected  with  it. 

The  difficulty  this  Principle  presents  to  our  mind  in  so  far  as  we 
can  approach  to  conception  of  it  may  be  exhibited  thus  : — 

We  begin  by  posing  space,  a  place,  a  Chaos  ;  into  this  existing 
container,  real  or  fancied,  we  introduce  God  and  proceed  to  enquire  :  we 
ask,  for  example,  whence  and  how  He  comes  to  be  there  :  we  investigate 
the  presence  and  quality  of  this  new-comer  projected  into  the  midst  of 
things  here  from  some  height  or  depth.  But  the  difficulty  disappears 
if  we  eliminate  all  space  before  we  attempt  to  conceive  God  :  He  must 


VI.  8.  12]  FREE-WILL  ANI)  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE  225 

not  be  set  in  anything  either  as  enthroned  in  eternal  immanence  or  as 
ha\ ing  made  some  entry  into  things  1  le  is  to  be  conceived  as  existing 
alone,  in  that  existence  which  the  necessity  of  discussion  forces  11s  to 
attribute  to  Him,  with  space  and  all  the  rest  as  later  than  Hint — space 
latest  of  all.  Thus  we  conceive  as  far  as  we  may,  the  spaceless  ;  we 
abolish  the  notion  ot  any  environment  we  circumscribe'  Him  within 
no  limit  ,  we  attribute  no  extension  to  Him  ;  He  has  no  quality  since 
no  shape,  even  shape  Intellectual;  He  holds  no  relationship  but  exists 
in  and  for  Himself  before  anything  is. 

How  can  we  think  any  longer  of  that  "  Thus  I  It'  happened  to  be  ”  ? 
H°w  make  this  one  assertion  of  Him  of  whom  all  other  assertion  can 
be  no  more  than  negation  ?  It  is  on  the  contrary  nearer  the  truth  to 
say  “  Thus  He  has  happened  not  to  be  ”  :  that  contains  at  least  the  utter 
denial  of  his  happening. 


12. 

\et,  is  not  God  what  He  is?  Can  He,  then,  be  master  of  being 
what  He  is  or  master  to  stand  above  Being  ?  1  he  mind  utterly  reluctant 
returns  to  its  doubt  :  some  further  considerations,  therefore,  must  be 
offered  : — 

In  us  the  individual,  viewed  as  body,  is  far  from  reality  ;  by  soul 
which  especially  constitutes  the  being  we  participate  in  reality,  are  in 
some  degree  real.  This  is  a  compound  state,  a  mingling  of  Reality  and 
Difference,  not,  therefore  reality  in  the  strictest  sense,  not  reality  pure. 
Thus  far  we  are  not  masters  of  our  being ;  in  some  sense  the  reality 
in  us  is  one  thing  and  we  another.  We  are  not  masters  of  our  being  ; 
the  real  in  us  is  the  master  since  that  is  the  principle  establishing  our 
characteristic  difference  ;  yet  we  are  again  in  some  sense  that  which 
is  sovran  in  us  and  so  even  on  this  level  might  in  spite  of  all  be  described 
as  self-disposing. 

But  in  1  hat  which  is  wholly  what  it  is  self-existing  reality,  without 
distinction  between  the  total  thing  and  its  essence  the  being  is  a  unit 
and  is  sovran  over  itself ;  neither  the  being  nor  the  essence  is  to  be 
referred  to  any  extern.  Besides,  the  very  question  as  to  self-disposal 

2G 


226 


PLOTINUS 


falls  in  the  case  of  what  is  First  in  reality  ;  if  it  can  be  raised  at  all, 
we  must  declare  that  there  can  be  no  subjection  whatever  in  That  to 
which  reality  owes  its  freedom,  That  in  whose  nature  the  conferring  of 
freedom  must  clearly  be  vested,  preeminently  to  be  known  as  the  liberator. 

Still,  is  not  this  Principle  subject  to  its  essential  Being  ?  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  the  source  of  freedom  to  Being. 

Even  if  there  be  Act  in  the  Supreme — an  Act  with  which  it  is  to  be 
identified — this  is  not  enough  to  set  up  a  duality  within  it  and  prevent 
it  being  entirely  master  of  that  self  from  which  the  Act  springs  ;  for  the 
Act  is  not  distinct  from  that  self.  If  we  utterly  deny  Act  in  it — holding 
that  Act  begins  with  others  moving  about  it — we  are  all  the  less  able 
to  allow  either  self-mastery  or  subjection  in  it :  even  self-mastery  is 
absent  here,  not  that  anything  else  is  master  over  it  but  that  self-mastery 
begins  with  Being  while  the  Supreme  is  to  be  set  in  a  higher  order. 

But  what  can  there  be  higher  than  that  which  is  its  own 
master  ? 

Where  we  speak  of  self-mastery  there  is  a  certain  duality,  Act 
against  essence  ;  from  the  exercise  of  the  Act  arises  the  conception  of 
the  mastering  principle — though  one  identical  with  the  essence — hence 
arises  the  separate  idea  of  mastery,  and  the  being  concerned  is  said  to 
possess  self-mastery.  Where  there  is  no  such  duality  joining  to  unity 
but  solely  a  unity  pure — either  because  the  Act  is  the  whole  being  or 
because  there  is  no  Act  at  all — then  we  cannot  strictly  say  that  the  being 
has  this  mastery  of  self. 

13- 

Our  enquiry  obliges  us  to  use  terms  not  strictly  applicable  :  we 
insist,  once  more,  that  not  even  for  the  purpose  of  forming  the  concept 
of  the  Supreme  may  we  make  it  a  duality ;  if  now  we  do,  it  is  merely 
for  the  sake  of  conveying  conviction,  at  the  cost  of  verbal  accuracy. 

If,  then,  we  are  to  allow  Activities  in  the  Supreme  and  make  them 
depend  upon  will — and  certainly  Act  cannot  There  be  will-less — and 
these  Activities  are  to  be  the  very  essence,  then  will  and  essence  in  the 
Supreme  must  be  identical.  This  admitted,  as  He  willed  to  be  so  He  is  ; 


VI.  8.  I3]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE  227 

it  is  no  more  true  to  say  that  He  wills  and  acts  as  His  nature  determines 
than  that  His  essence  is  as  He  wills  and  acts.  Thus  He  is  wholly  master 
of  Himself  and  holds  His  very  being  at  His  will. 

Consider  also  that  every  being  in  its  pursuit  of  its  good  seeks  to  be 
that  good  rather  than  what  it  is  ;  it  judges  itself  most  truly  to  be  when 
it  partakes  of  its  good  :  in  so  far  as  it  thus  draws  on  its  good  its  being 
is  its  choice  :  much  more  then  must  the  very  Principle,  The  Good,  be 
desirable  in  itself  when  any  fragment  of  it  is  very  desirable  to  the  extern 
and  becomes  the  chosen  essence  promoting  that  extern’s  will  and  identical 
"with  the  will  that  gave  the  existence  ? 

As  long  as  a  thing  is  apart  from  its  good  it  seeks  outside  itself  ; 
when  it  holds  its  good  it  accepts  itself  as  it  is  :  and  this  is  no  matter  of 
chance  ;  the  essence  now  is  not  outside  of  the  will ;  by  the  good  it  is 
determined,  by  the  good  it  is  in  self-possession. 

If  then  this  Principle  is  the  means  of  determination  to  everything 
else,  we  see  at  once  that  self-possession  must  belong  primally  to  it,  so 
that  through  it  others  in  their  turn  may  be  self-belonging  :  what  we 
must  call  its  essence  comports  its  will  to  possess  such  a  manner  of  being ; 
we  can  form  no  idea  of  it  without  including  in  it  the  will  towards 
itself  as  it  is.  It  must  be  a  consistent  self  willing  its  being  and  being 
what  it  wills  ;  its  will  and  itself  must  be  one  thing,  all  the  more  one 
from  the  absence  of  distinction  between  a  given  nature  and  one  which 
would  be  preferred.  What  could  The  Good  have  wished  to  be  other 
than  what  it  is  ?  Suppose  it  had  the  choice  of  being  what  it  preferred, 
power  to  alter  the  nature,  it  could  not  prefer  to  be  something  else  ;  it 
could  have  no  fault  to  find  with  anything  in  its  nature,  as  if  that  nature 
were  imposed  by  force  ;  The  Good  is  what  from  always  it  wished  and 
wishes  to  be.  For  the  really  existent  Good  is  a  willing  towards  itself, 
towards  a  good  not  gained  by  any  wiles  or  even  attracted  to  it  by  force 
of  its  nature  ,  The  Good  is  what  it  chose  to  be  and,  in  fact,  there  was 
never  anything  outside  it  to  which  it  could  be  drawn. 

It  may  be  added  that  nothing  else  contains  in  its  essence  the  principle 
of  its  own  satisfaction  ;  there  will  be  inner  discord  :  but  this  hypostasis 
of  the  Good  must  necessarily  have  self-option,  the  will  towards  the 


228 


PLOTINUS 


self ;  if  it  had  not,  it  could  not  bring  satisfaction  to  the  beings  whose 
contentment  demands  participation  in  it  or  imagination  of  it. 

Once  more,  we  must  be  patient  with  language  ;  we  are  forced  to 
apply  to  the  Supreme  terms  which  strictly  are  ruled  out ;  everywhere 
we  must  read  “  So  to  speak.”  The  Good,  then,  exists  )  it  holds  its 
existence  through  choice  and  will,  conditions  of  its  very  being  .  yet  it 
cannot  be  a  manifold  j  therefore  the  will  and  the  essential  being  must 
be  taken  as  one  identity  ;  the  act  of  the  will  must  be  self-determined 
and  the  being  self-caused  ;  thus  reason  shows  the  Supreme  to  be  its 
own  Author.  For  if  the  act  of  will  springs  from  God  Himself  and  is  as 
it  were  His  operation  and  the  same  will  is  identical  with  His  essence, 
He  must  be  self-established.  He  is  not,  therefore,  “  what  He  has  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  ”  but  what  He  has  willed  to  be. 

14. 

Another  approach  : — Everything  to  which  existence  may  be  attri¬ 
buted  is  either  one  with  its  essence  or  distinct  from  it.  Thus  any  given 
man  is  distinct  from  essential  man  though  belonging  to  the  order  Man  : 
a  soul  and  a  soul’s  essence  are  the  same — that  is,  in  the  case  of  soul 
pure  and  unmingled — Man  as  type  is  the  same  as  man’s  essence  ;  where 
the  thing,  man,  and  the  essence  are  different,  the  particular  man  may 
be  considered  as  accidental ;  but  man,  the  essence,  cannot  be  so  ;  the 
type,  Man,  has  Real  Being.  Now  if  the  essence  of  man  is  real,  not  chanced 
or  accidental,  how  can  we  think  That  to  be  accidental  which  transcends 
the  order  man,  author  of  the  type,  source  of  all  being,  a  principle  more 
nearly  simplex  than  man’s  being  or  being  of  any  kind  ?  As  we  approach 
the  simplex,  accident  recedes  ;  what  is  utterly  simplex  accident  never 
touches  at  all. 

Further  we  must  remember  what  has  been  already  said,  that  where 
there  is  true  being,  where  things  have  been  brought  to  reality  by  that 
Principle — and  this  is  true  of  whatsoever  has  determined  condition 
within  the  order  of  sense — all  that  reality  is  brought  about  in  virtue 
of  something  emanating  from  the  divine.  By  things  of  determined 
condition  I  mean  such  as  contain,  inbound  with  their  essence,  the  reason 


VI.  8.  I5]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE  229 

of  their  being  as  they  are,  so  that,  later,  an  observer  can  state  the  use 
for  each  of  the  constituent  parts— why  the  eye,  why  feet  of  such  and 
such  a  kind  to  such  and  such  a  being — and  can  recognise  that  the  reason 
for  the  production  of  each  organ  is  inherent  in  that  particular  being 
and  that  the  parts  exist  for  each  other.  Why  feet  of  a  certain  length  ? 
Because  another  member  is  as  it  is  :  because  the  face  is  as  it  is,  therefore 
the  feet  are  what  they  are  ;  in  a  word  the  mutual  determinant  is  mutual 
adaptation  and  the  reason  of  each  of  the  several  forms  is  that  such  is 
the  plan  of  man. 

Thus  the  essence  and  its  reason  are  one  and  the  same.  The  con¬ 
stituent  parts  arise  from  the  one  source  not  because  that  source 
has  so  conceived  each  separately  but  because  it  has  produced  simul¬ 
taneously  the  plan  of  the  thing  and  its  existence.  This  therefore  is 
author  at  once  of  the  existence  of  things  and  of  their  reasons,  both 
produced  at  the  one  stroke.  It  is  in  correspondence  with  the  things 
of  process  but  far  more  nearly  archetypal  and  authentic  and  in  a  closer 
relation  with  the  Better,  their  source,  than  they  can  be. 

Of  things  carrying  their  causes  within,  none  arises  at  hazard  or 
without  purpose  ;  this  So  it  happened  to  be  is  applicable  to  none. 
All  that  they  have  comes  from  The  Good  ;  the  Supreme  itself,  then, 
as  author  of  reason,  of  causation,  and  of  causing  essence — all  certainly 
outside  of  chance — must  be  the  Principle  and  as  it  were  the 
exemplar  of  things,  thus  independent  of  hazard  :  it  is  the  First,  the 
Authentic,  immune  from  chance,  from  blind  effect  and  happening : 
God  is  cause  of  Himself ;  for  Himself  and  of  Himself  He  is  what  He  is, 
the  first  self,  transcendently  The  Self. 

*5- 

Lovable,  very  love,  the  Supreme  is  also  self-love  in  that  He 
is  lovely  no  otherwise  than  from  Himself  and  in  Himself.  Self¬ 
presence  can  hold  only  in  the  identity  of  associated  with  associating ; 
since,  in  the  Supreme,  associated  and  associating  are  one,  seeker  and 
sought  one — the  sought  serving  as  Hypostasis  and  substrate  of  the 
seeker — once  more  God’s  being  ^nd  his  seeking  are  identical :  once 


230 


PLOTINUS 


more,  then,  the  Supreme  is  the  self-producing,  sovran  of  Himself, 
not  happening  to  be  as  some  extern  willed  but  existing  as  He 
wills  it. 

And  when  we  say  that  neither  does  He  absorb  anything  nor  any¬ 
thing  absorb  Him,  thus  again  we  are  setting  Him  outside  of  all  happening 
— not  only  because  we  declare  Him  unique  and  untouched  by  all  but 
in  another  way  also.  Suppose  we  found  such  a  nature  in  ourselves  ; 
we  are  untouched  by  all  that  has  gathered  round  us  subjecting  us  to 
happening  and  chance  ;  all  that  accrument  was  of  the  servile  and  lay 
exposed  to  chance  :  by  this  new  state  alone  we  acquire  self-disposal  and 
free  act,  the  freedom  of  that  light  which  belongs  to  the  order  of  the  good 
and  is  good  in  actuality,  greater  than  anything  Intellectual-Principle  has 
to  give,  an  actuality  whose  advantage  over  Intellection  is  no  adventitious 
superiority.  When  we  attain  to  this  state  and  become  This  alone,  what 
can  we  say  but  that  we  are  more  than  free,  more  than  self-disposing  ?  And 
who  then  could  link  us  to  chance,  hazard,  happening,  when  thus  we  are 
become  veritable  Life,  entered  into  That  which  contains  no  alloy  but  is 
purely  itself  ? 

Isolate  anything  else  and  the  being  is  inadequate  ;  the  Supreme 
in  isolation  is  still  what  it  was.  The  First  cannot  be  in  the  soulless  or 
in  an  unreasoning  life  ;  such  a  life  is  too  feeble  in  being  ;  it  is  reason 
dissipated,  it  is  indetermination ;  only  in  the  measure  of  approach 
towards  reason  is  there  liberation  from  happening  ;  the  rational  is  above 
chance.  Ascending  we  come  upon  the  Supreme,  not  as  reason  but  as 
reason’s  better  :  thus  God  is  far  removed  from  all  happening  :  the  root 
of  reason  is  self-springing. 

The  Supreme  is  the  Term  of  all ;  it  is  like  the  principle  and  ground 
of  some  vast  tree  of  rational  life  ;  itself  unchanging,  it  gives  reasoned 
being  to  the  growth  into  which  it  enters. 

16. 

We  maintain,  and  it  is  evident  truth,  that  the  Supreme  is  every¬ 
where  and  yet  nowhere  ;  keeping  this  constantly  in  mind  let  us  see 
how  it  bears  on  our  present  enquiry. 


VI.  8.  1 6]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE  231 

If  God  is  nowhere,  then  not  anywhere  has  He  “  happened  to  be  ”  ; 
as  also  everywhere,  He  is  everywhere  in  entirety  :  at  once,  He  is  that 
everywhere  and  everywise  :  He  is  not  in  the  everywhere  but  is  the  every¬ 
where  as  well  as  the  giver  to  the  rest  of  things  of  their  being  in  that 
everywhere.  Holding  the  supreme  place— or  rather  no  holder  but 
Himself  the  Supreme  all  lies  subject  to  Him  ;  they  have  not  brought 
Him  to  be  but  happen,  all,  to  Him — or  rather  they  stand  there  before 
Him  looking  upon  Him,  not  He  upon  them.  He  is  borne,  so  to  speak, 
to  the  inmost  of  Himself  in  love  of  that  pure  radiance  which  He  is,  He 
Himself  being  that  which  He  loves.  That  is  to  say,  as  self-dwelling  Act 
and  Intellectual-Principle,  the  most  to  be  loved,  He  has  given  Himself 
existence.  Intellectual-Principle  is  the  issue  of  Act :  God  therefore 
is  issue  of  Act,  but  since  no  other  has  generated  Him  He  is  what  He 
made  Himself  :  He  is  not,  therefore,  “  as  He  happened  to  be  ”  but  as 
He  acted  Himself  into  being. 

Again  ;  if  He  preeminently  is  because  He  holds  firmly,  so  to  speak, 
towards  Himself,  looking  towards  Himself,  so  that  what  we  must  call 
his  being  is  this  self-looking,  He  must  again,  since  the  word  is  inevitable, 
make  Himself :  thus,  not  “  as  He  happens  to  be  ”  is  He  but  as  He  Himself 
wills  to  be.  Nor  is  this  will  a  hazard,  a  something  happening ;  the  will 
adopting  the  Best  is  not  a  thing  of  chance. 

That  his  being  is  constituted  by  this  self-originating  self-tendance— 
at  once  Act  and  repose — becomes  clear  if  we  imagine  the  contrary  ; 
inclining  towards  something  outside  of  Himself,  He  would  destroy  the 
identity  of  his  being.  This  self-directed  Act  is  therefore  his  peculiar 
being,  one  with  Himself.  If  then  his  act  never  came  to  be  but  is  eternal 
a  waking  without  an  awakener,  an  eternal  wakening  and  a  supra- 
Intellection  He  is  as  He  waked  Himself  to  be.  This  awakening  is 
before  being,  before  Intellectual-Principle,  before  rational  life,  though 
He  is  these  ;  He  is  thus  an  Act  before  Intellectual-Principle  and  con¬ 
sciousness  and  life  ;  these  come  from  Him  and  no  other ;  his  being, 
then,  is  a  self-presence,  issuing  from  Himself.  Thus  not  “  as  He  happened 
to  be  ”  is  He  but  as  He  willed  to  be. 


232 


PLOTINUS 


Or  consider  it  another  way  : — We  hold  the  universe,  with  its  con¬ 
tent  entire,  to  be  as  all  would  be  if  the  design  of  the  maker  had  so  willed 
it,  elaborating  it  with  purpose  and  prevision  by  reasonings  amounting  to 
a  Providence.  All  is  always  so  and  all  is  always  so  reproduced :  therefore 
the  reason-principles  of  things  must  lie  always  within  the  producing 
powers  in  a  still  more  perfect  form  ;  these  beings  of  the  divine  realm 
must  therefore  be  previous  to  Providence  and  to  preference  ;  all  that 
exists  in  the  order  of  being  must  lie  for  ever  There  in  their  Intellectual 
mode.  If  this  regime  is  to  be  called  Providence  it  must  be  in  the  sense 
that  before  our  universe  there  exists,  not  expressed  in  the  outer,  the 
Intellectual-Principle  of  all  the  All,  its  source  and  archetype. 

Now  if  there  is  thus  an  Intellectual-Principle  before  all  things, 
their  founding  principle,  this  cannot  be  a  thing  lying  subject  to  chance 
—multiple,  no  doubt,  but  a  concordance,  ordered  so  to  speak  into  oneness. 
Such  a  multiple — the  co-ordination  of  all  particulars  and  consisting 
of  all  the  Reason-Principles  of  the  universe  gathered  into  the  closest 
union— this  cannot  be  a  thing  of  chance,  a  thing  “  happening  so  to  be.” 
It  must  be  of  a  very  different  nature,  of  the  very  contrary  nature,  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  other  by  all  the  difference  between  reason  and  reasonless 
chance.  And  if  the  Source  is  precedent  even  to  this,  it  must  be  continuous 
with  this  reasoned  secondary  so  that  the  two  be  correspondent  ;  the 
secondary  must  participate  in  the  prior,  be  an  expression  of  its  will, 
be  a  power  of  it :  that  higher  therefore  (as  above  the  ordering  of  reason) 
is  without  part  or  interval  (implied  by  reasoned  arrangement),  is  a 
one-all  Reason-Principle,  one  number,  a  One  greater  than  its  product, 
more  powerful,  having  no  higher  or  better.  Thus  the  Supreme  can  derive 
neither  its  being  nor  the  quality  of  its  being.  God  Himself,  therefore, 
is  what  He  is,  self-related,  self-tending  ;  otherwise  He  becomes  outward¬ 
tending,  other-seeking — He  who  cannot  but  be  wholly  self-poised. 

18. 

Seeking  Him,  seek  nothing  of  Him  outside  ;  within  is  to  be  sought 
what  follows  upon  Him  ;  Himself  do  not  attempt.  He  is,  Himself, 


VI.  8.  1 8]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE 


233 


that  outer,  He  the  encompassment  and  measure  of  all  things  ;  or  rather 
He  is  within,  at  the  innermost  depth  ;  the  outer,  circling  round  Him, 
so  to  speak,  and  wholly  dependent  upon  Him,  is  Reason-Principle  and 
Intellectual-Principle — or  becomes  Intellectual-Principle  by  contact  with 
Him  and  in  the  degree  of  that  contact  and  dependence ;  for  from  Him  it 
takes  the  being  which  makes  it  Intellectual-Principle. 

A  circle  related  in  its  path  to  a  centre  must  be  admitted  to  owe 
its  scope  to  that  centre  ;  it  has  something  of  the  nature  of  that  centre 
in  that  the  radial  lines  converging  on  that  one  central  point  assimilate 
their  impinging  ends  to  that  point  of  convergence  and  of  departure, 
the  dominant  of  radii  and  terminals  :  the  terminals  are  of  one  nature 
with  the  centre,  separate  reproductions  of  it,  since  the  centre  is,  in  a 
certain  sense,  the  total  of  terminals  and  radii  impinging  at  every  point 
upon  it ;  these  lines  reveal  the  centre  ;  they  are  the  development  of 
that  undeveloped. 

In  the  same  way  we  are  to  take  Intellectual-Principle  and  Being. 
This  combined  power  springs  from  the  Supreme,  an  outflow  and  as  it 
were  development  from  That  and  remaining  dependent  upon  that  Intel¬ 
lective  nature,  showing  forth  That  which,  in  the  purity  of  its  oneness, 
is  not  Intellectual-Principle  since  it  is  no  duality.  No  more  than  in  the 
circle  are  the  lines  or  circumference  to  be  identified  with  that  Centre 
which  is  the  source  of  both  :  radii  and  circle  are  images  given  forth  by 
indwelling  power  and,  as  products  of  a  certain  vigour  in  it,  not  cut  off 
from  it. 

Thus  the  Intellective  power  circles  in  its  multiple  unity  around 
the  Supreme  which  stands  to  it  as  archetype  to  image  ;  the  image  in 
its  movement  round  about  its  prior  has  produced  the  multiplicity  by 
which  it  is  constituted  Intellectual-Principle  :  that  prior  has  no  move¬ 
ment  ;  it  generates  Intellectual-Principle  by  its  sheer  wealth. 

Such  a  power,  author  of  Intellectual-Principle,  author  of  being — 
how  does  it  lend  itself  to  chance,  to  hazard,  to  any  “So  it  happened  ”  ? 

What  is  present  in  Intellectual-Principle  is  present,  though  in  a 
far  transcendent  mode,  in  the  One  :  so  in  a  light  diffused  afar  from  one 
light  shining  within  itself,  the  diffused  is  vestige,  the  source  is  the  true 

2H 


234 


PLOTINUS 


light ;  but  Intellectual-Principle,  the  diffused  and  image  light,  is  net 
different  in  kind  from  its  prior  ;  and  it  is  not  a  thing  of  chance  but  at 
every  point  is  reason  and  cause. 

The  Supreme  is  cause  of  the  cause  :  it  is  cause  preeminently,  cause 
as  containing  cause  in  the  deepest  and  truest  mode  ;  for  in  it  lie  the 
Intellective  causes  which  are  to  be  unfolded  from  it,  author  as  it  is  not 
of  the  chance-made  but  of  what  the  divine  willed  :  and  this  willing  was 
not  apart  from  reason,  was  not  in  the  realm  of  hazard  and  of  what  hap¬ 
pened  to  present  itself. 

Thus  Plato  seeking  the  best  account  of  the  necessary  and  appropriate 
says  they  are  far  removed  from  hazard  and  that  what  exists  is  what 
must  exist  :  if  thus  the  existence  is  as  it  must  be  it  does  not  exist  without 
reason  :  if  its  manner  of  being  is  the  fitting,  it  is  the  utterly  self-disposing 
in  comparison  with  its  sequents  and,  before  that,  in  regard  to  itself  : 
thus  it  is  not  “  as  it  happened  to  be  ”  but  as  it  willed  to  be  :  all  this,  on 
the  assumption  that  God  wills  what  should  be  and  that  it  is  impossible 
to  separate  right  from  realisation  and  that  this  Necessary  is  not  to  God 
an  outside  thing  but  is,  itself,  His  first  Activity  manifesting  outwardly 
in  the  exactly  representative  form.  Thus  we  must  speak  of  God  since 
we  cannot  tell  Him  as  we  would. 

19. 

Stirred  to  the  Supreme  by  what  has  been  told,  a  man  must  strive 
to  possess  it  directly  ;  then  he  too  will  see,  though  still  unable  to  tell 
it  as  he  would  wish. 

One  seeing  That  as  it  really  is  will  lay  aside  all  reasoning  upon  it 
and  simply  state  it  as  the  self-existent,  such  that  if  it  had  essence  that 
essence  would  be  subject  to  it  and,  so  to  speak,  derived  from  it  ;  none 
that  has  seen  would  dare  to  talk  of  its  “  happening  to  be,”  or  indeed 
be  able  to  utter  word.  With  all  his  courage  he  would  stand  astounded, 
unable  at  any  venture  to  speak  of  This,  with  the  vision  everywhere 
before  the  eyes  of  the  soul  so  that,  look  where  one  may,  there  it  is  seen 
unless  one  deliberately  look  away,  ignoring  God,  thinking  no  more  upon 
Him.  So  we  are  to  understand  the  Beyond-Essence  darkly  indicated 


VI.  8.  20]  FREE-WILL  AND  THE  WILL  OF  THE  ONE 


235 

by  the  ancients  :  it  is  not  merely  that  He  generated  Essence  but  that 
He  is  subject  neither  to  Essence  nor  to  Himself;  His  essence  is  not  His 
Principle  ;  He  is  Principle  to  Essence  and  not  for  Himself  did  He  make 
it  ;  producing  it  He  left  it  outside  of  Himself  :  He  had  no  need  of  being 
who  brought  it  to  be.  Thus  His  making  of  being  is  no  “  action  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  His  being.” 

20. 

The  difficulty  will  be  raised  that  God  would  seem  to  have  existed 
before  thus  coming  into  existence  ;  if  He  makes  Himself,  then  in  regard 
to  the  self  which  He  makes  He  is  not  yet  in  being  and  as  maker  He  exists 
before  this  Himself  thus  made. 

Ihe  answer  is  that  we  utterly  must  not  speak  of  Him  as  made  but 
sheerly  as  maker  ;  the  making  must  be  taken  as  absolved  from  all  else  ; 
no  new  existence  is  established  ;  the  Act  here  is  not  directed  to  an  achieve¬ 
ment  but  is  God  Himself  unalloyed  :  here  is  no  duality  but  pure  unity. 
Let  no  one  suspect  us  of  asserting  that  the  first  Activity  is  without 
Essence  ;  on  the  contrary  the  Activity  is  the  very  reality.  To  suppose 
a  reality  without  activity  would  be  to  make  the  Principle  of  all  principles 
deficient  ;  the  supremely  complete  becomes  incomplete.  To  make  the 
Activity  something  superadded  to  the  essence  is  to  shatter  the  unity. 
If  then  Activity  is  a  more  perfect  thing  than  essence  and  the  First  is 
all  perfect,  then  the  Activity  is  the  First. 

By  having  acted,  He  is  what  He  is  and  there  is  no  question  of 
“  existing  before  bringing  Himself  into  existence  ”  ;  when  He  acted 
He  was  not  in  some  state  that  could  be  described  as  “  before  existing.” 
He  v/as  already  existent  entirely. 

Now  assuredly  an  Activity  not  subjected  to  essence  is  utterly  free  ; 
God's  selfhood,  then,  is  of  his  own  Act.  If  his  being  has  to  be  ensured 
by  something  else,  He  is  no  longer  the  self-existent  First  :  if  it  be  true 
to  say  that  He  is  his  own  container,  then  He  inducts  Himself ;  for  all 
that  He  contains  is  his  own  production  from  the  beginning  since  from 
the  beginning  He  caused  the  being  of  all  that  by  nature  He  contains. 

If  there  had  been  a  moment  from  which  He  began  to  be,  it  would 


PLOTINUS 


236 

be  possible  to  assert  his  self-making  in  the  literal  sense  ;  but  since  what 
He  is  He  is  from  before  all  time,  his  self-making  is  to  be  understood 
as  simultaneous  with  Himself  ;  the  being  is  one  and  the  same  with  the 
making  and  eternal  “  coming  into  existence.” 

This  is  the  source  also  of  his  self-disposal— strictly  applicable  if 
there  were  a  duality,  but  conveying,  in  the  case  of  a  unity,  a  disposing 
without  a  disposed,  an  abstract  disposing.  But  how  a  disposer  with 
nothing  to  dispose  ?  In  that  there  is  here  a  disposer  looking  to  a  prior 
when  there  is  none  since  there  is  no  prior,  This  is  the  First  but  a 
First  not  in  order  but  in  sovranty,  in  power  purely  self-controlled.  Purely  ; 
then  nothing  can  be  There  that  is  under  any  external  disposition  ;  all 
in  God  is  self-willing.  What  then  is  there  of  his  content  that  is  not 
Himself,  what  that  is  not  in  Act,  what  not  his  work  ?  Imagine  in  Him 
anything  not  of  his  Act  and  at  once  His  existence  ceases  to  be  pure  ; 
He  is  not  self-disposing,  not  all-powerful :  in  that  at  least  of  whose 
doing  He  is  not  master  He  would  be  impotent. 


21. 

Could  He  then  have  made  Himself  otherwise  than  as  He 
did  ? 

If  He  could  we  must  deny  Him  the  power  to  produce  goodness 
for  He  certainly  cannot  produce  evil.  Power,  There,  is  no  producer  of 
the  inapt ;  it  is  that  steadfast  constant  which  is  most  decidedly  power 
by  inability  to  depart  from  unity  :  ability  to  produce  the  inapt  is  in¬ 
ability  to  hold  by  the  fitting  ;  that  self-making  must  be  definite  once 
for  all  since  it  is  the  right :  besides,  who  could  upset  what  is  made  by  the 
will  of  God  and  is  itself  that  will  ? 

But  whence  does  He  draw  that  will  seeing  that  essence,  source  of 

will,  is  inactive  in  Him  ? 

The  will  was  included  in  the  essence  ;  they  were  identical :  or 
was  there  something,  this  will  for  instance,  not  existing  in  Him  ?  All 
was  will,  nothing  unwilled  in  Him.  There  is  then  nothing  before  that 
will :  God  and  will  were  primally  identical. 

God,  therefore,  is  what  He  willed,  is  such  as  He  willed  ;  and  all 


VI.  9.  I] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE  237 

that  ensued  upon  that  willing  was  what  that  definite  willing  engendered  : 
but  it  engendered  nothing  new ;  all  existed  from  the  first. 

As  for  his  self-containing,  this  rightly  understood  can  mean 
only  that  all  the  rest  is  maintained  in  virtue  of  Him  by  means  of  a  certain 
participation  ;  all  traces  back  to  the  Supreme  ;  God  Himself,  self- 
existing  always,  needs  no  containing,  no  participating ;  all  in  Him 

belongs  to  Him  or  rather  He  needs  nothing  from  them  in  order  to  being 
Himself. 

When  therefore  you  seek  to  state  or  to  conceive  Him,  put  all  else 
aside  ,  abstracting  all,  keep  solely  to  Him  ;  see  that  you  add  nothing  ; 
be  sure  that  your  theory  of  God  does  not  lessen  Him.  Even  you  are 
able  to  take  contact  with  Something  in  which  there  is  no  more  than 
That  Thing  itself  to  affirm  and  know,  Something  which  lies  away  above 
all  and  is  it  alone  veritably  free,  subject  not  even  to  its  own  law, 
solely  and  essentially  That  One  Thing,  while  all  else  is  thing  and  some¬ 
thing  added. 


NINTH  TRACTATE 

On  The  Good,  or  The  One 

1. 

It  is  in  virtue  of  unity  that  beings  are  beings. 

This  is  equally  true  of  things  whose  existence  is  primal  and  of  all 
that  are  in  any  degree  to  be  numbered  among  beings.  What  could  exist 
at  all  except  as  one  thing  ?  Deprived  of  unity,  a  thing  ceases  to  be  what 
it  is  called  :  no  army  unless  as  a  unity  :  a  chorus,  a  flock,  must  be  one 
thing.  Even  house  and  ship  demand  unity,  one  house,  one  ship  ;  unity 
gone  neither  remains  :  thus  even  continuous  magnitudes  could  not 
exist  without  an  inherent  unity  ;  break  them  apart  and  their  very  being 
is  altered  in  the  measure  of  the  breach  of  unity. 

Take  plant  and  animal ;  the  material  form  stands  a  unity  ;  fallen 
from  that  into  a  litter  of  fragments,  the  things  have  lost  their  being  ; 
what  was  is  no  longer  there  ;  it  is  replaced  by  quite  other  things — as 
many  others,  precisely,  as  possess  unity. 


238 


PLOTINUS 


Health,  similarly,  is  the  condition  of  a  body  acting  as  a  co-ordinate 
unity.  Beauty  appears  when  limbs  and  features  are  controlled  by 
this  principle,  unity.  Moral  excellence  is  of  a  soul  acting  as  a  concordant 

total,  brought  to  unity.  » 

Come  thus  to  soul— which  brings  all  to  unity,  making,  moulding, 
shaping,  ranging  to  order— there  is  a  temptation  to  say  “  Soul  is  the 
bestower  of  unity;  soul  therefore  is  the  unity.”  But  soul  bestows  other 
characteristics  upon  material  things  and  yet  remains  distinct  from  its 
gift  :  shape,  Ideal-Form  and  the  rest  are  all  distinct  from  the  giving 
soul :  so,  clearly,  with  this  gift  of  unity  ;  soul  to  make  things  unities 
looks  out  upon  the  unity  just  as  it  makes  man  by  looking  upon  Man, 
realising  in  the  man  the  unity  belonging  to  Man. 

Anything  that  can  be  described  as  a  unity  is  so  in  the  precise  degree 
in  which  it  holds  a  characteristic  being ;  the  less  or  more  the  degree 
of  the  being,  the  less  or  more  the  unity.  Soul  while  distinct  from  unity  s 
very  self,  is  a  thing  of  the  greater  unity  in  proportion  as  it  is  of  the  greater, 
the  authentic,  being.  Absolute  unity  it  is  not  :  it  is  soul  and  one  soul, 
the  unity  in  some  sense  a  concomitant ;  there  are  two  things,  soul  and 
soul’s  unity  as  there  is  body  with  body  s  unity.  The  looser  aggregates 
such  as  a  choir  are  furthest  from  unity,  the  more  compact  are  the  nearer  ; 
soul  is  nearer  yet  but  still  a  participant. 

Is  soul  to  be  identified  with  unity  on  the  ground  that  unless  it  were 
one  thing  it  could  not  be  soul  ?  No  ;  unity  is  equally  necessary  to  every 
other  thing,  yet  unity  stands  distinct  from  them  ;  body  and  unity  are 
not  identical ;  body,  too,  is  still  a  participant. 

Besides,  the  soul,  even  the  collective  soul  for  all  its  absence  of  part, 
is  a  manifold  :  it  has  diverse  powers — reasoning,  desiring,  perceiving 
all  held  together  by  this  chain  of  unity.  Itself  a  unity,  soul  confers 
unity,  but  also  accepts  it. 


2. 

It  may  be  suggested  that,  while  in  the  unities  of  the  partial  order 
the  essence  and  the  unity  are  distinct,  yet  in  collective  existence,  in 
Real  Being,  they  are  identical,  so  that  when  we  have  grasped  Being 


VI.  g-  2] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE 


239 


we  hold  unity  ;  Real  Being  would  coincide  with  Unity.  Thus,  taking 
the  Intellectual-Principle  as  Essential  Being,  that  principle  and  the 
Unity  Absolute  would  be  at  once  Primal  Being  and  Pure  Unity,  pur¬ 
veying,  accordingly,  to  the  rest  of  things  something  of  Being  and  some¬ 
thing,  in  proportion,  of  the  unity  which  is  itself. 

There  is  nothing  (we  may  be  told)  with  which  the  unity  would  be 
more  plausibly  identified  than  with  Being  ;  either  it  is  Being  as  a  given 
man  is  man  or  it  will  correspond  to  the  Number  which  rules  in  the  realm 
of  the  particular  ;  it  will  be  a  number  applying  to  a  certain  unique 
thing  as  the  number  two  applies  to  others. 

Now  if  Number  is  a  thing  among  things,  then  clearly  so  this  unity 
must  be  ;  we  would  have  to  discover  what  thing  of  things  it  is.  If  Number 
is  not  a  thing  but  an  operation  of  the  mind  moving  out  to  reckon,  then 
the  unity  will  not  be  a  thing. 

We  found  that  anything  losing  unity  loses  its  being  ;  we  are  there¬ 
fore  obliged  to  enquire  whether  the  unity  in  particulars  is  identical 
with  the  being,  and  unity  absolute  identical  with  collective  being. 

Now  the  being  of  the  particular  is  a  manifold  ;  unity  cannot  be  a 
manifold  ;  there  must  therefore  be  a  distinction  between  Being  and 
Unity.  Thus  a  man  is  at  once  a  reasoning  living  being  and  a  total  of 
parts  ;  his  variety  is  held  together  by  his  unity ;  man  therefore  and 
unity  are  different — man  a  thing  of  parts  against  unity  partless.  Much 
more  must  Collective  Being,  as  container  of  all  existence,  be  a  manifold 
and  therefore  distinct  from  the  unity  in  which  it  is  but  participant. 

Again,  Collective  Being  contains  life  and  intelligence — it  is  no  dead 
thing — and  so,  once  more,  is  a  manifold. 

If  Being  is  identical  with  Intellectual-Principle,  even  at  that  it  is 
a  manifold  ;  all  the  more  so  when  count  is  taken  of  the  Ideal  Forms 
in  it ;  for  the  Idea,  particular  or  collective  is,  after  all,  a  numerable 
agglomeration  whose  unity  is  that  of  a  kosmos. 

Above  all,  unity  is  The  First :  but  Intellectual-Principle,  Ideas 
and  Being,  cannot  be  so  ;  for  any  member  of  the  realm  of  Forms  is  an 
aggregation,  a  compound,  and  therefore — since  components  must  precede 
their  compound — is  a  later. 


240 


PLOTINUS 


Other  considerations  also  go  to  show  that  the  Intellectual-Principle 
cannot  be  the  First.  Intellect  must  be  about  the  Intellectual  Act  . 
at  least  in  its  higher  phase,  that  not  concerned  with  the  outer  universe, 
it  must  be  intent  upon  its  Prior  ;  its  introversion  is  a  conversion  upon 
the  Principle. 

Considered  as  at  once  Thinker  and  Object  of  its  Thought,  it  is  dual, 
not  simplex,  not  The  Unity:  considered  as  looking  beyond  itself,  it 
must  look  to  a  better,  to  a  prior  :  looking  simultaneously  upon  itself 
and  upon  its  Transcendent,  it  is,  once  more,  not  a  First. 

There  is  no  other  way  of  stating  Intellectual-Principle  than  as 
that  which,  holding  itself  in  the  presence  of  The  Good  and  First  and 
looking  towards  That,  is  self-present  also,  self-knowing  and  Knowing 
itself  as  All-Being  :  thus  manifold,  it  is  far  from  being  The  Unity. 

In  sum  The  Unity  cannot  be  the  total  of  beings  for  so  its  oneness 
is  annulled  ;  it  cannot  be  the  Intellectual-Principle  for  so  it  would  be 
that  total  which  the  Intellectual-Principle  is ;  nor  is  it  Being,  for  Being 
is  the  manifold  of  things. 

3-  .  , 

What  then  must  The  Unity  be,  what  nature  is  left  for  it  ? 

No  wonder  that  to  state  it  is  not  easy  ;  even  Being  and  Form  are 
not  easy,  though  w^e  have  a  way,  an  approach  through  the  Ideas. 

The  soul  or  mind  reaching  towrards  the  formless  finds  itself  incom¬ 
petent  to  grasp  where  nothing  bounds  it  or  to  take  impression  where 
the  impinging  reality  is  diffuse  ;  in  sheer  dread  of  holding  to  nothingness, 
it  slips  away.  The  state  is  painful ;  often  it  seeks  relief  by  retreating 
from  all  this  vagueness  to  the  region  of  sense,  there  to  rest  as  on  solid 
ground,  just  as  the  sight  distressed  by  the  minute  rests  with  pleasure 
on  the  bold. 

Soul  must  see  in  its  own  way  ;  this  is  by  coalescence,  unification  ; 
but  in  seeking  thus  to  knowr  the  Unity  it  is  prevented  by  that  very  uni¬ 
fication  from  recognising  that  it  has  found  ;  it  cannot  distinguish  itself 
from  the  object  of  this  intuition.  Nonetheless,  this  is  our  one  resource 
if  our  philosophy  is  to  give  us  knowledge  of  The  Unity. 


VI*  9-  3] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE  24I 

W  e  are  in  search  of  unity ;  we  are  to  come  to  know  the  principle 
o  all,  the  Good  and  First  ;  therefore  we  may  not  stand  away  from  the 
realm  of  Firsts  and  lie  prostrate  among  the  lasts  :  we  must  strike  for 
those  Firsts,  rising  from  things  of  sense  which  are  the  lasts.  Cleared 
of  all  evil  in  our  intention  towards  The  Good,  we  must  ascend  to  the 
Principle  within  ourselves  ;  from  many,  we  must  become  one  ;  only  so- 
do  we  attain  to  knowledge  of  that  which  is  Principle  and  Unity.  We 
shape  ourselves  into  Intellectual-Principle  ;  we  make  over  our  soul  in  trust 
to  Intellectual- Principle  and  set  it  firmly  in  That ;  thus  what  That  sees 
the  soul  will  waken  to  see  :  it  is  through  the  Intellectual-Principle  that 
we  have  this  vision  of  The  Unity  ;  it  must  be  our  care  to  bring  over 
nothing  whatever  from  sense,  to  allow  nothing  even  of  soul  to  enter 
into  Intellectual-Principle  :  with  Intellect  pure,  and  with  the  summit 
of  Intellect,  we  are  to  see  the  All-Pure. 

If  the  quester  has  the  impression  of  extension  or  shape  or  mass 
attaching  to  That  Nature  he  has  not  been  led  by  Intellectual-Principle 
which  is  not  of  the  order  to  see  such  things  ;  the  activity  has  been  of 
sense  and  of  the  judgement  following  upon  sense:  only  Intellectual- 
Principle  can  inform  us  of  the  things  of  its  scope  ;  its  competence  is 
upon  its  priors,  its  content  and  its  issue  :  but  even  its  content  is  outside 

of  sense  ;  and  still  purer,  still  less  touched  by  multiplicity,  are  its  priors 
or  rather  its  Prior. 

The  Unity,  then,  is  not  Intellectual-Principle  but  something  higher 
still :  Intellectual-Principle  is  still  a  being  but  that  First  is  no  being 
but  precedent  to  all  Being :  it  cannot  be  a  being  for  a  being  has  what 

we  may  call  the  shape  of  its  reality  but  The  Unity  is  without  shape 
even  shape  Intellectual. 

Generative  of  all,  The  Unity  is  none  of  all ;  neither  thing  nor  quantity 
nor  quality  nor  intellect  nor  soul ;  not  in  motion,  not  at  rest,  not  in 
place,  not  in  time  :  it  is  the  self-defined,  unique  in  form  or,  better,  form¬ 
less,  existing  before  Form  was,  or  Movement  or  Rest,  all  of  which  are 
attachments  of  Being  and  make  Being  the  manifold  it  is. 

But  how,  if  not  in  movement,  can  it  be  otherwise  than  at  rest  ? 

The  answer  is  that  movement  and  rest  are  states  pertaining  to 


242 


PLOTINUS 


Being,  which  necessarily  has  one  or  the  other  or  both.  Besides,  anything 
at  rest  must  be  so  in  virtue  of  Rest  as  something  distinct  :  Unity  at 
rest  becomes  the  ground  of  an  attribute  and  at  once  ceases  to  be  a  simplex. 

Note,  similarly,  that  when  we  speak  of  this  hirst  as  Cause  we  are 
affirming  something  happening  not  to  it  but  to  us,  the  fact  that  we 
take  from  this  Self-Enclosed  :  strictly  we  should  put  neither  a  This  nor 
a  That  to  it  ;  we  hover,  as  it  were,  about  it,  seeking  the  statement  of  an 
experience  of  our  own,  sometimes  nearing  this  Reality,  sometimes  baffled 
by  the  enigma  in  which  it  dwells. 


The  main  of  the  difficulty  is  that  awareness  of  this  Principle  comes 
neither  by  knowing  nor  by  the  Intellection  that  discovers  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Beings  but  by  a  presence  overpassing  all  knowledge.  In  knowing, 
soul  or  mind  abandons  its  unity ;  it  cannot  remain  a  simplex  :  knowing 
is  taking  account  of  things  ;  that  accounting  is  multiple  ;  the  mind 
thus  plunging  into  number  and  multiplicity  departs  from  unity. 

Our  way  then  takes  us  beyond  knowing  ;  there  may  be  no  wandering 
from  unity  ;  knowing  and  knowable  must  all  be  left  aside  ,  e\ei>  object 
of  thought,  even  the  highest,  we  must  pass  by,  for  all  that  is  good  is 
later  than  This  and  derives  from  This  as  from  the  sun  all  the  light 

of  the  day.  .  . 

“  Not  to  be  told ;  not  to  be  written  ”  :  in  our  writing  and  telling 

we  are  but  urging  towards  it :  out  of  discussion  we  call  to  vision  :  to 
those  desiring  to  see.  we  point  the  path  ;  our  teaching  is  of  the  road 
and  the  travelling  ;  the  seeing  must  be  the  very  act  of  one  that  has  made 
this  choice. 

There  are  those  that  have  not  attained  to  see.  lhe  soul  has  not 
come  to  know  the  splendour  There  ;  it  has  not  felt  and  clutched  to  itself 
that  love-passion  of  vision  known  to  the  lover  come  to  rest  where  he 
loves.  Or  struck  perhaps  by  that  authentic  light,  all  the  soul  lit  by  the 
nearness  gained,  we  have  gone  weighted  from  beneath  ;  the  vision  is 
frustrate  ;  we  should  go  without  burden  and  we  go  carrying  that  whic  1 
can  but  keep  us  back  ;  we  are  not  yet  made  over  into  unity. 


VI-  9-  53 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE 


*143 


From  none  is  that  Principle  absent  and  yet  from  all:  present, 
it  remains  absent  save  to  those  tit  to  receive,  disciplined  into  some  accord¬ 
ance,  able  to  touch  it  closely  by  their  likeness  and  by  that  kindred  power 
within  themselves  through  which,  remaining  as  it  was  when  it  came  to 

them  from  the  Supreme,  they  are  enabled  to  see  in  so  far  as  God  mav 
at  all  be  seen. 

Failure  to  attain  may  be  due  to  such  impediment  or  to  lack  of  the 
guiding  thought  that  establishes  trust  ;  impediment  we  must  charge 
against  ourselves  and  strive  by  entire  renunciation  to  become  emancipate  : 
where  there  is  distrust  for  lack  of  convincing  reason,  further  con¬ 
siderations  may  be  applied  : — 


5- 

Those  to  whom  existence  comes  about  by  chance  and  automatic  action 
and  is  held  together  by  material  forces  have  drifted  far  from  God  and  from 
the  concept  ot  unity;  we  are  not  here  addressing  them  but  only  such  as 
accept  another  nature  than  body  and  have  some  conception  of  soul. 

Soul  must  be  sounded  to  the  depths,  understood  as  an  emanation 
from  Intellectual-Principle  and  as  holding  its  value  by  a  Reason-Principle 
thence  infused.  Next  this  Intellect  must  be  apprehended,  mi  Intellect 
other  than  the  reasoning  faculty  known  as  the  rational  principle  ;  with 
reasoning  we  are  already  in  the  region  of  separation  and  movement  : 
our  sciences  are  Reason- Principles  lodged  in  soul  or  mind,  having  mani¬ 
festly  acquired  their  character  by  the  presence  in  the  soul  of  Intellectual- 
Principle,  source  of  all  knowing. 

Ihus  we  come  to  see  Intellectual-Principle  almost  as  an  object 
of  sense  .  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  is  perceptible  as  standing  above 
soul,  father  to  soul :  we  know  Intellectual-Principle  as  the  motionless, 
not  subject  to  change,  containing,  we  must  think,  all  things  ;  a  multiple 
but  at  once  indi\isible  and  comporting  difference.  It  is  not  discriminate 
as  are  the  Reason- Principles,  which  can  in  fact  be  known  one  bv  one  : 
yet  its  content  is  not  a  confusion  ;  every  item  stands  forth  distinctly, 
just  as  in  a  science  the  entire  content  holds  as  an  indivisible  and  yet 
each  item  is  a  self-standing  verity. 


244 


PLOTINUS 


Now  a  plurality  thus  concentrated  like  the  Intellectual  Kosmos 
is  close  upon  The  First— and  reason  certifies  its  existence  as  surely  as 
that  of  soul— yet,  though  of  higher  sovranty  than  soul,  it  is  not  The 
First  since  it  is  not  a  unity,  not  simplex  as  unity,  principle  over  all 
multiplicity,  must  be. 

Before  it  there  is  That  which  must  transcend  the  noblest  of  the 
things  of  Being  ;  there  must  be  a  prior  to  this  Principle  which  aiming 
towards  unity  is  yet  not  unity  but  a  thing  in  unity  s  likeness.  From  this 
highest  it  is  not  sundered  ;  it  too  is  self-present  :  so  close  to  the  unity, 
it  cannot  be  articulated  :  and  yet  it  is  a  principle  which  in  some  measure 
has  dared  secession. 

That  awesome  Prior,  The  Lenity,  is  not  a  being,  for  so  its  unity 
would  be  vested  in  something  else  :  strictly  no  name  is  apt  to  it,  but 
since  name  it  we  must  there  is  a  certain  rough  fitness  in  designating  it 
as  unity  with  the  understanding  that  it  is  not  the  unity  of  some  other 

thing. 

Thus  it  eludes  our  knowledge  so  that  the  nearer  approach  to  it  is 
through  its  offspring,  Being  ;  we  know  it  as  cause  of  existence  to  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle,  as  fount  of  all  that  is  best,  as  the  efficacy  which,  self- 
perduring  and  undiminishing,  generates  all  beings  and  is  not  to  be  counted 
among  these  its  derivatives  to  all  of  which  it  must  be  prior. 

This  we  can  but  name  The  Unity,  indicating  it  to  each  other  by  a 
designation  that  points  to  the  concept  of  its  partlessness  while  we  are 
in  reality  striving  to  bring  our  own  minds  to  unity .  W  e  are  not  to  think 
of  such  unity  and  partlessness  as  belong  to  point  or  monad  ;  the  veritable 
unity  is  the  source  of  all  such  quantity  which  could  not  exist  unless 
first  there  existed  Being  and  Being’s  Prior  :  we  are  not,  then,  to  think 
in  the  order  of  point  and  monad  but  to  use  these — in  their  rejection  of 
magnitude  and  partition — as  symbols  for  the  higher  concept. 

6. 

In  what  sense,  then,  do  we  assert  this  Unity  and  how  is  it  to  be 

adjusted  to  our  mental  processes  ? 

Its  oneness  must  not  be  belittled  to  that  of  monad  and  point  . 


VI.  9-  6] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE  245 

for  these  the  mind  abstracts  extension  and  numerical  quantity  and 
rests  upon  the  very  minutest  possible,  ending  no  doubt  in  the  partless 
but  still  in  something  that  began  as  a  partible  and  is  always  lodged  in 
something  other  than  itself.  The  Unity  was  never  in  any  other  and 
never  belonged  to  the  partible  :  nor  is  its  impartibility  that  of  extreme 
minuteness  ,  on  the  contrary  it  is  great  beyond  anything,  great  not  in 
extension  but  in  power,  sizeless  by  its  very  greatness  as  even  its  immediate 
sequents  are  impartible  not  in  mass  but  in  might.  We  must  therefore 
take  the  Unity  as  infinite  not  in  measureless  extension  or  numerable 
quantity  but  in  fathomless  depths  of  power. 

x  nink  of  The  One  as  Mind  or  as  God,  you  think  too  meanly ;  use 
all  the  resources  of  understanding  to  conceive  this  Unity  and,  again, 
it  is  more  authentically  one  than  God,  even  though  you  reach  for  God’s 
unity  beyond  the  unity  the  most  perfect  you  can  conceive.  For  This  is 
utterly  a  self -existent,  with  no  concomitant  whatever.  This  self-sufficing 
is  the  essence  of  its  unity.  Something  there  must  be  supremely  adequate, 
autonomous,  all-transcending,  most  utterly  without  need. 

-^ny  manifold,  anything  beneath  The  Unity,  is  dependent :  combined 
from  various  constituents,  its  essential  nature  goes  in  need  of  unity  \ 
but  unity  cannot  need  itself ;  it  stands  unity  accomplished.  Again,  a 
manifold  depends  upon  all  its  factors  ;  and  furthermore  each  of  those 
factors  in  turn  as  necessarily  inbound  with  the  rest  and  not  self-standing 
—sets  up  a  similar  need  both  to  its  associates  and  to  the  total  so  con¬ 
stituted. 

The  sovranly  self-sufficing  principle  will  be  Unity-Absolute,  for 
only  in  this  unity  is  there  a  nature  above  all  need  whether  within  itself 
or  in  regard  to  the  rest  of  things.  Unity  seeks  nothing  towards  its  being 
or  its  well-being  or  its  safehold  upon  existence  ;  cause  to  all,  how  can 
it  acquire  its  character  outside  of  itself  or  know  any  good  outside  ? 
The  good  of  its  being  can  be  no  borrowing  :  This  is  The  Good.  Nor 
has  it  station  ;  it  needs  no  standing  ground  as  if  inadequate  to  its  own 
sustaining  ;  what  calls  for  such  underpropping  is  the  soulless,  some 
material  mass  that  must  be  based  or  fall.  This  is  base  to  all,  cause  of 
universal  existence  and  of  ordered  station.  All  that  demands  place  is 


PLOTINUS 


246 

in  need  ;  a  First  cannot  go  in  need  of  its  sequents  :  all  need  is  effort 
towards  a  first  principle  ;  the  First,  principle  to  all,  must  be  utterly 
without  need.  If  the  Unity  be  seeking,  it  must  inevitably  be  seeking 
to  be  something  other  than  itself  ;  it  is  seeking  its  own  destroyer.  What¬ 
ever  may  be  said  to  be  in  need  of  a  good  is  needing  a  preserver  ,  nothing 
can  be  a  good  to  The  Unity,  therefore. 

Neither  can  it  have  will  to  anything;  it  is  a  Beyond-Good,  not 
even  to  itself  a  good  but  to  such  beings  only  as  may  be  of  quality  to 
have  part  with  it.  Nor  has  it  Intellection  ;  that  would  comport  diver¬ 
sity  ;  nor  Movement  ;  it  is  prior  to  Movement  as  to  Intellection. 

To  what  could  its  Intellection  be  directed  ?  To  itself  ?  But  that 
would  imply  a  previous  ignorance  ;  it  would  be  dependent  upon  that 
Intellection  in  order  to  knowledge  of  itself  ;  but  it  is  the  self-sufficing. 
Yet  this  absence  of  self-knowing  does  not  comport  ignorance  ;  ignorance 
is  of  something  outside — a  knower  ignorant  of  a  knowable  but  in  the 
Solitary  there  is  neither  knowing  nor  anything  unknown.  Unity,  self- 
present,  it  has  no  need  of  self-intellection  :  indeed  this  self -presence 

were  better  left  out,  the  more  surely  to  preserve  the  unity  ;  we  must 
eliminate  all  knowing  and  all  association,  all  intellection  whether  internal 
or  external.  It  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  having  but  as  being  Intellection  , 
Intellection  does  not  itself  perform  the  intellective  act  but  is  the  cause  of 
the  act  in  something  else  and  cause  is  not  to  be  identified  with  caused  . 
most  assuredly  the  cause  of  all  is  not  a  thing  within  that  all. 

This  Principle  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  identified  with  the  good  of 
which  it  is  the  source  ;  it  is  good  in  the  unique  mode  of  being  The  Good 
above  all  that  is  good. 

7* 

If  the  mind  reels  before  something  thus  alien  to  all  we  know,  we 
must  take  our  stand  on  the  things  of  this  realm  and  strive  thence  to  see. 
But  in  the  looking  beware  of  throwing  outward  ;  this  Principle  does 
not  lie  away  somewhere  leaving  the  rest  void  ;  to  those  of  power  to 
reach,  it  is  present ;  to  the  inapt,  absent.  In  our  daily  affairs  we  cannot 
hold  an  object  in  mind  if  we  have  given  ourselves  elsewhere,  occupied 


VI.  9-  8] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE  247 

upon  some  other  matter ;  that  very  thing  must  be  before  us  to  be  truly 
the  object  of  observation.  So  here  also  ;  preoccupied  by  the  impress 
of  something  else,  we  are  withheld  under  that  pressure  from  becoming 
aware  of  The  Unity ;  a  mind  gripped  and  fastened  by  some  definite 
thing  cannot  take  the  print  of  the  very  contrary.  As  Matter,  it  is  agreed, 
must  be  void  of  quality  in  order  to  accept  the  types  of  the  universe,  so 
and  much  more  must  the  soul  be  kept  formless  if  there  is  to  be  no  infixed 
impediment  to  prevent  it  being  brimmed  and  lit  by  the  Primal  Principle. 

In  sum,  we  must  withdraw  from  all  the  extern,  pointed  wholly 
inwards  ;  no  leaning  to  the  outer  ;  the  total  of  things  ignored,  first 
in  their  relation  to  us  and  later  in  the  very  idea  ;  the  self  put  out  of 
mmd  in  the  contemplation  of  the  Supreme  ;  all  the  commerce  so  closely 
There  that,  if  report  were  possible,  one  might  become  to  others  reporter 
of  that  communion. 

Such  converse,  we  may  suppose,  was  that  of  Minos,  thence  known 
as  the  Familiar  of  Zeus  ;  and  in  that  memory  he  established  the  laws 
which  report  it,  enlarged  to  that  task  by  his  vision  There.  Some,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  will  be  to  disdain  such  citizen  service,  choosing 
to  remain  in  the  higher  :  these  will  be  those  that  have  seen  much. 

we  read  is  outside  of  none,  present  unperceived  to  all ; 
we  break  away  from  Him,  or  rather  from  ourselves  ;  what  we  turn  from 
we  cannot  reach  ;  astray  ourselves,  we  cannot  go  in  search  of  another  ; 
a  child  distraught  will  not  recognise  its  father ;  to  find  ourselves  is  to 
know  our  source. 

8. 

Every  soul  that  knows  its  history  is  aware,  also,  that  its  movement, 
unthwarted,  is  not  that  of  an  outgoing  line  ;  its  natural  course  may  be 
likened  to  that  in  which  a  circle  turns  not  upon  some  external  but  on 
its  own  centre,  the  point  to  which  it  owes  its  rise.  The  soul’s  movement 
will  be  about  its  source  ;  to  this  it  will  hold,  poised  intent  towards  that 
unity  to  which  all  souls  should  move  and  the  divine  souls  always  move, 
divine  in  virtue  of  that  movement ;  for  to  be  a  god  is  to  be  integral  with 
the  Supreme  ;  what  stands  away  is  man  still  multiple,  or  beast. 


248 


PLOTINUS 


Is  then  this  “  centre  ”  of  our  souls  the  Principle  for  which  we  are 
seeking  ? 

We  must  look  yet  further  :  we  must  admit  a  Principle  in  which 
all  these  centres  coincide :  it  will  be  a  centre  by  analogy  with  the  centre 
of  the  circle  we  know.  The  soul  is  not  a  circle  in  the  sense  of  the  geometric 
figure  but  in  that  it  at  once  contains  the  Primal  Nature  (as  centre) 
and  is  contained  by  it  (as  circumference),  that  it  owes  its  origin  to  such 
a  centre  and  still  more  that  the  soul,  uncontaminated,  is  a  self-contained 

entity. 

In  our  present  state— part  of  our  being  weighed  down  by  the  body, 
as  one  might  have  the  feet  under  water  with  all  the  rest  untouched 
we  bear  ourselves  aloft  by  that  intact  part  and,  in  that,  hold  through 
our  own  centre  to  the  centre  of  all  the  centres,  just  as  the  centres  of  the 
great  circles  of  a  sphere  coincide  with  that  of  the  sphere  to  which  all 
belong.  Thus  we  are  secure. 

If  these  circles  were  material  and  not  spiritual,  the  link  with  the 
centres  would  be  local ;  they  would  lie  round  it  where  it  lay  at  some 
distant  point  :  since  the  souls  are  of  the  Intellectual,  and  the  Supreme 
still  loftier,  we  understand  that  contact  is  otherwise  procured,  that  is 
by  those  powers  which  connect  Intellectual  agent  with  Intellectual 
Object ;  this  all  the  more,  since  the  Intellect  grasps  the  Intellectual  object 
by  the  way  of  similarity,  identity,  in  the  sure  link  of  kindred.  Material 
mass  cannot  blend  into  other  material  mass  !  unbodied  beings  are  not 
under  this  bodily  limitation  ;  their  separation  is  solely  that  of  otherness, 
of  differentiation  ;  in  the  absence  of  otherness,  it  is  similars  mutually 

present. 

Thus  the  Supreme  as  containing  no  otherness  is  ever  present  with 
us  ;  we  with  it  when  we  put  otherness  away.  It  is  not  that  the  Supreme 
reaches  out  to  us  seeking  our  communion  :  we  reach  towards  the  Supreme  ; 
it  is  we  that  become  present.  We  are  always  before  it :  but  we  do  not 
always  look  :  thus  a  choir,  singing  set  in  due  order  about  the  conductor, 
may  turn  away  from  that  centre  to  which  all  should  attend  ,  let  it  but 
face  aright  and  it  sings  with  beauty,  present  effectively.  We  are  ever 
before  the  Supreme— cut  off  is  utter  dissolution  ;  we  can  no  longer 


VI.  9-  9J 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE  249 

be— but  we  do  not  always  attend  :  when  we  look,  our  Term  is  attained  ; 
this  is  rest  ,  this  is  the  end  of  singing  ill ;  effectively  before  Him,  we 
lift  a  choral  song  full  of  God. 

9- 

In  this  choiring,  the  soul  looks  upon  the  wellspring  of  Life,  well- 
spring  also  of  Intellect,  beginning  of  Being,  fount  of  Good,  root  of  Soul. 
It  is  not  that  these  are  poured  out  from  the  Supreme  lessening  it  as  if 
it  were  a  thing  of  mass.  At  that  the  emanants  would  be  perishable  ; 
but  they  are  eternal ;  they  spring  from  an  eternal  principle,  which 
produces  them  not  by  its  fragmentation  but  in  virtue  of  its  intact  identity  : 
therefore  they  too  hold  firm  ;  so  long  as  the  sun  shines,  so  long  there 
will  be  light. 

We  have  not  been  cut  away  ;  we  are  not  separate,  what  though 
the  body-nature  has  closed  about  us  to  press  us  to  itself ;  we  breathe 
and  hold  our  ground  because  the  Supreme  does  not  give  and  pass  but 
gives  on  for  ever,  so  long  as  it  remains  what  it  is. 

Our  being  is  the  fuller  for  our  turning  Thither  ;  this  is  our  pros¬ 
perity  ;  to  hold  aloof  is  loneliness  and  lessening.  Here  is  the  soul’s 
peace,  outside  of  evil,  refuge  taken  in  the  place  clean  of  wrong  ;  here 
it  has  its  Act,  its  true  knowing  *  here  it  is  immune.  Here  is  living, 
the  true  ,  that  of  to-day,  all  living  apart  from  Him,  is  but  a  shadow, 
a  mimicry.  Life  in  the  Supreme  is  the  native  activity  of  Intellect  ; 
in  virtue  of  that  converse  it  brings  forth  gods,  brings  forth  beauty, 
brings  forth  righteousness,  brings  forth  all  moral  good  ;  for  of  all  these 
the  soul  is  pregnant  when  it  has  been  filled  with  God.  This  state  is  its 
first  and  its  final,  because  from  God  it  comes,  its  good  lies  There,  and, 
once  turned  to  God  again,  it  is  what  it  was.  Life  here,  with  the  things 
of  earth,  is  a  sinking,  a  defeat,  a  failing  of  the  wing. 

That  our  good  is  There  is  shown  by  the  very  love  inborn  with  the 
soul;  hence  the  constant  linking  of  the  Love-God  with  the  Psyches 
in  story  and  picture  ;  the  soul,  other  than  God  but  sprung  of  Him, 
must  needs  love.  So  long  as  it  is  There,  it  holds  the  heavenly  love  ; 
here  its  love  is  the  baser ;  There  the  soul  is  Aphrodite  of  the  heavens  ; 

2K 


250 


PLOTINUS 


here,  turned  harlot,  Aphrodite  of  the  public  ways  :  yet  the  soul  is  always 
an  Aphrodite.  This  is  the  intention  of  the  myth  which  tells  of  Aphrodite  s 

birth  and  Eros  bom  with  her. 

The  soul  in  its  nature  loves  God  and  longs  to  be  at  one  with  Him 
in  the  noble  love  of  a  daughter  for  a  noble  father  ;  but  coming  to  human 
birth  and  lured  by  the  courtships  of  this  sphere,  she  takes  up  with  another 

love,  a  mortal,  leaves  her  father  and  falls. 

But  one  day  coming  to  hate  her  shame,  she  puts  away  the  evil  o 

earth,  once  more  seeks  the  father,  and  finds  her  peace. 

Those  to  whom  all  this  experience  is  strange  may  understand  by 
way  of  our  earthly  longings  and  the  joy  we  have  in  winning  to  what  we 
most  desire — remembering  always  that  here  what  we  love  is  perishable, 
hurtful,  that  our  loving  is  of  mimicries  and  turns  awiy  because  all  was 
a  mistake,  our  good  was  not  here,  this  was  not  what  we  sought  ;  There 
only  is  our  veritable  love  and  There  we  may  hold  it  and  be  with  it,  possess 
it  in  its  verity  no  longer  submerged  in  alien  flesh.  Any  that  have  seen 
know  what  I  have  in  mind  :  the  soul  takes  another  life  as  it  approaches 
God  ;  thus  restored  it  feels  that  the  dispenser  of  true  life  is  There  to  see, 
that  now  we  have  nothing  to  look  for  but,  far  otherwise,  that  we  must 
put  aside  all  else  and  rest  in  This  alone,  This  become,  This  alone,  all 
the  earthly  environment  done  away,  in  haste  to  be  free,  impatient  of 
any  bond  holding  us  to  the  baser,  so  that  with  our  being  entire  we  may 
cling  about  This,  no  part  in  us  remaining  but  through  it  we  have  touch 

with  God. 

Thus  we  have  all  the  vision  that  may  be  of  Him  and  of  ourselves  ; 
but  it  is  of  a  self  wrought  to  splendour,  brimmed  with  the  Intellectual 
light,  become  that  very  light,  pure,  buoyant,  unburdened,  raised  to 
Godhood  or,  better,  knowing  its  Godhood,  all  aflame  then  but  crushed 
out  once  more  if  it  should  take  up  the  discarded  burden. 


io. 

But  how  comes  the  soul  not  to  keep  that  ground  ? 

Because  it  has  not  yet  escaped  wholly  :  but  there  will  be  the  time 
of  vision  unbroken,  the  self  hindered  no  longer  by  any  hindrance  of 


VI.  g.  ii] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE 


251 


body.  Not  that  those  hindrances  beset  that  in  us  which  has  veritably 
seen  ;  it  is  the  other  phase  of  the  soul  that  suffers  and  that  only  when 
we  withdraw  from  vision  and  take  to  knowing  by  proof,  by  evidence,  by 
the  reasoning  processes  of  the  mental  habit.  Such  logic  is  not  to  be 
confounded  with  that  act  of  ours  in  the  vision  ;  it  is  not  our  reason 
that  has  seen  ;  it  is  something  greater  than  reason,  reason’s  Prior,  as 
far  above  reason  as  the  very  object  of  that  thought  must  be. 

In  our  self-seeing  There,  the  self  is  seen  as  belonging  to  that  order, 
or  rather  we  are  merged  into  that  self  in  us  which  has  the  quality  of  that 
order.  It  is  a  knowing  of  the  self  restored  to  its  purity.  No  doubt  we 
should  not  speak  of  seeing ;  but  we  cannot  help  talking  in  dualities, 
seen  and  seer,  instead  of,  boldly,  the  achievement  of  unity.  In  this 
seeing,  we  neither  hold  an  object  nor  trace  distinction  ;  there  is  no  two. 
The  man  is  changed,  no  longer  himself  nor  self-belonging  ;  he  is  merged 
with  the  Supreme,  sunken  into  it,  one  with  it:  centre  coincides  with 
centre,  for  on  this  higher  plane  things  that  touch  at  all  are  one  ;  only  in 
separation  is  there  duality ;  by  our  holding  away,  the  Supreme  is  set  out¬ 
side.  This  is  why  the  vision  baffles  telling ;  we  cannot  detach  the  Supreme 
to  state  it ;  if  we  have  seen  something  thus  detached  we  have  failed  of  the 
Supreme  which  is  to  be  known  only  as  one  with  ourselves. 


II. 

This  is  the  purport  of  that  rule  of  our  Mysteries  :  Nothing  Divulged 
to  the  Uninitiate  :  the  Supreme  is  not  to  be  made  a  common  story,  the 
holy  things  may  not  be  uncovered  to  the  stranger,  to  any  that  has  not 
himself  attained  to  see.  There  were  not  two  ;  beholder  was  one  with 
beheld  ;  it  was  not  a  vision  compassed  but  a  unity  apprehended.  The 
man  formed  by  this  mingling  with  the  Supreme  must — if  he  only  remember 
— carry  its  image  impressed  upon  him  :  he  is  become  the  Unity,  nothing 
within  him  or  without  inducing  any  diversity  ;  no  movement  now,  no 
passion,  no  outlooking  desire,  once  this  ascent  is  achieved  ;  reasoning 
is  in  abeyance  and  all  Intellection  and  even,  to  dare  the  word,  the  very 
self  :  caught  away,  filled  with  God,  he  has  in  perfect  stillness  attained 
isolation  ;  all  the  being  calmed,  he  turns  neither  to  this  side  nor  to  that, 


252 


PLOTINUS 


not  even  inwards  to  himself  ;  utterly  resting  he  has  become  very  rest. 
He  belongs  no  longer  to  the  order  of  the  beautiful ;  he  has  risen  beyond 
beauty ;  he  has  overpassed  even  the  choir  of  the  virtues  ;  he  is  like 
one  who,  having  penetrated  the  inner  sanctuary,  leaves  the  temple 
images  behind  him— though  these  become  once  more  first  objects  of 
regard  when  he  leaves  the  holies  ;  for  There  his  converse  was  not  with 
image,  not  with  trace,  but  with  the  very  Truth  in  the  view  of  which  all 

the  rest  is  but  of  secondary  concern. 

There,  indeed,  it  was  scarcely  vision,  unless  of  a  mode  unknown  ; 
it  was  a  going  forth  from  the  self,  a  simplifying,  a  renunciation,  a  reach 
towards  contact  and  at  the  same  time  a  repose,  a  meditation  towards 
adjustment.  This  is  the  only  seeing  of  what  lies  within  the  holies :  to 
look  otherwise  is  to  fail. 

Things  here  are  signs  ;  they  show  therefore  to  the  wiser  teachers 
how  the  supreme  God  is  known  ;  the  instructed  priest  reading  the  sign 
may  enter  the  holy  place  and  make  real  the  vision  of  the  inaccessible. 

Even  those  that  have  never  found  entry  must  admit  the  existence 
of  that  invisible  ;  they  will  know  their  source  and  Principle  since  bj, 
principle  they  see  principle  and  are  linked  with  it,  by  like  they  have 
contact  with  like  and  so  they  grasp  ah  of  the  divine  that  lies  within  the 
scope  of  mind.  Until  the  seeing  comes  they  are  still  craving  something, 
that  which  only  the  vision  can  give  ;  this  Term,  attained  only  by  those 
that  have  overpassed  all,  is  the  All-Transcending. 

It  is  not  in  the  soul’s  nature  to  touch  utter  nothingness  ;  the  lowest 
descent  is  into  evil  and,  so  far,  into  non-being  :  but  to  utter  nothing, 
never.  When  the  soul  begins  again  to  mount,  it  comes  not  to  something 
alien  but  to  its  very  self  ;  thus  detached,  it  is  not  in  nothingness  but 
in  itself  ;  self-gathered  it  is  no  longer  in  the  order  of  being  ;  it  is  in 

the  Supreme. 

There  is  thus  a  converse  in  virtue  of  which  the  essential  man  out¬ 
grows  Being,  becomes  identical  with  the  Transcendent  of  Being.  The  self 
thus  lifted,  we  are  in  the  likeness  of  the  Supreme  :  if  from  that  heightened 
self  we  pass  still  higher — image  to  archetype — we  have  won  the  Term 
of  all  our  journeying.  Fallen  back  again,  we  waken  the  virtue  within 


VI.  9-  II] 


ON  THE  GOOD,  OR  THE  ONE  253 

until  we  know  ourselves  all  order  once  more  ;  once  more  we  are  lightened 
of  the  burden  and  move  by  virtue  towards  Intellectual-Principle  and 
through  the  Wisdom  in  That  to  the  Supreme. 

This  is  the  life  of  gods  and  of  the  godlike  and  blessed  among  men, 
liberation  from  the  alien  that  besets  us  here,  a  life  taking  no  pleasure 
in  the  things  of  earth,  the  passing  of  solitary  to  solitary. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Mr.  MacKenna  desires  to  offer  his  sincerest  apologies  for  the  long 
delay  in  the  publication  of  this  concluding  volume.  After  persistent 
effort  he  was  forced  to  recognise  that  the  adequate  handling  of  this  Sixth 
Ennead  was  beyond  his  competence  and  that  his  only  resource  was  to 
call  in  expert  assistance.  He  was  fortunate  in  securing  the  services  of 
Mr.  B.  S.  Page,  with  whose  help  the  work  was  speedily  concluded.  Mr. 
Page  has  translated  the  first  three  Tractates— making  some  concessions 
to  the  terminology  adopted  in  the  previous  volumes — and  has  subjected 
the  translation  of  the  remaining  six  to  minute  revision,  correcting  errors 
and  making  valuable  suggestions.  It  is  to  be  clearly  understood,  however, 
that  Mr.  Page  accepts  no  responsibility  for  the  final  form  of  this  part  of 
the  work.  Mr.  MacKenna  must  also  express  his  indebtedness  to  the 
German  translations  of  Mueller  and  Kieffer,  to  Dean  Inge  s  “  Plotinus, 
and  to  “  Select  Passages  Illustrating  Neoplatonism,”  by  Professor  E.  R. 
Dodds. 

The  warmest  thanks  of  the  translator  and  of  all  who  have  been 
served  by  the  translation  of  Plotinus  here  completed  are  due  to 
Mr.  E.  R.  Debenham,  without  whose  initiative  and  munificent  aid 
it  could  not  have  appeared. 

Mr.  Page  wishes  to  express  his  deep  sense  of  obligation  to  Professor 
E.  R.  Dodds,  who  has  always  been  ready  to  discuss  with  him  difficulties 
of  reading  and  interpretation  ;  several  passages  are  translated  in  the 
light  of  Professor  Dodds’s  suggestions.  From  the  books  which  have  helped 
him  in  various  ways  he  would  select  for  special  mention  Mueller’s  trans¬ 
lation  and  Nebel’s  “  Plotins  Kategorien  der  intelligiblen  Welt.” 


I  KIN  Hill  ny  W 1 1  MAM  IIKKNDON  AND  SON,  I, TO, 
PLYMOUTH,  KNUI  AND 


mrriNus: 

on  THE 
ONE  AND 
GOOD 

MACKIiNNA 
AND 
1‘AOB 
VOI„  V. 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS:  ON 
THE  ONE  AND  GOOD,  VOLUME  V. 

TRANSLATED  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 
AND  B.  S.  PAGE 


Date  Due 


flrni  /J 

fa  u1^ 

«/ 

/  — 

1  5  zoo* 

nnw  a 

NUV  VI 

8~M3 

(T>h 

■1) 


1 


B  693  A4  E6  v.  5 

Plotinus.  010101  non 

Oh  the  One  and  Good  being  the 


0  163  0210297  9 

TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


