THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS  :  THE 
DIVINE  MIND,  VOLUME  IV. 
TRANSLATED  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


NUNC  COCNOSCO  EX  PARTE 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


Of  this  Edition  1000  copies  have 
been  printed  on  pure  rag  paper 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS:  THE 
DIVINE  MIND,  VOLUME  IV. 


T>o  Com  jjtoipe  t)*  *j  ofiO|\4  ru  ti-6i[\e4nn. 


Sciop«in  mAC-GnnA. 


LOTINUS 

THE  DIVINEMIND, BEING 

THE  TREATISES  OF  THE  FIFTH 
ENNEAD,  TRANSLATED 
FROM  THE  GREEK  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


THE  MEDICI  SOCIETY,  LIMITED 
7  GRAFTON  ST.  LONDON,  W.  1 
ALSO  AT  BOSTON,  U.S.A.  1926 


j3  6  7  3  -  /?  y  Jz  t?  ]/,  V 


PRINTED  IN  ENGLAND 


CONTENTS 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  FIFTH  ENNEAD 

PAGE 

I.  The  Three  Initial  Hypostases  i 

II.  The  Origin  and  Order  of  the  Beings  Following  on  the  First  16 

III.  The  Knowing  Hypostases  and  the  Transcendent  18 

IV.  How  the  Secondaries  rise  from  The  First:  and  on  The  One  43 

V.  That  the  Intellectual  Beings  are  not  Outside  the  Intellectual- 

Principle  :  AND  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD  47 

VI.  That  the  Principle  Transcending  Being  has  no  Intellectual 

Act.  What  being  has  intellection  primally  and  what 
being  has  it  secondarily  63 

VII.  IS  THERE  AN  IDEAL  ARCHETYPE  OF  PARTICULAR  BEINGS  ?  69 

VIII.  On  the  Intellectual  Beauty  73 

IX:  The  Intellectual-Principle,  the  Ideas  and  the  Authentic 

Existence  89 

Acknowledgements  103 


THE  FIFTH  ENNEAD 


FIRST  TRACTATE 

The  Three  Initial  Hypostases 

i. 

What  can  it  be  that  has  brought  the  souls  to  forget  the  father,  God, 
and,  though  members  of  the  Divine  and  entirely  of  that  world,  to 
ignore  at  once  themselves  and  It  ? 

The  evil  that  has  overtaken  them  has  its  source  in  self-will,  in  the 
entry  into  the  sphere  of  process,  and  in  the  primal  differentiation  with 
the  desire  for  self  ownership.  They  conceived  a  pleasure  in  this  freedom 
and  largely  indulged  their  own  motion;  thus  they  were  hurried  down 
the  wrong  path,  and  in  the  end,  drifting  further  and  further,  they  came 
to  lose  even  the  thought  of  their  origin  in  the  Divine.  A  child  wrenched 
young  from  home  and  brought  up  during  many  years  at  a  distance  will 
fail  in  knowledge  of  its  father  and  of  itself  :  the  souls,  in  the  same  way, 
no  longer  discern  either  the  divinity  or  their  own  nature  ;  ignorance  of 
their  rank  brings  self-depreciation  ;  they  misplace  their  respect,  honouring 
everything  more  than  themselves  ;  all  their  awe  and  admiration  is  for 
the  alien,  and,  clinging  to  this,  they  have  broken  apart,  as  far  as  a  soul 
may,  and  they  make  light  of  what  they  have  deserted ;  their  regard 
for  the  mundane  and  their  disregard  of  themselves  bring  about  their 
utter  ignoring  of  the  divine. 

Admiring  pursuit  of  the  external  is  a  confession  of  inferiority  ;  and 
nothing  thus  holding  itself  inferior  to  things  that  rise  and  perish,  nothing 
counting  itself  less  honourable  and  less  enduring  than  all  else  it  admires 
could  ever  form  any  notion  of  either  the  nature  or  the  power  of  God. 

A  double  discipline  must  be  applied  if  human  beings  in  this  pass 
are  to  be  reclaimed,  and  brought  back  to  their  origins,  lifted  once  more 
towards  the  Supreme  and  One  and  First. 


B 


2 


PLOTINUS 


There  is  the  method,  which  we  amply  exhibit  elsewhere,  declaring 
the  dishonour  of  the  objects  which  the  Soul  holds  here  in  honour  ;  the 
second  teaches  or  recalls  to  the  soul  its  race  and  worth  ;  this  latter  is 
the  leading  truth,  and,  clearly  brought  out,  is  the  evidence  of  the  other. 

It  must  occupy  us  now  for  it  bears  closely  upon  our  enquiry  (as  to 
the  Divine  Hypostases)  to  which  it  is  the  natural  preliminary  :  the 
seeker  is  soul  and  it  must  start  from  a  true  notion  of  the  nature  and 
quality  by  which  soul  may  undertake  the  search  ;  it  must  study  itself 
in  order  to  learn  whether  it  has  the  faculty  for  the  enquiry,  the  eye  for 
the  object  proposed,  whether  in  fact  we  ought  to  seek  ;  for  if  the  object 
is  alien  the  search  must  be  futile,  while  if  there  is  relationship  the  solution 
of  our  problem  is  at  once  desirable  and  possible. 


2. 

Let  every  soul  recall,  then,  at  the  outset  the  truth  that  soul  is  the 
author  of  all  living  things,  that  it  has  breathed  the  life  into  them  all, 
whatever  is  nourished  by  earth  and  sea,  all  the  creatures  of  the  air, 
the  divine  stars  in  the  sky  ;  it  is  the  maker  of  the  sun  ;  itself  formed 
and  ordered  this  vast  heaven  and  conducts  all  that  rhythmic  motion  : 
and  it  is  a  principle  distinct  from  all  these  to  which  it  gives  law  and 
movement  and  life,  and  it  must  of  necessity  be  more  honourable  than 
they,  for  they  gather  or  dissolve  as  soul  brings  them  life  or  abandons 
them,  but  soul,  since  it  never  can  abandon  itself,  is  of  eternal  being. 

How  life  was  purveyed  to  the  universe  of  things  and  to  the  separate 
beings  in  it  may  be  thus  conceived  : — 

That  great  soul  must  stand  pictured  before  another  soul,  one  not 
mean,  a  soul  that  has  become  worthy  to  look,  emancipate  from  the  lure, 
from  all  that  binds  its  fellows  in  bewitchment,  holding  itself  in  quietude. 
Let  not  merely  the  enveloping  body  be  at  peace,  body’s  turmoil  stilled, 
but  all  that  lies  around,  earth  at  peace,  and  sea  at  peace,  and  air  and  the 
very  heavens.  Into  that  heaven,  all  at  rest,  let  the  great  soul  be  con¬ 
ceived  to  roll  inward  at  every  point,  penetrating,  permeating,  from  all 
sides  pouring  in  its  light.  As  the  rays  of  the  sun  throwing  their  brilliance 
upon  a  lowering  cloud  make  it  gleam  all  gold,  so  the  soul  entering  the 


V.  I.  2] 


THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES 


3 


material  expanse  of  the  heavens  has  given  life,  has  given  immortality  : 
what  was  abject  it  has  lifted  up  ;  and  the  heavenly  system,  moved 
now  in  endless  motion  by  the  soul  that  leads  it  in  wisdom,  has  become 
a  living  and  a  blessed  thing  ;  the  soul  domiciled  within,  it  takes  worth 
where,  before  the  soul,  it  was  stark  body — clay  and  water — or,  rather, 
the  blankness  of  Matter,  the  absence  of  Being,  and,  as  an  author  says, 
“  the  execration  of  the  Gods.” 

The  Soul’s  nature  and  power  will  be  brought  out  more  clearly,  more 
brilliantly,  if  we  consider  next  how  it  envelops  the  heavenly  system 
and  guides  all  to  its  purposes  :  for  it  has  bestowed  itself  upon  all  that 
huge  expanse  so  that  every  interval,  small  and  great  alike,  all  has  been 
ensouled. 

The  material  body  is  made  up  of  parts,  each  holding  its  own  place, 
some  in  mutual  opposition  and  others  variously  interdependent ;  the 
soul  is  in  no  such  condition ;  it  is  not  whittled  down  so  that  life  tells  of 
a  part  of  the  soul  and  springs  where  some  such  separate  portion  impinges ; 
each  separate  life  lives  by  the  soul  entire,  omnipresent  in  the  likeness 
of  the  engendering  father,  entire  in  unity  and  entire  in  diffused  variety. 
By  the  power  of  the  soul  the  manifold  and  diverse  heavenly  system  is 
a  unit :  through  soul  this  universe  is  a  God  :  and  the  sun  is  a  God  because 
it  is  ensouled  ;  so  too  the  stars  :  and  whatsoever  we  ourselves  may  be, 
it  is  all  in  virtue  of  soul ;  for  “  dead  is  viler  than  dung.” 

This,  by  which  the  gods  are  divine,  must  be  the  oldest  God  of  them 
all :  and  our  own  soul  is  of  that  same  Ideal  nature,  so  that  to  consider 
it,  purified,  freed  from  all  accruement,  is  to  recognise  in  ourselves  that 
same  value  which  we  have  found  soul  to  be,  honourable  above  all  that  is 
bodily.  For  what  is  body  but  earth,  and,  taking  fire  itself  (the  noblest 
of  material  things),  what  (but  soul)  is  its  burning  power  ?  So  it  is  with 
all  the  compounds  of  earth  and  fire,  even  with  water  and  air  added  to 
them  ? 

If,  then,  it  is  the  presence  of  soul  that  brings  worth,  how  can  a  man 
slight  himself  and  run  after  other  things  ?  You  honour  the  Soul  else¬ 
where  ;  honour  then  yourself. 


4 


PLOTINUS 


3- 

The  Soul  once  seen  to  be  thus  precious,  thus  divine,  you  may  hold 
the  faith  that  by  its  possession  you  are  already  nearing  God  :  in  the 
strength  of  this  power  make  upwards  towards  Him  :  at  no  great 
distance  you  must  attain  :  there  is  not  much  between. 

But  over  this  divine,  there  is  a  still  diviner  :  grasp  the  upward 
neighbour  of  the  soul,  its  prior  and  source. 

Soul,  for  all  the  worth  we  have  shown  to  belong  to  it,  is  yet  a 
secondary,  an  image  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  :  reason  uttered  is 
an  image  of  the  reason  stored  within  the  soul,  and  in  the  same  way 
soul  is  an  utterance  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  :  it  is  even  the  total 
of  its  activity,  the  entire  stream  of  life  sent  forth  by  that  Principle 
to  the  production  of  further  being ;  it  is  the  forthgoing  heat  of 
a  fire  which  has  also  heat  essentially  inherent.  But  within  the 
Supreme  we  must  see  energy  not  as  an  overflow  but  in  the  double  aspect 
of  integral  inherence  with  the  establishment  of  a  new  being.  Sprung, 
in  other  words,  from  the  Intellectual- Principle,  Soul  is  intellective,  but 
with  an  intellection  operating  by  the  method  of  reasonings  :  for  its  per¬ 
fecting  it  must  look  to  that  Divine  Mind,  which  may  be  thought  of  as 
a  father  watching  over  the  development  of  his  child  bom  imperfect  in 
comparison  with  himself. 

Thus  its  substantial  existence  comes  from  the  Intellectual- Principle  ; 
and  the  Reason  within  it  becomes  Act  in  virtue  of  its  contemplation  of 
that  prior  ;  for  its  thought  and  act  are  its  own  intimate  possession  when 
it  looks  to  the  Supreme  Intelligence  ;  those  only  are  soul-acts  which  are 
of  this  intellective  nature  and  are  determined  by  its  own  character  ; 
all  that  is  less  noble  is  foreign  (traceable  to  Matter)  and  is  accidental  to 
the  soul  in  the  course  of  its  peculiar  task. 

In  two  ways,  then,  the  Intellectual- Principle  enhances  the  divine 
quality  of  the  soul,  as  father  and  as  immanent  presence  ;  nothing  separates 
them  but  the  fact  that  they  are  not  one  and  the  same,  that  there  is 
succession,  that  over  against  a  recipient  there  stands  the  ideal-form 
received  ;  but  this  recipient,  Matter  to  the  Supreme  Intelligence,  is  also 
noble  as  being  at  once  informed  by  divine  intellect  and  uncompounded. 


V.  1. 4]  THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES  5 

What  the  Intellectual-Principle  must  be  is  carried  in  the  single  word 
that  Soul,  itself  so  great,  is  still  inferior. 

4- 

But  there  is  yet  another  way  to  this  knowledge  : — 

Admiring  the  world  of  sense  as  we  look  out  upon  its  vastness  and 
beauty  and  the  order  of  its  eternal  march,  thinking  of  the  gods  within  it, 
seen  and  hidden,  and  the  celestial  spirits  and  all  the  life  of  animal  and 
plant,  let  us  mount  to  its  archetype,  to  the  yet  more  authentic  sphere  : 
there  we  are  to  contemplate  all  things  as  members  of  the  Intellectual — 
eternal  in  their  own  right,  vested  with  a  self-springing  consciousness  and 
life — and,  presiding  over  all  these,  the  unsoiled  Intelligence  and  the 
unapproachable  wisdom. 

That  archetypal  world  is  the  true  Golden  Age,  age  of  Kronos,  who 
is  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  being  the  offspring  or  exuberance  of  God. 
For  here  is  contained  all  that  is  immortal :  nothing  here  but  is  Divine 
Mind  ;  all  is  God  ;  this  is  the  place  of  every  soul.  Here  is  rest  unbroken  : 
for  how  can  that  seek  change,  in  which  all  is  well ;  what  need  that  reach 
to,  which  holds  all  within  itself  ;  what  increase  can  that  desire,  which 
stands  utterly  achieved  ?  All  its  content,  thus,  is  perfect,  that  itself  may 
be  perfect  throughout,  as  holding  nothing  that  is  less  than  the  divine, 
nothing  that  is  less  than  intellective.  Its  knowing  is  not  by  search  but 
by  possession,  its  blessedness  inherent,  not  acquired  ;  for  all  belongs  to 
it  eternally  and  it  holds  the  authentic  Eternity  imitated  by  Time  which, 
circling  round  the  Soul,  makes  towards  the  new  thing  and  passes  by  the 
old.  Soul  deals  with  thing  after  thing — now  Socrates  ;  now  a  horse  : 
always  some  one  entity  from  among  beings — but  the  Intellectual- Principle 
is  all  and  therefore  its  entire  content  is  simultaneously  present  in  that 
identity  :  this  is  pure  being  in  eternal  actuality  ;  nowhere  is  there  any 
future,  for  every  then  is  a  now  ;  nor  is  there  any  past,  for  nothing  there 
has  ever  ceased  to  be  ;  everything  has  taken  its  stand  for  ever,  an  identity 
well  pleased,  we  might  say,  to  be  as  it  is  ;  and  everything,  in  that  entire 
content,  is  Intellectual- Principle  and  Authentic  Existence  ;  and  the  total 
of  all  is  Intellectual-Principle  entire  and  Being  entire.  Intellectual- 


6 


PLOTINUS 


Principle  by  its  intellective  act  establishes  Being,  which  in  turn,  as  the 
object  of  intellection,  becomes  the  cause  of  intellection  and  of  existence 
to  the  Intellectual-Principle — though,  of  course,  there  is  another  cause 
of  intellection  which  is  also  a  cause  to  Being,  both  rising  in  a  source 
distinct  from  either. 

Now  while  these  two  are  coalescents,  having  their  existence  in 
common  and  are  never  apart,  still  the  unity  they  form  is  two-sided  ; 
there  is  Intellectual-Principle  as  against  Being,  the  intellectual  agent 
as  against  the  object  of  intellection  ;  we  consider  the  intehective  act 
and  we  have  the  Intellectual- Principle  ;  we  think  of  the  object  of  that 
act  and  we  have  Being. 

Such  difference  there  must  be  if  there  is  to  be  any  intellection  ;  but 
similarly  there  must  also  be  identity  (since,  in  perfect  knowing,  subject 
and  object  are  identical). 

Thus  the  Primals  (the  first  “  Categories  ”)  are  seen  to  be  :  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  ;  Existence  ;  Difference  ;  Identity :  we  must  include 
also  Motion  and  Rest :  Motion  provides  for  the  intellectual  act,  Rest 
preserves  identity  as  Difference  gives  at  once  a  Knower  and  a  Known, 
for,  failing  this,  all  is  one,  and  silent. 

So  too  the  objects  of  intellection  (the  ideal  content  of  the  Divine 
Mind)— identical  in  virtue  of  the  self-concentration  of  the  principle 
which  is  their  common  ground — must  still  be  distinct  each  from  another  ; 
this  distinction  constitutes  Difference. 

The  Intellectual  Kosmos  thus  a  manifold,  Number  and  Quantity 
arise  :  Quality  is  the  specific  character  of  each  of  these  ideas  which 
stand  as  the  principles  from  which  all  else  derives. 

5- 

As  a  manifold,  then,  this  God,  the  Intellectual-Principle,  exists 
within  the  Soul  here,  the  Soul  which  once  for  all  stands  linked  a  member 
of  the  divine,  unless  by  a  deliberate  apostasy. 

Bringing  itself  close  to  the  divine  Intellect,  becoming,  as  it  were,  one 
with  this,  it  seeks  still  further  :  What  Being,  now,  has  engendered  this 
God,  what  is  the  Simplex  preceding  this  multiple  ;  what  the  cause  at 


THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES 


V.  i.  6] 


7 


once  of  its  existence  and  of  its  existing  as  a  manifold  ;  what  the  source 
of  this  Number,  this  Quantity  ? 

Number,  Quantity,  is  not  primal :  obviously  before  even  duality, 
there  must  stand  the  unity. 

The  Dyad  is  a  secondary ;  deriving  from  unity,  it  finds  in  unity  the 
determinant  needed  by  its  native  indetermination  :  once  there  is  any 
determination,  there  is  Number,  in  the  sense,  of  course,  of  the  real  (the 
archetypal)  Number.  And  the  soul  is  such  a  number  or  quantity.  For 
the  Primals  are  not  masses  or  magnitudes  ;  all  of  that  gross  order  is 
later,  real  only  to  the  sense-thought ;  even  in  seed  the  effective  reality 
is  not  the  moist  substance  but  the  unseen — that  is  to  say  Number  (as 
the  determinant  of  individual  being)  and  the  Reason-Principle  (of  the 
product  to  be). 

Thus  by  what  we  call  the  Number  and  the  Dyad  of  that  higher 
realm,  we  mean  Reason  Principles  and  the  Intellectual- Principle  :  but 
while  the  Dyad  is,  as  regards  that  sphere,  undetermined — representing, 
as  it  were,  the  underly  (or  Matter)  of  The  One — the  later  Number  (or 
Quantity) — that  which  rises  from  the  Dyad  (Intellectual-Principle) 
and  The  One — is  not  Matter  to  the  later  existents  but  is  their  forming- 
idea,  for  all  of  them  take  shape,  so  to  speak,  from  the  ideas  rising  within 
this.  The  determination  of  the  Dyad  is  brought  about  partly  from  its 
object — The  One — and  partly  from  itself,  as  is  the  case  with  all  vision  in 
the  act  of  sight  :  intellection  (the  Act  of  the  Dyad)  is  vision  occupied  upon 
The  One. 


6. 

But  how  and  what  does  the  Intellectual-Principle  see  and,  especially, 
how  has  it  sprung  from  that  which  is  to  become  the  object  of  its 
vision  ? 

The  mind  demands  the  existence  of  these  Beings,  but  it  is  still  in 
trouble  over  the  problem  endlessly  debated  by  the  most  ancient  philos¬ 
ophers  :  from  such  a  unity  as  we  have  declared  The  One  to  be,  how 
does  anything  at  all  come  into  substantial  existence,  any  multiplicity, 
dyad,  or  number  ?  Why  has  the  Primal  not  remained  self-gathered  so 


8 


PLOTINUS 


that  there  be  none  of  this  profusion  of  the  manifold  which  we  observe  in 
existence  and  yet  are  compelled  to  trace  to  that  absolute  unity  ? 

In  venturing  an  answer,  we  first  invoke  God  Himself,  not  in  loud 
word  but  in  that  way  of  prayer  which  is  always  within  our  power,  leaning 
in  soul  towards  Him  by  aspiration,  alone  towards  the  alone.  But  if  we 
seek  the  vision  of  that  great  Being  within  the  Inner  Sanctuary — self- 
gathered,  tranquilly  remote  above  all  else — we  begin  by  considering  the 
images  stationed  at  the  outer  precincts,  or,  more  exactly  to  the  moment, 
the  first  image  that  appears.  How  the  Divine  Mind  comes  into  being 
must  be  explained  : — 

Everything  moving  has  necessarily  an  object  towards  which  it 
advances  ;  but  since  the  Supreme  can  have  no  such  object,  we  may  not 
ascribe  motion  to  it  :  anything  that  comes  into  being  after  it  can  be 
produced  only  as  a  consequence  of  its  unfailing  self-intention  ;  and, 
of  course,  we  dare  not  talk  of  generation  in  time,  dealing  as  we  are  with 
eternal  Beings  :  where  we  speak  of  origin  in  such  reference,  it  is  in  the 
sense,  merely,  of  cause  and  subordination  :  origin  from  the  Supreme  must 
not  be  taken  to  imply  any  movement  in  it  :  that  would  make  the  Being 
resulting  from  the  movement  not  a  second  principle  but  a  third  :  the 
Movement  would  be  the  second  hypostasis. 

Given  this  immobility  in  the  Supreme,  it  can  neither  have  yielded 
assent  nor  uttered  decree  nor  stirred  in  any  way  towards  the  existence 
of  a  secondary. 

What  happened,  then  ?  What  are  we  to  conceive  as  rising  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  that  immobility  ? 

It  must  be  a  circumradiation — produced  from  the  Supreme  but  from 
the  Supreme  unaltering — and  may  be  compared  to  the  brilliant  light 
encircling  the  sun  and  ceaselessly  generated  from  that  unchanging 
substance. 

All  existences,  as  long  as  they  retain  their  character,  produce — about 
themselves,  from  their  essence,  in  virtue  of  the  power  which  must  be  in 
them — some  necessary,  outwardfacing  hypostasis  continuously  attached 
to  them  and  representing  in  image  the  engendering  archetypes  :  thus  fire 
gives  out  its  heat ;  snow  is  cold  not  merely  to  itself  ;  fragrant  substances 


V.  X.  7] 


THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES 


9 

are  a  notable  instance  ;  for,  as  long  as  they  last,  something  is  diffused 
from  them  and  perceived  wherever  they  are  present. 

Again,  all  that  is  fully  achieved  engenders  :  therefore  the  eternally 
achieved  engenders  eternally  an  eternal  being.  At  the  same  time,  the 
offspring  is  always  minor  :  what  then  are  we  to  think  of  the  All- Perfect 
but  that  it  can  produce  nothing  less  than  the  very  greatest  that  is  later 
than  itself.  This  greatest,  later  than  the  divine  unity,  must  be  the 
Divine  Mind,  and  it  must  be  the  second  of  all  existence,  for  it  is  that  which 
sees  The  One  on  which  alone  it  leans  while  the  First  has  no  need  whatever 
of  it.  The  offspring  of  the  prior  to  Divine  Mind  can  be  no  other  than 
that  Mind  itself  and  thus  is  the  loftiest  being  in  the  universe,  all  else 
following  upon  it — the  soul,  for  example,  being  an  utterance  and  act  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle  as  that  is  an  utterance  and  act  of  The  One.  But 
in  soul  the  utterance  is  obscured,  for  soul  is  an  image  and  must  look  to 
its  own  original  :  that  Principle,  on  the  contrary,  looks  to  the  First  with¬ 
out  mediation — thus  becoming  what  it  is — and  has  that  vision  not  as 
from  a  distance  but  as  the  immediate  next  with  nothing  intervening, 
close  to  the  One  as  Soul  to  it. 

The  offspring  must  seek  and  love  the  begetter  ;  and  especially  so 
when  begetter  and  begotten  are  alone  in  their  sphere  ;  when,  in  addition, 
the  begetter  is  the  highest  good,  the  offspring  (inevitably  seeking  its 
Good)  is  attached  by  a  bond  of  sheer  necessity,  separated  only  in  being 
distinct. 

7- 

We  must  be  more  explicit : — 

The  Intellectual-Principle  stands  as  the  image  of  The  One,  firstly 
because  there  is  a  certain  necessity  that  the  first  should  have  its  offspring, 
carrying  onward  much  of  its  quality,  in  other  words  that  there  be  some¬ 
thing  in  its  likeness  as  the  sun’s  rays  tell  of  the  sun.  Yet  The  One  is  not 
an  Intellectual-Principle  ;  how  then  does  it  engender  an  Intellectual- 
Principle  ? 

Simply  by  the  fact  that  in  its  self-quest  it  has  vision  :  this  very 
seeing  is  the  Intellectual- Principle.  Any  perception  of  the  external 


10 


PLOTINUS 


indicates  either  sensation  or  intellection,  sensation  symbolised  by  a  line, 
intellection  by  a  circle  .  .  .  [corrupt  passage]. 

Of  course  the  divisibility  belonging  to  the  circle  does  not  apply  to 
the  Intellectual-Principle  ;  all,  there  too,  is  a  unity,  though  a  unity 
which  is  the  potentiality  of  all  existence. 

The  items  of  this  potentiality  the  divine  intellection  brings  out,  so 
to  speak,  from  the  unity  and  knows  them  in  detail,  as  it  must  if  it  is  to 
be  an  intellectual  principle. 

It  has  besides  a  consciousness,  as  it  were,  within  itself  of  this  same 
potentiality  ;  it  knows  that  it  can  of  itself  beget  an  hypostasis  and  can 
determine  its  own  Being  by  the  virtue  emanating  from  its  prior  ;  it 
knows  that  its  nature  is  in  some  sense  a  definite  part  of  the  content  of 
that  First  ;  that  it  thence  derives  its  essence,  that  its  strength  lies  there 
and  that  its  Being  takes  perfection  as  a  derivative  and  a  recipient  from 
the  First.  It  sees  that,  as  a  member  of  the  realm  of  division  and  part, 
it  receives  life  and  intellection  and  all  else  it  has  and  is,  from  the  undivided 
and  partless,  since  that  First  is  no  member  of  existence,  but  can  be  the 
source  of  all  on  condition  only  of  being  held  down  by  no  one  distinctive 
shape  but  remaining  the  undeflected  unity. 

Corrupt  : — Thus  it  would  be  the  entire  universe  but  that  .  .  . 

And  so  the  First  is  not  a  thing  among  the  things  contained  by  the 
Intellectual-Principle  though  the  source  of  all.  In  virtue  of  this  source 
things  of  the  later  order  are  essential  beings ;  for  from  that  fact  there  is 
determination  ;  each  has  its  form  :  what  has  being  cannot  be  envisaged 
as  outside  of  limit ;  the  nature  must  be  held  fast  by  boundary  and  fixity  ; 
though  to  the  Intellectual  Beings  this  fixity  is  no  more  than  determina¬ 
tion  and  form,  the  foundations  of  their  substantial  existence. 

A  being  of  this  quality,  like  the  Intellectual-Principle,  must  be  felt 
to  be  worthy  of  the  all-pure  :  it  could  not  derive  from  any  other  than 
from  the  first  principle  of  all ;  as  it  comes  into  existence,  all  other  beings 
must  be  simultaneously  engendered — all  the  beauty  of  the  Ideas,  all  the 
Gods  of  the  Intellectual  realm.  And  it  still  remains  pregnant  with  this 
offspring  ;  for  it  has,  so  to  speak,  drawn  all  within  itself  again,  holding 
them  lest  they  fall  away  towards  Matter  to  be  “  brought  up  in  the  House 


V.  I.  8] 


THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES 


ii 


of  Rhea  ”  (in  the  realm  of  flux).  This  is  the  meaning  hidden  in  the 
Mysteries,  and  in  the  Myths  of  the  gods  :  Kronos,  as  the  wisest,  exists 
before  Zeus  ;  he  must  absorb  his  offspring  that,  full  within  himself,  he 
may  be  also  an  Intellectual-Principle  manifest  in  some  product  of  his 
plenty  ;  afterwards,  the  myth  proceeds,  Kronos  engenders  Zeus,  who 
already  exists  as  the  (necessary  and  eternal)  outcome  of  the  plenty 
there  ;  in  other  words  the  offspring  of  the  Divine  Intellect,  perfect  within 
itself,  is  Soul  (the  life-principle  carrying  forward  the  Ideas  in  the  Divine 
Mind). 

Now,  even  in  the  Divine  the  engendered  could  not  be  the  very  highest ; 
it  must  be  a  lesser,  an  image ;  it  will  be  undetermined,  as  the  Divine  is, 
but  will  receive  determination,  and,  so  to  speak,  its  shaping  idea,  from 
the  progenitor. 

Yet  any  offspring  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  must  be  a  Reason- 
Principle  ;  the  thought  of  the  Divine  Mind  must  be  a  substantial 
existence  :  such  then  is  that  (Soul)  which  circles  about  the  Divine  Mind, 
its  light,  its  image  inseparably  attached  to  it :  on  the  upper  level  united 
with  it,  filled  from  it,  enjoying  it,  participant  in  its  nature,  intellective 
with  it,  but  on  the  lower  level  in  contact  with  the  realm  beneath  itself, 
or,  rather,  generating  in  turn  an  offspring  which  must  lie  beneath  ;  of 
this  lower  we  will  treat  later  ;  so  far  we  deal  still  with  the  Divine. 

8. 

This  is  the  explanation  of  Plato’s  Triplicity,  in  the  passage  where  he 
names  as  the  Primals  the  Beings  gathered  about  the  King  of  All  and 
establishes  a  Secondary  containing  the  Secondaries  and  a  Third  con¬ 
taining  the  Tertiaries. 

He  teaches,  also,  that  there  is  an  author  of  the  Cause,  that  is  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle,  which  to  him  is  the  Creator  who  made  the  Soul, 
as  he  tells  us,  in  the  famous  mixing  bowl.  This  author  of  the  causing 
principle,  of  the  divine  mind,  is  to  him  the  Good,  that  which  transcends 
the  Intellectual- Principle  and  transcends  Being  :  often  too  he  uses  the 
term  “  The  Idea  ”  to  indicate  Being  and  the  Divine  Mind.  Thus  Plato 
knows  the  order  of  generation — from  the  Good,  the  Intellectual-Principle ; 


12 


PLOTINUS 


from  the  Intellectual-Principle,  the  Soul.  These  teachings  are,  therefore, 
no  novelties,  no  inventions  of  to-day,  but  long  since  stated,  if  not  stressed  ; 
our  doctrine  here  is  the  explanation  of  an  earlier  and  can  show  the 
antiquity  of  these  opinions  on  the  testimony  of  Plato  himself. 

Earlier,  Parmenides  made  some  approach  to  the  doctrine  in  identi¬ 
fying  Being  with  Intellectual-Principle  while  separating  Real  Being  from 
the  realm  of  sense. 

“  Knowing  and  Being  are  one  thing,”  he  says,  and  this  unity  is  to 
him  motionless  in  spite  of  the  intellection  he  attributes  to  it  :  to  preserve 
its  unchanging  identity  he  excludes  all  bodily  movement  from  it ;  and 
he  compares  it  to  a  huge  sphere  in  that  it  holds  and  envelops  all  existence 
and  that  its  intellection  is  not  an  outgoing  act  but  internal.  Still,  with 
all  his  affirmation  of  unity,  his  own  writings  lay  him  open  to  the  reproach 
that  his  unity  turns  out  to  be  a  multiplicity. 

The  Platonic  Parmenides  is  more  exact ;  the  distinction  is  made 
between  the  Primal  One,  a  strictly  pure  Unity,  and  a  secondary  One 
which  is  a  One-Many  and  a  third  which  is  a  One-and-Many  ;  thus  he 
too  is  in  accordance  with  our  thesis  of  the  Three  Kinds. 

9- 

Anaxagoras,  again,  in  his  assertion  of  a  Mind  pure  and  unmixed, 
affirms  a  simplex  First  and  a  sundered  One,  though  writing  long  ago 
he  failed  in  precision. 

Herakleitos,  with  his  sense  of  bodily  forms  as  things  of  ceaseless 
process  and  passage,  knows  the  One  as  eternal  and  intellectual. 

In  Empedocles,  similarly,  we  have  a  dividing  principle,  “  Strife,” 
set  against  “  Friendship  ” — which  is  The  One  and  is  to  him  bodiless,  while 
the  elements  represent  Matter. 

Later  there  is  Aristotle  ;  he  begins  by  making  the  First  transcendent 
and  intellective  but  cancels  that  primacy  by  supposing  it  to  have  self¬ 
intellection.  Further  he  affirms  a  multitude  of  other  intellective  beings — 
as  many  indeed  as  there  are  orbs  in  the  heavens  ;  one  such  principle 
as  mover  to  every  orb — and  thus  his  account  of  the  Intellectual  Realm 
differs  from  Plato’s  and,  failing  reason,  he  brings  in  necessity  ;  though 


V.  i.  ioj 


THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES 


J3 

whatever  reasons  he  had  alleged  there  would  always  have  been  the  objec¬ 
tion  that  it  would  be  more  reasonable  that  all  the  spheres,  as  contributory 
to  one  system,  should  look  to  a  unity,  to  the  hirst. 

We  are  obliged  also  to  ask  whether  to  Aristotle's  mind  all  these 
Intellectual  Beings  spring  from  one,  and  that  one  their  First ;  or  whether 
the  Principles  in  the  intellectual  are  many. 

If  from  one,  then  clearly  the  Intellectual  system  will  be  analogous  to 
that  of  the  universe  of  sense — sphere  encircling  sphere,  with  one,  the 
outermost,  dominating  all  the  First  (in  the  Intellectual;  will  envelop 
the  entire  scheme  and  will  be  an  Intellectual  (or  Archetypal;  Kosmos  ; 
and  as  in  our  universe  the  spheres  are  not  empty  but  the  first  sphere 
is  thick  with  stars  and  none  without  them,  so,  in  the  Intellectual  Kosmos, 
those  principles  of  Movement  will  envelop  a  multitude  of  Beings,  and 
that  world  will  be  the  realm  of  the  greater  reality. 

If  on  the  contrary  each  is  a  principle,  then  the  effective  powers 
become  a  matter  of  chance  ;  under  what  compulsion  are  they  to  hold 
together  and  act  with  one  mind  towards  that  work  of  unity,  the  harmony 
of  the  entire  heavenly  system  ?  Again  what  can  make  it  necessary  that 
the  material  bodies  of  the  heavenly  system  be  equal  in  number  to  the 
Intellectual  moving  principles,  and  how  can  these  incorporeal  Beings  be 
numerically  many  when  there  is  no  Matter  to  serve  as  the  basis  of  differ¬ 
ence  ? 

For  these  reasons  the  ancient  philosophers  that  ranged  themselves 
most  closely  to  the  school  of  Pythagoras  and  of  his  later  followers  and 
to  that  of  Pherekudes,  have  insisted  upon  this  Nature,  some  developing 
the  subject  in  their  writings  while  others  treated  of  it  merely  in  unwritten 
discourses,  some  no  doubt  ignoring  it  entirely. 


io. 

We  have  shown  the  inevitability  of  certain  convictions  as  to  the 
scheme  of  things  : — 

There  exists  a  Principle  which  transcends  Being  ;  this  is  The  One, 
whose  nature  we  have  sought  to  establish  in  so  far  as  such  matters  lend 
themselves  to  proof.  Upon  The  One  follows  immediately  the  Principle 


14 


PLOTINUS 


which  is  at  once  Being  and  the  Intellectual-Principle.  Third  comes  the 
Principle,  Soul. 

Now  just  as  these  three  exist  for  the  system  of  Nature,  so,  we  must 
hold,  they  exist  for  ourselves.  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  material  order — 
all  that  is  separable — but  of  what  lies  beyond  the  sense  realm  in  the 
same  way  as  the  Primals  are  beyond  all  the  heavens  ;  I  mean  the  corre¬ 
sponding  aspect  of  man,  what  Plato  calls  the  Interior  Man. 

Thus  our  soul,  too,  is  a  divine  thing,  belonging  to  another  order 
than  sense  ;  such  is  all  that  holds  the  rank  of  soul,  but  (above  the  life- 
principle)  there  is  the  soul  perfected  as  containing  Intellectual-Principle 
with  its  double  phase,  reasoning  and  giving  the  power  to  reason.  The 
reasoning  phase  of  the  soul,  needing  no  bodily  organ  for  its  thinking  but 
maintaining,  in  purity,  its  distinctive  Act  that  its  thought  may  be  uncon¬ 
taminated — this  we  cannot  err  in  placing,  separate  and  not  mingled 
into  body,  within  the  first  Intellectual.  We  may  not  seek  any  point  of 
space  in  which  to  seat  it  ;  it  must  be  set  outside  of  all  space  :  its  distinct 
quality,  its  separateness,  its  immateriality,  demand  that  it  be  a  thing 
alone,  untouched  by  all  of  the  bodily  order.  This  is  why  we  read  of  the 
universe,  that  the  Demiurge  cast  the  soul  around  it  from  without — 
understand  that  phase  of  soul  which  is  permanently  seated  in  the  Intel¬ 
lectual — and  of  ourselves  that  the  charioteer’s  head  reaches  upwards 
towards  the  heights. 

The  admonition  to  sever  soul  from  body  is  not,  of  course,  to  be 
understood  spatially — that  separation  stands  made  in  Nature — the 
reference  is  to  holding  our  rank,  to  use  of  our  thinking,  to  an  attitude 
of  alienation  from  the  body  in  the  effort  to  lead  up  and  attach  to  the 
over-world,  equally  with  the  other,  that  phase  of  soul  seated  here  and, 
alone,  having  to  do  with  body,  creating,  moulding,  spending  its  care  upon  it. 

II. 

Since  there  is  a  Soul  which  reasons  upon  the  right  and  good — for 
reasoning  is  an  enquiry  into  the  rightness  and  goodness  of  this  rather 
than  that — there  must  exist  some  permanent  Right,  the  source  and 
foundation  of  this  reasoning  in  our  soul ;  how,  else,  could  any  such 


V.  I.  12] 


THE  THREE  INITIAL  HYPOSTASES 


15 


discussion  be  held  ?  Further,  since  the  soul’s  attention  to  these  matters 
is  intermittent,  there  must  be  within  us  an  Intellectual-Principle 
acquainted  with  that  Right  not  by  momentary  act  but  in  permanent 
possession.  Similarly  there  must  be  also  the  principle  of  this  principle, 
its  cause,  God.  This  Highest  cannot  be  divided  and  allotted,  must 
remain  intangible  but  not  bound  to  space,  it  may  be  present  at  many 
points,  wheresoever  there  is  anything  capable  of  accepting  one  of  its 
manifestations  :  thus  a  centre  is  an  independent  unity ;  everything 
within  the  circle  has  its  term  at  the  centre  ;  and  to  the  centre  the  radii 
bring  each  their  own.  Within  our  nature  is  such  a  centre  by  which  we 
grasp  and  are  linked  and  held  ;  and  those  of  us  are  firmly  in  the  Supreme 
whose  collective  tendency  is  There. 


12. 

Possessed  of  such  powers,  how  does  it  happen  that  we  do  not  lay 
hold  of  them,  but  for  the  most  part,  let  these  high  activities  go  idle — 
some,  even,  of  us  never  bringing  them  in  any  degree  to  effect  ? 

The  answer  is  that  all  the  Divine  Beings  are  unceasingly  about  their 
own  act,  the  Intellectual-Principle  and  its  Prior  always  self-intent ;  and 
so,  too,  the  soul  maintains  its  unfailing  movement ;  for  not  all  that 
passes  in  the  soul  is,  by  that  fact,  perceptible  ;  we  know  just  as  much 
as  impinges  upon  the  faculty  of  sense.  Any  activity  not  transmitted 
to  the  sensitive  faculty  has  not  traversed  the  entire  soul :  we  remain 
unaware  because  the  human  being  includes  sense-perception  ;  man  is  not 
merely  a  part  (the  higher  part)  of  the  soul  but  the  total. 

None  the  less  every  being  of  the  order  of  soul  is  in  continuous  activity 
as  long  as  life  holds,  continuously  executing  to  itself  its  characteristic 
act  :  knowledge  of  the  act  depends  upon  transmission  and  perception. 
If  there  is  to  be  perception  of  what  is  thus  present,  we  must  turn  the 
perceptive  faculty  inward  and  hold  it  to  attention  there.  Hoping  to  hear 
a  desired  voice  we  let  all  others  pass  and  are  alert  for  the  coming  at  last 
of  that  most  welcome  of  sounds  :  so  here,  we  must  let  the  hearings  of 
sense  go  by,  save  for  sheer  necessity,  and  keep  the  soul’s  perception  bright 
and  quick  to  the  sounds  from  above. 


i6 


PLOTINUS 


SECOND  TRACTATE 

The  Origin  and  Order  of  the  Beings  following  on  the  First 

i. 

The  One  is  all  things  and  no  one  of  them  ;  the  source  of  all  things 
is  not  all  things  ;  all  things  are  its  possession — running  back,  so  to  speak, 
to  it— or,  more  correctly,  not  yet  so,  they  will  be. 

But  a  universe  from  an  unbroken  unity,  in  which  there  appears  no 
diversity,  not  even  duality  ? 

It  is  precisely  because  there  is  nothing  within  the  One  that  all  things 
are  from  it :  in  order  that  Being  may  be  brought  about  the  source  must 
be  no  Being  but  Being’s  generator,  in  what  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the 
primal  act  of  generation.  Seeking  nothing,  possessing  nothing,  lacking 
nothing,  the  One  is  perfect  and,  in  our  metaphor,  has  overflowed,  and  its 
exuberance  has  produced  the  new  :  this  product  has  turned  again  to  its 
begetter  and  been  filled  and  has  become  its  contemplator  and  so  an 
Intellectual- Principle. 

That  station  towards  the  one  (the  fact  that  something  exists  in 
presence  of  the  One)  establishes  Being  ;  that  vision  directed  upon  the 
One  establishes  the  Intellectual-Principle  ;  standing  towards  the  One 
to  the  end  of  vision,  it  is  simultaneously  Intellectual-Principle  and  Being  ; 
and,  attaining  resemblance  in  virtue  of  this  vision,  it  repeats  the  act  of 
the  One  in  pouring  forth  a  vast  power. 

This  second  outflow  is  a  Form  or  Idea  representing  the  Divine 
Intellect  as  the  Divine  Intellect  represented  its  own  prior,  The  One. 

This  active  power  sprung  from  essence  (from  the  Intellectual-Principle 
considered  as  Being)  is  Soul. 

Soul  arises  as  the  idea  and  act  of  the  motionless  Intellectual- 
Principle — which  itself  sprang  from  its  own  motionless  prior — but  the 
soul’ s  operation  is  not  similarly  motionless ;  its  image  is  generated  from 
its  movement.  It  takes  fulness  by  looking  to  its  source  ;  but  it  generates 
its  image  by  adopting  another,  a  downward,  movement. 

This  image  of  Soul  is  Sense  and  Nature,  the  vegetal  principle. 


V.  2.  2]  THE  ORIGIN  AND  ORDER  OF  THE  BEINGS 


17 


Nothing,  however,  is  completely  severed  from  its  prior.  Thus  the 
human  Soul  appears  to  reach  away  as  far  down  as  to  the  vegetal  order  : 
in  some  sense  it  does,  since  the  life  of  growing  things  is  within  its  province  ; 
but  it  is  not  present  entire  ;  when  it  has  reached  the  vegetal  order  it  is 
there  in  the  sense  that  having  moved  thus  far  downwards  it  produces 
— by  its  outgoing  and  its  tendency  towards  the  less  good — another 
hypostasis  or  form  of  being  just  as  its  prior  (the  loftier  phase  of  the  Soul) 
is  produced  from  the  Intellectual-Principle  which  yet  remains  in  un¬ 
troubled  self-possession. 

(From  end  of  second  chapter) 

But  does  this  Soul-phase  in  the  vegetal  order,  produce  nothing  ? 

It  engenders  precisely  the  Kind  in  which  it  is  thus  present :  how, 
is  a  question  to  be  handled  from  another  starting-point. 


2. 

To  resume :  there  is  from  the  first  principle  to  ultimate  an  outgoing 
in  which  unfailingly  each  principle  retains  its  own  seat  while  its  offshoot 
takes  another  rank,  a  lower,  though  on  the  other  hand  every  being  is 
in  identity  with  its  prior  as  long  as  it  holds  that  contact. 

In  the  case  of  soul  entering  some  vegetal  form,  what  is  there  is  one 
phase,  the  more  rebellious  and  less  intellectual,  outgone  to  that  extreme  ; 
in  a  soul  entering  an  animal,  the  faculty  of  sensation  has  been  dominant 
and  brought  it  there  ;  in  soul  entering  man,  the  movement  outward 
has  either  been  wholly  of  its  reasoning  part  or  has  come  from  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  in  the  sense  that  the  soul,  possessing  that  principle  as 
immanent  to  its  being,  has  an  inborn  desire  of  intellectual  activity  and 
of  movement  in  general. 

But,  looking  more  minutely  into  the  matter,  when  shoots  or  topmost 
boughs  are  lopped  from  some  growing  thing,  where  goes  the  soul  that  was 
present  in  them  ?  Simply,  whence  it  came  :  soul  never  knew  spatial 
separation  and  therefore  is  always  within  the  source.  If  you  cut  the 
root  to  pieces,  or  bum  it,  where  is  the  life  that  was  present  there  ?  In 
the  soul,  which  never  went  outside  of  itself. 


i8 


PLOTINUS 


No  doubt,  despite  this  permanence,  the  soul  must  have  been  in 
something  if  it  reascends  ;  and  if  it  does  not,  it  is  still  somewhere  ;  it 
is  in  some  other  vegetal  soul :  but  all  this  means  merely  that  it  is  not 
crushed  into  some  one  spot  ;  if  a  Soul-power  reascends,  it  is  within  the 
Soul-power  preceding  it ;  that  in  turn  can  be  only  in  the  soul-power 
prior  again,  the  phase  reaching  upwards  to  the  Intellectual-Principle. 
Of  course  nothing  here  must  be  understood  spatially  :  Soul  never  was 
in  space ;  and  the  Divine  Intellect,  again,  is  distinguished  from  soul  as 
being  still  more  free. 

Soul  thus  is  nowhere  but  in  the  Principle  which  has  that  characteristic 
existence  at  once  nowhere  and  everywhere. 

If  the  soul  on  its  upward  path  has  halted  midway  before  wholly 
achieving  the  supreme  heights,  it  has  a  mid-rank  life  and  has  centred 
itself  upon  the  mid-phase  of  its  being.  All  in  that  mid-region  is  Intellectual- 
Principle  not  wholly  itself — nothing  else  because  deriving  thence  (and 
therefore  of  that  name  and  rank)  yet  not  that  because  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  in  giving  it  forth  is  not  merged  into  it. 

There  exists,  thus,  a  life,  as  it  were,  of  huge  extension,  a  total  in 
which  each  several  part  differs  from  its  next,  all  making  a  self-continuous 
whole  under  a  law  of  discrimination  by  which  the  various  forms  of  things 
arise  with  no  effacement  of  any  prior  in  its  secondary. 

(See  end  of  Section  I) 


THIRD  TRACTATE 

The  Knowing  Hypostases  and  the  Transcendent 

i. 

Are  we  to  think  that  a  being  knowing  itself  must  contain  diversity, 
that  self-knowledge  can  be  affirmed  only  when  some  one  phase  of  the 
self  perceives  other  phases,  and  that  therefore  an  absolutely  simplex 
entity  would  be  equally  incapable  of  introversion  and  of  self-awareness  ? 

No  :  a  being  that  has  no  parts  or  phases  may  have  this  consciousness  ; 
in  fact  there  would  be  no  real  self-knowing  in  an  entity  presented  as 
knowing  itself  in  virtue  of  being  a  compound — some  single  element  in 


V.  3.  2] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


19 


it  perceiving  other  elements — as  we  may  know  our  own  form  and  entire 
bodily  organism  by  sense-perception  :  such  knowing  does  not  cover 
the  whole  field  ;  the  knowing  element  has  not  had  the  required  cognisance 
at  once  of  its  associates  and  of  itself  ;  this  is  not  the  self-knower  asked 
for ;  it  is  merely  something  that  knows  something  else. 

Either  we  must  exhibit  the  self-knowing  of  an  uncompounded  being 
— and  show  how  that  is  possible — or  abandon  the  belief  that  any  being 
can  possess  veritable  self-cognition. 

To  abandon  the  belief  is  not  possible  in  view  of  the  many  absurdities 
thus  entailed. 

It  would  be  already  absurd  enough  to  deny  this  power  to  the  soul  or 
mind,  but  the  very  height  of  absurdity  to  deny  it  to  the  nature  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle,  presented  thus  as  knowing  the  rest  of  things  but 
not  attaining  to  knowledge,  or  even  awareness,  of  itself. 

It  is  the  province  of  sense  and  in  some  degree  of  understanding  and 
judgement,  but  not  of  the  Intellectual-Principle,  to  handle  the  external, 
though  whether  the  Intellectual-Principle  holds  the  knowledge  of  these 
things  is  a  question  to  be  examined,  but  it  is  obvious  that  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  must  have  knowledge  of  the  Intellectual  objects.  Now,  can 
it  know  those  objects  alone  or  must  it  not  simultaneously  know  itself, 
the  being  whose  function  it  is  to  know  just  those  things  ?  Can  it  have 
self-knowledge  in  the  sense  (dismissed  above  as  inadequate)  of  knowing 
its  content  while  it  ignores  itself  ?  Can  it  be  aware  of  knowing  its  members 
and  yet  remain  in  ignorance  of  its  own  knowing  self  ?  Self  and  content 
must  be  simultaneously  present :  the  method  and  degree  of  this  know¬ 
ledge  we  must  now  consider. 


2. 

We  begin  with  the  soul,  asking  whether  it  is  to  be  allowed  self-know¬ 
ledge  and  what  the  knowing  principle  in  it  would  be  and  how  operating. 

The  sense-principle  in  it  we  may  at  once  decide,  takes  cognisance 
only  of  the  external ;  even  in  any  awareness  of  events  within  the  body 
it  occupies,  this  is  still  the  perception  of  something  external  to  a  principle 
dealing  with  those  bodily  conditions  not  as  within  but  as  beneath  itself. 


20 


PLOTINUS 


The  reasoning-principle  in  the  Soul  acts  upon  the  representations 
standing  before  it  as  the  result  of  sense-perception  ;  these  it  judges, 
combining,  distinguishing  :  or  it  may  also  observe  the  impressions, 
so  to  speak,  rising  from  the  Intellectual-Principle,  and  has  the  same 
power  of  handling  these  ;  and  reasoning  will  develop  to  wisdom  where 
it  recognises  the  new  and  late-coming  impressions  (those  of  sense)  and 
adapts  them,  so  to  speak,  to  those  it  holds  from  long  before — the  act 
which  may  be  described  as  the  soul’s  Reminiscence. 

So  far  as  this,  the  efficacy  of  the  Intellectual- Principle  in  the  Soul 
certainly  reaches  ;  but  is  there  also  introversion  and  self-cognition  or 
is  that  power  to  be  reserved  strictly  for  the  Divine  Mind  ? 

If  we  accord  self-knowing  to  this  phase  of  the  soul  we  make  it  an 
Intellectual-Principle  and  will  have  to  show  what  distinguishes  it  from 
its  prior  ;  if  we  refuse  it  self-knowing,  all  our  thought  brings  us  step  by 
step  to  some  principle  which  has  this  power,  and  we  must  discover  what 
such  self -knowing  consists  in.  If,  again,  we  do  allow  self-knowledge  in 
the  lower  we  must  examine  the  question  of  degree  ;  for  if  there  is  no 
difference  of  degree,  then  the  reasoning  principle  in  soul  is  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  unalloyed. 

We  ask,  then,  whether  the  understanding  principle  in  the  soul  has 
equally  the  power  of  turning  inwards  upon  itself  or  whether  it  has  no 
more  than  that  of  comprehending  the  impressions,  superior  and  inferior, 
which  it  receives. 

The  first  stage  is  to  discover  what  this  comprehension  is. 


3- 

Sense  sees  a  man  and  transmits  the  impression  to  the  understanding. 
What  does  the  understanding  say  ?  It  has  nothing  to  say  as  yet ;  it 
accepts  and  waits  ;  unless,  rather,  it  questions  within  itself  “  Who  is 
this  ?  ”  — someone  it  has  met  before — and  then,  drawing  on  memory, 
says,  “  Socrates.” 

If  it  should  go  on  to  develop  the  impression  received,  it  distinguishes 
various  elements  in  what  the  representative  faculty  has  set  before  it ; 
supposing  it  to  say  “  Socrates,  if  the  man  is  good,”  then,  while  it  has 


V-  3-  3] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


21 


spoken  upon  information  from  the  senses,  its  total  pronouncement  is  its 
own  ;  it  contains  within  itself  a  standard  of  good. 

But  how  does  it  thus  contain  the  good  within  itself  ? 

It  is,  itself,  of  the  nature  of  the  good  and  it  has  been  strengthened 
still  towards  the  perception  of  all  that  is  good  by  the  irradiation  of  the 
Intellectual-Principle  upon  it  ;  for  this  pure  phase  of  the  soul  welcomes 
to  itself  the  images  implanted  from  its  prior. 

But  why  may  we  not  distinguish  this  understanding  phase  as  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  and  take  soul  to  consist  of  the  later  phases  from  the 
sensitive  downwards  ? 

Because  all  the  activities  mentioned  are  within  the  scope  of  a  reason¬ 
ing  faculty,  and  reasoning  is  characteristically  the  function  of  soul. 

Why  not,  however,  absolve  the  question  by  assigning  self-cognisance 
to  this  phase  ? 

Because  we  have  allotted  to  soul  the  function  of  dealing — in  thought 
and  in  multiform  action  — with  the  external,  and  we  hold  that  observation 
of  self  and  of  the  content  of  self  must  belong  to  Intellectual-Principle. 

If  any  one  says,  “  Still ;  what  precludes  the  reasoning  soul  from 
observing  its  own  content  by  some  special  faculty  ?  ”  he  is  no  longer 
positing  a  principle  of  understanding  or  of  reasoning  but,  simply,  bringing 
in  the  Intellectual-Principle  unalloyed. 

But  what  precludes  the  Intellectual-Principle  from  being  present, 
unalloyed,  within  the  soul  ?  Nothing,  we  admit  ;  but  are  we  entitled 
therefore  to  think  of  it  as  a  phase  of  soul  ? 

We  cannot  describe  it  as  belonging  to  the  soul  though  we  do  describe 
it  as  our  Intellectual-Principle,  something  distinct  from  the  understanding, 
advanced  above  it,  and  yet  ours  even  though  we  cannot  include  it  among 
soul-phases  :  it  is  ours  and  not  ours  ;  and  therefore  we  use  it  sometimes 
and  sometimes  not,  whereas  we  always  have  use  of  the  understanding  ; 
the  Intellectual-Principle  is  ours  when  we  act  by  it,  not  ours  when  we 
neglect  it. 

But  what  is  this  acting  by  it  ?  Does  it  mean  that  we  become  the 
Intellectual-Principle  so  that  our  utterance  is  the  utterance  of  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle,  or  that  (at  best)  we  represent  it  ? 


22 


PLOTINUS 


We  are  not  the  Intellectual-Principle  ;  we  represent  it  in  virtue  of 
that  highest  reasoning  faculty  which  draws  upon  it. 

Still;  we  perceive  by  means  of  the  perceptive  faculty  and  are,  our¬ 
selves,  the  percipients  :  may  we  not  say  the  same  of  the  intellective  act  ? 

No  :  our  reasoning  is  our  own  ;  we  ourselves  think  the  thoughts 
that  occupy  the  understanding — for  this  is  actually  the  We — but  the 
operation  of  the  Intellectual-Principle  enters  from  above  us  as  that  of 
the  sensitive  faculty  from  below  ;  the  We  is  the  soul  at  its  highest,  the 
mid-point  between  two  powers,  between  the  sensitive  principle,  inferior 
to  us,  and  the  intellectual  principle  superior.  We  think  of  the  perceptive 
act  as  integral  to  ourselves  because  our  sense-perception  is  uninterrupted  ; 
we  hesitate  as  to  the  Intellectual-Principle  both  because  we  are  not  always 
occupied  with  it  and  because  it  exists  apart,  not  a  principle  inclining  to 
us  but  one  to  which  we  incline  when  we  choose  to  look  upwards. 

The  sensitive  principle  is  our  scout ;  the  Intellectual-Principle  our 
King. 

4- 

But  we,  too,  are  king  when  we  are  moulded  to  the  Intellectual- 
Principle. 

That  correspondence  may  be  brought  about  in  two  ways  :  either 
the  radii  from  that  centre  are  traced  upon  us  to  be  our  law  or  we  are 
filled  full  of  the  Divine  Mind,  which  again  may  have  become  to  us  a  thing 
seen  and  felt  as  a  presence. 

Hence  our  self-knowing  comes  to  the  knowing  of  all  the  rest  of  our 
being  in  virtue  of  this  thing  patently  present ;  or  by  that  power  itself 
communicating  to  us  its  own  power  of  self-knowing  ;  or  by  our  becoming 
identical  with  that  principle  of  knowledge. 

Thus  the  self-knower  is  a  double  person  :  there  is  the  one  that  takes 
cognisance  of  the  principle  in  virtue  of  which  understanding  occurs  in 
the  soul  or  mind  ;  and  there  is  the  higher,  knowing  himself  by  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  with  which  he  becomes  identical :  this  latter  knows  the 
self  as  no  longer  man  but  as  a  being  that  has  become  something  other 
through  and  through  :  he  has  thrown  himself  as  one  thing  over  into 


v.  3.  5] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


23 


the  superior  order,  taking  with  him  only  that  better  part  of  the  soul 
which  alone  is  winged  for  the  Intellectual  Act  and  gives  the  man,  once 
established  There,  the  power  to  appropriate  what  he  has  seen. 

We  can  scarcely  suppose  this  understanding  faculty  to  be  unaware 
that  it  has  understanding  ;  that  it  takes  cognisance  of  things  external ; 
that  in  its  judgements  it  decides  by  the  rules  and  standards  within  itself 
held  directly  from  the  Intellectual-Principle  ;  that  there  is  something 
higher  than  itself,  something  which,  moreover,  it  has  no  need  to  seek  but 
fully  possesses.  What  can  we  conceive  to  escape  the  self-knowledge  of 
a  principle  which  admittedly  knows  the  place  it  holds  and  the  work  it 
has  to  do  ?  It  affirms  that  it  springs  from  Intellectual-Principle  whose 
second  and  image  it  is,  that  it  holds  all  within  itself,  the  universe  of  things, 
engraved,  so  to  say,  upon  it  as  all  is  held  There  by  the  eternal  engraver. 
Aware  so  far  of  itself,  can  it  be  supposed  to  halt  at  that  ?  Are  we  to 
suppose  that  all  we  can  do  is  to  apply  a  distinct  power  of  our  nature  and 
come  thus  to  awareness  of  that  Intellectual-Principle  as  aware  of  itself  ? 
Or  may  we  not  appropriate  that  principle — which  belongs  to  us  as  we 
to  it — and  thus  attain  to  awareness,  at  once,  of  it  and  of  ourselves  ? 
Y es  :  this  is  the  necessary  way  if  we  are  to  experience  the  self-knowledge 
vested  in  the  Intellectual-Principle.  And  a  man  becomes  Intellectual- 
Principle  when,  ignoring  all  other  phases  of  his  being,  he  sees  through 
that  only  and  sees  only  that  and  so  knows  himself  by  means  of  the  self — 
in  other  words  attains  the  self-knowledge  which  the  Intellectual-Principle 
possesses. 

5. 

Does  it  all  come  down,  then,  to  one  phase  of  the  self  knowing  another 
phase  ? 

That  would  be  a  case  of  knower  distinguished  from  known,  and 
would  not  be  self-knowing. 

What,  then,  if  the  total  combination  were  supposed  to  be  of  one 
piece,  knower  quite  undistinguished  from  known,  so  that,  seeing  any 
given  part  of  itself  as  identical  with  itself,  it  sees  itself  by  means  of 
itself,  knower  and  known  thus  being  entirely  without  differentiation  ? 


24 


PLOTINUS 


To  begin  with,  the  distinction  in  one  self  thus  suggested  is  a  strange 
phenomenon.  How  is  the  self  to  make  the  partition  ?  The  thing  cannot 
happen  of  itself.  And,  again,  which  phase  makes  it  ?  The  phase  that 
decides  to  be  the  knower  or  that  which  is  to  be  the  known  ?  Then  how 
can  the  knowing  phase  know  itself  in  the  known  when  it  has  chosen  to  be 
the  knower  and  put  itself  apart  from  the  known  ?  In  such  self-know¬ 
ledge  by  sundering  it  can  be  aware  only  of  the  object,  not  of  the  agent  ; 
it  will  not  know  its  entire  content,  or  itself  as  an  integral  whole  ;  it  knows 
the  phase  seen  but  not  the  seeing  phase  and  thus  has  knowledge  of  some¬ 
thing  else,  not  self-knowledge. 

In  order  to  perfect  self-knowing  it  must  bring  over  from  itself  the 
knowing  phase  as  well :  seeing  subject  and  seen  objects  must  be  present 
as  one  thing.  Now  if  in  this  coalescence  of  seeing  subject  with  seen 
objects,  the  objects  were  merely  representations  of  the  reality,  the  subject 
would  not  possess  the  realities  :  if  it  is  to  possess  them  it  must  do  so 
not  by  seeing  them  as  the  result  of  any  self-division  but  by  knowing 
them,  containing  them,  before  any  self-division  occurs. 

At  that,  the  object  known  must  be  identical  with  the  knowing  act 
(or  agent),  the  Intellectual-Principle,  therefore,  identical  with  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Realm.  And  in  fact,  if  this  identity  does  not  exist,  neither  does 
truth  ;  the  Principle  that  should  contain  realities  is  found  to  contain 
a  transcript,  something  different  from  the  realities  ;  that  constitutes  non- 
Truth  ;  Truth  cannot  apply  to  something  conflicting  with  itself ;  what 
it  affirms  it  must  also  be. 

Thus  we  find  that  the  Intellectual-Principle,  the  Intellectual  Realm 
and  Real  Being  constitute  one  thing,  which  is  the  Primal  Being  ;  the 
primal  Intellectual-Principle  is  that  which  contains  the  realities  or,  rather, 
which  is  identical  with  them. 

But  taking  Primal  Intellection  and  its  intellectual  object  to  be  a 
unity,  how  does  that  give  an  Intellective  Being  knowing  itself  ?  An 
intellection  enveloping  its  object  or  identical  with  it  is  far  from  exhibiting 
the  Intellectual-Principle  as  self-knowing. 

All  turns  on  the  identity.  The  intellectual  object  is  itself  an  activity, 
not  a  mere  potentiality  ;  it  is  not  lifeless  ;  nor  are  the  life  and  intellection 


V.  3-  6] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


25 


brought  into  it  as  into  something  naturally  devoid  of  them,  some  stone 
or  other  dead  matter  ;  no,  the  intellectual  object  is  essentially  existent, 
the  primal  reality.  As  an  active  force,  the  first  activity,  it  must  be,  also 
itself,  the  noblest  intellection,  intellection  possessing  real  being  since  it  is 
entirely  true  ;  and  such  an  intellection,  primal  and  primally  existent, 
can  be  no  other  than  the  primal  principle  of  Intellection  :  for  that  primal 
principle  is  no  potentiality  and  cannot  be  an  agent  distinct  from  its  act 
and  thus,  once  more,  possessing  its  essential  being  as  a  mere  potentiality. 
As  an  act  — and  one  whose  very  being  is  an  act  — it  must  be  undistinguish- 
ably  identical  with  its  act :  but  Being  and  the  Intellectual  object  are  also 
identical  with  that  act  ;  therefore  the  Intellectual-Principle,  its  exercise 
of  intellection  and  the  object  of  intellection  all  are  identical.  Given  its 
intellection  identical  with  intellectual  object  and  the  object  identical 
with  the  Principle  itself,  it  cannot  but  have  self-knowledge  :  its  intellec¬ 
tion  operates  by  the  intellectual  act  which  is  itself  upon  the  intellectual 
object  which  similarly  is  itself.  It  possesses  self-knowing,  thus,  on 
every  count  ;  the  act  is  itself  ;  and  the  object  seen  in  that  act-self,  is  itself. 

6. 

Thus  we  have  shown  that  there  exists  that  which  in  the  strictest 
sense  possesses  self-knowing. 

This  self-knowing  agent,  perfect  in  the  Intellectual-Principle,  is 
modified  in  the  Soul. 

The  difference  is  that,  while  the  soul  knows  itself  as  within  some¬ 
thing  else,  the  Intellectual-Principle  knows  itself  as  self-depending, 
knows  all  its  nature  and  character,  and  knows  by  right  of  its  own  being 
and  by  simple  introversion.  When  it  looks  upon  the  authentic  existences 
it  is  looking  upon  itself  ;  its  vision  is  its  effective  existence,  and  this 
efficacy  is  itself  since  the  Intellectual-Principle  and  the  Intellectual  Act 
are  one  :  this  is  an  integral  seeing  itself  by  its  entire  being,  not  a  part 
seeing  by  a  part. 

But  has  our  discussion  issued  in  an  Intellectual-Principle  having  a 
persuasive  activity  (furnishing  us  with  probability)  ? 

No  :  it  brings  compulsion  not  persuasion  ;  compulsion  belongs  to 


26 


PLOTINUS 


the  Intellectual-Principle,  persuasion  to  the  soul  or  mind,  and  we  seem 
to  desire  to  be  persuaded  rather  than  to  see  the  truth  in  the  pure  intellect. 

As  long  as  we  were  Above,  collected  within  the  Intellectual  nature, 
we  were  satisfied  ;  we  were  held  in  the  intellectual  act ;  we  had  vision 
because  we  drew  all  into  unity — for  the  thinker  in  us  was  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  telling  us  of  itself — and  the  soul  or  mind  was  motionless,  assent¬ 
ing  to  that  act  of  its  prior.  But  now  that  we  are  once  more  here — living 
in  the  secondary,  the  soul — we  seek  for  persuasive  probabilities  :  it  is 
through  the  image  we  desire  to  know  the  archetype. 

Our  way  is  to  teach  our  soul  how  the  Intellectual-Principle  exercises 
self-vision  ;  the  phase  thus  to  be  taught  is  that  which  already  touches 
the  intellective  order,  that  which  we  call  the  understanding  or  intelligent 
soul,  indicating  by  the  very  name  that  it  is  already  of  itself  in  some  degree 
an  Intellectual-Principle  or  that  it  holds  its  peculiar  power  through  and 
from  that  Principle.  This  phase  must  be  brought  to  understand  by  what 
means  it  has  knowledge  of  the  thing  it  sees  and  warrant  for  what  it  affirms  : 
if  it  became  what  it  affirms,  it  would  by  that  fact  possess  self-knowing. 
All  its  vision  and  affirmation  being  in  the  Supreme  or  deriving  from  it  — 
There  where  itself  also  is — it  will  possess  self-knowledge  by  its  right  as 
a  Reason-Principle,  claiming  its  kin  and  bringing  all  into  accord  with 
the  divine  imprint  upon  it. 

The  soul  therefore  (to  attain  self-knowledge)  has  only  to  set  this 
image  (that  is  to  say,  its  highest  phase)  alongside  the  veritable  Intellectual- 
Principle  which  we  have  found  to  be  identical  with  the  truths  constituting 
the  objects  of  intellection,  the  world  of  Primals  and  Reality :  for  this 
Intellectual-Principle,  by  very  definition,  cannot  be  outside  of  itself,  the 
Intellectual  Reality :  self-gathered  and  unalloyed,  it  is  Intellectual- 
Principle  through  all  the  range  of  its  being — for  unintelligent  intelligence 
is  not  possible — and  thus  it  possesses  of  necessity  self-knowing,  as  a 
being  immanent  to  itself  and  one  having  for  function  and  essence  to  be 
purely  and  solely  Intellectual-Principle.  This  is  no  doer  ;  the  doer,  not 
self-intent  but  looking  outward,  will  have  knowledge,  in  some  kind,  of 
the  external,  but,  if  wholly  of  this  practical  order,  need  have  no  self- 
knowledge  ;  where,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  no  action— and  of  course 


V.  3-  7] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


27 


the  pure  Intellectual- Principle  cannot  be  straining  after  any  absent  good 
— the  intention  can  be  only  towards  the  self ;  at  once  self-knowing 
becomes  not  merely  plausible  but  inevitable  ;  what  else  could  living 
signify  in  a  being  immune  from  action  and  existing  in  Intellect  ? 

7* 

The  contemplating  of  God,  we  might  answer. 

But  to  admit  its  knowing  God  is  to  be  compelled  to  admit  its  self¬ 
knowing.  It  will  know  what  it  holds  from  God,  what  God  has  given 
forth  or  may  ;  with  this  knowledge,  it  knows  itself  at  the  stroke,  for  it  is 
itself  one  of  those  given  things — in  fact  is  all  of  them.  Knowing  God 
and  His  power,  then,  it  knows  itself,  since  it  comes  from  Him  and  carries 
His  power  upon  it ;  if,  because  here  the  act  of  vision  is  identical  with 
the  object,  it  is  unable  to  see  God  clearly,  then  all  the  more,  by  the 
equation  of  seeing  and  seen,  we  are  driven  back  upon  that  self-seeing  and 
self-knowing  in  which  seeing  and  thing  seen  are  undistinguishably  one  thing. 

And  what  else  is  there  to  attribute  to  it  ? 

Repose,  no  doubt ;  but  to  an  Intellectual-Principle  Repose  is  not  an 
abdication  from  intellect ;  its  Repose  is  an  Act,  the  act  of  abstention  from 
the  alien  :  in  all  forms  of  existence  repose  from  the  alien  leaves  the 
characteristic  activity  intact,  especially  where  the  Being  is  not  merely 
potential  but  fully  realised. 

In  the  Intellectual-Principle,  the  Being  is  an  Act  and  in  the  absence 
of  any  other  object  it  must  be  self-directed  ;  by  this  self-intellection  it 
holds  its  Act  within  itself  and  upon  itself  ;  all  that  can  emanate  from  it 
is  produced  by  this  self-centering  and  self-intention  ;  first-self-gathered, 
it  then  gives  itself  or  gives  something  in  its  likeness  ;  fire  must  first  be 
self-centred  and  be  fire,  true  to  fire’s  natural  Act ;  then  it  may  reproduce 
itself  elsewhere. 

Once  more,  then  ;  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  a  self-intent  activity, 
but  soul  has  the  double  phase,  one  inner,  intent  upon  the  Intellectual- 
Principle,  the  other  outside  it  and  facing  to  the  external ;  by  the  one  it 
holds  the  likeness  to  its  source  ;  by  the  other,  even  in  its  unlikeness,  it 
still  comes  to  likeness  in  this  sphere,  too,  by  virtue  of  action  and  pro- 


28 


PLOTINUS 


duction  ;  in  its  action  it  still  contemplates,  and  its  production  produces 
Ideal-forms — divine  intellections  perfectly  wrought  out — so  that  all  its 
creations  are  representations  of  the  divine  Intellection  and  of  the  divine 
Intellect,  moulded  upon  the  archetype,  of  which  all  are  emanations  and 
images,  the  nearer  more  true,  the  very  latest  preserving  some  faint  like¬ 
ness  of  the  source. 

8. 

Now  comes  the  question  what  sort  of  thing  does  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  see  in  seeing  the  Intellectual  Realm  and  what  in  seeing  itself  ? 

We  are  not  to  look  for  an  Intellectual  realm  reminding  us  of  the  colour 
or  shape  to  be  seen  on  material  objects  :  the  intellectual  antedates  all  such 
things  ;  and  even  in  our  sphere  the  production  is  very  different  from 
the  Reason-Principle  in  the  seeds  from  which  it  is  produced.  The  seed 
principles  are  invisible  and  the  beings  of  the  Intellectual  still  more 
characteristically  so  ;  the  Intellectuals  are  of  one  same  nature  with  the 
Intellectual  Realm  which  contains  them,  just  as  the  Reason-Principle 
in  the  seed  is  identical  with  the  soul,  or  life-principle,  containing  it. 

But  the  Soul  (considered  as  apart  from  the  Intellectual-Principle) 
has  no  vision  of  what  it  thus  contains,  for  it  is  not  the  producer  but,  like 
the  Reason-Principles  also,  an  image  of  its  source  :  that  source  is  the 
brilliant,  the  authentic,  the  primarily  existent,  the  thing  self-sprung 
and  self-intent ;  but  its  image,  soul,  is  a  thing  which  can  have  no  perman¬ 
ence  except  by  attachment,  by  living  in  that  other  ;  the  very  nature 
of  an  image  is  that  as  a  secondary  it  shall  have  its  being  in  something 
else,  if  at  all  it  exist  apart  from  its  original.  Hence  this  image  (soul) 
has  not  vision,  for  it  has  not  the  necessary  light,  and  if  it  should  see,  then, 
as  finding  its  completion  elsewhere,  it  sees  another,-  not  itself. 

In  the  pure  Intellectual  there  is  nothing  of  this  :  the  vision  and  the 
envisioned  are  a  unity ;  the  seen  is  as  the  seeing  and  seeing  as  seen. 

What,  then,  is  there  that  can  pronounce  upon  the  nature  of  this 
all-unity  ? 

That  which  sees:  and  to  see  is  the  function  of  the  Intellectual- 
Principle.  Even  in  our  own  sphere  (we  have  a  parallel  to  this  self-vision 


V.  3-  8] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


29 


of  a  unity),  our  vision  is  light  or  rather  becomes  one  with  the  light,  and 
it  sees  light  for  it  sees  colours.  In  the  intellectual,  the  vision  sees  not 
through  some  medium  but  by  and  through  itself  alone,  for  its  object  is 
not  external :  by  one  light  it  sees  another  not  through  any  intermediate 
agency  ;  a  light  sees  a  light,  that  is  to  say  a  thing  sees  itself.  This  light 
shining  within  the  soul  enlightens  it  ;  that  is,  it  makes  the  soul  intellective, 
working  it  into  likeness  with  itself,  the  light  above. 

Think  of  the  traces  of  this  light  upon  the  soul,  then  say  to  yourself 
that  such,  and  more  beautiful  and  broader  and  more  radiant,  is  the 
light  itself ;  thus  you  will  approach  to  the  nature  of  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  and  the  Intellectual  Realm,  for  it  is  this  light,  itself  lit  from 
above,  which  gives  the  soul  its  brighter  life. 

It  is  not  the  source  of  the  generative  life  of  the  soul  which,  on  the 
contrary,  it  draws  inward,  preserving  it  from  such  diffusion,  holding  it 
to  the  love  of  the  splendour  of  its  Prior. 

Nor  does  it  give  the  life  of  perception  and  sensation,  for  that  looks 
to  the  external  and  to  what  acts  most  vigorously  upon  the  senses  whereas 
one  accepting  that  light  of  truth  may  be  said  no  longer  to  see  the  visible, 
but  the  very  contrary. 

This  means  in  sum  that  the  life  the  soul  takes  thence  is  an  intellective 
life,  a  trace  of  the  life  in  the  (divine)  Intellect,  in  which  alone  the  authentic 
exists. 

The  life  in  the  Divine  Intellect  is  also  an  Act :  it  is  the  primal  light 
outlamping  to  itself  primarily,  its  own  torch  ;  lightgiver  and  lit  at  once  ; 
the  authentic  intellectual  object,  knowing  at  once  and  known,  seen  to 
itself  and  needing  no  other  than  itself  to  see  by,  self-sufficing  to  the 
vision,  since  what  it  sees  it  is  ;  known  to  us  by  that  very  same  light, 
our  knowledge  of  it  attained  through  itself,  for  from  nowhere  else  could 
we  find  the  means  of  telling  of  it.  By  its  nature,  its  self-vision  is  the 
clearer  but,  using  it  as  our  medium,  we  too  may  come  to  see  by  it. 

In  the  strength  of  such  considerations  we  lead  up  our  own  soul  to 
the  Divine,  so  that  it  poses  itself  as  an  image  of  that  Being,  its  life  becoming 
an  imprint  and  a  likeness  of  the  Highest,  its  every  act  of  thought  making 
it  over  into  the  Divine  and  the  Intellectual. 


30 


PLOTINUS 


If  the  soul  is  questioned  as  to  the  nature  of  that  Intellectual-Principle 
— the  perfect  and  all-embracing,  the  primal  self-knower — it  has  but  to 
enter  into  that  Principle,  or  to  sink  all  its  activity  into  that,  and  at  once 
it  shows  itself  to  be  in  effective  possession  of  those  priors  whose  memory 
it  never  lost :  thus,  as  an  image  of  the  Intellectual- Principle,  it  can  make 
itself  the  medium  by  which  to  attain  some  vision  of  it ;  it  draws  upon 
that  within  itself  which  is  most  closely  resemblant,  as  far  as  resemblance 
is  possible  between  divine  Intellect  and  any  phase  of  soul. 

9- 

In  order,  then,  to  know  what  the  Divine  Mind  is  we  must  observe  soul 
and  especially  its  most  God-like  phase. 

One  certain  way  to  this  knowledge  is  to  separate  first,  the  man  from 
the  body — yourself,  that  is,  from  your  body — next  to  put  aside  that 
soul  which  moulded  the  body,  and,  very  earnestly,  the  system  of  sense 
with  desires  and  impulses  and  every  such  futility,  all  setting  definitely 
towards  the  mortal :  what  is  left  is  the  phase  of  the  soul  which  we  have 
declared  to  be  an  image  of  the  Divine  Intellect,  retaining  some  light  from 
that  sun,  while  it  pours  downward  upon  the  sphere  of  magnitudes  (that 
is,  of  Matter)  the  light  playing  about  itself  which  is  generated  from  its 
own  nature. 

Of  course  we  do  not  pretend  that  the  sun's  light  (as  the  analogy 
might  imply)  remains  a  self-gathered  and  sun-centred  thing  :  it  is  at  once 
outrushing  and  indwelling ;  it  strikes  outward  continuously,  lap  after 
lap,  until  it  reaches  us  upon  our  earth  :  we  must  take  it  that  all  the 
light,  including  that  which  plays  about  the  sun’s  orb,  has  travelled  ; 
otherwise  we  would  have  a  void  expanse,  that  of  the  space — which  is 
material — next  to  the  sun’s  orb.  The  Soul,  on  the  contrary — a  light 
springing  from  the  Divine  Mind  and  shining  about  it — is  in  closest  touch 
with  that  source  ;  it  is  not  in  transit  but  remains  centred  there,  and,  in 
likeness  to  that  principle,  it  has  no  place  :  the  light  of  the  sun  is  actually 
in  the  air,  but  the  soul  is  clean  of  all  such  contact  so  that  its  immunity 
is  patent  to  itself  and  to  any  other  of  the  same  order. 

And  by  its  own  characteristic  act,  though  not  without  reasoning 


v.  3-  io] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


3i 


process,  it  knows  the  nature  of  the  Intellectual- Principle  which,  on  its 
side,  knows  itself  without  need  of  reasoning,  for  it  is  ever  self-present 
whereas  we  become  so  by  directing  our  soul  towards  it ;  our  life  is  broken 
and  there  are  many  lives,  but  that  principle  needs  no  changings  of  life 
or  of  things  ;  the  lives  it  brings  to  being  are  for  others  not  for  itself  :  it 
cannot  need  the  inferior  ;  nor  does  it  for  itself  produce  the  less  when  it 
possesses  or  is  the  all,  nor  the  images  when  it  possesses  or  is  the  prototype. 

Anyone  not  of  the  strength  to  lay  hold  of  the  first  soul,  that  possessing 
pure  intellection,  must  grasp  that  which  has  to  do  with  our  ordinary 
thinking  and  thence  ascend  :  if  even  this  prove  too  hard,  let  him  turn 
to  account  the  sensitive  phase  which  carries  the  ideal  forms  of  the  less 
fine  degree,  that  phase  which,  too,  with  its  powers,  is  immaterial  and  lies 
just  within  the  realm  of  Ideal-principles. 

One  may  even,  if  it  seem  necessary,  begin  as  low  as  the  reproductive 
soul  and  its  very  production  and  thence  make  the  ascent,  mounting  from 
those  ultimate  ideal  principles  to  the  ultimates  in  the  higher  sense,  that 
is  to  the  primals. 


10. 

This  matter  need  not  be  elaborated  at  present :  it  suffices  to  say 
that  if  the  created  were  all,  these  ultimates  (the  higher)  need  not  exist : 
but  the  Supreme  does  include  primals,  the  primals  because  the  producers. 
In  other  words,  there  must  be,  with  the  made,  the  making  source  ;  and, 
unless  these  are  to  be  identical,  there  will  be  need  of  some  link 
between  them.  Similarly,  this  link  which  is  the  Intellectual-Principle 
demands  yet  a  Transcendent.  If  we  are  asked  why  this  Transcendent 
also  should  not  have  self-vision,  our  answer  is  that  it  has  no  need  of 
vision  ;  but  this  we  will  discuss  later  :  for  the  moment  we  go  back, 
since  the  question  at  issue  is  gravely  important. 

We  repeat  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  must  have,  actually  has, 
self-vision,  firstly  because  it  has  multiplicity,  next  because  it  exists  for 
the  external  and  therefore  must  be  a  seeing  power,  one  seeing  that 
external ;  in  fact  its  very  essence  is  vision.  Given  some  external,  there 
must  be  vision  ;  and  if  there  be  nothing  external  the  Intellectual- Principle 


32 


PLOTINUS 


(Divine  Mind)  exists  in  vain.  Unless  there  is  something  beyond  bare 
unity,  there  can  be  no  vision  :  vision  must  converge  with  a  visible  object. 
And  this  which  the  seer  is  to  see  can  be  only  a  multiple,  no  undistinguish- 
able  unity  ;  nor  could  a  universal  unity  find  anything  upon  which  to 
exercise  any  act ;  all,  one  and  desolate,  would  be  utter  stagnation  ;  in 
so  far  as  there  is  action,  there  is  diversity.  If  there  be  no  distinctions, 
what  is  there  to  do,  what  direction  in  which  to  move  ?  An  agent  must 
either  act  upon  the  extern  or  be  a  multiple  and  so  able  to  act  upon  itself  : 
making  no  advance  towards  anything  other  than  itself,  it  is  motionless 
and  where  it  could  know  only  blank  fixity  it  can  know  nothing. 

The  intellective  power,  therefore,  when  occupied  with  the  intel¬ 
lectual  act,  must  be  in  a  state  of  duality,  whether  one  of  the  two  elements 
stand  actually  outside  or  both  lie  within  :  the  intellectual  act  will  always 
comport  diversity  as  well  as  the  necessary  identity,  and  in  the  same  way 
its  characteristic  objects  (the  Ideas)  must  stand  to  .the  Intellectual- 
Principle  as  at  once  distinct  and  identical.  This  applies  equally  to  the 
single  object ;  there  can  be  no  intellection  except  of  something  contain¬ 
ing  separable  detail  and,  since  the  object  is  a  Reason-principle  (a  dis¬ 
criminated  Idea),  it  has  the  necessary  element  of  multiplicity.  The 
Intellectual-Principle,  thus,  is  informed  of  itself  by  the  fact  of  being  a 
multiple  organ  of  vision,  an  eye  receptive  of  many  illuminated  objects. 
If  it  had  to  direct  itself  to  a  memberless  unity,  it  would  be  dereasoned  : 
what  could  it  say  or  know  of  such  an  object  ?  The  self-affirmation  of 
(even)  a  memberless  unity  implies  the  repudiation  of  all  that  does  not 
enter  into  the  character :  in  other  words,  it  must  be  multiple  as  a  pre¬ 
liminary  to  being  itself. 

Then,  again,  in  the  assertion  “  I  am  this  particular  thing,”  either 
the  “  particular  thing  ”  is  distinct  from  the  assertor — and  there  is  a 
false  statement — or  it  is  included  within  it,  and,  at  once,  multiplicity  is 
asserted  :  otherwise  the  assertion  is  “  I  am  what  I  am,”  or  “  I  am  I.” 

If  it  be  no  more  than  a  simple  duality  able  to  say  “  I  and  that  other 
phase,”  there  is  already  multiplicity,  for  there  is  distinction  and  ground 
of  distinction,  there  is  number  with  all  its  train  of  separate  things. 

In  sum,  then,  a  knowing  principle  must  handle  distinct  items  :  its 


V.  3-  II] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


33 


object  must,  at  the  moment  of  cognition,  contain  diversity  ;  otherwise 
the  thing  remains  unknown  ;  there  is  mere  conjunction,  such  a  contact, 
without  affirmation  or  comprehension,  as  would  precede  knowledge,  the 
intellect  not  yet  in  being,  the  impinging  agent  not  percipient. 

Similarly  the  knowing  principle  itself  cannot  remain  simplex, 
especially  in  the  act  of  self-knowing  :  all  silent  though  its  self-perception 
be,  it  is  dual  to  itself.  Of  course  it  has  no  need  of  minute  self-handling 
since  it  has  nothing  to  learn  by  its  intellective  act ;  before  it  is  (effec¬ 
tively)  Intellect  it  holds  knowledge  of  its  own  content.  Knowledge 
implies  desire,  for  it  is,  so  to  speak,  discovery  crowning  a  search  ;  the 
utterly  undifferentiated  remains  self-centred  and  makes  no  enquiry 
about  that  self  :  anything  capable  of  analysing  its  content,  must  be  a 
manifold. 


II. 

Thus  the  Intellectual-Principle,  in  the  act  of  knowing  the  Tran¬ 
scendent,  is  a  manifold.  It  knows  the  Transcendent  in  very  essence  but, 
with  all  its  effort  to  grasp  that  prior  as  a  pure  unity,  it  goes  forth  amass¬ 
ing  successive  impressions,  so  that,  to  it,  the  object  becomes  multiple  : 
thus  in  its  outgoing  to  its  object  it  is  not  (fully  realised)  Intellectual- 
Principle  ;  it  is  an  eye  that  has  not  yet  seen  ;  in  its  return  it  is  an  eye 
possessed  of  the  multiplicity  which  it  has  itself  conferred  :  it  sought 
something  of  which  it  found  the  vague  presentment  within  itself  ;  it 
returned  with  something  else,  the  manifold  quality  with  which  it  has  of 
its  own  act  invested  the  simplex. 

If  it  had  not  possessed  a  previous  impression  of  the  Transcendent 
it  could  never  have  grasped  it,  but  this  impression,  originally  of  unity, 
becomes  an  impression  of  multiplicity  ;  and  the  Intellectual-Principle 
in  taking  cognisance  of  that  multiplicity  knows  the  Transcendent  and 
so  is  realised  as  an  eye  possessed  of  its  vision. 

It  is  now  Intellectual-Principle  since  it  actually  holds  its  object,  and 
holds  it  by  the  act  of  intellection  :  before,  it  was  no  more  than  a  tendance, 
an  eye  blank  of  impression  :  it  was  in  motion  towards  the  transcendental ; 
now  that  it  has  attained,  it  has  become  Intellectual-Principle  henceforth 


34 


PLOTINUS 


absorbed  ;  in  virtue  of  this  intellection  it  holds  the  character  of  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle,  of  Essential  Existence  and  of  Intellectual  Act  where, 
previously,  not  possessing  the  Intellectual  Object,  it  was  not  Intellectual 
Perception,  and,  not  yet  having  exercised  the  Intellectual  Act,  it  was  not 
Intellectual-Principle. 

The  Principle  before  all  these  principles  is  no  doubt  the  first  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  universe,  but  not  as  immanent  :  immanence  is  not  for  primal 
sources  but  for  engendering  secondaries  ;  that  which  stands  as  primal 
source  of  everything  is  not  a  thing  but  is  distinct  from  all  things  :  it  is 
not,  then,  a  member  of  the  total  but  earlier  than  all,  earlier,  thus,  than 
the  Intellectual-Principle — which  in  fact  envelops  the  entire  train  of 
things. 

Thus  we  come,  once  more,  to  a  Being  above  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  and,  since  the  sequent  amounts  to  no  less  than  the  All,  we 
recognise,  again,  a  Being  above  the  All.  This  assuredly  cannot  be  one 
of  the  things  to  which  it  is  prior.  We  may  not  call  it  Intellect ;  there¬ 
fore,  too,  we  may  not  call  it  the  Good,  if  the  Good  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  some  one  member  of  the  universe  ;  if  we  mean  that  which 
precedes  the  universe  of  things,  the  name  may  be  allowed. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  is  established  in  multiplicity  ;  its  intellec¬ 
tion,  self-sprung  though  it  be,  is  in  the  nature  of  something  added  to  it 
(some  accidental  dualism)  and  makes  it  multiple  :  the  utterly  simplex, 
and  therefore  first  of  all  beings,  must,  then,  transcend  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  ;  and,  obviously,  if  this  had  intellection  it  would  no  longer 
transcend  the  Intellectual-Principle  but  be  it,  and  at  once  be  a  multiple. 


12. 

But  why,  after  all,  should  it  not  be  such  a  manifold  as  long  as  it 
remains  one  substantial  existence,  having  the  multiplicity  not  of  a 
compound  being  but  of  a  unity  with  a  variety  of  activities  ? 

Now,  no  doubt,  if  these  various  activities  are  not  themselves  sub¬ 
stantial  existences — but  merely  manifestations  of  latent  potentiality  — 
there  is  no  compound  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  remains  incomplete 
until  its  substantial  existence  be  expressed  in  act.  If  its  substantial 


v.  3-  12] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


35 


existence  consists  in  its  Act,  and  this  Act  constitutes  multiplicity,  then 
its  substantial  existence  will  be  strictly  proportioned  to  the  extent  of  the 
multiplicity. 

We  allow  this  to  be  true  for  the  Intellectual-Principle  to  which  we 
have  allotted  (the  multiplicity  of)  self-knowing  ;  but  for  the  first  prin¬ 
ciple  of  all,  never.  Before  the  manifold,  there  must  be  The  One,  that 
from  which  the  manifold  rises  :  in  all  numerical  series,  the  unit  is  the 
first. 

But — we  will  be  answered — for  number,  well  and  good,  since  the 
suite  makes  a  compound  ;  but  in  the  real  beings  why  must  there  be  a 
unit  from  which  the  multiplicity  of  entities  shall  proceed  ? 

Because  (failing  such  a  unity)  the  multiplicity  would  consist  of  dis¬ 
jointed  items,  each  starting  at  its  own  distinct  place  and  moving  acci¬ 
dentally  to  serve  to  a  total. 

But,  they  will  tell  us,  the  Activities  in  question  do  proceed  from  a 
unity,  from  the  Intellectual-Principle,  a  simplex. 

By  that  they  admit  the  existence  of  a  simplex  prior  to  the  Activities  ; 
and  they  make  the  Activities  perdurable  and  class  them  as  substantial 
existences  (hypostases)  ;  but  as  Hypostases  they  will  be  distinct  from 
their  source,  which  will  remain  simplex  ;  while  its  product  will  in  its  own 
nature  be  manifold  and  dependent  upon  it. 

Now  if  these  activities  arise  from  some  unexplained  first  activity  in 
that  principle,  then  it  too  contains  the  manifold  :  if  on  the  contrary  they 
are  the  very  earliest  activities  and  the  source  and  cause  of  any  multiple 
product  and  the  means  by  which  that  Principle  is  able,  before  any  activity 
occurs,  to  remain  self-centred,  then  they  are  allocated  to  the  product  of 
which  they  are  the  cause  ;  for  this  principle  is  one  thing,  the  activities 
going  forth  from  it  are  another,  since  it  is  not,  itself,  in  act.  If  this  be 
not  so,  the  first  act  cannot  be  the  Intellectual-Principle  :  the  One  does 
not  provide  for  the  existence  of  an  Intellectual- Principle  which  thereupon 
appears  ;  that  provision  would  be  something  (an  Hypostasis)  intervening 
between  the  One  and  the  Intellectual- Principle  its  offspring.  There 
could,  in  fact,  be  no  such  providing  in  The  One,  for  it  was  never  in¬ 
complete  ;  and  such  provision  could  name  nothing  that  ought  to  be 


36 


PLOTINUS 


provided.  It  cannot  be  thought  to  possess  only  some  part  of  its  content, 
and  not  the  whole  ;  nor  did  anything  exist  to  which  it  could  turn  in 
desire.  Clearly  anything  that  comes  into  being  after  it,  arises  without 
shaking  to  its  permanence  in  its  own  habit.  It  is  essential  to  the  existence 
of  any  new  entity  that  the  First  remain  in  self-gathered  repose  through¬ 
out  :  otherwise,  it  moved  before  there  was  motion  and  had  intellectual 
act  before  any  intellection — unless,  indeed,  that  first  act  (as  motionless 
and  without  intelligence)  was  incomplete,  nothing  more  than  a  tendency. 
And  what  can  we  imagine  it  lights  upon  to  become  the  object  of  such  a 
tendency  ? 

The  only  reasonable  explanation  of  act  flowing  from  it  lies  in  the 
analogy  of  light  from  a  sun.  The  entire  intellectual  order  may  be  figured 
as  a  kind  of  light  with  the  One  in  repose  at  its  summit  as  its  King  :  but 
this  manifestation  is  not  cast  out  from  it  :  we  may  think,  rather,  of  the 
One  as  a  light  before  the  light,  an  eternal  irradiation  resting  upon  the 
Intellectual  Realm  ;  this,  not  identical  with  its  source,  is  yet  not  severed 
from  it  nor  of  so  remote  a  nature  as  to  be  less  than  Real-Being  ;  it  is  no 
blind  thing,  but  is  seeing  and  knowing,  the  primal  knower. 

The  One,  as  transcending  Intellect,  transcends  knowing  :  above  all 
need,  it  is  above  the  need  of  the  knowing  which  pertains  solely  to  the 
Secondary  Nature.  Knowing  is  a  unitary  thing,  but  defined  :  the  first 
is  One,  but  undefined  :  a  defined  One  would  not  be  the  One-Absolute  : 
the  absolute  is  prior  to  the  definite. 


I3- 

Thus  The  One  is  in  truth  beyond  all  statement :  any  affirmation  is 
of  a  thing  ;  but  the  all-transcending,  resting  above  even  the  most  august 
divine  Mind,  possesses  alone  of  all  true  being,  and  is  not  a  thing  among 
things  ;  we  can  give  it  no  name  because  that  would  imply  predication  : 
we  can  but  try  to  indicate,  in  our  own  feeble  way,  something  concerning 
it :  when  in  our  perplexity  we  object,  “  Then  it  is  without  self- 
perception,  without  self-consciousness,  ignorant  of  itself  ”  ;  we  must 
remember  that  we  have  been  considering  it  only  in  its  opposites. 


v.  3-  I3-] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


37 


If  we  make  it  knowable,  an  object  of  affirmation,  we  make  it  a 
manifold  ;  and  if  we  allow  intellection  in  it  we  make  it  at  that  point 
indigent  :  supposing  that  in  fact  intellection  accompanies  it,  intellection 
by  it  must  be  superfluous. 

Self-intellection — which  is  the  truest — implies  the  entire  perception 
of  a  total  self  formed  from  a  variety  converging  into  an  integral :  but 
the  Transcendent  knows  neither  separation  of  part  nor  any  such  enquiry  ; 
if  its  intellectual  act  were  directed  upon  something  outside,  then,  the 
Transcendent  would  be  deficient  and  the  intellection  faulty. 

The  wholly  simplex  and  veritable  self-sufficing  can  be  lacking  at  no 
point  :  self-intellection  begins  in  that  principle  which,  secondarily  self- 
sufficing,  yet  needs  itself  and  therefore  needs  to  know  itself  :  this  prin¬ 
ciple,  by  its  self-presence,  achieves  its  sufficiency  in  virtue  of  its  entire 
content  (it  is  the  all)  :  it  becomes  thus  competent  from  the  total  of  its 
being,  in  the  act  of  living  towards  itself  and  looking  upon  itself. 

Consciousness,  as  the  very  word  indicates,  is  a  conperception,  an  act 
exercised  upon  a  manifold  :  and  even  intellection,  earlier  (nearer  to  the 
divine)  though  it  is,  implies  that  the  agent  turns  back  upon  itself,  upon 
a  manifold,  then.  If  that  agent  says  no  more  than  “  I  am  a  being,”  it 
speaks  (by  the  implied  dualism)  as  a  discoverer  of  the  extern  ;  and 
rightly  so,  for  being  is  a  manifold  ;  when  it  faces  towards  the  unmanifold 
and  says,  “  I  am  that  being,”  it  misses  both  itself  and  the  being  (since 
the  simplex  cannot  be  thus  divided  into  knower  and  known)  :  if  it  is  (to 
utter)  truth  it  cannot  indicate  by  “  being  ”  something  (single)  like  a 
stone  ;  in  the  one  phrase  multiplicity  is  asserted  ;  for  the  being  thus 
affirmed — (even)  the  veritable,  as  distinguished  from  such  a  mere  con¬ 
tainer  of  some  trace  of  being  as  ought  not  to  be  called  a  being  since  it 
stands  merely  as  image  to  archetype  —even  this  must  possess  multiplicity. 

But  will  not  each  item  in  that  multiplicity  be  an  object  of  intellection 
to  us  ? 

Taken  bare  and  single,  no  :  but  Being  itself  is  manifold  within  itself, 
and  whatever  else  you  may  name  has  Being. 

This  accepted,  it  follows  that  anything  that  is  to  be  thought  of  as 
the  most  utterly  simplex  of  all,  cannot  have  self-intellection  ;  to  have 


38 


PLOTINUS 


that  would  mean  being  multiple.  The  Transcendent,  thus,  neither 
knows  itself  nor  is  known  in  itself. 

14- 

How,  then,  do  we  ourselves  come  to  be  speaking  of  it  ? 

No  doubt  we  deal  with  it,  but  we  do  not  state  it ;  we  have  neither 
knowledge  nor  intellection  of  it. 

But  in  what  sense  do  we  even  deal  with  it  when  we  have  no  hold 
upon  it  ? 

We  do  not,  it  is  true,  grasp  it  by  knowledge,  but  that  does  not  mean 
that  we  are  utterly  void  of  it ;  we  hold  it  not  so  as  to  state  it,  but  so  as 
to  be  able  to  speak  about  it.  And  we  can  and  do  state  what  it  is  not, 
while  we  are  silent  as  to  what  it  is  :  we  are,  in  fact,  speaking  of  it  in  the 
light  of  its  sequels  ;  unable  to  state  it,  we  may  still  possess  it. 

Those  divinely  possessed  and  inspired  have  at  least  the  knowledge 
that  they  hold  some  greater  thing  within  them  though  they  cannot  tell 
what  it  is  ;  from  the  movements  that  stir  them  and  the  utterances  that 
come  from  them  they  perceive  the  power,  not  themselves,  that  moves 
them  :  in  the  same  way,  it  must  be,  we  stand  towards  the  Supreme  when 
we  hold  the  Intellectual-Principle  pure ;  we  know  the  divine  Mind 
within,  that  which  gives  Being  and  all  else  of  that  order  :  but  we  know, 
too,  that  other,  know  that  it  is  none  of  these,  but  a  nobler  principle  than 
anything  we  know  as  Being  ;  fuller  and  greater  ;  above  reason,  mind 
and  feeling  ;  conferring  these  powers,  not  to  be  confounded  with  them. 

15- 

Conferring — but  how  ?  As  itself  possessing  them  or  not  ?  How  can 
it  convey  what  it  does  not  possess,  and  yet  if  it  does  possess  how  is  it 
simplex  ?  And  if,  again,  it  does  not,  how  is  it  the  source  of  the  manifold  ? 

A  single,  unmanifold  emanation  we  may  very  well  allow — how  even 
that  can  come  from  a  pure  unity  may  be  a  problem,  but  we  may  always 
explain  it  on  the  analogy  of  the  irradiation  from  a  luminary — but  a 
multitudinous  production  raises  question. 

The  explanation  is,  that  what  comes  from  the  Supreme  cannot  be 


V.  3.  15] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


39 


identical  with  it  and  assuredly  cannot  be  better  than  it — what  could  be 
better  than  The  One  or  the  utterly  transcendent  ?  The  emanation,  then, 
must  be  less  good,  that  is  to  say,  less  self-sufficing  :  now  what  must  that 
be  which  is  less  self-sufficing  than  The  One  ?  Obviously  the  Not-One, 
that  is  to  say,  multiplicity  but  a  multiplicity  striving  towards  unity  ; 
that  is  to  say,  a  One-that-is-many. 

All  that  is  not  One  is  conserved  by  virtue  of  the  One,  and  from  the 
One  derives  its  characteristic  nature  :  if  it  had  not  attained  such  unity 
as  is  consistent  with  being  made  up  of  multiplicity  we  could  not  affirm 
its  existence  :  if  we  are  able  to  affirm  the  nature  of  single  things,  this  is 
in  virtue  of  the  unity,  the  identity  even,  which  each  of  them  possesses. 
But  the  all-transcendent,  utterly  void  of  multiplicity,  has  no  mere  unity 
of  participation  but  is  unity’s  self,  independent  of  all  else,  as  being  that 
from  which,  by  whatever  means,  all  the  rest  take  their  degree  of  unity 
in  their  standing,  near  or  far,  towards  it. 

In  virtue  of  the  unity  manifested  in  its  variety  it  exhibits,  side  by 
side,  both  an  all-embracing  identity  and  the  existence  of  the  secondary  : 
all  the  variety  lies  in  the  midst  of  a  sameness,  and  identity  cannot  be 
separated  from  diversity  since  all  stands  as  one  ;  each  item  in  that 
content,  by  the  fact  of  participating  in  life,  is  a  One-many  :  for  the  item 
could  not  make  itself  manifest  as  a  One-and-all. 

Only  the  Transcendent  can  be  that ;  it  is  the  great  beginning,  and 
the  beginning  must  be  a  really  existent  One,  wholly  and  truly  One,  while 
its  sequent,  poured  down  in  some  way  from  the  One,  is  all,  a  total  which 
has  participation  in  unity  and  whose  every  member  is  similarly  all  and 
one. 

What  then  is  the  All  ? 

The  total  of  which  the  Transcendent  is  the  Source. 

But  in  what  way  is  it  that  source  ?  In  the  sense,  perhaps,  of  sustain¬ 
ing  things  as  bestower  of  the  unity  of  each  single  item  ? 

That  too  ;  but  also  as  having  established  them  in  being. 

But  how  ?  As  having,  perhaps,  contained  them  previously  ? 

We  have  indicated  that,  thus,  the  First  would  be  a  manifold. 

May  we  think,  perhaps,  that  the  First  contained  the  universe  as  an 


40 


PLOTINUS 


indistinct  total  whose  items  are  elaborated  to  distinct  existence  within 
the  Second  by  the  Reason-Principle  there  ?  That  Second  is  certainly  an 
Activity  ;  the  Transcendent  would  contain  only  the  potentiality  of  the 
universe  to  come. 

But  the  nature  of  this  contained  potentiality  would  have  to  be 
explained  :  it  cannot  be  that  of  Matter,  a  receptivity,  for  thus  the  Source 
becomes  passive,  the  very  negation  of  production. 

How  then  does  it  produce  what  it  does  not  contain  ?  Certainly  not 
at  haphazard  and  certainly  not  by  selection.  How  then  ? 

We  have  observed  that  anything  that  may  spring  from  the  One 
must  be  different  from  it.  Differing,  it  is  not  One,  since  then  it  would  be 
the  Source.  If  unity  has  given  place  to  duality,  from  that  moment  there 
is  multiplicity  ;  for  there  is  variety  side  by  side  with  identity,  and  this 
imports  quality  and  all  the  rest. 

We  may  take  it  as  proved  that  the  emanation  of  the  Transcendent 
must  be  a  Xot-One  something  other  than  pure  unity  :  but  that  it  is  a 
multiplicity,  and  especially  that  it  is  such  a  multiplicity  as  is  exhibited 
in  the  sequent  universe,  this  is  a  statement  worthy  of  deliberation  : 
some  further  enquiry  must  be  made,  also,  as  to  the  necessity  of  any 
sequel  to  the  First. 

16. 

We  have,  of  course,  already  seen  that  a  secondary  must  follow  upon 
the  First,  and  that  this  is  a  power  immeasurably  fruitful ;  and  we  in¬ 
dicated  that  this  truth  is  confirmed  by  the  entire  order  of  things  since 
there  is  nothing,  not  even  in  the  lowest  ranks,  void  of  the  power  of 
generating.  We  have  now  to  add  that,  since  things  engendered  tend 
downwards  and  not  upwards  and,  especially,  move  towards  multiplicity, 
the  first  principle  of  all  must  be  less  a  manifold  than  any. 

That  which  engenders  the  world  of  sense  cannot  itself  be  a  sense- 
world  ;  it  must  be  the  Intellect  and  the  Intellectual  world  ;  similarly, 
the  prior  which  engenders  the  Intellectual-Principle  and  the  Intellectual 
world  cannot  be  either,  but  must  be  something  of  less  multiplicity.  The 
manifold  does  not  rise  from  the  manifold  :  the  intellectual  multiplicity 


V.  3-  16] 


THE  KNOWING  HYPOSTASES 


4i 


has  its  source  in  what  is  not  manifold  ;  by  the  mere  fact  of  being  mani¬ 
fold,  the  thing  is  not  the  first  principle  :  we  must  look  to  something 
earlier. 

All  must  be  grouped  under  a  unity  which,  as  standing  outside  of  all 
multiplicity  and  outside  of  any  ordinary  simplicity,  is  the  veritably  and 
essentially  simplex. 

Still,  how  can  a  Reason-Principle  (the  Intellectual),  characteristically 
a  manifold,  a  total,  derive  from  what  is  obviously  no  Reason-Principle  ? 

But  how,  failing  such  origin  in  the  simplex,  could  we  escape  (what 
cannot  be  accepted)  the  derivation  of  a  Reason-Principle  from  a  Reason- 
Principle  ? 

And  how  does  the  secondarily  good  (the  imaged  Good)  derive  from 
The  Good,  the  Absolute  ?  What  does  it  hold  from  the  Absolute  Good 
to  entitle  it  to  the  name  ? 

Similarity  to  the  prior  is  not  enough,  it  does  not  help  towards 
goodness  ;  we  demand  similarity  only  to  an  actually  existent  Good  : 
the  goodness  must  depend  upon  derivation  from  a  Prior  of  such  a  nature 
that  the  similarity  is  desirable  because  that  Prior  is  good,  just  as  the 
similarity  would  be  undesirable  if  the  Prior  were  not  good. 

Does  the  similarity  with  the  Prior  consist,  then,  in  a  voluntary 
resting  upon  it  ? 

It  is  rather  that,  finding  its  condition  satisfying,  it  seeks  nothing : 
the  similarity  depends  upon  the  all-sufficiency  of  what  it  possesses  ;  its 
existence  is  agreeable  because  all  is  present  to  it,  and  present  in  such  a 
way  as  not  to  be  even  different  from  it  (Intellectual-Principle  is  Being). 

All  life  belongs  to  it,  life  brilliant  and  perfect ;  thus  all  in  it  is  at 
once  life-principle  and  Intellectual-Principle,  nothing  in  it  aloof  from 
either  life  or  intellect :  it  is  therefore  self-sufficing  and  seeks  nothing  : 
and  if  it  seeks  nothing  this  is  because  it  has  in  itself  what,  lacking,  it  must 
seek.  It  has,  therefore,  its  Good  within  itself,  either  by  being  of  that 
order — in  what  we  have  called  its  life  and  intellect — or  in  some  other 
quality  or  character  going  to  produce  these. 

If  this  (secondary  principle)  were  The  Good  (The  Absolute)  nothing 
could  transcend  these  things,  life  and  intellect :  but,  given  the  existence 


42 


PLOTINUS 


of  something  higher,  this  Intellectual-Principle  must  possess  a  life 
directed  towards  that  Transcendent,  dependent  upon  it,  deriving  its 
being  from  it,  living  towards  it  as  towards  its  source.  The  First,  then, 
must  transcend  this  principle  of  life  and  intellect  which  directs  thither 
both  the  life  in  itself,  a  copy  of  the  Reality  of  the  First,  and  the  intellect 
in  itself  which  is  again  a  copy,  though  of  what  original  there  we  cannot 
know. 

*7- 

But  what  can  it  be  which  is  loftier  than  that  existence — a  life  com¬ 
pact  of  wisdom,  untouched  by  struggle  and  error,  or  than  this  Intellect 
which  holds  the  Universe  with  all  there  is  of  life  and  intellect  ? 

If  we  answer  “  The  Making  Principle,”  there  comes  the  question, 
”  making  by  what  virtue  ?  ”  and  unless  we  can  indicate  something 
higher  there  than  in  the  made,  our  reasoning  has  made  no  advance :  we 
rest  where  we  were. 

We  must  go  higher — if  it  were  only  for  the  reason,  that  the  maker 
of  all  must  have  a  self-sufficing  existence  outside  of  all  things — since  all 
the  rest  is  patently  indigent — and  that  everything  has  participated  in 
The  One  and,  as  drawing  on  unity,  is  itself  not  unity. 

What  then  is  this  in  which  each  particular  entity  participates,  the 
author  of  being  to  the  universe  and  to  each  item  of  the  total  ? 

Since  it  is  the  author  of  all  that  exists,  and  since  the  multiplicity  in 
each  thing  is  converted  into  a  self-sufficing  existence  by  this  presence  of 
The  One,  so  that  even  the  particular  itself  becomes  self-sufficing,  then 
clearly  this  principle,  author  at  once  of  Being  and  of  self-sufficingness,  is 
not  itself  a  Being  but  is  above  Being  and  above  even  self-sufficing. 

May  we  stop,  content,  with  that  ?  No  :  the  Soul  is  yet,  and  even 
more,  in  pain.  Is  she  ripe,  perhaps,  to  bring  forth,  now  that  in  her  pangs 
she  has  come  so  close  to  what  she  seeks  ?  No  :  we  must  call  upon  yet 
another  spell  if  anywhere  the  assuagement  is  to  be  found.  Perhaps  in 
what  has  already  been  uttered,  there  lies  the  charm  if  only  we  tell  it  over 
often  ?  No  :  we  need  a  new,  a  further,  incantation.  All  our  effort  may 
well  skim  over  every  truth,  and  through  all  the  verities  in  which  we  have 


V.  4.  Ij  HOW  THE  SECONDARIES  RISE  FROM  THE  FIRST 


43 


part,  and  yet  the  reality  escape  us  when  we  hope  to  affirm,  to  understand  : 
for  the  understanding,  in  order  to  its  affirmation,  must  possess  itself  of 
item  after  item  ;  only  so  does  it  traverse  all  the  field  :  but  how  can  there 
be  any  such  peregrination  of  that  in  which  there  is  no  variety  ? 

All  the  need  is  met  by  a  contact  purely  intellective.  At  the  moment 
of  touch  there  is  no  power  whatever  to  make  any  affirmation  ;  there  is 
no  leisure  ;  reasoning  upon  the  vision  is  for  afterwards.  We  may  know 
we  have  had  the  vision  when  the  Soul  has  suddenly  taken  light.  This 
light  is  from  the  Supreme  and  is  the  Supreme  ;  we  may  believe  in  the 
Presence  when,  like  that  other  God  on  the  call  of  a  certain  man,  He 
comes  bringing  light  :  the  light  is  the  proof  of  the  advent.  Thus,  the 
Soul  unlit  remains  without  that  vision  ;  lit,  it  possesses  what  it  sought. 
And  this  is  the  true  end  set  before  the  Soul,  to  take  that  light,  to  see  the 
Supreme  by  the  Supreme  and  not  by  the  light  of  any  other  principle — to 
see  the  Supreme  which  is  also  the  means  to  the  vision  ;  for  that  which 
illumines  the  Soul  is  that  which  it  is  to  see  just  as  it  is  by  the  sun’s  own 
light  that  we  see  the  sun. 

But  how  is  this  to  be  accomplished  ? 

Cut  away  everything. 

FOURTH  TRACTATE 

How  the  Secondaries  rise  from  The  First  : 

and  on  The  One 

i. 

Anything  existing  after  The  First  must  necessarily  arise  from 
that  First,  whether  immediately  or  as  tracing  back  to  it  through  inter- 
venients  ;  there  must  be  an  order  of  secondaries  and  tertiaries,  in  which 
any  second  is  to  be  referred  to  The  First,  any  third  to  the  second. 

Standing  before  all  things,  there  must  exist  a  Simplex,  differing 
from  all  its  sequel,  self-gathered  not  interblended  with  the  forms  that 
rise  from  it,  and  yet  able  in  some  mode  of  its  own  to  be  present  to  those 
others  :  it  must  be  authentically  a  unity,  not  merely  something  elabor¬ 
ated  into  unity  and  so  in  reality  no  more  than  unity’s  counterfeit ;  it  will 


44 


PLOTINUS 


debar  all  telling  and  knowing  except  that  it  may  be  described  as  tran¬ 
scending  Being — for  if  there  were  nothing  outside  all  alliance  and  com¬ 
promise,  nothing  authentically  one,  there  would  be  no  Source.  Un¬ 
touched  by  multiplicity,  it  will  be  wholly  self-sufficing,  an  absolute  First, 
whereas  any  not-first  demands  its  earlier,  and  any  non-simplex  needs  the 
simplicities  within  itself  as  the  very  foundations  of  its  composite 
existence. 

There  can  be  only  one  such  being  :  if  there  were  another,  the  two 
(as  indiscernible)  would  resolve  into  one,  for  we  are  not  dealing  with  two 
corporal  entities. 

Our  One-First  is  not  a  body  :  a  body  is  not  simplex  and,  as  a  thing 
of  process  cannot  be  a  First,  the  Source  cannot  be  a  thing  of  generation  : 
only  a  principle  outside  of  body,  and  utterly  untouched  by  multiplicity, 
could  be  The  First. 

Any  unity,  then,  later  than  The  First  must  be  no  longer  simplex  ; 
it  can  be  no  more  than  a  unity  in  diversity. 

Whence  must  such  a  sequent  arise  ? 

It  must  be  an  offspring  of  The  First ;  for  suppose  it  the  product  of 
chance,  that  First  ceases  to  be  the  Principle  of  All. 

But  how  does  it  arise  from  The  First  ? 

If  The  First  is  perfect,  utterly  perfect  above  all,  and  is  the  beginning 
of  all  power,  it  must  be  the  most  powerful  of  all  that  is,  and  all  other 
powers  must  act  in  some  partial  imitation  of  it.  Now  other  beings, 
coming  to  perfection,  are  observed  to  generate  ;  they  are  unable  to 
remain  self-closed  ;  they  produce  :  and  this  is  true  not  merely  of  beings 
endowed  with  will,  but  of  growing  things  where  there  is  no  will ;  even 
lifeless  objects  impart  something  of  themselves,  as  far  as  they  may  ;  fire 
warms,  snow  chills,  drugs  have  their  own  outgoing  efficacy  ;  all  things 
to  the  utmost  of  their  power  imitate  the  Source  in  some  operation  tending 
to  eternity  and  to  service. 

How  then  could  the  most  perfect  remain  self-set — the  First  Good, 
the  Power  towards  all,  how  could  it  grudge  or  be  powerless  to  give  of 
itself,  and  how  at  that  would  it  still  be  the  Source  ? 

If  things  other  than  itself  are  to  exist,  things  dependent  upon  it  for 


V.  4-  2]  HOW  THE  SECONDARIES  RISE  FROM  THE  FIRST  45 

their  reality,  it  must  produce  since  there  is  no  other  source.  And  further 
this  engendering  principle  must  be  the  very  highest  in  worth ;  and  its 
immediate  offspring,  its  secondary,  must  be  the  best  of  all  that  follows. 

2. 

If  the  Intellectual-Principle  were  the  engendering  Source,  then  the 
engendered  secondary,  while  less  perfect  than  the  Intellectual-Principle, 
would  be  close  to  it  and  similar  to  it :  but  since  the  engendering  Source 
is  above  the  Intellectual-Principle,  the  secondary  can  only  be  that 
principle. 

But  why  is  the  Intellectual-Principle  not  the  generating  source  ? 

Because  (it  is  not  a  self-sufficing  simplex)  :  the  Act  of  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  is  intellection,  which  means  that,  seeing  the  intellectual  object 
towards  which  it  has  turned,  it  is  consummated,  so  to  speak,  by  that 
object,  being  in  itself  indeterminate  like  sight  (a  vague  readiness  for  any 
and  every  vision)  and  determined  by  the  intellectual  object.  This  is 
why  it  has  been  said  that  “  out  of  the  indeterminate  dyad  and  The  One 
arise  the  Ideas  and  the  numbers  ”  :  for  the  dyad  is  the  Intellectual- 
Principle. 

Thus  it  is  not  a  simplex  ;  it  is  manifold  ;  it  exhibits  a  certain  com¬ 
posite  quality — within  the  Intellectual  or  divine  order,  of  course — as  the 
principle  that  sees  the  manifold.  It  is,  further,  itself  simultaneously 
object  and  agent  of  intellection  and  is  on  that  count  also  a  duality  :  and 
it  possesses  besides  another  object  of  intellection  in  the  Order  following 
upon  itself. 

But  how  can  the  Intellectual-Principle  be  a  product  of  the  Intellectual 
Object  ? 

In  this  way  :  the  intellectual  object  is  self-gathered  (self-compact) 
and  is  not  deficient  as  the  seeing  and  knowing  principle  must  be — deficient, 
I  mean,  as  needing  an  object — it  is  therefore  no  unconscious  thing  :  all 
its  content  and  accompaniment  are  its  possession  ;  it  is  self-distinguishing 
throughout ;  it  is  the  seat  of  life  as  of  all  things  ;  it  is,  itself,  that  self¬ 
intellection  which  takes  place  in  eternal  repose,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  mode 
other  than  that  of  the  Intellectual-Principle. 


46 


PLOTINUS 


But  if  something  comes  to  being  within  an  entity  which  in  no  way 
looks  outside  itself — and  especially  within  a  being  which  is  the  sum  of 
being — that  entity  must  be  the  source  of  the  new  thing  :  stable  in  its 
own  identity,  it  produces  ;  but  the  product  is  that  of  an  unchanged 
being  :  the  producer  is  unchangeably  the  intellectual  object,  the  product 
is  produced  as  the  Intellectual  Act,  an  Act  taking  intellection  of  its 
source — the  only  object  that  exists  for  it — and  so  becoming  Intellectual- 
Principle,  that  is  to  say,  becoming  another  intellectual  being,  resembling 
its  source,  a  reproduction  and  image  of  that. 

But  how  from  amid  perfect  rest  can  an  Act  arise  ? 

There  is  in  everything  the  Act  of  the  Essence  and  the  Act  going  out 
from  the  Essence  :  the  first  Act  is  the  thing  itself  in  its  realised  identity, 
the  second  Act  is  an  inevitably  following  outgo  from  the  first,  an  emana¬ 
tion  distinct  from  the  thing  itself. 

Thus  even  in  fire  there  is  the  warmth  comported  by  its  essential 
nature  and  there  is  the  warmth  going  instantaneously  outward  from 
that  characterising  heat  by  the  fact  that  the  fire,  remaining  unchange¬ 
ably  fire,  utters  the  Act  native  to  its  essential  reality. 

So  it  is  in  the  divine  also  :  or  rather  we  have  there  the  earlier  form 
of  the  double  act :  the  divine  remains  in  its  own  unchanging  being,  but 
from  its  perfection  and  from  the  Act  included  in  its  nature  there  emanates 
the  secondary  or  issuing  Act  which — as  the  output  of  a  mighty  power, 
the  mightiest  there  is — attains  to  Real  Being  as  second  to  that  which 
stands  above  all  Being.  That  transcendent  was  the  potentiality  of  the 
All ;  this  secondary  is  the  All  made  actual. 

And  if  this  is  all  things,  that  must  be  above  and  outside  of  all,  and, 
so,  must  transcend  real  being.  And  again,  if  that  secondary  is  all  things, 
and  if  above  its  multiplicity  there  is  a  unity  not  ranking  among  those 
things,  once  more  this  unity  transcends  Real  Being  and  therefore  tran¬ 
scends  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  well.  There  is  thus  something  tran¬ 
scending  Intellectual-Principle,  for  we  must  remember  that  real  being 
is  no  corpse,  the  negation  of  life  and  of  intellection,  but  is  in  fact  identical 
with  the  Intellectual-Principle.  The  Intellectual-Principle  is  not  some¬ 
thing  taking  cognisance  of  things  as  sensation  deals  with  sense  objects 


v.  5.  I] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


47 


existing  independently  of  sense  :  on  the  contrary,  it  actually  is  the 
things  it  knows  :  the  ideas  constituting  them  it  has  not  borrowed  : 
whence  could  it  have  taken  them  ?  No  :  it  exists  here  together  with  the 
things  of  the  universe,  identical  with  them,  making  a  unity  with  them  ; 
and  the  collective  knowledge  (in  the  divine  mind)  of  the  immaterial  is 
the  universe  of  things. 


FIFTH  TRACTATE 

That  the  Intellectual  Beings  are  not  outside  the 

Intellectual-Principle  and  on  The  Nature  of  The  Good 

i. 

The  Intellectual  Principle,  the  veritably  and  essentially  intellective,, 
can  this  be  conceived  as  ever  falling  into  error,  ever  failing  to  think 
reality  ? 

Assuredly  no  :  it  would  no  longer  be  intelligent  and  therefore  no 
longer  Intellectual- Principle  :  it  must  know  unceasingly  and  never  forget ; 
and  its  knowledge  can  be  no  guess-work,  no  hesitating  assent,  no  accept¬ 
ance  of  an  alien  report.  Nor  can  it  call  on  demonstration  or,  if  we  are 
told  it  may  at  times  act  by  this  method,  at  least  there  must  be  something 
patent  to  it  in  virtue  of  its  own  nature.  In  actual  fact  reason  tells  us 
that  all  its  knowledge  is  thus  inherent  to  it,  for  there  is  no  means  by 
which  to  distinguish  between  the  spontaneous  knowledge  and  the  other. 
But,  in  any  case,  some  knowledge,  it  is  conceded,  is  inherent  to  it. 
Whence  are  we  to  understand  the  certainty  of  this  knowledge  to  come  to 
it  or  how  do  its  objects  carry  the  conviction  of  their  reality  ? 

Consider  sense-knowledge  :  its  objects  seem  most  patently  certified,, 
yet  the  doubt  returns  whether  the  apparent  reality  may  not  he  in  the 
states  of  the  percipient  rather  than  in  the  material  before  him  ;  the 
decision  demands  intelligence  or  reasoning.  Besides,  even  granting  that 
what  the  senses  grasp  is  really  contained  in  the  objects,  none  the  less 
what  is  thus  known  by  the  senses  is  an  image  :  sense  can  never  grasp  the 
thing  itself  ;  this  remains  for  ever  outside. 


48 


PLOTINUS 


Now,  if  the  Intellectual- Principle  in  its  act — that  is  in  knowing  the 
intellectual — is  to  know  these  its  objects  as  alien,  we  have  to  explain  how 
it  makes  contact  with  them  :  obviously  it  might  never  come  upon  them, 
and  so  might  never  know  them  ;  or  it  might  know  them  only  upon  the 
meeting  :  its  knowing,  at  that,  would  not  be  an  enduring  condition.  If 
we  are  told  that  the  Intellectual- Principle  and  the  Intellectual  Objects 
are  linked  in  a  standing  unity,  we  demand  the  description  of  this  unity. 

Next,  the  intellections  would  be  impressions,  that  is  to  say  not 
native  act  but  violence  from  without :  now  how  is  such  impressing 
possible  and  what  shape  could  the  impressions  bear  ? 

Intellection,  again,  becomes  at  this  a  mere  handling  of  the  external, 
exactly  like  sense-perception.  What  then  distinguishes  it  unless  that  it 
deals  with  objects  of  less  extension  ?  And  what  certitude  can  it  have 
that  its  knowledge  is  true  ?  Or  what  enables  it  to  pronounce  that  the 
object  is  good,  beautiful,  or  just,  when  each  of  these  ideas  is  to  stand 
apart  from  itself  ?  The  very  principles  of  judgement,  by  which  it  must 
be  guided,  would  be  (as  Ideas)  excluded  :  with  objects  and  canons  alike 
outside  it,  so  is  truth. 

Again  ;  either  the  objects  of  the  Intellectual- Principle  are  senseless 
and  devoid  of  life  and  intellect  or  they  are  in  possession  of  Intellect. 

Now,  if  they  are  in  possession  of  Intellect,  that  realm  is  a  union  of 
both,  and  is  Truth.  This  combined  Intellectual  realm  will  be  the  Primal 
Intellect  :  we  have  only  then  to  examine  how  this  reality,  conjoint  of 
Intellectual- Principle  and  its  object,  is  to  be  understood,  whether  as 
combining  self-united  identity  with  yet  duality  and  difference,  or  what 
other  relation  holds  between  them. 

If  on  the  contrary  the  objects  of  Intellectual- Principle  are  without 
intelligence  and  life,  what  are  they  ?  They  cannot  be  premises,  axioms 
or  predicates  :  as  predicates  they  would  not  have  real  existence  ;  they 
would  be  affirmations  linking  separate  entities,  as  when  we  affirm  that 
justice  is  good  though  justice  and  good  are  distinct  realities. 

If  we  are  told  that  they  are  self-standing  entities — the  distinct 
beings  Justice  and  Good — then  (supposing  them  to  be  outside)  the 
Intellectual  Realm  will  not  be  a  unity  nor  be  included  in  any  unity  :  all 


v.  5-  2] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


49 


is  sundered  individuality.  Where,  then,  are  they  and  what  spatial 
distinction  keeps  them  apart  ?  How  does  the  Intellectual-Principle  come 
to  meet  with  them  as  it  travels  round  ;  what  keeps  each  true  to  its 
character  ;  what  gives  them  enduring  identity  ;  what  conceivable  shape 
or  character  can  they  have  ?  They  are  being  presented  to  us  as  some 
collection  of  figures,  in  gold  or  some  other  material  substance,  the  work 
of  some  unknown  sculptor  or  graver  :  but  at  once  the  Intellectual- 
Principle  which  contemplates  them  becomes  sense-perception ;  and 
there  still  remains  the  question  how  one  of  them  comes  to  be  Justice  and 
another  something  else. 

But  the  great  argument  is  that  if  we  are  to  allow  that  these  objects 
of  Intellection  are  in  the  strict  sense  outside  the  Intellectual- Principle 
which  therefore  must  see  them  as  external,  then  inevitably  it  cannot 
possess  the  truth  of  them. 

In  all  it  looks  upon,  it  sees  falsely  ;  for  those  objects  must  be  the 
authentic  things  ;  yet  it  looks  upon  them  without  containing  them  and 
in  such  knowledge  holds  only  their  images  ;  that  is  to  say,  not  containing 
the  authentic,  adopting  phantasms  of  the  true,  it  holds  the  false  ;  it 
never  possesses  reality.  If  it  knows  that  it  possesses  the  false,  it  must 
confess  itself  excluded  from  the  truth  ;  if  it  fails  of  this  knowledge  also, 
imagining  itself  to  possess  the  truth  which  has  eluded  it,  then  the  doubled 
falsity  puts  it  the  deeper  into  error. 

It  is  thus,  I  suppose,  that  in  sense-perception  we  have  belief  instead 
of  truth  ;  belief  is  our  lief  ;  we  satisfy  ourselves  with  something  very 
different  from  the  original  which  is  the  occasion  of  perception. 

In  fine,  there  would  be  on  the  hypothesis  no  truth  in  the  Intellectual- 
Principle.  But  such  an  Intellectual-Principle  would  not  be  truth,  nor 
truly  an  Intellectual- Principle.  There  would  be  no  Intellectual- Principle 
at  all  (no  Divine  Mind)  :  yet  elsewhere  truth  cannot  be. 


2. 

Thus  we  may  not  look  for  the  Intellectual  objects  (the  Ideas)  outside 
of  the  Intellectual-Principle,  treating  them  as  impressions  of  reality  upon 
it :  we  cannot  strip  it  of  truth  and  so  make  its  objects  unknowable  and 


H 


50 


PLOTINUS 


non-existent  and  in  the  end  annul  the  Intellectual-Principle  itself.  We 
must  provide  for  knowledge  and  for  truth  ;  we  must  secure  reality  ; 
being  must  become  knowable  essentially  and  not  merely  in  that  know¬ 
ledge  of  quality  which  could  give  us  a  mere  image  or  vestige  of  the  reality 
in  lieu  of  possession,  intimate  association,  absorption. 

The  only  way  to  this  is  to  leave  nothing  outside  of  the  veritable  In¬ 
tellectual-Principle  which  thus  has  knowledge  in  the  true  knowing  (that 
of  identification  with  the  object),  cannot  forget,  need  not  go  wandering 
in  search.  At  once  truth  is  there,  this  is  the  seat  of  the  authentic  Existents, 
it  becomes  living  and  intellective  :  these  are  the  essentials  of  that  most 
lofty  Principle  ;  and,  failing  them,  where  is  its  worth,  its  grandeur  ? 

Only  thus  (by  this  inherence  of  the  Ideas)  is  it  dispensed  from 
demonstration  and  from  acts  of  faith  in  the  truth  of  its  knowledge  :  it  is 
its  entire  self,  self-perspicuous  :  it  knows  a  prior  by  recognising  its  own 
source  ;  it  knows  a  sequent  to  that  prior  by  its  self-identity  ;  of  the 
reality  of  this  sequent,  of  the  fact  that  it  is  present  and  has  authentic 
existence,  no  outer  entity  can  bring  it  surer  conviction. 

Thus  veritable  truth  is  not  accordance  with  an  external ;  it  is  self¬ 
accordance  ;  it  affirms  and  is  nothing  other  than  itself  and  is  nothing 
other  ;  it  is  at  once  existence  and  self-affirmation.  What  external,  then, 
can  call  it  to  the  question  and  from  what  source  of  truth  could  the  refuta¬ 
tion  be  brought  ?  Any  counter  affirmation  (of  truth)  must  fall  into 
identity  with  the  truth  which  first  uttered  itself ;  brought  forward  as 
new  it  has  to  appear  before  the  Principle  which  made  the  earlier  statement 
and  to  show  itself  identical  with  that :  for  there  is  no  finding  anything 
truer  than  the  true. 

3* 

Thus  we  have  here  one  identical  Principle,  the  Intellect,  which  is 
the  universe  of  authentic  beings,  the  Truth :  as  such  it  is  a  great  god  or, 
better,  not  a  god  among  gods  but  the  Godhead  entire.  It  is  a  god,  a 
secondary  god  manifesting  before  there  is  any  vision  of  that  other,  the 
Supreme  which  rests  over  all,  enthroned  in  transcendence  upon  that 
splendid  pediment,  the  Nature  following  close  upon  it. 


V.  5.  4] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


5i 


The  Supreme  in  its  progress  could  never  be  borne  forward  upon  some 
soulless  vehicle  nor  even  directly  upon  the  soul :  it  will  be  heralded  by 
some  ineffable  beauty  :  before  the  great  King  in  his  progress  there  comes 
first  the  minor  train,  then  rank  by  rank  the  greater  and  more  exalted, 
closer  to  the  King  the  kinglier  ;  next  his  own  honoured  company  until, 
last  among  all  these  grandeurs,  suddenly  appears  the  Supreme  Monarch 
himself,  and  all — unless  indeed  for  those  who  have  contented  themselves 
with  the  spectacle  before  his  coming  and  gone  away  —prostrate  themselves 
and  hail  him. 

In  that  royal  progress  the  King  is  of  another  order  from  those  that 
go  before  him,  but  the  King  in  the  Supreme  is  no  ruler  over  extems  ;  he 
holds  that  most  just  of  governances,  rooted  in  nature,  the  veritable  king- 
ship,  for  he  is  King  of  Truth,  holding  sway  by  all  reason  over  a  dense 
offspring  his  own,  a  host  that  shares  his  divinity,  King  over  a  king  and 
over  kings  and  even  more  justly  called  father  of  Gods. 

[Interpolation  :  —Zeus  (Universal  Soul)  is  in  this  a  symbol  of  him, 
Zeus  who  is  not  content  with  the  contemplation  of  his  father  (Kronos, 
divine  Intellect)  but  looks  to  that  father’s  father  (to  Ouranos,  the  Tran¬ 
scendent)  as  what  may  be  called  the  divine  energy  working  to  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  real  being.] 

4* 

We  have  said  that  all  must  be  brought  back  to  a  unity  :  this  must 
be  an  authentic  unity,  not  belonging  to  the  order  in  which  multiplicity 
is  unified  by  participation  in  what  is  truly  a  One  ;  we  need  a  unity  inde¬ 
pendent  of  participation,  not  a  combination  in  which  multiplicity  holds 
an  equal  place  :  we  have  exhibited,  also,  the  Intellectual  Realm  and  the 
Intellectual-Principle  as  more  closely  a  unity  than  the  rest  of  things,  so 
that  therais  nothing  closer  to  The  One.  Yet  even  this  is  not  The  purely 
One. 

This  purely  One,  essentially  a  unity  untouched  by  the  multiple, 
this  we  now  desire  to  penetrate  if  in  any  way  we  may. 

Only  by  a  leap  can  we  reach  to  this  One  which  is  to  be  pure  of  all 
else,  halting  sharp  in  fear  of  slipping  ever  so  little  aside  and  impinging  on 


52 


PLOTINUS 


the  dual :  for  if  we  fail  of  the  centre,  we  are  in  a  duality  which  does  not 
even  include  The  authentic  One  but  belongs,  on  both  sides,  to  the  later 
order.  The  One  does  not  bear  to  be  numbered  in  with  anything  else, 
with  a  one  or  a  two  or  any  such  quantity  ;  it  refuses  to  take  number 
because  it  is  measure  and  not  the  measured  ;  it  is  no  peer  of  other  entities 
to  be  found  among  them  ;  for  thus,  it  and  they  alike  would  be  included 
in  some  container  and  this  would  be  its  prior,  the  prior  it  cannot  have. 
Not  even  essential  (ideal  or  abstract)  number  can  belong  to  The  One  and 
certainly  not  the  still  later  number  applying  to  quantities  ;  for  essential 
number  first  appears  as  providing  duration  to  the  divine  Intellection, 
while  quantitative  number  is  that  (still  later  and  lower)  which  furnishes 
the  Quantity  found  in  conjunction  with  other  things  or  which  provides 
for  Quantity  independent  of  things,  if  this  is  to  be  thought  of  as  number 
at  all.  The  Principle  which  in  objects  having  quantitative  number  looks 
to  the  unity  from  which  they  spring  is  a  copy  (or  lower  phase)  of  the 
Principle  which  in  the  earlier  order  of  number  (in  essential  or  ideal  number) 
looks  to  the  veritable  One  ;  and  it  attains  its  existence  without  in  the 
least  degree  dissipating  or  shattering  that  prior  unity  :  the  dyad  has 
come  into  being,  but  the  precedent  monad  still  stands  ;  and  this  monad 
is  quite  distinct  within  the  dyad  from  either  of  the  two  constituent  unities, 
since  there  is  nothing  to  make  it  one  rather  than  the  other  :  being  neither, 
but  simply  that  thing  apart,  it  is  present  without  being  inherent. 

But  how  are  the  two  unities  distinct  and  how  is  the  dyad  a  unity, 
and  is  this  unity  the  same  as  the  unity  by  which  each  of  the  constituents 
is  one  thing  ? 

Our  answer  must  be  that  the  unity  is  that  of  a  participation  in  the 
primal  unity  with  the  participants  remaining  distinct  from  that  in  which 
they  partake  ;  the  dyad,  in  so  far  as  it  is  one  thing,  has  this  participation, 
but  in  a  certain  degree  only  ;  the  unity  of  an  army  is  not  that  of  a  single 
building  ;  the  dyad,  as  a  thing  of  extension,  is  not  strictly  a  unit  either 
quantitatively  or  in  manner  of  being. 

Are  we  then  to  take  it  that  the  monads  in  the  pentad  and  decad 
differ  while  the  unity  in  the  pentad  is  the  same  as  that  in  the  decad  ? 

Yes,  in  the  sense  in  which,  big  and  little,  ship  is  one  with  ship,  army 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


V.  5.  5] 


53 


with  army,  city  with  city  ;  otherwise,  no.  But  certain  difficulties  in  this 
matter  will  be  dealt  with  later. 


5- 

We  return  to  our  statement  that  The  First  remains  intact  even  when 
other  entities  spring  from  it. 

In  the  case  of  numbers  the  unit  remains  intact  while  something  else 
produces,  and  thus  number  arises  in  dependence  on  the  unit  :  much  more 
then  does  the  unit,  The  One,  remain  intact  in  the  principle  which  is  before 
all  beings  ;  especially  since  the  entities  produced  in  its  likeness,  while  it 
thus  remains  intact,  owe  their  existence  to  no  other,  but  to  its  own  all- 
sufficient  power. 

And  just  as  there  is,  primarily  or  secondarily,  some  form  or  idea 
from  the  monad  in  each  of  the  successive  numbers — the  later  still  partici¬ 
pating,  though  unequally,  in  the  unit — so  the  series  of  Beings  following 
upon  The  First  bear,  each,  some  form  or  idea  derived  from  that  source. 
In  Number  the  participation  establishes  Quantity  ;  in  the  realm  of 
Being,  the  trace  of  The  One  establishes  reality  :  existence  is  a  trace  of 
The  One — our  word  for  entity  may  probably  be  connected  with  that  for 
unity. 

What  we  know  as  Being,  the  first  sequent  upon  The  One,  advanced 
a  little  outward,  so  to  speak,  then  chose  to  go  no  further,  turned  inward 
again  and  comes  to  rest  and  is  now  the  reality  and  hearth  (ousia  and 
hestia)  of  the  universe.  Pressing  (with  the  rough  breathing)  on  the  word 
for  Being  (on)  we  have  the  word  hen  (one),  an  indication  that  in  our  very 
form  of  speech  we  tell,  as  far  as  may  be,  that  Being  (the  weaker)  is  that 
which  proceeds  from  (the  stronger),  The  One.  Thus  both  the  thing  that 
comes  to  be  and  Being  itself  are  carriers  of  a  copy,  since  they  are  outflows 
from  the  power  of  The  primal  One  :  this  power  sees  and  in  its  emotion 
tries  to  represent  what  it  sees  and  breaks  into  speech  "  On  ;  einai ; 
ousia,  hestia  ”  (Existent  :  Existence  :  Essence  :  Hestia  or  Hearth), 
sounds  which  labour  to  express  the  essential  nature  of  the  universe 
produced  by  the  travail  of  the  utterer  and  so  to  represent,  as  far  as  sounds 
may,  the  origin  of  reality. 


54 

6. 


PLOTINUS 


All  this,  however,  we  may  leave  to  individual  judgement  :  to 
proceed  :  — 

This  produced  reality  is  an  Ideal  form — for  certainly  nothing  spring¬ 
ing  from  the  Supreme  can  be  less — and  it  is  not  a  particular  form  but  the 
form  of  all,  beside  which  there  is  no  other  ;  it  follows  that  The  First 
must  be  without  form,  and,  if  without  form,  then  it  is  no  Being  ;  Being 
must  have  some  definition  and  therefore  be  limited  ;  but  the  First 
cannot  be  thought  of  as  having  definition  and  limit,  for  thus  it  would  be 
not  the  Source  but  the  particular  item  indicated  by  the  definition  assigned 
to  it.  If  all  things  belong  to  the  produced,  which  of  them  can  be  thought 
of  as  the  Supreme  ?  Not  included  among  them,  this  can  be  described 
only  as  transcending  them  :  but  they  are  Being  and  the  Beings  ;  it 
therefore  transcends  Being. 

Note  that  the  phrase  “  transcending  Being  ”  assigns  no  character, 
makes  no  assertion,  allots  no  name,  carries  only  the  denial  of  particular 
being  ;  and  in  this  there  is  no  attempt  to  circumscribe  it :  to  seek  to 
throw  a  line  about  that  illimitable  Nature  would  be  folly,  and  anyone 
thinking  to  do  so  cuts  himself  off  from  any  slightest  and  most  momentary 
approach  to  its  least  vestige. 

As  one  wishing  to  contemplate  the  Intellectual  Nature  will  lay  aside 
all  the  representations  of  sense  and  so  may  see  what  transcends  the  sense- 
realm,  in  the  same  way  one  wishing  to  contemplate  what  transcends  the 
Intellectual  attains  by  putting  away  all  that  is  of  the  intellect,  taught  by 
the  intellect,  no  doubt,  that  the  Transcendent  exists  but  never  seeking  to 
define  it. 

Its  definition,  in  fact,  could  be  only  “  the  indefinable  "  :  what  is  not 
a  thing  is  not  some  definite  thing.  We  are  in  agony  for  a  true  expression  ; 
we  are  talking  of  the  untellable  ;  we  name,  only  to  indicate  for  our  own 
use  as  best  we  may.  And  this  name,  The  One,  contains  really  no  more 
than  the  negation  of  plurality  :  under  the  same  pressure  the  Pythagoreans 
found  their  indication  in  the  symbol  “Apollo  ”  (a=not ;  pollon=of  many) 
with  its  repudiation  of  the  multiple.  If  we  are  led  to  think  positively  of 
The  One,  name  and  thing,  there  would  be  more  truth  in  silence  :  the 


V.  5-  7] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


55 


designation,  a  mere  aid  to  enquiry,  was  never  intended  for  more  than  a 
preliminary  affirmation  of  absolute  simplicity  to  be  followed  by  the 
rejection  of  even  that  statement :  it  was  the  best  that  offered,  but  remains 
inadequate  to  express  the  Nature  indicated.  For  this  is  a  principle  not 
to  be  conveyed  by  any  sound  ;  it  cannot  be  known  on  any  hearing  but, 
if  at  all,  by  vision  ;  and  to  hope  in  that  vision  to  see  a  form  is  to  fail  of 
even  that. 

7* 

Consider  the  act  of  ocular  vision  :  — 

There  are  two  elements  here  ;  there  is  the  form  perceptible  to  the 
sense  and  there  is  the  medium  by  which  the  eye  sees  that  form.  This 
medium  is  itself  perceptible  to  the  eye,  distinct  from  the  form  to  be  seen, 
but  the  cause  of  the  seeing  ;  it  is  perceived  at  the  one  stroke  in  that  form 
and  on  it  and  hence  is  not  distinguished  from  it,  the  eye  being  held  entirely 
by  the  illuminated  object.  When  on  the  contrary  this  medium  presents 
itself  alone  it  is  seen  directly— though  even  then  actual  sight  demands 
some  solid  base  ;  there  must  be  something  besides  the  medium  which 
unless  embracing  some  object  eludes  perception  ;  thus  the  light  inherent 
to  the  sun  would  not  be  perceived  but  for  the  solidity  of  the  mass.  If  it 
is  objected  that  the  sun  is  light  entire,  this  would  only  be  a  proof  of  our 
assertion  :  no  other  visible  form  will  contain  light  which  must,  then, 
have  no  other  property  than  that  of  visibility,  and  in  fact  all  other  visible 
objects  are  something  more  than  light  alone. 

So  it  is  with  the  act  of  vision  in  the  Intellectual  Principle. 

This  vision  sees,  by  another  light,  the  objects  illuminated  by  the 
First  Principle  :  setting  itself  among  them,  it  sees  veritably  ;  declining 
towards  the  lower  Nature,  that  upon  which  the  light  from  above  rests,  it 
has  less  of  that  vision.  Passing  over  the  visible  and  looking  to  the 
medium  by  which  it  sees,  then  it  holds  the  Light  and  the  source  of  Light. 

But  since  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  not  to  see  this  light  as  some¬ 
thing  external  we  return  to  our  analogy  ;  the  eye  is  not  wholly  dependent 
upon  an  outside  and  alien  light  ;  there  is  an  earlier  light  within  itself,  a 
more  brilliant,  which  it  sees  sometimes  in  a  momentary  flash.  At  night 


56 


PLOTINUS 


in  the  darkness  a  gleam  leaps  from  within  the  eye  :  or  again  we  make  no 
effort  to  see  anything  ;  the  eyelids  close  ;  yet  a  light  flashes  before  us  ; 
or  we  rub  the  eye  and  it  sees  the  light  it  contains.  This  is  sight  without 
the  act,  but  it  is  the  truest  seeing,  for  it  sees  light  whereas  its  other  objects 
were  the  lit  not  the  light. 

It  is  certainly  thus  that  the  Intellectual-Principle,  hiding  itself  from 
all  the  outer,  withdrawing  to  the  inmost,  seeing  nothing,  must  have  its 
vision  —not  of  some  other  light  in  some  other  thing  but  of  the  light  within 
itself,  unmingled,  pure,  suddenly  gleaming  before  it ; 

8. 

so  that  we  are  left  wondering  whence  it  came,  from  within  or  with¬ 
out  ;  and  when  it  has  gone,  we  say,  “  It  was  here.  Yet  no  ;  it  was 
beyond  !  ”  But  we  ought  not  to  question  whence  ;  there  is  no  whence, 
no  coming  or  going  in  place  ;  now  it  is  seen  and  now  not  seen.  We  must 
not  run  after  it,  but  fit  ourselves  for  the  vision  and  then  wait  tranquilly 
for  its  appearance,  as  the  eye  waits  on  the  rising  of  the  sun,  which  in  its 
own  time  appears  above  the  horizon — out  of  the  ocean,  as  the  poets  say  — 
and  gives  itself  to  our  sight. 

This  Principle,  of  which  the  sun  is  an  image,  where  has  it  its  dawning, 
what  horizon  does  it  surmount  to  appear  ? 

It  stands  immediately  above  the  contemplating  Intellect  which  has 
held  itself  at  rest  towards  the  vision,  looking  to  nothing  else  than  the 
good  and  beautiful,  setting  its  entire  being  to  that  in  a  perfect  surrender, 
and  now  tranquilly  filled  with  power  and  taking  a  new  beauty  to  itself, 
gleaming  in  the  light  of  that  presence. 

This  advent,  still,  is  not  by  expectation  :  it  is  a  coming  without 
approach  ;  the  vision  is  not  of  sometliing  that  must  enter  but  of  some¬ 
thing  present  before  all  else,  before  the  Intellect  itself  made  any  move¬ 
ment.  Yet  it  is  the  Intellect  that  must  move,  to  come  and  to  go — going 
because  it  has  not  known  where  it  should  stay  and  where  that  presence 
stays,  the  nowhere  contained. 

And  if  the  Intellect,  too,  could  hold  itself  in  that  nowhere — not  that 
it  is  ever  in  place  ;  it  too  is  uncontained,  utterly  unplaced  — it  would 


V.  5.  9] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


57 


remain  for  ever  in  the  vision  of  its  prior,  or,  indeed,  not  in  vision  but  in 
identity,  all  duality  annulled.  But  it  is  Intellect  (having  a  sphere  of  its 
own)  and  when  it  is  to  see  it  must  see  by  that  in  it  which  is  not  Intellect 
(by  its  divinest  power). 

No  doubt  it  is  wonderful  that  The  First  should  thus  be  present  with¬ 
out  any  coming,  and  that,  while  it  is  nowhere,  nowhere  is  it  not :  but 
wonderful  though  this  be  in  itself,  the  contrary  would  be  more  wonderful 
to  those  who  know.  Of  course  neither  this  contrary  nor  the  wonder  at  it 
can  be  entertained.  But  we  must  explain  :  — 

9- 

Everything  brought  into  being  under  some  principle  not  itself  is 
contained  either  within  its  maker  or,  if  there  is  any  intermediate,  within 
that :  having  a  prior  essential  to  its  being,  it  needs  that  prior  always, 
otherwise  it  would  not  be  contained  at  all.  It  is  the  order  of  nature  :  — 
The  last  in  the  immediately  preceding  lasts,  things  of  the  order  of  the 
Firsts  within  their  prior-firsts,  and  so  thing  within  thing  up  to  the  very 
pinnacle  of  source. 

That  Source,  having  no  prior,  cannot  be  contained  :  uncontained  by 
any  of  those  other  forms  of  being,  each  held  within  the  series  of  priors,  it 
is  orbed  round  all,  but  so  as  not  to  be  pointed  off  to  hold  them  part  for 
part  ;  it  possesses  but  is  not  possessed.  Holding  all— though  itself  no¬ 
where  held — it  is  omnipresent,  for  where  its  presence  failed  something 
would  elude  its  hold.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  nowhere 
held  it  is  not  present :  thus  it  is  both  present  and  not  present ;  not 
present  as  not  being  circumscribed  by  anything  ;  yet,  as  being  utterly 
unattached,  not  inhibited  from  presence  at  any  point.  That  inhibition 
would  mean  that  the  First  was  determined  by  some  other  being  ;  the 
later  series,  then,  would  be  without  part  in  the  Supreme  ;  God  has  His 
limit  and  is  no  longer  self-governed  but  mastered  by  inferiors. 

While  the  contained  must  be  where  its  container  is,  what  is  un¬ 
contained  by  place  is  not  debarred  from  any  :  for,  imagine  a  place  where 
it  is  not  and  evidently  some  other  place  retains  it ;  at  once  it  is  contained 
and  there  is  an  end  of  its  placelessness. 


58 


PLOTINUS 


But  if  the  “  nowhere  ”  is  to  stand  and  the  ascription  of  a  “  where,” 
implying  station  in  the  extern,  is  to  fall,  then  nothing  can  be  left  void  ; 
and  at  once — nothing  void,  yet  no  point  containing — God  is  sovranly 
present  through  all.  We  cannot  think  of  something  of  God  here  and 
something  else  there,  nor  of  all  God  gathered  at  some  one  spot :  there 
is  an  instantaneous  presence  everywhere,  nothing  containing  and  nothing 
left  void,  everything  therefore  fully  held  by  the  divine. 

Consider  our  universe.  There  is  none  before  it  and  therefore  it  is  not, 
itself,  in  a  universe  or  in  any  place — what  place  was  there  before  the 
universe  came  to  be  ?  — its  linked  members  form  and  occupy  the  whole. 
But  Soul  is  not  in  the  universe,  on  the  contrary  the  universe  is  in  the 
Soul ;  bodily  substance  is  not  a  place  to  the  Soul ;  Soul  is  contained  in 
Intellectual-Principle  and  is  the  container  of  body.  The  Intellectual- 
Principle  in  turn  is  contained  in  something  else  ;  but  that  prior  principle 
has  nothing  in  which  to  be  :  the  First  is  therefore  in  nothing,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  nowhere.  But  all  the  rest  must  be  somewhere  ;  and  where  but  in 
the  First  ? 

This  can  mean  only  that  the  First  is  neither  remote  from  things  nor 
directly  within  them  ;  there  is  nothing  containing  it ;  it  contains  all.  It 
is  The  Good  to  the  universe  if  only  in  this  way,  that  towards  it  all  things 
have  their  being,  all  dependent  upon  it,  each  in  its  mode,  so  that  thing 
rises  above  thing  in  goodness  according  to  its  fuller  possession  of  authentic 
being. 


io. 

Still,  do  not,  I  urge  you,  look  for  The  Good  through  any  of  these 
other  things  ;  if  you  do,  you  will  see  not  itself  but  its  trace  :  you  must 
form  the  idea  of  that  which  is  to  be  grasped  cleanly  standing  to  itself  not 
in  any  combination,  the  unheld  in  which  all  have  hold  :  for  no  other  is 
such,  yet  one  such  there  must  be. 

Now  it  is  clear  that  we  cannot  possess  ourselves  of  the  power  of  this 
principle  in  its  concentrated  fulness  :  so  to  do  one  must  be  identical  with 
it :  but  some  partial  attainment  is  within  our  reach. 

You  who  make  the  venture  will  throw  forward  all  your  being  but 


V.  5.  II] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


59 


you  will  never  tell  it  entire — for  that,  you  must  yourself  be  the  divine 
Intellect  in  Act  — and  at  your  utmost  success  it  will  still  pass  from  you  or, 
rather,  you  from  it.  In  ordinary  vision  you  may  think  to  see  the  object 
entire  :  in  this  intellective  act,  all,  less  or  more,  that  you  can  take  to  mind 
you  may  set  down  as  The  Good. 

It  is  The  Good  since,  being  a  power  (being  effective  outwardly),  it  is 
the  cause  of  the  intelligent  and  intellective  life  as  of  life  and  intellect :  for 
these  grow  from  it  as  from  the  source  of  essence  and  of  existence,  the 
Source  as  being  One  (where  all  else  has  duality),  simplex  and  first  because 
before  it  was  nothing.  All  derives  from  this  :  it  is  the  origin  of  the  primal 
movement  which  it  does  not  possess  and  of  the  repose  which  is  but  its 
absence  of  need  ;  for  neither  rest  nor  movement  can  belong  to  that  which 
has  no  place  in  which  either  could  occur  ;  centre,  object,  ground,  all  are 
alike  unknown  to  it,  for  it  is  before  all.  Yet  its  Being  is  not  limited  ; 
what  is  there  to  set  bounds  to  it  ?  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  infinite 
in  the  sense  of  magnitude  ;  what  place  can  there  be  to  which  it  must 
extend,  or  why  should  there  be  movement  where  there  is  no  lacking  ? 
All  its  infinitude  resides  in  its  power  :  it  does  not  change  and  will  not  fail ; 
and  in  it  all  that  is  unfailing  finds  duration. 


II. 

It  is  infinite  also  by  right  of  being  a  pure  unity  with  nothing  towards 
which  to  direct  any  partial  content.  Absolutely  One,  it  has  never  known 
measure  and  stands  outside  of  number,  and  so  is  under  no  limit  either  in 
regard  to  any  extern  or  within  itself  ;  for  any  such  determination  would 
bring  something  of  the  dual  into  it.  And  having  no  constituent  parts  it 
accepts  no  pattern,  forms  no  shape. 

Reason  recognising  it  as  such  a  nature,  you  may  not  hope  to  see  it 
with  mortal  eyes,  nor  in  any  way  that  would  be  imagined  by  those  who 
make  sense  the  test  of  reality  and  so  annul  the  supremely  real.  For 
what  passes  for  the  most  truly  existent  is  most  truly  non-existent — the 
thing  of  extension  least  real  of  all — while  this  unseen  First  is  the  source 
and  principle  of  Being  and  sovran  over  Reality. 

You  must  turn  appearances  about  or  you  will  be  left  void  of  God. 


6o 


PLOTINUS 


You  will  be  like  those  at  the  festivals  who  in  their  gluttony  cram  them¬ 
selves  with  things  which  none  going  to  the  gods  may  touch  ;  they  hold 
these  goods  to  be  more  real  than  the  vision  of  the  God  who  is  to  be 
honoured  and  they  go  away  having  had  no  share  in  the  sanctities  of 
the  shrine. 

In  these  celebrations  of  which  we  speak,  the  unseen  god  leaves  those 
in  doubt  of  his  existence  who  think  nothing  patent  but  what  may  be 
known  to  the  flesh  :  it  happens  as  if  a  man  slept  a  life  through  and  took 
the  dream  world  in  perfect  trust ;  wake  him,  and  he  would  refuse  belief 
to  the  report  of  his  open  eyes  and  settle  down  to  sleep  again. 

12. 

Knowing  demands  the  organ  fitted  to  the  object ;  eyes  for  one  kind, 
ears  for  another  :  similarly  some  things,  we  must  believe,  are  to  be  known 
by  the  Intellectual-Principle  in  us.  We  must  not  confuse  intellection 
with  hearing  or  seeing  ;  this  would  be  trying  to  look  with  the  ears  or 
denying  sound  because  it  is  not  seen.  Certain  people,  we  must  keep  in 
mind,  have  forgotten  that  to  which  from  the  beginning  onwards,  their 
longing  and  effort  are  pointed  :  for  all  that  exists  desires  and  aspires 
towards  the  Supreme  by  a  compulsion  of  nature,  as  if  all  had  received 
the  oracle  that  without  it  they  cannot  be. 

The  perception  of  Beauty  and  the  awe  and  the  stirring  of  passion 
towards  it  are  for  those  already  in  some  degree  knowing  and  awakened  : 
but  the  Good,  as  possessed  long  since  and  setting  up  a  natural  tendency, 
is  inherently  present  to  even  those  asleep  and  brings  them  no  wonder 
when  some  day  they  see  it,  since  it  is  no  occasional  reminiscence  but  is 
always  with  them  though  in  their  drowse  they  are  not  aware  of  it :  the 
love  of  Beauty  on  the  contrary  sets  up  pain  when  it  appears,  for  those 
that  have  seen  it  must  pursue.  This  love  of  Beauty  then  is  later  than  the 
love  of  Good  and  comes  with  a  more  sophisticated  understanding  ;  hence 
we  know  that  Beauty  is  a  secondary  :  the  more  primal  appetition,  not 
patent  to  sense,  our  movement  towards  our  good,  gives  witness  that 
The  Good  is  the  earlier,  the  prior. 

Again  ;  all  that  have  possessed  themselves  of  The  Good  feel  it 


V.  5-  12] 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD 


61 


sufficient  ;  they  have  attained  the  end  :  but  Beauty  not  all  have  known 
and  those  that  have  judge  it  to  exist  for  itself  and  not  for  them,  as  in 
the  charm  of  this  world  the  beauty  belongs  only  to  its  possessor. 

Then,  too,  it  is  thought  enough  to  appear  loveable  whether  one  is  so 
or  not  :  but  no  one  wants  his  Good  in  semblance  only.  All  are  seeking 
The  First  as  something  ranking  before  aught  else,  but  they  struggle 
venomously  for  beauty  as  something  secondary  like  themselves  :  thus 
some  minor  personage  may  perhaps  challenge  equal  honour  with  the 
King’s  right-hand  man  on  pretext  of  similar  dependence,  forgetting  that, 
while  both  owe  their  standing  to  the  monarch,  the  other  holds  the  higher 
rank. 

The  source  of  the  error  is  that  while  both  The  Good  and  The  Beautiful 
participate  in  the  common  source,  The  One  precedes  both  ;  and  that,  in 
the  Supreme  also,  The  Good  has  no  need  of  The  Beautiful,  while  the 
Beautiful  does  need  The  Good. 

The  Good  is  gentle  and  friendly  and  tender,  and  we  have  it  present 
■when  we  but  will.  Beauty  is  all  violence  and  stupefaction  ;  its  pleasure 
is  spoiled  with  pain,  and  it  even  draws  the  thoughtless  away  from  The 
Good  as  some  attraction  will  lure  the  child  from  the  father’s  side  :  these 
things  tell  of  youth.  The  Good  is  the  older — not  in  time  but  by  degree 
of  reality— and  it  has  the  higher  and  earlier  power,  all  power  in  fact,  for 
the  sequent  holds  only  a  power  subordinate  and  delegated  of  which  the 
prior  remains  sovereign. 

Not  that  God  has  any  need  of  His  derivatives  :  He  ignores  all  that 
produced  realm,  never  necessary  to  Him,  and  remains  identically  what 
He  was  before  He  brought  it  into  being.  So  too,  had  the  secondary  never 
existed,  He  would  have  been  unconcerned,  exactly  as  He  would  not  have 
grudged  existence  to  any  other  universe  that  might  spring  into  being 
from  Him,  were  any  such  possible  ;  of  course  no  other  such  could  be 
since  there  is  nothing  that  has  not  existence  once  the  All  exists. 

But  God  never  was  the  All ;  that  would  make  Him  dependent  upon 
the  universe  :  transcending  all,  He  was  able  at  once  to  make  all  things 
and  to  leave  them  to  their  own  being,  He  above. 


62 


PLOTINUS 


I3- 

The  Supreme,  as  the  Absolute  Good  and  not  merely  a  good  being  or 
thing,  can  contain  nothing,  since  there  is  nothing  that  could  be  its  good. 

Anything  it  could  contain  must  be  either  good  to  it  or  not  good  ;  but 
in  the  supremely  and  primally  Good  there  can  be  nothing  not  good  ;  nor 
can  the  Absolute  Good  be  a  container  to  the  Good  :  containing,  then, 
neither  the  good  nor  the  not  good  it  contains  nothing  and,  containing 
nothing,  it  is  alone  :  it  is  void  of  all  but  itself. 

If  the  rest  of  being  either  is  good  — without  being  the  absolute  good — 
or  is  not  good  while  on  the  other  hand  the  Supreme  contains  neither 
what  is  good  nor  what  is  not  good,  then,  containing  nothing,  it  is  The 
Good  by  that  very  absence  of  content. 

Thus  we  rob  it  of  its  very  being  as  The  Absolute  Good  if  we  ascribe 
anything  to  it,  existence  or  intellect  or  goodness.  The  only  way  is  to 
make  every  denial  and  no  assertion,  to  feign  no  quality  or  content  there 
but  to  permit  only  the  “  It  is  ”  in  which  we  pretend  to  no  affirmation  of 
non-existent  attribute  :  there  is  an  ignorant  praise  which,  missing  the 
true  description,  drags  in  qualities  beneath  the  real  worth  and  so  abases  ; 
philosophy  must  guard  against  attaching  to  the  Supreme  what  is  later 
and  lower  :  moving  above  all  that  order,  it  is  the  cause  and  source  of  all 
these,  and  is  none  of  them. 

For,  once  more,  the  nature  of  the  Good  is  not  such  as  to  make  it  all 
things  or  a  thing  among  all :  that  would  range  it  under  the  same  classifi¬ 
cation  with  them  all  and  it  would  differ,  thus,  only  by  its  individual 
quality,  some  speciality,  some  addition.  At  once  it  becomes  not  a  unity 
but  a  duality  ;  there  is  one  common  element  not  good  and  another 
element  that  is  good  ;  but  a  combination  so  made  up  of  good  and  not 
good  cannot  be  the  purely  good,  the  primarily  good  ;  the  primarily  good 
must  be  that  principle  in  which  the  better  element  has  more  effectively 
participated  and  so  attained  its  goodness.  Any  good  thing  has  become 
so  by  communion  ;  but  that  in  which  it  has  communion  is  not  a  thing 
among  the  things  of  the  all ;  therefore  the  Good  is  not  a  thing  of  the  All. 

Since  there  is  this  Good  in  any  good  thing — the  specific  difference  by 
which  the  combination  becomes  good — it  must  enter  from  elsewhere 


PRINCIPLE  TRANSCENDING  BEING 


V.  6.  i] 


63 


than  the  world  of  things  :  that  source  must  be  a  Good  absolute  and 
isolated. 

Thus  is  revealed  to  us  the  Primarily  existent,  the  Good,  above  all 
that  has  being,  good  unalloyed,  containing  nothing  in  itself,  utterly  un¬ 
mingling,  all-transcending,  cause  of  all. 

Certainly  neither  Being  nor  Beauty  springs  from  evil  or  from  the 
neutral ;  the  maker,  as  the  more  consummate,  must  surpass  the  made. 


SIXTH  TRACTATE 

That  the  Principle  transcending  Being  has  no  Intellectual  Act. 

What  being  has  intellection  primally  and  what  being  has  it 

SECONDARILY 

I. 

There  is  a  principle  having  intellection  of  the  external  and  another 
having  self-intellection  and  thus  further  removed  from  duality. 

Even  the  first  mentioned  is  not  without  an  effort  towards  the  pure 
unity  of  which  it  is  not  so  capable  :  it  does  actually  contain  its  object, 
though  as  something  other  than  itself. 

In  the  self-intellective  there  is  not  even  this  distinction  of  being  : 
self-conversing,  the  subject  is  its  own  object,  and  thus  takes  the  double 
form  while  remaining  essentially  a  unity.  The  intellection  is  the  more 
profound  for  this  internal  possession  of  the  object. 

This  principle  is  the  primally  intellective  since  there  can  be  no 
intellection  without  duality  in  unity.  If  there  is  no  unity,  perceiving 
principle  and  perceived  object  will  be  different,  and  the  intellection, 
therefore,  not  primal :  a  principle  concerned  with  something  external 
cannot  be  the  primally  intellective  since  it  does  not  possess  the  object 
as  integrally  its  own  or  as  itself ;  if  it  does  possess  the  object  as  itself — 
the  condition  of  true  intellection — the  two  are  one.  Thus  (in  order 
to  primal  intellection)  there  must  be  a  unity  in  duality,  while  a  pure 
unity  with  no  counterbalancing  duality  can  have  no  object  for  its 


64 


PLOTINUS 


intellection  and  ceases  to  be  intellective  :  in  other  words  the  primally 
intellective  must  be  at  once  simplex  and  something  else. 

But  the  surest  way  of  realising  that  its  nature  demands  this 
combination  of  unity  and  duality  is  to  proceed  upwards  from  the  Soul 
where  the  distinction  can  be  made  more  clearly  since  the  duality  is 
exhibited  more  obviously. 

We  can  imagine  the  Soul  as  a  double  light,  a  lesser  corresponding 
to  the  soul  proper,  a  purer  representing  its  intellective  phase  ;  if  now 
we  suppose  this  intellective  light  equal  to  the  light  which  is  to  be  its 
object,  we  no  longer  distinguish  between  them  ;  the  two  are  recognised  as 
one  :  we  know,  indeed,  that  there  are  two,  but  as  we  see  them  they  have 
become  one  :  this  gives  us  the  relation  between  the  intellective  subject 
and  the  object  of  intellection  (in  the  duality  and  unity  required  by  that 
primal  intellection) :  in  our  thought  we  have  made  the  two  into  one  ;  but 
on  the  other  hand  the  one  thing  has  become  two,  making  itself  into  a 
duality  at  the  moment  of  intellection,  or  to  be  more  exact,  being  dual  by 
the  fact  of  intellection  and  single  by  the  fact  that  its  intellectual  object 
is  itself. 

2. 

Thus  there  is  the  primally  intellective  and  there  is  that  in  which 
intellection  has  taken  another  mode  ;  but  this  indicates  that  what 
transcends  the  primarily  intellective  has  no  intellection  ;  for,  to  have 
intellection,  it  must  become  an  Intellectual-Principle,  and,  if  it  is  to 
become  that,  it  must  possess  an  intellectual  object  and,  as  primarily 
intellective,  it  must  possess  that  intellectual  object  as  something  within 
itself. 

But  it  is  not  inevitable  that  every  intellectual  object  should  both 
possess  the  intellective  principle  in  itself  and  exercise  intellection  :  at 
that,  it  would  be  not  merely  object  but  subject  as  well  and,  besides, 
being  thus  dual,  could  not  be  primal :  further,  the  intellectual  principle 
that  is  to  possess  the  intellectual  object  could  not  cohere  unless  there 
existed  an  essence  purely  intellectual,  something  which,  while  standing 
as  intellectual  object  to  the  intellectual  principle,  is  in  its  own  essence 


V.  6.  3] 


PRINCIPLE  TRANSCENDING  BEING 


65 


neither  an  agent  nor  an  object  of  intellection.  The  intellectual  object 
points  to  something  beyond  itself  (to  a  percipient) ;  and  the  intel¬ 
lectual  agent  has  its  intellection  in  vain  unless  by  seizing  and  holding 
an  object — since,  failing  that,  it  can  have  no  intellection  but  is 
consummated  only  when  it  possesses  itself  of  its  natural  term. 

There  must  have  been  something  standing  consummate  indepen¬ 
dently  of  any  intellectual  act,  something  perfect  in  its  own  essence  : 
thus  that  in  which  this  completion  is  inherent  must  exist  before 
intellection  ;  in  other  words  it  has  no  need  of  intellection,  having 
been  always  self-sufficing  :  this,  then,  will  have  no  intellectual  act. 

Thus  we  arrive  at  : — a  principle  having  no  intellection,  a  principle 
having  intellection  primarily,  a  principle  having  it  secondarily. 

It  may  be  added  that,  supposing  The  First  to  be  intellective,  it 
thereby  possesses  something  (some  object,  some  attribute) :  at  once 
it  ceases  to  be  a  first ;  it  is  a  secondary,  and  not  even  a  unity  ;  it  is  a 
many  ;  it  is  all  of  which  it  takes  intellectual  possession  ;  even  though 
its  intellection  fell  solely  upon  its  own  content,  it  must  still  be  a 
manifold. 

3- 

We  may  be  told  that  nothing  prevents  an  identity  being  thus 
multiple.  But  there  must  be  a  unity  underlying  the  aggregate  :  a 
manifold  is  impossible  without  a  unity  for  its  source  or  ground,  or  at 
least  failing  some  unity  related  or  unrelated.  This  unity  must  be 
numbered  as  first  before  all  and  can  be  apprehended  only  as  solitary 
and  self-existent. 

When  we  recognise  it,  resident  among  the  mass  of  things,  our 
business  is  to  see  it  for  what  it  is — present  to  the  items  but  essentially 
distinguished  from  them — and,  while  not  denying  it  there,  to  seek  this 
underly  of  all  no  longer  as  it  appears  in  those  other  things  but  as  it 
stands  in  its  pure  identity  by  itself.  The  identity  resident  in  the  rest 
of  things  is  no  doubt  close  to  authentic  identity  but  cannot  be  it ;  and 
if  the  identity  of  unity  is  to  be  displayed  beyond  itself  it  must  also  exist 
within  itself  alone. 


K 


66 


PLOTINUS 


It  may  be  suggested  that  its  existence  takes  substantial  form  only 
by  its  being  resident  among  outside  things  :  but,  at  this,  it  is  itself  no 
longer  simplex  nor  could  any  coherence  of  manifolds  occur.  On  the 
one  hand  things  could  take  substantial  existence  only  if  they  were  in 
their  own  virtue  simplex.  On  the  other  hand,  failing  a  simplex,  the 
aggregate  of  multiples  is  itself  impossible  :  for  the  simplex  individual 
thing  could  not  exist  if  there  were  no  simplex  unity  independent  of  the 
individual,  (a  principle  of  identity)  and,  not  existing,  much  less  could 
it  enter  into  composition  with  any  other  such  :  it  becomes  impossible 
then  for  the  compound  universe,  the  aggregate  of  all,  to  exist ;  it 
would  be  the  coming  together  of  things  that  are  not,  things  not  merely 
lacking  an  identity  of  their  own  but  utterly  non-existent. 

Once  there  is  any  manifold,  there  must  be  a  precedent  unity  : 
since  any  intellection  implies  multiplicity  in  the  intellective  subject, 
the  non-multiple  must  be  without  intellection ;  that  non-multiple 
will  be  the  First :  intellection  and  the  Intellectual-Principle  must  be 
characteristic  of  beings  coming  later. 

4* 

Another  consideration  is  that  if  The  Good  (and  First)  is  simplex 
and  without  need,  it  can  neither  need  the  intellective  act  nor  possess 
what  it  does  not  need  :  it  will  therefore  not  have  intellection.  (Inter¬ 
polation  or  corruption  : — It  is  without  intellection  because,  also,  it 
contains  no  duality.) 

Again  ;  an  Intellectual-Principle  is  distinct  from  The  Good  and 
takes  a  certain  goodness  only  by  its  intellection  of  The  Good. 

Yet  again  : — In  any  dual  object  there  is  the  unity  (the  principle 
of  identity)  side  by  side  with  the  rest  of  the  thing ;  an  associated 
member  cannot  be  the  unity  of  the  two  and  there  must  be  a  self-standing 
unity  (within  the  duality)  before  this  unity  of  members  can  exist :  by 
the  same  reasoning  there  must  be  also  the  supreme  unity  entering  into 
no  association  whatever,  something  which  is  unity-simplex  by  its  very 
being,  utterly  devoid  of  all  that  belongs  to  the  thing  capable  of 
association. 


V.  6.  5J 


PRINCIPLE  TRANSCENDING  BEING 


67 

How  could  anything  be  present  in  anything  else  unless  in  virtue 
of  a  source  existing  independently  of  association  ?  The  simplex  (or 
absolute)  requires  no  derivation  ;  but  any  manifold,  or  any  dual,  must 
be  dependent. 

We  may  use  the  figure  of,  first,  light ;  then,  following  it,  the  sun  ; 
as  a  third,  the  orb  of  the  moon  taking  its  light  from  the  sun  :  Soul 
carries  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  something  imparted  and  lending 
the  light  which  makes  it  essentially  intellective ;  Intellectual-Principle 
carries  the  light  as  its  own  though  it  is  not  purely  the  light  but  is  the 
being  into  whose  very  essence  the  light  has  been  received ;  highest  is 
That  which,  giving  forth  the  light  to  its  sequent,  is  no  other  than  the  pure 
light  itself  by  whose  power  the  Intellectual-Principle  takes  character. 

How  can  this  highest  have  need  of  any  other  ?  It  is  not  to  be 
identified  with  any  of  the  things  that  enter  into  association  ;  the  self¬ 
standing  is  of  a  very  different  order. 

5- 

And  again  : — the  multiple  must  be  always  seeking  its  identity, 
desiring  self-accord  and  self-awareness  :  but  what  scope  is  there  within 
what  is  an  absolute  unity  in  which  to  move  towards  its  identity  or  at 
what  term  may  it  hope  for  self-knowing  ?  It  holds  its  identity  in  its 
very  essence  and  is  above  consciousness  and  all  intellective  act. 
Intellection  is  not  a  primal  either  in  the  fact  of  being  or  in  the  value  of 
being  ;  it  is  secondary  and  derived  :  for  there  exists  The  Good ;  and 
this  moves  towards  itself  while  its  sequent  is  moved  and  by  that  move¬ 
ment  has  its  characteristic  vision.  The  intellective  act  may  be  defined 
as  a  movement  towards  The  Good  in  some  being  that  aspires  towards 
it ;  the  effort  produces  the  fact ;  the  two  are  coincident ;  to  see  is  to 
have  desired  to  see  :  hence  again  the  Authentic  Good  has  no  need  of 
intellection  since  itself  and  nothing  else  is  its  good. 

The  intellective  act  is  a  movement  towards  the  unmoved  Good  : 
thus  the  self-intellection  in  all  save  the  Absolute  Good  is  the  working  of 
the  imaged  Good  within  them :  the  intellectual  principle  recognises 
the  likeness,  sees  itself  as  a  good  to  itself,  an  object  of  attraction  :  it 


68 


PLOTINUS 


grasps  at  that  manifestation  of  The  Good,  and  in  holding  that  holds 
self-vision  :  if  the  state  of  goodness  is  constant,  it  remains  constantly 
self-attractive  and  self-intellective.  The  self-intellection  is  not 
deliberate  :  it  sees  itself  as  an  incident  in  its  contemplation  of  The 
Good  ;  for  it  sees  itself  in  virtue  of  its  Act ;  and  in  all  that  exists  the  Act 
is  towards  The  Good. 

6. 

If  this  reasoning  is  valid,  The  Good  has  no  scope  whatever  for 
intellection  which  demands  something  attractive  from  outside.  The 
Good,  then,  is  without  Act.  What  Act  indeed,  could  be  vested  in 
Activity’s  self  ?  No  activity  has  yet  again  an  activity  ;  and  whatever 
we  may  add  to  such  Activities  as  depend  from  something  else,  at  least 
we  must  leave  the  first  Activity  of  them  all,  that  from  which  all  depend, 
as  an  uncontaminated  identity,  one  to  which  no  such  addition  can 
be  made. 

That  primal  Activity,  then,  is  not  an  intellection,  for  there  is 
nothing  upon  which  it  could  exercise  intellection  since  it  is  The  First ; 
besides,  intellection  itself  does  not  exercise  the  intellective  act  ;  this 
belongs  to  some  principle  in  which  intellection  is  vested.  There  is,  we 
repeat,  duality  in  any  thinking  being  ;  and  the  First  is  wholly  above 
the  dual. 

But  all  this  may  be  made  more  evident  by  a  clearer  recognition 
of  the  twofold  principle  at  work  wherever  there  is  intellection  : — 

When  we  affirm  the  reality  of  the  Real  Beings  and  their  individual 
identity  of  being  and  declare  that  these  Real  Beings  exist  in  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Realm,  we  do  not  mean  merely  that  they  remain  unchangeably 
self-identical  by  their  very  essence  as  contrasted  with  the  fluidity  and 
instability  of  the  sense-realm  ;  the  sense-realm  itself  may  contain  the 
enduring.  No  ;  we  mean  rather  that  these  principles  possess,  as  by 
their  own  virtue,  the  consummate  fulness  of  being.  The  Essence 
described  as  the  primally  existent  cannot  be  a  shadow  cast  by  Being, 
but  must  possess  Being  entire  ;  and  Being  is  entire  when  it  holds  the 
form  and  idea  of  intellection  and  of  life.  In  a  Being,  then,  the  existence, 


V.  7.  I]  IDEAL  ARCHETYPE  OF  PARTICULAR  BEINGS  69 

the  intellection,  the  life  are  present  as  an  aggregate.  When  a  thing  is  a 
Being,  it  is  also  an  Intellectual-Principle,  when  it  is  an  Intellectual- 
Principle  it  is  a  Being  ;  intellection  and  Being  are  co-existents.  There¬ 
fore  intellection  is  a  multiple  not  a  unitary  and  that  which  (like  the 
Good)  does  not  belong  to  this  order  can  have  no  Intellection.  And  if  we 
turn  to  the  partial  and  particular,  there  is  the  Intellectual  form  of  man, 
and  there  is  man,  there  is  the  Intellectual  form  of  horse  and  there  is 
horse,  the  Intellectual  form  of  Justice,  and  Justice. 

Thus  all  is  dual :  the  unit  is  a  duality  and  yet  again  the  dual 
reverts  to  unity. 

That,  however,  which  stands  outside  all  this  category  can  be  neither 
an  individual  unity  nor  an  aggregate  of  all  the  duals  or  in  any  way  a 
duality.  How  the  duals  rose  from  The  One  is  treated  elsewhere. 

What  stands  above  Being  stands  above  intellection :  it  is  no 
weakness  in  it  not  to  know  itself,  since  as  pure  unity  it  contains  nothing 
which  it  needs  to  explore.  But  it  need  not  even  spend  any  knowing 
upon  things  outside  itself  :  this  which  was  always  the  Good  of  all  gives 
them  something  greater  and  better  than  its  knowledge  of  them  in  giving 
them  in  their  own  identity  to  cling,  in  whatever  measure  be  possible,  to  a 
principle  thus  lofty. 


SEVENTH  TRACTATE 

IS  THERE  AN  IDEAL  ARCHETYPE  OF  PARTICULAR  BEINGS? 

I. 

We  have  to  examine  the  question  whether  there  exists  an  ideal 
archetype  of  individuals,  in  other  words  whether  I  and  every  other  human 
being  go  back  to  the  Intellectual,  every  (living)  thing  having  origin  and 
principle  There. 

If  Socrates,  Socrates’  soul,  is  eternal  then  the  Authentic  Socrates — 
to  adapt  the  term — must  be  There  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  individual  soul 
has  an  existence  in  the  Supreme  as  well  as  in  this  world.  If  there  is  no 
such  permanent  endurance — and  what  was  Socrates  may  with  change  of 


70 


PLOTINUS 


time  become  another  soul  and  be  Pythagoras  or  someone  else — then  the 
individual  Socrates  has  not  that  existence  in  the  Divine. 

But  if  the  Soul  of  the  individual  contains  the  Reason -Principles  of 
all  that  it  traverses,  once  more  all  men  have  their  (archetypic)  existence 
There  :  and  it  is  our  doctrine  that  every  soul  contains  all  the  Reason- 
Principles  that  exist  in  the  Kosmos  :  since  then  the  Kosmos  contains  the 
Reason -Principles  not  merely  of  man,  but  also  of  all  individual  living 
things,  so  must  the  Soul.  Its  content  of  Reason-Principles,  then,  must 
be  limitless,  unless  there  be  a  periodical  renovation  bounding  the  bound¬ 
lessness  by  the  return  of  a  former  series. 

But  if  (in  virtue  of  this  periodic  return)  each  archetype  may  be  re¬ 
produced  by  numerous  existents,  what  need  is  there  that  there  be  distinct 
Reason-Principles  and  archetypes  for  each  existent  in  any  one  period  ? 
Might  not  one  (archetypal)  man  suffice  for  all,  and  similarly  a  limited 
number  of  souls  produce  a  limitless  number  of  men  ? 

No  :  one  Reason-Principle  cannot  account  for  distinct  and  differing 
individuals  :  one  human  being  does  not  suffice  as  the  exemplar  for  many 
distinct  each  from  the  other  not  merely  in  material  constituents  but  by 
innumerable  variations  of  ideal  type  :  this  is  no  question  of  various 
pictures  or  images  reproducing  an  original  Socrates  ;  the  beings  produced 
differ  so  greatly  as  to  demand  distinct  Reason-Principles.  The  entire 
soul-period  conveys  with  it  all  the  requisite  Reason-Principles  and  so 
too  the  same  existents  appear  once  more  under  their  action. 

There  is  no  need  to  baulk  at  this  limitlessness  in  the  Intellectual ; 
it  is  an  infinitude  having  nothing  to  do  with  number  or  part ;  what  we 
may  think  of  it  as  its  outgoing  is  no  other  than  its  characteristic  Act. 


2. 

But  individuals  are  brought  into  being  by  the  union  of  the  Reason- 
Principles  of  the  parents  male  and  female  :  this  seems  to  do  away  with 
a  definite  Reason-Principle  for  each  of  the  offspring  :  one  of  the  parents 
— the  male  let  us  say — is  the  source  ;  and  the  offspring  is  determined 
not  by  Reason -Principles  differing  from  child  to  child  but  by  one  only, 
the  father’s  or  that  of  the  father’s  father. 


V.  7-3]  IDEAL  ARCHETYPE  OF  PARTICULAR  BEINGS 


7i 


No  :  a  distinct  Reason-Principle  may  be  the  determinant  for  the 
child  since  the  parent  contains  all :  they  would  become  effective  at 
different  times. 

And  so  of  the  differences  among  children  of  the  same  parents  :  it 
is  a  matter  of  varying  dominance  :  either  the  offspring— -whether  it  so 
appears  or  not — has  been  mainly  determined  by,  now,  the  male,  now, 
the  female  or,  while  each  principle  has  given  itself  entire  and  lies  there 
within,  yet  it  effectively  moulds  one  portion  of  the  bodily  substance 
rather  than  another. 

And  how  (by  the  theory  of  a  divine  archetype  of  each  individual) 
are  the  differences  caused  by  place  to  be  explained  ? 

Is  the  differentiating  element  to  be  found  in  the  varying  resistance 
of  the  material  of  the  body  ? 

No  :  if  this  were  so,  all  men  with  the  exception  of  one  only  would 
be  untrue  to  nature. 

Difference  everywhere  is  a  good,  and  so  there  must  be  differing 
archetypes,  though  only  to  evil  could  we  attribute  any  power  in  Matter 
to  thwart  nature  by  overmastering  the  perfect  Reason-Principles,  hidden 
but  given,  all. 

Still,  admitting  the  diversity  of  the  Reason-Principles,  why  need 
there  be  as  many  as  there  are  men  bom  in  each  Period,  once  it  is  granted 
that  different  beings  may  take  external  manifestation  under  the  presence 
of  the  same  principles  ? 

Under  the  presence  of  all ;  agreed  :  but  with  the  dominance  of  the 
very  same  ?  That  is  still  open  to  question. 

May  we  not  take  it  that  there  may  be  identical  reproduction  from 
one  Period  to  another  but  not  in  the  same  Period  ? 

3- 

In  the  case  of  twin  birth  among  human  beings  how  can  we  make  out 
the  Reason-Principles  to  be  different ;  and  still  more  when  we  turn  to 
the  animals  and  especially  those  with  litters  ? 

Where  the  young  are  precisely  alike,  there  is  one  Reason- 
Principle. 


72 


PLOTINUS 


But  this  would  mean  that  after  all  there  are  not  as  many  Reason 
Principles  as  separate  beings  ? 

As  many  as  there  are  of  differing  beings,  differing  by  something 
more  than  a  mere  failure  in  complete  reproduction  of  their  Idea. 

And  why  may  not  this  (sharing  of  archetype)  occur  also  in  beings 
untouched  by  differentiation,  if  indeed  there  be  any  such  ? 

A  craftsman  even  in  constructing  an  object  identical  with  a  model 
must  envisage  that  identity  in  a  mental  differentiation  enabling  him  to 
make  a  second  thing  by  bringing  in  some  difference  side  by  side  with 
the  identity  :  similarly  in  nature,  where  the  new  thing  comes  about  not 
by  reasoning  but  in  sole  virtue  of  Reason-Principles,  that  differentiation 
must  be  included  in  the  archetypal  idea,  though  it  is  not  in  our  power 
to  perceive  the  difference. 

The  consideration  of  Quantity  brings  the  same  result : 

If  production  is  undetermined  in  regard  to  Quantity,  each  thing  has 
its  distinct  Reason-Principle  :  if  there  is  a  measured  system  the  Quantity 
has  been  determined  by  the  unrolling  and  unfolding  of  the  Reason- 
Principles  of  all  the  existences. 

Thus  when  the  universe  has  reached  its  term,  there  will  be  a  fresh 
beginning,  since  the  entire  Quantity  which  the  Kosmos  is  to  exhibit, 
every  item  that  is  to  emerge  in  its  course,  all  is  laid  up  from  the  first  in 
the  Being  that  contains  the  Reason-Principles. 

Are  we,  then,  looking  to  the  brute  realm,  to  hold  that  there  are  as 
many  Reason-Principles  as  distinct  creatures  born  in  a  litter  ? 

Why  not  ?  There  is  nothing  alarming  about  such  limitlessness  in 
generative  forces  and  in  Reason -Principles,  when  Soul  is  there  to  sustain 
all. 

As  in  Soul  (principle  of  Life)  so  in  Divine  Mind  (principle  of  Idea) 
there  is  this  infinitude  of  recurring  generative  powers ;  the  Beings  there 
are  unfailing. 


V.  8.  i] 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


73 


EIGHTH  TRACTATE 

On  the  Intellectual  Beauty 

i. 

It  is  a  principle  with  us  that  one  who  has  attained  to  the  vision  of 
the  Intellectual  Beauty  and  grasped  the  beauty  of  the  Authentic  Intellect 
will  be  able  also  to  come  to  understand  the  Father  and  Transcendent 
of  that  Divine  Being.  It  concerns  us,  then,  to  try  to  see  and  say,  for 
ourselves  and  as  far  as  such  matters  may  be  told,  how  the  Beauty  of 
the  divine  Intellect  and  of  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  may  be  revealed  to 
contemplation. 

Let  us  go  to  the  realm  of  magnitudes  : — Suppose  two  blocks  of 
stone  lying  side  by  side  :  one  is  unpatterned,  quite  untouched  by  art ; 
the  other  has  been  minutely  wrought  by  the  craftsman's  hands  into 
some  statue  of  god  or  man,  a  Grace  or  a  Muse,  or  if  a  human  being,  not 
a  portrait  but  a  creation  in  which  the  sculptor’s  art  has  concentrated 
all  loveliness. 

Now  it  must  be  seen  that  the  stone  thus  brought  under  the  artist’s 
hand  to  the  beauty  of  form  is  beautiful  not  as  stone — for  so  the  crude 
block  would  be  as  pleasant — but  in  virtue  of  the  form  or  idea  introduced 
by  the  art.  This  form  is  not  in  the  material ;  it  is  in  the  designer  before 
ever  it  enters  the  stone  ;  and  the  artificer  holds  it  not  by  his  equipment 
of  eyes  and  hands  but  by  his  participation  in  his  art.  The  beauty, 
therefore,  exists  in  a  far  higher  state  in  the  art ;  for  it  does  not  come 
over  integrally  into  the  work  ;  that  original  beauty  is  not  transferred  ; 
what  comes  over  is  a  derivative  and  a  minor  :  and  even  that  shows  itself 
upon  the  statue  not  integrally  and  with  entire  realisation  of  intention 
but  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  subdued  the  resistance  of  the  material. 

Art,  then,  creating  in  the  image  of  its  own  nature  and  content, 
and  working  by  the  Idea  or  Reason-Principle  of  the  beautiful  object 
it  is  to  produce,  must  itself  be  beautiful  in  a  far  higher  and  purer  degree 
since  it  is  the  seat  and  source  of  that  beauty,  indwelling  in  the  art,  which 


74 


PLOTINUS 


must  naturally  be  more  complete  than  any  comeliness  of  the  external. 
In  the  degree  in  which  the  beauty  is  diffused  by  entering  into  matter, 
it  is  so  much  the  weaker  than  that  concentrated  in  unity  ;  everything 
that  reaches  outwards  is  the  less  for  it,  strength  less  strong,  heat  less 
hot,  every  power  less  potent,  and  so  beauty  less  beautiful. 

Then  again  every  prime  cause  must  be,  within  itself,  more  powerful 
than  its  effect  can  be  :  the  musical  does  not  derive  from  an  unmusical 
source  but  from  music  ;  and  so  the  art  exhibited  in  the  material  work 
derives  from  an  art  yet  higher. 

Still  the  arts  are  not  to  be  slighted  on  the  ground  that  they  create 
by  imitation  of  natural  objects  ;  for,  to  begin  with,  these  natural  objects 
are  themselves  imitations  ;  then,  we  must  recognise  that  they  give  no 
bare  reproduction  of  the  thing  seen  but  go  back  to  the  Ideas  from  which 
Nature  itself  derives,  and,  furthermore,  that  much  of  their  work  is  all 
their  own  ;  they  are  holders  of  beauty  and  add  where  nature  is  lacking. 
Thus  Pheidias  wrought  the  Zeus  upon  no  model  among  things  of  sense 
but  by  apprehending  what  form  Zeus  must  take  if  he  chose  to  become 
manifest  to  sight. 


2. 

But  let  us  leave  the  arts  and  consider  those  works  produced  by 
Nature  and  admitted  to  be  naturally  beautiful  which  the  creations  of 
art  are  charged  with  imitating,  all  reasoning  life  and  unreasoning  things 
alike,  but  especially  the  consummate  among  them,  where  the  moulder 
and  maker  has  subdued  the  material  and  given  the  form  he  desired. 
Now  what  is  the  beauty  here  ?  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  blood  or 
the  menstrual  process  :  either  there  is  also  a  colour  and  form  apart  from 
all  this  or  there  is  nothing  unless  sheer  ugliness  or  (at  best)  a  bare  recipient, 
as  it  were  the  mere  Matter  of  beauty. 

Whence  shone  forth  the  beauty  of  Helen,  battle-sought ;  or  of  all 
those  women  like  in  loveliness  to  Aphrodite  ;  or  of  Aphrodite  herself ; 
or  of  any  human  being  that  has  been  perfect  in  beauty  ;  or  of  any  of  these 
gods  manifest  to  sight,  or  unseen  but  carrying  what  would  be  beauty 
if  we  saw  ? 


V.  8.  2] 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


75 


In  all  these  is  it  not  the  Idea,  something  of  that  realm  but  com¬ 
municated  to  the  produced  from  within  the  producer  just  as  in  works 
of  art,  we  held,  it  is  communicated  from  the  arts  to  their  creations  ?  Now 
we  can  surely  not  believe  that,  while  the  made  thing  and  the  Idea  thus 
impressed  upon  Matter  are  beautiful,  yet  the  Idea  not  so  alloyed  but 
resting  still  with  the  creator — the  Idea  primal,  immaterial,  firmly  a 
unity — is  not  Beauty. 

If  material  extension  were  in  itself  the  ground  of  beauty,  then  the 
creating  principle,  being  without  extension,  could  not  be  beautiful : 
but  beauty  cannot  be  made  to  depend  upon  magnitude  since,  whether  in 
a  large  object  or  a  small,  the  one  Idea  equally  moves  and  forms  the  mind 
by  its  inherent  power.  A  further  indication  is  that  as  long  as  the  object 
remains  outside  us  we  know  nothing  of  it ;  it  affects  us  by  entry  ;  but 
only  as  an  Idea  can  it  enter  through  the  eyes  which  are  not  of  scope  to 
take  an  extended  mass  :  we  are,  no  doubt,  simultaneously  possessed 
of  the  magnitude  which,  however,  we  take  in  not  as  mass  but  by  an 
elaboration  upon  the  presented  form. 

Then  again  the  principle  producing  the  beauty  must  be,  itself,  ugly, 
neutral  or  beautiful :  ugly,  it  could  not  produce  the  opposite  ;  neutral, 
why  should  its  product  be  the  one  rather  than  the  other  ?  The  Nature, 
then,  which  creates  things  so  lovely  must  be  itself  of  a  far  earlier  beauty  ; 
we,  undisciplined  in  discernment  of  the  inward,  knowing  nothing  of  it, 
run  after  the  outer,  never  understanding  that  it  is  the  inner  which  stirs 
us  ;  we  are  in  the  case  of  one  who  sees  his  own  reflection  but  not  realising 
whence  it  comes  goes  in  pursuit  of  it. 

But  that  the  thing  we  are  pursuing  is  something  different  and  that 
the  beauty  is  not  in  the  concrete  object  is  manifest  from  the  beauty 
there  is  in  matters  of  study,  in  conduct  and  custom  ;  briefly  in  soul  or 
mind.  And  it  is  precisely  here  that  the  greater  beauty  lies,  perceived 
whenever  you  look  to  the  wisdom  in  a  man  and  delight  in  it,  not  wasting 
attention  on  the  face,  which  may  be  hideous,  but  passing  all  appearance 
by  and  catching  only  at  the  inner  comeliness,  the  truly  personal ;  if 
you  are  still  unmoved  and  cannot  acknowledge  beauty  under  such 
conditions,  then  looking  to  your  own  inner  being  you  will  find  no  beauty 


7  6 


PLOTINUS 


to  delight  you  and  it  will  be  futile  in  that  state  to  seek  the  greater  vision, 
for  you  will  be  questing  it  through  the  ugly  and  impure. 

This  is  why  such  matters  are  not  spoken  of  to  everyone  ;  you,  if 
you  are  conscious  of  beauty  within,  remember. 

3- 

Thus  there  is  in  the  Nature-Principle  itself  an  Ideal  archetype  of 
the  beauty  that  is  found  in  material  forms  and,  of  that  archetype  again, 
the  still  more  beautiful  archetype  in  Soul,  source  of  that  in  Nature.  In 
the  proficient  soul  this  is  brighter  and  of  more  advanced  loveliness  : 
adorning  the  soul  and  bringing  to  it  a  light  from  that  greater  light  which 
is  beauty  primally,  its  immediate  presence  sets  the  soul  reflecting  upon 
the  quality  of  this  prior,  the  archetype  which  has  no  such  entries,  and 
is  present  nowhere  but  remains  in  itself  alone,  and  thus  is  not  even  to 
be  called  a  Reason-Principle  but  is  the  creative  source  of  the  very  first 
Reason-Principle  which  is  the  Beauty  to  which  Soul  serves  as  Matter. 

This  prior,  then,  is  the  Intellectual-Principle,  the  veritable,  abiding 
and  not  fluctuant  since  not  taking  intellectual  quality  from  outside 
itself.  By  what  image  thus,  can  we  represent  it  ?  We  have  nowhere 
to  go  but  to  what  is  less.  Only  from  itself  can  we  take  an  image  of  it ; 
that  is,  there  can  be  no  representation  of  it,  except  in  the  sense  that  we 
represent  gold  by  some  portion  of  gold — purified,  either  actually  or 
mentally,  if  it  be  impure — insisting  at  the  same  time  that  this  is  not  the 
total  thing  gold,  but  merely  the  particular  gold  of  a  particular  parcel. 
In  the  same  way  we  learn  in  this  matter  from  the  purified  Intellect  in 
ourselves  or,  if  you  like,  from  the  Gods  and  the  glory  of  the  Intellect  in 
them. 

For  assuredly  all  the  gods  are  august  and  beautiful  in  a  beauty 
beyond  our  speech.  And  what  makes  them  so  ?  Intellect ;  and 
especially  Intellect  operating  within  them  (the  divine  sun  and  stars) 
to  visibility.  It  is  not  through  the  loveliness  of  their  corporeal  forms  : 
even  those  that  have  body  are  not  gods  by  that  beauty  ;  it  is  in  virtue 
of  Intellect  that  they,  too,  are  gods,  and  as  gods  beautiful.  They  do 
not  veer  between  wisdom  and  folly  :  in  the  immunity  of  Intellect  un- 


V.  8.  4] 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


77 


moving  and  pure,  they  are  wise  always,  all-knowing,  taking  cognisance 
not  of  the  human  but  of  their  own  being  and  of  all  that  lies  within  the 
contemplation  of  Intellect.  Those  of  them  whose  dwelling  is  in  the  heavens, 
are  ever  in  this  meditation — what  task  prevents  them  ? — and  from  afar 
they  look,  too,  into  that  further  heaven  by  a  lifting  of  the  head.  The 
Gods  belonging  to  that  higher  Heaven  itself,  they  whose  station  is  upon 
it  and  in  it,  see  and  know  in  virtue  of  their  omnipresence  to  it.  For  all 
There  is  heaven  ;  earth  is  heaven,  and  sea  heaven  ;  and  animal  and 
plant  and  man  ;  all  is  the  heavenly  content  of  that  heaven  :  and  the 
Gods  in  it,  despising  neither  men  nor  anything  else  that  is  there  where 
all  is  of  the  heavenly  order,  traverse  all  that  country  and  all  space  in 
peace. 

4- 

To  “  live  at  ease  ”  is  There  ;  and  to  these  divine  beings  verity  is 
mother  and  nurse,  existence  and  sustenance  ;  all  that  is  not  of  process 
but  of  authentic  being  they  see,  and  themselves  in  all :  for  all  is  trans¬ 
parent,  nothing  dark,  nothing  resistant ;  every  being  is  lucid  to  every 
other,  in  breadth  and  depth  ;  light  runs  through  light.  And  each  of 
them  contains  all  within  itself,  and  at  the  same  time  sees  all  in  every 
other,  so  that  everywhere  there  is  all,  and  all  is  all  and  each  all,  and 
infinite  the  glory.  Each  of  them  is  great ;  the  small  is  great ;  the  sun, 
There,  is  all  the  stars  ;  and  every  star,  again,  is  all  the  stars  and  sun. 
While  some  one  manner  of  being  is  dominant  in  each,  all  are  mirrored 
in  every  other. 

Movement  There  is  pure  (as  self-caused)  for  the  moving  principle 
is  not  a  separate  thing  to  complicate  it  as  it  speeds. 

So,  too,  Repose  is  not  troubled,  for  there  is  no  admixture  of  the 
unstable  ;  and  the  Beauty  is  all  beauty  since  it  is  not  merely  resident 
(as  an  attribute  or  addition)  in  some  beautiful  object.  Each  There 
walks  upon  no  alien  soil ;  its  place  is  its  essential  self ;  and,  as  each  moves, 
so  to  speak,  towards  what  is  Above,  it  is  attended  by  the  very  ground 
from  which  it  starts  :  there  is  no  distinguishing  between  the  Being  and 
the  Place  ;  all  is  Intellect,  the  Principle  and  the  ground  on  which  it 


78 


PLOTINUS 


stands,  alike.  Thus  we  might  think  that  our  visible  sky  (the  ground 
or  place  of  the  stars),  lit,  as  it  is,  produces  the  light  which  reaches  us  from 
it,  though  of  course  this  is  really  produced  by  the  stars  (as  it  were,  by 
the  Principles  of  light  alone  not  also  by  the  ground  as  the  analogy  would 
require). 

In  our  realm  all  is  part  rising  from  part  and  nothing  can  be  more 
than  partial ;  but  There  each  being  is  an  eternal  product  of  a  whole 
and  is  at  once  a  whole  and  an  individual  manifesting  as  part  but,  to  the 
keen  vision  There,  known  for  the  whole  it  is. 

The  myth  of  Lynceus  seeing  into  the  very  deeps  of  the  earth  tells 
us  of  those  eyes  in  the  divine.  No  weariness  overtakes  this  vision  which 
yet  brings  no  such  satiety  as  would  call  for  its  ending  ;  for  there  never 
was  a  void  to  be  filled  so  that,  with  the  fulness  and  the  attainment  of 
purpose,  the  sense  of  sufficiency  be  induced  :  nor  is  there  any  such 
incongruity  within  the  divine  that  one  Being  there  could  be  repulsive 
to  another  :  and  of  course  all  There  are  unchangeable.  This  absence  of 
satisfaction  means  only  a  satisfaction  leading  to  no  distaste  for  that  which 
produces  it ;  to  see  is  to  look  the  more,  since  for  them  to  continue  in  the 
contemplation  of  an  infinite  self  and  of  infinite  objects  is  but  to  acquiesce 
in  the  bidding  of  their  nature. 

Life,  pure,  is  never  a  burden  ;  how  then  could  there  be  weariness 
There  where  the  living  is  most  noble  ?  That  very  life  is  wisdom,  not  a 
wisdom  built  up  by  reasonings  but  complete  from  the  beginning,  suffering 
no  lack  which  could  set  it  enquiring,  a  wisdom  primal,  unborrowed,  not 
something  added  to  the  Being,  but  its  very  essence.  No  wisdom,  thus, 
is  greater  ;  this  is  the  authentic  knowing,  assessor  to  the  divine  Intellect 
as  projected  into  manifestation  simultaneously  with  it ;  thus,  in  the 
symbolic  saying,  Justice  is  assessor  to  Zeus. 

(Perfect  wisdom)  for  all  the  Principles  of  this  order,  dwelling  There, 
are  as  it  were  visible  images  projected  from  themselves,  so  that  all 
becomes  an  object  of  contemplation  to  contemplators  immeasurably 
blessed.  The  greatness  and  power  of  the  wisdom  There  we  may  know 
from  this,  that  it  embraces  all  the  real  Beings,  and  has  made  all  and  all 
follow  it,  and  yet  that  it  is  itself  those  beings,  which  sprang  into  being 


V.  8.  5] 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


79 


with  it,  so  that  all  is  one  and  the  essence  There  is  wisdom.  If  we  have 
failed  to  understand,  it  is  that  we  have  thought  of  knowledge  as  a  mass 
of  theorems  and  an  accumulation  of  propositions,  though  that  is  false 
even  for  our  sciences  of  the  sense-realm.  But  in  case  this  should  be 
questioned,  we  may  leave  our  own  sciences  for  the  present,  and  deal  with 
the  knowing  in  the  Supreme  at  which  Plato  glances  where  he  speaks  of 
"  that  knowledge  which  is  not  a  stranger  in  something  strange  to  it  ” — 
though  in  what  sense,  he  leaves  us  to  examine  and  declare,  if  we  boast 
ourselves  worthy  of  the  discussion.  This  is  probably  our  best  starting- 
point. 

5- 

All  that  comes  to  be,  work  of  nature  or  of  craft,  some  wisdom  has 
made  :  everywhere  a  wisdom  presides  at  a  making. 

No  doubt  the  wisdom  of  the  artist  may  be  the  guide  of  the  work  ; 
it  is  sufficient  explanation  of  the  wisdom  exhibited  in  the  arts  ;  but  the 
artist  himself  goes  back,  after  all,  to  that  wisdom  in  Nature  which  is 
embodied  in  himself ;  and  this  is  not  a  wisdom  built  up  of  theorems  but 
one  totality,  not  a  wisdom  consisting  of  manifold  detail  co-ordinated 
into  a  unity  but  rather  a  unity  working  out  into  detail. 

Now,  if  we  could  think  of  this  as  the  primal  wisdom,  we  need  look 
no  further,  since,  at  that,  we  have  discovered  a  principle  which  is  neither 
a  derivative  nor  a  “  stranger  in  something  strange  to  it.”  But  if  we  are 
told  that,  while  this  Reason-Principle  is  in  Nature,  yet  Nature  itself  is 
its  source,  we  ask  how  Nature  came  to  possess  it  ;  and,  if  Nature  derived 
it  from  some  other  source,  we  ask  what  that  other  source  may  be  ;  if, 
on  the  contrary,  the  principle  is  self-sprung,  we  need  look  no  further  : 
but  if  (as  we  assume)  we  are  referred  to  the  Intellectual-Principle  we  must 
make  clear  whether  the  Intellectual-Principle  engendered  the  wisdom  : 
if  we  learn  that  it  did,  we  ask  whence  :  if  from  itself,  then  inevitably, 
it  is  itself  Wisdom. 

The  true  Wisdom,  then  (found  to  be  identical  with  the  Intellectual- 
Principle)  is  Real  Being  ;  and  Real  Being  is  Wisdom  ;  it  is  wisdom  that 
gives  value  to  Real  Being  ;  and  Being  is  Real  in  virtue  of  its  origin  in 


8o 


PLOTINUS 


wisdom.  It  follows  that  all  forms  of  existence  not  possessing  wisdom 
are,  indeed,  Beings  in  right  of  the  wisdom  which  went  to  their  forming, 
but,  as  not  in  themselves  possessing  it,  are  not  Real  Beings. 

We  cannot  therefore  think  that  the  divine  Beings  of  that  sphere, 
or  the  other  supremely  blessed  There,  need  look  to  our  apparatus  of 
science  :  all  of  that  realm  (the  very  Beings  themselves),  all  is  noble 
image,  such  images  as  we  may  conceive  to  lie  within  the  soul  of  the  wise 
— but  There  not  as  inscription  but  as  authentic  existence.  The  ancients 
had  this  in  mind  when  they  declared  the  Ideas  to  be  Beings,  Essentials. 

6. 

Similarly,  as  it  seems  to  me,  the  wise  of  Egypt — whether  in  precise 
knowledge  or  by  a  prompting  of  nature — indicated  the  truth  where, 
in  their  effort  towards  philosophical  statement,  they  left  aside  the  writing- 
forms  that  take  in  the  detail  of  words  and  sentences — those  characters 
that  represent  sounds  and  convey  the  propositions  of  reasoning — and 
drew  pictures  instead,  engraving  in  the  temple-inscriptions  a  separate 
image  for  every  separate  item  :  thus  they  exhibited  the  mode  in  which 
the  Supreme  goes  forth. 

For  each  manifestation  of  knowledge  and  wisdom  is  a  distinct 
image,  an  object  in  itself,  an  immediate  unity,  not  an  aggregate  of 
discursive  reasoning  and  detailed  willing.  Later  from  this  wisdom  in 
unity  there  appears,  in  another  form  of  being,  an  image,  already  less 
compact,  which  announces  the  original  in  an  outward  stage  and  seeks 
the  causes  by  which  things  are  such  that  the  wonder  rises  how  a  generated 
world  can  be  so  excellent. 

For,  one  who  knows  must  declare  his  wonder  that  this  Wisdom, 
while  not  itself  containing  the  causes  by  which  Being  exists  and  takes 
such  excellence,  yet  imparts  them  to  the  entities  produced  in  Being’s 
realm.  This  excellence,  whose  necessity  is  scarcely  or  not  at  all  manifest 
to  search,  exists,  if  we  could  but  find  it  out,  before  all  searching  and 
reasoning. 

What  I  say  may  be  considered  in  one  chief  thing,  and  thence  applied 
to  all  the  particular  entities  : — 


V.  8.  7] 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


81 


7- 

Consider  the  universe  :  we  are  agreed  that  its  existence  and  its  nature 
come  to  it  from  beyond  itself  ;  are  we,  now,  to  imagine  that  its  maker 
first  thought  it  out  in  detail — the  earth,  and  its  necessary  situation  in 
the  middle  ;  water  and,  again,  its  position  as  lying  upon  the  earth  ;  all 
the  other  elements  and  objects  up  to  the  sky  in  due  place  and  order  ; 
living  beings  with  their  appropriate  forms  as  we  know  them,  their  inner 
organs  and  their  outer  limbs — and  that  having  thus  appointed  every 
item  beforehand,  he  then  set  about  the  execution  ? 

Such  designing  was  not  even  possible  ;  how  could  the  plan  for  a 
universe  come  to  one  that  had  never  looked  outward  ?  Nor  could  he 
work  on  material  gathered  from  elsewhere  as  our  craftsmen  do,  using 
hands  and  tools  ;  feet  and  hands  are  of  the  later  order. 

One  way,  only,  remains  :  all  things  must  exist  in  something  else  ; 
of  that  prior — since  there  is  no  obstacle,  all  being  continuous  within  the 
realm  of  reality — there  has  suddenly  appeared  a  sign,  an  image,  whether 
given  forth  directly  or  through  the  ministry  of  soul  or  of  some  phase  of 
soul,  matters  nothing  for  the  moment :  thus  the  entire  aggregate  of 
existence  springs  from  the  divine  world,  in  greater  beauty  There  because 
There  unmingled  but  mingled  here. 

From  the  beginning  to  end  all  is  gripped  by  the  Forms  of  the  Intel¬ 
lectual  Realm  :  Matter  itself  is  held  by  the  Ideas  of  the  elements  and  to 
these  Ideas  are  added  other  Ideas  and  others  again,  so  that  it  is  hard  to 
work  down  to  crude  Matter  beneath  all  that  sheathing  of  Idea.  Indeed 
since  Matter  itself  is,  in  its  degree,  an  Idea — the  lowest — all  this  universe 
is  Idea  and  there  is  nothing  that  is  not  Idea  as  the  archetype  was.  And 
all  is  made  silently,  since  nothing  had  part  in  the  making  but  Being  and 
Idea — a  further  reason  why  creation  went  without  toil.  The  Exemplar 
was  the  Idea  of  an  All  and  so  an  All  must  come  into  being. 

Thus  nothing  stood  in  the  way  of  the  Idea,  and  even  now  it  dominates, 
despite  all  the  clash  of  things  :  the  creation  is  not  hindered  on  its  way 
even  now  ;  it  stands  firm  in  virtue  of  being  All.  To  me,  moreover,  it 
seems  that  if  we  ourselves  were  archetypes,  Ideas,  veritable  Being,  and 
the  Idea  with  which  we  construct  here  were  our  veritable  Essence,  then 


M 


82 


PLOTINUS 


our  creative  power  too  would  toillessly  effect  its  purpose  :  as  man  now 
stands,  he  does  not  produce  in  his  work  a  true  image  of  himself :  become 
man,  he  has  ceased  to  be  the  All ;  ceasing  to  be  man — we  read — “  he 
soars  aloft  and  administers  the  Kosmos  entire  ”  ;  restored  to  the  All  he  is 
maker  of  the  All. 

But — to  our  immediate  purpose — it  is  possible  to  give  a  reason  why 
the  earth  is  set  in  the  midst  and  why  it  is  round  and  why  the  ecliptic 
runs  precisely  as  it  does,  but,  looking  to  the  creating  principle,  we  cannot 
say  that  because  this  was  the  way  therefore  things  were  so  planned  : 
we  can  say  only  that  because  the  All  is  what  it  is,  therefore  there  is  a 
total  of  good  ;  the  causing  principle,  we  might  put  it,  reached  the  conclu¬ 
sion  before  all  formal  reasoning  and  not  from  any  premises,  not  by 
sequence  or  plan  but  before  either,  since  all  of  that  order  is  later,  all 
reason,  demonstration,  persuasion. 

Since  there  is  a  Source,  all  the  created  must  spring  from  it  and  in 
accordance  with  it ;  and  we  are  rightly  told  not  to  go  seeking  the  causes 
impelling  a  Source  to  produce,  especially  when  this  is  the  perfectly 
sufficient  Source  and  identical  with  the  Term  :  a  Source  which  is  Source 
and  Term  must  be  the  All-Unity,  complete  in  itself. 


8. 

This  then  is  Beauty  primally  :  it  is  entire  and  omnipresent  as  an 
entirety  ;  and  therefore  in  none  of  its  parts  or  members  lacking  in  beauty  ; 
beautiful  thus  beyond  denial.  Certainly  it  cannot  be  anything  (be,  for 
example,  Beauty)  without  being  wholly  that  thing ;  it  can  be  nothing 
which  it  is  to  possess  partially  or  in  which  it  utterly  fails  (and  therefore 
it  must  entirely  be  Beauty  entire). 

If  this  principle  were  not  beautiful,  what  other  could  be  ?  Its 
prior  does  not  deign  to  be  beautiful ;  that  which  is  the  first  to  manifest 
itself — Form  and  object  of  vision  to  the  intellect — cannot  but  be  lovely 
to  see.  It  is  to  indicate  this  that  Plato,  drawing  on  something  well 
within  our  observation,  represents  the  Creator  as  approving  the  work 
he  has  achieved  :  the  intention  is  to  make  us  feel  the  lovable  beauty  of 


V.8.  9]  ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY  83 

the  autotype  and  of  the  Divine  Idea  ;  for  to  admire  a  representation  is 
to  admire  the  original  upon  which  it  was  made. 

It  is  not  surprising  if  we  fail  to  recognise  what  is  passing  within 
us  :  lovers,  and  those  in  general  that  admire  beauty  here,  do  not  stay  to 
reflect  that  it  is  to  be  traced,  as  of  course  it  must  be,  to  the  Beauty 
There.  That  the  admiration  of  the  Demiurge  is  to  be  referred  to  the 
Ideal  Exemplar  is  deliberately  made  evident  by  the  rest  of  the  passage  : 

He  admired  ;  and  determined  to  bring  the  work  into  still  closer  likeness 
with  the  Exemplar  "  :  he  makes  us  feel  the  magnificent  beauty  of  the 
Exemplar  by  telling  us  that  the  Beauty  sprung  from  this  world  is,  itself, 
a  copy  from  That. 

And  indeed  if  the  divine  did  not  exist,  the  transcendently  beautiful, 
in  a  beauty  beyond  all  thought,  what  could  be  lovelier  than  the  things 
we  see  ?  Certainly  no  reproach  can  rightly  be  brought  against  this  world 
save  only  that  it  is  not  That. 

9- 

Let  us,  then,  make  a  mental  picture  of  our  universe  :  each  member 
shall  remain  what  it  is,  distinctly  apart ;  yet  all  is  to  form,  as  far  as 
possible,  a  complete  unity  so  that  whatever  comes  into  view  shall  show 
as  if  it  were  the  surface  of  the  orb  over  all,  bringing  immediately  with 
it  the  vision,  on  the  one  plane,  of  the  sun  and  of  all  the  stars  with  earth 
and  sea  and  all  living  things  as  if  exhibited  upon  a  transparent  globe. 

Bring  this  vision  actually  before  your  sight,  so  that  there  shall  be 
in  your  mind  the  gleaming  representation  of  a  sphere,  a  picture  holding 
all  the  things  of  the  universe  moving  or  in  repose  or  (as  in  reality)  some 
at  rest,  some  in  motion.  Keep  this  sphere  before  you,  and  from  it  imagine 
another,  a  sphere  stripped  of  magnitude  and  of  spatial  differences  ;  cast 
out  your  inborn  sense  of  Matter,  taking  care  not  merely  to  attenuate  it : 
call  on  God,  maker  of  the  sphere  whose  image  you  now  hold,  and  pray 
Him  to  enter.  And  may  He  come  bringing  His  own  Universe  with  all 
the  Gods  that  dwell  in  it — He  who  is  the  one  God  and  all  the  gods,  where 
each  is  all,  blending  into  a  unity,  distinct  in  powers  but  all  one  god  in 
virtue  of  that  one  divine  power  of  many  facets. 


84 


PLOTINUS 


More  truly,  this  is  the  one  God  who  is  all  the  gods  ;  for,  in  the 
coming  to  be  of  all  those,  this,  the  one,  has  suffered  no  diminishing.  He 
and  all  have  one  existence,  while  each  again  is  distinct.  It  is  distinction 
by  state  without  interval :  there  is  no  outward  form  to  set  one  here  and 
another  there  and  to  prevent  any  from  being  an  entire  identity  ;  yet 
there  is  no  sharing  of  parts  from  one  to  another.  Nor  is  each  of  those 
divine  wholes  a  power  in  fragment,  a  power  totalling  to  the  sum  of  the 
measurable  segments :  the  divine  is  one  all-power,  reaching  out  to 
infinity,  powerful  to  infinity  :  and  so  great  is  God  that  his  very  members 
are  infinites.  What  place  can  be  named  to  which  He  does  not  reach  ? 

Great,  too,  is  this  firmament  of  ours  and  all  the  powers  constellated 
within  it,  but  it  would  be  greater  still,  unspeakably,  but  that  there  is 
inbound  in  it  something  of  the  petty  power  of  body  ;  no  doubt  the 
powers  of  fire  and  other  bodily  substances  might  themselves  be  thought 
very  great,  but  in  fact,  it  is  through  their  failure  in  the  true  power  that 
we  see  them  burning,  destroying,  wearing  things  away,  and  slaving 
towards  the  production  of  life  ;  they  destroy  because  they  are  themselves 
in  process  of  destruction,  and  they  produce  because  they  belong  to  the 
realm  of  the  produced. 

The  power  in  that  other  world  has  merely  Being  and  Beauty  of 
Being.  Beauty  without  Being  could  not  be,  nor  Being  voided  of  Beauty  : 
abandoned  of  Beauty,  Being  loses  something  of  its  essence.  Being  is 
desirable  because  it  is  identical  with  Beauty  ;  and  Beauty  is  loved 
because  it  is  Being.  How  then  can  we  debate  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
other,  where  the  nature  is  one  ?  The  very  figment  of  Being  needs  some 
imposed  image  of  Beauty  to  make  it  passable,  and  even  to  ensure  its 
existence  ;  it  exists  to  the  degree  in  which  it  has  taken  some  share  in 
the  beauty  of  Idea  ;  and  the  more  deeply  it  has  drawn  on  this,  the  less 
imperfect  it  is,  precisely  because  the  nature  which  is  essentially  the  beauti¬ 
ful  has  entered  into  it  the  more  intimately. 

io. 

This  is  why  Zeus,  although  the  oldest  of  the  gods  and  their  sovereign, 
advances  first  (in  the  Phaidros  myth)  towards  that  vision,  followed  by 


V.  8  ro] 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


85 


gods  and  demigods  and  such  souls  as  are  of  strength  to  see.  That  Being 
appears  before  them  from  some  unseen  place  and  rising  loftily  over  them 
pours  its  light  upon  all  things,  so  that  all  gleams  in  its  radiance  ;  it 
upholds  some  beings,  and  they  see  ;  the  lower  are  dazzled  and  turn 
away,  unfit  to  gaze  upon  that  sun,  the  trouble  falling  the  more  heavily 
on  those  most  remote. 

Of  those  looking  upon  that  Being  and  its  content,  and  able  to  see, 
all  take  something  but  not  all  the  same  vision  always  :  intently  gazing, 
one  sees  the  fount  and  principle  of  Justice,  another  is  filled  with  the 
sight  of  Moral  Wisdom,  the  original  of  that  quality  as  found,  sometimes 
at  least,  among  men,  copied  by  them  in  their  degree  from  the  divine 
virtue  which,  covering  all  the  expanse,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Intellectual 
Realm  is  seen,  last  attainment  of  all,  by  those  who  have  known  already 
many  splendid  visions. 

The  gods  see,  each  singly  and  all  as  one.  So,  too,  the  souls  ;  they 
see  all  There  in  right  of  being  sprung,  themselves,  of  that  universe  and 
therefore  including  all  from  beginning  to  end  and  having  their  existence 
There  if  only  by  that  phase  which  belongs  inherently  to  the  Divine, 
though  often  too  they  are  There  entire,  those  of  them  that  have  not 
incurred  separation. 

This  vision  Zeus  takes  and  it  is  for  such  of  us,  also,  as  share  his  love 
and  appropriate  our  part  in  the  Beauty  There,  the  final  object  of  all 
seeing,  the  entire  beauty  upon  all  things  ;  for  all  There  sheds  radiance, 
and  floods  those  that  have  found  their  way  thither  so  that  they  too 
become  beautiful ;  thus  it  will  often  happen  that  men  climbing  heights 
where  the  soil  has  taken  a  yellow  glow  will  themselves  appear  so,  borrow¬ 
ing  colour  from  the  place  on  which  they  move.  The  colour  flowering  on 
that  other  height  we  speak  of  is  Beauty ;  or  rather  all  There  is  light 
and  beauty,  through  and  through,  for  the  beauty  is  no  mere  bloom  upon 
the  surface. 

To  those  that  do  not  see  entire,  the  immediate  impression  is  alone 
taken  into  account ;  but  those  drunken  with  this  wine,  filled  with  the 
nectar,  all  their  soul  penetrated  by  this  beauty,  cannot  remain  mere 
gazers  :  no  longer  is  there  a  spectator  outside  gazing  on  an  outside 


86 


PLOTINUS 


spectacle  ;  the  clear-eyed  hold  the  vision  within  themselves,  though, 
for  the  most  part,  they  have  no  idea  that  it  is  within  but  look  towards 
it  as  to  something  beyond  them  and  see  it  as  an  object  of  vision  caught 
by  a  direction  of  the  will. 

All  that  one  sees  as  a  spectacle  is  still  external ;  one  must  bring 
the  vision  within  and  see  no  longer  in  that  mode  of  separation  but  as  we 
know  ourselves  ;  thus  a  man  filled  with  a  god — possessed  by  Apollo  or 
by  one  of  the  Muses — need  no  longer  look  outside  for  his  vision  of  the 
divine  being  ;  it  is  but  finding  the  strength  to  see  divinity  within. 

II. 

Similarly  any  one,  unable  to  see  himself,  but  possessed  by  that  God, 
has  but  to  bring  that  divine-within  before  his  consciousness  and  at  once 
he  sees  an  image  of  himself,  himself  lifted  to  a  better  beauty  :  now  let 
him  ignore  that  image,  lovely  though  it  is,  and  sink  into  a  perfect  self- 
identity,  no  such  separation  remaining  ;  at  once  he  forms  a  multiple 
unity  with  the  God  silently  present  ;  in  the  degree  of  his  power  and  will, 
the  two  become  one  ;  should  he  turn  back  to  the  former  duality,  still  he 
is  pure  and  remains  very  near  to  the  God  ;  he  has  but  to  look  again  and 
the  same  presence  is  there. 

This  conversion  brings  gain  :  at  the  first  stage,  that  of  separation, 
a  man  is  aware  of  self  ;  but  retreating  inwards,  he  becomes  possessor  of 
all ;  he  puts  sense  away  behind  him  in  dread  of  the  separated  life  and 
becomes  one  in  the  Divine  ;  if  he  plans  to  see  in  separation,  he  sets  him¬ 
self  outside. 

The  novice  must  hold  himself  constantly  under  some  image  of  the 
Divine  Being  and  seek  in  the  light  of  a  clear  conception  ;  knowing  thus, 
in  a  deep  conviction,  whither  he  is  going — into  what  a  sublimity  he 
penetrates — he  must  give  himself  forthwith  to  the  inner  and,  radiant 
with  the  Divine  Intellections  (with  which  he  is  now  one),  be  no  longer 
the  seer,  but,  as  that  place  has  made  him,  the  seen. 

Still,  we  will  be  told,  one  cannot  be  in  beauty  and  yet  fail  to  see  it. 
The  very  contrary  :  to  see  the  divine  as  something  external  is  to  be 
outside  of  it ;  to  become  it  is  to  be  most  truly  in  beauty  :  since  sight 


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  BEAUTY 


V.  8.  12] 


87 


deals  with  the  external,  there  can  here  be  no  vision  unless  in  the  sense  of 
identification  with  the  object. 

And  this  identification  amounts  to  a  self-knowing,  a  self-conscious¬ 
ness,  guarded  by  the  fear  of  losing  the  self  in  the  desire  of  a  too  wide 
awareness. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  sensations  of  the  ugly  and  evil  impress 
us  more  violently  than  those  of  what  is  agreeable  and  yet  leave  less 
knowledge  as  the  residue  of  the  shock  :  sickness  makes  the  rougher  mark, 
but  health,  tranquilly  present,  explains  itself  better  ;  it  takes  the  first 
place,  it  is  the  natural  thing,  it  belongs  to  our  being  ;  illness  is  alien, 
unnatural  and  thus  makes  itself  felt  by  its  very  incongruity,  while  the 
other  conditions  are  native  and  we  take  no  notice.  Such  being  our 
nature,  we  are  most  completely  aware  of  ourselves  when  we  are  most 
completely  identified  with  the  object  of  our  knowledge. 

This  is  why  in  that  other  sphere,  when  we  are  deepest  in  that  know¬ 
ledge  by  intellection,  we  are  aware  of  none  ;  we  are  expecting  some 
impression  on  sense,  which  has  nothing  to  report  since  it  has  seen  nothing 
and  never  could  in  that  order  see  anything.  The  unbelieving  element 
is  sense  ;  it  is  the  other,  the  Intellectual-Principle,  that  sees  ;  and  if 
this  too  doubted,  it  could  not  even  credit  its  own  existence,  for  it  can 
nevrer  stand  away  and  with  bodily  eyes  apprehend  itself  as  a  visible 
object. 


12. 

We  have  told  how  this  vision  is  to  be  procured,  whether  by  the  mode 
of  separation  or  in  identity  :  now,  seen  in  either  way,  what  does  it  give 
to  report  ? 

The  vision  has  been  of  God  in  travail  of  a  beautiful  offspring,  God 
engendering  a  universe  within  himself  in  a  painless  labour  and — rejoiced 
in  what  he  has  brought  into  being,  proud  of  his  children — keeping  all 
closely  by  Him,  for  the  pleasure  He  has  in  his  radiance  and  in  theirs. 

Of  this  offspring — all  beautiful,  but  most  beautiful  those  that  have 
remained  within — only  one  has  become  manifest  without ;  from  him 
(Zeus,  sovran  over  the  visible  universe)  the  youngest  bom,  we  may 


88 


PLOTINUS 


gather,  as  from  some  image,  the  greatness  of  the  Father  and  of  the 
Brothers  that  remain  within  the  Father’s  house. 

Still  the  manifested  God  cannot  think  that  he  has  come  forth  in 
vain  from  the  father  ;  for  through  him  another  universe  has  arisen, 
beautiful  as  the  image  of  beauty,  and  it  could  not  be  lawful  that  Beauty 
and  Being  should  fail  of  a  beautiful  image. 

This  second  Kosmos  at  every  point  copies  the  archetype  :  it  has 
life  and  being  in  copy,  and  has  beauty  as  springing  from  that  diviner 
world.  In  its  character  of  image  it  holds,  too,  that  divine  perpetuity 
without  which  it  would  only  at  times  be  truly  representative  and  some¬ 
times  fail  like  a  construction  of  art ;  for  every  image  whose  existence 
lies  in  the  nature  of  things  must  stand  during  the  entire  existence  of  the 
archetype. 

Hence  it  is  false  to  put  an  end  to  the  visible  sphere  as  long  as  the 
Intellectual  endures,  or  to  found  it  upon  a  decision  taken  by  its  maker  at 
some  given  moment. 

That  teaching  shirks  the  penetration  of  such  a  making  as  is  here 
involved  :  it  fails  to  see  that  as  long  as  the  Supreme  is  radiant  there  can 
be  no  failing  of  its  sequel  but,  that  existing,  all  exists.  And — since  the 
necessity  of  conveying  our  meaning  compels  such  terms — the  Supreme 
has  existed  for  ever  and  for  ever  will  exist. 

13- 

The  God  fettered  (as  in  the  Kronos  Myth)  to  an  unchanging  identity 
leaves  the  ordering  of  this  universe  to  his  son  (to  Zeus),  for  it  could  not 
be  in  his  character  to  neglect  his  rule  within  the  divine  sphere,  and,  as 
though  sated  with  the  Authentic-Beauty,  seek  a  lordship  too  recent 
and  too  poor  for  his  might.  Ignoring  this  lower  world,  Kronos  (Intellectual- 
Principle)  claims  for  his  own  father  (Ouranios,  the  Absolute,  or  One) 
with  all  the  upward-tending  between  them  :  and  he  counts  all  that  tends 
to  the  inferior,  beginning  from  his  son  (Zeus,  the  All-Soul),  as  ranking 
beneath  him.  Thus  he  holds  a  mid  position  determined  on  the  one  side 
by  the  differentiation  implied  in  the  severance  from  the  very  highest 
and,  on  the  other,  by  that  which  keeps  him  apart  from  the  link  between 


V.  9.  I] 


THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE 


89 

himself  and  the  lower  :  he  stands  between  a  greater  father  and  an 
inferior  son.  But  since  that  father  is  too  lofty  to  be  thought  of  under 
the  name  of  Beauty,  the  second  God  remains  the  primally  beautiful. 

Soul  also  has  beauty,  but  is  less  beautiful  than  Intellect  as  being  its 
image  and  therefore,  though  beautiful  in  nature,  taking  increase  of 
beauty  by  looking  to  that  original.  Since  then  the  All-Soul — to  use  the 
more  familiar  term — since  Aphrodite  herself  is  so  beautiful,  what  name 
can  we  give  to  that  other  ?  If  Soul  is  so  lovely  in  its  own  right,  of  what 
quality  must  that  prior  be  ?  And  since  its  being  is  derived,  what  must 
that  power  be  from  which  the  Soul  takes  the  double  beauty,  the  borrowed 
and  the  inherent  ? 

We  ourselves  possess  beauty  when  we  are  true  to  our  own  being  ; 
our  ugliness  is  in  going  over  to  another  order ;  our  self-knowledge,  that 
is  to  say,  is  our  beauty  ;  in  self-ignorance  we  are  ugly. 

Thus  beauty  is  of  the  Divine  and  comes  Thence  only. 

Do  these  considerations  suffice  to  a  clear  understanding  of  the 
Intellectual  Sphere  or  must  we  make  yet  another  attempt  by  another 
road  ? 


THE  NINTH  TRACTATE 

The  Intellectual-Principle,  the  Ideas  and  the  Authentic 

Existence 

1. 

All  human  beings  from  birth  onward  live  to  the  realm  of  sense  more 
than  to  the  Intellectual. 

Forced  of  necessity  to  attend  first  to  the  material,  some  of  them 
elect  to  abide  by  that  order  and,  their  life  throughout,  make  its  concerns 
their  first  and  their  last ;  the  sweet  and  the  bitter  of  sense  are  their  good 
and  evil ;  they  feel  they  have  done  all  if  they  live  along  pursuing  the  one 
and  barring  the  doors  to  the  other.  And  those  of  them  that  pretend  to 
reasoning  have  adopted  this  as  their  philosophy ;  they  are  like  the  heavier 
birds  which  have  incorporated  much  from  the  earth  and  are  so  weighted 
down  that  they  cannot  fly  high  for  all  the  wings  Nature  has  given  them. 


N 


90 


PLOTINUS 


Others  do  indeed  lift  themselves  a  little  above  the  earth  ;  the  better 
in  their  soul  urges  them  from  the  pleasant  to  the  nobler,  but  they  are 
not  of  power  to  see  the  highest  and  so,  in  despair  of  any  surer  ground, 
they  fall  back  in  virtue’s  name,  upon  those  actions  and  options  of  the 
lower  from  which  they  sought  to  escape. 

But  there  is  a  third  order — those  godlike  men  who,  in  their  mightier 
power,  in  the  keenness  of  their  sight,  have  clear  vision  of  the  splendour 
above  and  rise  to  it  from  among  the  cloud  and  fog  of  earth  and  hold 
firmly  to  that  other  world,  looking  beyond  all  here,  delighted  in  the  place 
of  reality,  their  native  land,  like  a  man  returning  after  long  wanderings 
to  the  pleasant  ways  of  his  own  country. 


2. 

What  is  this  other  place  and  how  is  it  accessible  ? 

It  is  to  be  reached  by  those  who,  born  with  the  nature  of  the  lover, 
are  also  authentically  philosophic  by  inherent  temper ;  in  pain  of  love 
towards  beauty  but  not  held  by  material  loveliness,  taking  refuge  from 
that  in  things  whose  beauty  is  of  the  soul — such  things  as  virtue,  know¬ 
ledge,  institutions,  law  and  custom — and  thence,  rising  still  a  step,  reach 
to  the  source  of  this  loveliness  of  the  Soul,  thence  to  whatever  be  above 
that  again,  until  the  uttermost  is  reached,  The  First,  the  Principle  whose 
beauty  is  self-springing  :  this  attained,  there  is  an  end  to  the  pain  in- 
assuageable  before. 

But  how  is  the  ascent  to  be  begun  ?  Whence  comes  the  power  ? 
In  what  thought  is  this  love  to  find  its  guide  ? 

The  guiding  thought  is  this  : — that  the  beauty  perceived  on  material 
things  is  borrowed. 

The  pattern  giving  beauty  to  the  corporeal  rests  upon  it  as  Idea  to 
its  Matter  and  the  substrate  may  change  and  from  being  pleasant  become 
distasteful,  a  sign,  in  all  reason,  that  the  beauty  comes  by  participation. 

Now,  what  is  this  that  gives  grace  to  the  corporeal  ? 

Two  causes  in  their  degree  ;  the  participation  in  beauty  and  the 
power  of  Soul,  the  maker,  which  has  imprinted  that  form. 

We  ask  then  is  soul,  of  itself,  a  thing  of  beauty :  we  find  it  is  not 


V.  9.  3] 


THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE 


9i 


since  differences  are  manifest,  one  Soul  wise  and  lovely,  another  foolish 
and  ugly  :  soul-beauty  is  constituted  by  wisdom. 

The  question  thus  becomes,  What  principle  is  the  giver  of  wisdom 
to  the  soul :  and  the  only  answer  is  "  The  Intellectual-Principle,"  the 
veritably  intellectual,  wise  without  intermission  and  therefore  beautiful 
of  itself. 

But  does  even  this  suffice  for  our  First  ? 

No  ;  we  must  look  still  inward  beyond  the  Intellectual,  which,  from 
our  point  of  approach,  stands  before  the  Supreme  Beginning,  in  whose 
forecourt,  as  it  were,  it  announces  in  its  own  being  the  entire  content 
of  the  Good,  that  prior  of  all,  locked  in  unity,  of  which  this  is  the  expres¬ 
sion  already  touched  by  multiplicity. 

3- 

We  will  have  to  examine  this  Nature,  the  Intellectual,  which  our 
reasoning  identifies  as  the  authentically  existent  and  the  veritable 
ssential :  but  first  we  must  take  another  path  and  make  certain  that 
such  a  principle  does  necessarily  exist. 

Perhaps  it  is  ridiculous  to  set  out  enquiring  whether  an  Intellectual- 
Principle  has  place  in  the  total  of  being :  but  there  may  be  some  to 
hesitate  even  as  to  this  and  certainly  there  will  be  the  question  whether 
it  is  as  we  describe  it,  whether  it  is  a  separate  existence,  whether  it 
actually  is  the  real  beings,  whether  it  is  the  seat  of  the  Ideas  ;  to  this 
we  now  address  ourselves. 

All  that  we  see,  and  describe  as  having  existence,  we  know  to  be 
compound  ;  hand-wrought  or  compacted  by  nature,  nothing  is  simplex. 
Now  the  hand- wrought,  with  its  metal  or  stone  or  wood,  is  not  realised 
out  of  these  materials  until  the  appropriate  craft  has  produced  statue, 
house  or  bed,  by  imparting  the  particular  idea  from  its  own  content. 
Similarly  with  natural  forms  of  being ;  those  including  several  constituents, 
compound  bodies  as  we  call  them,  may  be  analysed  into  the  materials 
and  the  Idea  imposed  upon  the  total ;  the  human  being,  for  example, 
into  soul  and  body  ;  and  the  human  body  into  the  four  elements.  Find¬ 
ing  everything  to  be  a  compound  of  Matter  and  shaping  principle — since 


92 


PLOTINUS 


the  Matter  of  the  elements  is  of  itself  shapeless — you  will  enquire  whence 
this  forming  idea  comes  ;  and  you  will  ask  whether  in  the  soul  we  recog¬ 
nise  a  simplex  or  whether  this  also  has  constituents,  something  represent¬ 
ing  Matter  and  something  else — the  Intellectual-Principle  in  it — repre¬ 
senting  Idea,  the  one  corresponding  to  the  shape  actually  on  the  statue, 
the  other  to  the  artist  giving  the  shape. 

Applying  the  same  method  to  the  total  of  things,  here  too  we  discover 
the  Intellectual-Principle  and  this  we  set  down  as  veritably  the  maker 
and  creator  of  the  All.  The  underly  has  adopted,  we  see,  certain  shapes 
by  which  it  becomes  fire,  water,  air,  earth  ;  and  these  shapes  have  been 
imposed  upon  it  by  something  else.  This  other  is  Soul  which,  hovering 
over  the  Four  (the  elements),  imparts  the  pattern  of  the  Kosmos,  the 
Ideas  for  which  it  has  itself  received  from  the  Intellectual-Principle  as 
the  soul  or  mind  of  the  craftsman  draws  upon  his  craft  for  the  plan  of  his 
work. 

The  Intellectual-Principle  is  in  one  phase  the  Form  of  the  soul,  its 
shape  ;  in  another  phase  it  is  the  giver  of  the  shape — the  sculptor, 
possessing  inherently  what  is  given — imparting  to  soul  nearly  the 
authentic  reality  while  what  body  receives  is  but  image  and  imitation. 

4- 

But,  soul  reached,  why  need  we  look  higher ;  why  not  make  this 
The  First  ? 

A  main  reason  is  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  at  once  something 
other  and  something  more  powerful  than  Soul  and  that  the  more  powerful 
is  in  the  nature  of  things  the  prior.  For  it  is  certainly  not  true,  as  people 
imagine,  that  the  soul,  brought  to  perfection,  produces  Intellect.  How 
could  that  potentiality  come  to  actuality  unless  there  be,  first,  an  effective 
principle  to  induce  the  actualisation  which,  left  to  chance,  might  never 
occur  ? 

The  Firsts  must  be  supposed  to  exist  in  actuality,  looking  to  nothing 
else,  self-complete.  Anything  incomplete  must  be  sequent  upon  these, 
and  take  its  completion  from  the  principles  engendering  it  which,  like 
fathers,  labour  in  the  improvement  of  an  offspring  bom  imperfect :  the 


V.  9.  5]  THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE  93 

produced  is  as  Matter  to  the  producing  principle  and  is  worked  over  by 
it  into  a  shapely  perfection. 

And  if,  further,  soul  is  passible  while  something  impassible  there 
must  be  or  by  the  mere  passage  of  time  all  wears  away,  here  too  we  are 
led  to  something  above  soul. 

Again  there  must  be  something  prior  to  Soul  because  Soul  is  in  the 
world  and  there  must  be  something  outside  a  world  in  which,  all  being 
corporeal  and  material,  nothing  has  enduring  reality  :  failing  such  a 
prior,  neither  man  nor  the  Ideas  would  be  eternal  or  have  true  identity. 

These  and  many  other  considerations  establish  the  necessary  exist¬ 
ence  of  an  Intellectual-Principle  prior  to  Soul. 

5- 

This  Intellectual-Principle,  if  the  term  is  to  convey  the  truth,  must 
be  understood  to  be  not  a  principle  merely  potential  and  not  one  maturing 
from  unintelligence  to  intelligence — that  would  simply  send  us  seeking, 
once  more,  a  necessary  prior — but  a  principle  which  is  intelligence  in 
actuality  and  in  eternity. 

Now  a  principle  whose  wisdom  is  not  borrowed  must  derive  from 
itself  any  intellection  it  may  make ;  and  anything  it  may  possess  within 
itself  it  can  hold  only  from  itself  :  it  follows  that,  intellective  by  its  own 
resource  and  upon  its  own  content,  it  is  itself  the  very  things  on  which 
its  intellection  acts. 

For  supposing  its  essence  to  be  separable  from  its  intellection  and 
the  objects  of  its  intellection  to  be  not-itself,  then  its  essence  would  be 
unintellectual ;  and  it  would  be  intellectual  not  actually  but  potentially. 
The  intellection  and  its  object  must  then  be  inseparable — however  the 
habit  induced  by  our  conditions  may  tempt  us  to  distinguish,  There  too, 
the  thinker  from  the  thought. 

What  then  is  its  characteristic  Act  and  what  the  intellection  which 
makes  knower  and  known  here  identical  ? 

Clearly,  as  authentic  Intellection,  it  has  authentic  intellection  of  the 
authentically  existent,  and  establishes  their  existence.  Therefore  it  is 
the  Authentic  Beings. 


94 


PLOTINUS 


Consider  : — It  must  perceive  them  either  somewhere  else  or  within 
itself  as  its  very  self  :  the  somewhere  else  is  impossible — where  could 
that  be  ? — they  are  therefore  itself  and  the  content  of  itself. 

Its  objects  certainly  cannot  be  the  things  of  sense,  as  people  think  : 
no  First  could  be  of  the  sense-known  order  ;  for  in  things  of  sense  the 
Idea  is  but  an  image  of  the  authentic  and  every  Idea  thus  derivative  and 
exiled  traces  back  to  that  original  and  is  no  more  than  an  image  of  it. 

Further,  if  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  to  be  the  maker  of  this  All, 
it  cannot  make  by  looking  outside  itself  to  what  does  not  yet  exist.  The 
Authentic  Beings  must,  then,  exist  before  this  All,  no  copies  made  on  a 
model  but  themselves  archetypes,  primals,  and  the  essence  of  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle. 

We  may  be  told  that  Reason-Principles  suffice  (to  the  subsistence 
of  the  All) :  but  then  these,  clearly,  must  be  eternal ;  and  if  eternal,  if 
immune,  then  they  must  exist  in  an  Intellectual-Principle  such  as  we 
have  indicated,  a  principle  earlier  than  condition,  than  nature,  than  soul, 
than  anything  whose  existence  is  potential  (or  contingent). 

The  Intellectual-Principle,  therefore,  is  itself  the  authentic  exist¬ 
ences,  not  a  knower  knowing  them  in  some  sphere  foreign  to  it.  The 
Authentic  Beings,  thus,  exist  neither  before  nor  after  it :  it  is  the  primal 
legislator  to  Being  or,  rather,  is  itself  the  law  of  Being.  Thus  it  is  true 
that  “  Intellection  and  Being  are  identical "  ;  in  the  immaterial  the 
knowledge  of  the  thing  is  the  thing.  And  this  is  the  meaning  of  the 
dictum  “  I  sought  myself,”  namely  as  one  of  the  Beings  :  it  also  bears  on 
reminiscence. 

For  none  of  the  Beings  is  outside  the  Intellectual-Principle  or  in 
space  ;  they  remain  for  ever  in  themselves,  accepting  no  change,  no 
decay,  and  by  that  are  the  authentically  existent.  Things  that  arise  and 
fall  away  draw  on  real  being  as  something  to  borrow  from  ;  they  are  not 
of  the  real ;  the  true  being  is  that  on  which  they  draw. 

It  is  by  participation  that  the  sense-known  has  the  being  we  ascribe 
to  it ;  the  underlying  nature  has  taken  its  shape  from  elsewhere  ;  thus 
bronze  and  wood  are  shaped  into  what  we  see  by  means  of  an  image 
introduced  by  sculpture  or  carpentry  ;  the  craft  permeates  the  materials 


V.  9.  6] 


THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE 


95 


while  remaining  integrally  apart  from  the  material  and  containing  in 
itself  the  reality  of  statue  or  couch.  And  it  is  so,  of  course,  with  all 
corporeal  things. 

This  universe,  characteristically  participant  in  images,  shows  how 
the  image  differs  from  the  authentic  beings  :  against  the  variability  of 
the  one  order,  there  stands  the  unchanging  quality  of  the  other,  self- 
situate,  not  needing  space  because  having  no  magnitude,  holding  an 
existence  intellective  and  self-sufficing.  The  body-kind  seeks  its  endur¬ 
ance  in  another  kind  ;  the  Intellectual-Principle,  sustaining  by  its  mar¬ 
vellous  Being,  the  things  which  of  themselves  must  fall,  does  not  itself 
need  to  look  for  a  staying  ground. 

6. 

We  take  it,  then,  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  the  authentic 
existences  and  contains  them  all — not  as  in  a  place  but  as  possessing 
itself  and  being  one  thing  with  this  its  content.  All  are  one  there  and 
yet  are  distinct  :  similarly  the  mind  holds  many  branches  and  items 
of  knowledge  simultaneously,  yet  none  of  them  merged  into  any  other, 
each  acting  its  own  part  at  call  quite  independently,  every  conception 
coming  out  from  the  inner  total  and  working  singly.  It  is  after  this  way, 
though  in  a  closer  unity,  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  all  Being  in 
one  total — and  yet  not  in  one,  since  each  of  these  beings  is  a  distinct 
power  which,  however,  the  total  Intellectual-Principle  includes  as  the 
species  in  a  genus,  as  the  parts  in  a  whole.  This  relation  may  be  illus¬ 
trated  by  the  powers  in  seed ;  all  lies  undistinguished  in  the  unit,  the 
formative  ideas  gathered  as  in  one  kernel ;  yet  in  that  unit  there  is  eye- 
principle,  and  there  is  hand-principle,  each  of  which  is  revealed  as  a 
separate  power  by  its  distinct  material  product.  Thus  each  of  the  powers 
in  the  seed  is  a  Reason-Principle  one  and  complete  yet  including  all  the 
parts  over  which  it  presides  :  there  will  be  something  bodily,  the  liquid 
for  example,  carrying  mere  Matter ;  but  the  principle  itself  is  Idea  and 
nothing  else,  idea  identical  with  the  generative  idea  belonging  to  the 
lower  soul,  image  of  a  higher.  This  power  is  sometimes  designated  as 
Nature  in  the  seed-life  ;  its  origin  is  in  the  divine  ;  and,  outgoing  from 


96 


PLOTINUS 


its  priors  as  light  from  fire,  it  converts  and  shapes  the  matter  of  things, 
not  by  push  and  pull  and  the  lever  work  of  which  we  hear  so  much,  but 
by  bestowal  of  the  Ideas. 

7- 

Knowledge  in  the  reasoning  soul  is  on  the  one  side  concerned  with 
objects  of  sense,  though  indeed  this  can  scarcely  be  called  knowledge  and 
is  better  indicated  as  opinion  or  surface-knowing  ;  it  is  of  later  origin 
than  the  objects  since  it  is  a  reflection  from  them  :  but  on  the  other 
hand  there  is  the  knowledge  handling  the  intellectual  objects  and  this 
is  the  authentic  knowledge  ;  it  enters  the  reasoning  soul  from  the  Intel¬ 
lectual-Principle  and  has  no  dealing  with  anything  in  sense.  Being 
true  knowledge  it  actually  is  everything  of  which  it  takes  cognisance  ; 
it  carries  as  its  own  content  the  intellectual  act  and  the  intellectual 
object  since  it  carries  the  Intellectual-Principle  which  actually  is  the 
primals  and  is  always  self-present  and  is  in  its  nature  an  Act,  never  by 
any  want  forced  to  seek,  never  acquiring  or  traversing  the  remote — for 
all  such  experience  belongs  to  soul — but  always  self-gathered,  the  very 
Being  of  the  collective  total,  not  an  extern  creating  things  by  the  act 
of  knowing  them. 

Not  by  its  thinking  God  does  God  come  to  be  ;  not  by  its  thinking 
Movement  does  Movement  arise.  Hence  it  is  an  error  to  call  the  Ideas 
intellections  in  the  sense  that,  upon  an  intellectual  act  in  this  Principle, 
one  such  Idea  or  another  is  made  to  exist  or  exists.  No  :  the  object  of 
this  intellection  must  exist  before  the  intellective  act  (must  be  the  very 
content  not  the  creation  of  the  Intellectual-Principle).  How  else  could 
that  Principle  come  to  know  it :  certainly  not  (as  an  external)  by  luck 
or  by  haphazard  search. 

8. 

If,  then,  the  Intellection  is  an  act  upon  the  inner  content  (of  a 
perfect  unity),  that  content  is  at  once  the  Idea  (as  object :  eidos)  and 
the  Idea  itself  (as  concept :  idea). 

What,  then,  is  that  content  ? 

An  Intellectual-Principle  and  an  Intellective  Essence,  no  concept 


V.  9-  9] 


THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE 


97 


distinguishable  from  the  Intellectual-Principle,  each  actually  being  that 
Principle.  The  Intellectual-Principle  entire  is  the  total  of  the  Ideas, 
and  each  of  them  is  the  (entire)  Intellectual-Principle  in  a  special  form. 
Thus  a  science  entire  is  the  total  of  the  relevant  considerations  each  of 
which,  again,  is  a  member  of  the  entire  science,  a  member  not  distinct 
in  space  yet  having  its  individual  efficacy  in  a  total. 

This  Intellectual-Principle,  therefore,  is  a  unity  while  by  that  posses¬ 
sion  of  itself  it  is,  tranquilly,  the  eternal  abundance. 

If  the  Intellectual-Principle  were  envisaged  as  preceding  Being, 
it  would  at  once  become  a  principle  whose  expression,  its  intellectual 
Act,  achieves  and  engenders  the  Beings  :  but,  since  we  are  compelled 
to  think  of  existence  as  preceding  that  which  knows  it,  we  can  but  think 
that  the  Beings  are  the  actual  content  of  the  knowing  principle  and  that 
the  very  act,  the  intellection,  is  inherent  to  the  Beings,  as  fire  stands 
equipped  from  the  beginning  with  fire-act ;  in  this  conception,  the 
Beings  contain  the  Intellectual-Principle  as  one  and  the  same  with 
themselves,  as  their  own  activity.  Thus,  Being  is  itself  an  activity  : 
there  is  one  activity,  then,  in  both  or,  rather,  both  are  one  thing. 

Being,  therefore,  and  the  Intellectual-Principle  are  one  Nature  : 
the  Beings,  and  the  Act  of  that  which  is,  and  the  Intellectual-Principle 
thus  constituted,  all  are  one  :  and  the  resultant  Intellections  are  the 
Idea  of  Being  and  its  shape  and  its  act. 

It  is  our  separating  habit  that  sets  the  one  order  before  the  other  : 
for  there  is  a  separating  intellect,  of  another  order  than  the  true,  distinct 
from  the  intellect,  inseparable  and  unseparating,  which  is  Being  and  the 
universe  of  things. 

9- 

What,  then,  is  the  content — inevitably  separated  by  our  minds — 
of  this  one  Intellectual-Principle  ?  For  there  is  no  resource  but  to  repre¬ 
sent  the  items  in  accessible  form  just  as  we  study  the  various  articles 
constituting  one  science. 

This  universe  is  a  living  thing  capable  of  including  every  form  of 
life  ;  but  its  Being  and  its  modes  are  derived  from  elsewhere  ;  that 


o 


98 


PLOTINUS 


source  is  traced  back  to  the  Intellectual-Principle  :  it  follows  that  the 
all-embracing  archetype  is  in  the  Intellectual  Principle,  which,  therefore, 
must  be  an  intellectual  Kosmos,  that  indicated  by  Plato  in  the  phrase 
“  The  living  existent.” 

Given  the  Reason-Principle  (the  outgoing  divine  Idea)  of  a  certain 
living  thing  and  the  Matter  to  harbour  this  seed-principle,  the  living 
thing  must  come  into  being  :  in  the  same  way  once  there  exists  an  intel¬ 
lective  Nature,  all  powerful,  and  with  nothing  to  check  it — since  nothing 
intervenes  between  it  and  that  which  is  of  a  nature  to  receive  it — inevit¬ 
ably  the  higher  imprints  form  and  the  lower  accepts  it.  The  recipient 
holds  the  Idea  in  division,  here  man,  there  sun,  while  in  the  giver  all 
remains  in  unity. 


io. 

All,  then,  that  is  present  in  the  sense  realm  as  Idea  comes  from  the 
Supreme.  But  what  is  not  present  as  Idea,  does  not.  Thus  of  things 
conflicting  with  nature,  none  is  There  :  the  inartistic  is  not  contained  in 
the  arts  ;  lameness  is  not  in  the  seed  ;  for  a  lame  leg  is  either  inborn 
through  some  thwarting  of  the  Reason-Principle  or  is  a  marring  of  the 
achieved  form  by  accident.  To  that  Intellectual  Kosmos  belong  qualities, 
accordant  with  Nature,  and  quantities  ;  number  and  mass  ;  origins  and 
conditions  ;  all  actions  and  experiences  not  against  nature  ;  movement 
and  repose,  both  the  universals  and  the  particulars  :  but  There  time  is 
replaced  by  eternity  and  space  by  its  intellectual  equivalent,  mutual 
inclusiveness. 

In  that  Intellectual  Kosmos,  where  all  is  one  total,  every  entity 
that  can  be  singled  out  is  an  intellective  essence  and  a  participant  in  life  : 
thus,  identity  and  difference,  movement  and  rest  with  the  object  resting 
or  moving,  essence  and  quality,  all  have  essential  existence.  For  every 
real  being  must  be  in  actuality  not  merely  in  potentiality  and  therefore 
the  nature  of  each  essence  is  inherent  in  it. 

This  suggests  the  question  whether  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  contains 
the  forms  only  of  the  things  of  sense  or  of  other  existents  as  well.  But 
first  we  will  consider  how  it  stands  with  artistic  creations  :  there  is  no 


V.  9.  Ii] 


THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE 


99 


question  of  an  ideal  archetype  of  evil :  the  evil  of  this  world  is  begotten 
of  need,  privation,  deficiency,  and  is  a  condition  peculiar  to  Matter 
distressed  and  to  what  has  come  into  likeness  with  Matter. 

II. 

Now  as  to  the  arts  and  crafts  and  their  productions  : — 

The  imitative  arts — painting,  sculpture,  dancing,  pantomimic  gestur¬ 
ing — are,  largely,  earth-based  ;  on  an  earthly  base  ;  they  follow  models 
found  in  sense,  since  they  copy  forms  and  movements  and  reproduce 
seen  symmetries  ;  they  cannot  therefore  be  referred  to  that  higher  sphere 
except  indirectly,  through  the  Reason-Principle  in  humanity. 

On  the  other  hand  any  skill  which,  beginning  with  the  observation 
of  the  symmetry  of  living  things,  grows  to  the  symmetry  of  all  life,  will 
be  a  portion  of  the  Power  There  which  observes  and  meditates  the 
symmetry  reigning  among  all  beings  in  the  Intellectual  Kosmos.  Thus 
all  music — since  its  thought  is  upon  melody  and  rhythm — must  be  the 
earthly  representation  of  the  music  there  is  in  the  rhythm  of  the  Ideal 
Realm. 

The  crafts  such  as  building  and  carpentry  which  give  us  Matter  in 
wrought  forms,  may  be  said,  in  that  they  draw  on  pattern,  to  take  their 
principles  from  that  realm  and  from  the  thinking  There  :  but  in  that 
they  bring  these  down  into  contact  with  the  sense-order,  they  are  not 
wholly  in  the  Intellectual :  they  are  founded  in  man.  So  agriculture, 
dealing  with  material  growths  :  so  medicine  watching  over  physical 
health  ;  so  the  art  which  aims  at  corporeal  strength  and  well-being  : 
power  and  well-being  mean  something  else  There,  the  fearlessness  and 
self-sufficing  quality  of  all  that  lives. 

Oratory  and  generalship,  administration  and  sovereignty — under 
any  forms  in  which  their  activities  are  associated  with  Good  and  when 
they  look  to  that — possess  something  derived  thence  and  building  up 
their  knowledge  from  the  knowledge  There. 

Geometry,  the  science  of  the  Intellectual  entities,  holds  place  There  : 
so,  too,  philosophy,  whose  high  concern  is  Being. 

For  the  arts  and  products  of  art,  these  observations  may  suffice. 


100 


PLOTINUS 


12. 

It  should  however  be  added  that  if  the  Idea  of  man  exists  in  the 
Supreme,  there  must  exist  the  Idea  of  reasoning  man  and  of  man  with 
his  arts  and  crafts  ;  such  arts  as  are  the  offspring  of  intellect  must  be 
There. 

It  must  be  observed  that  the  Ideas  will  be  of  universals  ;  not  of 
Socrates  but  of  Man  :  though  as  to  man  we  may  enquire  whether  the 
individual  may  not  also  have  place  There.  Under  the  heading  of  in¬ 
dividuality  there  is  to  be  considered  the  repetition  of  the  same  feature 
from  man  to  man,  the  simian  type,  for  example,  and  the  aquiline  :  the 
aquiline  and  the  simian  must  be  taken  to  be  differences  in  the  Idea  of 
Man  as  there  are  different  types  of  the  animal :  but  Matter  also  has  its 
effect  in  bringing  about  the  degree  of  aquilinity.  Similarly  with  difference 
of  complexion,  determined  partly  by  the  Reason-Principle,  partly  by 
Matter  and  by  diversity  of  place. 

13- 

It  remains  to  decide  whether  only  what  is  known  in  sense  exists 
There  or  whether  on  the  contrary,  as  Absolute-Man  differs  from  individual 
man,  so  there  is  in  the  Supreme  an  Absolute-Soul  differing  from  Soul  and 
an  Absolute-Intellect  differing  from  Intellectual-Principle. 

It  must  be  stated  at  the  outset  that  we  cannot  take  all  that  is  here 
to  be  image  of  archetype,  or  Soul  to  be  an  image  of  Absolute-Soul :  one 
soul,  doubtless,  ranks  higher  than  another,  but  here  too,  though  perhaps 
not  as  identified  with  this  realm,  is  the  Absolute-Soul. 

Every  soul,  authentically  a  soul,  has  some  form  of  rightness  and 
moral  wisdom  ;  in  the  souls  within  ourselves  there  is  true  knowing  :  and 
these  attributes  are  no  images  or  copies  from  the  Supreme,  as  in  the 
sense- world,  but  actually  are  those  very  originals  in  a  mode  peculiar  to 
this  sphere.  For  those  Beings  are  not  set  apart  in  some  defined  place  ; 
wherever  there  is  a  soul  that  has  risen  from  body,  there  too  these  are  : 
the  world  of  sense  is  one- where,  the  Intellectual  Kosmos  is  everywhere. 
Whatever  the  freed  soul  attains  to  here,  that  it  is  There. 

Thus,  if  by  the  content  of  the  sense-world  we  mean  simply  the 


V.  9.  14] 


THE  INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE 


io  i 


visible  objects,  then  the  Supreme  contains  not  only  what  is  in  the  realm 
of  sense  but  more  :  if  in  the  content  of  the  kosmos  we  mean  to  include 
Soul  and  the  Soul-things,  then  all  is  here  that  is  There. 

I4- 

There  is,  thus,  a  Nature  comprehending  in  the  Intellectual  all  that 
exists,  and  this  Principle  must  be  the  source  of  all.  But  how,  seeing  that 
the  veritable  source  must  be  a  unity,  simplex  utterly  ? 

The  mode  by  which  from  the  unity  arises  the  multiple,  how  all  this 
universe  comes  to  be,  why  the  Intellectual-Principle  is  all  and  whence  it 
springs,  these  matters  demand  another  approach. 

But  on  the  question  as  to  whether  the  repulsive  and  the  products 
of  putridity  have  also  their  Idea — whether  there  is  an  Idea  of  filth  and 
mud — it  is  to  be  observed  that  all  that  the  Intellectual-Principle  derived 
from  The  First  is  of  the  noblest ;  in  those  Ideas  the  base  is  not  included  : 
these  repulsive  things  point  not  to  the  Intellectual-Principle  but  to  the 
Soul  which,  drawing  upon  the  Intellectual-Principle,  takes  from  Matter 
certain  other  things,  and  among  them  these. 

But  all  this  will  be  more  clearly  brought  out,  when  we  turn  to  the 
problem  of  the  production  of  multiplicity  from  unity.  Compounds,  we 
shall  see — as  owing  existence  to  hazard  and  not  to  the  Intellectual- 
Principle,  having  been  fused  into  objects  of  sense  by  their  own  impulse 
— are  not  to  be  included  under  Ideas. 

The  products  of  putrefaction  are  to  be  traced  to  the  Soul’s  inability 
to  bring  some  other  thing  to  being — something  in  the  order  of  nature, 
which,  else,  it  would — but  producing  where  it  may.  In  the  matter  of 
the  arts  and  crafts,  all  that  are  to  be  traced  to  the  needs  of  human  nature 
are  laid  up  in  the  Absolute  Man. 

And  before  the  particular  Soul  there  is  another  Soul,  a  universal, 
and,  before  that,  an  Absolute-Soul,  which  is  the  Life  existing  in  the 
Intellectual-Principle  before  Soul  came  to  be  and  therefore  rightly  called 
(as  the  Life  in  the  Divine)  the  Absolute-Soul. 


ACKNO  WLEDG  EMEN  TS 


The  translator  feels  obliged  to  put  on  record  his 
constant  obligation — during  the  preparation  of  this 
volume — to  the  following  works  : — 

“  The  Evolution  of  Theology  in  the  Greek  Philo¬ 
sophers  ”  :  Edward  Caird,  LL.D.,  D.Litt., 
etc. 

“  The  Philosophy  of  Plotinus  ”  :  William  Ralph 
Inge,  C.V.O.,  D.D.,  etc. 

“  Select  Passages  Illustrating  Neo-Platonism  ”  : 
Professor  E.  R.  Dodds  (Birmingham  Uni¬ 
versity). 


PRINTED  BY  WILLIAM  BRENDON  AND  SON,  LTD. 
PLYMOUTH,  ENGLAND 


PLOTINUS: 

THE 

DIVINE 

MIND 

MACKENNA 
VOL.  IV. 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSLATIONS.  PLOTINUS  :  THE 
DIVINE  MIND,  VOLUME  IV. 
TRANSLATED  BY  STEPHEN  MACKENNA 


Date  Due 


nr  » - 

M— fr 

\ 

rjp  w 

)  tk  0  m 

9 

1  Mfl 

i 

R  1 8 1901 

r 

- &£ 

j  9  iQQr 

^  u  JOvffc 

—OCT 

7 • 1996 

-  ..JAN 

1  5  M8V 

NOV 

1  8  2003 

— 

- Frn 

.sl  L  onno 

rtB 

L  dUUo 

— jyfAP 

MAR 

i  pnnR 

UtJ 

>  tuuo 

CAT.  NO.  23  233  PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 


B  693  A4  E6  v.  4 

Plotinus.  . 

The  divine  rnind. 


010101  000 


n  1163  0210296  1 

0 TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


B6 

Plotinu 

Th 

93  .  A4E6  v. 4 

■ 

e  divine  mind 

DATE 

,SSUE°  429254 

129254 


*  V  .'•'"  V^.*,  X  T  ■  ■•'■:/.  h  •  V-/V  V  /vV-*‘V  #f*V  '*&>'/&••*  i 

.  *  •  .v*  .•  »  'Vi  •.  '  '^..V  ,  :*  *  *  .•*'•*  ■  ■  ..  «  ♦•  *>.,  v  > 

.  *:.  ••■  -v  v,\  --v  ■  ■  i/  :  ^ >'■- -‘l .  t  ;•: 


